ALEX DUGDALE
VETERINARY
ANAESTHESIA
PRINCIPLESTOPRACTICE
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Veterinary
Anaesthesia
Veterinary
Anaesthesia
Principles to Practice
Alex Dugdale, School of Veterinary Science, University of Liverpool
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
This edition first published 2010
@ 2010 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing programme has been merged
with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered office
John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, United Kingdom
Editorial ofces
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, United Kingdom 
2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
 For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply for permission to reuse
the copyright material in this book please see our website at www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identified as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with the UK Copyright,
Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, except as permitted by
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of the publisher.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Some content that appears in print may not be available in
electronic books.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. Al brand names and product
 names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners.
The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide
accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher
competent professional should be sought.
While the authors, editors, and publisher believe that drug selection and dosage and the specification and usage of equipment and
devices, as set forth in this book, are in accord with current recommendations and practice at the time of publication, they accept
 no legal responsibility for any errors or omissions, and make no warranty, express or implied, with respect to material contained
information relating to drug therapy, drug reactions, and the use of equipment and devices, the reader is urged to review and
evaluate the information provided in the package insert or instructions for each drug, piece of equipment, or device for, among
other things, any changes in the instructions or indication of dosage or usage and for added warnings and precautions.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publicarion Data
Dugdale, Alex, 1966-
Veterinary anaesthesia : principles to practice / Alex Dugdale.
P. ; cm.
 Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4051-9247-7 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary anesthesia-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 1. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Anesthesia-veterinary-Handbooks. SF 914 D866v 2010]
SF914.D84 2010
636.089'796-dc22
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 9.5/1l.5 pt Minion by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited
 Printed in Malaysia
12010
Contents
Preface and Acknowledgements
vii
About the authors
viii
Chapter 1
 Concepts of general anaesthesia
1
Chapter 2
 Pre-operative assessment
4
Chapter 3
Pain
8
Chapter 4
Small animal sedation and premedication
0
Chapter 5
Injectable anaesthetic agents
45
Chapter 6
Quick reference guide to analgesic infusions
55
Chapter 7
 Intravascular catheters: some considerations and complications
57
Chapter 8
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
64
Chapter 9
Anaesthetic breathing systems
76
Chapter 10
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and gas cylinders
93
Chapter 11
Anaesthetic machine checks
107
Chapter 12
 Local anaesthetics
109
Chapter 13
Local anaesthetic techniques for the head: Small animals
118
Chapter 14
Local anaesthetic techniques for the limbs: Small animals
123
Chapter 15
Miscellaneous local anaesthetic techniques: Small animals
132
Chapter 16
Local anaesthetic techniques: Horses
135
Chapter 17
Muscle relaxants
141
Chapter 18
 Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia
156
Chapter 19
Troubleshooting some of the problems encountered in anaesthetised patients
175
Chapter 20
Hypothermia: Consequences and prevention
179
Chapter 21
 Blood gas analysis
182
Chapter 2
Lactate
192
Chapter 23
Fluid therapy
198
Chapter 24
 Electrolytes
216
Chapter 25
 Drugs affecting the cardiovascular system
225
Chapter 26
Shock
232
Chapter 27
Gastric dilation/volvulus (GDV)
244
Chapter 28
Equine sedation and premedication
247
V
vi Contents
Chapter 29
Equine heart murmurs
259
Chapter 30
Equine anaesthesia
260
Chapter 31
Equine intravenous anaesthesia in the field and standing chemical restraint
274
Chapter 32
Donkeys
277
Chapter 33
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia
279
Chapter 34
Lamoids (formerly South American camelids) (llamas, alpacas, guanacos and vicunas)
299
Chapter 35
 Pigs: Sedation and anaesthesia
302
Chapter 36
Rabbit anaesthesia
309
Chapter 37
 Neonates/paediatrics
312
Chapter 38
Geriatrics
315
Chapter 39
Pregnancy and Caesarean sections
318
Chapter 40
 Considerations for ocular surgery
322
Chapter 41
Orthopaedic concerns
325
Chapter 42
Renal considerations
327
Chapter 43
Hepatic considerations
Chapter 44
Some endocrine considerations
Chapter 45
Background to neuroanaesthesia for the brain
337
Chapter 46
 Some cardiac considerations
341
Chapter 47
 Some respiratory considerations
344
Chapter 48
 Respiratory emergencies
347
Chapter 49
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR)
359
Appendix1
Canine emergency drug dose chart
366
Appendix2
Feline emergency drug dose chart
368
Appendix3
Equine emergency drug dose chart
370
Answers to self-test questions
371
Index
376
Tear out and keep: Accidents and emergencies procedure list
Preface and Acknowledgements
without a little pride, that well up inside when past students go
Preface
Welcome to Veterinary Anaesthesia: Principles to Practice.
by email with al manner of taxing questions which really keep me
The book was developed from The Liverpool University
on my toes! Learning and teaching will always be a two-way
Veterinary School student notes after much encouragement
process and I can only hope to impart some of my experiences
from both undergraduate and postgraduate students and is now
flavoured with a little of my enthusiasm through the pages of this
envisaged as a basic study aid for veterinary nurses, veterinary
 book, but am always open to discussion so please do contact me
students and particularly post-graduate students studying for
if you feel the urge!
professional veterinary anaesthesia qualifications. The book is
I hope that you too can develop a passion and enthusiasm
also designed to be a quick-reference source for veterinary
for anaesthesia and a deep enjoyment of being able to witness
surgeons in practice.
physiology and pharmacology interact at your fingertips.
 During my first ever dog anaesthetic in practice, on a busy
Happy reading!
morning when all my colleagues were out on calls,the responsibil
ity of the situation suddenly dawned on me when I realised just
Acknowledgements
how many questions I still had about the subject. Fortunately, a
quick call via a temperamental mobile telephone helped to assure
My grateful thanks are extended to my contributors: Nicki Grint
me that my calculations of premedication and induction doses
for the Rabbit Anaesthesia chapter and photographs and Mark
were reasonable and thankfully my patient survived. That after-
 Senior for sowing the seeds of the chapters on Pain, Monitoring.
noon, however, I telephoned the RCVS to enrol for the CertVA
Fluid Therapy and Equine Anaesthesia.
as I had clearly realised just how much more I needed to learn.
 I would also like to extend my gratitude to all past and present
 And I have been learning ever since, sometimes by my mistakes,
students and colleagues from Liverpool's Veterinary School and
but hopefully more often through the guidance and instruction
our many visiting residents for their encouragement. In particu-
of others, notably Dr. Jackie Brearley and Prof Ron Jones, and
lar, however, I owe much to Claire Dixon for her unfaltering
from the written word. My colleagues will attest to my passion for
 support and technical wizardry with word-processing.
books - I only wish I had time to read them al! So why, might 
Finally, without the amazing support of Amy, Justinia and Katy
you ask, would I wish to write one? Well, I really enjoy teaching
at Wiley-Blackwell, this book would not have been published.
as well as learning. There is a wonderful sense of satisfaction, not
My debt to them is more than words could ever say.
vii
About the authors
Principal Author: Alexandra Helena Anne Dugdale MA, VetMB,
Contributor: Nicola Jane Grint BVSc, Dip.ECVAA, DVA, CPS,
DVA, Dip.ECVAA, PGCert(LTHE), FHEA, MRCVS, RCVS
MRCVS.
Recognised Specialist in Veterinary Anaesthesia, European 
Nicki qualifed from Bristol Veterinary School in 2000 and com-
Specialist in Veterinary Anaesthesia.
pleted an Internship and then a Residency in Veterinary
Anaesthesia at Bristol before joining the veterinary anaesthesia
Alex qualifed from Cambridge University Veterinary School in
team at Liverpool Veterinary School in 2005 as Lecturer in
1990 after which she spent 6 years in mixed practice in Lancashire.
Veterinary Anaesthesia. Nicki gained the CertVA in 2002, the Dip.
She gained the RCVS Certificate in Veterinary Anaesthesia and a
ECVAA in 2005 and the DVA in 2006, shortly followed by a pro-
private pilot's licence in 1993 (who said anaesthesia was like
fessional teaching qualification (Certificate in Professional
flying!) and then undertook a Residency in Anaesthesia and
Studies) in 2007. She is currently undertaking a PhD at the
Critical Care at the Animal Health Trust in Newmarket between
 University of Bristol in the field of donkey analgesia.
1996 and 1999 under the supervision of Dr. Jackie Brearley. She
was appointed Temporary Lecturer in Veterinary Anaesthesia at
Contributor: Jonathan Mark Senior BVSc, CertVA, Dip.ECVAA,
Liverpool University in 1999 and gained the Diplomas of both the
PhD, MRCVS
RCVS and ECVAA in 2001 before becoming Lecturer and later
Mark qualifed from Liverpool University Veterinary School in
Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Anaesthesia. She became Head of a
1997, spending two years in mixed practice in Yorkshire before
newly created Division of Veterinary Anaesthesia in 2004 and
returning to Liverpool University as a Resident in Veterinary
completed a postgraduate qualification in teaching in 2006. She
Anaesthesia under the supervision of Prof. Ron Jones. He gained
is currently on sabbatical to undertake a PhD in equine obesity.
his CertVA in 2000 and the Dip.ECVAA in 2004, becoming
Lecturer in Veterinary Anaesthesia in 2002. He gained his
Doctorate in 2008 for his thesis on ^Complement and Endotoxin
in Equine Colic.
vili
Concepts of general anaesthesia
Learning objectives
 To be able to define general anaesthesia.
To be able to define balanced anaesthesia.
Definitions
might need to administer it in large doses to produce sufficiently
'deep unconsciousness to reduce the responses to noxious stimuli.
Anaesthesia literally means ‘lack of sensation/feeling² (from an
The problem is that such deep anaesthesia is often associated with
meaning without' and aesthesia pertaining to feeling). Therefore,
extreme depression of the central nervous system and homec-
general anaesthesia means global/total lack of sensations, whereas
static reflexes. Alternatively, therefore, we can produce the above
local anaesthesia relates to lack of sensation in a localised part of
 three components separately by administering drugs that more
the body.
specifically provide each component. This latter approach is theo-
 General anaesthesia can be defned as a state of unconscious-
retically advantageous because, by ‘titrating to specifc effect,
ness produced by a process of controlled, reversible, intoxication
we can often use relatively small doses of each individual drug
of the central nervous system (CNS), whereby the patient neither
thereby minimising both each individual drug's, and the overall,
 perceives nor recalls noxious (or other) stimuli.
side effects. This ^polypharmacy approach, meaning using several
General anaesthesia is, however, often referred to as the state 
different drugs, is often referred to as balanced anaesthesia.
of the patient when the three criteria in the triad of general anaes-
 thesia have been met.
Balanced anaesthesia
The use of a number of different drugs to produce a state of
The triad of general anaesthesia
 general anaesthesia, which fulfls our criteria of unconsciousness,
1. Unconsciousness: no perception (or memory) of any sensory,
muscle relaxation and analgesia.
or indeed motor, event.
 In this context, we must also consider the whole of the peri-
2. Suppressed reflexes: autonomic (e.g. haemodynamic, respira-
operative period, this includes:
 tory and thermoregulatory) and somatic (e.g. proprioceptive
reflexes such as the righting reflex). Suppression of autonomic
● Drugs administered before the induction of anaesthesia
reflexes can be a nuisance (see Chapter 18 on Monitoring),
(premedication).
● Drugs administered for the induction of anaesthesia.
whereas suppression of somatic reflexes can be useful,
● Drugs administered for the maintenance of anaesthesia.
for example it can provide a degree of muscular
● Drugs administered in the recovery phase.
weakness/'relaxation'.
 3. Analgesia (or, more correctly in an unconscious patient, anti-
The depth of general anaesthesia
 nociception): can also be thought of as suppressed responses/
reflexes to nociceptive sensory inputs.
Some texts refer to the stages and planes of anaesthesia that try to
mark the progression of the continuum between consciousness
We could potentially produce all three components in a patient
and death. When ether was used as the sole anaesthetic agent,
following administration of a single anaesthetic' drug. If, however,
these stages and planes could be fairly well defined. Table 1.1
that drug did not have very good analgesic properties, then we
describes their features for the dog. However, the features of these
1
2  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Table 1.1 Stages of ether anaesthesia in the dog.
Stage of anaesthesia
 Depression of CNS 
MM colour
 Pupil size
Eyeball activity
Breathing
Stage I: stage of voluntary
?Sensory cortex
N / flushed 
Small
Voluntary
Rapid/irregular 
movement/excitement
Stage ll: stage of involuntary
Motor cortex
Flushed
Dilated 
Increased
Irregular
movement/excitement
Decerebrate rigidity
'delirium'
Stage I (light surgicall: plane 1
 Midbrain
Flushed / N
Smaller
Increased
Slow/regular
 Stage Il (moderate surgical: plane 2
 Spinal cord 
N
Miotic
Fixed, ventral rotation 
Slow/regular
Stage Ill (deep surgicall: plane 3
 Spinal cord 
N/ pale
Miotic
Ventral rotation
Large abdominal component
 Stage I (excessive surgicall: plane 4
 Spinal cord 
Pale
Bigger 
Abdominal/shallow
Stage IV: paralysis (death follows 
Medulla
 Pale/cyanotic
Mydriatic
Central
 None/agonal gasps
respiratory and subsequent cardiac
arrest)
Stage
Pulse rate & BP
 Palpebral reflex
Cormeal reflex
Swallowing
Cough
 Pedal withdawal
Comments
Rapid/high
+
+
+
+
Analgesia?
×
Rapid/high
+
+
Unconscious
X
I (iplane 1)
N/N
Poss slight
+
-
+
I (iplane 2)
N/N
Slight
I (plane 3)
Rapid/low
Il (plane 4)
Rapid/low
Anal reflex poor
IV
'Shocky'
Anal/bladder sphincters relax
N = normal
 Changes tabled above refer specifically to those observed during ether anaesthesia in the dog.
 Surgical stimulation may alter haemodynamic and respiratory variables via autonomic reflexes which persist into stage Il, planes 2-3.
Table 1.2 Summary of effects of general anaesthesia.
CNS depression
● Loss of consciousness
● Damping of reflexes 
OCardiovascular
→Hypotension
Respiatory
→ Hypoventilation
OThermoregulatory
→Hypothermia
Postural
→ Reduced muscle tone
● Central modulation of nociception (hopefully providing analgesia/antinociception)
CVS depression
● Refle (e.g. baroreflex) suppression (centrally and peripherally)
●
 Changes in autonomic balance
→Hypotension
●
 Changes in vasomotor tone (drug effects, centrally and peripherally)
●
 Myocardial depression 
Direct (drugs)
O Indirect (e.g. hypoxaemia, hypercapnia [acidosis])]
 Respiratory depression
●
Reflex suppresson (ventilatory response to TPCO,[pH] and ↓O)
●
Reduced respiratory muscle activity (↓ sighing and yawning)
 Alveolar collapse/small airway closure (atelectasis)
→ Hypoventilation
●
 Reduced functional residual capacity
(hypercapnia/hypoxaemia)
●
 Ventilation/perfusion mismatch
Concepts of general anaesthesia
3
stages/planes of canine ether anaesthesia do not necessarily apply
of oxygen and removal of waste products. If this fails, we can
when we do not want to use ether, when we need to consider
expect increased patient morbidity and mortality. There are no
safe anaesthetics; there are only safe anaesthetists.
macy? to achieve the desired state/depth of general anaesthesia
and when we add surgical stimulation to the anaesthetised patient,
Further reading
because depth of anaesthesia is not only related to the dose' of
drug/s administered, but is also dependent upon the degree of
Jones RS (2002) A history of veterinary anaesthesia. Annales de
stimulation (usually surgery) at the time. Nevertheless, considera-
Veterinaria de Murcia 18, 7-15.
tion of anaesthetic depth does make us think about patient
Muir WW (2007) Considerations for General Anesthesia. In:
monitoring.
Lumb and Jones’“
Veterinary Anesthesia  and Analgesia.
 Table 1.1 is included purely for interest, but it is important to
4" Edition. Eds. Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA.
note that during the induction of anaesthesia, stage I (involun-
Blackwell Publishing. Table in Chapter 2, pp 14.
tary excitement/movement) may be witnessed; and during recov-
Schupp M & Hanning C (2003) Physiology of Sleep. British
ery from anaesthesia, all the stages are traversed in the reverse
Journal of Anaesthesia: CEPD Reviews 3 (3), 69-74.
order, such that emergence excitement (stage II) may be observed.
(Distinguishes sleep from general anaesthesia; useful informa-
tion on effects of sleep deprivation for the anaesthetist.)
Importantstagesofanaesthesia
Steffey EP (2001) Anesthesia classified. In:
：Veterinary
● Pre-operative assessment: patient stabilisation; provision of
 Pharmacology and Therapeutics 8"h Edition. Ed. Adams HR.
Iowa State University Press. Subsection of Chapter 9, PP
analgesia.
● Premedication: anxiolysis/sedation and initiation of analgesia
162-163.
 provision if not already provided.
● Induction of anaesthesia.
● Maintenance of anaesthesia: continuation of analgesia/anti-
 nociception provision.
● Recovery from anaesthesia (sometimes referred to as ‘re-
animation'): aftercare; continuation of analgesia provision.
 Self-test section
1.
 Define general anaesthesia.
Conclusions
2.
What do you understand by the phrase balanced
The effects of general anaesthesia are summarised in Table 1.2.
anaesthesia"?
Our main objective is to maintain tissue perfusion, with delivery
Pre-operative assessment
Learning objectives
To be familiar with the American Society of Anesthesiologists? physical status classification scheme.
 To be able to recognise features of the patient's signalment (e.g. species, breed, age) that have implications for choice of
anaesthetic drugs and technique/s.
History and clinical examination
II Slight risk Slight to mild systemic disease, but causing no
 ane uxa p qno p Aris po y
well).
They can give you clues as to the health status of the animal, which
III Moderate risk. Mild to moderate systemic disease, causing
may influence your choice of anaesthetic drugs and techniques
 clinical signs (animal not compensating fully).
and can affect the outcome of general anaesthesia.
 IV High risk Extreme systemic disease constituting a threat to
 In addition to a normal thorough clinical examination, try to
life.
establish the following:
V  Grave risk Moribund and not expected to survive >24 h.
sh uqnu eun ji suu uuado me! jo n o
Add E' to any class if the animal presents as an emergency.
required.
● Loose teeth or tartar: important during laryngoscopy and tra-
cheal intubation as loose things tend to get displaced down the
Factors affecting anaesthetic risk
airway.
The factors affecting anaesthetic risk are listed below, not all are
● Venous access: for horses, assess the patency of the jugular
patient-related. The duration of anaesthesia and surgery are par-
veins bilaterally. For small animals, assess superficial limb
ticularly related to risk.
veins, and ear veins for breeds like Basset hounds, as these may
be more accessible than limb veins. If a patient has undergone,
● Patient's health.
or is to undergo, limb amputation, the options are reduced.
● Urgency: elective or emergency procedure.
 Patients with cardiac pacemakers may have one ligated external
● Surgery: surgeon's experience, duration of surgery, type of
surgery, gravity of surgery, surgery that involves the airway/
jugular vein.
● Facilities available (surgical and anaesthetic): equipment, drugs,
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA)
 referral hospital, general practice or feld.
physical status classification
● Help available and experience of available personnel.
● Anaesthetist: experience, duration of surgery (tiredness/
Having completed the history and clinical examination, assign
vigilance/boredom), type of surgery.
the animal to one of the ASA physical status classes below, as
● Duration of anaesthesia and surgery.
this can help to decide whether anaesthesia can proceed, or
whether further investigations or patient stabilisation are war-
Anaesthetist
ranted first.
Tiredness can be a problem; 17h without sleep results in a reduc-
 I  Minimal risk. Normal healthy animal. No detectable under-
tion of psychomotor performance equivalent to a blood alcohol
lying disease.
concentration of 50 mg/dl; and 24 h of sleep deprivation reduces
4
Pre-operative assessment
5
performance equivalent to a blood alcohol concentration of
● Brachycephalics: brachycephalic
airway
obstruction
100 mg/dl. The current UK legal driving limit is 80 mg/dl.
syndrome (BAOS), also called brachycephalic upper airway
syndrome (BUAS) or brachycephalic obstructive airway syn-
Physiological function
drome (BOAS). Use acepromazine with caution (see Chapter 
Anaesthesia ('enforced unconsciousness") is accompanied by
4 on premedication).
depression of normal physiological functions and often incurs a
● Sight hounds (particularly Greyhounds, in which the original
degree of hypoventilation, hypotension and hypothermia, due to
work was done): have very little body fat, relatively little muscle
depression of respiratory, cardiovascular and brain functions.
 mass compared with bone mass and different/slower metabo-
Whilst the majority of animals cope with this suppression well,
d s id se s sp  rn os 
when the stressors of surgery with possible hypovolaemia,
●Doberman
 Pinschers: dilated
cardiomyopathy;
von
hypothermia and pain are added, animals may become more
Willebrand's disease; cervical spinal instability.
physiologically compromised, which increases their risk of peri-
● Boxers: brachycephalic; sub-aortic stenosis.
● St Bernards: atrial fbriltion; laryngeal paralysis.
operative morbidity and mortality. Therefore, when animals are
 under anaesthesia, we must monitor their physiological condition
● Terriers: idiopathic pulmonary fbrosis.
with the overarching aim of maintaining adequate tissue oxygen
● Bedlington teriers: copper storage hepatopathy.
delivery (see Chapter 18 on monitoring).
● Persian cats: polycystic kidneys; brachycephalic.
 Poor oxygen delivery to the tissues means trouble. Tissues
● Draught horses: polysaccharide storage myopathy atrial fbril-
susceptible to hypoperfusion/hypoxia are:
lation; laryngeal paralysis.
● Quarter horses: hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis.
● CNS (visual cortex)
● Welsh Mountain Ponies: ventricular septal defects.
● myocardium
● Pietrain and Landrace pigs: malignant hyperthermia.
●kidneys
● liver.
Body mass
 The gastrointestinal tract mucosa and pancreas are also rela-
 Is the animal overweight or too skinny, even debilitated? Is there
tively susceptible to periods of hypoperfusion/hypoxia; and in
a recent history of weight gain or loss? For obese animals, try to
horses, hypoperfusion/hypoxia of large muscle masses can lead to
assess what their lean mass ought to be.
 post-anaesthetic myopathy.
 Hypoperfusion can result from hypovolaemia and/or hypoten-
Age
sion. Tissue hypoxia may be secondary to hypoperfusion (ischae-
Very young (neonatal) and very old (geriatric) animals may
mia), but may also occur secondary to hypoxaemia (i.e. reduced
 require dose adjustments (see Chapter 37 on neonates and
oxygen carriage in the blood), due to lack of haemoglobin
Chapter 38 on geriatrics). Some chronologically old animals act
(anaemia), or to respiratory gaseous exchange failure. The latter
as if they are still very young and some very young animals act as
may follow reduced inspired oxygen percentage, reduced air/
if they are very old, so be aware that the animal's chronological
(true) age may not match its physiological/behavioural age. An
tion), reduced gaseous exchange at the alveoli, or abnormal ven-
animal's response to anaesthesia often matches its physiological
tilation/perfusion ratios.
age more than its chronological age.
Hypovolaemia, cardiac disease and respiratory disease
Reducing peri-operative morbidity and mortality
Hypovolaemia, cardiac disease or respiratory disease may com-
To reduce peri-operative morbidity and mortality, we must con-
promise the patient's ability to maintain adequate tissue per-
sider the effects of anaesthesia on any disease processes already
fusion/oxygen delivery, even before the physiological insult of
 present and the problems that those disease processes pose for
anaesthesia.
anaesthesia.
 Exercise tolerance is the best indication of how compromised
We can improve the overall safety of anaesthesia with adequate
an animal is by its cardiac and/or respiratory disease. Resting
 pre-operative assessment, medical treatment and stabilisation
heart and breathing rates are also useful, especially in dogs.
of the patient where possible, and anticipation of the possible
complications.
 Renal disease
Familiarity with an anaesthetic technique is often a more
 Renal disease may influence pharmacokinetic behaviour (e.g.
important safety factor than the theoretical pharmacological
reduced renal clearance or excretion of anaesthetic agents and
advantage of an unfamiliar drug/technique.
their metabolites), so may affect the course of anaesthesia (see
Chapter 5 on induction agents and Chapter 17 on muscle relax-
Factors that may influence anaesthesia
ants). Anaesthesia may exacerbate reduced renal function, espe-
cially if periods of hypotension result in further renal injury.
Breed susceptibilities
 Protein-losing nephropathies, in which albumin and small plasma
There are specific problems in some animals that may affect
proteins are preferentially lost, may result in reduced plasma
anaesthesia.
protein binding of acidic drugs (e.g. thiopental), peripheral
6  Veterinary Anaesthesia
oedema (increased volume of distribution for water-soluble
and post-operative periods) can then be tailored to suit each
drugs), and hypercoagulability due to loss of anticoagulant factors,
individual animal (see Chapter 18 on monitoring).
such as antithrombin III, which may be exacerbated by surgery
 Pre-operative support/stabilisation should be considered,
which activates coagulation cascades (see Chapter 42 on renal
which could involve:
considerations).
● anxiolysis/sedation
● analgesia
Hepatic disease
● pre-oxygenation/oxygen supplementation
Hepatic disease may influence pharmacokinetic behaviour via
altered plasma protein concentrations (which may alter drug
● fluid therapy/diuresis
binding because free (unbound) drug is active'),reduced hepatic
● medical support (e.g. for diabetes or cardiac arrhythmias)
● surgical procedures (e.g. tracheostomy, chest or pericardial
'detoxifcation’ and delayed clearance. Coagulation may be
affected. Plasma glucose regulation may be compromised (See
drainage).
 Chapter 43 on hepatic considerations).
Appropriate monitoring should be considered and may be
instigated in the pre-operative phase.
Endocrine disease
Endocrinopathies can result in glucose, body fluid, electrolyte or
Choice of anaesthetic drugs and techniques
acid-base abnormalities and organ dysfunction. Many require
chronic treatments that may impact upon the peri-operative
The choice of anaesthetic drugs and technique/s may be influ-
 period (see Chapter 44 on endocrine considerations).
enced by the following conditions. The reader is also referred to
the chapters concerning specific body system problems.
Atopy/allergic disease
Treatments for these conditions may include antihistaminics and
Pre-existing respiratory compromise
corticosteroids, which have side effects. Atopic dogs may be more
Try to minimise any further respiratory compromise. Pre-existing
prone to allergic drug reactions, particularly with the opioids
respiratory compromise includes BAOS and laryngeal paresis.
 pethidine and morphine in this author's experience.
 These are potential problems for airway management, requiring
increased vigilance following premedication and after tracheal
Seizures, neurological disease and behavioural problems
extubation. Patients with these conditions require rapid, smooth
Anticonvulsants may alter (increase or decrease) the effect of
anaesthetic induction techniques allowing quick intubation and
anaesthetic agents, for example by reducing CNS activity or via
control of the airway, followed by rapid recoveries without hang-
hepatic enzyme induction. Progestagens may induce diabetes
over. Have plenty of endotracheal tubes of different sizes avail-
mellitus and promote hypercoagulability. Itis generally suggested
able and even a choice of tracheostomy tubes at hand. Consider
that tricyclic antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors and 
pre-oxygenation if this can be performed in a stress-free manner.
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors are stopped for 24h
Light premedication (perhaps opioid alone with or without ben-
before anaesthesia as it is difficult to predict their exact effects on
 zodiazepine) is often suitable because the animal maintains its
the course of anaesthesia.
ability to ventilate. Obese dogs may require assistance with venti-
lation once they are anaesthetised. Consider using 100% inspired
Neoplasia
oxygen. Pulse oximetry and capnography may be useful, as may
Besides the effects of the tumour itself, consider possible side
blood gas analysis. During recovery, turn the animal into sternal
effects of chemotherapeutic agents, and check for paraneoplastic
recumbency and stretch out its head/neck and tongue after tra-
 syndromes. Most patients will also be in pain.
cheal extubation to help breathing with minimal obstruction.
Monitor breathing for some time after tracheal extubation.
Osteoarthritis
Pre-existing cardiovascular disease
 Many animals with osteoarthritis will be taking long-term treat
ments, possibly including non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Try to minimise further cardiovascular compromise. Animals
(NSAIDs) which willaffect the ability of the kidneys to autoregu-
with pre-existing cardiovascular disease include hypovolaemic
late their perfusion in times of low blood pressure (which is pos-
animals and those with primary cardiac disease. Where possible,
 sible under general anaesthesia). Owners may also administer 
pre-operative stabilisation should be carried out. Fluid therapy
other therapies that have not been prescribed by a veterinary
is an important part of the overall peri-operative management.
surgeon.
Circulatory support may also require drug intervention. Patients
with cardiac problems may require ventilatory support, but
beware compromising venous return and therefore cardiac output
Pre-operative considerations
by overzealous intermittent positive pressure ventilation. Choose
A careful history and thorough clinical examination will reveal
drugs with minimal cardiovascular effects. Benzodiazepine/opioid
any problem areas. If there is time, further work-up may be war-
combinations are fnding favour for premedication, and can be
ranted, such as laboratory tests, imaging or electrodiagnostics.
'topped up or followed with minimal doses of injectable or vola-
 The whole peri-anaesthetic period (including the pre-operative
tile agents. Reduce doses, and give intravenous agents slowly.
Pre-operative assessment
7
 Pulse oximetry, capnography, electrocardiography, central venous
Further reading
pressure and arterial blood pressure monitoring should be con-
sidered (and possibly blood gas analysis).
Alef M, von Praun F, Oechtering G (2008) Is routine pre
anaesthetic haematological and biochemical screening justifed
Pre-existing renal disease
in dogs? Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 35(2),
 Try to minimise further renal insult. Careful fluid therapy is
132-140.
warranted and, if possible, measure the intraoperative arterial
Brodbelt DC, Blissitt KJ, Hammond RA, Neath PJ, Young LE,
Pfeiffer DU, Wood JLN (2008) The risk of death: the
blood pressure to give an indication of tissue/organ perfusion.
 (Peri-operative urine output measurements are not always helpful
 Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities.
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 35(5), 365-373.
as the stress response results in antidiuretic hormone (ADH)
secretion, which reduces urine production.) Support arterial
Burton D, Nicholson G, Hall GM (2004) Endocrine and meta-
 bolic response to surgery. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia,
blood pressure with fluids and positive inotropes, but be careful
with concomitant cardiovascular disease. Renal disease may delay
Critical Care and Pain 4(5), 144-147.
drug elimination. Carefully consider the timing of NSAID admin-
Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood JLN, Taylor PM (2002) The
Confdential Enquiry into Perioperative Equine Fatalities:
istration; if you are unsure, wait until the animal has recovered
and its arterial blood pressure is 'normal.
Mortality Results phases 1 and 2. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
Analgesia 29(4), 159-170.
Pre-existing hepatic disease
Try to minimise further hepatic insult. Use drugs that require
minimal hepatic metabolism for their elimination (i.e. propofol,
Self-test section
isoflurane, sevoflurane). Remember that the half-lives of other
drugs may be prolonged and, with some 'reversal’ agents, the
1.
Which of the following dog breeds would make you
half-life of the initial drug may be longer than its antagonist so be
suspicious for the presence of some, perhaps as yet
aware of the potential for re-narcosis. Altered pharmacokinetic
subclinical, problem?
behaviour can accompany liver disease, for example the plasma
A.
Border Collie
 protein concentration may be low, and many drugs are protein
B.
Labrador
bound, so in the presence of hypoproteinaemia there is the poten-
C.
Doberman Pinscher
tial for a higher concentration of free (and usually active') drug
D.
Greyhound
in the plasma, so be prepared to reduce doses. Coagulation may
2.
Which of the following is the best indicator of cardio-
be affected, so you may prefer not to attempt epidural injections.
 respiratory compromise?
Monitor the blood glucose if liver function is very poor. Monitor
Tachycardia
the body temperature.
Arrhythmia
 Heart murmur
Thermoregulatoryrequirements
 Poor exercise tolerance
Take extra care with very young, old or thin animals, and those
 Weak peripheral pulses
with endocrinopathies or liver disease. Hypothermia will delay
 Pale mucous membranes
recovery. Remember that hypoglycaemia may also be a com-
●
 Congested mucous membranes 
pounding factor in very young animals, those with insulinomas,
● Prolonged capillary refill time
or poorly controlled diabetes mellitus.
Pain
Learning objectives
To be able to define pain (IASP definition).
To be able to outline the neurophysiological pain pathways and different sites for intervention.
To be able to recognise the importance of pre-emptive analgesia.
1
 To be able to discuss the concept of balanced (multimodal) analgesia.
To be familiar with the different classes of analgesic? drugs available, their proposed sites and mechanisms of action and their
side effects.
Introduction
d api o pn sds ad siao  da a o d
Predators preferentially attack weak animals, thus it is not in the
Two of the main challenges facing vets are to recognise when an
 interests of prey species (e.g sheep, cattle, horses) to express pain
animal is in pain and how to treat that pain adequately.
or distress signals. In both groups, however, there are similar
The current definition of pain by the International Association
increases in glucocorticoid and β-endorphin levels when painful'
for the Study of Pain (IASP) is that Pain is an unpleasant sensory
or stressful conditions exist.
and emotional experience associated with actual or potential
tissue damage, or described in terms of such damage. Since
2001, there has been an accompanying note to this definition,
The different types and qualities of pain
You may hear pain referred to as:
 the posibility that an individual is experiencing pain and is in
 need of appropriate pain relieving treatment.
● Somatic versus visceral
 Although acute pain can be beneficial because it can help
● Superficial versus deep
protect against injury and enable healing; chronic unrelenting
● Fast (transmitted by A& fibres) versus slow (transmitted by C
pain is detrimental to health, physiologically (homeostatically),
fbres)
immunologically and psychologically and it can result in suffering
and distress.
Pain components
Evolution of pain
● Sensory/discriminative allows determination of the site of
 origin of the pain and the stimulus intensity, duration and
Even in the ^primordial soup’ it seems reasonable to assume
quality.
that organisms that had some way of detecting and reacting
● Motivational/affective/behavioural results in cortical arousal,
neuroendocrine responses, limbic system responses (fear/
been shown that protozoa can respond to certain noxious stimuli.
anxiety) and activation of reflexes, such as the withdrawal
We find similarity between higher order organisms in the anatomy
reflex. Limbic system responses can feed back to the cortex to
and physiology of their nervous systems, such that it may be
 enhance the individual's perception of the input. It is important
reasonable to assume that the way in which they respond to pain
to realise that fear and anxiety can enhance the perception of
is similar.
pain.
The expression of pain has probably evolved differently in dif-
● Cognitive/evaluative the higher level information processing
ferent species. Social animals (e.g. dogs, monkeys) may cry out in
that exists in man and possibly animals.
8
Pain9
Brain
Cortex
 Reticular 
formation
Modulation
Perception
 Thalamus
Brainstem
Ascending tracts
O
Transmission
A& and C
fibres
Modulation
Nociceptor
Signal transduction 
Figure 3.1 Simplified pain pathway.
 Spinal cord
Pain signal acquisition, processing and recognition
when carried to completion, results in the conscious perception
 Figure 3.1 outlines the following four steps:
of pain.
 For pain to be perceived, consciousness is required, some
1. Signal transduction whereby any noxious stimulus (mechani-
 degree of brain analysis occurs, emotions may be displayed, and
cal, thermal or chemical), is converted into an electrical signal
memory and learning occur. Animals under an adequate depth of
at a nociceptor. A8 nociceptors are mechano-thermal and 
 general anaesthesia are incapable of perceiving painful stimuli, 
rapidly adapting, whereas C fbres are polymodal and slowly
but the first three steps of nociception can still occur.
adapting.
Clinical pain, or pathological pain, occurs when excessively
2. Transmission of the nerve impulse along the nerve fibre (A8
intense or prolonged stimuli induce tissue damage that results in
or C fbre), to the dorsal horn of the spinal cord.
extended discomfort and abnormal sensitivity. It can take several
3. Modulation of incoming pain information’ at various sites
forms: inflammatory, neuropathic and sympathopathic (i.e.
within the CNS (e.g. dorsal horn of spinal cord, brainstem and
where the autonomic nervous system becomes involved); which
higher centres). Acutely, this may be in the form of hypoalgesia
are not mutually exclusive.
(reduced pain sensation), in order to allow an animal to escape
from a predator; but more chronically, it can be responsible
Features of physiological pain
for ^sensitisation’ to pain inputs, for example hyperalgesia and
allodynia (see below).
● Much is due to A& fbre activity.
4. Conscious perception of pain.
● The pain' is acute, transient and localised.
● The pain' is stimulus-specific and rapidly adaptive (see below).
Although Figure 3.1 shows ascending pain information
● One could argue that it has protective functions, in that it may
crossing the midline, in more primitive (subprimate), species,
 prevent further tissue damage; and it may add to ‘learned
the nociceptive tracts often ascend bilaterally and tend to be
avoidance responses.
more diffuse.
 These four steps provide the main sites for drug intervention,
Features of pathological pain
as will be discussed below.
 Nociception is what we could term physiological pain. It
● Much is due to C fibre activity.
involves transduction, transmission and modulation of signals
● The pain' is persistent/chronic (outlasts the stimulus duration)
arising from stimulation of nociceptors by noxious stimuli; and
and diffuse.
10  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● The ^pain' is not stimulus-specific, but is slowly adaptive.
warmth, swelling, erythema and pain. The pain occurs because
● Chronic pain is not generally protective (it offers no useful
these mediators are algogens. Some of them stimulate nociceptors
 biological function or survival advantage), but is debilitating
directly to elicit pain (e.g. histamine); and others decrease the
and increases patient morbidity.
threshold of nociceptors at the site of inflammation (e.g. prostag-
landins), and as time progresses, of nociceptors around the site
 Adaptation to painful stimuli
too. We have all experienced this when immediately after a cut,
 Unlike the situation for most other sensory neurones,the adapta-
 only the cut itself is painful, but after a few minutes the skin
tion that occurs in pain fibres (especially C fbres) tends to be a
around the cut becomes painful too.
    an  e   
Hyperalgesia
pathological pain. It is important to remember that pain is a
dynamic and multidimensional experience and that neuronal
d  e n s   si 
plasticity is important in the progression? of pain.
stimulus. It occurs at the site of injury (primary hyperalgesia) due
to inflammatory mediators either activating or sensitising the
The pain pathway
nociceptors (peripheral sensitisation), lowering their thresholds
for firing; and it spreads to the surrounding non-injured tissues
Afferent fibres
(secondary hyperalgesia) due to events in the spinal cord (central
● A8 (myelinated) fibres relay fast pain' (e.g. mechanical pain,
sensitisation).
cuts, pin-pricks); sometimes called ipicritic pain. The conduc-
Allodynia
tion velocity is 5-20 m/s.
 Allodynia is a painful response to a normally innocuous stimulus.
● C(unmyelinated) fibres relay ^slow pain' (e.g. dull pain, burning
Allodynia refers to previously silent' high threshold mechanore-
 pain, aches); sometimes called protopathic pain. The conduc-
 ceptors that become recruited to relay pain information, for
tion velocity is 0.5-1 m/s.
example tissue inflammation reduces their thresholds (part of the
A8 and C fbres have peripheral sensory receptors (noci-
 peripheral sensitisation). Besides this peripheral change, there is
ceptors), which respond to various noxious stimuli. These fbres
also a ^central’ component to this altered interpretation of infor-
 transmit signals from the periphery to the dorsal horn of the
mation/allodynia (part of the central sensitisation).
spinal cord via the dorsal roots. Three basic things happen here:
Spinal cord
● The signal may invoke a spinal/segmental reflex (e.g. with-
 The sensory nerve synapses in the dorsal horn of the grey matter
 drawal type response) because interneurones may synapse with
are the frst site where neurotransmitters and neuromodulators
 motor fibres in the ventral roots to form reflex arcs.
influence the further propagation of the signal. This is also where
● The signal may be passed on up to the brain (thalamus/reticular
 some modulation may occur. The so called gate control theory
formation/cortex).
(Melzack and Wall) (Figure 3.2) was put forward in an attempt
● The signal may undergo some processing (modulation).
to try to explain this. The signal may then travel up the spinal cord
 If the original stimulus was intense enough, or caused enough
(possibly on the contralateral side). Most of these ascending path-
tissue damage, then an inflammatory reaction will have been initi-
ways are in the spinoreticular and spinothalamic tracts of the
ated. This involves the release of cytokines and inflammatory
spinal cord, and there are probably several levels of gating in
mediators (prostaglandins, histamine, bradykinin) that result in 
these ascending pathways.
Cfibre (slow)
Aβfibre (fast)
Inactivity in this touch' nerve fbre allows 
'pain' information in C fibre to be transmitted
Aβ fibre (fast)
Activity in this 'touch' nerve fibre
 prevents pain' information in C
fibre from being transmitted 
C fibre
Figure 3.2 Gate control theory.
Pain  11
 Descending pathways in the spinal cord, both inhibitory and
new-born have a lower pain threshold in later life than those
facilitatory, also exist, and can influence the gating processes.
babies that did not.
 If the mechanoreceptor fibre (AB) is inactive, the gate is open
 NMDA receptors control non-specific cation channels (allow-
for onward and upward C fbre transmission. However, activity in
ing Nat and Ca?+ influx and K+ efflux) in nerve fbres, and are
the Aβ fbre can close the gate, so that C fbre transmission is
involved in memory and learning and synaptic plasticity in
interrupted. In simple terms, the gate theory highlights that a
 general NMDA receptors are unusual because they are both volt-
painful nerve signal has to ^cross over or through’ many gates?
 age-gated and ligand-gated and both conditions must be satisfied
(other synapses) before that signal will be further transmitted.
for them to open. In order to open, the receptor requires initial
This is why, for example, when you bang your elbow, it hurts; but
membrane depolarisation (e.g. following opening of other ion
if you rub it, it hurts less.
-  os p a  t s  (
mate binding can then open it. Glutamate is an excitatory neuro-
Pain pathways in the brain
transmitter. Glycine (usually thought of as an inhibitory
neurotransmitter) is a co-agonist for the NMDA receptor. Its
The thalamus is the part of the brain which most of the ascending
binding can potentiate glutamate's binding and action. NMDA
 paths reach frst. From the thalamus billions of nerve fibres run
receptor/channels activate slowly and remain activated (open) for
to all parts of the brain including the cerebral cortex (i.e. this is
 where the signal is probably first perceived as pain), the reticular 
are well placed for their role in neuroplasticity. Prolonged ion
activating system (sleep centre), and the limbic system (emotion).
fluxes, especially the influx of calcium (the channel's main perme-
All these neuronal connections and communications result in
ability) can affect intracelular processes and signalling, including
what we experience as pain, but they also influence further trans-
 the activation of enzymes, altered gene expression and synthesis
mission and interpretation of the signal.
and activation of receptors.
Ketamine, and possibly pethidine and one of methadone's
Neuroplasticity/neuromodulation
isomers (d-methadone), can antagonise NMDA receptor activa-
This is how the perception of a painful stimulus changes over
tion by glutamate. This can prevent central sensitisation and can
time. This is an important feature of the CNS response to pain.
even reverse it once it has occurred. Ketamine, at sub-anaesthetic
There are two main types of adaptation: desensitisation and
 doses, is commonly used in the treatrment of chronic pain states.
central sensitisation.
Nitrous oxide and xenon also have some NMDA antagonistic
actions, and even benzodiazepines may modulate NMDA recep-
Desensitisation
tor activity.
 If there is a persistent painful stimulus, and if the animal continu-
 a ad   d  n an  a 
ously feels the same degree of pain, then that animal may not be
changeably with central sensitisation. However, in the strictest
able to behave and function normally. It is physiologically benefi-
terms, wind-up is a laboratory phenomenon, whereby repetitive
 cial for the CNS to modify its response to these signals so that the
(low frequency) and prolonged C fbre input to the dorsal horn
level of pain is decreased, that is for desensitisation to occur. This
can result in reduced fring thresholds of dorsal horn neurones.
 is a more medium to long-term response to a painful stimulus
Temporal and spatial summation of depolarisation increases the
and does not always occur. The mechanisms by which it is medi-
likelihood of NMDA receptor activation, which then results in
ated are poorly understood but the descending pathways (see
enhanced and prolonged depolarisation of dorsal horn neurones,
below) are thought to be involved.
which finally increases the overall response. This wind up? is only
seen during the period of actual repetitive stimulation.
Central sensitisation
Hyperalgesia strictly refers to a patient's overall exaggerated
 Plasticity works in the other direction too and can result in central
response to a given painful stimulus; whereas sensitisation/
sensitisation. It is thought to be an adaptive response to pain that
 hypersensitivity refers to an exaggerated response of an indi-
encourages the animal to develop protective behaviour. However,
vidual neurone to a noxious stimulus.
it may become maladaptive in the long term. The mechanisms
involved are complex but we know that N-methyl D-aspartate
Descending pathways
(NMDA) receptors are involved. The result is that any subsequent
 There are a number of descending pathways (Figure 3.3) through
painful stimulus islikely to be perceived as being more painful. It
which the brain can exert a modulatory effect on nerve
fbres involved in the transmission of pain. We usually talk of
analgesia in which analgesics are given before the pain starts, so
descending inhibitory pathways, but descending facilitatory
that they are working when the noxious stimulus occurs, and
pathways also exist. The four tiers of descending inhibition are
hopefully prevent central sensitisation. The result is that any sub-
considered to be:
sequent pain is easier to control than if analgesic treatment had
been delayed until after the noxious stimulus had occurred.
● Cortex and thalamus
Central sensitisation can result in changes to the CNS that may
● Peri-aqueductal grey matter in the midbrain
last much longer than minutes or hours. Some studies have shown
● Nucleus raphe magnus in the pons and rostral medulla
that babies that had repeated blood samples taken when they were
● Medulla oblongata and spinal cord (dorsal horns).
12  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Peri-aqueductal grey matter
Naloxone
can
antagonise
opioid-
 Descending opioid system
induced
analgesia
Nucleus raphe magnus
from this
point
'downwards'
 Descending inhibitory systems
 Atipamezole, in
 addition to antagonis-
and can 
ing α2 agonist-induced
 antagonise
e.g. Serotonin (5HT1)  and 
Noradrenaline
analgesia, can also 
α2 agonist-
antagonise opioid-
induced
induced analgesia
 analgesia 
from this point
亨
? via adenosine
? via acetylcholine
'downwards', because
of the adrenergic
 mechanisms evoked 
 Dorsal horns
by opioids
Figure 3.3 Some descending pathways.
One important part of the brain that controls some of these
probably means that we should be careful of using very high
 pathways is the peri-aqueductal grey matter in the middle of the
doses of opicids, and for long periods (especially if patients
brain, which has a high concentration of opioid receptors.
are not in that much pain), and perhaps be careful not to use
Although descending inhibition is thought to work on many
very high doses of opioids in premedications before noxious
levels of the CNS it is thought to be most important at the spinal
stimulation occurs, unless we combine their use with an NMDA
level. The power of this descending inhibition is great, allowing
 antagonist (e.g. low dose ketamine). We must practise balanced
 people to run away from a crashed car that is on fire, despite
 analgesia.
having suffered broken legs in the crash; this is called stress-
Visceral and referred pain
induced analgesia.
 The descending pathways are poorly understood but we know
There are very few true nociceptors in the viscera, but many
that a wide range of neurotransmitters are involved, such as
 mechanoreceptors with different thresholds. Nociceptors show a
 gamma-aminobutyric acid, serotonin, glutamate, noradrenaline
 graded response to increasing stimulus intensity (e.g. distension,
(norepinephrine), acetylcholine, adenosine and endorphins.
ischaemia,
 inflammation). 
Visceral  noxious  stimuli
are
These neurotransmiters are an important focus for the develop-
'intensity-coded. The viscera have a low density of innervation,
ment of novel pharmacological analgesic agents. The descending
and the nerves have huge and overlapping receptive fields and so
pathways have also helped us understand how current analgesics
stimuli cannot be localised very well, which is why visceral pain
may work.
 is often vague. The innervation density of skin compared with
We now know that, for example, nitrous oxide stimulates
viscera is around 100:1, with the ratio of A8:C fbres for skin
 the endogenous opioid system; which stimulates the descending
being 1:2, compared with viscera, where the ratio is 1:8-10. C
 spinal noradrenergic system (involving 0Ω receptors); which
fibres are truly polymodal, they can transduce mechanical, chemi-
stimulates a cholinergic system, resulting in analgesia via modula-
cal and thermal information. Temporal and spatial summation of
tion at the dorsal horns. You are probably familiar with how
visceral 'nociceptor activity is important.
closely the effects of opioids and α2 agonists resemble each other;
 Sensory afferents from the viscera enter the dorsal horns of the
this is because the opioidergic and noradrenergic systems are
spinal cord. Here they synapse with cells that receive afferent
closely linked (Figure 3.3). Figure 3.4 gives a more complex over-
inputs from other sensory nerves (e.g. somatic nerves) so there is
view in which you can see why NMDA antagonists are so useful
a somato-visceral convergence of information at the dorsal horn
in preventing central sensitisation, and even reversing it; and they
cells. Visceral afferents may be accompanied by sympathetic fibres
appear to prevent the development of tolerance to opioids, and
 s0 autonomic effects may accompany visceral nociception.
may even reverse that.
Referred pain is also common. This is pain that can be localised
 s n ss i  s  s 
to a distant structure. The pain is usually referred to superficial
morphine (pure μ agonist), can increase NMDA receptor respon-
 somatic structures innervated by the same segmental spinal nerve
  i d  sr r  s
that supplies the affected viscus (or up to one or two segments
with a ^tolerance to opicids). Does this mean that we should
be careful of using opioids for pre-ermptive analgesia? I think it
alongside the visceral (heart) pain.
Pain 13
 Release of glutamate and 
Noxious
 substance P etc. at
stimulus
 synapses in dorsal hom 
NMDA
Aeu supuejbejsoad pue ON
AMPA
NK
Receptors on
act as refrograde messengers
 post-synaptic cell
 on presynaptic neurones fo
enhance, especially glutamate
release
 ↑ Intracellular Ca2+
↑cNOS
↑ iNOS
↑ cOx-2
↑PLA2
↑ PKC
↑ NO
↑ Prostaglandins 
Enzyme and receptor
 phosphorylation
 ↓ Sensitivity of opioid receptors,
Sensitivity of NMDA receptors
especially μ?
 Opioid tolerance? and
Central sensitisation
hyperalgesia?
Figure 3.4 Pathway of central sensitisation.
AMPA and NMDA receptors are glutamate receptors; NK1, neurokinin 1 receptor is a substance P receptor; cNOS, constitutive nitric oxide synthase; iNOS,
inducible nitric oxide synthase; COX-2, cyclooxygenase 2 (inducible); PLA2, phospholipase A2; PKC, protein kinase C; NO, nitric oxide.
Other aspects of pain
● Antihyperalgesia is defined as the prevention, and/or reversal
The placebo effect occurs when a patient obtains pain relied after
of, sensitisation to pain.
taking a pharmacologically inactive or inert compound. About
By definition then, analgesia is the absence of all pain,
 20% of patients respond to a placebo analgesic; demonstrating a
but most of the methods we use to try to achieve analgesia are
 strong psychological component to pain.
only partially successful, so we only really effect hypoalgesia. The
 Psychological pain is the pain experienced by a patient when
term analgesia is often used loosely to mean both true analgesia
 there is no apparent pathology, although it usually follows a previ-
and also hypoalgesia. We probably should be using the term
ous painful incident (now look back at the definition of pain).
hypoalgesics (e.g. for opioids, which raise the threshold to pain
 Phantom pain occurs when an individual perceives pain from
 AND alter its perception), antihyperalgesics (for drugs that help
a part of the body that has been removed (e.g. limb, kidney,
to reset increased central sensitisation such as NSAIDs and
tooth). There have been a few case reports of this phenomenon
 NMDA antagonists), and true analgesics (e.g. for local anaesthet-
 in animals (see Chapters 12 and 14 on local anaesthetics and
 ics). For patients under general anaesthesia, and therefore unable
 Chapter 41 on orthopaedic concerns).
to consciously perceive pain, the term antinociception is pre-
ferred to analgesia or hypoalgesia. We can achieve analgesia/
Analgesia
hypoalgesia by:
● Analgesia is defined as a lack of pain sensation.
● Pharmacological agents
● Hypoalgesia is defined as a reduction of pain sensation to a
●  Surgical intervention (e.g. neurectomy)
more tolerable level.
● Nerve stimulation e.g. (TENS, acupuncture).
14  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Pharmacological agents
provided before surgery and should be continued into the post-
We can attempt to provide analgesia/hypoalgesia in the following
operative period for as long as the pain is likely to be present and
not bearable. The concept of this provision and continuation
ways.
of pre-emptive analgesia is what is called preventive analgesia.
 Interrupt the pain pathway at the site of
In this case, both the establishment and the maintenance of
noxious signal transduction 
peripheral and central sensitisation are prevented or reduced.
Local anaesthetics will prevent nociceptor activation. Anti-
Mu/timodal (balanced) analgesia
inflammatories (e.g. NSAIDs) will also reduce nociceptor stimu-
lation by reducing the amount of inflammatory mediators in the
The pain pathway can be interrupted at more than one site;
sensitising soup’ produced at the site of tissue injury. We also
and the more sites we can target, the better will be the overall
know that c2 receptors and opioid receptors are expressed in
analgesia provision. Another aim of this balanced analgesic
inflamed tissues, so opioids and α2 agonists may have peripheral
 approach is to maximise the analgesia provision by using drugs
 actions too. We are also learning that drugs like corticosteroids 
from different classes with complementary analgesic activities,
and NSAIDs have central actions in addition to their peripheral
whilst simultaneously minimising the overall side effects for the
actions.
patient.
 Interrupt the pain pathway at the site/s of
Sequential analgesia
signal transmission
 Sequential analgesia was once commonly used, especially in small
These sites are the peripheral and central neurones. Local anaes-
rodents. It refers to the administration of a potent μ agonist (e.g.
thetics prevent nerve conduction and can be used for, e.g nerve
 morphine) pre-operatively, which was then (especially after ^mild
blocks, ring blocks and neuraxial anaesthesia.
surgery), partially reversed post-operatively (e.g. by buprenor-
phine or butorphanol), in the hope of minimising the side effects
Affect modulation of the signal
of the full μ agonist (drowsiness), while maintaining decent anal-
 gesia (by the partial agonist or agonist/antagonist).
activity at receptors in the dorsal horns and higher centres, includ-
ing opioid receptors, C2 adrenoreceptors, NMDA receptors and
other ion channels. Opioids, 02 agonists and NMDA receptor
Opioids
antagonists can be administered systemically or neuraxially.
Tramadol, tricyclic antidepressants and anticonvulsants (e.g.
 Throughout most of recorded history, the opium poppy ( Papaver
somniferurm) has been used to provide pain relief. Despite all we
 gabapentin) can also be used.
have learned about pain, morphine is still the mainstay of anal-
Reduce perception of incoming signals in
gesic therapy for severe pain in human medicine.
the higher centres
● Opiates are drugs derived from the opium poppy (e.g. mor-
This can be achieved by anxiolysis, sedation or general anaesthe-
phine, papaveretum, codeine).
sia, using anxiolytics/sedatives (phenothiazines, C2 agonists,
● Opioids are drugs that work in a similar manner to morphine.
benzodiazepines), opioids (provide some sedation), and inject-
● Narcotic analgesics are basically any of the opioids, as they
 able and inhalational general anaesthetic agents.
provide analgesia but can also induce a state similar to sedation
Or euphoria (a sense of well-being) called narcosis.
This chapter focuses on the main groups of analgesic drugs that
Opioids exert their effects by binding to opioid receptors.
 you are likely to come across.
Originally it was thought that opioid receptors could only be
found in the CNS. It is now known that they also occur in the
Pre-emptive and preventive analgesia
periphery, such as in the gastrointestinal tract and in the joints
It is recognised that if analgesia (true analgesia being better than
(especially after inflammation). The receptor distribution in the
hypoalgesia) can be provided before a noxious stimulus is applied,
CNS (and probably elsewhere) differs between species (and prob-
then any subsequent pain experienced is of lesser intensity and
ably to some extent between individuals of the same species), so
duration, and is more easily controllable with analgesic drugs,
that different species may respond differently to different opioids
because the initiation and establishment of peripheral and central
and/or may require different doses. For instance, μ agonists in
sensitisation is prevented (or at least reduced). This is called pre-
humans tend to cause narcosis, whereas in horses (and cats) they
emptive analgesia.
can cause increased locomotor activity and excitement (in large
A one-off dose of analgesic/hypoalgesic given before surgery,
doses). This is thought to be because horses and cats have fewer
however, may have only a limited duration of action and may
 μ receptors in their CNS compared with humans and so require
not outlast the pain and inflammation that follows surgical inter-
lower doses. Another example is that some birds and reptiles have
vention, and therefore will not continue to pre-empt all post-
more K-receptors in their CNS and so respond much better to
operative pain. It is for this reason that pain relief should be
K-agonist than μ agonist analgesics.
Pain15
The known receptor types are listed below. They are now
Table 3.1 Comparison of opioid receptor effects.
classified according to the chronological order by which they
were cloned. However, most people still use the traditional
μ
K
6
classification (Greek letters) for everyday use.
 Analgesia
● OP-1 (8 delta) (81, 82?).
leudseidns
+++
● OP-2 (K kappa) (Kl, K2, k3?).
 Spinal
++
++
● OP-3 (μ mu) (μl, μ2?).
十
● G sigma is no longer classifed as an opioid receptor. It is now
●Peripheral
++
++
thought to be closely associated with NMDA receptors, perhaps
Respiratory
+++
? Antitussive
+ +? Antitussive
 the phencyclidine binding site.
 depression
● E epsilon is the theoretical receptor that the endogenous β-
Pupil
Miosis (dog);
Miosis
Mydriasis
 endorphins bind to,but has only been found in rat vas deferens;
mydriasis (cat, horse)
its existence elsewhere has yet to be proven.
Gastrointestinal
个个
↓?
↑
● Nociceptin/Orphanin FQ peptide (NOP) receptor: the role of 
motility
this receptor is uncertain, but it may help set the thresholds to
 pain, and may be involved in neuronal plasticity and tolerance
Euphoria
+++
to opioids.
Dysphoria
一
+++
The receptors shown in italics are some of the subtypes of
 Sedation
++
++
each receptor that are thought to exist. The existence of some
 Dependence
+++
of the different subtypes is controversial as although there is
pharmacological evidence that they exist, they have not all been
isolated in cloning studies. There may, however, be some post-
translational processing of receptors that results in expression
of the different subtypes. There are also likely to be species
Opioid effects
differences.
Apart from the analgesic effects described, opioids have a
The different receptors mediate their effects mainly via
number of other effects, which differ between agents and species.
G-protein interactions, resulting in, e.g. membrane ion permea-
Some of the more common effects are outlined in Table 3.1.
 bility changes or intracellular enzyme activation or inhibition.
It is an interesting fact that when an animal is in pain, any side
effects of opioid administration are very much reduced. All tend
Endogenous ligands
to produce analgesia at lower doses than those required for
● Pro-opiomelanocortin → β endorphin → acts on μ and 8
sedation.
receptors.
 Respiratory depression
● Pro-enkephalin
1→ (Met)enkephalin, (Leu)enkephalin and 
 Opioids reduce the sensitivity of the respiratory centre to changes
metorphamide → act on & (K and μ) receptors.
in blood carbon dioxide tension and can cause respiratory depres-
● Pro-dynorphin > dynorphin A,dynorphin B, C-neoendorphin,
sion. This effect does not seem to be as great a problem in the
β-neoendorphin → act on K (& and μ) receptors.
 common veterinary species as it is for humans, unless the potent
● Unknown precursor → endomorphin 1 and endomorphin 2
[ agonists, such as fentanyl, are used in high doses.
→ act on μ receptor.
1daa1 dON uo 511  OH O/N ← OH O/N 01d-1d ●
Gastrointestinal effects
The location of the receptors in the CNS determines their
 In animals that can vomit, many opioids act on the chemorecep-
effects. In the spinal cord (dorsal horn) opioid receptors inhibit
tor trigger zone (CTZ; not protected by the blood-brain barrier)
the release of primary pain neurotransmitters (e.g glutamate,
in the medulla (CNS), to initiate vomiting. However, most opioids
 u sdai do jo roqu aae e e a d n
also act on the vomiting centre itself (inside the blood-brain
 peri-aqueductal grey matter where they stimulate descending pain
barrier) to produce anti-emetic effects. The more fat-soluble the
control systems, so opioids are very effective against pain, and
opioid (e.g. methadone compared with morphine) the more likely
especially C fbre second pain or dull pain. There are not many
 it is to cross the blood-brain barrier faster, so its emetic activity
opioid receptors in the reticular formation ('state of arousal'
(action in the CTZ) is offset by its anti-emetic activity (action in
centre) and opioids are less effective against sharp pain (the retic-
the vomiting centre) so no vomiting occurs.
ular formation is an important reception site for sharp pain infor-
 In general, with the exception of pethidine (see below), opioids
mation). Opicid receptors are, however, found in the limbic
increase the motility (they increase the smooth muscle tone) of
system and are probably involved in the emotional aspect of pain.
the gastrointestinal tract, but this motility is uncoordinated and
 It seems that NOP receptors and N/O FQ are also involved in pain
 S0 the propulsive peristaltic activity is reduced overall. Sphincter
information processing.
tone is increased. Sometimes evacuation (defecation) occurs
16  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 3.2 Relative receptor affinities of some opioids.
ssasne jo swat u pauiedxa Aped) saiena pisabieue aapeaa E'e agel
to central opioid receptors).
μ receptor
K receptor
receptor
Analgesic
 % protein binding 
Drug
pkKa
 Lipid solubility
 Pethidine
++
+-
一
efficacy
Morphine
+++
+-
+/-
1
30
Morphine
7.9
Low
Methadone
+++
1/10
70
 Pethidine
8.5
Medium
Fentanyl
+++
-(+)
100
80
Fentanyl
8.4
Very high
 Alfentanil
+++
10-25
90
 Alfentanil
6.5
High
 Etorphine
+++
++
++
1000
90
 Sufentanil 
8
Very high
 Buprenorphine
+++(paitial agonist)
++(antagonist)
+/-
50
70-90
 Remifentanil
7.1
Medium
Butorphanol
++(agonist/antagonist)
++(agonist)
 Naloxone
+++ (antagonist)
++(antagonist)
+(antagonist)
 pe as pii  an su ae  
cumulate in fatty tissues.
before sphincter tone increases. Pethidine is spasmolytic due to
its anticholinergic (parasympatholytic) effects. It is also spasmo-
'Pure' μ agonists
lytic on the biliary and pancreatic duct sphincters. Bear in mind
Morphine: 0.1-1.0 mg/kg (tend towards lower doses for
that dogs probably do not have a true sphincter of Oddi, whereas
cats and horses) IM, IV, SC
cats do.
 s  n ise s i,  s 
compared. Can cause histamine release if administered IV. Dose
Cardiovascular effects
interval 2-4h (dogs, horses); 4-6h (cats) after IM or IV admin-
Cardiovascular effects are wide ranging and depend on the agent
istration. Poor bioavailability if administered orally. Can cause
and species. Some opioids cause histamine release and can cause
vomiting. Can also be administered extradurally and intra-
hypotension. Morphine can cause a centrally mediated (vagomi-
articularly. Cats have poor glucuronyl transferase activity, so there
metic) hypotension and bradycardia. Etorphine and carfentanil
is slow glucuronidation of morphine; and they tend to produce
can cause massive hypertension.
less  morphine-6-glucuronide  than  morphine-3-glucuronide.
Morphine-6-glucuronide is an even more potent analgesic than
Metabolism
the parent morphine. Morphine-3-glucuronide is inactive (or
Metabolism is hepatic, with biliary and urinary excretion of the
may have some antagonistic properties).
metabolites, so with any active metabolites there is the potential
for enterohepatic recycling.
Pethidine; 3.5-10mg/kg IM, SC, (not IV because of
potential histamine release)
Classification of opioids
Pethidine is less potent than morphine (about 1/10th). Duration
Opioids are classified depending on the receptors they mainly
of effect 45-60+ min in dogs (at about 5 mg/kg), probably nearer
act upon and their effects on those receptors. However, many
120min in cats (at about 10 mg/kg) (the dose interval is often
 opioids have effects on more than one receptor type as shown in
 quoted as 1-2h), and duration probably nearer to 30min in
Table 3.2.
horses and cattle. It has anticholinergic spasmolytic effects.
 The terms receptor affinity and potency can be confusing
 Pethidine is said to be vagolytic (whereas other opicids tend to be
when applied to the opioids. Affinity for receptor types is shown
vagomimetic), and is supposed, therefore, not to lower the heart
in Table 3.2, but an opioid's affnity for a receptor does not give
rate; although this supposed vagolytic effect may be partly due to
any information about its efficacy. For example, naloxone (an
histamine release and the reflex tachycardic response to a fall in
antagonist) has the same (and probably slightly greater) affinity
arterial blood pressure. There are, however, conflicting reports of
for the μ receptor as morphine (an agonist); but they have oppo-
the effects of pethidine on heart rate. A reduction in heart rate,
site effects.
reported with high (10mg/kg) doses, may be due to pethidine's
When discussing potency, the context should be clarifed.
agonistic action on c2B receptors, which results in peripheral
Potency can be described in terms of affinity for a receptor or in
vasoconstriction with subsequent increase in arterial blood pres-
terms of clinical efficacy (dose required for effect), as in Table 3.3.
sure followed by reflex bradycardia. Pethidine also has some direct
 Alfentanil has a more rapid onset and shorter duration than 
negative inotropic effect (via calcium channel blockade) at doses
fentanyl. The more rapid onset is because its pKa is lower. The
 >3.5 mg/kg, but this may have little clinical relevance. One of its
shorter duration is because its volume of distribution is less (it is
metabolites, norpethidine, has some analgesic activity, and can
more protein bound and less lipid soluble), which allows more
cause seizures at high doses, but this is highly unlikely to be a
rapid clearance; and it is not taken up by the lungs. It also has no
problem with clinical usage. Pethidine also has local anaesthetic-
active metabolites, whereas fentanyl has a partially active metabo-
like activity, and is antagonistic at NMDA receptors.
Pain  17
Methadone; 0.1-0.4mg/kg IM, IV, SC (0.1-0.5mg/kg
human medicine as boluses and infusions intra-operatively for
for cats)
analgesia. Their use in general veterinary practice is not yet
 Methadone is very similar to morphine, except it does not tend
common. Remifentanil is metabolised by red blood cell cholineste-
to initiate vomiting (a useful property), probably because of its
rase, and its elimination is therefore independent of hepatic func-
 greater lipid solubility; so it crosses the blood-brain barrier to
tion, which is very useful in cases with hepatic disease. However,
produce anti-emetic effects in the vomiting centre at the same
its duration is so short that when an infusion is terminated, other
time that it reaches the CTZ (outside the blood-brain barrier)
analgesics must be ‘on board’ to ensure continuation of
where it has emetic effects. (Morphine reaches the CTZ much
analgesia.
earlier than the vomiting centre, so emesis occurs initially). This 
also means that the peak activity is quicker after methadone
Etorphine
(about 5 min after IV administration) than after morphine (about
 This is an extremely potent μ agonist reputedly having 10,000
10-20min after IV administration). Methadone may have a
 times the analgesic potency of morphine. It is a highly dangerous
longer duration of action than morphine and it is slightly cumula-
drug in the case of accidental self-administration, and its use
tive. Its NMDA antagonistic effects may be useful.
should not be contemplated unless antagonists are available.
In the UK, etorphine gained notoriety as part of the cocktail
Papaveretum; 0.2-1.0 mg/kg IM (0.1-0.3 mg/kg for cats)
that makes up Large Animal Immobilon?. Immobilon is only
This is a mixture of morphine and other opiate alkaloids. Its
available in packs that also contain its antagonist, Revivon
effects are very similar to morphine. Papaveretum can cause his-
(diprenorphine).
  e d  sde i i a ji  a
neuroleptanalgesic combination along with acepromazine (ACP)
Partial μ agonists
for aggressive animals.
Buprenorphine: 0.005-0.02 mg/kg IM, IV or SC
Buprenorphine has a very high affinity for μ receptors but only a
Fentanyl; 0.001-0.005mg/kg IV
Fentanyl is a very potent analgesic and is useful for controlling
 antagonistic action at K receptors. Buprenorphine is licensed for
intra-operative pain. It has a fast onset of action (within 1-2 min),
use in the dog and cat. It has a slow onset time (about 30 min) but
and a short effective half-life of about 10 min making it suitable
 a correspondingly long duration of action of about 6-8h. It has
for repeated boluses or infusions, at least in the short to medium
shorter durations of actions in some pain models and some other
term (see later). It is, however, a potent respiratory depressant,
species (about 2 h in sheep). The drug has poor oral bioavailability
so that mechanical ventilation is often required in anaesthetised
(if swallowed), because of frst-pass metabolism, but recent work
 patients. Fentanyl actually has a very large volume of distribution
in cats has shown excellent absorption following oral (buccal)
and long elimination half-life due to its high degree of fat
 transmucosal (OTM) administration of the solution intended for
solubility, so (a bit like thiopental), too many repeated doses
injection. The dose used in cats for OTM administration is the
or too prolonged an infusion, may result in accumulation of
same as that for analgesia following IV or IM injection, i.e. 0.01-
the drug.
0.02 mg/kg. Unfortunately, similarly good OTM absorption does
 Fentanyl is combined with fluanisone (a butyrophenone) in the
not occur in dogs because of their different salivary pH. Horses,
product “Hypnorm' (marketed as a neuroleptic anaesthetic/anal-
however, have similar salivary pH to cats (approx. 9).
gesic for rabbits, rats, mice and guinea pigs).
 Transdermal fentanyl patches are available which slowly
Agonist-antagonists
release fentanyl at a constant rate, the fentanyl then being readily
Butorphanol: 0.2-0.5 mg/kg IM, IV, SC, dogs and cats;
absorbed across the skin. The dose rate required is 2-5 μg/kg/h;
(0.05-0.2mg/kg horses)
and patches are available with release rates of 12.5, 25, 50, 75 and
This drug is the source of much confusion in anaesthesia and
100μg/h (corresponding to 1.25, 5, 7.5 and 10 mg). For patch
 pharmacology textbooks. It is an agonist-antagonist with affinity
application, the hair should be shaved off to ensure that the patch
for both μ and K receptors. It has mainly antagonistic effects on
actually contacts the skin; the dorsum of the neck is a good place;
μ receptors and mainly agonist effects on K receptors. In the
and the edges of the patch can be secured with tissue glue before
majority of studies it also has a short duration of action of about
a light bandage is applied. Heavy bandaging may result in local
45 min (but may be longer, up to 1-2h, even up to 5h, depending
vasodilation secondary to a thermal insulating effect, which may
on dose, species and circumstance). Butorphanol is also a potent
result in too rapid drug absorption. After patch application in
antitussive and it was first licensed for this use.
dogs, peak plasma levels take about 20h to be achieved and last
Butorphanol is now commonly used in the UK in various
for 72 h; in cats, plasma levels take 12 h to peak, and patches last
combinations with C2 agonists (i.e. medetomidine/ketamine/
for 5 days. Beware local skin lesions and the effects of, for example
 butorphanol combinations in small animals, especially cats; and
heat pads, which cause local vasodilation and increase absorption.
 C2-agonist/butorphanol combinations in horses). Butorphanol
 For horses, one 10mg patch per 150 kg body mass is suggested;
has been associated with excitement and dysphoria in horses, dogs
onset time is about 1-3 h and duration about 32-48 h.
and cats. Whereas dysphoria is more likely following butorpha-
 Alfentanil, sufentanil and remifentanil are synthetic
cana-
nol, euphoria is more likely after buprenorphine. Nevertheless,
logues of fentanyl with even shorter half-lives and are used in
and especially in combination with acepromazine, o2 agonists or
18  Veterinary Anaesthesia
benzodiazepines, butorphanol appears to have synergistic seda-
● Anti-inflammatory action (inhibit phospholipase A2).
tive effects.
● Inhibit catechol-o-methyl transferase, and up-regulate β adren-
Although in theory buprenorphine and butorphanol are more
ergic receptors to facilitate the effects of catecholamines.
potent analgesics than morphine (2-5 times), pharmacological
studies have shown that the agonist-antagonists tend to have a
Anti-inflammatory actions
ceiling effect of analgesia where higher doses do not seem to
Glucocorticoids enter the cell and bind to cytoplasmic receptors.
 provide greater analgesia. Buprenorphine has a bell-shaped curve,
The steroid-receptor complex then enters the cell nucleus where
where very high (higher than likely to be used clinically) doses
it affects expression of various genes. Depending on the cell,
produce less analgesic effects than lower doses. A pure μ agonist
steroids can have a multitude of anti-inflammatory effects:
 should therefore be the choice for patients in severe pain.
● Corticosteroids enhance the synthesis of lipocortin 1, which
inhibits phospholipase A2 (PLA2), therefore there will be a
μ antagonists
Naloxone (0.04-1.0mg/kg)
reduction of PLA2 products, i.e. a decrease in arachidonic acid
 Naloxone is a pure antagonist with affnity for all three opicid
and platelet activating factor (PAF) production. (PAF is a
receptors. It is used mainly to antagonise the effects of full or
 partial μ agonists. It has a short duration of action of less than
chemotaxin too). Arachidonic acid is a 20 carbon fatty acid
an hour so repeated doses may be required.
which contains 4 double bonds. Its chemical name is eicosa-
(twenty) tetra- enoic (4 double bonds) acid (or ETE for short)
(Figure 3.5).
Clinical use of opioids
● Reduction of COX-2 products, i.e. decrease in arachidonic
 There are a number of applications where opioids may be used in
acid metabolites, so decreased prostaglandin/leukotriene
veterinary medicine:
production.
● Treatment of pain.
● Reduction of iNOS products, i.e. decreased NO. (NO is a
● Neuroleptanalgesia (see Chapter 4 on premedication).
 potent vasodilator).
● As part of a balanced analgesia regimen (multimodal pain
● Increased amount/activity of IkBo, which normally inhibits
therapy).
nuclear transcription factor kappa B (NFkB is a transcription
● As part of a balanced anaesthesia regimen.
factor which promotes cytokine production).
● As extradural (epidural) analgesics (see Chapters 12, 14 and 16
● Membrane stabilising effects, so reduction of mast cell
 on local anaesthetics and techniques).
degranulation (histamine release); and decreased lysosomal
· As antitussives.
enzyme release.
●As spasmolytics (pethidine).
● To decrease gut motility (antidiarrhoeals e.g. Codeine).
Potency and routes of administration
The  glucocorticoids have  variable mineralocorticoid effects
There are two main considerations before using opioids. The
(Table 3.4).
first (apart from choosing the right drug at the right dose), is to
Glucocorticoids can be administered via a wide variety of
make sure there are no contra-indications for use such as respira-
routes depending on the product formulation:
tory depression, increased intra-cranial pressure, oesophageal or
biliary/pancreatic duct obstruction. The second involves the legal
●Intravenous
implications, as many opioids are controlled drugs.
● Intramuscular
● Oral
● Inhalation (e.g. beclomethasone)
Corticosteroids
● Intra-articular
Corticosteroids are extremely effective anti-inflammatory drugs.
● Topical.
can be thought of as having analgesic properties. It is generally
accepted that these analgesic properties come from the reduc-
    n    
resulting effects these can have on inflammation and nociceptors.
Table 3.4 Relative effects of common corticosteroids.
It is controversial as to whether it can be stated that steroids
Drug
Anti-inflammatory
Mineralocorticoid
Duration (h)
have any direct analgesic action. They are included in this
action
action
chapter because clinically they can be a potent tool in some
circumstances.
Cortisol
1
8-12
The effects of corticosteroids include:
Methylprednisolone
5
0.5
12-36
● Altered carbohydrate, lipid and protein metabolism.
Betamethasone
25
0
36-72
● Altered fluid and electrolyte balance.
Dexamathasone
25
0
36-72
● Immunosuppression.
Pain  19
 Cell membrane phospholipids
Corticosteroids
 Phospholipase A2 (PLA2)
inhibit
 Arachidonic acid
 Platelet activating factor (PAF)
Cyclo-oxygenase (Cox) 
12-LOX1
12-hydroxyETE
5-Lipoxygenase (5-LOX) :
15-LOX1
(12-HETE)
 Cyclic endoperoxides 
Lipoxins
PGG2
A&B
PGH2
 5-hydroperoxy eicosatetraenoic acid 
(5-HPETE)
Prostacyclin synthase ?
:Thromboxane synthase!
: Prostaglandin synthase 
Prostacyclin
Thromboxanes
Leukotrienes
(PGI2)
(TXA2)
(LT)
Prostaglandins
(PGE2, PGF2α, PGD2)
Figure 3.5 Site of corticosteroid action.
The principal eicosanoids (arachidonic acid metabolites) are the prostaglandins, thromboxanes and leukotrienes. Others include the lipoxins. The term prosta-
noids is often reserved for just the prostaglandins and thromboxanes.
Side effects are numerous and include:
The carboxylic acids include:
● Immunosuppression.
● Salicylic acids (e.g aspirin).
● Laminitis in susceptible animals.
● Acetic acids (e.g. phenylacetic acids such as diclofenac and
● Hypothalamo-pituitary axis suppression.
eltenac).
●Abortion, so care is required in pregnant animals.
● Propionic acids (e.g. ketoprofen, carprofen, ibuprofen,
● Usually contraindicated in corneal ulceration.
vedaprofen).
● May result in gastrointestinal and renal compromise secondary
● Fenamic acids (e.g. meclofenamic acid, tolfenamic acid).
 to reduction in prostaglandin production; beware combination
●Nicotinic acids (e.g. flunixin).
with NSAIDs.
 Paracetamol is a non-acidic compound, and a para-aminophe-
nol derivative. It is a good antipyretic, but usually referred to as
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)
a weak analgesic and weak anti-inflammatory. It appears to have
 NSAIDs include any drug with anti-inflammatory properties that
mainly central actions (see below). Cats cannot glucuronidate
phenols very well, so tend to get methaemoglobinaemia and
is not a steroid. NSAIDs specifically are drugs that inhibit forma-
tion of prostaglandins (PG) and thromboxanes (TX) from arachi-
hepatic toxicity much more readily after paracetamol than other
 donic acid. NSAIDs classically have anti-inflammatory, analgesic
species.
 The specific COX-2 inhibitors (the coxibs such as rofecoxib,
and antipyretic effects.
celecoxib) are pyrazoles (see later). Despite their theoretically
 The two main groups are enolic acids and carboxylic acids. The
better safety profle, their use has been associated with procoagu-
 enolic acids include:
lant and adverse cardiovascular effects (stroke and myocardial
● Pyrazolones (e.g. dipyrone, tepoxalin).
infarction; due to vasoconstriction, and hypercoagulation, possi-
● Pyrazolidines (e.g. phenylbutazone).
bly due to more inhibition of PGI production than of TXAz pro-
● Oxicams (e.g. piroxicam, meloxicam).
duction) in man, and rofecoxib was withdrawn from the market.
20  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Effects of NSAIDs
● Peripheral actions: anti-inflammatory,
analgesic,
anti-
NSAIDs have the following effects:
endotoxic, antithrombotic, antispasmodic.
● Central actions: primarily analgesic and antipyretic effects.
● Anti-inflammatory via COX inhibition; see below.
The analgesic effects may include antihyperalgesic effects
● Antipyretic via COX inhibition, see below.
(neuromodulation).
●Analgesic by several possible mechanisms, see below.
● Antihyperalgesic by preventing sensitisation to pain via COX
 inhibition effects (i.e. they decrease PG synthesis), and NMDA
Cyclo-oxygenase (Cox) inhibition
receptor
effects
(see
below
under
 analgesia
and
NSAIDs inhibit COX enzymes (Figure 3.6). COX enzymes act on
 anti- hyperalgesia).
arachidonic acid (a product of cell membrane phospholipid
● Anti-endotoxic effects via COX inhibition and reduction of 
breakdown, especially in damaged cells); inhibition of COX
 NFkB activity, which is normally important in amplifying the
 enzymes therefore reduces PG and TX synthesis. (Cyclo-oxygenase
various inflammatory, complement and coagulation cascades.
used to be called prostaglandin G/H synthase).
● Antithrombotic effects via platelet COX inhibition, reduction
 Tepoxalin (Zubrin rM) (and ketoprofen) also inhibit 5-LOX and
of TXAz production, and thus reduction
ofplatelet
thus reduce leukotriene (LT) production, which results in anti-
aggregation.
 inflammatory and antibronchospasm effects. Classic NSAIDs are 
● Weak antispasmodic effects via inhibitory action on gastroin-
contra-indicated in asthmatic patients because inhibition of COX
 testinal tract smooth muscle.
 results in the shunting of more arachidonic acid down the 5-LOX
● Some may be chondroprotective (meloxicam, and carprofen
pathway, with more LT production, which can worsen asthma
 at recommended doses).
 attacks.
 Although the different drugs may be structurally and pharma-
● There are two main isoforms of COX: COX-1 and COX-2.
cokinetically dissimilar, their main mechanisms of action (and 
● COX-3 may be a splice variant of COX-1, and seems to be
 side effects) tend to be shared. These mechanisms include:
 expressed in the CNS (see later).
 Cell membrane phospholipids
1Phospholipase A2 (PLA2) i
NSAIDs inhibit
Arachidonic acid
 Platelet activating factor (PAF)
: Cyclo-oxygenase (COX)
12-LOXi
12-hydroxyETE
15-LOX1
(12-HETE)
 Cyclic endoperoxides
PGG2
Lipoxins
A&B
PGH2
 5-hydroperoxy eicosatetraenoic acid 
(5-HPETE)
Prostacyclin synthase
Thromboxane synthase
syntha
 Thromboxanes
Leukotrienes
Prostacyclin
{TXA2)
(LT)
(PGl2)
Prostaglandins
(PGE2, PGF2α, PGD2)
Figure 3.6 Site of NSAID action.
Pain21
● Many NSAIDs are non-selective inhibitors of both forms of
cause vasodilation). 5-LOX inhibition should therefore contrib-
COX.
ute to the anti-inflammatory effect of NSAIDs which also inhibit
● COX-1 is the constitutively expressed enzyme in many tissues,
COX.
and its inhibition results in reduction of the production of
NSAIDs also inhibit activation of NFkB (which is normally
many housekeeping good’ prostaglandins. Most adverse side
responsible for the production of inflammatory mediators); may
effects of NSAIDs are associated with inhibition of COX-1
inhibit free radical generation; may inhibit metalloproteinases
● COX-2 is inducible in many tissues (e.g. inflammatory cells)
and possibly also inhibit lysosomal enzyme release.
and its products include the inflammatory prostaglandins
(some of which enhance pain transmission or even act as direct 
Analgesia and antihyperalgesia
algogens).
 PGs released during inflammation are involved in causing hyper-
algesia, both peripherally, by sensitising (reducing the firing
 It used to be thought that inhibition of COX-1 had detrimental
threshold of) nociceptors, and centrally in the dorsal horns of the
effects by interfering with the housekeeping PGs, especially in
spinal cord (and possibly higher centres) via their actions at pros-
the kidneys and gastrointestinal tract. Such housekeeper PGs are
tanoid receptors. Some COX-2 products (PGs) may act as direct
involved in the autoregulation of renal blood flow, renin secretion 
algogens in the periphery too.
and tubular transport; and in the regulation of gastric mucosal
 blood flow, production of the protective mucus/bicarbonate layer
Whilst NSAIDs
produce their anti-inflammatory/anti-
nociceptive/analgesic effects through inhibition of PG production
 in the stomach, modulation of gastric acid and enzyme secretion,
(and therefore action), peripherally and possibly centrally too,
there is growing evidence for centrally mediated prostaglandin-
keeper PG production may therefore result in the well known
renal and gastrointestinal side effects, so the hunt was on for
an increase in CNS kynurenate (kynurenic acid), a naturally
NSAIDs which preferentially inhibited COX-2.
However, it is now known that COX-2 is involved in the ang-
occurring metabolite of tryptophan, which is an endogenous
antagonist at the glycine binding site of the NMDA receptor for
iogenesis of wound healing. COX-2 is constitutively expressed in 
glutamate. Thus, NSAIDs may be able to reduce the activation of
 the kidneys, both COX-1 and COX-2 are constitutively expressed
NMDA receptors by glutamate. It may be that COX-1 inhibition
in the CNS, and COX-1 products may also contribute to the
 is more useful in this respect than COX-2 inhibition.
inflammatory response. So, instead of wanting to inhibit only
 NSAIDs are much more effective if given before inflamma-
COX-2, a little COX-1 inhibition might actually be OK, and
 z yn m u psia a nous aes sd
tion/pain occurs, because their early administration combats
 the development of peripheral and central sensitisation.
is produced. Overall, most of the newer veterinary NSAIDs are
COX-2 selective (sometimes called preferential) rather than
 Antipyretic effects
wholly COX-2 specifc. Such drugs include meloxicam and pos-
Endogenous pyrogens (e.g. IL-1), are released by inflammatory
sibly carprofen. The coxibs are the most COX-2 selective/
cells and increase PGE-type prostaglandin production in the
specific.
 There is often much debate about the COX ratio (usually the
 lation, resulting in fever. NSAIDs inhibit PGE production, which 
ratio of ICso for inhibition of COX-1 versus the ICso for inhibition 
 results in the restoration of normal body temperature.
of COx-2, but sometimes reported the other way round), for the
NSAIDs, but these are usually derived from in vitro studies,
Effects on cartilage
and are highly dependent upon the type of assay used and the cell
 Some NSAIDs have chondroprotective effects in vitro, for example
line. They may be difficult to translate to the in vivo situation and
carprofen at low doses. Others increase the rate of proteoglycan
must never be extrapolated between species. At best, these ratios
loss from cartilage (e.g. aspirin) and so are chondrodestructive.
may help to indicate what sort of safety profle a drug may have
Meloxicam may be chondroprotective, or possibly has no effect
in vivo.
at all (chondroneutral) on articular cartilage metabolism and
turnover.
Anti-inflammatory actions
COX inhibition, and therefore reduced production of prostaglan-
 Gastrointestinal (Gl) effects
din Ez (PGEz especially in polymorphonuclear leucocytes), and
PGI, and PGEz (COX-1 products) are GI protective as they
PGI, and PGD (especially in mast cells), prevents vasodilation,
 decrease acid production whilst increasing mucus production.
histamine release and bradykinin production. Thus, NSAIDs
Thus, their inhibition can increase the risk of gastric ulceration,
reduce erythema, oedema and exudation. Migration of leucocytes
u u  nn  an od t s  ig
medicine, gastroprotectant strategies are often used alongside
for self-perpetuating chronic inflammation is decreased.
 NSAID treatment. One novel drug combination is the tagging of
 Leukotrienes are generally pro-inflammatory, being chemotac-
nitric oxide (a vasodilator) onto the NSAID, producing a so-called
tic to inflammatory cells, and by increasing vascular permeability.
 NO-NSAID, to provide some GI protection.
They are also potent bronchoconstrictors, although their effects
Gastro-protectants include PGE analogues (misoprostol),
on vascular tone vary (some cause vasoconstriction, others may
proton pump inhibitors (e.g. omeprazole), anti-H, histamines
22  Veterinary Anaesthesia
(e.g. cimetidine, ranitidine, famotidine), sucralfate and the
using them in patients with hepatic disease, where plasma pro-
antacids.
teins may be low.) The agents themselves may cause some liver
 Oral phenylbutazone (as used in horses) can bind to feed com-
damage, for example, long term use of phenylbutazone in old
 ponents and later be released in the large intestine resulting in the
 production of lesions here.
metabolites is mainly via urine, although some are excreted via
 bile also, which provides the potential for some enterohepatic
 Renal effects
recirculation, especially if there are active metabolites (e.g phe-
PGE, and PGE, are renal vasodilators, especially during hypoten-
      s
sion and hypovolaemia. (Remember that under general anaesthe-
been occasional reports of acute hepatic dysfunction in Labradors
sia, it is not unusual for a slight reduction in arterial blood
after treatment with carprofen, but no explanation has been put
pressure to occur.) NSAIDs inhibit the production of these pro-
forward.
tective PGs, resulting in renal hypoperfusion, especially in patients
in whom hypotension or hypovolaemia may be a problem (i.e.
Side effects
anaesthetised patients). The renal medulla is most susceptible to
The side effects of NSAIDs include:
ischaemic damage.
● Gastrointestinal
ulceration: protein losing enteropathy;
 Renin production is partly controlled by PGs in the kidney,
haemorrhage.
so NSAIDs can reduce renin production. This could lead to
● Renal medullary/papillary ischaemia/necrosis: acute renal
hypoaldosteronism, which results in reduced sodium and water
retention and increased potassium retention; but hyperkalaemia
hypotensive).
is quite a rare consequence of NSAID administration. More com-
● Hepatotoxicity (how reversible?). Beware paracetamol, espe-
monly, slight fluid (sodium, chloride and water) retention occurs 
 cially in cats.
with NSAID administration because of inhibition of a variety of
● Possible embryotoxicity/teratogenicity, especially in the first
renal effects of PGs. That is, PGs can alter regional renal blood
flow and increase glomerular fltration rate, they tend to promote
 trimester, especially aspirin.
● Bone marrow toxicity and blood dyscrasias (sometimes
sodium, chloride and water excretion (partly via increasing GFR
irreversible).
and partly by inhibition of Na', Cl and water reabsorption in the
● Haemorrhagic diatheses (especially the older COX-1 inhibitors
loop of Henle), and they antagonise the effect of ADH (although
they increase renin production). PGs, however, are not primary
such
as  aspirin);
 beware  patients  with   pre-existing
coagulopathies.
 regulators of basal renal function in normal individuals, so the
● Delayed parturition (beware use near parturition).
side effects of NSAID treatment on fluid and electrolyte imbal-
-ad o uonsue aemaq nsoe snp jo anso o
ances are more likely to be seen in patients with a degree of pre-
existing renal dysfunction.
nant animals).
● Worsen bronchoconstriction in asthmatics, possibly by divert-
 ing more arachidonic acid down the 5-lipoxygenase pathway.
Platelet effects
 Platelet aggregation is reliant on the balance of TXAz and PGI2.
are chemoattractants for inflammatory cells, and they can
TXAz promotes platelet aggregation, whereas PGI, has anti-
aggregation (and vasodilation) effects. Some NSAIDs, especially
induce changes in vascular permeability.
● Chondrodestruction:
 especially   articular
cartilage  (e.g.
aspirin and ketoprofen, limit platelet TXAz production, whilst
phenylbutazone).
allowing vascular endothelium PGlz production (i.e. vascular
endothelial cel can generate new COX); hence producing an
Available drugs
antithrombotic effect. Aspirin's effect on platelet COX (TXA2
production) is irreversible, because of covalent binding to the
General notes
enzyme. There have been several reports of ^excessive bleeding?
Absorption of NSAIDs
during surgery in otherwise healthy animals, following ketoprofen
Mainly administered via oral or parenteral (mainly IV or SC)
administration. The COX-2 selective drugs (coxibs such as
routes. Administration by mouth is also possible as NSAIDs are
rofecoxib) may preferentially inhibit PGI production, thus
well absorbed, but food may interfere with their absorption.
NSAIDs are weak acids (pH about 3) therefore they are relatively
unionised in the acidic environment of the stomach and so are
Hepatotoxicity
more lipophilic and cross the gastric mucosa more easily.
The precise metabolism and excretion of NSAIDs varies between
species. This is why paracetamol is so dangerous to cats and why
Distribution of NSAIDs
 phenylbutazone is so dangerous to humans (hence its EU ban in
Highly plasma protein bound, about 95-99%, except aspirin
food animals). Generally both phase I and phase II hepatic meta-
(50-80%). (Phenylbutazone is thought to bind irreversibly to
bolic pathways are important. This means that care should be
plasma proteins). NSAIDs should be used with care in cases of
taken in using these agents in animals with impaired liver func-
tion. (These agents are all highly protein bound too, so beware
used concurrently (e.g. thiopental, warfarin).
Pain 23
 Leakage of plasma proteins at sites of inflammation leads to
Carprofen (Rimady!m)
'trapping' of NSAIDs at the site where they are really needed.
For horses, cattle, dogs, cats. Available in injectable and orally
This may explain why you can detect a clinical effect from a
administered forms, but not licensed for oral administration in
NSAID, even though its plasma concentration may not be in the 
cats and only licensed for a single peri-operative dose in cats. In
therapeutic range.
horses and cats, carprofen has a long half-life of about 24h. Its
exact actions may be different in different species, but carprofen
Metabolism and excretion of NSAIDs
is reported to be a weak COX (COX-2 > COX-1) inhibitor,
Hepatic metabolism is important. Renal excretion is determined
although this may not entirely account for its actions.
by the degree of plasma protein binding (and therefore concentra-
tion of free drug), and urine pH. As stated above, the metabolism
● Licensed for pre-operative administration in dogs and cats.
varies between species. NSAIDs of the propionic acid group are
chiral compounds, and exist as two different enantiomers; the
Vedaprofen (Quadriso!")
S(+) and R(-) forms; the available solutions are usually racemic
For horses and dogs. As with all oral NSAIDs, this should be given 
(50:50) mixtures of these. The S(+) form is usually the most
(e m   son s  o 
potent enantiomer where COX inhibition is concerned. The dif-
Do not give to animals with oral lesions. Not licensed for horses
ferent enantiomers may have different pharmacokinetics and
<6 months old.
 pharmacodynamics because of differing stereochemistry; and
● Licensed for pre-operative dosing in horses.
stereoselective processes are often species-related. In vivo, chiral
inversion usually occurs, so that the R(-) form is converted into
Eltenac (Teizenac m)
the S(+) form. This unidirectional chiral inversion occurs to
differing extents with different drugs in different species; but
 For horses only. Should only be administered IV. Reported to be
interestingly, carprofen does not appear to undergo chiral
swelling; but should only be administered post-operatively.
inversion in the horse, calf, dog, cat or man. The non-chiral
species.
Meclofenamic acid (Arquel Vm)
 The analgesic dose is often less than the anti-inflammatory
 For horses only. Oral preparation only.
dose, so it may be possible to reduce the dose, especially in more
chronic pain states. Different patients with different types of pain
Metamizole (dipyrone)
may respond differently to different NSAIDs; so if one NSAID
 In the UK, marketed as Buscopan compositumrm which also
does not appear to work, try another,but ideally allow a minimum
contains hyoscine. For horses, cattle, pigs and dogs. Can cause
 24h washout period between different NSAIDs. Individual
localised tissue reaction if administered extra-vascularly. Because
 patients may also differ in their tolerance to different NSAIDs.
hyoscine is a parasympatholytic, an increase in heart rate com-
monly occurs after administration. Dipyrone is an interesting
Phenylbutazone (Equipalazone ", Companazone ")
 NSAID. It is a good antipyretic, a good antispasmodic, and a good
For horses, dogs, cats. Phenylbutazone comes in a wide variety
antithrombotic (potentially useful in horses with endotoxaemia
 of preparations: injectable (IV only; very irritant to tissues if
and in the early stages of disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
accidental extravascular administration occurs), granules, paste.
(DIC)); but is a relatively poor anti-inflammatory.
Only available as tablets (not an injectable) for dogs and cats.
Metabolised to oxyphenbutazone. Danilon EquidosT contains
Meloxicam (Metacam ")
suxibuzone: this is metabolised to phenylbutazone, oxyphenbuta-
For cattle, pigs, dogs, cats, horses. COX-2 selective. The analgesic
zone and gamma hydroxyphenylbutazone.
dose is often less than the anti-inflammatory dose (as for other
NSAIDs), so higher doses are commonly administered peri-
Flunixin megfumine (Finadyne m)
operatively. Meloxicam is now licensed for oral administration in
For horses, cattle, dogs. Flunixin is available in injectable and
cats, at 0.3 mg/kg on day one followed by 0.05 mg/kg every 24 h
orally administered forms. It is a potent analgesic for equine colic
for up to 14 days. Further reduction to, for example, every other
and can mask pain and the cardiovascular effects of endotoxae-
day therapy may also be attempted; but with any long-term
mia. Therefore care should be exercised over its administration to
 therapy, be vigilant for side effects.
horses with colic. Flunixin is commonly combined with an anti-
biotic in preparations designed for farm animal practice, for
● The only NSAID formulated as a palatable syrup, chewable
 example treatment of calf pneumonia.
 tablets and in two concentrations, for easy administration.
● Licensed for pre-operative use in dogs and cats
Ketoprofen (Ketofen ")
● Licensed for long term use in dogs and up to 14 days in cats 
For horses, cattle, pigs, dogs, cats. Ketoprofen is reportedly as
potent as flunixin in masking the signs of colic. It is only licensed
Tolfenamic acid (Tolfedine m)
for post-operative use as it has been reported to cause clotting
For cattle, pigs, dogs, cats. Some debate about whether preferen-
 problems.
tial COX-2 inhibition.
24  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Tepoxalin (Zubrin m)
arachidonic acid to form N-arachidonoylphenolamine, which is
 For dogs. Marketed as a drug of choice for osteoarthritis flare-ups.
an endogenous cannabinoid. N-arachidonoylphenolamine itself
A non-selective COX inhibitor (therefore strong COX-1 inhibi-
has weak actions on the CB1 receptor, but inhibits uptake of
tion), and a 5-LOX inhibitor (although this action may be rela-
another endogenous cannabinoid, anandamide, which does act
tively short-lived in vivo). It is reported to selectively avoid gastric
on(
CB1 receptors in the CNS (with analgesic results), and
COX inhibition, which coupled with its 5-LOX inhibition, is sup-
N-arachidonoylphenolamine also appears to have agonist actions
posed to provide an improved GI safety profle. It is claimed to
at one of the vanilloid receptors, so-called transient receptor
have a renal sparing? effect because only 1% is renally excreted.
potential non-selective cation channel, subfamily V, member 1
It is available as fast melt ‘tablets’ which stick to the buccal
(TRPV1), which is important in the transmission and modulation
mucosa and dissolve rapidly. The tablets consist of a lyophilisate
of pain both centrally and peripherally. Recently, paracetamol was
preparation, essentially micronised drug interspersed between the
shown to have anti-arrhythmic properties in dogs.
pores of a lyophilised gelatine-sugar matrix.
● Dogs: 25mg/kg by mouth, four times daily. Marketed as
 Pardale-Vr; paracetamol (400mg) with codeine phosphate
Nimesulide (Zolan "m)
(9 mg).
For dogs only. Only an oral preparation is available. A COX-2
● Cats: narrow therapeutic index, so contra-indicated.
selective inhibitor.
The mechanism of toxicity of paracetamol is related to the
Firocoxib (Previcox m)
drug's metabolism. In dogs, paracetamol is normally metabolised
 For dogs only. To date, only an oral preparation is available. A
in the liver, primarily by conjugation (glucuronidation more
highly selective (?specific) COX-2 inhibitor, with possibly few GI
than sulphation pathways), and to a small extent, oxidation.
and renal side effects.
 If large doses are given, however, the glucuronidation and
sulphation pathways become overwhelmed, so that the oxidation
Cincophen/prednisolone (PLT")
 pathway becomes more active. The product of oxidative metabo-
For dogs only. Combination of NSAID and steroid. Can be very
effective in some patients (probably because,like tepoxalin,there
benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI), which is a highly reactive oxidant
is ^dual inhibition? of COX and 5-LOX pathways; COX inhibition
species. Normally, hepatic and red cell glutathione can deactivate
through cincophen; and PLA2 inhibition (so basically COX and
this compound, but if large doses of paracetamol have been
 5-LOX pathways are starved of substrates) through prednisolone).
ingested, the glutathione is rapidly depleted, and glutathione syn-
Beware GI tract side effects.
thesis may also be inhibited, allowing NAPQI to damage proteins,
cell membranes (red cells and hepatocytes), cause methaemo-
Acetylsalicylic acid/aspirin (Rheumatine i" 120 mg tablets)
globin production and eventually lead to red cell lysis and hepatic
An AVM-GSL product is available for dogs; and numerous pro-
necrosis.
In cats, because their glucuronidation and sulphation pathways
prietary products marketed for man (300 mg standard tablet, or
 are less active, even small doses of paracetamol are metabolised
75 mg junior aspirin).
via the oxidation pathway with the production of NAPQI. Cats
● Dogs: 10 mg/kg by mouth, twice a day.
also seem to have relatively low levels of glutathione. Hence the
● Cats: 10mg/kg by mouth, every other day. Up to 75 mg once
narrow therapeutic index in this species.
every 3 days was at one time recommended to treat throm-
 Treatment is aimed at providing antioxidant (reductant)
boembolic disease, but it seems that 25 mg once every 3 days
capacity. N-acetylcysteine is the preferred antidote as it is a pre-
may be just as effective and with less risk of side effects.
cursor of glutathione and is also oxidised in the liver to form
Definitely never exceed 40 mg/kg every 24 h.
sulphate which helps the sulphation pathway for paracetamol
● Aspirin has a much longer half-life in dogs (8-12h) than man;
metabolism. Ascorbic acid may also be used as an antioxidant; it
 in cats, it is even longer (20-40h).
is suggested that it may help convert methaemoglobin back to
● Aspirin should be administered with care: it is a potent anti-
haemoglobin.
thrombotic agent.
Local anaesthetics
Paracetamol (Acetaminophen)
Not a classic COX-1 inhibitor, but may act on central (CNS)
 Not only can local anaesthetic agents be used to perform nerve
COX-3 (which may be a COX-1 splice variant). Some debate
blocks, but their systemic administration (lidocaine has been
about whether it is a COX-2 inhibitor also exists. It used to be
most commonly used) also provides analgesia (see Chapters 12-
 m a  s r pu i rn pis
16 on local anaesthetics and techniques).
actions of arachidonic acid derivatives (with possible antihyper-
algesic actions), but it has recently been discovered that paraceta-
α2-adrenoceptor agonists
mol acts as a prodrug: the active product being an endogenous
cannabinoid, which produces analgesia. Paracetamol is first
Xylazine, romifidine, detomidine and medetomidine are the α2
de-acetylated to p-aminophenol; this is then conjugated with
agonists used in veterinary practice in the UK. They have a wide
Pain 25
range of effects on the body and the CNS (see Chapters 4 and28
Tramadol
can also be administered systemically and
on premedication and sedation). Like opioid receptors, α2 recep-
neuraxially.
tors are G-protein linked transmembrane receptors, which can be
Side effects include vomiting and drowsiness.
coupled to several types of effector mechanisms (i.e. voltage gated 
ion channels, adenyl cyclase). In the CNS, c2 receptor activation
Contra-indications
tends to have an inhibitory effect. Many α2 receptors are found
 Although tramadol can be administered alongside NSAIDs and
in similar locations to opioid receptors in areas of the CNS
 gabapentin without any dose adjustments, it should be used with
involved with pain, and there is much interaction between the
caution if tricycle antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors
opicidergic and adrenergic systems, both of which may explain
or serotonin reuptake inhibitors are being taken because of the
some of the synergistic effects seen when the two classes of drugs
 risk of serotonin syndrome. The serotonin syndrome (due pri-
are administered together. However, because of the other effects
marily to increased serotonin activity in the CNS), can manifest
of these drugs such as sedation, cardiovascular and respiratory
effects, the c2 agonists are seldom used as primary analgesics.
as agitation or confusion, convulsions, increased muscle activity/
 rigidity, diarrhoea, autonomic instability and fever; occasionally
Nevertheless, they are commonly used alongside other agents (e.g.
it can result in death.
opioids, ketamine) to produce combinations of sedation, anaes-
thesia and analgesia. There are exceptions to this, however, for
example, xylazine can be useful to relieve the pain associated with
Ketamine
pue Suepss se lam se sjouseds uaod e s! lI se syo aurnba
Ketamine is a phencyclidine congener. As discussed earlier, gluta-
calming the horse, yetits effects are short lived and will not mask
mate is an important excitatory neurotransmitter in the CNS and
any signs of deterioration in colic cases; and α2 agonists may also
 is involved in pain processing whereby pain responses are altered
be administered extradurally to provide analgesia.
(ie. neuroplasticity/modulation). Glutamate binds with four
types of receptor, but the NMDA receptor has a key role in the
processing and modulation of neural activity and in the develop-
Other analgesic drugs
ment of memory. The NMDA receptor has binding sites for both
glycine and glutamate, but its ligand-gated activity is also depend-
Tramadol
ent upon membrane depolarisation (voltage gating), whereby
Sometimes called an atypical opioid, tramadol is a synthetic
Mg?t inhibition (Mg?t possibly sits in the channel) is 'relieved.
4-phenylpiperidine analogue of codeine with roughly 1/1oth the
 potency of morphine. A racemic mixture of 2 enantiomers (+ and
Glycine +
NMDA receptor
-), it is a centrally acting analgesic with both opicid and non-
→Ca²+ enters cell
glutamate  Membrane depolarisation
opioid effects, but with fewer side effects than true opioids. The
major active metabolite in man is M1 (via the hepatic cytochrome
Ketamine is a non-competitive NMDA antagonist. It does not
P450 system), which has six times the analgesic potency of
compete with glutamate for glutamate's binding site, but instead,
tramadol itself. Production of the various metabolites is
ketamine binds to the phencyclidine (PCP)-binding site (some
species-dependent. Metabolism involves demethylation and
sources suggest that this might also be the old sigma (o) opioid
glucuronidation or sulphation; cats struggle with both the
receptor), which is probably located within the channel of the
 demethylation and the glucuronidation path.
NMDA receptor. This channel blockade' is time-, concentration-,
Actions of tramadol include:
and stimulation-frequency (i.e. use)-dependent; it depends
● Weak μ agonist (parent compound (very low affinity) and 
upon initial channel activation and opening, but once ketamine
M1  metabolite 
(200 times greater affnity than parent
 gains access to the channel, further Ca?t entry into the cell is
compound).
inhibited.
● Weak direct α2 agonist action (M1 metabolite).
 Ketamine possibly has some opicid actions that may add to its
● Inhibition of re-uptake of noradrenaline (the - enantiomer);
 analgesic effects. It has antagonistic actions at μ receptors, but
 therefore enhanced descending noradrenergic inhibitory activ-
 agonistic ones at K and & receptors.
ity in spinal cord.
 Ketamine has sympathomimetic effects, in that it produces a
● Inhibition of serotonin uptake, and enhancement of serotonin
non-uniform stimulation of the sympathetic nervous system,
release (the + enantiomer); therefore enhanced descending
inhibition of the parasympathetic nervous system, and also inhib-
 its the reuptake of noradrenaline (monoamine uptake 1 and 2),
● May reduce the release of substance P.
 and so increases vascular tone, heart rate and myocardial oxygen
demand.
 Ketamine has direct myocardial depressant effects (negative
Dose and side effects
inotropy, possibly via voltage-gated calcium channel blockade),
The oral dose is:
but this effect is usually masked by its sympathetic stimulatory
● Dogs: (1)-2-5 mg/kg, twice to four times a day; start at low dose
effects. However, shocky animals with depleted catecholamine
and increase as necessary.
stores may be more susceptible to overall cardiovascular
● Cats 2-4 mg/kg twice a day.
depression.
26  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Ketamine is a racemic mixture of two isomers:
has minimal effects on the animal's physiology and homeostasis,
but also reduces the requirements for other anaesthetic agents
● R(-) ketamine is a poor analgesic and is associated with
(and therefore their side effects). In addition, its low blood and
excitatory/psychomimetic effects.
● S(+) ketamine is a potent analgesic with little excitatory/
tissue solubilities mean that it is rapidly eliminated (during venti-
lation; beware diffusion hypoxia), so can be used peri-operatively
 psychomimetic effects.
without risk of prolonging recovery from anaesthesia.
 Unfortunately, with the standard mixture, both effects are seen
The major drawbacks with nitrous oxide are the worry of
and so ketamine is usually administered with some other agent/s
prolonged exposure (by hospital staff) with the slight risk of
to counter the excitatory effects.
neurological problems, teratogenic effects and anaemia; and the
 However, the analgesic properties of ketamine are such that it
environmental impact (nitrous oxide is a greenhouse gas and
can be administered either in very small (subanaesthetic) doses
facilitates atmospheric ozone depletion).
(<1/10th induction dose, e.g. 0.1-0.5 mg/kg), or by infusion
 Xenon has many of the properties of an ideal anaesthetic agent,
during anaesthesia (e.g. 10-20 μg/kg/min), to provide excellent
and can be used as such at normal atmospheric pressures (its
analgesia.
minimal alveolar concentration is about 70%). It also provides
 Ketamine is a basic compound, and is available commercially
analgesia by mechanisms similar to nitrous oxide, yet pollution
as the hydrochloride salt (ketamine-HCl), therefore the solution
and toxicity are not problems because xenon is inert. Although
is acidic (pH 3.5-5.5). Ketamine's pKa is 7.5; so at pH 4, most is
its administration requires inhalation, which could limit its appli-
 present as the ionised (NHt) form. At body pH (7.4),the equilib-
cation to in-patients, the major drawbacks at the moment are its
rium shifts so that almost equal quantities of the ionised and
 rarity and the expense of its production.
unionised forms are present; thus conferring both good water
solubility and good lipid solubility. Combined with its low protein
binding, the shift towards more of the unionised form helps to
Other drugs
 enhance its passage across the blood-brain barrier This property
is utilised in the administration of ketamine for extradural
● Antidepressants and anxiolytics (e.g. tricyclics, MAO inhibi-
tors, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors).
anaesthesia.
● Anticonvulsants (e.g. gabapentin and pregabalin).
 Preparations are being developed which contain only the S(+)
· Cannabinoids.
isomer, so they should have fewer undesirable side effects.
● Cholecystokinin (CCK) antagonists.
 Because of ketamine's antagonistic actions at NMDA receptors,
● Ion channel blockers.
which are involved in the adaptation of the CNS to pain stimuli,
● Bisphosphonates.
it may have some promise as a treatment for chronic pain condi-
tions such as phantom limb pain and hyperalgesia. In the mean-
Antidepressants and anticonvulsants may modulate central
while, other NMDA antagonists are available for use in the
  d d n  sd d 
treatment of chronic pain states, such as amantadine (originally
be useful in some chronic pain states, especially those associated
developed as an antiviral compound), which is available for oral
with cancer and neuropathic pain. The tricyclic antidepressants,
administration. Further work is necessary in veterinary species to
 e.g. carbamazepine ( Tegretol), and amitriptyline have been used
determine the safety and effcacy of these drugs.
in the treatment of neuropathic pain states such as trigeminal
 There has also been speculation whether exogenous magne-
neuralgia, and so are sometimes given to head-shaker horses
sium can help to provide analgesia (via increased blockade of
where increased trigeminal nerve sensitivity is thought to exist.
NMDA receptors). The results so far have been equivocal.
These drugs tend to inhibit the re-uptake of monoaminergic
neurotransmitters (noradrenaline and serotonin), and thus are
Nitrous oxide and xenon
able to enhance activity in the descending monoaminergic
NO has minimal cardiovascular or respiratory depressant effects,
inhibitory pathways and therefore aid in providing analgesia.
it is not metabolised and has very low blood solubility. For it to
Beware concurrent use with tramadol because of the risk of
act as a general anaesthetic it would have to be administered at a
serotonin syndrome.
concentration of at least 90% of the inspired gases in humans; in
 Gabapentin and pregabalin are gamma-aminobutyric acid
animals it is even less potent. So, at normal atmospheric pressure,
(GABA) analogues, but seem not to produce their main effects
it could never be used as an anaesthetic agent (as we would not 
(anticonvulsant, anxiolytic, analgesic) at GABA receptors. Instead,
be able to deliver enough oxygen). It can, however, be used at
they modulate and inhibit the actions of voltage-gated calcium
sub-anaesthetic doses (normally 50 to about 66% of the inspired 
channels (such as can be up-regulated in chronic pain states), and
 gases) where it still provides analgesia.
so have been found useful in the treatment of chronic, especially
 For its anaesthetic properties, it is thought to work in a similar
neuropathic, pain states. Gabapentin reduces the activity of pre-
manner to the volatile anaesthetic agents (e.g. halothane), but for 
its analgesic properties, it has NMDA antagonist activities, and
excitatory neurotransmitter) release. It may also modulate the
also stimulates endogenous opioid production (see earlier). The
activity of the post-synaptic glutamate receptors, both NMDA
main advantage is that nitrous oxide can be used as an adjunct to
and non-NMDA types. Pregabalin also interacts with voltage-
anaesthesia (as part of balanced anaesthesia), where it not only
sensitive potassium channels.
Pain27
Sensory nerves express different types of sodium channels.
various tissues, including intestinal and renal tubular cells and
Those which are important for transmission of non-noxious
brain capillary endothelial cells. This ATP-dependent transporter
stimuli are expressed in Aβ fbres and are called tetrodotoxin
protein appears to be able to transport a number of structurally
sensitive (TTXs) sodium channels. However, pain fbres (A& and
and functionally unrelated drugs to limit their oral absorption
C fbres) express both TTXs and tetrodotoxin resistant sodium
and CNS entry. Mutations in the MDRl gene may result in poor
channels (TTXr), the latter being important for the transmission
function of the P-gp which may increase susceptibility to the
of noxious stimuli. These may be up-regulated in chronic pain
toxicity of several drugs. The most well known example is the
states, such that TTXr antagonists may be useful.
mutation present in Collies which results in their susceptibility to
 Neurones also express a range of voltage sensitive calcium
ivermectin toxicity because of an absence or functional deficiency
channels, some of which can be inhibited by cannabinoids as well 
 of P-gp. It is also suggested that such mutations may increase the
as the anticonvulsants (e.g gabapentin). Conotoxins (from ven-
risk of toxicity to sedative and anaesthetic agents,by allowing an
omous snails such as Conus magus) are N-type calcium channel
 increased concentration within the CNS.
antagonists and have analgesic actions. One such is ziconotide,
The MCiR gene has also received attention recently. This
which is administered intrathecally.
analgesic sensitivity have already been documented, especially in
 rodents; and in women, red hair is a useful phenotypic expression
-e n a a sise  rn sau ludd
of MCiR mutations. Red-haired women have recently been
 gesia afforded by opioids.
shown to be more sensitive to thermal pain, more resistant to
 Resiniferatoxin (RTX) is a relative of capsaicin (the com-
lidocaine, more sensitive to K agonist opioids, and less sensitive
pound that makes chilli peppers hot'), and like capsaicin, it has
to desflurane anaesthesia. This is likely to be an exciting area of
been shown to bind to vanilloid receptors, allowing excessive
research in the future.
calcium influx into cells, which can result in their death. Only cells
expressing the receptors are vulnerable, including pain fibres (C
type especially). For some chronic pain states, chemical neuronal
Adjuncts to analgesia
knock-out like this has been considered.
Notwithstanding our ability to provide analgesia with drugs, there
Sarapin is a distillate of alkaloids from the pitcher plant and
are several other ways to improve patient comfort:
has been used as a therapy or an adjunct in the treatment of many
chronic and neuropathic pain states. It does not seem to have local
anaesthetic type activity, despite often being used to perform
wound dressings.
'regional analgesia. Its mechanism of action is unknown.
● Cardiovascular and respiratory support such as resuscitation
 Bisphosphonates (e.g. tiludronate disodium), although usually
(IV fluids, supplemental O).
used for the treatment of hypercalcaemia, also appear to provide
● Nutritional support aids wound healing.
analgesia for patients with bone cancer and perhaps with
● Gentle surgery and for example the use of muscle relaxants.
inflammatory bone disorders (e.g. navicular disease in horses).
● Muscle relaxation for example diazepam to reduce the muscle
Their mechanisms of action are incompletely understood, but in
spasms associated with neck and back pain with intervertebral
disc disease.
 antagonistic actions.
● Allay fear and anxiety with judicious use of sedatives and tran-
 Note: Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi) are
 quillisers as necessary (apprehensiveness increases perception 
widely used in small animal medicine, yet they prevent the deg-
of pain).
radation of substance P and bradykinin and can upregulate the
● Provide a comfortable environment for example provide a
quiet kennel, at an appropriate temperature, a comfy bed,
therapy may have the undesirable side effect of promoting
ensure food and water are available, provide light and dark
hyperalgesia.
times, assist grooming, provide tender loving care and quality
time. Animals that are ‘expressive’ (e.g. dogs) when they
 Pharmacogenetics
feel pain seem to respond when they are petted or nursed by
another animal (human or otherwise). This is not thought to
Pharmacogenetics is the study of genetic variations that cause
 be just a behavioural response but it is actually thought that
endorphins released in the brain decrease the amount of pain
known that individual animals can have a unique response or
being felt.
 non-response to a particular drug; and studies are beginning to
● Ensure empty bladder and rectum and prevent skin
 unravel some of the underlying genetic differences.
scalding.
Genetic mutations/polymorphisms in the cytochrome P450
● Gentle physiotherapy such as massage and passive range of
system can have a huge influence on the individual's pharmacoki-
motion exercises. Other types of physiotherapy which may
netics for a drug. We are also learning more about the MDR1 gene
be helpful in controlling pain are hot/cold compresses, laser
(sometimes referred to as the ABCBl gene). It encodes a trans-
treatment, ultrasound, magnetic feld therapy, and Faradic
porter protein called P-glycoprotein (P-gp) which is expressed by
stimulation.
28  Veterinary Anaesthesia
SHORT FORM OF THE GLASGOW COMPOSITE PAIN SCALE
Dog's name
Hospital Number
Date
/Time
 Surgery Yes/No (delete as appropriate)
 Procedure or Condition .
 A. Look at dog in Kennel
Is the dog?
(ii)
(i)
Ignoring andy woud or painful area
0
Quiet
 Looking at wound or painful area
1
 Crying or whimpering
1
Licking wound or painful area 
2
Groaning
2
Rubbing wound or painful area
3
Screaming
3
Chewing wound or painful area 
4
 In the case of spinal, pelvic or multiple limb fractures, or where assistance is
required to aid locomotion do not carry out section B and proceed to C
 Please tick if this is the case then proceed to C.
 B. Put lead on dog and lead out of the kennel.
C. If it has a wound or painful area
including abdomen, apply gentle pressure 2
 inches round the site.
Does if?
When fhe dog rises/walks is ift?
(iv)
(ii)
Do nothing
0
Normal
Look round
Lame
Flinch
2
Slow or reluctant
Growl or guard area
3
Stiff
.3
Snap
4
It refuses to move
Cry
5
D. Overall
Is fhe dog?
Is fhe dog?
(v)
(vi)
 Happy and content or happy and bouncy
0
Comfortable
0
Quiet
Unsettled
Indiffenent or non-responsive to surroundings
2
Restless
2
 Nervous or anxious or fearful
3
Hunched or tense
3
 Depressed or non-responsive to stimulation
4
4
@ University of Glasgow
Total Score (i+ii+ili+iv+v+vi) =
Figure 3.7 Short form of the Glasgow composite pain scale.
Copyright @ 2008 University of Glasgow. Permission granted to reproduce for personal and educational use only. Commercial copying.
hiring. lending is prohibited. The short form composite measure pain score (CMPs-SF) can be applied quickly and reliably in a clinical
setting and has been designed as a clinical decision making tool which was developed for dogs in acute pain. It includes 30 descriptor
o upioe Aeaunu pauen ane soidsa aun obane yea ua gou bunpnun 'saoaie jennoauag g uui suoo
their associated pain severity and the person carrying out the assessment chooses the descriptor within each category which best fits
the dog's behaviour/condition. It is important to carry out the assessment procedure as described on the questionnaire, following the
sible to assess. The total CMPS-SF score has been shown to be a useful indicator of analgesic requirement and the recommended
analgesic intervention level is 6/24, or 5/20 (for non-ambulatory patients).
Pain29
● Stimulation induced analgesia and acupuncture attempt to
practice and future studies. Equine Veterinary Journal 37,
utilise the body's own mechanisms for controlling pain by
565575.
stimulating endogenous endorphin release or by stimulating
Kissin I (2000) Preemptive analgesia. Anesthesiology 93(4), 1138-
certain afferent nerve fbres which activate inhibitory neuro-
1143. (Should be read alongside Wolf CJ and Chong M-S 1993).
transmission in the spinal cord (non-painful paraesthesia).
Morton CM, Reid J, Scott EM, Holton LL, Nolan AM (2005)
The best known example of this method is acupuncture
Application of a scaling model to establish and validate an
which uses extra-segmental stimulation (i.e. the stimulation is
interval level pain scale for assessment of acute pain in dogs.
not localised to the part of the body from where the pain
American Journal of Veterinary Research 66(12), 2154-2166.
arises). Proponents of acupuncture say this method not only
Reid J, Nolan AM, Hughes JML, Lascelles BDX, Pawson P, Scott
releases widespread endorphins but treats the ‘whole body
 EM (2007) Development of the short-form Glasgow Composite
response to pain.
 Measure Pain Scale (CMPS-SF) and derivation of an analgesic
● TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) is com-
intervention score. Animal Welfare 16(S), 97-104.
monly employed by physiotherapists and doctors and is used
Sun Y, Gan TJ, Dubose JW, Habib AS (2008) Acupuncture and
As si i (s ) s d a on iu 
related techniques for post-operative pain: a systematic review
used to treat chronic back pain, and so its application may be
of randomised controlled trials. British Journal of Anaesthesia
limited in animals as such conditions may be diffcult to
101(2), 151-160.
diagnose.
Vineula-Fernandez I, Jones E, Welsh EP, Fleetwood-Walker SM
● Surgery may seem obvious, but removing the cause of the
 (2007) Pain mechanisms and their implication for the manage-
painful stimuli is often the best way to provide relief from pain.
 ment of pain in farm and companion animals. The Veterinary
 This can involve immobilising a fractured bone, removing
Journal 174(2),227-239.
a foreign body, removing a tumour, removing a section of
Wiseman-Orr ML, Nolan AM, Reid J， Scott EM (2004)
 ischaemic intestine, or performing a neurectomy.
Development of a questionnaire to measure the effects of
chronic pain on health-related quality of life in dogs. American 
Journal of Veterinary Research 65(8), 1077-1084.
Euthanasia
Woolf CJ, Chong M-S (1993) Preemptive analgesia
- treating
Uniquely, as vets, we have the ability and the means to relieve
 post-operative pain by preventing the establishment of central
unrelenting or uncontrollable pain and suffering in animals by
sensitisation. Anesthesia and Analgesia 77(2), 362-379. (Best
euthanasia. This should always be done as humanely as possible
read in conjunction with Kissin (2000)).
with consideration to the animal, and, if applicable, the owner. In
Yeates J, Main D (2009) Assessment of companion animal quality
many circumstances, it may be helpful to view euthanasia as a
of life in veterinary practice and research. Journal of Small
 positive action and the most humane treatment option.
Animal Practice 50, 274-281.
Assessment of pain
Useful textbook resources
 Flecknell P, Waterman-Pearson A Eds (2000). Pain Management
Pain scoring
 in Small Animals. Published by WB Saunders, London, UK.
There are methods of assessing pain in animals whereby different
Gaynor JS, Muir WW Eds (2002).Veterinary Pain Management.
scores (numerical rating, visual analogue or simple descriptive),
Published by Mosby Inc. (Elsevier Science), Missouri, USA.
are given to the presence and severity of various signs associated
Grant D (2006) Pain Management in Small Animals: a manual
with pain. The recurrent problem is that these assessments are
for veterinary nurses and technicians. Butterworth-Heinemann 
subjective and individuals differ widely in their interpretation of
(Elsevier Science), Philadelphia, USA.
signs. They are used mainly to aid research into pain and are not
Mathews KA. Ed (2008) Update on Management of Pain.
always easily applicable to busy practice. However, the types of
Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small Animal Practice
score whereby the observer interacts with the animal, and several
38(6).
aspects of its behaviour or physiology are assessed (so-called com-
 Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T Eds. BSAVA Manual of canine
 posite or multi-dimensional scales) seem to be superior. The
and feline anaesthesia and analgesia. 2nd Edition. BSAVA
Glasgow veterinary school multidimensional pain scale has been
 Publications, Gloucester, UK.
 perhaps the most well-validated for dogs. In its shortened form
in a practice situation. There has also been a recent increase in
interest in patient (quality of life’ (see references)
Self-test section
Further reading
1.
 Define pain.
2.
What do you understand by the term balanced (or
Ashley FH, Waterman-Pearson AE, Whay HR (2005) Behavioural
multi-modal) analgesia?
assessment of pain in horse and donkeys: application to clinical
Small animal sedation and premedication
Learning objectives
 To be able to list the aims of premedication.
 To be able to discuss the properties of an ideal premedicant.
To be able to discuss the factors affecting the choice of these agents, to provide either sedation or premedication.
Premedication
● Have reasonably quick onset of action, and reasonable duration
of action.
Why use premedication?
● Be antagonisable (reversible).
● To relieve anxiety in the patient, making it more amenable to
● Be predictable (dose-dependent) and reliable.
handling for induction of anaesthesia. This also reduces cate-
● Be safe and effective in all species.
cholamine release in the patient, thus reducing some of the
● Produce minimal cardiovascular, respiratory, and other side
risks, such as catecholamine-induced cardiac arrhythmias. The
effects.
anxiety of the anaesthetist may also be reduced, which helps
● Provide some analgesia and muscle relaxation.
 promote calm patient handling.
● Possibly provide amnesia.
● To smooth the induction of anaesthesia.
No single drug fulfls all these criteria, but the drugs available
● To smooth the maintenance phase of anaesthesia (should the
to us are detailed below.
jo uonn suo an e au snp unn
action).
● To smooth the recovery from anaesthesia (should the premedi-
A few definitions
cation drugs have a suffciently long duration of action).
These terms may be diffcult to distinguish in animals.
● To reduce the required doses of induction and maintenance
 An anxiolyticis a drug that is said to produce a mental calming
 anaesthetic agents and thus reduce their side effects.
effect, characterised by a reduction in locomotor activity, reduced
● To provide analgesia (pre-emptively).
anxiety, and a lack of concern for, or interest in, the environment.
● To reduce muscle tone (this aids surgery).
Animals still maintain the ability to be aroused by stimuli, espe-
● To reduce unwanted autonomic reflexes (e.g. vagal reflexes).
cially painful ones, but tend to be a little less jumpy and quieter
 (Anticholinergics are now much less commonly used in pre-
to handle. The terms anxiolytics, tranquillisers, ataractics and
medication in the UK, but are still commonly used in USA. In
neuroleptics tend to overlap.
the UK, they tend to be reserved until needed.)
A sedative is a drug that produces a mental calming
 The last four points show how premedication can form a part
effect, characterised by sleepiness as well as disinterest in the
environment, and generally a poorer responsiveness to stimuli
of balanced anaesthesia.
than produced by anxiolytic. However, animals may still be
 An ideal premedication should:
aroused. Sedatives are sometimes called hypnotics. Some
● Allay fear and anxiety.
drugs afford analgesia as well as sedation and are called
● Be easily administered, perhaps by several different routes, and
 sedative-analgesics.
be miscible with other agents. Its administration should not be 
 Narcosis is the term coined to describe the sedation produced
unpleasant for the animal.
by opioid analgesics, hence 'narcotic analgesics.
30
Small animal sedation and premedication  31
Phenothiazines
Resu/ts of administration
Acepromazine (ACP injection 2 mg/ml; and tablets 10 mg and
Mental calming effect
25mg) is the only licensed veterinary phenothiazine for small
 The mental calming effect is the primary reason for veterinary use.
animals. Chlorpromazine is taken as the prototype drug in this
This is mediated by antidopaminergic actions in the CNS (espe-
class because much work was done with it, but other phenothi-
cially in the reticular activating system). More specifically, the
 action includes post-synaptic DA receptor blockade in the CNS
 azines are very similar.
 Phenothiazines contain two benzene rings that are linked by a
and inhibition of dopamine release, yet an increase in the rate of
sulphur and a nitrogen atom. Different substitutions can alter the
dopamine and norepinephrine turnover. The result of these
activity of the resulting compound, one interesting example being
actions is an overall decrease in motor activity, and an increase in
 the threshold for responding to external stimuli.
metho trimeprazine, which has some analgesic properties that are
absent in other drugs of this group.
 Centrally, dopamine receptors (D1, D2, D3, D5 and possibly
other types), are found in the basal ganglia, the medulla (vasomo-
 tor and respiratory centres and the chemoreceptor trigger zone
Actions
(CTZ)), and the hypothalamus. Peripherally, dopamine receptors
● Anti-adrenergic (@l adrenoceptor blockade).
are found, for example, in the GI tract and in the renal and
● Antidopaminergic (DA1 and DA2 receptor blockade).
splanchnic vascular beds.
●Anticholinergic (muscarinic receptor blockade).
 Peripheral post-synaptic dopamine receptors are DA1 (and on
●Antihistaminic (H1 receptor blockade).
 blood vessels, blockade results in vasoconstriction); whereas pre-
●Antiserotonergic (5-HT receptor blockade).
synaptic dopamine receptors are DA2 (and blockade of these
● Local anaesthetic effects (ion channel blockade).
results in an increase in release of norepinephrine from the pre-
●“Membrane’ effects (sits in phospholipid bilayers).
 synaptic nerve terminal, resulting in vasoconstriction). The
● Anti-arrhythmic actions (possibly due to local anaesthetic
peripheral antidopaminergic actions of phenothiazines would
effects, membrane stabilising effects, sedative effects [through
thus seem to favour vasoconstriction, but this effect is relatively
 decreasing circulating catecholamines], or direct effects on
 mild compared to the alpha 1 receptor antagonism, hence overall,
myocardial receptors [α1 or c2]).
vasodilation prevails.
● No analgesia (except methotrimeprazine).
 It is often said that low doses of ACP produce tranquillisation/
● Smooth muscle spasmolytic effects (e.g. GI tract) due to anti-
anxiolysis, whereas higher doses produce sedation. The dose-
cholinergic effects.
response curve, however, rapidly reaches a plateau, after which
●Antithrombotic actions.
increasing the dose only increases the duration of effect, not nec-
● Anti-oxidant properties?
essarily the degree of sedation. Onset of action depends on the
●Anti-inflammatory effects?
route of administration, but even after IV administration, it is
suggested to wait 30-40 min, whilst leaving the patient undis-
Effects
turbed, for the full effect to occur. Sedation after ACP begins to
wane after 3-4h, but lasts about 6-8h, and can be prolonged by
● Sedation
debility. However, ACP is unpredictable, and different responses
● Hypotension
can be seen in the same animal under different circumstances. The
● Hypothermia
● Anti-emetic
lus, hence ACP is rarely used as the sole sedative agent. See below
●Anti-arrhythmic
for discussion about phenothiazines and benzodiazepines for fire-
●Antihistaminic
works phobias.
 Phenothiazines potentiate the CNS depressant effects of other
Pharmacology
sedative and anaesthetic agents, therefore doses of other anaes-
Phenothiazines are highly protein bound (>90%). They are
thetic agents can be reduced. Doxapram (an analeptic [CNS
lipophilic (so cross the blood-brain barrier and placenta), and
stimulant]),is suggested as an antagonist to excessive CNS depres-
hydrophilic. They undergo hepatic metabolism; the metabolites
sion caused by phenothiazines. Amphetamines may also be useful.
being excreted in urine and faeces (via bile). Some metabolites 
 There may be species, breed and individual sensitivities, and
have some activity. Metabolism follows the usual phase I and II
 larger animals tend to be 'more sensitive possibly because of
biotransformation reactions. Hydroxylation with subsequent
allometric scaling. (Perhaps we should dose according to body
glucuronidation represents the principal metabolic pathway.
surface area rather than to body weight; see later under dexme-
but sulphation and demethylation also occur.
detomidine.) Brachycephalics also tend to be ^more sensitive’ to
Phenothiazines have a wide variety of actions, mostly
the effects of ACP (see below).
associated with depression of parts of the CNS which assist
in the control of homeostasis, these include vasomotor control,
ised CNS stimulation and aggressiveness. At high doses, extrapy-
thermoregulation, hormonal balance, acid-base balance and
ramidal effects can be seen, such as akathisia (increased locomotor
emesis.
activity and uncontrollable restlessness). Certainly, high doses can 
32  Veterinary Anaesthesia
lead to excitement, restlessness, muscle tremors and rigidity,
Respiratory effects
sweating, tachycardia, seizures and recumbency.
The literature is confusing. Phenothiazines reduce the sensitivity
of the respiratory centre to carbon dioxide and usually a slight
Cardiovascular effects
reduction in respiratory rate is observed. There is normally little
Hypotension
change (or a slight decrease) in tidal volume. Thus, minute ven-
Due mainly to peripheral cl receptor blockade and the resulting
tilation is minimally reduced and blood gases remain almost
vasodilation, but also, suppression of the sympathetic nervous
unchanged.
system both centrally and peripherally, resulting in a slight change
 Phenothiazines can potentiate the respiratory depressant effects
 in autonomic balance towards an increased parasympathetic tone.
 of other sedative and anaesthetic agents.
Occasionally, the slight fall in blood pressure elicits a reflex
increase in heart rate, but bradycardia has also been described.
Anti-emetic effect
A slight negative inotopy occurs, probably due to the decrease
 Phenothiazines inhibit dopamine (and histamine, serotonin
in sympathetic tone. Beware in animals with pre-existing
(5-HT), and acetylcholine(ACH)), activity in the central
hypovolaemia.
chemoreceptor trigger zone. Their anti-emetic effect is especially
good against the emetic effects of opioids (and possibly C2
Syncope
agonists).
Cardiovascular collapse due to hypotension and bradycardia,
 Phenothiazines are not so good for the treatment of motion
leading to fainting. Dogs are quite susceptible to this, and espe-
 sickness (nausea and vomiting of vestibular origin), but may help
cially the brachycephalics with their inherently high resting vagal
to prevent it (perhaps due to anxiolysis). Beware sedation as the
tone. ACP also increases the risk of respiratory obstruction in
unwanted side effect when used for anti-emetic activity.
brachycephalics, because of the sedation and ^muscle relaxation?
(including the pharyngeal muscles) produced.
Antihistaminic effects
 Due to H1 receptor blockade. Different phenothiazines have dif-
Adrenaline reversa!
ferent antihistaminic potencies; but ACP should not be used prior
Excited and apprehensive animals have high levels of circulating
to intradermal skin testing.
catecholamines. These can worsen the hypotension produced by
ACP and cause fainting. Catecholamines include epinephrine
Pro- or anti-convulsant properties?
(adrenaline) and norepinephrine ( noradrenaline). Norepinephrine
It is generally considered that ACP can lower the seizure threshold
is a vasoconstrictor (α agonist), but this action is antagonised by
in animals with epilepsy and should be used with caution or
ACP. Epinephrine can act as a vasoconstrictor at high concentra-
avoided in animals with a history of seizures. Many authors also
tions (α1 [and α2] effects), so can also be antagonised by ACP,
Suggest it should be avoided in myelography cases, as the radio-
but epinephrine preferentially produces vasodilation, especially at
 graphic contrast media used may be irritant to the brain and
lower concentrations (β2 effects). When Cl activity is blocked by
trigger seizure activity, and ACP may enhance this. However,
ACP, then β2 activity can prevail, such that epinephrine's β2-
many veterinary anaesthetists routinely use ACP in myelography
induced vasodilation can potentiate the c1 blocking effects of
cases, with no significant increased incidence of seizures in recov-
ACP, and worsen the vasodilation and hypotension.
ery. Many years ago, the data sheet for ACP suggested its use as
 If hypotension becomes a problem, treatment is with αl ago-
an anticonvulsant; and even today, some still suggest it is admin-
nists (e.g. phenylephrine), and intravenous fluids.
istered in large doses to provide sedation and possibly treat the
 Phenothiazines can also potentiate the cardiovascular depres-
seizures due to metaldehyde poisoning (slug pellets), although
sant effects of other anaesthetic agents.
diazepam is usually the preferred anticonvulsant.
Anti-arrhythmic effects
 Anticholinergic effects
Phenothiazines are said to reduce the incidence of catecholamine
Weak antimuscarinic effects. Mainly noted as antispasmodic
induced cardiac arrhythmias in dogs under barbiturate and
 effects in the GI tract, with slight reduction in GI tract secretions.
halothane anaesthesia (which increase the sensitivity of the myo-
Although ACP has been shown to be spasmolytic, its use has not
cardium to such arrhythmias). Suggested mechanisms include:
been associated with any increased risk of ileus. It causes relaxa-
● Reduction of overall activity of the sympathetic nervous system
tion of the cardiac sphincter, and increases the risk of reflux and
(so reduction of circulating catecholamines), and change of
regurgitation.
ANS balance to a more parasympathetic dominance.
 The peripheral antidopaminergic effects on the GI tract also
● Local anaesthetic like activity/membrane stabilising effects
 add to the decreased gut motility, but tend to increase GI tract
(ACP has been shown to decrease the conduction velocity in
 secretions.
cardiomyocytes, with a concomitant increase in the refractory
period).
Hypothermia
● Blockade of ^cardiac α(1 or 2?) arrhythmic receptors, com-
 Due to depression of activity in the thermoregulatory centre, and
bined with only a weak anticholinergic effect on the heart.
 to increased heat loss from the vasodilated periphery.
Small animal sedation and premedication  33
Analgesia
those with decreased platelet function (including von Willebrand's
Methotrimeprazine appears to exert analgesic actions in its own
disease).
right; however, other phenothiazines merely enhance the analge-
sia afforded by opioids and c2 agonists. Mechanisms may include
Blood dyscrasias
dopaminergic, adrenergic and local anaesthetic effects.
Leukopaenia and agranulocytosis have only been rarely associated
with long-term use in man.
Local anaesthetic behaviour
 Chlorpromazine may be the most potent in this respect. It can 
Metabolic effects
 block sodium (and possibly other cation) channels.
Chlorpromazine causes a significant increase in plasma choles-
terol in man.
Muscle relaxation
Phenothiazines do not cause muscle relaxation as such, but do
Other effects
reduce the general locomotor/muscle activity because of their
 No work has been done to establish the safety, or otherwise, of
anxiolytic effects; and they do decrease the muscle spasticity
ACP in pregnant animals.
associated with ketamine. (Remember that side effects can include
 Phenothiazines can potentiate the effects of organophosphate
muscle tremors, rigidity and akathisia).
 compounds, via reversible inhibition of acetylcholinesterase and
 pseudocholinesterase; (despite exhibiting atropine-like effects), so
Hepatic effects
beware recent ectoparasite treatments.
 No direct hepatotoxic actions, although cause an increase in bile
Long-term
 treatment
can
sometimes
result
viscosity. Repeated dosing may result in enzyme induction.
 photosensitisation.
 The effects of phenothiazines are exacerbated by:
Renal effects
No direct effects, but beware prolonged and severe hypotension.
● Age - very old and very young.
 Phenothiazines may have mild diuretic effects via suppression of
●Debility.
●Renal disease.
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) secretion, and/or via direct action
 on renal tubules to decrease water and electrolyte reabsorption.
● Hepatic disease.
● Hypovolaemia.
Hormonal effects
● Congestive heart disease.
 Reduction in ADH, growth hormone and ACTH (and therefore
● Beware in brachycephalics.
cortisol), secretion. Cortisol has permissive effects on the actions
of catecholamines, and ADH has vasoconstrictor properties; thus
 Neurolept malignant syndrome
along with reduced catecholamine levels, these all result in poten-
 Follows the use of phenothiazines and butyrophenones. Possibly
 tiation of peripheral αl blockade and hypotension.
facilitated by dehydration, exhaustion or CNS disease. The syn-
 Prolactin levels increase because of reduced secretion of prol-
actin-release-inhibiting hormone, and antidopaminergic activity
the drugs. Clinical signs develop over 1-3 days and include:
in the pituitary. Increased prolactin levels can lead to gynaeco-
 a n n m  p e
● Hyperthermia.
· Tachycardia.
 problem in humans). High doses may reduce FSH and LH secre-
● Altered consciousness.
 tion and oestrus cycles may be suppressed.
● Muscle rigidity (and damage leading to raised values of creatine
kinase), due to extrapyramidal dysfunction (tremor/dystonia).
Haematological effects
● Autonomic instability (labile blood pressure, sweating, saliva-
A dose-dependent decrease in packed cell volume and total
tion, urinary incontinence).
 protein is seen within 30 min of administration in dogs, cows and
horses. It is thought to be due to splenic sequestration, and pos-
The differential diagnosis should include malignant hyperther-
mia, rhabdomyolysis, tetanus, and central anticholinergic syn-
 drome (see below). Treatment is supportive and includes oxygen
reduction in WBC count may be due to margination of cells.
 supplementation, fluid therapy, cooling, and possibly dantrolene.
Antithrombotic effect
 Occasional mortality occurs from acute renal failure, arrhythmias,
 Phenothiazines also interact with the phospholipid bilayer merm-
 pulmonary emboli, or aspiration pneumonia.
brane of platelets to inhibit aggregation via increasing membrane
fluidity. ACP results in a decrease in platelet count (splenic
Central anticholinergic syndrome
sequestration), and a decrease in platelet function (decreased
Occasionally occurs after administration of compounds with
 aggregation); but it is only transient, and has never been reported
anticholinergic activity (atropine, pethidine, phenothiazines).
as a cause of any increased risk associated with poor haemostasis
in previously normal patients. Perhaps caution should be exer-
and depression, muscular inco-ordination, restlessness, anxiety,
cised in animals with pre-existing coagulopathy and in particular,
hallucinations, convulsions, coma, and signs of peripheral
34  Veterinary Anaesthesia
anticholinergic activity, such as tachycardia, dry mouth, dry skin,
unpredictable, and possibly even more so than in dogs. Use lower
urinary retention.
doses in sick cats. Oral doses are the same as for dogs (i.e.
c. 1 mg/kg PO).
Uses of ACP in small animals
 More predictable sedation is obtained if ACP is combined with
(For horses, see Chapter 28)
an opioid:
● Available as 2 mg/ml yellow solution (not to be confused with
●ACP c. 0.05 mg/kg + pethidine (5 mg/kg) IM (or SC).
 the equine 10 mg/ml solution); and as pale yellow tablets, 10 mg
● ACP c. 0.05 mg/kg + morphine (0.1-0.2 mg/kg) IM.
or 25 mg.
● ACP c. 0.05 mg/kg + methadone (0.25 mg/kg) IM.
● For sedation/premedication.
● ACP c. 0.05 mg/kg + butorphanol (0.1-0.5 mg/kg) IM.
● As a tranquilliser/sedative during treatment of tetanus.
● ACP c. 0.05 mg/kg + buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg) IM.
● Was once fashionable as a vasodilator in the treatment of arte-
Allow 30-40 min for sedation to develop; it usually wanes in
rial thromboembolic disorders in cats, but less commonly used
 3-4 h, but can persist for about 7h. As well as these neuroleptan-
now.
algesic combinations, ACP has been used with ketamine in cats,
● As an aid to urethral relaxation in blocked cats’ (but beware
 to provide a state approaching full dissociative anaesthesia. ACP
their intravascular volume status).
offsets the muscle hypertonus associated with ketamine and can
The dose is very variable and depends on the size and nature
smooth induction and recovery from ^anaesthesia. Doses recom-
of the animal, and on which other drugs may be combined with
mended are ACP (0.05-0.1 mg/kg) + ketamine (c. 5+ mg/kg) IM
it. Injectable ACP can be administered IM or IV, although, at least
or even SC. Allow at least 20min for the full effect to occur.
in cats, absorption after SC injection may also be adequate.
Doses up to 0.4mg/kg were at one time suggested for cases of
Allow 20-40 min after injection (any route), and at least 40 min
thro mboembolism.
after oral administration, for it to take effect; and leave the animal
undisturbed in quiet surroundings for this time for the best
Butyrophenones
results.
Butyrophenones are even less predictable than phenothiazines
Dogs
 and tend to cause excitement before sedation finally occurs. They
The injectable dose is 0.01-0.05 (even up to 0.1) mg/kg IM, lower
are, however, potent anti-emetics. Butyrophenones are said to
doses IV (e.g. half of IM dose). Doses as low as 0.01 mg/kg can
cause less cardiorespiratory depression and interference with
still cause syncope in hypovolaemic dogs. Use lower doses in
thermoregulation than phenothiazines. Sedation occurs due to a
bigger dogs (applying allometric scaling, i.e. metabolic rate is
combination of antidopaminergic, anti-adrenergic and GABA-
more related to surface area than body mass); and extremely low
mimetic activity in the reticular activating system. Only two are
 doses in brachycephalics and sick dogs. The cral dose is generally
licensed for use in veterinary species.
1 mg/kg but can vary from 0.25-3 mg/kg.
 The effect tends to be more predictable if combined with an
Azaperone
opioid, and lower ACP doses can often then be used too. Opioids 
This is licensed for use in pigs. It can be used to reduce
 have sedative properties which are enhanced by combination with
fghting amongst newly mixed pigs, reduce transport stress,
other sedatives/tranquillisers. Such combinations provide neuro-
and reduce rejection/aggression in newly farrowed gits/sows
leptanalgesia (the combination of a neuroleptic/tranquilliser, and
towards their litters of piglets. It is not analgesic. (See Chapter 35
an analgesic), and include:
on pigs.)
● ACP c.0.03 mg/kg + pethidine (3.5-5 mg/kg) IM (NOT IV).
● ACP c.0.03 mg/kg + morphine (0.1-0.5 mg/kg) IM.
Fluanisone
This is available in a mixture with fentanyl (a potent opioid),
● ACP c. 0.03 mg/kg + methadone (0.25 mg/kg) IM.
● ACP c.0.03 mg/kg + butorphanol (0.1-0.5 mg/kg) IM.
marketed as Hypnorm. It is licensed for use in mice, rats, rabbits 
and guinea pigs. (See Chapter 36 on rabbits.)
● ACP c.0.03 mg/kg + buprenorphine (0.01-0.02 mg/kg) IM.
It is often said that the most reliable sedation that can be
Thioxanthenes
achieved in aggressive dogs is with the combination of ACP and
an opioid, papaveretum (a mixture of opium alkaloids) being
These are phenothiazine relatives. They are dopamine antagonists
 suggested as the best. The papaveretum dose suggested is c. 0.2+
and thus have sedative properties. They are relatively long acting
mg/kg. However, never trust any 'sedated-looking dog, as some
and are useful for combination with opioids to provide neurolep-
will be able to be aroused, even if only transiently, and bite.
tanalgesia for wild animal capture. Zuclopenthixol is the main
Allow 30-40min for sedation to develop; the effect usually
one that you may hear about.
wanes in 3-4 h, but residual sedation may be apparent for 6-8 h.
Benzodiazepines
Cats
The injectable dose is 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM (or SC), and lower the
No benzodiazepines are licensed for veterinary use, but two are
dose for IV administration (e.g. half of IM dose). Again, very
commonly used: diazepam and midazolam. Zolazepam, in com-
Small animal sedation and premedication  35 
bination with tiletamine, is used more often in large animals (see
and barbiturates also enhance each other's binding at GABAA
Chapter 28 on equine premedication and sedation). Midazolam
receptors, hence they can potentiate each other's GABA-ergic
is roughly twice as potent as diazepam, and shorter acting, but
effects.
this difference is often hard to detect clinically. Both can be well
 Benzodiazepines depress activity in the reticular activating
absorbed across mucous membranes, and midazolam has been
system, by enhancing GABA actions, to produce sleepiness on a
used by the intranasal/transmucosal route. Diazepam is also avail-
scale from anxiolysis to sedation (dose-dependent). Central
able in preparations for rectal administration. (Oral administra-
tion and absorption via the stomach and hepatic portal vein,
They also act in the spinal cord, where they depress internuncial
results in significant first-pass metabolism, so doses must be
neurotransmission, resulting in postural muscle weakness, via
increased (perhaps doubled) to be effective by this route.)
 enhancement of inhibitory GABA effects, and possibly by poten-
The actions of benzodiazepines are:
tiation of the inhibitory effects of glycine. This muscle weakness
● Anticonvulsant.
is often referred to as ^central’ muscle relaxation.
 Some texts also claim an anti-arrhythmic effect, probably more
● Anxiolytic and sedative.
related to a reduction in circulating catecholamines with ^seda-
● Muscle relaxation (skeletal muscle).
tion' than any direct myocardial effects. (Beware preparations of
● Amnesic (anterograde; also some retrograde).
diazepam in propylene glycol, as the latter may cause arrhyth-
● Not analgesic.
mias). Benzodiazepines may also modulate NMDA receptor
Pharmacology
activity.
Benzodiazepines consist of benzene rings fused to a diazepine
Resu/ts ofadministration
ring. Midazolam is unusual in that it contains an imidazole ring.
Administration leads to anxiolysis/sedation. There are very few
 In acidic solution, this ring opens and the compound becomes
side effects.
water soluble; but at pH >4, the ring closes and it becomes highly
lipophilic. This unusual feature enables water-soluble salts to be
Cardiovascular depression
 prepared (commercially available solutions have pH 3.5), avoid-
This is minimal, especially at lower doses. Midazolam, at the
ing the need for either inclusion of propylene glycol, which is
higher doses (0.2+ mg/kg), causes more cardiovascular depres-
necessary to solubilise the non-water-soluble diazepam, or pro-
sion (some negative inotropy and vasodilation, which result in
duction ofan emulsion in intralipid. The formulation of diazepam
hypotension), than diazepam (the effects of which are negligible
solubilised in propylene glycol, should be administered only
at this dose). Following such higher dose midazolam administra-
intravenously, and may cause pain on injection because of the
tion, a transient fall in blood pressure and slight increase in heart
propylene glycol. Intramuscular deposition of this formulation
rate occur, of a similar magnitude to that seen after thiopental
results in poor bioavailability and causes discomfort on injection
administration.
and tissue irritation. Propylene glycol has also been blamed for
haemolysis, cardiac arrhythmias, and hypotension. Diazepam
Respiratory depression
adheres to certain types of plastic, possibly including those of
This is minimal at doses up to 0.2 mg/kg, but can enhance the
syringes and IV fluid giving sets (equivocal results), so that any
 respiratory depression caused by other anaesthetic agents and
injections should be prepared immediately before administration.
adjuncts. Depression is due to a reduced ventilatory response to
The form of diazepam available as an emulsion in soybean oil/egg
 carbon dioxide, and a slight relaxation of intercostal muscles pro-
 phosphatide/glycerol (intralipid), is called Diazemuls in the UK.
 ducing less effective ventilation.
Its bioavailability after intramuscular administration is poor.
 nd a ann  pn  
Other effects
(>95%). Hepatic metabolism results in a variety of metabolites,
Liver enzyme induction may occur. Hepatic disease may slow
which are excreted via urine and bile. Many of diazepam's metab-
metabolism, but renal disease should not affect the plasma
olites are active, for example oxazepam and temazepam, and there
clearance of drugs. There may also be endocrine effects because
is potential for entero-hepatic recycling and cumulative effects.
benzodiazepines reduce plasma adrenocorticotropic hormone
Midazolam's metabolites are much less active, and it is better
(ACTH) and cortisol concentrations, but the significance of this
suited for infusion, if that is necessary (see later). Diazepam has
is not clear. Diazepam may increase cardiac sphincter tone.
a slightly slower onset of action than midazolam after IV admin-
istration, and may produce drowsiness lasting for several (4 up to
Uses and doses
12+) hours (compared with1-4h for midazolam).
Anxiolytic/sedative agent
Benzodiazepines are often used as the sole anxiolytic/sedative
Mechanisms of action
agent for paediatric, geriatric, and debilitated patients. Their use
Benzodiazepines act on specific benzodiazepine binding sites,
alone in fit healthy adult animals may result in CNS excitement
which are associated with GABA, receptors, to enhance the affin-
reactions and possibly altered temperament, for example a previ-
ity for and/or action of, gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA),
ously quiet animal may become aggressive (due to disinhibition,
which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter. These receptors are
the relief of inhibitions). The dose for either diazepam or mida-
found primarily in the brain and spinal cord. Benzodiazepines
zolam is 0.1-0.25 mg/kgIV. For debilitated animals, try the lower
36  Veterinary Anaesthesia
dose. Although midazolam is twice as potent as diazepam, it is
Convulsions/status epilepticus
shorter acting, and halving the dose is not commonly practised.
 Benzodiazepines can be given for the treatment of convulsions/
Midazolam can also be administered IM.
status epilepticus and can be administered by infusion if neces-
sary. Midazolam is possibly a better choice as it does not adhere
In combination with opioids
to plastic, and is less cumulative. There is also no propylene glycol
Benzodiazepines can be used in combination with opioids
to worry about.. (The diazepam in diazemuls can also adhere to
(morphine, methadone, pethidine, butorphanol, buprenorphine),
plastic.) Dose 0.5 mg/kgIV. Repeat every 10 min, up to a total of
or other sedative agents (ACP or C2 agonists). Dose 0.1-
three doses. If struggling to get IV acces the dose can be admin-
0.25 mg/kgIV.
istered per rectum. Alternatively, the same dose as for IV admin-
 istration can be given intranasally/transmucosally, for either drug.
As an adjunct to ketamine
but preferably, midazolam. Midazolam infusion rates are around
As an adjunct to ketamine, for reduction of muscle tone. Dose
0.4 μg/kg/min IV.
0.1-0.25 mg/kgIV.
Antagonism
 In the treatment of tetanus
Specific benzodiazepine antagonists are available. Flumazenil is
Benzodiazepines can be used in the treatment of tetanus and for
the most commonly used. It is expensive and doses have not been
'muscle relaxation’ to improve analgesia when intervertebral discs
established. The dose required depends upon the dose of agonist
have prolapsed. They may be useful for urethral relaxation in
given and the length of time since its administration. However, a
blocked cats. Dose 0.5-1 mg/kgIV; 0.5-5 mg/kg PO (but up to
starting dose would be of the order of 10μg/kgIV. The duration
10 mg/kg if necessary).
of antagonism provided by flumazenil is relatively brief and repeat
doses may be necessary.
 As a co-induction agent
Benzodiazepines can be used as co-induction agents alongside, for
Fireworks phobias
example thiopental or propofol, to reduce the dose requirements
 It is generally believed that benzodiazepines are more potent anxi-
of the latter. (The dose requirement for ketamine is diffcult to
olytics than phenothiazines; and the use of, for example, ACP
lower, because of its dissociative effects.) Dose 0.1-0.25 mg/kgIV.
alone in anxious dogs may produce sedation but not allay their
Midazolam (0.1-0.25 mg/kg), can be used in conjunction with
underlying fears; thus dogs may appear sedated but still be suffer-
ketamine (c. 2.5-5+ mg/kg) IM for cats, usually if they are ill or
ing fear of fireworks. In these cases it may be best to combine ACP
debilitated, to produce a more tractable patient, for example for
with a benzodiazepine (e.g. diazepam) to produce sedation and
insertion of an IV catheter, blood sampling, or radiography.
anxiolysis more predictably. Benzodiazepines alone are also unre-
However, occasionally cats, especially healthy cats, will become
liable and can result in excitement (so-called disinhibition),hence
a rn r aa aq  s e n) 
monotherapy is not often successful. Some people now prefer
excitement’ side effect of ketamine. Try not to be tempted to
 the combination of a benzodiazepine with an antidepressant
administer a further dose of midazolam, as this will worsen the 
e.g. a tricyclic antidepressant such as clomipramine (trade name
excitement. A low dose of ACP (0.01-0.03 mg/kg) or perhaps a
Clomicalm), or a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (e.g.
very low dose of an α2 agonist can help, but these agents may
fluoxetine; Prozac).
both be relatively contra-indicated in sick or debilitated cats.
Sometimes the addition of butorphanol (0.1-0.2 mg/kgIM) can
Other uses
help. Diazepam or midazolam can be administered with ketamine
 As a behaviour modifying agent for anxiety disorders. Dose 0.2-
 IV in cats (and dogs), usually after premedication with for example
 2 mg/kg PO every 8h for cats; 0.5-2 mg/kg PO for dogs.
ACP/opioid,
typical  doses
being 0.25 mg/kg
benzodi-
To stimulate appetite (especially in cats). Dose 0.5-1 mg/kgIV.
azepine + 2.5 mg/kg ketamine. These doses result in a sedated and
tractable patient for radiography, ultrasonography or other mini-
 Hepatic problems
mally invasive diagnostics. Endotracheal intubation is, however,
The oral administration of diazepam in cats has been associated
usually not possible because of retained gag and pharyngeal and
with the development of fulminant hepatic failure; and many
laryngeal reflexes. (Ketamine is not licensed for IV administration 
internal medicine clinicians do not favour its use in cats with
in dogs in the UK, and must not be administered alone without
hepatic disease.
 premedication in dogs.)
 Beware hepatic disease if hypoproteinaemia is present, as there
may well be an increase in the proportion of free (unbound)
Calming
drug, so that an exaggerated response (overdose) is observed.
 Benzodiazepines can be given to calm patients with post-operative
Animals with portosystemic shunts may well be hypoproteinae-
restlessness/emergence delirium. Dose 0.25-0.4mg/kg (some
mic; and many are prone to seizures/hepatic encephalopathy
cardiorespiratory depression may occur at these higher doses).
(due to production/absorption of false neurotransmitters'
Ensure that the animal is pain free, not suffering from opioid
from the gut), despite the common fnding of increased
excitement; and ensure it has an empty bladder and is as comfort-
circulating endogenous benzodiazepines? Some clinicians will
able as possible.
not use benzodiazepines in animals with portosystemic shunts
Small animal sedation and premedication  37
because of the problems associated with protein-binding, drug
Table 4.1 Receptor selectivity of the common α2 agonists.
metabolism and the potential for increased likelihood of seizures,
Drug
sd  n  , r n a
α2: α1 selectivity ratio
and therefore excitement), or rebound seizures (i.e. exogenous
Clonidine
220 :1
benzodiazepines may help initially, but seizures can recur as their
effect wears off).
Xylazine
160 :1
Detomidine
260 :1
α2 adrenoceptor agonists
Medetomidine (mainly due to the dextro isomer)
1620: 1
Romifidine
340 : 1
02 adrenoceptor agonists are sedative drugs with analgesic and
muscle relaxant properties. The licensed drugs for small animal
 n  on ana ( aa)  n
use are xylazine ( Rompun) (20 mg/ml), medetomidine (Domitor)
(1 mg/ml) and dexmedetomidine (Dexdomitor) (0.5 mg/ml).
lipophilicity, they cross membranes easily, for example the blood--
brain barrier, placental barrier, gut wall and mucous membranes.
Sedative effects tend to outlast analgesic effects (although this is
equivocal). Effects become apparent within 5 min of administra-
 Xylazine, medetomidine and dexmedetomidine are not pure' c2
tion, but maximal sedation may take up to 20 min to be achieved.
agonists, but show selectivity for interaction with α2 receptors. In
Duration of sedation is dose-dependent, but is of the order of
this respect, medetomidine and dexmedetomidine are much
30-60 min after xylazine, and 30-180 min after medetomidine or
more selective for α2 receptors than α1 receptors; whereas xyla-
dexmedetomidine.
zine is less α2 selective and has some, not insignificant, αl activity
also (Table 4.1).
Actions and effects
02 receptors are widely distributed in the body, although the exact
Receptors
numbers of receptors, their sensitivity and their distribution in
Alpha (c) subtypes
the body, may vary between species and possibly with certain
Cl and α2, further subdivided into αlA, α1B, α1C, and cα2A,
disease states. 02 receptors can also be found pre-synaptically
C2B, α2C and α2D (the rodent homologue of human c2A).
and post-synaptically, whereas α1 receptors are generally post-
Beta (β) subtypes
synaptic. 02 agonists act both centrally (at the spinal and suprasp-
inal [brain], levels), and peripherally. Their actions depend on:
β1, β2 and B3.
● Interaction with c2 (and αl) receptors.
Imidazoline'receptors'
● Interaction with imidazoline receptors (I1 and 12).
 Imidazoline derivatives also interact with imidazoline-preferring
●‘Local anaesthetic type activity.
 binding sites (I receptors, also subdivided into I1 and I2 types,
●'Membrane effects.
with I2 being subdivided further into I2A and 12B). 11 receptors
 are found in the brain and produce a centrally mediated hypoten-
 02 adrenoceptor agonists have the following effects:
sion. I2 receptors are present in the brain, kidney and pancreas.
●Anxiolysis.
Significant interaction occurs between C2 and I receptors. Central
● Sedation.
and peripheral I1 and I2 receptors may be responsible for some
● Neuroprotection/anticonvulsant?
of the observed effects of o2 agonist drugs. These receptors are
· Analgesia.
thought to have different signal transduction mechanisms com-
●Muscle relaxation.
pared with c2 receptors, but their activation may influence the
· Bradycardia.
activity of nearby Q2 receptors. Their activation may inhibit
● Arterial blood pressure changes.
monoamine oxidase (MAO). Cardiac I2 receptors, especially in
● Thermoregulatory suppression, but peripheral vasocon-
 mitochondrial membranes, may be involved in protection against
striction.
myocardial ischaemia; and neural mitochondrial I2 receptors
● Emesis.
may be involved in neuroprotection against ischaemic damage
● Reduction in GI tract motility and perfusion.
(see below).
● Uterine activity increases (depending on species, and whether 
 gravid or non-gravid uterus).
Receptor distribution
● Pro- or anti- arrhythmic?
● Peripheral and central (spinal/supraspinal).
● Endocrine changes (hyperglycaemia, diuresis).
● Pre-synaptic, post-synaptic and extrasynaptic.
● Coagulation (platelet aggregation) enhanced?
● Ocular changes.
0QA receptors are most prevalent in the CNS, whereas 0ΩB
receptors are most prevalent peripherally. 02A, α2B, and α2C
Pharmacology
receptors are thought to be involved in the analgesic actions of α2
These compounds also contain benzene rings, and some contain
agonist drugs. Different species have different receptor subtypes,
a thiazine ring (e.g. xylazine), whereas others contain an imida-
 distributions and receptor densities.
38  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Metabolism
factors potentially influencing these events is the balance between
Metabolism occurs mainly in the liver (particularly oxidative and 
Ql receptor (excitatory), and α2 receptor (inhibitory), activity.
hydrolytic breakdown), and metabolites are excreted in the urine.
Central I (2?) receptor activity is also important (see above).
A small amount of unchanged parent compound may also be
Where raised intracranial pressure is a concern, the vasocon-
excreted in the urine. Many metabolites are produced, but most
strictive effects of c2 agonists act to reduce total intracranial
have minimal activity. Repeated doses may result in some appar-
 blood volume, and therefore intracranial pressure, although they
ent tolerance, which may be due to hepatic enzyme induction or
may reduce perfusion. Diseased tissue may, however, respond
receptor down regulation/desensitisation. However, medetomi-
differently.
dine has also been reported to inhibit the Cytochrome P450
enzyme system.
Analgesia
It appears that α2A, 0QB and c2C receptor interactions are
Resu/ts of administration
involved, peripherally and centrally. Analgesia is similar to that
Anxiolysis and sedation
afforded by opioids, and synergistic with it. Analgesia is said to be
Anxiolysis and sedation are produced by actions at different sites
mostly visceral, but some 'surface' analgesia is also produced. As
within the CNS. Sedation follows C2A agonism in the locus coeru-
with the opioids, analgesia appears to correlate with cerebrospinal
leus in the brainstem; whereas anxiolysis follows suppression of
fluid (CsF) concentration of the drug; and these agents can also
 activity in the reticular activating system. The sedation produced
be used for epidural and true spinal/intrathecal (into the CSF),
by c2 agonists resembles that produced by opioids, because Q2
administration. The supraspinal analgesic effects of opioids
and μ receptors are found in similar locations throughout the
include the activation of descending monoaminergic systems
body, and these receptors also share common signal transduction
(noradrenergic and serotonergic) with resultant spinal actions.
pathways (involving G proteins), and common effector mecha-
The spinal analgesic effects of α2 agonists therefore augment the
nisms (e.g. changes in ion permeabilities). c2 agonists and opioids
analgesic effects of opioids. These descending pathways also stim-
are therefore synergistic. Note that sedated animals may be stimu-
ulate spinal cholinergic and purinergic (adenosine), systems.
ps ien u ine aq ro p is sse on p
Hence intrathecally applied c2 agonists, adenosine, or acetylcho-
time. Never trust a sedated animal, even after combination of an
line (local acetylcholine concentration is usually increased by way
02 agonist with an opioid, which normally improves the reliabil-
of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, e.g. neostigmine), can enhance
ity of the sedation.
opioid analgesia. Nitrous oxide increases endogenous opioid
production, and its analgesic effects have much in common with
Anaesthetic sparing effect
the supraspinal opioid analgesic effects, in that the descending
The anxiolytic/sedative, analgesic and myorelaxant effects also
monoaminergic pathways are involved. Naloxone should antago-
allow reduction in dose requirements of other anaesthetic drugs
nise the supraspinal and spinal (including endogenous α2 effects)
(injectable and inhalational), and to a greater extent than after
components of opioid analgesia; whereas atipamezole should only
ACP or a benzodiazepine. These greatly reduced doses should also
reverse the spinal α2 effects (of opioids, or of exogenous α2 ago-
be administered IV slowly to effect. The circulation time is slowed
nists), whilst leaving the supraspinal opioid effects untouched.
because of the fall in cardiac output, so be patient, and wait 
 All c2 agonists have local anaesthetic like actions, but xylazine
1-2 min before considering top-ups. The effect of the α2 agonist
 is the most potent in this respect. This property has been sug-
dose also depends upon the basal level of excitement of the animal
gested to be due to their chemical structure closely resembling
at the time of drug administration. The more excited/stressed the
that of the local anaesthetics:
animal, the less will be the observed sedative effects.
● Local anaesthetics: Aromatic group - amide or ester link 
Other CNS effects
amino group.
Anti-convuisant/pro-convulsant?
● C2 agonists: Aromatic group - link - hydrophilic part.
Low doses result in CNS depression and possible anticonvulsant
activity. Higher doses, especially of the less pure xylazine (i.e. less
Cardiovascular effects
02 selective), may result in stimulation, especially of cl receptors,
The actual events depend on the drug administered, the dose, the
central excitement' and a pro-convulsant effect. CNS ol receptor
route of administration, the species to which it is administered,
stimulation results in increases in cyclic guanosine monophos-
and the individual (e.g. their level of excitement, pain and stress).
 phate (cGMP) and nitric oxide (NO) activities, both of which are
Table 4.2 outlines the cardiovascular distribution of common
indicative of excitatory effects.
adrenoceptors and the effects of their stimulation.
Cardiovascular effects following intravenous administration
Neuroprotection (cerebroprotection)
are classically described as follows.
It is well known that brain injury due to hypoxia/ischaemia is
 An initial arterial hypertension occurs due to peripheral post-
characterised by a series of events which most importantly includes
the increased release of excitatory neurotransmitters, notably
some αl receptor activation; resulting in peripheral vasocon-
glutamate, which tend to result in a subsequent uncontrolled
striction. (If the 02 agonist is administered IM, then the initial
increase in intracellular calcium, and cell death. Amongst the
hypertension is much less dramatic.)
Small animal sedation and premedication  39 
Table 4.2 Location of adrenoceptors in the cardiovascular system and results 
 vital organs) are said not to have their perfusion or oxygenation
of their stimulation.
compromised.
 Pro-arrhythmic effects are suggested because occasionally
Receptor
 Situation 
 Location 
Effect of stimulation
bradyarrhythmias, such as A-V blocks (which may be associated
Post-synaptic
Vascular smooth muscle
Vasoconstriction
 with ventricular escape beats), may occur as well as the bradycar-
α1
+ve inotropy
 dia. Xylazine and medetomidine are also suggested to have direct
Myocardium?
myocardial depressant effects in the dog (negative inotropy), and
α2
Post/extra
Vascular smooth muscle
Vasoconstriction
have been blamed for sensitisation of the myocardium to catecho-
Synaptic
Vasoconstriction or
lamine-induced arrhythmias. However, protection against cate-
Endothelium?
cholamine induced arrhythmias may stem from the shift in
vasodilation
autonomic nervous system (ANS) balance towards a more vagal
α2
Presynaptic
Vascular smooth musce 
Alleviation of
dominance (central α and I effects); and protection (cardiopro-
vasoconstriction
tection), against myocardial ischaemia is afforded by interaction
β1
Post-synaptic
Vascular smooth muscle
Vasodilation
with I2 receptors, located in cardiomyocyte mitochondrial
Myocardium
+ve inotropy
+ve chronotropy
membranes.
 Beware of using atropine to treat the bradycardia. Try a small
β2
Post-synaptic
Vascular smooth musce 
Vasodilation
dose of atipamezole instead (partial reversal/antagonism).
Myocardium?
+ve inotropy
 Occasionally fatal arrhythmias and cardiac arrest have occurred
+ve chronotropy
following atropine administration, possibly because massive
 hypertension and tachycardia are induced, but the high afterload
(peripheral vasoconstriction) remains, adding to cardiac work-
load. Also immense tachycardias reduce diastolic flling time (and
This is followed by bradycardia, partly as a vagally-mediated
coronary perfusion), so cardiac output can be further reduced,
baroreflex to the hypertension, partly due to central pre-synaptic
and myocardial oxygen supply further compromised in the face
C2 receptor and indeed I (1?) receptor activation causing a central
of increased demand. All this is bad news for the heart, especially
sympatholysis (and a relative increase in parasympathetic tone),
if any degree of compromise pre-existed.
and also partly due to peripheral presynaptic α2 receptor activa-
tion resulting in reduced norepinephrine release at peripheral
Respiratory effects
sympathetic nerve terminals in the heart.
Respiratory rate may be reduced, although tidal volume may
Finally, arterial blood pressure returns to near normal,
increase so that overall minute ventilation is not affected.
usually slightly below normal, due to the central effects described
 Blood gases remain virtually unchanged. These statements are
above, and peripheral presynaptic α2 receptor activation, which
true for the lower' doses. In some species, notably ruminants, Q2
reduces norepinephrine release, helping to relieve part of the pre-
agonists cause bronchoconstriction and an increase in pulmonary
viously induced peripheral vasoconstriction. Usually a slight vaso-
vascular resistance, leading to pulmonary oedema and impaired
constriction remains; the slight decrease in blood pressure being
oxygenation of blood with resultant hypoxaemia. Care must be
mainly a feature of the slowed heart rate and reduction in cardiac
taken with their use in ruminants, especially small ruminants;
output. Clonidine is said to have a 'U' shaped dose response curve
calves, sheep and goats. (Large doses of detomidine do the same
for ^eventual vasomotor tone; low and high doses resulting in
in horses).
overall vasoconstriction, and middle doses resulting in overall
vasodilation. The other drugs may behave similarly.
 Muscle relaxation
The bradycardia observed may be of the order of half the previ-
This manifests as ataxia or recumbency. Postural muscles and
ous resting heart rate. A compensatory increase in stroke volume
smooth muscles seem to be affected. Reduced vigilance, accom-
may be limited because of peripheral vasoconstriction (increased 
panying anxiolysis/sedation, central actions, perhaps at imidazo-
afterload), so cardiac output is thus dramatically reduced. Because
line, glycine and GABAA receptors and possible local anaesthetic
 the circulation is slowed, IV administration of anaesthetic agents
actions, have all been suggested to be responsible.
should be done slowly to effect.
Beware α2 agonist use in brachycephalics and animals with
 Peripheral mucous membranes look pale because of the vaso-
laryngeal paresis, as pharyngeal and laryngeal muscle relaxation
constriction; and they may even appear cyanotic, because of
 may further impair their already compromised airway.
reduced perfusion (due to vasoconstrction) allowing a slower
Lower oesophageal sphincter pressure is reduced, thus poten-
passage of blood through the capillary beds, and therefore more
tially increasing the risk of gastro-oesophageal reflux.
time for oxygen extraction by the tissues. Pulse oximeters may
Their use in blocked cats has been suggested to aid urethral
not pick up a good signal so the SpOz value will be low because
 relaxation to facilitate passage of a urinary catheter; but you must
with poor signal-to-noise ratio, the saturation reading tends
be aware of electrolyte disturbances (high potassium will cause
towards 85% (see Chapter 18 on monitoring). Although the
bradycardia and arrhythmias), and intravascular volume status;
cardiac output is reduced overall, because there are effectively
and remember that these drugs can induce a diuresis, so you must
fewer peripheral tissues to perfuse, the ^central’ tissues (i.e. the
 establish urinary drainage.
40  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Hormonal effects
sedation is required. Opioids also delay gut transit.) Lower
cesophageal sphincter tone is reduced, encouraging gastro-
● Decreased ADH secretion and responsiveness.
● Decreased renin secretion.
oesopahgeal reflux.
● Decreased insulin secretion (due to action on C2 receptors on
 Emesis may occur, especially if the animal is not starved before
drug administration: possibly more common after xylazine than
pancreatic islet β cells).
after (dex)medetomidine. Emesis tends to occur before maximum
● Decreased ACTH secretion, and therefore decreased cortisol
sedation is apparent; and occurs before gut motility is reduced.
(reduced stress response; good or bad?).
catecholamines
Cats may also vomit on recovery from sedation. At one time it
● Decreased
 (sympatholysis/parasympatho
was thought to be due to the initial transient hypertension; but
mimesis).
now it is believed to be more likely due to c2 receptor activation
● Increased growth hormone.
in the chemoreceptor trigger zone, or vomiting centre. Their use
Arterial blood pressure effects from C and imidazoline receptor
is contra-indicated in cases with oesophageal obstruction and, for
activation (changes in vasomotor tone and in ANS balance), are
example, gastric dilation/volvulus cases.
compounded by reduction in ADH (also called vasopressin)
secretion and receptor responsivenes and by the reduction in
Thermoregulation
cortisol which normally has a permissive effect on the actions of
Central suppression of thermoregulation occurs, but reduction in
catecholamines; and without which the effects of catecholamines,
heat production may be countered slightly by reduction in heat
 especially on vasomotor tone, are reduced.
loss due to a slightoverallperipheral vasoconstriction. Nevertheless,
it is important to monitor the patient's temperature and guard
Diuresis
against hypothermia.
● Reduced ADH secretion and responsiveness lead to diuresis.
Haematological effects
● Reduced insulin leads to increased hepatic glycogenolysis and
Cell counts and total protein may decrease slightly. Hyperglycaemia
 gluconeogenesis causing hyperglycaemia, but this rarely results 
is common. Platelet aggregation is theoretically enhanced (cx2
 in glycosuria/osmotic diuresis (except in cattle).
agonism), but is not reported to cause clinical problems. Packed
● Reduced renin and therefore aldosterone (and possibly
cell volume is said to decrease due to splenic sequestration. Total
increased release of atrial natriuretic factor) add to the
diuresis.
protein is said to decrease due to a shift of fluid into the intravas-
cular space secondary to hyperglycaemia.
● Reduced renin also results in reduced angiotensin II leading to
 increased glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (and therefore adds 
Ocular effects
to diuresis) and natriuresis. (Note that the reduced cardiac
Mydriasis (c2 receptors in radial (not circular) muscles of the iris
output may itself result in some reduction in renal blood flow
and GFR; so perhaps the reduced renin/angiotensin helps to
are stimulated to contract), and aqueous humour production is
reduced (c2 receptor activation in ciliary body). Despite mydria-
offset this.)
sis, which usually slows aqueous outflow, the overall tendency is
 Although normal micturition reflexes are maintained, urethral
for a decrease in intraocular pressure. ADH, prolactin and cortisol
sphincter tone decreases, and overflow urine spillage may occur.
are also important in the regulation of intraocular pressure; and
 Urine specifc gravity and osmolality are reduced in inverse rela-
imidazoline receptor effects may also be involved.
tion to the increase in urine volume. Glycosuria is not a common
feature, except in cattle.
Uses and doses
Care
Uterine effects
 These compounds can be absorbed across mucous membranes,
May affect uterine tone and intra-uterine pressure; exact effects
and have impressive cardiovascular and respiratory depressant
appear to depend on species and drug and whether the animal is
 effects in people; so beware any splashes into your eyes/mouth, or
pregnant. These agents, however, may cause utero-placental vaso-
indeed prolonged skin contact, especially if any broken skin. Seek
constriction which may compromise foetal viability. α2 agonists
medical attention if accidental self administration occurs; do not
cross the blood-placental barrier easily and there is insufficient
 attempt to drive yourself to hospital.
data about their safety in pregnant animals during foetal organo-
 genesis. Their use is not recommended during pregnancy.
Xylazine
It is recommended to withhold food for 6-12h to reduce the risk
Gl tract effects
Gut motility is reduced (acetylcholine release is reduced from the
of emesis.
 presynaptic terminals of post-ganglionic parasympathetic fibres
● For sedation or premedication. Onset 5-15 min; duration up to
in the gut wall), secretions are reduced, and gut blood flow
 60 min (dose-dependent). Dose (dogs and cats) 1-3 mg/kgIM.
is reduced. Gut transit time is prolonged. Beware if trying to
● In combination with any opioid to improve the reliability
perform a barium series. (Although ACP also prolongs gut
of sedation/premedication. Use lower doses of xylazine with
transit time, some people prefer its use for such studies, if indeed
e.g. pethidine (3.5-5 mg/kg, but up to 10 mg/kg if necessary
Small animal sedation and premedication  41
in cats), morphine (0.1-0.2 mg/kg, but up to 0.5mg/kg if
selective c2 agonists available). It can also be used to antagonise
necessary in dogs), methadone (0.25 mg/kg), buprenorphine
the effects of the less α2 selective agent, xylazine, although the
(0.01-0.02 mg/kg), or butorphanol (0.1-0.5 mg/kg).
doses are less well verifed.
● In combination with (an opioid and) ketamine for anaesthesia.
 Antagonism (often called 'reversal') is occasionally accompa-
Dose: dogs, xylazine 1 mg/kg (lower doses in larger animals)
nied by muscle tremors, tachycardia, over-alertness, transient
followed 10min later by ketamine c.10+ mg/kg IM; cats, xyla-
hypotension (blockade of post-synaptic 02 receptors), panting.
zine 1 mg/kg administered alongside ketamine c.10+ mg/kg IM.
defecation and vomiting (?excitement reaction). Antagonism of
the c2 agonist not only reverses the sedative effects, but will also
Medetomidine
reverse the analgesia, so care must be taken to ensure adequate
 It is recommended that animals are fasted for 12 h prior to admin-
analgesia is provided by other drugs (and remember that atipam-
 istration of medetomidine and dexmedetomidine.
ezole may also reduce the effectiveness of opioids at the spinal
● For sedation. Dose: dogs, 10-20+ μg/kg IM (or the lower doses 
level). Although ^reversal′ of sedation becomes obvious soon after
administration of atipamezole, the cardiovascular effects may not
IV); cats, 10-50 μg/kg, or up to 150 μg/kg if necessary, IM (or
be completely reversed at the doses most commonly used:
SC). Allow 10-20min for onset, duration is dose-dependent,
e.g. 30-180 min. Useful for intradermal skin testing.
● Dose for cats = 2.5x the μg/kg dose of medetomidine IM
● In combination with an opicid, e.g. butorphanol, for sedation 
(equivalent to half the volume of medetomidine (Domitor)
or premedication. Dose: dogs, 5-10 μg/kg medetomidine + 0.1--
administered).
0.5 mg/kg butorphanol IM (IV); cats, 10-50 μg/kg medetomi-
● Dose for dogs = 5x the μg/kg dose of medetomidine IM
dine + 0.1-0.5 mg/kg butorphanol IM or SC.
(equivalent to the same volume of medetomidine (Domitor r)
● In combination with (an opioid and) ketamine for anaesthesia.
administered).
Dose: dogs, c. 10-20+ μg/kg medetomidine (+ opicid), fol-
lowed 15 min later by c. 5 mg/kg ketamine IM; cats, c. 25+ μg/
The dose of atipamezole may be adjusted according to the time
 delay following administration of (dex)medetomidine. It is also
kg medetomidine (+ opioid) + 5 mg/kg (range 2.5-7.5 mg/kg)
 recommended that when ketamine has been combined with (dex)
ketamine IM.
medetomidine, the (dex)medetomidine should not be antago-
nised for at least 20min (cats), to 40 min (dogs), to reduce the
Dexmedetomidine
chance of unveiling the excitement effects of residual active keta-
Recently licensed for use in dogs and cats in the UK. It can be
administered either IM or IV in dogs, but sugested only IM in
mine. Indeed, reversal of medetomidine after combination with
cats. The dosage for dogs is suggested in terms of body surface
ketamine is not recommended in dogs, because the excitement 
area (the data sheets provide a conversion chart for ranges of body
effects of residual ketamine, including convulsions, may be
 d n rn r    
weights), equivalent to between 3 and 40 μg/kg. In cats, a dose of
 domestic cats may also suffer the excitement effects of ketamine,
40 μg/kg based on body mass is suggested in all instances. As with 
they are less likely to convulse, and ketamine is licensed as a sole
medetomidine, however, it is likely that these doses can be
anaesthetic agent for domestic cats.
reduced; remembering that a dose of X μg/kg medetomidine
 To antagonise the effects of xylazine, again the xylazine dose
should be equivalent to a dose of (X/2) μg/kg dexmedetomidine
administered and the time since xylazine administration are
(but equal injection volume because of the different concentra-
important. Atipamezole doses from 50 to 200 μg/kg IM are rec-
tions of the solutions).
ommended; starting at the lower dose, and waiting at least 5 min
for effect before giving further doses.
Epidural administration
02 agonists can theoretically be administered by the epidural
(extradural) route, alone, or in combination with opioids and/or
Opioids
local anaesthetics. However, they can be rapidly absorbed into the
 There is more information about opioids in Chapter 3 on pain.
systemic circulation, and so prior sedation or premedication with
Although opioids are more usually combined with 'sedatives' (i.e.
C2 agonists should be practised with caution. Xylazine has the
 neuroleptanalgesia), they can be used alone, to provide some
most local anaesthetic effects, so expect a degree of motor block-
sedation and analgesia, with minimal cardiorespiratory depres-
ade too. Use of c2 agonists for small animal epidural injection is
sion. Analgesia occurs at lower doses than those necessary for
rarely reported. None of the products is licensed for administra-
sedation. Opioids alone can provide good sedation but high doses,
tion by this route; all include preservatives, so no more than a
especially in pain-free animals, may cause excitement (cats and
single dose is recommended.
horses are more susceptible than dogs) which is typified by
increased motor activity. Animals which are not experiencing
Antagonism
 pain will show excitement reactions after lower doses of opioids
Atipamezole (Antisedan)
 than those animals which are experiencing immense pain.
Atipamezole (5 mg/ml) is the most selective c2 antagonist avail-
Opioids have central (brain and spinal cord) actions, and also
able; and as such makes an excellent choice for antagonism of
can act in the periphery, as we now know that opioid receptors
medetomidine and its dextro isomer dexmedetomidine (the most 
 are expressed in inflamed tissue.
42  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 4.3 The relative activities of some of the different opioids available at 
Results of OP1 (8) receptor stimulation include:
the various opioid receptors.
● Analgesia (?modulation of μ receptor effects).
Drug
Kappa
Delta
●?Dysphoria/increased locomotor activity.
Mu
● Reduced gut motility.
Morphine
+++
+/-
+/-
● Respiratory depression (some say stimulation)/antitussive?
●Mydriasis.
Methadone
+++
一
Pethidine (meperidine)
++
+/-
-
Effects of administration
Fentanyl
+++
-(+)
The effects of opioid administration depend on the opioid, the
 Etorphine
+++
++
++
dose, the species treated, and how much pain that animal is in.
Buprenorphine
+++ (partial agonist)
++ (antag?)
+/-
 Some generalisations, based on morphine and dogs are given
Butorphanol
++ (ag/antag?)
++
below.
Naloxone (antagonist)
+++
++
+
Bradycardia
 Bradycardia may occur with minimal decrease in blood pressure,
due to vagomimetic effects. A more profound hypotension results 
if histamine release occurs e.g pethidine IV or morphine IV stim-
ulate histamine release. The exception is commonly quoted to be
Opioid receptors
 pethidine (meperidine), which is said to have vagolytic actions.
The heart rate therefore should not decrease, but you may see a
 The main opioid receptors are:
slight increase in heart rate (which may partly be a reflex response
● Mu (μ) now called OP3.
following histamine release and slight hypotension). At doses
● Kappa (k) now called OP2.
above 3-5 mg/kg, slight direct myocardial depression (negative
● Delta (8) now called OP1.
s  psn o s n n  
where you do not want to cause bradycardia (e.g. neonates depend
Table 4.3 outlines the opioid receptor preferences of the
on a high heart rate to maintain their cardiac output, as they
commonly used opioids.
Mu agonists are drugs such as morphine, methadone, pethidine
cannot vary their stroke volume very well). Some texts suggest
and fentanyl. Buprenorphine is described as a partial mu agonist;
that at low doses, morphine is sympathomimetic. In horses, at
and butorphanolis a kappa agonist and is also variously described
'normal doses, morphine certainly seems to have some positive
as either a partial mu agonist, or a mu antagonist. Fentanyl is
inotropic effects.
combined with a butyrophenone called fluanisone, as ^Hypnorm',
 Respiratory depression
which is used for neuroleptanalgesia in mice, rats, rabbits and
 Slight (but dose-dependent), respiratory depression occurs due to
 guinea pigs. Etorphine is combined with ACP in large animal
 a decrease in sensitivity of the respiratory centre to carbon dioxide.
Immobilon, which is used to provide neuroleptanaesthesia (i.e.
etorphine is such a potent opicid, that its effects resemble those
 Respiratory depression is much more of a worry in man. In
animals it is not a common problem, especially in animals in pain.
of general anaesthesia).
Results of OP3 (μ) receptor stimulation include:
Cough suppression can be useful, for example in the treatment of
kennel cough, or following laryngeal or tracheal surgery. Codeine
● Analgesia.
and butorphanol are often used as antitussives.
●Sedation/narcosis.
● Euphoria/increased locomotor activity.
Temperature
● Nausea/vomiting/constipation (decreased gut motility).
dun apoq jo uonpai suas e u sunsai qued aeu saoa
● ? Respiratory depression (more in man than in animals)/cough
ture. This is thought to be due to a resetting of the temperature
suppression.
 set-point in the thermoregulatory centre.
● Dependence.
● Miosis in dog and pig (mydriasis in horse and cat).
 Salivation, nausea, vomiting. defecation
 Less emesis is seen when animals are in pain prior to receiving
Results of OP2 (k) receptor stimulation include:
 opioids. Morphine and papaveretum (like a crude opium poppy
· Analgesia.
extract,containing mostly morphine, but some other opioids too)
●Sedation.
are the worst for causing vomiting. See Chapter 3 on pain.
● Dysphoria/increased locomotor activity.
● Slightly reduced gut motility.
Gl tract
● Respiratory depression?/antitussive?
 Increased resting tone of GI tract, but reduced propulsive peri-
● Diuresis.
stalsis (follows initial vomiting and defecation), and reduced GI
· Miosis.
tract secretions may occur. There is increased sphincter tone,
Small animal sedation and premedication   43
including those of the biliary and pancreatic ducts and ureters.
Buprenorphine
Lower oesophageal sphincter tone is also reduced, with increased
Dogs 0.01-0.02 mg/kgIM or SC q. 6-8 h.
risk of gastro-oesophageal reflux. The exception is pethidine.
Cats 0.01-0.02 mg/kgIM or SC (or buccal transmucosal; delivered
 Pethidine is spasmolytic, therefore an excellent choice where there
into cheek) q. 6-8 h.
may be ureteral colic, pancreatitis, or cholangiohepatitis. See
Butorphanol
Chapter 3 on pain for a discussion about the sphincter of Oddi.
 Dogs 0.1-0.5 mg/kgIM or SC q. 1-2 h.
Cats 0.1-0.5 mg/kgIM or SC q. 1-2 h.
Urine production
For more information about opioids, see Chapter 3.
 Urine production may be decreased secondary to an increase in
ADH secretion. Urine retention may occur due to increased ure-
thral sphincter tone, although bladder tone tends to be increased
Anticholinergics
too. Some people think this increase in ADH secretion is part of
Atropine (0.6 mg/ml); and glycopyrrolate (200 μg/ml) are men-
the stress response, and not a true reflection of opioid activity.
tioned in all anaesthetic texts. When ether was the commonly
used anaesthetic agent, its pungent odour stimulated respiratory
Other effects
tract secretions and salivation. To reduce problems of potential
● Miosis (but mydriasis in cats and horses, which are more
respiratory obstruction due to excessive secretions (especially in
 sensitive to the excitement side effects of high dose opioids).
cats because of their small diameter airways), anticholinergic pre-
● Sedation.
medication used to be given as standard. Nowadays, the use of
Analgesia
tion), or where vagal reflexes are encountered, for example during
Table 4.4 summarises the relative analgesic potencies of com-
surgery, or after administration of vagomimetic drugs such as
 monly used opioids. The doses used in clinical practice are given
potent opioids. Their use after or with c2 agonists is no longer
recommended, unless you feel that the heart rate is so low that
below.
cardiac output is compromised, but in this situation, it is better
Doses
to administer atipamezole first.
 Neither drug is a pure muscarinic receptor antagonist, as small 
Morphine
doses can produce bradycardia. At one time, this was thought to
Dogs 0.1-0.5+ mg/kg IM q. 2-46 h.
 be due to CNS actions, as it is more profound after atropine which
Cats 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IM q. 4-6-8 h.
easily crosses the blood-brain barrier. However, it is now thought
 Methadone
 that both compounds can exert weak agonistic actions on periph-
Dogs 0.1-0.25+ mg/kg IM q. 2-4-6 h.
eral muscarinic receptors. The drugs may also have indirect sym-
Cats 0.1-0.25+ mg/kg IM q.2-4-6h.
pathomimetic effects (i.e. they may inhibit the normal negative
feedback of endogenous catecholamine release).
Papaveretum
Also see Chapter 17 on muscle relaxants because these
Crude mixture of opium alkaloids, including morphine, codeine.
 agents are also used in the ^reversal of neuromuscular blockade,
Dogs 0.2 mg/kg ++ IM.
Cats 0.1-0.3 mg/kg IM.
t0prevent  the unwanted muscarinic side effects of
anticholinesterases.
 Pethidine
Dogs 3.5-5 mg/kgIM or SC q. 1 h.
Atropine
Cats 3.5-5(-10) IM or SC q. nearer 2h.
Atropine is a natural alkaloid and a tertiary amine. Atropine has
 some local anaesthetic-like activity. Its elimination is rapid in
dogs, with some metabolism to tropine, but much is excreted
unchanged in the urine. Cats, rats and rabbits (and possibly rumi-
Table 4.4 Relative analgesic potencies of common opioids.
 nants) have high blood concentrations of atropine esterase, thus
Drug
'Potency' (clinical efficacy as analgesic)
 promoting rapid clearance.
Morphine
1
Results of administration
 Pethidine
1/10
● Bronchodilation (can increase dead space, and facilitate
Fentanyl
100
rebreathing).
● Decreased respiratory secretions (watery part), and decreased
Alfentanil
10-25
ciliary activity; so there is reduced clearance of a more viscid
Remifentanil
50
mucus.
 Sufentanil
1000
● Decreased watery part of saliva (so saliva becomes more
Etorphine
10,000
viscid).
● Increased heart rate, with some increase in blood pressure.
44  Veterinary Anaesthesia
●You may see tachyarrhythmias.
high afterload limits any increase in stroke volume output. (The
● Increased myocardial oxygen demand/heart work.
tachycardia may also be associated with decreased diastolic flling
● Occasionally paradoxical bradycardia occurs (after low doses;
time for the heart.) Moreover, if anticholinergics are administered
due to central effects [atropine crosses the blood-brain barrier],
along with c2 agonists, they prevent the reflexly driven bradycar-
 or differential effects on SA and AV nodes).
dia, which means that very high arterial blood pressures are
● Mydriasis.
reached, which can potentially burst blood vessels (particularly in
● Reduced tear production.
the brain and retina). For these reasons, caution is advised in the
● Reduced gut motility and GI tract secretions.
use of anticholinergics in animals that have been given C2 ago-
● Reduced lower oesophageal sphincter tone (so increased risk of
 nists. Usually a first line of treatment for α2 agonist-induced
 gastro-oesophageal reflux).
bradycardia is to reverse or partially reverse the Q2 agonist with
● Very little sedative effect.
an antagonist, usually atipamezole.
● Cardiovascular effects last 40-90 min.
Further reading
Doses
The dose of atropine for resuscitation/treatment of vagal reflexes
Bowen J (2008) Firework fears and phobias. UK Vet 13(8),
in dogs and cats is 0.01-0.04 mg/kgIV. However, occasionally you
59-63.
may see magnificent tachycardias and tachyarrhythmias at these
Murrell JC (2007) Premedication and sedation. In: BSAVA
doses if used in non-anaesthetised patients, so try the lower doses 
 Manual of canine and feline anaesthesia and analgesia. 2nd
(0.005-0.01 mg/kgIV) for bradycardias, and the higher doses for
Edition. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T. BSAVA
asystole (but remember that further bradycardia (paradoxical)
 Publications, Gloucester, UK. Chapter 12, pp120-132.
 may occur, before tachycardia finally ensues).
Murrell JC, Hellebrekers LJ (2004) Medetomidine and dexme-
detomidine: a review of cardiovascular effects and antinocicep-
Glycopyrrolate
tive properties in the dog. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
Glycopyrrolate was originally developed as an antihistamine ( H2).
32, 117-127.
It is a synthetic quaternary ammonium compound, hence it is also
 Self IA, Hughes JML, Kenny DA, Clutton RE (2009) Effect of
 known as glycopyrronium.
muscle injection site on preanaesthetic sedation in dogs.
Veterinary Record 164, 323-326.
Results of administration
Valverde A, Cantwell S, Hernandez J, Brotherson C (2004) Effects
These are the same as for atropine, but glycopyrrolate does not
of acepromazine on the incidence of vomiting associated with
the cross blood-brain barrier or placenta, as it is highly ionised.
opioid administration in dogs. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
Because of this,there is reportedly less chance of seeing paradoxi-
Analgesia 31, 40-45.
cal bradycardia (see above). Its onset of action is much slower
than atropine, even after IV injection (e.g. 1-3 min), therefore it
is less useful in emergency situations.
 It supposedlyhas a longer duration of action than atropine (but
depends on the species); 2-4 h for cardiovascular effects, and even
Self-test section
longer antisialogogue (and other GI tract) effects (e.g. can last
several (about 7) hours. It also reduces gastric acid secretion more 
1.
Which of the following statements concerning ace-
than atropine (H2 blocking effect). Altogether less dramatic car-
 promazine (ACP), is false?
diovascular effects but more potent GI effects than atropine.
A.
 It causes hypotension.
Tachyarrhythmias are less likely.
 When used as the sole agent for sedation, its 
 effects are unreliable.
Doses
C.
There is no danger to its use in brachycephalics.
Glycopyrrolate is less useful in emergencies than atropine as it
D.
 It has some anti-arrhythmic' properties.
takes longer to work, even after IV injection. The dose is (5-)
2.
Which of the following would you be most reluctant
10μg/kgIV.
to administer to neonates (1-2 weeks old)?
Some people advocate the use of anticholinergics when C2
A.
 Pethidine
agonists have been used, because they feel uncomfortable with the
B.
Benzodiazepines
bradycardias observed. The resultant tachycardia, however, mas-
C.
Isoflurane
sively increases the myocardial work, and despite the increase in
D.
 Medetomidine
heart rate, the cardiac output is minimally increased, because the
Injectable anaesthetic agents
Learning objectives
 To be able to list the properties of an ideal injectable anaesthetic agent.
To be familiar with the concept of minimum infusion rate (MIR).
Overview
● Rapid metabolism (even independent of hepatic, pulmonary or
renal function).
Many of these drugs potentiate or facilitate the effects of the
● No toxic or active metabolites.
inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA),
●‘Reversible.
by their actions at GABAa receptors (chloride channels), in the
● Does not cause histamine release.
central nervous system (CNS). These agents may also inhibit
●Minimal
cardiorespiratory  side effects  (depression or
L-type calcium channels and other ion channels. All general
stimulation).
anaesthetics also appear to stabilise the desensitised conforma-
● Produces a degree of muscle relaxation.
tional state of the neuronal nicotinic acetylcholine receptor.
● Produces a degree of analgesia.
Routes of injection may be intravenous, intramuscular, intra-
● Stable in storage (not degraded by heat or light).
 peritoneal or intraosseous (intramedullary); but the intravenous
● Stable in solution (not degraded by heat or light).
pual nou op suse auos pue spasn Aquouo isou si anon
● Miscible with other agents.
themselves to other routes because of tissue irritation or poor
● Inexpensive.
bioavailability.
● High therapeutic index.
 Injectable agents can be administered for induction of anaes-
 thesia, and some are also suitable for maintenance of anaesthesia,
if administered by intermittent top-ups, or continuous
 Advantages and disadvantages of
infusions.
injectable drugs
Advantages
Properties of an ideal injectable
 anaesthetic agent
● Little equipment needed (syringes, needles, intravenous
catheters).
● Rapid onset of action (fat soluble, crosses blood-brain barrier
● Usually easy to administer.
quickly).
● Induction of anaesthesia can be rapid and smooth.
● Smooth induction of anaesthesia.
● Possibly relatively cheap.
● Smooth recovery from anaesthesia.
● No environmental pollution.
●Non-irritant to tissues.
· Good bioavailability by all routes of administration.
Disadvantages
● Short duration of action (may be an advantage; this is useful
for top-up doses or for continuous infusion).
● Once given, retrieval is impossible.
● Non-cumulative this is useful for top-up doses or for continu-
● The patient must be weighed accurately in order to calculate
ous infusion).
the dose.
45
46  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● When used as the sole anaesthetic agent, high doses are often
people also say that fat and skin are differently perfused, and
necessary to produce suffcient depression of the CNS to
 should be represented by two different compartments. Hence we
can say that the body can be represented by five compartments:
produce profound cardiovascular and respiratory system side
● Lungs.
effects (usually depression).
● Vessel-rich tissues (vital organs, importantly the brain).
●Not well tolerated by debilitated, hypovolaemic or endotoxae-
● Vessel-moderate tissues (muscles (some people include skin)).
mic animals, and by those suffering renal or hepatic impair-
●Vessel-poor tissues (skin, tendons, bones, cartilage).
ment; therefore doses should be reduced and given slowly to
 effect (unless you require rapid induction in order to gain rapid
● Fat.
control of the airway).
 Some people include a sixth group for bones, cartilage and
● Some drugs have the potential for human abuse.
tendons which is also vessel poor, but has even slower equilibra-
● Risks of inadvertent self-administration.
tion than the last two groups listed above. Each of these compart-
ments has its own 'time constant'. This is a measure of the time
e  rd  p
Response to administration
with the central compartment (blood), once any change has
The response to administration depends on the following:
occurred in the central compartment. The time constant is directly
proportional to the volume of the compartment, and inversely
● Dose, concentration and rate of injection (if intravenous).
 proportional to its perfusion.
●Absorption from injection site (if not intravenous) ie.
bioavailability.
Volume of compartment
● Cardiac output (influences absorption from intramuscular or
Time constant α
 Perfusion of compartment
intraperitoneal sites, and also rate of delivery of drug from
intravenous injection site to brain). Cardiac output is influ-
When relatively lipophilic anaesthetic drugs are administered
enced by heart rate and stroke volume; and these depend on a
 a nn arq sii a ssn  in
number of things such as autonomic tone, presence of dys-
organs,and of these vital organs,the brain contains a large amount
rhythmias, systemic vascular resistance (afterload), myocardial
 of lipid (white matter), so lipid-soluble drugs try to equilibrate
contractility, blood volume (preload), and the effects of seda-
with the brain first. This is useful as it allows a relatively fast
tive/anaesthetic drugs. See Chapter 18 on monitoring.
induction of anaesthesia. Other tissues with longer time constants
· Cerebral blood flow.
have to wait longer for their chance to equilibrate, (which is aided 
● Lipid solubility and ease of passage across the blood-brain
by a high lipid content in the tissue), but eventually this occurs
barrier.
as drug is redistributed away from the brain to the other
● Degree of ionisation in tissue fluids (depends on body pH and
compartments.
 p jo junoue au jeu ym ie Hd au si ed) (ed sanp
Body fat can be a huge compartment, with a large capacity;
 present is in its ionised form).
sp oae sdoi rn ne aois e se ie u i o
● Degree of protein binding (bound drug is unavailable; free
(although it is usually slow to equilibrate because its perfusion
unbound drug is active).
is low); but such drugs have no anaesthetic action’ when in
● Rate of redistribution to other tissues (and the mass of other
adipose tissue. Redistribution of anaesthetic drugs away from
 tissues and their perfusion).
the brain to a peripheral “inactive’ fatty store-house provides
● Rate of metabolism and excretion.
a useful method of awakening? from anaesthesia as the brain
● Do the lungs sequester or metabolise the drug?
 concentration falls.
● Are there any active metabolites?
Recovery from anaesthesia (re/awakening), may be partly
dependent upon such redistribution, whereas eventual drug elim-
Pharmacokinetic body compartments
ination depends upon metabolism and excretion. Once elimina-
tion (redistribution and metabolism) and excretion of the drug
If we think of the blood as the central compartment, and injection
are underway, its plasma concentration starts to fall, and drug
being made into that, or absorption from an intramuscular injec-
can now leach out of the fat (and other) stores’ to fuel further
tion site occurring into blood, then wherever the blood flows next,
elimination/excretion, until eventually elimination/excretion is
that is where the drug is next delivered.
complete.
We often read about:
● Vessel-rich tissues (vital organs: heart, brain, lungs, liver,
Barbiturates
kidneys).
● Intermediate vascularity tissues (muscles (and skin).
 Barbiturates are categorised according to their duration of action:
● Vessel-poor tissues (fat).
● Long acting: 8-12 h.
 If, however, a drug is administered into a systemic vein, the first
● Short acting: 45-90 min (e.g. pentobarbital).
tissue it reaches is the heart, quickly followed by the lungs, so the
lungs are sometimes considered as a separate compartment. Some
tal, methohexital).
Injectable anaesthetic agents  47
Duration of action also depends on the dose administered.
● Thiopental is not analgesic, and some say it is anti-analgesic
 All barbiturates may induce hepatic enzymes.
('ant-analgesic'), at subanaesthetic doses.
● Thiopental is cerebroprotective, because it reduces cerebral
Thiopental (thiopentone) sodium
blood flow by causing cerebral arterial vasoconstriction (and so
Thiopental is the agent to which others tend to be compared.
reduces intracranial pressure), and it also reduces cerebral
metabolic rate, but maintains the coupling between these two
● A veterinary licensed product is no longer available in the UK.
factors.
● It is a thiobarbiturate (the sulphur content gives the drug a
● It causes splenic engorgement, so beware with surgery for
yellowish colour). Thiopental acts, at least partly, on GABAA
splenectomy and gastric dilation/volvulus.
receptors in the CNS to produce anaesthesia. This action is
● Metabolism is slow. Greyhounds (N.B. the work was done only
 enhanced by benzodiazepines.
 in Greyhounds, although often all 'sight hounds are referred
● Once reconstituted with water, it is stable in aqueous solution
to) have even slower metabolism; and beware liver problems,
for 6 days at room temperature.
either through disease or immaturity. Metabolism takes place
1 pd s (1'1 1 1o) 1nos (1/8 57) %'7 V o
in liver and kidneys. One potential metabolite is pentobarbi-
 small animals, whereas 5% is preferred for large animals (gives
tal, which is active.
'easier volume for administration).
● Thiopental causes a degree of hepatic dysfunction and this,
● It is a racemic mixture.
● The pH of the 2.5% solution is about 10.5 (the pKa is about
metabolism of the drug, is blamed for the post-anaesthetic
7.6); i.e. sodium carbonate is required to solubilise (in water),
"hangover', which can last for several days.
the sodium salt derivative of thiobarbituric acid and prevent it
● Thiopental's short duration of action depends upon redistri-
from precipitating. Sodium carbonate reacts with water to form
bution (to muscle and fat). All sight hounds have less fat, and
 OH ions, which help to keep the pH alkaline.
  n  n r s    s 
● The dry powder is stored under nitrogen (not air), to reduce
redistribution is limited, so recovery is again prolonged Thin
formation of the insoluble free acid because carbon dioxide in
or emaciated animals and neonates also have little fat and low
air can lead to acidification.
relative muscle mass for such redistribution.
● Thiopental will undergo temperature-dependent degradation,
● Greyhounds may also have relatively low plasma protein (allows
s0 storage in a cool place will prolong the shelf-life.
higher packed cell volume (PCV) for racing, without the blood
● Thiopental is more lipid soluble than pentobarbital, so it
 getting too viscous). This reduces protein binding, so increases 
crosses the blood-brain barrier quicker, so its onset of effect is
free/active drug concentrations, and may also contribute to
quicker (c. 20-40 s). Animals often sigh deeply or yawn at the
their slower recovery from thiopental anaesthesia.
onset of unconsciousness.
● Thiopental is not necessarily contra-indicated in lean animals,
● Protein (mainly plasma albumin) binding is 72-86%. Protein
but large doses may result in prolonged recoveries.
binding may be affected by pH <7.35 and >7.5. Acidosis can
● Recovery from anaesthesia is highly dependent upon redistri-
also increase the non-ionised form, which increases blood--
bution. Thiopental is not particularly suitable for prolonged
brain barrier penetration.
infusions or multiple top-up doses, because it cumulates in
● Thiopental is very irritant, both to vascular endothelium and
fat, is metabolised slowly, and the recovery becomes very
 to tissues if injected extravascularly. Use of low concentration
 prolonged.
solutions and intravenous catheters is recommended to mini-
● Thio pental reduces lower oesophageal sphincter tone more in
mise the risks of tissue damage.
cats than in dogs; and can result in reflux (often silent'). Most
● Induction and emergence excitement are possible, hence pre-
prermedicants also reduce lower oesophageal sphincter tone.
medication is favoured.
● Arrhythmogenic (possibly partly through sensitisation of
Dose
myocardium to catecholamines); ventricular bigeminy (normal
 For induction of anaesthesia without prior premedication, doses
beats alternating with ventricular premature complexes) is
 of 5-30 mg/kg may be required. However, since recovery can be
commonly seen.
 prolonged with doses much above 10-15 mg/kg, and induction
● Intravenous administration results in slight hypotension, via
and emergence
 excitement can occur, premedication is
 direct myocardial depression (negative inotropy) and possible
 recommended.
 peripheral vasodilation. However, there is often a slight tachy-
● After acepromazine/opioid type premedication, the induc-
tion dose of thiopental is expected to be 5-10 mg/kg.
which lessens the degree of blood pressure fall. Different species 
● After an α2 agonist/opioid premedication, the dose is
may respond differently, and responses may be dose-related.
expected to be 2-5 mg/kg.
 There is still some debate about whether hypotension or hyper-
tension ocurs, what happens to the heart rate, and whether
Some people advocate the rapid bolus injection technique,
 peripheral vasodilation or vasoconstriction occur.
whereas others prefer to inject more slowly and ‘to effect. If
● Mild respiratory depression does occur, but is most noticeable
slower injection is made, occasionally animals may show excite-
ment reactions during induction (stage II of anaesthesia: the
apnoea). May cause a degree of bronchoconstriction.
involuntary excitement stage); but these are reduced by prior
48  Veterinary Anaesthesia
premedication. When injection is made more slowly and ^to
● Its administration results  in dose-dependent anaesthetic
effect, often the dose administered is less than it would have been
duration and depth, but, despite slow administration 'to effect,
had the operator chosen a rapid bolus injection technique. This
it is hard to judge the dose and its response.
can reduce the cardiovascular and respiratory depressant effects
● Minimal cardiovascular depression, but can produce marked
associated with induction.
respiratory depression.
 Although rapid injection is associated with rapid effect (rapid
● Slow metabolism especially in small animals (more rapid in
induction of anaesthesia), awakening tends to occur relatively
ruminants and horses), tends to prolong the recovery.
sooner (acute tolerance? effect), possibly because there is an
Metabolism is important for recovery from anaesthesia.
increased concentration gradient for redistribution to the other
● Pentobarbital does not provide any analgesia.
fatty tissues, so the brain concentration declines relatively quicker.
● Pentobarbital is commonly solubilised in propylene glycol.
This phenomenon may also be partly related to the degree of
● Extravascular injection is irritant to the tissues.
patient ‘excitement before induction, and to the differential
 tissue distribution of its cardiac output.
Dose
● For induction of anaesthesia, c. 3-25 mg/kg, if unpremedicated.
Methohexita! (methohexitone) sodium
● The lower doses produce sedation, whereas anaesthesia is
● No longer available for veterinary use in the UK.
achieved at the higher doses. Doses are reduced after
● Methohexital is an oxybarbiturate.
premedication.
● It is said to be 2-2.5 times more potent than thiopental.
● Pentobarbital should be injected intravenously, slowly, and ^to
● It is a racemic mixture.
 effect. For continuous infusion (e.g. for anaesthesia, or for
● It is stable in solution for 6 weeks.
 seizuring animals), the induction dose can be followed with an
● A 1% or 2.5% solution is used; the pH of the 1% solution is
 infusion of c. 1-2 mg/kg/h IV, but beware respiratory depres-
10-11, pKa is 7.9.
sion, and place a cuffed orotracheal tube if gag/swallowing
●Not irritant if extravascular leakage occurs.
reflexes are lost.
● Slightly less lipid soluble than thiopental, but pKa favours
● The euthanasia solution should not be used (diluted or not)
unionised form at body pH, so more rapidly crosses blood-
for anaesthesia as the solution is not guaranteed to be sterile
 brain barrier, and onset of anaesthesia is slightly quicker than
and free from pyrogens.
after thiopental.
● Highly protein bound.
Neurosteroids
● More likely to induce excitement reactions during induction
Saffan" (alphadolone (3 mg/ml)/alphaxalone
and recovery than thiopental, hence premedication always 
(9mg/ml))
recommended. Excitatory phenomena possibly due to glycine
antagonism in CNS.
● For cats only.
● More cardiovascular depression than thiopental (more hypo-
● No longer available, but considered here for background
 tension), but similar respiratory depression to thiopental.
information.
● Not analgesic.
● High therapeutic index, hence considered a 'safe-anaesthetic?
● Recovery is dependent on redistribution to inactive tissues
 and was therefore given the trade name Saffan.
 and metabolism.
● Saffan consisted of two pregnane-dione derivatives (alphaxalone
and alphadolone), solubilised in cremophor EL (which causes
drug could be used for continuous infusion, as it has very little
allergic reactions/histamine release, especially in dogs, hence
contra-indicated in dogs). Histamine release in cats caused
tendency to cumulate in tissues.
● Much less hangover than after thiopental.
 localised paw/ear erythema and oedema; more rarely laryn-
 geal and/or pulmonary oedema. Histamine release may also
Dose
cause bronchospasm.
● Alphaxalone produced anaesthesia (at least partly via actions
● Without premedication, c. 10 mg/kg.
 at GABA, receptors).
● After premedication, c. 3-5mg/kg (depends on the
 premedication).
calcium channel blockade and enhanced GABAa activity), but
had poor sedative/hypnotic actions, and was included to
Pentobarbita! (pentobarbitone) sodium
improve the solubility.
● Sagatalrm; 6% solution (i.e. 60 mg/ml); no longer available for
● Poor analgesia overall; some workers described anti-analgesic
 anaesthesia in the UK.
effects at sub-anaesthetic doses.
● It is only available in higher concentration (200 mg/ml) in UK
● Viscid solution, pH 7, miscible with water.
for euthanasia by anaesthetic overdose.
● Not irritant to tissues, and in fact could be administered IV or
● Pentobarbital is an oxybarbiturate.
IM.
● It is less lipid soluble than thiopental and methohexital, so is
● Not painful on injection, even IM injection. Could be admin-
 slower to cross the blood-brain barrier and induce anaesthesia.
 istered IM at low doses to produce sedation/premedication.
Injectable anaesthetic agents  49
● Mild, transient respiratory depression.
Dose
● Cardiovascular depression similar to that seen after thiopen-
 Data sheets recommend that the anaesthetic induction dose is
tal (similar decrease in blood pressure and increase in heart
administered slowly over 60 s. Doing this, you may realise that you
rate). Did not sensitise the heart to the arrhythmogenic effects
need less than the doses recommended (e.g. c. 0.5-1 mg/kg rather
of catecholamines, but direct myocardial depression was mainly
than 2+ mg/kg) to induce anaesthesia but if you administer only
 responsible for the hypotension observed.
these low doses (0.5-1 mg/kg), then the animals may very sud-
● Reasonable muscle relaxation.
 denly awaken after about 5 min because of rapid drug metabolism
● Caused a marked reduction in lower oesophageal sphincter
 and possibly insufficient time for an adequate depth of volatile
tone.
 agent anaesthesia to be established.
● Extremely rapid metabolism, such that recovery was mainly
● Dogs: without premedication, 3mg/kg; after premedication,
dependent upon this rapid metabolism. No active metabolites.
2 mg/kg.
 Some excretion of unchanged parent drugs into urine.
● Cats: with or without premedication, 5 mg/kg.
● Noncumulative. Was commonly administered by continuous
 intravenous infusion for maintenance of anaesthesia.
● Recovery could be excitable, especially if the animal was dis-
Substituted phenols
 turbed; hence premedication was recommended.
Propofol (2,6-di-isopropyl phenol)
● Saffan did not appear to interfere with sex hormones or other
steroid hormones, although some workers reported a weak
● Most commonly marketed in the veterinary world as a 1%
anti-oestrogenic effect.
macro-emulsion (10 mg/ml), pH 7.8, in soybean oil, glycerol
and egg phosphatide (i.e. intralipid’; one of the components 
used for intravenous nutrition). The emulsion slowly settles, so
Dose
 it is recommended to shake the bottle before drug is withdrawn.
Administered IV or IM.
● A modifed propofol emulsion (Propofol-Lipurom), in which
● For sedation/premedication, c. 4 mg/kg (total steroid dose).
the oil phase consists of medium and long chain triglycerides,
● For induction of anaesthesia, 9-18mg/kg (total steroid dose).
 is available for humans and is associated with slightly less pain 
 If using other agents for premedication, especially c2 agonists,
upon injection, possibly because of the reduced concentration
the dose could be reduced to about 2.5-5 mg/kg for anaesthetic
of propofol present in the aqueous phase.
induction.
● Recently (2009) a lipid-free (aqueous) nano-droplet micro-
emulsion  formulation  of  propofol
1 has been released
(PropoClearrM) (see Further reading), but it is also possible that
AlfaxanTM
 propofol solubilised in cyclodextrins (aqueous solution), may 
●Has taken the place of SaffanTd.
become available.
● For dogs and cats (although has been used off licence in other
● No preservatives in the macro-emulsion formula. Has been
species e.g goats, rabbits and horses).
shown to support bacterial growth, so it is safest to discard any
● An aqueous solution of alphaxalone (10 mg/ml), solubilised in 
unused vial contents at the end of the day on which the vial has
 2-hydroxypropyl beta cyclodextrin; pH 6.5-7.0 and without a
been opened. Do not store leftovers in syringes (even in a
preservative.
refrigerator), as dispensing into syringes often results in bacte-
● No pain upon injection, and no tissue damage if accidental
rial contamination, no matter how careful you are. The new
extravascular injection occurs. Intravenous administration
micro-emulsion formulation can be used over 28 days after the
recommended, but can be administered intramuscularly.
vial is first broached.
● No histamine release is caused by this formulation (no require
● 98% protein-bound, especially to albumin in blood.
 ment for cremophor EL).
● Highly lipid soluble.
● Minimal cardiorespiratory depression. Hypotension (due to
● GABA, agonist.
a combination of direct myocardial depression and some
● Not (usually) irritant if extravascular deposition occurs, but 
 peripheral vasodilation), is offset to some degree by a reflex
must be administered intravenously to be effective, because
tachycardia. Higher doses cause more marked effects, and ven-
absorption from, for example IM sites is almost equalled by
tilatory support may be required if accidental overdose occurs.
 metabolism, so blood (and CNS) concentrations never get high
● Reasonable muscle relaxation but animals may show inco-
enough for anaesthesia to occur.
ordinated muscular activity during recovery, hence premedi-
● Occasionally causes pain upon IV injection Although not
cation recommended.
reduced by warming to body temperature; this is overcome in
●Not analgesic.
man by injecting a little lidocaine frst or by ^reducing the
● GABA, agonist.
propofol concentration frst reaching the endothelium (by
● Very rapidly metabolised, hence clinically non-cumulative. It
 dilution or slow injection).
is marketed with a strong suggestion for total intravenous
● Extremely rapid metabolism in liver and also extrahepatic
anaesthesia by boluses every 10 min, or by continuous infusion.
sites  (possibly
lungs, kidneys, and even GI tract).
 See data sheets for more details.
Glucuronidation and hydroxylation are both important in
50  Veterinary Anaesthesia
the metabolism of this phenolic compound. Cats can not
administered and possibly the rate of injection. Mild bron-
glucuronidate drugs very well, so propofol has the potential to
chodilation may occur.
be more cumulative in cats. Very little cumulation (except
cats), so can be administered by continuous infusion for main-
cyanosis may be detected after rapid IV injection. This may not
tenance of anaesthesia. If repeated doses or infusion are con-
be totally due to post-induction apnoea, but may be due to the
sidered for cats, especially if multiple anaesthetics are required
opening up of intra-pulmonary shunts (perhaps pulmonary
(e.g. for fractionated radiotherapy), beware phenol toxicity and
veins are more sensitive to the venodilation); it may also be due
the development of haemolytic anaemia.
to transient effects on the binding of oxygen to haemoglobin.
● Recovery after one injection is due to redistribution and
 Propofol is a potent depresor of chemoreceptor function,
 metabolism; whereas after prolonged infusion, metabolism
-isod au on ppe Aeu su pue uxo on Aansus Adsa
becomes more important as the tissues become saturated.
induction apnoea seen; whereas thiopental and etomidate may
Metabolism in Greyhounds appears a little slower than in other
stimulate chemoreceptor function slightly. (Interestingly, pro-
dog breeds.
pofol potentiates hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction via inhi-
● Urine often looks bright green/yellow and stains easily, due to
bition of Karp channel-mediated vasodilation, but how this fits
excretion of compounds akin to azo-dyes, called quinols.
into the clinical picture has to be determined.)
● Induction and recovery from anaesthesia are generally
● Some muscle relaxation occurs, but sometimes muscular
smooth and excitement-free.
spasms are observed (see above), possibly due to glycine antag-
● Occasional vomiting has been recorded upon recovery.
onism in the CNS.
 Sometimes appetite stimulation appears to occur.
● Cerebroprotection. Propofol reduces cerebral blood flow by
● Cats may rub their faces on recovery.
causing cerebral arterial vasoconstriction (thereby reducing
● Dogs may develop occasional limb stiffness/tonic/clonic spasms
intracranial blood volume and thence pressure), and it reduces
especially of the forelimbs and head and neck muscles, on
cerebral metabolic rate, but maintains the coupling between
induction and/or at recovery. This is not thought to be repre-
these two factors.
sentative of true seizures (i.e. EEG recordings show subcortical
● Propofol may have anti-oxidant properties, possibly due to its
activity, rather than cortical activity). Propofol infusions can be
structure resembling that of vitamin E; and it may enhance the
 used to anaesthetise patients in status epilepticus.
cellular glutathione anti-oxidant system. However, when
● No hangover effect because of rapid and ^complete? metabo-
administered to cats every day for 10 consecutive days, malaise
lism. No active metabolites.
and Heinz body anaemia were recorded, suggesting some oxi-
● Propofol has been reported to cause acute pancreatitis in man,
dative damage. Lipids (i.e. in the macroemulsion formulation
even after one dose. This may have something to do with the
of propofol), may encourage lipid peroxidation; and under UV
high lipid content of the propofol macro-emulsion. Some vets
light, some lipid peroxidation occurs in the bottle.
are wary of its use in animals if pancreatitis has already been
●Variable effects on platelet aggregation (low doses enhance it,
 diagnosed, or if they are at risk of developing it (e.g. pancreatic
high doses suppress it), but not reported to be a problem
surgery).
clinically.
● Not analgesic or anti-analgesic.
● Reduces lower oesophageal sphincter tone more in dogs than
● Slight direct myocardial depression (negative inotropy), and
 in cats, to result in gastro-oesophageal reflux. (Note that thio-
the intralipid formulation causes venodilation, so blood pres-
pental reduces lower oesophageal sphincter tone more in cats
sure falls. The mechanism for venodilation appears to involve
than dogs).
increasing nitric oxide release from vascular endothelium
(nitric oxide is a potent vasodilator), and reducing sympathetic
tone. In addition, baroreceptor sensitivity is reset so that
Dose
reflex tachycardia (and sympathetically-mediated vasocon-
● For induction of anaesthesia in unpremedicated dogs, the dose
striction) tend not to occur; therefore the hypotension
 is 6.5 mg/kg.
observed is actually more profound than that which occurs
● For induction of anaesthesia in unpremedicated cats, the dose
after thiopental. Propofol causes mild arterial vasoconstriction
is 8 mg/kg.
at clinically relevant concentrations, yet not suffcient to offset
● After premedication, the induction dose is 2-4 mg/kg in dogs
the fall in arterial blood pressure due to venodilation and
and 4-6 mg/kg in cats; the actual dose required depends upon
negative ino tropy.
the premedicant, but propofol dose requirement is reduced
● Splenic engorgement also occurs (possibly secondary to veno-
more after inclusion of an α2 agonist in the premedication.
dilation), so caution is advised for splenectomies and gastric
● As with thiopental, rather than rapid bolus IV injection, a
dilation/volvulus cases.
slower injection can be made, and 'to effect. Doing this usually
● Mild to moderate respiratory depression occurs and post-
enables lower doses to be used, with fewer consequent side
 induction apnoea can last for several minutes following rapid
 effects (especially cardiovascular and respiratory).
IV injection. Some anaesthetists report worse apnoea after
● Propofol is minimally cumulative, so can be administered for
slower injection, others say apnoea is worse after fast bolus
maintenance of anaesthesia by ^top-ups’ or continuous infu-
injection. The length of apnoea appears related to the dose
sion (not recommended in cats).
Injectable anaesthetic agents  51
● Infusion rate c. 0.5-1mg/kg/min or less and often stepped-
Phencyclidine derivatives/aryl-cyclohexylamines
 down with time. Infusions are commonly administered along-
side opioid infusions (e.g. fentanyl or remifentanil) to reduce
The three compounds, phencyclidine, tiletamine and ketamine,
 the propofol requirements further.
have been used. Phencyclidine is the most potent and longest
acting, tiletamine is intermediate, and ketamine is the shortest
 acting. Tiletamine is most often used in combination with a ben-
Minimum infusion rate (MIR)
zodiazepine called zolazepam, in a mixture called Telazolrm (in
This concept was introduced in the 1970s to define the median
the USA) or Zoletilrm (in Europe); for, especially, zoo or wild
effective dose (ED50) of an IV agent which would prevent gross
animal darting. Ketamine, although licensed for domestic animals
 purposeful movement in response to surgical incision.
(small animals, horses), is also used widely in avian and exotic
 Propofol has been a much studied injectable anaesthetic agent
animal anaesthesia.
for total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA), and MIR is a necessary
Ketamine hydrochloride
i.e. where the plasma concentration (or better, the effect site/brain
●Aqueous solution, 10% (100 mg/ml), pH 3.5-5.5; pKa 7.5.
concentration) can be determined and the infusion tailored to
● Around 50% protein-bound, and prefers cl acid glycoprotein
maintain the required target level. Figure 5.1 outlines the features
to albumin, because it is a basic drug. It is prepared commer-
which help determine the time lag between injection of an anaes-
cially as the hydrochloride salt, hence pH around 4, and is
thetic agent and loss of consciousness.
The effect-site equilibration time (the time for the drug to get
highly ionised in this aqueous solution. The drug is water- and
lipid-soluble. At body (blood) pH (7.4), it is roughly 50%
from the blood across the blood-brain barrier and to its site of
jonised (because its pKa is 7.5), the unionised version is more
action in the brain) is slower for propofol than thiopental. It is
fat soluble and so, coupled with low protein binding, it can
about 3min for propofol compared with about l min for thio-
readily cross the blood-brain barrier.
pental (in sheep, and probably similar in other species). The
Ad riy sn pe od jo q-nd r
●Racemic mixture, S (+) isomer is 2-4 times more potent than
the R (-) isomer, and is less psychoactive (less emergence
uptake (sequestration plus or minus some metabolism) may also
contribute to this slower onset of éeffect. In addition, propofol
excitement).
● Can be administered IV or IM, and is well absorbed across
reduces the cerebral blood flow during the induction process and
 mucous membranes (beware accidental self administration).
this can also delay’ onset of unconsciousness (especially if also
 Stings on IM injection because of acidic pH.
administered by relatively slow injection).
● Ketamine is a dissociative anaesthetic agent. Dissociative
 anaesthesia is characterised by:
Suggested optimal injection times (to avoid overdosing)
O Profound analgesia.
● Inject the chosen dose of thiopental over 10-30 s; then wait a
O Light sleep (there is much debate about whether this is true
good 30s (preferably 60s) to assess the effect, before deciding
unconsciousness).
whether more is required.
O Amnesia.
● Inject (infuse) the chosen dose of propofol over about
 O Catatonia/catalepsy (trance-like immobility with a degree of
(1-)2 min; then wait 1-2 min to assess the effect. Ideally
muscle rigidity).
nd pe dnd tsn r sn ue
 0 Poor muscle relaxation; muscle rigidity/hypertonus/sponta-
co-operative patient are required for such a slow injection.
neous movements.
 Peripheral IV injection
Time lag depends on:
 Physicochemical
This time lag is defined as:
properties of the drug
Effect-site equilibration time
(lipid solubility, protein
binding, molecular size
or
11
Biophase delay
and charge (pKa) etc.
Cardiac output
 First-pass pulmonary
uptake
 Dose and administration
rate
Unconsciousness
Figure 5.1 The time lag between IV injection of an anaesthetic agent and the loss of consciousness.
52  Veterinary Anaesthesia
0 Hypersensitivity to noise.
lating catecholamines, central sympathetic stimulation plus
O Active cranial nerve reflexes: ocular (palpebral and corneal),
vagal withdrawal, and uptake 1 and 2 inhibition.
and oral (gag/swallowing) reflexes persist, but do not guar-
O Beware in shocky animals, or those with sympathetic
antee a protected airway; salivation and lacrimation occur.
exhaustion or poor sympathetic reserves, because in these
Nystagmus is commonly seen in horses.
animals you will unmask ketamine's direct myocardial
 0 Transient convulsive-like activity is occasionally seen, espe-
depressant effects and see some hypotension.
cially in large felids and dogs.
o In hyperthyroid animals and those with adrenal tumours
 Dissociative anaesthesia can be thought of as more of a func-
(i.e. phaeochromocytomas) ketamine may cause some
 tional disorganisation of the CNS rather than a generalised
arrhythmias, although it only minimally sensitises the myo-
depression; such that the patient becomes ^disconnected'
cardium to the arrhythmogenic effects of catecholamines.
from its environment, both in terms of its interpretation of
● Analgesia and antihyperalgesia. Ketamine can prevent and
it, and its response to it. The thalamic and limbic systems
seem to be stimulated, whereas higher centres/cortical
anaesthetic doses. It may be a better antihyperalgesic (e.g. in 
 activity are depressed/dissociated from any incoming
chronic pain states),than analgesic (e.g. for surgical incisional
signals.
type pain).
● Onset of action is relatively slow (1-2+ min), because of it
● Ketamine may also have an important role in preventing toler-
 producing dissociative effects rather than conventional anaes-
ance to opioid analgesics. Opioid analgesics in some circum-
thetic unconsciousness.
stances seem to enhance the development of hyperalgesia
● Recovery after one dose depends upon redistribution
(increased sensitivity to pain), and ketamine appears to prevent
and metabolism (no metabolism in cats); whereas after
this.
prolonged infusions, metabolism and excretion are more
● Cerebro/neuro-protective. Ketamine promotes cerebral blood
important.
flow (so actually increases intracranial pressure), but enhances
● Hepatic metabolism occurs in most species (not cats), to
blood flow over and above the demands of cerebral metabo-
some degree, with the production of an active metabolite;
lism. It may also offer neuroprotective effects via calcium
norketamine (has about a quarter of the activity of the
channel blockade, thereby reducing intracellular calcium accu-
 parent compound). Norketamine can be excreted in the
mulation; and also by blocking the effects of the potentially
urine or further metabolised/inactivated (by glucuronidation).
harmful excitotoxic neurotransmitter, glutamate, at N-methyl-
Some horses metabolise ketamine to dihydronorketamine
D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors. However, it has also been
(inactive) rather than norketamine for urinary excretion.
reported to cause neurotoxic effects in rats. Intrathecal admin-
 In cats, almost all the parent compound is excreted in
istration can cause lesions in the spinal cord, but the preserva-
the urine unchanged, so beware cats with compromised
tive chlorbutanol was probably to blame for these; hence
renal function, and with urine-voiding problems. Some
preservative-free preparations are recommended for epidural
texts suggest that ketamine can induce hepatic enzyme
and intrathecal administration. Preservative-free solutions,
synthesis.
especially of the more active S(+) isomer, are becoming avail-
● Infusions are cumulative, as redistribution sites become 'satu-
 able for epidural administration.
rated’; and beware the effects of the active metabolite (norketa-
● Changes in intra-ocular pressure may be species-dependent,
 mine) in non-felid species.
 but any increase may be associated with increased extra-ocular
● Ketamine causes minimal respiratory depression, perhaps a
muscle tone.
little post-induction apnoea after rapid IV bolus injection. The
● Ketamine does not appear to alter the lower oesophageal
ventilatory response to carbon dioxide is maintained, even
 sphincter tone.
enhanced. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is also main-
● Ketamine (+ benzodiazepine) can cause splenic engorgement.
tained. Occasionally irregular or periodic breathing patterns
are observed and apneustic breathing may also occur. This is
Actions
where there is an end-inspiratory pause, rather than an end-
The actions of ketamine include:
expiratory pause.
● Active cranial nerve reflexes do not ensure a protected airway.
● Non-competitive NMDA antagonism (binds to phencyclidine
 Bronchodilation may occur, especially seen as a 'relief of bron-
(PCP) binding site of the NMDA receptor; at one time the PCP
chospasm due to other causes.
 binding site of the NMDA receptor was proposed to be the 0
● Mild cardiovascular stimulation is seen in healthy animals.
opioid receptor).
 Ketamine is actually a direct myocardial depressant (a negative
● Antagonism at non-NMDA glutamate receptors.
inotrope, possibly partly via calcium channel blocking effects);
● Actions at opioid receptors (μ antagonism, K agonism, 8
  ae s s  ss oe i i
agonism).
non-uniform fashion throughout the body), and so indirectly
●Actions at
GABAa receptors (anticonvulsant?); this is
stimulates cardiac activity, with the overall effect of slightly
controversial.
increasing cardiac output, heart rate and blood pressure.
● Actions at nicotinic and muscarinic cholinergic receptors.
Cardiovascular stimulation is associated with increased circu-
●Actions at monoaminergic receptors.
Injectable anaesthetic agents  53
● Inhibition of uptake 1 and uptake 2 (i.e. monoamine uptake:
example 10-20μg/kg/min (intra-operatively) or c. 2 μg/kg/min
noradrenaline (norepinephrine), serotonin (5-HT), and
 post-operatively.
dopamine).
● Blockade of voltage-dependent calcium channels (L-type).
Carboxylated imidazoles
● Has local anaesthetic-like activity (ion channel blockade?).
● Has anti-inflammatory/immuno-modulatory  actions
(via
Etomidate
reduced NFkB activation and possibly via adenosine).
 Etomidate is a GABAA agonist. It is not licensed for veterinary use
in the UK. Three preparations are available:
See Chapter 3 on pain for more information about NMDA,
which binds to a subtype of glutamate receptors found in the
● Hypnomidatem. Etomidate solubilised into aqueous solution
CNS that are heavily involved in pain processing, especially
(0.2%; 2 mg/ml), by 35% propylene glycol. Propylene glycol
the sensitisation to pain (resulting in hyperalgesia); and also
can cause pain on injection, respiratory depression, hypoten-
      d 
sion, cardiac arrhythmias and direct myocardial depression
neurotransmitter.
(negative inotropy) all by itself, and can also be responsible for
haemolysis, especially after large doses, for example prolonged
Anaigesic and antihyperalgesic actions
infusions. An increase in lactate is sometimes observed after
These may involve:
propylene glycol administration, because one product of its
metabolism is lactate (see Chapter 22 on lactate).
● NMDA antagonism.
● Etomidate-Lipuror. Etomidate presented in lipid (Lipofundin 
● Descending monoaminergic pathway interactions.
MCT/LCT
rm, which is similar to intralipid), emulsion;
● Opioid receptor interactions.
2 mg/ml.
● Local anaesthetic type actions (may provide an extra benefit for
● A drug matrix formulation for oral/transmucosal delivery in
epidural administration).
man; for sedation rather than anaesthesia. Some of the prelimi-
● Cholinergic effects (descending pathways).
nary work for this administration route was done in dogs.
● CNS dissociative effects.
● Reduction in pain memory formation.
Properties
● The propylene glycol solution has a pH of 6.9, and can cause
Uses and doses
pain on injection and can be mildly irritant if injected
Anaesthesia
extravascularly (due to the propylene glycol and/or the fact
Ketamine is used as an anaesthetic induction agent, usually fol.
that the propylene glycol formulation is mildly hyperosmolar),
lowing premedication, and often combined with a benzodiazepine
pKa 4.2. The lipid emulsion formulation does not cause pain 
to reduce muscle hypertonus. It can be used in most species, but
on injection or venous/tissue irritation.
it is licensed (in the UK) for cats, dogs, horses and sub-human
● Etomidate is water soluble when highly ionised at acidic pH
 primates.
(the drug is basic), but highly lipid soluble at body pH, when 
 The dose varies, and depends on premedication, but common
about 99% is unionised.
values are:
● Etomidate is 75-76% protein-bound, mainly to albumin in
● 2.5 mg/kg for dogs
blood.
● 2.5+ mg/kg for cats
● The R(+) enantiomer (d isomer) is most active; hence the
● 2.2 mg/kg for horses and farm animals
of R:S enantiomers is said to be 5-10:1. Etomidate is unique
● Higher doses are often required for birds and exotics 
● Routes of administration are IV, IM or even transmucosal.
in that it shows stereoselectivity for GABAg receptors and was
one of the frst drugs to be marketed as a single enantiomer
 Ketamine can be used for maintenance of anaesthesia either as
 rather than a racemic mixture.
top-up bolus doses or as an infusion; commonly combined with
● Etomidate is an excellent hypnotic, but provides poor analge.
         s 
sia and poor muscle relaxation Muscle hypertonus/myo-
aggressive dogs, ketamine squirted into the mouth will be well
clonus, especially during induction and recovery, are common 
absorbed across the oral mucosa to effect anaesthesia, but often
with either IV formulation, hence premedication is recom-
 the animals become quite hyperaesthetic (seizure-like activity
mended (benzodiazepines provide useful muscle relaxation
 may occur), if no sedative is administered first.
with minimal cardiovascular and respiratory effects). Muscle
 hypertonus is thought to be due to enhancement of monosyn-
Analgesia
aptic spinal reflex activity.
Ketamine can be administered in subanaesthetic doses for anal-
● Good cardiovascular stability; minimal cardiovascular depres-
sion; occasionally mild reduction in arterial blood pressure
painful but non-surgical conditions. Doses are 0.1-0.5 mg/kg by
and possible slight increase in heart rate. No sensitisation of
any route (IV, IM or SC); and further boluses may be adminis-
myocardium to catecholamine-induced arrhythmias, but slight
tered, or a single bolus can be followed with an infusion at, for
 negative inotropy.
54  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Occasionally causes transient apnoea after rapid IV injection.
Further reading
 Transient mild respiratory depression is proportional to the
 dose and speed of injection. It does not inhibit hypoxic pulmo-
Dugdale AHA, Pinchbeck GL, Jones RS, Adams WA (2005)
nary vasoconstriction.
 Comparison of two thiopental infusion rates for the induction
● No histamine release.
of anaesthesia in dogs. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
● GI motility minimally affected; you occasionally see vomiting
32(6),360-366.
at induction or recovery which is usually prevented by pre-
Jackson AM, Tobias K, Long C, Bartges J, Harvey R (2004) Effect
 medication and withholding food pre-operatively. It may occa-
of various anesthetic agents on laryngeal motion during laryn-
 goscopy in normal dogs. Veterinary Surgery 33, 102-106.
 sionally cause salivation.
Kastner SBR (2007) Intravenous anaesthetics. In: BSAVA Manual
● Metabolism by liver and plasma esterases, so not wholly
dependent on liver function. Metabolism is rapid A very small
of canine and feline anaesthesia and analgesia. 2nd Edn. Eds:
fraction of the parent drug may be excreted in the urine
Seymour C,
, Duke-Novakovski T. BSAVA Publications,
 Gloucester, UK. Chapter 13, pp133-149.
unchanged.
 Kohrs R, Durieux ME (1998) Ketamine: teaching an old drug new
● After a single dose, redistribution and metabolism contribute
 t0 rapid recovery; after prolonged infusions, metabolism
tricks? Anesthesia and Analgesia 87, 1186-1193.
becomes more important. (Beware recent organophosphate
Musk GC, Pang DSJ, Beths T, Flaherty DA (2005) Target-
treatment, as plasma esterases will be less functional.) Very
controlled infusion of propofol in dogs - evaluation of four
targets for induction of anaesthesia. The Veterinary Record
little cumulation; no active metabolites. Useful for continuous
 infusions but adrenal suppression may compromise the ani-
157, 766-770.
 mal's post-operative recovery and rehabilitation.
 Strachan FA, Mansel JC, Clutton RE (2008) A comparison of
● May be ‘cerebroprotective’ as it decreases intracranial
microbial growth in alfaxalone, propofol and thiopental.
 pressure through cerebral vasoconstriction and also reduces
Journal of Small Animal Practice 49(4), 186-190.
cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen (CMRO2) and cerebral
blood flow.
● Suppresses adrenocortical function for 2-6h (healthy), and
 Self-test section
 longer if unhealthy (6-48h, even after one dose), and therefore
suppresses the stress response. The mechanism of suppression
1.
Which one of the following drugs and solutions has
 of adrenocorticosteroid synthesis production is through inhibi-
 an acidic pH?
tion of 11-B-hydroxylase and 17-α-hydroxylase. There is still
2.5% thiopentone
debate about whether this could be beneficial or detrimental,
B.
 propofol
but this will also depend upon the individual patients health
C.
 ketamine
status. Beware its use in critically ill patients with poor adrenal
D.
 sodium bicarbonate
function, as it may increase mortality. Some people advocate
2.
Which of the following reasons best explains keta-
supplementation with corticosteroids if a patient has known
 mine's antihyperalgesic effects?
adrenocortical insufficiency and this drug is chosen.
A.
Its interaction with opioid receptors.
B.
 Its antagonistic actions at NMDA receptors.
Dose
C.
Its interaction with GABAa receptors.
The
dose
iS
about  13 mg/kgIV.   Premedication 
D.
 Its ion channel blocking activities.
recommended.
 Information chapter
Quick reference guide to analgesic infusions
Morphine
Because of its rapid elimination, a reduction in the infusion rate
 Or stopping the infusion (at the end of surgery), will result in a
● Dogs: loading dose 0.3-0.5 mg/kg slow IV; infusion c. 0.1-
rapid ^return? of pain sensation, therefore it is imperative that
0.2(-1.0) mg/kg/h (may need to titrate up or down to effect).
other forms of analgesia are provided before the patient recovers
● Cats: loading dose 0.1-0.3 mg/kg slow IV; infusion rates less
from anaesthesia.
well documented.
● Loading dose c. 1 μg/kg; infusion 0.1-0.2 μg/kg/min.
Fentany!
 If using alongside propofol for total intravenous anaesthesia
Patches
(TIVA), start remifentanil infusion at 0.1 μg/kg/min 3-4 min
Aim for 2-5 μg/kg/h. Patches are available with release rates of
before infusing propofol slowly to complete the induction. Then
12.5,25, 50, 75 and 100 μg/h (corresponding to patches with 1.25,
aim to continue propofol infusion at around 100-200 μg/kg/min.
2.5, 5, 7.5 and 10 mg fentanyl content).
If a cardiovascular response occurs with surgical stimulation, then
● Dogs: peak plasma levels after c. 20h; duration about 72 h.
the remifentanil infusion rate can be increased; whereas if there
● Cats: peak plasma levels after 12 h; duration about 5 days.
is gross purposeful movement upon surgical stimulation, a small
● Horses: 1 x 10 mg patch per 150kg; plasma levels peak within
bolus of propofol should be administered and an increase in the
1-3h; duration about 32-48 h.
 propofol infusion rate should be considered. If neuromuscular
● Beware local skin lesions and effects of for example heat pads,
blockers are administered, then there is unlikely to be gross pur-
which cause local vasodilation and increase absorption.
poseful movement (because the patient is effectively paralysed),
upon surgical stimulation. Therefore, autonomic responses
Intra-operative infusions
should be monitored closely, but be aware of the vagomimetic
response to remifentanil and also of the effects (and likely dura-
● Loading dose 1-5 μg/kgIV; infusion 0.1-0.7μg/kg/minute
tion of action) of any administered anticholinergics.
(may need to adjust up or down to suit patient/surgery).
● Bradycardia is a potential side effect, which may require glyco-
Ketamine
pyrrolate (5-10 μg/kgIV).
● Bradypnoea/apnoea is a potential side effect, you may need to
Ketamine can be administered at analgesic (sub-anaesthetic)
 assist ventilation or provide mechanical ventilation.
doses as outlined below. If ketamine is administered intra-
operatively, the improved analgesia will reduce the requirement
Alfentanil
for maintenance anaesthetic agents (e.g less volatile agent should
Intra-operative infusions
be required).
● Loading dose 0.5-1.0 μg/kgIV; infusion c. 0.5-1.0μg/kg/min.
● Intra-operative analgesia: Loading dose c. 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV;
● Potential side effects are the same as those for fentanyl (brady-
infusion c. 10-20μg/kg/min.
cardia and bradypnoea/apnoea).
● Post-operative analgesia: Following intra-operative ketamine
administration: infusion rate 2 μg/kg/min. Otherwise, loading
Remifentanil
dose 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM, SC or IV (beware transient brady-
Intra-operative infusions
 pnoea); infusion 2 μg/kg/min.
Bradycardia
and  bradypnoea/apnoea
commonly
occur.
● Avoiding infusions: One or more intramuscular (or SC)
 Intermittent positive pressure ventilation is normally required.
dose/s of ketamine can be given at the start of and/or before
Some suggest the infusion rate be adjusted to maintain heart rate
n s uo noe ne nl ns jo p a
above 40bpm; others prefer to administer an anticholinergic.
surgery): dose c. 0.1-0.5 mg/kg.
55
56  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Lidocaine (without epinephrine)
● Ketamine loading dose 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV or IM; infusion 10-
20 μg/kg/min.
● Equine: Loading dose 1-2 mg/kg given IV slowly (over
5-10min); infusion rate is usually 50 μg/kg/min but can be
Can provide excellent analgesia; and the infusion can be con-
 increased to 100 μg/kg/min.
tinued post-operatively but at a lower rate.
● Dog: Loading dose 1-1.5 mg/kg; infusion around 50 μg/kg/min.
Although adding all three components to one infusion does
●Cat: Loading dose 0.5mg/kg; infusion rates less well
not allow variation in administration rates of the individual
 determined.
components, it can simplify therapy and allow easier calcula-
tion of fluid therapy. The following recipe is a useful starting
A commercial 0.2% lidocaine solution (in 5% glucose),is avail-
able in 500 ml bags. For horses, 500ml 2% lidocaine (without
point. To a 500ml bag of crystalloid, usually Hartmann's solu-
epinephrine) can be added to a 5l bag of Hartmann's solution,
tion, add:
thus making a 0.2% solution (i.e. 2 mg/ml solution). This solution
● 300 mg ketamine (= 3 ml of 10% ketamine).
is suggested to be stable for 21 days.
●720mg lidocaine (=
36ml of 2% lidocaine without
 Infusion pumps are advised for smaller patients.
epinephrine).
Once the patient is settled on the lidocaine infusion, an anaes-
● 120 mg morphine (= 12 ml of 1% morphine).
thetic sparing effect (e.g. MAC reduction) is often noted, so the
Infusion of this mixture intra-operatively can then be set at
vaporiser setting can usually be turned down.
2 ml/kg/h, which provides:
Morphine-lidocaine-ketamine infusion (MLK)
● 20 μg/kg/min ketamine.
● 48 μg/kg/min lidocaine.
●Morphine loading dose 0.3-0.5 mg/kg IM; infusion 2-20 μg/kg/
● 8μg/kg/min morphine.
min.
● Lidocaine loading dose 1-2mg/kg slow IV (lower for cats);
 Post-operatively the infusion can be tapered down gradually
infusion 50(-100) μg/kg/min.
whilst additional analgesia is provided by other means.
Intravascular catheters: some considerations
and complications
Learning objectives
●To be able to recognise the different types of intravascular catheter.
 To be able to discuss the complications of vascular (both venous and arterial) catheterisation.
 To be able to devise a treatment plan for complications such as thrombophlebitis and venous air embolisation.
Veins for catheterisation
● Radial artery: pigs, occasionally other species.
● Femoral artery: any species if access safely obtainable.
● Cephalic vein: dogs, cats, small ruminants, horses.
● A branch of the caudal auricular artery (usually the intermedi-
● Saphenous vein: medial saphenous vein preferred in cats and
ate (midle) branch) on dorsal/caudal surface of pinna: dogs
can be accessed in anaesthetised horses (Figure 7.1); lateral
with large pinnae, horses, cattle, small ruminants, rabbits, pigs).
saphenous vein (has cranial and caudal rami), commonly used
 Note that veins lie in close proximity to arteries.
 in dogs as an alternative to cephalic vein.
● Transverse facial artery: horses (Figure 7.4). Beware the close
● Lateral thoracic vein: larger species such as horses.
 proximity of a vein and a branch of the facial nerve.
● Jugular vein: larger species; any species if central venous cath-
● Mandibular artery: horses (Figure 7.5), cattle, small ruminants.
eterisation required.
Beware the close proximity of the parotid duct in horses.
● Femoral vein: medial saphenous vein drains into it, so that
● Mandibular facial artery: horses, cattle, small ruminants. This
either the medial saphenous vein or the femoral vein can be
 is a continuation of the mandibular artery where it courses up
catheterised using a long catheter to reach the caudal vena cava
the cheek.
for 'central’ venous access.
● Dorsal/lateral metatarsal artery: horses (Figure 7.6). This artery
●‘Milk vein' (cranial superficial epigastric vein): cattle.
 is unusual in that there is no vein close by.
● Auricular veins, marginal (lateral or medial), or intermediate
branches. Ease of catheterisation depends on species, ear pinna
Complications of vascular catheterisation
size and shape. Figure 7.2 shows catheterisation of the medial
marginal vein of a rabbit's ear.
● Haematoma formation.
● Haemorrhage (e.g. if cap becomes displaced; especially off a
 In medicine the word catheter tends to be used for any tube
‘rostrally directed’ jugular venous catheter or off an arterial
  ts  rn  pn  zi  
catheter).
 practice catheter and cannula' are used almost interchangeably.
● Air embolisation (e.g. if catheterised vein is above′ the heart;:
especially if cap becomes displaced off a caudally directed
Arteries for catheterisation
above’ the heart).
Where possible, ‘end arteries’ should be avoided in order to
● Extravascular leakage of drugs/fluids and possible periphlebitis/
 prevent distal necrosis should occlusion of blood flow be caused
cellulitis/necrosis.
during the “life' of the catheter or as a complication of its
● Embolisation of catheter fragments (material failure (stress
 placement.
fracture), or poor placement technique where pieces are sheared
● Dorsal pedal (dorsal metatarsal) artery: dogs (Figure 7.3), cats.
off).
● Plantar metatarsal artery (located medially): pigs.
● Thrombophlebitis (if vein is catheterised); thromboarteritis (if
● Palmar carpal arch/metacarpal arteries: dogs.
artery is catheterised).
57
58  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Fgure 7.2 Catheterisation of marginal ear vein in a rabbit.
Figure 7.1 Catheterised saphenous vein in an anaesthetised horse.
Fgure 7.4 Transverse facial artery catheter in a horse.
 Figure 7.3 Dorsal metatarsal artery catheter in a dog (left hindlimb).
● Infection: septic
 thrombophlebitis, thromboarteritis
Or
abscessation.
Arterial catheterisation is usually performed in order to allow
continuous invasive blood pressure monitoring (see Chapter 18),
but can also allow the intermittent withdrawal of arterial blood
Fgure 7.5 Three way tap and extension tube (for arterial blood pressure
samples for blood gas analysis (see Chapter 21). Complications
measurement attached to a catheter in mandibular artery in a horse.
Intravascular catheters: some considerations and complications 59
Mechanical trauma to the valve leaflets (present in jugular
veins) caused by the catheter and/or stylette will incite local
inflammation and thrombus formation.
Reaction to the foreign material’ of the catheter results in the
development of a fibrin sheath, (due to inherent thrombogenic-
ity of catheter materials, surface properties and irregularities).
Chemical irritation or trauma to the vascular endothelium or
intima by the drugs and fluids administered can also cause throm-
bophlebitis, which is infuenced by the characteristics of the drugs
(pH, tonicity, temperature and propensity to crystallise out), and
speed of delivery (ie. turbulence of blood flow and potential for
dilution).
 Patient factors include:
●‘Virchow's triad' which includes the three important factors for
 thrombus formation: slow blood flow, endothelial damage, and
a hypercoagulable state. Endotoxaemic horses (e.g. certain
colics), can present in some stage of disseminated intravascular
Figure 7.6 Catheter in dorsal/lateral metatarsal artery in a horse.
coagulopathy (DIC), and thus have abnormal clotting profles.
Early on in the disease process, antithrombin II is used up, so
are generally similar to those for venous catheters, but arterial
the tendency to clot outweighs the tendency to bleed, so cath-
catheters may be left in situ for shorter times, certainly in non-
eters tend to clot and thrombophlebitis tends to develop much
ICU patients, and generally septic complications are fewer. The
more easily in these patients, which are also the most likely to
need prolonged vascular access
many arteries are paralleled by veins. The following notes focus
● Patient movement, and interference with the catheter may
on the problem of thrombophlebitis; its development, complica-
reduce its 'in-dwelling time considerably
tions, prevention and treatment options.
Sources of infection for septic thrombophlebitis
Thrombophlebitis
● Contamination of the catheter may occur during its insertion.
Thrombophlebitis can be associated with increased patient mor-
Careful aseptic technique is therefore vital.
bidity and mortality.
● Microorganisms can gain access to the vessel via the breach
made in the animal's integument. The cleanliness of the ani-
Potentialsequelaeofthrombophlebitis
mal's skin and its external environment are extremely impor-
tant. The cleanliness of the operator's hands is also vitally
● Vascular occlusion: limits IV access. Also, bilateral jugular
important.
occlusion in horses results in congestion of nasal mucosa and,
● Microorganisms can 'seed’ into sites of inflammation,throm-
because horses are obligate nose-breathers, respiratory distress,
bosis or tissue compromise from distant infected foci by the
haematogenous route. Mild bacteraemias are common, but the
● Endocarditis.
liver and lungs normally do a good ^fltering' job. However,
● Distant organ thromboembolisation, with subsequent prob-
sites of compromised/inflamed tissue are attractive to bacterial
lems such as infarction, abscessation, loss of function. Emboli
colonisation.
may lodge in pulmonary, coronary, cerebral, renal, mesenteric
● Contaminated fluids or drugs may be a source of infection,
or other vascular beds.
 especially if ‘home-made’ where there is more chance of a
● Bacteraemia/septicaemia if septic thrombophlebitis.
breach in sterility during preparation.
Factors involved in the development of
● Patient factors that influence their susceptibility to septic
aseptic thrombophlebitis
 thrombophlebitis include: malnutrition, immuno-compromise
(steroids and stress), existing infection and coagulation abnor-
Mechanical irritation or trauma to the vessel wall which triggers
malities (e.g. DIC).
inflammatory (e.g. kinin) and coagulation cascades:
● At the site of venepuncture.
Aseptic technique
● At sites of^contact' between the catheter and the intimal surface
The use of aseptic technique cannot be over-ermphasised. Asepsis
of the vessel (anywhere along the length of the catheter, but
should be maintained during catheter insertion, and also during
especially where it penetrates the vessel and at its tip).
its maintenance. The hair should be clipped, and a wide area of
● Rapid infusions under pressure can cause endothelial or intimal
skin should be cleansed and disinfected. Drapes may be used
injury at the site of impact (increased local turbulence, and
to reduce the potential for contamination from surrounding
whipping? motion of catheter within vessel).
 uncleansed skin. Hands should be scrubbed and preferably gloved.
60  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Care should be taken not to touch the catheter with your fingers
Catheter material
when you are inserting it.
All catheter materials are thrombogenic, but some are less
Once the catheter is in situ, use of an extension set allows a
so than others. The materials are, in decreasing order of
'stand off between the catheter's hub (important site for bacterial
thrombogenicity:
contamination, colonisation and access to subcutaneous tissues
and the vessel), and the injection port. Using extension sets also
● Polypropylene (most thrombogenic).
●Polyethylene.
reduces the potential for movement of the catheter within the vein
● Teflon (polytetrafluoroethylene).
(thus reducing intimal damage), and minimises disturbance at the
● Siliconised rubber (silastic).
skin entry site of the catheter, thus reducing further inflamma-
● Rubber.
 tion, bacterial colonisation and invasion.
● Nylon.
 Some people advocate the use of antimicrobial ointments at the
● Polyvinylchloride (PVC).
site of skin penetration of the catheter. It is doubtful whether this
● Ethylene acrylic acid.
helps, especially in the normal horse's environment. The pro-
 phylactic use of systemic antibictics only appears to enhance bac-
● Polyurethane (least thrombogenic).
terial resistance, without precluding the development of infections.
 Some people advocate bandaging the site of the catheter hub,
Softness
using sterile dressings for the first layer. However, patient move-
 Temperature affects the softness of materials, especially plastics.
 Catheters of different materials, but with comparable softness at
ment and recumbency can result in movement and displacement
of the catheter and bandage, or contamination or wetting of the
body temperature, can have similar thrombogenicities. Softness
 dressing which can then wick microorganisms more quickly to
also affects the ability of the catheter to resist kinking and
the protected’ site. It is, however, good practice to clean any spilt
collapse.
blood away from the catheter insertion site after completion of its
insertion, and to inspect the site regularly.
Surface texture
 Hands should be cleaned, preferably gloved, before any medi-
This influences thrombogenicity and the ability of bacteria to
cations are administered. Injection ports should be swabbed with
adhere. Any damage incurred during percutaneous placement,
alcohol and allowed to dry before injections are made. The cath-
such as wrinkling of the tip, or kinking, can provide sites for
eter and administration set should be treated as a ^closed’ system
thrombus formation and bacterial adherence. A small skin inci-
wherever possible. Giving sets should be changed daily, and con-
 sion can be made prior to catheter insertion to reduce the poten-
 nection sites swabbed before and after exchange.
tial for crinkling the catheter, but the larger skin wound can
All drugs and fluids administered should be sterile. (Be careful
 increase the risk of bacterial ingress. Thick-skinned animals may
to maintain sterility if mixing solutions.) Bottle and container
well require a small skin incision and occasionally a cut-down
tops should be swabbed with alcohol and allowed to dry before
may be required. Whether percutaneous insertion or insertion via
withdrawing drugs or fluids.
cut-down is performed, the aim is to minimise the tissue trauma
The skin penetration site of the catheter and as much of the
caused.
vein's superficial course as possible should be inspected every day,
and preferably several times a day. At the first sign of trouble, the
Catheter size
catheter should be withdrawn, taking cultures from the tip. The
The shorter and narrower (relative to the vein) a catheter is, the
skin at the catheter entry site should be swabbed with alcohol and
less thrombophlebitis it will incite, however, the size chosen may
allowed to dry before removing the catheter, to reduce contami-
be governed by the drugs and dose rates required to be given. Very
nation of the tip before culture. Blood cultures can also be taken.
short catheters, however, are difficult to maintain within the
vessel lumen because they are easily displaced by patient move-
Catheter considerations
ment. The larger the catheter, relative to the size of the vessel, the
● Anticipate duration of venous access required.
 greater the potential for vessel wall contact and the development
● Catheter material: assess its thrombogenicity, surface proper-
of thrombophlebitis. Contact may occur anywhere along the cath-
ties and security.
eter's length, but always occurs at the tip. Thrombophlebitis
● Size (bore and length) necessary to deliver anticipated
occurs locally at the site of venepuncture and where the catheter
medications.
tip touches the vessel wall. Between these sites, fibrin deposition
● ‘Up versus down' the vein (for jugular veins).
grows’ over the surface of the catheter to form the ^fbrin sleeve,
● Placement technique: over the needle, through the needle,
this process is usually complete within 24 h. Fibrin deposition on
 Seldinger (over a wire guide).
the inner surface of the catheter is retarded by continual fluid
● Familiarity of placement technique (potential for venetrauma
administration, or frequent (4-6 times daily) flushing with
 or contamination).
heparinised saline to provide a heparin lock. The outer fbrin
● Tonicity, pH, irritancy, quantity and temperature of drugs or
sheath presents a tasty site for bacterial colonisation, and becomes
fluids to be administered.
displaced and may embolise upon catheter removal. Heparinised
● Continuous fluid administration versus intermittent dosing.
saline of 2 i.u. heparin/ml is generally used for small animals and
Cost.
5-10 i.u. heparin/ml for horses.
Intravascular catheters: some considerations and complications 61
Catheter movement
Through-the-needle catheters may be associated with a greater
Once inserted, catheters must be firmly secured to reduce their
tendency for periphlebitis or cellulitis to develop, because the
movement within the vein which incites inflammation and
needle has a larger bore, and makes a larger hole in the vein than
thrombosis. The best site to ensure ^security’ is at the catheter's
the catheter itself, allowing extravascular leakage of blood and
hub. Careful security at this position helps to prevent the catheter
injectates. The needle must be retracted from the vessel, but
moving backwards and forwards in to and out of the vein, 'revers-
cannot normally be removed from the catheter completely, so it
ing out of the skin and vein entirely (especially a problem with
 is usually encased in a plastic shield to prevent it from causing
short catheters inserted at sites of highly mobile skin), and ^whip-
 damage to the patient or the catheter. A variation on this tech-
 ping? around inside the vein. Sutures and superglue are invaluable
nique uses a large bore needle to introduce a peel-away sheath
(the stratum corneum is continually shedding so glue needs to
through which the catheter is inserted (Figure 7.8a). Finally the
be re-applied every day). Extension sets reduce handling of the
toggles on the peel-away sheath are pulled to split the sheath so
catheter hub, and reduce the potential to disturb the catheter
that it can be removed from the vessel (Figure 7.8b).
seating.
 The Seldinger technique requires initial vascular access with a
stout needle, through which a flexible wire is then threaded
Turbulent blood flow
(Figure 7.9 shows a Seldinger-type catheter kit.) After completely
Turbulence enhances catheter contact with the vessel wall, and
withdrawing the needle (over the wire), a dilator is passed over
stimulates the formation of thrombophlebitis. Turbulence is
the wire and twizzled to dilate the skin and vein entry sites to
  p id a 's sre a aq p
ensure easy passage of the catheter, so that it can pass through the
administration, and at sites of vessel branching (thus try not to
skin and into the vein with minimal force or damage. Lastly, the
site the catheter tip at vascular branching sites).
dilator is withdrawn and the catheter is then railroaded over the
smaller diameter guidewire, before the wire is finally removed and
'"Up or down the vein?"
It is conceivable that catheters which are placed against the direc-
tion of blood fow create more turbulence, and have a greater
tendency to ^whip' around inside the vessel, especially during drug
or fluid administration. Thus, when intravascular access is
required for more than a few hours, it is often advocated to place
the catheter in the same direction as the blood flow.
Techniques for catheter insertion
Most readers will probably be most familiar with over-the-needle
catheters, which are suffcient for most situations. An over-the-
needle catheter has a sharp stylette, trocar or needle, which is
necessary to penetrate the vein (Figure 7.7). The stylette is used
as an introducer over which the catheter is then advanced into the
vein.
 If, during advancement, the catheter does not run smoothly off 
the stylette into the vein, never try to re-insert the stylette into the
(a)
catheter. If you do this, you risk shearing off the tip of the catheter,
which may be carried in the blood stream and lodge in some
 distant organ such as the lungs, heart or brain.
Figure 7.7 The stylette tip protrudes beyond the catheter's tip. On inserting
(q)
such a catheter into a blood vessel, blood should flash back'into the hub of
the stylette when the stylette's tip has entered a blood vessel, but the whole
Figure 7.8 (a) Peel-away sheath over needle. The sheath is first inserted 
assembly should be advanced a small distance further to ensure that the
along with the needle, in the same way as an over-the-neede catheter is
catheter's tip is also within the vessel; only then, when blood should still be
inserted. After the needle is withdrawn, the catheter is then inserted through 
dripping from the stylette's hub, should the catheter be advanced over the
the sheath which is finally peeled into two halves and removed from the
stylette.
vessel to leave only the catheter behind (b).
 62  Veterinary Anaesthesia
and these crystals can then cause haemolysis and endothelial
injury. Guaiphenesin (guaifenesin) is also renowned for its
ability to cause haemolysis, endothelial injury and thrombosis,
possibly following in vivo crystallisation. Sulpha drugs and
tetracyclines are also well known for their tissue irritancy.
Hypertonic/hyperosmotic fluids (e.g. those used for parenteral
nutrition), should always be administered by a large, preferably
'central, vein to minimise problems by maximising the potential
for dilution.
Aftercare
 Prevention of complications thus requires consideration of all the
above factors. Careful aseptic technique must be continued into
the period of aftercare of the catheter. Aftercare must also include
a heightened awareness of the potential for the development of
Figure 7.9 The components required for insertion of a catheter over a flex-
thrombophlebitis, and thus the catheter site and vein must be
ible guidewire: a needle, the wire, a dilator and the catheter. The wire is
carefully inspected at least daily (preferably at least four times
Wo l uaaaid on pue l! lonuos diay on buse ynsed e uuni pauieuo
daily), and the patient must be evaluated for signs of complica-
becoming contaminated during insertion. The I tip is retracted before the
tions, such as fever spikes or depression.
wire can be advanced through the needle. The I' tip prevents the wire from
entering small vascular branches, however, it can sometimes cause problems 
Clinical signs of aseptic thrombophlebitis
during wire advancement such that this author may 'reverse' the wire direc-
tion so that a straight tip is advanced into the vein.
● Swelling or induration along the vein.
● Abnormal flling or emptying of the vein.
● Thickening or 'cording' of the vein.
Table 7.1 Drug pH values.
● Stiff neck (if jugular vein).
● Swollen head if both jugular veins affected in horses (beware
Drug
pH
nasal oedema and respiratory obstruction in horses which are
 Normal saline 
5-6.1
obligate nose-breathers).
Hartmann's solution
6.4
Clinical signs of septic thrombophlebitis
Dextrose 5% solution
4.5
Are the same as those for aseptic thrombophlebitis but also
Phenylbutazone
8.8
include:
Vitamin B complex
4
● Heat along path of vein.
3.5-5.5
● Pain on palpation of the vein.
Ketamine
● Unexplained fever.
 Thiopental
10.5
● Depression.
 Note that septicaemia can develop in the absence of obvious
 signs of problems in the catheterised vein.
the catheter is secured in place. This technique can be very useful
where small veins are difficult to access, or where central venous
 Ultrasonographic evaluation of affected veins may help to
determine the extent of vessel obstruction or patency, and whether
access is necessary (requiring long catheters).
 there is pocketing of infection. Ultrasound-guided aspiration is
 Familiarity with insertion technique and operator experience
also possible if focal accumulations of non-flowing suppuration
in general can help because fewer venepuncture attempts with less
are observed. Such samples, collected aseptically, can then be
vascular trauma reduce the potential for complications. Attention 
submitted for laboratory evaluation.
to aseptic technique is of paramount importance.
Treatment options
Drug/fluid administration
Many drugs have acidic or alkaline pH (Table 7.1), are of unphysi-
● Remove the catheter as soon as any problems are detected, and
ological tonicity or osmolality, or may crystallise out once in the
re-establish venous access in another, distant vein, if required.
blood. All of these factors may contribute to the ^irritation? caused
Remember to take swabs from the catheter tip, and preferably
to vascular endothelium. The speed of administration may also 
 blood cultures from blood samples drawn aseptically from a
affect local blood flow and create turbulence which may affect the
 distant site.
dilution of the drug by the blood.
● Treat any underlying diseases.
Thio pental is known for its propensity to crystallise out as soon
● Topical hot packs or cold compresses.
as it is injected into the bloodstream, due to the change in pH,
● Local hydrotherapy.
Intravascular catheters: some considerations and complications 63
● Topical anti-inflammatories such as dimethyl
sulfoxide
pressure on the veins to slow further entrainment of air). For
(DMSO), non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
further notes on central venous catheterisation, see Chapter 18 on
 possibly steroids.
monitoring.
● Topical antimicrobials.
● Topical nitroglycerine cream (vasodilator).
Further reading
●Systemic anti-inflammatories (NSAIDs).
●Systemic antimicrobials.
Barr ED, Clegg PD, Senior JM, Singer ER (2005) Destructive
● Excise any necrotic tissue and lance abscesses.
 lesions of the proximal sesamoid bones as a complication of
● Consider tetanus prophylaxis.
dorsal metatarsal artery catheterization in three horses.
Veterinary Surgery 34, 159-166.
Air emboli
Bradbury LA, Archer DC, Dugdale AH, Senior JM, Edwards GB
(2005) Suspected venous air embolism in a horse. The
Venous air emboli are more common, but arterial emboli can
Veterinary Record 156(4), 109-111.
sometimes occur (e.g. during laparoscopy). Horses can tolerate
Hay CW (1992) Equine intravenous catheterization, Equine
up to 0.25 ml/kg air being aspirated before showing clinical signs,
Veterinary Education 4(6), 319-323.
but the rate of entrainment is also important, with more than
Lankveld DPK, Ensink JM, van Dijk P, Klein WR (2001) Factors
0.5 ml/kg/min causing trouble. In dogs, up to 4ml/kg gas (air,
 influencing the occurrence of thrombophlebitis after post-
surgical long-term intravenous catheterization of colic horses:
and the clinical signs were dose, rate and gas dependent. Carbon
a study of 38 cases. Journal of Veterinary Medicine A, 48,
dioxide is a very soluble gas, so caused least trouble.
545-552.
 Spurlock SL, Spurlock GH (1990) Risk factors of catheter-related
Clinical signs
 complications. Compendium on Continuing Education for the
 If the patient is awake:
 Practising Veterinarian 12, 241-248.
White R (2002) Vascular access techniques in the dog and cat. In
● Confusion, disorientation or panic.
●Blindness.
Practice 24, 174-192. (Also includes notes on intra-osseous
needles.)
● Paresis.
●Pruritus.
· Dyspnoea.
 If the patient is anaesthetised:
 Self-test section
● Decreased end-tidal carbon dioxide tension.
1.When considering the thrombogenicity of catheters,
● Decreased SpOz (pulse oximetry: arterial haemoglobin oxygen
put the following catheter materials in order, from
saturation value).
 most thrombogenic to least thrombogenic:
● Decreased systemic arterial blood pressure.
Teflon
● Increased heart rate.
●Polyurethane
●Possibly arrhythmias.
●Polyethylene
● Possibly millwheel murmur.
●
Nylon
2.Match the following items:
Treatment
Turn off any NO, as this will make any bubbles bigger. Lower the
Drug/fluid
pH
site of the venous hole^ to below the heart level if possible; put
 pressure (a finger) on or occlude the site of the hole, or flood the
Thiopental
6.4
Hartmann's solution 
8.8
site with sterile saline. Commence rapid intravenous fluids to
 Phenylbutazone
3.55.5
increase the central venous pressure (CVP); and if the patient is
Ketamine
10.5
 under general anaesthesia, commence intermittent positive pres-
sure ventilation (this also increases CVP, which helps to put back
Inhalation anaesthetic agents
Learning objectives
 To be able to discuss the basic pharmacology of the volatile agents.
To be able to list the properties of an ideal inhalation agent.
To be able to define MAC.
● To be able to discuss the factors affecting agent choice.
Introduction
● Allows rapid control of anaesthetic depth (low blood
solubility).
Inhalation agents, commonly volatile liquids or compressed gases
● Some analgesia would be an advantage.
(strictly vapours'), can be administered, by inhalation, for induc-
● Some muscle relaxation would be an advantage.
tion and/or maintenance of anaesthesia. Although all their actions
● Few cardiorespiratory side effects.
remain to be determined, it appears that most enhance inhibitory
● No renal or hepatic toxicity.
activity at GABAg receptors (in the brain) and glycine receptors
●Inexpensive.
(in the spinal cord), whilst also possibly inhibiting excitatory
● Not requiring expensive vaporiser.
effects at cholinergic (muscarinic and nicotinic) and glutamate
receptors. The volatile agents also depress activity at various types
Table 8.1 gives some physicochemical properties of inhalation
of calcium channels; and may inhibit some types of sodium and
agents for man. For comparison, the blood gas partition coeff-
 potassium channel activities.
cient for nitrogen (N) is 0.0147. There are species differences, for
example for the horse, the blood gas partition coefficients for
 Properties of an ideal inhalation agent 
halothane, isoflurane and sevoflurane are 1.66, 0.92 and 0.46,
respectively.
● Easily vaporised at or near room temperature.
● Non-flammable/non-explosive.
MAC
● Stable on storage (not degraded by heat or light).
● Does not react with materials of anaesthetic breathing system
MAC (or MAC-incision) is defined as the minimal alveolar con-
or vaporiser.
centration of agent at which 50% of patients fail to respond, by
● Does not readily diffuse through materials of anaesthetic
 gross purposeful movement (i.e. a motor response), to a standard
breathing system to pollute the operating environment.
supramaximal noxious stimulus (skin incision). It is defined in
● Compatible with soda lime.
terms of percentage of 1 atmosphere pressure. (Be aware of
●Non-toxic to tissues.
altitude.)
● Minimally metabolised; any metabolites should be non-toxic
 MAC values allow a comparison of inhalation agents by
and inactive.
their potency, whereby potency is inversely proportional to the
● Environmentally friendly; easily scavengeable.
MAC value. Potency is directly proportional to the brain lipid
● Non-irritant to mucous membranes; non-pungent, so that
solubility of the agents, which is reflected by the oil-gas partition
 inhalation induction is not unpleasant.
coeffcient. Table 8.2 shows MAC values for the commonly used
● Induction of anaesthesia and recovery from anaesthesia should
inhalation agents in man and some of the domestic animal
be excitement-free.
 species.
64
Inhalation anaesthetic agents  65
Table 8.1 Some properties of actualinhalation agents (based on man).
Ag ent
B.Pt. °℃
SVP mmHg at 
MWt
B/G
0/G
F/B
MAC (%)
Metab.
20°℃
Ether
34.6
442
74
12
65
1.92
some
104.7
23
Methoxyflurane
165
13
825
0.16
20-80%
Halothane
50.2
243
197
2.4
224
60
0.8
C. 20%
Isoflurane
48.5
238
184
1.4
86
45
1.3-1.6
0.2%
Sevoflurane
58.5
170
200
0.65
45
48
2.05+
C. 2%
Desflurane
23.5
664
168
0.45
18.7
27
5.7+
0.02%
ON
68-
44Atmos.
44
0.44-0.47
20
2.3
100-200
Inert
Cylinder pressure
Xenon
-108.1
131
0.115
1.9
<10
60-71
Inert
The figures in this table may vary slightly from other reference sources.
B.Pt., boiling point at standard atmospheric pressure; Atmos., atmospheres; SVP, saturated vapour pressure at 20°C in mmHg (except NO); MWt, molecular weight;
Table 8.2 Some MAC values.
● Blood pH.
● PaCO, between 10 and 90 mmHg.
Species
Halothane
Isoflurane
Sevoflurane
Desflurane
Nitrous oxide
● PaO between 40 and 500 mmHg.
1.2%
1.93%
105%
● Moderate anaemia.
Man
0.76%
6.99%
● Moderate hypotension (not below 50 mmHg mean arterial
Dog
0.87%
1.3%
2.3%
7.2%
188-297%
 pressure).
Cat
1.1% 
1.6%
2.6%
9.8%
255%
● Hypertension.
Horse
0.9%
1.3%
2.3%
7.6%
190-205%
MAC is affected by
These values may vary slightly according to source.
● Species (body size, i.e. MAC increases as the relative surface
area increases).
● Age. MAC is lower in the very young (neonates) and very old
As a basic rule of thumb, if a patient has an end tidal anaes-
(geriatrics); but higher in young, growing and fit animals.
 thetic agent concentration of 1.2-1.5 x MAC,it is highly unlikely
● PaO, <40 mmHg (arterial hypoxaemia); and PaCO >90 mmHg
 to move at skin incision.
(hypercapnia); both decrease MAC.
Several different MAC values are described for man, such as
● Hypotension (mean arterial pressure <50mmHg) decreases
MAC-BAR (where BAR means blockade of autonomic response),
MAC.
which refers to the minimal alveolar concentration of agent at
 Change in body temperature (for every one degree Celsius
which the increase in heart rate and/or blood pressure provoked
h o osz Aq sauu  aradun apq u au 
by skin incision is prevented in 50% of subjects. MAC-BAR is
value; it decreases with hypothermia, and increases with
usually around 1-1.7 MAC-incision.
hyperthermia).
There is also MAC-awake (usually 0.3-0.5 MAC-incision),
 Other CNS depressant drugs will reduce MAC.
which refers to the minimal alveolar concentration of agent at
● CNS stimulant drugs will increase MAC.
which 50% of subjects stop voluntarily responding to verbal com-
● Hyperthyroidism, and high levels of circulating catecholamines
mands (i.e. cessation of perceptive awareness) during induction
 (excited or nervous animals; phaeochromocytoma) will increase
of anaesthesia with that agent, or when 50% of subjects begin
MAC.
 responding to verbal commands upon recovering from anaesthe-
● Pregnancy reduces MAC.
sia under that agent.
● Hypernatraemia and hyperosmolality increase MAC.
There is controversy about the MAC concept because the def-
MAC is not affected by
nition of MAC is highly dependent upon spinal reflex activity and
● Duration of anaesthesia (unless patient becomes hypothermic,
spinal sites of action of anaesthetic agents. For this reason, claims
hypoxaemic or hypercapnic).
that drugs have analgesic properties because they can cause MAC
● Gender.
reduction may not necessarily be valid.
66  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Administration of inhalation agents
 When a patient breathes a mixture of oxygen and anaesthetic
gas/vapour from a non-rebreathing system (so that each inhaled
Inhalation agents may be administered for induction and/or
breath has the same composition), then the partial pressures of
 maintenance of anaesthesia. Administration may be via:
the agent in the alveoli, blood and tissues (including brain),
●Face/nose mask.
increases over time towards those of the inspired mixture.
●Nasopharyngeal tube (insuflation).
 Rate of induction and recovery from inhalation anaesthesia
● Nasotracheal tube.
is governed by the rate of change of anaesthetic agent partial
● Orotracheal tube (see Chapter 9 for potential problems associ-
pressure in the brain, which follows, with a slight delay, the
ated with endotracheal tube use).
 change in its partial pressure in the alveoli.
● Laryngeal mask airway.
We cannot measure the brain concentration' of these agents,
● Induction chambers can be used for anaesthetic induction, but 
 but we can measure the alveolar tensions, or, at least the end tidal
 do not allow access to the patient during maintenance.
 anaesthetic agent concentration can be measured as a guide to the
alveolar anaesthetic agent concentration. See Chapter 18 on
Inhalation induction
monitoring.
Inhalation induction may be accomplished by:
 Let us now consider the factors which affect the rate of change
 of the alveolar tension of anaesthetic agents, and therefore the
● Step-wise method, starting with just oxygen, and then slowly
uptake and elimination of these agents. Kety curves can be con-
 increasing the delivered inspired anaesthetic agent concentra-
structed, which are mathematical descriptions of anaesthetic
tion, e.g. by a quarter to half a percent every three or four
uptake under defined conditions (Figure 8.1).
breaths.
  n nn    e a o
Factors affecting alveolar anaesthetic agent
outset (often called a ^crash induction').
uptake/induction of anaesthesia
 Induction is said to be smoother if the frst method is used; but
● Inspired anaesthetic agent concentration.
induction is faster with the second. Most patients, especially if not
● Loss of agent (e.g. via diffusion through anaesthetic breathing
premedicated, seem to traverse the involuntary movement/
system).
excitement stage? (Stage II) of anaesthesia as depth of anaesthesia
● Alveolar ventilation rate.
increases towards a deeper, more surgical, plane, so be prepared
● Uptake by blood and tissues.
for some struggling. This period of struggling should be shorter
when a high concentration is delivered from the outset. Inclusion
Inspired anaesthetic concentration
of nitrous oxide may also speed the rate of induction through the
Depends upon the volatility of the agent and its boiling point
second gas effect (see later).
compared to room temperature. Its saturated vapour pressure at
room or standard temperature will give you a clue, for example
Uptake and elimination of anaesthetic agents
ether is very volatile (SVP = 442 mmHg), methoxyflurane is much
Inhalation agents produce anaesthesia via their effects in the CNS.
less volatile (SVP = 23 mmHg). The temperature at which the
Depth of anaesthesia depends upon the ‘concentration’ of
 si anssd use sa ssd rod p
the agent in the brain. A better term than ‘concentration'
 agent's boiling point.
would be partial pressure’ or 'tension, because these agents are
 Increasing the vaporiser setting should increase anaesthetic
gaseous, and we usually measure their ^concentration? in units
agent delivery to the anaesthetic breathing system, and thereby to
of pressure.
the alveoli, to hasten induction of anaesthesia. This is called the
 i Initial rise: represents anaesthetic agent delivery
 to the lungs with alveolar ventilation. The gradient 
will be steeper with increased alveolar ventilation
(at the same inspired concentration).
 ii Knee: represents initial equilibration between 
 anaesthetic agent delivery to the alveoli by 
ventilation and removal of anaesthetic agent from 
Alveolar
the alveoli by pulmonary capillary blood flow.
tension
 i Slowly rising plateau: may also be represented
 by a series of knees and changing gradients.
 Represents equilibration between other tissues,
 blood and alveolar concentrations.
Time
Figure 8.1 Kety curve.
Inhalation anaesthetic agents 67
of anaesthetic agent from the patient's lungs into the blood and
than is really required is initially delivered to the patient, but
tissues is considered below; but loss from open body cavities or
induction of anaesthesia is hastened. The vaporiser setting is
wounds, and to a small extent intact skin, can also occur to the
turned down as soon as the patient is anaesthetised to avoid an
atmosphere.
excessive depth of anaesthesia being achieved.
The design of the vaporiser used may have some influence
Alveolar ventilation
upon the achievable inspired anaesthetic agent concentration, for
example:
● Minute ventilation = breathing rate X tidal volume
● Tidal volume = alveolar volume + dead space volume
● Temperature changes affect vaporisation, so temperature com-
● Alveolar ventilation = breathing rate X alveolar volume
pensated (e.g. Tecrm) vaporisers will give a more consistent
● Alveolar ventilation = breathing rate × (tidal volume - dead
output.
space volume)
● Incorporation of wicks to increase the surface area for evapora
 tion may also help to increase the delivered anaesthetic agent
 The term dead space volume refers to the total, or physiologi-
concentration, as may increasing the operating temperature of
cal, dead space. This includes the anatomical dead space (the
the vaporiser. Thymol (a poorly volatile ^stabiliser included
 upper respiratory tract down to the respiratory bronchioles; i.e.
with halothane), may affect vaporiser performance by clogging
where gaseous exchange does not normally occur), and the alveo-
lar dead space (the relatively under-perfused or over-ventilated
up wicks etc.
● Some vaporisers may be calibrated to deliver higher concentra-
alveoli). Normally the physiological dead space is about one-third 
tions of agent than others. Most halothane and isoflurane
of the tidal volume; or the alveolar volume is about two-thirds of
vaporisers have a maximum calibrated output concentration of
the tidal volume. So, alveolar ventilation is about two-thirds of
5%, whereas some have a maximum output of 8%.
minute ventilation.
 Alveolar ventilation therefore depends upon breathing rate and
The inspired anaesthetic agent concentration cannot, however,
 depth (and also the dead space volume). Anything which increases
be indefinitely increased because sufficient oxygen (usually a
minute ventilation and/or decreases dead space, results in
minimum of 33% is suggested for humans) must also be supplied
increased alveolar ventilation and should facilitate an increase in
to the patient.
 the uptake of anaesthetic agent by enhancing the delivery of
 If a circle (rebreathing) system is being used with an out-of-
anaesthetic agent to the alveoli. Hyperventilation, either in an
circuit vaporiser (VOC), at the beginning of an anaesthetic, then
excited patient during inhalation induction, or by applying rapid
increasing the fresh gas flow into the circle will help to maintain
or deep intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV), can
 hasten anaesthetic induction or depth change, especially for the
agents which are relatively highly soluble in the blood). It is fairly
 more highly blood-soluble agents.
standard practice to denitrogenate both the circle and the patient
Apparatus dead space should also be kept to a minimum,
(via its lung functional residual capacity; FRC), such that rela-
 because this acts like an extension of the patient's own dead space.
 i  r  o ae s s  i a
 Lower patient FRC also helps to hasten anaesthetic uptake, so in
20 min anyway. Using the smallest possible rebreathing bag (about
 pregnant or bloated animals where the chest volume is reduced,
2 times the patient's tidal volume), to minimise the circle's volume
 slightly quicker anaesthetic agent uptake can be expected. Such
will alsohelp to maintain a higher anaesthetic agent concentration
 patients also have smaller oxygen reserves in their smaller FRC,
delivered to the patient by reducing the time constant of the
s0 pre-oxygenation might be warranted.
system (see Chapter 9).
The higher the blood solubility of the agent, the more
 If using a vaporiser-in-circuit (VIC), then increasing the fresh
 pronounced is the effect of increasing alveolar ventilation on
gas flow will tend to dilute the anaesthetic agent concentration in
hastening the speed of induction.
the circle. Higher flows through the vaporiser result in cooling
and a reduction in evaporation; and higher flows do not become
fully saturated during their passage through the vaporiser.
Uptake by the blood and tissues
The higher the blood solubility of the agent, the 
 Blood uptake depends on:
more
 pronounced is the effect of increasing the inspired anaesthetic
● Solubility of agent in blood (B/G partition coefficient).
agent concentration on hastening the speed of induction
● Pulmonary blood flow/perfusion (depends on cardiac output).
(see below).
● Concentration gradient between alveoli and blood.
● Diffusing capacity of the lung (but this rarely causes problems
Loss of anaesthetic agent
unless there is severe lung disease).
This can be a loss from the anaesthetic breathing system or
Tissue uptake depends on:
the patient. Fresh soda lime can ad/bsorb some of the agent
from the anaesthetic breathing system and also different agents
● Solubility of agent in tissues.
have different solubilities in the rubber or plastic hoses of the
● Tissue blood flow/perfusion (cardiac output).
anaesthetic breathing systems, so this route could be another
● Concentration gradient between blood and tissue (equivalent 
 potential route for loss of agent from the breathing system. Loss?
 to the arterio-venous concentration gradient).
68  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 The more soluble the agent is in blood, the more is required
thetic agent tension; and this delay in increase in alveolar anaes-
to increase its partial pressure in the alveoli, and hence the
thetic agent tension can be thought of as reflected in a delay in
slower the induction of anaesthesia remembering that anaes-
increase in brain anaesthetic agent tension, and so induction of
 thetic concentration in the brain follows, with a slight delay,
anaesthesia is also seen to be delayed. However, this is partly offset
that in the alveoli. Brain is in the vessel rich' tissue group, so
by a faster delivery of anaesthetic agent to the tissues (including
has one of the first opportunities to receive anaesthetic agent
brain) because of the greater cardiac output. In reality, the alveo-
delivered in the blood. Brain contains a lot of lipid, and most of
lar ventilation rate is also increased by excitement, and this also
 these agents have high lipid solubilities.
offsets the effects of increased cardiac output, so that induction
 Compared with an agent of high blood (and tissue), solubility,
 may in fact be hastened.
an agent of low blood (and tissue), solubility is associated with a
 In shocky animals, the lower cardiac output speeds induction
more rapid equilibration, because only a small amount of anaes-
 of anaesthesia, because alveolar anaesthetic agent concentration
thetic agent need be dissolved in blood (and tissues), before equi-
rises faster when alveolar perfusion is slow.
librium (with the delivered concentration) is reached. Low blood
Changes in cardiac output and alveolar ventilation have more
solubility is usually more desirable because induction and
effect on the speed of induction with volatile anaesthetic agents
recovery are more rapid, and intraoperative anaesthetic depth
 of higher blood (and tissue) solubilities than those of lower
changes can be achieved more rapidly. Methoxyflurane
(no
blood solubilities.
longer commonly available), is poorly volatile, yet very soluble in
Alveolar-to-blood, and blood-to-tissue concentration gradi-
blood and fat, so that inhalation induction is very slow, as is
ents are greatest at the beginning of induction, and reduce with
change of anaesthetic depth,but this does make it difcult to get
time. Different body compartments equilibrate at different rates,
patients too deep very quickly. Therefore, despite its high potency
according to their size and perfusion (see Chapter 5 on injectable
(low MAC value), methoxyfluranes low volatility reduces the
risks of overdose.
stants is discussed).
 For rapid anaesthetic induction, theoretically we need to slow
Equilibration between all body compartments takes time. The
down the removal or absorption of anaesthetic agent from the
fat compartment can be huge and poorly perfused and therefore
alveoli, thereby promoting a rapid rise in alveolar concentration
can take a long time to equilibrate, perhaps longer than the actual
of the agent (and therefore promoting a rapid rise of brain anaes-
length of anaesthesia in clinical cases. Most agents are very soluble
thetic agent concentration). For agents of low blood solubility,
in fat, but interestingly, NO and xenon are not. This equilibration
the rate of rise of the alveolar anaesthetic agent tension is more
time thus depends upon the fat perfusion; how fat-soluble the
rapid.
agent is; how obese the patient is; and whether the agent is metab-
 The alveolar anaesthetic agent tension may also be increased by
olised to any extent, which will delay this slow equilibration
the 'second gas effect', sometimes called the ‘concentration
process further.
effect', because it is only noticeable when the second gas is present
at high concentration. For example, if nitrous oxide (the ^second 
Factors affecting elimination of inhalation
gas') and a vapour (e.g. halothane) are both delivered to the
agents/recovery from anaesthesia
 patient in a stream of oxygen then because nitrous oxide is less
Such ^recovery’ is sometimes referred to as eduction. Recovery
soluble in blood (compared to halothane), and because it is
after an intravenous infusion of anaesthetic agent is stopped
administered at a much higher inspired concentration than the
depends on drug redistribution and metabolism; both of which
volatile agent (i.e. 50-66% compared to 2-5%), its uptake by
might be affected by the duration of the drug infusion, as well as
blood and brain occurs (is ^completed') more rapidly. Although
the characteristics of the drug (its solubility, especially in fat), and
nitrous oxide's solubility in blood is poor, some will dissolve; and
of the patient, for example in terms of tissues available for redis-
at such high delivered concentrations, even though only relatively
tribution (e.g. absolute muscle and fat mass), and metabolic
little becomes dissolved in blood, this small proportion of the
capacity (liver and kidney function). The context-sensitive half
large delivered concentration is still substantial enough to have an
time helps us to be better able to predict patient ^recovery after
effect. The consequence, at this early stage of the induction, is that
varying durations of infusions. The context-sensitive half time is
the initial rapid absorption’ (removal) of nitrous oxide from the
the time taken for the plasma concentration of the drug to halve
alveoli results in a relative increase in concentration of the gases
after termination of drug infusion. The ^context’ refers to the
left behind in the alveoli, ie. halothane (and also oxygen). This in
duration of the infusion.
turn enhances the rate of rise of alveolar, and then brain, anaes-
 A similar concept can be applied to inhaled anaesthetics, where
thetic agent concentration, to hasten anaesthetic induction. The
we talk of context-sensitive decrement times. Again, the context
effect, however, is much less noticeable for volatile agents of lower
refers to the duration of the anaesthetic, so context-sensitive
blood solubility.
decrement times vary according to the duration of anaesthesia,
 Anything which slows the rate of increase of alveolar anaes-
 but are also affected by the solubility of the agent (especially in
thetic agent tension will delay induction of anaesthesia. For
fat), the adiposity of the patient and whether the agent can be
example, if an excited animal is undergoing induction of inhala-
metabolised or is inert and requires exhalation.
tion anaesthesia, then its faster cardiac output (and pulmonary
Recovery depends upon reduction of alveolar anaesthetic
perfusion), will result in more rapid depletion of alveolar anaes-
agent tension (by reduction of administered anaesthetic agent
Inhalation anaesthetic agents  69
concentration), and anaesthetic agent exhalation and some
anaesthetic, when the delivered concentration of NO and, for
metabolism.
example halothane, are reduced, NO being least soluble, most
Following reduction of delivered (and therefore, alveolar)
quickly leaves the blood and enters the alveoli, thereby diluting
anaesthetic agent concentration, anaesthetic agent moves down
the other gases present. Dilution of oxygen in the alveoli may
the concentration gradients from the blood to the alveoli and
reduce oxygen uptake, and so result in hypoxaemia and the so-
from the tissues to the blood, and so exhalation can continue (so
called diffusion hypoxia; whereas dilution of halothane in the
long as alveolar ventilation continues). Therefore, recovery is
alveoli steepens the blood-alveolar concentration gradient, thus
influenced by:
enhancing its elimination.
 After short anaesthetics, recovery depends mainly upon exhala-
● Inspired anaesthetic agent concentration.
tion, redistribution and may be some metabolism. After long
● Loss of agent from anaesthetic breathing system/patient (open
anaesthesia, recovery depends more upon the fat solubility of
wounds/body cavities).
the agent, and how near saturation (equilibrium), the tissues
● Alveolar ventilation.
(esp. fat), have become. Obese patients will have much more
● Tissue/blood
and blood/gas solubilities (and patient
 prolonged recoveries after anaesthesia (especially if lengthy), with
adiposity).
the more fat-soluble agents, such as halothane and sevoflurane,
● Tissue perfusion.
than non-obese patients. Any metabolism of the agent, however,
●Metabolism.
helps hasten recovery.
 It is important to reduce the inspired anaesthetic agent concen-
 Elimination curves do not always exactly mirror uptake curves,
tration if you require reversal’ of anaesthesia. Switching off the
 because of the effects of duration of anaesthesia, fat solubility and
vaporiser willrapidly reduce the delivered anaesthetic agent con-
metab olism.
centration if a non-rebreathing system is used. If a rebreathing
Sometimes halothane recoveries do not seem very different
system is used, however, the delivered anaesthetic agent concen-
 in length to isoflurane recoveries, possibly because metabolism
tration is much slower to change,even if the vaporiseris switched
plays a more important role in elimination of halothane than
 off, unless the fresh gas flow is increased and the rebreathing bag
isoflurane. Methoxyflurane recoveries were very prolonged (highly
is emptied (dumped’) through the pop-off valve several times
fat soluble), despite considerable metabolism; but the quality
(and the system is re-flled with oxygen), to increase the rate of
 of recovery was usually excellent, as methoxyflurane also added
change of anaesthetic agent concentration circulating within the
   d ae d   
system. However, the inspired anaesthetic agent concentration
to think of other methods of analgesia, as halothane and isoflurane
cannot be reduced to below zero, so there is only a limited amount
are notanalgesic to the same degree as methoxyflurane. Sevoflurane
you can do to reverse the concentration gradient between alveoli
is slightly more soluble in fat than isoflurane, so after long anaes-
and blood/tissues/brain.
thetics, even though sevoflurane has a lower blood solubility than 
Alveolar ventilation is important, but again, more so for the 
isoflurane, the recovery times may not be that different.
more soluble agents.
Various equations have been described to calculate uptake and
 Some anaesthetic agent will be lost through the patient's
elimination, or rather the rate of change of alveolar anaesthetic
wounds and any open body cavities, and to a small extent, intact
agent concentration. One is Lowe's equation, one version of
skin. Some agents may continue to be lost through the anaes-
which is:
 thetic breathing system tubing.
 The more tissue- and blood-soluble the agent, the slower its
 Rate of uptake of agent from alveoli = ΛBG x COx P(a-v)
release back into the blood (and then the alveoli), and thus the
slower the recovery. Tissue perfusion and cardiac output are again
Where ABG is blood gas partition coeffcient (measure of solu-
important. However, any metabolism of the agent is also impor-
bility), CO is cardiac output, and P(a-v) is the arterio-venous
tant as it can accelerate the recovery.
concentration (partial pressure) gradient.
Duration of anaesthesia potentially has a large influence, espe-
The rate of uptake of the anaesthetic agent from the alveoli is
 inversely related to the rate of induction/recovery or anaesthetic 
fat), solubility, because the longer the anaesthetic duration, the
 depth change.
more time these agents have to (attempt to) reach equilibrium
 The faster the anaesthetic agent is absorbed from the alveoli,
With these tissues. The larger the body ^stores that are built up
the slower the alveolar concentration of the agent rises,the slower
(especially in the adipose tissues of obese patients), the longer
 the brain concentration rises, and therefore the slower the anaes-
it takes for the agent to be eliminated from those stores. This
thetic induction.
was especially noticeable for methoxyflurane which is highly
 Uptake and elimination curves can be represented as in Figures
fat-soluble (see oil-gas or fat-blood partition coefficients).
8.2 and 8.3.
Methoxyflurane is no longer available in the UK, but is still
available in some countries, most notably Australia.
Effects of the volatile agents
When using nitrous oxide, beware of the Fink effect, whereby
diffusion hypoxia may occur. In this situation, the effect is analo-
All  agents cause dose-dependent cardiovascular depression,
 gous to the second gas effect, but in reverse. At the end of an
for example they reduce blood pressure (all agents produce
70  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Some reflex tachycardia occurs with methoxyflurane, isoflu-
 Nitrous oxide
rane, sevoflurane and desflurane and this partly compensates for
Desflurane
the reduction in blood pressure; however, this may not occur with
F
Sevoflurane
halothane (due to relatively little vagolysis,although this is species-
dependent), and thus there may be a slightly greater reduction in
cardiac output seen with halothane compared with isoflurane,
sevoflurane and desflurane. In addition, the peripheral vasodila-
lsoflurane
tion caused by isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane reduces the
Halothane
cardiac afterload, which may allow a relatively better maintained
cardiac output with these agents compared with halothane.
Greater respiratory depression (see below) tends to occur with
isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane, leading to the development
ofrespiratoryacidosis (ifventilation is notsupported), which itself
Methoxyflurane
results in sympathetic stimulation, which helps to offset the
Time
decrease in cardiac output and arterial blood pressure. The institu-
Figure 8.2 'Wash-in' of anaesthetic agent (uptake).
tion of IPPV to maintain normocapnia would then result in
F/F, alveolar concentration of anaesthetic agent/inspired concentration of
removal of this extra sympathetic tone and a reduction in cardiac
anaesthetic agent.
output and blood pressure; but the physical effects of IPPV, in
addition to the chemical effect (on PaCO2), can also reduce venous
return and cardiac output. Nevertheless it appears that there is
 greater cardiovascular depression induced by halothane (even
though it causes slightly less respiratory depression) than with the
Methoxyflurane
Halothane and 
 Isoflurane and sevoflurane (and the other halo-ethers), do not
isoflurane
FA
sensitise the myocardium to the arrhythmogenic effects of
FAd
- very similar
because some
catecholamines; whereas halothane does (as do the other halo-
halothane is 
hydrocarbons). Paroxysmal atrio-ventricular (A-V) dissociation
metabolised
may occur in cats.
Sevoflurane
 All agents cause some dose-dependent respiratory depression
Desflurane
(isoflurane > methoxyflurane > halothane and sevoflurane). In
piratory depression to isoflurane. Isoflurane and methoxyflurane
Nitrous oxide
possibly have a more pungent smell and are more irritant to the
Time
respiratory mucosa. Desflurane is also very pungent (see below).
 Overall, it is said that minute ventilation decreases due to a reduc-
Figure 8.3 'Wash-out' of anaesthetic agent (elimination).
tion in tidal volume, with a slight, non-compensatory, increase in
Fx/FAo. alveolar concentration of anaesthetic agent/alveolar concentration of
rate; at higher doses, breathing rate then also tends to decrease
anaesthetic agent just before vaporiser is turned off.
(but the exact effects are species- and drug-dependent). The
volatile agents:
similar mean arterial pressure reduction at equi-MAC doses);
● Depress the ventilatory response to CO2.
 and they reduce cardiac output (halothane = methoxyflurane >
● Depress hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction.
isoflurane ≥ sevoflurane > desflurane):
● Almost abolish the ventilatory response to hypoxia.
●Cause bronchodilation(
(which
increases
dead
● By direct myocardial depression
space);
(negative
inotropy)
halothane > all others.
(halothane >> isoflurane, sevoflurane > desflurane).
● By causing peripheral vasodilation (isoflurane, sevoflurane and
Hepatic and renal blood flow may be reduced because cardiac
desflurane >> halothane).
output and mean arterial blood pressure are reduced, and /or
● By decreasing vascular reactivity and impairing tissue autoreg-
because splanchnic vasoconstriction occurs. Halothane hepatitis
 ulation, so that tissue perfusion becomes more dependent upon
may occur in man (see below). Most volatile agents cause some
the ‘driving (systemic arterial) blood pressure. Coronary
 inhibition of hepatic cytochrome P450 enzyme systems. Halothane
 autoregulation is suggested not to be affected.
reduces blood flow in the hepatic portal vein and the hepatic
● Via CNS depression and reducing autonomic tone. These
artery; whereas isoflurane reduces flow in the hepatic portal vein
 agents have sympatholytic and parasympatholytic properties,
 os ae u an r mo  a  i
but sympathetic tone is generally reduced more than parasym-
little overall change in hepatic perfusion occurs but an improve-
pathetic tone. Halothane is least parasympatholytic, desflurane
ment in hepatic oxygenation may result.
is most.
Inhalation anaesthetic agents  71
Cerebral blood flow is increased (due to vasodilation) (haloth-
than isoflurane, build up of sevoflurane in the adipose tissues can
ane > all others), but cerebral metabolic rate is reduced (which
still slow the recovery so that there is not often much difference
would normally result in some vasoconstriction due to autoregu-
between isoflurane and sevoflurane.
lation of cerebral blood flow, but the volatile agents depress this
All the volatile agents are calcium channel (L, T and possibly
to some extent). Intracranial pressure therefore tends to increase
 N type) blockers, and their muscle relaxation effects (on cardiac,
(dose-related),because of the overiding vasodilation. This can be
striated and vascular and other smooth muscle), may stem from
offset by hyperventilation, as hypocapnia promotes cerebral vaso-
reduced calcium entry into muscle cells and initial depletion of
constriction, at least in the short term, but cerebral autoregulation
intracellular calcium stores, followed by reduced release from sar-
 is also depressed by the volatile agents. The volatile agents may
coplasmic reticulum. The affinity of troponin C for calcium may
afford some cerebroprotection against ischaemia, at least partly
also be affected.
via activating adenosine receptors and thereby modulating KATP
 In addition to the GABAgmimetic effects of the volatile agents,
channel activity. Sevoflurane produces less cerebral vasodilation
 they are likely to have other actions, and, for example, isoflurane
than the other agents at equi-MAC doses, and interferes less with
 has been shown to have NMDA antagonist actions (so potentially
cerebral autoregulation than the other agents. It also produces
 provides some analgesia).
greater protection against cerebral ischaemia than all the other
 Halothane requires inclusion of 0.01% poorly volatile thymol
 agents, both acutely and more chronically after any ischaemic
 as a stabiliser/preservative. Methoxyflurane has butylated hydrox-
insult. The more chronic protective effect appears to be due to a
ytoluene added as an antioxidant. Sevoflurane may degrade to
reduction in cell apoptosis, but the mechanism of this is unclear
acidic products in the presence of Lewis acids (usually metal
although it may include a reduction in intracellular calcium
oxides or halides, but thought to be primarily aluminium oxide
accumulation.
impurities in glass), to form for example hydrofluoric acid, which
All volatile agents may trigger malignant hyperthermia (in pigs,
is a toxic volatile acid with a pungent smell even at sub-toxic
dogs, horses,cats, man).
 doses. This can further react with glass (silicon dioxide) to form
The volatile agents produce poor analgesia except for methoxy-
silicon fluorides (e.g. SiF which is volatile, pungent and highly
flurane (and the most pungent ones, isoflurane and desflurane,
toxic). Sevoflurane is now supplied in special plastic bottles or
may even cause hyperalgesia). Although methoxyflurane pro-
lacquer-coated aluminium bottles and water is added as its
duces similar cardiorespiratory depression to halothane, it is a
preservative^ (a Lewis base (or Lewis acid inhibitor) to prevent
good analgesic and because of this, patients can often be ade-
 this degradation.
quately anaesthetised under lighter planes of anaesthesia, so rela-
 Agents undergo hepatic metabolism: methoxyflurane > haloth-
tively less methoxyflurane is required, with consequently relatively
ane >> sevoflurane > isoflurane > desflurane. Metabolic products
fewer cardiorespiratory side effects.
from methoxyflurane breakdown include free fluoride and oxalic
Some muscle relaxation occurs, especially with methoxyflu-
acid, both of which can be nephrotoxic (so beware patients with
rane; but all the volatile agents potentiate the neuromuscular
pre-existing renal disease). Halothane can be metabolised to trif-
block produced by non-depolarising neuromuscular blocking
luoroacetic acid (see later under potential toxicities).
agents (possibly due to calcium channel blocking effects).
Desflurane has some special physical properties. Its saturated
 All the volatile agents reduce lower oesophageal sphincter tone
vapour pressure (SVP) is high at room temperature, which along-
and potentiall increase the risk of gastr-cesophageal reflux,but
side its low boiling point (23.5°C), means that very high concen-
there may be species differences due to differences in the anatomy
 trations can be delivered to the patient. It requires a special
and physiology of the lower oesophageal sphincter (i.e. smooth
temperature-controlled vaporiser (see Chapter 10 on vaporisers).
muscle/skeletal muscle components and muscle fbre configura-
Its low blood solubility means that induction, recovery and anaes-
tion at the gastro-oesophageal junction).
thetic depth change can be very rapid. Its low oil/gas solubility
Allagents cause a degree of uterine relaxation, and vasodilation,
means that desflurane has a low potency, and therefore a high
 but halothane may slow uterine involution more.
MAC. Desflurane is also very pungent, so is not suitable for inha-
 Isoflurane is less soluble in blood than halothane, therefore
lation inductions, at least in man, where pulmonary (and other)
anaesthetic induction, recovery and anaesthetic depth change
pungent' receptors are stimulated by rapid increases in inspired
should be more rapid. Recovery is not always noticeably quicker
desflurane concentrations and can result in 'sympathetic storms.
after isoflurane, however, because halothane is more metabolised,
Desflurane may prove to be more suitable in veterinary species,
which hastens an otherwise slower recovery. Methoxyflurane has
but it is not yet licensed.
a low saturated vapour pressure, and a high blood solubility, so
despite being very potent (low MAC), it takes a long time to
Nitrous oxide
achieve induction, and recoveries are also slow, but with good
analgesia and usually of good quality. Sevoflurane is less soluble
Nitrous oxide is produced by thermal decomposition of ammo-
than isofurane, so faster induction, recovery and anaesthetic
nium nitrate at 240°℃. It is supplied in pale blue painted cylinders,
depth change can be expected. Recovery, however, is not always
as a saturated vapour above liquid
that much quicker, especially after long anaesthetics in obese
 A substance present in the gaseous phase is referred to as a gas
patients, as sevoflurane is more fat soluble than isoflurane, so
when at a temperature above its critical temperature; and a vapour
cumulates in the fat; and, despite being slightly more metabolised
when at a temperature below its critical temperature.
72  Veterinary Anaesthesia
The critical temperature is the temperature above which a gas?
Although it is a direct negative inotrope, it also stimulates the
cannot be liquefied, no matter how much pressure is applied.
sympathetic nervous system, reminiscent of ketamine The small
Cylinder pressure is 4400kPa. The critical temperature for
rise in peripheral vascular resistance often documented has also
nitrous oxide is 36.5°C. However, at room temperature (which is
been shown to occur with increased inspired oxygen fractions
below this critical temperature), NO can be liquefied by com-
(possibly reflecting increased tissue oxygen delivery, and thence
pression, so that cylinders are filled with saturated vapour above
-nd ssns sn  (ssa rone
a liquid. At constant temperature, the cylinder saturated vapour
      is 
pressure (and therefore the cylinder pressure gauge reading),
 decreases. High inspired oxygen concentrations tend to lower
does not decrease until all the liquid has evaporated Therefore
pulmonary vascular resistance (through offsetting hypoxic pul-
estimation of cylinder content is made by weighing the cylinder
monary vasoconstriction); but if apnoea occurs (due to the rela-
and comparing to empty weight. The empty weight (tare weight)
tive oxygen oversufficiency), and hypercapnia follows, then
of the cylinder should be stamped onto its neck. The density of
hypercapnia can itself promote pulmonary vasoconstriction.
NO is also stamped on the cylinder neck (0.0018726 kg/l). Density
Despite some texts suggesting caution with pre-existing pulmo-
equals mass/volume; so volume remaining equals massdensity.
nary hypertension, if attention is paid to blood oxygenation, CO
(It is often easier to multiply the weight of the cylinder contents
tension, and FRC (lung volume can affect the pulmonary vascular
by 534; (534 = 1/density).) Alternatively, because 1 mole of
 resistance too), then the effects are minimal.
 gas occupies 22.4 litres at standard temperature and pressure
Nitrous oxide administration reduces the requirement for
(Avogadro's law), and as the molecular weight of nitrous oxide is
other anaesthetic agents, and therefore the side effects associated
44; the cylinder contents (in grammes) divided by the molecular
 s u Jo ssp re 
weight, multiplied by 22.4, also gives an estimate of the number
In man, its use may be associated with an increase in post-
of litres remaining.
operative nausea and vomiting.
The filling ratio for NzO cylinders in temperate climates like
The blood/gas partition coeffcient (solubility) of N is 0.0147;
the UK is 0.75; whereas it is 0.67 in the tropics. The flling ratio
thus it is much less soluble than NzO (blood/gas partition coef-
is the ratio of the maximum weight of N,O vapour and liquid that
fcient of 0.47).NO partitions into ^insoluble gas'-filled spaces,
the cylinder should be filled with, compared to the weight of water
the cylinder could hold, at around 16°C. It is less in hotter climates 
that compartment is distensible or not. That is, NO can enter
because the relative under-filling reduces the potential for pres-
such spaces faster than the already present, and even more insolu-
sure build up (and potential cylinder rupture) with modest
ble gases, can leave. Such insoluble gases include nitrogen (so
increases in temperature.
beware air-filled spaces), hydrogen and methane (so beware
 If nitrous oxide is withdrawn rapidly from the cylinder, then
rumens and large intestines in herbivorous creatures with fermen-
tation occurring at various portions of their GI tracts). This may
evaporates (ie. there is little time for heat energy to be transfered
cause problems, for example with pneumothorax, gastric dilation/
   n r      n
volvulus and equine colics if the distended viscus is not frst
within the cylinder). This can result in frosting of the cylinder (up
decompressed; and if venous air emboli are likely it can enhance
 to the level of remaining liquid within) and perhaps on the cylin-
their size. Nitrous oxide can also partition into air-flled endotra-
der outlet too.
cheal tube cuffs, so their volume and pressure can increase if not
The MAC of N,O in man is 105%, however, when administered
initially inflated with a mixture of gases including nitrous oxide
at subanaesthetic doses, it affords useful analgesia. In man, inspired 
at the concentration to be administered. Some people prefer to
concentrations above 20% provide some analgesia, but animals
inflate the cuff with sterile water or saline.
The use of NzO is equivocal in healthy horses, rabbits and
(188% in dogs, and 255% in cats), that in order to deliver it at
ruminants, as although one study documented an increase in the
sufficient dose to even contemplate any sort of anaesthesia, and
volume of the large intestine in healthy horses during anaesthesia
without causing hypoxia, it would have to be given under hyper-
which included NO, no untoward adverse effects (e.g. post-
baric conditions. However, it is often administered to provide
operative colic) were documented. This author would still suggest
 some analgesia when delivered at concentrations of 50-66%.
caution however.
 Nitrous oxide can be used to encourage uptake of other inhala-
Mechanisms of analgesic effects
tion agents at the beginning of an anaesthetic (i.e. by the second
 gas effect), or during the changeover from intravenous induction
● NO activates the endogenous opioid system (which in turn
to inhalation maintenance; but there is the potential for diffusion
activates descending monoaminergic, cholinergic and puriner-
hypoxia at the end of the anaesthetic. Although the duration of
gic pathways).
this effect is probably only 2-5 min, most references advocate
● NO has NMDA antagonist activities.
turning off the NO, and turning up the O, flow about 10 min
 before turning offthe volatile inhalation agent to try to prevent
Systemic effects
this.
 Nitrous oxide causes minimal overall cardiorespiratory depres-
 The use of NO is often cautioned in anaemic patients because
sion, and may even cause some mild cardiovascular stimulation.
 its use limits the inspired oxygen percentage that can be delivered.
Inhalation anaesthetic agents 73
However, such patients lack haemoglobin as an oxygen carrier, so
with DNA synthesis and cell division. There have also been some
the additional amount of oxygen that can be dissolved in plasma
reports of neuropathies developing after acute and, especially.
by increasing the amount of oxygen the animal breathes, is actu-
prolonged exposure.
ally very minimal. Chronic exposure to N,O can result in anaemia.
Nitrous oxide may be a very weak trigger of malignant
Reactive radicals and immunotoxicity
hyperthermia.
 In man, under normoxic conditions, a radical called trifluoroace-
 NO cannot be destroyed by scavenging, it can only be expelled
tic acid (TFA) is produced during halothane metabolism, which
 into the atmosphere, where it is a potent greenhouse gas and adds
binds to (acetylates) liver proteins to produce novel antigens, to
to the destruction of the ozone layer and acid rain problems. It
 which immune responses can be generated and these antibodies
survives in the atmosphere for at least 150 years.
may also recognise normal antigens. On subsequent halothane
exposure, the immune response is greater, and can result in
 Xenon
immune-mediated hepatic destruction, so called halothane
hepatitis, which can lead to fulminant hepatic failure. Under
Xenon is an inert, colourless, odourless gas. Its name means
hypoxic conditions, other active radicals can be produced (by a
'stranger. It is very expensive to isolate from atmospheric gases
 non-oxygen dependent pathway), which can also result in hepatic
(by fractional distillation of liquefied air), because it is a trace gas,
damage, this time via lipid peroxidation. Fortunately, most
present at no greater than 0.0875 ppm. It tends to be produced as
veterinary species do not suffer the same problems as man,
a by-product of oxygen production. It is available as a compressed
 although there have been reports in rabbits, rats and an alpaca
gas in cylinders. Because it is a normal component of atmosphere
cria.
and it is inert, it is not a pollutant. It cannot be metabolised (i.e.
 Isoflurane and desflurane (but not sevoflurane), can be metab-
it is an inert gas). It is non-flammable and does not support com-
olised to produce minute amounts of TFA and other similar com-
bustion. It is only really affordable for use in closed system anaes-
 pounds, but in such minute quantities that they do not produce
thesia, to which it is suited because of its very low blood/gas
novel haptens for antibody production. There is some suggestion
 partition coeffcient. It diffuses easily through rubber and silicone,
odxa sunbasqns pue aueuoeu oi ainsodxa rotd yeun (ue u)
so plastic tubing is preferred. Xenon does not interact with soda
S    o   i 
lime.
 Sevoflurane is metabolised (c.2%) in the liver to produce hexa-
 Like N,O, xenon has analgesic effects at sub MAC doses and is
fluoroisopropanol (HFIP) and free fluoride ions, but neither
an NMDA antagonist. It causes minimal cardiovascular depres-
seem to cause significant hepatic or renal injury, probably because
sion (is often described as being cardiostable). It does not trigger
they are produced in such small quantities.
malignant hyperthermia. It causes some respiratory depression,
and unusually a decrease in rate and a slight increase in tidal
Free fluoride ions/radicals
volume, which almost compensates for the decrease in rate (other
Methoxyflurane is readily metabolised (in liver and kidneys),
agents tend to decrease tidal volume and increase rate). Xenon
products of this biotransformation including free fluoride ions,
has higher density and viscosity than air (3.2 and 1.7 times,
oxalic acid, difluoromethoxyacetic acid and dichloroacetic acid.
 Free fluoride ions and oxalic acid (oxalate) can both cause renal
resistance to breathing, and patients may require IPPV. It does
damage. Free fluoride ions compete with chloride ions at the
not interfere with cerebral autoregulation and appears not to alter
chloride transporter in the ascending limb of the loop of Henle
regional cerebral blood flow; its place in neuroanaesthesia seems
promising.
halide ions/radicals are produced by halothane > sevoflu-
Xenon's MAC of 60-70% allows a reasonable oxygen concen-
rane > isoflurane (and, very minimally, desflurane) degradation
tration to be delivered during xenon anaesthesia. Diffusion
 in liver and kidneys. Halothane halide radicals/ions (F, Cl and Br)
hypoxia and partitioning into insoluble gas-/air-filled spaces
may cause renal (and possibly hepatic) damage in guinea pigs.
should theoretically also occur, as with NO, but despite its very
(Bromide ions have also been reported to acetylate hepatic pro-
low blood solubility, xenon is only about 10 times less soluble
teins, but the consequences of this are unclear.) Chloroform,
than nitrogen (whereas NO is about 30 times less soluble than
although no longer used in clinical practice, can release free radi-
N); and because xenon is a big molecule, its ^diffusibility is poor;
cals during its biotransformation which can cause hepatic damage.
 both of which factors mean that these effects should be compara-
Halothane and isoflurane may be degraded by ultraviolet light to
tively mild.
 produce free chlorine which can destroy ozone. Sevoflurane and
desflurane do not contain chlorine atoms and are thought not to
Potential toxicities
result in atmospheric ozone depletion.
N2O
Interaction of inhalation agents with
Prolonged exposure has been anecdotally associated with tera-
CO, absorbents
togenic effects, abortion and infertility. Also, anaemia (pernicious
or megaloblastic) and leukopaenia may occur, secondary to oxj-
Degradation of all volatile agents by soda lime can occur and
dation of the cobalt within vitamin B12, which results in problems
 primarily decreases the amount of anaesthetic agent available to
74  Veterinary Anaesthesia
the patient. Fresh soda lime can also adsorb volatile agents.
 Compound A production is increased if the absorbent is dry
Degradation of volatile agents by soda lime tends to be more
and hot and contains activators.
significant if the absorbent is dry (rather than moist) and hot.
Fresh baralyme contains less water than soda lime because its
Absorbents in rebreathing systems can become dry if the fresh gas
natural water of crystallisation is sufficient to get the normal CO2
flow exceeds the minute ventilation. Alternatively, if oxygen
 absorption reaction going (see Chapter 9). It should therefore be
(from a cylinder source and therefore ^dry) is inadvertently left
'drier than soda lime, and allow more degradation of volatile
flowing through the absorbent over a weekend, the absorbent can
 agents than soda lime, however, it is often marketed without
beco me desiccated.
activators, which are normally thought responsible for enhancing
The interaction of volatile agents with absorbent can itself
volatile agent degradation. Therefore, Compound A production
result in remarkable increases in temperature of the absorbent
 may be less with activator-free baralyme than with soda lime,
(57°℃ with desflurane, 78"℃ with isoflurane, 86°℃ with halothane,
and even than with some KOH-free soda lime. Adding water to,
128°℃ with sevoflurane), which are more dramatic with desic-
and removing NaOH and KOH from, normally hydrated soda
cated absorbent, for example up to 100°℃ with desflurane and
lime can reduce Compound A production dramatically. Several
350-400°C with sevoflurane. There have been reports of sponta-
 new generation CO absorbers are now available, tending to
neous combustion in low flow anaesthesia systems with sevoflu-
exclude caustic activators, and therefore less likely to result in
rane, dry soda lime and high oxygen concentrations.
significant Compound A production (e.g. LoFloSorbrm and
Amsorbr).
Trichloroethylene (Trilene)
Interacts with soda lime to produce dichloroacetylene (a neuro-
Desflurane
toxin). If the soda lime is very hot, then this dichloroacetylene is
 Carbon monoxide (CO) production requires the presence of a
 degraded to carbonyl chloride (phosgene, COCl), a pulmonary
difluoromethoxy group, so should not be possible from halothane
irritant (mustard gas).
and sevoflurane. CO production said to be most with dry (desic-
cated), and hot absorbents and only with those which contain
Halothane
strong alkalis (KOH, NaOH) as activators. Degradation to CO
Reacts with soda lime (especially if hot and dry, and if a strong
depends upon interaction with these strong alkalis. Also high
alkali is present as an activator) to produce hydrofluoric acid,
 carbon dioxide production by the patient may influence the pro-
which is a potential lung irritant, and Compound BCDFE (bromo
 duction of CO. CO production with baralyme is said to be greater
chloro difuoro ethylene), which can be nephrotoxic via the
than with soda lime, because baralyme is drier.
cysteine conjugate β lyase pathway (in rats). Addition of potas-
CO production said to be in the order: desflurane >>
sium permanganate to soda lime reduces production of BCDFE.
isoflurane >>>>>>>> (sevoflurane = halothane); see comments
Interestingly, hepatic metabolism of halothane can also produce
above.
small quantities of compound BCDFE.
 Desflurane is initially degraded to trifluoromethane (also called
fluoroform, CF;H) a precursor of CO.
Isoflurane
Very few problems.
It has been suggested that to rehydrate dry absorbent add
c. 150ml water (c. 1 cup) per 1.2kg desiccated absorbent; or,
Sevoflurane
preferably replace the dry absorbent with new fresh ('moist')
Hot and dry absorbents, especially if they contain activators
absorbent.
(monovalent bases such as KOH and NaOH) lead to production
of Compound A (which accumulates under conditions of low
Chemical formulae
flow anaesthesia). Compounds B, C, D and E have also been
described. Compound A is fluoromethyl difluorotrifluoromethyl
Isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane are halogenated ethers;
vinyl ether (an olefin). It undergoes hepatic glucuronidation, fol-
whereas halothane is a halogenated hydrocarbon.
lowed by renal metabolism (via the cysteine conjugate β lyase
The more fluorine atoms in the molecule, the more resistant
pathway, which is very active in rats) to yield a reactive thiol (and
to metabolism and degradation; so there is a reduced require-
possibly free fluoride). This thiol can cause lung damage and the
ment for stabilisers or preservatives to be included; there is a
free fluoride may result in renal damage, although this has only
longer shelflife; there is reduced flammability; there is less inter-
been shown to be a clinical problem in rats. This may not be the
full story though, so caution should be exercised with prolonged
Halo-ethers
low flow anaesthesia especially with absorbents containing KOH
or NaOH.
Diethyl ether (combustible in air, explosive in oxygen)
 Dry soda lime can also degrade sevoflurane to formaldehyde.
Some sources state that COz absorbents produce compound
HH
HH
A with sevoflurane in the following order: baralyme > soda
一一
一一
H-5-0-0-0-3-H
lime > KOH-free soda lime > activator-(KOH and NaOH)-free
soda lime.
HH
HH
Inhalation anaesthetic agents  75
Isoflurane
Halothane
CIF
E
日
H
C-Br
E
H
Sevoflurane
Further reading
H
Bovill JG (2008) Inhalation anaesthesia: from diethyl ether to
 xenon. Handbook of Experimental Pharmacology 182,
日
F3
121-142.
 Eckenhoff RG, Johansson JS (1999) On the relevance of clinically
Desflurane
relevant concentrations’ of inhaled anaesthetics in in vitro
 experiments. Anesthesiology 91, 856-860.
Matthews NS (2007) Inhalant anaesthetics. In: BSAVA Manual of
canine and feline anaesthesia and analgesia. 2"d Edn. Eds:
H
Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T. BSAVA Publications,
Gloucester, UK. Chapter 14, pp 150-165.
F
H
 Moens Y, De Moor A (1981) Diffusion of nitrous oxide into the
intestinal lumen of ponies during halothane-nitrous oxide
Methoxyflurane (no longer used in UK)
anesthesia. American Journal of Veterinary Research 42(10),
1751-1753.
H
  ()    (1 g  
applications of MAC. Anesthesiology 53,315-334.
H-C--C-
C-H
Stabernack CR, Brown R, Laster MJ, Dudziak R, Eger (II) EI
(2000) Absorbents differ enormously in their capacity to
H
produce compound A and carbon monoxide. Anesthesia and 
Halo-hydrocarbons
Analgesia 90, 1428-1435.
Chloroform
CI
H-C-CI
Self-test section
CI
1.
 Define MAC.
Which of the following statements about isoflurane is
.
Trichloroethylene (Trilene) (thymol was included as
true?
an antioxidant)
A.
Isoflurane sensitises the myocardium to the
arrhythmogenic effects of catecholamines.
CI
B.
 Isoflurane causes very little sensitisation of the
myocardium to the arrhythmogenic effects of
catecholamines.
H
C:
 Isoflurane causes cardiovascular depression/
 hypotension mainly by causing direct myocardial
depression.
Cyclopropane (explosive)
D.
 At equivalent MAC doses, isoflurane depresses
cardiac output more than halothane.
H
H
Anaesthetic breathing systems
Learning objectives
●Be familiar with the commonly used non-rebreathing and rebreathing systems.
●
 To determine the fresh gas flow required to prevent rebreathing of carbon dioxide-rich exhaled gases for the commonly used
non-rebreathing systems during spontaneous ventilation.
To discuss the factors affecting choice of anaesthetic breathing system.
To list the ways in which workplace pollution with anaesthetic gases can be reduced.
 Be familiar with the common problems associated with endotracheal tube use.
Introduction
Types of breathing systems
Anaesthetic breathing systems deliver oxygen and anaesthetic
With the above in mind, non-rebreathing systems are those
gases and vapours to the patient, and allow elimination of carbon
systems which use no chemical absorbent for COz removal, but
dioxide by means of one way valves, ‘washout, or chemical
instead depend upon a high fresh gas flow (entering the system
absorption. Anaesthetic breathing systems are broadly divided
from the anaesthetic machine), to flush out all the exhaled CO
from the system. Such systems are ^flow-controlled. There are
into:
also ‘valve-controlled’ systems, in which the exhaled gases are
● Non-rebreathing systems.
discharged to the atmosphere via a one way non-rebreathing
●Rebreathing systems.
valve, which is positioned close to the endotracheal tube connec-
tor/the patien's incisor arcade. Some resuscitation breathing
systems use these one way valves.
Rebreathing
Anaesthetic breathing systems have several classification
The clinical definition of rebreathing (Nunn) is that: Rebreathing
systems applied to them. For example, the Mapleson system for
 Occurs when the inspired gas/es reaching the alveoli contain more
non-rebreathing systems (A to F, according to their efficiency
carbon dioxide than can be accounted for by mere re-inhalation
with respect to the fresh gas flow necessary to prevent rebreathing
from/of the patient's dead space gas (which should contain
of CO2) and the Miller system, which describes the systems in
negligible carbon dioxide).
terms of the position of the bag: whether on the efferent or affer-
The concept of rebreathing has been subdefined as follows:
ent limb (i.e. ‘efferent reservoir system’ would describe the
Mapleson D system; afferent reservoir system' would describe the
● Total rebreathing: the simple re-inhalation of exhaled air,
Mapleson A system), or whether it could serve to store both fresh
which results in re-inhalation of COz-laden gas.
gases and expired gases (junctional reservoir system as used in
● Partial rebreathing: describes the possibility for some re-
some resuscitation systems). However, division into rebreathing
inhalation of exhaled breath from which the COz should
and non-rebreathing is the simplest classification and serves our
have been removed (either absorbed by soda lime, or flushed
 purposes well. The systems are then further subdivided into dif-
 out of the anaesthetic breathing system by the incoming fresh 
ferent 'models, but the ones we commonly use are listed below.
gas flow).
Common non-rebreathing systems:
● Complete rebreathing: where the whole of the exhaled breath
is available for re-inhalation, once the CO, has been absorbed
● T-piece (Mapleson E (without bag); Mapleson F (with bag)).
by soda lime.
● Bain (Mapleson D).
76
Anaesthetic breathing systems  77
Table 9.1 Yypes of breathing systems in the UK.
Table 9.2 Types of breathing systems in the USA.
In UK
Reservoir bag
 Rebreathing
Examples
In USA
Reservoir bag
Rebreathing  Examples
Open
ON
No
'Open drop' e.g. chloroform
Opern
No
ON
Ayre's T-piece (at correct, normal
mask
fresh gas flow)
Semi-open
No
No
Ayre's T-piece at correct
Semi-open
Yes
No
 Jackson Rees T-piece and Bain,
fresh gas flow
(at normal fresh gas flow)
 Partial
Ayre's T-piece at too low
ON
Magill and Lack (at higher than
fresh gas flow (some COz
normal fresh gas flows)
re-breathed)
Semi-closed  Yes
Partial
 Magill and Lack at normal fresh 
Semi-closed
Yes
No
Jackson Rees T-piece, Bain
gas flows
without CO2
at normal fresh gas flows
 Partial
Jackson Rees T-piece and Bain if
 absorption 
Partial
 J/R T-piece, Bain if too low
inadequate fresh gas flow
fresh gas flow (some COz
(some COz re-breathed)
re-breathed)
Closed
Yes
Complete
Magilland Lack at correct,
Circle, To and Fro (with CO2
Partial
absorbers used)
normal fresh gas flows
Semi-closed
Yes
Partial
Circle, To and Fro at high
with COz
fresh gas flows
High flow is the situation when FGF exceeds minute
 absorption
ventilation. Used for non-rebreathing systems in semi-open/
Closed
Yes
Complete
Circle, To and Fro at low
semi-closed mode.
fresh gas flows
 There is also some overlap between the use of terms, such that
low flow? and “closed’ are often used interchangeably; ^medium
flow can be used to mean 'semi-closed’ (in the USA and the UK);
● Magill (Mapleson A).
and “high flow can be used to mean 'semi-open' (in the USA) or
● Lack (Mapleson A).
'semi-closed' (in the UK).
Common rebreathing systems:
The correct method for determining if carbon dioxide rebreath-
ing is as follows (see also Chapter 18 on monitoring). Remember
● To and Fro.
that increased CO, will normally tend to stimulate ventilation.
· Circle.
Rebreathing occurs when:
● Inspired CO, increases by 1.5 mmHg; and/or
Terminology
● End tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO) tension increases by 5 mmHg
(or more) without any decrease in minute ventilation that
Other terms applied to anaesthetic breathing systems include
open, semi-open, semi-closed, closed and also low-flow,
could otherwise have caused this; and/or
● Minute ventilation increases by 10% (or more) without any
medium-flow and high-flow.
 In the UK, the term ^open? is used to describe the situation
 resultant decrease in ETCO, tension; and/or
● ETCO, tension increases by 2.3 mmHg (or more) and minute
where air can be entrained into the respiratory tract during inha-
lation, or even where the Oz supply is from the air (e.g. chloro-
ventilation increases by 5% (or more).
form mask). 'Semi-open? implies that some rebreathing is possible,
and again, ambient air can be entrained. ^Closed’ and ‘semi-
Fresh Gas Flow (FGF)
closed’ are applied to systems where no entrainment of ambient
 FGF refers to those gases that emerge from the common gas outlet
air is possible (Table 9.1). In the USA, there are slight differences
(CGO) of the anaesthetic machine. They usually consist of
of opinion as to the meanings of the terms open, 'semi-open,
 oxygen ± air ± nitrous oxide and may also pass through a vapor-
and ^semi-closed’ (Table 9.2) Although it is common to refer to
 iser to pick up’ volatile anaesthetic agent.
 gas flow rates, such an expression is an unnecessary repetition of
 Oxygen is historically administered at 33% of the inspired
words with the same meaning (in this case flow' and 'rate').
 mixture as a minimum. In humans under anaesthesia, due to
Low flow is the situation when O, flow rate equals the
 pulmonary atelectasis and ventilation perfusion mismatching, a
metabolic oxygen demand (i.e. around 4-10 ml/kg/min). It is
shunt of up to 10-15% of cardiac output may develop and in
used for rebreathing systems in closed mode (e.g. circles).
order to overcome the venous admixture (and therefore arterial
Medium flow is the situation when the fresh gas flow (FGF)
desaturation) that this causes, administration of c. 30% inspired
supplies more than the metabolic O, demand, but FGF is less
 oxygen is generally suffcient. This fgure of c. 30% inspired
than minute ventilation. Used for rebreathing systems (circles,
 oxygen has therefore been borrowed from humans. Note, in
To and Fro), in semi-closed (rather than closed) mode. Can be
horses where shunts of >20-30% of cardiac output may develop,
used for non-rebreathing systems in semi-closed mode, but care
even 100% inspired oxygen may be insufficient to overcome the
must be taken to avoid excessive rebreathing.
ensuing desaturation.
78  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 In non-rebreathing systems, the nitrous oxide:oxygen ratio
 Factors to consider when choosing
can be 2: 1. In rebreathing systems, where there is more danger
 a breathing system
of supplying insuffcient oxygen to the patient, nitrous oxide
is either omitted (this is the safest thing to do if you have
● Patient size and respiratory capability; consider the resistance
minimal monitoring), or the nitrous oxide:oxygen ratio can
 offered by the system.
be 1:1.
● Mode of ventilation; spontaneous or IPPV.
● Requirement for economy of use of oxygen and anaesthetic
Minute ventilation
 gases and vapours.
Minute ventilation is usually estimated at around 200 ml/kg/min.
● Particularly if you want to use a circle, do you want to use
Although often an over-estimate, using this figure should mini-
vaporiser out of circuit (VOC) or vaporiser in circuit (VIC)?
mise the risk of rebreathing when calculating the fresh gas flows
● If you want to use low flow in a rebreathing system, are your
req uired with non-rebreathing systems.
flowmeters and vaporisers sufficiently accurate at these low
Minute ventilation, or minute respiratory volume, is the
flows?
volume of air moved into (or out of) the lungs in 1min. This
● It is ^usual’ to denitrogenate rebreathing systems at the start of
volume can be calculated as the product of tidal volume and
the anaesthetic.
breathing rate:
● Which inhalation agent/s do you want to use? NO, halothane,
 isoflurane, sevoflurane, desflurane (probably not yet xenon)?
 Minute ventilation = Tidal volume × Breathing rate
● Be careful with the use of NO in rebreathing systems; ideally
you should be able to measure the inspired oxygen
 The tidal volume is usually approximated to 10-20 ml/kg. The
concentration.
breathing rate will depend upon species and the presence of
● Expected length of procedure.
 disease,but can be approximated to 10-20 breaths/min.
● Requirement for heat and moisture preservation (may partly
 depend upon length of procedure and size of patient).
Minute ventilation =10-20 ml/kg X10-20 breaths/min
● Necessity for sterilisation of equipment after procedure (you
may wish to use a disposable breathing system).
MV =100-400 ml kg/min.
(Aaains qnoupeay ?'a Aroains jo uoneon) sep mo, ●
 because anaesthetic breathing systems may afect surgical access
Most texts, however, quote 200 ml/kg/min as the best mid-
range approximation, but minute ventilation will be higher in 
too.
● Ease of scavenging (e.g. where is pop-off valve located?).
panting animals.
The first part (about one-third) of exhaled breath consists of
dead space gases (which are now warm and moist,but have not
 Non-rebreathing systems
undergone any gaseous exchange); and the last part (about two-
Magill and Lack (Mapleson A)
thirds) is from the alveoli and therefore contains carbon dioxide
These function similarly; the Lack in its coaxial or parallel forms
(Figure 9.1).
is basically like a coaxial or parallel Magill.
Magill
The Magill system is shown in Figure 9.2. The corrugated tube
volume should be greater than the patient's tidal volume to ensure
Exhalation
no rebreathing. The length of the tube in a standard Magill system
. Dead space gas
is around 1.1 m. The valve increases the system's resistance, there-
fore it is not generally used for animals <10kg.
Aveolar gas (COz laden)
The characteristics of the Magill system are:
● Modest apparatus dead space.
● Simple design, easy to use.
● Easy to clean and sterilise.
Patient+
L
-Fresh Gas Flow
Fgure 9.1 Exhaled gases.
Hgure 9.2 A Magill system.
Anaesthetic breathing systems  79
● Modest circuit drag' (heavy valve near animal's mouth).
bulky patient end in the coaxial form too (inner tube is for 
● Can be easily scavenged from, but scavenging tubing increases
exhalation, so must be relatively large diameter to reduce
 nm,
resistance; therefore outer tube is even bigger).
● Cumbersome for head/dental surgery.
● Beware prolonged IPPV; must increase FGF to about 2 times
● Not ideal for prolonged IPPV because rebreathing is encour-
minute ventilation, and allow long end-expiratory pauses to
aged; unless the FGF is increased to 2 times minute ventilation
 prevent rebreathing. (It is best to monitor ETCO, if IPPV is 
(i.e. doubled), adequate end-expiratory pauses are allowed, and
necessary for more than the occasional breath).
nifty operation of the pop-off valve is carried out.
● To test the intactness of the inner tube in the coaxial Lack:
● Generally used for animals >10 kg and up to around 80 kg.
 insert, as snugly as possible, the tip of an endotracheal tube into
● FGF need only be 1 (-2) times minute ventilation during
 the patient end of the inner (expiratory) tube; close the pop-off
spontaneous breathing in order to prevent rebreathing of
valve (which is located at the far? end of this expiratory limb),
CO,. Animals which pant or have high breathing rates have a
and then attempt to blow down the endotracheal tube. If the
higher minute ventilation and may also require a relatively
inner tube is intact, there should be resistance to your exhala-
higher FGF to prevent rebreathing because of the shortened
tion, and the bag (on the inspiratory limb), should not move.
end-expiratory pause.
 If there is any bag movement, then there is probably a leak in
● Quite an efficient system, conserving some of the dead space 
the inner tube.
 gases (warm and moist) for re-use.
Mini Lack
Lack
 Burton's now produce a mini parallel Lack, which can be used in
Figure 9.3 shows the coaxial Lack system and Figure 9.4 the paral-
patients down to about 2-3kg. This system is supplied with an
lel Lack system.
extremely low resistance valve and smooth bore tubing (to reduce
The characteristics of the Lack system are:
resistance to breathing), and the tubing is also narrower, with a
special Y piece with a small septum/shelf in it,to reduce apparatus
● Very similar to the Magill, so FGF should be l (-2) times
 dead space. The narrower tubing also reduces some of the inevi-
minute ventilation. This system is possibly slightly more
efficient than the Magill for spontaneous breathing, so FGF
table mixing of gases, thus reducing the potential for rebreathing
need only be about 0.8 times minute ventilation, but FGF
 n p s q o s p snn
inertia and therefore resistance of the system.
 ao s r  i os  a n a
with relatively smaller FGF. Also animals which pant or have
Movement of gases within the Magill system during
high breathing rates may require higher FGF to prevent
spontaneous breathing
rebreathing.
Figure 9.5 shows how rebreathing of carbon dioxide is avoided
s a ssa er nie q sds 
● Resistance seems to be less (especially the parallel from), than
tion during early inspiration when some dead space gases from
 that of the Magill,perhaps because two-way gas flow down one 
the previous exhalation are inhaled. Figure 9.5b depicts the situ-
tube does not occur to any great extent.
ation during late inspiration. Figure 9.5c shows the situation
● Slightly less circuit drag (valve away from animal's head),
during early exhalation. Towards the end of exhalation and during
although there is a Y piece in the parallel version, and a more 
the end-expiratory pause, most of the COz-laden exhaled gas is
pushed out through the valve, i.e. the pop-off' valve is ^popped
open’ when the pressure in the system builds up again as FGF
 continues to fill the bag and then the tubing (Figures 9.5d and
<L
9.5e).
Patient
Fresh Gas Flow
 Movement of gases within the Magill system
during IPPV
During IPPV there is a risk of causing the patient to rebreathe
carbon dioxide. Imagine we are at the start of ventilating the
Figure 9.3 The coaxial Lack system.
patient's lungs, and the system is full of fresh gases from the
anaesthetic machine. In order to get a reasonable chest inflation,
we have to close the pop-off valve. Now we can squeeze the bag
<<<<<>><<>>>
(but we all tend to be a bit over-zealous) so a lot of gas enters the
Patient+
-Fresh GasFlow
patient, and we can appreciably empty the reservoir bag (Figure
<>><<<><<<<<
9.6a). We now let the patient's chest deflate, i.e. let the patient
exhale (we need to open the valve again too). The bag was so
empty that both the exhaled gases from the patient and the fresh
gases from the anaesthetic machine can enter the reservoir bag
Figure 9.4 The parallel form of the Lack system.
(Figure 9.6b).
80  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Early
-Fresh Gas Flow
 Pop off valve is closed 
 inspiration 
First positive
Fresh Gas Flow
pressure
inspiration
(a)
Alveolar (end tidal) gas
 Dead space gas from
from previous exhalation 
previous exhalation
Exhalation
+
-Fresh Gas Flow
(a)
(high COz content)
(b)
Late
>>>>
Fresh Gas Flow
Valve “pops open”
 inspiration
End 
FreshGasFlow
expiratory
pause
(b)
 Note how bag empties a little 
(c)
Early
—Fresh Gas Flow
expiration
pressure
Fresh Gas Flow
inspiration
 FGF continues and is 
 mainly responsible for refilling bag
(d)
(c)
 Pop off valve is closed
Valve‘pops open’
Fresh Gas Flow
'inspirations'
Late
Fresh Gas Flow
expiration
(a)
(d)
Fgure 9.6 Movement of gases within the Magill system during IPPV.
 Further alveolar gas is vented 
End 
expiratory
Fresh Gas Flow
 see how the patient is forced to rebreathe much of its previously
pause
exhaled, and COz-laden, gases. Therefore the Magill, and Lack
(because it works in a similar fashion), are not very good for
(e)
prolonged IPPV (Figure 9.6e).
Figure 9.5 Movement of gases within the Magill system during spontane-
However, if we:
ous breathing.
● Increase the FGF (to c. 2 times minute ventilation (compared
with 1 times minute ventilation for spontaneous breathing);
and
After the first breath by IPPV, the FGF will purge much of the
● Remember to allow a long end-expiratory pause (i.e. do not
CO-laden gas from the tubing and out through the valve (if we
ventilate too rapidly; we should not need to ventilate too rapidly
remembered to open it again, and if we leave a long-ish end-
anyway, because we more than compensate for a slow rate by
expiratory pause). However, the tubing tends not to be fully
tending to give a larger tidal volume). This allows a long time
purged of COz-laden gas between breaths, because it takes more
for FGF to purge the tubing of CO and further dilute what is
a i oi a i i os   o, a li 0 
in the bag.
breathing system pressure at which the valve pops open. Some
FGF, however, does enter the bag to dilute the CO within it
Then there is less potential for causing rebreathing. So, it is
 somewhat. The situation during the end-expiratory pause is
q 'ddi puod ao ioy yoet pue e a asn o aqisso
shown in Figure 9.6c. Now imagine it is time for another inspira-
you must heed these rules. It also helps if you monitor with cap-
tion. We need to close the pop-off valve again, and squeeze the
nography, as this will tell you whether the amount of inspired CO2
bag again, but this time the tube and bag contain some CO2
 is increasing from the normal negligible amount.
(Figure 9.6d). Imagine that we now give several more breaths by
The T-piece
IPPV. Breath by breath (of IPPV), as the patient's alveolar gas
(CO-laden end tidal gas) continues to reach the reservoir bag.
The original design (Ayre's T-piece), consisted of a T-shaped con-
the concentration of CO in the reservoir bag increases. Also the
 nector attached to a length of tube, and also to a fresh gas supply
tube is incompletely purged of COz-laden gas, especially if we
hose (which connects to the common gas outlet on the anaesthetic
allow only a relatively short end-expiratory pause. We can now
machine) (Figure 9.7).
Anaesthetic breathing systems
81
Patient 
nspiration
Aveolar gas from
Fresh Gas Flow
previous
(a)
exhalation
Fresh Gas Flow
Figure 9.7 Ayre's T-piece (Mapleson E).
Late inspiration
(q)
Fresh Gas Flow
Patient 
Early expiration
Fresh Gas Flow
Figure 9.8 Jackson Rees modification of Ayre's T-piece (Mapleson F).
Fresh Gas Flow
Dead space gas
(c)
The volume of the corrugated limb should be greater than the
 patient's tidal volume, or else outside air will be entrained during
inspiration, and will dilute the O/NO and anaesthetic vapour
Late expiration 
being delivered to the patient. Normally the fresh gas flow (FGF),
is at right angles to the direction of gas flowing into and out of
the patient, but other configurations are possible (see later).
(p)
Fresh Gas Flow
 -n aq ao ues s sd au 'snd- say a sn 
lated (ie IPPV can be applied), by intermittent oclusion of the
open end of the expiratory limb until the chest inflates, and then
 End expiratory pause
releasing the occlusion to allow exhalation, none of which allows 
for a very good pattern of ventilation (ie inflation tends to be too
slow). The Jackson Rees modification of the Ayre's T-piece, in
which an open-ended bag is placed at the end of the expiratory
(e)
Fresh Gas Flow
limb, allows much easier application of IPPV, because the open
Figure 9.9 Movement of gases within a T-piece during spontaneous
end of the bag can be occluded, and once the bag has filled suf-
 breathing.
ficiently, it can be squeezed gently to create a much better (more
rapid, more physiological) lung inflation (Figure 9.8). Squeezing
the bag allows some assessment of the compliance of the lungs
deflate completely, because complete deflation increases the
too. Bag movements can also be observed during spontaneous
ventilation to allow some assessment of the patient's spontaneous
 resistance to exhalation.
breathing.
● Simple design; easy to use.
● Easy to clean and sterilise.
● Cheap disposable versions available.
Characteristics of T-pieces
● Modest drag' because two (small) tubes are near the patient's
● Minimal apparatus dead space: apparatus (or mechanical)
mouth.
 dead space is defined as an extension of the patient's own ana-
● Can apply prolonged IPPV (J/R modification best).
tomical dead space. Anatomical dead space is the volume of the
● Used for animals <l0 kg.
respiratory tree where no gas exchange occurs, i.e. the upper
● FGF needs to be 24 times minute ventilation to ensure no
respiratory tract from the nares down to the respiratory bron-
 rebreathing. If the animal is panting, there may be insufficient
chioles; but gases are still warmed and humidified. Apparatus
time for the FGF to purge the system of CO between breaths,
dead space is recognised as the volume within the anaesthetic
s0 you may need to increase the FGF further.
breathing system, between the incisor arcade and that part of
● Not easy to scavenge from open ended bag without kinking
the anaesthetic breathing system where the inspired and expired
the bag neck or outlet, and risking a build up of gases, and
gas streams divide.
subsequent volutrauma to the lungs.
● Low resistance, especially in the Ayre's T-piece form. Once a
 bag is added, the resistance of the system may be increased
How a T-piece works
slightly. To minimise this, a small ^cage^ is often placed in the
The movement of gases within a T-piece during spontaneous
neck of the bag, which ensures that the bag cannot flatten or
breathing is shown in Figure 9.9.
82  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Patient 
End expiratory pause
(a)
Fresh Gas Flow
Fresh Gas Flow
 Functional
apparatus
Figure 9.10 Modification at patient connector (Y piece).
dead space
Fresh Gas Flow
End expiratory pause 
(b)
Fresh Gas Flow
jeujbuo ayn (e) 4m laneai6 s! aneds peap smeiedde leuopouny zl'6 ainby
T-piece configuration than (b) the Y-piece configuration.
Patient
><>L
Figure 9.11 Cape Town arrangement.
Patient *
Fresh Gas Flow
Fgure 9.13 Mapleson D system.
T-piece modifications
The Y piece
The Y piece allows the fresh gas inlet to be angled towards the
Patient
 patient (Figure 9.10). This increases the resistance to exhalation
Fresh Gas Flow
(because exhalation is directly into the face of the oncoming FGF),
and adds a slight positive pressure to inhalation, assisting inhala-
tion. This continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is favoured
in many human neonatal clinics because it reduces the tendency
Fgure 9.14 Modified Bain system.
of the neonatal lungs to collapse. The Y piece also reduces the
functional apparatus dead space slightly, by a flushing effect
efficiency. The (modifed) Bain has the added bag and pop-off
(during the end-expiratory pause), when fresh gases are still
valve, and it still functions like a T-piece (Figure 9.14). The fresh
flowing (see below). Minimising the dead space minimises the risk
of rebreathing.
gas inflow is through the inner tube in a Bain.
 The addition of valves usually adds resistance to a system,
The Cape Town arrangement
d   i e a n re n s 
This design brings the FGF entry point as close to the patient's
during breathing, which usually means more of a problem for
 smaller patients.
mouth as possible, thus minimising apparatus dead space (which
 The volume of the corrugated tube and bag should be greater
minimises the potential for rebreathing), and also provides CPAP
than the tidal volume of the patient. Bain (modifed Bain) systems
(Figure 9.11).
are available in three lengths: 1.8, 2.7 and 5.4 m. The longer the
tube, the more the resistance to gas flows. However, animals
aeds peap sneiedde jeuooung pue areds peap sneieday
>10 kg and up to about 80 kg can usually cope with these systems.
Functional apparatus dead space is greater with the original
   d s  si  
T-piece configuration (Figure 9.12a) than with the Y-piece con-
ments, and the relatively narrow tubing creates a higher resistance
figuration (Figure 9.12b).
under these circumstances; also the very high fresh gas flows
required for these large animals cause some of the COz-laden
Mapleson D system
 exhaled gases to be 'sucked’back towards the patient (the Venturi
 One anaesthetic breathing system often sold as a T-piece can be
 effect) to cause some rebreathing. Other possible problems for
thought of as a miniature parallel modified Bain, but its true clas-
very large patients are that: some flowmeters do not provide high
sification is as a Mapleson D system (Figure 9.13). It can be used
 enough flows for larger animals, especially if using only oxygen
in animals between about 3kg and 10kg because it has a low
 and not Oz/NO mixtures; and at very high FGF (e.g. >15 l/min),
resistance valve and small bore corrugated tubing.
most vaporisers no longer deliver the concentration dialled up.
 The characteristics of the modifed Bain system are:
Bain (Mapleson D) system
The original Bain (unmodifed version), had no bag or valve. It is
● Relatively low resistance (but greater than the T-piece).
like a giant co-axial Ayre's T-piece, and functions with similar
● Minimal apparatus dead space.
Anaesthetic breathing systems  83
● Fairly simple design, but beware disconnection or leakage of
Disadvantages
inner tube which facilitates rebreathing. Test the intactness of
● Poor economy because high FGF wastes lots of Oz and NO;
the inner tube by attaching the system to the common gas
and high FGF also leads to high consumption of volatile inhala-
outlet of the anaesthetic machine; then turn on say 2l/min O2
flow. Now occlude the patient end of the inner tube with a pen
tion agent, therefore much wastage.
● Must scavenge (lots of 'waste gases to dispose of).
 or pencil, and watch the O flowmeter bobbin; it should fall.
● Consider mode of ventilation (spontaneous versus IPPV;
If it does not, the inner fresh gas delivery tube is broken or
remember problems associated with IPPV with Magill and
disconnected. An alternative test is the Pethick test: use oxygen
Lack).
(either turn on the oxygen flow or use the oxygen flush facility)
so as tofllthe system, especially thebag; then, with the patient
● The loss of rebreathable humidifed and warmed gases with
most systems promotes hypothermia and dehydration, espe-
end unoccluded, activate the oxygen flush valve. If the inner
cially in small patients; and results in reduced function of the
a ra a y mo x isy an  si a
should produce a Venturi effect at the patient end which draws
respiratory mucociliary escalator, with increased potential for
gases from the outer tube and bag, so the bag should deflate. If
obstruction of the airways with drying secretions.
● High gas flows also increase the risk of barotrauma/volutrauma
the bag does not deflate, or even inflates, then the inner tube is
to the lungs (causing pneumothorax), should there be an
not intact. Of both these tests, the inner tube occlusion test
 obstruction to the anaesthetic breathing system outflow.
 seems to be most sensitive and most preferred.
● Minimal circuit drag.
● Easy to scavenge.
Heat and moisture exchangers (HMEs)
 HMEs are available which help conserve the warmth and humid-
● Disposable versions available.
 ity of exhaled gases. These are often used with non-rebreathing
● Can be used for prolonged IPPV.
systems, and in small patients undergoing long procedures. It may
08-0z oi dn ue 0r< sewue 1oy pasn o
● FGF needs to be 2-4 times minute ventilation to prevent
take up to 10-20min of continued use for HMEs to reach their
 best performance. HMEs usually add little in the way of resistance,
rebreathing during spontaneous breathing. Panting animals
although they may add some apparatus dead space depending
may require higher FGF.
upon the size used, but they are available in several sizes to suit
● FGF can be reduced to nearer 1 times minute ventilation for
different patient sizes.
 IPPV if you aim to hyper-ventilate slightly (and thus blow off 
a bit too much CO2), because this hyperventilation potentially
Bag terminology
causes hypocapnia/respiratory alkalosis which is then ^offset by
 The term reservoir bag is usually used for the bag in any breathing
the CO, rebreathing that follows the reduction in FGF This is
system where none of the patient's exhaled gases ever pass back
called deliberate functional rebreathing; or you aim to provide
into the bag. Strictly this means only the bags in the Mapleson A
IPPV with a largeish tidal volume and with a relatively slower
systems (e.g. the Magill and Lack) where the bag is on the inspira-
rate, so the extra long end-expiratory pause allows FGF to
tory limb, but beware IPPV with these systems. However, some
purge the system of CO-laden gases. However, it is advisable
people include the bags in the Jackson Rees modifed Ayre's
● Inhaled fresh gases are thought to be warmed slightly by heat
 T-piece and Bain systems, saying that if none of the exhaled gases
 transfer from the warm exhaled gases in the surrounding
are actually rebreathed by the animal (i.e. they should all be
flushed far enough downstream by the FGF) then the bags act only
tube (counter current system).
 as reservoir bags.
 The term rebreathing bag is used for the bag in any breathing
Non-rebreathing systems compared with
system where the patient's exhaled gases can/do pass into the bag.
rebreathing systems
Therefore this is strictly the correct term for the bags in the
Advantages
Jackson Rees modifed Ayre's T-piece, the Bain and also the
rebreathing systems like the Waters? To and Fro and the circle.
● Simple construction; easy to use; generally easy to clean.
● No soda lime necesary (cheaper? (but use higher gas flows);
The chosen bag should be of such a size that the capacity to
which it may be easily distended must exceed the patient's tidal
less resistance).
volume. Although larger bags are safer (they more easily absorb
● Minimal apparatus dead space.
● Make the best use of precision vaporisers (ie. the inspired
 pressure increases), they increase the time constant in rebreathing
systems (i.e. they slow down the rate of change of anaesthetic
vapour concentration should be that which is dialled up on the
 agent concentration when the vaporiser setting is altered).
vaporiser).
● Lowish resistance (especially systems without valves; none have
soda lime).
Hybrid systems
● No need for denitrogenation of the system.
● Can use NO safely.
The Humphrey ADE system and circle
● Cheap disposable versions available.
Some of you may come across this system in practice. It is one?
● Can scavenge easily from most of the systems.
system that by switching the position of a lever, the bag, and
84  Veterinary Anaesthesia
adding a soda lime canister with inspiratory and expiratory valves,
(a) Valve 'open'
can be converted between:
When the pressure within the breathing system
reaches 0.5-1 cm HzO pressure, the valve disc 
● A Magill/Lack type system (the Mapleson A) for effcient spon-
 (attached to a stem) pops off' its knife-edge
tanecus breathing.
 seating, allowing gases to escape 
● A Bain/T-piece type system (Mapleson D/E) for most efficient
IPPV.
(b) Valve 'closed'
● A circle with soda lime absorber.
When the valve is screwed shut, the spring 
tightens and prevents the valve disc from lifting
The system used to be available in coaxial and parallel forms,
 off its seating. Modern valves tend to have a
but now is marketed most commonly in the parallel form. In the
 safety pressure release feature whereby they
A configuration it acts just like a parallel Lack; in the D/E configu-
 can open at pressures ≥60 cm HzO 
ration it acts like a Bain/T-piece and is designed to allow IPPV in 
this mode. Therefore you can switch between A (spontaneous
Fgure 9.15 valves in (a) the open and (b) the closed position.
breathing) and D/E configurations (IPPV) without changing the
FGF, because the effciency of the Mapleson A system for sponta-
Pop-off or APL (adjustable pressure limiting) valves
 neous breathing equals that of the Mapleson D system for IPPV.
A valve may be partly or fully open (Figure 9.15a). The valve
A soda lime canister can be added, which incorporates inspiratory
and expiratory valves, so converting the system into a circle. The
the valve is, variable tension is applied to a spring which acts on
system requires a lot of maintenance and regular servicing and
the valve disc. Now, when pressure within the system builds up
replacement of all its moving parts, but it is a very neat piece of
 engineering. It is supplied with narrow smooth bore hoses, and a
and reaches the set pop-off pressure (determined by how tightly
low resistance pop-off valve. It can be used for any patient size by
the spring holds the disc down onto the seating), then the valve
leaflet lifts from the seating, and gases can escape, ideally into the
choosing the configuration most appropriate for the patient's size
 scavenging system. When the valve is closed (Figure 9.15b), the
and needs. It can be used for patients down to 2-3 kg in the A and
valve leaflet is held tight against the valve seating by the spring.
D/E modes.
 m snsd  ra a sa p i 
system could not open the valve. However, modern valves now
do have a safety relief at higher pressures (usually c. 60 cmHO).
 Rebreathing systems
Anaesthetic agent concentration
These include a canister containing soda lime which absorbs
With rebreathing systems, because each new inhaled breath is not
carbon dioxide from the gases in the system. They also tend to be
mostly fresh gases, as delivered from the anaesthetic machine
used with FGF rates less than the patient's minute ventilation; but
(therefore different to non-rebreathing systems), it is difficult to
for the first 20 min or so of their use, the FGF is often higher. This
know exactly what concentrations of oxygen, nitrous oxide and
allows the system (and the patient's lung functional residual
inhalation agent the animal does inspire with each breath, because
capacity (FRC), to be purged of air (78% nitrogen), and allows
the incoming FGF from the anaesthetic machine is diluted by
a quicker increase in oxygen and anaesthetic vapour concentra-
exhaled gases and the other gases within the system (e.g. air at the
tion to build up in the system. This nitrogen washout' or deni-
start of the anaesthetic, unless the system is first flushed with fresh
 trogenation' also reduces the chance of delivering an oxygen-poor
gases? from the anaesthetic machine).
gas mixture to the patient, for example nitrogen can dilute out
the gases that you are delivering to the breathing system from the
Time constants
anaesthetic machine. After this initial denitrogenation phase, the
 The rate of change of anaesthetic agent concentration in rebreath-
FGF can be reduced so that the ^pop off valve' (a safety release
valve should the pressure of gases within the system exceed safe?
ing systems is proportional to the fresh gas inflow from the anaes-
thetic machine, and inversely proportional to the volume of the
levels), should not need to vent gases (and could even be closed)
if the oxygen and anaesthetic inflows are reduced to become
system.
exactly equivalent to the patient's uptake; all exhaled carbon
Volume of breathing system
dioxide being absorbed.
Time constant of the system =
 Because the patient's oxygen and anaesthetic demands can
Fresh gas inflow
vary from minute to minute (oxygen demand is normally
If we change the vaporiser setting (in order to change the anaes-
410ml/kg/min; but depends on factors such as patient size,
thetic concentration in the system):
metabolic rate, temperature, depth of anaesthesia), it is very dif-
ficult to perform true ^closed system’ anaesthesia. Instead, we
● After one time constant, the change in anaesthetic agent con-
tend to supply a little extra oxygen and anaesthetic, and allow the
centration in the system can be expected to be 63.2%
complete.
fore left open'; we tend to use these systems in ^semi-closed'
● After two time constants, the change is 86.7% complete.
mode.
● After three time constants, the change is 95% complete.
Anaesthetic breathing systems  85
● After four time constants, the change is 98.1% complete.
octahydrate (i.e. it has its own water of crystallisation; the water
● After five time constants, the change is 99.33% complete.
content is about 11-16%). Some brands exclude the activators?
From this, you will see that if you want a more rapid change
No hardeners are necessary. The indicator dye changes from
pink to a blue/grey colour with exhaustion of the granules. The
(increase or decrease) in anaesthetic concentration in the system,
reactions between COz and baralyme can be summarised as
you will have to increase the FGF, and/or change (increase or
follows:
 decrease) the dial setting on the vaporiser by more than what you
actually want to achieve, but then you must remember not to
Ba (OH),*8HO +CO2 →BaCO + 9HO+ Heat
leave it like this for too long or you could end up delivering too
much or too little anaesthetic agent to your patient.
9H,O+9CO,→ 9H,CO
 If you need to reduce the anaesthetic agent concentration
9HCO, +9Ca (OH), → 9CaCO, +18HO+ Heat
within the system rapidly, the bag can be ^dumped’ (i.e. emptied 
by expressing its contents out through the pop-off valve rather
1 kg baralyme absorbs around 270 litres of carbon dioxide
than into the patient's lungs), the vaporiser switched off, and the
oxygen flush button activated to fll the system with oxygen (and/
 The optimum granule size for all absorbents is about 1.5-5 mm
or the oxygen flowmeter turned up, but this may be too slow to
diameter. Soda lime is often sold according to 'mesh size'; this is
refill the system quickly enough for the patient's next breath). The
 the number of holes per square inch of the mesh. In the UK, the 
bag often requires dumping more than once because even with
common mesh size is 3-10; in the USA, the common mesh size
the vaporiser switched off, the exhaled gases from the patient will
is 48.
 a  p  e  s 
 The absorber canister should be large enough to contain an
flush' valve bypasses the vaporiser).
air space between granules that is the same size or greater than
 the maximum tidal volume of the patient.
When standard absorbent (mesh size 4-8ish) is used, the
Soda lime
inter-granular space constitutes about 50% of the canister's
Classically consists of 80+% calcium hydroxide, with sodium
volume. This means that ideally the canister should have a
hydroxide and/or potassium hydroxide as 'activators', kieselguhr
volume ≥2 times maximum tidal volume. However, we usually
or silica as “hardeners', 14-20% added water (to help the reac-
have canisters with volumes around twice normal/resting tidal
tions get going), and a pH indicator dye. The two common dyes
are ethyl violet, where the granules begin white and change
volume.
Soda lime is caustic, so you should take suitable precautions
colour to purple as they are exhausted; and Clayton yellow, where
when handling it. According to health and safety rules, you should
the granules start off bright pink, and turn white as they are
wear gloves, goggles and a mask. It will cause crazing of the
exhausted. After the end of an anaesthetic, some granules may
perspex canisters, and can add to the corrosion of breathing
change colour back to their starting colour, which might confuse
system components which occurs, which is also facilitated by
you. This is because active chemicals from the centre of the gran-
some breakdown products of some of the inhalation agents, such
ules can diffuse to the surface again resulting in some rejuvenation
as hydrofluoric acid which is a degradation product of halothane
of the soda lime. However, because the amount of useful soda
lime is much reduced,the soda lime very quickly changes colour
(despite its 'stabiliser' thymol).
back to its éexhausted’ colour at the next use. Exhausted ('spent')
To and Fro (often called Waters' To and Fro)
soda lime granules are softer and chalkier than fresh granules. The
Figure 9.16 shows a Waters To and Fro. The pop-off valve may
reactions which occur between carbon dioxide and soda lime can
alternatively be situated between the canister and the bag. The
be summarised as follows:
continually reversing gas flow creates resistance due to inertia,
and the soda lime and valve also add to the resistance to breath-
CO+HO→HCO,
ing offered by this system. A To and Fro system is usually used
HCO, + 2NaOH →NaCO, + 2H,O+HEAT
for animals >10-15 kg. The canister capacity and rebreathing bag
capacity determine the maximum size of patient. Rebreathing
NaCO, +Ca (OH), →CaCO, (chalk)+ 2NaOH
bags should have a capacity of 2-6 times the minimum/resting
Note that the activator is regenerated, and that heat and water
tidal volume.
are produced. This reaction is exothermic, and the soda lime
canister will feel warm when CO absorption is taking place. Large
animal (e.g. horse) canisters are often made of metal to help heat-
dissipation as otherwise the patients may sometimes become
> Patient
hyperthermic. 1 kg of soda lime is said to be able to absorb 250
litres of carbon dioxide
You may also hear of other types of CO absorbents (see
Fresh GasFlow
Chapter 8 on inhalation agents). One of these is baralyme. This
consists of 80% calcium hydroxide, and 20% barium hydroxide
Figure 9.16 To and Fro.
86  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Problems with horizontal canisters, as with the Waters'
ical bronchitis. To reduce this problem, many people place a piece
To and Fro system
of fine material, usually muslin, at the end of the canister nearest
No matter how well you think you fill the canister, the granules
to the patient, to filter out some of the dust, but without increas-
always ^settle' with time, so that a small channel, empty of gran-
ing the resistance of the system.
ules, forms at the upper side of the canister (Figure 9.17a). Gases
Although these canisters can be placed vertically, this is very
passing backwards and forwards to and from the patient will take
 difficult to achieve whilst maintaining the minimum tube length
the path of least resistance, and so will follow any channels because
 between patient and canister. Vertical canisters are much more
the path is unhindered by granules. Unfortunately this means that
easily employed in circle systems.
the gases do not contact so many of the granules, and so CO
absorption is very poor. The patient is then forced to breathe gases
Circle systems
with a high carbon dioxide content.
The word 'circuit strictly only applies to circle systems, because
 If you manage to pack the canister well, and avoid too much
of the circuitous flow of gases around the system (Figure 9.18).
channelling, then you will see that the soda lime becomes
sd pea e u odns alenn are sis s eos
exhausted at the end of the canister nearest the patient first 
to reduce the problems of channelling. The canister height:width
because this is where the exhaled CO, frst meets active soda lime
ratio should ideally be 1:1. Usually canisters are not filled right
granules (Figure 9.17b). As the granules become exhausted, the
to the top so that gases entering at the top of the canister can slow
face of active soda lime moves further and further away from the
 down. This decreases their turbulence, and therefore keeps the
patient, so more and more of the exhaled gases do not reach active
circuit resistance to a minimum, whilst at the same time increas-
soda lime. This effectivelyincreases the dead space of the system,
ing the contact time between the gases and the granules, so
and can lead to rebreathing of carbon dioxide.
improving CO, absorption efciency.
 You can also see why there must be only a short tube between
Within the canister, the lowest resistance to gas flow is along
the patient and the soda lime canister - to reduce the initial dead
the walls of the canister, because one side of the passage is the
space of the system to a minimum. Because the patient's end tidal
relatively smooth interior surface of the canister wall. This results
gases should reach/interact with active soda lime, we need to keep
in a sort of channelling of gas flow; so in order to minimise this,
the length of tubing between the patient and the canister as short 
 annular rings (baffes) are often placed within the canister, to try
as possible to keep the apparatus dead space as small as possible.
to encourage (redirect) gases to flow more through the centre of
This means that the canister must be close to the mouth, which
the canister, where the gas flow comes into contact with granules
is very cumbersome, especially for dental or oral surgery.
 on all sides.
The other problem with this proximity of patient and canister
is that because soda lime granules are quite dusty, the dust is
The one-way inspiratory and expiratory valves may be housed
 in the Y piece, OR they can be moved further away from the
easily inhaled by the patient over this short distance. The dust is
patient. You may see them located on the soda lime canister as
quite irritant to the tracheobronchial tree, and can cause a chem-
turret valves in some horse circle systems. However, for
maximum effciency, they should be in the Y piece. For ease of
construction, the pop-off valve is usually placed nearer the bag
'Channelling'
and canister than shown in Figure 9.18, but this position means
that the efficiency of the system is slightly reduced.
The one way valves (inspiratory and expiratory) which help to
Patient
maintain the unidirectional/circular flow of gases around the
'circle', and the soda lime granules, do add extra resistance to
breathing, and so circles are normally used for animals >l5kg.
(a)
Fresh Gas Flow
However, modern valves can be made of extremely light weight
materials, and the resistance they offer is much less than tradi-
tional valves, so that some makes of circles can be used on patients
Exhausted soda lime
e  a s i  e n 
scaled (small) soda lime canisters with smaller bore tubing which
may even be smooth-bore too). These paediatric circles also tend
→Patient
 i os d   e a  sid a is a o
mechanical dead space is minimised, and therefore rebreathing of
 CO-laden gas is minimised.
Fresh Gas Flow
There are many different designs for circles, but for best eff-
 Soda lime exhausts in direction 
ciency a few rules should be followed:
(b)
 of thick black arrow
● The rebreathing bag and the patient should be on opposite sides
Figure 9.17 Problems with horizontal canisters. (a) A small channel, empty
 of the one-way (inspiratory and expiratory) valves.
of granules, may form at the upper side of the canister. (b) The soda lime
● The FGF entry point should not be between the patient and the 
 becomes exhausted at the end of the canister nearest the patient first.
expiratory valve.
Anaesthetic breathing systems  87
Expiratory
 Soda lime
one-way valve
> Patient
 canister
Inspiratory
one-way valve
Y piece =
patient
connector
housing the
one-way
valves
Fresh Gas Flow
Figure 9.18 Circle system.
● The ^pop-off' valve should not be between the patient and the
Inspiratory valve
Expiratory valve
inspiratory valve.
● The rebreathing bag is best positioned between the FGF inlet
Patient 
 and the inspiratory valve.
Fresh Gas Flow
The one-way inspiratory and expiratory valves may be ‘turret
valves and positioned at the soda lime canister; or they may be
rubber flap type valves and positioned within the Y piece. If they
are within the Y piece, the circle is more effcient, as it allows less
mixing of dead space and alveolar gases, which enables the pop-
Fgure 9.19 F circuit (first described by Dr Fukunaga from Japan).
off valve to be placed nearer the patient (even in the Y piece)
which allows more selective venting of alveolar (CO-laden) gas,
which prolongs the life of the soda lime. However, scavenging
contamination of liquid agent by condensed water vapour, which
 otherwise occurs readily if vaporisers are placed in the expiratory
from a pop-off valve housed within the Y piece adds to the circuit
drag.
limb, as exhaled gases are moist.
 The normal’ small animal (or human) circles can be used for
The universal F circuit
patients up to about 135 kg (possibly up to150kg), but for animals
 This system is basically a circle, but the inspiratory and expiratory
larger than this, a large animal circle is required. Sometimes the
tubes to and from the patient are within each other for a distance
size of the endotracheal tube determines which circle can be used,
(so it islike a coaxial circle) (Figure 9.19). There isless circuit drag
-o e ym s a nu u sqn s a s
ible with the Y pieces of larger circles.
(it is less bulky), at the patient end than with the conventional
circle. More heat conservation is possible (counter current
The circle described above is used when the vaporiser for the
exchange).
inhalation agent of choice is situated out of the circle itself (VOC,
vaporiser out of circle). However, there are several designs of
Rebreathing systems compared with
circles where a vaporiser can be incorporated into the circle (VIC,
non-rebreathing systems
vaporiser inside circle). These include the Komesaroff machine
and the Stephens circle. (See Chapter 10 for information on
Advantages
vaporisers.) In-circle vaporisers (low resistance, draw-over types),
● Rebreathing of respired gases, once the carbon dioxide has been
are usually placed in the inspiratory limb, which also reduces
removed, allows conservation of heat and moisture in the
88  Veterinary Anaesthesia
respired gases, which is also added to by the chemical reaction
value. It is calculated by circle volume/FGF. After two time con-
of carbon dioxide and the absorber (e.g. soda lime).
stants, 87% of the final concentration will have been reached; after
● Economical because relatively small quantities of oxygen and 
three time constants, 95%; after four time constants, 98% and
 anaesthetic gases and vapours are required.
after five time constants, 99% of the final concentration will have
ss n is d ss e   5e 
been reached. You need to allow at least three, and preferably five,
although much reduced requirement for scavenging if ^closed'
time constants for equilibration?
system use).
For example, a large animal circle may have a volume of about
● Can easily ventilate the patient's lungs.
601 (501 rebreathing bag, 5l soda lime canister, 51 hose volume),
so at a FGF of 5 l/min, when the vaporiser dial is turned from 2%
Disadvantages
to 3%, the time constant is 60/5 = 12 min. After one time constant
● Relatively high resistance offered by soda lime and one-way
(12 min), the in-circle concentration will reach 2.6% (and this is
valves.
with no patient attached to the circuit ^removing’ anaesthetic
● Bulky circle Y pieces increase circuit drag, as do bulky Waters?
agent concentration), and only after five time constants (60min)
willthe in-circle concentration be approaching 3%. To hasten the
canisters with short tubes to the patient's endotracheal tube in
the To and Fro.
rate of change of anaesthetic agent concentration in the circle, you
● Beware apparatus dead space. This increases during use with
can increase the FGF (and shorten the time constant), and/or you
the To and Fro system as soda lime is exhausted; and some old
an n un ao (m no dn) l sd n  1
 circles have relatively large dead space in the Y pieces.
need; but remember to turn it back (down or up) to what you
● Soda lime is expensive, and requires changing regularly.
really wanted before the anaesthetic agent concentration has
● Inhalation of soda lime dust is possible with To and Fro systems.
changed too much.
● Channelling of soda lime may also occur with To and Fro
 systems leading to inefficient carbon dioxide absorption.
Scavenging
● Circles are more complex and harder to clean than To and Fro
In 1989, the United Kingdom Control of Substances Hazardous
systems.
● Normally these systems (and patient's lung FRC) are denitro-
to Health (COSHH) Code of Practice was approved by the Health
genated (which takes some time) before attempting to use low
 and Safety Commission, under section 16 of the Health and Safety
flows, so are less useful for short procedures.
at work Act (1974). The COSHH regulations require an employer
● Can scavenge, but scavenging tubing increases the bulk and
to protect employees by:
circuit drag with the To and Fro system.
● Performing risk assessments for procedures requiring the use,
● Care must be taken if nitrous oxide is to be administered, as
storage and handling of chemicals.
this may build up in concentration in the system, resulting in
● Producing local rules, standard operating procedures and
contingency plans, of how to use, handle and store chemicals?
mixture to the patient.
with minimum risk; including how to prevent/control
● We do not know the inspired anaesthetic concentration, or the
exposure.
inspired oxygen and nitrous oxide concentrations, unless we 
● Providing control measures, including regular examination,
buy expensive equipment to measure them.
testing and servicing of equipment involved.
● When used in low flow mode, these systems make poor use
● Monitoring work place exposure regularly.
of expensive precision out-of-circuit vaporisers. Precision
● Providing information and training for employees.
vaporisers also have poorer accuracy when flow rates below
● Providing health surveillance.
0.25-0.5 l/min are used.
Inhalation anaesthetic agents are regulated by these COSHH
iser seting is altered, unless larger changes are made to the
guidelines. Occupational exposure standards (OESs) were set (in
vaporiser dial setting and FGF is also increased (see time con-
1996), for each agent, and are expressed as 8h time weighted aver-
stants, above and below).
ages (8h TWA):
● You must ensure minimal leaks from the system components
● Nitrous oxide = 100 ppm.
if you are trying to achieve true low flow anaesthesia.
●Halothane = 10ppm.
 aq  aaisxa a ae ss o p   a o
● Isoflurane = 50 ppm.
non-rebreathing systems, although cheaper disposable (and 
● Sevoflurane = 60 ppm.
 possibly re-usable) versions are now available.
● Beware using low flows on hot days, especially with To and Fro
In the USA and European countries other than the UK, these
 systems as the large heat source (soda lime canister) is nearer
limits tend to be lower, for example the limit for NO is 25 ppm
the patient and they may suffer heat stroke.
 and the limits for halothane and isoflurane are 2 ppm (and sug-
gested to be <0.5 ppm if NO is in use). In the USA, the National
Time constants
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), which was
A circle's time constant is the time for a step change in anaesthetic
set up under the Occupational Safety and Health Act (OSHA),
agent concentration within the circle to reach 63% of its final
is a federal agency responsible for prevention of work-related
Anaesthetic breathing systems  
68
injuries and illnesses and sets legally enforceable Occupational
For active scavenging systems (Figure 9.21), the bottom of the 
 Exposure Limits (OELs). To reduce exposure to these agents,
receiver is open to the air, and so if over- or under-pressure
we must therefore ‘remove’ waste anaesthetic gases from the
occurs, air/gases move through the open end; hence the term
workplace environment by 'scavenging*
air-brake.
 Halothane, isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane (halogenated
 compounds) can be adsorbed onto activated charcoal (which if
 Reducing exposure to anaesthetic gases in the work place
 heated will elaborate these agents back into the atmosphere).
● Reduce the number of inhalation/mask inductions of anaesthe-
Activated charcoal canisters are available (e.g. AldasorberrM); and
have minimal resistance, so can be used to scavenge from any
 sia performed.
● Use cuffed endotracheal tubes.
anaesthetic breathing system. The canisters weigh 1300g when
● Use more injectable agents.
'new, but must be discarded when they weigh 1400 g (i.e. when
● Use lower flows (rebreathing systems) where possible.
they are full). However, activated charcoal does not remove
● Regularly check anaesthetic breathing systems for leaks.
nitrous oxide. The only way of removing NzO from the operating
● Fill vaporisers with their key-fll devices to reduce spillage.
environment is to duct it away to the outside atmosphere, where
it is a greenhouse gas (and contributes to global warming); causes
● Fill vaporisers at the end of the day, and preferably in a fume
 cupboard or well ventilated area.
ozone depletion (it is degraded by ultraviolet light to reactive
● Make sure the scavenging devices work (activated charcoal
 radicals); and reacts with water to form nitric acid, therefore acid
requires changing when it becomes 'saturated').
rain.
s a on an  sid a  
breathing system before you deliver anaesthetic gases (i.e. turn
Scavenging can be passive, or active
 Passive systems duct the waste gases (which are vented from the
 on the oxygen frst, then connect patient's endotracheal tube to 
breathing system, then finally turn on NO and vaporiser as 
anaesthetic breathing system via the pop-off valve), away, either
required).
into a ventilation shaft which then must not recirculate air into
● Ideally flush/purge the patient's anaesthetic breathing system
any other room in the building, or into an activated charcoal
with oxygen (switch off all other anaesthetic gases/vapours),
canister (but this will not remove nitrous oxide).
 Active systems require an extractor fan or vacuum pump, and
tion, or at the end of surgery.
then gentle suction is applied to the pop-off valve, so that waste
● Ensure the recovery area is well ventilated (once a patient is
 gases are sucked away.
 disconnected from the anaesthetic breathing system, and even 
 All scavenging systems require some safety features though, or
after its trachea is extubated, the recovering patient continues
a  pne ssd a  oon a a  a
to exhale some anaesthetic gases which are very difficult to
system (especially in the case of active systems), or too much
'scavenge').
 positive pressure applied (especially in the case of passive systerms,
e.g. if the tubing becomes kinked it is like the pop-off valve being
closed tight.) Positive and negative pressure safety devices should
 be included, examples are given below (Figure 9.20 and Figure
9.21).
Suction - to disposal site
 For passive systems (Figure 9.20), the positive pressure valve
usually activates at about 10cmHO; and the negative pressure
valve usually activates at about -0.5 cmHO. These protect the
anaesthetic breathing system (and therefore the patient) from
Window
excessive positive and negative pressures. The bag acts as an indi-
cator of over- or under-pressure, by observing its size. If the bag
From anaesthetic
expands or collapses too much, then the valves should operate to
system's pop-off
 Indicator float
valve
ensure patient safety.
- should be
visible in 
window when
working
Positive pressure
relief valve
 Negative pressure
 From anaesthetic breathing
L
 relief valve
To outside air,
Filter anc
system pop-off valve
 eventually
grill
 Air entrainment
Figure 9.21 Active scavenging receiver system: often called a Barnsley
Figure 9.20 Passive scavenging 'receiver' system with safety valves.
receiver as it was first developed in a Yorkshire hospital.
90  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● The operating and recovery areas and staff should be moni-
details). Soft flexible bougies can also be used to aid the correct
tored for exposure to anaesthetic gases and vapours at regular
and gentle placement of an endotracheal tube within the trachea,
intervals.
either by increasing or decreasing the curvature of the tube or,
● The operating room and recovery area should be
well
following placement of the blunt tip of the bougie just through
ventilated;15 air changes per hour is the minimum suggested.
the glottis, by allowing the tracheal tube to be railroaded’ over
it. When used correctly, at least in human anaesthesia, the tip
of the blade of a laryngoscope should be used to depress only
Endotracheal tubes
the base of the tongue (the blade tip being placed in the vallecula;
 Different types of tubes are available (Figures 9.22 and 9.23), and
the ‘pocket’ between the tongue base and ventral surface of
they can be made from different materials, such as red rubber,
the epiglottis). In veterinary anaesthesia, however, on occasion
siliconised rubber (silastic), or various types of plastic (e.g. PVC).
the blade tip may be used to gently depress the tip of the
Some tubes are made with more of a curvature than others, often
epiglottis.
determined by the material they are made from. Some of the
 The internal diameter (in millimetres) of the tube is used to
stiffer plastic and PVC tubes will actually soften if placed in warm
describe the tube 'size'. However, the material from which it is
(sterile) water first which may facilitate (after drying) a less trau-
made and whether it is cuffed or not, determines its outer diam-
matic tracheal intubation. Tubes may be cuffed or uncuffed,
eter, which is actually what determines whether it will fit into the
although some are shaped with a 'shoulder (e.g. the Cole pattern
animal's airway or not.
tube). Laryngeal mask airways (LMAs) do not sit within the
You should always try to use the largest tube possible, but
airway, but merely protect and isolate? the glottis (Figure 9.24).
 A laryngoscope is commonly used to aid endotracheal intuba-
ensures the minimum resistance to breathing. Resistance is pro-
tion. Various blades (e.g straight, curved) are available, and for
portional to length, but inversely proportional to the fourth
right-handed or left-handed use (see further reading for more
power of the radius, so the internal diameter affects resistance
much more than length. When considering resistance, the
endotracheal tube may be responsible for the site of greatest resist-
ance within the endotracheal tube-anaesthetic breathing system?
combination.
Tube length should be such that there is not a great excess
 protruding from the animal's mouth because this adds dead
space and encourages rebreathing; but neither should a massive
length be inserted so far down the trachea that one mainstem
bronchus is intubated and the other totally occluded (this can
cause hypoxaemia very quickly). The proximal end of the tube
should ideally lie at the incisor arcade and the distal tip of the
tube should lie somewhere between the larynx and the thoracic
inlet. Try not to have the tube tip positioned such a short distance
through the larynx that when you inflate the cuff you may damage
the vocal cords. Remember those species with an eparterial bron-
not to occlude the entrance to this with the tube/cuff. Some tubes
 come with a small hole in the tip (the so-called Murphy eye) to
Figure 9.22 Different types of endotracheal tube; from the top: silicone
 give some protection against occlusion of a bronchus; or occa-
rubber cuffed tube; red rubber (Magill cuffed tube; PVC cuffed tube; PVC
uncuffed tube; Cole pattern tube.
Fgure 9.24 Laryngeal mask airway (sometimes referred to as a 'Brain
Figure 9.23 Armoured tube (see metallic spiral which prevents tube from
airway', named after its designer). The photograph shows the cuff which
seats around the epiglottis/laryngeal inlet, inflated.
Anaesthetic breathing systems  91
sionally the endotracheal tube can lie awkwardly within the
Surprisingly, these can produce fairly good protection of the
trachea so that its open tip is obstructed against the tracheal wall,
airway against fluid aspiration, but also can cause a lot of laryngeal
so the Murphy eye protects against this too.
bruising, especially if the animal's position is changed a lot.
Cuffs
Problems with tubes
 For cats, traditionally un-cuffed tubes have been favoured, because
Tubes should be secured in place once in position. Remember
if a cuffed tube was chosen, because of the extra bulk of the cuff 
that they can become occluded with mucus or debris. They may
material, the outer diameter of the tube was necessarily bigger,
become kinked or bitten; and can even be inhaled. Make sure the
which meant that you had to settle for a smaller internal diameter
tube in order to fit in the bulky cuffed tube. These days, because
connector fits correctly and when you tie an endotracheal tube in
of better manufacturing processes and slim cuff, it is easier not
place, make sure it is not just the connector you have tied in, but
that the tube is still attached to it. If the animal's position must
to have to down-size on the endotracheal tube if you want to use
be changed during anaesthesia, you should disconnect the anaes-
a cuffed tube.
thetic breathing system from the patient's endotracheal tube
 There are potential problems when using cuffed tubes, espe
before moving the animal. Remember to turn of the anaesthetic
 agent delivery (and dump the bag contents out through the pop-
is easily ruptured by over-zealous cuff inflation. Although you
off valve and into the scavenging system) before you disconnect
often will not notice anything immediately, the cat will re-present
too, to reduce theatre pollution. If you do not disconnect the tube
a day or two later with subcutaneous emphysema (looks like
then the chances are that the endotracheal tube might be forced
a Michelin man) which is a tell-tale sign of a ruptured trachea.
This is especially a risk when the patient's position requires
to rotate around inside the animal's trachea when the animal's
 position is changed; and you can now imagine the bevelled tip
changing during anaesthesia (e.g. for dental work or multiple
asea ueo su esoonu jeuoen au yanou Aem si u
radiographs).
happen in cats, whose tracheas are not very forgiving, and tracheal
Cuffs can be:
tears can result.
● Low volume; high pressure (e.g. those of red rubber tubes).
● High volume: low pressure (e.g. those of plastic tubes).
Aternatives to traditional endotracheal tubes
● Medium volume: medium pressure (e.g. those of silastic tubes).
You may also see armoured tubes, these have spiral nylon or wire
re-enforcements in the tube wall and are supposed to prevent
To inflate a cuff safely, the best practice is, once you are sure
kinking. At one time they were used for neck radiography and
that the tube is in the trachea, to connect the tube to the anaes-
cerebrospinal fluid tap procedures, both requiring flexed neck
thetic breathing system of choice and set the oxygen flow to the
positions.
desired rate. Close the pop off valve on the breathing system and
 Tubes can also be coated in flexible metal tape to give them
gently squeeze the bag whilst gently inflating the cuff. When you
some protection against the use of lasers (high heat energy sources 
no longer hear/detect gas leaking around the tube, the cuff is
near a high oxygen source is recipe for a fre).
adequately inflated. Remember to open the pop-off valve again.
It is very diffcult to tell what the pressure in the cuff is just by
 You may even come across the laryngeal mask airway (LMA or
Brain airway). It has a soft, inflatable cushion which sits on/
feeling the ^pilot balloon'; manometers can be specially adapted
around the larynx with the idea of securing an airway. Sometimes
to measure this. Modern balloons have pressure relief devices.
the seal provided is not very good,and they cannot ensure a patent
Excessive cuff pressure can cause tracheal mucosal ischaemia/
airway if laryngospasm occurs. They have been used in rabbits,
necrosis which may lead to later stricture. In the meanwhile, a
diphtheritic membrane of necrotic tissue may form and some-
cats and dogs. They are supposed to take very little skill to place
as you do not need to visualise the larynx.
times these flaps of tissue can later (some time after tracheal
extubation) act like valves and can totally obstruct the animal's
trachea which is life-threatening.
How do you know you've placed the tube into
 If you need to ventilate the animal's lungs with a mechanical
the trachea?
ventilator, sometimes, for example if high inspiratory pressures
● You may have observed correct placement (with the aid of a
are required, you might need to inflate the cuff a little more.
laryngoscope).
 The cuff is usually inflated with air but if you are supplying
● You can detect breath (by feeing it or by using a wisp of cotton
oxygen and nitrous oxide to your patient, the nitrous oxide can
wool which will move in the stream of breath) exiting the tube
partition into air-flled spaces, so the cuff volume/pressure can
during exhalation.
increase over time. Some people prefer to use sterile saline or
● You may see condensation forming on the inside of the tube
water to prevent this; or a mixture of NO and oxygen in the same
 during exhalation if it is made of clear material; or you could
ratio as that to be delivered to the patient.
 use a cold glass microscope slide to look for condensation.
 Cole pattern tubes are uncuffed but have a 'shoulder where
● You could use a purpose-made thermistor to detect the warmth
the diameter of the tube decreases. The shoulder of the tube
of the expired gases (e.g. ApalertrM).
should be positioned so that it sits gently on the larynx, with the
● You could measure the CO content of the exhaled gases, or
narrower distal part of the tube passing into/through the larynx.
 look at a capnogram trace.
92  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● You could watch the bag of the anaesthetic breathing system
1998). Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
 deflate and inflate slightly with each inspiration and expiration,
216, 1592-1595.
respectively.
Nunn G (2008) Low-flow anaesthesia. Continuing Education in
● You could squeeze the bag of the breathing system (close the
Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain 8(1), 1-4.
valve to do this) and watch (even listen with stethoscope) for
Steffey EP, Howland D (1977) Rate of change of halothane con-
chest inflation; but occasionally this looks promising but you
centration in a large animal circle anesthetic system. American 
 are really just inflating the patient's stomach. It is a bad habit 
Journal of Veterinary Research 38(12), 1993-1996.
 to press on the animal's chest to enforce an exhalation as this
 may encourage gastro-oesophageal reflux with all its repercus-
Recommended books
sions (oesophagitis and stricture).
Al-Shaikh B, Stacey S. Eds 
s (2007) Essentials of Anaesthetic
Tracheal extubation
Equipment 3"d Edition.(
Churchill Livingstone, Elsevier,
Usually the cuff is deflated before the tube is gently withdrawn.
 Philadelphia, USA.
Occasionally, if there is worry that some fluid, blood or debris
Davey AJ, Diba A. Eds (2001) Ward's Anaesthetic Equipment. 5"h
may be near the larynx, the tube is withdrawn with the cuff still
Edition. Elsevier Saunders, Philadelphia, USA.
partially (or more rarely, fully) inflated (see Chapter 33 on rumi-
Dorsch JA, Dorsch SE.
(2008) Understanding Anesthesia
nants.) The nearer the larynx any debris can be brought, the more
Equipment 5"h Edition. Lippincott, Williams and Wilkins,
likely the cough reflex is to be elicited and the airway thus
Wolters Kluwer Health, Philadelphia, USA.
 protected.
 During long surgery, especially when using non-rebreathing
 systems where cold/dry gases are being breathed, the tracheal
secretions may become dry/tacky so be aware that the endotra-
 Self-test section
cheal tube could become blocked or even ^stuck' within airway by
this glue. You may need to replace the tube if it becomes blocked.
1.
 A fresh gas flow of 2-4 times minute ventilation is
If it feels 'stuck in the trachea, trickle some sterile saline around
used for which of the following non-rebreathing
it to soften the secretions. If you use, for example atropine, the
 systems (when used for spontaneously breathing
secretions will probably become drier and stickier even more
patients)?
quickly.
A.
 T-piece and Bain 
B.
 T-piece and Magill
Further reading
C.
 Bain and Lack
D.1
 Lack and Magill
Alderson BA, Senior JM, Dugdale AHA (2006) Tracheal necrosis
Which of the following statements about soda lime is
following tracheal intubation in a dog. Journal of Small Animal
incorrect?
Practice 47, 754-756.
A.
 Its reaction with carbon dioxide is exothermic.
Hughes L (2007) Breathing systems and ancillary equipment. In:
B.
Its main
chemical constituent is sodium
 BSAVA Manual of canine and feline anaesthesia and analgesia.
hydroxide.
2nd Edition. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T. Chapter 5,
C.
 Its reaction with carbon dioxide produces water.
Pp 30-48.
D.
It is caustic, and is included under the COSHH
Mitchell SL, McCarthy R, Rudloff E, Pernell RT (2000) Tracheal
regulations.
rupture associated with intubation in cats: 20 cases (1996-
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and 
das
lers
Learning objectives
 To be able to describe the functions of an anaesthetic machine.
●
 To be able to define a gas and a vapour.
To be able to describe cylinder safety features.
1
 To be able to outline how high pressure gases and vapours are safely administered to patients at much lower pressures.
 To be able to describe the basic construction and function of vaporisers.
Definitions
material) in epoxy resin, in a hoop-wrap’ configuration. They
u psm uo pe ram i ns a ne
● Gases supplied to or through the anaesthetic machine include:
 oxygen, nitrous oxide, air and carbon dioxide.
pressurisation.
 Cylinders come in a variety of sizes and have different ftments
● A 'gas' is strictly the name given to a substance present in the
for opening their valves (e.g. pin-index, bull nose, handwheel or
integral valves). Examples for the UK are given in Table 10.2.
 ture) above its critical temperature.
a u ssad asqns e on a a a si od,  o
Cylinder and pipeline colours
gaseous phase when at a temperature below it critical
temperature.
In the UK, cylinder shoulders and pipelines are coloured-coded
(Table 10.3) according to the International Standard ISO 32 and
● The critical temperature is that temperature above which
a gas cannot be liquefied, no mater how much it is
British/European Standard BS EN 1089. In many European coun-
tries and Canada, cylinders (shoulders) are also coloured accord-
compressed.
ing to ISO 32; but in the USA, cylinder (shoulder) colours follow
s e nb oi bu anssad au s assad pe au o
a different coding system.
 at its critical temperature.
Cylinder information
Cylinders
Although cylinder colour is commonly relied upon to identify the
contents of a cylinder, the correct method of identification of
 In the UK, Europe, North America and many other countries,
cylinder contents is to read the label. The label should state:
medical gases are considered as medicinal products and are there-
fore subject to regulation. Table 10.1 summarises information for
● The name of the contents, its chemical symbol and product
commonly used medical gas cylinders in the UK.
specification.
● The batch number, including details of filling plant, fill date,
Cylinder construction
expiry date (which facilitates cylinder rotation in the hospital),
Molybdenum steel cylinders are most commonly used, being
contents and cylinder size.
relatively light for their strength. Aluminium cylinders are avail-
● Cylinder contents (litres).
able for MRI use (molybdenum steel cylinders are strongly
● Maximum cylinder pressure.
attracted by the magnetic feld), but cannot be filled to the same
● Product licence number.
high pressures as molybdenum steel cylinders. Composite cylin-
· Cylinder size code.
ders are also now available, consisting of steel or aluminium
● Hazard warning diamonds.
“liners? surrounded by Kevlar or carbon fbre (incredibly tough
● Directions for use, storage and handling.
6
94  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 10.1 Basic cylinder data.
Cylinder contents
State of contents
Critical temperature. (℃)
Cylinder pressure (full)
Saturated vapour pressure (SVP)
Oxygen
Compressed gas
-118
13,700 kPa
N/a
pio s
 Saturated vapour above liquid 
+36.5
 SVP until no more liquid remains 
4400kPa
to provide saturated vapour
Carbon dioxide
 Saturated vapour above liquid 
+31
SVP until no more liquid remains
5000 kPa
to provide saturated vapour
Table 10.2 Cylinder size and valve fitments (UK).
Content 
Size C
Size D
Size E
Size F
Size G
Size 」
Oxygen
 Pin index
Pin index
 Pin index
Bull nose
Bull nose
Pin index
 Nitrous oxide
 Pin index
Pin index
 Pin index
Handwheel
Handwheel
 Not available
Carbon dioxide
Pin index
Not available
Pin index
Handwheel
 Not available
 Not available
 Cylinder size increases from C to J
Table 10.3 Cylinder colour coding.
What if oxygen cylinders are not available?
Oxygen concentrators can be used. These consist of two cham-
Cylinder contents 
Colour in UK 
Colour in USA
bers, each with a flter, a heat exchanger (to cool the compressed
Oxygen
Green
 gases), and a compressor. The compressor drives filtered air into
White shoulders (black body)
White pipelines
one of the chambers, where a zeolite (hydrated aluminium sili-
cate) filter adsorbs nitrogen; the ^air remaining in the chamber,
ixo sn
 French blue
 French blue
 under some degree of compression, is then fairly pure oxygen (i.e.
Blue pipelines
 92-95% oxygen is achievable, the main contaminant is argon).
Carbon dioxide
Grey
Grey
After some time, when the filter’ is deemed full, the second
V
 Black and white shoulders
Yellw
 chamber is used, and a vacuum is applied to the frst chamber to
(grey body)
 help release the nitrogen back into the atmosphere.
Black pipelines
 Nitrogen
Black
Black
How is nitrous oxide manufactured?
 Nitrous oxide is produced when ammonium nitrate is thermally
N.B. Medical vacuum pipelines are yellow in the UK.
decomposed at 240°℃.
Pressure units
Entonox
Entonox cylinders are flled to 13,700 kPa. They are initially par-
● 1 Atmosphere = 760 mmHg (at sea level) = 1bar = 1000 mbar
tially flled with liquid nitrous oxide,then compressed oxygen is
= 15 psi
bubbled through the liquid nitrous oxide (by inverting the cylin-
● 1 Atmosphere = 103 kPa = 1033.6 cmH,O
der), such that as the oxygen dissolves into the liquid nitrous
● Therefore: 760 mmHg = 103 kPa = 1033.6 cmH,O
oxide, the latter evaporates, resulting in a purely gaseous mixture.
● 1 mmHg = 0.136kPa = 1.36 cmH,O
This is called the Poynting (or overpressure) effect. When gases
● 1kPa = 10 cmH,O = 7.4 mmHg
are mixed, their critical temperatures and pressures can change.
● 1 cmH,O = 0.74 mmHg = 0.1kPa = 1 mbar 
With Entonox, the critical temperature of nitrous oxide becomes
around -6°C, the so-called pseudocritical temperature; hence at
Gases in cylinders
normal room temperatures, the nitrous oxide component should
How do we get pure oxygen for cylinders?
remain as a gas. But should a cylinder of Entonox be exposed to
Oxygen is ^extracted’ from cooled and liquefed air by fractional
temperatures below -6°C (at a pseudocritical pressure of
distillation. Liquid oxygen can then be stored in huge vacuum
11,700 kPa), the nitrous oxide component can liquefy, leaving an
flasks (vacuum insulated evaporators; VIEs), which is commonly
done in human hospitals, or gaseous oxygen is stored as a com-
separation, called lamination, can be reversed by re-warming and
 pressed gas in smaller cylinders.
  xa     
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and gas cylinders 95
contents. If, however, the cylinder is used without re-warming
be taken, however, when cracking cylinders: they must be firmly
secured and care should be taken that the venting gases do not
delivered to the patient, but as gases are withdrawn and the liquid
contact bare skin as freeze-burns may be sustained.
then evaporates, a mixture of gas of decreasing oxygen content
Bodok seals (non-combustible neoprene rubber discs with an
and increasing nitrous oxide content is then delivered to the
aluminium rim), are used to help make a gas-tight seal between
 patient, risking delivery of a hypoxic mixture.
the cylinder valve and its attachment (yoke/regulator). Whenever
cylinders are connected to yokes/pressure regulators, hydrocar-
Cylinder safety
bon-based lubricants must never be used to improve the seal or
Cylinders undergo pressure/leak testing (hydraulic testing and
fit.
internal inspection), every 5-10 years; the dates of the test are
 Cylinder valve blocks have pressure relief devices so that at high
stamped into the cylinder neck and the test pressure (TP) engraved 
temperature, the contents are safely vented to the atmosphere. In
on the valve block (usually around 22,000kPa, i.e. at least 50%
the USA, such pressure relief devices are usually a plug of fusible
higher than the expected normal working/service pressure), and
(relatively low melting point) material within the valve block; in
the plastic collars (which are shape- and colour-coded) denote the
the UK, the fusible material (Wood's metal) is used between the
date of the next test due. Each time a cylinder is due to be refilled,
valve and the cylinder neck. Each valve block should also be
it is visually inspected for evidence of corrosion and physical
engraved with the chemical symbol of the cylinder contents.
impact/distortion. Flattening, bending and impact testing is per-
formed on one cylinder every hundred, as are tensile tests, where
Compressed 'gases' are dry
 one in a hundred cylinders is cut into strips for testing.
Cylinders should be stored upright to avoid damage to the
● To protect the cylinders from corrosion.
● To protect the cylinder valves, regulators, and pressure gauges
valves. Cylinders which contain liquid (NO, CO2), should always
from icing, which can cause blockage and damage (including 
be used in an upright position too. Cylinders must be stored in
'explosion').
such a way that they are restrained safely and cannot fall over.
Usually they are held into wall-mounted brackets by chains or
Because liquid nitrous oxide evaporates to maintain the SVP
rings, or placed into a rack (vertically or horizontally).
above the liquid within the cylinder, the latent heat of vaporisa-
Cylinders should be stored in a well-ventilated area, ideally
tion necessary for this evaporation is 'taken from the cylinder and
away from:
its surroundings. Hence the cylinder will feel cold to the touch,
● Flammable substances, oil, grease etc.
and you may see condensation of water vapour, or even a thin
●Heat sources (including direct sunlight).
layer of frost develop, on the outside of the cylinder (up to the
●High voltage sources.
liquid level), especially on cold days and at high rates of demand
● Drains (where grease or dense vapours/gases may collect).
for nitrous oxide evaporation.
●Dampness (to prevent corrosion).
As gases leave their highly compressed state in cylinders, they
expand, the pressure reduces and they cool if the processis adi-
● Corrosive chemicals.
abatic. Usually, however, heat energy can be ‘taken’ from the
● Tarmac or asphalt floors.
● Areas where smoking is allowed.
rate of gas flow is not too fast. Nevertheless, gases from cylinders
Cylinders should be labelled Full, In use' or Empty as appro-
are cold’ (relative to our patients) and dry, and this can lead to
 priate; and full cylinders should be stored away from empty cyl-
problems if used for prolonged time periods, as the patient's
inders. The stock of stored cylinders should be rotated so that the
respiratory tree can be a source of great heat and moisture loss,
'oldest' ones are used first.
 and should not be desiccated (see Chapter 20 on hypothermia and
Cylinder valves are protected by disposable plastic dust covers
 Chapter 9 on anaesthetic breathing systems). See notes on nitrous
when they are delivered. This prevents dirt and grease getting into
 oxide in Chapter 8 on inhalation agents for more details about its
the valve, which, as well as preventing proper ^seating? to the
cylinders, the filling ratio’ in different climates and how the cyl-
attachment device (e.g pin index yoke, bull nose ftting) and
inder content can be calculated from cylinder weight and NO
therefore causing leaks, could also be dangerous, as grease in the
density or molecular mass.
presence of oxygen, or indeed nitrous oxide, venting under high
pressure can cause explosions. Both oxygen and nitrous oxide can
 Pin Index Safety System
support combustion. For fre, a fuel (e.g. blob of grease), a source
 There are seven possible positions for holes on the valve block,
of ignition (e.g. the heat given out by rapidly expanding oxygen
which are used in various combinations for the different gases and
(gases decompress as they leave the cylinder), and something to
which match protruding pins on the cylinder attachment (Figure
support the combustion (e.g. oxygen) are required. Valves should
10.1). The pins are 6mm long and 4 mm in diameter except pin
always be opened slowly, and it used to be recommended that all
 7 which is slightly wider. The seventh hole lies in the centre of the
cylinders were briefly opened to the air ('cracked'), before being
arc between positions 3 and 4 and is the only position used for
connected up. This was to ensure that any dust or grime on the
valve would be blown away so that it would not get pushed into
oxide. The pin holes help to locate the cylinder into its yoke, from
the regulator, pressure gauge or anaesthetic machine. Care must
which corresponding pins project. This Pin Index Safety System
96  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Gland nut
Spindle
Gland
Outlet
Valve
seating
Pin index 
(a)
(b)
holes
Fgure 10.2 (a) Pin hole positions on O cylinder (e.g. size E) valve block.
Tapered screw
(b) Pin hole positions on NO cylinder (e.g. size E) valve block. Reproduced
thread to fit
fom Ward's Anaesthetic Equipment 3"d Edition. Eds: Davey A, Moyle JTB,
cylinder
Ward CS. Chapter 3, The Supply of Anaesthetic Gases, Pp 32-38. Copyright
(a)
1992, with permission from Elsevier.
X
HD
X
23456
Regulated
low-pressure
outlet
(q)
Figure 10.1 Pin Index Safety System. (a) A cut-away diagram through a pin
index cylinder valve block. Reproduced from Ward's Anaesthetic Equipment
3d Edition. Eds: Davey A, Moyle JTB, Ward CS. Chapter 7, The Continuous 
How Anaesthetic Machine, pp 94-112. Copyright 1992, with permission from
Elsevier. (b) Possible pin index hole positions. Reproduced from Essentials of
High-pressure
Anaesthetic Equipment. 2"d Edition. Eds: Al-Shaikh B and Stacey 5. Chapter
inlet
1, Medical Gas Supply. Pp 1-13. Copyright 2002, with permission from
Elsevier.
Fgure 10.3 The functional parts of a pressure regulato. D, diaphragm; 5.
spring: C, low pressure chamber; V, valve seating: X, adjustment screw.
Reproduced from Ward's Anaesthetic Equipment 3d Edition. Eds: Davey A,
(PISS), helps to ensure that only the correct cylinder can possibly
 Moyle JTB, Ward CS. Chapter 1, Physical Principles, Pp -19. Copyright 1992.
be attached to its correct cylinder yoke (Figure 10.2). Bull nose
with permission from Elsevier.
fittings are also size-coded for each gas.
Down-regulation of pressure
vapour pressure of N,O), only starts to fall once all the liquid NO
How do we reduce the high pressure of compressed gas in a
has evaporated.
cylinder down to something more user-friendly? We need a
 Two-stage regulators are capable of producing even more finely
pressure-reducing valve, also called a 'pressure regulator' (Figure
regulated constant outlet pressure.
10.3).
 Regulators are gas-specific.
 Pressure regulators not only reduce cylinder pressure to
 In the UK, cylinder pressures are regulated down to pipeline
something much more safe and workable, but also keep the outlet
pressures' of 420kPa (c. 60 psi). In the USA, cylinder pressure is
gas at a constant pressure This is important, because, especially
regulated down to 350kPa (c. 50 psi) pipeline pressure. Such
for oxygen, a true compressed gas, the initially high cylinder
 pipeline pressures then supply the anaesthetic machine.
 pressure falls linearly (at constant temperature) as the cylinder
The anaesthetic machine may be constructed so as to ^carry' its
empties. For nitrous oxide, the cylinder pressure (the saturated
 own gas cylinders, and therefore needs regulators and pressure
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and gas cylinders 97
 gauges for each cylinder attached’; and/or it may be supplied by
Index collar
'piped gases' from a distant cylinder or bank of cylinders.
 For anaesthetic machines which can carry cylinders and accept
Hose
piped gases, the pressure to which the cylinders are regulated is
usually a little (about 5 kPa) lower than the pipeline pressure, so
that gases are preferentially drawn from the piped gas (higher
pressure), supply. As the piped gases are used preferentially, any
cylinder gases (if the cylinders are left turned 'on' by accident),
Locking groove
 should remain available in an emergency, for example should the 
Figure 10.4 A Schrader probe. Note that it is the collar which is important
piped gas supply fail.
for the safety of the system. The collar varies in size between different gas
hoses, so that you cannot plug the wrong pipeline into the wrong socket.
Piped gas supplies
Reproduced from Essentials of Anaesthetic Equipment. 2d Edition. Eds: Al-
Shaikh B and Stacey 5. Chapter 1, Medical Gas Supply, Pp 1-13. Copyright 
If the operating theatre has a piped gas supply, then gases are
2002, with permission from Elsevier.
carried there from a bank of cylinders placed somewhere distant
to the operating theatre. The cylinders in each bank (there is
usually one ^in use^ bank, one ^full/reserve^ bank and sometimes
an additional éemergency bank), are attached to a manifold via
pressure regulators. Non-return valves prevent flow of gases
between cylinders. Each manifold then supplies (via a valve) the
main pipeline for that particular gas (e.g. O or NzO). The pipes
are made of degreased copper alloy, and are of a diameter to suit
the demand envisaged. They terminate in special terminal outlets,
usually some form of self-closing 'socket, in the operating theatre.
 To access the piped gas supply, another pipeline is required,
usually a flexible hose, to duct the gases to the anaesthetic
 machine. The flexible (and antistatic) gas hoses that are used have
the following features:
● They are colour coded, for example in the UK, white = oxygen;
 blue = nitrous oxide.
Gas inflow
● They are attached permanently' at one end to the anaesthetic
Hgure 10.5 Bourdon gauge. Reproduced from Ward's Anaesthetic
machine via gas-specific non-interchangeable screw thread
Equipment 3"dEdition. Eds: Davey A, Moyle JTB, Ward CS. Chapter 1, Physical
(NIST) fttings, where the small probe (within a nut), is profled
Principles, pp 1-19. Copyright 1992, with permission from Elsevier. 
according to its specific gas, so called diameter index safety
system, DISS). NIST is perhaps a misleading name, as the screw
threads are not themselves different between gases, but the nuts
 There are many different ways of measuring pressure, for
cannot be tightened unless the probes can be completely
example the ‘U’ tube manometer containing either water or
engaged.
mercury, the aneroid barometer and the mercury sphygmoma-
 nometer. These can be used for measuring relatively low pres-
● They have an 'indexed’ probe collar at the other end that fits
 into a complermentary self closing ^socket which is either wall-
sures, but when we are dealing with the sort of high pressures of
mounted or at the end of a pendant dangling from the ceiling.
compressed gases, we need something more robust. Many high
Such probes and sockets are usually of the Schrader type in the
pressure gauges work on the principle of the Bourdon pressure
UK (Figure 10.4).
gauge (Figure 10.5).
 The Bourdon gauge consists of a curved flattened tube, such
that when pressurised gases enter it, the tube expands, and the
Pressure gauges
curvature is partially straightened out. This moves the rack and
Pressure gauges are necessary so that pipeline and cylinder pres-
pinion and so the pointer can move over the scale. There is a
sures can be measured and monitored. For compressed gases such
constrictor at the entrance to the gauge to protect it from sudden
as oxygen, the cylinder pressure will decrease as the cylinder
pressure surges. The gauge registers the cylinder pressure above
empties (Boyle's Law); but for a full nitrous oxide cylinder, which
 atmospheric pressure, i.e. the gauge is ^zeroed’ at atmospheric
contains saturated vapour above liquid, the pressure within the
 pressure. This is because once the cylinder contents have reduced
cylinder remains constant (at its saturated vapour pressure) until
 to atmospheric pressure, gases can no longer flow out of the cyl-
all the liquid in the cylinder has evaporated, when the pressure
inder, so it is as if the cylinder is effectively empty. Remember that
will finally fall. Saturated vapour pressure is affected by tempera-
for gases to flow, they must follow a path from an area of high
ture (see later) but daily temperature fluctuations are likely to
pressure to an area of lower pressure down a gradient; so if no
have little influence inside an operating theatre.
pressure gradient exists, no gas flow can occur. If gases are piped
98  Veterinary Anaesthesia
to theatre, then it is usual for the low pressure alarm to sound
 The high pressure part includes those parts which receive gas
once the manifold pressure falls to 7-8bar, allowing some time to
at cylinder pressure (if the machine has cylinder yokes):
 change banks before the supply fails
● Each cylinder yoke (which normally includes a flter and a
unidirectional valve).
● Each cylinder pressure regulator.
The anaesthetic machine
● Each cylinder pressure gauge.
An anaesthetic machine can be anything from a Boyle's trolly
The intermediate pressure part includes those parts which
(the wheel-about anaesthetic machines commonly used in hospi-
receive gases at lower, relatively constant, pressure (in the UK
tals), to something much smaller and simpler. Equine anaesthetic
around 60psi (420 kPa)), from pipelines, or downstream from
machines are normally co-mounted onto a stand along with a
anaesthetic machine-mounted cylinder regulators:
large animal circle. The anaesthetic machine:
● If the machine can receive piped gases; the piped gas inlets and
 their pressure gauges (which normally include flters and one-
respective flowmeters.
way valves).
● Then conducts the gases through a back bar, on which a
● The pipework of the anaesthetic machine itself (downstream of
vaporiser can be mounted (if vOC type of vaporiser).
the cylinder or pipeline inputs).
 (o) nno   an on  so  o
● Medium pressure gas outlets (only oxygen), often in the form
where they can be delivered to a patient via an anaesthetic
of mini-Schrader sockets (which can supply drive gas to, for
breathing system mounted on the CGO (Figure 10.6)
 example, a ventilator).
The common gas outlet (where the anaesthetic breathing
● The low oxygen pressure'/'oxygen failure' alarm.
system is attached), may be incorporated into a Cardiff swivel,
● The oxygen flush valve.
that is the CGO connector swivels to help position the breathing
● All the flowmeter needle valves.
system so that it drags less on the patient's endotracheal tube/
The low pressure part - those components distal to the flow-
airway.
 The path of oxygen through an anaesthetic machine is shown
 meter needle valves whose working pressure is around 1-10kPa
 above atmospheric pressure:
 in Figure 10.7.
 The anaesthetic machine can be thought of as consisting of
● The flowmeter tubes.
three different parts; each subjected to different gas pressures.
● The back bar and vaporiser.
Gas
Regulators/
 Anaesthetic machine
Back bar/
 pressure gauges
Flowmeters
+CGO
cylinders
pipework
vaporiser
Piped gas supply
Figure 10.6 Flow of gases through the anaesthetic machine.
Alam for
low O2
pressure
 O2 cylinder
Oz enters
Flowmeter
Common
anaesthetic
machine
gas outlet
eathing
 Oz pipeline
O2flush valve
Medium pressure
Oz to drive e.g.
ventilator
Figure 10.7 The path of oxygen through an anaesthetic machine.
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and gas cylinders 99
● The anaesthetic machine check valves': the overpressure valve
(works at about 35 kPa (= 350cmHO)), and underpressure
valve, if present.
● The common gas outlet.
Unidirectional valves
These are usually found in cylinder yokes and pipeline inputs to:
Bobbin
Ball
● Prevent gas ingress or egress (to or from the anaesthetic
Figure 10.8 Different types of indicator floats'.
 machine), when cylinders or pipelines are ‘empty’ or not
attached.
● Allow change of cylinders, when the anaesthetic machine is in 
creates through the common gas outlet of the anaesthetic machine
Use, without gases leaking to the atmosphere.
(bypassing the flowmeters and vaporiser), is around 45l/min
● Prevent trans-flling between gas sources, for example when
(minimum 30 l/min and usually not exceeding a maximum of
cylinders are at different pressures. Although pressure regula-
60l/min). This can be used to purge an anaesthetic breathing
tors try to ensure that the regulated pressure is fairly constant,
system of anaesthetic vapour and NO in an emergency situation
it will fall when the cylinders are nearly empty.
for example.
Safety features of anaesthetic machines
Flowmeters
These may vary between manufacturers, and veterinary anaes-
thetic machines are often cheaper to buy because they have fewer
These consist of glass or plastic conically tapered tubes, which are
safety features. Safety features should include:
calibrated according to the gas they convey. They are operated by
means of a needle valve, which is opened/closed by a knob which
● An oxygen failure alarm; something which makes a loud noise
you can turn (anticlockwise to open; clockwise to close). An indi-
when the oxygen supply pressure is falling.
cator ^float within the tube is used to 'read off’ the flow against
● An emergency oxygen flush device.
the calibrations etched or painted on the tube (Figure 10.8). If the
● A back bar high pressure relief valve (prevents pressure build 
up in the back bar, and therefore protects flowmeters and
indicator is a bobbin, then the flow is read from the top of the
bobbin. If the indicator is a ball, then the flow is read from the
vaporisers. Usually activated at around 35 kPa (above atmos-
middle (equator) of the ball.
pheric pressure).
● A back bar negative pressure valve, which allows air ingress
 Some bobbins are designed to rotate (rotameters), and there-
 should problems with gas supply ocur and the patient make
fore have an upper rim' (wider than the body of the bobbin), with
slanted grooves cut into it which enable rotation of the bobbin in
inspiratory efforts (see below).
a gas stream. A spot marker is usually painted onto the side of the
 An oxygen failure alarm should be fitted Most of these have
bobbin to enable you to see if it does in fact rotate when gas flows.
to fulfl certain standards:
Such bobbins may also be 'skirted.
 Poiseuille's equation is important when considering the flow
● Must be audible, at least 60db at 1m from the anaesthetic
of fluids and gases through tubular, annular or orifce structures.
machine, and be of at least 7 s duration.
 s m au rua dn p s omi s n
● Must require only oxygen to operate it, and be activated when
or turbulent:
the oxygen pressure falls to c. 200 kPa.
● Must not be able to be silenced until the oxygen supply is
Pressure gradient Xπ X radius4
restored.
Laminar flow:
● Must be linked to a gas shut-off device, such that at least one
8×n× length 
 of the following happens:
Where n = viscosity.
 O All gases being delivered to the patient via the common gas
outlet, except air and oxygen, are shut off.
/Pressure gradient X radius2
o There is a progressive decrease in flow of all other gases
Turbulent flow α
whilst oxygen flow is maintained at the pre-set proportion,
√p × length
 of all other gases is shut off from the patient.
Where p = density.
 In flowmeter tubes, at low flows when the indicator is nearer
0 Pathways are established between the atmosphere and the
the bottom, the annular shaped gap around the float is relatively
anaesthetic machine. Air can be entrained through negative
tubular (definition of a tube is when the length exceeds the diam-
pressure valves (so the patient is not denied some form of
eter); and flow is governed by viscosity because flow tends to be
oxygen supply), and anaesthetic gases are vented to the
a d i s  a  s n n  
atmosphere.
annular shaped gap around the float is more like an orifice (i.e.
The emergency oxygen/oxygen flush valve is supplied by
diameter > length), and flow is more turbulent, so density becomes
Oxygen at c. 420kPa,such that when activated,the oxygen flow it
 more important. These flowmeters are therefore called ‘variable
100  Veterinary Anaesthesia
area, constant differential pressure flowmeters' because the vari-
 Problems with flowmeters
ation in size of the gap maintains a constant differential pressure
Fowmeter tube not vertical
across the float and the float position can be used to indicate the
Flowmeters are designed to work in an upright position, so if
gas flow.
tilted, the indicator may stick against the side of the tube, and the
 Flowmeter tubes are calibrated individually, with their floats,
annular gap around the float becomes complex in shape, so that
and with the gas in question being dry and at a specific tempera-
it may read inaccurately.
ture and pressure near to those of the expected operating range
(e.g room temperature (c. 18-25°℃) and sea level pressure).
Float sticks to the sides of the tube or to the tube 'stops
 Flowmeters are not calibrated from zero, but are calibrated
at the top or bottom of the tube
from the lowest accurate flow. Sometimes you may find two flow-
Floats may stick to the side of the tube if the tube is tilted, or if
meter tubes in series, so called cascade flowmeters, controlled by
there is dirt, grease or static within the tube. Dirt can change the
one knob, where the first tube has smaller graduations (e.g. cali-
weight of the float, and change the shape' of the flowmeter tube,
 brated up to 1l/min), and the second, larger: gas flow is read from
so leading to inaccuracies. Compressed gases should be filtered as
 the highest indication. You may also come across a unique design
they are ^released’ from cylinders, or as they enter the anaesthetic
(expanded range; dual scale) where there is one flowmeter tube
machine from pipeline supplies. Some tubes are coated (inside
with two floats, and two scales, so that one float is calibrated
and out), with a very fine layer of some antistatic/conducting
against the larger graduations, and the other against the smaller.
material (e.g. gold) to relay any static electricity safely to earth.
The flowmeters of the anaesthetic machine are usually arranged
 in a bank,from which each supplies a common manifold. Oxygen
Float not spinning in gas flow
should be the last gas to enter this manifold, to reduce the risks
Some floats (usually bobbins, but balls can rotate too) are designed
of a hypoxic mixture of gases being delivered to the patient should
to spin or rotate in the gas flow (flowmeters can then be called
there be any cracks in the tubes. Historically, in the UK, the
rotameters), the rotation decreases their tendency to stick against
 Oxygen flowmeter is positioned to the left of all others because Mr
the side of the tube. If they are not spinning it may be because
Boyle who first pioneered the anaesthetic machine’ was left-
they are sticking against the wallof the tube. Rotameter floats have
handed. This could cause problems, because the oxygen flowm-
fluted rims to help them spin. (Note that not all floats are designed
eter is then the frst to deliver gases into the common manifold,
to spin.)
and if there are leaks in the other flowmeter tubes, then a hypoxic
gas mixture could be relayed to the patient. In the USA, the
Cracked flowmeters
oxygen flowmeter is placed to the right of all the others, from
Oxygen should be the last gas to enter common manifold (see
where it has no problem in being the last flowmeter to supply the
above).
common manifold. In the UK, modifications to the common
manifold have now made it possible for oxygen to enter the
 Downstream from the flowmeter manifold, on the anaesthetic
common manifold last (Figures 10.9 and 10.10).
 machine back bar, is the vaporiser mounting, if the Vaporiser is
 The oxygen flowmeter is also supposed to have a recognisably
to be used ^Out-of-Circuit' (VOC). Let us now consider some of
different knob, in size, colour and feel, compared to the control
 the important features of vaporisers.
knobs of the other gas flowmeters. The oxygen flowmeter knob
should be bigger, with a chunkier fluted edge, and stick out further
Vaporisers
than all other control knobs. In the UK, it should be coloured
white, or sometimes is a black knob with a white face (in the USA
Figure 10.11 shows the basic construction of a vaporiser.
it is green).
 Inflow gas (fresh gas’ from the anaesthetic machine flowme-
ters), is split into two streams on entering the vaporiser. One
stream flows through the bypass channel and the other, smaller
Potentially less oxygen than intended 
Leak
thetic agent vapour whilst on its travels. The two gas streams then
re-unite before leaving the vaporiser. The vaporising chamber is
O2
ON
designed so that the gas leaving it (the carrier gas),is always fully
Figure 10.9 0ld flowmeter system.
Rotary valve
Bypass gas
Inflow gas
 Outflow gas carrying vapour
Oxygen supply should be fine (but
 potentially less of other gases 
delivered to the patient than intended)
Carier gas 
- Vaporising chamber
Leak
 Liquid volatile agent
02
N,O
Fgure 10.11 Basic vaporiser construction. The rotary valve alters the pro-
Figure 10.10 Newer flowmeter system.
portion of gas diverted through the vaporising chamber.
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and gas cylinders
101
Table 10.4 Volatile agent boiling points.
>
Atmospheric
Agent
 Boiling point (°C)
pressure =
SVP = 243 mmHg at room
760mmHg
1
temperature for halothane
Halothane
50.2
Figure 10.12 Saturated vapour fills the vaporisation chamber.
Isoflurane
48.5
Sevoflurane
58.5
rapid provision' of heat energy means that the temperature of the
Desflurane
23.5
liquid agent is unlikely to drop very much during vaporisation,
so that the vaporisation rate should be unaffected as vaporisation
proceeds.
 Temperature, by affecting vaporisation, affects the saturated
saturated with vapour before it rejoins the bypass gas. This should
vapour pressure (SVP); the cooler, the lower the SVP; the warmer,
be achieved despite changes in gas flow and some temperature
the greater the SVP For example, the boiling point of a liquid is
fluctuations (see below for temperature compensating devices).
Within the vaporising chamber, saturation of carrier gas with
the temperature at which its SVP equals atmospheric pressure.
Within the vaporisation chamber, the vapour should always be
vapour is facilitated by increasing the surface area of contact
'saturated’ (Figure 10.12). The carrier gas then becomes saturated
with vapour before it rejoins the bypass gas. The 'mixed gases that
by means of wicks and baffles incorporated into the vaporising
leave the vaporiser then carry a concentration of vapour deter-
chamber. The desired output concentration is obtained by adjust-
ing the percentage control dial, which alters the'splitting ratio of
mined by the splitting ratio of the original fresh gas into the
carrier and bypass gas flows. For example, when a halothane
the inflow gas, so that more or less is diverted into the carrier gas
vaporiser concentration dial is set at 2%, the gases leaving the
stream. Temperature compensating devices can also affect the
vaporiser consist of 2% halothane by volume, and 98% other/
splitting ratio (see below).
carrier gases. The 2% halothane is then responsible for exerting
Vaporisation of volatile anaesthetic agents depends on:
2% of the total (i.e. atmospheric) pressure; 2% of 760mmHg is
●Agent volatility (boiling point).
equal to 15.2 mmHg.
● Temperature of the liquid agent at which vaporisation is
 Halothane's SVP at standard room temperature is 243 mmHg.
expected to occur.
Thus, halothane evaporates within the vaporiser until a saturated
● Temperature of the gas in contact with the liquid agent.
vapour pressure of 243 mmHg is created. If all the gases entering
● Flow of gas over/past/through the liquid agent.
the vaporiser were diverted through the vaporisation chamber, so
● Surface area of contact between the gas and the liquid agent.
 that all the gas leaving the vaporiser was fully saturated with
halothane, then halothane would make up 243/760 (i.e. 32%), of
Agent volatility
 the mixed gas composition leaving the vaporiser. Now 32%
There is nothing we can do to alter this. Table 10.4 shows that
halothane is far too much to anaesthetise anything safely. We
most of the agents we use have a boiling point above normal room
more usually need concentrations in the order of 1-3%.
 Let us imagine that we have a fresh gas flow of 2 l/min heading
 Note, however, that desflurane has a much lower boiling point.
towards our vaporiser, and we want it to deliver a halothane
We will come back to consider this agent, and why it needs a
concentration of 1%, so we set its concentration dial at the 1%
 special vaporiser, later.
calibration. How can we calculate how much of the gas flow is
diverted through the vaporisation chamber?
Agent temperature
If total gas flow entering, and later leaving, the vaporiser is 21/
If we have a liquid agent in a vaporising chamber, then as it
min; and the output is set at 1%; then in every 100ml of gas
vaporises, heat is required (i.e. the latent heat of evaporation/
leaving the vaporiser, there must be 1ml halothane and 99 ml of
vaporisation). This heat is ^taken’ from the body of the liquid
other gases. So in 1min, in the 2l of gas leaving the vaporiser,
agent remaining, and from the immediate environment of the
there must be 20ml halothane and 1980 ml other gases.
liquid agent (i.e. the gas in contact with the liquid, and the mate-
 Now, within the vaporisation chamber, where the vapour is
rial of the vaporisation chamber in which the liquid is placed).
fully saturated with halothane, halothane exerts 32% of the total
 If the vaporisation chamber is made of a material with a low
pressure (see above), so there is 32ml halothane in every 100 ml
specific heat capacity and low heat conductivity, it is effectively a
of gas' (i.e. every 100 ml consists of 32 ml halothane and 68 ml
thermal insulator, then the temperature of the liquid agent will
other gases). Each 1 ml halothane is accompanied by 2.125 ml of
drop as the agent evaporates, and its evaporation rate will slow
other gases. In order for 20ml halothane to leave the vaporiser
down as its temperature drops further and further away from its 
every minute, it must be carried in/accompanied by 42.5 ml
boiling point. If, however, the vaporisation chamber is made of a
(20 x 2.125) of other gases.
material of high specific heat capacity (i.e. it can hold a lot of heat
 If 20ml halothane and an accompanying 42.5ml of other
energy), and high thermal conductivity (i.e. can conduct heat
 gases leave the vaporisation chamber every minute, but a total
energy quickly),then it acts as a very good heat source; and its
of 20o0ml must leave the whole vaporiser, we can see that
102  Veterinary Anaesthesia
1937.5 ml/min (2000 - (20 + 42.5), of gases must bypass the
are variable depending upon the stage of the respiratory cycle,
vaporisation chamber; and only 62.5ml/min constitutes the
although the gases within circle systems (whether VIC or VOC),
carrier gas flow.
should be warm and moist.
 Old vaporisers that consisted of glass bottles were poor heat
sources, so vaporisation slowed as cooling occurred. Water baths
Classification of vaporisers
could be used to try to maintain vaporiser temperature. However,
We can classify vaporisers according to their features as docu-
the newer vaporisers are made of metals with high specific heat
mented above, for example:
The warmer the temperature of the gas into which we expect
● How is the splitting ratio determined? For example variable
  s s  ) s
vaporisation to occur, the less hindrance there is to vaporisation;
although the material of the vaporising chamber, (and its tem-
(operator-determined e.g. copper kettle, where the operator
had the two flows (bypass and carrier gases), to determine
perature), usually has the greater influence in practice. See also
below under temperature compensation devices.
 separately); dual-circuit' (e.g. desflurane vaporisers).
● What method of vaporisation is employed? For example flow-
over; bubble-through; gas/vapour blend (e.g. desflurane).
Gas flow
● Temperature compensation? For example automatic; manual
Vaporiser output at very low, and very high, gas flows can be
(old copper ketle again, where the operator had to vary the gas
inaccurate (see later).
flows if the temperature changed); or not an issue because the
vaporiser is heated to a constant temperature (e.g. desflurane
Surface area of 'contact'
vaporiser).
If the surface area of contact between the volatile liquid and its
● Calibration? Yes, agent specific; or no.
carrier gas’ can be increased, then vaporisation will be more
● Position? VIC or VOC ? Depends on the internal resistance.
efficient. The surface area of contact can be increased by: incor-
porating wicks into the vaporisation chamber; by using cowls and
baffles to direct and redirect the gases to flow nearer the surface
Some features of modern plenum-type vaporisers
'i au ynou sue au sugnq aq no im au jo
Variable bypass
e an    a   
Internal resistance of vaporisers
You will appreciate from the comments in the above paragraph,
iser is turned 'on, then some of the fresh gas flow is diverted
that if the inside of a vaporiser is cluttered with lots of wicks
through the vaporisation chamber of the vaporiser; the propor-
and baffles, then it presents a high resistance to the passage of
tion being dependent upon the concentration set on the vapor-
gases through it. This is not such a problem if the vaporiser is
iser's dial. Thus the stream of fresh gases entering the vaporiser is
 seated on the back bar of an anaesthetic machine, where gases
effectively split into two streams, the bypass stream and the carrier
under some pressure (a little above atmospheric), are effectively
gas stream.
pushed’ through the vaporiser. In fact, ‘high resistance'
is
The'splitting ratio'is primarily determined by the vaporiser
what we call the plenum' type vaporisers which are situated
 concentration dial, but the temperature compensation device
 on the anaesthetic machine outside the anaesthetic breathing
may also affect it (see below).
system, these are called vaporisers out-of-circuit/circle (VOC).
However, some anaesthetic breathing systems, notably the
Method of vaporisation
Stephens circle, and the similar Komesaroff circle, have special
Usually “flow-over', i.e. the carrier gas literally flows over the
low resistance' vaporisers that sit 'in' the circle itself, so are called
surface of the liquid within the vaporisation chamber and over
vaporisers-in-circuit/circle (VIC).
the surface of soaked wicks there. Bafles are often also incorpo-
These in-circuit vaporisers must offer low resistance to gas
rated. The old fashioned ^copper kettle' vaporiser had to have two
flow, because gases flowing ‘through’ them are driven by the
gas supplies and the anaesthetist had to calculate the flows for the
patient's respiratory efforts. They are usually positioned in the
bypass gas and the carrier gas. The carrier gas was introduced
inspiratory limb, to reduce contamination of the liquid anaes-
 into the vaporising chamber via a sintered bronze or glass element,
thetic agent contents by condensed water vapour (more water
e pinb au yanou paqgng, sem sea au neu os
vapour is present in the exhaled gases in the expiratory limb).
They are often called ‘draw-over’ vaporisers, as the patient's
Temperature compensation
inspiratory effort ^draws? the gases through them, and over the
We have already discussed the advantages of using a good heat
source for the construction material of a vaporiser (e.g. large mass
agent concentration tends to be much less accurate than plenum
of copper), but even then, there can be variations in output, espe-
type vaporisers, and because of their simple construction, their
 cially at high gas flows. Thus additional temperature compensat-
temperature compensation is often poor, but, they are not subject
ing devices are usually incorporated to ensure that vaporiser
Aip pue pio, jo pue 'smog yaiu snonuuoo aues au anb o
output is what the concentration dial says, over a wide range of
gas flows. (In the ‘tec series of vaporisers, the term tec means
vaporisers are subjected to the patient's respiratory flows, which
temperature compensated.) Temperature compensation devices
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and gas cylinders 
103
have been automated and usually utilise bimetallic strip or other
halothane's SVP is still 243 mmHg, and the vaporising chamber
s n s ne n sn  
contains 243/380 = 64% halothane. Although the dial says 1%,
valves. With a bimetallic strip (or similar) device, as the tempera-
the output is actually 2%; but 2% of 380mmHg = 7.6 mmHg.
ture decreases during vaporisation (especially at high fresh gas
which again is the partial pressure exerted by halothane in the
flows), the double strip bends away from the vaporiser inlet
gases leaving the vaporiser. As it is the partial pressure of haloth-
channel, and encourages more gas to flow through the vaporisa-
ane in the lung alveoli, and thereby the brain, that determines
tion chamber, so that vaporiser output, in terms of concentration
whether the patient remains anaesthetised, we should not need to
of anaesthetic agent in the total gases leaving the vaporiser,
alter the vaporiser setting at all (unless the temperature also
remains constant (Figure 10.13).
changes). The MAC value is expressed in terms of percent of 1
With an ether-filled copper bellows device, expansion or con-
standard (760 mmHg) atmospheric pressure.
If atmospheric pressure changes, then this equation can be used
mine the proportion of gas diverted through the vaporisation
to determine the new vaporiser output:
chamber. With cooling, the bellows shrinks, and the bypass flow
is restricted so that more gas is forced through the vaporisation
New vaporiser output in terms of vol% = C x(P/P)
chamber (Figure 10.14).
 Temperature compensation mechanisms have a limited range
Where C is vaporiser setting in vol%; P is atmospheric pressure
over which they work best; for most vaporisers this is between 10
at which vaporiser was calibrated (standard atmospheric pres-
(to18)℃ and 35-40°℃. Outside these temperatures, the SVP of
sure); P' is new atmospheric pressure.
the agents may vary too much for vaporiser output to be
 and e d  sa im a ie on
accurate.
affect vaporiser output secondary to their effcts on flow. Changes
in temperature and pressure can affect gas viscosity and density,
Effects of ambient atmospheric pressure
which can affect gas flow and the accuracy of flowmeters.
Because SVP depends only on temperature, and not pressure, the
atmospheric pressure has little effect on vaporiser output. For
Tilt protection
example, at 760 mmHg atmospheric pressure, if the concentration
Most of the older vaporisers do not have any means of protecting
dial is set at 1%, then the output partial pressure of halothane will
the bypass gas channel from contamination by liquid agent should
be 1% of 760 mmHg (= 7.6 mmHg). However, if the atmospheric
the vaporiser accidentally be tilted. Therefore, following acciden-
 pressure is 380 mHg, and if the temperature has not changed, then
tal tilting, such vaporisers should be drained as fully as possible
and then purged with a fresh gas flow (oxygen) of 5l/min, with
the concentration dial set at 5%, for at least 30min. Note that
different makes of vaporiser may have different instructions for
 this. This ensures that no liquid agent can possibly remain in the
   d  io a  e  s s
Some of the newer vaporisers do have anti-tilting devices, for
example the 'tec 3 series are supposed to be able to withstand
tilting of up to 90°, whereas the 'tec 4 and 5 series should with-
stand tilting of up to 180%; but their manufacturers suggest you
do not trust these tilt-protection devices, and stillsuggest empty-
ing and purging the vaporiser should tilting occur.
Figure 10.13 Temperature compensation achieved with bimetalic strip.
Intermittent back-pressure ('pumping') protection
 Especially when IPPV is necessary, (and also when the oxygen
flush valve is activated), the pressure exerted on the anaesthetic
breathing circuit can be transmitted back to the anaesthetic
machine back bar, and therefore the vaporiser. If gases which have
left the vaporiser are forced to flow backwards and flow through
the vaporisation chamber again,they can pick up' even more of
the volatile agent; so when the gases finally leave the vaporiser, the
concentration of agent delivered to the patient is much higher
than originally intended. Most anaesthetic machine back bars
now have pressure ^surge-protectors", in the form of constrictors;
and some have one-way valves at the common gas outlet. Most
vaporisers also now have some kind of back-pressure protection,
Figure 10.14 Temperature compensation achieved by variable expansion of
ether-filled copper bellows.
pathways.
104  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Carrier gas flow and composition
filling nozzles. The fillers are geometrically coded (keyed) to fit
Most modern vaporisers are designed so that their output is
both the collar on the bottle of agent, and the filling port of the
virtually independent of fresh gas flows over a range from
 ss s   az r  ra s
c. 250 ml/min up to c. 15l/min. Very slow flows (the gases need
that docks into the filling port of the correct vaporiser. The fllers
a bit of momentum to push’ the relatively heavy vapour out of
are also colour coded according to agent:
the vaporiser), and very fast gas flows (vaporisation in the vaporis-
● Red for halothane.
ing chamber cannot keep pace with fast gas flow, so the vapour
● Purple for isoflurane.
 may not reach fully a saturated condition), tend to be associated
● Yellow for sevoflurane.
with reduced output.
● Blue for desflurane.
 Plenum vaporisers are designed to work with carrier gas flows
at more stable flows than draw-over vaporisers, which are subject
 These keyed-flling devices also reduce spillage of liquid agent,
to a wide variation in flows, for example from nil (during an end-
eliminate the problem of air-locks, and prevent over-filling of
expiratory pause), up to peak inspiratory fows (which can be
vaporisers.
 about 3-5 times minute ventilation; so about 20 1/min for a 25 kg
(8op
 How much liquid anaesthetic agent does a vaporiser use
 The gas composition, in terms of its temperature, its viscosity
per hour?
and density, and its chemistry, can affect vaporiser output. For
 In 1993, Ehrenwerth and Eisenkraft gave the following formula:
example, nitrous oxide will dissolve, to some extent, in liquid
anaesthetic agents. When nitrous oxide flow is first turned on, this
 3 × fresh gas flow (l/min) X concentration dial setting (%)
dissolution into the liquid anaesthetic agent will effectively reduce
= ml liquid used per hour
the volume of carrier gas passing through the vaporisation
chamber, and thus will reduce vapour output. However, this is
 only a transient effect, as the amount of dissolved nitrous oxide
How much vapour does 1ml of liquid agent produce?
soon reaches equilibrium with that in the carrier gas. The dissolu-
Typically, 1 ml of liquid agent yields about 200 ml of vapour. You
can now appreciate why tipping over a vaporiser and contaminat-
reduce its vaporisation (and SVP), slightly. (Volatile anaesthetic
ing its bypass channel is so dangerous.
agents also diffuse into/through plastic and rubber components
of anaesthetic breathing systems and adsorb into soda lime.)
Agent specific calibration
 Each modern vaporiser is calibrated at standard temperature and
Gas flow direction
pressure for the specific volatile agent for which it is intended.
 If a vaporiser is erroneously connected back-to-front, higher 
Calibration is also preformed over a range of gas flows.
vapour concentrations than dialled up' may be delivered.
The old copper-kettle vaporiser was not agent specifc, but was
also not calibrated. The anaesthetist had to calculate what flows
Liquid level - how full?
were needed: to send directly to the patient; and to send through
 Most vaporisers work best when filled to the correct level Too
the vaporiser, (remember that this vaporiser required two sepa-
 empty, and they cannot produce accurate output; too full and the
wick may be totally submerged, thus reducing the surface area
tion of the chosen agent at the temperature of the vaporiser at the
available for evaporation, so output may again not be optimal.
time. The vaporiser consisted of a huge mass of copper to try to
Also, if the vaporiser is too full, there is a risk of liquid agent
prevent cooling.
escaping into the bypass which is very dangerous. Vaporisers
The SVP for halothane (243 mmHg), is very similar to that for
t l, pe Ada, se uu ss-is, e aau ansn
isoflurane (238 mmHg). Because of their similarity, you could
 and the vaporiser works best when the liquid level is between these
theoretically use either agent in either vaporiser, and the concen-
two lines.
tration delivered would be roughly correct. Enflurane (SVP
When vaporisers are filled, they should be turned 'off’ (except
175 mmHg), and sevoflurane (SVP 160-170 mmHg), are also
the desflurane vaporiser, see later). If they are turned ^on' while
similar in volatility. However, it is very bad practice to fill a vapor-
gases are flowing through them, the gases will try to bubble out
iser intended for one agent, with another (only possible if the
through the filler port which is very messy and polluting. If a
vaporiser does not have the keyed-filler system), without cleaning
vaporiser is turned 'on' during filling when gases are not flowing.
it and recalibrating it in between.
there is a risk of over-flling it, with subsequent problems as men-
 In addition, liquid halothane comes with its less volatile stabi-
tioned above.
liser, thymol. Thymol does not vaporise easily, so gets left behind,
and eventually it clogs up' wicks and the inner working parts of
Vaporiserfilling
halothane vaporisers, and may affect vaporiser output, which is
Some vaporisers just have a funnel-shaped flling port, where you
why vaporisers require servicing/cleaning at least annually. It is
literally just pour in the agent. Newer vaporisers have a keyed-
also suggested that halothane vaporisers be completely drained
fller system, the so-called Fraser-Sweatman safety system. The
(and the liquid drained, be discarded), every 2 weeks to slow down 
keyed filler devices are in the form of agent-specific vaporiser-
this clogging.
Anaesthetic machines, vaporisers and gas cylinders 105
Discoloration of agent
because of immobilisation of the equivalent pin movement on
Some vaporisers incorporate plastic spacers between paper wicks,
that vaporiser.
and these can react with the liquid anaesthetic agent which causes
discoloration (yellowy-brown); but apparently without any sig-
Safety features of vaporisers:
nificant consequence to vaporiser output.
● Keyed fllers (ensure correct agent, and prevent over-filling).
● Vaporisers must be locked into place before they can work.
Corrosion
● The safety interlock system prevents the use of more than one
 Halothane requires a stabiliser/preservative thymol to reduce its
 degradation. The more fluorinated an agent, the less reactive' it
vaporiser at any one time.
● The low position of the flling port prevents over-filling, and
is, so isoflurane, sevoflurane and desflurane do not need stabilis-
 prevents spillage into the bypass.
ers/preservatives as such. However, sevoflurane is bottled in
● Anticlockwise turn ^on’; all modern vaporisers are now the
 plastic or lacquered aluminium and has water added to reduce its
same in this respect.
degradation.
 Because halothane is potentially so reactive, it can cause corro-
Desflurane vaporiser
sion of the vaporiser material. Hence, the vaporiser material
 Desflurane's SVP is about 664 mmHg at room temperature which
should be as robust as possible. One of halothane's potential
means that it is very volatile; in fact it is almost at its boiling point
breakdown products is hydrofluoric acid, which is very corrosive
 at room temperature, and smallfluctuations in room temperature
 and anaesthetic breathing system components too.
 can greatly affect its vaporisation. In order to ^control′ the vapori-
sation of this agent accurately, the liquid agent must be held at a
constant temperature, so that its SVP is constant. This can only
Vaporiser mounting on the back bar
 be achieved by using a special vaporiser, which boils the liquid
Vaporisers can be permanently mounted onto an anaesthetic
machine back bar, usually by conical/tapered (so-called cage-
agent and then heats its vapour to 39°C, at which its SVP is
1500 mmHg.
mount'), fittings. Alternatively they can be detachably mounted,
The archetypal tec 6 desflurane vaporiser works as follows. It
usually onto some quick-release type of mounting, for example
 consists of a thermostatically controlled agent reservoir, which
the ‘selectatec’ system. This consists of two protruding 'male'
 holds about 400 ml of liquid agent. It is heated (requires electrical
docking port valves on the back bar and compatible female
docking port recesses on the vaporiser. Once the male and female
supply, and has battery back-up), to a temperature of 39°C. At
this temperature, the SVP of desflurane is 194kPa (1500 mmHg).
ports have been ^married’, i.e. the vaporiser is 'seated’ on the back
When vapour is required, a valve opens and pure vapour (under 
bar, it must then be locked’ in place by turning a knob. The
d , s s an s oi P si (nssd 
vaporiser must be locked into its position before any gas can flow
sure vapour passes through an electronic pressure regulator,
through it. With the older tec 3 series vaporisers, gas could flow
which reduces its pressure to around 1-2kPa above atmospheric
through the vaporiser head’ (i.e. though the bypass), as soon as
pressure (ie. the sort of pressure that is normally found in a
the vaporiser was locked on; even before its concentration dial
was actually turned on. With the newer tec4 and 5 series vaporis-
a   nsd sn  s sn 
is then, according to the dialled up percentage, fed into a carrier
ers, the vaporiser must be locked onto the back bar and the con-
 centration dial turned 'on before any gas can flow through it.
 asnd es e on nenaa aq si um sns sis
then the blended' gas flow can leave the vaporiser.
 The vaporiser requires a 5-10min warm-up time to reach its
Selectatec vaporiser interlock system
operating temperature. It cannot be turned on until it is ready. It
Until recently, hospital anaesthetists often used to use more than
is the onevaporiser that you canfll whileitis in use atdial settings
one vapour simultaneously, and they used to follow certain rules,
 of 8% or less, but not at the higher settings (it delivers up to 18%).
such as which vaporiser was placed upstream. However, now it is
This is necessary, because turning off a desflurane vaporiser in
considered not such a good practice; but many anaesthetic
order to fill it might allow the patient to wake up because it is an
machines still have back bar ^positions’ available for more than
agent of very low blood solubility. Desflurane bottles are plastic-
one vaporiser. So, if more than one vaporiser is mounted on an
coated, to help them withstand the high pressures generated by
anaesthetic machine (e.g. the vaporisers are attached all the time,
d a  a  n n n     i
for inadvertently administering more than one inhalational agent
VIC: Stephens circle and Komesaroff machine
to the patient, for example if the previous anaesthetist forgot to
 If we apply our classification rules to VIC, what do we fnd?
turn his/her chosen vaporiser off at the end of the anaesthetic and
 you now select a different vaporiser.
● The splitting ratio is determined by the concentration dial posi-
 In order to try to prevent this dangerous situation, the inter-
tion (although calibrations' are rough, see below).
locking pin system was invented. Literally this means that when
● The method of vaporisation is flow-over (or draw-over). Wicks
two vaporisers are mounted next to each other, and one is turned
must be metal (so provide some temperature compensation
 o sod d s n  samis sd d, e '
ability too), as cloth wicks tend to become saturated by con-
next door vaporiser, so preventing it from being turned on
densed water vapour. Wicks may be included to enhance
106  Veterinary Anaesthesia
vaporisation of the less volatile agents, but they also increase
Further reading
resistance.
● They have no temperature compensation devices. They are
Alibhai H (2007) The anaesthetic machine and vaporisers. In:
 usually in the form of glass bottles/jars, and their output varies 
 BSAVA Manual of canine and feline anaesthesia and analgesia.
2nd Edn. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T. BSAVA
with gas flow.
● The anaesthetic agent concentration within the circle will
Publications, Gloucester, UK. Chapter 4, pp 8-29.
 decrease if the fresh gas flow entering the circle is increased,
Ambrisko TD, Klide AM (2006) Evaluation of isoflurane and
because additional entry of cool fresh' gases, (which are not
sevoflurane vaporizers over a wide range of oxygen flow rates.
 carrying anaesthetic agent), will tend to reduce vaporisation
American Journal of Veterinary Research 67(6), 936-940.
and dilute out the anaesthetic-laden gases already within the
(Discusses the potential problems of vaporisers being calibrated
With air, yet being used with oxygen.)
circle.
● They have no accurate calibration. Their output can be increased
Clutton E (1995) The right anaesthetic machine for you? In
by turning the dial to a higher value, for example the Goldman
Practice 17(2), 83-88.
vaporiser has one dial setting for off, and three positions for
 Dosch MP (2005) The Anesthesia Gas Machine. Web resource at:
http://www.udmercy.edu/crna.agm/
on: 1, 2 and 3.
● They are designed for use within an anaesthetic breathing
Eales M, Cooper R (2007) Principles of anaesthetic vaporisers.
system, usually in the inspiratory limb of a circle type system.
Anaesthesia and Intensive Care Medicine 8(7), 111-115.
Hartsfield SM (1994)
Practical
When the vaporiser is within the circuit, the patient can regu-
1 problems with
veterinary
late its own anaesthetic depth. For example, if the depth of
anaesthesia machines. Journal of Veterinary Anaesthesia 21,
86-98.
anaesthesia becomes too deep, then the animal breathes more
 slowly, and less gas is drawn over the liquid agent in the vapor-
 Peyton J, Cooper R (2007) Anaesthetic machines. Anaesthesia and
 iser. Couple this with the fact that the vapour already present
 Intensive Care Medicine 8(7), 107-111.
within the circle is getting diluted by the continuing inflow of 
 Sinclair CM, Thadsad MK, Barker I (2006) Modern anaesthetic
fresh gas from the anaesthetic machine, and you will see that
machines. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care
 n   al   ,  
and Pain 6(2), 75-78.
it will tend to breathe faster (unless it breath-holds), so more
 gases are drawn through the vaporiser, and the vapour concen-
tration within the circuit increases, so anaesthetic depth
increases. This sort of feedback’ control system, however, is
over-ridden if you apply IPPV.
Self-test section
These systems can take a bit of getting used to, and some people
 do not like them because they think that animals regulate their
1.
 How is pure' oxygen obtained for medical use?
depth of anaesthesia to a very deep plane. However, those vets
2.
 By what five criteria are vaporisers classified?
who use them regularly really like them.
 Information chapter
Anaesthetic machine checks
Whenever you are contemplating using an anaesthetic machine,
With just oxygen flowing, check that you can feel gas exiting
you should perform various checks.
through the common gas outlet (CGO) of the anaesthetic machine.
 Ensure that there is suffcient oxygen and other gases and make
Briefly occlude the CGO, and watch the O, flowmeter indicator
sure that you can ^open? the cylinder valves, i.e. have the correct
float. It should fall (with the increased back pressure you are
cylinder spanner/key and check that the valves are not closed too
creating, which also increases the density), and if you maintain
tightly for you to open.
the CGO occlusion for a little longer you should hear the noise of
Once the gas cylinders (e.g. O, NO, air), have been turned on,
 gases escaping through the high (positive) pressure relief valve
listen/feel carefully for leaks around the cylinder valves, and
of the anaesthetic machine back-bar (often incorporated near the
throughout the anaesthetic machine plumbing. Special leak detec-
CGO). If the float fails to fall, there may be a leak somewhere in
tion fluid (non-combustible) is available.
the back-bar.
 If there is a piped gas supply to the operating theatre, check that
 Turn off the oxygen flow, and check that the emergency oxygen 
the Schrader probes of the gas hoses are correctly placed into
flush valve is functional.
their respective sockets. Once in place, give the probe a gentle tug
To check the oxygen failure device, the Oz cylinder/pipeline
(the 'tug test') to ensure that it has locked’ correctly into the
 supply must frst be turned off/disconnected, respectively. Then
socket. Listen for leaks.
turn on the O flowmeter and watch the Oz pressure gauge register
Check that the flowmeters are functional. Ensure that the indi-
a fall in Oz pressure. An audible alarm should sound once the
 cator floats can move throughout the whole range of their scales,
 pressure falls to around 200kPa. Remember to re-establish the O2
and check that the floats do not stick either to the sides of the
 a  d  ro  a  at 
flowmeter tubes, or to the ^stops’ at the top and bottom of the
back into the piped supply, before starting an anaesthetic.
flowmeter tubes. Rotameter floats should rotate when gases are
To perform a negative pressure leak' test on the anaesthetic
flowing.
 machine, you need a rubber squeezy suction bulb. With allflow-
Check that there is a vaporiser available for the volatile agent 
 meters and vaporiser (if present) off, attach the pre-squeezed
of choice. The vaporiser may be permanently plumbed in to the
(ie. empty) suction bulb to the CGO (you require the proper
back-bar of the anaesthetic machine (on cagemount fittings), but
connector for this), and wait for at least 10s. This effectively
if the vaporiser is 'removable (ie. selectatec/quick-release mount-
applies a gentle vacuum to the low-pressure parts of the anaes-
ing), check forleaks before mounting the vaporiser Set the oxygen
thetic machine. If there are any leaks, the bulb will fll easily. If
flowmeter to say 5 l/min and check for leaks from the vaporiser
dai aq ose nr isn s da as lm qq a u
seating; not forgetting to turn off the oxygen flow once the test is
with the vaporiser turned on,but with no gases flowing. The bulb
completed. Then mount the vaporiser correctly onto its seating
should not fill.
on the back-bar and lock it in position before repeating the leak
To check if the negative pressure (air inlet) valve is working.
test with the vaporiser both turned off and also on. Ensure that
 then more negative pressure needs to be applied. A tube (e.g an
the vaporiser can be turned on. Halothane vaporiser flow-splitting
 endotracheal tube),can be connected to the CGO and by sucking
valves (actuated by turning the concentration dial) can become
on the free end of the tube, suffcient negative pressure can be
difficult to turn when gummed up by the non-volatile ^stabiliser,
created to perform the test, which should activate the back bar
thymol. Ensure that the concentration dial can be turned through-
negative pressure relief valve, which will be heard groaning or
out its full range of concentrations. Make sure that the vaporiser
whistling. Not all veterinary machines have this safety feature.
is full, and with the correct agent; and that there is suffcient
The anaesthetic breathing systems should also be tested. Turn
supply of volatile agent and spare besides.
 on the oxygen flowmeter to for example 2l/min. For all the
 Before attempting these next checks, turn off the vaporiser and
breathing systems, if the patient end of the system is occluded and
any NO flow, to reduce theatre contamination. (Remember to
the ^pop-off' valve is closed (or for a Jackson Rees modifed Ayre's
check the scavenging system.)
T-piece, the open end of the bag is occluded), ensure that the
107
108  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 system/bag fills. If the bag is then squeezed gently, any leaks may
 system is temporarily occluded, the system can be^flled’ by briefly
be detected. Note that some newer pop-off valves have a high
turning on the oxygen flowmeter until the pressure registered on
pressure (usually around 60 cmHO) release port. Do not forget
the manometer reads about 30-40 cmH,O. Then turn off the O2
to open the pop-off valves again so that the systems are ready,
flowmeter, and watch and wait. If there are no leaks, then the
and not dangerous, for use.
pressure will stay constant. If there are leaks, then the pressure
 ai i ysn on  si n ss u 
will fall. The leak rate can be determined by turning the O flow-
tube is intact, or else there is a risk of causing some rebreathing
meter back on, and adjusting it until the pressure reading remains
of exhaled gases. The simplest way to do this is, with oxygen
constant. You should not accept leaks of more than 100 ml/min
flowing at about 2 l/min, by then occluding the end of the inner
for a circle system if you are going to be performing low flow?
(fresh gas supply) hose at the patient's end of the system, the
anaesthesia. Common sites for leaks in circles are around the
flowmeter float should fll (due to back pressure/increased gas
valves (especially if 'turret valve design), and around the soda
density); and the anaesthetic machine's back-bar high pressure
lime canister.
relief valve may activate.
 Once the anaesthetic machine and anaesthetic breathing
Another way of testing anaesthetic breathing systems for leaks
 systems have been checked, it is important to check the function-
is to use a manometer. This is easy with some circles, as they often
ing of any monitoring equipment that might be required.
have manometers incorporated into their design. It is also more
You should also check that there is a functional waste anaes-
important for circles, where low flow anaesthesia may be prac-
thetic gas scavenging system.
tised where even small gas leaks can represent a significant
All the drugs and fluids necessary should also be available,
wastage/loss from the system. If the patient end of the breathing
 including an emergency drugs box.
Local anaesthetics
Learning objectives
To be able to describe the basic pharmacology of local anaesthetic agents in terms of their chemical structure, including the
two types of molecular linkage, and their mechanism of action at voltage sensitive sodium channels.
To appreciate the possible order of blockade of mixed nerves.
 To be able to discussthe features of the two main groups (amino- and ester-linked) which affect onset and duration of action,
tissue penetration and toxicity.
 To be able to describe the clinical effects of toxicity.
 For example, if we apply local anaesthetic to a mixed spinal
Mechanism of action
nerve, the nerve consists of several types of nerve fibres; some are
 Local anaesthetics are weak bases, which reversibly block' voltage-
myelinated (with variable thickness of myelin sheath depending
gated sodium channels; and thereby prevent membrane depolari-
upon nerve type), and some are unmyelinated nerves with just
sation. They may also block various other ion channels too and
loose Schwann cell covering. The different types of nerve fibres
have other actions, such as anti-inflammatory effects (see below).
conduct currents at different velocities. The velocity of conduc-
Voltage-gated sodium channels exist in various conformational
tion is primarily dependent upon the fbre diameter. Smaller
'states, and pass through at least these different states as the
membrane potential changes:
slower transmission velocity. Smaller diameter fibres also usually
●Resting (or 'rested-closed').
have a relatively smaller absolute number of sodium channels per
unit of membrane length, so the size' of sodium current gener-
● Open/activated.
ated is limited, which also limits the conduction velocity.
● Inactivated (or inactivated-closed')/desensitized.
 Unmyelinated nerves are very susceptible to local anaesthetic
 The channels may change between states as shown in Figure
action because:
12.1.
 Local anaesthetics preferentially block' the inactivated and
 local anaesthetic molecules.
open/activated channels; but not the resting state (i.e. I>O>>R);
● They are usually small diameter fbres, so that the overall
and because their dissociation from the channel takes longer than
number of sodium channels per unit length of fbre is small, so
their association with it, they tend to stabilise sodium channels
complete conduction blockade is accomplished easily by low
(and therefore the membrane), in a non-conducting state. Sodium
channels are transmembrane pores, (formed by at least one C
doses of local anaesthetic.
and one or two β membrane-spanning protein subunits).
Myelinated nerve fbres use saltatory” conduction, whereby
Because of this voltage-gated sodium channel blockade, local
current jumps? from one node of Ranvier to the next; and because
anaesthetics are able to inhibit membrane depolarisation, and
of this, only three successive nodes need to be blocked by local
therefore the development and transmission of electrical currents
anaesthetic to effect total conduction block in the fbre. Nodes are
within ^excitable’ tissues; notably neurones and muscles (espe-
 not insulated by myelin, and therefore are more susceptible to
cially cardiac muscle). The ease of blockade of electrical impulses
 block by local anaesthetics than the internodal parts of the nerve
(block of sodium currents), depends upon the sodium channel
fibre. Although there tends to be a high density of sodium
density in the tissue concerned, the ^state? of the channels, and
channels at nodes, sufficient channels (to prevent conduction)
how well insulated’ they are from the applied local anaesthetic.
may be blocked more easily at three successive nodes, than along
109
110  Veterinary Anaesthesia
a sufficient length of nonmyelinated nerve fibre to block conduc-
In large mixed nerves, those fibres on the ‘outside’ of the
tion. Therefore, sometimes, myelinated fbres appear to block
nerve are blocked first (the mantle effect). These usually supply
more easily than unmyelinated fbres. The order of blockade of
the more proximal parts of a limb, whilst distal parts are supplied
the fibres also depends on their frequency of ^use' or fring (see
by nerves lying deeper within the mixed nerve. Hence, limbs tend
below).
to become blocked from proximal to distal, and the block wears
 The quoted order of blockade of a 'mixed’' nerve is usually:
 off in the reverse sequence, so that sensation to the toes blocks
last and returns first.
1. Preganglionic sympathetic B fbres (poorly myelinated).
 2. Post-ganglionic sympathetic C fbres; also temperature and
 pain fibres (C and A8 fbres). (C fbres are unmyelinated; A&
 Chemical structure of local anaesthetic agents
fibres are poorly myelinated).
3. Touch (discriminatory), deep pressure, muscle spindle
 Although a number of drugs possess local anaesthetic-like' activ-
ity and ^membrane stabilising? properties (e.g. phenothiazines,
sensory fbres (flower spray endings) (myelinated Aβ fibres).
 pethidine, ketamine, atropine, Q2 agonists and antagonists, anti-
 4. Motor fibres to muscle spindles (myelinated Ay fibres).
histamines, anticonvulsants and beta blockers), the local anaes-
 5. Proprioception (myelinated Aα fbres), and somatic motor
fibres (myelinated Aα fbres); also muscle spindle sensory
thetics which we use specifically in order to block nerve conduction
have a common chemical structure:
fbres (annulospiral endings) (myelinated Ao fibres), and
sensory fibres of golgi tendon organs (myelinated Ao fbres).
Aromatic group
 Intermediate link
Amino group
When myelinated fibres block before unmyelinated fbres it
(lipophilic)
(hydrocarbon chain)
(hydrophilic)
may be partly because of “use-dependent” (or “frequency-of-
firing'-dependent) blockade. That is, those fibres which are more
The amino group most often consists of a tertiary amine,
active, have more channels in a state which can be blocked by local
except:
anaesthetic agents (remember I>O>>R). So A8 fbres (fast pain;
● Prilocaine, which has a secondary amine instead.
incisional pain) may block before C fbres (slow pain); and
sometimes Ac fbres seem to block frst, if these fbres are more
cannot exist in the ionised (RNH+) form.
inherently active (see later).
 Some texts describe the effects of differential nerve blockade as
The nature of the intermediate link (i.e. whether it contains an
follows. If the local anaesthetic is applied to a mixed peripheral
 ester or an amide group), defines the two broad sub-groups of 
nerve at X,its differential effects spread out in wavefronts? (Figure 
 local anaesthetic agents:
12.2).
(o-(o=)) no s a o
● the amide-linked group (-NH-C(=O)-).
The distance between the lipophilic and hydrophilic groups is
 important, and for best activity, must be 6-9 Angstroms (i.e. 45
atoms).
 Most local anaesthetics are prepared as racemic mixtures of R
 and S enantiomers; but lidocaine is achiral.
Figure 12.1 Voltage-gated sodium channels may change between the
Local anaesthetics, although weak bases with low water solubil-
states of resting (R), open (O) and inactivated (I) in the direction of the arrows.
ity, can be formulated as hydrochloride salts, which dissolve
Proximal :
Zone of muscle relaxation,
i.e. ALL nerve types are
blocked
tissu
 Zone of sympathetic
block - only
 sympathetic fibres are
Zone of analgesia,
blocked here and skin
D
i.e. sympathetic,
feels warm because of 
pain and possibly
vasodilation
touch fibres are
blocked
Distal 
Figure 12.2 Zones of desensitisation following local anaesthesia of a peripheral nerve at X.
Local anaesthetics  111
RNH+ >RN + H+
Properties of the amino-esters
Outside
● Poor tissue penetration.
Membrane
RN
● Short duration of action because rapid metabolism (hydroly-
Inside
sis), by tissue and plasma esterases/cholinesterases (most of
which are produced by the liver). Beware recent organophos-
RNH+ → RN + H+
 phate treatment. Cocaine is the exception because it undergoes
Sodium channel
only hepatic metabolism. Note that CSF contains no esterases,
so accidental intrathecal injection produces very long duration 
Figure 12.3 Sites of action of local anaesthetic agents at excitable mem-
of effects.
branes. Open arrows denote channel blocking. RN is the tertiary amine form
(free base); and RNH+ is the quaternary N+ state (ionised state).
● Possibly less chance of toxicity because of rapid metabolism
(short duration of action).
● Possibly responsible for causing allergic reactions. One of the
readily in water at pH 4-7. The commonly used local anaesthetic
 metabolites is para-amino benzoic acid (pABA), which is impli-
agents have pKa values between 7.6 and 8.9 (see below). Within
cated in various allergic/hypersensitivity reactions. Also, pABA
the body (both extracellular and intracellular fluids), most
antagonises  the  actions of trimethoprim  potentiated
local anaesthetic agents are therefore fairly wel ionised. Both
sulphonamides.
the ionised and unionised forms of the local anaesthetic are
Amide-linked local anaesthetics (aniline derivatives)
ultimately important for sodium channel blocking activity
(Figure 12.3). Both forms exist according to the following
●Lidocaine (lignocaine)
equilibrium.
●Mepivacaine
● Bupivacaine
RN + H+  RNH+
● Ropivacaine
●Prilocaine
Where RN is the tertiary amine form (free base); and RNH+ is
the quaternary N+ state (ionised state).
 Properties of the amino-amides
 The pH of the commercially available formulations is acidic
(e.g. the hydrochloride salt of lidocaine has pH 6.5), and thus
● Good tissue penetration.
● Longer duration of action (compared to amino-esters), as
increases the amount of drug in the ionised form. After injection
 slower elimination by hepatic metabolism (amidase enzymes).
into tissues, the physiological pH is more alkaline (about 7.4), and
the acidity of the injected solution is easily buffered (so raising the
Metabolites are subsequently excreted in urine. There is
pH of the injectate); so that an increase in the unionised lipophilic
minimal excretion of the parent compound into urine and bile.
● Slower elimination may increase risk of toxicity.
form is favoured.
● Possible allergic reactions because of methylparaben which is
The small amount of ionised form (RNHt) remaining can
 block sodium channels from the ^outside of the cell membrane;
 commonly included as a preservative and can be broken down 
whilst the unionised (RN) form easily crosses cell membranes.
to pABA.
● Other complications are that prilocaine, especially the R isomer,
The unionised form (RN), can block sodium channels from
 is metabolised to ortho-toluidine, which oxidises haemoglobin
'within’ the membrane; and once inside the cell, where the intra-
(causing the formation of methaemoglobin). Methaemo-
cellular pH is slightly more acidic than the extracellular fluid, an
globinaemia may occur with prilocaine toxicity. Excessive
increase in ionised form is favoured. The ionised form (RNH+),
use of EMLA cream (see later), of which prilocaine is one
can now also block' sodium channels from the ^inside' of the cell
component, can also result in such toxicity.
membrane.
 RN can block' channels from 'within’ the membrane and this
blocking action is non-frequency dependent (non-use depend-
Physicochemical properties
ent); whereas channel blocking by RNH', whether from inside or
Tables 12.1 and 12.2 summarise the physicochemical properties
outside the membrane, is frequency-dependent.
of local anaesthetic agents and how they relate to their clinical
Benzocaine cannot exist in the ionised form, and possibly just
effects.
blocks channels from 'within' the membrane.
Key characteristics
Ester-linked local anaesthetics (benzoic
acid derivatives)
● The dissociation constant (pKa) which partly determines onset
of action.
● Cocaine
● Lipid solubility which partly determines potency.
● Procaine
● Protein binding which partly determines duration of action.
●2-chloroprocaine
● Benzocaine
pKa is defined as the pH at which half the drug is present in
●Tetracaine (Amethocaine)
the unionised form and half in the ionised form. Speed of onset 
112   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 12.1 Physicochemical properties of commonly used local anaesthetic agents.
pka
Onset
Relative lipid solubility
Relative potency
 Protein binding
 Duration of action
 Procaine
8.9
Slow
1
Very low
1
6%
Short
Tetracaine
8.5
Slow
200
Medium
8
75%
Long
Lidocaine
7.9
Fast
150
Medium
2
65%
Intermed.
Prilocaine
7.9
Fast
50
Low
2
55%
Intermed.
Mepivacaine
7.6
Fast
50
Low
2.5
75%
Intermed.
 Bupivacaine
8.16
Moderate
1000
High
8
95%
Long
 Ropivacaine
8.1
Moderate
400
Medium
6
95%
Long
 Basic drugs prefer to bind to globulins, especially α1-acid glycoprotein, whereas acidic drugs prefer to bind to albumin.
Table 12.2 Relationship between physicochemical properties and clinical
 also said to reduce the stinging often perceived on initial injection.
 effects.
 However, cooling of nerves results in a reduction in conduction
velocity and therefore potentiation of the anaesthetic effect.
 Physicochemical characteristic 
Correlate
Alkalinising the solution before injection can also alter the pH
of the solution to nearer the drug's pKa, favouring more equal
pka
Speed of onset
 amounts of ionised and unionised forms, and also reducing sting-
Tissue penetrance
Speed of onset
ing on injection; but care must be taken not to over-alkalinise the
Vasodilator potential
 Duration of action 
solution as precipitation can occur. Alkalinisation usually involves
(Potency? Toxicity?)
addition of a small amount of bicarbonate:
Lipid solubility
Potency (toxicity?)
To 1 ml lidocaine 2% add 0.1 ml of an 8.4% sodium bicarbo-
 Onset (and duration?) of action 
nate solution.
Protein binding
 Duration of action 
 To 1ml bupivacaine 0.5% add 0.01 ml of an 8.4% sodium
(Toxicity?)
bicarbonate solution.
Chemical linkage
 Sometimes, instead of hydrochloride salts, salts of carbonic acid
 Affets metabolism (duration of action)
are available (i.e. carbon dioxide is added’ to the solution to
Frequency/use-dependent
Sensori-motor dissociation/discrimination
 increase its acidity and favour RNH+ formation and increase solu-
blockade
bility in aqueous solution). The idea behind this is that, once
injected into tissues, excess CO, is supposed to enter cells rapidly
thereby creating a more acidic intracellular environment and a
of block is proportional to the concentration of the unionised
less acidic extracellular environment, which favours formation of
form outside the neuronal membrane. Those local anaesthetic
agents with pKa values near body pH offer a faster onset of action
RN outside the cell, but RNHt inside the cell, with the result of a
rapid onset of block. This addition of carbonic acid/CO, is called
because relatively more RN is present. In fact, more equal amounts
carbonation.
of RN and RNH+ are present; and whilst extracellular RN concen-
 The onset of block can also be hastened by application of a
tration is important for speed of onset of block, both forms are
ultimately necessary for local anaesthetic activity. Interestingly,
higher concentration of local anaesthetic solution (but beware
toxicity). This is simply via the 'concentration effect'. That is, the
2-chloroprocaine has a high pKa (8.7), yet a very rapid onset, so
 sy tHN ue N a au pndde si ie np o
it is believed that ^tissue penetrance' also has a role (see informa-
present; and the faster the onset of block. Hence, topical local
tion on concentration effect below, as often relatively high con-
anaesthetics are often prepared in higher concentrations than
centration (c.3%) solutions of 2-chloroprocaine were used which
would also hasten onset of block). Tissue penetrance depends
those intended for ^injection.
 Local anaesthetic agents have inherent vasoactive properties.
upon a number of factors: degree of ionization (pKa, local pH),
There tends to be a biphasic response, for example low doses
fat solubility, ease of molecular diffusion (molecular size, concen-
resulting in vasoconstriction and higher doses resulting in vasodi-
tration gradient), and addition of dispersers. If the tissue is
lation, but the different drugs, and their different enantiomers
inflamed, it tends to have a lower (more acidic), pH, and therefore
 may also have different actions; and actions in different species
 tends to reduce the amount of unionised form present, and delays 
 may be different. For example:
the onset of block.
Warming the local anaesthetic solution is said to lower the pKa,
● Cocaine is a potent vasoconstrictor.
and therefore hasten the block onset, by increasing the amount of
· Procaine causes mild vasodilation.
RN available to diffuse into the nerve. Warming the solution is
● Tetracaine (amethocaine) causes mild vasodilation.
Local anaesthetics 113
● Lidocaine (has no enantiomers as it is achiral), causes
degrees of myelination are differently susceptible to block. It is
vasodilation.
normally expected that sensory fibres are blocked first' in prefer-
● Racemic mepivacaine lacks vasodilator activity (or may cause
ence to motor fibres (see above).
slight vasoconstriction).
Sensorimotor discrimination may also be associated with the
● S-bupivacaine causes vasoconstriction and R-bupivacaine
 phenomenon of use-dependent or frequency-dependent blockade
causes vasodilation, so when the racemic mixture is applied,
of sodium channels; whereby the nerves in which sodium chan-
very little overall change in vasomotor tone is observed.
nels are most active are more susceptible to blockade. Under
●Ropivacaine has very weak vasoconstrictor properties.
general anaesthesia, the patient should not be moving voluntarily.
 so motor fbres are quiet and therefore relatively resistant to block,
 If the local anaesthetic causes vasoconstriction, then systemic
but sensory fbres are stimulated by surgery and should be more
absorption is delayed, and the duration of block is prolonged. If
susceptible to block. Local anaesthetics tend to take longer to dis-
it causes vasodilation, then systemic absorption is more rapid, and
sociate from sodium channels than they do to block them in the
the duration of block is shortened. The degree of vascularity at
first place, so that spatial and temporal summation of effect can 
the site of application/administration will also influence duration
also occur.
of activity.
Lidocaine and bupivacaine are very good at producing this
 Cocaine is a potent vasoconstrictor because it inhibits catecho-
sensorimotor dissociation. However, there may be more to this
lamine uptake by uptakel, and it inhibits monoamine oxidase,
 phenomenon yet to be discovered. For example, perhaps the
so it enhances monoaminergic neuro transmitter concentration at,
sodium channels of sensory and motor nerves are differentially
for example, sympathetic nerve terminals. It also stimulates
 sensitive to certain local anaesthetics; or may be the interchange
central adrenergic pathways, by which it can produce
of sodium channels between their various states is different
dependence.
 between different nerve types; and differently affected by different
Vasoconstrictors are commonly added to local anaesthetic
local anaesthetics.
agents with inherent vasodilator activity (e.g. lidocaine).
 Some ester-linked local anaesthetics were available with added
Epinephrine (adrenaline) is the most common vasoconstrictor
hyaluronidase (a disperser'). This was supposed to speed onset
of block by enhancing tissue penetration; and increase the spread
have also been used. If epinephrine is used, in order for it to
of anaesthesia thus increasing the likelihood of successful nerve
remain stable in solution (long shelf life), the pH of the solution
blockade. However, duration of block was also reduced because
must be quite acidic. Most commercially available local anaes-
systemic absorption was enhanced.
thetic solutions already have a slightly acidic pH (pH 6.5-7.2).
 Other additives may be included. Preservatives such as sodium
Increasing the acidity (to about pH 4-5), to keep epinephrine
metabisulphite or methylparaben are commonly added. It is often
stable, further enhances the formation of the RNH+ form of the
recommended to use preservative-free solutions for neuraxial
local anaesthetic, and delays block onset; but this effect is negated
anaesthesia due to the potential neurotoxicity of such agents. The
by the vasoconstrictor effect (of epinephrine), which keeps a high
addition of glucose to local anaesthetic solutions can alter their
concentration of local anaesthetic in the vicinity of the adminis-
density (baricity); which may be used to influence their spread
tered local anaesthetic. Epinephrine also has some local anaes-
within the CSF Hypo-, iso- and hyper-baric formulations are
 a  d a  o si j ae a
available. The density of CSF in dogs, cats and horses is about
block.
1.010, so that 1% lidocaine, 0.5% bupivacaine and 1% ropivacaine
Vasoconstrictors reduce the systemic absorption of local
 are slightly hypobaric.
anaesthetics from their sites of application. By maximizing the
'amount' (concentration) of a local anaesthetic at its application
Toxic doses
site, a more rapid onset of block is achieved. Reduction in sys-
temic absorption also prolongs the duration of block; and
Toxic doses depend on the species, the block performed, whether
reduces the chance of systemic toxicity.
the local anaesthetic solution includes epinephrine, and patient 
The addition of epinephrine to bupivacaine makes little differ-
factors such as health status; but are of the order of:
ence, because racemic bupivacaine has no vasodilator effect (has
● Lidocaine: toxic dose = 4-6 (-10) mg/kg; safe dose = 2-4 mg/
little overall effect on vasomotor tone), is highly lipid soluble and
kg.
highly protein (including sodium channel)-bound, and thus tends 
● Procaine: toxic dose = 5 (-10) mg/kg; safe dose = 5 mg/kg.
to have a long duration of action, almost regardless of local vaso-
● Bupivacaine: toxic dose = 1-2 (4) mg/kg; safe dose = 1-2 mg/
mo tor tone.
Sensori-motor  dissociation/discrimination  refers  to  the
kg.
● Ropivacaine: toxic dose = c. 5mg/kg: safe dose = 2-3 mg/kg.
ability of some local anaesthetics to preferentially block sensation,
whilst leaving motor nerve conduction undisturbed. The drug's
 Regarding the above doses,it is probably wise to err on the low
pKa may be partly responsible for differential sensory/motor
 side, especially for cats. Whether they are ^more sensitive, or just
block, as the amount of drug present in the unionised form (more
easier to overdose because of their small size, is undetermined.
fat soluble) will partly determine how easily it can cross nerve
s 'a) yq ao n a d o l ae n 
sheaths and neuronal membranes; so nerve fibres with different 
cat's larynx with lidocaine before tracheal intubation, then
114  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 perform a brachial plexus block with lidocaine), beware the total
CVS depression
dose of lidocaine used. If you want to use a mixture of different 
Lidocaine
Respiratory arrest
local anaesthetics (e.g. lidocaine for one block and bupivacaine
plasma
 Unconsciousness/coma
for another), beware the cumulative toxicity effects. Keep the
concentration
Seizures
individual drug doses below their respective toxic doses in order
Sedation
 to avoid cumulative toxicity.
Muscle twitches
Light-headedness/visual disturbances (man)
 Peri-oral tingling/metallic taste in mouth (man)
Adverse reactions and toxicity
Fgure 12.4 Typical systemic toxicity described for lidocaine.
True allergic reactions
More likely after use of ester-linked local anaesthetics because
related to pABA production from hydrolysis of ester-linked local
agent increases (Figure 12.4). Usually CNS signs are seen first;
anaesthetics. However, methylparaben can be used as a preserva-
depressed consciousness, convulsions and apnoea. Serious cardio-
tive for amide-linked local anaesthetics and its metabolism can
vascular effects usually occur secondarily to hypoxaemia (follows
also lead to pABA production.
-iq jo asop ai e jo uonoatu so iae no (eaoe
vacaine (cardiotoxicity).
Local tissue injury/neurotoxicity
As the plasma concentration of lidocaine increases (Figure
Local tissue injury or neurotoxicity can occur due to:
12.4), the signs of systemic toxicity progress from 'sedation,
● Preservatives
through seizures to depression, unconsciousness, coma, to respi-
● Vasoconstrictors (if ‘end arteries’ are vasoconstricted, then
 ratory arrest and cardiovascular collapse.
 distal tissue ischaemia/necrosis can occur).
 Inadvertent intrathecal injection can lead to hyperacute CNS
● Needle injury to nerves, usually transient neural/neuromuscu-
toxicity and secondary cardiorespiratory depression.
lar dysfunction.
All the local anaesthetics have similar toxic:therapeutic ratios
● Needle injury to blood vessels, haematoma formation (beware
for CNS toxicity; but the seizure threshold varies for each drug
coagulopathies).
 and species.
● Introduction of infection (use good aseptic technique).
 All local anaesthetics have a similar ratio for cardiac:CNS toxic-
● In high concentrations, local anaesthetics act like detergents
ity; but cardiovascular depression is not usually seen until the
and can cause irreversible damage to nerves (detergent effect
plasma concentration reaches three times the seizure threshold
on both myelin sheaths and neuronal cell membranes), so be
plasma concentration. However, bupivacaine prolongs cardiac
careful what concentrations you choose, especially for intrathe-
conduction and increases the chance of re-entrant arrhythmias
cal injection.
at concentrations only slightly above those of the seizure
threshold.
Systemic toxicity
 Local anaesthetics may prefer to block cardiac sodium channels
Systemic toxicity may occur due to the ^membrane stabilising?
over neuronal or skeletal muscle sodium channels (perhaps
actions of these drugs on excitable brain and myocardial cells. It
because of use-dependency/intrinsic higher  affinity/different
depends on the blood concentration of the agent and its affinity
-   e yo   q (sd 
for sodium channels in nerves, myocardium and skeletal muscle
and ligand-gated ion channels. Bupivacaine, with its extremely
cells. It may follow:
great ability to bind proteins, slows the recovery of cardiac sodium
channels much more than lidocaine, and is therefore much more
● Absolute overdose.
arrhythmogenic. Bupivacaine may also bind to a mitochondrial
● Inadvertent intravascular injection.
● Individual sensitivity? Different species may be differentially
enzyme, carnitine acylcarnitine translocase, which is important
for fatty acid oxidation and ATP generation in the heart. If bupi-
sensitive to different local anaesthetics.
vacaine toxicity results in ventricular arrhythmias, then bretylium
 Plasma concentration depends on:
used to be the treatment of choice, but is no longer available in
● Total dose given.
the UK. Lipid emulsion (Intralipidrm) has gained much attention
as an agent to treat local anaesthetic (especially bupivacaine)
● Rate of absorption (local tisue vascularity, vasoactivity of the
drug, addition of vasoconstrictors).
overdose; so-called lipid rescue Its exact mechanism of action is
us idi, au ou umnp, aq a auidnq inq 'umom
● Distribution to tissues (occurs in proportion to their relative
and away from tissues.
perfusion, so brain, heart and vital organs receive large propor-
 Beware hepatic dysfunction which results in both reduced
tions of the amount absorbed).
amide-linked local anaesthetic metabolism and reduced ester-
● Metabolism and elimination: plasma
 esterases (for esters,
linked local anaesthetic metabolism (because of reduced plasma/
except cocaine), or hepatic metabolism (for amides).
 pseudo-cholinesterase production).
Progressive depression of the CNS and the cardiovascular
 Organophosphate treatment results in inhibition of neuromus-
system occurs as plasma concentration of the local anaesthetic
cular junction acetylcholinesterase and pseudocholinesterase, so
Local anaesthetics 115
expect prolonged action of ester-linked local anaesthetics, and
 Non-specific infiltration
 possibly increased chance of toxicity.
● Line block/reverse 7 (or inverse L) block/feld block/ring block.
Some people are poor producers of plasma cholinesterase, or
● Intratesticular injection pre-castration, improves analgesia
they produce atypical plasma cholinesterase. A test of plasma
 under general anaesthesia.
cholinesterase activity is available for man, called the dibucaine
● Incisional/wound infltration (e.g. via 'soaker catheters) can be
test. Dibucaine ( or cinchocaine, which is the local anaesthetic used
used in surgical incisions for example thoracotomy and coeli-
with quinalbarbital in SomuloseM), is an ester-type local anaes-
thetic. The test results are expressed as the Dibucaine number.
otomy incisions.
 Acid-base disturbances may alter the degree of protein binding
Specific nerve blocks: a type of 'regional' block
and the degree of ionisation of local anaesthetics; and may alter
their pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics.
● Limbs - horse lameness workups.
● Heads - regional anaesthesia (see Chapters 13 and 16).
Methaemoglobinaemia
● Intercostal block.
Methaemoglobinaemia can be seen following the use of high
●Paravertebral block.
doses of prilocaine. The R-enantiomer especially, is metabolised
● Epidural (extradural) block.
to ortho-toluidine (o-toluidine), which is responsible for oxida-
● Intrathecal (true spinal/subdural) block.
tion of the haem iron in haemoglobin from the ferrous state to
the ferric state (i.e. haemoglobin becomes methaemoglobin). Cats
Intravenous regional anaesthesia (IvRA) - Bier's block
are said to be especially susceptible to this, so also beware exces-
● Another type of 'regional'block.
sive application of EMLA cream. Methaemoglobinaemia has also
been reported following benzocaine administration.
Systemic administration
Bupivacaine and cardiotoxicity
· By IV infusion.
The R-enantiomer is more cardiotoxic than the S-enantiomer
(also known as laevo-bupivacaine). S-bupivacaine has similar
Some of the local anaesthetics available
local anaesthetic potency to R-bupivacaine and there are only
Procaine (Willcainm)
small differences in intrinsic affinity and stereoselectivity of both
isomers for the sodium channels of skeletal muscle and heart
Available as 5% solution with epinephrine (adrenaline). It is the
muscle, but overall the S-isomer may bind proteins (including
only local anaesthetic licensed for use in farm animals in the UK.
sodium channels), slightly less well; which may partly explain its 
 Procaine is an ester-linked local anaesthetic, therefore has rela-
 tively poor tissue penetrance (so be as accurate as possible with
available commercially for man as Chirocaine.
injection sites when performing nerve blocks). It also has a slowish
onset of action and short duration of effect; and is associated with
occasional allergic reactions. Beware concurrent use of trimetho-
Uses of local anaesthetics
 prim potentiated sulphonamides for treatment of infection, as the
 pABA produced may reduce antibiotic effectiveness. Although
Dilution of local anaesthetic solutions
procaine inherently causes some vasodilation, the veterinary
Sometimes a less concentrated solution of local anaesthetic is
licensed product contains the vasoconstrictor epinephrine. When
required, for example for performing nerve blocks or wound infl-
 administered systemically by IV infusion, procaine has analgesic
 tration in small patients. Local anaesthetic solutions can be diluted
properties (studies in man).
to achieve this; the best dilutent is sterile normal saline as it is
slightly acidic and tends to preserve the pH of the parent
2-Chloroprocaine
solution.
An ester-linked local anaesthetic. Has a rapid onset of action
despite a high pKa, possibly because it has good ‘tissue pene-
Surface or topical application
trance? It has a short duration of action, due to rapid hydrolysis
● Mucous membranes (e.g. larynx for endotracheal intubation;
and therefore a relatively low risk of toxicity. There used to be
bovine teat canals; bull nose pre-insertion of bull ring).
some concerns that after use for intravenous regional anaesthesia,
● Conjunctiva or cornea.
it caused thrombophlebitis; and after epidural use, neurotoxic
● Skin: patches are now available which result in only very low
effects were seen, but this is now thought to have been due to one
 systemic absorption.
of the anti-oxidants (e.g. sodium bisulphite) included in the
● Synovial or intra-articular.
preparation.
● Interpleural.
● Intra-abdominal for peritoneal block' (e.g. dogs with pancrea-
Lidocaine (formerly lignocaine)
Commonly available as 1% and 2% solutions (with or without
● Topical application to a wound (even including into a fracture
epinephrine (adrenaline)) for injection, 2-4% solutions for
 site), including 'splash' blocks.
[ido ro suaunuo pue s s-z pue Aeidsuonedde eidon 
116  Veterinary Anaesthesia
application. Lidocaine was the first amide-linked local anaesthetic
Prilocaine
to be produced commercially. It is not a chiral compound; it does 
This is an amide-linked local anaesthetic, with very low toxicity
not exist in different isomeric forms. It has a quick onset of action,
because its absorption is relatively slow, yet its metabolism is very
with good tissue penetration (causes local vasodilation, unless
rapid. This in theory should reduce the potential for systemic
epinephrine added), and a duration of effect of about 1 h (2h with
toxicity, but metabolism, especially of the R-enantiomer, pro-
epinephrine). A greater reliability of nerve blocks is usually
duces ortho-toluidine, which can oxidise haem iron, and cause
observed because of its greater tissue penetrance, so you do not
methaemoglobinaemia. Prilocaine can be used for local nerve
need to be absolutely accurate when performing nerve blocks. It
blocks and produces very little local tissue^reaction' (i.e. very little
 demonstrates frequency-dependent or use-dependent block, so
 swelling is observed because of minimal effect on local vasomotor
some sensorimotor discrimination is observed. Sometimes nerve
tone).
root irritation can occur after neuraxial administration, especially
with higher concentration solutions (probably due more to its
EMLA cream
detergent effect on nerve membranes than any preservatives
Eutectic Mixture of Local Anaesthetics. This is an emulsion of
present). Like other local anaesthetic agents, the unionised form
prilocaine and lidocaine bases, which forms a constant melting
can cross the placenta,and once in the foetus (which is more acidic
than the dam), it can ^ion-trap’ there, so beware foetal toxicity.
point (eutectic) mixture, of lower melting point than either of the
constituents. The pH of the mixture is 9.4, so that the unionised
Other properties of lidocaine are that it is:
forms (RN) of both agents are favoured, hence increasing absorp-
● Antiarrhythmic/proarrhythmic.
tion across the relatively fatty skin or mucosa. Its onset of action
●Anticonvulsant/proconvulsant.
is up to 45 min,but some effect is present afer 5 min. tis absorbed
● Analgesic (allows MAC reduction) when administered systemi-
more rapidly across the mucosa, and is not supposed to be admin-
cally in low doses, but may not reduce the stress response to
istered by this route (in case a toxic dose given).
anaesthesia/surgery.
● Prokinetic (enhances gut motility) at least where gut motility
Tetracaine (formerly amethocaine)
 is already compromised (e.g. colic cases); mechanism of action
An ester-linked local anaesthetic especially for topical anaesthesia
uncertain but possibly secondary to its analgesic and anti-
of the conjunctiva/cornea. Available as 0.5% and 1% solutions. It
 inflammatory effects.
stings for 30s or so after first application and may stimulate lac-
● Anti-inflammatory (reduces inflammatory mediator produc-
rimation, so wait for that sensation to pass and the block' to work
tion/action; has vasodilator properties; reduces white blood
before continuing with ocular surface examination or surgery.
cell margination and has antithrombotic effects; reduces
Also available as a topical anaesthetic for skin application, as
inflammation-induced increases in vascular permeability. It is
Ametop? and is sometimes said to be preferred to EMLA cream
often said to prevent the ^no-reflow phenomenon subsequent
prior to venepuncture in children.
to tissue ischaemia, by preserving/enhancing capillary patency
and therefore reperfusion).
Proxymetacaine 0.5% (Ophthaine ")
The use of lidocaine in or near wounds/surgical incisions has
A topical local anaesthetic for ocular administration.
been hotly debated, as some surgeons believe it reduces wound
Mepivacaine (Intra-epicaine")
tissue infection (also by its anti-inflammatory effects). However,
An amide-linked local anaesthetic agent, and the parent' of
most authors believe that it causes no ill effects; and in fact the
 bupivacaine. Causes minimal overall effect on vascular tone. It has
analgesia is beneficial. One study in rabbits certainly showed no
a slightly slower onset than lidocaine, a slightly longer duration,
difference in speed of wound healing or strength of healing/healed
and is slightly more potent. It causes minimal tissue 'reaction?
tissue.
(vascular tone effects), and therefore is preferred for local nerve
blocks in horses over lidocaine.
Some lidocaine preparations available for topical use
Bupivacaine
● Xylocaine gel (2% lidocaine = 20 mg/ml).
An amide-linked local anaesthetic. It is a derivative of mepi-
● Xylocaine ointment (5% lidocaine).
'(asop, nod suresopl Suu ol) Aerds suesolx ●
more lipid soluble,and has greater protein binding Its higher pKa
● Xylocaine 4% solution (lidocaine solution for topical
means a slower onset, but its higher lipid solubility and protein
application).
 binding mean higher potency and longer duration of action. It 
● Intubeaze (Arnolds Veterinary) = 2% lidocaine spray; each
has approximately four times the potency of lidocaine. Addition
spray delivers 0.1-0.2 ml (i.e. 2-4mg of lidocaine HCl). Be
of epinephrine (adrenaline) makes little difference to the duration
careful with how many sprays you deliver to the larynx of a
of action (see above). Bupivacaine demonstrates frequency-
kitten before you intubate its trachea (toxic dose 1-4 mg/kg).
dependent block and sensorimotor discrimination similar to
Some people prefer to dilute a 2% solution of lidocaine and
(slightly better than) lidocaine, but sometimes the block is more
deliver it via a small syringe for effecting local anaesthesia of
o r  se id e s   i 
the larynx in tiny patients.
depression, but 16 times as potent an arrhythmogen. Bretylium
Local anaesthetics 117
used to be advocated to treat bupivacaine-induced cardiac
 in horses undergoing surgery. Journal of Veterinary Medicine
arrhythmias; however, recent work sugests lipids, such as intrali-
A 50, 190-195.
 pid’ (the carrier for macro-emulsion propofol) can be very effec-
Picard J, Meek T (2006) Lipid emulsion to treat overdose of local
tive (see above and further reading). Bupivacaine crosses the
anaesthetic: the gift of the glob. Anaesthesia 61 (2), 107-109.
 placenta less than lidocaine, possibly due to it being more highly
Robertson SA, Sanchez LC, Merritt AM, Doherty TJ (2005) Effect 
 protein bound. Laevobupivacaine (Chirocainerm) is available for
of systemic lidocaine on visceral and somatic nociception in
man, which is less cardiotoxic (see above).
conscious horses. Equine Veterinary Journal 37(2), 122-127.
Rosenberg PH, Veering BT, Urmey WF (2004) Maximum recom-
Ropivacaine (Naropin "m)
 mended doses of local anesthetics: a multifactorial concept.
Can be used off-licence for animals. It has a similar pKa to bupi-
Regional Anesthesia and Pain Medicine 29(6),564-575.
vacaine (8.1). For calculating appropriate doses,the same volume
Savvas I, Papazoglou LG, Kazakos G, Anagnosou T, Tsiolo V,
of 0.75% ropivacaine can be used as would have been used for
 Raptopoulos D (2008) Incisional block with bupivacaine for
0.5% bupivacaine. It is an amide-linked local anaesthetic with
analgesia after celiotomy in dogs. Journal of the American
properties somewhere between bupivacaine and mepivacaine.
Animal Hospital Association 44(2), 60-66.
Slightly quicker onset than bupivacaine (despite similar pKa and
 Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007) Local anesthetics. In: Lumb and
lower lipid solubility, so may be a concentration effect phenom-
Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 4" Edn. Eds:
enon too) with slightly shorter duration (slightly less protein
Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing.
binding). Less lipid soluble than bupivacaine, therefore slightly
Iowa, USA. Chapter 14, Pp 395-418.
less potent. Possibly causes mild inherent vasoconstriction.
 Marketed as the S-enantiomer only. Less cardiotoxic than racemic
bupivacaine.
 Self-test section
Further reading
1.
Which of the following is achiral?
Cassutto BH, Gfeller RW (2003) Use of intravenous lidocaine to
A.
 Prilocaine
prevent reperfusion injury and subsequent multiple organ dys-
B.
Lidocaine
function syndrome. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and
C.
 Mepivacaine
Critical Care 13(3), 137-148.
D.
Procaine
Dzikiti TB, Hellebrekers LJ, van Dijk P (2003) Effects of intrave-
2.
 Draw a diagram to summarise the sites of action of
nous lidocaine on isoflurane concentration, physiological
local anaesthetic agents at excitable cell membranes.
 parameters, metabolic parameters and stress-related hormones
Local anaesthetic technigues for the
 head:
Small animals
Learning objectives
To be familiar with nerve blocks around the head.
Introduction
The needle can be inserted intra-orally (i.e. the lip can be
reflected up), or extra-orally (through the skin). The needle tip is
The facial nerve (cranial nerve VII), only supplies motor innerva-
inserted about 0.5 cm rostral to the bony lip of the foramen, and
tion to the muscles of facial expression. If we want to block sensa-
then advanced gently towards the foramen. Aspirate before injec-
tion, we must therefore concern ourselves with branches of the
tion to ensure the needle is not in a blood vessel.
trigeminal nerve (cranial nerve V) (Figure 13.1).
 Maxillary nerve block
Infraorbital nerve block
Blocks the maxillary branch of the trigeminal nerve. Figure 13.3
Blocks the infraorbital nerve which arises from the maxillary
shows the site of injection; the maxillary foramen within the
branch of the trigeminal nerve (Figure 13.2).
pterygopalatine fossa.
Structures blocked 
Structures blocked
Upper lip, nose (nasal planum and roof of nasal cavity), and skin
 Nose (nasal planum and most of bridge of nose), upper lip, upper
rostroventral to infraorbital foramen. Not any teeth.
teeth, palate, maxilla.
Site for nerve block
Site for nerve block
Where the infraorbital nerve exits the infraorbital foramen. The
In the pterygopalatine fossa (Figure 13.3), between the rostral alar
 infraorbital foramen is located approximately midway between
foramen (where the maxillary branch of trigeminal nerve leaves
 the rostrodorsal border of the zygomatic arch and the ipsilateral
the cranial vault), and the maxillary foramen (entrance to the
canine root tip, although its location also depends on the patient's 
 infraorbital canal).
nose length. In cats and brachycephalic dogs, the foramen is
located much closer to the rostral end of the zygomatic arch.
Method
Method
● Needle: 23-25 g, 1".
● Dose for dogs >20kg: 1-3 ml lidocaine 2% +/- epinephrine, or
● Needle: 22-25 g, 5/8-1" (depends on patient size).
1-2 ml bupivacaine 0.5%; or 1.5 ml lidocaine 2% with 1 ml
● Dose for dogs >20kg: 1-2 ml lidocaine (1-2%) +/- epine-
bupivacaine 0.5%.
phrine, or 0.5-1ml bupivacaine 0.5%; or a mixture of 1 ml
● Dose for cats and small dogs: 1-2 ml lidocaine 1% +/- epine-
lidocaine (1-2%) and 0.5 ml bupivacaine 0.5%.
phrine, or 0.5-1 ml bupivacaine 0.25%; or 1 ml lidocaine 1%
● Dose for cats and small dogs: 0.5-1 ml lidocaine (1%) +/-
with 0.5 ml bupivacaine 0.25%.
epinephrine, or 0.25 ml bupivacaine 0.5%; or a mixture of
0.5 ml lidocaine (1%) with 0.25 ml bupivacaine 0.25%.
The needle is inserted percutaneously, at 90° to the skin surface
● Bilateral block will be required for surgery on both sides of the
and in a medial direction, just below the ventral border of the
nasal planum.
Zygomatic arch, and, for medium-sized dogs, about 0.5 cm caudal
118
Local anaesthetic techniques for the head: Small animals 
119
Maxillary branch of trigeminal nerve
Ophthalmic branch of trigeminal nerve
 Maxillary foramen
Infraorbital nerve
(branch of maxillary
nerve) exiting
infraorbitalforamen
Mandibular branch
of trigeminal nerve
 Mental nerves
exiting mental
foramina
Figure 13.1 Trigeminal nerve branches in the dog. Reproduced from Miller's Anatomy of the Dog 2"d Edition. Eds: Evans HE, Christensen GC. Chapter 15.
The cranial nerves, pp 903-934. Copyright 1979, with permission from Elsevier.
Infraorbital
foramen
Figure 13.3 The site of injection (marked X) is the maxillary foramen within 
Figure 13.2 Infraorbital foramen. Reproduced from Miller's Anatomy of the
the pterygopalatine fossa.Reproduced from Miller's Anatomyof the Dog 2nd
Dog 2"d Edition. Eds: Evans HE, Christensen GC. Chapter 15, The cranial
Edition. Eds: Evans HE, Christensen GC. Chapter 15, The cranial nerves, PP
nerves, pp 903-934. Copyright 1979, with permission from Elsevier.
903-934. Copyright 1979, with permission from Elsevier.
to a perpendicular line dropped from the lateral canthus of the
be located just about level with (slightly rostral to) the second
 eye. The needle is then advanced into the pterygopalatine fossa,
 premolar, and at about the mid-point of the dorso-ventral height
aiming slightly rostrally (for the maxillary foramen). Aspirate
of the mandibular ramus at this site (Figure 13.4).
before injection to check that the needle has not penetrated a
blood vessel.
Structures blocked
Lower lip and chin rostral to the site of the block. Not any teeth.
Mental nerve block
 Site for nerve block
Blocks the mental nerves which are the terminal extra-osseous
Where the middle mental nerve exits from the middle mental
 branches of the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve. The
foramen. The middle mental foramen is biggest in dogs, and
middle (biggest) mental foramen can be hard to palpate, but can
carries the largest of the mental nerves.
120   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Method
Site for nerve block
Where the inferior branch of the mandibular nerve enters the
● Needle: 21-23 g, 5/8".
mandibular canal at the mandibular foramen (Figure 13.5).
● Dose for dogs >20kg: 1-2 ml lidocaine 1-2% +/- epinephrine,
or 0.5-1 ml bupivacaine 0.5%; or 1 ml lidocaine (1-2%) with
Method
0.5 ml bupivacaine 0.5%.
● Dose for cats and small dogs: 0.5-1 ml lidocaine 1% +/- epine-
● Needle: 21-23 g, 1" or longer (depending on size of patient).
 phrine, or 0.25-0.5 ml bupivacaine 0.25%; or 0.5 ml lidocaine 
● Dose for dogs >20kg: 2 ml lidocaine 2% +/- epinephrine, or
1% with 0.25 ml bupivacaine 0.25%.
1-2 ml bupivacaine 0.5%; or 1 ml lidocaine 2% with 1 ml bupi-
 The needle is inserted percutaneously, judging the position of
vacaine 0.5%.
● Dose for cats and small dogs: 1-2 ml lidocaine 1% +/- epine-
the foramen from the second premolar (if present). Aspirate
 phrine, or 1-2 ml bupivacaine 0.25%; or 1 ml lidocaine 1% with
before injection. Bilateral blocks are required for example for
1 ml bupivacaine 0.25%.
surgery on the bilateral fleshy part of chin.
The lip of the mandibular foramen can just about be palpated;
this is more diffcult in bigger dogs and those with more muscle
Mandibular nerve block
(e.g. Rottweilers, Mastiffs and bull terrier types). The needle can
Blocks the mandibular branch of the trigeminal nerve.
then be inserted percutaneously at the lower angle of the jaw, and
advanced against the medial side of the mandible, directed towards
Structures blocked 
the foramen. To insert the needle aim approximately 1.5cm
Lower teeth, mandible, skin and mucosa of lower lip.
rostral to the angular process in a 25 kg dog, and the foramen is
approximately 1.5 cm vertically up from the lower edge of the jaw.
Aspirate before injection.
With bilateral blocks, occasionally both lingual nerves can
also be blocked. Each lingual nerve branches off just before the
inferior mandibular alveolar nerve enters the mandibular foramen.
 If this happens, the animal may have trouble feeling its tongue,
and may traumatise or bite it, especially during recovery from
anaesthesia.
Ophthalmic nerve block
 Blocks the ophthalmic division of the trigeminal nerve.
Structures blocked
Middle mental foramen
Eye, orbit, conjunctiva, eyelids, forehead skin. Some of the bottom
 eyelid is supplied by the zygomatic nerve, which is branch of the
Figure 13.4 Site for mental nerve block. Reproduced from Miller's Anatomy
of the Dog 2"d Edition. Eds: Evans HE, Christensen GC. Chapter 15, The cranial
maxillary nerve, but in performing this block, you may also block
nerves, pp 903-934. Copyright 1979, with permission from Elsevier.
the maxillary nerve.
 Lip of the mandibular foramen
Angular process
Figure 13.5 The lip of the mandibular foramen can just about be palpated on the medial aspect of the mandible. Reproduced from Miller's Anatomy of the
Local anaesthetic techniques for the head: Small animals 
121
Site for nerve block
A little topical local anaesthetic may be instilled into the con-
In the pterygopalatine fossa, but now aiming for the orbital
junctival sac to desensitise the conjunctiva first. The needle can
fissure, where the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve
be inserted through the eyelid (i.e. from the ^outside'), but most
leaves the cranial vault. The orbital fissure lies slightly further
 people prefer to gently retract the eyelid and then insert the needle
rostrally than the rostral alar foramen, but caudal to the maxillary
into the conjunctival fornix. Aspirate before injection.
foramen.
Potential complications
Method
● Damage to eyeball.
Needle: 23 g, 1-1.5".
● Damage to optic nerve.
Dose for dogs >20kg: 2ml lidocaine 2% +/- epinephrine, or
 o   s  o    o
 1-2 ml bupivacaine 0.5%; or 1 ml lidocaine 2% with 1 ml bupi-
enucleations).
vacaine 0.5%
●Retrobulbar haemorrhage.
 Dose for cats and small dogs: 1-2ml lidocaine 1% +/- epine-
● Increased retrobulbar, and therefore intraocular, pressure due
 phrine, or 1-2 ml bupivacaine 0.25%; or 1 ml lidocaine 1% with
to: the volume of local anaesthetic injected which tends to
1 ml bupivacaine 0.25%.
 proptose the eye and any retrobulbar haemorrhage.
● Injection oflocal anaesthetic into the CSF within the optic nerve
 The nerve block is performed similarly to the maxillary nerve
 meningeal sheath (see immediate signs of CNS toxicity).
block (i.e. aim under the ventral border of the zygomatic arch),
● The oculocardiac reflex may occur as the block is performed.
but this time as near as possible ‘on’ the perpendicular line
dropped from the lateral canthus of the eye. The needle is directed
caudomedially, and very slightly dorsally. Aspirate before
 Peribulbar block
injection.
Although not used in veterinary surgery, this is an alternative to
' ,  a  r  n
Retrobulbar block
 Local anaesthetic (often a mixture of lidocaine for rapid onset,
Blocks cranial nerves II, II, IV, V (ophthalmic and maxillary
and bupivacaine for prolonged effect), is injected so as to encircle
branches), and VI.
the globe. Nerves blocked include the long (from ophthalmic
 nerve) and short (from ciliary ganglion) iliary nerves, the extra-
Structures blocked
conal branches of the ophthalmic and maxillary nerves and the
This block desensitises the eye, the eyelids and most of the upper
motor nerves to the extraocular muscles. A 25g, 1" so-called
face. Some eyelid tone may remain from palpebral (cranial nerve
"blunt' (short-bevel) needle is inserted at several positions around
VII) innervation. There are several potential risks with this block
 the globe, keeping the needle at a tangent to the globe, and insert-
(see below), so it is often reserved for enucleations. This block was
ing its tip no deeper that the equator of the globe before local
fashionable at one time to reduce the vagal oculocardiac reflex
anaesthetic is injected (c.15 ml total for adult man). The local
occasionally seen with ocular traction or pressure during eye
anaesthetic should be deposited outside the cone of extraocular
surgery, but the actual performance of the block may also stimu-
muscles. Gentle pressure is then applied to the globe for around
late this reflex.
10 min to help disperse the local anaesthetic. Topical conjunctival
anaesthesia is required first. The needle can be passed transcuta-
Method
neously or transconjunctivally. Palpebral block (motor block)
may also be required for awake surgeries. Complications include
Needle: 21-23 g, slightly curved and flexible, 3".
-os rnd nsd rnn ps as
Dose for dogs >20kg: 1-5 ml lidocaine 1% +/- epinephrine, or
rhage, globe perforation and chemosis.
1-5 ml bupivacaine 0.25%; or about 1-2.5 ml lidocaine 1% with 
1-2.5 ml bupivacaine 0.25%.
Dose for cats and small dogs: 0.5-2 ml lidocaine 1% +/- epine-
Sub-Tenon block
 phrine, or 0.5-2ml bupivacaine 0.25%; or 0.5-1 ml lidocaine
Another alternative to retrobulbar block and possibly with fewer
1% with 0.5-1 ml bupivacaine 0.25%.
complications than for peribulbar block. Tenon's capsule is the
 Many variations of technique are reported in the literature.
dense connective tissue enveloping the posterior part of the globe.
The simplest is a 1-point injection, whereby a pre-curved needle
The sub-Tenon block requires a small incision to be made through
is inserted near the lateral canthus, just below the dorsal orbital
the conjunctiva and then through Tenon's capsule, so that a
rim, and carefully advanced around and behind the eyeball,
curved blunt cannula can then be passed in the plane between the
taking care not to puncture it. Some people place the needle via
capsule and the sclera so that the cannula's tip lies beyond the
the medial canthus, but there is a greater risk of the needle tip
globe's equator. Local anaesthetic solution is then injected to
 penetrating the optic nerve sheath, beneath which lies CSF; intra-
block the nerves as outlined for the peribulbar block. The main
thecal injection of local anaesthetic will result in direct CNS
complication is conjunctival haemorrhage which is usually easily
toxicity.
controlled as the site of haemorrhage is easily visualised.
122  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Further reading
Self-test section
Lemke KA (2007) Pain management II: local and regional anaes-
thetic techniques. In: BSAVA Manual of canine and feline
1.
 Which structures are desensitised by a bilateral mental
 anaesthesia and analgesia. 2"d Edition. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-
block?
Novakovski T. BSAVA Publications, Gloucester, UK. Chapter
A.
Nasal planum
10, pp 104-114.
 All lower teeth
Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007) Local and regional anesthetic
C.
 Chin and rostral-most part of the lower lip
 and analgesic techniques: Dogs. In: Lumb and Jones Veterinary
D.1
Eyeball
Anesthesia and Analgesia 4" Edition. Eds: Tranquilli WJ,
2.
 List three possible complications of a retrobulbar
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa, USA.
block.
Chapter 20, p 561-593.
 Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007) Local and regional anesthetic
 and analgesic techniques: Cats. In: Lumb and Jones Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia 4" Edition. Eds: Tranquilli WJ,
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa, USA.
Chapter 21, pp 595-603.
Local anaesthetic technigues for the limbs:
Small animals
Learning objectives
 To be familiar with the main techniques for limb analgesia in small animals.
Use of local anaesthetics
and various other novel agents have also been tried, with some
success. Even normal saline itself has been shown to provide some
● Surface application; intra-articular.
analgesia.
● Intralesional, wound, incisional infltration (wound healing not
Perineural nerve blocks
proven to be a problem). Deposition into fracture site not easy
 to perform pre-anaesthesia whilst maintaining asepsis.
 These can provide excellent analgesia for surgery under general
● Regional analgesia: individual nerve block (perineural nerve
anaesthesia, but you need a good working knowledge of limb
blocks); plexus block (e.g. brachial plexus block); ring blocks
 anatomy (see further reading). Such blocks, especially in distal
(exclude epinephrine if end-arterial supply); intravenous
limbs, are also commonly used in horses for diagnostic purposes
regional anaesthesia and analgesia (exclude epinephrine).
 during lameness evaluations.
● Neuraxial anaesthesia and analgesia: epidural (extradural); true
 Individual nerves can usually be easily identified and should be
spinal  (intrathecal/subarachnoid). Ideally,  preservative-free
blocked (by careful injection of a small volume of local anaesthetic
 drugs should be used, especially if long-term treatment or 
 beneath the nerve sheath), before transection during, for example,
repeated infusions are administered via catheters.
limb amputation. Once the nerves are prevented from transmit-
 ting noxious information to the CNS, the likelihood of the devel-
Intra-articular analgesia
 opment of phantom limb pain is greatly reduced. An alternative,
In the small animal peri-operative setting, intra-articular analge-
-e an o q n s d sded 1
sia can be a part of the intra-operative analgesia regimen during
tion would be to provide extradural analgesia (with at least local
arthroscopies or arthrotomies. Most of the literature concerns
anaesthetic) before surgery. A brachial plexus block would com-
stifle arthrotomies. Local anaesthetic may be injected before the
 plement individual nerve block during forelimb amputation). For
joint is opened and may be repeated, with or without opioid, at
further anatomical details, the reader is referred to veterinary
the end of surgery after the joint is closed once again. Although
anaesthesia texts and the further reading section.
some chemical synovitis may ensue, the reaction is no worse than
Catheters (e.g. 'soaker or diffusion? catheters) are commer-
following instillation of normal saline. However, there are increas-
cially available (or can be home-made) for providing continuous
ing worries about the possible chondrotoxic effects of intra-artic-
s  r  s (  u 
ular local anaesthetic agents, the mechanisms of which are as yet 
following total ear canal ablation. The reader is referred to the
unknown (see further reading).
reference list.
Doses quoted for stifle injection in dogs
Ring blocks
Local anaesthetic agents can be injected to encircle the area of
● Bupivacaine 1-2.5 mg/kg (equivalent to 0.2-0.5 ml/kg ofa 0.5%
interest, for example a distal limb or around a flank wound.
solution).
● Morphine 0.1 mg/kg.
other structure whose perfusion may be compromised by the
Various other agents have been used in man. Clonidine (an α2
inclusion of a vasoconstrictor. Dilute the local anaesthetic solu-
agonist) has been administered at 1 μg/kg; neostigmine, ketamine
tion as necessary to provide an easier volume to inject, and reduce
123
124  Veterinary Anaesthesia
the risk of causing toxicity. Do not inject through inflamed or
● Hypotension/arrhythmias after tourniquet removal (due to
infected tissues.
reactive hyperaemia/vasodilation in ischaemic limb with or
without reabsorption into the general circulation of products
Intravenous regional anaesthesia (VRA)
of anaerobic metabolism including K+ and free radicals). Rare
(Bier's block)
if the tourniquet only in place for <2 h.
● Diffculty in identifying a suitable vein; usually only a problem
This is an excellent technique to provide distal limb analgesia. A
if local inflammation or cellulitis is present.
superficial vein may be cannulated, distal to where the tourniquet
is to be placed. The distal limb is then usually exsanguinated,
using either an Esmarch bandage (be careful not to dislodge the
Neuraxial anaesthesia
catheter during Esmarch bandage placement or unwrapping after
Intrathecal/subarachnoid!/'true spina!
the tourniquet placed), or by holding the limb above heart level
for 5 min. The tourniquet is placed proximal to the site of interest.
anaesthesia/analgesia
 The Esmarch bandage (if one was placed),is then unwrapped. The
 Intrathecal injections, where the injectate actually enters the CSF
local anaesthetic solution is then injected into the vein either via
surrounding the spinal cord, are less commonly performed than
the catheter or ^off the needle. Beware local anaesthetic toxicity.
epidural (extradural) injections. Table 14.1 highlights some of the
but local anaesthetic agents can be diluted in sterile normal saline
features of the two types of neuraxial analgesia.
if necessary. At least 10 min should be allowed for onset of anal-
 Many local anaesthetic solutions (lidocaine 1%, bupivacaine
gesia. Tourniquets can be safely placed on the limbs of small
0.5% and ropivacaine 1%) are slightly hypobaric (less dense
animals for up to 2h, and analgesia persists for as long as the
than CsF) in horses, dogs and cats (CSF specific gravity c. 1.010
tourniquet is in place. A bloodless surgical feld and reduced
in these species); and so if inadvertently injected into the CSF, the
 potential for blood loss can also be advantages. The tourniquet
best ploy to avoid cranial spread to the brain is actually to tip the
should not be released for at least 20 min to avoid the sudden
animal head-down'; or at least, do not tip it head-up. Lidocaine
delivery of a relatively large dose of local anaesthetic (and perhaps
2% is isobaric with CSF (i.e. both have specific gravity of 1.010).
vasoconstrictor) into the circulation which increases the risk of
Special hyperbaric local anaesthetic and opioid solutions (usually
problems. When the tourniquet is fnally released, sensation
a) s rn rn aqe ae (asona 
returns within 5-15 min; the animal should be monitored closely
"heavy lidocaine') so the patient can then be positioned so that
for signs of systemic local anaesthetic toxicity, and other problems
gravity will help to direct the spread of the analgesic solution.
 that can follow occlusion of limb perfusion (e.g hypotension and
 Morphine and methadone tend to be hypobaric, but when diluted
arrhythmias).
 in normal saline or glucose solutions, may become iso- or hyper-
 Bupivacaine should not be used because of the risk of escape
baric respectively.
into the systemic circulation and cardiotoxicity.
Epidural (extradural) anaesthesia/analgesia
Dose
Indications are for tail, hindlimb, perineal, pelvic, abdominal or
For a 25 kg dog, the dose is 2-5 ml of 1% lidocaine, preferably
thoracic surgery pain relief for acute pancreatitis; and in cats with
without epinephrine so as to enhance the extravascular tissue
aorto-iliac thrombosis, local anaesthetic injected extradurally
distribution of the local anaesthetic and hasten the onset of block.
The mechanisms and sites of action of IVRA are disputed, but
tion), which is possibly also beneficial in addition to the analgesia
may involve blockade of sensory nerve terminals as well as small
it affords.
diameter fbres and possibly even larger nerve trunks. Neural
Gravity can influence the epidural spread of drugs; as can
ischaemia, secondary to tourniquet occlusion, may also result in
the amount of fat and the pressure within the epidural space. In
some deterioration of nerve conduction, which may enhance
most normal subjects, at least in the standing or sternal positions,
analgesia; but tourniquet application itself can be painful. It is 
 there is a slight negative pressure in the caudal epidural space,
usual to inject the local anaesthetic agent as distally in the limb as
although the pressure in the epidural space is influenced by intra-
possible and also in a distal (toe-wards) direction if possible.
 thoracic and intra-abdominal pressures too. The greatest negative
Anaesthesia develops frst in the most distal structures and
pressure in the epidural space is usually in the thoracic segment,
 progresses proximally.
so that cranial spread of injectate tends to be encouraged (from
more caudal injection sites). Nevertheless, the block occurs earli-
 Problems
est and is most intense at the site of injection.
● Inadequate analgesia (tourniquet not tight enough or you did 
Terminology
 not wait long enough for the local anaesthetic to work).
● Inadvertent systemic local anaesthetic toxicity (tourniquet not
● Caudal, low or posterior are terms sometimes applied to the
tight enough).
extradural technique where the animal retains the motor func-
● Ischaemic damage to structures distal to tourniquet (rare).
tion of its hindlimbs.
● Pain after removal of tourniquet (possibly due to ischaemia or
● Cranial, high or anterior are terms applied to the technique
reperfusion).
where the animal loses control of its hindlimbs.
Local anaesthetic technigues for the limbs: Small animals 
125
Table 14.1 Comparison of true spinal (intrathecal) and epidural (extradural) techniques
Feature
Extradural
Subarachnoid ('subdural)
Injection made into
 Epidural fat
CSF
Volume/dose of injectate
Rel. high 
Rel. low
Speed of onset
Rel. slow
Rel. fast 
 Duration (depends on drug
Rel. long
Rel. short
dharacteristics)
 Potential errors
Injection into CSF
Injection into epidural fat
“Headache'
Mo
Yes (post-dural puncture)
Risk of toxicity
Could inject IV or into CSF
Rapid spread to brain in CSF
Effects of patient positioning
Not very position-sensitive (i.e. gravity
Position sensitive i.e. gravity and baricity (density)
after injection
Gan affect spread in epidural space,
 of injectate greatly affect spread in CSF
but the effect is not huge)
Reliability of block
Not billiant
Much better
(a)
1/2
,Needle
S3L
4156】
(q)
Needle
Y 14 1 15 1 16.1 17.
Figure 14.2 Slightly different needle insertion sites for dogs (a) and cats (b).
Reproduced from Pain Management in Animals. Eds: Flecknell P and
Figure 14.1 Location of the lumbosacral space determined by forming a
Waterman-Pearson A. Chapter 5, Management of postoperative and other
tiangle with the thumb and first two fingers.
acute pain, pp 81-145. Copyright 2000, with permission from Elsevier.
The distinction in terminology depends upon the quantity of
Landmarks
drug injected, not the site of injection.
 The craniodorsal iliac spines are located by palpation. If an imagi-
 When an extradural injection has been performed, even if the 
nary line is drawn between these, it should intersect the dorsal
drug travels rostrally within the epidural space, it cannot enter the
 spinous process of the last (7th) lumbar vertebra. Slightly caudal
brain from the epidural space, because the epidural space is non-
to the dorsal spinous process of the 7th lumbar vertebra, you will
existent at the site of the cisterna magna (Cel-Ce2), since the
feel a 'dip' between it and the smaller sacral dorsal processes; this
 periosteum and dura mater fuse to form one layer. Extradural
is the Lu7-Sal interspace. The lumbosacral space can be located
  a   a r 
 by placing the thumb and middle finger on the craniodorsal iliac
rapidly, can result in transient increases in extradural pressure and
spines and forming a triangle with the index finger (Figure 14.1).
secondary increases in intracranial pressure, with accompanying
The spinal needle is inserted in the midline and perpendicularly
decreases in spinal cord and cerebral blood flows.
to this space (Figures 14.2 and 14.3).
126  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Needle
 placement
Needle
placement
[
Dorsal view
Figure 14.3 Location of needle placement site for dog. Reproduced from Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. 3"d Edition. Eds: McKelvey D and Hollingshead
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.4 Patient in sternal recumbency. (a) Hindlimbs are initially frog-legged to facilitate identification of lumbosacral space, then (b) drawn forwards to
tense the dorsal spinous ligaments to improve the sensation of the needle 'popping through' into the epidural space.
The exact injection site differs slightly for cats and dogs (Figure
Animal positioning for epidural injection 
14.2 and Figure 14.3). For dogs, due to the shape of the dorsal
Patients are usually placed in either sternal or lateral recumbency.
spinous processes, aim in the centre of the Lu7-Sal interspace.
under sedation or general anaesthesia. In sternal recumbency, the
For cats, due to the shape of the dorsal spinous processes, aim in
Lu7-Sa1 interspace is easiest to palpate with the hindlimbs frog-
the caudal third of the Lu7-Sa1l interspace.
legged’ beneath the animal (Figure 14.4a). Once the space has
 The spinal cord terminates at about vertebrae Lu6-7 in most
been located, then the hind legs can be drawn forwards (Figure
dogs, whereas it terminates at Sa1l-3 in cats. The meningeal sac
14.4b). Although this makes the Lu7-Sal interspace harder to
(containing CSF), continues slightly further caudally than the
palpate, because it tenses the dorsal spinous ligaments, it is
spinal cord; but in most dogs, terminates just cranial to Lu7-Sa1.
 supposed to enable a better ^popping sensation' to be felt as the
The caudal termination of the meningeal sac (containing CSF)
ligamentum flavum is penetrated. In lateral recumbency, the
continues further caudally in cats than in dogs. It is therefore
hindlimbs can be drawn forwards, and the forelimbs may also be
  ( s an e d n ssod o
i a  as a e du  s 
cats, even when attempting to perform only an epidural (extra-
tion of the correct interspace and injection (Figure 14.5). The area
dural) injection.
of interest must be clipped and aseptically prepared.
Local anaesthetic techniques for the limbs: Small animals
127
 If the needle penetrates the intervertebral space too deeply, the
needle tip may grate against the bony floor of the vertebral canal,
or even embed into an intervertebral disc. If this occurs, the
 needle should be withdrawn slightly before attempting injection.
There are two vertebral venous sinuses which lie on the floor of
the vertebral canal, and a central spinal artery also lies ventrally;
whereas dorsally there are paired lateral spinal arteries. The result 
is that there is an increased risk of penetrating a blood vessel if
the needle tip travels deeper within the vertebral canal. Also, the
deeper the needle penetrates the vertebral canal, the more likely
it is to come into close proximity with the cauda equina nerves.
 The 'tail waggle' that ensues can be used as a sign of correct needle
placement, but the needle should be withdrawn slightly before
attempting injection.
How can you tell if the needle tip is in the
epidural space?
You feel a definite 'popping sensation and a sudden loss of
resistance to needle advancement as the needle penetrates the
Figure 14.5 Position used to tense the dorsal spinous ligaments for injection
ligamentum flavum (Figure 14.6).
with the patient in lateral recumbency.
 There is loss of resistance to injection of a test dose. For
example, a 5 ml syringe, filled with 3 ml sterile saline and 1 ml air
Why use spinal needles?
is attached to the spinal needle and gentle pressure is applied to
the syringe plunger as the needle is advanced into the epidural
space. When the syringe is attached to the spinal needle, the air
function and use.
floats to form a cushion above the saline; therefore the air is less
● A short bevel makes them ^relatively blunt’ so that if nerves
likely to be injected when the patient is lying in sternal recum-
are hit, the needle tends to push between nerve fibres as it
bency than in lateral recumbency. A sudden loss of resistance to
 penetrates the nerve, rather than transect them. This relative
injection accompanies needle tip entry into the epidural space.
bluntness is also believed to enhance the popping? sensation
The injection should then be possible with minimal resistance and
on penetrating the ligamentum flavum.
the air cushion should not be compressed. You may even find
●A notch in the hub tells you which way the bevel is
that, because of the slight negative pressure in the epidural space,
orientated.
the injectate tends to be sucked in.
● A stylette reduces the chance of blockage with a plug of skin/
 The hanging drop technique relies on the usual slight negative
 subcutaneous tissue/ligament/bone or intervertebral disc.
 pressure within the caudal epidural space. Using a styletted needle,
the tip of the needle/stylette assembly is inserted through the skin
Technique
and subcutaneous tissues. The stylette is then rermoved and a drop
As the needle is inserted (bevel directed cranially), it will first pass
of sterile saline is applied to the open needle hub before the needle
through the skin (you may wish to use a scalpel blade to make a
is advanced further. Upon entry of the needle tip into the epidural
small nick, especially if using a relatively blunt spinal needle);
space, the bleb of saline should be sucked in, due to the slight
then the subcutaneous fat; then the supraspinous ligament; then
the interspinous ligament; and fnally the interarcuate ligament
 in lateral recumbency and, at least in goats, lateral recumbency
(also called the ligamentum flavum) (Figure 14.6). It is on passing
may reduce the negativity of the epidural pressure at the lum-
through this interarcuate ligament with the needl that a popping
bosacral site.
sensation can usually be felt.
Other techniques include the ‘whoosh' test. Air is injected,
Once the needle is in position, observe for a few seconds to
and auscultation is performed over the spine with a stethoscope.
ensure that no blood or CSF issues from the hub, and then aspi-
rate to check again for blood or CSE If bleeding is observed, then
Injection
you may prefer to abandon the technique, as it becomes difficult
to discern whether CsF is also present, and runs the risk of intra-
within the epidural space, the injection is made over at least 30s
vascular injection and local anaesthetic toxicity. Unless the animal
 and preferably 1-2 min. Commonly used needle sizes are shown 
has a coagulation abnormality, it is unlikely that it will suffer any
in Table 14.2.
untoward effects from a small amount of haemorrhage. If CsF is
 Rapid extradural injection of cold drugs can produce a shiver-
observed, the technique can either be abandoned, or converted to
ing response known as Durran's sign (the mechanism for this is
a true spinal (intrathecal) technique, but you must reduce the
uncertain). It is therefore preferable to warm the injectate (e.g. by
 prepared doses to about one quarter, or less.
holding the syringe in a warm hand for a few minutes) before
128  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Supraspinous
ligament
Skin
Sacrum
Interspinous
ligament
 Dura mater
Arachnoid
 and pia
membrane
Spinal cord
Cauda
Intervertebral
Ligamentum
equina
L7
interarcuatum
disk
(flavum)
Figure 14.6 The structures traversed during needle placement for extradural injection. Reproduced from Veterinary Anesthesia and Anaigesia. 3d Edition. Eds:
a e sd   o  dd s l e      
Table 14.2 Commonly used needle sizes.
● Infection, especially skin infection at the proposed injection site
Or even other distant foci of infection including bad periodon-
 Animal size (kg)
Needle gauge
Needle length
tal disease, risk local or haematogenous spread of infection to
the injection site.
<5
25
5-10
22
1.5"
Complications
10-45
 22 or 20
2-2.5"
● Hypotension. Local anaesthetics deposited extradurally around
>45
22 or 20
3.5"
the caudal part of the spinal cord result in sympathetic block
to the caudal end of the animal with resulting peripheral
vasodilation, a relative hypovolaemia and therefore hypoten-
sion. If the block spreads far enough cranially, the sympathetic
cardio-accelerator fbres are also affected, resulting in inhibi-
injection. After the injection has been completed, the animal can
tion of a reflex tachycardia which would otherwise help to offset
be positioned so as to use gravity to encourage block of the sensory
the hypotension. The hypotension tends to be worse in animals
nerves (which lie dorsally), and if analgesia on only one side is
required, the animal can be laid on that side. This allows gravity
sion can be treated with IV fluids and vasopressors. Ideally,
assist' to help the injected drug reach the site of interest.
intravenous access should be secured before extradural injec-
 It is good practice to monitor heart and breathing rates during
tion of local anaesthetic is performed; and some people will give
extradural injection of drugs. It is also advisable to ensure IV
 a bolus of IV fluids before extradural injection is performed
access (cannula), before the injection is performed so that drugs
to offset this hypotension.
and fluids may be administered by this route if necessary should
● Very far cranial spread may block the intercostal and phrenic
an emergency arise.
(Ce 5, 6, 7) nerves,resulting in hypoventilation or even apnoea.
● Hypothermia, is more common in smaller animals and is due
Contraindications
to local anaesthetics causing peripheral vasodilation in caudal
● Obesity makes it diffcult to find landmarks.
parts, and motor blockade of these muscles which prevents
● Pelvic (or lower lumbar spine or lumbo-sacral) injuries may
shivering.
distorted the local anatomy.
● There may be increased bleeding at the surgical site, due to
vasodilation. This may be a nuisance for surgery.
haemorrhage.
● Signs of local anaesthetic toxicity (e.g. CNS depression and
● Pre-existing neuropathies may make it diffcult to distinguish
cardiorespiratory depression) can follow inadvertent intrathe-
worsening of a prior condition from neural damage caused by
the technique.
absorption.
Local anaesthetic techniques for the limbs: Small animals
129
● Introduction of infection (meningitis/osteomyelitis/neuritis).
Ketamine (preservative free), is also now being used by the
● Spinal cord/nerve damage (following needle insertion (rare); or 
extradural route, either alone, or in combination with other
 secondary to haemorrhage, or introduction on infection).
'ssnp
● Urinary (and faecal) retention can follow the use of local anaes-
With extradural injections, it has been said that it is neither
thetics or indeed opioids administered neuraxially.
 the volume, nor the concentration of injectate, nor even the rate
● Pruritus is occasionally associated with neuraxially adminis-
of injection ('pressure’ of injection), that influence cephalad
tered opioids.
spread of analgesia/anaesthesia, but the actual mass (dose) of drug
● There have been some reports of poor hair regrowth or white
 given. However, other workers dispute this; the speed of injection 
hair regrowth at the site of injection. The cause is uncertain.
 and possibly the temperature of the injectate may influence the
● Poor results. Extradural drug delivery can never be guaranteed
 cranial spread of the effect, along with other factors (see list
to work because of individual animal differences etc. Patchy
below).
blocks are more common after too rapid injection, or if the
 Remember with old, pregnant and obese animals, to reduce
injectate is very cold, or if previous extradural injections have
the doses, because:
been given and scar tissue has formed within the epidural space.
 Unilateral blocks may also result after an extradural catheter is
● Old animals have more fibrous tissue blocking intervertebral
 placed, if its tip lies to one side.
foramina, so extradurally injected drugs can travel, and produce
● Hind limb ataxia is less of a worry for small animals than large
 effects, further cranially.
animals (e.g. cattle), which may ^do the splits, and where
● Pregnant animals tend to have engorged vertebral blood vessels,
recumbency itself may cause problems for the animal and for
due to the higher intra-abdominal pressure. This means that
the proposed surgical procedure.
there is a relative reduction in the amount of space available
within the spinal canal and therefore epidural space. High
Drugs and Doses
intra-abdominal pressure also pushes more soft tissues into the
Commonly used dugs are listed in Table 14.3.
intervertebral foramina, which may partly block the foramina
With combinations of lidocaine and bupivacaine, the doses of
(as with older animals), and may also reduce the space available
each are reduced (e.g. half and half), to avoid administering a
within the spinal canal.
toxic cumulative dose. For opioids, the less fat soluble they are,
● Obese animals tend to have more fat in their extradural spaces,
the longer their extradural duration of action (the slower their
 again relatively reducing the extradural space capacity.
systemic absorption).
 The doses shown in Table 14.3 will provide adequate analgesia
 Factors affecting cranial spread of anaesthesia or analgesia:
up to the first or second lumbar segmental nerves (Lul/2). Doses
can be increased (doubled), to provide analgesia up to the fourth
● Patient size.
or fifth thoracic segmental nerves (Th4/5), but beware toxicity,
●Patient age.
especially in cats.
● Patient conformation including obesity.
 Morphine at 0.1 mg/kg may provide adequate analgesia up to
● Increased intra-abdominal pressure (e.g. pregnancy, gastric
d n   s h  ss   
dilation).
adequate analgesia up to this level and possibly to Th2 without
● Volume of drug injected.
systemic side effects. Thus, neuraxial techniques can also provide
● Dose (mass) of drug injected.
analgesia for abdominal or thoracic surgery/pain.
● Rate of injection.
 Epinephrine may be included with local anaesthetics to prolong
● Direction of needle bevel.
the duration of block, and possibly enhance its speed of onset, by
Anaesthesia/analgesia may be less *patchy'if a lower volume/
adding a little local anaesthetic like action of its own.
higher concentration of drug is injected more slowly; and
Table 14.3 Commonly used drugs.
Drug
Dose
Onset time (min)
Duration (hr)
Lidocaine
4 mg/kg
5-10
1-2 (2 with epinephrine)
Bupivacaine
1 mg/kg
15-20
4-6(+)
Morphine
0.1 mg/kg
20-60+
16-24
Buprenorphine
 5-15 μg/kg
60
16-24
Medetomidine
10 μg/kg
5-10
1-8
Morphine + bupivacaine
0.05-0.1mg/kg + 0.5-1mg/kg
15
16-24
Morphine + medetomidine 
0.1 mg/kg + 1-5 μg/kg
10
16-24
130  Veterinary Anaesthesia
warming the injectate to body temperature may also help. One
● Cross the dura (and arachnoid) mater and enter the CSF, from
of the problems with extradural drug administration is that the
where it can slowly enter the spinal cord and spinal nerve roots
efficacy is difficult to guarantee.
across the pia mater.
Many authors advocate dilution of drugs to provide easier
For more information regarding extradural catheters, which
volumes to inject, which is best done using sterile saline for local
allow easy ^top-up doses? or continuous infusions of analgesics to
anaesthetics and sterile water for opioids. Some books mention
be administered, see the list of further reading at the end of the
'mls of injectate per x cm of crown-rump length' in preference
chapter.
to 'ml of injectate per kg body weight, as some small breeds
may have relatively long backs. However, if 2% lidocaine, 0.5%
Brachial plexus block
bupivacaine or preservative free morphine at a concentration of
The area blocked is from the elbow region distally. The nerves
c. 0.5 mg/ml are used, then at the doses above (see Table 14.3),
blocked are the radial, median, ulnar, musculocutaneous and axil-
the volume of injectate is usually sufficient without further
dilution. As a rough guide, it is generally agreed not to exceed
lary (Figure 14.7).
1 ml injectate per 5-7kg body weight, and not to inject more
Landmarks
than 6 ml maximum for any dog.
Point of shoulder (greater tuberosity of humerus). Some people
 Extradurally administered opioids are rarely solely suffcient for
like to choose a site midway between the point of the shoulder
surgery (e.g. in a sedated animal), because although they provide
s , s i i j ssd sa a 
 excellent analgesia against C fibre pain (slow, burning, second,
however, you may block the phrenic nerve; beware if bilateral
blocks are required, although the intercostals and accessory res-
pain (fast, sharp, incisional, frst, ipicritic pain). In order to
 piratory muscles should be able to cope in most animals.
 perform surgery under extradural analgesia, you will need to add
 The animal is best positioned in lateral recumbency. Clip and
a local anaesthetic or an α2 agonist. Although α2 agonists produce
aseptically prepare the region around the shoulder joint and
analgesia similar to opicids, they also have local anaesthetic effects.
medially to it, and medially to the cranial border of the scapula.
 If opicids alone are administered extradurally, then the animal
 Insert the needle medial to the shoulder joint, staying on the
should remain standing and ambulatory, because motor nerve
medial side of the scapula, but staying outside the chest. Advance
blockade does not occur (although mild ataxia and occasionally
the needle parallel to the vertebral column, aiming for the costo-
myoclonus, have been reported after extradural morphine, pos-
chondral junction of the first rib. Aspirate to be sure the needle
sibly due to some local anaesthetic activity of the opioid itself or
tip is not in a blood vessel, then inject a small aliquot of the total
due to effects on spinal reflex arcs).
volume; the remainder is injected as the needle is withdrawn,
 Remifentanil should not be administered by the neuraxial
aspirating before each subsequent injection (Figure 14.7). An
routes because glycine is included in the preparation. Glycine is
assistant can be helpful to ^elevate? the scapula/shoulder. Using a
a CNS inhibitory neurotransmitter, but is also a co-agonist at
 peripheral nerve stimulator/nerve locator to identify branches
NMDA receptors.
of the brachial plexus (electro-location), can greatly improve the
 Extradural injection of low doses' of local anaesthetics should
 chance of successful block (see further reading).
produce minimal motor fbre blockade but animals may still
The chosen needle size depends upon the size of the dog or cat.
become recumbent because some of the sensory fibres involved
For larger dogs, a 3" needle is best, and some people prefer to use
 in the maintenance of postural muscle tone may be blocked.
the spinal needles for their supposed relative bluntness, and hence
02 agonists, due to their slight local anaesthetic activity, can
reduced potential to cause nerve damage (i.e. with the “blunt'
 produce some ataxia due to motor nerve blockade. Their systemic
spinal needles, if nerves are hit,the needle is supposed to separate
absorption can also lead to sedative and myorelaxant effects which
nerve fbres on its way through rather than transect them). Needle
may also manifest as ataxia.
gauge should be around 21-23 g.
Dose of local anaesthetic
Proposed sites of drug action after extradural injection
Drugs can be absorbed systemically from the epidural space, so
● Bupivacaine c.1 mg/kg: onset around 20-30 min, duration
you should consider their systemic side effects and be aware of
c.6h ++.
the total doses used if you want to administer a systemic dose as
● Lidocaine c. 4mg/kg: onset around 10-20 min, duration
well as an extradural dose.
c. 1-2 h (nearer 2 h if use lidocaine with epinephrine).
After injection into the epidural 'space′ the drug can:
● You can use a mixture of the two, for rapid onset and prolonged
● Escape from the epidural space/vertebral canal via the interver-
duration; just be aware of the total doses used regarding
possible toxicity.
tebral foramina, to effectively produce a “high paravertebral
block.
The local anaesthetic solutions commercially available (2%
● Be absorbed into the vertebral venous sinuses (and produce a
lidocaine and 0.5% bupivacaine) can be diluted with sterile saline
systemic effect).
in order to increase the volume of injectate and increase the
● Be absorbed into epidural lymphatics (and produce a systemic
spread of local anaesthetic. A good final injectate volume would
effect).
be about 10-15 ml for a 25 kg dog.
Local anaesthetic techniques for the limbs: Small animals
131
local anaesthetic deposition. One researcher has defined the exact 
innervation anatomy of the lumbar spine in horses and subse-
 quently identified ultrasonic landmarks in this location to improve
anaesthesia/analgesia of articular facets. This should facilitate
these animals (see further reading in Chapter 16).
Further reading
 Campoy L (2008) Fundamentals of regional anesthesia using
nerve stimulation in the dog. In: Recent advances in veterinary
anesthesia and analgesia: companion animals. Eds. Gleed RD,
Ludders JW. International Veterinary Information Service,
Ithaca, New York (www.ivis.org).
Deloughty JL, Griffiths R (2009) Arterial tourniquets. Continuing
Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain 9(2), 56-60.
(Excellent review of physiological effects of tourniquets and com-
plications of their use; based on their use in man.)
Fettes PDW, Jansson J-R, Wildsmith JAW (2009) Failed spinal
anaesthesia: mechanisms, management and prevention. British
Journal of Anaesthesia 102(6), 739-748. (This review, based on
humans,reminds us that intrathecal/true spinal blocks can also
Figure 14.7 Anatomical site for brachial plexus block injection. Reproduced 
sometimes fail.)
from Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia. 4l Edition. Eds: Muir wW, Hubbell
Lemke KA (2007) Pain management II: local and regional anaes-
JAE, Bednarski RM, Skarda RT. Chapter 7, Local Anesthesia in Dogs and Cats,
thetic techniques. In: BSAVA Manual of canine and feline
Pp 118-139. Copyright 2007, with permission from Elsevier.
anaesthesia and analgesia. 2"d Edition. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-
Novakovski T. BSAVA Publications, Gloucester, UK. Chapter
10, pp 104-114.
 Potential complications
Low J, Johnston N, Morris C (2008) Epidural analgesia: frst do
●Pneumothorax.
no harm. Editorial. Anaesthesia 63, 1-3. (Discusses the pros and 
● Large haematomas.
cons of epidural anaesthesia with respect to the stress response and
outcome after, in particular, abdominal (gastrointestinal tract)
● Intravascular injection of local anaesthetic, with subsequent
surgery.)
signs of local anaesthetic toxicity (convulsions, respiratory and
Tuominen M (1996) Spinal needle tip design - does it make any
cardiac depression).
difference? Current Opinion in Anaesthesiology 9, 395-398.
● Brachial plexus damage, with ensuing neuritis, paresis or paral-
Webb ST, Ghosh S (2009) Intra-articular bupivacaine: potentially
ysis (may be permanent).
chondrotoxic? Editorial. British Journal of Anaesthesia 102(4),
● Introduction of infection into the axilla.
439-441.
● Paraesthesias (e.g. abnormal sensation, itching'). This may
worry the animal (as may loss of sensation in the limb), during
onset of block (if not under general anaesthesia), and during
DVD
recovery from the block.
 Peripheral nerve blocks in the dog. Available through Partners in
● Residual block can sometimes last up to 24h, so slight motor
Animal Health, Cornell University, Ithaca, New York, USA
impairment may be noticeable for this time (the reason is
(www.partnersah.vet.cornell.edu)
uncertain).
● If you choose to perform the block more proximally, i.e. per-
forming the injection nearer the cervical spine, you may also
block the phrenic nerve. If you do this bilaterally you can
impair the animal's ability to breathe (although its intercostal
Self-test section
and accessory respiratory muscles should still be functional).
1. List five potential complications of a brachial plexus
 In addition to the increasing interest in the use of nerve stimu-
block.
lation for improved deposition of local anaesthetic and more
2.
 Compare and contrast epidural (extradural) and
effective nerve blocks, there is also a growing interest in the use
intrathecal (true spinal) techniques.
of ultrasound imaging to 'visualise nerve branches to improve
Miscellaneous local anaesthetic techniques:
Small animals
Learning objectives
 To be familiar with local analgesic techniques for the chest and abdomen.
Intercostal nerve block
Aiming perpendicularly to the body wall, the needle is slid off
the caudal border of the rib, and proximally, as near to the
Indications
intervertebral foramen as possible (i.e. as proximally along the
● Thoracotomy - perioperative analgesia.
intercostal nerve as possible, so as to block most of its branches).
● Rib fractures - analgesia.
Aspirate before injection.
· Chest drainage - analgesia.
As a guide, about 0.25-1 ml of local anaesthetic solution is
See also Chapter 48 on respiratory emergencies.
injected at each site, depending upon the animal's size.
The nerve blocks can be performed during surgery (common-
place during thoracotomies), as the nerves are easily visualised by
Site
the surgeon, just beneath the parietal pleura. Better pre-emptive
A neurovascular bundle is associated with the caudal border of
analgesia is, however, provided by performing the nerve blocks
each rib (Figure 15.1).
before the surgical incision is made.
 There is much overlap of innervation of the chest wall, so that
Analgesia is usually excellent, and is provided without
at least two, and preferably three,'segments' cranial and caudal
respiratory depression. High dose extradural morphine (0.1-
to, and including the intercostal site where analgesia is needed,
should be blocked. For example, for insertion of a chest drain,
0.2 mg/kg) can also provide excellent analgesia for thoraco tomies,
the tube should enter the thoracic cavity at about intercostal space
especially sternal splits, and also without respiratory depression;
see Chapter 14.
7 or 8. Thus intercostal nerve blocks should be performed for
intercostal nerves 5 to 9 or 6-10. For lateral thoracotomy, the
Potential complications
surgical incision is usually made at about intercostal space 4, so
Complications are usually associated with faulty technique.
that intercostal nerves 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6 should be blocked.
● Pneumothorax.
Technique
● Haemothorax.
● Lung damage.
● Needle: 23-25 g, 5/8-1".
● Doses: Lidocaine 1-2% (+/- epinephrine), 4(-10) mg/kg for
dogs (nearer 4mg/kg for cats); or bupivacaine 0.25-0.5%,
Interpleural (intra-pleural or pleural) *block
1(4) mg/kg for dogs (nearer 1 mg/kg for cats). Lidocaine anal-
A type of regional anaesthesia
gesia only lasts 1-2 h, whereas bupivacaine analgesia lasts 4-8 h.
A mixture is often used, combining lidocaine (<4 mg/kg) for
Indications
rapid onset with bupivacaine (<1 mg/kg) for prolonged dura-
tion of effect. Beware total doses of local anaesthetics used,
● Analgesia following thoracotomy.
especially if planning to perform other blocks too, e.g. an inter-
● Analgesia
for thoracostomy
tube: in-dwelling, drainage,
pleural block.
removal.
132
 Mscellaneous local anaesthetic technigues: Small animals 
133
the previous hour, that lidocaine is still on board, so calculate
Cranial
Rib
Caudal
doses accordingly.
 Bupivacaine is favoured for its longer duration of action. The
toxic dose is said to be between 1 and 4 mg/kg, so that 1 (-2) mg/
kg is a commonly chosen dose. If using more than one type of
local anaesthetic, be aware of cumulative toxicities.
Figure 15.1 The intercostal nerves are closely associated with the caudal
 Depending upon the patient's size, between 1 and about 10 ml
borders of the ribs.
of total volume can be instilled. Stock solutions can be diluted
with sterile saline. Some operators will roll the animal, gently,
onto the side that requires most analgesia, for several minutes 
● Analgesia for rib fractures or chest wall trauma.
 after instillation of the local anaesthetic.
● Analgesia for neoplastic conditions of the chest wall, pleura or
mediastinum.
● Analgesia for painful abdominal (especially cranial abdominal)
Potential complications
conditions (e.g. pancreatitis, cholecystectomy, renal surgery).
● Interpleural catheter-related complications (see chest drain
complications in Chapter 48, for example pneumothorax,
Some clinicians prefer repeating intercostal blocks in conscious
 infection, pleural effusion).
patients in preference to repeating pleural instillation of local
● Phrenic nerve block; beware of causing bilateral diaphragmatic
anaesthetics, although it can be reduced a little by adding sodium
paralysis.
bicarbonate and warming the solution (see below and Chapter
1
   n  , r  
autonomic nervous system effects.
12).
● Beware cardiac arrhythmias if performing this technique to
To 1ml bupivacaine 0.5%, add 0.01ml of 8.4% sodium
provide analgesia after thoracotomy for  pericardectomy
bicarbonate.
because bupivacaine may be deposited directly onto the now
To 1ml
lidocaine 2%, add 0.1ml of 8.4% sodium
bicarbonate.
naked myocardium. If this technique is chosen, the patient
should be placed in a sternal position and local anaesthetic
 injected slowly, whilst monitoring pulse and ECG.
Mechanisms
Exactly how instillation of local anaesthetic solutions into the
pleural 'space? produces such widespread analgesia is not fully
Other techniques
understood. It is thought that there is diffusion of local anaes-
Techniques affording useful analgesia for abdominal and chest
thetic through the parietal pleura (and possibly through the dia-
surgery/pain include epidural (extradural) and intrathecal tech-
 phragm) to effectively produce multiple thoracic intercostal (and
niques (see Chapter 12).
thoracic (and cranial lumbar) sympathetic chain and the splanch-
Pancreatitis
nic (sympathetic) nerves. There could also be rapid systemic
absorption from the huge 'surface area’ of the pleura, with a
Analgesia for these cases can present quite a challenge, not least
because many of these animals have other co-existent diseases.
resultant analgesic effect similar to that following intravenous
 NSAIDs can be a worry, with respect to gastro-intestinal tract
administration.
ulceration. Corticosteroids may be contra-indicated, as, in addi-
Technique
tion to gastrointestinal side effects, they have been known to
promote the development of pancreatitis. Opioids, such as
Local anaesthetic solution can be instilled through an in-dwelling
morphine, have often been considered contra-indicated, because
chest drain. Otherwise, a catheter or chest tube may be placed into
morphine may cause vomiting (usually only after the frst dose
the pleural space either percutaneously, or under direct view (e.g.
though), and there has been the worry that they may encourage
before closure of a thoracotomy incision).
 Special catheter kits can be bought for this purpose and the 
constriction of the bile duct and pancreatic duct sphincters
'needles’ through which these catheters are inserted are also
(although this is less of a problem for dogs than for cats and man,
as dogs do not have a true sphincter of Oddi). Although pethidine
similar to ^spinal’ needles in that they have short bevels and are
 is useful (it is spasmolytic for these sphincters) it is short acting.
therefore relatively blunt. Aspirate before injection, to check for
blood and air (although there may be some present if a thora-
and painful on intramuscular injection, so that the patient will
soon become averse to repeated injections. Buprenorphine or
cotomy has just been performed).
butorphanol may be less of a problem than morphine for these
sphincters, but the analgesia they afford is of a lesser quality.
Dose of local anaesthetic
 Other strategies include:
If local anaesthetic has already been used, for example if an inter-
costal nerve block has already been performed, keep in mind the
● Extradural morphine; reduces systemic side effects, and there-
total doses. Lidocaine is commonly used topically in cats to desen-
fore reduces sphincter problerms.
sitise the larynx for tracheal intubation. If this was done within
● Consider fentanyl patch, but relatively long ^onset' time.
134  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Interpleural local anaesthetic administration.
   o (    1
● Combined interpleural and intraperitoneal local anaesthetic 
and analgesic techniques: Dogs. In: Lumb and Jones? Veterinary
administration.
Anesthesia and Analgesia 4l Edition. Eds: Tranquilli WJ,
●Intravenous lidocaine infusion
+-
ketamine
(bolus
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa, USA.
+/- infusion).
Chapter 20, pp 561-593.
Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007) Local and regional anesthetic
Further reading
and analgesic techniques: Cats. In: Lumb and Jones? Veterinary
Anesthesia and Analgesia 4" Edition. Eds: Tranquilli WJ,
 Borer K (2006) Local analgesic techniques in small animals. In
Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa, USA.
Practice 28, 200-207.
Chapter 21, pp 595-603.
Conzemius MG, Brockman DJ, King LG, Perkowski SZ (1994)
Analgesia in dogs after intercostal thoracotomy: a clinical trial
comparing intravenous buprenorphine and interpleural bupi-
 Self-test section
vacaine. Veterinary Surgery 23, 291-298.
McKenzie AG, Mathe S (1993) Interpleural local anaesthesia: ana-
1.  For an intercostal block, how many ^segments? cranial
tomical basis for mechanism of action. British Journal of
and caudal to the site of injury' should be blocked?
Anaesthesia 76, 297-299.
Local anaesthetic technigues: Horses
Learning objectives
To be familiar with locoregional anaesthetic techniques for the horse's head.
 To appreciate which nerves supply motor and sensory innervation to the head.
To be familiar with the technique of epidural (extradural) anaesthesia.
Equine limb nerve blocks
surgery under general anaesthesia. Figure 16.1 shows useful ana-
Concerning limb analgesia, similar techniques to those in small
tomical landmarks and positions of the various nerve foramina.
animals, or indeed cattle, can be applied to horses. However, more
commonly the reason for requiring limb analgesia is in the clinic
Infraorbital nerve block
 diagnostic setting, where lameness is being evaluated. The reader
Sites of block
is referred to orthopaedic texts for specific horse limb perineural
blocks. Table 16.1 compares the commonly available local
 1. Where infraorbital nerve emerges from infraorbital foramen
anaesthetics.
(Figure 16.1).
For evaluation of lameness, diagnostic nerve blocks are initially
 2. Within infraorbital canal.
mal blocks, and a medium-acting local anaesthetic drug is chosen,
Structures desensitised 
commonly mepivacaine (Carbocainem, Intra-EpicainerM). If
1. The upper lip, the nostril, the roof of the nasal cavity and the
 mepivacaine is not available, then often the next favoured choice
skin of the face rostroventral to the foramen.
is prilocaine, another amide-linked local anaesthetic which also
 2. As above plus the incisors, the canine and up to the frst two
causes minimal effect on vasomotor tone.
cheek teeth (+ associated gum and bone), and some more skin
The long duration of action of bupivacaine renders it less 
 towards the medial canthus of the eye.
suitable for diagnostic nerve blocks, but often more suitable for
 peri-operative analgesia of the distal limb. More proximal nerve
Technique
blockade, however, can compromise recovery quality because the
 The infraorbital foramen lies about half way along, and slightly
 patient effectively has a dead leg.
dorsal to, a line between the rostral end of the facial crest and the
naso-incisive notch; and it is partly covered by a thin strap-like
vacaine (20) > tetracaine (10) > lidocaine and mepivacaine
muscle called the levator nasolabialis superioris which you will
(2) > prilocaine (1.7) > procaine (1).
need to reflect upwards a litle so you can feel the bony rim of the
Intra-articular analgesia with local anaesthetic agents and/or
foramen more easily. The nerves supplying the incisors, canines
opioids can be performed in standing or anaesthetised horses.
and cheek teeth actually arise from the maxillary nerve within the
canal, so to block these you need to infltrate local anaesthetic
about 2-4 cm into the canal.
Head blocks
Once the foramen is located and after clipping and aseptic
Head and eye local anaesthetic blocks are useful for investigations
preparation of the skin, a 20-23 g needle can be inserted, either
and stitch-ups (e.g. under sedation), and are discussed in more
with its tip at the opening of the foramen for the first technique,
detail below. All these techniques can be used to provide peri-
 or slid into the canal by about 2-4 cm for the second technique.
operative analgesia, i.e. to form part of a balanced anaesthetic and
The latter can be quite painful, so the horse will usually require
135
136  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 16.1 Comparison of commonly available local anaesthetic drugs for diagnostic nerve blocks.
Lidocaine
Mepivacaine
 Bupivacaine
 Prilocaine
 Onset (min)
 5-10 min 
 10-15 min 
15-20 min
1 0-15 min 
Duation (h)
1 h without epinephrine;
c.2 h
4-8 (+)} h
1-2h without epinephrine:
 2h with epinephrine
usually only available
2-2.5h with epinephrine
without epinephrine
Vasomotor effects
Causes local vasodilation
No overall effect on vascular
Little overall effect on
Litle overall effect; little tissue
(often interpreted as
tone; little 'tissue reaction';
vascular tone.
reaction', so can be used for limb
'tissue reaction' because
therefore tends to be the
nerve blocks without unsightly
areas where local
preferred agent for limb
 Swellings. Might need to be more
anaesthetic is injected 
nerve blocks
accurate with placement of blocks,
often look swollen,
 because poorer tissue penetration
therefore not first choice)
than lidocaine, hence usually
 second choice to mepivacaine
Toxic dose
46 (up to 10) mg/kg
Similar to/less than lidocaine
1-2 (up to 4) mg/kg
Similar to/less than lidocaine
% solution available
1% and 2%
2%
(0.25%), 0.5% and (0.75%)
1%, 2%, 4%
with or without
epinephrine
Relative doses (volumes)
1 ml of 2%
1 ml
1 ml of 0.5%
1 ml of 4%
for injection
 Supraorbital (frontal)
maxillary foramen. The block can be performed in the sedated or
foramen
 anaesthetised patient.
Zygomatic
 arch
 Structures desensitised
 All the cheek teeth, paranasal sinuses and nasal cavity in addition
to the upper lip, the nostril and the skin of the face as for the
 Facial crest 
infraorbital nerve block within the infraorbital canal.
Technique
Infraorbital foramen
 A 10 cm long (spinal) needle, 20-23 g is inserted perpendicularly
Naso-
beneath the zygomatic arch (below the transverse facial neuro-
incisive
 vascular bundle), caudal to the lateral canthus of the eye, cranial
notch
to the vertical ramus of the mandible, and is advanced into the
pterygopalatine fossa. Aspirate to check that a blood vessel has not
been punctured before injection of about 10 ml of local anaes-
thetic (e.g. 2% lidocaine). A slightly different needle insertion
 Mandibular
technique, with fewer complications, has recently been described:
foramen
the extraperiorbital fat body insertion technique (see further
reading).
Mental foramen
Supraorbital/Frontal nerve block
Figure 16.1 Anatomical landmarks of the horse head.
Site of block
The supraorbital nerve is a branch of the ophthalmic division of
the trigeminal nerve. It emerges from the supraorbital foramen
sedation. Aspirate (should be no blood), before injection of about
which lies roughly half way between the medial and lateral canthi,
5 ml of local anaesthetic (e.g. 2% lidocaine).
about 1-2cm ^above' the bony upper rim of the orbit (Figure
16.1).
Maxillary nerve block
Site of block
 Structures desensitised 
The site of maxillary nerve blockade is similar to the technique in
 The middle two-thirds of the upper eyelid and the forehead skin.
dogs, i.e. in the pterygopalatine fossa, where the nerve enters the
 Note that the medial and lateral canthi themselves are not desen-
Local anaesthetic techniques: Horses
137
sitised. Some motor block of levator palpebrae superioris also
The suggested dose is 0.5-1 ml of local anaesthetic (e.g. 2% lido-
occurs (i.e. branches of the oculomotor nerve (Ill) are also
caine) per 1 cm of skin or tissue to be desensitised. The combina-
tion of all four blocks is called a 'diamond' block.
lavage systems.
Mental nerve block
Technique
Sites of block
Once the foramen has been located by palpation a 23-25 g, 5/8"
 1. Where the mental nerve emerges from the mental foramen
needle is inserted (through aseptically prepared skin), so as to
enter the foramen by about 1 cm. Aspirate to check the needle has
(Figure 16.1).
 2. Within the mandibular canal.
not penetrated the frontal artery or vein. Then inject 1-2 ml of
local anaesthetic (e.g. 2% lidocaine). A further 1-2 ml can be
Structures desensitised 
deposited beneath the skin as the needle is withdrawn. The use of
longer needles risks popping through into the orbit and possibly
1. The lower lip rostral to the foramen.
damaging the eyeball.
2. As above, plus incisors, canine, and the first three cheek teeth,
and associated gum and bone.
Infratrochlear, zygomatic and
lacrimal nerve blocks
Technique
These nerve branches supply sensation to the rest of the peri-
The mental foramen lies in the middle of the interdental
orbital region.
space (diastema), slightly hidden under another strap-like muscle
called the depressor labii inferioris, which can be reflected
● Infratrochlear nerve is a branch of the ophthalmic division of
‘upwards’ to facilitate palpation of the foramen. The nerves
the trigeminal nerve. It supplies sensation to the medial canthus,
supplying the teeth arise within the canal, so local anaesthetic
 nictitans, lacrimal duct region and a small sector of facial skin
must be deposited about 2-5cm into the canal in order to
fanning out' from the medial canthus.
desensitise them.
● Lacrimal nerve is also a branch of the ophthalmic division
 Insert a 20-22 g, 1-3" needle percutaneously (after aseptic
of the trigeminal nerve. It supplies sensation to the lateral
 preparation of the site) so that the tip is near the foramen for the
canthus, the lateral quarter of the upper eyelid and a tiny
frst technique, or so that the needle can then be advanced up
 segment of skin between the lateral canthus and the base of the
inside the canal for the second version of the technique. It may
ear.
be ^tight to advance the needle, and the injection requires some 
● Zygomatic (zygomaticotemporal) nerve is a branch of the
 pressure. Again, performing the block can be quite painful for the
 maxillary division of the trigeminal nerve. It supplies sensation
animal, so sedation is usually required. Aspirate to check for inad-
to the middle-lateral two-thirds of the lower eyelid, and a
vertent perforation of a blood vessel before local anaesthetic is
small sector of skin fanning out' from the ventral eyelid
 injected. About 5 ml of local anaesthetic (e.g. lidocaine 2%) is
margin.
usually suffcient for the first technique, but up to 10 ml is required
for the second.
Sites for blocks
All of these nerves can be blocked as they cross the orbital rim;
Mandibular nerve block
but their exact location can be tricky to find. The infratrochlear
Site of block
nerve can be blocked at the tiny bony notch located just lateral to
Where the mandibular nerve enters the mandibular foramen on
 the medial canthus on the upper orbital rim. The lacrimal nerve
 the medial aspect of the vertical ramus of the mandible (Figure
is blocked just medial to the lateral canthus on the upper orbital
16.1). This can be technically challenging and is easier to perform
rim. The zygomatic nerve is blocked just medial to the lateral
 if the patient is under general anaesthesia.
canthus along the lower orbital rim. The peri-orbital nerves can
 be thought of as forming four points of a diamond (Figure 16.2).
Structures desensitised 
 If you are not sure of the location of these nerves, you can
All lower teeth and associated mandibular bone in addition to the
 infltrate some local anaesthetic all the way around the orbital rim.
 structures mentioned for the intra-mandibular canal technique
for mental nerve block.
 Frontal
 Technique
Ear
 If you draw an imaginary line along the occlusal surface of
Nose
Lacrimal
the cheek teeth, and intersect it at 90° with another imaginary
Infratrochlear
line drawn down from the lateral canthus of the eye, then where
the two lines meet is approximately where the mandibular
foramen is located, on the medial aspect of the mandible. The
 Zyg omatic
insertion of the needle can be so as to follow either of these
Figure 16.2 Representation of location of peri-orbital nerves.
imaginary lines:
138  Veterinary Anaesthesia
This block also reduces blinking, so be aware of corneal
drying and further foreign body accumulation if in a dusty
environment.
Site/s of block
● In the triangular depression where a line along the ventral
border of the zygomatic arch intersects with a vertical line
drawn up from the caudal border of the vertical ramus of the
mandible (the cross in Figure 16.3).
 a e a e am sp rn   o
 border of the zygomatic arch transects a vertical line drawn up
from the caudal border of the vertical mandibular ramus (the
line with a circle at its end in Figure 16.3).
● Where the palpebral nerve crosses the dorsal margin of the
Figure 16.3 Sites for (auriculo-) palpebral nerve block. See text for details.
 Zygomatic arch; roughly half way between the eye and the ear.
You can feel the nerve, as a tiny band crossing the zygomatic
rim. Block at this site is more correctly called a palpebral nerve
block rather than an auriculopalpebral nerve block, as no ear
● From the ventral border of the mandible, just in front of the
droop will be produced (the arrow in Figure 16.3).
angle where the vertical and horizontal rami meet, the needle
 is advanced vertically along the medial side of the mandibular
Technique
ramus.
Choose one of the above sites for injection. A 22-25 g, 1" needle,
● From a point on the caudal border of the mandible, about
 and about 2-5ml of local anaesthetic (e.g. 2% lidocaine) are
3cm below the temporomandibular joint, in the slight
required.
depression between the ear base and the wing of the atlas,
the needle is advanced rostrally along the medial side of
Retrobu/bar block
the mandible.
See notes for small animal retrobulbar blocks (Chapter 13).
 Aspirate to check for inadvertent penetration of a blood vessel
 Similar techniques, precautions and complications apply. It can
before injecting about 15-20ml local anaesthetic (e.g. lidocaine
be performed in standing, sedated or anaesthetised horses. It is
 2%). Wait 15-30 min for the block to work.
usually reserved for enucleations.
Palpebral nerve block/Auriculopalpebra!
nerve block
Paravertebral block
 Figure 16.3 shows the three different sites for this nerve block. The
This can be performed in horses to provide flank anaesthesia.
auriculopalpebral nerve is a branch of the facial nerve (cranial
nerve VII), and is therefore only motor. Blockade of this nerve
Landmarks
does not desensitise anything. So why do we bother to block it at
A vertical line drawn up from the caudal border of the last rib,
all? Because it is motor to several of the peri-ocular superficial
locates the transverse process of the third lumbar vertebra. Judging
muscles, especially the orbicularis oculi muscle; and in horses
the horizontal distance between the second and third lumbar
especially, this muscle can contract so tightly that examination of 
 transverse processes gives you an estimate of the distance between
the eye can be almost impossible. This nerve can therefore be
the frst and second lumbar transverse processes.
usefully blocked when eye examination is necessary, but when
tight blepharospasm is present, to look for foreign bodies or to
Spinal segmental nerves blocked
look at corneal injuries and pathology. However, if you want to
The Th 18, Lul and Lu2 nerves can be blocked paravertebrally
do anything painful to the peri-ocular structures, the ocular
either off the cranial borders of the frst, second and third
surface, or the globe, you will need to add some kind of sensory
lumbar transverse processes, or off the cranial edge of the
block. Instillation of topical local anaesthetic (e.g. ophthaine')
transverse process of the frst lumbar vertebra and then the
off the caudal edges of the frst and second lumbar transverse
 a grass seed from the conjunctival sac.
processes, similarly to cattle (see Chapter 33). Paravertebral
 Combining an (auriculo)palpebral block with a supraorbital 
needles, long spinal needles or the stylettes from long over-the-
nerve block goes a long way to reducing tight closure of the eyelids
needle catheters (at least 10 cm long, about 20g) are used; and
in horses with very painful corneal lesions or uveitis, because the
about 30-40ml local anaesthetic (e.g. lidocaine 2%) for each
 supraorbital nerve block also blocks some motor innervation to
nerve (25-30 ml for the ventral branches and 10ml for the dorsal
upper eyelid muscles (e.g. levator palpebrae superioris).
branches).
Local anaesthetic techniques: Horses 
139
Although nerve location by electrical stimulation pre-block
to the xylazine; but also perhaps due to different, but synergis-
has not been described in Equidae, paravertebral block may be
 tic, mechanisms mediating analgesia.
improved by such a technique; and the use of ultrasound to help
● Detomidine 60μg/kg, diluted to final volume of 10ml. Onset
locate the segmental nerves responsible for innervation of the
10-15 min. Duration 2-3 h. Despite this being a relatively more 
lumbar spine in horses has been described (see further reading).
potent dose of detomidine than the above mentioned 0.17-
 See also Chapter 14 on small animals.
0.25 mg/kg xylazine (at least if administered intravenously), the
duration of analgesia is less than that after xylazine, possibly
due to more rapid systemic absorption. Xylazine may have
Epidural (extradural) analgesia/anaesthesia
more vasoconstrictive action due to its greater cl agonist
Location of site
actions, so delaying absorption.
The commonest injection site is the frst coccygeal interspace.
● Morphine 0.1 mg/kg, made up to fnal volume 10ml for a
This space is located by ^pumping? the tail up and down and
 500 kg horse. Onset 1-4(+) h. Duration 17 up to 24h. Analgesia
feeling for the most obvious/most moveable interspace (usually
extends cranially to at least the first lumbar segment. (Morphine
Co1-Co2; but occasionally Sa5-Col). The site is usually about
 0.2 mg/kg assures analgesia up to ninth thoracic segment; onset
1-2 cm cranial to the first tail hairs. The needle can be inserted
is slightly quicker, and duration slightly longer at this higher
 perpendicularly to croup, or at about 30 degrees (as if aiming up
dose).
the vertebral canal). For further information, see notes on cattle
● Morphine 0.05-0.1 mg/kg + detomidine 30μg/kg. Onset about
(Chapter 33) and small animal (Chapter 14) extradural injection
20 min. Duration 12-24 h.
techniques and references below.
True spinal/subdural/intrathecal anaesthesia/analgesia.
 The reader is referred to anaesthetic texts for the best tech-
What to inject for an average 500 kg horse, to avoid
niques and drug doses (see references).
hind limb motor block
 Use preservative-free preparations where possible, and especially
if multiple doses are to be administered. Table 16.2 summarises
Other blocks
commonly used drugs and combinations.
 Pudendal and caudal rectal nerve block
● 5-10ml lidocaine 2%. Onset 5-10 min (sometimes a little
 This can be performed in horses, similarly to in cattle. The reader
longer than for cattle where it normally takes about 5min).
 is referred to veterinary anaesthesia texts and the further reading
Duration 1-2 h.
section for more details.
● 5 ml mepivacaine 2%. Onset 20 min. Duration 2+ h.
● 0.17 mg/kg xylazine, made up to 10 ml in normal saline. Onset
Continuous infusion of lidocaine
20-30 min. Duration 2-4 h. (Or, 0.25 mg/kg xylazine in 8 ml
 This is becoming increasingly used as a component of balanced
normal saline: onset 10-15 min; duration 3+h.)
anaesthesia? for its analgesic effects. It can also be used to form a
● 0.17 mg/kg xylazine + 0.22 mg/kg lidocaine (without epine-
 part of a balanced analgesic' regimen.
 phrine). Onset 5-10 min. Sweating in perineal region accom-
 panies onset of analgesia. Duration 5 h. Duration longer than
Further reading
either agent alone, possibly due to some vasoconstriction due
Moon PF, Suter CM (1993) Paravertebral thoracolumbar
anaesthesia in 10 horses. Equine Veterinary Journal 25(4),
Table 16.2 Drug doses for epidural (extradural) injection for a typical 500kg
304-308.
horse.
Robertson SA, Sanchez LC, Merritt AM, Doherty TJ (2005) Effect
of systemic lidocaine on visceral and somatic nociception in 
Drug
Volume
Onset
 Duration
conscious horses. Equine Veterinary Journal 37(2), 122-127.
Lidocaine 2%
 5-10 ml 
 Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007) Local and Regional Anesthetic
 20 min
1-2 h
and Analgesic Techniques: Horses. In: Lumb and Jones'
Mepivacaine 2%
 5 ml
 20 min
2h
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. 4" Edition. Eds: Tranquilli
Xylazine 0.17 mg/kg
Can dilute to
15 min
2-5h
WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, lowa,
10ml in saline
USA. Chapter 22, pp 605-642.
 Detomidine 60 μg/kg 
Can dilute to
15 min
2-3h
Stazyk C, Bienert A, Baumer W, Feige K, Gasse H (2008)
10ml in saline
 Simulation of local anaesthetic nerve block of the infraorbital
Can dilute to
17-24h
nerve within the pterygopalatine fossa: anatomical landmarks
Morphine 0.1 mg/kg 
1-4h
10ml in saline
defined by computed tomography. Research in Veterinary
Science 85, 399-406.
Morphine 0.05-0.1 mg/kg +
20min
17-24h
Sysel AM, Pleasant RS, Jacobson JD, Moll HD, Warnick LD,
Detomidine 30 μg/kg
Sponenberg DP, Eyre P (1997) Systemic and local effects
140
 Veterinary Anaesthesia
associated with long-term epidural catheterisation and mor-
 phine-detomidine administration in horses. Veterinary Surgery
 Self-test section
26, 141-149.
1.
Which of the following nerves supplies only motor
Vandeweerd J, Desbrosse F, Clegg P, Hougardy V, Brock L, Welsh
A, Cripps P (2007) Innervation and nerve injections of the
innervation?
A.
 Infraorbital
lumbar spine of the horse: a cadaveric study. Equine Veterinary
Journal 39(1), 59-63.
B.
 Infratrochlear
C.
 Palpebral
D.
Zygomatic
2.
 Rank the relative toxicities of: mepivacaine, tetracaine,
bupivacaine, procaine and prilocaine.
Muscle relaxants
Learning objectives
 To be able to discuss the indications and contra-indications for use of neuromuscular blockers.
 To be able to describe the basic neuromuscular junction structure and function.
 To be able to compare and contrast depolarising and non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers.
 To be able to discuss how the degree of neuromuscular block can be monitored.
1
 To be able to discuss the considerations for reversal of the block and recognise any complications.
 To be aware of the influence of other drugs/conditions on the degree of neuromuscular block.
Introduction
● Reduce the requirement for reflex or voluntary muscular activ-
 ity, for example, general anaesthesia results in reduced muscu-
Why use neuromuscular blockade
lar activity.
(muscle relaxation)
● Interfere with reflexes which control postural muscle strength.
●To help the surgeon for fracture reduction,for thoracic surgery,
Benzodiazepines and guaiphenesin inhibit these reflexes at
for deep abdominal surgery, or for ophthalmic surgery where
spinal cord level, as does baclofen (a gamma aminobutyric acid
the operating field must remain as still as possible.
(GABA) analogue but with other actions too).
● To facilitate IPPV (intermittent positive pressure ventilation).
● Block motor nerve conduction. Local anaesthetics can achieve
 Not all patients that require ventilation require muscle relaxa-
this.
tion, because by simply ventilating their lungs a litle more than
● Block acetylcholine synthesis (or uptake), or storage in vesicles 
they would for themselves, we can reduce their blood CO, level
 or vesicle transport in the motor nerve terminal.
● Block acetylcholine release from motor nerve terminals, for
to reduce the ventilatory drive; and so we can capture' control
of their ventilation. However, some patients continue to ^fight
example, botulinum toxin prevents vesicles of acetylcholine
the ventilator, and this can cause problems (e.g. during thora-
from fusing with the nerve membrane for exocytosis.
cotomy where the lungs should not be inflating as the surgeon
● Block the action of acetylcholine on the post-synaptic (muscle)
incises into the chest cavity); or simply be a nuisance.
 membrane. This is achieved with neuromuscular blockers.
● As part of a balanced anaesthetic technique, it may be espe-
● Prevent muscle contraction. Inhalation agents affect calcium
cially useful in high risk cases, where you can provide the
channels, so reduce calcium entry and produce a degree of
'muscle relaxation? component of general anaesthesia with a
muscle weakness. Dantrolene interferes with excitation-
neuromuscular blocker, but choose one with minimal side
contraction coupling by inhibiting calcium release from the
effects and a duration to suit your need. You must be able to
sarco plasmic reticulum.
 monitor the depth of anaesthesia in any paralysed patient.
Choice of muscle relaxant
● For endotracheal intubation, especially in man and occasion-
ally cats or pigs (these species are prone to laryngospasm).
Choice of muscle relaxant is influenced by:
● Anaesthetic and surgical requirements.
How can we relax muscles?
● Speed of onset of action required.
There are several ways to achieve muscle relaxation (of striated
● Duration of action required.
muscles):
● Potential side effects.
141
142  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Contra-indications to muscle relaxation
 disinhibition (over-inhibition of inhibitory neurotransmission,
resulting in uncontrolled excitement). These drugs can also cross
● Inability to ventilate the patient adequately.
the placenta.
● Inability to be able to judge depth of anaesthesia adequately.
 Neuromuscular blocking agents 
Centrally acting muscle relaxants
These are the true, peripherally acting, 'muscle relaxants? These
Centrally acting muscle relaxants do not act specifically at the
 drugs do not provide analgesia,sedation or hypnosis; and because
 peripheral neuromuscular junctions.
they paralyse respiratory muscles, artificial ventilation is neces-
Guaiphenesin
sary to keep the patient alive.
 These are all quaternary ammonium compounds with at least
Guaiphenesin (guaifenesin; glyceryl guiacolate (GG); glyceryl
 one N+ that can interact with the α subunits of the post-synaptic
guaiacolate ether (GGE)) is a propanediol derivative. See Chapter
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors of the neuromuscular junction,
33 on ruminant anaesthesia, and also Chapter 31 on feld anaes-
 and block neuromuscular transmission.
thesia techniques for horses.
Each nicotinic (N) acetylcholine receptor consists of
Guaiphenesin inhibits reflex arc internuncial neuronal relay in
the spinal cord and brainstem, and thus tends to reduce postural
 5 glycoprotein subunits which span the post-synaptic membrane.
Normal adult neuromuscular junction N acetylcholine receptors
muscle strength. It crosses the blood-brain barrier and placenta.
(NAChR), consist of two α subunits, one β subunit, one &
It causes minimal interference with the animal's ability to breathe
subunit, and one E subunit. Foetal NAChR and extra-junctional
when used at the normal doses. It has some sedative properties,
NAChR consist of two C, one β, one &, and one Y.
with minimal cardiovascular depressant side effects, but it is
Normally, two acetylcholine molecules must bind simultane-
irritant to vascular endothelium and to tissues if extravascular
ously, one each, to the two α subunits, for channel activation to
deposition occurs. It has some antitussive action but is also an
occur; so two acetylcholine (ACh) molecules are required for one
expectorant.
channel to open. Activation of the channel results in conforma-
 It was (but is no longer) available commercially in a 15% solu-
tional change and opening of a pore, a non-specific cation
tion, but could be diluted in dextrose-saline (0.18% saline, 4%
channel, through which sodium (and calcium) can move in to,
glucose) down to 5% or 10% solutions too. Home-made solutions
 and potassium can move out of, the muscle cell.
were used prior to the advent of the commercial solution. These
At the neuromuscular junction (Figure 17.1), the post-synaptic
were variously solubilised in dextrose, water, or saline to try to
muscle membrane at the ^motor end plate' is highly folded. This
reduce guaiphenesin's side effects of tending to cause thrombosis
helps to increase the area of ^contact (across a narrow synaptic
(especially if >10% and if infused rapidly under pressure), and
cleft), between the pre and post-synaptic cells. The folded post-
haemolysis (especially if >15%). The commercial product was
junctional membrane has most NAChR concentrated on the
solubilised in N-methyl pyrrolidone (an organic solvent also used
shoulders of its folds; but the crypts are also important, as they
 as a paint stripper, which also has the potential to be irritant).
harbour much acetylcholinesterase, which is necessary to destroy
 The dose required is 30-100+ mg/kg. The lethal overdose is
the transmitter, acetylcholine, once it has done its job.Acetylcholine
around 300 mg/kg. It is metabolised in the liver, but is cumulative.
is hydrolysed by this enzyme, and the choline which is formed can
The metabolite, catechol, may be responsible for most of the side
 be taken up again by the prejunctional nerve terminal, and re-
effects. Doses exceeding 150-180 mg/kg will produce side effects
cycled to form further acetylcholine.
of some cardiorespiratory depression (with hypotension, occa-
 sional arrhythmias and altered (often apneustic) breathing pat-
terns with an overall reduction in minute ventilation), muscle
 Presynaptic receptors
rigidity and CNS excitement reactions.
There may be nicotinic, muscarinic, and even adrenergic pre-
junctional receptors. These may be involved in positive and
Benzodiazepines
negative feedback loops for enhancing, or diminishing,transmit-
Benzodiazepines (e.g. diazepam and midazolam) are also
ter release respectively. Some presynaptic receptors result in
described as centrally acting muscle relaxants because they also
mobilisation of ACh from distant reserve stores to the readily
inhibit internuncial neurotransmission in the spinal cord and
releasable stores. The prejunctional nicotinic acetylcholine
brainstem via actions at benzodiazepine binding sites (which are
 n so n    s
some of them may be similar to those found in autonomic
results in postural muscle weakness, and no real inhibition of
ganglia. Nevertheless, some of these pre-junctional receptors
respiratory muscle function, however, in large doses, they will
may also be blocked by our neuromuscular blocking drugs
cause some cardiorespiratory depression.
(see later).
 Benzodiazepines are metabolised in the liver and there are some
active metabolites from diazepam's metabolism. Benzodiazepines
 Post-synaptic receptors
can produce some sedation, but are also capable of causing CNS
Can be junctional or extra-junctional. Extra-junctional receptors
excitement reactions too, possibly due to the phenomenon of
are up-regulated (increased in number +/- sensitivity):
Muscle relaxants  143
Motor nerve terminal 
 Readily releasable stores
of ACh vesicles;: vesicle
release is calcium-
dependent
Synaptic
cleft 
 Skeletal
muscle cell
membrane
Motor end plate - highly folded
 Acetylcholine vesicles
 N acetylcholine receptors
Lots of
口
 acetylcholinesterase
 Pre- and extra- junctional N ACh receptors
Figure 17.1 The neuromuscular junction.
●If denervation of the muscle occurs.
Muscles of facial expression
● With extensive burn injuries.
Jaw muscles
● If disuse of muscle occurs.
Tail muscles
 Horse and cattle
facial muscles seem
Neck and distal limb muscles 
 Denervation and burns result in up-regulation of receptors
Proximal limb muscles 
to be much more
 throughout the post-synaptic muscle membrane, whereas disuse
Swallowing and phonatory muscles
resistant to block
Abdominal wall muscles 
than their limb
results in up-regulation of receptors in the peri-junctional area
Intercostal muscles 
muscles
only. Although both junctional and extrajunctional receptors can 
Diaphragm
be affected by neuromuscular blocking drugs, only those recep-
tors in or near the neuromuscular junction can participate in
Fgure 17.2 The normal sequence of muscle block quoted for the dog.
normal neuromuscular transmission. The normal channel ^open?
time is about 1 ms for junctional receptors, but much longer for
mation occurs, but a muscle action potential is only generated
extra-junctional receptors.
when the end plate is depolarised sufficiently to reach its threshold
 In order for successful neuromuscular transmission to occur,
potential.
5-20% of motor end plate NAChR must be open' so that an all-
 or-none muscle action potential can be generated (5-20% is
Order of blockade of muscle activity
quoted because neuromuscular junctions vary in sensitivity.)
The commonly quoted order of blockade of muscle activity for
Thus you can see that there are many'spare' receptors; and these
the dog is shown in Figure 17.2.
spare receptors offer a large 'margin of safety to neuromuscular
 In theory, it is possible to titrate neuromuscular block to get
transmission' which forms the basis of our clinical monitoring of
 relaxation of, for example the extra-ocular muscles for eye surgery,
neuromuscular blockade.
whilst maintaining respiratory muscle function. In practice, this
Lots of spare receptors make neuromuscular block by non-
 is very difficult to do, as patients can respond quite individually
 depolarising agents more difficult; whereas lots of spare recep-
 to the neuromuscular blockers. Therefore you should always be
 tors make block by depolarising agents much easier.
 prepared to provide IPPV.
 Quantal release of ACh occurs spontaneously, and randomly,
Antagonism ('reversal') of blockade tends to follow the reverse
and each quantal packet contains insuffcient ACh for a muscle
 order, but is not always the exact reverse. The order of muscle
action potential to be generated, but sufficient for some depolari-
relaxation and recovery also depends upon local muscle blood
sation of the motor end plate, which can be recorded by electro-
flow (to deliver the neuromuscular blocker, and take it away), and
physiological techniques as a 'mini end plate potential (MEPP).
If several quanta are released simultaneously, then MEPP sum-
generation).
144  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Development of neuromuscular blockers
●The aminosteroids.
The South American Indians used arrow poison' to dart their
● The benzylisoquinoliniums.
 prey, which they could then catch because they were immobilised.
Non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers are classically
The highly ionised compound can not be absorbed via the gas-
thought to act by competing with acetylcholine at the neuromus-
trointestinal tract, so the eater can not suffer from the same
cular junction (NMJ), and binding to NAChR but without causing
poison. They used an extract from the leaves and bark of a tropical
their activation. Because of the enormous safety margin for neu-
plant called Chondrodendron tomentosum which we call ^curare.
 is e '(sodi ads, jo si) isss n
Later, this was purifed, and the active substance was called
 of these NAChR must be blocked by these competitive antagonist
 d-tubocurarine. Muscle relaxation was demonstrated to be revers-
ible, as animals were shown to recover as long as their ventilation
non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers, for any degree of
neuromuscular block to be detected; and upwards of 92%
was supported. Muscle relaxants gained a place in balanced anaes-
 thesia, but because curare, and later succinylcholine, were found
NAChR occupancy by non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers
to have many unwanted side effects, the race started to try to
is required for complete block of neuromuscular transmission.
discover newer and better drugs,that do not cause massive hista-
(There is some variation, between muscles, of NMJ sensitivity to
neuromuscular block.)
mine release, and do not have too much activity at autonomic
The benzylisoquinoliniums are sometimes referred to as the
 ganglia or cardiac muscarinic receptors.
leptocurares (long spindly molecules), and are generally suscep-
Drug development has also been driven by two important
tible to hydrolysis by non-specific plasma esterases, or to sponta-
aspects of muscle relaxation for humans. Firstly, that neuromus-
neous Hofmann elimination (at normal body temperature and
cular block should be rapid in onset, to allow rapid tracheal intu-
pH). This contrasts with the aminosteroids, or pachycurares
bation (to ‘secure the airway” and protect the patient against
(stumpy fat molecules), which are more resistant to such attack
aspiration); and secondly, that it should be of short duration (in
and are instead metabolised by the liver and are more likely to
case tracheal intubation is unsuccessful), so that the patient can
have active metabolites and be cumulative. Metabolites, and some
regain respiratory muscle function as soon as possible (i.e. can
unchanged parent compound, are then excreted in the urine or
almost cope without needing to be ventilated). Succinylcholine is
bile.
rapid in onset, and has a short duration of action in man, but it
 The benzylisoquinoliniums are generally more likely to evoke
has a number of side effects, so the search was also on for a drug
histamine release.
 that had rapid onset but short duration and with fewer side effects.
 Onset of block is thought to be dependent upon swamping as
Although there are several neuromuscular blocking drugs avail-
many NAChR as possible; so high doses of neuromuscular block-
able for use in man, this discussion will focus on the important
ers tend to be given for rapid onset of block. However, with the
 ones that you may use in veterinary species.
more potent neuromuscular blockers, smaller doses will produce
a good degreeof neuromuscularblock,but the onset of block then
Types of neuromuscular blocking drugs available
tends to be delayed because only a small dose is administered.
● Non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers.
Overall:
● Depolarising neuromuscular blockers.
 All contain at least one quaternary ammonium group and are
Time to onset of block α 1/dose
   e    s 
fluid; they do not cross the blood-brain barrier or the placenta.
 Cardiovascular effects of non-depolarising
 Because they are restricted to the extracellular fluid (ECF), their
neuromuscular blockers
volume of distribution is pretty much equal to the ECF volume.
● Cardiac muscarinic receptor effects (due to receptor block).
These drugs do bind proteins, however, and can be around 50%
● Autonomic ganglia nicotinic receptor effects (due to receptor
 protein-bound in plasma.
Where two quaternary ammonium groups exist, the distance
block).
● Histamine release (as a group, the aminosteroids tend to
between them is important for their activity (because they interact
be more acidic and are less likely to stimulate histamine
with the two C subunits of the NAChR). If the length of carbon
release).
chain between the two N+ groups is 10 carbon atoms, then the
compound will favour interaction with the NAChR of neuromus-
cular junctions; whereas if there are only six carbon atoms in the
The autonomic margin of safety
 chain, the compound will prefer the NACh receptors of auto-
This is the dose difference between that necessary for neuro-
nomic ganglia.
muscular blockade, and that to produce circulatory effects.
Vecuronium and cis-atracurium have the widest safety margins.
Non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers
Overall, there is considerable variation between drugs and
species, and even between individuals. The prevailing autonomic
Non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers fall into two broad
tone and administration of other drugs may also influence the
groups:
outco me.
 Muscle relaxants
145
Characteristics of incomplete non-depolarising
example by the neuromuscular blocker (especially if present in 
neuromuscularblock
high concentration), and possibly even by ACh itself.
Fade is minimal (and usually said not to occur because clini-
Non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers are competitive
 antagonists and compete with ACh for post-synaptic NAChR.
cally significant fade is not apparent), with depolarising block
(phase I), because succinylcholine does not inhibit the presynap-
● Slow onset of block compared to depolarising block (because
tic nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (c3 βB2 subtype) and may affect
lots of NAChR have to be blocked).
 pre-junctional receptors to enhance transmitter release.
● No initial muscle fasciculations.
 Fade seems to be very variable with ToF stimulation patterns
● “Fade^ is demonstrable after tetanic or Train of Four (ToF)
 in horses, whereas it is more predictable with tetanic stimulation 
stimulation.
patterns.
●Post-tetanic potentiation occurs.
● Block is enhanced by other non-depolarising neuromuscular
 Post-tetanic potentiation
blockers.
 This is normally seen as an increase in the muscle tension devel-
● Block is reversible with anticholinesterases.
oped after a period of tetanic stimulation, in normal 'non-blocked'
● If the post-synaptic muscle is stimulated directly, it will
muscle. It is thought to occur because of presynaptic events,
contract.
including increased choline re-uptake and enhanced ACh re-
 synthesis (following the large release of transmitter during the
What is "fade'?
tetanic stimulation), and mobilisation of ACh stores from distant
Fade refers to the unsustained muscle tension developed by a
reserve stores to the readily releasable stores. Some degree of post-
muscle when incomplete non-depolarising neuromuscular block
exists and a supramaximal electrical stimulus (usually a tetanic
 block; but is not seen during phase I depolarising block. This may
stimulus, or several individual stimuli in quick succession, like
 be because any enhanced presynaptic transmitter release (by the
ToF), is applied to the motor neurone supplying the muscle under
depolarising blocker), occurring at onset of block, has diminished
study (Figure 17.3). The electrical stimulus must be supramaxi-
the presynaptic stores; or that during phase I block, any further
 mal in order to recruit all the nerve fbres of the motor neurone,
 ACh release only serves to reinforce (enhance) the depolarising
so that all motor units receive an input.
block.
Why does fade occur with non-depolarising
Some non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers
neuromuscular blockers?
 Aminosteroids include d-tubocurarine, pancuronium, vecuro-
Fade is thought to represent a problem with the normal pre-
nium, rocuronium. Benzylisoquinoliniums include atracurium,
synaptic transmitter recycling, mobilisation and release. There
cisatracurium, and mivacurium. Table 17.1 summarises some
are presynaptic autoreceptors which are involved in both positive
and negative feedback of transmitter release. Presynaptic
features of commonly used non-depolarising neuromuscular
blockers.
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (subtype α3β2) blockade by non-
 These neuromuscular blockers can be administered by con-
depolarising neuromuscular blockers can reduce normal ACh
tinuous infusion, for example:
mobilisation and release. Presynaptic (possibly nicotinic) receptor
blockade may reduce choline uptake, and therefore slow the
● Vecuronium: loading dose 0.1 mg/kg IV; then infusion at
synthesis of ACh. Pre- and post-synaptic receptors/ion channels
 0.1 mg/kg/hr but titrate as necessary to just maintain one twitch
may also be susceptible to nonspecific ^open channel block, for
of ToF.
Tension
generated
Muscle
in muscle
tension
time
time
 Fade of muscle tension with
Fade with ToF stimulation e.g. four
 tetanic stimulation e.g. at 50 Hz
successive stimuli at 2 Hz
Figure 17.3 Representation of fade'.
146  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 17.1 Features of common non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers.
Drug
First dose (mg/kg)
 Onset (min)
 Duration (min)
 Renal excretion
 Biliary excretion
 Hepatic metabolism
Histamine release
 Atracurium
0.1-0.25
1-3
20-45
 Not significant 
 Not significant 
Not significant 
Yes
Vecuronium
0.05-0.1
1-2 
15-30
15-25%
40-75%
20-30%
ON
 Pancuronium
0.07
3-5
40-70
80%
5-10%
10-40%
ON
Rocuronium
0.35
1-2 
20-60
10-25%
50-70%
10-20%
ON
Mivacurium
0.08
1-2-3*
12-20
 Not significant
Not significant
Not significant
Yes
*Depends on species.
●Rocuronium: Loading dose 0.5 mg/kg IV; infusion 0.2 mg/kg/
compared to pancuronium, but it is extensively metabolised in
hr.
the liver: so safer in patients with a degree of renal failure, but
beware patients with poor hepatic function.
 Neuromuscular blockers can be categorised according to their
 onset and duration of action:
Rocuronium
Onset:
 Closely related to vecuronium, but less potent (so tends to be given
in higher doses, therefore faster onset (advantage for man) but
●Rapid: succinylcholine (<1 min).
also longer duration). More stable in aqueous solution than
●Medium-rapid: rocuronium (1-2 min).
●Medium: atracurium, vecuronium, mivacurium (1-3 min).
vecuronium; shelf life 3 months. Few side effects, but more car-
diovascular effects, you may observe heart rate and blood pressure
● Slow: pancuronium (3-5 min).
changes, and histamine release is more likely than with vecuro-
Duration:
nium. Narrower autonomic safety margin than vecuronium.
● Ultra-short acting: e.g. succinylcholine (e.g. 2-3 min, but
Much less hepatic metabolism than vecuronium (more biliary and
depends upon species).
urinary excretion), so less likely to produce active metabolites;
● Short acting: mivacurium (10-20 min).
less cumulative and possibly better suited to long infusions.
● Intermediate acting: atracurium, vecuronium (15-40 min).
Atracurium
● Long acting: pancuronium (40+ min).
A bisquaternary benzylisoquinolinium compound. The commer-
 If prolonged neuromuscular block is required, for example
cially available solution actually consists of several (about 10)
d-doi u suae jo asop aus e rae pnoid ieu ueu sao
isomers; and must be refrigerated until use because of spontane-
doses (of around a quarter to a half of the original dose) can be
ous degradation. Atracurium has a unique elimination pathway.
 given, or continuous infusions can be administered. Top-up doses
 It undergoes spontaneous chemodegradation in plasma (at
are usually given when, for example one or more twitches return
normal body temperature and pH) by Hofmann elimination,
in response to ToF stimulation. With continuous infusions, the
independently of hepatic or renal function (therefore useful if
infusion rate is usually tailored to keep, for example, just the first
hepatic or renal disease). It is also susceptible to non-specific
twitch response to ToF stimulation present.
   n  ) d   
neuromuscular blocker for continuous infusions, as it is
Pancuronium
non-cumulative.
A bisquaternary aminosteroid compound. Few side effects, but
Laudanosine (a product of atracurium metabolism) has
can block cardiac muscarinic receptors and cause tachycardia. No
neurotoxic activities in rats (causes convulsions), because, unlike
histamine release. No autonomic nervous system (ANS) gangli-
the parent compound, it can cross the blood-brain barrier.
onic effects. Excreted almost entirely unchanged into the urine,
 (Laudanosine requires renal excretion for its clearance from
therefore potentially cumulative in patients with renal failure.
plasma.) However, there have been no reports of CNS problems
in dogs, cats or horses. Atracurium can cause histamine release,
Vecuronium
 but has no ANS ganglion effects or cardiac muscarinic effects. It
A monoquaternary derivative of pancuronium. Comes as a dry
has a wide autonomic safety margin. The commercially available
powder which must be reconstituted with water and then has a
 solution is acidified to minimise the likelihood of spontaneous
shelf life of 24h in day light and room temperature. Very few side
degradation in vitro. Storage at room temperature results in a
effects. No ANS ganglion effects, no cardiac M receptor effects.
reduction in potency of the order of 5% every 30 days.
No histamine release (although sporadic cases of anaphylaxis?
reported in man). Very wide autonomic safety margin. Can be
Cis-atracurium
used for infusion but some of its metabolites may have some
 Purifed form of one of the 10 stereoisomers of atracurium; the
activity, so possibly slightly cumulative. Not much renal excretion
cis-cis isomer. More potent than atracurium: therefore the dose
Muscle relaxants  147
10% urine unchanged
Atracurium
 35-45% Hofmann elimination
 45+% ester hydrolysis
Laudanosine
Intermediates
undergo Hofmann
 elimination or ester 
hydrolysis
Figure 17.4 Elimination pathways for atracurium.
required is smaller so the onset of block is longer and the duration
Table 17.2 Succinylcholine in different species. Onset of block is within
of block is shorter. Much less histamine release than atracurium.
30-60 s.
Wider autonomic safety margin than atracurium. In contrast to
Species
Dose (mg/kg)
atracurium, non-specific plasma esterases do not seem to be
 Duration (min)
involved in metabolism of cisatracurium. Most of it is degraded
Dog
0.1-0.3
10-20
by the Hofmann elimination, with some (15%) excreted
Cat
unchanged in the urine. Although potentially more laudanosine
0.5-1
2-6
produced per mg of cisatracurium administered compared with
Pig
0.5-2
2-3
atracurium, overall laudanosine production is less because a
Horse
0.04-0.15
4-10
smaller dose is given (it is more potent).
Ruminants
0.02
6-8 ++
Mivacurium
 A benzylisoquinolinium. Actually three isomers, two of which are
'active. This molecule has the wrong shape for Hofmann elimina-
Succinylcholine must diffuse away from the NMJ into the
tion, so undergoes plasma ester hydrolysis by plasma cholineste-
extracellular fluid or blood, where it is relatively slowly hydrolysed
rase. The rate of hydrolysis depends upon plasma mivacurium
by plasma/pseudo-cholinesterase (produced by the liver), to suc-
concentration, and therefore increasing the dose administered
cinylmonocholine (which has a tiny amount of activity); which is
does not prolong the duration of block. Causes some histamine
 then even more slowly broken down by either acetylcholinesterase
release. No effects at ANS ganglia or cardiac muscarinic receptors.
 Or plasma cholinesterase to succinic acid and choline. Some suc-
Beware organophosphates and reduction in plasma cholinesterase
cinylcholine is broken down by alkaline hydrolysis, and a small
activity as the block can then be prolonged. Onset of block appears
amount may be excreted in the urine unchanged.
quicker in cats than in man.
The amounts, affinities and efficacies of pseudocholinesterase
vary between species, so that the duration of action of succinyl-
Depolarising neuromuscular blockers
choline varies between species. For example, man, cats and pigs
are relatively resistant to succinylcholine block, which therefore
Suxamethonium (succinylcholine)
only lasts about 2-5 min after large-ish doses. Dogs and horses
Succinylcholine is the only depolarising neuromuscular blocker
have intermediate sensitivity, and ruminants are much more
in clinical use. Succinylcholine consists of two acetylcholine mol-
sensitive, and block can last around 15-20 min (depends on
ecules back to back. One molecule of succinylcholine can then
dose). The activity of pseudocholinesterase can be tested with the
result in interaction with the two α subunits of one NAChR, to
ester-linked local anaesthetic agent dibucaine (cinchocaine) in the
 produce channel activation/opening. This results in generation of
 dibucaine test (see Chapter 12). Table 17.2 outlines the species-
muscle action potentials and muscle contractions, seen as inco-
 dependent doses and durations of activity of succinylcholine.
ordinated muscle fasciculations. The onset of effect after admin-
Beware recent treatment with organophosphates, as the inhibi-
istration of succinylcholine is rapid, because the drug only needs
tion of pseudocholinesterase can prolong the block,(and increase
to interact with 5-20% of post-synaptic NAChR to produce its
 the chances of a phase I block developing, see below).
block. However, unlike the situation with normal neuromuscular
transmission whereby the acetylcholine (ACh) transmitter is
Cardiovascular effects
rapidly broken down, succinylcholine is not hydrolysed by acetyl-
Succinylcholine can also interact with other nicotinic, and even
cholinesterase, and can sit on the NAChR for longer, maintaining
muscarinic, ACh receptors, for example in autonomic ganglia,
the channel in its open state This sustained depolarisation results
and at post-synaptic parasympathetic nerve terminals (e.g. in
 in post-synaptic membrane refractoriness (because voltage sensi-
heart and gut). Bradycardia and hypotension are seen in some
tive (voltage-gated) sodium channels in the peri-junctional area
species, whereas tachycardia and hypertension are seen in others.
become refractory to stimulation), and hence neuromuscular
Bradycardia and hypotension are believed to result from direct
block.
cardiac muscarinic cholinergic receptor stimulation, with
148  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 negative inotropic and negative chronotropic effects. Tachycardia
Desensitisation block (Phase Il block)
and hypertension are believed to follow activation of nicotinic
● ‘Fade' can be demonstrated.
cholinergic receptors in autonomic ganglia. Histamine release
● Post-tetanic potentiation occurs.
may also occur, resulting in vasodilation and hypotension (usually
● Block can now be antagonised/reversed with anticholine-
with some degree of reflex tachycardia).
sterases.
● Direct muscle stimulation results in contraction.
Problems with succinylcholine
The development of phase II block and its reversibility with
● Species differences in plasma cholinesterase, and therefore in
 anticholinesterases is not predictable, but it commonly follows a
 duration of block.
 single dose of succinylcholine in dogs.
● Myalgia (muscle pain) after fasciculations; and even muscle
--s, ro oq l, are ie  no sn 
damage, e.g. both extensor and flexor muscles are stimulated
 old’ block), which may occur as receptor desensitisation takes
to contract simultaneously so muscle fibres may tear.
place and the membrane potential is returning towards normal,
● Release of K', phosphate and myoglobin from damaged muscle 
but remains somewhat refractory to stimulation.
cells (beware arrhythmias, kidney damage).
● Malignant hyperthermia trigger in pigs, dogs, man, horses, cats.
● Transient increase in intra-ocular pressure.
Monitoring
● In burns patients, with increased numbers of extrajunctional
Monitoring anaesthetic depth in a
receptors which are responsive to succinylcholine, these
paralysed patient
channels can remain open for a relatively long time (are often
  o s   , 
 Anaesthetic depth is monitored by looking at signs from the auto-
 Hyperkalaemia may result.
 nomic nervous system:
● Burns patients, and those with denervation or disuse, have
● Heart rate.
upregulation of extrajunctional receptors, and therefore are
● Blood pressure.
more susceptible to depolarising block; but are more resistant
●Sweating.
 to non-depolarising block (because more of these^spare′ recep-
● Salivation.
tors need blocking)
· Lacrimation.
● Beware recent treatment with organophosphate compounds
● Defecation/urination (possibly anal tone). The anal sphincter
which can result in prolonged block.
has an internal smooth muscle part, and an external striated
● Occasional histamine release.
muscle part; only the latter is affected by neuromuscular
● Succinylcholine should be kept in the refrigerator as it under-
blockers.
  in  si  si  sn
● Some movements. Because we rarely produce a 100% block and
temperature.
different muscles have different sensitivities to neuromuscular
block, there is the potential for some movement. This may be
Characteristics of incomplete depolarising
a tongue curl, or a paw movement. Ay motor neurone NMJs
neuromuscularblockade
tend to be blocked first (so that postural muscle strength/tone
Initial depolarising block (Phase I block)
is lost first); whereas Ao fibre NMJs may be more resistant, to
There is rapid onset of initial depolarisation, with muscle fascicu-
 allow occasional voluntary movement despite seemingly ade-
 lations; then neuromuscular block ensues.
quate block.
● This phase I block shows no ^fade' with tetanic stimulation or
Monitoring neuromuscular blockade
ToF stimulation.
● This phase I block shows no post-tetanic potentiation.
What follows below relates mainly to the non-depolarising agents.
● The phase I block can be potentiated by anticholinesterases
We have already said that in order for any degree of muscle weak-
(which allow an increase in the local ACh concentration).
ness or relaxation to become apparent, we must block at least 75%
● Direct stimulation of the post-synaptic muscle cell does not
of post-synaptic NAChR with a non-depolarising neuromuscular
elicit contraction.
blocker. Complete relaxation requires at least 92% receptor occu-
 pancy. Normally, between 75% and 85% receptor blockade is
With prolonged action of the drug (seen as an individual
sufficient for good surgical conditions.
response especially in dogs; or following large doses or many
 Simply monitoring muscle tone we can monitor:
top-up doses), the “blocked’ NAChR may become desensitised",
q a o,   a mn s, a re
● Diaphragmatic movements (i.e. the animal fights the ventila
"blocked’ by the physical presence of drug in the ion channel
tor’) as the block wears off. This is easier to ^see' with capno-
(called ^open channel block'). Once this happens, (exact mecha-
graphy (e.g. curare clefts'; see Chapter 18).
nism unknown), the post-synaptic membrane can repolarise, and
● You may note a decrease in chest compliance during
the neuromuscular block takes on the characteristics of a non-
ventilation when the chest muscles ‘tone up’ as the block
 depolarising block (see below).
wears off.
 Muscle relaxants 
149
● Jaw tone increases as the block wears off.
phy); acceleration transduction measures the evoked accelera-
● Eye position alters as the block wears off (i.e. in dogs, a relaxed
tion of the moving part (acceleromyography).
central eye rotates forwards and downwards if anaesthetic
● Measure the electrical response of the muscle: electromyogra-
 depth is at a surgical plane).
phy (EMG).
● Reflex activity returns as the block wears off, for example
● Measure the low frequency sounds created during muscle con-
 palpebral reflexes and limb withdrawal reflexes return.
 tractions using special microphones. Originally called acoustic
myography, but now called phonomyography. Very easily
We can, however, monitor the degree of neuromuscular block
applicable in the clinical situation as it can be applied to any
more precisely than this. For effective neuromuscular blockade
muscle, even those from which it would otherwise be difficult
we must block most of the normal neuromuscular transmission,
 to record force of contraction or acceleration (eg peri-ocular
so we can only ^measure what remains. (Remember that we said
facial muscles).
there were lots of spare receptors, and that these were useful to
help us measure the degree of neuromuscular blockade.) We do
Because our visual and tactile acuity is not good, especially
this by applying an electrical stimulus to the motor nerve of a
muscle whose action ('twitch response'), we can ^observe' (e.g. for
various techniques can be used to increase our chances of
the peroneal nerve we observe digital extension or hock flexion;
detecting changes. These involve different modes of applying our
for the ulnar nerve we observe digit and carpal flexion; for the
electrical stimulus.
dorsal buccal branch of facial nerve we observe muzzle (orbicu-
 Electrical stimuli can be applied:
laris oris) twitch). As the degree of neuromuscular block is
● In single discharges, which can be repeated when the observer
increased, we expect to see less muscle movement as a result of
requires, or automatically at 0.1-1 Hz frequency.
electrical stimulation of the nerve.
● In a train-of-four (ToF) pattern, which can also be repeated
 The electrical stimulus we apply (by our peripheral nerve stim-
when the observer requires, or automatically every 10s (Figure
ulator), must be ^supramaximal in order to recruit all the nerve
17.5).
fibres to the motor unit of our attention. Usually supramaximal
● In a double burst stimulation (DBS) pattern, repeated as
stimuli are of the order of 50mA minimum (some say up to
necessary, or automatically every 10 s (Figure 17.5).
100 mA).
● As a tetanic stimulus (Tet) (e.g. for l-5s), which can be
 It is good practice to apply a supramaximal tetanic stimulus for
repeated as required.
 2-5 s before assessing response to nerve stimulation by our chosen
stimulus pattern. This 'stabilisation technique ensures that all
 The responses to single stimuli are not easy to assess or compare.
nerve fibres of the motor unit are recruited, so that we can see
With ToF, DBS, and Tet, we can see fade'; and with ToF and DBS
what the maximum possible muscle response is to our nerve
we can compare the response to the latest stimulus with that to
 stimulation. This must be done before neuromuscular blocking
the first, during the same time-frame of stimulation (see ToF ratio
drugs are given, so that when the block wears off or is reversed,
and DBS ratio below).
we know what our maximum response should be. Otherwise
 If fade exists, we can see or feel (or measure), that the last twitch
things can get quite confusing as previously inactive nerve fibres
 in the ToF, or the response to the second short burst with DBS,
 can become recruited late on.
is less cbvious than the frst. (If a depolarising neuromuscular
When we apply a stimulus to a peripheral nerve, we can:
 blocker was used, we can only see that the overall twitch response
magnitude is less, compared to the pre-block twitch response; as
● Observe the visual twitch response.
fade does not occur, at least with phase I block). Figure 17.6 shows
● Palpate the 'tactile' twitch response.
the differing muscle twitch responses with ToF stimulation fol-
● Transduce the mechanical 'twitch' response: force transduction
lowing various degrees of block with a non-depolarising neuro-
measures the evoked tension in the muscle (mechanomyogra-
muscular blocker.
Time
Time
 Train-of-four stimulation at 2 Hz
 Double burst stimulation: 3 impulses delivered 
at 50 Hz and repeated after 750 ms
Figure 17.5 Two different forms of electrical stimuli: ToF and double burst.
150  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Receptor
<75%
75-80%
80-85%
85-90%
90-95%
95-100%
occupancy
Non-
depolarising
block
No obvious block
Complete block
Figure 17.6 Muscle twitch responses recorded with ToF stimulation (with non-depolarising neuromuscular blocker).
With ToF stimulation:
There may be several mechanisms for this potentiation, including:
alteration of regional muscle blood flow (e.g. isoflurane is a potent
● The last (fourth) twitch is all but abolished with just over 75%
vasodilator); calcium channel blockade (presynaptically to reduce
receptor blockade by non-depolarising blocker.
transmitter release, and post-synaptically to reduce muscle
● The third and second (as well as fourth) twitches are all but
abolished with c.85-90% receptor block.
response/contraction); and CNS depression (to reduce overall
● The first twitch (as well as the second, third and fourth) is all
muscle tone).
but abolished with c. 92+% receptor blockade.
Injectable anaesthetic agents
The twitch response to single electrical stimuli reflects events
These have minimal effects.
at the post-junctional membrane, whereas the responses to Tet,
 ToF or DBS reflect events at the presynaptic membrane too.
Antibiotics
The stimulated nerve impulses result in ACh release at the
Tetracyclines, macrolides, aminoglycosides, polymixin B, metro.
NMJ, which competes with the non-depolarising neuromuscular
nidazole (not penicillins or cephalosporins or trimethoprim
blocker for NAChR; but depolarising neuromuscular blockade is
potentiated sulphonamides (TMPS), may block  (non-
non-competitive because succinylcholine results in membrane
specifically), both pre- and post-junctional calcium channels.
refractoriness (phase I block) to any released ACh (at least while
This results in both reduced ACh release and reduced response
phase I block lasts).
to ACh.
 You may hear of the ToF ratio. This is the ratio of the response
 p u, m n i ss n a o
Local anaesthetics
the response to the frst stimulus (i.e. first twitch height). If the
 These inhibit nerve and muscle conduction, and so can reduce
ToF ratio is ≥0.7, it is almost impossible to detect fade visually.
 synaptic activity. (They reduce pre-junctional transmitter release
You can only really detect ToF ratios of <0.4-0.5 visually or even
 and post-junctional membrane responsiveness). Remember that
palpably. Because it is considered that adequate recovery of
ester-linked local anaesthetics can also compete with succinylcho-
muscle function after block wears off (or is reversed), requires a
 line and mivacurium for metabolism by plasma cholinesterase, so
ToF ratio of at least O.7 then the double burst stimulation tech-
succinylcholine and mivacurium block could potentially be pro-
nique was devised. With this technique, you can appreciate visu-
longed (although unlikely at clinical doses).
ally and palpably, a DBS ratio (last response to first) of 0.67.
However, it is now believed that for a patient to be able to breathe
Diuretics
adequately on its own, and maintain adequate laryngeal and
 Diuretics shrink the extracellular fluid volume, so reduce the
 pharyngeal protective reflexes (to protect the airway from, for
volume of distribution of these compounds and enhance their
 example, aspiration), a ToF ratio of ≥0.9 is necessary. Hence most
actions by effectively increasing their concentration; but they also
modern devices used to monitor neuromuscular blockade include
increase glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and renal excretion.
some means of transducing the twitch response to peripheral
 Diuretics may also cause electrolyte changes which may affect
nerve stimulation.
neuromuscular blockade (see below).
 Factors affecting neuromuscular block
Antidysrhythmics and anticonvuisants
Local anaesthetics, beta blockers, calcium channel blockers,
Drugs
barbiturates and phenytoin may also reduce presynaptic ACh
Volatile anaesthetic agents
release.
These potentiate neuromuscular block in a dose-dependent
fashion. Different volatile agents may affect different neuromus-
Dantrolene
cular blockers differently; for example for vecuronium and suc-
 Dantrolene blocks neuromuscular excitation-contraction cou-
cinylcholine,isoflurane potentiates the block more than halothane.
 pling, and potentiates neuromuscular block.
 Muscle relaxants
151
Corticosteroids
depolarising neuromuscular blockers (e.g. atracurium and vecuro-
These increase choline-acetyl-transferase activity, and so increase
nium); and respiratory alkalosis antagonises them. Metabolic
transmitter availability, helping to reverse non-depolarising block,
alkalosis has been shown to prolong block by pancuronium.
but enhancing depolarising block.
Temperature
Lithium compounds (e.g.anticonvulsants)
Has variable effects. Hypothermia can slow the circulation and
Lithium compounds inhibit cholinesterase activity, so prolong
metabolism and alter drug pharmacokinetics. Mild hypothermia
depolarising (and possibly mivacurium), neuromuscular block,
tends to antagonise non-depolarising blocks (action potential
but reduce the potency and duration of non-depolarising block.
 duration is increased, so more ACh is released); but deep hypo-
thermia potentiates non-depolarising block (reduces ACh release,
Metoclopramide
and delays drug elimination). Onset of block is also delayed if
This inhibits cholinesterase activity, and so enhances duration
circulation is slowed, so beware overdosing in cold animals.
of depolarising (and possibly mivacurium) block, but reduces
 potency of non-depolarising blockers.
Age
 Receptor types at neuromuscular junctions change and ECF
Organophosphate compounds
volume and metabolic capacity changes with age. Neonates are
These inhibit acetylcholinesterase and pseudocholinesterase, and
'mini-myasthenics, and have an increased sensitivity to non-
depolarising neuromuscular blockers (least noticeable with atra-
so increase ACh availability at NMJs, and reduce metabolism of
succinylcholine and mivacurium. They prolong depolarising and
mivacurium block, and reduce the potency and duration of non-
have a relatively large ECF, so can be easy to overdose at frst; but
depolarising (bar mivacurium) block. They may increase the
elimination (hepatic/plasma cholinesterase), is often slower, so
chance of phase II block developing with succinylcholine.
that drug action can be prolonged. Geriatrics also have increased
 s    
Electrolytes
noticeable with atracurium), due to reduction in ECF volume
Mg2+
(increased body fat), reduction in hepatic and renal blood flow
 and function, and NMJ changes.
block (reduces presynaptic transmitter release and post-synaptic
membrane responsiveness); and may shorten depolarising (and
Gender
mivacurium) block due to enhancement of plasma cholinesterase
Females are more susceptible to neuromuscular blockers than
males because they have relatively more body fat, so have rela-
(pseudocholinesterase) activity.
tively less ECF volume (therefore they have a smaller volume of
K+
distribution for the drugs).
Acute increase in extracellular potassium causes depolarisation
Obesity
(the equilibrium potential becomes less negative) of membranes
 Obese patients have a relatively low ECF, so are more susceptible
(pre- and post-synaptic), and thus antagonises non-depolarising
 to neuromuscular block; but also tend to have higher plasma
block (by enhancing ACh release); but enhances depolarising
cholinesterase, so are actually slightly more resistant to succinyl-
block. Acute decrease in ECF potassium causes hyperpolarisation
choline and mivacurium.
(the equilibrium potential becomes more negative) and thus
increases the resistance to depolarising block (by decreasing ACh
Hypovolaemia
release), but enhances non-depolarising block.
Reduction in ECF volume, of any cause, can increase susceptibil-
ity to neuromuscular block.
Ca2+
Hypocalcaemia reduces ACh release and muscle response, so
Pregnancy
enhances non-depolarising block. Hypercalcaemia enhances ACh 
 Pregnancy increases blood volume, and therefore ECF volume;
release, and may weakly antagonise non-depolarising block.
 but decreases plasma cholinesterase activity. Pregnant animals
 may seem relatively resistant to non-depolarising blockers at first,
Other factors affecting neuromuscular block
although their action may then be prolonged. They are more
pH
susceptible to prolonged block with succinylcholine (and
 Respiratory and metabolic perturbations may affect different
mivacurium).
neuromuscular blockers differently. Acidosis slows, and alkalosis
speeds up, Hofmann elimination, but such pH changes are
Liver disease
unlikely to have much effect over the range of pH compatible with
 Reduced plasma cholinesterase increases sensitivity to succinyl-
  s s oe s hd sa ssd a
choline, and also mivacurium. Reduced hepatic metabolism of
opposite way to how they affect Hofmann elimination i.e. acidosis
aminosteroids delays their elimination. If generalised oedema,
speeds up, and alkalosis slows, ester hydrolysis). Respiratory
(due to hypoproteinaemia), and therefore increased ECF volume
acidosis has been shown to prolong the action of some non-
 accompanies the hepatic disease, then patients may initially seem 
152  Veterinary Anaesthesia
more resistant to neuromuscular block, but then drug elimination
bamate-enzyme bond then has a half-life of about 30 min for
takes longer. Most problems are seen with infusions or multiple
dissociation, compared with 40 microseconds for dissociation
doses.
of the acetylated enzyme (which occurs during destruction of
ACh), and so the enzyme is effectively out of action for a con-
Kidney disease
siderable time.
Certain neuromuscular blockers (gallamine, pancuronium, pipe-
● Irreversible inactivation by phosphorylation, for example the
curonium), are excreted almost entirely unchanged in the urine,
organophosphate insecticides.
so beware prolonged action if renal function is poor. (Plasma
Neostigmine also inhibits plasma cholinesterase; and can delay
cholinesterase may be reduced too).
recovery from succinylcholine and mivacurium.
Burns
Actions of anticholinesterase
 Increased susceptibility to succinylcholine block (increase in
number of NAChR),but increased resistance to non-depolarising
Anticholinesterases act by more than just enzyme inhibition. They
block.
have at least two actions:
●Acetylcholinesterase inhibition.
Myotonia
● Presynaptic effects. The drugs themselves (or the increase in
 Increased susceptibility to succinylcholine.
 ACh they cause in the synaptic cleft) act on presynaptic recep-
tors to result in antidromic action potentials in the nerve ter-
Myasthenia
 minals, and repetitive fring of motor nerve terminals (resulting
in increased ACh release).
tional receptors), and increased resistance to succinylcholine.
Drugs with quaternary Nt groups may also be able to act on
post-synaptic NAChR and therefore these enzyme inhibitors may
 Denervation/disuse
also have some neuromuscular blocking activity; but usually this
Increased sensitivity to succinylcholine (more receptors), but
requires very high (possibly non-clinical) doses.
increased resistance to non-depolarising blockers.
 The enzyme acetylcholinesterase has an 'active site' which is
Genetic susceptibility
optimally targeted by molecules or drugs of certain structures (we
talk of structure-activity relationships) (Figure 17.7). We can then
Genetic susceptibility to malignant hyperthermia in man, horses,
imagine how the enzyme's natural substrate, acetylcholine, fits"
dogs, pigs and possibly cats.
(Figure 17.8).
There is therefore an optimal length' between the quaternary
Reversal of non-depolarising
Nt and the ester linkage, so that these groups are complementary
neuromuscular blockade
to the different parts of the active site of the enzyme. Enzyme
inhibitors are therefore based on the idea that they should be
During partial (incomplete) non-depolarising neuromuscular
block, if the amount/availability of ACh in the synaptic cleft can
alternative/competitive substrates for the enzyme.
 be increased, then the block can be antagonised, and muscular
The pharmacological effects of anticholinesterases are due to:
strength can be restored, because the extra ACh competes with
 and displaces the blocker from some of the receptors
 The amount of ACh in the synaptic cleft can be increased by:
● Repetitively stimulating the motor nerve (tetanic stimulation),
 in the hope of mobilising ACh stores for release at the nerve
Anionic site
Esteratic site
terminal.
● Using anticholinesterase drugs, which inhibit cholinesterase
Fgure 17.7 Acetylcholinesterase's esteratic site and nearby anionic site.
 enzymes (particularly acetylcholinesterase at neuromuscular
 junctions).
Anticholinesterases
(CH3)-N+-CH2-CH2-O-C(=O)-CHg
These are classifed according to how they inhibit acetylcho-
linesterase:
● Reversible inhibition, for example edrophonium forms a
reversible electrostatic attachment to the enzyme's anionic site.
● Reversible formation of carbamyl esters, for example carbamate
 insecticides such as neostigmine, physostigmine, pyridostig-
mine, are hydrolysed by the enzyme, which itself becomes
Anionic site
Esteratic site
carbamylated (at the esteratic site), in the process. The car-
Fgure 17.8 Interaction of acetylcholine with acetylcholinesterase.
Muscle relaxants  153
● An increase in ACh availability at the NMJ.
To judge adequacy of breathing:
● An increase in ACh availability at the autonomic ganglia.
● Observe the patient's respiratory efforts. Does the chest move-
● An increase in ACh availability at the post-synaptic parasym-
ment look good or pathetic?
● Observe the capnograph trace for its form and for the value
piratory tract).
of end tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2) as you try to wean the
 Therefore we can see an increase in nicotinic cholinergic recep
animal off IPPV. The animal should be able to maintain a
tor activity and in muscarinic cholinergic receptor activity.
normal capnograph waveform; and adequacy of its ventilation 
Muscarinic effects are evoked by lower concentrations of ACh
can be judged by its ETCO value, i.e. hypoventilation results
than those required for production of nicotinic effects at auto-
in increasing ETCOz (unless the tidal volume is so small that
nomic ganglia and neuromuscular junctions; but reversal of neu-
CO can hardly be exhaled, in which case, one IPPV breath will
romuscular blockade requires the nicotinic effects, so we cannot
reveal hypercapnia).
avoid producing muscarinic effects, which are therefore a nui-
● You could measure the patient's tidal volume, for example
sance. However, the expression of these muscarinic effects can be
using a Wright's respirometer. Normal tidal volume during
prevented by the concurrent administration of anticholinergics
quiet breathing is around 10-20ml/kg. Better still is if you
(antimuscarinics) such as atropine or glycopyrrolate, which leave
measured tidal volume before neuromuscular block; then you
the nicotinic (NMJ) effects undisturbed. See Chapters 4, 16 and
can compare it after reversal of block. Some capnography
25 for more information about anticholinergics, which have their 
machines also have spirometry functions which enable tidal
own side effects.
volume and minute ventilation to be measured which is very
 Unwanted muscarinic effects include:
handy.
● Bradycardia (even bradyarrhythmias/asystole), and possibly
 r a in anssd ai an a  nn o
generate for/on inspiration, by transiently occluding the
hypotension.
endotracheal tube, and measuring the inspiratory effort with a
● Salivation and increase in other GI secretions.
manometer/aneroid pressure gauge. Horses should be able to
● Miosis.
● Lacrimation.
generate -10 to -25 cmHO pressure; dogs around -5 cmH,O.
● Hyperperistalsis (defecation).
 If you think that your frst dose of reversal drug/s was not
· Urination.
enough, then you can give more; usually after about 5-7 min.
● Bronchoconstriction and increased respiratory tract mucus
secretion.
When should you reverse neuromuscular block?
Before you 'awaken' the animal from its anaesthetic.
Factors determining reversa!
 It is generally taught that non-depolarising neuromuscular
 block should only be reversed when signs of spontaneous recovery
Reversal of neuromuscular block depends upon:
from blockade are observed (while the animal is still under general
● Which neuromuscular blocker was administered.
anaesthesia), for example when the twitch responses to nerve
● The ^depth’ of neuromuscular blockade at which reversal is
stimulation re-appear/increase, or the animal starts to breathe for
being attempted.
itself. I like to see the return of at least two (and preferably all
● Which anticholinesterase is chosen, and the dose given.
  ,   s   smn (
● The chosen ^end point for ^successful’ reversal of neuromus-
apparent. This is because too early reversal (when the degree of
cular block, for example a certain ToF ratio, or the ability
neuromuscular block is ^deep'), may just result in excessive ACh
to breathe spontaneously and with adequate tidal volume.
activity at the NMJ, that can cause desensitisation (+/- ^open
 Normal tidal volume is around 10-20 ml/kg; or you might have
channel block), of the post-synaptic membrane, which may com-
measured the pre-neuromuscular block tidal volume with a
plicate monitoring of neuromuscular blockade, and eventual
Wright's respirometer, so you can compare the post-reversal
 reversal of the block.
tidal volume with the pre-neuromuscular block value to judge
 Phase I depolarising blockade cannot be reversed by the use of
adequacy of reversal. (In man, the ability to sustain a head-lift,
 anticholinesterases (see notes above); and although phase I block
blow out a match, or hand-grip strength can be assessed, but
may be reversible with anticholinesterases, its reversibility is not
our patients are not so co-operative.)
 predictable; and it may not always be easy to assess if and when
 phase I block changes character and becomes phase II block.
How to judge adequacy of reversa!
After reversal drugs have been administered, it is important to
Should you always reverse non-depolarising
observe the patient to ensure that reversal is adequate, paying
neuromuscular block?
particular attention to respiratory function. Even in the presence
 If you administered one dose of neuromuscular blocker at the
of strong evoked muscle responses to peripheral nerve stimula-
beginning of surgery, but surgery continued for several hours, and
tion, the ability to breathe may be inadequate. Do not 're-awaken'
you have no reason to assume that the animal cannot metabolise/
the animal from anaesthesia until you are sure that it is not still
eliminate the chosen drug, and you are happy that it can breathe
paralysed.
 adequately on its own (measure tidal volume, or assess end tidal
154  Veterinary Anaesthesia
(or arterial blood) carbon dioxide tension over several minutes
you see no changes in heart rate. To this end you need to try to
when the animal is breathing spontaneously and observe that the
match the ^onset' (and duration), of action of the two drugs.
animal is capable of keeping these within ^normal limits), then
Atropine and edrophonium are well matched. They have
reversal should not be necessary as there is no significant neu-
similar pharmacokinetics and when given together, their onset
romuscular blocking activity still apparent. However, some people
 oq  pe ri n o) p are s
will still administer a dose of reversal agent just to be absolutely
relatively short durations of action. However, it seems that in the
sure.
clinical situation, the duration of action of edrophonium is little
different from that of neostigmine, possibly because although
Problems with reversa!
its interaction with the enzyme is brief, it is a repeatable
interaction.
If there are problems with reversal, for example if the animal does 
 Glycopyrrolate and neostigmine are well matched. Both have
 not seem to recover from neuromuscular blockade:
 slightly slower onset times, and are long acting.
● Check its temperature (remember the effects of hypothermia).
 However, many books still recommend the administration of
● Check for acid-base disturbances, especially respiratory acido-
the anticholinergic first, followed a little later by the anticholineste-
sis which happens if an animal hypoventilates ( which it may do
rase, to minimise the risk of causing bradycardia (which is perhaps
if block is inadequately reversed). Respiratory acidosis can also
more detrimental than the tachycardia that you may see initially
 prolong the duration of block.
after the anticholinergic).
● Check for electrolyte disturbances.
 In reality, I tend to administer both the anticholinesterase and
● Is the depth of anaesthesia too deep?
the anticholinergic simultaneously, slowly intravenously, and
● Did you use neuromuscular-block-potentiating antibiotics?
monitor the heart rate and rhythm carefully.
● Are the animal's lungs being hyperventilated inadvertently?
 In the horse (and man), edrophonium seems to have very few
 If the animal is hypocapnic, then it has very little drive to
muscarinic effects, and therefore very few cardiovascular side
breathe.
effects; so inclusion of an anticholinergic is not necessary, i.e.
● Is there any chance that the animal has undiagnosed renal or
edrophonium can be used on its own safely. In horses, it is useful
hepatic disease?
not to have to give anticholinergics as these can reduce gut motil-
ity and have been blamed for causing post-operative colic.
Re-curarisation
 Only after the neuromuscular block is successfully reversed
This occurs when you seem to have successfully reversed neu-
should you 're-awaken' the animal from its general anaesthetic
romuscular block and the patient is breathing well, but some time
(because waking up when you can not breathe or move is very
later the patient seems to become re-paralysed despite you giving
stressful).
no further relaxant drugs. Potential causes of this phenomenon 
include:
Doses
For dogs (and cats)
● Reversal agent has shorter half life than neuromuscular blocker, 
and you reversed when the degree of neuromuscular block was
 After vecuronium either:
'great.
● Neostigmine (0.08 mg/kg) + atropine (0.04 mg/kg) slowly IV.
● Enterohepatic recirculation of neuromuscular blocker (many
● Neostigmine (0.08 mg/kg) + glycopyrrolate (0.01-0.02 mg/kg)
 are excreted unchanged into bile).
slowly IV.
● Receptors may become ‘desensitised’ to neuromuscular
blockers for a while, but with time become sensitive again;
 After atracurium:
so for neuromuscular blockers with long half lives, re-block
Edrophonium 0.1-0.5 mg/kg (possibly + atropine (0.04 mg/kg))
can occur.
 slowly IV.
For horses
Drugs used to reverse non-depolarising
 Afer atracurium, at c. 0.1 mg/kg, edrophonium alone can be
neuromuscular block
 administered at 0.1 mg/kg: up to 0.5 mg/kg if necessary.
An anticholinesterase (e.g. neostigmine or edrophonium).
 Neostigmine may have fewer presynaptic effects than edro-
Notes
 phonium; but also inhibits plasma cholinesterase. Edrophonium
 Peripheral chemoreceptors have nicotinic and muscarinic acetyl-
 may be a better inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase than neostig-
choline receptors; and are responsible for sensing blood Oz and
mine. Edrophonium and neostigmine may not be equally effective
CO, tensions. The sensitivity of these peripheral chemoreceptors
for reversal of atracurium (edrophonium is possibly better), and
 is reduced by some neuromuscular blocking agents (e.g. vecuro-
vecuronium (neostigmine is possibly better).
-q p     o s (
Possibly plus
 an   anticholinergic
(e-g.
atropine
0r
ing), such that not all respiratory depression is due to respiratory
glycopyrrolate).
muscle paralysis. (But the central chemoreceptors, which are most
The best way to give an anticholinesterase and an anticholiner-
important for driving the ventilatory response to COz are pro-
gic, is so that all you get is reversal of neuromuscular block and
tected from neuromuscular blockers by the blood-brain barrier).
 Muscle relaxants 
155
 New reversal agents are being designed (cyclodextrins), which
King JM, Hunter JM (2002) Physiology of the neuromuscular
selectively bind to and ^chelate/encapsulate’ the neuromuscular
 junction. British Journal of Anaesthesia CEPD Reviews 2(5),
 blockers, and so have minimal side effects, yet do a good job. One
129-133.
of these is Sugammadexm, which is a gamma cyclodextrin com-
Lee C (2009) Goodbye suxamethonium! Anaesthesia 64, Suppl.1,
pound. Cyclodextrins are cyclic oligosaccharides which can
73-81.
encapsulate lipophilic molecules such as steroidal compounds.
Martyn JAJ, Fagerlund MJ, Eriksson LI (2009) Basic principles of
Being water soluble, cyclodextrins can allw lipophilic
com-
neuromuscular transmission. Anaesthesia 64, Suppl. 1, 1-9.
pounds to be solubilised in water. Sugammadex is specially sized
and shaped so that two rocuronium molecules ft into the cavity
Note: The whole supplement of Anaesthesia volume 64, supplement
of its ring, aided by electrostatic interaction between the nega-
1 (2009) is devoted to Neuromuscular block and its antagonism.
tively charged side chains of the cyclodextrin interacting with the
positively charged quaternary nitrogen groups of the rocuro-
niums which locks the neuromuscular blocking molecules in
place. This lock' is irreversible once made, and therefore access
of rocuronium to NAChR is prevented, and dissociation from
them is encouraged when the local rocuronium concentration
 Self-test section
falls; hence reversal of neuromuscular block is achieved. The
1. Concerning the administration of a non-depolarising
complex (sugammadex + 2 rocuronium) is filtered by the glomer-
neuromuscular blocker as part of a balanced anaes-
ulus and excreted in the urine. Sugammadex has no direct cholin-
thetic technique, put the following events in order:
ergic effects, so there is no need to administer an anticholinergic
●Reverse the neuromuscular blockade only when
compound alongside it. Sugammadex reverses profound neu-
 some neuromuscular activity has returned.
romuscular block by rocuronium three times faster than using an
Cease administration of anaesthetic.
     x 
 Administer the neuromuscular blocker.
vecuronium).
 Initiate intermittent positive pressure ventilation
 Alfaxalone (Alfaxan ) is solubilised in 2 alpha-hydroxypropyl
(IPPV).
 beta cyclodextrin. This beta cyclodextrin is doughnut-shaped and
 Anaesthetise the patient and monitor neuromus-
the central cavity is a hydrophobic place where the lipophilic
cular activity.
neurosteroid alphaxalone, can be carried. Alphaxalone does
●Ensure
return
of
adequate
not fit into the central cavity of Sugammadex; and rocuronium
spontaneous
ventilation.
does not fit the central cavity of 2 alpha-hydroxypropyl beta
 2.Which of the following drugs can be used as centrally
cyclodextrin.
acting muscle relaxants?
A.
 Diazepam, vecuronium and GG/E*
Further reading
B.
 Diazepam, atracurium and GG/E
C.
 Diazepam, midazolam and GG/E 
Booij LHDJ (2009) Cyclodextrins and the emergence of sugam-
D.
 Diazepam, clenbuterol and GG/E
madex. Anaesthesia 64, Suppl.1, 31-37.
Fuchs-Buder T, Schreiber J-U, Meistelman C (2009) Monitoring
*GG/E = guaiphenesin, guaifenesin or glyceryl guaiacolate
neuromuscular blockade: an update. Anaesthesia 64, Suppl.1,
ether
82-89.
?
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia
Learning objectives
 To be able to discuss why patient monitoring is necessary.
 To be able to monitor the physiological status of an anaesthetised patient and its depth of anaesthesia using both unsophis-
ticated methods (senses, stethoscopes) and more sophisticated monitoring devices: both non-invasive and invasive.
● To be familiar with common problems associated with monitoring devices.
Introduction
How to monitor the patient's status
To monitor is to observe continually; it is the measure of an
The most sensitive complex and adaptable monitoring machine
anaesthetist!
ever created was ourselves. We can use our senses (sight, smell,
If you do one thing, then do no harm.
hearing and touch), and ^compute’ these input signals in our
Monitoring should really start from pre-operative patient
brains to monitor anaesthetised patients. Modern equipment can
assessment and should continue right the way through recovery.
help us, often by providing earlier warning signals than we alone
Monitoring a patient's physiological status provides us with
can detect, but a machine should never be solely relied upon. The
warning signals when things go wrong; and hopefully allows
readouts should always be confrmed by our basic monitoring
early intervention and aversion of trouble. Monitoring involves
techniques; and we should develop a feel for each patient's well-
making measurements which are then compared to standard
being. If you do choose to use sophisticated equipment, you
reference ^normal’ values or ranges of values. This requires not
should be familiar with how it works, know its limitations for
different patient species and sizes, know some of the common
only some means of making the measurements, but also some
knowledge of the normal values. Normal values may differ
reasons for erroneous readings, and know how to trouble-shoot
between species.
most of these common problems; but do not forget to keep
looking at the patient too.
Aims of monitoring physiological status
 Having lots of sophisticated monitoring equipment usually
● To maintain the function of certain body organ systems as close
enables warning signals to be detected earlier; thus buying us a
little more time to sort things out so that we can hopefully prevent
 to physiological normality as possible.
a critical incident. For example, a low oxygen pressure alarm
● To maintain an adequate ^depth' of anaesthesia (not too deep
 or light), under different levels of surgical stimulation during a
sounding tells us that the oxygen cylinder is about to run out, so
hopefully we will replace it before we would eventually see the
 procedure.
effects of hypoxaemia in our patient.
● To ensure safety of the patient. Anaesthesia can carry a high
risk for the patient. Horses especially suffer a high risk of mor-
What should be monitored
bidity and mortality under general anaesthesia (complication/
 It is important to monitor:
death rate of 1 in 100 (all cases) to 1 in 200 (healthy); compared
to 1 in 900 for cats, and 1 in 1800 for dogs (healthy animals)).
● Central nervous system.
● To ensure safety of personnel: maintain unresponsiveness of
● Cardiovascular system.
 the patient to surgical stimuli.
● Respiratory systerm.
● Legal implications: record events during an anaesthetic.
●Temperature.
156
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia  157
● Neuromuscular function.
● Renal function.
Monitoring the central nervous system (CNS)
Ironically, the one system that we should be monitoring the most
closely is the one system that in certain species we can only
monitor to a limited extent. All agents that induce a state of
 general anaesthesia depress the CNS to a greater or lesser extent.
Traditionally, anaesthetists have utilised the various reflexes of the
CNS to help them assess the level of CNS responsiveness, and
from that, judge the depth of anaesthesia.
Assessment of reflexes
● Palpebral reflex: check both eyes if possible; becomes refrac-
tory with over-stimulation; affected if irritants such as hair,
blood, or surgical scrub enters the eyes.
Figure 18.1 Ventral rotation of eyeballduring 'surgical' plane of anaesthesia
● Corneal reflex: in most species it is present until deep/surgical
levels of anaesthesia (although sometimes persists in the horse).
in a cow.
 Regular touching of the cornea, whilst tear production is
depressed, can damage the cornea.
increase in heart rate and/or blood pressure that we can observe.
● Gag reflex and jaw tone. Laryngeal and pharyngeal refexes
Small animals and ruminants tend to show both heart rate and
 may persist until deeper planes of anaesthesia in pigs and cats
blood pressure increases whereas horses tend only to show
than other species.
 increases in blood pressure, without very obvicus changes in heart
● Limb withdrawal reflexes.
rate.
● Perineal reflex (anal tone).
However, occasionally if animals are ^too light, and painful
● Righting reflex: often used for exotics.
surgical stimulation occurs, you will see a fall in blood pressure
and heart rate. This occurs because the animal has fainted' (i.e.
Assessment of eye position, movement,
lacrimation
vasovagal syncope). Although it seems counterintuitive, you need
to deepen the plane of anaesthesia. You may well see animals
 In the horse, ruminant, dog and cat, the eyes can also reflect the
vagal in this way near the end of surgery, when you may start to
level of CNS depression via their position, palpebral reflx, pres-
lighten the plane of anaesthesia (in order to hasten the recovery):
ence of spontaneous nystagmus, and lacrimation. However, there
 you observe the heart rate and blood pressure falling, just when
is some variation between species and it is important that you
you think they should be increasing because you know the animal
familiarise yourself with the common species. For example, horses
should be light because you've reduced the administration rate
tend to maintain a slow palpebral reflex under greater depths’ of
of its anaesthetic. Remember to look for other signs of anaesthetic
anaesthesia than do dogs. The eyeball position in horses, however,
 depth,such as eye reflexes and jaw tone, to help prevent you being
can be unreliable and often one eye has a different position from
confused.
the other, which is also confusing.
 Also, be aware of other factors which may influence autonomic
 Eyeball position in dogs and cats and ruminants is much more
tone, such as hypovolaemia, drug administration 
and
reliable In dogs and cats,the eyes tend to rotate ventromedially
dysautonomias.
(forwards and downwards) as anaesthesia deepens towards the
surgical planes; but the eyes then become central if anaesthesia
Electroencephalography
deepens further.
A more sophisticated way of monitoring the CNS under anaes-
 In cattle, the eyeballs rotate ventrally as anaesthesia progresses
 thesia is electroencephalography (EEG). This requires specialised
from light planes to surgical planes (Figure 18.1); and then they
machinery and interpretation of recorded data. The high cost and
rotate back to a central position with greater depth of anaesthesia.
difficulty of interpretation preclude this form of monitoring from
As anaesthesia lightens, the eyeballs follow these excursions in the
routine veterinary use at the moment.
exact reverse order.
 Electroencephalography is the recording of electrical activity of
the cortical areas of the brain, using the ^nearest’ location for
Assessment of autonomic nervous system activity
electrodes (i.e. on the scalp). The EEG consists of spontaneous
The activity of the autonomic nervous system can also be used to
and evoked activity. The complex waveform of the raw EEG can
 u oo, st iee e f sdp asa s sn di
be analysed by Fourier transformation into its component parts.
the sympathetic nervous system is stimulated by painful surgery
The different frequencies are delta (<4 Hz), theta (4-8 Hz), alpha
and catecholamines are released. These are responsible for the
(9-13 Hz), and beta (>13 Hz).
158  Veterinary Anaesthesia
During consciousness the raw EEG data (i.e. before Fourier
degrees of sedation/hypnosis in man, but depend very much on
transformation) is said to be^desynchronised’ and usually consists
which drug is being administered. BIS is measured on a scale from
of low amplitude, high frequency components (e.g. alpha and beta
0 (isoelectric) to 100 (awake). BIS has been used in various vet-
waves). With anaesthesia, initially there may be an increase in beta
erinary species and may show some promise.
activity, but alpha activity is suppressed. As anaesthesia deepens,
lower frequency, higher amplitude rhythms (theta and delta),
appear and the EEG becomes progressively more synchronised.
Monitoring the cardiovascular system (CvS)
With increasing anaesthetic depth, periods of little or no EEG
Pre-operative assessment of CVs function is important. Figure
activity may be recorded (isoelectric = flat line), separated by
18.2 shows some of the things we can think about measuring and
bursts of activity: this is often described as the phase of burst
monitoring. Remember that in order to ensure good patient sur-
suppression. As depth increases further, the EEG eventually
vival, tissue oxygen delivery is the key player.
becomes quiescent (i.e. isoelectric).
 It is obviously important to monitor the CVS in animals under
 In addition to anaesthetic drugs, other things can affect the
general anaesthesia (GA), not only because many anaesthetic
 EEG such as hypoxia, hypercapnia, extreme hypocapnia (cerebral
agents have profound effects on the CVs, but also because many
disease states and surgical procedures also have profound influ-
 and extreme hypotension (poor perfusion)
ences on the CVS. Remember that although ultimately we are
concerned with oxygen delivery to the tissues (peripheral per-
Interpretation of EEGs
fusion), we need both a functioning respiratory system and a
Raw EEG data is hard to interpret, especially in real time. Therefore
functioning CVS to achieve this.
fast Fourier analysis of the different frequencies is performed,
 n s   s   s  n
cardiac output and the oxygen content of arterial blood, ideally
called epochs. This can be variously displayed:
we should be monitoring these, however, this is not so easy in the
● Power spectrum analysis. Epochs of 2-16s undergo Fourier
clinical situation; and a global fgure for cardiac output may not
help us to know, for example, how well the left retina or right
analysis, then power (i.e. amplitude squared) is plotted against
kidney are being perfused.
frequency for each epoch.
● Compressed spectral array. Power/frequency graphs are
 smoothed and sequential epochs are stacked up to give a moun-
Cardiac output = Stroke volume x Heart rate
 tain range appearance.
Cardiac output
● Density modulated spectral array. Each epoch is represented
Mean arterial pressure (- Central venous pressure)
 by a line of dots of different sizes (density) according to power
Systemic vascular resistance
at that frequency.
If we cannot measure cardiac output, but wish to measure what
Spectral edge frequency (SEF)
has sometimes been called the 'next best thing? (i.e. mean arterial
This is defined as the frequency below which a certain percentage
 blood pressure; MAP) we can combine these equations to derive
of the total power of the EEG is located. This is usually 50%, 80%
 an expression for mean arterial blood pressure as follows:
or 95%; hence MF (median frequency or SEF50), SEF80, or
SEF95. Shifts in SEF can help to determine drug (anaesthetic and
MAP = Heart rate X Stroke volume X
analgesic) effects; and it may be that MF varies differently to
Systemic vascular resistance
SEF95.
Although MAP can be measured much more easily, it is only
Brainstem evoked responses (potentiais)
one determinant of cardiac output, and cannot tell us much about
These disappear later than spontaneous EEG activity under anaes
actual tissue perfusion, except that we can have a number for the
thesia. These include auditory, visual, (somato)sensory, (somato)
driving pressure behind the potential blood flow. For most tissues
motor, and autonomic. Some are fnding some place in the race
to be able to autoregulate their blood flow, they require the MAP
to discover a better way of monitoring anaesthetic depth in man.
to be of the order of 60-70 mmHg. The perfusion pressure for a
However, some of you may well already use techniques such as
tissue is given by MAP minus intra-compartmental pressure.
BAER (brainstem auditory evoked potentials), and ERG (elec-
For muscles, where the intra-compartmental pressure may reach
troretinography) if you do neurological work (and need to assess
30-40 mmHg during recumbency, a perfusion pressure of at least
animals for deafness), or ophthalmological work (and need to
30-40 mmHg is required for maintenance of oxygen delivery.
assess animals for blindness).
Heart rate is also an important determinant of cardiac output,
and of MAP; and again, at least we can measure heart rate rela-
Bispectral index (BIS)
tively easily. The other variables in the equations are much harder
This measures correlation of the phase between different fre-
to measure in a clinical situation. Arrhythmias can be associated
quency components of the EEG and at present uses human algo-
with poor ventricular filling (especially tachyarrhythmias where
rithms and human EEG data. BIS values correlate fairly well with
the heart has less time to fill in between beats), and poor ventricu-
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia  159
Intravascular blood volume
Cardiac capacity
(pericardial disease
 Systemic vascular
 /myocardial disease)
resistance
Venous PO2
Preload
Arterial blood
pressure
Oxygen
Afterload
extraction 
Oxygen
consumption
Myocardial
Stroke
 contractility
volume
Metabolic
Tissue oxygen
rate
delivery
Cardiac output
Heart rate
Temperature
 Thyroid hormone levels 
and rhythm
 Arterial blood 
 Catecholamines etc.
 oxygen content
Hb saturation
 Arterial PO2
Venous
with O2
admixture:
 Haemoglobin concentration, 
shunts, low V/Q
(anaemias)
ratios
Dyshaemoglobins - MetHb,
 Diffusion problems
 CarboxyHb, thalassaemias,
sickle Hb etc.
Alveolar PO2
 Inspired O2
Tidal volume
 percent
Other
Alveolar ventilation
 inspired
Breathing rate
gases
Atmospheric pressure
Physiological dead
space
Figure 18.2 Cardiovascular and respiratory factors that should be considered for measuring and monitoring.
lar emptying (because of inco-ordinated contractions); and so can 
● Indicator dye dilution cardiac output where CO is the quan-
lead to a reduction in cardiac output.
tity of dye injected divided by the area under the concentration/
time curve.
Cardiacoutputmeasurement
● Lithium dilution cardiac output does not require intracardiac
catheterisation. CO is the quantity of lithium injected divided
Cardiac output (CO) measurement is mainly a research tool for
 by the area under the concentration/time curve.
vets at the moment. The equipment necessary is usually very
●Fick principle cardiac output follows the principle that oxygen
expensive. Examples are:
uptake by the lungs equals the oxygen added to the pulmonary
● Thermodilution cardiac output requires intracardiac cathe-
blood. Therefore CO equals oxygen uptake divided by the arte-
terisation (e.g. Swan-Ganz catheter). CO is inversely propor-
rial-to-venous difference in oxygen content of blood.
 tional to the area under the temperature/time curve. Often said
● Total or partial CO, rebreathing cardiac output is a non-
to be the 'gold standard’ technique.
invasive technique and requires intermittent positive pressure
160  Veterinary Anaesthesia
ventilation (IPPV). Total CO, rebreathing CO uses a form of
 the Fick equation, but in place of oxygen measurements, it uses 
CO. Therefore CO equals COz production divided by venous-
to-arterial CO2 content difference. Partial CO rebreathing
 methods use a differential form of this CO, Fick equation.
● TOE (trans-oesophageal echocardiography) uses Doppler
ultrasonography to measure blood velocity in the descending
aorta. Although the aortic root would be a better place to
measure this, it is not easy to obtain a steady image of this or
the ascending aorta. The velocity-time integral is multiplied by
the aortic cross sectional area to give the volume flow rate of
 blood (related to the stroke volume). This is multiplied by the
heart rate to give an estimation of cardiac output; and can give
beat-to-beat information. (Note slight ‘error’ as only the
 descending aorta is imaged.)
● Bullet method uses echocardiography and considers the heart
to be shaped like a bullet, long and short axis views of the heart
are obtained and the dimensions are compared in systole and 
Fgure 18.3 Oesophageal stethoscope (3 sizes available).
 diastole to assess the change in volume and therefore cardiac
output.
● Pulse contour integrated continuous cardiac output uses
electrical activity of the heart. The ECG cannot tell us if the heart
is actually beating and if so, how well it is pumping blood around
 pulse plethysmography to define the shape' (contour) of a
the body, for example,pulselesselectrical activity can occur where
peripheral arterial pulse which is then ‘calibrated’ against a
the ECG looks completely normal but the myocardium does not
measurement of CO (often using the lithium dilution tech-
contract. Advantages are that it allows monitoring of electrical
nique). In between fairly regular calibrations, the pulse contour 
activity of the heart and early detection of arrhythmias.
can then be used to calculate the beat-to-beat cardiac output.
Disadvantages are that it gives no information on cardiac output,
● Thoracic electrical bio-impedance, and impedance cardiogra-
can be expensive and requires adequate knowledge of cardiology
 phy. The reader is referred to specialised texts.
for accurate interpretation.
Heart rate and rhythm monitoring
Echocardiography
 It is important to monitor the heart rate because it gives us some
Echocardiography, in the form of trans-oesophageal echo (TOE),
indication of cardiac output; and also of the autonomic tone. The
assessment of heart rhythm, by electrocardiography (ECG), is also
hearts performance in real time, and even to measure cardiac
important for the evaluation of any arrhythmias. Methods of
output on a beat-to-beat basis. Technology has not yet been devel-
monitoring the heart rate and rhythm are given below.
oped in all veterinary species, due to cost and differences in chest
shape and heart/oesophageal alignment.
Palpation of the apex beat
 s  s i s o i e s
 Palpation of the pulse
required and it is non-invasive. Disadvantages are that access may
This assesses pulse rate, rhythm and quality/character. Be familiar
be limited in some cases, for example, a patient under drapes, and
with the best sites for palpation of arterial pulses in our various
accurate assessment of arrhythmias difficult.
veterinary species. Peripheral and more central pulses can be
compared; remember that we are concerned with peripheral
Auscultation
perfusion too. Sites for pulse palpation include:
● Precordial stethoscopy: the advantage is that you can use a
● Femoral arteries ('central') all animals.
conventional stethoscope. Disadvantages are that access may be
● Brachial arteries ('central') in birds and large animals.
limited and interpretation of arrhythmias may be difficult.
● Lingual arteries (peripheral) in dogs.
● Oesophageal stethoscopy is very useful; advantages are that it
● Palatine arteries (peripheral) in horses (Figure 18.4).
uses simple cheap equipment and can monitor respiration rate
● Transverse facial artery (peripheral) in horses.
at the same time. Figure 18.3 shows an oesophageal stetho-
● Mandibular and mandibular facial arteries (peripheral) in
scope. The disadvantage is that interpretation of arrhythmias
horses, ruminants, pigs.
may be difficult.
● Branches of caudal auricular arteries (peripheral) in all
 animals.
Electrocardiography
● Dorsal pedal and palmar metacarpal arch arteries (peripheral)
Essential for the accurate diagnosis of arrhythmias. Not reliable
in dogs and cats.
for basic monitoring because only gives information about the
● Dorsal/lateral metatarsal arteries (peripheral) in horses.
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia  161
ULTASONICTDOPPLER
MODEL 811-B
CEn
Figure 18.4 The course of one of the paired palatine arteries is shown with
string. Either artery may be palpated during anaesthesia.
● Median sacral/ventral (middle) coccygeal arteries (peripheral)
 in horses and cattle.
When you palpate a pulse, you should be assessing three things:
● ‘Pulse pressure': the difference between the systolic and diasto-
lic pressures. A pulse of 120/80 may feel similar to a pulse of
80/40, but the mean pressures would be very different (see
below).
●‘Mean pressure': we can guesstimate the mean pressure by how
Figure 18.5 Doppler flow probe.
 easy it is to occlude the arterial pulse by digital pressure and by
assessing how ^full or ^turgid’ the artery feels between the
Indirect and non-invasive techniques
pulses. After a little practise, you can become pretty good at
this, but high degrees of vasomotor tone can fool you.
Sphygmomanometry
● ‘Character' of the pulse, for example, we may describe a pulse
 An appropriately sized inflatable cuff/bladder, the pressure in 
as bounding, when a large difference between systolic and
which is measured by a mercury or aneroid manometer, is placed
 diastolic pressures exists. This is common in conditions such
 proximally on a limb (or tail base), and inflated until blood flow
as aortic valvular insuffciency.
to the distal appendage is ocuded. Then the cuff/bladder is
deflated slowly and the return of pulsatile blood flow in an artery
Pulses can be difficult to palpate in very small animals and
distal to the cuff is detected by palpation, auscultation (stethos-
exotics, but some other techniques may detect them more easily.
copy) or by Doppler-shifted ultrasound (which detects either
for example pulse oximeters or Doppler blood flow probes.
arterial wall motion or red cell movement within the artery)
(Figure 18.5). You may even be able to use a pulse oximeter,
Pulse oximeters and Doppler flow probes
 applied somewhere distal to the occlusive cuff as a pulse-detector.
 Pulse oximeters and Doppler flow probes can give an indication
The cuff/bladder pressure at which the returning blood flow is
of pulse rate; and you may *hear if arrhythmias are present.
first detected is usually taken as the systolic pressure. The diastolic
 pressure is more difficult to determine as it depends upon much
Arterial blood pressure measurement
more subjective interpretation. The mean pressure is calculated
In many cases it is useful to be able to measure arterial blood
from the systolic and diastolic pressures, as per the equation
pressure, rather than relying on subjective assessment from
above.
pulse pressure palpation and there are a number of methods
 Advantages are that it is a relatively simple technique, it is non-
available to do this. Mean arterial pressure (MAP) can be derived 
invasive and the equipment is inexpensive. Disadvantages are
from systolic and diastolic arterial pressures as follows:
that it is labour-intensive, thick hair or fat can interfere with
measurement, it only measures systolic pressure accurately and
+DAP
 only intermittent measurements are possible. When using Doppler
3
ultrasound flow probes, some people say that the apparent systolic
162  Veterinary Anaesthesia
the cuff should be placed on an appendage at the same level as
the heart.
 If the cuff is positioned on an appendage below heart height,
you will get falsely high pressure readings. If the cuff is positioned
-d m s a m  i e aae de e 
sure readings. You can correct the values to true heart height (a
10 cm height difference is approximately equal to a 7.5 mmHg
pressure difference), or when trends only are being monitored it 
may be all right to report uncorrected values, but do not mix
corrected and uncorrected values.
 If the cuff is too narrow or too loose, you will get falsely high
 readings. If the cuff is too wide or too tight you will get falsely low
readings.
Figure 18.6 DinamapTm monitor: the cuffis positioned on the donkey's tail.
High definition oscillometric devices
 pressure determined may be slightly less than the actual systolic
Highly sensitive oscillometric devices display the detected cuff
pressure: often the accuracy of readings is given as within
pressures on a computer screen so you can visualise the reading
±10 mmHg of the true systolic pressure; and for cats, some people
in real-time; which also allows you to see arrhythmias and arte-
advocate ading 14.7mmHg to the apparent systolic pressure
facts. It can repeat measurements every 1-10min. Should be more
reading obtained, or even taking the readings as being closer to
accurate than plain oscillometric devices, especially for smaller
 mean pressure than the systolic pressure.
patients.
Oscillometric devices
Oscillotonometric technique
These are automated versions of the sphygmomanometer. An
The oscillotonometric technique is similar to oscillometry, but
inflatable bladder (often referred to as the cuff), (with or without
older, uses a double-cuff, and is not fully automated.
a covering sleeve), of appropriate size (see below) is placed on an
appendage (limb or tail) (Figure 18.6). The machine then cycli-
Plethysmography
cally inflates and deflates the cuff and sensors detect pressure
As a byproduct of how a pulse oximeter determines the saturation
changes in the cuff during its deflation as pulsatile flow returns to
 of haemoglobin with oxygen, pulsatile blood flow is measured.
the appendage. These changes in cuff pressure, as pulsatile flow
This information can be displayed in waveform as a plethysmo-
returns, are used to determine systolic (at maximal rate of increase
 graph (a pulse volume graph') (Figure 18.7), or as a visual 'signal
in oscillation size), mean (at maximal oscillation amplitude) and
d i m sq al no n a u il  
diastolic (at maximal decrease in oscillation size, or disappearance
much in the same way as the dolby sound system volume on your
of oscillations) pressures. Pulse rate is usually also determined.
music centre). Although not quantitative, the qualitative informa-
Advantages are that it is noninvasive, less labour intensive and
tion obtained about arterial blood pressure can be very useful, but
most can be programmed to take readings every 1-10 min.
be sure that a ^weak’ signal indication does not just mean that the
Disadvantages are that it is more expensive, does not work well
probe has slipped.
in the presence of arrhythmias or slow pulse rates or low blood
pressures, it is not good with hairy or fat appendages or in animals
Penaz technique (Finapres m)
less than about 7kg, gives only intermittent readings which are
 Combines oscillometric technique with pulse photoplethysmog-
retrospective by the time the machine displays the values (we
raphy to provide a continuous waveform display of arterial pres.
really prefer real time, and beat-to-beat information) and can give
erroneous values, although the trend in readouts should reflect 
within the cuff (to maintain constant volume of the tissues
the real situation.
beneath), and this may interfere with tissue perfusion during
 Larger cuff generally consist ofa rubber bladder (the business
long procedures. Was designed for the human finger, so not so
part) within a protective sleeve of material, whereas smaller cuffs
particularly useful for hairy animals. Not commonly available
tend to be made of plastic e.g. PVC and do not require further
any more.
protection. The terms cuffs and bladders′ tend to be used inter-
changeably. There may be one or two hoses connected to the cuff/
Direct (invasive) techniques
bladder depending upon whether inflation/deflation and pressure
The actual blood pressure value recorded from different arteries
measurement require independent ports.
will vary because of their different sizes and distances (number of
For best results the cuff/bladder width should be c. 0.4
branches) from the aortic root, which affects their compliance
(0.2-0.6) times the circumference of the appendage. For rubber
(more peripheral arteries tend to be ^stiffer'). This distal pulse
bladders, the length of the inflatable bladder should be c. 0.8-1
amplification? results in increasing systolic, decreasing diastolic,
times the circumference of the appendage but plastic cuffs
but almost unchanging (very little decease) mean arterial pressure
must be able to encircle the appendage in order to fasten. Ideally
in arteries with increasing distance from the aorta.
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia   163
CPR
Figure 18.8 Pressure veilm attached to aneroid manometer.
Figure 18.7 Sugivet V3395 TPR monitor'm displaying the pulse rate (30),
Oxygen saturation of arterial blood haemoglobin (SpO97%), and the plethys-
mograph ('pulse volume) trace. This monitor also includes a thermistor to
detect warmer exhaled breath (to measure respiratory rate), and a tempera-
sure can be determined. There is too much inertia in the system
ture probe (not shown).
for measurement of systolic and diastolic pressures.
Electronic pressure transducer
 It is important to measure pressure against a reference level
Most commonly a strain gauge e.g. a stiffdiaphragm whose move-
(level of the heart; often the sternal manubrium is used as a
ment is detected as a change in electrical resistance which is con-
landmark), so devices to record pressure need to be ^zeroed?.
verted into a pressure signal. Numerical pressure values are given,
After an arterial catheter is placed, it is connected, via non-
usually alongside a waveform display. If the transducer is posi-
compliant extension tubing (containing heparinised saline or
tioned above heart level, the values measured are falsely low; if
heparinised glucose), to a pressure transducer device which con-
positioned below heart level, the values measured are falsely high.
verts the arterial pulse into a numerical value with or without a
 pulse waveform display. Pressure transducers can be any of the
 Damping and resonance are important considerations for elec-
following.
 tronic pressure transducers. An arterial waveform can be described
 in terms of Fourier analysis as a complex sine wave, composed of
its fundamental frequency (the pulse rate) and a series of (at least
Saline flled 'U' manometer
the frst 10) harmonics. The diaphragm in the transducer and the
This is similar to how we measure central venous pressure, but
needs to be quite tall as arterial pressures are expected to be
fluid-filled catheter and extension tube (the hydraulic coupling),
constitute the catheter-transducer system which can undergo
much higher than venous pressures. Mean arterial pressure can
simple harmonic motion when subjected to a pressure pulse and
be determined fairly accurately, but not systolic and diastolic
this may affect the accuracy of the measured pressure. Resonance
because of excessive inertia.
in the system results in over-estimation of pressures whereas
damping in the system results in under-estimation of pressures.
Aneroid manometer
The resonant frequency of the transducer system must be
The inner workings of the aneroid manometer must be protected
from arterial blood and other fluids, so incorporate an air column,
or else the signal may be distorted by resonance. For example, the
or use a device called a ^pressure veil which looks like a rubber
glove-finger in a plastic case (Figure 18.8). In either case, once the
higher harmonics of arterial waveforms of dogs lie in the range of
20 Hz, s0 a system with a resonant frequency of 30-40 Hz should
system has been primed’ (ie. flled with heparinised fluid (but
 be all right. The dynamic response of a transducer system depends 
leaving an air column (<10 cm) between the fluid and the manom-
on:
eter), and also pressurised so that the manometer needle reads
more than the expected arterial pressure), position the fluid-air
● The fundamental frequency of the input signal (expected pulse 
interface at heart level to zero it before finally opening the three-
rate).
way tap so that the pulsating arterial blood communicates directly
● The resonant (natural) frequency of the transducer system.
with the fluid column and manometer. Only mean arterial pres-
● The degree of damping present in the system.
164   Veterinary Anaesthesia
The natural frequency of a system is that at which it resonates.
For the transducer system this should be of the order of at least
10 times the fundamental frequency of what is being measured.
Natural frequency
Fgure 18.9 Under-damping.
(Stiffness of diaphragm)
=1/(2π)x
V (Mass of oscillating fluid and diaphragm)
 The most important factors are:
● Length and diameter of catheter/extension.
Fgure 18.10 Excessive damping.
● Density of fluid within catheter/extension.
● Continuity of fluid column within catheter/extension.
The transducer system should have low compliance, so non-
compliant tubing should be used. Short stiff extension tubing can
increase the resonant frequency but beware using long extension
Fgure 18.11 Critical damping.
tubing where low pulse rates are expected. The hydraulic coupling
should be a continuous fluid column. Blood clots in the system
(usually at the catheter end) increase damping. Small air bubbles
increase resonance whereas large air bubbles increase damping.
The system damping can be checked by performing a fast-flush
test with the following possible results:
● Under-damping is indicated by excessive oscillation of the
Hgure 18.12 Optimal damping.
pressure response before stabilising (Figure 18.9). Damping
factor <<0.7.
● Excessive damping is indicated by the absence of an overshoot
over which autoregulation works best, but the organs and tissues
and a slow decline in pressure (Figure 18.10). Damping factor 
that we worry most about are the kidneys (especially small
>1.0.
animals) and skeletal muscles (especially horses). If we maintain
● Critical damping is said to exist where there is just no over-
MAP ≥ (60-)70 mmHg, then autoregulation should be main-
shoot; the damping factor is 1.0 (Figure 18.11).
tained. We also like to see diastolic arterial pressure (DAP)
 ms  m     o
>40 mmHg, as below this, coronary perfusion (which occurs, at
distortion due to resonance and minimal distortion due to
least to the left ventricle, mainly during diastole, and therefore
phase shift (caused by excessive damping). It is present when
depends on DAP), may become compromised. Monitoring arte-
the pressure overshoot is limited to 6-7% of the initial pressure 
rial BP also assists us in monitoring anaesthetic depth.
displacement: the damping factor is 0.6-0.7 (ideally 0.64)
 The arterial pressure waveform can also give us more informa-
(Figure 18.12).
tion than just systolic, mean and diastolic blood pressures, but
 It is usual to aim for slight under-damping so that, as long as
beware over-interpretation. The area under the systolic part of the
curve can tell us about the stroke volume, and therefore cardiac
output (but the ^dicrotic notch' on a peripheral arterial waveform
of detail and responsiveness outweigh the potential problems of
is not really an indicator of end of systole); the rate of change of
resonance. With use, some increase in damping is inevitable (by
pressure over time on the upstroke can tell us about myocardial
the occasional air bubble or blood clot in the system), so starting
 contractility (but also depends on local vascular tone); hypovol-
with a slightly under-damped system gives more ^room’ for
aemia is suggested by a narrow wave with a low ^dicrotic notch'
damping to occur before the system becomes over-damped.
and large reductions in peak systolic pressure (i.e. >15% 'systolic
 Mean arterial pressure is the most accurate value because:
 pressure variation’) with IPPV breaths.
● Excessive damping results in underestimation of the systolic
 pressure, yet over-estimation of diastolic pressure.
 Potential complications of arterial catheterisation
● Excessive resonance in the system tends to over-estimate systo-
●Trauma.
lic pressure and under-estimate diastolic pressure.
● Haematoma.
● Emboli (air or thrombi).
Why measure arterial blood pressure, especially directly?
● Infection.
Most tissues and organs can autoregulate their perfusion, but this
● Necrosis of distal tissues (if a functional end artery is cannu-
ability depends upon the body maintaining ‘normal’ arterial
lated and then becomes thrombosed).
blood pressure. Different tissues and organs have slightly different
d s  ' ss -d  i 
autoregulatory thresholds and ranges of arterial blood pressure
ducts etc.
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia 
165
Advantages and disadvantages of direct arterial blood 
expiratory pause, ensuring no positive end expiratory pressure 
pressure measurement
(PEEP).
Advantages of direct arterial blood pressure measurement include
● Intra-abdominal pressure (beware bloat, colics and gastric dila-
that real time beat-to-beat information may be obtained; accu-
tion/volvulus (GDV)).
rate values should be obtained; and it provides arterial access for
● The patient's position (eg. standing, head down, dorsally
sampling arterial blood for blood gas analysis. The pressure wave-
recumbent).
form itself can also give extra information.
 Overall, serial measurements (trends) are much more useful
 Disadvantages of direct arterial blood pressure measurement
 than single readings.
are that a little skill is required and the above list of complications
Fluid challenges' may be used when trying to decide if a
may occur (rare).
patient is hypo-, normo-, or hyper-volaemic. Set up CVP moni-
Central venous pressure (CVP) measurement
toring and get a baseline value. This is usually low or negative if
hypovolaemia exists. As long as the baseline value is not massively
CVP gives a measure of the ability of the heart to cope with the
 positive ( normal CVP for standing animals is around 0-5 cm H,O
volume of blood being returned to it. It indicates a balance
and may be up to 10 cmH,O), then you can conduct a fuid
between the cardiac output and the venous return. Clinical
challenge.
examination can provide you with an impression of CVP, for
Administer 10-20ml/kg of crystalloid (normal saline or
example check jugular filling and emptying with the head/body
Hartmann's solution), or 2.5-5 ml/kg of colloid, rapidly IV, (the
in normal position. Jugular vein distension is present with
lower volumes for cats), and monitor the changes in CVP during.
increased CVP.
 and for about 15 min after the challenge.
CVP measurement is invasive and requires catheterisation of
the jugular (more rarely the femoral/medial saphenous) vein, so
 In a normovolaemic animal, the CVP will rise slightly, but will
 fall back down to normal after about 15 min.
that the tip of the catheter lies, ideally, in the right atrium (but
 In a hypovolaemic animal, if your fluid bolus was inadequate
beware creating arrhythmias if the catheter tickles the heart), or
to fix its hypovolaemia, then the CVP will rise a bit (e.g. by
at least in the intrathoracic portion of the cranial (or caudal) vena
<1 mmHg (<1.36 cmHO), but will fall again after 15 or 20 min.
cava. The catheter is attached to a ^U’ tube manometer or an
 In a hypervolaemic animal (e.g. with congestive heart failure),
electronic pressure transducer, via an extension tube, and either
 joae u   y s pe s mda
device should be zeroed to the level of the right atrium (tricuspid
(>4 cmHO), is an indication of probable fluid overload).
valve). CVP (waveform shown in Figure 18.13) gives us a guide
to how full' the circulation is, and can be used as a rough
 Measuring CVP
 guide to whether the patient is hypovolaemic, normovolaemic or
To measure CVP, a fluid infusion is set up. This is attached to a
hypervolaemic.
tube is also attached to the three way tap (Figure 18.14). The open
Factors influencing CVP
ended tube is secured vertically against a ruler, the ^zero’ reading
● Heart chamber flling (beware myocardial and pericardial
problems).
● Stage of heart cycle (systole/diastole).
● Intra-thoracic pressures: CVP varies with stage in respiratory
Infusion fluid
cycle (inspiration/expiration), and is also affected by pleural
space disease and IPPV. It is best measured during the end-
Open ended tube
Right atruim
Figure 18.13 Typical CVP waveform.
a, atrial contraction; c tricuspid valve cusps displaced back into right atrium
(during ventricular contraction); v, end of ventricular contraction, distortion
of right atrium and atrial flling from vena cava; x descent, atrial relaxation
Three way tap
+/- ventricular contraction pulling down on A-V valve ring: x' descent, atrial
relaxation +/- ventricular contraction pulling down on A-V valve ring: y
Figure 18.14 CVP measurement. Modified from Veterinary Fluid Therapy.
descent, opening of tricuspid valve and emptying of blood into ventricle. In
Eds: Michell AR, Bywater RJ, Clarke KW, Hall LE, Waterman AE, Blackwell
horses, a positive h wave may occurshortly afterthe ydescentand is thought
 Scientific Publications (1989), with kind permission of Blackwell Publishing
to be due to the continued filling of the right atrium during diastasis.
Ltd.
166  Veterinary Anaesthesia
of which should be at the level of the right atrium; but leave some
Other assessments of the cardiovascular system:
tubing below the zero mark too. Once happy that the jugular
blood work
venous catheter is patent (i.e. fluid flows into it easily from the
Haematological analyses
bag), briefly turn the three way tap so that fluid now flows from
Haematological analyses, such as packed cell volume (PCV), total
the infusion bag and into the open ended tube, at least 20 cm up
protein (TP) and haematological profles, only provide informa-
it. To measure CVP, turn the three way tap so that the open
tion about the constituents of blood at a particular time; and
ended tube now communicates with the jugular vein (and the
should be carried out before anaesthesia if thought necessary.
fluid bag is not open to either). The fluid level in the open ended
Occasionally it may be necessary to track changes in PCV, (hae-
tube falls to the mean CVP value. The reason why we allow some
tube (a good 10cm) to be below the zero level is that during
moglobin (Hb), and TP during long surgical procedures, for
example where much fluid therapy support is needed.
inspiration, CVP can become more negative, and air may be
sucked into the tubing and into the jugular vein. The fluid menis-
Biochemical analyses
cus willfluctuate a little with the heart cycle, and by a few cm with
 Determinations of renal or hepatic function, or checking glucose
the respiratory cycle, although these ^waves are less easily dis-
 or electrolyte balance, should really be done pre-operatively; but
cernible than if a more sensitive electronic pressure transducer is
sometimes it is useful to be able to track changes in electrolytes
used.
or glucose, or urea and creatinine, during a long surgical
Peripheral perfusion assessment
procedure.
Blood lactate measurement
Serial measurements of blood lactate levels can be extremely
 Monitoring the respiratory system
useful. Arterial lactate reflects net body lactate balance. Venous
blood can also be used, although venous lactate is influenced by
 Remember to assess the respiratory system pre-anaesthesia.
the net lactate balance of the specific portion of the circulation
 In order to deliver oxygen (and anaesthetic agents) to the
drained by that vessel. Venous lactate values tend to be slightly
tissues (including the brain), we need a delivery system (the CVS),
lower than arterial blood values because of lactate uptake by
and (because we live on land), systems that can carry gases (the
tissues and also the slightly lower pH of venous blood tends to
blood), and exchange them efficiently at a gas/liquid interface (the
favour lactate uptake by red blood cells via their monocarboxylate
lungs, which must be ventilated).
 transporters (see Chapter 22).
 The simplest way to monitor the respiratory system is by
observing:
Systemic P(a-v)O2 gradient
●Breathing rate.
Tissue oxygen extraction may be influenced by perfusion (cardiac
●Breathing rhythm.
output) and metabolic rate.
● Tidal volume/depth of each breath.
●Mucous membrane colour.
Urine output (and specific gravity)
This can help us to determine the adequacy of circulating blood
Minute ventilation = breathing rate X tidal volume
volume and peripheral tissue (including kidney) perfusion, but
also tells us about renal function/dysfunction. Normal urine
'Minute ventilation' is also called 'minute respiratory volume?.
output is 1-1.5ml/kg/h.
Breathing rate monitoring
Core-peripheral temperature gradients
The core-periphery temperature gradient is normally of the order
● Observe or palpate the chest wall (difficult in draped animals).
 of 2-4°℃,but a larger gradient than this (cool periphery) is assocj-
● Observe movements of reservoir/rebreathing bag in the
ated with poor peripheral perfusion and is seen for example in
anaesthetic breathing system.
hypovolaemia/shock states.
● With some circle systems, you can see the valves move, or hear
the clicking of the valves as they open and close.
Mucous membrane colour and capillary refill time
● Sometimes you can see water vapour cyclically condensing/
Mucous membrane colour and capillary refill time can also be a
evaporating at the endotracheal tube connection.
guide to the state of the circulation and peripheral perfusion, but
● Oesophageal stethoscopy can be used to detect breath sounds.
remember that a dead animal can still have a normal capillary
 Advantages: cheap and simple, can also monitor heart rate.
refill time (<2 s) because of backflow of blood from venous and
-dsa reu  inp ae sq ss ai
arterial sides. Some drugs and disease states also influence capil-
cially in small patients with small tidal volumes.
lary refll time, therefore use capillary refill time in conjunction
      ) , 
with your other clinical findings; never rely on it solely, although
endotracheal tube connector to measure the temperature dif-
a capillary refill time of >4s is probably significant. Remember
ference between inspired and expired gases to determine
that to perform capillary refll time properly, you should really
breathing rate.
blanch the mucous membrane for a good 5s first.
● Breathing rate is often displayed by capnograph monitors.
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia 167
● Some ECG machines can display breathing rate (baseline
Blood gas analysis
wandering due to breathing movements is converted into
This is the best way to determine how well oxygenated the blood
breathing rate using changes in thoracic impedance).
is, but gas exchange at the lungs, ventilation, and pulmonary
Tidalvolumemeasurement
perfusion (i.e. cardiovascular function) are all involved. In fact
the cardiovascular and respiratory systems are inextricably linked.
The tidal volume is very diffcult to determine accurately from
 Arterial blood gas analysis tells us how well the blood is oxygen-
mere observations of patient chest or reservoir/rebreathing bag
ated at the lungs. Venous blood gas analysis tells us how much
movement. It can be measured by devices such as the Wright's
oxygen remains in the blood after tissues have been perfused, and
respirometer, spirometers or pneumo- tachometers/tachographs.
thus depends upon original uptake of oxygen in the lungs, tissue
Mucous membrane colour
perfusion and peripheral extraction of oxygen, and so reflects
This can tel us a little about blood oxygenation, but also gives
 pulmonary and cardiovascular statuses and tissue metabolism. Be
careful which vein you sample from; the ideal’ mixed venous
information about tissue perfusion. Note a 'slow circulation can
 blood is that taken from the pulmonary artery. Blood gas analysis
have increased peripheral oxygen extraction, and so the tissues
also tells us the acid-base status of the patient and helps us to
look more “blue. Mucous membrane colour is very subjective,
determine the cause (respiratory and/or metabolic) of any pertur-
and may depend upon many other factors, such as background
bations (see Chapter 21).
lighting, drug administration and vasomotor tone.
● White mucous membranes are associated with anaemia, or
Capnography
intense tissue vasoconstriction.
Why measure end tidal CO (ETCO2) tension? Note that some
● Yellow mucous membranes are associated with jaundice.
machines measure ETCO percentage rather than tension (partial
 Beware the starved horse: because they have no gall bladder,
pressure). Alveolar CO, tension normally equilibrates with pul-
they constantly secrete bile and have increased unconjugated
monary capillary CO, tension by the time the pulmonary capillary
bilirubin in their blood during starvation so mucous mem-
blood has ^traversed’ the alveolar bed. Pulmonary capillary blood
branes look yellowy; beware the horse with a lot of carotene in
comes from pulmonary arterial blood, and pulmonary arterial
its diet (carrots, fresh grass), as membranes will look more
blood was the systemic venous blood returning to the heart in the
orangey yellow too.
venae cavae. Systemic venous blood has low oxygen tension and
● Grey/purple/cyanotic mucous membranes are associated
high carbon dioxide tension. Pulmonary capillary blood, after
with poor tissue oxygen delivery (poor cardiac output, or 
undergoing gaseous exchange in the alveoli, becomes pulmonary
insufficient oxygen to meet the tissue's demands). Cyanosis
venous blood, and returns to the left side of the heart, to be
is generall not observed until there is at least 5g/dl of
 pumped out through the aorta. Hence, pulmonary venous blood
deoxyhaemoglobin present (therefore it is impossible to detect
(which has been oxygenated, and has given up some of its CO2)
 in anaemic patients with <5 g/dl of Hb in the first place).
 becomes systemic arterial blood.
● Navy blue mucous membranes are said to be associated with
The alveolar CO, tension should therefore reflect the systemic
excess nitrous oxide administration (accompanied by (or due
arterial CO, tension.
to?), hypoxia/cyanosis).
When an animal exhales, the frst part of the exhaled 'air' comes
● Cherry red mucous membranes are associated with carbon
from its ^dead space, which forms about one-third of the total
monoxide poisoning (ie. large amounts of carboxy-
tidal volume. Dead space air has been filtered (if inhaled through
haemoglobin).
 the nose), warmed and humidified, but has not undergone any
● Muddy brown mucous membranes are associated with meth-
gaseous exchange. The last part of the air to be exhaled (the
aemoglobin; where the haem iron is oxidised, and therefore
 remaining two-thirds) is then from the alveoli, and has undergone
with nitrite poisoning (especially large animals), paracetamol
gaseous exchange. So towards the end of exhalation (the end of
poisoning (especially cats), or excessive doses of prilocaine local
the tidal exhalation, hence ^end tidal'), the exhaled gases have a
anaesthetic.
high CO, content, and a low Oz content.
● Brick red/brown/cyanosed mucous membranes are all associ
 The ETCO, tension should reflect the alveolar CO, tension.
 ated with endotoxaemic states.
So, we could say, ETCO, tension reflects the systemic arterial
CO, tension.
Monitoring the efficiency of ventilation
 And ETCO, tension gives us an idea of the effciency of alveo-
Requires some means of measuring gaseous exchange at the lungs.
 lar ventilation, because:
● The gold standard is to measure arterial blood gas tensions
(see Chapter 21 on blood gas analysis).
Alveolar CO, tension x
1
● The second best is to measure end tidal carbon dioxide tension.
 Alveolar ventilation
● Some information can be gained from measurement of the
saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen by pulse oximetry, but
 However, there is normally some dilution of the alveolar gases
high inspired oxygen concentrations can impair the detection
(i.e. the dead space gases do mix slightly with the alveolar gases),
of hypoventilation.
so that the ETCO tension is often slightly less (1-3mmHg
168  Veterinary Anaesthesia
difference in man and small animals), than the actual alveolar
(and therefore systemic arterial) CO, tension. In horses, this dif-
ference can be much greater (because of ventilation/perfusion
mismatches). Occasionally, 'inverse gradients? occur (i.e. ETCO2
tension is greater than alveolar CO, tension): usually at very slow
breathing rates, and when alveoli empty unevenly with, for 
example, pulmonary disease.
P
IQ
Whenever ETCO tension is measured, it is useful to take the
Fgure 18.15 Typical capnograph trace (called a time capnogram) fom high
occasional arterial blood sample to determine the arterial CO2
tension (PaCO), just so you get an idea of how accurate the
speed (75cm/min) recording of single breath.
Inspiratory segment, R to T (= phase O); expiratory segment, O to R; dead
ETCO value is. The trend in ETCO values (i.e. if values increase
space gases exhaled, O to P(= phase I; mixture of dead space and alveolar
or decrease), is usually reliable, although (especially for horses),
gases exhaled, P to Q (= phase Il: pure alveolar gases exhaled, Q to
the actual values of ETCOz and PaCOz may differ quite
R = alveolar plateau (= phase Il); ETCO, reading is taken at R; occasionally
considerably.
asharp upswing (phase IV) may be noted atthe end ofthe plateau, especially
The normal value for systemic arterial CO, 'tension' (or partial
if the plateau is flat, this is usually a sign of reduced thoracic compliance; α
pressure) is around 35-45 mmHg (and often towards the lower
angle = angle between phase Iland phase Il tells of ventiltion/perfusion
end (32-35 mmHg) for cats), and so values should be similar for
status of lung); β angle = angle between phase Ill and descending limb of
ETCO, tension. However, under anaesthesia, when most patients
 inspiratory segment (helps assess extent of rebreathing).
hypoventilate to some degree because of respiratory depression,
these values may increase. It is usual to aim to maintain the values
for PaCOz (and ETCO2) tension between 20 and 60 mmHg. Below
 20mmHg (you are probably hyperventilating the animal), cere-
bral blood vessels vasoconstrict and can compromise cerebral
oxygen delivery, so try not to go this low. Above 60 mmHg, you
will begin to change the blood pH (respiratory acidosis; see notes
on blood gas analysis), which may compromise myocardial func-
Fgure 18.16 A trend capnogram; obtained when recording speed is slow
tion; and although the high CO stimulates sympathetic nervous
(25mm/min). Each bar represents one breath.
system activity, which may be useful, it may also result in an
increased incidence of cardiac arrhythmias.
contained within the ‘sampler’ prevents water vapour interfer-
ence. The samplers are quite delicate, and increase the apparatus
Capnometry/capnography techniques
(anaesthetic breathing system) dead space because they are quite
These techniques measure the amount of COz (commonly by
bulky. However, they do tend to give more accurate results than
 infrared absorption spectroscopy), in gases continuously sampled
sidestream analysers. Time capnograms or trend capnograms can
from near the endotracheal (ET) tube connector, and usually
 determine the breathing rate as well as the ETCO tension (or
again be displayed.
 percentage). ETCO, tension reflects systemic arterial CO, tension.
Continuous monitoring is either by sidestream or mainstream
Monitoring ETCO2
 ETCO, values depend upon:
techniques.
Sidestream sampling requires gases to be withdrawn from the
● Rate of production of COz (depends on metabolic rate which
 anaesthetic breathing system near/at the ET tube connector (low
depends upon for example temperature, thyroid hormones,
dead space connectors are available for patients <5 kg), usually at
catecholamines, malignant hyperthermia).
a rate of about 200 ml/min. These gases then reach the measuring
● Alveolar ventilation (if alveolar ventilation decreases, then
chamber (with a slight delay, so the information is slightly histori-
alveolar CO, increases, and therefore ETCO, value increases).
cal), where their infrared absorption is compared to a standard,
● Cardiac output, and therefore pulmonary (alveolar) perfusion.
before the result is displayed, either by a needle-gauge (capnom-
For example,if cardiac arrest or massive pulmonary embolism
eter), or in graphic form as a time or trend capnogram (Figures
occurs, alveolar perfusion ceases, so alveolar gases equilibrate
18.15 and 18.16). Water vapour must be removed before the
with inhaled gases (if ventilation continues, e.g. IPPV) so
sample reaches the measuring chamber, as HO interferes with
ETCO, decreases. Monitoring ETCO, values can be a useful
infrared absorption by CO. The volume of gases removed form
indicator of return of a circulation’ when resuscitation from
the anaesthetic breathing system should either be scavenged, or
cardiac arrest is performed.
 returned to the system, at a point distant from where the sampling
Therefore, monitoring ETCO, values tells us about metabo-
is occurring.
lism, ventilation and circulation. It can also provide us with
 Mainstream sampling requires an expensive ET tube adapter?
useful information about our anaesthetic breathing system:
which contains the necessary ^machinery to do ^on the spot' CO2
analysis, again by infrared absorption spectroscopy. There is vir-
● Is the ET tube in the airway or the oesophagus?
tually no time delay in displaying the results. A heating element
● Is the ET tube patent?
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia  169
● Is the soda lime working, or is there rebreathing of CO, because
● Decreased production of CO, suggests lowered basal metabolic
 the soda lime is exhausted? Most capnometers and capnographs 
rate, perhaps with hypothermia or hypothyroidism.
will enable you to determine if the inhaled CO is too high.
● Decreased cardiac output, possible cardiac arrest or pulmonary
● Are the one-way valves in the circle system working or is there
embolism (air/thrombus).
rebreathing of CO?
● Disconnection, blockage or leaks in sampling system or the ET
● Is the fresh gas flow high enough with non-rebreathing systems?
tube cuff may have become deflated.
 If not, then some rebreathing of COz-laden gases will occur.
Figure 18.17 summarises the interpretations for commonly
Interpretation of ETCO, values
 observed time capnograms.
Because the ETCO value depends on at least three things, we
must be careful how we interpret it. ETCO tension accurately
Advantages
reflects PaCO, only when:
● There are no major ventilation/perfusion mismatches (no
● Noninvasive.
major shunts or dead space problems); or major diffusion
● Real time signal with mainstream analysers.
 problems.
● Breathing rate also displayed by most modern machines.
● The tidal volume is adequate to displace the alveolar gases to
● Some machines may also display information about the inhaled
the point of sampling.
anaesthetic agent in use, for example its inspired concentration,
its end tidal concentration, and the multiple of that agent's
● A cuffed ET tube is used, so that there are no leaks, and no
 MAC value being administered to the patient (also warnings 
'dilution' of the sample (which is ^drawn? into the sampling line
with sidestream sampling), with entrained air.
can be given when you are potentially delivering very high
● The fresh gas flow is not so excessive as to dilute the sample.
anaesthetic agent concentrations).
● The sampling rate is not so excessive as to interfere with the
● Many machines will also give values of inspired and expired O2
patient's ventilation, or dilute the end tidal sample with fresh
 no j au a  m (a Pn) s
 gases or dead space gases.
using low flow anaesthesia and lots of nitrous oxide, where
● There are no major 'time constant' differences between differ-
 there is always the danger of delivering a hypoxic mixture of
 ent parts of the lungs, to ensure that the ETCOz value reflects
gases to your patient.
● Very useful when having to ventilate your patient's lungs
the ^majority situation?. Different lobes of the lungs often have
different inflation and deflation rates (reflected by ^time con-
(IPPV), as you can tailor the ventilation, almost from breath
stants, where a time constant equals lung lobe volume/rate of
to breath, to keep the ETCOz value within the normal
flow into or out of that lobe). With disease, or atelectasis under
range (and without needing to take frequent arterial blood 
anaesthesia (especially horses), there can be large differences in
 samples for blood gas analysis).
 time constants between different lobes of the lungs.
● Colorimetric devices are useful to determine tracheal versus
oesophageal intubation (Figure 18.18). The chemicals last
With small patients like cats, a number of the above points are
about 2h so they can only be used for relatively short proce-
not always adhered to; a better sampling position may be nearer
dures to determine breathing rates and only give a ^range' value
the carina rather than at the proximal’ end of the ET tube, but
for ETCO. Trade names: Nellcor Easy-Cap II and Pedi-Cap for
this would require a special modification of the ET tube.
larger and smaller animals, respectively.
 If ETCO, value is increasing, look out for:
● Increased CO inhalation, suggests either rebreathing (check 
Disadvantages
anaesthetic breathing system, valves, soda lime and fresh gas
flow (FGF)), or inadvertent delivery of CO, into the fresh gases.
● Sampling delay with sidestream analysers means that displayed
● Increased CO2 production, suggests increased metabolism,
 data are slightly historical.
perhaps because the patient is too ‘lightly’ anaesthetised,
● Sidestream sampling can remove a significant volume of gases
or malignant hyperthermia is developing, or the patient is
 from the anaesthetic breathing system, which can be a problem,
seizuring, or a thyroid storm is developing, or there is a
especially with low flow techniques.
phaeochromocytoma.
● Can be inaccurate (ideally they require occasional blood
gas analyses to verify readings), but trends are generally
because the patient is too ^deep').
reliable.
● Endobronchial intubation (so that one lung is bypassed). An
● Nitrous oxide and oxygen can interfere with carbon dioxide
 increase in PaCO, and a decrease in PaO, are seen on blood gas 
analysis.
 modern analysers are less affected.
● For sidestream analysers, must use sampling line which is non-
If ETCO, value is decreasing, look out for:
 permeable to COz (e.g. Teflon).
● Increased excretion of CO, suggests hyperventilation, perhaps 
● Machines need to be re-calibrated from time to time (e.g. every
 because of over-zealous IPPV, or the patient is panting (perhaps
3 months).
too “light?).
●Expensive.
170  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Endo-oesophageal intubation
Deflated ET tube cuff, or dislodgement 
of ET tube 
Leaky sampling line
Pulmonary embolism if sudden
clecrease,rthercausesf hy-
perfusion, e.g. low BP
Hypothemia if slower decrease
 Hyperventilation if slower decrease
ET extubation
Disconnection/blockage of sampling 
device from ET tube,rof ET tube from
patient
Apnoea
Cardiac arrest
Increased metabolic rate; seizures,
shivering, malinant hyperthermia
Hypoventilation (e.g. due to anaesthetic
(sjuabe aisabjeue pue
Endobronchial intubation
Partial expiratory obstruction
(resistance) e.g. kinked ET tube,
 bronchospasm or diaphragmatic 
rupture: increased α angle, loss of 
definition of plateau 
Mayindicatepartialyblockedsampling
line if downslope also prolonged
Rebreathing of carbon dioxidle:
baseline does not return to zero
between breaths, βangle increases
resembling a melting iceberg:
accompany the dininishing
 spontaneous breaths after
administration of a neuromuscular
blocker
Curare clefts' visible in plateaux as
animal fights the ventilator
(diaphragmatic activity) when
neuromuscular blockade is wearing off 
tooth pattem on downslope
These are seen with slow breathing
rates, especialy where there is a long
end-expiratory pause and a small
(aneds peap (sneedde +) leojwoieue
and often most noticed when the
'L'g punoje sl ogei buueaq:esnd
When the heart beats, it moves against
 the lungs and causes extra mini
ventilations during the end-expiratory
pause. If the gases from these extra
mini exhalations can reach the 
sampling port (with circumstances as 
outlined above), then cardiogenic
oscillations, synchronous with the heart 
beat, become noticeable on the
 adoisumop s,wejboudeo
Figure 18.17 Interpretation of common capnogram waveforms.
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia   171
Figure 18.19 V3402 " pulse oximeter with transmittance probe attached
to cat's tongue.
100
Figure 18.18 Colorimetric CO, detector (Easy-Cap ll) being used for a dog.
85
% SpO2
● Beware addition of dead space to the anaesthetic breathing
system, especially with mainstream analysers, although paedi-
atric adapters are available. With sidestream analysers, low
0
R value
dead space adapters are available or the sampling line can be
0.4
1
3.4
connected to a needle inserted into the ET tube (although this 
is not necessarily good practice).
Figure 18.20 Pulse oximetry algorithm for determination of percentage 
● Water traps must be used with sidestream analysers; or special
SpO, value.
water-permeable sampling line (called nafion tubing).
which shine light of red and infrared wavelengths alternately (at
Pulse oximetry
an alternating frequency of 770-1000 Hz), through or into the
This determines the degree of saturation of haemoglobin with
chosen tissue bed (tongue, toe, ear, cloaca/rectum/cesophagus).
oxygen. From the haemoglobin/oxygen disociation curve you
A receiver (opposite the emitter if a transmittance probes; or set
can recall how oxygen tension of arterial blood (PaO), is related
at an angle to the emitter if a reflectance probe), then receives the
to haemoglobin saturation with oxygen (SaO), by a sigmoid
signal after it has traversed the tissue bed in question.
curve. On the slope part of the curve, a large fall in saturation
The signal received has a constant part (background’') which
follows a small decrease in PaOz.
is due to non-pulsatile tissue (venous blood, muscle, bone), and
 Pulse oximetry is based on two principles:
an ‘alternating part which is due to the pulsatile arterial flow. The
machine then discounts’ the constant background signal, paying
● Pulse photoplethysmography: changing volume of a tissue
attention to only the pulsatile signal. The ratio of red to infrared
 bed (due to arterial pulsation), can be measured by change in
light absorption of this pulsatile arterial signal is then used to
light absorption.
determine the percentage saturation of the haemoglobin with
● Spectrophotometric oximetry: deoxyhaemoglobin and oxy-
oxygen. That is, SpO values are determined from R values (see
haemoglobin absorb different wavelengths of light differently;
 they have different absorption spectra. Oxyhaemoglobin looks
Figure 18.20) where R is the ratio of pulsatile absorption at 660 nm
(red) to pulsatile absorption at 940 nm (infrared). Most machines
red because it reflects red light, and absorbs blue light; deoxy-
use an algorithm based on human haemoglobin but validated for
haemoglobin looks blue because it reflects blue light, and
dog, horse, pig, cow and cat haemoglobin, from which they can
absorbs red.
'read off' (calculate), a saturation value (Figure 18.20) for any
Pulse oximeters have either transmittance or reflectance
given R value.
'probes’ (the things we clip onto the tongue (if transmittance
 Note that if R equals 1, the pulse oximetry SpO, reading will
(Figure 18.19)), or place into the oesophagus or cloaca (if reflect-
be 85%; and with a poor signal:noise ratio, the R value tends 
ance). Both types of probes contain light emitting diodes (LEDs)
towards 1, so beware.
172  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Pulse oximetry readings are generally fairly accurate (within
● Extraneous light (especially fluorescent tubes). If high noise,
5%), between saturations of 70-100%. The algorithms that most
then reading tends to c. 85%.
 of them use are based on humans, and values below 70% are
extrapolated (<70% equals big trouble).
Blood oxygen carriage
The total amount of oxygen carried in a certain volume of blood
Advantages
depends on:
● Noninvasive.
● Amount of functional haemoglobin in that blood.
· Continuous.
● Percentage saturation of that Hb with Oz (SpO, if derived
● Pretty quick response time (only slight time delay, the more
from a pulse oximeter; SaO, if calculated by a blood gas
peripheral the tissue bed/artery chosen, the longer the time
analyser).
 from events happening at the aorta).
● Amount of O, dissolved in physical solution in the blood
● Many machines will display a pulse rate too.
(plasma) (i.e. PaO).
● Many machines will give an idea of signal strength, perhaps in 
The total oxygen content/carriage of 100 ml of blood (CaO,) is
 the form of a series of illuminated bars (Figure 18.19); the more
 given by the following equation.
bars that are illuminated, the better the signal strength, and
therefore, possibly, the better the signal (pulse) quality, or in
the form of a pulse plethysmograph (i.e.a pulse volume graph)
CaO, = ([Hb ]x % satn X1.34) + (PaO , x 0.003)
which can give extra information, similar to that displayed by
1.34 = Huffner's constant which may be quoted as anything from
 an arterial pressure wave (Figure 18.7).
1.31 to 1.39. It is the oxygen carrying capacity of haemoglobin;
● No need for re-calibration.
and equals the number of ml of oxygen actually bound to 1 g
● Decreases the necessity for lots of arterial blood gas analyses.
 of haemoglobin under standard conditions (standard atmos-
● Relatively cheap.
pheric pressure and 37°℃).
Disadvantages
0.003 equals the number of ml of oxygen carried by 100 ml (i.e.
1 dl), of plasma for each 1 mmHg PO2.
● Results may be inaccurate.
[Hb]  equals the haemoglobin concentration, and is given in g/dl.
● Can be quite a late indicator of trouble (i.e. PaO, may decrease
We try to ensure adequate tissue oxygen delivery in our anaes-
a lot for only a slight fall in SpO2) (see notes on blood gas
thetised patients.
analysis in Chapter 21).
● Signal strength indicators only tell of tissue perfusion at the site
Tissue oxygen delivery = Cardiac output X CaO2
of the probe (Figure 18.19).
Tissue oxygen delivery = (Heart rate X stroke volume) x CaO2
Signal detection/acquisition may be a problem, for example:
● Hypotension.
Gas and agent monitoring
● Hypovolaemia (peripheral vasoconstriction).
● Hypothermia (peripheral vasoconstriction).
Oxygen meters
(all, oon sdead saueouoeo (sise mo g') sn 0
 Routinely used by medical anaesthetists to verify that oxygen is
 may cause peripheral vasoconstriction.
 delivered through the common gas outlet of anaesthetic machines.
● Slow heart rates.
Oxygen measurement devices may also be incorporated into other
● Arrhythmias.
 gas analysers, for example alongside capnographs and volatile
● Venous pulsations, especially in A-V anastomoses (e.g. in skin),
anaesthetic agent monitors. Different technologies are used to
may be a nuisance.
measure oxygen: galvanic cells, polarographic cells (Clark elec-
● Other pigments in skin, or blood (dyes; bilirubin (little effect
trodes), and paramagnetic techniques.
in modern analysers); carboxyhaemoglobin (SpOz tends to
over-read: beware animals from recent house fires with smoke
Anaesthetic agent monitors
or carbon monoxide inhalation); methaemoglobin (tends to
Volatile anaesthetic agents and nitrous oxide can also be
read 85%).
measured in the gases inspired and expired by patients. Again,
● Anaemia (pulse oximetry needs at least some haemoglobin to
different technologies exist. Infrared absorption spectrometry is
be present).
probably the commonest technique used, but other technologies
● Patient movement.
are available e.g. ultraviolet absorption, mass spectrometry and
● Poor probe positioning (causing optical shunt, later called the
Raman scattering. Methane in exhaled gases from the patient can
 penumbra effect), results in readings tending towards a value
interfere with some infrared absorption devices, depending upon
of 85% because of poor signal:noise ratio.
the wavelengths used, and can cause falsely elevated readings for
● Excessive fat or hair at probe site.
the volatile anaesthetic agents. It is advisable to check the
● Very thin tissue beds (too much light transmitted or reflected,
machine's specification before use, especially in horses and rumi-
so poor signal to noise ratio).
nants. Some aerosol propellants (e.g. used in asthmatic inhalers)
Monitoring animals under general anaesthesia 173
may also interfere with volatile agent (especially sevoflurane)
Hyperthermia can also be a problem. Beware malignant
monitoring.
hyperthermia (see especially Chapter 35 on pigs), but also, on
hot days, if you are using rebreathing systems (which retain/
Monitoring the neuromuscular system
produce heat and moisture (soda lime reaction with CO is
exothermic and produces some water)), and say you have also
Most of the time we do not monitor the neuromuscular system
used a heat and moisture exchanger, and the theatre is not air-
as such, except, for example, when testing the presence/strength
conditioned, and the operating lights are producing massive
of limb withdrawal reflexes, or when certain electrolyte imbal-
amounts of heat, when you are feeling hot, your patient may be
ances may affect neuromuscular activity (muscle twitches/sei-
hyperthermic too.
Zures). However, when we use peripherally acting neuromuscular
blocking agents to effectively paralyse our patients, then it is
Monitoring the renal system
important to monitor the degree of neuromuscular block for two
reasons:
As many anaesthetic agents can cause hypotension, and some may
impair/alter renal function, it is important to consider the kidneys.
● To ensure adequate neuromuscular blockade when it is needed
 As mentioned earlier, urine output can be measured (normally
(e.g. for surgery).
equals 1-1.5 ml/kg/h). This requires bladder catheterisation and
● To ensure adequate return of neuromuscular function when
 initial emptying, so that you get a start' point. Samples can also
paralysis’ is no longer required (that is, when the animal
be taken for dipstick analysis and in particular, specific gravity
recovers from anaesthesia it must now be able to breathe and
 determination. Although we tend not to routinely monitor urine
move for itself). See Chapter 17 on muscle relaxants for further
output during anaesthesia, it can be affected by a number of
explanation.
factors during anaesthesia; and plays an important part in the
intensive care setting.
Temperature monitoring
The stress response to anaesthesia includes an increase in ADH
secretion, and so we can expect a reduction in urine output
Temperature is commonly measured with thermometers (expan-
during, and for some time after, general anaesthesia. Some drugs
(e.g. 0Ω agonists, can also affect urine output (see Chapters 4 and
True core temperature is measured in the pulmonary artery
28 on sedatives); and whether the patient receives IV fluids during
during the end-expiratory pause; and is best approximated by
anaesthesia can also influence urine output.
deep oesophageal temperature. Rectal temperature may be a poor
Thus, whilst not routinely monitoring urine output under
substitute (especially with faeces present), but is the most com-
anaesthesia, we do things during anaesthesia with the kidneys in
monly used and least invasive site. If the tympanic membrane is
mind. For example, we like to have some idea of mean arterial
intact and the ear canal clean, radiant heat (infrared) from the
 blood pressure (we know that most anaesthetic agents will depress
tympanic membrane can be measured over a very short time (c.
blood pressure to some degree), as autoregulation of tissue blood
5 sec) by a thermopile (collection of thermocouples), but the best
flow (including the kidneys), depends upon having reasonable
results are obtained with devices which are specifically designed
blood pressure (MAP of 60-70 mmHg). If renal perfusion cannot
for the ear of the particular species in question.
be autoregulated, then the renal cells with the highest metabolic
Temperature can be helpful in assessing the cardiovascular
requirements become compromised and damaged, particularly
 status of animals (ie. cold extremities, core-periphery tempera-
the most metabolically active renal tubular epithelial cells. Often
ture gradients). Temperature is also vitally important to monitor
we will administer IV fluids during anaesthesia to help to bolster?
 em se s u assse  
 some of the (almost inevitable), fall in blood pressure, and to try
surface area:volume ratio. Anaesthesia generally depresses the
to maintain adequate renal perfusion. We also consider carefully
thermostat' in the hypothalamus of the CNS and thereby reduces
the use of, for example NSAIDs, as these can further compromise
a patient's ability to thermoregulate. Anaesthesia (unless very
renal blood flow and, in the presence of hypotension, can lead to
light'), also temporarily prevents the animal from shivering.
renal medullary/papilary necrosis and acuterenal failure. The use
Many of the drugs we use during anaesthesia also cause peripheral
ooaody apeane u uo au iodns on sp Al jo
vasodilation, and thereby enhance heat loss. This is exacerbated
animals is a must.
by us clipping large patches of fur off (reducing insulation), and
then using copious volumes of scrub solution, and then surgical
Summary
spirit (weting the animal and enhancing evaporative cooling).
Hypothermia can be a real problem in very young and small 
These notes provide a brief outline of the ways in which anaes-
animals. Preventing heat loss is easier than re-warming an
 thesia can be monitored in animals. They are by no means exhaus-
animal. See Chapter 20 on hypothermia.
tive, but illustrate the potential available. Not all of these methods
Some degree of hypothermia is common in many of our
 are applicable to every case; sometimes it can take longer to
anaesthetised patients, and can be one of the causes of a pro-
instrument an animal in order to monitor anaesthesia, than it can
longed recovery. Ideally an animal's rectal temperature should be
 to perform the surgery (e.g. cat castration); so you must use your
back to 37.5°C before it leaves ^recovery' to return to its kennel.
 judgerment to decide what is necessary for each case.
174  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Further reading
Self-test section
Corley KTT, Donaldson LL, Durando MM, Birks EK (2003)
Cardiac output technologies with special reference to the horse.
1.
 During surgery in a dog in dorsal recumbency, arterial
 Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 17, 262-272.
blood pressure is being monitored directly from the
Cross M, Plunkett E (2008) Physics, pharmacology and physiol-
left dorsal pedal artery via an electronic pressure
ogy for anaesthetists: key concepts for the FRCA. Cambridge
transducer. The mean arterial blood pressure meas-
University Press, UK. Various chapters.
ures 82 mmHg before the surgeon decides to elevate
Kissin I (200o) Depth of anaesthesia and bispectral index moni-
the operating table by 30cm. If the position of the
 toring. Anesthesia and Analgesia 90, 1114-1117.
pressure transducer is not also elevated, and no
haemodynamic changes have occurred in the patient,
Madger S (1998) More respect for the CVP. Editorial. Intensive
Care Medicine 24, 651-653.
what reading should now be displayed for the mean
Menon DK (2o01) Mapping the anatomy of unconsciousness:
 arterial blood pressure?
imaging anaesthetic action in the brain. Editorial. British
2.1
 List five advantages and fve disadvantages of pulse
Journal of Anaesthesia 86(5),607-610.
oximetry.
 Moens Y, Coppens P (2007) Patient monitoring and monitoring 
Match the ECG lead’ to the required skin surface
equipment In: BSAVA Manual of canine and feline anaesthesia
electrode positions.
and analgesia. 2nd Edn. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T.
 BSAVA Publications, Gloucester, UK Chapter 7, pp 62-78.
ECG lead
 Electrode positions
Otto K, Short CE (1991) Electrcencephalographic power spec-
Lead I
 trum analysis as a monitor of anesthetic depth in horses.
Right arm to right leg
Lead II 
Left arm to left leg
Veterinary Surgery 20(5), 362-371.
Lead II
Right arm to left leg
 Palazzo M (2o01) Circulating volume and clinical assessment of
Left arm to right leg
the circulation. Editorial. British Journal of Anaesthesia 86(6),
Right arm to left arm
743-746.
Right leg to left leg 
Rampil IJ (2001) Monitoring depth of anesthesia. Current
Opinion in Anaesthesiology 14, 649-653.
Stoneham MD (1999) Less is more. ... Using systolic pressure
variation to assess hypovolaemia. Editorial. British Journal of
Anaesthesia 83(4), 550-551.
Verschuren F, Heinonen E, Clause D, Zech F Reynaert MS,
Listro G (2005) Volumetric capnography: reliability and
reproducibility in spontaneously breathing patients. Clinical
Physiology and Functional Imaging 25, 275-280.
 Information chapter
Troubleshooting some of the 
 problems encountered
in anaesthetised patients
Causes of tachycardia
Hypoxaemia/anaemia (early stages)
Hyperthermia/pyrexia
Increased sympathetic tone; decreased
Electrolyte problems: hypocalcaemia, hypokalaemia
parasympathetic tone
Reflexes
● Pain (light general anaesthesia).
● Bainbridge reflex e.g. tachycardia due to atrial stretch, seen with
· Fear.
for  example hypervolaemia  (usually iatrogenic fuid
· Excitement.
overload).
●Exercise.
● Phaeochromocytoma.
● Hyperthyroidism.
Causes of bradycardia
● Drugs:
 O Anticholinergics: atropine, glycopyrrolate.
Increased parasympathetic tone: decreased
 O Sympathomimetics: ketamine, nitrous oxide?
sympathetic tone
● Hypercapnia (hypercarbia).
● α2 agonists (central vagomimetic/sympatholytic effects).
● Opioids (vagomimetic effects, with the possible exception of
Baroreflex to hypotension/vasodilation
pethidine).
● Drug-induced:
O Acepromazine (ACP).
Baroreflex response to hypertension
0 Thiopental (not propofol).
+ α2 agonists.
 0 Isoflurane/sevoflurane/desflurane
(not
usually
with
halothane).
· αl agonists.
O Sodium nitroprusside.
● ‘CNS ischaemic response′ seen with raised intracranial pressure 
(part of Cushing's triad, also called the Cushing reflex). Raised
●‘Shock':
 intracranial pressure can lead to Cushing's triad: hypertension,
 0 Hypovolaemic/endotoxaemic/cardiogenic/anaphylactic
bradycardia and abnormal respiratory patterns.
(histamine release; e.g pethidine).
● Supine hypotensive syndrome of pregnancy (aorto-caval com-
Vagal 'reflexes'
pression syndrome). Can also be a cause of bradycardia via the 
Bezold-Jarisch reflex.
●Ocular surgery.
● Over-zealous intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV),
● Head and neck surgery.
and increased intrathoracic pressure, for example
with
● Sometimes a response to laryngoscopy/tracheal intubation, or
pneumothorax, can also cause hypotension, and reflex
 even visceral traction.
tachycardia.
● Cardiac tamponade, through reducing cardiac output and
Vagal and vaso-vagal reflexes
resulting in systemic hypotension and reduced tissue oxygen
The Bezold-Jarisch (B-J) reflex resulting in bradycardia and hypo-
delivery, can result in tachycardia.
tension is caused by one of the following:
175
176  Veterinary Anaesthesia
·Acute massive hypovolaemia(
(decompensating
shocky
Causes of bradypnoea
animals); high epidural with local anaesthetic which results
in massive vasodilation of hind end of animal, and also
● CNS disease (respiratory centre affected).
blocks sympathetic cardioaccelerator fibres thus preventing
● Local anaesthetic toxicity (CNS depression).
tachycardia which would otherwise try to offset the fall in
● Too light a plane of anaesthesia leading to breath-holding.
blood pressure.
● Too deep anaesthesia (excessive respiratory depression).
● Sudden critical obstruction to venous return such as compres-
● Post-induction apnoea (thiopental, propofol, alfaxalone,
sion of vena cavae by raised intra-abdominal pressure (e.g.
ketamine).
● Extreme hypoxaemia.
 pregnant animal in dorsal recumbency).
●“Emotional causes e.g patient awareness’ during light
● Hypothermia.
 anaesthesia.
● Hypocapnia (common following periods of over-zealous
manual IPPV, especially if high inspired O%). Severe
All these things can result in 'syncope (fainting). The frst twO
 hypercapnia, enough to result in anaesthesia, may also depress
causes stimulate the B-J reflex because they produce low right-
ventilation eventually.
heart flling pressures, causing distortion of the under-flled heart
and activating stretch receptors, and may cause ^collapse-firing
 Causes of hypocapnia
 of baroreceptors. Strong emotions are also sufficient to stimulate
the same reflex.
● Hyperventilation (over-zealous IPPV; nervous panting).
  d    s m
● Increased ventilatory drive due to hypoxaemia.
(often called inappropriate bradycardia’ because we usually
● Increased ventilatory drive as compensation for metabolic
expect them to be tachycardic), hypothermia and hypoglycaemia,
acidosis.
are decompensating and generally have a poor prognosis,
especially cats.
Causes of hypercapnia
 Branham reflex: ligation of patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
● Hypoventilation: too deep anaesthesia with respiratory depres-
recognised by baroreceptors, hence baroreflex bradycardia.
sion; inability to breathe adequately e.g. poorly reversed neu-
However, a sudden increase in left ventricular afterload may also
 romuscular blockade or otherwise weak respiratory muscles
be partly responsible.
(myasthenia gravis, debility); inadequate IPPV.
Hyperkalaemia
● Rebreathing: too low fresh gas flow with non-rebreathing
 systems; exhausted soda lime or faulty valves with rebreathing
Hypercalcaemia?
 systems; excessive dead space (e.g. over-long endotracheal (ET)
tube).
Hypothermia
● Increased CO production: hyperthermia, hyperthyroidism
 Such bradycardias do not respond to anticholinergic therapies.
(thyroid storms), increased catecholamines (phaeochromo-
Hypoxaemia in the late (decompensatory) stages. (The initial
cytomas).
response to hypoxaemia is tachycardia.) Such bradycardias do not
respond to anticholinergic therapies.
Causes of hypoxaemia
Primary heart disease e.g. sick sinus syndrome.
 Note: hypoxaemia means poor oxygenation of blood (low blood
  rd s    
Causes of tachypnoea
tissues.
● Too light a plane of anaesthesia.
● Inadequate inspired oxygen percentage (oxygen supply ran out;
● Too deep anaesthesia can also cause exaggerated breathing
high altitude).
 efforts before breathing finally ceases.
● Airway obstruction
● Hypercapnia.
● Hypoventilation by poor chest wall movement:
● Hypoxaemia (early stages).
 0 Respiratory depression (perhaps deep general anaesthesia).
● Hyperthermia.
 O Weak respiratory muscles (residual neuromuscular block).
● Hypotension (baroreceptors also influence the respiratory
 0 Diaphragm paresis/rupture.
centre).
 0 Cervical lesion affecting phrenic nerve activity (Ce 5, 6, 7).
● Diaphragmatic hernia.
● Hypoventilation by inability to expand lungs:
● Pleural space disease.
 O Pleural/mediastinal space disease.
● Pulmonary parenchymal disease.
● Poor gaseous exchange in alveoli:
● Partial respiratory obstruction (partly secondary to hypercap-
 0 Pulmonary parenchymal disease/oedema/contusions.
 nia and hypoxaemia).
   oae    o y  o
● Obesity (fat dogs tend to pant).
be present in sufficient quantities for adequate uptake by
● Opioids (see panting especially with methadone).
blood).
Troubleshooting some of the problems encountered in anaesthetised patients 177
● Venous admixture:
● Is oxygen geting from the anaesthetic breathing system to the
O Ventilation/perfusion mismatches (low V/Q ratios, shunts").
 patient via its ET tube? Presumably the patient has a tracheal
● Circulatory failure (poor cardiac output):
tube in place, or is it on a mask?
0 Poor pulmonary perfusion.
O Is the ET tube in the correct place, i.e. trachea not oesopha-
 0 Increased systemic oxygen extraction leads to reduced sys-
gus? And is ET tube patent, or clogged with mucus, or twisted
temic PvOz, so more oxygen is required to re-oxygenate
or kinked or otherwise occluded? (Over-inflation of the cuff
blood at the lungs.
can sometimes occlude the tube.) Does the bag move when
● Increased oxygen requirement:
the animal breathes, and the chest move when you squeeze
0 Hypermetabolic
states (e.g.
 malignant hyperthermia,
the bag? Capnography also useful to help determine if ET
seizures, shivering, sepsis).
tube in place and patent.
O Is ET tube too long? It could be placed down one bronchus,
therefore occluding one lung and creating huge V/Q
Cyanosis of mucous membranes
mismatch.
The definition of cyanosis is >5g/dl deoxygenated Hb (so
anaemic animals with [Hb] <5 g/dl can not ever look blue)
Is oxygen getting into the animal's lungs?
Causes of cyanosis
● Is it breathing? What rate/character?
One or both of the following:
 O Causes of apnoea include: too light/too deep/potent opioids/
neuromuscular block (NMB).
● Not enough oxygen getting into blood.
● Not enough blood (with or without oxygen) getting to tissues
0 Causes of hypoventilation: deep anaesthesia, cervical neck
 injury (diaphragm paralysis), chest wall problems (e.g.
(for their level of demand).
surgeon leaning on chest or NMB use), pleural space disease
(fluid/gas).
Results/implications
 Tissue hypoxia, at least of peripheral tissues (only mucous mem-
branes observed), but possibly (global’ too, results in all tissues
Is oxygen able to get from the lungs into the blood?
 building up an oxygen debt. In the short term, anaerobic metabo-
● What else is in the alveoli? Fluid (oedema/pus/blood) could be
lism is possible by most tissues, but lactic acidosis ensues causing
due to lung disease, trauma, fluid overload, cedema secondary
 problems of its own. In the long term, tissue damage and possibly
to heart problems etc. Solid tissue - tumour/inflammation.
death occur.
Gases other than Oz, e.g. excess COz (e.g. hypoventilation),
The most life-threatening results are brain hypoxia and cardio-
 NO, N can dilute the oxygen, thus less oxygen enters blood.
respiratory arrest. You often see bradycardia (non-responsive to
● Are the alveoli being perfused? What is the cardiac output like?
anticholinergics) before arrest.
Very deep anaesthesia could mean excessive cardiovascular
Cardiac arrhythmias possible (but often delayed due to
(CV) depression and poor perfusion. Does the animal have CV
'preconditioning/stunning type of mechanisms).
 Or pericardial disease? What about V/Q mismatches? These are
Causes of not enough oxygen getting into blood
more common in larger animals; but endobronchial intubation 
is a kind of V/Q mismatch and pulmonary thrombo- and air
Is enough oxygen being supplied?
emboli are also potential causes of V/Q inequalities and these
● Check oxygen cylinder content, and that it is turned 'on.
can happen in any patient. Any possibility of lung collapse/lobe
● Check oxygen is flowing through the flowmeter (ie. bobbin
torsion/disease/tumour?
might be stuck) and verify the gas is oxygen with an oxygen
● Does the blood contain adequate functional haemoglobin (Hb)
to pick up oxygen? Anaemia or abnormal types of Hb can be
meter.
● Is O, flow rate adequate?
present (MetHb makes mucous membranes look brown;
● Is Oz:NO ratio correct, or potentially too much NO?
CarboxyHb makes mucous membranes look cherry red/pink).
● Is breathing system functioning OK? If a circle, was it denitro-
Is enough blood getting to the tissues?
genated? Is it connected to common gas outlet of anaesthetic
machine, and also to the patient (ie. is oxygen being delivered
● What is the state of the cardiovascular system? Check heart/
through the anaesthetic breathing system)? Are the valves
pulse rate, rhythm and character. Consider potential causes of
working correctly? Is the soda lime working (check colour/
CV depression/dysfunction. Arrhythmias (including vagal and 
heat) because hypercapnia can dilute the oxygen concentration
sympathetic reflexes), may occur intra-operatively so check
 in the alveoli and lead to hypoxaemia. Any leaks? Is the pop off
what the surgeon was doing last. Was there any evidence of
valve functioning OK? If closed, this could cause lung trauma.
 heart disease pre-operatively? Anaesthetic and other drugs can
Check the tubing is not blocked (a lot of condensed water
s  s   d 
vapour can water-log the tubes of circle systems especially after
Cardiac/intracardiac shunts may be present (e.g. PDA can
long anaesthetics or where tubes are not drained between
lead to caudal cyanosis but cranial parts OK). c2 agonists
patients).
slow peripheral circulation secondary to vasoconstriction, so
178  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 peripheral ^cyanosis? is usual. They may also alter V/Q match-
only by ventilation, but also by metabolism and pulmonary per-
 ing. Slow perfusion of peripheral tissue allows increased oxygen
fusion (which reflects global circulation unless there has been
extraction leading to cyanosis due to desaturation. Beware
pulmonary embolism).
tissues like the tongue which can get trapped between the teeth
 Check heart rate, pulse rate and rhythm. Arrhythmias may
and gag occluding its blood supply: check other mucous mem-
require treatment. Haemodynamic support may be required.
 branes and the surgical site.
Auscultate chest bilaterally if worried about pleural or pulmo-
● Check oxygen demand/metabolic rate? What is the patient's
nary parenchymal problems,and this also helps to diagnose endo-
temperature, catecholamine level, thyroid hormone level?
bronchial intubation. Drain pleural space if necessary. Pulmonary
 Increased oxygen demand may outstrip supply in some cases 
oedema may be treated with furosermide, but you need to find the
leading to cyanosis.
cause, for example it could be due to iatrogenic fluid overload,
but could also be due to cardiac disease.
Treatment outline
After initial patient assessment, you may need to start CPCR,
Check for pulses and breathing activity in the patient, as it may
but check equipment functioning first (e.g. O supply and delivery
have suffered cardiopulmonary arrest.
to patient), as malfunctions will reduce your chances of success.
 If patient is apnoeic, check for heart activity and if asystolic,
Problems with machinery or equipment (O supply; ET tube;
start CPCR (see Chapter 49). Otherwise, check anaesthetic depth
anaesthetic breathing system) should be quickly corrected. Check
and adjust accordingly. What drugs has the patient received?
lumen of ET tube for mucus, saliva, blood. ET tube problems
Antagonists are available for opioids and c2 agonists if necessary
should be corrected by re-intubating the trachea with a patent
(beware problems of antagonism though, i.e. analgesia and seda-
tube of the correct length inserted into the correct place (trachea).
tion can be antagonised). If NMB used, check IPPV adequate, or
 Check breathing system is functioning OK. If not, replace it with
reverse NMB if necessary. Capnography may have given some
a functional one. Turn off NO and volatile agents, turn up O to
indication as to cause of the problem and can be used to assess
100% and flush the system. May need to support ventilation so
response to treatment. Capnography, however, is affected not
check ventilator functioning OK.
Hvpothermia: Conseguences and prevention
Learning objectives
 To appreciate the (patho)physiological effects of hypothermia.
S  nd n s   a s
Introduction
Hypocoagulable blood
Blood becomes hypocoagulable as platelets sequester in blood
Heat loss occurs by conduction, convection, radiation and
 sinusoids in liver, spleen and bone marrow; and one stage pro-
evaporation.
thrombin time (OSPT) and activated partial thromboplastin time
 Hypothermia is defined as when the core body temperature is
(APTT) become prolonged.
 greater than one standard deviation below the normal mean core
temperature for that species, under resting conditions, in a
Excitable cell membranes (muscies, nerves) are affected
thermoneutral environment. For a dog, this would be < 37.8°C.
 Electrophysiological changes occur, i.e. conduction velocities are
However, hypothermia starts to have consequences when core
slowed leading to the myocardium becoming irritable at <30°℃,
temperature falls below 34°C for most of our veterinary homoio-
S0 arrhythmias are possible, especially ventricular. Heart rate
therms. (Below 34°C, shivering ceases.)
tends to slow, and the bradycardia is non-responsive to anti-
cholinergics. ECG changes include: S-T segment depression and
Adverse effects of hypothermia
T wave inversion, increased P-R interval and QRS widening, and
possibly waves at the so called J point: called J waves or Osborn
Metabolicrate decreases
waves (positive deflections at the end of the QRS complex) at
The rate decreases by about 10% for each 1°C decrease in core
 around 30°C. The fibrillation threshold is said to be 28°℃.
temperature, so:
● Drug metabolism/elimination is reduced and therefore drug
Depression of CNS activity
requirements are reduced which means that drug overdoses
This results in:
 may occur.
● Reduced minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) (reduced
● Recovery may be prolonged because drug metabolism is
volatile agent requirement).
reduced.
● Confusion below 35°℃.
● Cell sodium pump activity is reduced, so cells become oedema-
● Unconsciousness around 30°C.
tous and swell. Electrolyte abnormalities and pH imbalances
● Cessation of cerebral electrical activity below 18°℃.
  s e   r  
 initial hyperglycaemia.
Labile haemodynamics
Along with the bradycardia, blood pressure tends to fall as
Blood viscosity increases
baroreceptor sensitivity/reflexes are depressed, and cardiac
 PCV increases as red cells swell, and also splenic contraction tends
 output is therefore reduced A reduction in cardiac output also
to accompany acidosis and hypothermia. Myocardial work is
increased.
ened, which alongside a reduction in CNS neuronal excitability,
179
180  Veterinary Anaesthesia
further reduces MAC. Reduced cardiac output also results in
Try to ensure a warm environment
reduced glomerular filtration rate (GFR), so reduced urine pro-
Beginning immediately after premedication and continuing
duction may occur, except this is offset to some degree by a
throughout preparation for surgery, ensure a warm environment
 diuresis because of reduced sodium and water reabsorption.
for the patient right through until recovery is complete.
Respiratory muscle activity is reduced
Minimise clipping and wetting (especially with spirit/alcohol
Chemoreceptor sensitivity/reflexes are depressed leading to
based preps)
hypoventilation (bradypnoea; and apnoea at around 24°C), with 
Use warm solutions where possible during surgical site
respiratory acidosis.
preparation.
Reduced mucociliary activity
Use warm fluids for IV administration and
 There is increased risk of respiratory secretion accumulation and
body cavity lavage
infection.
If possible, try to keep IV fluids warm during their passage through
 giving sets.
Post-operative shivering
During recovery, which tends to be prolonged if the patient is
Maintain body heat
hypothermic, post-operative shivering is promoted (once >34°C),
 For all parts of the patient not required for surgical or anaesthetic
and this increases patient oxygen demand usually at a time when
access, especially limbs and tails (which are good examples of high
the fractional inspired concentration of oxygen (FiO2) is not
 surface area:volume body parts from which heat loss is rapid), the
supplemented.
following may be useful:
● Heat pads or heat mattresses.
Immune cell functionis depressed
● Circulating warm water beds.
There is an increasing chance of infections taking hold, and also
● Forced warm air (blankets' (e.g. Bair Huggerm) (Figure 20.1).
of metastasis of neoplastic cells.
● Heat lamps.
●‘Hot hands.
Left shift in the position of the oxygen/haemoglobin
● Insulative blankets or wraps (cotton wool/bubble wrap/space
dissociation curve
blankets/foil).
This is offset somewhat by respiratory and metabolic acidoses
which shift the curve to the right. Overall there tends to be a slight
left shift which means that issue oxygen delivery is impeded,
and tissues may metabolise anaerobically (hence adding to meta-
bolic acidosis), but the oxygen requirement is also reduced
because of the lowered basal metabolic rate.
Blood gas analysis
 Should we use the alpha-stat or pH-stat technique, i.e. should we 
correct for patient temperature? See Chapter 21 for further
discussion. Whichever technique you choose, be consistent.
Active peripheral vasoconstriction
Once the temperature falls below about 34-35°C, active periph-
eral vasoconstriction occurs which makes venous/arterial access
more tricky. Vasodilation occurs below 20°C when vasoconstric-
tion can no longer be maintained.
Death
 Death occurs at around 20°℃.
 Minimising heat loss
Minimise anaesthesia and surgical time
 Remember that local anaesthetic techniques result in sympathetic
block to the tissues anaesthetised: neuraxial techniques can
therefore increase heat loss by causing vasodilation in the
caudal part of the patient, and also by reducing their ability to
 Fgure 20.1 Bair hugger warm air blanket used to warm a foal in intensive
shiver in the area of anaesthesia (especially the hindlimbs).
care.
Hypothermia: Consequences and prevention 181
has yet to be proven clinically; and these agents will not be suitable
for some patients.
Further reading
Cabell LW, Perkowski SZ, Gregor T, Smith GK (1997) The effects
of active peripheral skin warming on perioperative hypother-
mia in dogs. Veterinary Surgery 26, 79-85.
 Dix GM, Jones A, Knowles TG, Holt PE (2006) Methods used in
veterinary practice to maintain the temperature of intravenous
fluids. Veterinary Record 159,451-456.
 Kirkbride DA, Buggy DJ (2003) Thermoregulation and mild peri-
operative hypothermia. British Journal of Anaesthesia CEPD
Reviews 3(1), 24-28.
Figure 20.2 A heat and moisture exchanger (available in diferent sizes for
Kurz A, Sessler DI, Christensen R, Dechert M (1995) Heat balance
different sizes of patient).
and distribution during the core-temperature plateau in anes-
 thetized humans. Anesthesiology 83, 491-499.
Sessler DI (2000) Perioperative heat balance. Anesthesiology 92,
Dry the patient
578-596.
The patient should be dried as much as possible if it gets wet under
Sullivan G, Edmondson C (2008) Heat and temperature.
anaesthesia or surgery.
Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
8(3),104-107.
Conserve respiratory tract heat and moisture
Heat and moisture exchangers (Figure 20.2) may be used with
 non-rebreathing systems. Rebreathing systems avoid cooling (and
 Self-test section
drying) of the respiratory tract to reduce overall heat loss.
 List at least five potentially adverse consequences of
α2agonists
hypothermia.
Theoretically the use of c2 agonists, which tend to cause periph-
2.
Where is the J-point of the ECG?
eral vasoconstriction, may help to prevent core heat loss, but this
21
Learning objectives
To be able to describe the carriage of oxygen and carbon dioxide in the blood.
To be able to relate haemoglobin saturation to partial pressure of oxygen in plasma.
 To be able to define pH and discuss the basic homeostasis of pH in the body.
 To be able to define pKa and explain its importance for buffering systems.
1
 To be familiar with the common causes of respiratory and metabolic (non-respiratory) disturbances.
 To be able to interpret blood gas analyses and know when and how to intervene.
Introduction
Portable and bench-top analysers are becoming more com-
monly available (Figures 21.1 and 21.2). Newer machines also
Blood gas analysis helps determine:
tend to measure electrolytes, glucose, lactate and a host of other
● The blood pH.
variables. Some machines even allow continuous blood gas moni-
● The degree of oxygenation of the blood.
toring, but these are expensive.
● The carriage of CO, by the blood.
Arterial blood samples are the most useful, giving information
about pulmonary gaseous exchange and also the acid-base status.
pH
Venous samples can also tell us about acid-base status and can
give some indication of oxygen extraction by the tissues. Arterial
and venous samples can be taken simultaneously to compare,
  d n  n o  
about how well the peripheral tissues are being perfused and
and therefore pH is inversely related to the H+ ion
extracting oxygen. Lithium heparin is the anticoagulant of choice,
concentration.
as Na+K+EDTA will chelate any calcium present and falsely elevate
The pH scale is from 0 to 14, with 7 being neutral pH (i.e. pure
any K+ measurement. Ideally, arterial samples should be with-
water), <7 is acidic and >7 is alkaline.
 drawn over 1-2 respiratory cycles.
 The term ^pH buffer describes a substance which acts to nor-
 Blood gas analysers basically measure three things, using three
malise any disturbances to the pH of a 'system. Usually, chemical
different electrodes:
buffers are weak acids and their conjugate bases. The weak acid
·pH
 partially dissociates in water to produce some negatively charged
·PO
ions (the base), and some Ht ions.
· PCO2
*Weak' acids do not fully dissociate when dissolved in water:
All the other values given are calculated from these (by the use
 of algorithms based on Sigaard-Anderson diagrams, or Davenport 
HA <>H+ +A
diagrams), and include:
 Note that strong acids do fully dissociate (ionise) in aqueous
● HCO
solution:
● Base excess (BE)
● Percentage saturation of haemoglobin with oxygen (SaO)
HA →H+ +A
182
Blood gas analysis
183
we can measure carbon dioxide tension and pH and derive the
bicarbonate concentration. Therefore, the above expression can
-STAT
be thought of as one equilibrium:
CO +HO→ H++HCO
We can apply the law of mass action and Le Chatelier's princi-
 ple to the above equilibrium, ie. it can be pushed to the left or
right by changes in the concentrations of any of the reactants. For
example, increasing the H+ ion concentration will drive the reac-
HESKA
tion towards the left; whereas decreasing the H+ ion concentration
口
口
will pull the reaction over to the right. Similarly, increasing the
CO will push the reaction over to the right, whereas decreasing
060
CO, will pull the reaction to the left.
000
Regulating pH
ENT PBT DIS
 Regulation is required because many biochemical (metabolic)
reactions can only occur efficiently over a narrow range of pH.
The normal pH range compatible with life is 6.8-7.8, and the body
Figure 21.1 Portable analyser.
tries hard to regulate the extracellular fluid pH to within an even
narrower range (i.e. 7.35-7.45).
Possible pH derangements
If we measure the pH of a sample of blood and it is more acidic
than normal, we can say that there is an acidaemia (i.e. acidic
blood). Conversely, if the blood's pH is more alkaline than
normal, we can say that there is an alkalaemia. Only when we
 know what is causing the perturbation in pH (i.e. whether it is the
respiratory system at fault or the non-respiratory/metabolic
system), should we say that there is an acidosis, or an alkalosis.
For example if the blood is acidic and we know (from the rest of
 our blood gas analysis), that the respiratory system is to blame,
we can say there is a respiratory acidosis. The pH disturbances
that can occur are categorised as:
●Acidosis: metabolic (non-respiratory) or respiratory.
● Alkalosis: metabolic (non-respiratory) or respiratory.
● Mixed disorders: can be additive (e.g. metabolic acidosis +
 respiratory acidosis) or offsetting (e.g. metabolic acidosis +
respiratory alkalosis).
Whatever causes the primary disturbance/s, the body will try to
Figure 21.2 A bench-top analyser with its quality control solutions in the 
mount compensatory responses.
tray to the left.
 Examples of causes of respiratory acidosis are:
● Hypoventilation under anaesthesia, especially deep anaesthesia
 In the body, carbon dioxide is produced during metabolism
(and common in anaesthetised horses).
and undergoes the following reactions:
● Pulmonary or pleural space disease (may even include very
exody ue eoudsp aq puede) (see aso
CO, +HO <→HCO; →H+ + HCO
● Neck lesions with diaphragmatic paralysis.
Carbonic anhydrase catalyses
● Respiratory obstruction, for example laryngeal paralysis (may
be acco mpanied by hypoxaemia and dyspnoea).
These reactions are described as equilibria, because they never
Examples of causes of respiratory alkalosis are:
go to completion in any one direction, hence the bi-directional
arrows. Carbonic acid (H,COs) is a weak acid, i.e. it does not fully
● Hyperventilation secondary to anaemia.
● Hyperventilation secondary hypoxaemia (e.g. pneumonia, high
ability. Although we cannot measure carbonic acid concentration,
altitude).
184  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Hyperventilation secondary to fear/excitement.
(metabolised by renal proximal tubular cells to bicarbonate and
● Hyperventilation secondary to pyrexia.
ammonium). Bicarbonate is ^regained’ when ammonium and
various hypo/phosphate compounds are excreted. Although the
 Examples of causes of metabolic acidosis are:
kidneys have an important role in acid-base, water and electrolyte
●Ketoacidosis (with diabetes mellitus).
balance, the gut has a modulatory role.
● Lactic acidosis (secondary to hypovolaemia and tissue anaero-
bic metabolism; also accompanies endotoxaemia).
How the three pH regulatory systems work
● Prolonged diarrhoea (partly due to bicarbonate loss).
The most important chemical buffer system in the blood is the
● Failure of kidneys to excrete an acid load.
bicarbonate buffer system; described by the equations above.
 Other buffer systems include the phosphate buffer system and the
Examples of causes of metabolic alkalosis are:
ability of many proteins to bind Ht ions. These chemical buffers
● Commonly iatrogenic after sodium bicarbonate treatment.
act almost immediately when something occurs to disturb normal
● Can accompany acute or prolonged gastric vomiting (acid
blood pH.
loss).
 For chemical buffers to work best, their pKa needs to be within
● In ruminants, can accompany abomasal sequestration.
+/- 1pH unit of the pH of their normal working environment.
The pKa of a system describes the pH at which half of the weak
compound is dissociated, and half is undissociated; ie.
How does the body regulate its pH?
[HA] = [A]. This means that if the pH is disturbed, the buffer
Three systems are used to regulate pH.
is as good at handling an acid challenge as it is at handling an
alkaline challenge.
Chemical buffers in the extracelluiar and intracelluiar fluids
The bicarbonate buffer system has been extensively studied. It
The extracellular buffers act immediately (seconds to minutes);
is an excellent buffer system in extracellular and intracellular
and the intracellular buffers act next (minutes to hours). Chemical
fluids because it is so abundant, despite its pKa being less than
buffers include the bicarbonate system, the phosphate system, the
ideal for the extracellular fluid (ECF). Its pKa is 6.1; whereas
ammonia/ammonium system (kidney tubules), and proteins,
both extracellular and intracellular (especially haemoglobin inside
normal extracellular fluid pH is 7.4 ish, so it is a better buffer for
red blood cels). There is also a transcelular H'/K+ ion exchange
the intracellular fluid (ICF) where the intracellular pH is more
acidic, c. 7.0 (6.5-7.2). However, it is still a good buffer for the
which aids the buffering process. Some important consequences
ECF because of its abundance, and because it is what we call an
of haemoglobin's structure and many functions are:
'open buffer'; that is the amount of bicarbonate can be varied by
● The Bohr effect describes the rightward shift of the haemo-
pulmonary ventilation (secondary to changes in PCO, through
globin-oxygen dissociation curve at the tissues, i.e. due to
the above equilibria). In addition, the kidneys can affect H+ and
increased PCOz and H+ in the tissues and therefore increased
rq sun on juodu Ara si asepiqe suoqres pue OH
 binding of these to haemoglobin, oxygen release from the hae-
 system.
moglobin is enhanced. At the lungs, the opposite occurs, such
 If the blood pH cannot be fully corrected by these chemical
that oxygen uptake by haemoglobin is facilitated.
 buffers (i.e. their buffering capacity is exhausted), then the other
● The Haldane effect describes how release of oxygen from hae-
mechanisms come into play.
moglobin at the tissues leaves deoxyhaemoglobin which has a
The respiratory system works in the medium term to try to help
 greater affinity for binding CO and H+ ions. At the lungs, the
correct blood pH by altering the level of CO in the blood (see
 increased binding of Oz to haemoglobin and formation of oxy-
above). The control offered by the respiratory system is a some-
haemoglobin results in enhanced release of CO, and H+.
what ^coarse’ control (i.e. not perfect). This limited control is
● The above two effects are linked.
partly due to the respiratory system also being responsible for
●The chloride shift (Hamburger shift): in the tissues, CO, enters
oxygenation of the patient.For example,if the patient was suffr-
red cells and Oz is given up by haemoglobin. CO is converted
 ing from lactic acidosis (a metabolic acidosis), then if ventilation
to carbonic acid by carbonic anhydrase and H+ and HCO: ions
was increased (by breathing faster and/or deeper), then more CO2
are formed. H+ and CO, are more easily bound by deoxyhaem-
is blown off, and effectively a respiratory alkalosis is created which
oglobin, leaving HCO; free to leave the cell. In order to maintain
can partially ^offset' the metabolic acidosis, that is the extracellular
electrical neutrality, chloride ions enter the red cells: the so-
pH could be corrected back towards normal, even though the
called chloride shift. The reverse occurs in the lungs.
respiratory system has now created perturbations in the PCO2.
But there is a limit to just how ^fast/deep we can ventilate (it is
Respiratory system
tiring for the respiratory muscles to work this hard), and if the
Changing ventilation to regulate the blood content of COz acts in
PCO, falls below about 20 mmHg, then the cerebral blood vessels
the medium term (minutes to hours) to provide a coarse control.
  n    no  
Therefore there are natural limits to this compensatory response.
The kidneys
On the other hand, if we had a metabolic alkalosis, then by
The kidneys can excrete excess acids/reabsorb bases. They act in
slowing ventilation, we could allow CO, to build up, and create a
the longer term (hours to days), to provide a fine control. The
respiratory acidosis to try to offset the metabolic alkalosis. But
liver and GI tract are also important to provide glutamine
again there are brakes on the magnitude of the response, i.e. if you
Blood gas analysis
185
breathe too slowly, your oxygenation falls, and eventually you
Where 1.34 is number of ml O carried by 1 g of haemoglobin
 s a   s   
(called Huffner's constant); [Hb] is haemoglobin concentration
response is self-limiting.
(normally around 15 g/dl); SaO,% is percentage saturation of hae-
 If the pH is still not returned to normal after the first two
moglobin with oxygen; PaO is partial pressure of O (dissolved
systems have tried, then the kidneys finally sort things out, as long
in plasma); 0.003 is number of ml of O carried in 100 ml blood
as they have adequate perfusion and kidney function is normal.
 per 1 mmHg partial pressure of oxygen.
The control offered by the kidneys is more of a long term option,
 From this equation, we can see that without haemoglobin, we
i.e. it does not occur very quickly, but it is a ^fine control, and
would be strugling for oxygenation. That is, in 100ml normal
will eventually correct the pH to all but normal.
arterial blood (PaO around 100 mmHg when breathing room
air; SaO% around 97%), the amount of oxygen carried in
physical solution in blood is around 0.3ml (100 x 0.003);
PO, and PCO2
compared to the amount of oxygen carried in association with
the haemoglobin, which is around 20 ml (1.34 x 15 x 0.97). Thus,
The “P’ means partial pressure or tension, which are ways of
 haemoglobin increases the oxygen carrying capacity of our blood
by about 60 times.
The a' and 'v (e.g. PaO, PvCO) mean ^arterial or 'venous.
 Remember the sigmoid shaped haemoglobin-oxygen dissocia-
How is CO carried in blood?
oxygen) the haemoglobin inside red blood cells can be, for a given
● 70-75% is present as bicarbonate. Carbon dioxide reacts with
 partial pressure of oxygen (in physical solution) in the blood.
water, under the influence of carbonic anhydrase, to form car-
Because of the long plateau, note how the saturation of haemo-
bonic acid, which then partially dissociates into H+ ions and
globin with oxygen only decreases by a tiny amount (100% to
bicarbonate ions (HCO).
90%) for a dramatic fall in PaOz (e.g. 500 mmHg to 60 mmHg).
● 7-10% dissolves in blood (imagine it as very tiny bubbles). This
But once the shoulder of the curve is reached, any further, even
 is the portion that is responsible for the measured PCO2.
small, reductions in PaO are associated with larger falls in satura-
● 15-25% binds to proteins, especially haemoglobin, to form
tion, e.g. once PaO falls below 60mmHg (equivalent to a satura-
carbamino-compounds (e.g. carbaminohaemoglobin).
tion of about 90%), the saturation falls rapidly too, because we
are on the steep slope of the curve. A PaO of <80 mmHg is strictly
How is O2 carried in the blood?
   as s iq u se pss
● 97% is carried in combination with haemoglobin in the red
PaO, 80-90 mmHg; moderate as 60-80 mmHg: and severe as
blood cells.
<60 mmHg.
● 3% is dissolved in plasma (the very tiny bubbles again). This is
 Remember that the exact position of the curve depends upon
the portion that is responsible for the PO2.
the patient's temperature, its PCO, and its pH amongst other
factors, such as the P50 of its haemoglobin. The P50 is the partial
O, content of
pressure of oxygen at which the haemoglobin is 50% saturated
= (1.34 x [Hb] x SaO,%) +(PaO x 0.003)
100 ml blood
with oxygen (around 30 mmHg for dogs).
100
06
80
70
09
SaOz
50
40
30
10
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
PaO2 (mmHg): can be up to 500 mmHg +
Figure 21.3 Haemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve.
186  Veterinary Anaesthesia
The curve shifts to the right with:
For example, room air has approx. 21% oxygen, so
21% x 5 = 105 mmHg.
● Low pH.
s  e e  ss 
● High PCO2.
●High temperature.
the expected PO, would be 500 mmHg (although this is rarely
● Lactic acidosis (e.g. exercise).
achieved in anaesthetised horses because of ventilation/perfusion 
 inequalities in their lungs).
● High 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG) (e.g. chronic anaemia).
There are various other ways of guesstimating the effciency of
● Hyperchloraemia and hyperphosphataemia.
Oxygenation, as outlined below.
The curve shifts to the left with:
● High pH.
Indices of oxygenation
● Low PCO2
● PaO/PAO ratio. If <0.85, then severe venous admixture
● Hypothermia.
● Foetal Hb.
exists.
● PaO + PaCO. If >140 +/- 20 mmHg (at sea level), and breath-
●L0w 2,3-DPG.
ing room air, then ability of lungs to oxygenate the blood is
● Hypochloraemia and hypophosphataemia (the effect of hypo-
normal. If <120mmHg, then there is venous admixture or
 phosphataemia is partly due to low 2,3-DPG).
reduced effciency of gaseous exchange in the lungs.
 Before we can interpret the results of blood gas analysis, we
● PaOz/FiO, ratio. Normal is 450-530; <300 accompanies mild
need to know the normal ranges of the values (Table 21.1).
lung ineffciency, <200 accompanies severe lung inefficiency.
 Note that the normal' values given in Table 21.1 assume that
● P(A-a)Oz gradient. Need to use the alveolar gas equation (see
the patient is breathing room air and that its temperature is 37°℃.
below) to calculate PAOz, and then calculate the gradient.
Reference values should ideally be those specific to the analyser
PAO = PIOz - PaCOz/RQ. You can guesstimate the RQ at 0.8,
being used. The normal ranges given here are quite generous
and use the blood gas analysis results for arterial CO, tension
to accommodate much of the published data. Most blood gas
in
place of PACO2.
Therefore, calculated PAO2
三
analysers assume the patient's temperature is 37°C, unless
150 - PaCOz/0.8. Subtract measured PaO, from calculated
 instructed otherwise.
PAO and if the result is >15 mmHg on room air, then there is
As a rule of thumb, to guesstimate what the PO, should be if
reduced lung effciency.
we know what the oxygen percentage is in the inspired air, we can
● Respiratory index P(A-a)Oz/PaO2.
use a rough derivation of the alveolar gas equation:
The alveolar gas equation
Alveolar POz (and therefore arterial POz,in an ideal world) α
 Inspired O, tension
The form that we usually use is:
PCO2
Rule of thumb: Inspired O percentage X 5 = PaO
PO=PO
RQ
Where PaOz is alveolar partial pressure of oxygen; PrOz is partial
Table 21.1 Yypical blood gas values for dogs (and where values differ sig-
 pressure of humidifed (saturated) inspired oxygen; PaCO is
nificantly, for horses and cats.
 alveolar partial pressure of carbon dioxide (= systemic arterial
 blood CO tension); RQ is respiratory quotient (around 0.8).
Variable
Arterial blood
Venous blood
pH
7.4 (7.35-7.45)
7.35 (7.35-7.45)
Now,PO=FOx(P-PH2o)
(Cats 7.4 (7.37.45))
 PO, (room air)
100 mmHg (90-120)
40 mmHg
Where FO, is fraction of oxygen in inspired air; Ps is atmos-
 pheric (barometric) pressure; Phzo is saturated water vapour pres-
PCO2
40 mmHg (35-45)
45 mmHg
(Cats 31 (25-37))
sure at body temperature (37°℃).
(Cats 35-40)
EOJH
21-28 mmol/l 
24-28 mmol/l
PCO2
(Cats c. 18)
(Cats c. 21)
So, PaO =FO(P -PH2o)-
RQ
Base excess (BE)
-5 to +5mmol/l (Cats 
-5 to +5mmol/l 
usually negative and
(Cats usually
If we apply this to room air, then:
may be below -6)
negative) (Adult
(Adult horses not 
horses usually
usually negative;
positive)
PaO = 0.21 (760 -47)-(40/0.8)
up to c. +8) 
=(0.21x713)-50
70-75%
=150-50
Hb saturation with Oz
Approx. 98%
i.e. PaO=100mmHg
Blood gas analysis  187
 If gaseous exchange were ideal, then arterial PO (PO2) would
relatively soluble oxygen in the absence of a more insoluble gas
also be 100 mmHg.
such as nitrogen. Some suggest we should incorporate such
 If we now apply this to an animal breathing almost 100%
insoluble gases as N, NO or He to 'splint the alveoli open;
0xygen under anaesthesia (there would probably be 1-2% anaes-
however, this is more of a preventative strategy than a treat-
thetic agent present, but for the purpose of this exercise we will
ment when hypoxaemia already exists.
forget that for the moment), then:
● Institute intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV).
● Apply positive end expiratory pressure (PEEP) to try to 'splint?
PO=1(760 -47)-(40/0.8)
alveoli open/prevent them from collapsing again.
=713-50
● Try bronchodilators, for example clenbuterol IV, or perhaps 
=663 mmHg
better, aerosolised salbutamol intra-tracheally (see below).
● Ensure adequate pulmonary perfusion (ie. ensure mean arte-
In an ideal situation, POz would also be 663mmHg, so our
rial blood pressure is around 60-70mmHg minimum), so
guestimate of 500 is a bit short, but the ideal situation rarely exists
check anaesthetic depth, and give fluid, and/or inotropic and/
in reality. (The actual atrmospheric pressure will also affect the
or vasopressor support as necessary.
results.)
 Conversion of mmHg to and from kPa
Clenbutero!
Clenbuterol is a β2 agonist, and therefore is a smooth muscle
1 mmHg = 0.136 kPa
relaxant (bronchodilator, uterine relaxant, vasodilator etc.). It
1 kPa = 7.4 mmHg
also causes positive inotropic and positive chronotropic effects;
tachycardia tends to occur, probably in response to vasodilation
although little overall change in blood pressure results. The tachy-
For example: 100 mmHg = (100 x 0.136) kPa = 13.6kPa
cardia, however, increases myocardial oxygen demand (just when
the oxygen supply is not all that great), and could potentially
5 kPa =(5 ×7.4) mmHg =37 mmHg
result in arrhythmias. Clenbuterol also causes sweating (due to
beta adrenergic sweating and possibly secondary to peripheral
Interpreting blood gases
vasodilation), lacrimation and a lightening of the plane of anaes-
thesia. It also causes muscle tremors, and many believe it results
When interpreting blood gas results:
in poor quality recoveries form anaesthesia in horses (perhaps due
● Look at the oxygenation (PO2).
to muscle soreness following the fasciculation-type activity and
● Look at the pH and decide if it is normal or more acidic or
sweaty slippery recovery box floors).
more alkaline than normal.
● Look at PCO and bicarbonate.
Salbutamol
● Check BE.
When delivered into the respiratory tract, a low dose of salbuta-
mol results in better improvement in oxygenation and fewer side
 effects (less obvious tachycardia and less profuse sweating).
Oxygenation (PaO2)
From the rule of thumb above, we can calculate the expected
IPPV
PaO. Many horses have poor oxygenation under general
 IPPV may help but can have detrimental effects too. The large
anaesthesia, especially the larger horses, and especially if in
dorsal recumbency, because of hypoventilation,
positive pressure within the chest can reduce the venous return
reduced
(the venae cavae get squashed),and hence reduce cardiac output.
cardiac output and venous admixture (ventilation perfusion
This is especially a problem if the animal is already hypovolaemic
mismatches).
(i.e. the venae cavae are already 'relatively empty). Occasionally
 PaO values below 90 mmHg (certainly in anaesthetised animals
a am i a a jo   dn p a
on >21% inspired oxygen), start to ring alarm bells. The levels of
nicely before our intervention; and this over-inflation may
hypoxaemia have been described as:
'stretch’ and close the alveolar capillaries that would otherwise
PaO, 80-90 mmHg = mild hypoxaemia.
have been responsible for gaseous exchange. Thus we can convert
PaO, 60-80 mmHg = moderate hypoxaemia.
normal ventilation/perfusion areas of lung into dead space?
PaO,<60 mm Hg = severe hypoxaemia.
(over-ventilated but not perfused; or ventilation in excess of per-
fusion.) We may also not in fact be able to do much to re-inflate
Once hypoxaemic, and certainly if the PaO,is below 60mmHg.
atelectatic parts of the lung, despite our best efforts to 'recruit'
and especially if it is below 50 mmHg, some interventions must
such areas of perfusion in excess of ventilation (e.g. 'shunt').
 be made to try to improve it. These would be:
● Increase the inspired oxygen percentage (if not already at
pH
-dsa s  uxo jo s y (
Abnormal pH can be associated with respiratory acidosis or alka-
tion/absorption atelectasis i.e. the collapse/closure of alveoli
losis, metabolic acidosis or alkalosis, or a mixture of respiratory
"behind closed small airways' because of rapid absorption of
and metabolic problems. Remember that disturbances can be
188  Veterinary Anaesthesia
acute or chronic. The body tries to make compensatory responses
Base excess (BE)
oas ) o aas  m os Hd  no 
This really gives us an idea of the buffering ability of all the chemi-
disturbances. For example, a horse with colic and a metabolic
cal buffers present, including, importantly, haemoglobin; and we
acidosis (because it loses bicarbonate into the gut secretions which
look at this value in conjunction with the pH, HCO and the
get sequestered in twisted bowel and lactic acidosis develops sec-
PCO. If the animal is short of chemical buffering ability, then this
ondary to hypovolaemia), may be breathing faster than normal.
deficit of chemical buffers is referred to as a negative base excess?
Although this might be partly due to hypovolaemic hypotension,
(we do not tend to say base deficit').
pain or abdominal distension making ventilation more difficult,
it could also be due to a compensatory response to the metabolic
Definition of BE
acidosis.
The base excess is the number of millimoles of acid or alkali which
 Therapeutic interventions should be considered once pH is
must be added to 1 litre of blood in order to restore its pH to
outside the ^normal’ range, and especially if <7.l-7.2 or >>7.6
normal (7.4), after first cancelling out any perturbations in PCO2
(although such levels of alkalosis are rare unless iatrogenically
(and therefore secondary changes in bicarbonate), due to respira-
induced).
tory causes, by equilibrating the blood sample with a PCO of
40 mmHg at 37°C at the actual oxygen saturation of the patient.
PCO2
Therefore, the BE value tells us of metabolic problems only
This is often higher than normal in anaesthetised animals,
(being independent of PCO,).
especially large animals, because they tend not to breathe very
 The above definition strictly refers to the actual base excess
well when under anaesthesia and recumbent. Higher than
(ABE) or BE(b) because it tells us about the buffering capacity of
normal PCOz and lower than normal pH is the situation
whole blood (includes bicarbonate, phosphate, haemoglobin and
described as respiratory acidosis. In order to correct this,
plasma proteins; of which bicarbonate and haemoglobin are the
IPPV should be instituted, to help the patient to blow off more
most important buffers, although not quite of equal importance).
carbon dioxide.
It also requires knowledge of the haemoglobin concentration of
Values of PaCO, >60-70 mmHg often require intervention
the blood, which is measured or estimated by the blood gas
(blood pH may approach the worrying range for acidaemia; and 
machine.
sympathetic nervous system stimulation can elicit catecholamine-
 However, if we wish to extend our knowledge of the blood
induced cardiac arrhythmias).
(which is only one compartment of ECF with a small ICF com-
At the other extreme, PaCO, values of <20mmHg should be
partment (the red blood cells which contain the very important
avoided, because cerebral blood vessels become so constricted
buffer, haemoglobin)), to the whole of the ECF, for our calcula-
that brain oxygenation can become compromised. (It is rare to
tions we can assume the haemoglobin content of the blood is
see PCO, values so low, unless you are over-zealous with the
‘shared’ between all the ECF compartments. The calculations
 IPPV). The cerebral blood vessel responsiveness to CO (which is
result in a value that tells us about the buffering capacity of all the
actually due to the pH), is quite useful when dealing with head
'extracellular fluids, denoted the standard base excess (SBE) or
trauma and raised intracranial pressure, because by deliberately
BE(ecf).
hyperventilating these patients (to PCOz of about 20-25mmHg
 BE(ecf) is often said to be the better value to use in interpreta-
(not any lower), we can reduce cerebral blood volume (at least for
tion of metabolic problems, so from here on, BE is used to mean
several hours, until the system re-adjusts itself), and help to
BE(ecf).
 reduce intracranial pressure, which may be life-saving.
Administering sodium bicarbonate
From the equilibrium: CO + HO <> H+ + HCO
When the BE value is more negative than -7 mmol/l in arterial
blood (allow more negative values for cats), (usually when also
If CO, increases, the reactions get pushed to the right, so [H+]
accompanied by a low pH, i.e. c. 7.1-7.2), we could treat the
 increases (and therefore pH decreases to more acidic values), but
metabolic acidosis by administering sodium bicarbonate intrave-
bicarbonate also increases. However, when the pH changes in the
nously, usually in addition to other intravenous fluid therapy. The
acidic direction, the bicarbonate buffering system becomes more
equation we use to calculate how much bicarbonate an adult
effcient because the system pH is nearer to the buffer's pKa.
animal needs is:
 It may seem strange that the acidity can increase even when the
bicarbonate concentration (the buffer) also increases, but pH, by
mmol bicarbonate required = BE × 0.3 × body weight (in kg)
 definition, is related only to the H+ concentration.
One-third of the body weight is a rough estimate of the animal's
Bicarbonate
ECF volume, because it is the buffer deficiency of fluid in this
This should increase if CO increases (see equilibria), and decrease
compartment that we have measured and that we are primarily
if CO, decreases. Therefore, with primary respiratory distur-
concerned with. For neonates, 0.45 is used.
bances, the direction of change (increase or decrease) of bicarbo-
 Because bicarbonate is not an innocuous substance to give (i.e.
nate should be the same as that for CO. If the direction of change
sometimes we can cause more complications than we cure),
 is opposite, then something else is happening.
usually half of the calculated amount is given first, and the base
Blood gas analysis  189
excess is re-evaluated. Alternatively, instead of using the meas-
 Bicarbonate must never be used to treat respiratory acidosis,
ured BE value in the above equation, we could use either the
as it will only serve to worsen it (because it causes an acute
difference between the negatively low BE value from our blood
increase in the PCO,).
gas analysis and -5 (the low end of our normal range), or even
 Bicarbonate solutions should be given slowly intravenously, for
the difference between the negatively low BE value and -7 (our
 example give the final decided dose over 10-20 min, and then take
intervention point), to put into the equation, to reduce our cal-
another arterial blood sample for blood gas analysis about 15 min
culated dose. Then we would not need to halve the dose.
after the bicarbonate administration has been completed, to allow
time for re-equilibration. Bicarbonate solutions should not be
Probiems associated with bicarbonate administration
 administered through the same giving sets as solutions which
8.4% NaHCO, is a hypertonic fluid, so if given rapidly it has some
contain calcium (e.g. Hartmann's solution), or else calcium car-
similar effects to hypertonic saline (c. 7.2%); (these effects can
 bonate may crystallise out in the giving set/vein.
also be seen, slightly less dramatically, after the 4.2% solution,
The 8.4% sodium bicarbonate solution commonly used for
which is also hypertonic):
large animals seems a bit of a strange concentration, but it con-
tains 1 mmol of bicarbonate in every 1 ml, so it makes calculations
● Haemodilution (decreases PCV, total protein, platelets, clotting
of the volume to give really easy. Note the 4.2% solution
factors, chloride, potassium, calcium, magnesium). Care if
already anaemic, hypoproteinaemic, poor clotting ability,
(0.5 mmol/ml) is reserved for small animals, foals and calves.
 There is also a 1.26% solution (0.15 mmol/ml) available. These
hypokalaemic or hypocalcaemic. Hypokalaemia, hypomagne-
lower percent solutions are preferred for peripheral venous
saemia and hypocalcaemia add to muscle weakness (including
 administration; whereas the 8.4% solution is reserved for central
respiratory muscles), gastrointestinal ileus, and problems for
other excitable membranes (heart muscle and nerves), so may
vein administration only.
see arrhythmias and seizures. Hypokalaemia also interferes
Other options
with renal function (e.g. hypokalaemic nephropathy i.e.
THAM (tromethamine) is an organic amine buffer. It combines
reduced ability of kidneys to concentrate urine).
with Ht and is renally excreted. It does not increase COz produc-
● Increases sodium (beware hypernatraemia).
● Volume expansion (beware congestive heart failure).
tion. It does not cause hypernatraemia (may even cause hyponat-
 raemia due to haemodilution). It is hypertonic, and causes plasma
● Increases PCO, (see equilibria above). The animal must have
 volume expansion, haemodilution, and osmotic diuresis. It may
adequate respiratory capacity to blow offthe extra CO, created.
Beware respiratory depression in anaesthetised animals because
also enter cells. It is available as a 0.3M solution, and the number
 the extra CO produced can cause a 'respiratory-type' acidosis,
of ml required is equal to BE x (1.1 x body weight in kg). Carbicarb
 is equimolar NazCO, and NaHCOs. It is sometimes preferred to
on top of the metabolic acidosis that you are trying to treat.
sodium bicarbonate as less CO, is generated.
The extra CO, can also diffuse into cells to cause intracellular
acidosis, and cross the blood-brain barrier to cause ^paradoxi-
Temperature compensation
cal CSF acidosis?
Alpha-stat or pH-stat technique
● Rapid changes in pH can also affect electrolytes, e.g. over-
 These different strategies came about because of the development 
correction of acidosis produces an alkalosis. This results in a
 of hypothermic cardiac/neuro anaesthetic techniques in man.
reduction in ionised calcium, due to altered buffering by
Temperature changes cause changes in the dissociation constant
albumin etc., and stimulates cellular Ht/K+ exchange resulting
of water; and also in the solubilities and therefore partial pressures 
 in hypokalaemia in the extracellular fluid. Cellular HCO/Cl
(tensions) of dissolved gases, so should we measure blood gases
 exchange may also be affected.
at the patient's actual temperature or at 37°℃?
Bicarbonate is only really suitable to help treat metabolic aci-
 dosis where there has been bicarbonate loss. It is less appropriate
Alpha-stat strategy
where the metabolic acidosis is due to a primary gain in H', for
Whatever the patient's temperature, aim to maintain a constant
example, lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis. In all cases of metabolic
ratio of [OH-]:[H+] (at c. 16:1) for better intracellular
acidosis, however, intravenous fuid therapy usually helps, by
functioning.
diluting the acid and restoring renal perfusion so that the kidneys
● If the temperature decreases; the dissociation constant of water
can do their job. Why does hypovolaemia cause lactic acidosis?
When an animal is hypovolaemic, the blood pressure starts to fall,
is affected; the ratio changes and [H+] tends to increase.
● Cooling also increases the solubility of gases, so we see decreased
but the body tries to maintain the blood pressure so that tissue
 partial pressure of dissolved gases i.e. decreased POz and PCO2;
perfusion (especially of vital organs) is maintained. The sympa-
and [H+] tends to decrease because of the lowered carbon
 thetic nervous system therefore gets activated, and the increase in
dioxide tension, i.e. respiratory alkalosis tends to develop.
catecholamines results in peripheral vasoconstriction, which cen-
tralises the blood volume to where i's needed most (the vital
The tendency of [H+] to increase by changes in the dissociation
 organs). However, these peripheral tissues are now starved of
oxygen, and so start to metabolise anaerobically and produce
because of the respiratory alkalosis; ie. tendency for pH to
lactic acid.
decrease is opposed by the tendency for pH to increase. So, as the
190  Veterinary Anaesthesia
patient cools down, allow PCO, to decrease and possibly pH to
and can be used to calculate a 'strong ion gap, but you need to
increase. But how do we know if the pH and PCOz are ^normal
be able to measure more ionic’ components in the blood; see
for that particular temperature as we do not have reference values
further reading.
for all possible hypothermic and hyperthermic temperatures.
Basically, we ask the blood gas machine to display the results as if
patient's temperature is 37°C; and ^treat' any abnormalities by
Examples
comparing these results (at 37°C) against known normothermic
Horse under GA, lateral recumbency
valules.
pH-stat strategy
PH
7.28
(N = 7.35-7.45)
Whatever the patient's temperature, aim to maintain constant pH
PCO2
71.6 mmHg
(N = 35-45)
and PCO, the idea being that brain blood flow regulation is highly
PO2
254.7mmHg
dependent upon blood pH and PCO, and neurological outcomes
EODH
33.7 mmol/l
(N =21-28)
are improved.
BE
4.0 mmol/l
(N = -5 to +8)
● This time, as the patient cools down, we do not allow the cool
pH and PCO, to drift from the standard normothermic
'normal values we are familiar with (at 37°℃).
Interpretation
● Carry out blood gas analysis after telling the machine the
● Consider oxygenation frst. Assume horse breathing c. 100%
 patient's actual temperature; and then 'treat' the patient accord-
 oxygen, so applying rule of thumb, PAO (and hopefully PaO2),
 ing to normothermic values.
should be 100 × 5 = 500mmHg. Well it is not, but this is a
horse, and values over 100 mmHg are a bonus.
Other approaches to blood gas analysis
● Look at the pH. There is an acidaemia.
Anion gap
● Look at the PCO. It is higher than normal; so already we could
say that at least part of the acidaemia is due to a respiratory
(Na+ + K+ + unmeasured cations (UC))-
acidosis, but also look at the bicarbonate. It is high too, which
 is what we would expect with a primary respiratory acidosis
(Cl- + HCO; + unmeasured anions (UA))=0
(whereas we would expect it to be low with a metabolic acido-
Anion gap =(Na++ K+)-(Cl- + HCO)
sis). But to be sure:
● Look at the BE value. It is within normal limits, so as far as we
The anion gap (UA - UC), is represented by the difference
can tell this is a primary respiratory acidosis.
Although in reality, in order to maintain electroneutrality, the
What can we do about it?
number of cations must equal the number of anions, the above 
Check anaesthetic depth ('too deep' can be associated with more
calculation results in a usual excess of cations over anions because
profound respiratory depression).
not all anions can be easily measured e.g. lactate, acetoacetate,
Apply IPPV.
beta hydroxybutyrate, phosphates, sulphates and proteins. Normal
A repeat blood gas analysis about 20 min later gave the following
values are 12-25 mmol/l in dogs and 13-27 mmol/l in cats.
results:
If HCO; decreases (as can happen with metabolic acidosis),
then another anion must increase (e.g. Cl or one of the unmeas-
ured anions) to maintain electrical neutrality. The anion gap may
pH
7.37
PCO2
52.4mmHg
be used to differentiate between the two common types of meta-
bolic acidosis:
PO2
352.7mmHg
EODH
30.1 mmol/l
● Bicarbonate loss (e.g. diarrhoea). HCO; loss is compensated
BE
3.4mmol/l
for by an increase in Cl, so we see a 'normal anion gap, hyper-
chloraemic metabolic acidosis.
● Accumulation of unmeasured anions (organic acid gain) (e.g.
Interpretation
with diabetic ketoacidosis). The increase in organic acids
● Oxygenation is still OK (in fact the IPPV has improved it).
(ketones) results in the bicarbonate buffer being used in order to
 maintain pH (so the measured HCO; is reduced),but no change 
● pH now just back in normal range (still slightly on acidic side).
● PCO better, but still a little high.
 in Cl occurs because of the organic acid anions. Hence we see a
● HCOs, down a bit - but what we expect after reducing the
'high anion gap, normochloraemic metabolic acidosis.
PCO2.
● BE still normal.
Quantitative approaches
Examples are the Fencl-Stewart approach and the ion-equilibrium
These results are not quite perfect, but we have made good
theory. These approaches more critically evaluate changes in BE
improvement.
Blood gas analysis 
191
Pony (135kg), colic, under GA, dorsal recumbency
 Interpretation
● Oxygenation good (IPPV has improved it in this case).
PH
7.13
● pH just alittle on the acidic side, but not worryingly low now.
PCO2
57.3mmHg
● PCOz on the low side of normal (perhaps we can change the
"Od
209.8 mmHg
ventilator settings).
EO3H
19.2 mmol/l
● HCO; is just slightly on the low side, and just a bit lower than
BE
-11.0 mmol/l
could be expected from the PCOz, so the bicarbonate buffer is
still slightly lacking.
● BE is within 'normal range, but there is always some individual.
Interpretation
variation, and may be this is slightly more negative than this
● Oxygenation. Assuming c. 100% inspired O, and applying our
pony usually likes to be (i.e. Equidae usually have BE values
rule of thumb, this is OK.
towards the more positive end of the range). Perhaps the extra
 20 mmol of bicarbonate should have been given, but these
● pH is lower than normal, so there is an acidaemia. Values below
7.1-7.2 are also worryingly low.
results are fine at this stage. Another blood gas analysis should
be performed after a further 30 min to check progress.
● PCO, is higher than normal, so there is a respiratory compo-
nent to the acidaemia.
● HCO is low. If there was just a primary respiratory acidosis,
Further reading
we would expect HCO to be higher than normal too, so
because the HCO; is low it must be being used/lost somewhere
 Armstrong JAM, Guleria A, Girling K (2007) Evaluation of gas
exchange deficit in the critically ill. Continuing Education in 
else.
Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain 7(4), 131-134. (Explains
● BE is very negative, so there is a deficit of buffers. This means
 that there is also a metabolic component to the acidaemia.
more about oxygenation indices.)
Corey HE (2003) Stewart and beyond: new models of acid-base
So, this is a mixed respiratory and metabolic acidosis. Before
balance. Kidney International 64, 777-787. (If you like equa-
As ns e pu s  l pss m aod a
tions you'll enjoy this.)
alkalosis, as a compensatory response to try to offset the metabolic
Cruickshank S, Hirschauer N (2004) The alveolar gas equation.
Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
tory depression to oppose this.
4(1), 24-27. (Explains the full form of the alveolar gas
equation.)
What can we do?
Driscoll P, Brown T, Gwinnutt C, Wardle T. Eds (1997) A simple
Check anaesthetic depth.
 guide to blood gas analysis. BMJ Publishing Group, London,
Address the low pH:
UK.
 Handy JM, Soni N (2008) Physiological effects of hyperchlorae-
● Start IPPV.
● Continue IV fluid therapy.
mia and acidosis. British Journal of Anaesthesia 101(2),
● Administer bicarbonate (BE more negative than -7 and pH is
141-150.
 Hennessey IAM, Japp AG. Eds (2007) Arterial blood gases made
worryingly low).
easy. Churchill Livingstone, (Elsevier Health), Philadelphia,
 The amount of HCO; required = BE × (0.3 x body weight (kg))
USA.
 Hopper K, Haskins SC (2008) A case-based review of a simplifed
quantitative approach to acid-base analysis. Journal of
= 11 × (0.3 × 135)
OR
= (11-5) × (0.3 × 135)
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 18(5), 467-476. (An
= 445.5mmol
= 243mmol
excellent, well written and easy to follow review with examples.)
Halve this = c. 222 mmol
(do not need to halve this)
 Sirker AA, Rhodes A, Grounds RM, Bennett ED (2002) Acid-base
'sde o, a pe nn, a nisrd
 This pony received 200 ml because sodium bicarbonate comes
Anaesthesia 57, 348-356.
 in bottles of 200 ml. Intravenous fluid therapy was continued and
IPPV was instituted. A repeat blood gas analysis 30 min later
yielded these results:
PH
7.34
Self-test section
PCO2
36.6 mmHg
PO2
501.8 mmHg
1.
How is pH defined?
Write down the alveolar gas equation (commonly
EOJH
20.1 mmol/l
-4.5 mmol/l
used version).
BE
Lactate
Learning objectives
 To be able to discuss body lactate balance.
To be familiar with the causes of hyperlactataemia and lactic acidosis.
Pathways of lactate metabolism
● Conversion to lactate (most likely when O is deficient, but can
occur when Oz is not lacking). Lactate:pyruvate ratio is nor-
       s r 
mally 10: 1.
shows the main biochemical pathways involved in lactate
metabolism.
Glycolysis in cytoplasm yields 2 ATP; oxidative phosphoryla-
 The pKa of lactic acid is 3.86 so lactic acid is highly ionised at
tion in mitochondria yields an extra 36 ATP, so is more energy
body pH, therefore almost all is present as lactate. Normally the
efficient. During glycolysis, 2 NAD+ are reduced to 2 NADH. The
H+ ions are buffered or are ^used up' in the production of adeno-
 cell normally tries to keep cytoplasmic NADH low because it
sine triphosphate (ATP) by oxidative phosphorylation (in aerobic
stimulates lactate production; so the ox-phos shuttle in the mito-
conditions). Impairment of oxidative pathways during lactate pro-
chondria is important in clearing cytoplasmic NADH and regen-
duction greatly promotes the development of (lactic) acidosis.
 erating NADt. Note how alanine can be converted to pyruvate, 0r
 be made from it. In chronic or critical llness, protein catabolism
 Only the L-isomer is produced in the body. D-lactate is pro-
duced by microbes in the GI tract and can be absorbed and metab-
olised slowly. In diarrhoeic calves, metabolic acidosis may be
mass action, can overwhelm normal oxidative pathways, so lactate
partly due to D-lactate absorption; where hyper D-lactataemia
may increase.
may be associated with somnolence and weakness. Hartmann's
solution contains racemic lactate (i.e. 50:50 D:L lactate). The
Regulation of the basic pathway
L-lactate is oxidised (which consumes H+ and therefore has an
There are a number of points where the basic pathway is regulated
alkalinising effect), or is converted to glucose through glucogen-
(Figure 22.3):
esis. The D-lactate is metabolised more slowly. The exogenous
● Epinephrine (β2 and possible C receptor effects) stimulates
lactate is theoretically a worry in patients with liver disease, but
glycogenolysis via increased cyclic adenosine monophosphate
 not usually a problem unless there is severe hepatic failure. There
(cAMP) and increased activity of Na/K-ATP pumps, especially
has been one report of exacerbation of hyperlactataemia in dogs
in skeletal muscles.
with lymphoma.
 There are different isoenzymes of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH),
for example LDH1-2 is found in the heart and favours lactate use
increased pyruvate then, by mass action, can overwhelm aerobic
pathways and result in increased lactate production.
rather than lactate production.
Glucose (or glycogen) undergoes glycolysis to pyruvate.
● Increased ADP:ATP ratic also promotes glycolysis by stimula-
 Pyruvate reaches an important T junction where one of the fol-
tion of PFK; and stimulates pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) for
aerobic respiration.
lowing takes place:
● High ATP concentration inhibits PDH.
● Oxidative phosphorylation/aerobic metabolism via acetyl CoA
● High plasma NADH favours lactate production by LDH, and
 and the Krebs cycle.
also inhibits PDH activity, so promotes lactate production.
192
Lactate
193
COO
HO-
H
CH3
Figure 22.1 Lactate is half a glucose molecule.
D-glucose
D-glucose-6-phosphate
 Glycogen
D-fructose-6-phosphate
Net 2 × ATP
 D-fructose-1,6-biphosphate
(anaerobic)
and 
2 × NADH
2 x Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
 2 x Phosphoenol pyruvate
2 x Pyruvate
→2x L(+) Lactate
LDH
Mitochondrion
Transaminase
Net36xATP
PDH
 2 x Acetyl CoA → Krebs cycle
(aerobic)
and
NAD+ regenerated/
Alanine
Figure 22.2 Basic biochemical pathways.
Glycogen
+ve
 Epinephrine (anti-insulin effects)
Endotoxin
 Thiamine deficiency
-Acetyl CoA
↑[ATP]:[ADP]
NAD<..
Glucose
Alkalosis
↑NADH:NAD+
+ve
T[ADP]:[ATP]
PFK
NADH + H+
Hypoxia
 Pyruvate
↑NADH:NAD+
ve
▼
>NAD+
+ve.
PDH
LDH
NADH + H+
Lactate
cetyl CoA
vé
NADH + H+
NAD*
Krebs cycle
'Ox-Phos shuttle
NADt
Mitochondrion
Figure 22.3 Regulation of pathways involved in lactate production and utilisation.
194  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● High acetyl CoA inhibits PDH. Lack of O, for Krebs cycle
 port on haemoglobin because it influences the position of the Hb/
 results in accumulation of acetyl CoA.
O, dissociation curve.
● Thiamine is a cofactor for PDH, so deficiency, which is common
The RBC lactate concentration equilibrates (within minutes)
 in critical illness, results in PDH inhibition favouring lactate
with plasma lactate concentration, by three mechanisms: MCA
production.
transporters (main mechanism), anion exchange and simple
● Gluconeogenesis results in NADt production, which can help
diffusion (very little normally). Regarding MCA transporters:
 in the conversion of lactate to pyruvate to fuel the further pro-
● Different types are present in different tissues.
duction of glucose.
● Commonest is the Ht/MCA co-transporter.
● Oral biguanide hypogylcaemics inhibit renal and hepatic glu-
coneogenesis, so NADt fall and NADH increases which
● Many are stereoselective (e.g. prefer L-lactate to D-lactate).
● Monocarboxylates are lactate, pyruvate, propionate, aceto-
 increases transformation of pyruvate to lactate.
acetate, beta hydroxy-butyrate.
Lactate balance
During anion exchange MCA is exchanged for Cl or HCO .
Anion exchange is not stereoselective. Simple diffusion requires
The overall blood lactate concentration depends on a balance
undissociated acid (becomes relevant with acidaemia). It is not
between production, consumption, excretion and transcellular 
 ( s a d) e   a 
equilib rium.
becomes more relevant with high lactate concentrations.
 Production occurs in:
● Skeletal muscles (especially white, fast fbres).
Fate of lactate
● RBCs (WBCs, platelets).
Lactate as a fuel. Even during exercise where muscle lactate
● Smooth muscles.
production can be high, much is metabolised through oxidative
● Brain.
processes which spares glucose for other things and also limits the
● GI tract.
development of lactic acidosis: described as the lactate shuttle.
● Kidneys (especially medulla).
Lactate is oxidised to produce ATP/energy (e.g. in skeletal muscles,
●Skin.
cardiac muscles, brain):
● Retina.
● Pyruvate oxidation (Krebs cycle): 336kcal.
● (Liver under certain conditions).
● Lactate oxidation (via pyruvate and Krebs cycle): 326 kcal.
● (Lungs, for example with lung injury, such as acute respiratory
distress syndrome (ARDS).)
 Consumption occurs in the:
liver and kidneys. The glucose can then be utilised by muscles to
produce lactate: this is described as the Cori cycle (i.e. lactate is
● Liver.
converted to glucose, which is converted to glucose and so on)
● Kidneys (especially cortex).
which also helps acid-base balance.
● Heart.
●(Skeletal muscles.)
Normal lactate metabolism
●(Brain.)
● Basal lactate production is c. 0.8 mmol/kg/h (man).
Excretion occurs in the:
● Liver removes about 50-70% of lactate in blood; mainly for
● Kidneys (into urine if exceeds the high renal threshold of
 glucogenesis (under normal circumstances).
● Renal cortex (and skeletal and cardiac muscles) convert
6-10 mmol/l).
remaining 30-50% of lactate to pyruvate for energy production
Transcellular equilibrium (especially RBCs) depends on:
via Krebs cycle.
● Urinary excretion
● Monocarboxylate (MCA) transporters.
of <5% occurs (can increase with
●Anion exchange.
 hyperlactataemia).
● Simple diffusion of undissociated acid.
Hyperlactataemia and lactic acidosis
Lactate as an end product of metabolism 
Some tissues have no mitochondria (e.g. RBCs, platelets) and
The definitions of hyperlactataemia and lactic acidosis in man are:
some have only a few (e.g. white muscle cells, some tumour cells,
● Hyperlactataemia is lactate ≥2-5 mmol/l without acidaemia.
possibly WBCs). These cells therefore cannot use oxidative phos-
● Lactic acidosis is lactate >5 mmol/l with either pH <7.35 or
phorylation for energy production and in these tissues, glycolysis
 base deficit >6 mmol/l.
results in the production of pyruvate/lactate.
RBCs are a special case, because in RBCs glycolysis usually
 The term base deficit' used here is the same as saying ^negative
results in the production of 2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG)
base excess, which would therefore be a figure more negative than
rather than pyruvate/lactate. 2,3-DPG is important for O trans-
6mmol/l.
Lactate
195
Causes of increased lactate
Increased lactate production with hypoperfusion
Basically, either increased production and/or reduced clearance.
For example secondary to hypovolaemia. Hypovolaemia leads to
There are two types: A and B.
increased sympathetic tone. This results in peripheral tissue/non-
vital organs); and in these tissues anaerobic respiration leads to
Type A (tissue hypoxia: absolute or relative)
increased NADH accumulation and increased lactate production.
Type A can be the result of decreased Oz supply, as a result of:
Hypoxic GI tract leads to endotoxaemia. Endotoxin inhibits
PDH and can result in a global increase in lactate production even
● Shock (hypovolaemic, cardiogenic, maldistributive).
● Regional hypoperfusion (tourniquet, thromboembolus).
in the face of relatively adequate tissue oxygenation. Endotoxin
● Severe hypoxaemia (PaO, <30-40 mmHg).
also activates WBC glycolysis to result in increased lactate
production.
● Severe anaemia (PCV ≤10-15%, or [Hb] ≤3-5 g/dl).
● Carbon monoxide poisoning (smoke inhalation).
 High catecholamines and hyper-cytokinaemia (associated with
endotoxaemia) accelerate glycolysis. Stimulation of skeletal muscle
It can also be the result of increased O, demand as a result of:
 Nat/K+ ATP pumps by catecholamines results in increased use of
ATP and increased production of ADP. The increased ADP:ATP
● Increased muscular activity caused by:
 0 Severe exercise/shivering.
ratio stimulates PFK to increase pyruvate production, which, by
o Convulsions.
mass action, can result in increased lactate, which is further
● Hypermetabolic states caused by:
increased by increased NADH and mitochondrial dysfunction.
The liver and kidneys also become producers, rather than 
 O Malignant hyperthermia.
O Thyroid storm.
'clearers, of lactate (due to hypoperfusion/impaired function).
 0 Critical illness/systemic inflammatory response syndrome
 Do not always rely on increased lactate as a marker of hypoxia
because mitochondrial dysfunction can result in increased lactate
(SIRS)/burns/trauma.
O Neoplasia.
   n      
 problem is more one of oxygen utilisation:
● Increased lactate does not always correlate with worsening tra-
Type B (no overt hypoxia or hypoperfusion)
 ditional indices of oxygenation.
Includes three subtypes: B1, B2 and B3.
● Lactate does not always decrease when tissue oxygen delivery is
Type Bl (underlying disease):
 restored/increased.
●Neoplasia (see above).
● Liver disease (lactate production > lactate consumption).
Lactate measurement
● Renal failure (lactate production > lactate consumption;
perhaps impaired urinary excretion too).
Most analysers measure only L-lactate.
● Diabetes melitus (oral hypoglycaemics impair gluconeogene-
sis; also possible metabolic pseudohypoxia).
Enzymic spectrophotometry
● Alkalaemia: metabolic or respiratory (increased PFK activity).
●Requires deproteinised blood.
● SIRS/endotoxaemia/trauma/burns (see above and below).
● Adds lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) in order to oxidise lactate
● Thiamine deficiency (PDH inhibition; critical illness).
 to pyruvate in presence of NADt.
●Alanine formation (critical illness; neoplasia).
● Short bowel syndrome, diarrhoea (increased D-lactate
● Light at 340 nm is used to measure resultant NADH concentra-
 tion which is related to lactate concentration.
absorption).
Type B2 (toxins/drugs):
Enzymic amperometry (the technique used in
blood gas analysers)
● Exogenous or endogenous catecholamines increase glycogenol-
ysis/glycolysis (head injury; shock states; trauma; burns;
● Lactate oxidase present to convert lactate to HO2
 phaeochromocytoma).
● The HO is oxidised at a platinum anode, and produces a
● Cyanide
(secondary
excess sodium
 nitroprusside
 current proportional to the lactate concentration.
treatment).
● Tends to read higher than spectrophotometric method, but
● Propylene glycol and ethylene glycol (metabolised in liver to
 correction for haematocrit reduces this tendency.
 pyruvate which promotes lactate production).
● Biguanide hypoglycaemics (inhibit gluconeogenesis leading to
 Sample handling
decreased NAD+: NADH).
● Samples should be analysed immediately or:
● Endotoxin (PDH inhibition).
O Store on ice (reduces cellular metabolism).
Type B3 (inborn errors of metabolism), includes PDH defi-
ciency (e.g. Clumber spaniels).
 0 Add inhibitors of glycolysis (sodium fluoride).
196  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Anticoagulants have little effect.
those patients in whom lactate could not be normalised within
● Arterial blood best, but mixed venous or even regional venous
this time frame.
blood also useful (usually only small differences are present).
● In canine trauma, lactate concentrations were significantly
Arterial lactate reflects net body lactate balance whereas venous
higher in non-survivors.
lactate is influenced by the net lactate balance of the specific
 portion of the circulation drained by that vessel and by RBC/
Importance of serial lactate determinations
 plasma lactate equilibration.
These allow better evaluation of prognosis:
● Beware prolonged venous occlusion pre-sampling.
● Beware struggling during sampling.
● Both initial blood lactate and duration of high lactate affect
outcome.
● Duration of high lactate is especially important for prognosis.
 Normal lactate concentrations
 Serial measurements allow assessment of response to treatment
Man: 0.3-1.3 mmol/l.
but be aware that initial fluid therapy may washout lactate from
Dog: 0.3-2.5 mmol/l (Hughes et al. 1999).
tissues leading to a transient increase in lactate.
Beagles: 0.42-3.58 mmol/l (Evans 1987).
Cat: 0.3-1.7 mmol/l (Rand et al. 2002).
Other uses of lactate
Horse: c. 0.5-1 mmol/l.
Lactate in other fluids
Lactate as possible prognostic indicator
Various fluids have been investigated:
● During in-hospital cardiac arrest and 1h after return of spon-
taneous circulation, blood lactate concentrations were predic-
higher than blood lactate, if septic belly; but there are other
tive of survival in man.
markers too. In dogs and cats, blood:peritoneal fluid glucose
● Human shock: mild hypoperfusion, 2.5-4.9mmol/l lactate
 difference may be a better marker.
(associated with 25-35% mortality); moderate, 5-9.9 mmol/l
● Pericardial effusions.
lactate (associated with 60-75% mortality); severe, >10 mmol/l
● CSF lactate mirrors severity of underlying trouble in man with:
(associated with >95% mortality).
uaxo anssn 'andno seie ueu ysn arou yonu s aee 
 O Spinal cord fbrocartilagenous emboli.
 delivery, oxygen consumption or oxygen extraction ratio, to
O Spinal cord trauma.
O Bacterial meningitis.
 determine survival in patients with shock.
● Synovial fluid.
● Pyruvate also increases in states of shock/hypoperfusion, but
● Aqueous humour (melanoma leads to increased lactate).
lactate is a much more sensitive predictor of outcome than
pyruvate or L:P ratio.
Usefulness for determining viability of skin grafts
● In early SIRS/sepsis,
, hyperlactataemia may reflect tissue
 Using microdialysis techniques to sample chemicals produced by
hypoxia; early improvement of tissue oxygen delivery improves
specifc tissue beds, venous or arterial occlusion to myocutaneous
outcome.
● In established SIRS/sepsis, lactate interpretation is more
flaps caused:
complex. Impaired lactate clearance and increased lactate
● Decreased glucose.
production both occur. Increased lactate production in the
● Increased pyruvate.
absence of hypoxia is common e.g. due to accelerated glycoly-
● Increased lactate.
sis, inhibition of PDH by endotoxin, mitochondrial dysfunc-
 The changes were related to flap ischaemia and the differences
tion etc. Although dichloroacetate enhances PDH activity, and
could differentiate between arterial and venous occlusion.
lowers blood lactate, it had no effect on haemodynamics or
survival.
Role of lactate in neoplastic conditions
● In canine gastric dilation/volvulus (GDV), pre-operative lactate
has been used as a prognostic indicator: <6.0 mmol/l (99%
 Cancer cachexia is often associated with increased blood lactate
because of:
survival); >6.0 mmol/l (58% survival).
● In equine colic, several studies have examined pre-operative
● Hypermetabolic state due to tumour products/cytokines/
 blood lactate and survival and some have incorporated lactate
inflammatory mediators which cause increased protein break-
values into a pre-operative survival score. Overall it appears
 down leading to increased alanine which stimulates pyruvate,
sisid rood e ym ose s Uo s's  i
and therefore lactate production.
 Peritoneal fluid lactate was also higher in non-survivors.
● Tumour cells have few mitochondria, so rely more on anaero-
● In neonatal foals with sepsis/SIRS, lower lactate concentration
bic metabolism, with more lactate production.
 at admission and after 18-36h treatment both correlated with
● Tumour may outgrow its blood supply, so hypoxia also reduces
survival.
 aerobic metabolism.
● In human trauma patients, normalisation of lactate within
● Hepatic function possibly reduced, which alongside altered
 24-48 h was associated with improved survival compared with
metabolism leads to increased lactate production.
Lactate
197
● With chronic illness/critical illness, thiamine becomes deficient
Hughes D, Rozanski ER, Shofer FS, Laster LL, Drobatz KJ (1999)
leading to decreased PDH activity and increased lactate
Effect of sampling site, repeated sampling, pH and PCO, on
 production.
● Often intolerant to exogenous lactate so beware Hartmann's
of Veterinary Research 60(4), 521-524.
solution (L: D ratio 50: 50).
Lorenz I, Gentile A, Klee W (2005) Investigation of D-lactate
metabolism and the clinical signs of D-lactataemia in calves.
Veterinary Record 156, 412-415. See also correspondence
Conclusions
from Stampfli H and a reply from Lorenz I (2005) Veterinary
Lactate measurements (arterial/venous):
Record 156,816.
 Phypers B, Pierce JMT (2006) Lactate physiology in health and
● Form an important part of the overall assessment of haemody-
disease. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care 
 namic function, especially serial values which track response to
and Pain 6(3), 128-132.
trea tment.
Rand JS, Kinnaird E, Baglioni A, Blackshaw J, Priest J (2002)
● Single cut-off values are unlikely to be reliable prognostic
 Acute stress hyperglycaemic in cats associated with struggling
indicators when used alone, but form a valuable part of the
and increased concentrations of lactate and norepinephrine.
 overall assessment.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 16, 123-132.
Further reading
Allen SE, Holm JL (2008) Lactate: physiology and clinical utility.
 Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 18(2),
123-132.
Corley KTT, Donaldson LL, Furr MO (2005) Arterial lactate con-
Self-test section
centration, hospital survival, sepsis and SIRS in critically ill
 neonatal foals. Equine Veterinary Journal 37(1), 53-59.
What is the Cori cycle?
 Evans GO (1987) Plasma lactate measurements in healthy beagle
Which isomer of lactate is produced in the body:
2.
dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research 48(1),
D-lactate or L-lactate?
131-132.
Fluid therapy
Learning objectives
 To be familiar with the body's water compartments.
To appreciate the main different types of fluid loss.
 y i ae q pe (s uxo sio sis a sp o sd u  aqsp oi aeq o
to the type of fluid loss.
To be familiar with different routes and rates of fluid administration, and be able to choose the most appropriate.
 To be able to devise a fluid therapy plan and understand the importance of patient monitoring to assess the therapy.
Distribution of fluid within the body
'semi-permeable membranes′ separating them. The magnesium-
 dependent Na*/K+-ATPase pump is important for maintaining
In all mammals, water makes up a significant part of the total
 these gradients between compartments. The osmotically active
body weight (the exact amount varies slightly with age and
particles are:
Apq p jo sp-om no g xde uo (so
weight in adults. (See Chapter 37 on neonates.) Of this total the
● In the extracellular interstitial fluid: Nat and Cl and some
water is distributed amongst the compartments as illustrated in
protein (albumin).
 Figure 23.1 and Table 23.1. There are three main fluid compart-
●In the extracellular intravascular fluid: Na*, Cl and large
ments within the body, separated by semi-permeable membranes,
colloidal proteins (e.g. albumin).
which allow water to pass freely between them:
● In the intracellular fluid: Kt and proteins.
● Intracellular compartment, the largest compartment in adults.
Any change to the concentration of osmotic particles within a
● Interstitial compartment, the fluid that surrounds and bathes
compartment (without any change in the volume of water) will
cells.
result in an alteration of the equilibrium between compartments
● Intravascular compartment, essentially the plasma (the small-
and therefore the ratio of distribution of water.
est compartment).
 Normal plasma osmolarity is c. 280-320 mOsm/l, very little of
which is provided by proteins. It can be calculated from:
 Extracellular fluid (ECF) is made up of interstitial and intra-
vascular fluid.
Plasma osmolarity _2×([Na+]+[K+])+[Glucose]+[Urea]
1 l of water weighs c. 1 kg.
(mOsm/1)
(all values in mmol/l)
Total blood volume depends upon plasma volume and haema-
tocrit (HCT) i.e. red cell size and number. Therefore, total blood
Notice what little effect plasma proteins have.
volume is approximately 9% body weight for dogs and horses (i.e.
Proteins in solution exert an osmotic pressure called ^oncotic
plasma (5% body weight) + RBCs (4% body weight)). The water
 d   d    s
in skeletal components (bone and cartilage), and in transcellular
fluids (ocular fluids, synovial fluid, CsF, respiratory and GI secre-
into their vicinity, thus greatly increasing their osmotic pulling
tions), exchanges slowly with other compartments, so is usually
power on water - this pull being described as colloid osmotic
ignored for fluid therapy reasons.
 pressure. Plasma proteins (mainly albumin) and their associated
The distribution of water between these different compart-
cations normally exert a colloid osmotic pressure of c. 18-
ments is governed by the osmotic gradients between them and the
25 mmHg in blood.
198
Fluid therapy 199
INTRACELLULAR WATER
40% body weight or 2/3 total body water
(200 kg for 500 kg horse)
INTERSTITIAL WATER
(includes transcellular fluids e.g. synovial and CSF)
TOTAL BODY WATER
15% body weight or 1/4 (i.e. 3/12) total body water
60% or 2/3 body weight
3/4 of extracellular water
(300 kg for 500 kg horse)
(75 kg for 500 kg horse)
EXTRACELLULAR WATER
20% body weight or 1/3total body water
(100 kg for 500 kg horse)
INTRAVASCULAR WATER (plasma)
5% body weight or 1/12 total body water
1/4 extracellular water 
(25 kg for 500 kg horse)
Figure 23.1 Distribution of body water.
Table 23.1 Guide to compartment volumes.
● Red cells.
● White cells.
Intracellular
Extracellular
Interstitial
Intravascular 
● Platelets.
500kg horse
200litres
100 litres
75 litres
25 litres
 In the frst few (4-6) hours, the composition of the remaining
 20 kg dog
8 litres
4 litres
3 litres
1 litre
 blood and other fluid compartments does not change appreciably
because pure blood loss does not result in alteration of any of the
6op 6ys
2 litres
1 litre
0.75 litres
0.25 litres
osmotic gradients between compartments acutely, so initially no
huge fluid (water) shifts occur. If blood loss was significant, then
 after a few hours the effects of homeostatic mechanisms impor-
The tonicity of a solution/compartment refers to its ability to
tant for the maintenance of blood pressure, such as the renin-
initiate water movement. It depends upon the number (rather
 angiotensin-aldosterone-ADH system, become more noticeable
than the size), of effective osmoles present which are impermeant
 and sodium, chloride and water are retained. These latter will
to the surrounding solutions/compartments. Tonicity is therefore
 distribute throughout the whole of the ECF (including the intra-
a measure of the effective osmolarity of a solution.
vascular space), to cause haemodilution, i.e. the packed cell
volume (PCV) will fall 4-12h post haemorrhage (possibly partly
offset by splenic contraction). Haemodilution is promoted by
Types of fluid loss
altered Starling forces at the capillaries, so less interstitial fluid is
 In order to implement a fluid therapy plan, it is important to
formed, yet such fluid can still be returned to the intravascular
determine the type of fluid loss This is important so that you can
 space through the lymphatics (transcapillary refill). Some albumin
choose the most appropriate fluid to administer to the animal.
will be restored to the plasma from this interstitial fluid, but new
Good history taking, sound clinical judgement, observation and
 red cells will have to be made by the bone marrow which takes 
laboratory tests can all be helpful in determining types of fluid loss.
3-5 days.
Whole blood loss
ECF loss
 For example, rupture of splenic haemangiosarcoma, erosion of 
 For example diarrhoea, vomiting, diuresis, sweating, 'third space
internal carotid artery by fungal plaque in guttural pouch, severed
losses^ (some accumulations (losses) of fluid within the body e.g.
superfcial arteries or large veins. This fluid lost from the intra-
 peritonitis). The most common type of fuid loss in clinical prac-
vascular compartment is composed of:
tice. This fluid, lost from interstitial and intravascular compart-
●Water.
ments,is composed of:
● Electrolytes.
● Water.
● Proteins (including clotting factors).
● Electrolytes (mainly Nat and Cl ).
200  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 If sodium and chloride are lost in their normal ratio to water
Response of the body to fluid loss
(it is common for electrolytes to be lost alongside water), then the
osmotic potential of the ECF tends not to change very much.
Hypovolaemia is a reduction of fluid in the intravascular com-
Intravascular hypovolaemia then stimulates homeostatic mecha-
partment (i.e. a reduced circulating volume). Hypovolaemia can
nisms, resulting in increased sodium and water retention. With
be present without dehydration (e.g. acute haemorrhage); but
significant losses, haemoconcentration of blood will occur, so an
dehydration cannot exist without at least some degree of hypo-
 increase in PCV and total protein will result. Interstitial fluid may
volaemia. Dehydration is loss of water, which affects all body
compartments.
 Clinical signs of hypovolaemia reflect the increase in sympa-
increases in protein concentration result in tiny increases in
thetic tone. These are (acutely):
osmotic pressure in the ECF compartment which also favour
water movement into this compartment.
● Tachycardia.
If water is lost in excess of electrolytes, then the ECF compart-
● Weak pulses (especially peripheral).
 ments become hypertonic compared to the intracellular compart-
● Pale mucous membranes.
ment, so water moves from intracellular compartment to ECF.
● Brisk capillary refill time.
This changes the osmolarity of the cells, and this is recognised in
● Cool extremities.
 the CNS so that ADH release is stimulated and thirst increases 
● Tachypnoea.
water drinking until osmolarities return to normal.
Laboratory/clinical tests that could help to confrm
 If electrolytes are lost from the ECF in excess of water, the ECF
compartments become hypotonic compared to intracellular com-
hypovolaemia:
partments and then water moves into cells to swell the intracel-
● PCV/TP in conjunction (both increase with dehydration
lular space. CNS cells swell resulting in a reduction in ADH
whereas TP falls slightly, but PCV can fall more dramatically
release.
6-12 h post haemorrhage (hypovolaemia)).
● High urine specifc gravity/reduced urine production (<l-
Protein rich ECF loss
1.5 ml/kg/h).
For example some pleural/peritoneal effusions, GI sequestration,
● Low arterial blood pressure.
 protein losing enteropathies, protein losing nephropathies, burns.
● Low central venous pressure.
Fluid is lost from interstitial and intravascular compartments,but
● Increased blood lactate.
this time is composed of:
Intravascular volume deficits are present in all types of fluid
●Water.
losses. The severity of the deficit depends upon the type, magni-
●Electrolytes (Na*, Cl-).
tude and duration of fluid loss.
● Proteins.
Clinical signs of dehydration (primary water deficit, but affects
all fluid compartments),include:
Such fluid losses tend to have an electrolyte composition like
●Thirst.
plasma/ECF compartment. Due to pathological processes such as
inflammation there is leakage or effusion of plasma proteins into
· Oliguria.
the fluid. These losses result in haemoconcentration (increased 
● Dry mucous membranes.
PCV), but depending upon the quantity of protein lost, the effects
● Reduced skin pliability.
on plasma protein can be variable. Plasma protein has only small
● Sunken eyes.
effects on plasma osmolarity, but if total protein (TP) falls below
● Depressed mentation.
c. 30 g/l, then oedema will occur as water is not easily retained in
● Neuromuscular derangements (weakness/seizures due  to
the intravascular space. As the interstitial space also becomes
hypernatraemia).
 protein-depleted, then its osmolarity will also be slightly reduced.
Although dehydration affects all compartments, because the
It is possible that these conditions may favour an increase in the
intracellular compartment is by far the largest fluid compartment
movement of water to inside cells, and thus cellular oedema in
(in adults), the clinical signs associated with intracellular fluid loss
addition to interstitial oedema occurs.
are often late in onset (because of the huge reserve). Laboratory
tests to help confirm dehydration include a high measured plasma
Pure water loss
Nat concentration.
For example high respiratory rate (pneumonia, pyrexia), or
 primary water deprivation. As water moves freely across all com-
Clinical evaluation
 partments, fluid lost from all compartments comprises water. The
History
tonicity of all compartments increases, but the remaining water
distributes between the compartments in the normal ratios. All
Accurate and comprehensive history taking can be invaluable to
compartments show a reduction in volume alongside the increase
the clinician in determining the nature and degree of fluid loss.
in tonicity. This is sensed by homeostatic mechanisms so that
 The clinician should ask questions about normal maintenance
thirst and ADH release are increased.
 requirements and abnormal losses:
Fluid therapy  201
● How much is the animal drinking?
Table 23.2 Assessment of 'dehydration'.
●How much is the animal urinating?
● Has the animal been suffering from vomiting/diarrhoea/
 Percentage dehydration
Clinical signs
diuresis?
4%
None
● Does the animal have ascites or oedema?
● Is the animal bleeding badly? Has the animal bled?
5%
Semi-dry oral mucous membranes, eyes still
● Has the animal been sweating profusely?
moist, nomal skin turgor
6-7%
Dry oral mucous membranes, eyes still moist,
Clinical examination
mild loss of skin turgor
Haemodynamic status
8-10%
Dry oral mucous membranes, eyes sunken,
considerable loss of skin turgor, weak rapid
● Heart (pulse) rate: tends to increase with hypovolaemia.
pulse.Oliguria,cold extremities,increased
● Colour of mucous membranes (remember disease states such
Gapillary refill time (CRT)
 as anaemia and endotoxaemia can confuse the picture).
10%
Very dry mucous membranes, severe eye
● Capillary refill time is not always very reliable, but tends to
retraction, eyes dull, complete loss of skin turgor.
anuia, weak thready pulses, weak and 
 prolonged as decompensation sets in.
recumbent, ?altered consciousness 
● Peripheral pulse quality (you can estimate pulse pressure by
12%
All of above + moribund 
how easy pulses are to occlude with digital pressure); peripheral
 pulses become more difficult to palpate (and easier to occlude)
12-15%
All above + very prolonged CRT, dying
with greater degrees of hypovolaemia. Arterial blood pressure
 measurement may be helpful.
● In cases of pre-existing anaemia (e.g. where PCV was reduced
● Thei
temperature
of  extremities becomes cool with
beforehand), then the PCV could appear 'normal (because of 
hypovolaemia.
haemoconcentration), despite significant fluid loss. To reduce 
● Measure central venous pressure (CVP) or arterial blood pres-
such mis-interpretations the PCV should always be interpreted
sure. Measurement of CVP can be a good indicator of cardio-
 alongside the TP.
vascular status (see Chapter 18 for factors which affect it), but
● TP tends to increase with ECF loss and water loss, however,
 in practice it may not be possible to measure either CVP or
 hypo- or hyper-proteinaemia can obviously obscure results.
arterial blood pressure. However with practice the clinician can
 become quite good at estimating the mean arterial pressure by
 Excessive protein loss can be a problem with some conditions.
At levels below 35 g/l (with albumin <20 g/l) there is a signifi-
palpating how easy it is to occlude a peripheral or central
(femoral) artery.
cant reduction in intravascular colloidal oncotic pressure which
can result in extravasation of fluid.
● Lactate measurement in either venous or arterial blood (little
 difference between them usually) can help determine the sever-
Urine production and specific gravity
ity of hypovolaemia and reduced tissue perfusion.
Urine production is decreased in cases of hypovolaemia where a
mean arterial pressure of <60-70 mmHg causes a marked reduc-
Skin pliability
tion in renal blood flow. Compensatory homeostatic mechanisms
After being raised in a pinch the skin should return rapidly to its
then cause the healthy kidney to retain water (and Nat) in situa-
resting position. A slower return over 3-5s indicates about 5+%
dehydration. If the skin remains in a fold it indicates about 10--
tions of falling blood pressure. As a result the volume of urine
 production decreases whilst its concentration increases. Therefore
12+% dehydration (Table 23.2). This is a very subjective test (and 
if you can obtain a urine sample, then measuring the volume and
can be affected by for example emaciation, obesity, Cushing's
 the specifc gravity of the urine (using a refractometer) can give
 disease, cutaneous asthenia) and will only provide a rough guide
at best. Also if this test is being done repeatedly then the same site
an indication of fluid status (but beware concomitant renal
 disease). The rate of production of urine is also used in human
should be used by the same person. Skin pliability is most useful
 and small animal intensive care to monitor effectiveness of fluid
when you are trying to observe changes in pliability and so more
therapy.
than one check over a period of time is necessary.
 Normal urine production 1-1.5 ml/kg/h, or 25 ml/kg/day.
PCV/TP
 Daily water requirement (normal healthy adult) is 50 ml/kg/
● PCV tends to increase with ECF loss and water loss.
Aep
 Normal daily urinary water loss is 25 ml/kg/day (the 'sensible
● PCV does not immediately decrease after whole blood loss; but
losses).
it takes several (>4-6) hours for the PCV, and to a lesser extent
 Normal daily respiratory, faecal and skin losses are 25 ml/kg/
the TP, to begin to decrease.
day (the (insensible' losses).
● It should be remembered that there is an enormous variation
 in *normal PCV between individuals so repeated samples are
 In animals with impaired kidney function, the compensatory
 needed in order to provide a dynamic picture.
mechanisms that conserve water and concentrate urine are also
202  Veterinary Anaesthesia
impaired. As a result, such animals may have either a normal or
the needle. This method can be particularly useful where the
even slightly reduced specific gravity in the face of hypotension/
temperament of the patient makes management of an intravenous
dehydration. It is also true that animals that suffer from increased
catheter difficult or for tiny patients e.g. hamsters, mice etc. The
       s r ,
intra-peritoneal route is not considered to be suitable for emer-
mia than 'normal animals. For instance an animal with polyuric
gency acute volume replacement, although absorption from this
renal failure will become dehydrated/hypovolaemic more quickly
site is a little quicker than from the subcutaneous site.
if it is denied access to water compared to animals with normal
kidney function.
Subcutaneous route
 From the above and Table 23.2, you cannot tell if an animal is
This is included for completeness although this is not an appro-
<5% dehydrated, yet it is almost dead with 15% dehydration. So,
priate route for rapid large-quantity volume replacement, because
if you find some of the clinical signs listed above, you can hazard
during acute severe hypovolaemia the perfusion to the subcutane-
a guess at 10% dehydration for a starting point, an easy number
ous tissues is much reduced, so absorption from this site is slowed.
with which to calculate your patient's fluid requirements.
For lesser degrees of intravascular deficit, however, this route may
still be used, and is often advocated for chronic renal failure cats
Routes of fluid administration
with mild degrees of dehydration.
Intravenous route
Oral route
This is the most favoured route for rapid restoration of intravas-
This route is included for completeness although it is not the best
cular volume. If necessary use more than one IV catheter and
route for rapid restoration of large intravascular volume deficits,
   d      a 
especially in sick animals. Nevertheless, this route is often used in
extremely important (see Chapter 7).
farm species. Oral rehydration therapies should supply sufcient
 It is vitally important to use the right giving sets (i.e. normal;
 sodium to enable restoration of ECF volume (but without causing
burette sets for cats and small dogs; blood giving sets with micro-
hypernatraemia), sufficient glucose (in the correct ratio to
filters for any blood product). Burette sets are much safer for
sodium), sufficient water and other electrolytes (K', Cl, Mg2,
small animals as you only put the total volume you wish to admin-
Ca?t), and something to treat acidosis if necessary. The patient's
ister into the burette, ensuring that the whole fluid bag does not
energy intake should not be forgotten, but oral rehydration thera-
have the chance to run into the animal's vein and overhydrate it.
pies seldom provide suffcient on their own. Sodium can be co-
 You should make sure that you are aware of the number of drops
transported with glucose and amino acids, so these are both
per ml for the type of set you use:
commonly included. Glucose, glycine and citrate can also be
● Most standard giving sets are 20 drops per ml.
absorbed along with water independently of sodium, so further
● Paediatric/burette sets are 60 drops per ml.
aid water absorption. Glucose, glycine, alanine, glutamate (and
● Most blood giving sets are 15 drops per ml.
glutamine) are energy/protein sources and help gut epithelial cell/
villus regrowth. Citrate is a bicarbonate ^sparer/precursor’ and
● The giving sets commonly used in equine hospitals give 10
drops per ml.
aids correction of metabolic acidosis, although acetate is preferred
for milk fed animals as it does not interfere with abomasal milk
This is important in calculating drip rates:
clotting in calves.
Body weight (kg)x
Infusion rate (ml kg h) x Drops ml
 Types of parenteral fluids
Drip rate (drops/s) =
3600 (s h)
● Crystalloids.
· Colloids.
Intra-osseous route
● Oxygen-carrying solutions.
For very small patients such as neonates, venous access can be
difficult to establish. In such patients, a needle can be inserted into
● Blood and blood products.
the medullary cavity of a bone, usually the iliac crest, femoral
Crystalloids
greater trochanter, lateral humeral tuberosity, tibial crest or even
 These are aqueous solutions made from crystalline compounds.
sternum, for the administration of fluids. As for intravenous cath-
 These may be isotonic, hypotonic or hypertonic with respect to
eters, the skin should be prepared aseptically prior to placement
plasma (Table 23.3).
of the needle. A styletted 20G spinal needle can be used for the
Crystalloids include:
 procedure if intraosseous needles are not available.
●Normal (0.9%) saline.
Intra-peritoneal route
● Hartmann's solution (lactated Ringer's solution).
In some circumstances it may be necessary to administer fluids
●0.18% saline + 4% glucose.
directly into the peritoneal cavity, from which they are absorbed
● 5% glucose (Dextrose is strictly only the D-glucose isomer that
into the circulation via the peritoneum. A bolus dose of fluid
is preferred for animal metabolism, and therefore not quite the
(usually an isotonic crystalloid solution) can be administered ^off 
same as glucose solutions which contain the D- and L-isomers,
Fluid therapy 203
Table 23.3 Characteristics of common crystalloid solutions.
Solution
 Colloid Osmotic
Osmolarity
pH
(+EN)
(CI)
[K+)
(Ca+)
(Mg2+)
Buffer
Pressure (mmHg)
(mOsm/)
(mmol/)
(mmol/)
(mmol/l)
(mmol/)
(mmol/)
(mmol/)
Isotonic
0.9% NaCI
300-308
5.0-5.7
150-154
150-154
0
0
0
0
0.18% NaCl + 4% glucose
0
262
C. 4.0
30
30
0
0
5% glucose in water
0
252-278
4.0-6.5
0
0
Hartmann's solution 
0
273
6.5
130-131
109-111
4-5
2-3
0
28-29
lactate**
Hypertonic.
7.2% NaCI
0
C. 2400
c. 5.0
1232
1232
门
 = Hd jewu sw = Aeoso sd wn
** Other available solutions contain acetate and/or gluconate and/or propionate for buffering.
but these two names are often used interchangeably as here.
 only about a quarter of this (i.e. 250 ml) remains in the intravas-
 Dextrose yields slightly more energy per mole than the mixture
cular space after 1-2 h.
of isomers in glucose).
Normal saline is not quite as closely matched to ECF as
Hartmann's solution. It does not contain lactate, and with an
Other crystalloid solutions for special clinical situations
acidic pH tends to cause a dilutional acidosis. Part of the reason
include:
for this is that too much chloride is given for the body's require-
● Potassium chloride solutions.
ments, displacing bicarbonate ions (buffer) from the ECF in order
●Sodium bicarbonate solutions (8.4%, 4.2%).
to maintain electroneutrality. Hypokalaemia is also encouraged.
● Calcium and magnesium containing solutions.
Normal saline is useful to help treat hyponatraemia and
● High concentration dextrose solutions (e.g. 50% dextrose).
hyperkalaemia.
Most solutions are adjusted to be isotonic with plasma so that
the red blood cells do not crenate (shrink) or swell and burst.
Bicarbonate sparers or biarbonate precursors?
Although Hartmann's solution is listed beneath the ‘isotonic'
Hartmann's solution contains lactate anions. During glucogene-
fluids in Table 23.3, once the bicarbonate ions have been metabo-
sis, lactate can be converted, via pyruvate, into glucose. For each
lised'/utilised, then the solution is effectively hypotonic, providing
two molecules of lactate required for the production of one mol-
ecule of glucose, two Ht ions are consumed, hence lactate is said
water in excess of electrolytes. Glucose (dextrose)-containing
to have a bicarbonate sparing? effect. The oxidative metabolism
solutions, although provided in isotonic solutions, are a good way
to provide water, because once the glucose has been utilised by
of lactate and other organic anions such as acetate, propionate,
cells, only water remains; and in fact, some metabolic water is
gluconate and citrate can result in the production of bicarbonate
ions and therefore these anions have been called “bicarbonate
 precursors. Whichever the dominant mechanism for lactate,
tions are also, therefore, effectively hypotonic.
there is an overall alkalinising effect.
Crystalloid solutions are useful for:
● ECF (including plasma) volume replacement; hypertonic crys-
 talloids act as transient plasma volume expanders.
 Usually hypertonic saline, but some people make their own sort
● Maintenance fluid (water/electrolyte) requirements.
of hypertonic Hartmann's solution.
● Special occasions.
Hypertonic saline
ECF replacement fluids
Solutions which have a composition similar to ECF in terms of
(7.2% NaCl), Osmolarity is c. 2400 mOsm/l. Hypertonic saline
can be administered IV to produce a rapid, yet transient, increase
water and electrolytes are normal saline and Hartmann's solution.
in intravascular blood volume and blood pressure by a number
 Due to the concentration of sodium in these solutions being very
similar to the ECF sodium concentration, these fluids stay in the
of mechanisms:
extracellular compartment. Therefore the main function of these
● It draws water from the interstitial space (and to some extent
types of fluids is to replace ECF. After these fluids are adminis-
from the intracellular space including vascular endothelium
tered into the intravascular compartment, the fluid will redistrib-
and red cells). It causes haemodilution; the reduction in PCV
ute between the intravascular (1/4) and interstitial
1(3/4)
being partly due to haemodilution and partly because red cells
compartments; thus for every 1 litre of fluid administered IV,
also give up some of their own water.
204   Veterinary Anaesthesia
● It causes a pulmonary-vagal reflex, followed by selective sym-
 Maintenance fluids
 pathetic activation, resulting in haemodynamic effects such as
 Solutions which provide water in greater excess to electrolytes,
 the venoconstriction of major capacitance vessels.
include:
● Its hypertonicity results in direct vasodilation such that rapid
 administration can result in hypotension due to this, in addi-
● Dextrose-saline.
● 5% dextrose solution.
tion to vagal reflexes. Coronary and cerebral circulations may
 remain vasodilated.
An animal's maintenance requirement is defined as the amount
● Its hypertonicity draws water from myocardial cells, and
of water and electrolytes required to replace those lost through
 possibly concentrates their intracellular calcium, resulting in
normal physiological procees, ie. through respiration, perspira-
 increased inotropy.
tion and excretion via the alimentary and urinary tracts. In the
normal adult animal, the maintenance requirement for water is
Much of the published work on hypertonic saline describes its
50 ml/kg/day or 2 ml/kg/h. In addition to supplying water, the
use along with dextrans (colloid) and commercially available
maintenance fluid should replace some electrolytes. Normal daily
solutions of dextrans in hypertonic saline are available in the USA.
sodium requirement is around 1(-2)mmol/kg. Normal daily
In the UK hypertonic saline is available on its own? or with
potassium requirement is around (1-)2 mmol/kg. Normal fluid
hydroxyethyl starch solutions. The effect that hypertonic saline
losses are hypotonic to the ECF, but contain more potassium.
produces is only transient (30-120 min; in horses its effects may
However, we cannot put a solution into the vascular space
last only c. 20 min). The use of hypertonic saline must be followed
that is too hypotonic, otherwise the blood cells would swell and
burst.
talloids to replace borrowed water and to provide a long-term
 In the UK, we do not have a commercially available veterinary
increase in circulating volume.
fluid that has all the components that the body needs in terms of
A guideline dose is 4ml/kg over 10 min.
maintenance requirements. Ideally we would like a fluid with
 Hypertonic saline can be given IV in most cases of shock i.e.
plenty of water, not too much sodium and chloride, but a fair bit
hypovolaemic or endotoxaemic, to increase intravascular volume
of potassium, some magnesium, some calcium, other minerals
rapidly, but as the effects of hypertonic saline are transient then
and vitamins. It should be noted that the amount of dextrose
some thought is necessary in choosing when to administer it to
present in the solutions described provides negligible energy at
gain maximum benefit. For example if hypertonic saline is given
the concentrations used.
prior to anaesthetising a horse with surgical colic, it is usually
administered immediately prior to anaesthesia so that the benefi-
The daily energy requirement is c. 50 kcal/kg/day (0.2MJ/kg/
cial restoration of blood volume/pressure will be present before
day).
the cardiovascular insult of anaesthetic induction. If the hyper-
1 g glucose provides only 3.4kcal (14.3kJ).
 tonic saline is given too soon then this cardiovascular advantage
For animals which cannot tolerate enteral nutrition, parenteral
may be lost. The timely administration of subsequent fluids
nutrition should be instituted as soon as possible. Parenteral
should be considered to provide a longer lasting improvement in
nutrition is outside the scope of this chapter.
circulating volume and to ^payback’ the fuid drawn from the
 These solutions (5% dextrose (glucose); or 4% dextrose with
 interstitial and intracellular compartments.
1/5th normal (0.18%) saline), are isotonic because of the dextrose
 By 'shrinking? vascular endothelial cells and reducing leukocyte 
and the small amount of sodium. (Putting pure water into the
bloodstream carries with it the risk of haemolysis.) Once the
tissue perfusion and may help against ischaemia-reperfusion
 dextrose has been metabolised and is no longer osmotically active,
injury. However, the use of hypertonic saline has some potential
only, or mainly, water remains, which can distribute freely
side effects:
throughout the three fluid compartments as there is either no, or
● Hypernatraemia (it should, therefore, not be used in animals
only a little amount of Na', to trap it in the extracellular space.
which are already hypernatraemic, although this may not
 For each gram of dextrose metabolised, 0.6 ml of metabolic water
always be known.)
are also produced. Thus, if 1litre of 5% dextrose is given, then an
● Hypokalaemia.
 extra 30 ml of water are generated.
● Haemolysis.
These fluids are not useful for restoring circulating volume as
● Thrombosis.
it would require, for example, 12l of 5% dextrose to restore the
● The potential for re-haemorrhage i.e. if used in cases of haem-
circulating (intravascular) volume by 1l, and by that time the red
 orrhagic shock, the increase in blood pressure after its admin-
blood cells, and other cells including vascular endothelial cells,
 istration may result in resumption of bleeding as the improved
would be bursting due to water overload, and interstitial oedema
blood pressure may displace blood clots.
would be developing. This is because the dextrose solution basi-
cally provides water, and this can freely distribute between all
 It is because of these problems that repeated doses of
fluid compartments, so only about 1/12 of the volume given IV
hypertonic saline are contra-indicated. Its use in small animals
remains in the intravascular space after 1-2 h.
is limited due to the longer duration and cost effectiveness of
The solutions noted above are, however, ideal for treating
colloids.
 primary water loss. They are also used as maintenance fluids, but
Fluid therapy  205
if so, should have potassium added to them. For example, 4%
plasma because of the high sodium content (i.e. 4.2% solution has
glucose with 0.18% sodium chloride, supplemented with 20-
osmolarity of 1000 mOsm/l, and 8.4% solution has osmolarity of
30 mEq/l of potassium for maintenance, is commonly used. Or,
2000mOsm/l). Normally the 4.2% (0.5 mmol/ml) solution is
reserved for use in small animals and can be administered by
20-30 mmol/l), followed by 2 bags of 5% dextrose (also supple-
peripheral veins, whereas the 8.4% (1 mmol/ml) solution is
mented with K+ to 20-30 mmol/l).
reserved for large animals, like horses, and should only be admin-
istered by central veins (e.g. jugular). A 1.26% (0.15 mmol/ml)
Fluids for special occasions
solution is less commonly available.
 These include potassium chloride and sodium bicarbonate. See
Bicarbonate therapy is not a treatment for respiratory acido-
also Chapters 24, 21 and 44 on electrolytes, blood gas analysis
sis. If you give bicarbonate to an anaesthetised horse with a mixed
and endocrine problems. For 50% dextrose see Chapter 44 on
metabolic and respiratory acidosis, then you must correct any
endocrine considerations.
respiratory component of the acidosis, by increasing minute ven-
tilation, frst. Likewise, bicarbonate therapy in deressed, recum-
bent diarrhoeic calves should be given with caution asit can cause
Potassium chloride
a respiratory acidosis if the animals are unable to blow off any
For supplementation of other fluids. ‘Strong KCl is the stock
carbon dioxide generated.
solution that you can add to your other bags of fluids. It is a very
 Bicarbonate solutions should not be administered concur-
 dense (heavy) solution, so you must ensure that you mix it really
rently through the same catheter or giving set as Hartmann's
well once added to the fluid bag. Nothing will kill an animal
solution as the bicarbonate and the calcium in the Hartmann's
quicker than to give it an overdose of K. The strong potassium
 solution may precipitate out as insoluble calcium carbonate.
solution commonly available in the UK is usually 20%; 13 mmol
Kt in 5 ml. In the USA a 14.9% solution is used, with 2 mmol K+
Colloids
per ml. When you supplement your fuids for infusion, most
 Colloids are macromolecules which cannot pass through mem-
people add enough K+ to make the final K+ concentration between
branes. Their solutions can be almost iso-osmotic or hyper-
20 and 30 mEq/l (= mmol/l). In some circumstances you may
wish to add more but you must then be very careful at what rate
respect to plasma colloid osmotic pressure (normal is 18-
you give the fluid. See Chapter 44 on electrolytes.
25 mmHg); and they can be made up in hypertonic solutions with
Maximum rate for K+ infusion is 0.5 mEq/kg/h. Any faster
respect to plasma osmolarity (Table 23.4). They include:
than this and you may put your patient in danger.
● Synthetic colloids: gelatins, dextrans, hydroxyethyl starches.
● Natural colloids: plasma, albumin.
Sodium bicarbonate
● Oxyglobin (a haemoglobin-based oxygen carrying solution).
See also Chapter 21 on blood gas analysis. Many disease states in
● Blood and blood products.
animals can cause acidosis or alkalosis of varying degrees (e.g.
GDV, sepsis, endotoxaemia). Acidosis is easier to treat than alka-
Colloids contain large molecules, 5-1000+ kDa, which cannot
losis. Measurement of acidosis/alkalosis requires a blood gas ana-
 pass through normal vascular endothelium. If their osmotic pres-
lyser. If you do not have a means of measuring blood gases or
sure is higher than that of the plasma, in addition to the given
'total CO, then use of bicarbonate therapy can be dangerous as
volume of fluid staying in the intravascular compartment, water
you have no idea of how much to give.
is also 'pulled’ from the interstitial space (and some from the
If metabolic acidosis is due to bicarbonate loss or deficiency,
intracellular space) into the intravascular space, so they are called
 then bicarbonate is an appropriate therapy to give In most cases,
' plasma volume expanders.
however, bicarbonate therapy may not be necessary unless the pH
 Colloids can be used in any case where rapid improvement
<7.1-7.2 and the base deficit more negative than -7.0 mmol/l; i.e.
of circulating volume is necessary. Colloids remain within the
fluid therapy itself may allow the homeostatic mechanisms to
intravascular space longer than crystalloids (starches >
restore pH.
Sd s  s  a s  s
 If the metabolic acidosis is due to accumulation of other acids
 though. Because smaller volumes are required compared with
(e.g. lactic acidosis or ketoacidosis), then bicarbonate treatment
crystalloids, restoration of intravascular volume can be achieved
may not be all that helpful but rather the underlying cause should
more quickly. As a general rule no more than 25% of the normal
be treated.
circulating volume of an animal should be administered as a
 If you are using bicarbonate therapy then the following formula
colloid at any one time (because of clotting problems, and
 is useful in working out how much to give:
haemodilution). Colloids can be used intra-operatively to help
maintain blood pressure, or if an animal has a TP of less than
 mEq Bicarbonate = 0.3 x base deficit x body weight (kg ).
35 g/l, in order to boost COP and prevent oedema formation.
The use of colloids may promote tissue dehydration (especially
Administer half slowly over 20-30min, wait 15-30min then
if the animal is already dehydrated) by drawing water from the
reassess. Two solutions of sodium bicarbonate are commonly
interstitial (and intracellular), space. In order to payback the
available; 4.2% and 8.4%. Both are hypertonic with respect t0
fluid drawn from these spaces it is usual to administer isotonic
 206  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 23.4 Characteristics of common colloids.
Solution
MWt (kDa)
 Duration of effect
COP
Osmolarity
PH
(4eN)
(CI)
[K+)
(Ca)
Ave (range)
(mmHg)
(mOsm/)
(mmol/)
(mmol/)
(mmol/)
(mmol/)
Iso-osmotic colloids (in normal saline)
 6% Hetastarch
450 (10-3400)
24-48 h
29-32
310
5.5
154
154
0
0
80E
154
 6% Pentastarch
200 (11-1000)
18-24 h 
32-36
5.5
154
0
6% Tetrastarch
130
18-24 h 
36-37
308
4-5.5
154
154
0
0
Haemaccel (3.5%
35
Maximum effect
25-29
293
7.3
145
145
 5.1
6.25
urea-linked gelatin)
wanes within 4 h
Gelofusin (4%
30
Maximum effect
SE-EE
279
7.4
154
120
0.4
0.4
succinylated gelatin)
wanes within 4 h
4-5% Albumin 
69
 Depends on 
13-25
300
？
0
40
10
0
pathology
Hyperosmotic colloids (in normal saline)
6% Dextran 70
70 (15-160)
 Maximum effect 
60-75
309-310
5.0 (3 - 7)
154
154
0
0
wanes by 12-24h
10% Dextran 40
40 (10-80)
 Maximum effect 
40
310-311
3.5-7.0
154
154
0
wanes by 6-12 h
10% Pentastarch 
200
18-24 h 
72
326
5.0
154
154
20-25% Albumin
69
 Depends on 
195
1500
？
40
10
pathology
1.3% oxyglobin in 
200 (65-130)
24+h
42-43
290-310
7.8
113
113
4
modified Hartmann's
Colloid effect may
solution
outlast oxygen-
carrying effect
Hypertonic - hyperosmotic
7.5% NaCl/
depends on
 24-48 +h 
>100
2567
Acidic
1283
1283
0
 20% Starch
starch type
7.5% NaCl/
70
24+h
62-75
2567
4.0-5.0
1283
1283
0
6% Dextran 70
or effectively hypotonic crystalloids either concurrently with, or
This intravascular retention might be partly explained by electro-
immediately after, the colloid (similarly to the situation when
 static repulsion forces between starch molecules and the endothe-
hypertonic saline is administered). There are several colloid prod-
 lium or exposed basement membrane, however, once the larger 
ucts available. Tables 23.4 and 23.5 outline some of their proper-
starch molecules are degraded by plasma amylase, they can then
ties. If you are unfamiliar with a certain type of colloid then you
escape into the interstitial space and so can promote interstitial
should read the data sheets for contra-indications as each type can
and pulmonary oedema formation, just as is possible with all col-
have disadvantages such as anaphylaxis or coagulopathies.
loids when the capillaries are leaky.
As far as the initial plasma volume expansion goes, it is the
number of colloidal molecules per volume of solution adminis-
Albumin
tered that are important, and not their size. In fact, the bigger the
 Good for initial treatment of protein-losing enteropathy or neph-
molecules, the fewer are present per unit volume, so the plasma
ropathy where life-threatening hypoalbuminaemia exists (<15 g/l1).
   ss s i ssa s ae i
 One problem, however, is that exogenously administered albumin
 intravascular space so, for example, hetastarch is also useful for
will reduce the endogenous (hepatic) production of albumin. Less
the treatment of hypo-oncotic patients.
useful for effusions where increased capillary permeability is the
 Some sizes of starch molecules, the so-called pentafraction
cause because albumin will also leak through the capillaries:
(200-250kDa), the most abundant sizes in pentastarch, were at
higher molecular weight colloids may be a better choice. In
one time believed not only to stay within the circulation in the
 patients with SIRS and capillary leak syndrome, albumin is again
face of capillary leak syndrome (part of systemic inflammatory
likely to leak out of the vascular system,but so might other higher
response syndrome (SIRs)), but also to actually plug' the leaks.
molecular weight products which may cause a very long lasting
Fluid therapy  207
Table 23.5 Plasma volume expander-associated side-effects.
 Gelatin based colloids
Gelofusine (succinylated gelatin)
 May cause hypersensitivity reactions ranging from mild urticarial
Haemaccel (urea-linked gelatin;
 lesions to anaphylaxis.
polygeline) (solution contains Ca)
 Coagulopathy, parly dilutional, but gelatins also become incorporated
 into clots, and weaken them.
Dextran based colloids
Dextran 40
 Hypersensitivity reactions rare.
Dextran 70
D-40 may precipitate in renal tubules (especially with pre-existing
hypovolaemia and renal damage), but may have beneficial effets
 in improving rheology (partly due to interference with coagulation?)
Coagulopathy, partly dilutional, but dextrans, especially D-40, may
 interfere with the function of von Willbrand (vw) factor, factor VIll 
and platelets.
Blood glucose may increase as dextrans are metabolised.
Hydroxyethyl starch
 Hetastarch 
Hypersensitivity reactions rare.
 based colloids
Pentastarch
Coagulopathy, parly dilutional, but similar effects to dextrans on
Tetrastarch
 dotting factors and platelets.
Larger molecules implicated in causing renal dysfunction.
May reduce phagocytic activity of phagocytic immune cells, potential
 concern for immunocompromised animals?
 Metabolised by plasma amylase.
Hypertonic (7.2%) saline
7.2% sodium chloride
Transient effect (20+ min), increases circulating volume at the 
expense of other fluid compartments.
interstitial oedema. Administration rate c. 1-3 ml/kg/h. Beware
Initial plasma volume expansion is up to five times the volume
anaphylaxis. Overdose can cause pulmonary oedema.
administered. Its half-life in the circulation is around 30-40 h; but
duration of oxygen-carrying effect is unknown. It is thought to
Dose required (g) = 10x (desired albumin (g/dl)
 -s e iu adexa no 'shep 1 oy aq-uaxo, ue piaod
actual albumin (g/dl) x 0.3x Body weight.
able blood donor can be found.
There is no need to cross-match. Multiple doses have been
Oxygen carrying solutions
given, although this is not recommended in the data sheets.
Include haemoglobin (Hb)-based solutions and perfluorocarbon 
Although antibodies were raised, no antibody deposition was
 found in liver or kidneys, and no reduction in oxygen-carrying
emulsions. There are different types of Hb-based solutions:
capacity of the polymerised Hb was found.
● Modifed Hb solutions such as C-α diaspirin cross-linked Hb
Bovine haemoglobin uses Cl instead of 2,3-DPG as an allos-
and polymerised purified Hb (oxyglobin) have been tried (see
teric modulator to modify its transport of O, CO and H+. (Thus
below).
 another advantage over using stored blood, in which the 2,3 -DPG
● Hb-containing liposomes have also been tried. These have a
level is often depleted so that infused red cells do not function
longer intravascular life than Hb-based solutions; the Hb can 
optimally immediately.) Feline haemoglobin is likewise chloride-
be co-encapsulated  with allosteric modulators such
as
 dependent, whereas dog haemoglobin is 2,3-DPG-dependent.
2,3-diphosphoglycerate (2,3-DPG); and metHb reductase can
 Horse Hb appears to be more complex, see the further reading.
also be added to improve useful lifespan. These are still in the
developmental stage.
P50
The P50 is the partial pressure of oxygen (in the plasma) necessary
Oxyglobin (Hb glutamer 200) m
for 50% saturation of the haemoglobin. The P50 of the oxyglobin
Colloidal solution containing 13g/dl (130mg/ml), of purified
 polymerised bovine haemoglobin in a modifed lactated Ringer's
solution is around 35 mmHg.
solution, pH 7.8. The solution has a lower viscosity than blood,
● Ruminant Hb P50s are around 25-35 mmHg.
so can be given very much more quickly than blood if necessary.
● Feline Hb P50 is around 35-36 mmHg.
The solution is isotonic with plasma,but is slightly hyperosmotic/
● The P50 of 2,3-DPG-dependent haemoglobins (e.g. canine,
hyperoncotic (huge chunky highly charged molecules). It can be
human), is around 29-31 mmHg for dogs and 27mmHg for
administered via standard infusion sets; does not require a filter;
man.
 and can also be administered via peristaltic infusion pumps. It has
● Horse Hb has a P50 of about 24-26 mmHg and is less 2,3-DPG
a shelf-life of c. 3 years at room temperature. Once opened, use
dependent than that of the dog.
within 24h because of production of metHb (i.e. oxidative
● Llamas and alpacas have Hb P50s of around 17-20mmHg
damage). Bag sizes are: 125 ml and 60 ml.
because they are used to living at high altitudes.
208  Veterinary Anaesthesia
100%
● There is transient (24-48h) interference with some serum
oxyglobin
chemistries (colorimetric techniques).
●PaO, should not change.
% satn
● Some types of coagulation tests are affected, it depends on the
methodology of the test, but can include activated partial
50%
thromboplastin time (APTT) and one stage prothrombin
time (OSPT). Platelet counting is unaffected (but platelets
can be diluted out by the volume expansion that occurs),
and fbrin degradation products (FDPs) are supposedly
unaffected.
PO2 (mmHg)
30
35
Hb and the vasopressor action of oxyglobin
As a protein, Hb is remarkable in many ways. We already know
Figure 23.2 Dissociation curves for red-cell bound haemoglobin (solid line)
how, especially in the red cell environment, Hb carries O, CO2,
and oxyglobin (dashed line).
Ht. In plasma, it can also perform these functions, but is to some
degree less regulated. However, Hb also binds ('scavenges), nitric
oxide (NO). DeoxyHb can bind NO (termed HbNO), and OxyHb
The oxyglobin-oxygen dissociation curve lies to the right of the
can form a nitrosothiol compound with NO (designated SNO-
canine red-cell haemoglobin-oxygen dissociation curve (Figure
23.2). Thus oxyglobin is less fully saturated at low POz values or,
Hb). Some people believe that the bigger the Hb polymers, the
less they can bind NO, and there may be other mechanisms
 xo s dn aaia on dd si qxo m r 1d
whereby oxyglobin scavenges NO.
tissues. Therefore oxyglobin greatly improves tissue oxygen deliv-
ery in dogs.
Normally, inside RBCs, Hb does not come into close contact
with vascular endothelium. But, free in plasma, as oxyglobin, it is
 The average molecular weight of oxyglobin is 200kDa. Less
able to contact endothelium. Capillary (and larger blood vessel),
 than 5% is present as unstable dimers and tetramers; and these
vascular endothelium produces many local modulators of vascu-
are rapidly excreted into the urine, hence the urine looks very red/
lar tone, including prostacyclin (PGI) a vasodilator, endothelins
orange (transient haemoglobinuria) for the frst few hours (c. 4 h)
after dosing.
(vasoconstrictors), and nitric oxide (a vasodilator). Free Hb, in
the form of oxyglobin, binds the normally produced NO, and
Administration of oxyglobin also improves oxygen delivery
to the tissues because it improves microcirculatory oxygen
causes an overall increase in peripheral vascular tone (vasocon-
striction). (There is a debate about whether red-cell confined Hb
delivery. Normally, very small capillaries do not allow RBCs to
also has a role in NO transport and delivery to the tissues.)
pass through, even though RBCs are highly deformable and
 Such vasoconstriction, combined with plasma volume expansion,
can squeeze through many larger capillary beds. However, because
 may cause problems (similar to over-dose of fuids): high CVP,
 Oxyglobin is not contained within cells, it is relatively smaller than
 increased tisue oedema (including pulmonary), and congestive
RBC and there is a better chance that plasma carrying oxyglobin
cardiac failure. Because of this potential to easily over-dose, some
can pass through small capillaries, thus taking oxygen nearer to
 people have been wary of administering oxyglobin.
the cells that are likely to be most deprived of oxygen.
 Another problem, in the situation of haemorrhagic hypovolae-
mic shock, is that if oxyglobin is used to restore blood volume
Consequences of oxyglobin administration are
and oxygen-carrying capacity, especially if CVP is used to
● Discoloration of skin, mucous membranes and sclerae for 3-5
determine the end-point for infusion, then you may under-dose
days post infusion.
initially because of:
● Discoloration of urine (haemoglobinuria) for frst 4h post
● Vasoconstriction (secondary to NO scavenging).
 infusion in healthy animals, due to unstable low molecular
weight polymers in the solution. The rest of the polymers are
● Plasma volume expansion (secondary to water being pulled
into the intravascular space from both other interstitial sites,
broken down by the reticulo-endothelial system (RES). While
and also the intracellular compartment). It has been said that
urine is discoloured, urine dipsticks are unreliable for pH,
5 ml/kg oxyglobin is equivalent to 20 ml/kg hetastarch.
 glucose, ketones and protein.
● PCV will decrease even more, due to haemodilution. Oxyglobin
Vasorelaxation will occur with time, and therefore continued
 is a colloid and a potent plasma volume expander
patient monitoring is necessary to guide the requirement for
● Haemoglobin concentration increases (so you cannot use the
further therapy. If you are worried about fluid overload, but
rule of thumb, whereby [Hb] approximately equals one-third
cannot measure CVP, then administer oxyglobin slowly where
PCV, for at least 24-48 h).
possible and monitor the clinical response including the respira-
● Total plasma protein increases.
tory rate, and auscultate the lungs to warn of developing pulmo-
● Pulse oximetry readings tend to become an average of red-cell
nary oedema (pleural effusions may develop before lung
Hb saturation and oxyglobin saturation.
 parenchymal oedema in cats).
Fluid therapy  209
Other concerns
● Hypoproteinaemia.
● Coagulopathies.
● Dilutional coagulopathy can occur. You may need to give fresh
● Thrombocytopaenia.
frozen plasma/platelet rich plasma to restore clotting factors
and platelets.
 Transfusion triggers
● By improving tissue oxygen delivery, can oxyglobin fuel reper-
fusion injury?
In human medicine, transfusion used to be thought necessary
once PCV was down to 30% and [Hb] to 10 g/dl. However, blood
● What of methaemoglobinaemia? How soon does the adminis-
transfusions can result in the transfer of infectious diseases and
tered polymerised Hb become unable to transport oxygen? Are
cause immunosuppression, with increased risk of tumour metas-
 nitrosylated haemoglobins active?
tases, so this trigger has been reducing, as long as there is no
Uses
accompanying cardiorespiratory disease, to values as low as PCV
Oxyglobin can be used for the treatment of anaemia due to:
21%: [Hb] 7 g/dl. As far as veterinary species go, acute and chronic
anaemias, and different species (remember the cat has a peculiar
● Haemorrhage, trauma/surgery (concurrent hypovolaemia is
erythron compared to the dog), may require different inter-
likely).
ventions, and each patient has to be dealt with individually. The
● Haemolysis (immune-mediated, infectious). Patients 
are
 m s  n ns n 
usually normovolaemic (euvolaemic), so beware volume over-
 physiological ones, for example markers of tissue oxygen delivery
load; administer slowly.
such as lactate, venous oxygen saturation or oxygen extraction, is
● Non-regenerative anaemia due to disease states such as chronic
gradually becoming commonplace.
renal failure and neoplasia (again probably normovolaemic so
beware volume overload).
Some 'rules of thumb' regarding hypo-coagulation
 It is very useful especially when donors are not to hand and
● For clinically detectable haemorrhage to be apparent, clotting
there is no time to cross match.
factors must be reduced to about 30% of normal.
● If clotting factor deficiencies are present, then replacement of
Contra-indications
them, up to 20-30% of what is a normal level, is usually suf-
are hypervolaemic states:
ficient to arrest haermorrhagic episodes.
● Congestive heart failure
● Platelet count <50 x 10°/l is trouble; but replacement to about
● Oliguric/anuric renal failure
25 x 10/l can help.
● Fibrinogen <lg/l is the critical level for haemorrhagic
diatheses.
Cautions
 include normovolaemic states (haemolytic anaemias).
● Haemodilution with fluid therapy tends to dilute out platelets
long before clotting factors become critical (as long as no clot-
Doses
ting factor deficiency was pre-existing).
Dogs: 3-8 ml/kg and generally not faster than 10 ml/kg/h. For
Anticoagulants for blood donation
normovolaemic chronic anaemia cases, aim to give 0.5-2 ml/
kg/h, but you can give up to 15-30 ml/kg as rapidly as necessary
● Acid citrate dextrose (ACD) affords 3 weeks? storage (refriger-
if replacing acute large volume blood loss as well as oxygen
ated). 1 ml per 7-9 ml whole blood.
carrying capacity. Not to exceed 30 ml/kg in 24h. It is said that
● Citrate phosphate dextrose adenosine (CPD A1) affords 4
6 ml/kg will increase [Hb] by 1 g/dl.
weeks storage (refrigerated). 1 ml per 7-9ml whole blood.
Cats: 1-2 ml/kg and generally ≤0.5 ml/kg/h (most cats in need of
● Heparin: use blood immediately Need 2 units heparin per ml
extra oxygen-carrying capacity are chronically anaemic so are
whole blood.
normovolaemic; hence give it slowly, usually not faster than
2 ml/kg/h). But you can give up to 5 ml/kg (or more), and more
Volume of donor blood
rapidly if treating acute massive haemorrhage. Not yet licensed.
 You can safely take up to 10% of the donor's blood volume every
4 weeks. Donors (preferably <8 years old), must be healthy and
 there are a few case reports ofits administration at similar rates
not anaemic. Suggested minimum weight for a dog donor is 25 kg.
and total doses to those reported in dogs.
    r o e  A  
PCV 35%. More usually, 20% of donor blood volume is taken.
Blood and blood components: transfusions
Indications are:
1 unit of dog blood = 450 ml (=20% from 25 kg dog)
● Severe acute haemorrhagic shock (acute loss of >25% of total
1 unit of cat blood = 45-50 ml (=20% from 3.5 kg cat)
 blood volume; possibly >15% if under anaesthesia).
●Haemolytic anaemia.
When taking 20% of donor blood volume, you should give
●Aplastic anaemia.
the donor some fluids to help replace the losses. It is usually
210  Veterinary Anaesthesia
recommended to give 3-4 times the volume taken in the form of
Horses
 IV Hartmann's solution. Re-donation can be every 12 weeks.
Blood volume = 80-90 ml/kg (8-9% body weight).
Dogs
Red cell survival time is c.145 days, although less than this for
 transfused cells. More than 400,o00 blood types are possible due
Blood volume =80-90 ml/kg (= 8-9% of body weight).
to 30 different RBC antigens comprising at least eight blood
groups. The most immunogenic antigens are Aa from the A group
Red cell survival is c. 120 days; although is less than this for
 and Qa from the Q group. Antigens in the C group may also be
 transfused red cells. Canine blood groups are:
significant. There is no universal donor but aim for Aa and Qa
●DEA 1.1
negative if possible (especially for foals suffering from neonatal
●DEA 1.2
isoerythrolysis). Donors can give 4-81 blood per month. Geldings
(or mares that have never bred) are usually preferred donors.
●DEA 3
Cross match (major and minor), if time permits. Blood should
●DEA 4
●DEA 5
be transfused as soon as possible after harvesting as, with time,
●DEA 6
potassium leaks out of the RBC. The erythrocyte sedimentation
●DEA 7
rate is very rapid so that within 1-2h plasma can be separated off.
●DEA 8
●DEA 9
Blood administration
●DEA 10
●DEA 11
● Must use giving set with in-line filter to ensure microthrombi
do not get infused.
●DEA 12
● Blood should be either at room temperature or preferably at
●DEA 13
37°℃ for transfusion; not cold straight from the fridge.
DEA 1.1, 1.2 and 7 are the most important and the Universal
● Record recipient's baseline temperature, pulse and respiration
donor is DEA 1.1, 1.2 and 7 negative.
(TPR) before the start of transfusion, this makes it easier to
 Dogs rarely have naturally occurring alloantibodies, so the frst
note reactions.
 transfusion is unlikely to cause problems. Ideally you should
● Some people like to administer an antihistamine (usually
always cross match, and must do this for dogs which have received
chlorphenamine, c. 0.4-0.5 mg/kg) slowly intravenously before
 previous transfusions. It takes between 4 and 14 days to produce
- d no      
 antibodies after being challenged.
fusion reactions. Chlorphenamine can cause hypotension
(especially if administered rapidly), and drowsiness.
● Do not administer blood through lines with Hartmann's
Cats
solution, or other calcium-containing solutions in them, or else
Blood volume =60-70 ml/kg (= 6-7% of body weight).
coagulation might occur in the line.
● Some peristaltic pumps will fracture the red cells; use syringe-
 drivers or pressure-infusors if necessary.
Red cell survival is c. 75 days; although it is less than this for
 transfused red cells. Feline blood groups are:
Rate of administration
● A (dominant to AB, and most common).
 Depends upon the reason for therapy. Generally start at
● B (thought to be common in some breeds e.g. Persian, British 
≤0.5ml/kg/h, certainly for first 5-15min to check for acute
shorthair).
reactions. If necessary, can then increase up to 5-20 ml/kg/h,
● AB (recessive to A; co-dominant with B).
or faster if needed.
There is no universal donor. Type A cats have naturally occur-
ring alloantibodies to B antigens, and type B cats have naturally
 Blood volume requirement
occurring alloantibodies to A antigens. Type AB cats have no
It is often said that: 2.2 ml/kg of donor blood (PCV c. 40%) will
naturally occurring alloantibodies. Anti-A antibodies are strong
raise recipient PCV by 1% and likewise: 1 ml/kg of packed red cells
haemagglutinins and haemolysins. Anti-B antibodies are weaker
(PCV c. 80-90%) will raise recipient PCV by c. 1%. Therefore:
aglutinins and haemolysins. Cats can also have naturally occur-
ring cold agglutinins.
 ml of donor blood required = desired PCV increase X
    j   s s  
(2.2 x Recipient weight( kg)).
compatible blood types between donor and recipient.
The other formula that you may see is:
Major cross-match = donor red cells + recipient plasma
mls donor
 recipient blood volume X (desired PCV -recipient PCV)
Minor cross-match = recipient red cells + donor plasma
blood required =
donor PCV
Fluid therapy  211
Where recipient blood volume equals 80-90 ml times recipient
Blood component therapy
body weight (kg) for dogs; and 60-70ml times recipient body
Whole blood
weight (kg) for cats.
The best preservative/anticoagulant is CPDA-1 (citrate, phos-
A typical ^unit' of dog blood is 450ml; and ^unit' of packed red 
 phate, dextrose, adenine). Commercially available blood collec-
cells is c. 200ml. A typical ^unit' of cat blood is 45 ml; and ^unit'
tion bags (Baxter Fenwal), contain c. 63 ml of this preservative/
of packed red cells is c. 20 ml.
anticoagulant mixture. The ‘unit' of blood which can then be
Blood 'storage lesions'
collected is 450 ml. (Keep ratio of anticoagulant: blood at 1: 7-9).
 Blood can be stored for up to 4 weeks at +4°C (refrigerator), as
● Decreased red cell ATP, so increased cellular rigidity/fragility;
long as a closed system was used for its collection. Platelets lose
 and cells are slightly swollen because membrane sodium pumps
viability within 1-3 days. If aseptic technique was breached, then
have no energy supply.
blood must be used within 24 h. Use filtered giving set.
● Decreased 2,3-DPG, so oxygen dissociation curve moves to left 
with resultant reduced ability of haemoglobin to give up its
 Packed red cells
 Oxygen to the tissues (Valtis-Kennedy effect). Transfused red
 Usually washed with saline (three times), and re-suspended in
cells regain 2,3-DPG after 24-48 h.
minimal saline, so final PCV c. 80-90%. Can be administered,
● Decreased pH, so oxygen/haemoglobin dissociation curve
 slowly, as packed red cells, especially to patients with chronic
moves to right (although overall left-shift may predominate,
 see above). Stored blood is poor at improving tissue oxygen
anaemic conditions that are normovolaemic. Can be further re-
 suspended in sterile normal saline to make a less viscous solution
delivery, at least at first.
for administration. Use filtered giving set.
● Increased plasma PCO2.
● Decreased plasma PO2.
● Increased plasma K+ secondary to some haemolysis (especially
Leukocyte-poor red cells
 in high K+ red cell species and breeds: man, horse, not normally
If patients have antibodies to foreign white blood cells, such prep-
dogs except Japanese Akitas).
arations can be prepared in human hospitals (although these days,
● Increased NH, so beware liver disease patients.
 (haem)apheresis machines are used for all sorts of blood compo-
● Decreased platelets (after 2-3 days).
nent therapies).
● Decreased labile clotting factors (after 6 or so hours).
● Decreased glucose.
Fresh plasma
 Blood must be centrifuged and plasma harvested for use within
Transfusion reactions
e q si esd y sianed pe s o aaes oi u
Can be  immunologic 
(acute and delayed), and 
1non-
istered to increase the recipient's TP, then this formula can be
immunologic with the following clinical signs:
used:
● Agitation/restlessness/change in attitude/muscle tremors.
● Nausea, vomiting, salivation.
ml plasma _ Desired TP - Recipient TP 
● Urticaria (especially around head), angioedema, +/- pruritus.
 X Recipient plasma volume
required
DonorTP
●Anaphylaxis.
● Pyrexia.
Recipient plasma volume is usually taken as c. 5% of body
● Tachypnoea/dyspnoea.
weight (or 50 ml/kg).
●Tachycardia.
● Hypotension.
Fresh frozen plasma
● Seizures.
Blood centrifuged and plasma harvested and frozen (-18 to
● Haemolysis, jaundice, haemoglobinuria.
-20°C) within 6h to save clotting factors. Can be stored for up
Others
to 1 year; but after thawing, should be given within 6h. It
● Hypocalcaemia (citrate toxicity). Rare unless liver disease and
contains:
slow metabolism of citrate; or huge volumes citrated blood
● Factors I (fbrinogen), II, V, VII, VIII and vW factor, IX, X, XI,
administered.
'IIIX
●Hypervolaemia (volume overload).
● Antithrombin III.
● Hypothermia (blood not warmed prior to infusion).
● Alpha 1 antitrypsin.
●Allosensitisation.
● Alpha 2 macroglobulin.
● Transmission of infectious diseases.
●Bradykinin inhibitors.
● Immunosuppression (increased metastasis rate).
● Albumin.
● Immunoglobulins.
If reaction occurs: Stop infusion
 Perhaps try antihistamine +/— corticosteroid. If the reaction is
The main indication for fresh or fresh frozen plasma seems
mild continue but at a slow rate. If it is severe, do not continue.
to be for patients with SIRS and coagulopathies including
212   Veterinary Anaesthesia
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) (see Chapter 26
Devising a fluid therapy plan
on shock). Frozen plasma, especially hyperimmune, is useful in
foals with failure of adequate (quality or quantity) colostral intake
 Fluid therapy goals:
 and transfer of passive immunity.
● Replace like with like.
● Replace volume for volume.
Purified human immunoglobulin
● Replace fluids at a similar rate to that at which they are lost.
Provides immunotherapy. Has been used in man in the treat-
ment of various immune-mediated conditions; and has been used
Priority 1 Restoration of circulating volume
in dogs to treat immune-mediated haemolytic anaemia, immune-
If the clinical signs and history indicate that there is a significant
mediated thrombocytopaenia, a case of drug-induced Stevens-
hypovolaemia, then the first priority of fluid therapy is to restore
Johnson syndrome, and in a cat to treat erythema multiforme.
circulating volume as quickly as possible.
High dose IgG given IV modulates immune-mediated diseases by
The old 'maxim of fluid therapy is to replace like with like, and
several mechanisms, including:
so it is important to assess the cause of hypovolaemia. How much
● Excess IgG competes with receptors for the Fc portion of anti-
fluid has been lost? What sort of fluid has been lost? The history
bodies on mononuclear cells.
and presentation of the patient may help to determine the type of
fluids lost, but accurately working out the amount of fluid lost
● Excess IgG may 'mop up' complement components and prevent
 them being involved in other immune-mediated reactions.
can be diffcult. The clinical examination will help give an idea
but does not give a quantitative indication of the total amount of
Platelet rich plasma (PRP)
fluid lost. If you knew the body weight of the animal before a
Blood must be kept warm after collection. Two spin cycles are
disease (e.g. diarrhoea) you could work out how much fluid had
necessary to concentrate the platelets into a small volume (about
been lost; assuming that body tissues are not usually gained or
 55 ml). They must then be rested for an hour, before being stored
lost rapidly enough to effect such a major change in body weight.
at room temp. (>18°C), and slowly agitated. (PRP can also be
Then on the basis that lkg equals 1 litre, you can calculate the
spun again to produce platelet concentrate.) Platelets only
requirement; remembering that ECF is lost in the ratio of 3/4 from
survive for 1-5 days. Contains about 10,000 platelets per unit. A
the interstitial space and 1/4 from the intravascular space.
dose of 5-10 ml/kg of PRP can increase platelet count by 20,000/
Remember that the 1/4 intravascular volume deficit is your first
microlitre.
concern to replace. Methods of working out deficit volumes
describing calculations based on when the animal last drank/ate,
Cryoprecipitate
number of vomits, and number of diarrhoea episodes are not very
Made by thawing fresh frozen plasma until it is slushy. Then it is
practical.
centrifuged again so that a precipitate is obtained, which is stored
 Often estimation can be imprecise, but by continual clinical
at -18 to -20°C. This is called the cryoprecipitate; and the plasma
examination during fluid therapy, monitoring heart rate, periph-
above this is called ^cryopoor, but can be used for its albumin
eral pulses, mentation, PCV/TP, skin pliability, CVP, urine
content. Cryoprecipitate contains high concentrations (about 6
output/specific gravity, and lactate, the clinician should have a
times those of fresh frozen plasma) of:
reasonably clear picture of how the fluid therapy regimen is
working.
● Von Willebrands factor.
 How long will it take to repair the deficit? Normally aim to
● Factor VIII.
●Fibrinogen (I).
replace intravascular volume deficit as quickly as possible; then
any remaining deficit can be replaced over a 12-36h period.
●Fibronectin (XIII).
From the above sections on the types of fluids, colloids and, in
● V, IX and XI.
some circumstances, hypertonic saline, are often advocated for
 In man, 2-4 ml/kg of cryoprecipitate is usually sufficient to stop
the rapid restoration of large deficits of circulating volume. If
a bleeding episode.
 isotonic crystalloids are chosen instead to achieve the same goal,
then much larger volumes are required. See section below on
Additional therapies
trauma/haemorrhagic shock, for more discussion on replacement
For thrombocytopaenia
rates.
Vincristine increases platelet release from bone marrow, but
 In practice, you should administer the chosen fluid until the
these platelets may be immature' and poorly functional. Dose:
clinical signs of hypovolaemia diminish, for example improved
0.01-0.025 mg/kg IV every 7 days as necessary.
mentation, heart rate decreases, urine production normalises and
good pulse pressure returns.
For von willebrand's disease
   i    
Priority 2 Replace remaining deficit
Dose: 1-4μg/kg SC or IV (dilute in 20ml saline and administer
Once the priority of dealing with hypovolaemia has been taken
over 10 min) about 30-60 min before surgery or to a donor prior
care of, one can set about restoring any remaining fluid imbal-
to blood collection. Effect lasts about 5h. Tranexamic acid
ances, which can be done over 12-36h. If you pour in fluids too
(a pro-coagulant),can be given the day before surgery.
quickly, the kidneys will excrete them; and you end up with a loss
Fluid therapy  213
of the renal medullary concentration gradient, so called renal
 In many cases requiring fluid therapy, there are also abnormal
 medullary wash-out.
ongoing losses (e.g. diarrhoea, exudates, oedema, abnormal
 If circumstances in your practice (e.g. staffing levels) are limited
metabolism). Normally these ongoing losses are similar to ECF in
then there is nothing wrong with replacing the deficit in two or
composition and so Hartmann's solution is used in these cases.
three aliquots, but try to administer the fluids over as many hours
Beware high protein losses.
as possible to allow the animal to redistribute and fully utilise the
fluids you administer before excreting them. It may be more
'Surgical maintenance' for anaesthesia
convenient to administer the fluids over 8h when the patient and
 Intravenous fluids are administered to animals under anaesthesia
its catheter can be regularly checked than to leave it overnight
because:
unobserved where the catheter may block or be pulled out.
 Aim to get any animal onto oral fluids as soon as possible to
● The animal has been starved (and often animals will not drink
if they do not eat), and is also unlikely to drink for a few hours
reduce the complications of intravenous catheterisation and to
after surgery.
retain normal gut function. Commercially available electrolyte
● The fluid administered makes up for ECF losses, evaporation
solutions can be administered by dosing-syringe or stomach tube.
 and mild haemorrhage during surgery.
Once you have identifed the type of fluid lost, choose the most
● Intravenous fluids help to support the circulating blood volume
appropriate replacement fluid. As stated earlier the most common
and blood pressure.
fluid lost is ECF so Hartmann's solution is the usual choice or
● The fluid administered helps to make up for any abnormal
Hartmann's plus colloids in cases of hypoproteinaemia. In cases
losses such as increased urine production and sweating after C2
of pure dehydration, 5% dextrose is the preferred choice.
agonist use.
Priority 3 Cater for maintenance requirements
 It has been commonplace to use a 'surgical maintenance rate?
plus ongoing losses
of fve times normal maintenance for the frst hour (ie.
All animals need water. The total water loss is made up from
10 ml/kg/h; e.g. 5 l/h for a 500kg horse), and then for the following
sensible (urinary loss, which in the healthy kidney can be adjusted
hours this rate was reduced to 5 ml/kg/h as long as there were no
down to the minimum obligatory urine volume needed to excrete
 increased surgical losses. Recently, however, following medical
 nitrogenous waste products, to conserve water) and insensible
evidence, it appears that a more conservative rate, nearer 5ml/kg/
losses (inevitable losses of water e.g. respiration, defecation and
 hr (unless the animal is hypovolaemic before anaesthesia), should
sweating).
be less detrimental (in terms of potential fluid overload and tissue
The normal maintenance requirement for a healthy animal is
oedema) for a surgical maintenance rate. Also the CEPSAF study
c. 2ml/kg/h or c. 50ml/kg/day. In practical terms this means a
has shown increased complications with fluid therapy in cats;
25kg dog requires 50ml/h or about 1.21/day; a 500kg horse
requires c. 1l/h or 241/day.
one of relative overdosage?), or just a marker of poor health was
 The most suitable maintenance fluids are different to the most
not conclusively determined.
suitable replacement fluids. Whilst we need to maintain all the
Brief notes on Fluid therapy for trauma!
fluid compartments, the most significant compartment in adults
is the intracellular compartment as it contains the most amount
haemorrhagic shock
of water. Intracellular fluid is very different to ECF in terms of its
See also Chapter 26 on shock. Total blood volume for dogs is
Na* and K+ concentrations. Also the concentrations of Na and
80-90 ml/kg. Total blood volume for cats is 60-70 ml/kg.
K+ in urine are different to the ECF, e.g. urine Nat is 40mmol/l
(compared with c. 135-140 mmol/l in plasma); and urine K+ is
Blood loss/hypovolaemia
 20 mmol/l (compared with c. 4.5 mmol/l in plasma). For mainte-
Animals normally present with tachycardia, pale and cool extrem-
nance therapy we are therefore dealing with water, Kt and Mg2+
ities/mucous membranes. Peripheral pulses may be harder to feel.
requirements in excess of Nat requirements (especially if the
 Pain and anxiety can exacerbate the tachycardia. Following acute
animal is not eating).
blood loss, the PCV will not change appreciably for 4-6 h. After
All this means that the use of Hartmann's solution or 0.9%
this time interval, if no fluids are given the PCV will gradually
NaCl for maintenance provides far too much Nat (although a
decrease following fluid shifts into the intravascular space from
healthy kidney can cope with Nat excess) and insuffcient K+ (but
the interstitium. The total protein tends not to reduce much,
the kidney is an obligate K+ excretor), so eventually Hartmann's
because protein (albumin) is mobilised from the interstitial space
solution or 0.9% NaCl will produce hypokalaemia if the animal
along with water.
is not eating. Magnesium is lost similarly to potassium, yet so far
 Most healthy animals can easily withstand the acute loss of
we are very poor at addressing our patients' Mg requirements, and
15-25% of total blood volume. Most of these would do fine
most fluids contain no Mg at all.
without fluid therapy, as long as oral intake can be maintained.
 Usual maintenance solutions are 0.18% (normal/5) NaCl with
However, by giving fluids, you can reduce the chances of long
4% dextrose with 20-30 mEq/l KCl added, or 1 part Hartmann's
solution to 2 parts 5% dextrose, each with 20-30mEq/l final K+
animals can survive, at least in the short term (hours), acute
concentration. Do not exceed 0.5 mEq K+/kg/h.
loss of about 40% of total blood volume. However, these are the
214  Veterinary Anaesthesia
ones that may struggle to survive in the long term if you do not
the intravascular space for longer than crystalloids, and most col-
intervene with some supportive fluid therapy.
loids result in some plasma volume expansion, so often you need
Heart rate increase, arterial (centrally'-measured) blood
less colloid volume than the volume of plasma you are trying to
pressure decrease, and central venous pressure decrease may
replace.
not become very obvious until blood loss reaches 30-40% of
With haemorrhagic shock animals, you can begin fluid therapy
total blood volume. Some animals with significant hypovolaemia
by administering a bolus volume of around 1/5-l/4 of the ani-
may present with bradycardia, which is usually a sign of
mal's normal blood volume.
decompensation.
 This can be given either as:
The following ready reckoner is often quoted:
● a bolus of colloid (c. 10-20ml/kg; nearer 10 for cats, and nearer
● 10-15% blood loss, replace with crystalloids.
20 for dogs)
●15-25% blood loss, replace with colloids.
● a larger volume of crystalloid (this is where the 'shock volumes
● >25-30% blood loss, replace with blood.
came from, as you would need to give four times the colloid
Beware anaemic animals. Also, it is also often stated that under
dose in ml/kg, therefore approximately 40-80 ml/kg, which
 approximates a whole blood volume for a cat or dog, in order
anaesthesia, blood loss much >15-20% of total blood volume
for 1/4 to remain intravascular). However, because it takes
should be replaced with blood, as patients are less tolerant of
longer to give such a large volume of crystalloids, and during its
reduced tissue oxygen delivery when under general anaesthesia.
administration it starts to partition into the rest of the extracel-
This may be debatable as blood transfusion is not without its
lular compartments, smaller volume boluses of colloids are
problems.
 often preferred. If you are worried about over-doing it, then you
 It can be hard to judge the actual volume of blood loss, but
fluid therapy is aimed at correcting the clinical signs associated
can give smaller boluses, and reassess at frequent intervals.
with hypovolaemia and therefore high sympathetic tone. In the
As a very general rule, you should be safe to start with 20-
immediate situation, fluid therapy is aimed at reducing tachycar-
40 ml/kg crystalloids (nearer 20 especially for cats, or give slower),
dia, and restoring the peripheral circulation (mucous membranes
or 5-10ml/kg colloids (nearer 5 for cats, or give slower), as your
pinken up, extremities warm up, peripheral pulses become palpa-
first fluid bolus, then reassess. You may need to give more.
ble again). Certainly within the first few hours, you want to restore
Hypertonic saline behaves a little like a colloid in the frst
urine output (a good indicator of organ perfusion), and effect a
instance because of the volume expansion it causes. However,
reduction of any previously increased lactate (which indicates
eventually fluid shifts occur, so its final effects become like those
restoration of tissue oxygen delivery and consumption). In the
of normal saline although there has been some intracellular and
acute situation, hypovolaemia and the stress response (with
interstitial tissue dehydration. It should be followed by adminis-
increased ADH release), will reduce urine output, so do not
tration of isotonic fluids, and even hypotonic' fluids like dex-
necessarily expect to re-establish this within the first 60 min of
trose-containing solutions. The immediate volume expansion
instituting fluid therapy.
 effect of hypertonic saline can be ^prolonged' by addition of a
colloid.
Fluids to use
 All non-sanguineous fluids will cause some degree of haemodi-
lution. Try not to let the PCV fall much below about 28% ([Hb]
● Crystalloids: normal saline, Hartmann's solution, hypertonic
around 9g/d), or you risk reducing tissue oxygen delivery, espe-
saline.
● Colloids: gelatins, dextrans, starches, plasma, whole blood,
cially if the patient is only breathing room air. Mild haemodilu-
tion, however, to a PCV of around 28% actually improves tissue
oxyglobin.
oxygenation by reducing blood viscosity and the resistance to
With normal saline or Hartmann's solution, only about a
blood flow.
quarter of the volume administered intravenously remains in the
 Oxyglobin is a powerful colloid, in addition to the haemo-
intravascular space after an hour or so, and then the interstitium
globin polymers providing oxygen carrying capacity. Only
starts to get soggy. Also, in order to maintain an increase in the
 pasn aq u ynoe  a ie saop u sn rg ps
circulating volume of X ml, you'll need to give 4 times X ml, which
cats, if careful. Provides an oxygen bridge' so buys you a little
takes longer to get into the vein too. (Dextrose-based solutions
time so you can find a blood donor if necessary.
are really only a posh way of giving pure water into the blood-
stream without lysing red cells; and such solutions partition
Summary
throughout all compartments, so are not good if you're wanting
I have tried not to give too many 'rules about fluid therapy, such
to restore circulating blood volume).
With colloids, most suggest 15-20ml/kg as a maximum in any
as what rates to use and for how long, as every case is different,
and too many ^rules' can be restrictive and preclude against sound
one period of 24h because of the problems of possible over-
 clinical judgement.
expansion of plasma volume, such as haemodilutional anaemia
The main points to remember are:
and coagulopathy. However, if you feel that the animal needs
more, then more can be given,but consider why, and contemplate
● Understand the physiology and you will not be too far out in
blood products if much blood is being lost. Colloids remain in
identifying the type of fluid loss and the right fluid choices.
Fluid therapy  215
● Restoration of circulating volume is the priority, then address 
Dugdale A (2008) Shifts in the haemoglobin-oxygen dissociation
the remaining deficits alongside ongoing losses and mainte-
curve: can we manipulate P50 to good effect? The Veterinary
nance requirements.
Journal 175,12-13.
● Develop your own regimens regarding how you set up fluids
Hollis A, Corley K (2007) Practical guide to fluid therapy in neo-
and monitor fluid therapy to ft in with your practice
natal foals. In Practice 29, 130-137.
situation.
Hughes D (20o0) Transvascular fluid dynamics. Veterinary
Anaesthesia and Analgesia 27(1), 63-69.
 Do not be afraid of fluid therapy, you will be amazed at how
Hughes D (2001) Fluid therapy with artifcial colloids: complica-
many animals you will save.
 tions and controversies. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia
28(2),111-118.
 Further reading
 Moon-Massat PF (2007) Fluid therapy and blood transfusion. In:
 BSAVA Manual of canine and feline anaesthesia and analgesia.
Adamantos S, Boag A, Hughes D (2005) Clinical use of a haemo-
2nd Edn. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T. BSAVA
globin-based oxygen carrying solution in dogs and cats. In
 Publications, Gloucester, UK. Chapter 16, pp 166-182.
Practice 27, 399-405.
Morris C, Boyd A, Reynolds N (2009) Should we really be more
 Bishop Y (2005) Drugs affecting nutrition and body fluids In: The
balanced’ in our fluid prescribing? Editorial. Anaesthesia 64,
Veterinary Formulary 6" Edn. Ed. Bishop Y. Pharmaceutical
703-705. (An excellent discussion of the dogma that surrounds
 Press, London, UK. Chapter 16, Pp 411-413. (Discusses oral
fluid therapy)
rehydration solutions)
 Nappert G (2008) Review of current thinking on calf oral rehydra-
 Boldt J (2009) Seven misconceptions regarding volume therapy
strategies; and their correction. Editorial. British Journal of
tion. Cattle Practice 16(3), 174-182.
Anaesthesia 103(2),147-151. (Excellent reading)
 Nuttall TJ, Malham T (2004) Successful intravenous human
immunoglobulin treatment of drug-induced Stevens-Johnson
Boscan P, Watson Z, Steffey EP (2007) Plasma colloid osmotic
syndrome in a dog. Journal of Small Animal Practice 45,
pressure and total protein trends in horses during anesthesia.
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 34(4), 275-283.
357-361.
 Soni N (2009) British consensus guidelines on intravenous fluid
Brodbelt DC, Pfeiffer DU, Young LE, Wood JLN (2007) Risk
 therapy for adult surgical patients (GIFTASUP) - Cassandra's
factors for anaesthetic-related death in cats: results from the
view. Editorial. Anaesthesia 64, 235-238. (An interesting over-
confidential enquiry into perioperative small animal fatalities
view of some of the controversies surrounding fluid therapy)
(CEPSAF). British Journal of Anaesthesia 99(5), 617-123.
Bumpus SE, Haskins SC, Kass PH (1998) Effect of synthetic col-
loids on refractometric readings of total solids. Journal of
 Self-test section
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 8(1), 21-26.
DiBartola SP. Ed (206) Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base disorders
1.
How is water distributed in the normal adult body?
in small animal practice. 3r Edition Saunders, Elsevier,
2.
Why is 5% dextrose solution effectively hypotonic?
Missouri, USA.
Electro
Learning objectives
 To be familiar with the causes and effects of common electrolyte imbalances.
 To be able to devise and discuss the therapeutic options.
Introduction
Potassium
Fluid therapy can also be used to treat electrolyte imbalances.
The major intracellular cation (about 95% of total body potas-
 The main electrolytes (ions) in the body are sodium, potas-
sium is found within cells). Important for maintenance of cell
sium, chloride, calcium, magnesium and phosphate. They are
osmolarity and electroneutrality. Important for electrical activity
collectively responsible for maintaining normal cellular function,
and the concentrations of these ions are normally controlled by
the body's homeostatic mechanisms to within very narrow ranges.
Table 24.1 Electrolyte concentrations for common species. (Values may vary
slightly between laboratories).
During many disease processes, the normal electrolyte balances
may be disturbed when their homeostatic mechanisms become
Electrolyte
Intracellular concentration
Extracellular concentration
 impaired or overwhelmed.
(mEq/)
(mEq/)
Extracellular fluid (intravascular and interstitial) contains large
 amounts of sodium and chloride ions, whereas the main intracel-
Nat
10-12
135-146 (man)
lular ions are potassium, magnesium and phosphate. The approx-
136 (horse)
imate distribution of these electrolytes between intracellular and
144 (cattle)
140-150 (dog)
extracellular fluids is summarised in Table 24.1.
150-160 (cat)
 Our understanding of the importance of electrolytes and elec-
trophysiology is steadily expanding. This, along with our under-
K+
140
3.5-5.5
standing of acid-base balance has led to the development of anion 
Ca²+
10
4-5.5 mEq/l (=2-2.75 mmol/L)
gap, strong ion diffrence and strong ion gap approaches, which
total (man)
are allattempts to explain what happens during metabolic distur-
2.2-3.8mmol/l total
bances with electrolyte imbalances (see Chapter 21 on blood gas
(1.2-1.5mmol/ ionised) (dog)
analysis). It is outside the scope of this book to discuss electrolyte
2.0-2.6mmol/l total
(1.1-1.4mmol/l ionised) (cat)
imbalances in great detail, however, the main electrolyte imbal-
ances are briefly described below and are summarised in the
Mg2+
40
1.5-2.5 (total)
0.6-1.0 (ionised)
tables.
CI
96-106 (man)
100 (horse)
Sodium
103 (cattle)
110 (dog)
The main extracellular cation and important for maintenance of
120 (cat)
ECF osmolarity and volume (along with chloride). Important for
Inorganic
100
electrical activity in excitable cells. Involved in regulation of
1 -1.5 mEq/l (man) 
phosphates 
0.8-1.8 mmol/l (dog)
potassium, chloride and bicarbonate and therefore in acid-base
balance too. Sodium imbalances are listed in Table 24.2.
0.8-1.9mmol/l (cat)
216
Electrolytes 217
Table 24.2 Sodium disturbances.
Type of imbalance 
Common causes
Clinical sig ns
Treatment
Hypernatraemia
Primary water foss:
Severity of clinical signs is highly
Slow correction with 5% dextrose
(Na >160-170 mmol/l
Severe panting 
related to rapidity of development 
or 0.18% NaCI in 4% dextrose
in dogs)
 Diabetes insipidus 
of hypermatraemia and increase in
(4 ml/kg/h)
(>175mmol/ in cats)
Water deprivation 
osmolarity. Neurological signs
predominate because of changes
Address the underlying cause
(Associated with
Hypotonic fluid foss:
Severe vomiting
in CNS osmolarity Patient may be
 Rate of change of plasma sodium
'uncorrected'
hypo- or relatively hyper-volaemic.
 should not exceed 0.5 mmol/l/h
hyperchloraemia)
Diarrhoea
Intestinal obstruction
Iritabity cofusion, lthay.
Effusions
seizures, coma
Excess sodium gain:
Muscle weakness, myoclonus
Salt paisoning
In creased thirst
latrogenic (hypertonic saline; sodium
bicarbonate therapy)
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome or
 spironolactone therapy)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease)
Hyponatraemia
Primary water gain:
Severity of clinical signs is related to
0.9% NaCI (4ml/kg/h)
(Na <120 mmol/l
Psychogenic polydipsia
lapidity of onset of hyponatraemia
Hypertonic saline?
in dogs)
and change in osmolarity (usually
Hypotonic fuid gain:
Address the underlying cause
(<130mmol/l in cats)
a decrease, but some
latrogenic (Iv fluids low in Na)
hyperglycaemic patients may be
Rate of change of plasma sodium
(Associated with
Uroabdomen
 SIADH (syndrome of inappropriate ADH 
hyper-osmolar. Neurological signs
 should not exceed 0.5 mmol/h
'uncorrected"
secretion - CNS disorders, prolonged
predominate. Patients may be
hypochloraemia)
hypo- to hyper-volaemic
 Pseud ohypo-natraemia
IPPV/PEEP)
Water excess with lesser sodium excess
Muscle weakness, tremors 
{underestimation of
 e.g. cardiac failure; hepatic failure;
Restlessness, confusion, lethargy.
sodium concentration)
nephrotic sy ndrome
seizures
can occur when
Nausea and vomiting 
hyperipaemia or
Excess sodium foss:
hyperproteinaemia
Duodenal vomiting
Paralytic ileus
are present 
Possibly lack of thirst
Diarrhoea
 Effusions incl. third space losses and 
pancreatitis
Severe sweating (horses)
Addison's disease
Diuresis
Redistribution:
Gain of other osmotic particles in ECF e.g.
hyperglycaemia
Sick cell syndrome in terminally ill patients 
results in Na movement into cells due
to reduced activity of sodium pumps
 in excitable cells. Involved in acid-base regulation. Beware blood
samples taken into Na/K/EDTA as potassium values will be falsely
Cel
elevated.
 In the situation of acidosis, there are excess H+ ions outside the
 d  q o a    s 
Figure 24.1 Transcellar H*/K+ exchange.
 transcellular exchange system (Figure 24.1),by which ECF pH can
be quite well buffered; but in exchange, K+ ions must leave the
cells to maintain electrochemical neutrality. The opposite happens
alkaloses, both respiratory and metabolic, with each 0.1 unit of
if alkalosis exists. Although there is stil much debate, it seems that
 pH increase, the [K+] tends to decrease by ≤0.4 mmol/l.
respiratory acidosis has a more profound impact on ECF [K]
 The potassium content of red blood cells (RBCs) varies accord-
than metabolic acidosis. With respiratory acidosis, for each 0.1
 ing to the number/activity of sodium/potassium pumps in the
unit of pH decrease, the [K+] can increase by 0.2-1.7 mmol/l. For
membranes of mature RBCs, which is genetically determined
218  Veterinary Anaesthesia
(Table 24.3). “High potassium? (HK) red cells are found in man,
Table 24.3 The potassium content of red blood cells.
horses and certain dog breeds such as Japanese Akitas, some sheep
and cattle; the others are low potassium (LK) breeds. To main-
Species
RBC [K+] (mmol/)
RBC [Na+] (mmol/l)
tain electroneutrality, the sodium content of HK RBC is lowered.
Man
104-155
10-21
Table 24.4 lists potassium disturbances while Table 24.5 gives
Swine
the ECG changes with potassium imbalances.
100-124
11-19
Sheep LK
8-39
74-121
Chloride
 Sheep HK 
60-88
10-43
The major ECF anion, comprising about two-thirds of total
Cattle LK
7-37
72-102
anions in ECE Its homeostasis is closely linked with that of
Cattle HK
70
15
sodium and it is important in acid-base regulation. Measurements
Horse
80-140
4-16
 of serum chloride are usually corrected for possible changes in
 plasma free water (using a ratio of normal to measured sodium 
Dog LK
4-11
93-150
concentration), so that true changes in chloride concentration can
 Dog HK
124
54
be distinguished from those occurring secondary to sodium/water
Cat
6-8
104-142
changes. Table 24.6 lists chloride disturbances.
Table 24.4 Potassium disturbances.
Type of
Common causes
Clinical signs
Treatment
imbalance
Hyperkalaemia
increased administration:
(Brady)dysrhythmias
Life-threatening arrhythmias- give calcium. Hyperkalaemia makes the equilibrium 
(K >5.5;
latrogenic (IV fluids with
Muscle weakness
('resting) membrane potential less negative (which inactivates some Na channels);:
esp.
high K; potassium 
(including 
Galcium raises the threshold potential and so helps to 'restore' a more normal
>7 mmol/)
penicillin)
respiratory
pattern of electrical activity in the heart.However, its effects are only transient
muscles and
(c. 20 min), as it tends to be taken up, and then sequestered inside cells
Reduced excretion:
ileus)
 Urethral obstruction
10% Calcium chloride: 0.2 ml/kg IV over 5-10 min 
 Ruptured bladder
OR
Severe dehydration (reduced
10% Calcium (boro)gluconate: 0.6 ml/kg IV over 5-10 min (beware boron toxicity)
urine output; akin to
acute pre-renal failure)
Calcium chloride contains 1.4 mEq/ml of elemental calcium; whereas calcium
Acute renal failure (anuric
gluconate/barogluconate contains only 0.45mEq/ml of elemental calcium. Some
 people prefer to give calcium gluconate/borogluconate because it is harder to
dliguric)
overdose. N.B. 10 mg elemental Ca = 0.5 mEq 
Addison's disease
Treatment can be repeated twice, but beware calcium toxicity
 Drugs (NSAIDs (reduce renin 
and aldosterone
Dilution and diuresis
production), ACE
IV fluids. Fluids should be potassium-poor to dilute out the potassium as much as
inhibitors (reduce
possible
aldosterone production);
0.18% NaCl in 4% dextrose or 5% dextrose
potassium-sparing
diuretics; heparin (inhibits
0.9% NaCl if also hyponatraemic (e.g. Addison's)
 aldosterone secretion)
Saline (normal or hypertonic) solutions are 'acidifying', because they tend to dilute out
Redistribution.
 the body's own bicarbonate buffer and also they add a lot of chloride
Insulin deficiency e.g.
Dextrose-containing solutions may be beneficial because the dextrose may stimulate
 Diabetes mellitus insulin
 insulin release which promotes the celular uptake of potassium
 stimulates Na/K pump
Diuretics - furosemide (loop), or osmotic - are also K+-losing - but beware status of
activity: partly related to
renal function
and partly unrelated to
Correct metabolic acidosis. If you cannot measure blood gases, then guesstimate 
glucose uptake by cells)
dose of bicarbonate to be c. 1 (-2) mmol HcOs/kg body weight. Administer slowly 
Beta blockers
 (catecholamines stimulate
V, and not into fluids containing calcium, or else calcium carbonate wil precipitate.
N.B. a pH change of 0.1 unit, can result in a change in plasma potassium
beta receptors to increase
concentration of 0.6 mmol/l. Giving bicarbonate to an animal with an excess of H+
Na/K pump activity)
Digitalis glycosides (inhibit 
ions, results in the production of COz which then must be 'blown off'. Awake
animals without pulmonary disease can do this OK; but beware anaesthetised 
Na/K pump activity)
Jo dn pnq a jewou se ansuas se pou ae siodanaowaup asom 'sewe
Garbon dioxide can create a respiratory acidosis 
Electrolytes 219
Table 24.4 Continued
Type of
Common causes
 Clinical signs
Treatment
imbalance
Suxamethonium (during 
Correct any respiratory acidosis: easier under GA when an animal's lungs can be
depolarisation, Kt exits
more easily ventilated. Also, if the animal is deliberately hyperventilated (more 
cells)
apid/deep IPPV than 'normal), then a respiratory alkalosis can be produced, which
Acidosis (metabolic or 
helps encourage Ht ions to leave cells, and therefore K+ ions (and also Mgz+ ions)
respiratory)- due to
to enter them 
transcellular K+/H +
Glucose (dextrose) +/ insulin (soluble insulin)
exchange
Massive tissue trauma/
Insulin promotes cellular uptake of glucose and potassium (and also phosphate and
magnesium). Can be quite a potent mechanism. Giving glucose alone stimulates 
rhabdomyolysis (including
endogenous insulin secretion, so some people say that giving insulin is not 
post-anaesthetic
necessary, unless the patient is an insulin-deficient diabetic. Other people still
myopathy, malignant
advocate giving both ...
hyperthermia and crush/
compartmental injuries)
 Glucose dose = 0.5-1 g/kg body weight 
Tumour lysis synd rome
Insulin dose = 0.2-0.5iu soluble insulin per 1g glucose administered
Massive intravascular
 Some people give the glucose/insulin mixture as one infusion; others prefer to give 
haemolysis (esp. species
half the dose of glucose with the insulin faily rapidly; and then the second half of
 and breeds with high K
the glucose dose more slowly. Avoid excessively rapid bolus dosing with glucose,
inside red cells)
 Reperfusion injuries (after
as rebound hypoglycaemia may occur (following insulin secretion), especially in 
 young animals with less accurate glucose homeostasis
tourniquet or 
thromboemboli)
Try not to administer glucose solutions of >20% by peripheral veins, as hyperosmotic
 Hyperkalaemic periodic
 solutions can be iritant and promote the development of thrombophlebitis 
paralysis (Quarter horses)
Cation exchange resins can be given orally or by enema
Peritoneal dialysis
Haemodialysis
?Mineralocorticoids
 Address underlying cause
Hypokalaemia
increased fos5:
Clinical signs
Oral KCl at 1 mmol/kg/day
(K <3.5 mmol/)  Gastric vomiting (can test 
depend on
or
vomit with litmus paper)
apidity of onset 
Include c. 30mmol/ KCI in IV maintenance fluid; in some circumstances more may be
Chronic diarrhoea
as well as
 added (see below) but do not exceed 0.5 mmol/kg/h by this route
Chronic renal failure (esp.
degree of
For K+ 3.6-5.0mmol/l; add Kt to final conc 20 mmol/l
cats)
hypokalaemia
 Diuresis (diabetes mellitus;
For K+ 3.1-3.5mmol/l; add Kt to final conc 30 mmol/l
post-acute renal failure;
(Tachy)
For K+ 2.6-3.0mmol/l; add Kt to final conc 40 mmol/l
dysrhythmias,
For K+ 2.1-2.5mmol/l; add Kt to final conc 60 mmol/l
non K-sparing diuretics;:
hypotension
For K+<2.0 mmol/l; add K+ to final conc 80 mmol/l
Cushing's disease
Confusion, delirium
(steroids interfere with
 DO NOT EXCEED 0.5 mmol/kg/h administration rate
 ADH action and reduce
Lethargy. apathy
Muscle weakness
 Address underlying cause
renal PG production))
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn's
incl. leg, neck
(ventroflexion)
 Syndrome; spironolactone)
and respiratory
Decreased intake:
muscles
Usually iatrogenic i.e. long
lleus (abdominal
term intravenous fluid
distension with
therapy or TPN without
or without
K+ supplementation 
constipation);
Redistribution:
anorexia
Alkalosis
Reduced ability to
Hypomagnesaemia (i.e.
concentrate urine
reduced Na/K pump
activity)
 Hypokalaemic periodic
paralysis (Burmese cats)
Large doses of
catecholamines
Large doses of insulin or
glucose
220  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 24.5 ECG changes with potassium imbalances.
Phosphate
 Plasma [K+] 
ECG disturbances
A major intracellular fluid anion. Organic phosphates are found
mainly in cell membranes in the form of phospholipids and hence
<3.5 mmol/l
 Depressed ST segment; flattened T wave; U waves
are important for maintenance of cellular integrity. Inorganic
 (?repolarisation of papillary muscles) may occur 
phosphates are important for bone/tooth matrix (c. 85%), and as
superimposed on where T wave should be
a)  r u po so r
'No Potassium, No Tea'
ATP, GTP), oxygen carriage by haemoglobin (i.e. 2,3-diphos-
>5.5 mmol/l
 Peaked T waves; shortened Q-T interval
phoglycerate; 2,3-DPG) and buffering (14-15%), with only c. 1%
>6.5 mmol/l
 Prolonged QRS duration 
of inorganic phosphates being found in the ECF Of the inorganic
>7.0 mmol/l
 Reduced P height; prolonged P-R interval
phosphate (PO2-) in ECF, 10-20% is protein-bound and the
remainder is either complexed (with sodium, magnesium or
>8.5 mmol/l
No P waves; bradycardia
calcium), or present as the free anion. Table 24.7 lists phosphate
>9 mmol/l
Asystole; cardiac arrest; occasionally ventricular fibrillation
disturbances.
Table 24.6 Chloride disturbances.
Type of imbalance
Common causes
Clinical signs 
Treatment
 Corrected hyperchloraemia
Increased intake (CI>Na):
Hyperchloraemia is often associated
Ideally measure serum 
(CI >110 mmol/)
latrogenic (normal saline, hypertonic
with a tendency to metabolic
 sodium concentration too
 saline, fluids with added KCl,
acidosis
Slow correction with 5%
 Pseudohyperchloraemia can be
TPN, treatment with ammonium
dextrose or 0.18% NaCI in
 present where halides (e.g.
Clinical signs tend to be those of a
chloride [urinary acidifier]
4% dextrose (4ml/kg/h)
bromide) are used for therapy
metabolic acidosis and include
 as even ion selective electrodes 
Excessive foss of Na relative to Cl:
lethargy, weakness, tachypnoea,
may be appropriate
 Gannot distinguish the halides
Diarrhoea
dyspnoea, amhythmias and
Diurese (furosemide)
 possible coma. Signs may be partly 
Excessive gain of Cl relative to Na:
 due to increased ionised calcium 
 Address the underlying cause
Renal tubular acidosis
with the acidosis.
Renal failure
 Chronic respiratory alkalosis
Metabolic acidosis
Corrected hypochloraemia
 Decreased intake/absorption:
See also notes on hyponatraemia
Ideally measure serum 
(CI <95 mmol/)
Prolonged low dietary intake
 because this may be present
 sodium concentration too
Hyponatraemia (Na is required for 
 because of the reduced ability to
0.9% NaCI (4ml/kg/h) may
 Pseudohypochloraemia can occur
much of Cl absorption)
reabsorb Na because of Cl shortage
be appropriate
with hyperlipaemia which
Hypokalaemia (some Cl is absorbed
interferes with chloride
Hypochloraemia is often associated 
Address underlying cause
with K}
measurement
with a tendency to metabolic
Excessive foss of Cl relative to Na:
alkalosis
Vomiting (gastric or biliary)
Diarrhoea
 Clinical signs may include seizures
and muscle twitches, tetany and 
Intestinal obstruction
 even respiratory arrest and may in
Diuresis (loop or thiazide diuretics)
 part be due to changes in sodium
Chronic respiratory acidosis
and osmolanity as well as chloride
(bicarbonate increases, so extra
and acid/base status. lonised
dhloride is lost into urine)
 Metabolic alkalosis (e.g. chronic
Galcium tends to decrease with
akalosis and may be responsible
vomiting, GDV, abomasal
for some of the signs
displacement)
Excessive gain of Na relative to CI:
latrogenic (sodium bicarbonate
therapy)
Electrolytes 221
Table 24.7 Phosphate disturbances.
Type of imbalance 
Common causes
Clinical signs
Treatment
Hypophosphataemia
Reduced absorption/intake:
Weakness
Slow correction, esp. with IV therapy
(<0.3 mmol/l ?)
Malabsorption
Anorexia
 (sodium or potassium phosphate
Vomiting
 Disorientation
 5-20 mmol/h IV or 10-20 mmol PO) as 
 Diarrhoea
 Joint pain 
 Sudden hypocalcaemia and 
 Severe dietary deficiency
Haemolysis
hypomagnesaemia can accompany a
Vitamin D deficiency (vit D
Rhabdomyolysis (due to
 sudden increase in phosphate
normally increases both Ca and
 inadequate ATP production to
Veterinary product Foston" contains
 phosphate absorption from gut
maintain sodium pump activity
 200 mg/ml toldimfos sodium (an organic
Excessive use of antacids which
so cells swell)
bind phosphates and prevent
phosphonic acid salt which contains
 Platelet and leukocyte dysfunction
about 140 mg organic phosphate per
their absorption
Acute respiratory failure
Seizures,coma
ml; calcium hypophosphite also
increased excretion:
available at 18 mg/ml
Diuresis (diuretics, Diabetes
mellitus, Cushing's disease,
 Address the underlying cause
hyperaldosteronism (Conn's
 syndrome or spironolactone
therapy)
 Primary hyperparathyroidism
(causes phosphaturia)
Transcelfutfar shifts:
Insulin (or glucose)
Bicarbonate
Refeeding syndrome
Hyperphosphataemia
Physiological:
Clinical signs are few, but
Dilution (IV fluids not containing
(as yet the
Young growing animals
hyperphosphataemia may lead
phosphate); diuresis
concentration at
 Post-prandial
to hypocalcaemia (high 
Acetazolamide can increase urinary
which clinical
phosphate inhibits activation of
 phosphate excretion (but can cause
Increased absorption/intake:
signs occur is not
vitamin D); and metabolic
Excessive phosphate in diet
metabolic acidosis)
well defined)
acidosis (high phosphate
 Glucose or insulin administration may help
 Hypervitaminosis D
Excessive phosphate enemas
results in a reduction in
Bicarbonate administration may also help
bicarbonate). Clinical signs are
Reduce absorption by oral antacid 
Reduced excretion:
usually of the neuromuscular
 administration
 Pre-renal (e.g. dehydiation,
type associated with
 Check serum calcium concentration too
Addison's disease)
hypocalcaemia and metabolic 
Acute or chronic renal failure
acidosis
Address underlying cause
 Post-renal (obstruction)
Hyperphosphataemia also
Hypaparathyroidism (e.g. post 
 predisposes to metastatic
bilateral throidectomy)
calcification
Transceffufar shifts:
Tumour lysis syndrome
Rhabdomyolysis
Haemolysis
Calcium
chelated (with phosphate, bicarbonate, sulphate or lactate); 34-
A major cation in the body. Almost 99% of the total body's
40% protein-bound (mainly to albumin). This protein binding is
calcium is found within bones and teeth where it is important to
affected by pH, such that alkalosis tends to lead to an increase in
maintain structural integrity. Calcium is involved in maintenance
binding (reducing the ionised fraction but without affecting the
of membrane integrity and permeability. It is also important for
total concentration); and acidosis leads to a reduction in protein
maintenance of function in excitable cells and inter- and intra-
binding so that the ionised fraction increases but, again, the total
cellular signalling and is an important co-factor for coagulation
 concentration remains unchanged. In intracellular fluid, most of
and some inflammatory pathways (e.g. complement cascade). In
the calcium is protein-bound or complexed so that the ionised
plasma, calcium is present in three forms: c. 52-56% ionised
   i s      n
(free’ and therefore biologically active); 8-10% complexed or
 intracellular processes and intercellular signalling.
222  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Total and ionised calcium concentrations can be measured in
catecholamine release.) It is a cofactor for many enzymes, includ-
blood samples. Beware samples taken into EDTA as this chelates
ing the ubiquitous sodium pump (magnesium-dependent Nat/
calcium, therefore falsely lowering the value. Heparinised samples
K′-ATPase) and is therefore important in the regulation of intra-
may be diluted by the anticoagulant (if present in liquid’ form)
cellular and extracellular osmolarity. It may also have analgesic
and therefore can also result in falsely low values. Table 24.8 lists 
actions by its ability to inhibit activation of NMDA receptors.
calcium disturbances.
Table 24.9 lists magnesium disturbances.
Magnesium may have a role as a therapeutic agent in several
situations, besides hypomagnesaemia. Potential uses include:
Magnesium
About 70% of the total body magnesium is found in bones, along-
● As an antidysrhythmic; especially for ventricular arrhythmias
side calcium and phosphate; c. 20% is found within muscle cells
refractory to other treatments (should also check plasma
and the remaining c.10% is found in other soft tissues. Almost
potassium).
99% of the total body magnesium is found intracellularly, with
●To help treat/prevent hypertension and tachycardia (e.g. during
only 1% being in the extracellular compartment where it is present
surgical manipulation of phaeochromocytomas).
in one of three forms: 55% ionised (free' and therefore biologi-
e      u  o
cally active); 20-30% protein (mainly albumin)-bound; 15-25%
(man).
complexed with anions. Because magnesium is not as highly
● To help reduce/prevent reperfusion injury by reducing calcium
albumin-bound as calcium (c. 25% compared with c. 40%), it is 
accumulation in hypoxic cells.
less affected by changes in protein/albumin concentration.
● To help reduce muscle spasms in patients with tetanus.
Knowledge is limited, but it appears that only about 1-2% of
● Has been suggested to help provide analgesia by reducing acti-
intracellular magnesium is present in the free ionised/active form.
vation of NMDA receptors. Although theoretically this should
 Magnesium is the natural physiological antagonist of calcium
work, it has not necessarily been the case in practice.
and therefore is important in the maintenance of the normal
● Has been sugested as an anticonvulsant (in pre-eclampsic
function of excitable cells (nerve and muscle) and synapses. (It
women; where its action may be due to prevention of cerebral
competes with calcium at synapses to affect acetylcholine and
vasospasm).
Table 24.8 Calcium disturbances.
Type of imbalance
Common causes
 Clinical signs
Treatment
Hypercalcaemia
Physiological:
 Polyuria/polydipsia ('renal diabetes
 Dilute/diurese with 0.9%
(total Ca >3 mmol/l; ionised 
 Young animals
 insipidus because Ca interferes with 
NaCI (5 ml/kg/h) and
calcium >1.8-2.2 mmol/l) 
ADH actions)
furasemide (1-2 mg/kg)
ldiopathic:
In cats
Thirst
Bisphosphonates
Vomiting
Corticosteroids
Increased uptake/absorption:
Constipation
Calcitonin
Excesive calcium supplementation in diet
 Neuromuscular effects (twitches,
Trisodium edetate
Hyperparathyroidism (esp. primary, also 
stiffness to weakness)
(chelator)
 pseudo-hyperparathyroidism - many
 Bradycardia, arhythmias, cardiac arrest 
Magnesium ?
malignancies with paraneoplastic
Seizures, coma
Check other electrolytes
syndrome e.g. lympho(sarco)ma, pernianal
Metastatic calcification including cornea
 Address underlying cause
ad enoma)
 and skin and nephrocalcinosis (which 
Hypervitaminosis D (some plant toxins;
may lead to renal failure:
iatrogenic)
"hypercalcaemic nephropathy")
 Bone lesions (malignancy, infection)
Urolithiasis
Reduced excretion:
Hypercoagulability
Addison's disease
 Renal failure (e.g. acute renal failure in
horses)
Aftered protein binding:
Acidosis results in reduced protein binding
 and increased ionised calcium
Electrolytes 223
Table 24.8 Continued
Type of imbalance
Common causes
 Clinical signs
Treatment
Hypocalcaemia
Reduced uptake/absorption:
Clinical signs are more obvious where
10% calcium gluconate IV
(total Ca << 2 mmol/l; ionised
Dietary Ca insuficiency
hypocalcaemia has occurred rapidly:
over 10-15min
calcium <0.8-0.9 mmol/)
Malabsorption
and are exacerbated by
(5-15 mg/kg or
Hypoparathyroidism (e.g. post bilateral
hypomagnesaemia and hypokalaemia
0.5-1.5ml/kg)
 Pseudohypocalcaemia may occur
thyroidectomy: hypomagnesaemia
Tachycardia, hypotension
with hypoalbuminaemia:
or
results in reduced parathyroid hormone
 Neuromuscular effects: twitches,
10% calcium chloride
although total calcium is
(PTH) release and effect; 
spasms and tetany may progress to
reduced, ionised fraction is
0.1-0.5 ml/kg over
hypermagnesaemia may also, by
weakness and paresis (Synchronous
10-15 min.
maintained normal if possible
competing with Ca, reduce PTH release)
diaphragmatic flutter (thumps), rarely
Followed by 10 mg/kg/h
Hypovitaminosis D
laryngospasm and stridor, respinatory
 by continuous infusion 
(may be secondary to liver disease, renal
 arrest and death)
failure, hypoparathyroidism or
Restlessness and hypersensitivity may
if required
hyperphosphataemia)
 progress to lethargy and recumbency
Address underlying cause
increased foss:
Anorexia
Calciuresis (hypoparathyroidism; Cushing's
Secondary clotting problems 
Bone decalcification/defective
 disease (corticosteroids inhibit Na/water 
reabsorption (cause pu/pd) and inhibit
 mineralisation
renal activation of vitamin D))
Lactation (milk fever)
Sweating (horse)
Burns
 Chelating agents (beware blood
transfusions with excessive citrate)
Tissue calcification e.g. with acute
 pancreatitis and hyperphosphataemia
Altered protein binding:
Alkalosis results in reduced ionised (active) 
calcium
Massive tissue trauma/rhabdomyolysis/
tumour lysis syndrome - release of
intracellular contents may provide further
 compounds which bind/chelate Ca
Table 24.9 Magnesium disturbances.
Type of imbalance 
Common causes
 Clinical signs
Treatment 
Hypermagnesaemia
Physiological:
Muscle weakness, incl. respiratory muscles
IV calcium 5-15mg/kg over
(at present it is
Hibernation
 s0 respiratory insuffciency possible
10 min
Lethargy
Dilution with IV fluid therapy
difficult to
 Primary water foss:
suggest a
 Hypotension (vasodilation and reduced
(0.9% saline)
 concentration
Pure dehydration
 catecholamine release)
Diuresis
above which
Impaired excretion:
 Bradycardia, cardiac dysrhythmias; similar to
Address the underlying cause
clinical signs
Acute or chronic renal failure
hyperkalaemia
may occur)
Impaired coagulation 
Excessive intake:
latro genic
Excessive Mg-based antacids
Redistribution:
Acidosis (similar to potassium shifts with
acidosis)
224  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 24.9 Continued
Type of imbalance
Common causes
 Clinical signs
Treatment
Hypomagnesaemia
Reduced intake:
Confusin, restlesses iitabiity, eiu
Emergency dose = 0.15-
(<0.7 mmol/)
Malabsorption (Gl or pancreatic disease)
Muscle tremors, twitches, spasms, weakness 
 0.3 mEq/kg over 10 min
Anorexia
Ileus, dyphagia, inappetance, weight lss
Max dose 0.75-1.0mEq/kg/day
Excessive loss:
Bronchoconstriction, respiratory muscle
Address the underlying cause 
weakness, stridor, dysphonia
Vomiting
Hypertension (vasoconstriction), tachycardia
Diarrhoea
Arrhythmias, esp. ventricular e.g.
Lactation 
 polymorphic VPCs and torsades de pointes
Diuresis (e.g. Hyperaldosteronism (Conn's
(ECG changes similar to hypokalaemia)
Syndrome; spironolactone therapy):
Haemolysis (sodium pumps do not work well
hyperthyroidism; chronic diabetic
So RBCs swell and burst)
ketoacidosis; non K+-sparing diuretics;:
osmotic diuretics; hypercalcaemia)
Hypercoagulability (increased platelet
reactivity)
Redistribution or excessive diution:
 See also notes on hypokalaemia and
latrogenic (prolonged therapy with IV
fluids or nutrition not containing Mg)
hypocalcaemia as these may co-exist:
Alkalosis (results in shift of magnesium
Hypomagnesaemia results in reduced PTH
 into intracellular compartment, similar 
release and effectiveness, thus secondary
to potassium)
hypocalcaemia (refractory to calcium
Insulin, or glucose which causes increase
treatment alone) is common 
 in insulin (cause intracellular shift of
 Due to reduced sodium pump activity, the
 magnesium, similar to potassium and
 phosphate movement)
 body becomes potassium depleted, hence 
 Catecholamines (cause intracelular shift 
hypokalaemia (refractory to potassium
of magnesium, similar to potassium
treatment alone) often co-exists
movement)
Further reading
 Handy JIM, Soni N (2008) Physiological effects of hyperchlorae-
mia and acidosis. British Journal of Anaesthesia 101(2),
Aguilera IM, Vaughan RS (200o) Calcium and the anaesthetist.
141-150.
Anaesthesia 55,779-790.
 Macintire DK (1997) Disorders of potassium, phosphorus and
 Borer KE, Corley KTT (2006) Electrolyte disorders in horses with
magnesium in critical illness. Compendium on Continuing 
colic. Part l: potassium and magnesium. Equine Veterinary
Education of the Practising Veterinarian: Small Animal 19(1),
Education 18(5),266-271.
41-48
 Borer KE, Corley KTT (2006) Electrolyte disorders of horses with
 Rose BD, Post TW. Eds (2001) Clinical physiology of acid-base
 colic. Part 2: calcium, sodium, chloride and phosphate. Equine 
 and electrolyte disorders. 5"h Edition McGraw Hill, USA.
Veterinary Education 18(6),320-325.
Schropp DM, Koviac J (2007) Phosphorus and phosphate
de Morais HA, DiBartola SP. Eds (2008) Volume: Advances in
metabolism in veterinary patients. Journal of Veterinary
fluid, electrolyte and acid-base disorders In: Veterinary Clinics
Emergency and Critical Care 17(2), 127-134.
of North America: Small Animal Practice 38(3), 423-753.
(Very useful resource)
DiBartola SP. Ed (2006) Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base
disorders in small animal practice. 3rd Edition Saunders,
 Elsevier, Missouri, USA.
Dube L, Granry J-C (2003) The therapeutic use of magnesium
 Self-test section
 in anaesthesiology, intensive care and emergency medicine:
a review. Canadian Journal of Anaesthesia 50(7), 732-746.
1.
 List at least five causes of hyperkalaemia.
Edwards G, Foster A, Livesey C (2008) Use of ocular fluids to
2.
Whatare
main
 treatment
options
for
aid post-mortem diagnosis in cattle and sheep. In Practice
hyperkalaemia?
31,22-25
Information chapter
cardiovascular svstem
Methylxanthines (theophylline derivatives)
contractility is enhanced without the need to increase intracel-
lular calcium concentration).
Actions:
Levosimendan, which is also a Karp channel opener (and there-
● Stimulate the CNS (increase reticular activating system activ-
fore can cause some vasodilation), is gaining popularity in human
ity), also lower the seizure threshold.
medicine for the treatment of acute cardiac failure.
● Stimulate respiratory activity (increase sensitivity to CO2),
 cause bronchodilation and enhance diaphragmatic activity.
● Stimulate cardiac activity (positive inotropy, some positive
Angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEl)
chronotropy), also lower the arrhythmia threshold.
 Inhibit angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE). This normally
● Diuresis, secondary to increased cardiac output, possible
         
vasodilation, and renal tubular effects (decrease Nat
vasoconstrictor and stimulates the release of aldosterone),
reabsorption).
and breaks down bradykinin (a potent vasodilator); so that
● Rheological effects: decrease RBC aggregability (increase cell
the result of ACE inhibition is vasodilation, on both the arterial
flexibility and decrease blood viscosity), and decrease platelet 
 and venous sides of the circulation. Reduced angiotensin II also
 aggregation (decrease adhesion molecule expression).
results in:
True xanthines are adenosine antagonists, and non-selective
● Reduced aldosterone release (at least in the short term), so
phosphodiesterase (PDE) inhibitors. They include theophylline,
sodium and water retention are reduced.
caffeine, aminophylline and etamiphylline.
● Reduced facilitation of sympathetic nervous system and anti-
Propentofylline (trade name ‘Vivitonin') is an adenosine
 agonist, with PDE inhibitor effcts, and causes more vasodilation
 diuretic hormone (ADH) activities, so adding to the hyovolae-
mic and hypotensive effects.
and less CNS stimulation.
Angiotensin II promotes vascular smooth muscle proliferation
 and cardiac remodeling, whereas bradykinin increases prostaglan-
Selective PDE Ill inhibitors (also called
din I (PGI) and NO, which inhibit these things. Thus ACEI also
ino-dilators)
reduce the production of myotrophic factors and therefore
There are several, possibly five, isoforms of phosphodiesterase
 decrease cardiac and smooth muscle remodelling.
(PDE); but these selective agents tend to target PDE III.
● Phosphodiesterase normally breaks down cAMP, so its inhibi-
Digitalis glycosides
tion leads to increased intracellular cAMP. In myocardial cells,
● Inhibit Na*/K+-ATPase (the sodium pump, which is also
this results in increased intracellular ionised Ca²+, and thus
upregulated in heart failure), so increase intracellular [Na],
increased contractility (positive inotropy), whereas in smooth
which in turn increases Na*/Cat exchange, resulting in
muscle (especially vascular), it leads to interference with
increased intracellular [Ca?t], and hence positive inotropy
translocation of Ca?t into cells, resulting in relaxation (i.e.
(increased contractility).
vasodilation).
● Sensitise baroreceptors, so that overall sympathetic tone is
Imidazolone derivatives: enoximone
reduced, and parasympathetic tone is increased.
Bipyridine derivatives: milrinone and amrinone
● Activate vagal nuclei, so further increasing vagal tone.
 Pyridazinone derivatives: pimobendan. Pimobendan (trade name
● Overall, see weak positive inotropy, which increases myocardial
"Vetmedin') is a PDE II inhibitor and a calcium ^sensitiser
oxygen demand, but, myocardial oxygen demand is at the
(i.e. it increases the sensitivity of troponin for Ca?+, so that
same time reduced because of the increase in vagal activity.
225
226  Veterinary Anaesthesia
AV conduction is slowed, and refractory periods (at AV node)
● Phase l is the early rapid repolarisation phase. K+ efflux in atrial
 increased due to increased vagal influences.
 and ventricular myocytes.
● Mild diuresis due to increased cardiac output.
● Phase 2 is the slow repolarisation or plateau phase. Ca?t influx
(decreasing over time), with Kt efflux (increasing over time) in
Excellent for the treatment of atrial fibrillation. Unfortunately
these agents have a low therapeutic index, therefore are often
atrial and ventricular myocytes.
● Phase 3 is the rapid repolarisation phase. K+ efflux important
dosed according to metabolic body weight (i.e. according to body
 in atrial and ventricular myocytes and nodal cells.
surface area) rather than actual body mass. Side effects include
anorexia, vomiting, diarrhoea, arrhythmias (especially ventricu-
lar). Check [K+] also, because extracellular potassium concentra-
Class I: sodium channel blockers
tion increases slightly after initiation of therapy, but then, with
These do not work well in hypokalaemic patients. They work best
diuresis, the total body K+ can become depleted. Digoxin tends to
in non-nodal tissue (nodal tissue is more dependent on calcium
be preferred over digitoxin.
tion velocity, and result in negative inotropy and slight negative
Classical antidysrhythmics (or anti-arrhythmics)
chronotropy. They are subdivided into: Class Ia; Class Ib; and
Class Ic.
   m   aq s o
class I by Harrison.
Class la
● Under certain circumstances, all antidysrhythmic drugs can be
● Moderately depress phase 0 (slow the rate of rise of the cardiac
 pro-dysrhythmic (arrhythmogenic).
 action potential).
● New classification system for antidysrhythmics is the Sicilian
● Slow conduction to increase the action potential duration
Gambit, which is a multidimensional classification system
based on pathophysiological considerations.
(prolong QRS interval).
● Prolong repolarisation/refractory period (prolong QT inter-
This system identifies one or more vulnerable parameters?
val) (possibly via Kt channel blockade).
associated with specific arrhythmogenic mechanisms. It can
● Best versus ventricular arrhythmias.
accommodate drugs with multiple actions better than the Vaughan
 Examples are procainamide and quinidine.
Williams classification. A vulnerable parameter is an electrophysi-
ological property or event whose modification by drug therapy
results in termination or suppression of the arrhythmia with
Quinidine suiphate
minimal undesirable side effects.
Quinidine sulphate given orally, or quinidine gluconate IV, are
used in the treatment of atrial fbrillation in horses, to try to
Figure 25.1 shows stylised action potentials from different types
convert them back into sinus rhythm. Do not use in horses
of myocardial cells.
with signs of congestive heart failure accompanying the atrial
The main ion currents that accompany the action potentials:
fbrillation. Quinidine is a Class Ia antidysrhythmic, but is also
● Phase 4 is the diastolic depolarisation phase or pacemaker
vagolytic (may see increase in heart rate), and an alpha blocker
(causing vasodilation and hypotension).
potential. Spontaneous depolarisation due to Nat and Ca2+
 Some of the 'side effects' of treatment with quinidine are:
inflow, and reduced K+ outflow in atrial and ventricular myo-
 cytes. In nodal tissue, Ca?t influx and reduced Kt effux occur.
● Hypotension (may see ^collapse') (due to alpha blockade +/-
● Phase 0 is the rapid depolarisation phase. Mainly Nat influx in
tachycardia +/— arrhythmias).
atrial and ventricular myocytes; mainly Ca?+ influx in nodal
● Rapid supraventricular tachycardia (possibly due to reduction
cells.
of vagal tone).
● Ventricular arrhythmias including a particularly nasty form of
multifocal (multiform) ventricular tachycardia called torsades
 Atrial and ventricular myocardial cells
Nodal cells
 de pointes.
● May see GI discomfort such as flatulence, diarrhoea, colic.
allergic phenomenon).
● May see bizarre neurological signs including strange behaviour,
ataxia, seizures.
What can you do if problems occur during quinidine
treatment?
Fgure 25.1 Cardiac action potentials in cardiomyocytes from different
● For hypotension: rapid IV fluids, and possibly phenylephrine
regions of the heart.
infusion at 0.1-0.2 μg/kg/min ^to effect.
Drugs affecting the cardiovascular system  27
● For rapid supraventricular tachycardia, try esmolol or pro-
Class ll: beta blockers
 pranolol (0.03 mg/kg IV), or even digoxin (0.0022 mg/kg IV).
● Act on phase 4 of the cardiac action potential to reduce auto-
● Sodium bicarbonate (1 mg/kg IV), will rapidly reduce the con-
 maticity (especially SA node), and prolong the refractory
centration of free (unbound) quinidine, and thus effectively
reduce its activity. (A more alkaline pH will encourage binding 
 period (e.g prolonging AV node conduction).
● Prolong PR interval.
of quinidine to plasma proteins.)
● No effect on QRS interval or QT interval.
● Magnesium sulphate (1-2.5 g/450kg/min) has been shown to
 be effcacious against some forms of ventricular arrhythmias,
● Are effective at nodal tissue.
● Result in negative inotropy and negative chronotropy.
 including torsades de pointes.
● Best versus supraventricular arrhythmias, but also against ven-
● Lidocaine may also be useful against ventricular arrhythmias;
try bolus 0.5 mg/kg and then onto infusion at about 25 μg/kg/
tricular arrhythmias, and best in situations of tachyarrhythmias
due to high sympathetic tone.
min (to effect, but beware toxicity).
Examples are propranolol and esmolol.
Class Ib
Beta blockers are highly protein bound, and in the face of
 inflammation, where acute phase proteins increase in plasma, the
● Mildly depress phase 0 in abnormal tissue (i.e. mildly slow
free concentration of drug may be reduced, leading to reduced
rate of rise of cardiac action potential), but no effect in normal
efficacy.
tissue.
● Little effect on, or slight decrease of, action potential duration
(little change of QRS interval).
Propranoloi
● Shorten repolarisation/refractory period (decrease QT inter-
 This can be used to treat feline hyperthyroidism and hypertrophic
val) and can reduce re-entrant dysrhythmias.
cardiomyopathy, but beware if thromboembolic disease accom-
panies the cardiac problem, because the slight beta 2 blocking
● Best versus ventricular arrhythmias.
activity of propranolol will reduce vasodilation in, and distal to,
Examples are phenytoin, lidocaine and mexiletine.
 clotted vessels, and may further compromise distal limb per-
fusion. Side effects of propranolol may include cough due to
Phenytoin
bronchospasm/bronchoconstriction (another beta 2 blocking
 Phenytoin also has anticonvulsant and sympatholytic properties.
effect). Propranolol often exhibits (bradyphylaxis,i.e. an increased
Good versus digoxin toxicity-induced arrhythmias too.
effect with subsequent doses, possibly due to upregulation/
 increased sensitivity of beta receptors.
Lidocaine (formerly lignocaine)
 Under some circumstance can be anticonvulsant; but beware tox-
Esmoloi
icity, where convulsions are one sign. Will not work in the pres-
This is much more beta 1 selective, but it is very rapidly
ence of hypokalaemia (or hypomagnesaemia).
metabolised by plasma esterases, so has a very short half life.
It is therefore suited to administration ‘to effect' by infusion
Mexiletine
(e.g. intra-operatively).
 Mexiletine is an orally effective lidocaine analogue.
Class ll: potassium channel blockers
Class Ic
● Prolong repolarisation/refractory period. (They mimic a
● Depress phase 0 (i.e. slow the rate of rise of the cardiac action
hypothyroid like effect.)
po tential).
● Prolong QT interval, with little effect on QRS interval.
● Little change in conduction leading to little change in action
● Good versus ventricular and supraventricular arrhythmias.
potential duration (with almost no change (possible slight
increase) in QRS interval).
Examples are bretylium (also reduces catecholamine release
● Little effect on repolarisation (no change in QT interval).
and so has a sort of indirect beta blocking activity) and amiodar-
● Best versus ventricular arrhythmias, but can be used versus
one (a benzofuran derivative). Bretylium has been reported to be
supraventricular arrhythmias.
effective in the treatment of bupivacaine toxicity-induced arrhyth-
mias, although intralipid seems to work well, perhaps by binding
Examples are flecainide and propafenone.
bupivacaine and reducing plasma concentrations.
Flecainide
Class IV
 Flecainide (a fluorinated derivative of procainamide) is associated
Class IV is now divided into:
with many side effects, and can worsen heart failure.
●Class IVa including Ca?+ channel blockers (L-type).
Propafenone
● Class IVb including K+ channel openers (cromakalim; nicoran-
Propafenone may be less toxic.
dil (also a nitrate)): open Karp channels.
228  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Class IVa
It may reduce ischaemic/reperfusion/reoxygenation injury' by
● Slow the action potential upstroke phase in AV (and SA) node,
limiting intracellular calcium accumulation. It was proposed to
have analgesic effects via its function at NMDA receptors, but this
and prolong the PR interval. Relatively selective for AV nodal
has not been proven clinically. Its blockade of NMDA receptors,
L-type calcium channels.
● Theoretical ability to prolong the action potential plateau phase
however, may afford some neuroprotection by reducing CNS
excitatory glutamate activity.
 in atrial, ventricular and Purkinje tissue, but no effect on QRS
interval in vivo.
● Best versus supraventricular arrhythmias.
Anticholinergics
 They are negative inotropes (reduce contractility), negative
chronotropes (reduce heart rate), negative dromotropes (reduce
If we include tachycardias in our arrhythmias, we should not
forget the bradyarrhythmias and bradycardias.
conduction velocity), but positive lusitropes (enhance relaxa-
tion); and they cause vasodilation in the periphery so they reduce
Atropine
systemic vascular resistance and blood pressure. They also reduce
A tertiary amine. Atropine IV has a faster onset than glycopyr-
the platelet release reaction (which normally enhances platelet
rolate and, possibly, a shorter duration of action, although this
aggregation), and may be useful in thromboembolic disorders.
 depends on species, but. c. 40-90 min compared with c. 2-4 h for 
Because they reduce intracellular [Cat], they may provide some
glyco pyrrolate.
cytoprotection, especially in the face of ischaemia and reper-
fusion, and therefore may have a role in cardiopulmonary cerebral
● Reduces the watery component of saliva and mucous secre-
resuscitation. (This is very different to how we used to teach
tions, making them more viscous and harder to clear. Also
CPCR, which included administration of calcium salts for their
 reduces tear production.
positive inotropic properties.)
● May reduce mucociliary activity too, and so slows secretion
 Examples are diltiazem and verapamil. Nifedipine is more of a
 removal even more.
vasodilator (vascular smcoth muscle relaxant), than an antidys-
● Slows gut motility and reduces lower oesophageal sphincter
rhythmic. Amlodipine is often favoured for treatment of primary
 tone. GI effects usually outlast cardiovascular effects.
systemic hypertension in cats.
● Causes bronchodilation (increases dead space, and may
 aggravate hypoventilation problems, especially under general
Class IVb
anaesthesia).
● Kt conduction is enhanced, so SA and AV nodes become
● Crosses blood-brain barrier rapidly; causing excitation due to
the ^central anticholinergic syndrome'; although excitation may
hyperpolarised.
in part be due to its mydriatic effect, especially in cats and
● Only used to treat supraventricular arrhythmias, except atrial
fb rillation.
horses.
● Paradoxical bradycardia is believed to occur after rapid IV
● Provide some protection against ischaemia via cardiac adeno-
administration when it is thought that the central effects (across
sine receptor actions.
 the blood-brain barrier), occur before the peripheral effects
 Examples are adenosine, nicorandil and cromakalim.
become apparent. Some weak agonism of peripheral mus-
 carinic receptors may contribute to the bradycardia. It can be
Other anti-arrhythmics
  i  n    ae   
Benzofurone derivative E047/1
drop further, but usually after a few seconds it will then increase.
This has shown some promise in the treatment of experimentally
The eventual tachycardia may be partly due to antagonistic
induced (catecholamine) arrhythmias in dogs.
effects on pre-synaptic muscarinic receptors on sympathetic
nerve terminals. (Acetylcholine action on these receptors nor-
Magnesium sulphate
mally reduces norepinephrine release.)
Magnesium is the natural antagonist of calcium. It is a cofactor
● Increases heart rate with little change in blood pressure.
for many enzymes including Na/K-ATPase. It is an important
● Increases myocardial oxygen demand too; so can be
intracellular ion. It competes with calcium in stimulus-secretion
tachyarrhythmogenic.
 coupling at synapses and nerve terminals. For example, it can
● Contra-indicated if:
reduce acetylcholine release at neuromuscular junctions produc-
O Pre-existing tachycardia (shock, fever).
 ing muscle weakness (including respiratory muscles); and affect
O Hyperthyrcidism.
neurotransmitter release at synapses in the sympathetic nervous
O Phaeochromocytoma.
system, resulting in sympatholytic effects. It can also enhance
● Metabolism and elimination vary depending on species: cats,
smooth muscle relaxation, resulting in vasodilation (hypoten-
 rats and rabbits destroy it very quickly.
sion), bronchodilation, and GI hypomotility. It has been shown
Glycopyrrolate (or glycopyrronium)
of ventricular arrhythmias (e.g. torsades de pointes). It may inter-
Slower onset of action, therefore less useful in emergencies than
fere with coagulation.
atropine. Duration of action c. 2-4 h.
 Drugs affecting the cardiovascular system
229
● A synthetic quaternary ammonium compound, originally
Table 25.1 Distribution of adrenergic receptors in the cardiovascular system.
 developed for antihistamine (H2) effects.
● It reduces acidity and volume of gastric secretions more so than
Receptor type/location
Tissue location
 Effect of stimulation
 atropine. It reduces lower cesophageal sphincter tone and
 Post-synaptic α1
Vasculature
Vasoconstriction
causes GI hypomotility.
 Post-synaptic α2
Vasculature
● It reduces volume of saliva and mucous secretions more so than
Vasoconstriction
atropine, but again they become more viscous.
Pre-synaptic α2
Vasculature
 Decrease norepinephrine release
● Can increase heart rate, but usually less dramatic increase than 
(-ve feedback); reduction in
 seen with atropine. Said to be less tachyarrhythmogenic.
vascular tone
● Supposed not to cause paradoxical bradycardia, because, being
 Post-synaptic α1
Cardiac
+ve inotropy especially at low
a very polar molecule does not crossthe blood-brain barrier
heart rates(HR) (no effect on HR)
(although it may cross it slowly).
Pre-synaptic α2
Cardiac
 Decrease norepinephrine release
● Any paradoxical bradycardia
l seen may be due to some
{-ve feedback)
 peripheral actions, as outlined above under atropine.
 Post-synaptic β2
Vasculature
Vasodilation 
 Post-synaptic β1 
Cardiac
+ve inotropy: (+ve chronotropy);:
Other drugs used for cardiovascular support
+ve dromotropy: -ve lusitropy
 Post-synaptic β2
Cardiac
+ve inotropy; +ve chronotropy.
during anaesthesia
These receptors up-regulate in 
Table 25.1 outlines the distribution of cardiovascular system
heart failure i.e. when β1
receptors down-regulate)
adrenoceptors and Table 25.2 shows the relative activities of com-
monly used drugs at these receptors.
Post-synaptic β2
Skeletal muscles
Increase in muscle tension 
 generated (especially in tired
muscles), +/- effect on muscle
Positive inotropes
spindles: these effects may be
responsible for the 'tremors' seen
 Dopamine
with β2 agonists such as
Endogenous catecholamine, with dopaminergic agonist effects
clenbuterol
(DA1 and DA2 receptors), and adrenergic agonist effects (β and
 Post-synaptic β2
Sweat glands
 Sweating (especially horses)
( receptors).
 It is often taught that different dose rates have different
 Post-synaptic DA1
Renal, coronary.
Vasodilation
effects:
mesenteric
vasculature
● With up to 2.5 μg/kg/min, DA1 and DA2 effects predominate,
 Pre-synaptic DA2
SNJ
 Decrease norepinephrine release
resulting in vasodilation (especially in renal/splanchnic beds),
(-ve feedback)
reduced systemic vascular resistance, (possibly slightly reduced 
blood pressure), and enhanced cardiac output secondary to the
reduced afterload. The increased cardiac output may contrib-
ute to a diuresis, which may also be due to a reduction in
Table 25.2 Relative activities of commonly used drugs at adrenergic
proximal convoluted tubule reabsorption of Na* (and may
receptors.
reduce renal tubular energy demands).
● At 2.5-5 μg/kg/min, β1 effects predominate, resulting in
Drug
α1
αx2
β1
β2
DA
 positive inotropy (and chronotropy). Arrhythmias may also
 Dopamine
++
？
++++
++
++++
occur.
● At infusion rates >5-10μg/kg/min, some α1 and o2 activity
 Dobutamine
+?
++++
++
0
becomes apparent, so that peripheral vasoconstriction and
 Epinephrine
++
+++
++++
+++
0
increased systemic vascular resistance (and afterload) occur.
 Norepinephrine
 Blood pressure may increase as the heart is still under β agonist 
+++
+++
+++
+/
infuence to pump harder against the increased aferload.
Isoprenaline
一
++++
++++
Q
Arrhythmias are more likely as myocardial oxygen demand is
Phenylephrine
++/+++
+
？
0
increased.
But the old 'renal dose' for renoprotection (increased renal
 perfusion, restoration of urine output), may not always hold true
 The potential diuresis stimulated by dopamine may also be
because different species, and different individuals within a
 detrimental to compromised or failing kidneys. Thus, if you
species, express different receptor types, numbers and sensitivi-
want to improve urine output, choose fluid therapy and positive
ties, which may also be affected by disease processes. Metabolism
inotropes to increase cardiac output, which secondarily increases
of these drugs may also be different, and affected by other diseases.
 renal perfusion and thus urine output.
230   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Dobutamine
Norepinephrine (noradrenaline)
A synthetic catecholamine; an isoprenaline (isoproterenol) deriv-
 Preferred by most human anaesthetists for refractory hypoten-
ative. Has predominantly B1 agonist activities, but also has some
sion, but this author has had mixed results. At low doses, has
β2 and αl actions (the latter may cause splenic contraction which
predominantly αl agonist effects. Increased afterload may actu-
can result in increased PCV). Some people suggest that dob-
ally result in reduced cardiac output. At higher doses, has some β
utamine has activity at cardiac α1 arrhythmic' receptors.
effects. Must be infused to effect (e.g. 0.05-2.5 μg/kg/min).
At low to moderate infusion rates (1-5μg/kg/min) β1 effects
predominate (i.e. positive inotropy). Positive chronotropy may
Ino-constrictors
also occur, but at low doses, the increase in arterial blood pressure
Ephedrine
may stimulate baroreceptor reflexes to result in bradycardias/
A synthetic non-catecholamine, which has direct and indirect
bradyarrhythmias.  Increased  stroke
volume (and  possibly
actions and is sympathomimetic. Reminiscent of epinephrine
increased cardiac output), and increased blood pressure result.
because it has α and β (β1 > β2) actions, with β activity predomi-
Overall systemic vascular resistance remains unchanged, or
nating at lower doses. Often given as a bolus, the effects last up to
there may be a slight reduction. Diastolic arterial pressure may
an hour in horses. Dose 0.01-0.2 mg/kg, given in boluses of up to
fall but systolic pressure increases so that mean pressure usually
10 mg per 500 kg horse.
increases.
● β1 activity manifests as positive inotropy; and at higher doses,
At high infusion rates (10-20μg/kg/min), mild β2 and c1
 C activity manifests as peripheral vasoconstriction: hence it is
an ino-constrictor.
due to β2 and cardiac αl actions, but still very little change in
● Is a MAO (monoamine oxidase) inhibitor.
overall systemic vascular resistance because the vasodilatory
● Increases release of norepinephrine from nerve terminals, but
actions of β2 agonism are balanced’ by the vasoconstrictor effects
this mechanism works best after the first dose, because there-
 of α1 agonism. Tachycardias and tachyarrhythmias are more of a
after, the norepinephrine stores may not have had time to be
problem.
replenished, so the phenomenon of tachyphylaxis (reduced
effectiveness with subsequent doses), occurs.
Dopexamine
A synthetic catecholamine; a derivative of dopamine. It has DA1
Note
and β2 agonist activities (with a little DA2 and B1 activity). Again,
Use of epinephrine (adrenaline) is now gaining popularity in
there are dose-dependent results. It tends to cause a lot of vasodi-
 shocky cats that are unresponsive to other therapies (e.g. fluids
lation (so reduces afterload), so cardiac output is increased, but
and other vasopressors and inotropes). At low doses, it is prefer-
arterial blood pressure may actually fall. May result in profuse
entially a β agonist; but at higher doses has C actions too. Infusions
sweating in horses.
are used at c. 0.05-1 μg/kg/min, to effect. Beware arrhythmias.
Isoprenaline
Vasodilators are sometimes required: sodium nitroprusside is
Has β1 (and some β2) agonist activity. Positive inotropy and
 probably the commonest used.
 positive chronotropy result in variable effects on blood pressure.
Vasopressors
Further reading
Phenylephrine
Bailey JM (2ooo) Dopamine: one size does not ft all. Editorial.
Is an Cl agonist, direct-acting non-catecholamine. Very high
 doses are said to have β effects. It is infused to effect (0.1-2μg/
Anesthesiology 92(2), 303-305.
Galley HF (2000) Renal dose dopamine: will the message now get
kg/min), or can be given as a bolus (c. 0.01 mg/kg).
through? Editorial. The Lancet 356,2112-2113.
● Causes peripheral vasoconstriction, therefore increases blood
Humm KR, Senior JM, Dugdale AH, Summerfield NJ (2007) Use
pressure.
of sodium nitroprusside in the anaesthetic protocol of a patent
● Increased systemic vasoconstriction initially increases venous
 ductus arteriosus ligation in a dog. The Veterinary Journal 173,
return and through Starling's law, increases myocardial con-
194-196.
tractility (because of increased stretch of chambers because of
Lee Y-H L, Clarke KW, Alibhai HIK, Song D (1998) Effects of
increased filling). But the increase in systemic vascular resist-
dopamine, dobutamine, dopexamine, phenylephrine and saline
ance increases afterload on the heart and may actually reduce
solution on intramuscular blood flow and other cardiopulmo-
stroke volume, and therefore cardiac output, (and therefore
nary variables in halothane-anesthetized ponies. American
future venous return), even though arterial blood pressure is
Journal of Veterinary Research 59(11), 1463-1472.
increased.
The Sicilian Gambit: A new approach to the classification of
● Increased arterial pressure may cause reflex bradycardia; which
antiarrhythmic drugs based on their actions on arrhythmogenic
may further reduce cardiac output.
 mechanisms. (1991) The Task Force of the Working Group on
● Increases myocardial oxygen demand because of increased
Arrhythmias of the European Society of Cardiology. Circulation
afterload, which demands increased cardiac work.
84, 1831-1851.
 Drugs affecting the cardiovascular system  231
Wohl JS, Schwartz DD, Flournoy WS, Clark TP, Wright JC (2007)
Young LE, Blissitt KJ, Clutton RE, Molony V (1998) Temporal
 Renal hemodynamic and diuretic effects of low-dose dopamine
effects of an infusion of dobutamine hydrochloride in horses
in anesthetized cats. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and
anesthetized with halothane. American Journal of Veterinary
Critical Care 17(1),45-82.
Research 59(8), 1027-1032.
Shock
Learning objectives
cauises.
To be able to describe the different stages of shock.
To be able to discuss the various basic treatment options.
 To be able to outline the problems of ischaemia and reperfusion.
 To be able to recognise the importance of close monitoring and regular patient reassessment, and of changing treatment plans
as necessary.
Introduction
Hypovolaemic
This is an absolute deficiency of intravascular volume:
No matter what the cause, shock is the clinical state due to failure
 of the microcirculation to deliver adequate oxygen and meta-
●Haemorrhagic.
bolic substrates to the cells, and to remove their waste metabolic
● Traumatic.
products. This results in altered cell metabolism, eventual cell
● Severe fluid losses and dehydration.
 death and even organ dysfunction or failure. Shock may also
occur when the cells are unable to utilise the delivered oxygen
Distributive/maldistributive/vasculogenic
(see below).
 Shock is the 'end stage' or final common path' of many dis-
Can be high or low resistance. We most often talk of the relative
 deficiency of intravascular volume due to vasodilation, which may
eases, severe trauma or infection. It can be thought of as a syn-
 drome; a collection of clinical signs associated with these final
be due to endotoxic shock, histamine (anaphylactic shock), or
common pathophysiological processes.
neurogenic shock; but inappropriate vasoconstriction can also
 Shock has been classified according to the primary cause (e.g.
occur.
haemorrhagic, anaphylactic, septic, endotoxaemic, neurogenic,
● Endotoxic shock/septic shock; the clinical manifestations of
cardiogenic) in the hope that identification of the initiating
 problem would help us to target our treatment more effectively.
● Anaphylactic shock: massive histamine release leading to
However, because shock is an end-stage syndrome, the clinical
vasodilation.
signs associated with it tend to be common to all its causes, so we
● Neurogenic shock: acute massive reduction in sympathetic tone
must still endeavour to diagnose the underlying cause in each
leading to widespread vasodilation. Can follow spinal trauma
case. As we will see later, a dog with gastric dilation/volvulus
or massive emotional distress (similar to the Bezold-Jarisch
(GDV), of several hours duration may have hypovolaemic, car-
response resulting in vaso-vagal syncope, but with longer
diogenic, distributive, obstructive and metabolic shock.
lasting (clinical) neuroendocrine consequences).
Main 'types' of shock
Obstructive
The main types' of shock (with some overlap of causes) are given
 Impedance to venous return/cardiac output; impedance to organ
below.
perfusion.
232
Shock 233
● Cardiac tamponade/restrictive pericarditis.
which renders it inactive. (The “inhibitor of kappa B' α isoform
● Tension pneumothorax.
is common in man, whereas the β isoform is common in the
● Massive pulmonary thromboembolism.
horse.) Cytokines, endotoxins and oxidants can separate NFkB
●Aorto-iliac thrombosis.
from IkB, through activating Ik kinases, which then phosphor-
● Disseminated intravascular
coagulopathy (DIC)/multiple
ylate IkB which leads to its subsequent degradation. Then, NFkB
thromboses.
can move unhindered into the nucleus where it can affect gene
● Bloat/GDV/ some equine colics. Increased intra-abdominal
transcription. Phosphorylation of IkB can also occur independ-
 pressure.
ently of the Ik kinase pathway, by a redox-regulated pathway that
is controlled by intracellular HO. This pathway results in the
Cardiogenic
activation of NFkB with hypoxia/reperfusion.
 Primary (mechanical or electrophysiological) pump failure.
Hypoxia inducible factors (HIFs) are transcription factors con-
sisting of c and β subunits. In normally oxygenated tissues the C
● Heart failure (forward or backward). Congenital or acquired
subunits are ubiquitinated and destroyed, however, in hypoxic
heart disease.
● Arrhythmias (tachy- or brady-). Disease- or drug- (including
cells, the C subunits can dimerise with the β subunits, and the
 dimers can then affect gene transcription.
 anaesthetic) induced.
Poor tissue oxygenation results in triggering of
Metabolic/endocrine/hypoxaemic
 Reduced blood oxygen content; factors affecting cellular respira-
an inflammatory response
tion/metabolism including metabolic toxins and hormone
● Damaged cells/cell membranes increase the flux of phospholi-
imbalances.
 pid breakdown products (arachidonic acid), through cyclo-
oxygenase (COX) and 5-lipoxygenase (5-LOX) pathways to
● Anaemia; dyshaemoglobinaemia (e.g. methaemoglobinaemia;
formation
 produce prostaglandins (PGs), thromboxanes (TXs) and leu-
carbon
monoxide
inhalation
and
of
kotrienes (LTs), as well as producing platelet activating factor
carboxyhaemoglobin).
(PAF) and some reactive oxygen species (ROS).
●Cyanide toxicity.
● Kinin system activation.
● Heat stroke.
· Complement activation.
● Malignant hyperthermia.
● Coagulation cascade activated (leading to DIC).
● Hypoglycaemia.
●Activation of inflammatory cells: monocyte/macrophage
● SIRS/sepsis/endotoxaemia (mitochondrial dysfunction).
system, mast cells (leading to histamine and heparin release
● Acute adrenal insufficiency in critical illness.
(heparin may also have immunomodulatory activities)), and
Figure 26.1 shows how gastric dilation/volvulus (torsion) can
neutrophils.
embrace more than one cause or type of shock. See Chapter 27
O Activated inflammatory cells have increased expression of
on GDVs for further information.
COX-2 (leading to increased PG production), and i-NOS
(leading to increased NO production).
0 Activated inflammatory cells also produce pro-inflamma-
Shock as an imbalance between oxygen supply
tory and anti-inflammatory cytokines (e.g. IL-1, TNF-α,
 and oxygen demand
IL-6, IL-8, IL-10) possibly via increased activity of nuclear 
transcription factors such as NFkB.
This may be achieved by one or more problems in the factors that
affect O supply and demand (Figure 26.2). Mitochondrial func
O Results in the ‘acute phase response', further changes in
systemic vascular permeability (increases), tone (decreases),
tion may also be impaired by, for example, certain cytokines and
endotoxin, further exacerbating the problems.
and cell-adhesion (increases) properties which promote
further inflammatory/immune cell recruitment, further
Hypoxaemia is poor oxygenation of blood.
involvement of coagulation pathways, stimulation of
Hypoxia is poor oxygenation of tissues. It can be due to:
hypothalamic-pituitary axis (HPA) with development of the
' ss = (id nod)  
neuroendocrine 'stress-response, hepatic production of
● Poor oxygenation of blood = hypoxaemic hypoxia.
acute phase proteins, negative nitrogen (protein) and energy
● Anaemia (poor oxygenation of blood due to inadequate hae-
balance, fever and malaise.
 moglobin) = anaemic hypoxia.
In a “local’ setting, the integration of all these is probably
● Metabolic poisons so cells can't utilise oxygen = histotoxic or
important for wound healing. However, pro-inflammatory
cytotoxic hypoxia.
mediators and cytokines may spill over into the systemic circula-
Figure 26.3 demonstrates the knock-on effects of decreased
tion, and if they do so in sufficient quantity, then 'systemic' events
cellular oxygen availability.
occur. Usually, the pro-inflammatory response is countered,
 Nuclear transcription factor kappa B (NFkB) plays a key role
either locally or systemically, by a compensatory anti-inflamma-
 in the inflammatory response. It is a heterodimer that normally
tory response, but if the anti-inflammatory response is insuff-
exists in the cytoplasm of cells bound to an inhibitory IkB protein
cient, then trouble results.
234  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Gastric dilation/volvulus 
Gastric
↑ pressure on
 ischaemia/necrosis
diaphragm
↑ pressure on
Gastric
+/- splenic problems
caudal vena cava*
 atony/intestinal ileus
↓ tidal
(impaired emptying 
volume;
both up and down)
Blood/protein
ventilation/
loss
↓ venous
perfusion
mismatching
return
 Fluid sequestration
Absorptionof
bacteria and toxins
Hypoxaemia
√ cardiac output
Hypovolaemic shock
Hypercarbia
Perforation/
(respiratory
√ cardiac
peritonitis
acidosis)
Obstructive/
ndno
Endotoxaemic
distributive shock
/septic shock 
Myocardial
ARDS
hypoxia
SHOcK - many different types
· Impaired tissue Oz delivery/utilisation
· Infliammatory cascades activated
Arrhythmias
· MDFs (from ischaemic pancreas, NO)
Reduced inotropy
· Electrolyte imbalances 
·Acid-base disturbances
 ·Hypoproteinaemia
↓ cardiac 
· Possibly anaemia
ndno
· Shock lung/possibly ARDS
·DIC
 High sympathetic tone results in down-regulation of
Cardiogenic shock
adrenoreceptors (especially β1, with possible upregulation of β2);:
and this contributes to myocardial dysfunction.
 (Upregulation of β2 receptors on blood vessels further promotes
vasodilation)
Figure 26.1 How different types of shock can co-exist.
MDF, myocardial depressant factors, one of which may be nitric oxide (NO).
0l sppe ypium (pooq jo buyood) uogsabuos Apoq lepnes/jeuai/siuqouelds sasnen uian lepod speday jo osje inq eaen euan jepnes jo Ajuo pou uoissaidwoy
the maldistribution of blood.
ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome due to pulmonary ischaemia/oedema/thromboemboli (i.e. 'shock' affects the pulmonary circulation as well as the
systemic circulation).
The systemic pro-inflammatory response is termed the
difficulty with regulating their inflammatory responses too (i.e.
Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome; SIRS. It may be
genotype appears to be important).
balanced by a systemic anti-inflammatory response (termed the
The term 'sepsis' is often reserved for situations where the
compensatory anti-inflammatory response syndrome; CARS).
SIRS is due to severe infection. Other, non-infectious, causes
If an imbalance occurs and the pro-inflammatory response gets
of SIRS include trauma, burns, hypoxaemia, pancreatitis and
out of hand, it becomes detrimental to the well-being of the
 neoplasia.
animal. SIRs, if unchecked, eventually leads to multiple organ
Nomenclature and definitions are the focus of much debate;
dysfunction syndrome/failure (MODS/MOF). An imbalance of
see the further reading.
SIRS and CARS may simply be due to overwhelming tissue injury
 Some of the actions of the major participants in the inflamma-
or infection, although certain individuals may also have more
 tory response are listed below.
Shock 235
Stroke volume
Cardiac output
Heart rate/rhythm
Tissue Oz delivery
Hb concentration 
>→Arterial blood O2 content
PaO2
Figure 26.2 Important players in the delivery of oxygen to the tissues.
Hb, haemoglobin. Both the quality and quantity present in blood are important.
 Metabolic rate/O2 consumption
 Tissue O2 extraction 
Stroke volume is affected by preload, afterload and myocardial contractility.
(temperature, thyroid hormones,
Preload depends upon venous return (and therefore on blood volume), and
catecholamines, metabolic toxins etc.)
cardiac chamber capacity (which can be affected by pericardial and myocardial
disease). Afterload is affected by systemic vascular resistance.
Venous O2 content
Inadequate cellular O2
Anaerobic metabolism
and
 Altered gene expression
(↑ production of vasodilatory products, K*, H*, COz, adenosine) (↑ cytokine production)
(and also ↑ NO via HIFs)
(e.g. via ↑ activation of NFkB
possibly via NO/HIF-dependent mechanism;
and by changes in intracellular HzOz)
↓ function of Na*/K+-ATPase (sodium pumps), and calcium pumps etc.
↑ intracellular [Na] which = **cell swelling/death,lysosomal rupture etc.
and
 ↑ intracellular [Ca?] which = disruption of cellular enzymic processes etc. and 
possibly involved in apoptosis (programmed cell death)
and
Intracellular hypoxia →> ↑ hypoxanthine (a breakdown product of adenosine) and 
↑ conversion (Ca-stirmulated), of xanthine dehydrogenase to xanthine oxidase which
 results in increased free radical production 
↑ production of ROS/RNS (especially with reperfusion)-
+ activation of NFkB
lipid peroxidation and production of arachidonic acid from mermbrane phospholipids
Inflammatory response
Vasodilation and ↑ capillary permeability
Figure 26.3 Consequences of reduced cellular oxygen availability.
** Cell swelling includes capillary endothelial cells, the swelling of which further compromises tissue perfusion; and results in 'rounding up' of cells on the
aeds lennsiau aun ou! (sa Aioewweu Aeadsa) san/suanodpin jo abeeal pue Aqeawad iensea paseaiu ot speal qpium aueiqwaw juawaseq
(causing oedema which further reduces O delivery to cels). Exposure of basement membrane also exposes factors which trigger inflammatory and coagulation
cascades. Mucosal barrier' of gut also compromised leading to endotoxaemia. Mitochondrial damage and malfunction also occur when the normal intracellular
environment is disturbed.
'g eddey jonej uondussuen leanu 'gyin rsopey alqpnpui exodsy 'sin :salpads uabonju anneal 'sna rsapads uabxo annieal 'sod
236  Veterinary Anaesthesia
PAF (platelet activating factor):
macrophages and neutrophils, and NO is produced in vast quan-
tities by iNOS. (NO is a reactive nitrogen species and can react
●Activates platelets.
● Increases vascular permeability.
with ROS to produce other RNS). COX-2 is the inducible form
cyclo-oxygenase that produces PGs and TXs.
● Encourages cellular adhesion to endothelium.
IL-1
(N.B. see decreased albumin and decreased transferrin).
● Pro-inflammatory (via NfkB): increases TNFα, other cytokines,
● C-reactive protein (CRP).
NO (via iNOS), and PG (via COX-2), production.
● Complement components.
● Endogenous pyrogen (leads to fever).
● Protease inhibitors (ol antitrypsin, Ql antichymotrypsin, 02
●Reduces appetite.
macroglobulin, C2 antiplasmin).
● Possibly a myocardial depressant factor (MDF).
● Lipopolysaccharide binding proteins (LBPs).
● Serum amyloid A (SAA).
IL-6
· αl acid glycoprotein.
● Stimulates acute phase protein production.
● Clotting factors (fibrinogen, von Willebrand factor).
● May modulate IL-1 and TNFo production.
● Metal-binding proteins (caeruloplasmin, haemopexin, hap-
toglobin (transferrin usually decreases)).
IL-8
● Antithrombin II is reduced in many species, but is increased
● Chemotactic (especially to neutrophils).
 in cats, in which it is an acute phase protein.
● Plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI1).
IL-10
● Anti-inflammatory: decreases TNFα and IL-8 production.
Potential causes of SIRS
TNFα
 Infectious causes are:
● Pro-inflammatory (via NfkB): enhances production of other
●Bacteria.
cytokines (ILs, PGs (via COX-2), NO (via iNOS)) and adhesion 
● Viruses.
●Fungi.
molecules.
●Parasites.
· Causes fever?
● Reduces appetite (a cachectin?).
 Noninfectious causes are:
● Induces lethargy.
● Possibly a myocardial depressant factor (MDF).
● Trauma.
● Inflammation (e.g. pancreatitis).
NO (nitric oxide)
● Hypoxia.
● Causes vasodilation (note that carbon monoxide (CO) also
● Prolonged hypovolaemia.
produces vasodilation through similar mechanism, ie. produc-
●Endotoxaemia.
tion of cGMP).
● Burns.
● Increases capillary permeability.
● Neoplasia.
● Decreases myocardial function (possibly a myocardial depres-
If unbalanced SIRS is left untreated, cellular dysfunction
sant factor, MDF).
progresses to organ dysfunction. When compensatory mecha-
● Decreases WBC adhesion.
nisms fail, irreversible organ damage occurs and MODs/MOF
● Decreases platelet aggregation.
 eventually results in death of the whole organism.
● Important in immunomodulation.
● Affects renin release, and Na and water homeostasis.
Endotoxaemia
Two important enzymes involved
May occur with or without septicaemia. Septicaemia is often
iNOS is the inducible form of nitric oxide synthase, an enzyme
Gram negative in veterinary species,but do not forget that Gram-
that produces NO. Constitutive NOS (cNOS), is expressed in
positive septicaemia can also occur. Endotoxin is Gram-negative
vascular endothelial cells (eNOS) and neurones (nNOS), and NO
bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (Figure 26.4).
 is usually produced in small quantities; whereas inducible NOS
The lipid A region is the most important for the effects of
(iNOS) is expressed by vascular smooth muscle cells, hepatocytes,
endotoxins.  Endotoxin binds  to lipopolysaccharide-binding
'O' region = polysaccharide
Core region = oligosaccharide
Lipid A inserts into Gram-negative bacterial membrane
Fgure 26.4 Gram-negative bacterial endotoxin.
Shock 237
 protein (LBP), in the patient's blood. The endotoxin:LBP complex
● Brick red mucous membranes, brisk CRT
then interacts with cell (especially inflammatory/immune-cell)
● Tachypnoea
membrane receptors (CDl4). This whole conglomerate now
● Reduced urine output
interacts with Toll-like receptors in cell membranes (helped by
● Normal mentation
another protein), and then intracellular events can be triggered.
This is the compensatory stage, often called the hyperdynamic
 The result of cell ^activation' by endotoxin is the release of
stage. During this stage, the stress response (increased catecho-
inflammatory mediators such as cytokines, prostaglandins,
lamines, cortisol, glucagon, growth hormone, and possibly thyroid
thromboxanes, leukotrienes, PAF, nitric oxide, and reactive
hormones) may result in hyperglycaemia. Insulin resistance is
oxygen species. Most of their production is stimulated through
 promoted. Inflammatory cells use glucose (non insulin-depend-
up-regulation of gene expression; for example we know that
e  oe   s  d  s (
nuclear transcription factor NFkB is ^activated' by endotoxin.
energy substrate for many of the vital organs. These responses
 Most of the clinical signs which follow endotoxaemia are due
to the actions of these inflammatory mediators; for example hypo-
therefore help to divert energy sources to the cells which most
need them. There is an overall increase in O/energy demand.
tension due to vasodilation, haemoconcentration due to increased 
 Sympathetic nervous system and renin-angiotensin system activa-
capillary permeability, coagulation abnormalities and reduced O2
tion and increase ADH aim to promote vasoconstriction.
supply to the tissues. Endotoxin can also reduce the ability of
However, if this stage continues untreated, then the inflamma-
cells to utilise oxygen acting like a metabolic toxin. (It affects 
tory mediators (cytokines and NO), and products of cellular
mitochondrial function, for example it reduces pyruvate deydro-
anaerobic metabolism (e.g. K, CO, H, adenosine), and cell
genase activity, resulting in an increase in lactate production even
death (e.g. enzymes), all oppose the compensatory response
when oxygen supply is not limiting.) Endotoxin can therefore
mechanisms. (Endotoxaemia may also come into the picture.)
initiate SIRS. In the lungs, endotoxin causes bronchoconstriction,
 Eventually unbalanced SIRS leads to:
 pulmonary vasoconstriction (yet inhibition of hypoxic pulmonary
vasoconstriction), thickening of the alveolar-capillary membrane
● Vasodilation
(especially
y precapillary arterioles) which
due to oedema (increased vascular permeability) and infltration
worsens tissue congestion, oedema, sludging of blood flow and
with inflammatory cells, especially neutrophils. This, along with
 microthrombi formation.
the hypotension it causes, results in ventilation/perfusion mis-
● Increased vascular permeability (capillary leak syndrome;
matching and reduced pulmonary gaseous exchange (especially
Clarkson's syndrome).
for oxygen, as oxygen is less soluble/diffusible than carbon
● Negative inotropy.
dioxide). The overall result is hypoxaemia.
● Deranged cellular metabolism (increased intracellular Ca?t;
mitochondrial dysfunction).
Responses to'shock'
Decompensation may then follow (with a combination of
hypovolaemic, distributive and cardiogenic types of shock).
The body tries hard to maintain vital organ perfusion and oxy-
For primary hypovolaemic shock, peripheral vasodilation
 genation, through activation of the sympathetic nervous system,
now influences the late clinical signs which include:
activation of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, and
increased antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release, (and also activa-
● Tachycardia or bradycardia
tion of the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis.) Differential
● Peripheral pulses are poor
tissue vasoconstriction and vasodilation try to divert blood to vital
● Mucous membranes often congested
organs. Fluid shifts also occur at the capillary level. The degree of
● Capillary reflltime prolonged, >2-3 s
compensation possible depends to some extent upon the nature
● Glucose may be high, normal or low
and severity of the inciting cause/s.
● Decreased body temperature
 For primary hypovolaemic shock, peripheral vasoconstric-
● Mental depression
tion influences the early clinical signs which include:
 For primary distributive shock, peripheral vasodilation is
●Tachycardia
 ongoing and the late clinical signs include:
● Weak peripheral pulses
● Tachycardia or bradycardia
● Cool extremities
● Peripheral pulses are weak and thready
● Pale mucous membranes, decreased capillary refill time (CRT)
● Mucous  membranes often congested/cyanotic/petechiated
●Tachypnoea
(disseminated intravascular coagulopathy; DIC)
●Reduced urine output
● CRT is prolonged, >2-3 s
● Normal mentation
●Glucose may be normal or low
 For primary maldistributive shock, peripheral vasodilation
● Decreased body temperature
●Mental depression
influences the early clinical signs which include:
● Tachycardia
This is the decompensated stage, or hypodynamic stage.
● Pulses bounding (despite hypotension)
The rate of progression from the compensatory to the decom-
● Warm extremities
 pensatory stage depends upon the severity of the initial insult, but
238  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 progression tends to be faster with maldistributive types of shock.
to around 50% (normal room air is 21%); whereas increasing the
(Often the picture may be a little more complicated, as more than
flow rate to around 500 ml/kg/minute will increase the inspired
one type of^shock’ tends to be present; i.e. endotoxaemia often
oxygen to around 80%. Try to humidify any Oz you supply in this
becomes involved, after compromise of GI tract perfusion). The
way as it is less troublesome for the respiratory tract. (Oz toxicity
decompensated stage can quickly progress to a stage refractory to
  ()  s (  doap 
treatment.
periods of time >12-24 h; so try to reduce FiOz to <60% as soon
 Poor prognostic indicators are:
 as possible.) Serial arterial blood gas analyses are very useful.
Consider anaemia; does the patient have enough red cells and
● Bradycardia.
functional haemoglobin? You may need to consider blood trans-
● Hypoglycaemia.
fusion, or oxyglobin.
● Hypothermia.
●Acidosis.
· DIC.
Circulatory support
Fluids
See Chapter 23 on fluid therapy.
often taught as only tachycardic; but we now know that bradycar-
Beware in cases of congestive cardiac failure and those with
dia may occur, and tends to herald the onset of decompensation.
pulmonary oedema/ARDS. Consider the choices if your patient is
It seems that the bradycardia is a last ditch attempt to reduce O2
hypoproteinaemic. Carefully consider fuid choices with capillary
requirement. Suffice it to say that an animal that otherwise appears
leak states.
 in shock should not have treatment withheld just because its heart
 Types of fluids:
rate does not fit the rest of the picture. Animals, especially cats,
that present with bradycardia, hypothermia and hypoglycae-
● Crystalloids: isotonic or hypertonic.
 mia, tend to have a poor prognosis.
● Colloids including Hb-based Oz carriers (Oxyglobin M).
 Tachypnoea occurs partly in response to hypoperfusion
●Albumin.
(hypoxia) of the chemoreceptors and partly as a response to hypo-
● Plasma: fresh +/- heparin (which is a cofactor of antithrombin
tension because the baroreceptors also communicate with the
III).
respiratory centre; but may in addition occur in response to pain
· Blood.
or fear, and as a compensatory response to metabolic acidosis.
 Do not be afraid to change your fluid plan regularly, or use
 more than one type of fluid.
Treatment
 Routes of administration:
Our main aim is to restore tissue oxygen delivery. So we try to
● Intravenous.
 improve PaO and cardiac output. (We still have a lot to learn 
● Intraosseous.
about the role of cellular and subcellular dysfunction, and we do
● Subcutaneous route too slow.
( a aq   ai m mo m  n
● Intraperitoneal route also slow but may also be inappropriate
You may have heard of 'VIP':
for the condition (e.g peritonitis) or the type of fluid required.
● V = ventilation, to improve oxygenation of blood.
Volume and rate
● I = infusion of fluids and restoration of intravascular volume.
What were the clinical signs? Could you estimate a percentage
● P = maintenance of myocardial pump function and tissue
dehydration from skin tent (increased duration of skin tent
perfusion.
usually means between 5% and 15% dehydration), and haemo-
It is reminiscent of the ABC' of cardiopulmonary cerebral
concentration. (Remember that after acute haemorrhage, the
resuscitation. The longer the shock-producing event is allowed to
packed cell volume (PCV) and total protein (TP) will not have
persist, the greater the consequences, and the more likely serious 
had time to change.)
complications are to develop (e.g. endotoxaemia (if it was not the
Jou o si i on Pn yn mou mouY o Aem isaq au
inciting cause), DIC, reperfusion injury).
the response to treatment (Table 26.1). For example, you are
looking for an improvement in mentation; normalisation of heart
Respiratory support
rate, mucous membrane colour, moistness and CRT; improve-
Oxygen
ment in peripheral pulse quality and arterial blood pressure;
We can try to improve the oxygenation of blood by increasing the
restoration of urine output and specifc gravity (SG); and closing
inspired O concentration. Very rarely are our patients depressed
of wide core:periphery temperature gradients. Blood lactate con-
enough (at admission), to allow endotracheal intubation and
centration sometimes increases with instigation of fluid therapy
 mechanical ventilation; but placement of nasal oxygen prongs, or
(due to reperfusion), but should decrease as fluid therapy
insertion of a nasopharyngeal catheter for O, insufflation; or use
progresses.
 of a makeshift O tent (Elizabethan collar and clingfilm) are better
As with all fluid therapy plans, aim to restore circulating blood
tolerated and should be benefcial. For nasal catheters, oxygen
volume as soon as possible; then address the deficits of the other
flow rates of around 200 ml/kg/min increase the inspired oxygen
fluid compartments; and cater for ongoing losses, as well as
Shock 239
Table 26.1 Variables to monitor to help guide fluid therapy.
Vasopressin (ADH)
Vasopressin is also used sometimes to reduce the requirement for
Patient mentation/responsiveness 
Aim for bright alert responsive
other vasopressors, and works in an acidic environment.
Heart rate/pulse rate
Aim for >60 and <180 (dog);
>85 and <200 (cat); 20-45 (horse)
Naloxone
Aim for strong peripheral pues
 Naloxone may also reduce some of the detrimental effects of
Pulse quality (central/peripheral)
endogenous opioids (such as hypotension and gastrointestinal
Mucous membrane colour. 
Aim for pink, moist, CRT ≤2s
ileus).
moistness, CRT
Respiration rate
Aim for normal (10-40 small
Methylene blue
animals; 8-16 horse)
 Methylene blue reduces NO production (inhibits NO synthase)
Temperature (core; periphery)
Aim for normal temp., and temp.
 and may help reverse some NO-induced vasodilation; it may also
 gradient not >3-4°℃
 decrease ROS production.
 Skin turgor
 Aim for normal
Corticosteroids
Urine output and SG
Aim for 1-1.5 ml/kg/h
The adrenal glands are often underactive in shock (the ^relative
CVP
Aim for 5-10 cm H0 (very
adrenal insuffciency of critical illness). Supplementation may
positional, and depends a little on
help. Glucocorticoids have anti-inflammatory effects, and they
intra-abdominal, pericardial, and 
 have permissive effects on the actions of catecholamines and help
intra-thoracic pressures). Measure
up-regulate β receptors, so may enable reduced cardiovascular
 during end-expiratory pause
 support with exogenous inotropes and vasopressors. (ACTH
Arterial blood pressure
Aim for 60-70 mmHg mean
stimulation test is often advised first.)
arterial pressure
Blood gases and electrolytes
Aim for Pa0>60-70 mmHg; and 
 Antidysrhythmics
PvO>35 mmHg; pH 7.3-7.5 and
 May be necessary. See Chapters 25 and 27.
 normal electrolyte concentrations
Other therapeutic interventions
Blood glucose
Aim for normal (3-6 mmol/l) 
Acid-base disturbance correction
PCV/TP
Aim for PCV >28% (can be lower
 Fluid therapy and restoration of renal function go a long way to
if increase Fi0) and <45%; and
Ip/6s'E< dl
sorting out many of these problems. See Chapters 23 and 21.
Albumin
Aim for >2 g/dl
Correct electrolyte disturbances
Hb
Aim for at least 7 (pref. 9) g/dl
 Acid-base disturbances may also influence electrolyte concentra-
tions. Acute hyperkalaemia is probably the most life-threatening
Lactic acid (lactate)
A lot of infuencing factors, normal
around <1 mmol/l
 electrolyte abnormality (see Chapter 24). Correct chronic changes
slowly, and acute changes in electrolyte concentrations more
Weight
Helps monitor fluid balance and
rapidly.
Galorific intake
Tight glycaemic control
Endeavour to normalise blood glucose concentration. Both
hypoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia have adverse consequences.
ongoing maintenance requirements. Remember that ‘volume-
 Some patients may also be diabetic, and critically ill patients
replacement’ crystalloid fluids (e.g. normal (0.9%) saline,
 often have a degree of insulin resistance requiring insulin +/-
 Hartmann's solution), are not good maintenance fluids. For 
glucose infusions; monitor electrolytes (especially potassium) too.
maintenance fluid requirements, 5% glucose or 4% glucose + 1/5
 Although many 'maintenance crystalloid fluids contain some
normal (0.18%) saline tend to be used, but often with added K+
glucose, these do not contain enough glucose for total body
and other electrolytes. How fast you administer the fluid/s depends
 energy requirements.
upon the patient's response and the underlying cause/s of the
shock.
Attend to calorific requirements
You should think about providing calories (enteral/parenteral
 Inotropes and vasopressors
nutrition) as soon as a patient cannot eat for itself. Negative
May be required for maintenance of ‘normal haemodynamic
 energy balance is common in critical patients, often because we
function.
overlook their calorific requirements. Small volume (pharmaco-
logical) oral feeds help to keep the gut active and healthy, even if
Dobutamine, dopamine, ephedrine, norepinephrine,
most calorie requirements must be met by parenteral nutrition.
epinephrine，phenylephrine,andmethoxamine
Oral glutamine also helps aid gastrointestinal tract villus epithelial
These may all have a place.
restitution.
240  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Antibiotics
vated by ^activating surfaces' (e.g. bacteria, viruses, endotoxin
Broad spectrum antibiotics are probably a good idea. Remember
(LPS), aggregated immunoglobulins). The third method of com-
that rapid killing of bacteria in the blood stream, however, can
plement activation involves acute phase proteins called mannose-
increase the release of endotoxin. Take good care of indwelling
s e e are s  d 
vascular, oxygen delivery, urinary and feeding catheters.
IL-1, IL-6 and TNF-α, which stimulate hepatocytes to secrete
acute phase proteins, among which are the so-called mannose-
Control fever: prevent hypothermia
 binding proteins. These bind to the mannose-containing glyco-
Whilst mild hypothermia reduces O requirements,beware exces-
proteins of bacterial cell walls to act as opsonins, and stimulate
sive hypothermia as shivering certainly increases O requirements
the alternate complement pathway Interestingly, the mannose-
and can compromise ventilatory effciency.
binding proteins have some structural homology with Clq, and
 d s  n e  snd s 
Anti-endotoxins, anti-inflammatories, anti-oxidants and
terminal pathway of the complement system results in formation
rheological agents
of the 'membrane-attack-complex, which forms a large pore that
Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) and
inserts itself, and punches holes into cell membranes resulting in
possibly ketamine and some opioids
cell death.
NSAIDs have an anti-NFkB effect as well as causing COX (+/-
 Regulation of the complement system is important. The natural
5-LOX) inhibition. Ketamine and possibly some of the opioids,
inhibitor of the classical pathway is Cl-inhibitor (or C1-
also have anti-NFkB actions.
inactivator). This blocks the activation of Clr and Cls. The
- a aa) sd in s s ad a
Monocional antibodies
accelerating-factor). There are also inhibitors of the formation of
Against O antigens you can use ‘Stegantox. Against core? anti-
the membrane attack complex (e.g protectin).
 gens use hyperimmune serum.
 C1-inhibitor is also important in regulating the intrinsic coagu-
lation system; and thus may be useful in down-regulating activa-
Polymixin B
tion of this in DIC. In sepsis, a reduction in active Cl-inhibitor
 Acts like a detergent, it reacts with the lipid A part of endotoxin.
has been correlated with increased mortality. Administration of
It has its own side effects though (nephro- and neuro-toxicity).
exogenous Cl-inhibitor reduced the need for vasopressors in
patients with sepsis; and may have a role in the treatment of
TACE-inhibitors (TNFo-converting enzyme inhibitors)
endotoxaemia.
TNFo remains membrane-bound on the inflammatory cells that
produce it, until it is released by the TNFα-converting enzyme
Pentoxifylline
‘TACE. Free TNFo is the most ^active. TACE inhibitors should
A methylxanthine derivative which also inhibits the phosphoryla-
reduce the amount of active' TNFo.
tion of IkB and so reduces the activation of NFkB. It is a potent
anti-inflammatory, especially in the face of endotoxin challenge.
Heparin-incubated fresh plasma
It may be used as a ^rheological agent to decrease blood viscosity
At one time, the added heparin was thought necessary to fully
and platelet aggregation, cause selective vasodilation, and
activate all the antithrombin II in fresh plasma, thereby making
help offset some of the haemodynamic consequences of
it even better for transfusion into animals with DIC. However,
endotoxaemia.
fresh plasma, or even blood (with platelets too), is probably just
as beneficial. Low molecular weight heparin has longer half-life
Clenbutero!
and fewer side effects than unfractionated heparin because it only
 A β2 adrenoceptor agonist, so normally used as a bronchodilator
inhibits the action of factor Xa, and not IIa; its actions are more
(and has vasodilator properties). Also now known to have anti-
easily antagonised by protamine too.
inflammatory effects through inhibiting NFkB.
Activated protein C (protein Ca)
Antioxidants
Has antithrombotic actions via inhibition of factors Va and VIHla.
 See below under ischaemia-reperfusion injury.
 In some human trials, when extra protein Ca was given to patients
with SIRS, a strongly positive influence on outcome was seen.
TLC (tender loving care)
However, in some patients, there was an increased tendency to
 Good nursing/physiotherapy/encourage patient mobilisation and
bleed which caused problems.
interest.
C1-inhibitor
Ischaemia-reperfusion/reoxygenation injury
The complement cascade is activated in a number of ways. The
classical pathway can be activated by, for example contact with
One of the problems with resuscitation is that those cells that were
antigen-bound antibodies, or contact with some viral and bacte-
badly hypoxic (but did not die), had converted a lot of xanthine
rial surfaces. The classical pathway starts with C1 which has three
dehydrogenase into xanthine oxidase (due to accumulation of
parts: C1q, C1r, C1s, and C1r and C1s have proteolytic activity
intracellular calcium, which in turn drives abnormal enzymic
when activated. The alternate pathway (starting with C3) is acti-
processes). Along with hypoxanthine (a product of adenosine
Shock 241
breakdown, via inosine), and the restoration of tissue perfusion
(i.e. an Oz supply), xanthine oxidase can now produce reactive
 inhibits NFkB.
● Deferoxamine
(suppresses
Fe-dependent
free-radical
transition metal ions (e.g. Fe, Cu). These released reactive ions
reactions).
along with ROS may produce their damage locally, but may also
Some people suggest that inclusion of some of the above during
be borne in the restored circulation to distant sites, creating more
resuscitation can improve the chances of survival.
   n sn s p s p
become apparent several hours after resuscitation.
 Ischaemia-reperfusion/reoxygenation injury is  also
now
Osmotic agents
thought to involve heat shock proteins ('stress proteins'). These
Osmotic agents, such as mannitol, may also be beneficial, as they
proteins normally help maintain intracelular protein function
shrink cells suffering from cellular oedema, especially vascular
(e.g. confer thermotolerance), chaperone glucocorticoids to their
endothelial cells, and this may enhance return of perfusion.
receptors and thence to the nucleus, and are induced by such
Mannitol is also thought to be a free radical scavenger. Other
environmental stressors as heat, cold and hypoxia. During shock
diuretics (e.g. furosemide) may be useful to help fluid mobilisa-
states, hypoperfused tissues are deprived of oxygen and also
 tion and redistribution, to reduce tissue and pulmonary oedema,
become cool. During reperfusion there is an increase in tissue
and to help restore urine output. (Also very useful with cardio-
temperature due to the increased blood flow. All these insults can
 genic shock; where vasodilators also play a role.)
increase the production of heat shock proteins. Mild transient
ischaemia can increase tissue resistance to short-term future
Lidocaine
ischaemic insults (a phenomenon called preconditioning), pos-
 Lidocaine when administered intravenously has anti-inflamma-
sibly via increased heat shock protein production and enhanced
 tory properties; and may reduce inflammatory cell adhesion to
activity of natural antioxidants. However, marked ischaemia,
endothelium, as well as causing some vasodilation. These actions
when followed by reperfusion, can result in an increased produc-
ad aq dar d du on psns rq a
tion of ROS (in the face of reduced antioxidant defences), and the
the 'no-reflow? phenomenon. That is, even with fluid therapy,
higher tissue temperature may be detrimental. This may partly
some vascular beds remain blocked, not always by microthrombi
explain why antioxidants and free radical scavengers are not
 or cell debris, but rather possibly by vasoconstriction/vasospasm
always successful in preventing reperfusion injury, so perhaps we
(due to high intracellular calcium concentration in vascular
should think about careful tissue temperature control too.
smooth muscle cells), or adhered inflammatory cells, or due to
 Hypoxia can also result in the production of so called hypoxia-
vascular endothelial cellular oedema, or even due to extrinsic
compression by interstitial oedema. Some people are even bold
tion, for example to upregulate glucose and lactate transporters,
enough to use vasodilators (alongside well monitored fluid
increase the production of erythropoietin, increase angiogenesis,
therapy and haemodynamic function), in the hope that they
and upregulate iNOS, resulting in the increased production of
 improve tissue perfusion and oxygen delivery.
nitric oxide (NO). Nitric oxide itself can change intracellular
events, and can result in increased activity of NFkB. This tran-
scription factor, once activated, results in the production of lots
Glucocorticoids
Glucocorticoids inhibit phospholipase A2, and therefore reduce
of pro-inflammatory cytokines, and a vicious circle is now entered,
flux through COX and 5-LOX pathways, and reduce PAF produc-
  o ( )     
tion. They promote production of IKBα, inhibit NFKB activation
NFkB activity; and NFkB can increase the production of NO
and therefore have a powerful anti-inflammatory effect, and
(via iNOS), eicosanoids (via COX-2), and cytokines (e.g. TNFα).
further reduce cytokine, eicosanoid and NO production. They
have a permissive/facilitatory effect on the actions of catecho-
Reducing the potential for reperfusion injury
 iin n  o   s
Natural antioxidants are present within cells, even inside differ-
β receptor expression); thus improving patient response to
ent cell organelles, and also in the extracellular environment.
inotropes and reducing exogenous inotropic requirements. They
Antioxidants are present in both the aqueous and lipid phases.
 tend to make animals feel better too (said to be euphoric).
They include non-enzymatic molecules which scavenge ROS,
such as vitamin C, vitamin A, vitamin E, co-enzyme Q-10; pro-
teins with sulphydryl groups (albumin, haptoglobin, caeruloplas-
Coagulation and DiC
min); and enzymes which minimise ROS generation and activity.
   s     
such as catalase, superoxide dismutase and glutathione peroxi-
thrombosis to occur:
dase, for which selenium is an important cofactor.
Theoretically the following compounds have antioxidant
● Hypercoagulable state.
properties:
● Stasis/slow blood flow.
●Vascular
 endothelial
‘damage’(incl. hypoxic/ischaemic
●Allopurinol (inhibits xanthine oxidase).
damage).
● Superoxide dismutase (converts superoxide radicals into
hydrogen peroxide, H,O).
Figure 26.5 outlines the coagulation cascade.
242   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
Exposed collagen
Tissue factor Ill (thromboplastin) 
XII
xlla
Hageman 
factor
XI
Xla
VI
illa
X
IXa
Aternate pathway
ww factor
Vllla
Vlla.tissue factor Ill complex
stabilises
factor Vil
 Classical pathway
Xa and Illa
Final common path 
X
Xa
(on platelet surface)
(Prothrombin) II
Ila (Thrombin)
(Fibrinogen) 1
la (Fibrin)
- Xillla →
XIlll (Fibronectin)
(la)n (polymerised)
Figure 26.5 Brief summary of coagulation pathways.
Ca²+ (often called factor IV), is necessary in all steps bar Xll→> Xlla; and Xl → Xla
Diagnosis of DIC
● Prolonged thrombin time (TT).
Diagnosis of DIC is not easy, unless acute or fulminant DIC is
● Presence of schizocytes on peripheral blood smear (but this is
present (severe bleeding from everywhere). Subclinical and
not unique to DIC).
chronic forms are harder to diagnose, but classically have been 
● Prolonged bleeding time (e.g. buccal mucosal bleeding time
 suggested with three or more of the following:
>c. 4.2 min in dogs, and >2.4 min in cats).
● Reduced platelet number and platelets may be slightly dysfunc-
 tional, perhaps partly due to increased fibrin degradation (split)
Platelets
products (FD(S)Ps).
● Reduced fbrinogen acutely (may increase chronically).
Surface receptors:
● Reduced antithrombin II (but may already be low, as decreases
● Glycoprotein Ib (Gplb) binds to von Willebrand's factor to
 as part of acute phase reaction in most species, bar cats).
help stick platelets to each other and to exposed subendothelial
● Reduced coagulation factors.
collagen via their glycoprotein Ia/Ila receptor.
● Increased fbrin degradation products (FDPs); particularly
 D-dimers, D-E fragment. (Significant liver disease can also raise 
fbrinogen (and von Willebrand's factor). (Ideally the final
 FDPs due to reduced clearance.)
common pathway of coagulation occurs on platelet surfaces.)
● Prolonged one stage prothrombin time (OsPT).
There are three commercially available GplIb-IIla antagonists
● Prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT).
available.
Shock 243
Effects of DIC
function syndrome. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and
Initially in shock states, with haemoconcentration (loss of plasma
Critical Care 13(3), 137-148.
Ceron JJ, Eckersall PD, Martinez-Subiela S (2005) Acute phase
laries), vascular endothelial basement membrane exposure,
proteins in dogs and cats: current knowledge and future per-
adherence of inflammatory cells, sludging of blood flow through
spectives. Veterinary Clinical Pathology 34,85-99.
the capillaries (slowed circulation because of reduced cardiac
 Chandler M (2008) Nutritional support for the hospitalised small
output and cell/platelet adherence and swollen capillary endothe-
animal patient. In Practice 30, 442-448.
lial cels causing some occlusion), and many other pro-coagulant
Flournoy WS, Macintire DK, Wohl JS (2003) Heatstroke in dogs:
triggers, there is an initial hypercoagulable state. Activation of
 clinical signs, treatment, prognosis and prevention. The
 coagulation by multiple pathways results in thrombosis outstrip-
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising
 ping thrombolysis, despite valiant attempts by antithrombin I
Veterinarian: Small Animal/Exotics 25(6), 422-431.
and various other natural antithrombotic substances. The patient 
 Gajanayake I, Chan D (2009) Nutritional support for the critical
therefore has a tendency to clot. The formation of microthrombi
care patient. In Practice 31, 386-389.
 in capillaries further reduces tissue perfusion, and promotes the
Hopper K, Bateman S (2005) An updated view of hemostasis:
 patient's demise. Pulmonary thromboemboli may also cause
mechanisms of hemostatic dysfunction associated with sepsis.
trouble.
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 15(2),
 As time progresses, more pro- and anti-thrombotic agents are
83-91.
produced (including NO which has antithrombotic activity),
 Johnson V, Gaynor A, Chan DL, Rozanski E (2004) Multiple
platelets and clotting factors are ^used up, and there is a shift in
 organ dysfunction syndrome in humans and dogs. Journal of
balance towards a hypocoagulable state The patient now has a
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 14(3), 158-166.
tendency to bleed (and is in a dangerous situation). You may
Levy MM, Fink MP, Marshall JC, Abraham E, Angus D, Cook D,
detect petechiae/ecchymoses on mucous membranes and gla-
Cohen J, Opal SM, Vincent JL, Ramsay G (2001) SCCM/ESIM/
brous areas of skin.
ACCP/ATS/SIS International Sepsis Definitions Conference.
Intensive Care Medicine 29(4), 530-538.
Natural modulators of haemostasis
Marx G (2003) Fluid therapy in sepsis with capillary leakage.
 European Journal of Anaesthesiology 20, 429-442.
● Antithrombin III (needs heparin as a cofactor); inhibits IIa
McMichael M, Moore RM (2004) Ischaemia-reperfusion injury
(thrombin), Xa and Xa.
 pathophysiology, part I. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and
● Activated protein C (i.e. Ca) (vitamin K dependent, needs
Critical Care 14(4),231-241.
activated protein S (Sa) as its cofactor); together they inhibit
McMichael M (2004) Ischaemia-reperfusion injury: assessment 
Va and VIIIa.
●Tissue factor pathway inhibitor; inhibits VIla (and IXa and Xa).
and treatment, part II. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and
Critical Care 14(4), 242-252.
● Fibrin degradation products also bind to platelets and reduce
their reactivity; and inhibit thrombin (Ila), and fbrin (Ia).
vasodilatory shock and cardiopulmonary arrest. Journal of
● αl antitrypsin, α2 macroglobulin, C2 antiplasmin, PA1l; all
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 19(2), 145-157.
 inhibit plasmin (fbrinolysin) activity.
Sykes BM, Furr MO (2005) Equine endotoxaemia: a state of the
art review of therapy. Australian Veterinary Journal 83(1-2),
Protein-losing nephropathy
45-50.
Protein-losing nephropathy is sometimes associated with throm-
boembolic disease because in addition to albumin, other small
Werners AH, Bull S, Fink-Gremmels J (2005) Endotoxaemia: a
review with implications for the horse. Equine Veterinary
 proteins such as antithrombin IIl, are also ‘lost in the urine.
Journal 37(4), 371-383.
With the loss of this anticoagulant factor, the blood is more likely
to clot.
 Note: A special issue of the Journal of Veterinary Emergency and
Thromboembolic disease can also accompany protein-losing
Critical Care has been devoted to the subject of haemostasis:
enteropathies, but,larger proteins can also be lost with this condi-
Volume 19(1), February 2009.
tion and these larger proteins tend to include the pro-coagulant
factors, so there is then a more balanced loss of pro- and anti-
coagulant factors, so sometimes no change in overall coagulability
is apparent.
 Self-test section
 Further reading
1.
 Define shock.
Cassutto BH, Gfeller WG (2003) Use of intravenous lidocaine to
2.
 List the main types of shock and their causes.
prevent reperfusion injury and subsequent multiple organ dys-
 Information chapter 
Gastric dilation/volvulus (GDV)
See also Chapter 26 on shock.
● Hyper- or hypo-glycaemia (can occur at different stages of
'shock').
The problems
● Low cardiac output/shock results in reduced pulmonary per-
fusion (adds to hypoxaemia).
● Obstructed oesophagus (cannot vomit).
● Low cardiac output/shock also results in myocardial com-
● Massively dilated stomach + fluid sequestration (third-space
promise (i.e. cardiogenic shock) (worsened by electrolyte-
losses).
abnormality-induced arrhythmias).
● Compromised blood supply to stomach +/- spleen.
● Myocardial hypoxia results in (ventricular) arrhythmias
● Abdominal distension results in ‘splinting’ of diaphragm
which, rather than occurring acutely, often develop within 1-3
(similar to bloated cows and colicky horses); ventilation
days of the GDV occurring.
becomes compromised leading to respiratory acidosis and
● Changes in packed cell volume (PCV)/ total protein (TP) and
hypoxaemia.
coagulation profle. Haermoconcentration results from hypo-
● Abdominal distension can also interfere with venous return
volaemia, but haemorrhagic fluid losses into the stomach
and therefore cardiac output (i.e. obstructive shock) (think of
lumen are also posible. This alladds to much variation in what
bloated cows and colicky horses).
 the haematological and electrolyte profles can be.
● Fluid sequestration in stomach and salivary losses lead to hypo-
● Many of these dogs are the giant deep-chested breeds (e.g.
volaemia and hypovolaemic shock.
Great Danes) which are also prone to atrial fibrillation.
● Compromised blood supply to stomach leading to ischaemia
(may get haemorrhagic fluid losses into stomach also) results
in endotoxaemia/septicaemia and therefore endotoxaemic/
Treatment
distributive shock and disseminated intravascular coagulopa-
There is a great deal of debate as to how quickly you take these
thy (DIC).
 patients to surgery. Cardiac arrhythmias (often secondary to myo-
● Fluid losses can also cause acid-base and electrolyte imbalances
cardial ischaemia), tend to occur within the frst 1-3 days follow-
(these are unpredictable, see below).
ing development of the condition and can be fatal; but often the
● Acid-base and electrolyte disturbances may be:
frst 6-12h are free of such arrhythmias (although beware elec-
O Metabolic alkalosis (often early on, acid loss into stomach
trolyte-abnormality-induced arrhythmias), and this ^window’ is
 greater than salivary bicarbonate loss).
 preferred by many. Pre-anaesthetic medical stabilisation will
O Metabolic acidosis (as shock develops, lactic acidosis occurs).
reduce the risks in all cases, but this author prefers surgery sooner
0 Respiratory
acidosis
('splinted"
diaphragm
and
than later because you are never sure whether necrotic stomach
hypoventilation).
is present. No matter when the surgery is timed, post-operative
O Respiratory alkalosis (may develop as a compensatory
 arrhythmias are common and warrant close patient monitoring.
response for metabolic acidosis).
 Initially, the stomach should be decompressed if possible,
0 Hypokalaemia (often accompanies alkalosis; K+ lost in gastric
whether by passing a stomach tube, or by percutaneous trocarisa-
secretions too).
tion. Hypovolaemia and electrolyte imbalances should be
0 Hyperkalaemia (often accompanies severe acidosis because
addressed at this time too, although electrolyte measurement is
of Ht/K+ transcellular exchange); arrhythmias may occur.
not always available. Intravenous fluid therapy is the mainstay of
0 Hypochloraermia (often accompanies early alkalosis, Cl lost 
stabilisation and resuscitation. Large bore catheters are chosen
in stomach secretions).
and placed into more than one vein if necessary. If the patient is
 0 Hypernatraemia (Nat not lost to any great degree in stomach
very collapsed, you may need to perform a cut down’ procedure
secretions, but haemoconcentration occurs with developing
to locate a vein. Colloids, which remain within the intravascular
hypovolaemia).
space longer than crystalloids, are often preferred to restore intra-
244
Gastric dilation/volvulus  245
vascular volume acutely; and tend to sequester less into the com-
● Lidocaine (c. 0.5-1 mg/kg) can be administered just prior to an
promised stomach than crystalloids. A small volume of hypertonic
injectable anaesthetic agent. This can reduce the required dose
saline can also be used for immediate ^resuscitation, but it is good
of induction agent and should provide some useful antidys-
to know the pre-treatment sodium and potassium concentrations,
rhythmic action too.
as this fluid will worsen pre-existing hypernatraemia and hypoka-
ua pano e asn anqissod se uoos se eauin an aieqni
laemia. That said, patients are more likely to die of hyperkalaemia
cheal tube. Have suction and a laryngoscope available.
than hypokalaemia. With all fluid therapy, the initial aim is to
restore circulating blood volume; and the patient's response (clin-
ical, haemodynamic), to treatment is monitored as a guide to the
Maintenance
effectiveness of this therapy.
If the patient has atrial fbrillation, the risks are even greater.
● Must provide O2.
Check if the dog has been receiving medication for this, or indeed,
● Not N,O; at least before the stomach is decompressed as it
other conditions.
will increase any gaseous distension of the stomach, causing
more diffculties for the patient and the surgeon. Once the
Premedication
stomach has been decompressed, however, NO can be used
 although if there is any doubt over gastric motility, it may be
The patient may be so collapsed it does not require much seda-
better avoided.
tion; although premedication reduces the required doses of other
● Gently turn the patient into dorsal recumbency to reduce any
anaesthetic agents. Some animals may struggle when you try to
sudden further compression of the caudal vena cava or hepatic
 pass a stomach tube, so sedation may be useful. Opioids alone
 portal vein.
can provide good sedation with analgesia, but not morphine as it
● You may need to assist ventilation (ventilation is impaired
may cause vomiting, which is distressing if these animals have
when the diaphragm is effectively splinted by the increased
oesophageal obstruction and cannot vomit. Acepromazine (ACP)
intra-abdominal pressure). Monitor ETCO, values and blood
causes vasodilation which compounds the hypovolaemic shock,
 gases if possible and aim to ^correct any disturbances. Beware
so tends not be used. The CΩ agonists also cause haemodynamic
the mechanical and chemical side effects of IPPV.
changes which may be poorly tolerated in shocky patients. They
● Balanced/ multimodal analgesia.
can occasionally induce vomiting which, as for morphine, is dis-
● Halothane no longer easily available, but is more arrhyth-
tressing. Benzodiazepines may be useful adjuncts to opioids and
 can also be used as co-induction agents.
mogenic than sevoflurane and isoflurane.
● Continue fluid therapy. Colloids, crystalloids, plasma, oxy-
 globin or even blood may be required.
Induction
● Monitor closely: heart rate, pulse rate, ECG, breathing rate,
Pre-oxygenate for 5 min by the clock if possible.
 SpO, (by pulse oximetry), mucous membrane colour, arterial
 A benzodiazepine; diazepam or midazolam (the latter causes
blood pressure (direct/continuous if possible), CVP, ETCO2
slightly more cardiorespiratory depression), followed by:
tension, blood gases, temperature (even core:periphery gradi-
● Slow propofol or alfaxalone to effect, but not to slow, because
ent), electrolytes, blood glucose, lactate, urine output.
you may need to place an endotracheal tubeas soon as possible
● Cardiac arrhythmias may occur, although they are more
to protect the airway from saliva in the throat (if you have not
 common in recovery. During splenic handing, however, ven-
managed to de-rotate the oesophagus/stomach). Have suction
tricular premature contractions (VPCs) are very common.
available if possible.
Lidocaine infusion may be chosen to provide some intra-
● Probably not thiopental, as it is arrhythmogenic.
operative analgesia and some useful anti-inflammatory and
● Possibly etomidate. Excellent cardiovascular stability, but
anti-reperfusion injury actions as well as an anti-arrhythmic
increases muscle tone which may make endotracheal intuba-
effect.
tion difficult. Suppression of adrenal activity may be an
● Beware pneumothorax this is one complication of circumcos-
unwanted side effect in shocky patients.
tal gastropexy.
● Possibly ketamine, but with the high sympathetic tone already
present, you may observe ketamine's negative inotropic effects
Recovery
transiently.
● Possibly fentanyl before propofol, although induction is slow
● Nasal O,. Insuflation at c. 200 ml/kg/min (2-10l/min for 10--
(1-2 min), and you may now need an anticholinergic to offset
 50 kg); increases inspired oxygen to about 50%.
the bradycardia. Anticholinergics reduce the watery part of sali-
● Continue fluids/blood/plasma as necessary.
vary secretions, and reduce gastric acid secretion (if there is
● Continue treatment of acid-base and electrolyte disturbances
enough blood supply to the stomach), but, in tachycardic
as necessary.
 n r   se 
● Monitor ECG (and pulse oximetry, and arterial blood pressure
myocardial work/oxygen demand. Also, with atrial fibrillation,
if possible), and be prepared to treat arrhythmias if necessary
anticholinergics may encourage atrio-ventricular transmission
(see below).
and increase ventricular rate.
● Good general nursing; continuous observation if possible.
246  Veterinary Anaesthesia
When is an arrhythmia 'malignant'?
 may revert to normal sinus rhythm with time and continued post-
The answer is that we do not really know, but when the animal's
operative care; but maintain your vigilance.
haemodynamics are affected, ie. when there's significant
cardiac output reduction to result in forward cardiac failure.
Further reading
for long periods).
Adamvik KN, Burgener IA, Kovacevic A, Schulze SP, Kohn B
● When any abnormal complexes are frequent (>15/min, or >15
(2009) Myoglobin as a prognostic indicator for outcome in
 consecutively), especially if associated with pulse deficits.
dogs with gastric dilation-volvulus. Journal of Veterinary
● When VPCs are multiform/polymorphic (multiple ectopic
Emergency and Critical Care 19(3), 247-253.
foci), because ventricular fibrillation is possible. (Check for low
Buber T, Saragusty J, Ranen E, Epstein A, Bdolah-Abram T,
 serum potassium and magnesium; magnesium is often used to 
Bruchim Y (2007) Evaluation of lidocaine treatment and risk
 treat torsades de pointes in man.)
factors for death associated with gastric dilation and volvulus
● When VPCs ocur very close together; the so-called ‘R on T'
in dogs: 112 cases (1997-2005) Journal of the American
 phenomenon is a pre-fibrillatory rhythm.
Veterinary Medical Association 230(9), 1334-1339.
For a dog recovering in ICU, confined to a kennel, but happy
Tivers M, Brockman D (2009) Gastric dilation-volvulus syn-
to lie there and be nursed, treatment may not be necessary. If it
drome in dogs 1. Pathophysiology, diagnosis and stabilisation.
has uniform ventricular tachycardia, with palpable, albeit weak,
 In Practice 31, 66-69.
d s sd   s,  sd ssds
Tivers M, Brockman D (2009) Gastric dilation-volvulus
 plethysmograph or with continuous direct arterial blood pressure
syndrome in dogs 2. Surgical and postoperative management.
monitoring), it may not be necessary to treat the arrhythmia as it
In Practice 31, 114-121.
Equine sedation and premedication
Learning objectives
 To be able to list the reasons for providing premedication.
●
 To be able to discuss the properties of an ideal premedicant.
●
 To be familiar with the main groups of drugs, their effects and side effects.
●
 To be able to discuss the factors affecting drug choice for standing chemical restraint and for premedication.
Introduction
The ideal drug
Before any drugs are administered, a full and pertinent history
An IDEAL drug to provide sedation would:
should be obtained, including details of patient age, vaccination
status, previous and current illnesses and treatments. If the patient
● Have a high therapeutic index (i.e. wide dose margin, safe in
and time allow, you should aim to conduct as full a clinical exami-
all Equidae, and all ages).
nation as possible, at the very least it should include the cardiores-
● Be reliable and produce predictable (and dose-related) sedation
piratory systems. Several factors usually need to be considered
and duration of sedation.
● Have a rapid onset of action after administration by any of the
before a final choice of agent and method can be made.
 Bear in mind that horses are driven by their sympathetic
 possible routes.
nervous systems (the fright and flight response), and therefore, in
● Be well absorbed by all parenteral and enteral routes.
the absence of more dominant animals to look to for guidance,
● Be non-irritant to tissues and non-painful upon injection.
● Produce minimal or no side effects (eg. cardiorespiratory
will tend to want to run away from any potentially 'new' situation.
Physical restraint alone, including ‘twitching, may suffice for
effects, ataxia, sweating, diuresis).
certain procedures, but is more often considered an adjunct to
● Have a practical volume for injection.
● Be miscible with other agents.
chemical restraint, and should never be considered sufficient as
the only means of restraint where painful interventions are antici-
● Possibly provide analgesia, and some muscle relaxation.
 pated. Therefore before we can make any decisions about which
● Be reversible (antagonisable).
drugs to use, we must consider:
No such ideal drug is available yet, although where one
● The patient's temperament, tractability and degree of excite-
drug alone is insuffcient, combinations of two or more may be
 ment (possibly affected by breed).
more effective. Drug combinations may allow optimisation of
● The patient's physiological condition (concurrent illness or
desired effects, whilst simultaneously minimising undesirable
pregnancy).
side effects.
 n ae e aa e e d  o
 The effectiveness of any 'sedative? drug, or combination, will
● Facilities and environment available.
always be influenced by external factors, some of which will be
● Intensity and duration of desired effect.
beyond your control. The state of excitement of the horse may
●Your familiarity with the drug/s.
affect the outcome, and where possible, the patient (and possibly
● The patient's weight.
the owner too), should be allowed to, or encouraged to, calm
247
248  Veterinary Anaesthesia
down before drugs are administered. The general environment in
Phenothiazines
which the drug is administered, (i.e. the level of stimulation/dis-
traction to which the horse is subjected) is important. Aim for a
Of these drugs, only acepromazine (ACP) is licensed in the UK.
quiet environment, with few distractions, especially where drugs
It is available as a yellow solution (10 mg/ml large animal formula-
are to be administered by intramuscular or oral routes, when the
tion; not to be confused with the 2 mg/ml small animal formula-
onset of action is expected to be delayed; and in these circum-
tion), and as an oral paste.
stances do not be impatient, but allow suffcient time for the
response to become apparent.
Dose
Try to choose the right drug/s for the effect desired. For
● 0.01-0.05 mg/kg IV (0.5-2.5 ml for 500 kg horse).
example, the following scenarios may well require different 
● 0.03-0.1 mg/kg IM.
approaches:
● 0.1-0.25 mg/kg PO.
● Standing sedation for clipping; sweating is undesirable.
● Sedation for boxing/travelling (consider length of journey and
Actions of phenothiazines
return journey).
●Anti-adrenergic (αl adrenoceptor antagonist).
● Sedation for standing castration or wound suturing.
● Sedation for shoeing, radiography, or diagnostic nerve blocks;
● Anticholinergic (muscarinic receptor antagonist).
ataxia undesirable.
●Antihistaminic (H1 receptor antagonist).
● Sedation for laryngeal endoscopy; excessive α2 agonist sedation
● Antiserotonergic (5-HT receptor antagonist).
may be undesirable.
● Local anaesthetic action (ion channel blockade; quinidine-like
● Premedication (also requires patient preparation; elective
effects').
versus emergency surgery).
● Membrane effects (alter fluidity of lipid bilayers).
 Also consider the route of administration. The volume of injec-
● Analgesic actions (methotrimeprazine only?).
tate makes a difference too: a small volume may be best if a rapid
injection is desired, but for a slow, controlled injection, a larger
Resu/ts of administration
volume may be easier to handle.
 Mental calming effect
 Remember to respect all horses even when they are sedated,
Mediated especially by the antidopaminergic actions in the CNS
as they may still be arousable and deliver well-aimed kicks and
(especially the reticular activating system). It is often said that low
bites
doses of ACP result in tranquillisation, whereas higher doses
produce sedation (i.e. the horse will lower its head). However,
Definitions
phenothiazines are notoriously unpredictable in their effects
A few definitions are given below although the effects described
(hence the wide dose ranges published), and different responses
may be diffcult to distinguish in animals.
can often be seen in the same animal under different circum-
An anxiolytic is a drug that is said to produce a mental calming
stances. The predictability of effect can be improved by combina-
effect, characterised by a reduction in locomotor activity, reduced
tion with opioids.
anxiety, and a lack of concern for, or interest in, the environment.
Animals still maintain the ability to be aroused by stimuli, espe-
Hypotension
cially painful ones. It may be difficult to assess whether a horse is
 This is due to peripheral αl receptor antagonism which results in
indeed less anxious, because the head tends not to be lowered (see
vasodilation. Sometimes a tachycardia is observed in response to
below). Animals tend to be a little less jumpy and quieter to
the
hypotension, but bradycardia may also be observed.
 handle. The terms anxiolytics, tranquillisers, ataractics and neu-
roleptics tend to overlap.
and peripherally, resulting in relatively more parasympathetic
 A sedative is a drug that produces a mental calming effect,
activity. Hypotension may be a problem in excited or already
characterised by sleepiness as well as disinterest in the environ-
hypovolaemic animals.
ment, and generally a poorer responsiveness to stimuli than after
Hypovolaemic animals try to maintain their blood pressure by
anxiolytics. However, animals may still be aroused. Sedation in
increasing their sympathetic tone and vasoconstricting their
horses is observed as a lowering of the head, thought to be a sub-
 periphery in order to centralise their remaining blood volume to
missive posture, and not just due to 'muscle relaxation/weakness?
supply vital organs. ACP-induced peripheral vasodilation may
 Sedatives are sometimes called hypnotics. Some drugs provide
overcome this compensatory response and result in a profound
analgesia as well as sedation and are called sedative analgesics.
  o  n a   
Narcosis is the term coined to describe the sedation produced
syncope (fainting') may result as cerebral perfusion is compro-
by opioid analgesics, hence 'narcotic analgesics.
mised (see below).
Whenever the term ‘muscle relaxation’ is used below, it
 Excited animals will have high circulating levels of catecho-
describes only the nonspecific effects of the agents considered
lamines from their adrenal medullae (epinephrine (adrenaline)
here. No discussion of the specific peripheral neuromuscular
and norepinephrine (noradrenaline)). Epinephrine acts at β
blocking agents is included here (see Chapter 17).
adrenergic receptors in preference to C receptors, whereas nor-
Equine sedation and premedication  249
epinephrine prefers Q receptors. If peripheral α receptors are
minic properties, sometimes used to treat Parkinson's disease)
blocked by ACP, then the β effects of epinephrine, ie. vasodila-
may help; dose c. 20 μg/kg IV.
tion, becomes more apparent, with the potential for profound
hypotension. (See notes on adrenaline reversal under small
Hypothermia
animal premedication in Chapter 4.)
Hypothermia due to central depression of the hypothalamic ther-
moregulatory centre, coupled with the increase in heat loss sec-
cardia, tachypnoea, ataxia, collapse and unconsciousness).
ondary to peripheral vasodilation, may be a problem in young or
Treatment is with intravenous fluids (crystalloids, for example
 small animals especially with cold ambient temperatures.
Hartmann's solution as a 10ml/kg bolus is usually suffcient),
and/or vasopressors such as Cl adrenoceptor agonists for example
Blood effects
 phenylephrine. (Note that epinephrine is contra-indicated for the
Splenic sequestration of blood, and possibly changes in the
reasons outlined above.)
Starling forces across peripheral capillary beds, result in reduction
of the packed cell volume (PCV), platelet count and total protein
Respiratory effects
values after ACP administration. ACP also interacts with platelet
The literature is confusing regarding respiratory efects. Usually
 membranes to reduce their aggregability (and therefore their
 there is a slight reduction in respiratory rate, with little change
function) but there have never been any reports of problems
(or a slight decrease) in tidal volume. Overall,blood gas tensions
associated with the resultant potential for poor haemostasis in
and pH remain fairly unchanged in previously healthy individu-
animals without pre-existing haemorrhagic diatheses. White
als, although the sensitivity of the respiratory centre to CO is
blood cell counts may also be slightly reduced due to increased
reduced.
margination of cells.
Spasmolytic effects
Hormonal effects
Spasmolytic effects on the GI tract are due to weak anticholinergic
The secretion of antidiuretic hormone (ADH) may be inhibited,
effects. Note that the use of ACP has not been associated with any
promoting a mild diuresis. Prolactin secretion may also be
increased risk of post-operative ileus, but its use may predispose
increased (due to an anti-DA effect), as may circulating levels of
 to the development of cesophageal choke. Older texts suggest the 
sex hormones. Oestrus cycles may, however, be inhibited. It is
use of ACP to treat 'spasmodic colics, but beware its use in colics
recommended that ACP should not be given to pregnant animals,
 that are cardiovascularly compromised (ie. hypovolaemic), and
although no specifc studies have been performed to assess its
remember it takes a relatively long time to work. In general, most
safety during pregnancy. In lactating mares, it aids milk
practitioners tend to avoid the use of ACP in colicky horses.
let-down.
Anti-arrhythmic effects
Photosensitisation
 ACP is reported to reduce the incidence of catecholamine-induced
As with chlorpromazine, prolonged administration may lead to
 arrhythmias in dogs under barbiturate and halothane anaesthesia
 photosensitisation.
(which increase the sensitivity of the myocardium to such arrhyth-
Pharmacodynamics
mias). We sometimes extrapolate this belief of ACP's anti-
arrhythmic effects to other species (see Chapter 4).
The onset of action of ACP is relatively slow regardless of the route
of administration chosen. Normally, 30-40 min should be allowed
Muscle relaxation
for peak effect, during which time the animal should be left undis-
Although ACP has been shown to be spasmolytic, its use has not
turbed. If possible, the animal should be calm before administra-
been associated with any increased risk of ileus (see above). ACP
tion. Only about 70% of animals respond in the expected manner,
results in reduced locomotor activity and reduced muscle tone,
and there is no way of forecasting which animals will respond.
although ataxia is rarely noted. In male animals (especially stal-
Some animals also respond differently under different circum-
lions, but also reported in geldings), the retractor penis muscle
stances. The administration of further doses usually prolongs the
becomes relaxed, sometimes paralysed (c. 1 in 10,000), so that the
degree of tranquillsation observed, without increasing its depth.
penis protrudes. Prolonged penile protrusion may result in con-
However, further doses will also worsen the hypotension, and its
gestion and/or traumatic damage, and paraphimosis. Priapism
duration, and remember that the cardiovascular effects outlast the
(sustained erection) has also been reported, with similar prob-
observed sedative effects. Duration of effect is up to 4-6 h.
lems. Penile trauma may necessitate amputation of the distal
e aq  ou  s a q s e  os s
Pharmacokinetics
to serve mares properly. Thus, the use of ACP in breeding stallions
ACP is highly protein bound (>90%), and is metabolised by the
is contra-indicated, although these problems can still occur in
liver. Many metabolites have been discovered, and the exact meta-
geldings. If problems do occur, the penis should be replaced in
bolic pathways are undetermined. The metabolites are excreted
the sheath, and retained there by placement of a preputial purse
by the kidneys into the urine, and may be found there for at least
string suture as a frst aid measure and to reduce further trauma.
3 days. Hence dosing with ACP is not recommended for any horse
Benztropine mesylate (a drug with anticholinergic and antihista-
(e.g. race horses),likely to undergo a urine test (to test for doping)
250  Veterinary Anaesthesia
within the following 4 days. The activity of the many metabolites
agonists, there is improvement in cardiac output (tissue per-
is unknown. Frequent dosing may lead to hepatic enzyme induc-
fusion), including pulmonary perfusion which resulted in
tion. The elimination half-life is thought to be greater than 3h in
improved blood xygenation, despite a slight fall in arterial blood
the horse. Although the duration of observable effects is dose-
pressure.
dependent (normally 3-8h), some authors recommend that
ACP may be used in the treatment of laminitis, to encourage
horses should not be ridden for 36 h following the administration
digital vascular vasodilation and thereby, hopefully, perfusion.
of ACP.
ACP may be used as an adjunct in the treatment of tetanus, to
allay anxiety, to reduce locomotor activity and to effect some
Effects of overdosage
reduction in muscle tone.
Usually manifested as excitement, possibly increased locomotor
ACP has been administered for long-term box rest of up to 6
activity, yet muscle weakness, ataxia and tremors. Tachycardia,
weeks without noticeable ill effects.
tachypnoea and sweating have also been reported. It is possible
that all of these observed effects are reactions to a more profound
hypotension, although the Parkinsonian-like (extrapyramidal)
Butyrophenones
effects may well be due to over-suppression of central dopamin-
Azaperone (40mg/ml)
ergic neurotransmission. There are no specific antidotes, although
The dose is 0.25-0.5 mg/kg but it is no longer used in horses and
intravenous fluid therapy, vasopressors, and possibly ampheta-
 jn a rn ed e pg  i ynoe  no s
mines, methylxanthines, and analeptics (CNS stimulants such as 
behavioural problems such as crib biting.
4-aminopyridine or doxapram), may be used.
Butyrophenones tend to be even less predictable than pheno-
 Intracarotid injection has been associated with excitement, col-
lapse and seizures. Diazepam may be required to treat the
depression of dopaminergic and noradrenergic activity in the
seizures.
reticular activating system, and gamma aminobutyric acid
Usefuiness
(GABA)-mimetic activity (GABA is an inhibitory neurotransmit-
ter), which may also produce some behaviour-modifying effects.
The slight anxiolytic effect of ACP may be all that is required in
 Butyrophenones are said to produce minimal cardiorespiratory
certain situations, for example for loading and transport of appre-
depression and therefore should be less likely to induce hypoten-
hensive horses, to help calm horses which need to be box-rested,
sion than phenothiazines, but this may not always be so.
and occasionally to enable clipping or dental attention. The major
 Azaperone is very unpredictable in horses, with many showing
 problem is the unreliability of the effects, although the ease of
ataxia accompanied by excitement, before eventually (after about
oral administration allows owner dosing, which may be an
 5 min) becoming ^sedated. Muscle tremors, sweating, salivation,
advantage.
lacrimation and vocalisation may accompany the ataxia and
Where ACP alone may be judged to be insuffcient, combina-
excitement. Some animals exhibit bizarre and even potentially
tion with opioids may improve the response. The following
dangerous behaviour (i.e. they may back-up, almost dog-sit and
opioids may be used:
then leap forwards, possibly several times). The excitement reac-
● Morphine at a dose of 0.05-0.1mg/kg IM or IV.
tions are thought to be manifestations of panic. It has been sug-
● Methadone at a dose of 0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM or IV.
gested that butyrophenones cause sedation without markedly
● Butorphanol at a dose of 0.025-0.05 mg/kg IM or IV.
relieving anxiety, and that a sudden feeling of sedation, especially
if accompanied by limb weakness, may frighten the animal.
It is believed that some of the ^excitement' phenomena follow-
ing high-dose opioid administration to horses are due to an
increase in central dopamine activity, and as ACP has anti-
Benzodiazepines
dopamine actions,it may be useful to help control opicid-induced
● Diazepam (5 mg/ml): dose 0.01-0.2 mg/kg IV only (often
excitement. When ACP is chosen to help reduce the possible
0.05 mg/kg for adults, and 0.1-0.25 mg/kg for foals).
manifestations of opioid-induced ‘excitement (e.g. increased
locomotor activity), then it should be given first, and allowed time
● Midazolam (5 mg/ml): dose 0.01-0.2 mg/kg IV or IM.
to act (minimum 30 min by whichever route), before the opioid
● Zolazepam (in combination with tiletamine), is often used for
the chemical restraint of feral Equidae.
is given; alternatively the opioid may be administered by intra-
muscular injection to slow its absorption.
Diazepam is insoluble in water, but is solubilised either by
ACP is often administered to horses before general anaesthesia,
propylene glycol which itself can be responsible for hypotension,
as its inclusion in the anaesthetic protocol has been associated
haemolysis, and cardiac arrhythmias; or in an intralipid emulsion.
with a reduced risk of peri-operative morbidity and mortality.
Midazolam is water soluble at low pH, but at body pH, one of the
Whether this is due to its anti-arrhythmic effects (horses seem
'rings' in its chemical structure closes, and the compound becomes
prone to developing arrhythmias under general anaesthesia); or
fat soluble. It is said to be twice as potent as diazepam, with a
 its vasodilatory effects (thus reducing the likelihood of post-oper-
shorter duration of action, although this difference is not always
ative laminitis or myopathy); we do not know. However, recent
clinically noticeable. It is much less irritant to tissues and can be
work has shown that when ACP is used in conjunction with c2
administered by the intramuscular route.
Equine sedation and premedication  251
Table 28.1 Results of diazepam administration to horses.
Duration of clinical
Dose (mg/kg)
Head lowering
Fixed gaze
Muscle
Ataxia
Recumbency
Other
effect (min)
fasciculations
5
0.05
No
Yes
Yes
No
No
 Mouthed food, paced 
20-50
0.1
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
ON
Not reported
50
0.2
ON
Yes
Yes
Yes
Rare (for 3 min)
 Not reported
50-120
0.4
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
More often
 Not reported
(for 7-21 min)
Actions
many anaesthetic agents also act via GABAa receptors.
Benzodiazepines and barbiturates are thought to promote each
● Anxiolysis and sedation.
 other's binding to these GABAa receptor complexes.
● Muscle relaxation.
 Horses were not reported to have extended and lowered their
●Anticonvulsant.
heads, as seen with sedation, although they did appear to be less
●Amnesic (especially anterograde).
 aware of their surroundings, and therefore were tranquillised?
· Not analgesic.
Occasionally, horses showed strange behavioural reactions,
Mechanism of action
such as mouthing food, or attempting to pace (which may have
 been a response to the centraly produced muscle relaxation).
Benzodiazepines are thought to act at specific benzodiazepine
Table 28.1 outlines the results of the study.
binding sites (part of the larger GABA, receptor complex). GABAA
receptors are themselves involved in inhibitory neurotransmis-
sions. Benzodiazepines are believed to have at least brain and
Usefuiness
spinal sites of action. Centrally they depress the reticular activat-
 In adult animals, transient ataxia/excitement and recumbency can
 ing system activity to produce sleepiness on a scale from anxiolysis
occur with doses that produce some (but minimal), mental
to sedation/hypnosis, and in the ventral horn of the spinal cord
^calming, and thus benzodiazepines tend not to be used for stand-
they depress internuncial neurotransmission resulting in postural
ing chemical restraint. It is suggested that the feeling of muscular
muscle weakness, via enhancement of inhibitory GABA effects,
 weakness causes the horse to panic, so it tries to run away, which
 and possibly via potentiation of the inhibitory effects of glycine.
is not easy if it is ataxic. However, due to the muscle relaxant
 An anti-arrhythmic effect may be due to a central reduction in
 effects produced, benzodiazepines are a useful adjunct to keta-
sympathetic tone, but beware the effects of propylene glycol. They
mine anaesthesia. Benzodiazepines, especially the longer acting
 may also modulate N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor
 diazepam, may seemingly 'enhance? muscle relaxation produced
activity.
by both other centrally acting muscle relaxants (e.g guaiphen-
esin) and peripherally acting neuromuscular blocking agents,
Pharmacology
although this does not appear to be clinically significant.
Midazolam is 96% protein bound. Diazepam is 98-99% protein
 In foals, since recumbency is less of a problem (the feeling of
bound. Both are metabolised in the liver to produce a variety of
muscular weakness seems to be tolerated better by foals, which
metabolites. Many of diazepam's metabolites are active 
(e.g
seem to accept the weak feeling and just lie down), and is less
temazepam and oxazepam); whereas the metabolites of mida-
dangerous for the handlers and is even desirable, benzodiazepines
zolam have very litle activity. Metabolites are excreted in the
are often chosen to produce sedation with minimal cardiorespira-
urine, and faeces via bile. The elimination half life of diazepam
tory side effects in animals younger than 6 weeks old. However,
has been reported to be 3-22h, which outlasts the observed clini-
occasionally disinhibition’ (excitement) will occur.
 cal effects, and suggests that repeated doses are cumulative.
Benzodiazepines are also useful for the treatment of seizures; 
Experimentally, diazepam doses of 0.05-0.4mg/kg (IV) in
 10-100 mg diazepam per horse is the starting dose.
adult horses produced minimal cardiovascular and respiratory
 Overdoses can be treated with supportive measures, for example
depressant effects, although doses greater than 0.2 mg/kg often
support of respiration and circulation. However, specific benzo-
resulted in increased muscular weakness, muscle fasciculations
diazepine antagonists (e.g. flumazenil), are available, although
especially of the head, neck and forequarter muscles, ataxia and
very expensive. A dose rate for horses is not recorded in the litera-
even recumbency. Sedation was not very obvious until doses of
 ture, but for dogs, a dose of 10 μg/kg is suggested, which may have
0.2 mg/kg. Higher doses (e.g. 0.6 mg/kg), result in some cardiores-
 to be repeated due to its relatively short lasting effects. Compounds
 piratory depression, but lower doses can enhance the cardiores-
Such as theophylline derivatives, and anticholinesterases, were
piratory depressant effects of other agents.
s.The use
of
once used in an attempt to ^reverse’ benzodiazepine sedation
benzodiazepines may reduce anaesthetic dose requirements, as
before the introduction of flumazenil.
252   Veterinary Anaesthesia
α2 adrenoreceptor agonists
Table 28.2 Location of adrenoceptors in the cardiovascular system and
results of their stimulation.
These are sedative-analgesics with some muscle relaxant prop-
erties. Those licensed for use in horses include:
Receptor
 Situation 
 Location
 Effect of stimulation 
● Xylazine (100 mg/ml also 20mg/ml); a thiazine derivative.
α1
Post-synaptic
Vasc smooth muscle
Vasoconstriction
Dose: 0.25-1.1 mg/kg IV or IM.
?Myocardium
+ ve inotropy
● Detomidine (10mg/ml) an imidazoline derivative. Dose:
α2
 Post/extia synaptic
Vasc smooth muscle
Vasoconstriction
0.005-0.08 mg/kg IV or IM. Also well absorbed across mucous
?Endothelium
Vasoconstriction or
membranes, and can be administered in a relatively small
vasodilation
volume sublingually, at a dose of c. 50 μg/kg, i.e. 2-3 ml for the
average 500kg horse).
α2
 Pre-synaptic
Vasc smooth muscle
Alleviation of
vasoconstriction
● Romifidine (10 mg/ml) an imidazoline derivative (but does not
contain an imidazole ring). Dose: 0.025-0.1 mg/kg IV (not
β1
 Post-synaptic
Vasc smooth muscle
Vasodilation
licensed for IM).
Myocardium
+ ve inotropy
+ve chronotropy
 Imidazoline derivatives have more activity at imidazoline
β2
Past-synaptic
Vasc smooth muscle
Vasodilation
(I1 and I2) receptors, than thiazine derivatives.
?Myocardium
+ ve inotropy
 Doses at the lower end of the range should be used for large
+ve chronotropy
breed and draft horses. Larger horses have relatively smaller
surface areas, relatively slower metabolic rates, and require
reduced doses, especially when these are calculated according to
body weight (i.e. on a mg/kg basis). This is all to do with allom-
Typically, following intravenous administration, there is an
etric scaling of doses. Perhaps we should just dose according to
body surface area, as is now suggested for dexmedetomidine in
post-synaptic C2 (and possibly some cl) receptor activation
dogs.
which results in peripheral vasoconstriction and splenic contrac.
 Metabolism is mainly in the liver and metabolites are excreted
tion. In response to this sudden hypertension, a baroreceptor
in the urine. Many metabolites are produced, but it is thought
(vagally) mediated reflex bradycardia follows, sometimes accom-
that they are minimally active. Enzyme induction may occur with
panied by bradyarrhythmias (e.g. S-A and A-V blocks). About the
repeated doses over time. Repeated doses also may result in recep-
same time as the reflex bradycardia is occurring, the central
tor desensitisation or down-regulation.
actions of the drug become apparent as the drug crosses the
blood-brain barrier. Thus, a centrally mediated sympatholysis
Effects of α2 adrenoreceptor agonists
(decreased sympathetic tone and relatively increased parasympa-
thetic tone) enhances the bradycardia, and allows for some relax-
Actions
See also Chapter 4. The actions are:
ation of the peripheral vascular tone. Also, peripheral presynaptic
02 receptor activation occurs, which inhibits the release of nore-
● Dependent on interaction with α adrenergic receptors (mainly
pinephrine from nerve terminals, thus also helping to reduce
α2, some c1).
the sympathetic effects on the heart and relieve the peripheral
● Dependent on interaction with non-adrenergic receptors (imi-
vasoconstriction. Central cΩ and 11 (and possibly I2) effects also
 dazoline-preferring binding sites).
mediate hypotension.
● Independent of specifc receptor interactions, ie. ion channel 
 The eventual state of the peripheral vasculature (i.e. usually a
blockade
(local
 anaesthetic-type
actions),
and
slightly increased peripheral vascular tone remains), and blood
'membrane-effects.
pressure (i.e. usually fairly near the original blood pressure,
slightly above or slightly below), depends on the balance between
Cardiovascular system effects
central and peripheral effects, the drug chosen, the dose chosen,
the route of administration, the species and the individual animal
Table28.2
summarises the distribution of  adrenoceptors
(health state and degree of excitement). Cardiac output is reduced
throughout the cardiovascular system and the effects of their
(often by as much as a half), and so the circulation is slowed.
stimulation.
 Despite their pro-arrhythmic effects (especially bradyarrhyth-
The overall cardiovascular effects of α2 agonists depend on:
mias), c2 agonists may also have some anti-arrhythmic proper-
● Actions at peripheral and central receptors, with α2, α1 and I1
ties, in that they may guard against catecholamine-induced
and 12 receptors being involved.
arrhythmias (tachyarrhythmias). These anti-arrhythmic effects?
● Species (different receptor subtypes, distributions, densities,
may have their origin in activation of central c2 and 11(?2) recep-
affinities).
tors, possibly via the change in autonomic nervous system (ANS)
● Drug used (o2:αl selectivity).
 balance to parasympathetic predominance; in activation of myo-
● Dose.
cardial mitochondrial I2 receptors; and also via activation of
· Route of administration.
peripheral c2 receptors.
Equine sedation and premedication  253
Respiratory effects
 Some α2 agonists, especially xylazine, also possess some local
 Respiratory effects are variable and are dependent on dose and
 anaesthetic like activity, which may interfere with sensory nerve
species. The respiratory rate may be reduced, although tidal
impulse transmission to augment their analgesic effects.
volume may increase to compensate, so that overall alveolar ven-
Opioids activate descending monoaminergic pathways, which
tilation is not compromised at low doses. Blood pH and blood
are important in pain modulation and analgesia (antinocicep-
gas tensions remain almost unchanged in healthy animals given
tion), with released norepinephrine then acting on c2 receptors
low doses.
(see Chapter 3). Thus, exogenously administered c2 agonists are
 Remember that any drug which acts on the CNS to relieve
believed to enhance this opioid-induced analgesia, by acting in
anxiety, produce sedation or alleviate pain, is necessarily associ-
 concert with endogenous norepinephrine. Activated descending
ated with some reduction in alveolar ventilation, which may
noradrenergic pathways are thermselves believed to stimulate ace-
reflect a reduction in metabolic rate.
tylcholine release, which itself has a role in antinociception.
 In ruminants, use of oΩ agonists has been associated with pul-
Hence, exogenously applied c2 agonists may also stimulate ace-
 monary hypertension (pulmonary vasoconstriction), bronchoc-
tylcholine release as part of their analgesic mechanisms.
onstriction, and pulmonary cedema, leading to hypoxaemia and
 The analgesia afforded by C2 agonists includes visceral and
sometimes death. Five times overdoses of detomidine (c. 300-
superficial analgesia, although analgesia can be diffcult to study
 500μg/kg) have resulted in hypoxaemia in horses too; posibly by
separate from sedation, and is hard to qualitate and quantify.
similar mechanisms.
Muscle relaxation
CNS effects
Muscle relaxation manifests as ataxia or limb inco-ordination. It
 may be the result of:
include:
● Reduced vigilance and lack of concentration which accompa-
●Anxiolysis.
nies the anxiolysis and sedation.
· Sedation.
● Local anaesthetic type of action on motor nerves?
● Central actions on I1/2 receptors? (such receptors are thought
· Analgesia.
●Muscle relaxation.
to be similar to, or connected with, benzodiazepine receptors,
● Sympatholysis.
 d      
● Bradycardia (and hypotension).
effects at glycine and GABA, receptors).
●Possibly anti-arrhythmic effects.
Lowering of the head may be partly a response to the muscle
● Suppression of thermoregulation.
relaxation as well as a result of the induced sedation. Penile pro-
Anxiolysis and sedation are believed to be caused by actions at
trusion also occurs, but there have been no reports of problems
different sites within the CNS. Sedation appears to be the result
associated with this, unlike with ACP. Smooth muscles appear to
 be afected most. Beware animals with laryngeal paralysis where
of α2 agonist action in the locus coeruleus (in the brainstem);
whereas anxiolysis appears to result from suppression of activity
these drugs may obscure the diagnosis and promote respiratory
 in the reticular activating system.
obstruction.
 Sedation is characterised by head lowering, ptosis, drooping
of the lower lip, some ataxia and penile protrusion in males.
Hormonal effects
 Penile protrusion has not been reported to cause any lasting
● Decreased ADH secretion (central action), and also decreased
problems.
ADH responsiveness in the periphery.
● Decreased renin secretion (action on renal c2 receptors).
Analgesia
● Decreased insulin secretion (action on α2 receptors on pancre-
 Note that, amongst other locations, C2 receptors are found on
atic islet β cells).
sensory nerve terminals (nociceptors) in the periphery, and at
● Decreased ACTH
secretion (central action), leading to
central sites (spinal cord, brain). As far as analgesia is concerned,
 decreased cortisol.
their supraspinal and spinal sites are thought to be most impor-
● Decreased catecholamines (sympatholysis/vagomimesis).
tant, because analgesia correlates with the CSF concentration of
● Increased growth hormone.
α2 agonist.
The reduction in 'stress hormones’ may reduce the 'stress
 The sedation and analgesia provided by α2 agonists are not
 response associated with anaesthesia and surgery, but whether
unlike those produced by opioids, and there are two possible
this is of benefit or detriment to the animal is not known. It may
reasons why this is so:
be that modulation of the ‘inflammatory response’ to surgery,
● CΩ and μ receptors are found in similar locations in the brain
rather than of the stress response, is more important to eventual
and spinal cord.
'outcome, at least in healthy' patients.
● These receptors share common signal transduction pathways
(involving G proteins), and similar effector mechanisms (e.g.
Diuresis
changes in ion permeabilities).
This may be due to several factors:
254   Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Reduced ADH (production and responsiveness) results in diu-
There is inconclusive evidence about the safety and possible
resis (most important mechanism).
teratogenic effects of α2 agonists on the developing embryo and
● Reduced insulin leads to increased hepatic glycogenolysis and
foetus in the frst trimester of pregnancy (organogenesis stage).
Overall, there still remains some fear about o2 agonist use in
can result in an osmotic diuresis. Glycosuria, however, is rare
pregnant animals, especially in the last trimester of pregnancy;
 in horses (i.e. blood glucose rarely exceeds the renal threshold)
and their use in this period is contra-indicated in the data sheets.
but it is common in cattle.
 But the distress caused by not sedating an anxious mare might
● Reduced renin (and therefore also aldosterone), and possibly
 be more detrimental than a dose of o2 agonist. If multiple top-
 increased atrial natriuretic factor promote diuresis.
ups or an infusion of c2 agonist are required, then it is often
● Secondary to reduced renin, angiotensin I levels decrease, and
recommended to administer clenbuterol (800ng/kg IV at the
this may help to promote glomerular filtration rate (GFR) (in
start of the procedure and again 12h later), in the hope of
the face of likely reduced GFR due to reduced cardiac output),
 preserving uteroplacental perfusion. Clenbuterol administration
which also augments the diuresis.
is also recommended when pregnant mares undergo general
Although normal micturition reflexes are maintained, dimin-
anaesthesia.
ished urethral sphincter tone may encourage urine overflow
 during anaesthesia. Urine specifc gravity and osmolarity are
Gastrointestinal tract effects
Overall, gut motility is reduced (both large and small intestine),
reduced, inversely in relation to the increase in urine volume.
and passage of food through the GI tract becomes slowed (i.e. gut
Glycosuria does not always occur.
transit time is increased). The increase in oesophageal transit time
may predispose animals to the development of oesophageal
Sweating
choke, thus horses should not be fed soon after sedation. The
Sweating is often observed, especially on recovery from sedation,
and may be due to changes in ANS balance and regional blood
with certain forms of ^colic' (e.g. spasmodic colic) but associated
flow, and also to the reduction in ADH and aldosterone.
with the reduction in gut motility, there may be vasoconstriction
of the gut blood vessels, which may further compromise already
Uterine effects and pregnancy
 Uterine α2 receptor stimulation tends to result in uterine contrac-
ischaemic gut. One study reported that an increase in motility of
small intestines occurred in the face of vasoconstriction, thereby
tion and an increase in intrauterine pressure in the non-gravid
increasing oxygen demand whilst simultaneously decreasing its
equine uterus which caused concern about potential ecbolic
(abortifacient) effects. In the non-gravid uterus, xylazine causes
 Supply. However, no other authors have demonstrated other than
the most increase in intra-uterine pressure, followed by detomi-
reduced gut activity. The reduced gut motility is thought at least
partly due to a reduction in acetylcholine release in local mye-
dine, whereas romifidine increases intra-uterine pressure the
nteric plexi.
least.
The results of one study, using 'equipotent sedative doses (i.e.
Thermoregulatory effects
subjectively indistinguishable degree and duration of sedation),
Thermoregulation is suppressed centrally, resulting in decreased
 of the three available c2 agonists in non-pregnant mares are
thermogenesis. The usual slight overall increased peripheral
outlined in Table 28.3.
vasoconstriction may offset body heat loss, to some extent.
 In pregnant mares, however, detomidine was shown to have
Sweating, however, may also influence body heat loss.
no effect on intra-uterine pressure, or even reduced it. Does this
mean that c2 agonists can be used in pregnant mares? Maybe not,
Ocular effects
because all α2 agonists potentially cause uteroplacental vaso-
Stimulation of α2 receptors in the radial muscles of the iris results
constriction, which may compromise foetal viability and they
in their contraction and hence mydriasis, which may reduce
depress foetal cardiovascular fiunction regardless of whether or
 aqueous drainage and favour an increase in intraocular pressure
not they affect uterine tone. α2 agonists easily cross the
but, stimulation of c2 receptors in the ciliary body results in a
placenta, so the foetus also suffers similar cardiovascular effects
reduction in aqueous humour production (enhanced by the
to the dam (i.e. reduced cardiac output). The foetus also becomes 
sedated.
reduction in ADH and cortisol), and so intraocular pressure tends
to reduce. The initial arterial hypertension and rise in central
venous pressure following intravenous administration of α2 ago-
Table 28.3 Uterine effects of α2 agonists in non-pregnant mares.
nists may transiently increase intraocular pressure; and lowering
of the head (secondary to sedation) may also reduce venous
Drug
Xylazine
 Detomidine
Romifidine
return from the head, and increase intraocular pressure.
Dose (equipotent)
1.1 mg/kg
40 μg/kg
80 μg/kg
Blood effects
Intrauterine P ↑
++++
++
+
Cell counts and total protein may decrease slightly. PCV and TP
Duration of i/u P ↑
+(+)
++
decrease possibly secondary to the mild hyperglycaemia and pos-
+
 sible shift of water into the intravascular space; some of the PCV
Equine sedation and premedication 
255
decrease may be secondary to RBC sequestration in the spleen too.
Table 28.4 Features of the three common c2 agonists when administered
Blood pH and blood gas tensions also remain essentially
 at 'equipotent' sedative doses.
 e  s r ad  p
theoretically enhanced, but clinical problems have not been
α2 agonist
 Detomidine
 Romifidine
reported. Hyperglycaemia is common, but is not usually accom-
Dose (IV)
1.1 mg/kg
10-20μg/kg
80(-100)μg/kg
 panied by glycosuria.
Onset of action
Within 3 min
Within 5 min
Within 5 min
Usefulness
 Duration of action
Average 20 min
 Average 80 min
>80 min
Sedlation
Use alone for sedation
+++
++
+(+)
02 agonists reliably produce predictable sedation in >80% of
Muscle relaxation
++
+++
+
horses. Failure of a response may be seen in animals which are
Ataxia*
+++(+)
++(++)
+
excited, in pain or stressed or fearful, and is due to their higher
sympathetic activity which ‘competes’ better with the drug-
Analgesia
++++
(>10 μg/kg)
+(+)
induced sympatholysis. In such animals, further doses may be
++++
required, or the procedure could be abandoned and attempted
Sweating
Diffcult to predict
another day when the animal should be calmed first if possible.
 All animals should be left in a quiet environment after drug
*May be influenced by speed of IV injection.
administration for sedation to become apparent before further
interventions are begun.
A feature of the sedation produced with α2 agonists is that
● Romifidine 80-100μg/kg (some believe that higher doses of
horses maybe aroused by sudden stimuli, especially touch, and
romifidine are associated with a reduction in, or reversal of, the 
can still deliver well-aimed kicks. To increase the reliability
observed sedation).
of the sedation (especially in fractious animals), increase the
At these doses, the cardiopulmonary effects are similar.
analgesia, and reduce the responsiveness to stimuli, c2 agonists
After these doses it is assumed safe to ride the horse:
are often combined with opioids, butorphanol being favoured,
mainly because it is not a controlled drug and is thus readily
● 8h after xylazine.
available.
● 24 h after detomidine.
 Sedation can be diffcult to assess in horses, with the degree of
● Up to 48 h after romifidine.
 head lowering often being taken as an objective measurement for
depth and duration of sedation. Analgesia and sedation can also
 Use in conjunction with opioids for sedation
be difficult to differentiate, with analgesia itself being diffcult
 The addition of an opioid improves the reliability of the seda-
 u aa ps si s sse on rn
tion and reduces the possibility of arousal and reaction to stim-
drooping of the eyelids and bottom lip, some ataxia, and penile
ulation, but never trust a sedated-looking animal. The addition
 protrusion in male horses.
of opioids generally does not increase the cardiovascular depres-
 The sedation produced by c2 agonists is dose-dependent with
 sion already produced by the QX2 agonist, but may increase the
a ceiling effect (a dose beyond which the depth of sedation is not
 respiratory depression and ataxia observed.
 increased further by increasing the dose) but the duration of seda-
Opioids are always quoted for their ability to cause ^excitement
tion continues to increase. Analgesia is also thought to be dose-
dependent, and to persist for only about one-third to two-thirds
(and cats), but much of this dogma results from the early experi-
of the duration of the observed sedation. Although xylazine and
detomidine seem to obey these ^rules,there has been much debate
ments where huge doses were given to non-painful animals. Such
over romifdine. The sedation (head lowering) is much less
^excitement' usually manifests as increased locomotor activity and
restlessness, occasional head pressing if they walk into a corner 
obvious following romifdine than the other agents, meaning
and try to keep going, muscle tremors (especially around the
perhaps a less deep sedation; and some authors believe that the
face), and ataxia. It usually occurs soon after IV administration,
analgesia afforded by romifidine is the least (least predictable), of
and later gives way to sedation. These reactions are due mainly to
all the agents. The three commonly used α2 agonists are com-
activity at mu receptors, but kappa receptor stimulation may
 pared in Table 28.4 at equipotent doses.
 augment locomotor activity and ataxia, and occasionally causes
 Equipotent sedative doses are believed to be:
bizarre behaviour such as yawning. When opioids are to be
administered, the sedative agent is usually given first, and then the
Xylazine 1.1 mg/kg = Detomidine 20 μg/kg (some say 40 μg/kg)
opioid is given once sedation has been assured. If the injections
= Romifidine 80 μg/kg
cannot be separated, be aware of the potential side effects seen
with high dose opioid administration, especially in relatively pain-
The ceiling doses for sedation are believed to be:
free animals.
●Xylazine 1.1 mg/kg.
 Butorphanol is the most commonly used opioid. Its intrave-
●Detomidine 40 μg/kg.
nous use has not been associated with histamine release, and the
256  Veterinary Anaesthesia
volume for injection is convenient. Its use is also not complicated
Problems associated with the use of α2 agonists alone
by legislation requiring a written record to be made for each dose
as sedative-analgesics
administered. As a sole agent, doses as low as 50μg/kg IV may
induce some increase in locomotor activity and mild ataxia.
● Bradycardia and bradyarrhythmias, especially A-V blocks. It is
(Doses up to 200 μg/kg (or more), may be necessary to provide
believed that horses exhibiting physiological A-V blocks prior
adequate analgesia in some circumstances.) Butorphanol alone
to sedation are at no extra risk. Occasionally heart rates below
causes minimal haemodynamic and respiratory effects but can
20 bpm have been recorded. Atropine (0.01 mg/kg IV) is an
enhance the respiratory depressant effects of other agents. It tends
effective treatment, but not itself without side effects (intestinal
to produce excitement effects and ataxia, especiallyat higher doses
ileus, mydriasis and central excitement). Some prefer to use
in non-painful animals, but these later give way to sedation, which
glycopyrrolate (2 μg/kg IV), which is longer acting, but does not
can augment that resulting from other sedative agents.
cross the blood-brain barrier. Anticholinergic agents may be
When used in combination with o2 agonists, butorphanol
given prior to c2 agonist administration, but their prevention
is usually administered at doses of 25-50μg/kg The α2 agonists
of the reflex bradycardia in response to the initial hypertension
can then also be administered in lower doses (e.g. xylazine
may have adverse haemodynamic effects. Also the tachycardia
0.5 mg/kg; detomidine 10 μg/kg; romifdine 40 μg/kg).
resulting from anticholinergic administration will demand an
 02 agonists may also be combined with ACP, although reduced
 increase in myocardial oxygen requirement, which may cause
doses should be used. In this department, a useful combination,
problems if hypoxaemia already exists (see also Chapter 4).
given below, for intramuscular administration in fractious animals
● Respiratory obstruction, due to nasal oedema if prolonged head
ensures a good quality of sedation. The addition of ACP seems to
drooping and relaxation of the nostrils, may cause stertorous
assure a good background anxiclysis and further reduces the ani-
breathing. Horses with laryngeal paralysis, may suffer further
mal's response to environmental and other stimuli. It also
inspiratory dyspnoea due to relaxation of laryngeal muscles.
improves the haemodynamics and may even be thought of as
These agents are not a good choice for assessment of laryngeal
good practice The doses commonly used (in magic mixture), are:
function.
 Detomidine 20 μg/kg + ACP 30 μg/kg + butorphanol 50 μg/kg
● Diuresis and increased urination may cause problems where
IM.
urethral obstruction exists.
 Must leave undisturbed for good 30 min.
● Sweating (+/- piloerection) may cause problems if sedation is
 For a 500kg horse: 10 mg detomidine (1 ml) + 15 mg ACP
(1.5 ml) + 25 mg butorphanol (2.5ml); total volume = 5 ml.
tions (and lameness may be masked by the analgesic effects).
Use for premedication
● The use of these agents is controversial in pregnant animals,
 Predictable sedation and calming of horses prior to induction of
anaesthesia greatly smoothes the course of anaesthesia. If exces-
● Reduced gastrointestinal motility theoretically increases the
sive ataxia is to be avoided, agents such as romifidine may be
risk of oesophageal choke, impactions, and ileus; and ischaemic
preferred, or lower doses of the other agents may be sufficient.
 gut may be further compromised by vasoconstriction, thus be
 Residual sedation at the end of surgery also smoothes the recov-
aware of these potential problems in colics, and perhaps use
ery period by reducing the excitement to which horses seem
the shorter acting Q2 agonists where possible.
prone, especially if romifidine has been used, because the ataxia
● Subcutaneous or intramuscular administration occasionally
is minimal. Alternatively, additional doses of oΩ agonists may be
causes localised inflammatory reactions.
given at the beginning of the recovery period to serve the same
● Urticarial rashes have been observed following detomidine and
purpose. The different α2 agonists produce slightly different fea-
romifidine, but required no specific treatment.
● Occasional 'excitement' reactions have been observed following
(e.g. romifidine tends to delay return of swallowing, so do not
the IV administration of xylazine and detomidine. These reac-
always wait for this before removing the endotracheal tube); and
tions are most commonly observed as tachypnoea. The reac-
 how long they spend in sternal recumbency before attempting to
tions are not always repeatable in the same animal and with the
stand.
same dose.
C2 agonists, when administered for premedication, greatly
● Intra-arterial injections have been associated with rapid onset
reduce the requirements for other anaesthetic agents, both induc-
 of disorientation, excitement, seizures and collapse. Treatment
tion and maintenance agents.
by induction of barbiturate anaesthesia, with or without ben-
There seem to be no obvious differences between the charac-
 zodiazepine anticonvulsants, and the provision of oxygen may
teristics of anaesthesia when different Q2 agonists have been used
 provide a favourable outcome. The use of IV α2 antagonists
for premedication. Heart rates, arterial blood pressures and
is not advised as a frst line treatment because the reaction
breathing rates and patterns all seem similar, all other factors
is thought to be due more to general cerebral irritation/
being equal. Whether a prolonged peripheral vasoconstriction
vasoconstriction than the specific central actions of the drugs.
may compromise muscle blood flow with detrimental long term
● Beware use in shocked/hypovolaemic animals, because the
effects is not known. However, the use of other anaesthetic agents
resulting bradycardia, hypotension and reduced cardiac output
also complicates the situation.
may compromise the animal's ability to compensate cardiovas-
Equine sedation and premedication  257
cularly. Small doses of the shortest acting agent, xylazine, are
 effects, thereby causing localised vasoconstriction and delaying
 preferred if necessary (e.g. in colic cases).
systemic absorption, and possibly due to its ^membrane effects?
● Large breeds (e.g. draft horses) were believed to be more sensi-
tive to c2 agonists, whereas smaller breeds were thought to be
dine should have more local anaesthetic-type activity, because it
more resistant. This apparent differential sensitivity may be due
is an imidazole derivative, and its chemical structure is suggested
to ^metabolic weight' differences, i.e. the allometric (as opposed
to be more suited to producing local anaesthetic type actions).
to isometric) scaling of body size. That is, dosing should be
related more to body surface area than to actual body weight.
Detomidine alone
With these precautions in mind, smaller doses (mg/kg) should
60μg/kg seems to be preferred, for sacro-coccygeal or intercoc-
be considered for large breed horses.
 cygeal placement, again diluting the fnal volume into 10ml
● The contemporaneous administration of detomidine and
normal saline. This should provide 2-3h of analgesia.
 intravenous trimethoprim potentiated sulphonamides has been
associated with fatal cardiac arrhythmias. Although this may
Combinations
have been an effect of the antibiotic alone (probably the
 In combination with morphine, use half the above doses of α2
(carrier), precaution should be observed.
 agonist, with 0.05-0.1 mg/kg of morphine. Note that preservative
● There are reports that there may be some deterioration in the
 free morphine should be used.
 activity of xylazine in bottles that have been broached for some
 In combination with local anaesthetic solutions, e.g. 0.17 mg/
days.
kg xylazine can be combined with 0.22 mg/kg lidocaine.
● Beware especially with sedation for shoeing or dentistry where
you may leave the farm once the animal has been sedated; and
Antagonism
for all occasions of sedation, because you are responsible for
 One of the advantages of the use of c2 agonists is the potential
the horse (and safety of the horse and any attending personnel)
for their specific antagonism ('reversal'). Before the availability of
until the horse is fully recovered.
 specific antagonists, agents such as 4-amino-pyridine and doxa-
● Beware accidental self-administration (eg. across mucous
 pram (non-specific CNS stimulants), were used. There are a
 number of α adrenoceptor antagonists available, with differing
membranes), as profound cardiorespiratory depression and
sedation result, necessitating respiratory and circulatory
02:α1 selectivity:
support and the use of specific antagonists.
● α1 > α2 prazosin.
● Xylazine is contra-indicated as a sedative prior to Somulose
● αl = c2 tolazoline.
(quinalbarbitone and cinchocaine), euthanasia. It seems to
● α2 > (1 idazoxan, yohimbine.
worsen the quality of death, posibly by altering cardiac output 
● α2 >> αl atipamezole.
so that slow injection isn't slow enough; although the other
02 agonists don't seem to cause the same problems. Perhaps
Atipamezole
xylazine's central cl receptor actions may be partly
Atipamezole is not licensed for use in horses, but can be used
responsible.
where antagonism of o2 agonist effects is warranted, for example
 adverse reactions (e.g. excessive ataxia). Remember that analgesia
Epidural (extradural) administration 
will also be 'reversed' with the reversal of sedation, but the cardi-
Useful as an adjunct to standing chemical restraint for obstetrical
opulmonary effects may not be entirely reversed when sedation is
 obviously reversed. Some authors suggest that opioid analgesia
Different doses, and combinations with local anaesthetic agents
may also be partly reversed by α2 antagonists, just as naloxone
and opioids, have been published. The use of c2 agonists alone
 may also reverse α2 agonist-induced analgesia, although there is
should negate the possibility of motor nerve blockade, ataxia and
much controversy (see Chapter 3).
recumbency and panic. However, administration of c2 agonists
 The dose of atipamezole has not been determined for each C2
by the epidural route still allows their systemic absorption, so
agonist, and will depend on the dose of agonist administered and
sedation and some ataxia may still be observed; and their local
the time elapsed since that administration. However, as a guide,
anaesthetic type activity (especially xylazine), can also produce
50μg/kg is a starting point, and may need to be repeated.
some motor nerve blockade, and therefore ataxia. Just a few of
 Atipamezole should be administered by IM or slow IV injection.
these combinations are listed (see also Chapter 16):
Rapid IV injection results in rapid displacement of agonist from
 peripheral α2 receptors, with a sudden hypotension and reflex
Xyiazine alone
tachycardia. There has been some suggestion that atipamezole
Xylazine has a wide dose range (0.03-0.35 mg/kg), but the pre-
may also result in a degree of sedation in horses, which has not
ferred dose seems to be 0.17-0.35 mg/kg for sacro-coccygeal or
 been reported in any other species.
inter-coccygeal injection. The resulting volume can be diluted into
about 10 ml normal saline to provide an easier volume for admin-
Use in foals
istration. This should produce good analgesia for 3-5 h. The anal-
 Usually foals less than 4-6 weeks old can be nicely sedated with
Aq pnd ie sisno azx ida aq Piad i
benzodiazepines, possibly including an opioid. However, for
epidural detomidine, possibly because of its greater cl agonist
those which are more boisterous, C2 agonists may be used to
258  Veterinary Anaesthesia
facilitate handling. The following doses have been used without
tion and laryngeal/pharyngeal trauma in the horse. Journal of
 problems in healthy foals, but remember that foals resist the
Equine Veterinary Science 28(8), 461-467.
muscle weakness feeling less and so often become recumbent.
 Bryant CE, England GCW, Clarke KW (1991) Comparison of the
Recumbency may facilitate your intervention, but can also
sedative effects of medetomidine and xylazine in the horse.
promote the development of postural hypoxaemia (common in
Veterinary Record 129, 421-423.
neonatal foals anyway), such that supplemental oxygen may be
Carregaro AB, Luna SPL, Mataqueiro MI, de Queiroz-Neto A
administered if recumbency is prolonged. Also be aware of the
(2007) Effects of buprenorphine on nociception and spontane-
foal's hydration status and its temperature. Sick foals may only
ous locomotor activity in horses. American Journal of
require much smaller doses.
Veterinary Research 68(3),246-250.
 Doses in healthy foals:
 England GCW, Clarke KW (1996) Alpha 2 adrenoceptor agonists
● Xylazine 0.2-1 mg/kg IV.
in the horse: a review. British Veterinary Journal 152,
● Detomidine 5-40μg/kg IV.
641657.
● Romifidine 20-70 μg/kg IV.
Marntell S, Nyman G, Funkquist P, Hedenstierna G (2005) Effects
of acepromazine on pulmonary gas exchange and circulation
● Butorphanol can be included at 0.05-0.2 mg/kg to enhance
during sedation and dissociative anaesthesia in horses.
sedation/analgesia.
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 32(2),83-93.
Naylor JM, Garven E, Fraser L (1997) A comparison of romifidine
Anticholinergics
and xylazine in foals: the effects on sedation and analgesia.
Equine Veterinary Education 9(6), 329-334.
See Chapter 4 on small animal sedation and premedication.
Oijala M, Katila T (1988) Detmodine (Domosedan) in foals: seda-
Because of the mydriasis which follows atropine, which can cause
tive and analgesic effects. Equine Veterinary Journal 20,
photophobia, blurred vision and excitement, and due to the
327-330.
reduction in gut motility and the possibility of this leading to
 Schatzmann U, Josseck H, Stauffer J-L, Goossens L (1984) Effects
impaction type colics, these drugs are not generally favoured, and
 therefore tend to be reserved for emergency situations.
of alpha 2 agonists on intrauterine pressure and sedation in
 Doses used are atropine 0.01mg/kg IV and glycopyrrolate
horses: comparison between detomidine, romifidine and xyla-
 2μg/kg IV. In one study, atropine at 0.044mg/kg reduced GI
zine. Journal of Veterinary Medicine A, 41, 523-529.
motility for 3-12h in ponies; whereas 5μg/kg glycopyrrolate
reduced GI motility for 2-6 h.
Self-test section
Hyoscine (scopolamine)
This is said to be 100 times more potent than atropine as a seda-
1.
Which of the following is not associated with the
tive. It has been administered to anaesthetised horses (0.1 mg/kg)
administration of α2 agonists to horses?
in an attempt to increase heart rate, blood pressure and cardiac
A.
Diuresis.
output, but the effects were only short lasting (c. 5-10 min). It is
B.
Tachyarrhythmias.
present in Buscopan and Buscopan compositum. It acts as a GI
C.
Sweating.
spasmolytic, but the heart rate often increases, so beware when
D.
Ataxia.
assessing colics which have received a recent dose.
2.
Acepromazine is a:
A.
Butyrophenone.
Further reading
B.
Thioxanthine.
C.
Phenothiazine.
Bradbury LA, Dugdale AHA, Knottenbelt DC, Mackane SA,
D.
Benzodiazepine.
Senior JM (2008) The effects of anesthesia on laryngeal func-
Information chapter
Equine heart murmurs
Physiological/functional/flow murmurs
lic pressure. This means that the pulses are easy to feel because
Tend to become more intense after mild exercise. Usually local-
larger than 'normal.
ised, especially over the aortic and pulmonic valves. Usually soft
Horses are prone to developing arrhythmias.
and blowy sounds, and grades I to II, occasionally ^clicks. Usually
systolic.
 Haemic murmurs associated with anaemia are due to reduced
Mitral regurgitation
blood viscosity and increased turbulence of blood flow.
 Systolic murmur. Possibly secondary to endocardiosis-type ageing
 In hypovolaemic states (colics), the heart is less full, so the
changes, or to bacterial endocarditis. Ruptured chordae tendineae
valve rings become distorted so that murmurs become more
 also result in a murmur of mitral insufficiency.
likely. The situation may also be compounded by high a heart rate,
Mitral insuffciency results in volume overload of the left ven-
a hyperdynamic circulation and a change in blood viscosity if
 packed cel volume/total protein (PCV/TP) increase.
tricle, which increases back pressure on the pulmonary circula-
tion. This in turn causes pressure overload of the right heart which
may result in tricuspid regurgitation also.
Young racehorses in training
Tricuspid and mitral regurgitation are common systolic murmurs.
Tricuspid regurgitation
The heart hypertrophies with exercise, but valve leaflets cannot
grow, so the valves become leaky as the valve rings (annuli)
Systolic murmur. Usually secondary to mitral regurgitation (see
'stretch. Tend to be low grade, but can affect performance if
above). If not, then check for atrial fibrillation (atrial enlarge-
severe.
ment), and differentiate from ventricular septal defects.
Aortic regurgitation
Ve ntricular septal defects
Diastolic murmur. Middle aged to older animals. Condition will
Pansystolic murmur. Common congenital defect, especially small
 progress, but ‘Over what time course? is the six million dollar 
 pony breeds (e.g. Welsh section A and Shetlands). Often located
question.
in the membranous portion of the interventricular septum, just
Secondary to aortic regurgitation, the left ventricle becomes
underneath the tricuspid valve, so that the murmur is loudest over
  el r   
the tricuspid valve area on the right side.
chamber dilates), leading to secondary mitral regurgitation (and
You will also hear a systolic ejection murmur over the pulmo-
therefore a systolic murmur can also be heard).
nic valve, usually one grade softer than the murmur over the
 Bounding pulses are a feature of aortic regurgitation. That is,
tricuspid valve.
due to back flow of blood from the aorta into the left ventricle,
 Left to right shunting of blood through a ventricular septal
there is augmented volume in the left ventricle for ejection with
defect (VSD) causes the loudest sounds to be heard over the tri-
the next ventricular contraction; so systolic pressure will be high.
cuspid valve area. The slightly softer murmur over the pulmonic
However, due to the leaky valve, blood can flow back into the
valve area is due to the increased volume of blood passing through
heart as well as continue on downstream along the aorta, so the
a ^normal′ pulmonic valve, which represents a 'relative? pulmonic
high systolic pressure falls rapidly to a lower than ^normal diasto-
stenosis.
259
Equine anaesthesia
Learning objectives
 To discuss possible causes of the relatively high risk of anaesthesia for Equidae.
To be familiar with the available drugs and techniques.
Introduction
inspired oxygen concentrations), and hypotension (poor pulmo.
nary perfusion), probably also have a role, we tend to talk of
The risks associated with general anaesthesia in the horse are
ventilation-perfusion mismatches as the major cause of
greater than for any other commonly encountered veterinary
hypoxaemia.
species. The peri-anaesthetic morbidity/mortality rate for elective
 Obesity,regardless of the underlying frame size, may also com-
procedures in horses is around 1 in 100 to 1 in 200. The peri-
 plicate the course of a general anaesthetic.
operative morbidity/mortality rate for compromised patients/
emergencies is even worse at around 1 in 10-20.
Breed
There are certain breeds of horses which may be at greater anaes-
Factors influencing anaesthetic risks
thetic risk. Draught breeds are thought to be more likely to suffer
from spinal cord malacia and also post-anaesthetic myopathies
Factors (other than emergencies or colic), which may influence 
d a  rs n l n   s)
the risks associated with anaesthesia in the horse are given below.
 storage myopathy (EPSM)). Quarter horses may suffer from
Consideration of all the factors which may influence risk associ-
hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis. Welsh mountain ponies are
 ated with general anaesthesia is important in helping us as anaes-
about 20 times more likely than other breeds to suffer from con-
thetists take steps to minimise those risks where possible and to
genital heart abnormalities such as ventricular septal defects
inform owners as to what those risks are.
(VSD) or tetralogy of Fallot.
Within some breeds, certain types of horse may be at greater
Size
risk, for example the fit Thoroughbred that has fractured a leg on
Size really does matter. This not only influences how easily the
the racecourse is probably one of the greatest challenges to the
horse can be handled before, during and after anaesthesia it also
equine anaesthetist due to the temperament, fitness and high
affects the risks associated with anaesthesia. A larger horse suffer-
levels of circulating catecholamines.
ing from ataxia or having a bad recovery has more momentum
and is more likely to injure itself Larger horses are thought to be
Temperament
at more risk from post-operative myopathy/neuropathy syn-
A horse's best means of defence is to run away from any threat.
drome (but this may be more related to breed, see later).
 This means that many horses are flighty or nervous in strange
 Large horses are more susceptible to developing hypoxaemia
circumstances and tend to have a lot of circulating catecholamines
and large alveolar-arterial (A-a) oxygen tension gradients, espe-
which are not good for anaesthesia. Also, during recovery from
cially in dorsal recumbency where the abdominal viscera com-
s oon (me un on) uis on An A ssou aos eisse
 press the conical diaphragm causing compression atelectasis (thus
after regaining consciousness as they feel safer’ on their feet.
reducing pulmonary ventilation). Although other factors such as
Some horses may respond to fear by barging, biting or kicking
anaesthetic agents, reabsorption atelectasis (from the use of high
and can be a danger to personnel.
260
Equine anaesthesia  261
Sex
despite the fact that arterial blood pressure is often reduced.
Sex is important as it not only relates to temperament (stallions,
Recently, its combination with 02 agonists has been shown
mares) but also to some specific risks associated with anaesthesia.
to improve the PaOz, via effects on improved pulmonary
For example, the use of acepromazine (ACP) is contra-indicated
perfusion.
 in breeding stallions as there is a small risk of priapism (sustained 
 penile erection) or paraphimosis (inability to retract the penis
Health status
following paralysis of the retractor muscles). In mares the use of
One of the most important influences on risk associated with
C2 agonists is not recommended in the last trimester of preg-
 general anaesthesia, and not just in the horse, is the metabolic and
nancy. Care is needed in anaesthetising heavily pregnant mares as
 physiological state of the patient. The ASA classification system is
the gravid uterus may impede venous return from the caudal vena
described in Chapter 2.
cava and most anaesthetic agents cross the placenta.
Pre-anaesthetic assessment
Age
Young animals have an increased anaesthetic risk because of
Following thorough history-taking, a full clinical examination
 immature physiology and metabolism (see section on foal anaes-
 should be performed, with particular focus on the cardiovascular
thesia and Chapter 37). Old horses may suffer from concurrent
and respiratory systems. The reproductive state of the animal may
medical problems such as liver disease (ragwort toxicity), osteoar-
well influence choices, as may the state of its musculoskeletal
thritis and Cushing's disease. How much these conditions increase
system.
 the risk of anaesthesia is unclear.
Surgery time
Preparation for anaesthesia
Anaesthetic durations of more than 2h are associated with a
As stated above, all animals that undergo elective anaesthesia
marked increase in risk of peri-operative morbidity/mortality.
should be given a full pre-anaesthetic assessment. If that assess-
Thus every attempt should be made to reduce anaesthesia time
(ie. clip surgery site before anaesthetic induction, complete
investigated before the animal undergoes anaesthesia.
surgery as swiftly as possible).
Withhold food for 6-12 h
Time of procedure
All non-emergency cases should be starved for 6-12h prior to
 Due to the nature of equine veterinary work a significant number
surgery. This is to reduce the amount of digesta in the gut, and
of anaesthetics occur ^out-of-hours. There is some evidence that
therefore the weight of the gastrointestinal tract pressing on the
'out-of-hours’ anaesthesia carries more risk than at other times
diaphragm and great vessels during recumbency. Ideally shavings
 even in patients that are not compromised. The reasons for this
or shredded paper should be used to reduce the chances of a
seem to include human error in addition to physiological varia-
hungry horse eating its bedding. Some people muzzle horses, but
tions due to circadian rhythms and lack of pre-operative starva-
tion. Pre-operative starvation reduces diaphragmatic (and vena
muzzles prevent horses which are not used to them from drink-
ing. This can lead to an increased incidence of post-operative
caval) compression by a full stomach/intestine, and potentially
 impactions. Do not withhold water.
allows for better pulmonary ventilation (and venous return/
cardiac output).
Re-check basic parameters (TPR) immediately
prior to surgery
Agents?
 If the horse was admitted to the hospital the day prior to surgery,
 In most studies on peri-operative equine fatalities there have been
it should be re-examined on the day of surgery to make sure
no widely used anaesthetic agents where their specific use has been
that it has not developed any problems that may influence
signifcantly associated with an increased risk of anaesthesia.
anaesthesia such as respiratory infection (from mild viraemia to
However, lack of premedication/sedation before anaesthesia has
shipping fever).
been associated with an increased risk; although this may have
reflected the fact that the most sick patients were less likely to have
Catheter placement
received premedication/sedation. Interestingly, the only agent
 Before any horse is anaesthetised a wide bore (12g or 14g)
that was associated with a decreased risk of anaesthesia was the
 indwelling catheter should be placed and secured in the
pre-operative use of ACP. Possible reasons include the fact that
ACP is anti-arrhythmic by: blocking cardiac Q1 adrenergic recep-
jugular vein.
tors, reducing catecholamine release (due to its sedative effects),
 Theatre head collar/tail bandage
and preventing the sensitisation of cardiomyocytes to catecho-
 A leather padded head collar is used for aiding control of the horse 
lamines caused by, e.g. halothane. In doing this it reduces the
chances of catecholamine induced arrhythmias (e.g. secondary to
at induction.
hypercapnia or inadequate anaesthetic depth). The vasodilation
● Leather is less likely than nylon webbing to cause trauma such
that results from its use may also be protective of tissue perfusion,
as friction burns if pulled tight against the horse's skin.
262   Veterinary Anaesthesia
● The padding is to protect superficial nerves near bony pro-
● Butorphanol has antagonistic activity at mu receptors and so
 minences from the metal rings in the head collar.
may complicate the administration of full mu agonists until its
● A soft cotton rope is then attached to the head collar as this is
effects have worn off.
● Butorphanol can enhance any ataxia caused by c2 agonists,
rapidly through their hands.
possibly by enhancing the sedation.
● A tail bandage should be placed to reduce contamination of
Morphine is this author's opioid of choice. This can be admin-
 theatre and to prevent long tails tripping up the horse during
istered IM or slowly IV at the time of premedication without
 recovery from anaesthesia.
no ticeable increase in ataxia.
Shoe removal/surgery clip
 Ideally all shoes are removed before induction of anaesthesia. This
Induction of anaesthesia
is for horse and handler safety and to protect the induction box
floor. Removing shoes after induction increases anaesthesia time.
The first problem that the equine anaesthetist faces is that by
For the same reason it is helpful if the surgery site is clipped before
inducing a state of general anaesthesia, a horse must undergo the
anaesthetic induction, however, some horses do not tolerate clip-
transition from a (usually) standing position to recumbency as
safely as possible. Try to select the best possible place for induction
pers very well.
and recovery. There is not much that can beat a flat, grassy field
(but beware barbed wire or stony ground). Remember that you
Mouthwash
will be responsible for the safety of the horse and any persons
The horse's mouth should be washed out with water using either
helping you.
p yu se aai i s s ss usp ai e io asou e
Although the chosen anaesthetic induction agent may influence
material that may have aggregated there as possible. Otherwise
the quality of induction, the biggest influence is to have a calm
when the endotracheal (ET) tube is passed “blindly’ that food
(and preferably sedated) horse. Handling techniques range from
material may be ^collected’ by the tube and passed down into the
minimal handling, through using a swinging door as a crush, to
trachea. Particular attention should be paid to the space between
tilt tables. It does not matter which technique is used as long as
the cheeks and the cheek teeth.
the handlers are familiar with it and there is adequate equipment
and assistance.
 Pre-anaesthetic medication
 In many cases antibiotics and/or non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
Induction agents
drugs (NSAIDs) may need to be administered before
 See also the foal section later. Usually only intravenous induction
anaesthesia.
agents are used to induce anaesthesia in adult horses because
● Na penicillin (Crystapen) can cause hypotension and bradyar-
inhalational induction in adults may lead to an uncontrollably
rhythmias and so should be administered slowly and ideally at
excited animal. At the moment there are few licensed intravenous
least 20 min before induction so that any haemodynamic effects 
induction agents which may be used in horses.
will have subsided by the time anaesthesia is induced. It also
m sp u-im sd on ssu s o s
Ketamine (2.2 mg/kg IV)
10 min of administration; it is preferable not to contaminate
Is a dissociative anaesthetic. It has excitatory and inhibitory effects
your induction/recovery box.
 on different parts of the CNS (see Chapter 5 on induction agents
● Intravenous trimethoprim-potentiated sulphonamides (TMP-
and Chapter 3 on pain). The simplest way to think of it is that it
S) can cause fatal arrhythmias if administered around the same
^dissociates? the CNS from all sensory input. Its properties are:
 time as intravenous detomidine
· Excellent analgesic.
● Many NSAIDs are not licensed for pre-operative use.
● Duration of action 10-20 min.
● Maintains cardiovascular parameters (in healthy animals).
 Premedication/sedation
● Maintains cranial nerve reflexes.
● Extensor muscle rigidity/poor muscle relaxation.
 See Chapter 28 on equine premedication/sedation. When using
● Increases intra-cranial/intra-ocular pressure.
Q2 agonists as premedication agents, butorphanol, if required for
● Can cause excitement/convulsions if given alone.
analgesia, is often not given at exactly the same time. It may be
● Normally a more ^controlled’ induction.
given 5-10 min after the α2 agonist, or even after induction of
anaesthesia. This is because:
Thiopental (about 10mg/kg IV i.e. 50 ml of 5%
solution for a 500kg horse)
● Butorphanol only has a short duration of action. Thus, if
 Is a fast-acting intravenous anaesthetic agent. Its properties are:
administered as a premedicant, by the time surgery actually
 starts its effects may be waning.
● Duration of action 10-20 min.
● Butorphanol can cause increased locomotor activity in horses,
● Cardiovascular depression.
●Respiratory depression.
Equine anaesthesia  263
● Good muscle relaxation.
● Can provide intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV).
● Irritant extravascularly.
● Easy to alter depth of anaesthesia.
● Faster induction.
Total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA)
Many horses are premedicated before induction (see Chapter
● Minimal equipment.
28) but some animals are not (see colic anaesthesia notes below).
● Easy to do 'in the field.
If ketamine is used the horse should be heavily sedated with an
● Does not deliver oxygen.
Q2 agonist first. This is to reduce any excitement which may occur
● Not easy to alter level of anaesthesia.
as the ketamine takes effect, but also to counter the increased
● Once administered, the agents cannot be taken back.
muscle tone that occurs with ketamine. A benzodiazepine (e.g.
● Drugs can be expensive.
diazepam) may also be administered at induction to try to improve
muscle relaxation, especially for endotracheal intubation. Horses
Some people also provide supplemental oxygen by insufflation
 in which anaesthesia is induced with ketamine are more diffcult
or dermand valve (via nasopharyngeal or ET tube), to TIVA-
 to intubate than those where anaesthesia is induced with thiopen-
anaesthetised horses.
tal as they retain the swallowing and laryngeal reflexes. As keta-
Inhalational anaesthesia
mine retains many of the cranial nerve reflexes the horses may also
appear light' with a brisk palpebral reflex and lip/ear twitching.
See Chapter 8 on inhalational agents and Chapter 9 on breathing
 A typical anaesthesia protocol for a ketamine induction would
systems. Inhalational anaesthesia requires an anaesthetic breath-
be:
ing system. A large animal circle (LAC) or ^To-and fro? are the
 two main types available (a small animal circle or a Magill with a
80μg/kg romifidine IV (30 min after 0.03 mg/kg ACP IM, IV)
suitably sized reservoir bag can be used for foals). Anaesthetic
 breathing systems need to be maintained. Both the LAC and the
wait 5 min
To-and-fro’ require soda lime, which also needs to be changed
2.2 mg/kg ketamine (+/- 0.05 mg/kg diazepam) IV as a bolus
when exhausted. Oxygen flow rates for horses on the LAC are
around 1 l/100 kg, with the adjustable pressure limiting (APL)
A typical anaesthesia protocol for thiopental would be:
valve open.
0.05 mg/kg ACP IM or IV
TIVA
TIVA can be achieved in two main ways, by 'top-up' bolus injec-
wait 30 min
tions or by continuous (drip) infusions. TIVA produces a much
10 mg/kg thiopental IV
diminished anaesthesia stress response compared with inhala-
tion anaesthesia and is therefore often regarded as a physiologi-
OR
cally superior method of anaesthesia. The main drawbacks are
80μg/kg romifidine IV
highlighted above.
wait 5 min
'Top up' TIVA
After induction of anaesthesia (usually via intravenous agents)
 5 mg/kg thiopental IV
anaesthesia is maintained by the bolus administration of intrave-
nous agents, either when the horse shows signs of becoming
The induction dose of thiopental is greatly reduced due to the
effects of the α2 agonist. This combination causes profound car-
light, or at regular time intervals. For example:
diovascular depression.
Anaesthetic induction (usually after premed) with thiopental
After anaesthetic induction it is important that the horse is
 provides 10-20 min surgical anaesthesia
quickly placed into the desired recumbency and its position
×
secured (if applicable). If one is to be used, an endotracheal (ET)
if necessary 1-2 mg/kg thiopental increments when plane of
tube should be placed in the trachea at this time. Patient monitor-
anaesthesia lightens
ing should begin immediately after induction.
Repeated doses of thiopental can lead to prolonged recoveries.
Try to keep total dose <15-25 mg/kg
Maintenance of anaesthesia
OR
Anaesthesia can be maintained with inhalation and/or intrave-
Anaesthetic induction (after suitable premed) with 2.2 mg/kg
nous agents.
ketamine (+/- 0.05 mg/kg diazepam) provides about 10-15 min
 Inhalational anaesthesia
surgical anaesthesia
● Requires expensive equipment.
● Not easy to use in the field.
if necessary 1/3 (about 0.7 mg/kg) induction dose of ketamine
● ET tube essential.
3y/8 / 10 auyo1 y/anlog 10) auze[x sy/lu g0 pue
● Delivers oxygen to horse.
detomidine)
264  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Ketamine can be administered without further c2 agonist for
CNS/reflexes
the first few doses if detomidine or romifidine were given in the
- e s uosod aa (sie pue sop ym panedo) ssiou u o
 premed, because these are longer acting.
tively unreliable indicator of anaesthetic depth.
Ketamine (+/-- α2 agonist) is often best given by-the-clock'
● Palpebral reflex (check both eyes if possible) is often just'
about every 10 min
 maintained, but becomes refractory if you repeat the stimula-
tion too frequently.
 It is not usually advised to keep horses anaesthetised with ^top-
● Perineal reflex/anal tone can be a useful index of anaesthetic
up TIVA' for much longer than 90 min because of the cumulation
depth.
of injected drugs.
Horses anaesthetised with ketamine maintain cranial nerve
Continuous infusion TvA ('triple-drip)
After induction (normally via intravenous agents; some people
and ears may twitch as well. This makes it hard to tell whether the
horse is light' or not.
use the ^triple-drip for induction purposes) anaesthesia is main-
tained using a combination of agents which together provide all
Cardiovascular system
the components of the triad’ of anaesthesia.
The cardiovascular system of horses seems to be more easily
The three components of the ^triple-drip’ are:
depressed by anaesthesia than any other species and cardiovascu-
● Ketamine to provide the analgesia and anaesthesia?.
lar support is often required during anaesthesia. Arterial hypo-
● GGE (guaiphenesin) to provide muscle relaxation.
tension is a common consequence of anaesthesia, especially
● α2 agonist to provide sedation (counter any excitatory effects
under inhalation agents.
of ketamine), some analgesia and muscle relaxation.
 Horses have a huge amount of cardiac reserve,thus in response
to an increased sympathetic tone they may not increase their heart
See Chapter 31 on feld anaesthesia for recipes. Because there
 is normally a limited amount of anaesthesia time available using
rate to achieve an increase in cardiac output. Instead they just
squeeze their ventricles more (i.e. increase stroke volume). This
'triple-drip’ infusion, cases should be selected very carefully to
means that heart rate is not necessarily a good indicator of a horse
ensure that the surgical procedure is completed in plenty of time.
becoming light and is one reason why we monitor arterial blood
Stuffing ears with cotton wool and covering eyes may reduce audi-
 pressure in horses.
 tory and visual stimuli and increase anaesthesia depth and time.
 Peripheral arterial blood pressure should ideally be monitored
Monitoring of horses receiving ^triple-drip′ is diffcult as the
as horses are susceptible to developing myopathies/neuropathies.
horses are receiving large amounts of ketamine and so can appear
 One of the risk factors for the development of myopathies is
light' which results in the infusion rate being increased more than
necessary. Much of the muscle movement, hypertonus and strange
ischaemia due to poor perfusion of muscles. The mean arterial
blood pressure is usually maintained between 60 and 70 mmHg
respiratory patterns can also be due to the build up of catechol, a
in order to maintain muscle perfusion. Positive inotropes and
metabolite of GGE, which causes excitatory phenomena and can
vasopressors may be required to aid maintenance of adequate
lead you into thinking the animal is too light, when in fact it is
too deep.
arterial blood pressure. Anaesthetic depth can also impact on
arterial blood pressure. IV fluid therapy may help a little,
 Care should be taken to ensure that excessive doses of GGE are
especially in previously hypovolaemic animals.
not given (should be <150 mg/kg), as GGE is a cumulative cen-
Be aware of certain drugs (e.g. 02 agonists, hyoscine, clen-
 trally acting muscle relaxant. Therefore if the horse receives to0
much it will be ataxic on recovery and may have an excitable
 heart rate even when the horse is anaesthetised.
recovery or remain recumbent for a long period.
 A final disadvantage of 'triple-drip' is that once the solution is
Respiratory system
made up it should be used that day. If only a small amount of a
 Intra-operative hypoxaemia and hypercapnia are common in
solution is used the rest has to be thrown away, so ^triple-drips"
anaesthetised horses.
can be expensive.
Horses also have a huge respiratory reserve and so may not
 a  ag  e a sr e 
however, suddenly change their respiratory pattern or take a
Monitoring horses under general anaesthesia
sudden intake of breath when light.
 This section should be read after reading the general notes on
 Ketamine (and sometimes thiopental) predisposes horses to
monitoring animals under general anaesthesia (see Chapter 18 on
develop periodic breathing. This means that the horse will take
monitoring).
several breaths in relatively quick succession before then holding
The anaesthetised horse presents the anaesthetist with some
its breath for a longer period of time. This can make determining
extra risk because unwanted movement can be very dangerous
respiratory rates difficult and make the anaesthetist think the
both to the horse and to personnel. Always be aware of personnel
horse is lighter/deeper than it actually is.
standing in potentially dangerous positions. Below are some brief
In general, the respiratory system is depressed in horses
points about monitoring that specifically relate to horses.
during general anaesthesia. Supplementary oxygen is usually
Equine anaesthesia
265
 ET COz lower than arterial blood CO2,
esp. after venous admixture
Low CO2, No CO2
Low O2: High CO2
Wasted
ventilation =
'dead space'
Wasted
perfusion
= 'shunt”
NoQ
 Still Low Oz: High CO2
Venous admixture
Figure 30.1 Abdominal viscera compress and 'splint' the diaphragm,
especially during dorsal recumbency.
Medium O2:
Medium CO2
High O2: Low CO2
provided to the horse and ideally some method of monitoring
Figure 30.2 Ventilation/perfusion mismatching is outlined in this diagram
(at least percentage saturation of arterial blood haemoglobin 
of alveoli under three different conditions (no ventilation, but perfusion; no
with oxygen) should be used.
 perfusion, but ventilation; perfusion and ventilation). Deoxygenated blood
 Intra-operative hypoxaemia has several causes:
reaching alveoli in pulmonary arteries is shown by black arrows. The white
arrow shows re-oxygenated blood in a pulmonary vein leaving areas of good
● Hypoventilation:
ventilation and perfusion. The grey arrow shows how admixture of pulmonary
 0 Reduced respiratory drive even when CO is increased and
venous blood of diferent oxygen saturations occurs to result in overalldesat-
O, is decreased (due to inhalation agents).
 uration. The degree of desaturation depends, ultimately, on the overall pro-
0 Splinting of the diaphragm with recumbency, especially
portion of 'shunt.
dorsal (Figure 30.1).
 0 Reduced respiratory muscle tone under general anaesthesia,
 the animal increase the chances of the animal injuring itself (or
 and inhibition of sighing/yawning so functional residual
others), but when we place horses into the recovery box we with-
capacity (FRC) reduces.
 draw all our monitoring and support and sometimes expect them
o Increased alveolar CO, tension also reduces alveolar O2
to breathe from a lung that has just been compressed for 2 h. It is
tension.
not uncommon for sick colics to ^survive′ the anaesthesia period 
● Compression atelectasis of dependent lung areas (Figure 30.1).
and then to die in the recovery box.
● Absorption (resorption) atelectasis (i.e. because we commonly
 Many techniques are used throughout the world. Recovery may
 provide 100% inspired O2).
be free stand’, where the horse is not assisted at all, or may include
● Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is inhibited by inhalation
the use of ropes on the head and tail to assist standing. Other
agents.
techniques are sometimes used including slinging, tilt tables,
● Reduced cardiac output (results in reduced pulmonary per-
 inflatable mattresses which are deflated rapidly when the horse is
 fusion and reduced mixed venous (pulmonary arterial) oxygen
ready to stand, hydropools, or rafts in swimming pools. The
tension).
number of techniques in use reflects the diffculty in finding a
solution to the problem of recovering our patients safely and the
Ventilation/perfusion mismatching is a common result of all
 old adage that familiarity is best often applies.
the above (Figure 30.2).
Treatment of hypoxaemia includes:
The recovery environment
● Increasing the inspired Oz percentage (although it may already
● Choose a place with minimal chance for the horse to injure itself
be being delivered at 100%).
eg. a large flat grassy feld, a loose box with bedded floor and
● Providing intermittent positive pressure ventilation +/- posi-
bales stacked against the walls (make sure the bales are secure
tive end expiratory pressure (PEEP). (Beware possible reduc-
and will not fall onto the horse), or a padded recovery box.
tion in cardiac output due to increased intrathoracic pressures
● Ideally some means of supplementing oxygen should be
and reduction in PaCO).
available.
●Bronchodilators (intravenous or intra-tracheal/bronchial).
● A quiet environment is more likely to result in smoother
● Maintain adequate mean arterial pressure (cardiac output).
recoveries.
● Dimly lit boxes may also reduce external stimulation and
The recovery period
 increase the chances of a smoother recovery, or put a dark cloth 
 over the horse's eye if in the field.
This is perhaps the most dangerous time for a horse undergoing
● Emptying the bladder reduces the chances of horses soiling
 general anaesthesia. Not only does the size and temperament of
bandages or trying to stand too soon.
266  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Positioning the horse for recovery
light planes, the horse may bite down on the tube (if no gag is
Ideally the horse should be placed in the same lateral recumbency
present) preventing its removal and causing respiratory obstruc-
that it endured throughout anaesthesia. If the horse was in dorsal
tion. Some horses may displace their soft palate on removal of the
recumbency then it should be placed in whichever lateral recum-
 ie os i i ua i a o s s a
always check for adequate airflow from the nostrils/nasopharyn-
aoe soddn aq aeu ains auoapun pe e qu
 geal tube after ET tube removal. One school of thought advocates
tracheal extubation whilst relatively deeply anaesthetised, thus
 some people suggest that the affected limb may also be depend-
ent). There was a suggestion that left lateral recumbency might be
incurring fewer problems with laryngospasm and stimulating the
best as then the uppermost lung is the right which is bigger, but
horse to try to stand too soon; but another advocates waiting until
studies have shown no difference.
swallowing has returned (relatively lightly anaesthetised), to
ensure repositioning of the soft palate is possible by the patient
 Occasionally there may be justification to put the horse into the
itself (i.e. during swallowing). (If horses are sedated for the
opposite lateral recumbency for recovery, for example after
 surgery on the medial aspect of a leg. In these situations, the 
early part of the recovery period, the swallowing reflex may be
 benefits of having an affected leg uppermost for ease of standing
suppressed; this seems particularly so with detomidine and
romifidine, but less so after xylazine.)
up must be weighed against the deleterious effects of the horse
 Remember to remove the gag, if used, once the ET tube has
having to breathe from a congested lung. When a horse is turned
been removed.
over after a prolonged period in one lateral recumbency, then the
 The horse should be observed from a safe position to ensure
newly dependent lung becomes congested quicker (in 10-20 min),
that no respiratory obstruction occurs and that the nasopharyn-
than the new uppermost lung clears of congestion.
 The horse should be positioned so that there is enough room
geal tube, if present, is patent.
 Many horses that are agitated or frightened on recovery respond
 in front of it to allow it to stand easily. The horse should be placed
with its back nearest to the access point into the box so that it is
to a calming voice.
 Making the decision to re-enter a recovery box if, for example
facing away from that point.
The foreleg nearest the ground is often pulled forward as far as
 ist and the potential danger to the horse/anaesthetist.
possible to reduce the pressure of the body on the dependent
 Manually assisted recoveries should not be attempted in con-
triceps muscle mass. Protraction of the dependent limb helps to
spread' the triceps muscle bellies, and reduce overall pressure on
fined recovery boxes for anything other than small horses or foals
the muscle mass This action may also help protect against radial
 and only if you have adequate help.
a no d   oe si nn  d
dependent forelimb and may cause increased struggling to attain
Problems associated with recovery
sternal recumbency.
from anaesthesia
All hobbles, ropes, and overshoes should be removed. The
Nasal mucosal hyperaemia/congestion/oedema
recovery floor should be as non-slippery as possible.
This can bea problem especially in horses that have been in dorsal
recumbency for long periods. It is caused by hydrostatic conges-
Monitoring during the recovery period
tion. Nasopharyngeal tubes or topical decongestants (e.g. phe-
When the horse is first placed into the recovery box an immediate
nylephrine) can be used but beware of rebound hyperaemia as the
decongestant wears of. In most cases the hyperaemia/oedema
assessment should be made of anaesthetic depth as many horses 
reduces significantly after a short period of time in recovery and
respond to the stimulus of being moved.
If appropriate, an oxygen demand valve can be used to provide
even faster once sternal recumbency is achieved and the head is
oxygen (via the ET tube). A nasopharyngeal tube and perhaps a
once again above heart height.
nasal oxygen insufflation tube can also be placed. The purpose of
the nasopharyngeal tube is to prevent the soft palate from
Catheter or3-way tap damage or leakage
obstructing the upper airway and to ensure some kind of nasal
If the catheter or 3-way tap is damaged or twisted there can often
be haemorrhage from an ^up the vein' catheter. Although it may
airway (albeit narrow and high resistance, but better than nothing).
look dramatic, it is not life threatening in most cases (the horse
Horses are obligate nose-breathers and often develop nasal
mucosal oedema/hyperaemia/congestion during surgery (espe-
would lose no more than 5l of blood, and probably less (it usually
cially if in dorsal recumbency when the head is often below the
clots),if you did nothing for an hour), so do not enter the box to
level of the heart and venous return from the head is compro-
correct the problem until you are certain it is safe to do so.
mised, despite valves in the jugular veins). An alternative approach
Catheters placed down the vein’ may entrain air if they become
to the problem of nasal mucosal congestion is to use a topical
uncapped. Venous air emboli are potentially lethal.
decongestant at the end of surgery (e.g phenylephrine).
 If there is an ET tube in place it should be removed before the
Trauma (from cuts and grazes to dislocations and
"(slshu jo suais isng an puie aeu) suo oon si ssiou
fractures of limbs or neck)
 In most cases we are not worried about regurgitation, so removing
The plastic/rubber floored boxes are susceptible to becoming very
the tube at deeper planes of anaesthesia is less of a worry. At very
slippery if they get very wet. So try to minimise possible sources
Equine anaesthesia  267
of liquid, for example catheterise the bladder, dry the sweat off 
● Prolonged anaesthesia time, especially >2 h.
the horse or put some form of bedding down to provide grip.
● Repeated anaesthetics.
Respiratory obstruction
 teals, semitendinosus).
  n d i a  n o si s
● Inadequate padded support/bedding (e.g. concrete versus
from mild snoring to complete respiratory obstruction. Complete
water/air bed correctly inflated).
respiratory obstruction can be caused by displacement of the soft
●Recent exercise/fit horses.
palate, laryngeal paralysis or occlusion of ET tube or nostrils and
● Equine polysaccharide storage myopathy (EPSM) especially
can be quickly fatal. Some cases of laryngeal paralysis may not
 Draught breeds.
become obvious until the horse requires increased respiratory
● Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis (HYPP) (a sodium channel
effort to whinny or to walk back to its loose box. Even if the cause
 problem) especially in Appaloosas/Quarter horses.
of the obstruction is quickly rectified, negative pressure pulmo-
nary oedema (with a component of neurogenic pulmonary
work horses (i.e. high concentrate diets).
 cedema, due to hypoxaemia) is a common sequel to respiratory
cbstruction and unlesstreatedaggressivelycan be fatal. Pulmonary
Diagnosis
thromboemboli are a rare cause of dyspnoea and occasionally
 Horses suffering from myopathy may show any/all of the follow.
death in recovery.
ing symptoms:
● Sweating (especially over the affected muscles).
CNS ischaemia
●Pain.
 Often results in a delayed onset of neurological signs.
● Reluctance to move or stand; lameness.
Horse will not get up
● Affected muscles firm or swollen.
● Raised aspartate aminotransferase and creatine kinase (AST/
Most horses should regain their feet within 90 min of the end of
CK) (but concentrations do not always parallel the clinical
anaesthesia. A prolonged recovery is considered to be one in
severity of the condition).
excess of 30min for every hour of anaesthesia time. If the horse
● Myoglobinuria.
is still recumbent after this time the anaesthetist should start to
consider the following possibilities:
 In cases of neuropraxic neuropathy, where only nerves are
●Horse exhausted e.g. colics of long duration.
affected, the symptoms depend upon the actual nerve affected,
but usually horses show no pain Facial nerve pareses may result
● Arthritis especially old horses.
in, for example, lip droop on one side, ptosis, or ear droop. Radial
● Myopathy/neuropathy (see below).
nerve paresis (common with poor padding over triceps muscles)
● Spinal cord malacia.
results in a dropped elbow, inability to protract the forelimb, and
● Fracture/dislocation/severe trauma.
reluctance to stand or move. Recovery (relatively slow) depends
upon the degree of nerve damage.
Post-anaesthetic colic
May develop within the first 72h post-operatively. Several causes
Treatment for myopathy
have been proposed (see further reading).
The goals of treatment are to calm and analgese the horse, increase
 blood flow to the affected muscles, and diurese ( prevent myoglobin 
Jugular venous thrombosis
May develop within the frst few days of surgery (see Chapter 7).
 precipitating in renal tubules).
● Sedation if necessary (ACP useful as vasodilation may increase
Post-anaesthetic myopathy/neuropathy syndrome
 perfusion of affected muscles)
 Horses that undergo general anaesthesia are at an increased risk
● Analgesia NSAIDs, opioids, α2 agonists?,steroids?
of developing myopathies or neuropathies. The aetiology of post-
● Fluids: intravenous fluids (extracellular fluid volume replacers)
anaesthetic myopathy is complex, multi-factorial and still not
 at 2-3 times maintenance.
fully understood. Myopathy may be localised to one or two
muscle groups, or may become generalised to include multiple
(may be anti-inflammatory, anti-free radical and promotes
muscles. As muscles swell, nerves can become compressed, so
local vasodilation).
● Massage/physiotherapy.
neuropathies can also occur independently of myopathies, due to
 If there has been no improvement in the horse's condition after
 poor padding over the bony prominences near which nerves run.
 24-36h then the prognosis is poor especially in cases of general-
 Some of the factors which may result in post-anaesthetic
 ised myopathy.
myopathies:
Prevention
 occlusion of vessels, compartmental syndrome).
 Fortunately, our greater awareness of myopathy/neuropathy and
●Hypoxaemia.
some of its causal factors means that it is becoming less common.
268  Veterinary Anaesthesia
However even with all the precautionary steps we take (listed
● Hypothermia can develop due to the large surface area :volume
below) the condition can still occur.
ratio and poorly developed hypothalamic thermostat.
● Neonates are susceptible to hypoglycaemia. The liver's ability
● Maintain peripheral mean arterial blood pressure >70 mmHg.
● Keep anaesthesia times as short as possible (e.g. remove shoes,
for gluconeogenesis is poorly developed.
● Neonates have highly compliant chests, a high work of breath-
clip surgical site before induction).
●Avoid unnecessary repeat anaesthetics.
ing and minute ventilation is breathing rate-dependent. They
 are prone to airway/alveolar closure even during normal tidal
pue (sasse se ia) supaqsioddns aedondde sn o
e   a p pn de si d
easily develop. The high minute ventilation means that they are
recumbency.
very sensitive to drugs which depress respiratory activity.
● EPSM: if this is suspected and surgery cannot be delayed, then
● Neonates are poorly tolerant of hypervolaemia/hypovolaemia.
three teacups of vegetable oil administered by stomach tube
 before anaesthesia is said to help, by some authors, as a last
● Check IgG levels in neonates.
● Have you got appropriate equipment and facilities?
resort.
● Stres foals get stressed very easily; use gastroprotectants and
● HYPP: acetazolamide treatment for several days before anaes-
 thesia may help; otherwise be familiar with treatments for acute
hyperkalaermia.
 All the above may leave you full of despair when contemplating
foal anaesthesia. The good news is that foals mature at a far faster
rate than many other species so that even by 4 weeks of age they
Spinal cord malacia
A problem most often encountered in young male Draught breeds
are more like a young horse than a foal.
especially after dorsal recumbency, but also reported in smaller
Pre-anaesthetic evaluation/preparation
breeds, mares and also after lateral recumbency. Typically no
problems are encountered during general anaesthesia, which is
● History is important. Was the birth diffcult? Passed meco-
often of short duration and blood pressure was well maintained.
nium? Urinated? Suckled?
The horse, however, fails to stand afterwards, but is seen dog-
● Clinical examination. Most foals under the age of 5 days will
sitting with its hind limbs often extended. The condition, typically
have a patent ductus arteriosus (i.e. continuous machinery
affecting the thoracolumbar spinal cord, progresses cranially, with
murmur), heart rate 70-90bpm, respiratory rate about 30
loss of perineal sensation, anal reflex, tail tone, hind limb deep
 breaths per min.
pain and voluntary movement and eventually panniculus reflex.
● If possible and stress-free, pre-oxygenate the foal before induc
Horses are usually not distressed. No improvement occurs with
tion of anaesthesia.
time or treatment such as corticosteroids. The aetiopathogenesis
● Secure IV access.
is unsure. It has been suggested that young horses’ vertebral
Induction of anaesthesia
columns grow faster than their spinal cords, so the spinal cord is
Have all the appropriate equipment ready and all personnel
easily stretched during dorsal recumbency which reduces its per-
fusion. It has also been suggested that dorsal recumbency in these
present aware of the plan. Sedate the mare if necessary and have
a safe stable available for her. It is advisable to have the flexibility
large horses compresses the caudal vena cava and azygos vein
resulting in venous congestion of tissues in the caudal part of
of having a plan B and even plans C and D, as some foals belie
animal, including the spinal cord, so compromising its perfusion.
their age or physiological status and become distressed and/or
Some people suggest microthromboemboli or fibrocartilagenous
unhandleable and require a sudden change in plan. Below are a
emboli as the cause, and that perhaps verminous arteritis is a
few outline example protocols.
predisposing factor, of either the emboli or reduced perfusion.
Some have suggested anomalous or poor vasculature in the tho-
Young <4 weeks (or sick) foals
racolumbar spine region in Draught horses, but this has never
been proved. The prognosis is hopeless.
Weigh
Achieve restraint by gentle handling
Anaesthesia of foals
≥0.2 mg/kg diazepam IV often provides useful sedation
See Chapter 37 on neonates. The age of the foal is very important
Apply local anaesthetic cream/gel to nasal passage then intro-
as this reflects how developed the organ systems, metabolism and
duce either a nasopharyngeal or nasotracheal tube. Inflate the cuff
homeostasis are. Some of the factors to consider include:
of the latter or occlude the other nostril if using a nasopharyngeal
● Most foals come with their dam, and she may need sedating.
tube. Attach an appropriate anaesthetic breathing system (e.g.
● Cardiac output is dependent on heart rate in neonates as the
Magill for small foals or small animal circle for larger foals) and
ventricles are less compliant; care with drugs that depress
start by administering oxygen. Then quickly increase the inspired
cardiac function, especially heart rate .
concentration of inhalational agent to ensure quick transition
● Liver metabolism is immature until about 4 weeks of age.
through any induction excitement phase. Once a stable plane of
Equine anaesthesia  269
anaesthesia is achieved then a larger diameter (less resistance)
With non-strangulating obstructions, secretions sequester into
oro-tracheal tube can be placed if necessary and anaesthesia main-
the gut lumen, constituting third space' fluid loss (extracellular
tained with a volatile agent in oxygen.
fluid loss), and promoting the development of hypovolaemia Gas
may also build up following bacterial fermentation of gut contents.
Foals >4 weeks age
 Increased fluid and gas within the gut lumen causes distension of
o a snn a oe e d s m n
Weigh
ssp an jo as aui ao on n on (ud osie) in au
on downstream. If gut distension persists, eventually the gut
Sedation: ACP often avoided. Xylazine 0.2-0.5 mg/kg with
becomes fatigued of its hypermotility and becomes hypomotile.
 ≥0.1 mg/kg butorphanol IV
 Stretch of the gut wall also compromises its perfusion so it becomes
This combination will make most foals become recumbent 
 hypoxic and oedematous. Oedema tends to compromise its per-
+
Ketamine 2.2 mg/kg (+/- diazepam 0.05 mg/kg). The ketamine
fusion further so a vicious cycle is entered, which results in further
helps to counter some of the cardio depressant effects of the
aa e , sq e n  os s
 endotoxaemia complicates the earlier hypovolaemia.
xylazine
With strangulating lesions, the mucosal barrier becomes com-
Place ET tube and maintain anaesthesia with a volatile agent in
promised much sooner, allowing translocation of bacteria and
oxygen
toxins into the blood stream, so that endotoxaemia and hypovol-
(Propofol 4-8 mg/kg can also be used but beware hypotension 
aemia almost co-exist from the start. As ischaemic bowel becomes
and post-induction apnoea)
necrotic, peritonitis may also develop.
 Clinical signs of hypovolaemia/hypovolaemic shock are those
Hypotension
of sympathetic stimulation. Initially (compensatory phase), these
 Foals seem to be particularly sensitive to the systemic hypotensive
include tachycardia, weak peripheral pulses, cold and pale extrem-
effects of inhaled anaesthetics even at very light planes of anaes-
ities (peripheral vasoconstriction tries to centralise’ the remain-
thesia. In adult horses under anaesthesia, the administration of
ing blood volume for vital organ perfusion), and possibly
sympathomimetics is routinely used to maintain arterial blood
tachypnoea. (Pain itself is rarely the sole cause of tachycardia in
pressure. In foals these agents may not produce the desired effect
colicky horses.) Hypoperfusion of chemoreceptors and stimula-
because of the foal's immature sympathetic nervous system.
 tion of baroreceptors due to hypotension stimulate the respiratory
Administration of intravenous fluids is the other conventional
centre (via baroreceptors) to cause tachypnoea. Respiratory com-
response to hypotension. It is reported that foals are sensitive to
 pensation for metabolic acidosis may also drive tachypnoea. Poor
blood volume expansion and that pulmonary oedema is easily
 peripheral perfusion creates a peripheral oxygen debt, and anaer-
induced. Careful volume expansion with colloidal solutions (e.g.
 obic metabolism occurs creating acidic metabolic products espe-
 dextrans, starches) has been quite safe when accompanied by
 cially lactic acid. Metabolic acidosis commonly develops.
careful monitoring. In foals, the faster recovery from the less
 Eventually, when the animal can no longer compensate, and
blood-soluble inhalation agents makes these a more popular
the periphery demands more perfusion, massive peripheral
choice for anaesthetic maintenance despite their hypotensive
vasodilation occurs, dropping the blood pressure dramatically
effects.
and loading the blood with acidic metabolites. Decompensation
thus occurs, and the animal rapidly deteriorates clinically.
Uroperitoneum
Endotoxaemic horses tend to be much sicker (dull and
See Chapter 42.
 depressed, but this may be masked if painful). Endotoxins play
havoc with vascular integrity and vessel tone (via stimulation of
phagocytic cells to produce inflammatory mediators, and via
 Pregnant mares
interactions with endothelial cells, platelets and clotting factors),
 Before term, whether requiring sedation for standing procedures
resulting in vasodilation, capillary leakiness and disseminated
Or general anaesthesia, clenbuterol (800ng/kg) can be given at the
intravascular coagulopathy  (DIC) (petechiae, ecchymoses).
time of sedation or general anaesthesia and 12h later to try to
 Horses tend to have congested (vasodilated) mucous membranes
offet any detrimental effects of sedation or general anaesthesia
(+/- petechiae), with sluggish perfusion (prolonged capillary refll
on uteroplacental perfusion. The risks of pregnancy failure due to
time; CRT).
stress may outweigh those associated with chemical restraint or
anaesthesia.
Problems
● Pain. Visceral pain from distended/ischaemic gut and
Anaesthesia of horses suffering from colic
med jo suis oo jida a sasn uon ss
flank watching, rolling, kicking belly. Parietal pain can be
GI tract obstructions can be:
present with peritonitis; the animal will board’ its abdomen
· Strangulating.
and be unwilling to move rather than show the more overt and
●Non-strangulating.
violent signs of pain. Sometimes both types occur together.
270  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Hypovolaemia
a (+ increased packed cell volume (PCV)).
● Findings upon rectal examination may help determine site of
Compromised circulation (due to fluid loss and abdominal
lesion.
distension).
Anyone who has witnessed a horse with severe pain from colic
● Endotoxaemia. Compromised circulation and pulmonary
will appreciate how distressed and uncontrollable the animal can
 e o   d a 
 be. Furthermore these painful episodes can appear suddenly with
endotoxaemia)
no warning. Thus, administration of an analgesic relieves pain and
● Compromised ventilation due to abdominal distension and
allows examination and supportive therapy to be administered
possible ‘splinting? of the diaphragm (especially with large
d  s q   n  ri e 
colon torsions).
Why is there pain?
Problems for anaesthesia
● Due to distension of gut with fluid and gas.
●Emergency.
● Due to stretching of mesentery.
● Horse may be in (sometimes severe) pain; can be dangerous to
● Due to hypermotility which is unsuccessful in relieving the
handle.
local distension.
● No control of previous drugs administered by referring vet.
● Due to early ischaemia of the gut wall (once necrotic, the gut
● Shock (hypovolaemia +/- endotoxaemia).
 is no longer painful).
●Abdominal distension ('splints’ the diaphragm to compromise
● Due to inflamed gut.
ventilation; may compromise venous return due to compres-
● Due to peritoneal inflammation if peritonitis.
sion of abdominal vena cava and therefore reduces cardiac
output). Abdominal compartment syndrome may occur with
Initial concerns
 severe intra-abdominal hypertension.
● Risk of reflux/aspiration.
· Analgesia.
● Your personal safety when examining or treating the animal;
● Acid-base/electrolyte abnormalities.
 the above may be required.
● Often unsociable hours; tired personnel.
Apart from the administration of analgesic drugs, decompres-
Approach
sion of distended gut can afford much relief of discomfort. Pass
a nasogastric tube if at all possible, and caecal/colonic trocarisa-
● Analgesia (+/- sedation), including gut decompression where
tion may occasionally be attempted.
appropriate.
● Fluids; possibly pre-operatively (possibly hypertonic saline or
Clinical examination and preparation
colloids?), also intra-operatively and post-operatively.
● Use of drugs with minimal cardio-respiratory depressant effects.
As soon as any horse arrives as a colic referral a quick but thor-
● Drugs with anti-endotoxic effects (NSAIDs, polymixin B etc.).
ough clinical examination should take place. Listed below are the
● Avoid NO (at least until the gut is decompressed) as it parti-
main factors which are useful in determining a suitable approach
 to anaesthesia of each case.
entrapped in gut), and worsens the problems for the surgeon
● Assess whether the horse is in pain and safe to approach.
and the anaesthetist alike. Some anaesthetists avoid N,O in all
 It may need analgesia/sedation in order to make it safe to
horse anaesthetics as it may increase gut distension and predis-
examine.
 pose to post-operative colic.
● Assess how long it has been since the horse was last normal.
● Assist ventilation, especially if massive abdominal distension.
●Determine its cardiovascular status:
(IPPV, especially in hypovolaemic animals, may reduce tho-
O Pulse pressure, rate and rhythm.
racic vena caval blood flow and venous return to the heart,
O Auscultate heart.
 thereby reducing cardiac output and blood pressure etc.).
O Mucous membrane colour and CRT.
● Dorsal recumbency further compromises venous return and
0 PCV and total protein (TP). Splenic contraction (increased
cardiac output (because the great vessels (vena cava and aorta;
sympathetic tone) can increase PCV markedly.
although veins are most compressible) get squashed), especially
O Lactate.
in hypovolaemic animals, and may cause an animal to decom-
● Respiratory rate: may indicate acidosis.
pensate acutely and die between anaesthetic induction and the
● Check stomach for accumulation of fluid. Some authors advo-
 operating table (when hoisted up by its legs). Position changes
cate leaving a stomach tube tied in place for induction to reduce
should be performed slowly and gently.
the chances of stomach rupture. However the stomach tube
● Acid-base/electrolyte support.
allows fluid to pass down its outside as well which can lead to
● Beware of reperfusion/re-oxygenation injury, e.g. re-establish-
 inhalation/aspiration of reflux. It may be better to make a com-
ment of blood flow to previously compromised gut (with entry
 prehensive attempt to relieve gastric distension by stomach
into the main circulation of anaerobic metabolism products),
tube and then remove the stomach tube before induction of
and production of reactive oxygen species in previously ischae-
anaesthesia.
mic/damaged tissue. Animals can ^crash' shortly after affected
● Abdominocentesis: test fluid for cellularity, protein and lactate.
 gut is un-twisted. (DMSO, lidocaine etc. may be useful.)
Equine anaesthesia  271
 Despite the often unsociable hours, anaesthesia of horses suf-
maintenance of anaesthesia. (At least most horses will then survive
 n   sd    
the relative physiological insult of anaesthetic induction.) Both
equine anaesthetist. Colic surgery is not something that should be
these treatments should be followed by isotonic crystalloids.
undertaken lightly, it is a team effort that requires adequate facili-
It is important not to administer isotonic ^extracellular fluid
ties and levels of staff. Having said that, more and more practices
volume replacers' (Hartmann's solution, 0.9% saline) at too high
are developing hospital facilities and it is perhaps only a matter
a rate until any compromised gut is isolated, otherwise fluid may
of time before colic surgery becomes more commonplace in
sequestrate from the circulation into the gut wall and lumen
private practice.
 Obviously there are many causes of colic, and it is outside the
 tomosis sites. Once the affected gut has been isolated then aggres-
scope of these notes to discuss the anaesthetic approach to each
sive fluid administration (up to 30l/h for the average 500kg
type of colic, suffce it to say that an understanding of the anatomy
 horse) with crystalloids can be initiated if necessary; although
and pathophysiology of different types of colic is as important to
nowadays, colloids are being used more.
the anaesthetist as it is for the surgeon.
 Many horses with colic have acid-base abnormalities. Although
there is no consistent acid-base abnormality at the time of admis-
Analgesics
sion, most horses with any degree of hypovolaemia will have a
This section is specifically aimed at discussing the analgesics com-
mild metabolic acidosis (lactic acidosis). Endotoxin absorption 
and/or E. coli septicaemia leads to severe metabolic (lactic) aci-
decompression (e.g gastric) can afford pain relief too. Causes of
dosis. Severe metabolic acidosis may also develop with small
pain include gut distension, ischaemia, inflammation and
bowel obstruction and in the presence of strangulation, but this
mesenteric traction.
is by no means an absolute rule. During fluid therapy and rehy-
 For examination of the horse, if the pain is acute and a short-
dration, improvements in the peripheral circulation can wash?
term effect is required before anaesthesia, then xylazine is often
 previously sequestered products of anaerobic metabolism into the
administered as it produces good visceral analgesia, partly through
 general systemic circulation so the situation may appear to worsen
depressing gut motility and it also produces sedation. Relatively
 initially.
small doses should be given intravenously to effect, beginning
Alkalotic horses are normally only encountered as a result of
with doses as low as 0.2 mg/kg. Opioids may be added (see below).
 over-treatment with bicarbonate or when magnesium salts have
 Once the decision to take the horse to surgery has been made
 been administered by the referring veterinary surgeon.
and providing the horse has not previously received a full dose of
Horses which hypoventilate under anaesthesia can develop res-
a NSAID, then a NSAID should be administered. Flunixin is
piratory acidosis and this may compound a previously existing
usually the NSAID of choice due to its analgesic properties and
 metabolic acidosis causing a very low blood pH.
it decreases the degree of cardiovascular dysfunction associated
 In colic cases it is impossible to over-emphasise the benefit
with endotoxaemia, although other NSAIDs such as carprofen,
 derived from serial blood gas and acid-base measurements over 
meloxicam, ketoprofen and phenylbutazone may be used.
 the course of treatment. Venous blood is adequate if one is inter-
 Opioids may be administered (e.g. butorphanol, morphine or
ested only in the degree of metabolic acidosis or alkalosis. Arterial
 pethidine). Different anaesthetists have different preferences for 
samples provide extra information on the adequacy of ventilation
as seueapesi ue sareape raun se yea pe sinp asa
and oxygenation. In the conscious horse, the sites from which to
Chapter 3).
 draw arterial blood include the transverse facial artery and the
 Lidocaine and ketamine infusions may also have a place.
carotid artery directly “behind’ the jugular vein, about 10 cm
Lidocaine infusion is also often advocated for a possible
 prokinetic effect on the gastrointestinal tract; possibly through
 groove (in an average 500 kg horse). After an arterial blood sample
analgesic, anti-inflammatory and anti-reperfusion injury mecha-
is obtained by needle puncture, digital pressure over the arterial
nisms although direct effects on myenteric plexi or gut smooth
puncture site is required for a good 5 min to prevent haematoma
muscle have also been suggested.
formation.
 Many horses anaesthetised for colic surgery are hypotensive so
Fluid therapy
 the use of vasopressors and inotropes is often necessary (+ IV
-ody m au jo le io ue aq u ay sss sos u
fluids) to support peripheral arterial blood pressure (see Chapter
aemia/dehydration, electrolyte imbalances and acid-base abnor-
25).
 malities. On presentation it is important to assess the status of the
 Phenylephrine solution (100μg/ml) administered to effect is
cardiovascular system (see above). Whilst clues can be gained (or
most useful when diastolic pressure <40 mmHg (coronary per-
deductions made) about likely acid-base/electrolyte status at this
fusion compromised), and tachycardia accompanies hypovolae-
time, it is often not until blood samples are analysed that a clearer
mia. You should be able to reduce or withdraw vasoconstrictor
picture is gained.
 therapy as fuid resuscitation progresses.
For horses that are in shock (i.e. PCV >45%, heart rate >80,
 Dobutamine solution (250μg/ml) administered to effect. If
cool extremities, poor pulse pressure, CRT >3-4 s etc.), either
diastolic pressure is already low, dobutamine sometimes reduces
4ml/kg hypertonic (7.2%) saline over 10 min or 4ml/kg of
this further. Dobutamine is not this author's frst choice where
hydroxyethyl starch (colloid) over 10 min can be administered 
tachycardia is already present in conjunction with low arterial
to improve the circulating volume before the induction and early
 blood pressure and low diastolic pressure.
272  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Anaesthetic protocols
have a much reduced minimal alveolar concentration (MAC) so
 Once the decision has been made to take a colic horse to surgery,
beware not to overdose.
then in nearly every case speed is extremely important, and as little
time as posible should be wasted fighting with agitated animals
Monitoring
 Colic cases require careful monitoring and the use of expensive
 to get an accurate weight or remove shoes.
monitoring equipment is almost essential. Sudden changes in
 There is a lot of debate about what the best anaesthetic protocol
physiological status can occur, for example when endotoxins are
is for horses with colic, but there are many types of colic and no
released into the general circulation when strangulated portions
one protocol is going to be an anaesthetic panacea and anaesthe-
 of intestine are untwisted; or when a large mesenteric artery is
tising colic horses is not the time to try new drugs/techniques;
torn.
familiarity is best! Below are some general points:
● ACP is often contraindicated as it compounds hypotension.
Recovery
● Be careful not to overdose the horse with NSAIDs.
As stated earlier, the recovery period is a dangerous time for any
● Inhalational anaesthesia tends to be more commonly
 horse. Some colic horses will be exhausted and have very pro-
practised for anaesthetic maintenance as surgeries tend to
longed recoveries.
be long. IV adjuncts include lidocaine, ketamine and opioid
infusions.
Post-operative care
It is important that all cases are carefully monitored and sup-
For cases that are not showing signs of circulatory failure then
 ported in the first few days after surgery.
a standard induction protocol may be used. Some anaesthetists
 prefer to use xylazine instead of romifidine in the premedication.
The justification for this is that any deleterious cardiovascular and
Further reading
GI effects will not last as long.
Auckburally A, Flaherty D (2009) Recovery from anaesthesia in
xylazine 0.1-0.75 mg/kg IV
horses. Part 1: What can go wrong? In Practice 31, 340-347.
Wait 2 min
Auckburally A, Flaherty D (2009) Recovery from anaesthesia in
horses. Part 2: Avoiding complications. In Practice 31,
ketamine 2.2 mg/kg (+/-0.05 mg/kg diazepam) IV
362-369.
 Bettschart-Wolfensberger R, Kalchofner K, Neges K, Kastner S,
halothane/isoflurane/sevoflurane in oxygen
 Furst A (2005) Total intravenous anaesthesia in horses using
medetomidine and propofol.  Veterinary  Anaesthesia and
For animals that are severely hypovolaemic, if the use of o2
Analgesia 32(6), 348-354.
agonists is more limited, then ketamine inductions are less com-
Brosnahan MM, Holbrook TC, Gilliam LL, Ritchey JW, Confer
monly practised. An alternative induction strategy could be as
AW (2009) Intra-abdominal hypertension in two adult horses.
follows.
Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 19(2),
174-180.
No sedation
Cook VL, Blikslager AT (2008) Use of systemically administered
5%, 10% or 15% GGE solution infused IV to effect followed by
 lidocaine in horses with gastrointestinal tract disease. Journal
 5 mg/kg thiopental IV
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 232(8),
1144-1148.
halothane/isoflurane/sevoflurane in oxygen
Driessen B (2005) Assisted recovery in horses awakening from
 general anaesthesia. In: Recent advances in anesthetic manage-
GGE/thiopental inductions often produce a more dramatic
ment of large domestic animals. Ed. Steffey EP International
onset of unconsciousness where the horse literally falls to the floor
Veterinary Information Service (www.ivis.org).
like a felled tree, so unless it is assisted into recumbency by the
Grosenbaugh DA, Muir WW (1998) Cardiorespiratory effects of
aid of an induction gate or similar, distended stomach or intestine
sevoflurane, isoflurane and halothane anesthesia in horses,
 may rupture as the horse falls to the induction box floor.
American Journal of Veterinary Research 59(1), 101-106.
 After induction it is important to place a cuffed ET tube and
Johnston GM, Eastment JK, Wood JLN, Taylor PM (2002) The
inflate the cuff as soon as possible to protect the airway from
confdential enquiry into perioperative equine fatalities
potential reflux.
(CEPEF): mortality results of Phases 1 and 2. Veterinary
The use of inhalational anaesthesia to maintain anaesthesia
Anaesthesia and Analgesia 29, 159-170.
in colic cases entails the placement of an ET tube (cuffed tube
Leece EA, Girard NM, Maddern K (2009) Alfaxalone in cyclodex-
important to protect the respiratory tract from reflux), and
trin for induction and maintenance of anaesthesia in ponies
ensures the provision of supplemental oxygen.
undergoing feld castration.  Veterinary Anaesthesia and
Halothane, isoflurane or sevoflurane (not licensed) may be
Analgesia 36, 480-484.
used and two maxims apply. Familiarity is best. Use the agent
Marntell S, Nyman G, Funkquist P, Hedenstierna G (2005) Effects
that you are used to. Enough is enough. Compromised patients
of acepromazine on pulmonary gas exchange and circulation
Equine anaesthesia  273
during sedation and dissociative anaesthesia in horses.
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 32, 83-93.
Self-test section
Muir WW, Lerche P, Erichson D (2009) Anaesthetic and cardi-
1.
Which of the following is not a common problem
orespiratory effects of propofol at 10% for induction and 1%
 during equine anaesthesia?
for maintenance of anaesthesia in horses. Equine Veterinary
A.
Hypertension.
Journal 41(6), 578-585.
Raisis AL, Blissitt KJ, Henley W, Rogers K, Adams V, Young LE
Hypoventilation.
Hypercapnia.
(2005) The effects of halothane and isoflurane on cardiovascu-
D.
lar function in laterally recumbent horses. British Journal of 
Hypoxaemia.
2.
 Post-anaesthetic myopathy has been associated with
Anaesthesia 95(3), 317-325.
all of the following, except which?
Santos M, Fuente M, Garcia-Iturralde P, Herran R, Lopez-
Sanroman J, Tendillo FJ (2003) Effects of alpha 2 adrenoceptor
A.
 Long duration of anaesthesia.
B.
 Poor positioning/padding.
agonists during recovery from isoflurane anaesthesia in horses.
C.
Intra-operative use of nitrous oxide.
Equine Veterinary Journal 35(2), 170-175.
Senior JM, Pinchbeck GL, Allister R, Dugdale AHA, Clark L,
D.
 Intra-operative hypotension.
Clutton RE, Coumbe K, Dyson S, Clegg PD (2006) Post anaes-
thetic colic in horses: a preventable complication? Equine
Veterinary Journal 38(5), 479-484.
Shelly MP, Robinson AA, Hesford JW, Park GR (1987)
 Haemodynamic effects following surgical release of increased
 intra-abdominal pressure. British Journal of Anaesthesia 59,
800-805.
 Information chapter 
Equine intravenous anaesthesia in the field
and standing chemical restraint
Field anaesthesia
0 Detomidine (10-20 μg/kg IV) gives up to 80min sedation,
analgesia, some ataxia.
● First of all, consider if general anaesthesia is really necessary.
 0 Romifidine (60-100 μg/kg IV) gives minimum 80 min seda-
Can you achieve the same thing with sedation with or without
tion, some analgesia, minimal ataxia.
a local block?
● If possible, take some experienced help with you; another vet-
Analgesia
erinary surgeon or a nurse.
● Pre-empt surgical/inflammatory pain with NSAIDs where
● Check out the local environment. Soft ground is best, for
example a well-gassed paddock, and definitely not stony
possible.
● Opioids provide good analgesia and increase sedation (synergy
ground. A flat field or one with a gentle gradient is best. Ensure
with sedatives).
there are no barbed wire fences, ponds or streams in the vicinity
of where anaesthesia or surgery is proposed.
0 Butorphanol (0.05-0.2 mg/kg IV) provides minimum 60-
90 min analgesia.
● Take a good history and perform a clinical examination as you
would for an in-hospital case. Check tetanus vaccination status.
0 Morphine (0.12-0.2 mg/kg IM or slow IV) provides 2-4h
Afer explaining the associated risks to the owner/agent, a
analgesia.
consent form should be signed.
O Methadone (0.1-0.25 mg/kg IV) provides 2-4h analgesia.
0 Pethidine (3.5-5 mg/kg IM) provides 30-40 min analgesia.
● The horse's weight should be estimated; weigh-tapes or formu-
0 Buprenorphine (0.006-0.01mg/kg IM) provides up to 12 h
lae can be used (it is unlikely that a weighbridge will be
available).
analgesia (onset 30-45 min).
● Minimum anaesthesia equipment should include: intravenous
● Local anaesthetic blocks can provide a useful part of balanced
 catheters; suffcient sedative, anaesthetic and analgesia drugs;
analgesia.
 padded head collars of diffeent sizes; soft ropes; small towels 
Induction of anaesthesia
(for covering/protecting eyes).
● Some people like to take a small oxygen cylinder and some
 In the field, anaesthetic induction can be hard to control, so
means of delivering it to the patient (insufflation or by demand
 guaiphenesin (GGE), which can cause ataxia during induction, is
valve, via naso- or oro-tracheal or nasopharyngeal tube).
 often avoided at this stage of field anaesthesia. By avoiding GGE
● Clippers, surgical scrub, swabs and instruments and suture
for anaesthetic induction, however, more use can be made of it
material as required for the particular surgery will also be
during anaesthetic maintenance (see below). Anaesthesia may be
required. The complexity of surgery attempted in the field will
induced with, for example:
dictate the degree to which the hospital is exported to the field;
● Ketamine 2.2 mg/kg after 02 agonist premedication.
but only simple procedures should be attempted away from
● Ketamine with benzodiazepine 2.2 mg/kg ketamine + 0.05 mg/
the ‘relative safety” of the well-equipped and well-staffed
kg diazepam OR midazolam, after α2 agonist premedication.
hospital.
●Thiopental:
 0 5-8 mg/kg after 02 agonist premedication.
Sedation/premedication
 0 10-15 mg/kg after only ACP (+/- opioid) premedication.
● Phenothiazines: Acepromazine (ACP) may be useful as a
 0 Try not to far exceed 15 mg/kg (25 mg/kg maximum) total
pre-premed, but sufficient time should be allowed for it to
thiopental dose, or recovery may be prolonged. The use of
work (30-40 min undisturbed). It provides an anti-arrhythmic
thiopental for anaesthetic induction therefore limits the
effect and, in combination with α2 agonists, improves
number of top-ups you can give.
 haemodynamics.
● Thiopental with benzodiazepine:
● 02 agonists provide more reliable sedation.
 0 5-8 mg/kg + 0.05 mg/kg benzodiazepine after 02 agonist.
0 Xylazine (1.1 mg/kg IV) provides 10-20 min sedation, anal-
 0 10-15 mg/kg + 0.05 mg/kg benzodiazepine after ACP type
gesia, some muscle relaxation, slight ataxia.
 premed.
274
Equine intravenous anaesthesia in the field and standing chemical restraint 275
Maintenance of anaesthesia
0 GGE 15% (150 mg/ml) + xylazine (1.5 mg/ml) + ketamine 
(3mg/ml).
● Try to keep anaesthesia time to ≤2 h.
■ To a 500 ml bottle of 15% GGE, add 750 mg xylazine and
● Ensure careful limb positioning.
1500 mg ketamine.
● Protect eyes from dirt, dust and sunlight.
0 GGE 10% (100mg/ml) + detomidine (0.02 mg/ml) + keta-
● Incremental top-up bolus IV doses of:
mine (2 mg/ml).
 O Ketamine +/- α2 agonist. Try to pre-empt the requirement
■ To a 500 ml bottle of 10% GGE, add 10 mg detomidine
for extra doses a little, because these extra doses take time to
 and 1000 mg ketamine.
produce their effect. Minimise environmental stimulation as
0 GGE 15% (150mg/ml) + detomidine (0.03 mg/ml) + keta-
 much as possible too to improve and increase sleep time; try
mine (3mg/ml).
cotton wool in the ears and put a blanket over the eyes
■ To a 500 ml bottle of 15% GGE, add 15 mg detomidine
(lubricant should also be put into the eyes). Some people
 and 1500 mg ketamine.
prefer to administer top up doses every 10-12min by the
0 GGE 10% (100mg/ml) + romifidine (0.05 mg/ml) + keta-
clock.
mine (2mg/ml).
 If xylazine was administered as the premedicant, xylazine
■ To a 500 ml bottle of 10% GGE, add 25 mg romifidine and
and ketamine can be administered every 10-12 min, at
1000 mg ketamine.
1/3-1/2 the original premedication and induction doses.
0 GGE 15% (150mg/ml) + romifidine (0.06-0.075mg/
Ketamine is slightly cumulative and has a partially active
ml) + ketamine (3 mg/ml).
metabolite (norketamine) in some horses, so, after the
■ To a 500ml bottle of 10% GGE, add 30-37.5 mg romif-
third or so top up the dosing interval should be increased
dine and 1500mg ketamine.
and/or the subsequent doses decreased a little.
■ If detomidine was administered for premedication, only
For all of these, the combination is infused ‘to effect, but
ketamine need be included for the first two top ups.
remember that horses will look light (i.e. they tend to have
A half-dose of detomidine need only be administered
spontaneous palpebral reflexes and swallowing) so beware of
about every 30min (ie. with every third ketamine
getting them too deeply anaesthetised. As a rough guide the infu-
top-up).
sion rate is around 1 ml/kg/h for all the above mixtures, but often
■ If romifidine was administered as the premedication,
the infusion rate can be reduced over time. Try not to exceed
then a further dose of romifidine (13/-1/2 the original
150mg/kg GGE, or signs of toxicity may develop: arrhythmias,
dose) need only be administered after about lh of
muscle spasms, and prolonged and ataxic recoveries. If you use
anaesthesia.
a standard 20 drops/ml giving set, then for a 500kg horse, you
0 Thiopental 1 mg/kg (range 0.5-2.5 mg/kg) (keep a track of 
will need to start with a drip rate of nearly 3 drops/s; and begin
 the total dose administered). Thiopental produces a much
the infusion as soon as possible after the induction of
 quicker effect than ketamine, so is useful if the horse moves
anaesthesia.
suddenly.
 O A benzodiazepine can be administered alongside either keta-
Standing sedation
mine or thiopental top-ups. Doses of diazepam or mida-
zolam (around 0.025 mg/kg) can be administered every
 Potential uses are for prolonged standing procedures, such as
20-30 min,but after three such doses (especially of diazepam),
frontal bone trephination, thoracoscopy or laparoscopy for
the time interval between top-ups should be increased to
ovariectomy.
60 min, or else recovery quality may be affected.
Advantages:
Ketamine (0.25-lmg/kg) can be administered after a
● No need for repeated top-ups.
 thiopental induction.
● Aims to maintain an even plane of sedation.
 Thiopental (0.5-l+ mg/kg) can be administered after a
● Can anticipate changes in level of sedation.
ketamine induction.
Disadvantages:
● Continuous intravenous infusions, based on combinations of
●Time taken to set up.
GGE, ketamine and an C2 agonist. Several different combina-
· Cost.
tions have been reported:
● Possibility of profound sedation if not observant.
0 GGE 5% (50 mg/ml) + xylazine (0.5 mg/ml) + ketamine
(l mg/ml).
 Romifidine/morphine/xylazine top-up
■ To a 500 ml bottle of 5% GGE, add 250mg xylazine and
500 mg ketamine.
● The horse is first sedated with 100 μg/kg romifidine IV followed
 0 GGE 10% (100 mg/ml) + xylazine (1 mg/ml) + ketamine
 by 0.12-0.2 mg/kg morphine IM or IV (+/- ACP).
(2 mg/ml).
● ‘Top-ups′ are administered, as necessary, with increments of
■ To a 500 ml bottle of 10%GGE, add 500 mg xylazine and
xylazine (0.5 mg/kg) mixed in the same syringe as morphine
1000 mg ketamine.
(0.05 mg/kg).
276  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Detomidine infusion
or
● The horse is first sedated with 6 μg/kg detomidine IV (allow
● 7μg/kg IV, then wait 5 min, and then start infusion at 3.5 μg/
 5 min to achieve full effect).
kg/h.
● An opioid is also usually administered e.g. butorphanol IV
0.05-0.1 mg/kg or morphine IM 0.12-0.2 mg/kg.
 Some suggestions for badly behaved horses
● Prepare the detomidine infusion: add 12 mg of detomidine to
 500 ml of normal saline.
For difficult' horses, the following combination usually works
● For a 500kg horse, the initial drip rate is around 4 drops/s
well (often dubbed 'magic mixture').
(about 0.1 μg/kg/min); this rate should be adjusted pro rata for
ACP (0.03 mg/kg) + detomidine (0.02 mg/kg) + butorphanol 
other body weights.
(0.05 mg/kg) all in one syringe, given IM.
● When adequate sedation is achieved, the infusion rate is
 Xylazine (1.1 mg/kg) can be used instead of detomidine, but the
reduced to around 1-2 drops/s.
effect is shorter lasting.
● After the end of the procedure, the horse should be able to be
 Some people use romifidine (100 μg/kg) instead of detomidine;
 led back to its loose-box around 15-20 min after the infusion
but romifidine is not licensed for IM use and when mixed with
is finally stopped.
ACP in the same syringe, the mixture will go cloudy. Ideally then,
the romifidine component should be administered separately. If 
left, however, the mixture will clear again and there are anecdotal
Xylazine infusion
reports of this cleared mixture being administered IM to good
clinical effect.
● The horse is first sedated with 0.5 mg/kg xylazine IV (allow
For wild/feral Equidae (e.g. for zebra), try:
2-5 min for full effect).
ACP (0.05 mg/kg) + detomidine (0.08 mg/kg) + morphine
● Then 0.02 mg/kg ACP IV and 0.12-0.2 mg/kg morphine IM are
(0.5 mg/kg) IM.
administered.
If desperate try oral chloral hydrate. Withhold water fora good
● Prepare the infusion: add 500 mg xylazine to 500 ml of normal
 48 h frst. Add 30-60(+) g chloral hydrate per average 500kg horse
saline.
to 5-10 l water in a bucket and offer this to the horse to drink.
● For a 500kg horse, the initial drip rate is around 2 drops/s
Hopefully the horse will drink it, but allow time for the chloral
(about 12 μg/kg/min) (adjusted for other body weights).
hydrate to take effect.
● When adequate sedation is achieved, the infusion rate should
 For clipper-shy or box-shy horses sometimes the following
be reduced to 1-2 drops/s.
works well when given orally:
● At the end of the procedure, the horse should be able to be led
back to its loose-box about 10-15 min after stopping the
 5(-10) ACP tablets (25 mg variety) per 500 kg horse
 infusion.
+/-
5(-10) diazepam tablets (10 mg variety) per 500 kg horse
Medetomidine infusion (not licensed in the UK)
 It may take some trial and error to determine the best dose for
● Loading dose 5 μg/kg IV, then immediately start infusion
 a particular horse; and these tablets are not licensed for use in the
at 3.5 μg/kg/h
horse.
Learning objectives
 To appreciate that donkeys are not just small horses.
To be aware of the potential difficulties with regard to tracheal intubation and jugular venous catheterisation.
●
●
 To be aware of the anatomical differences for epidural injections.
1
To be familiar with the different pharmacokinetics for some NSAIDs.
Introduction
● Donkeys have a larger intracellular fluid compartment to extra-
cellular fluid compartment ratio than horses which means that,
 Donkeys come in three sizes: miniature, standard and mammoth.
being desert-adapted, their packed cell volume (PCV) tends to
Mule = mare x jack.
increase only once dehydration has reached 12-15%.
 Hinny = jenny X stallion.
● They tend to have faster hepatic (oxidative) metabolism than
 horses, so the half-lives of many drugs are less.
Normals
● They are prone to hyperlipaemia if starved or off food for >3
● Heart rate 35-55 bpm; respiratory rate 20-35 breaths per min.
days.
● Horse/ pony weigh tapes are not accurate.
● Auricular arteries are generally preferred for cannulation as
● Body condition score is best assessed by looking at fat pads
 they are bigger than mandibular and transverse facial arteries.
which lie either side of spine.
● The spinal cord terminates at Sa2, but the dural meningeal
sheath extends to Co1-2. To perform an epidural injection, you
may need to employ a slightly different angle than in horses
Key anatomical/physiological variations
and you may occasionally puncture the dura to discover CSE
from horses
● Donkeys have relatively thick skin over the jugular groove, s0
Drug responses
 you may need to nick the skin before inserting a jugular cath-
eter (appropriate sizes would be 14g or 16g). The well devel-
● Some of the literature suggests that donkeys may be more
oped longus colli muscle sometimes obscures the jugular
resistant to the effects of anaesthetic agents than horses. This
groove.
may be due to allometric scaling whereby, because of their rela-
● They have relatively large heads compared to their bodies, so
 azis aoq on prdo e ans aoq re aa
we often tend to over-estimate endotracheal (ET) tube size.
weight, they require seemingly higher doses.
However, they also tend to have disproportionately small tra-
● Donkeys are, on the whole, more stoical than horses, and are
cheas for their size, so have small ET tubes available.
also prepared to argue the toss as to whether they will do what
● The angle of opening of the glottis from the pharynx is more
you require of them or not. That is, they seem more prepared
acute than in horses, but the epiglottis is softer and easier to
to ^fight' rather than to take the fright and flight' option.
displace (and possibly easier to retrovert). They also have a rela-
  r in s   ss  a o
tively deep pharyngeal recess. If you have diffculty in passing an
 ment upon recovery from general anaesthesia, or indeed excite-
orotracheal tube, you could try the nasotracheal route, but the
 ment upon induction of anaesthesia. When they do stand, they
ventral nasal meatus is relatively narrower than in horses, so you
 get up more like cows (hind end first). (Mules tend to recover
may have to down-size tubes quite considerably.
more like horses.)
277
278  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● If the animal is not tame, then it may require a larger dose of
short half-life. Flunixin and phenylbutazone are metabolised
sedative, especially for the C2 agonists. However, with tame
and cleared more rapidly than in horses; however carprofen is
 donkeys, it is always worth starting with an equivalent horse
 cleared more slowly.
dose, and observing the response.
● The half-life of ketamine is shorter in donkeys than in the
Further reading
horse, so if using top-up doses, be prepared to re-dose more
frequently.
Matthews NS, Taylor TS (2002) Anesthesia of donkeys and mules:
● The MAC of inhalation agents is similar in donkeys to horses.
how they differ from horses. Proceedings of the Annual
● The eyes are ^quieter? under anaesthesia than in horses, and
Convention oftheAssociation ofAmerican Equine Practitioners,
definitely not a reliable indicator of anaesthetic depth.
volume 48, 110-112. Also available through www.ivis.org.
● Arterial blood pressure seems better maintained than in anaes-
 thetised horses, and can be used as an indicator of anaesthetic
depth.
Self-test section
● Noxious stimuli may result in breath-holding at lighter planes
of anaesthesia.
1.  Describe the differences between horses and donkeys
● Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs): there is
which affect endotracheal intubation?
 much debate about their effectiveness. Meloxicam has a very
33
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia
Learning objectives
To be familiar with the risks of general anaesthesia in ruminants (e.g. regurgitation/aspiration, bloat); and therefore why local
anaesthetic techniques +/- sedation tend to be preferred.
 To be able to describe the precautions necessary when having to perform general anaesthesia in ruminants.
1
 To be able to discuss drug and technique choices.
 To be able to recognise the options for providing analgesia: both systemic and local techniques.
General anaesthesia
 Starvation for longer than 24h also results in increased fluidity of
rumen contents and increases the likelihood of regurgitation.
General anaesthesia in ruminants is associated with several factors 
Recumbency increases the risk of bloating, because the cardia may
which complicate the course of anaesthesia and may even endan-
ger the animal's life. These are due to the effects of both recum-
become ‘submerged. Left lateral recumbency helps to keep the
cardia above' the liquid level, but then denies you access to the
bency and anaesthesia itself and include:
left flank to trocarise the rumen if ruminal intubation (by naso- or
● Restraint, handling risks.
oro-gastric tube), is unsuccessful in relieving gaseous distension.
● Body weight often has to be guesstimated.
(Do not starve neonates.)
● Ruminal tympany (bloat).
● Regurgitation of reticuloruminal contents.
Deny access to water for 12-18h
● Aspiration of refluxed material or saliva, leading to aspiration
It is also recommended to deny access to water for 12-l8h to
pneumonia.
reduce reticuloruminal bulk and fermentation rate. (Packed cell
● Hypoventilation, and possible hypoxaemia and hypercapnia.
volume (PCV) may increase as the animal effectively becomes
● Hypotension.
dehydrated.)
● Neuropathy (myopathy is much less common as cattle are often
 more bony than muscly compared to horses).
Cuffed endotracheal (ET) tubes
●Fluid and electrolyte imbalances (loss of bicarbonate and phos-
Cuffed ET tubes should always be used, because aspiration of
 phate in saliva).
 saliva or regurgitated reticuloruminal contents is one of the great-
● Not many licensed drugs.
 est hazards of ruminant anaesthesia. Regurgitation can be active
or passive. Active regurgitation occurs during light levels of
Reducing the risks
anaesthesia, whereas passive regurgitation occurs during deeper
Pre-operative starvation for 18-24h
levels of anaesthesia. Active regurgitation may occur during
Reduces the rate of fermentation and the subsequent develop-
attempts to intubate the trachea, making intubation a critical
ment of bloat, although the quantity and quality of ingesta also
occasion during general anaesthesia. If possible,try to maintain 
influence the fermentation rate. Starvation for longer than 24h
the animal in sternal recumbency, with its head held up, during
 inq se d iu u sisi u s 
result in alkalosis in less metabolically stressed animals possibly
of placing a sand bag or similar under its head so as to raise its
due to changes in volatile fatty acid production and increased pH
poll, so that the glottis is ^uphill from any saliva or reflux which
of rumen contents. Body temperature decreases in animals starved
pools under the influence of gravity If regurgitation occurs before
for over 24 h, and this affects their metabolic rate and pH status.
the airway is secured, to reduce the risk of aspiration (if you
279
280   Veterinary Anaesthesia
cannot lower the animal's head below the level of its body), you
and pH, until or unless moderate-to-severe hypoxaemia occurs.
can do one of the following:
Lung volume and functional residual capacity (FRC) are also
reduced: by compression of the chest by abdominal contents
● Apply 'cricoid pressure' as in man, where you push hard against
the larynx in order to squash closed the oesophagus which lies
pushing on the diaphragm (during recumbency); by smaller tidal
breaths; and by the abolishment of normal sighing and yawning.
behind it (Sellick's manoeuvre).
FRC is that volume of air remaining in the lungs after a normal
● You can place a cuffed ET tube into the oesophagus, inflate the
tidal exhalation and its presence allows gaseous exchange to
cuff and try to duct the refluxed material away from the
continue throughout the end-expiratory pause. If FRC is reduced,
pharynx. It is not easy to achieve correct cuff inflation, however,
the gas reserve' in the lung alveoli is reduced, alveoli and small
and reflux tends to stream around the outside of the tube. You
airways may start to collapse, and ventilation-perfusion mis-
also then need to find another cuffed ET tube to intubate the
matches start to occur. Hypoxic pulmonary vasoconstriction is
trachea.
also blunted by many anaesthetic agents, which does not help this
situation (see Chapter 8).
Anticholinergics as 'drying agents' (antisialogogues)
Saliva production is copious, cows produce 50-150l/day depend-
 ing on diet (sheep produce around 10l/day), and production 
Hypotension
 Hypotension is rarely observed in anaesthetised cattle (compared
tends to continue under anaesthesia. Not only can this be another
to anaesthetised horses), except under very deep planes of anaes-
source of material for aspiration and obstruction of the respira-
thesia. Large doses of xylazine, or inclusion of acepromazine
tory tract,but it also represents a substantial fluid loss, and within
(ACP) in the premed can contribute to the development of hypo-
that fluid, many electrolytes and especially buffers such as bicar-
tension though. Why healthy cattle normally maintain better arte-
bonate and phosphate are lost (so the animal may become aci-
rial blood pressure under anaesthesia remains a mystery, but
dotic, see below). Atropine and glycopyrrolate will reduce the
several ideas have been put forward:
volume of saliva produced, but this is by reducing the watery part
of the secretions, so the saliva that is produced is then much more
● Because cattle hypoventilate under general anaesthesia, the CO?
viscous and more difficult to clear from either the animal's throat
concentration of the blood increases, and high blood CO2
or indeed its airway if aspiration occurs. These agents also reduce
tension stimulates the sympathetic nervous system, so that
mucociliary function and thus reduce clearance of material from
overall there is gentle cardiovascular stimulation. This sounds
 the respiratory tree which may increase the chances of subclinical
 good but when IPPV was instituted to maintain normal blood
infections taking hold.
CO, tension, the cattle still maintained high' (i.e. near ^normal'
for them), blood pressures (even despite the often detrimental
Hypoventilation
cardiovascular effects of IPPV).
 Ruminants tend to hypoventilate under general anesthesia, as
● It seems that vagal activity predominates in conscious cattle,
evidenced by shallow breaths, which are not fully compensated
and is actually further enhanced by starvation (i.e. we often see
for by the small increase in breathing rate. Thus, it is common to
slower heart rates in starved (especially >48h) cattle), and
anaesthesia may change the autonomic balance so that sympa-
mechanically ventilate their lungs under general anaesthesia
 thetic activity predominates. (This suggestion has not yet been
(muscle relaxants are not necessary to do this). Tidal volumes of
around 1-1.5 1/100 kg body weight, and rates of around 10 breaths 
proven or disproven.)
per minute make a good starting point. If end tidal CO, tension
can be monitored, it reflects (but may be lower than) the systemic
Recumbency
arterial carbon dioxide partial pressure and would normally be
Recumbency is rarely associated with myopathies in cattle, but
around 35-45 mmHg. End tidal COz tension can be used as a
beware post-operative recumbency associated with hypocalcae.
guide to the adequacy of ventilation. Ruminant lungs contain less
mia especially in periparturient cattle. Neuropathies are more
fbrous connective tissue than horse lungs, so they are more prone
common, and occur if the animal is poorly positioned, insuff-
 to alveolar rupture and pneumothorax if inadvertently high peak
cient padding is used over boney prominences, and recumbency
airway pressures are delivered during intermittent positive pres-
is prolonged. Remember to protect from heat and cold especially
sure ventilation (IPPV). Therefore be sure to limit the peak inspir-
if outdoors, and also to protect eyes from direct sunlight.
atory pressure to <30 cmHO with IPPV. Recumbency itself allows
the large heavy GI tract to press on' the diaphragm, resulting in
Huid and electrolyte losses
some ^splinting’ of diaphragmatic movements, and thus hypo-
These occur because of continued saliva production with all its
ventilation. General anaesthesia also causes a degree of respiratory
 buffers, which is not then swallowed, and the inevitable reticulo-
depression, such that thoracic and diaphragmatic breathing
ruminal reflux losses. Intravenous crystalloids, usually Hartmann's
movements are reduced due to 'muscular relaxation'; and depres-
 solution, are usually administered at around 5-10 ml/kg/h (the
sion of chemoreceptor reflexes occurs so that CO can build up
typical surgical maintenance rate, see Chapter 23),but if surgery
 in the blood to higher than normal levels before breathing is
is unduly prolonged, then electrolytes and pH should be moni-
stimulated. Although the hypoxic drive to ventilation is depressed
tored, and treated as necessary, paying particular attention to
too, ventilatory drive is mainly regulated by blood CO tension
calcium, magnesium and bicarbonate (and possibly phosphate).
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia 281
Some people collect the saliva and refluxed material, and re-
cardiac outputs. ACP, although not licensed, has been sug-
administer it to the animal by stomach tube at the end of the
 gested as an alternative sedative for pregnant cattle.
 procedure.
● Reduces reticuloruminal activity and increases the chance of
tympany because it reduces eructation. (Interestingly, diar-
 Xylazine and detomidine 
rhoea may be observed 12-24h after sedation.)
 Use xylazine and detomidine with care in pregnant cattle because
● May (controversial) reduce cardiac sphincter tone, so may
of their potential to increase uterine tone and possibly compro-
 increase the likelihood of regurgitation.
mise uteroplacental perfusion and cause abortion in the last tri-
● Reduces swallowing, leading to pharyngeal accumulation of
mester (see below). Their safety during embryogenesis in the first
saliva and reflux which increases the risks of inhalation. Animals
 trimester has not yet been proven.
tend to drool saliva because swallowing is reduced, not because
saliva production is increased.
Premedication/sedation
● Reduces laryngeal activity, which increases the risk of
aspiration.
Not always necessary in ruminants because they are much more
● Causes diuresis. Interestingly, glycosuria is a more common
docile than horses and do not appear to suffer from the same
feature in cattle than for example in horses, so a component of
emergence delirium during recovery from anaesthesia. However,
the diuresis is due to an osmotic diuresis, on top of antidiuretic
 premedication can reduce the dosage requirements of induction
hormone (ADH) effects (see Chapters 4 and 28).
and maintenance agents and may sometimes be required to
● Reduces gastrointestinal motility by reducing acetylcholine
increase operator safety.
release from the presynaptic terminals of post-ganglionic para-
 ded ae aru m  a u squ 
Xylazine
receptors on these cholinergic nerve endings, and presynaptic
Xylazine is an c2 adrenoreceptor agonist, and as such is a seda-
 Q2 receptor activity is enhanced by α2 agonists, which results
tive-analgesic with muscle relaxant properties. It is licensed for
in a reduction of transmitter (in this case, acetylcholine),
cattle in the UK. It may be administered intramuscularly, intra-
venously or subcutaneously, according to the data sheets (the
output.
● Increases airway resistance (causes bronchoconstriction), and
different manufacturers? recommendations vary), and its effects
are dose-dependent, although can be a little unpredictable espe-
may cause pulmonary hypertension in ruminants. This has
occasionally resulted in the development of pulmonary cedema,
cially in previously ^excited animals. Ruminants are more ^sensi-
and can be one of the many causes of hypoxaemia under general
e  s issd s  x o 
anaesthesia. Remember to use low doses, and beware in animals
metabolites are produced and also due to differences in post-
receptor signaling between species), so the 2% solution is pre-
that have, or have had, respiratory infections.
● Hypertension is rarely detected following the IM administra-
ferred over the 10% solution for more accurate dosing volumes.
tion of xylazine, but bradycardia and hypotension (especially
 In cattle, the dose ranges from 0.05 mg/kg to 0.3 mg/kg IM and
with repeated or higher doses) can be observed.
 0.03-0.1 mg/kg IV. The degree of sedation is dose-dependent such
● Repeated doses of xylazine over several days are accompanied
that once the dose increases above 0.1 mg/kg IM, recumbency
by the development of tolerance to the drug. This could be due
(sternal to lateral), usually occurs. Generally about one-third of
to receptor down regulation/desensitisation; or to the induc-
the IM dose will produce the same effect if administered IV. In
tion of hepatic microsomal enzymes for its metabolism.
sheep and goats, which may be more diffcult to dose accurately
● Effects on thermoregulation have been variously described,
(or perhaps are even more ^sensitive'), doses range between
with both increases and decreases in rectal temperature observed
0.05 mg/kg to 0.1 mg/kg IM, or not more than 0.05 mg/kg IV. If
 for the several hours following xylazine administration.
the patient becomes recumbent, then be prepared to elevate its
 poll to encourage saliva to drain away from the pharynx/larynx.
Detomidine
 A dose of 10-40μg/kgIM or IV is licensed for use in cattle in the
Effects of xylazine
UK. The degree of sedation is dose-dependent. Manufacturers
● Increases uterine tone in non-pregnant and pregnant cattle and
caution against its use in the last trimester of pregnancy for similar
sheep, but without causing synchronised uterine contractions;
reasons to xylazine (see above).
may also vasoconstrict the utero-placental blood vessels,
thereby possibly compromising placental perfusion and foetal
Atipamezole
 Although atipamezole is not licensed for use in ruminants, it is
increase the risk of abortion, so manufacturers warn to avoid 
useful to antagonise sedation and shorten post-operative recum-
its use if possible in the last trimester of pregnancy. However,
bency following xylazine or other C2 agonists. Doses of 20-50 μg/
detomidine does not have such potent oxytocin-like actions in
kgIM (or slow IV) are usually suggested.
 pregnant cattle and sheep, and some have suggested its use is
 preferable in pregnant cattle, in place of xylazine, if sedation
Doxapram
is necessary; but it may cause vasoconstriction in the utero-
 Doxapram may also be useful in domestic ruminants as a sort
placental circulation and it reduces both maternal and foetal
 of non-specific stimulant (preferably in situations where the
282  Veterinary Anaesthesia
animal's oxygenation status is good). The dose is around 1 mg/
Diazepam has poor bioavailability if administered IM, but
kgIV, but seems to be of little effect in llamas.
midazolam can be administered by this route. Although mida-
zolam is said to be twice as potent as diazepam and shorter acting.
Acepromazine (ACP)
the two are often diffcult to distinguish clinically, so similar doses
Not licensed for use in ruminants. Reduces cardiac sphincter tone,
are used (although recently I have contemplated using midazolam
so increases the likelihood of regurgitation.
at half the diazepam dose, to get less disinhibition/excitement in
adult cattle).
Atropine and glycopyrrolate
 Benzodiazepines, at 0.05-0.1 mg/kgIV, are a useful adjunct to
 Neither is licensed. Both reduce the lower cesophageal sphincter
ketamine anaesthesia to provide some muscular relaxation to
tone and may facilitate reflux; but they also reduce overall gut
counteract the muscular hypertonus associated with ketamine.
motility and thereby possibly encourage the development of bloat.
(Similarly guaiphenesin (GGE) can be used alongside ketamine,
Ruminant dose for atropine variously quoted as 0.02-0.1 mg/
 see later.)
kgIV. Ruminant dose for glycopyrrolate c. 2-5 μg/kgIV.
 Benzodiazepines are also useful anticonvulsants.
Chloral hydrate
Opioids
Not licensed. Can be administered by drench or stomach tube, but
 None licensed. Enhance the sedative effects of benzodiazepines,
 10-20 min must then be allowed for its effects to become apparent.
 and the sedative and analgesic effects of c2 agonists. Tend to slow
Intravenously, a 10% solution can be infused ^to effect. Dose
gut motility. (See later under epidural analgesia.)
around 10 mg/kg (sedation) to 50-100 mg/kg (anaesthesia). When
● Butorphanol is a useful adjunct to α2 agonists or benzodi-
infusing IV to effect remember to pre-empt the degree of sedation/
azepines. Dose 0.02-0.05 (to 0.1) mg/kg preferably IV for seda-
anaesthesia required because sedation/anaesthesia will continue to
 deepen over the next minute or so after an IV infusion is stopped
tion (and some analgesia); or up to 0.2mg/kgIM for
 analgesia.
because the drug is reduced in blood to the active principle:
● Buprenorphine 0.006-0.01 mg/kgIM (N.B. poor efficacy and
trichloroethanol. For intravenous administration a catheter would
 short duration of action in sheep).
be advised as the drug is highly irritant if deposited extravascularly.
● Morphine 0.1-0.3 mg/kgIM; methadone 0.25 mg/kg IM or IV.
Chloral hydrate has a narrow therapeutic index, does not provide
● Pethidine 3.5-5 mg/kgIM (not IV because of the risk of hista-
analgesia, and gives only moderate muscle relaxation. Anaesthetic
doses cause marked respiratory depression (death from overdose
mine release).
follows respiratory centre depression); and also cardiovascular
depression by direct myocardial depression (negative inotropy),
Induction of anaesthesia
and vagomimesis. Best used to provide ^sedation’ rather than
Can be by injectable drugs: intravenous or intramuscular, or by
anaesthesia. Recovery may be prolonged after higher doses and is
 inhalational techniques.
often characterised by a hangover? for several hours.
Intravenous access
Benzodiazepines
 If possible try to secure intravenous access by IV catheter before
None licensed. Diazepam and midazolam cause minimal cardio-
anaesthetic induction with injectable agents. Bovine skin is often
vascular and respiratory depression. Very useful alone for seda-
very thick and very mobile, so use long catheters to try to ensure
tion of young and small ruminants. Result in ‘anxiolysis to
that at least the tip remains in the vein. Jugular veins and 'milk
sedation, depending on the dose used, and muscle relaxation
veins′ (superficial epigastrics) are useful sites for IV access in cows.
(central action in spinal cord (and brainstem), to inhibit reflex
In bulls it is often very diffcult to find jugular veins as they have
spinal relay of postural muscle strength). Ruminants tend not to
very thick neck skin and thick subcutaneous tissues; you may need
panic at the feeling of muscular weakness, but give in to it to
to ^cut-down’ to locate the vein. Alternatively, auricular veins may
become recumbent if high enough doses are given. Occasionally,
offer a site of venous access, but first ensure that the animal is
animals may become excited' due to disinhibition. Appetite may
adequately sedated or its head is secured in a neck-yoke. Extension
also be stimulated (as sometimes is seen in small animals).
 sets can be useful to reduce catheter dislodgement should the
Quoted dose rates vary widely, from 0.02-0.25 mg/kg IV and
patient fidget excessively during drug administration.
even up to 0.5 mg/kgIV. Lower doses are favoured in adult cattle,
 possibly because diazepam has been blamed for increased saliva-
Ketamine
tion and ruminal atony. However, the oesophagus of dogs and
Commonly used as an IV or IM induction agent, although it is
ruminants is all striated muscle and, at least in dogs, diazepam
not licensed for use in ruminants in UK. The dose is around
increases lower oesophageal sphincter tone and may reduce the
2-5 mg/kg by either route. After α2 agonist premedication, the
incidence of reflux.
lower end of the dose range (2-2.5 mg/kg) is used, whereas if no
The higher dose rates can be used alone for sedation of calves,
premedication is given, or poor sedation is achieved after pre-
sheep and goats for non painful procedures such as radiography;
medication, be prepared to increase the dose, to 4.5-5mg/kg
e.g. 0.25-0.5 mg/kg diazepam or midazolam IV gives recumbent
or more. Allow 1-2 min for ketamine to produce its effects after
sedation in sheep, goats and calves.
IV injection, and longer (5-10 min) after IM administration.
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia 283
Although ketamine preserves, and even enhances, cranial nerve
muscular relaxation, for example for relocation of dislocated hips
reflexes, it will not guarantee a protected airway, especially if you
or shoulders.
administered an c2 agonist in the premedication (i.e. you still
need to intubate the trachea with a cuffed ET tube to ensure a
Barbiturates
protected airway). Sometimes the increased muscle tone that
 Thiopental (not licensed for use in cattle, and no longer available 
ketamine causes will make endotracheal intubation diffcult,
as a veterinary licensed product in the UK) must be administered
hence C2 agonists, benzodiazepines or GGE are useful adjuncts.
IV. It is very irritant if extravascular deposition occurs. If a total
Diazepam (or midazolam) at 0.02-0.5 mg/kg with ketamine at
 dose much in excess of 15-25 mg/kg is administered, then recov-
2-5 mg/kgIV or IM makes a good induction cocktail. Ketamine
 ery will be prolonged, but without premedication, up to 15 mg/
itself is thought not to alter lower oesophageal sphincter tone, but
kg may be required: therefore premedication is advised where
the other agents used alongside it will often reduce that tone, thus
possible. Thiopental can be combined with, or used after, GGE to
enhancing reflux. Ketamine often increases salivation.
reduce the dose of thiopental necessary. Initial recovery depends
 Ketamine can be used as part of an IV infusion cocktail for
upon redistribution into muscles and fat (metabolism is slow), so,
maintenance of general anaesthesia, for example, combined
pue siee sunoh u papioae isaq ane sasop rauiu aun iseal ie
with GGE, but because of increased sensitivity to xylazine, this
also very skinny and debilitated animals. It quickly crosses the
should only be included at low doses in ^triple drip' anaesthetic
blood-brain barrier, so it is relatively easy to judge the adequacy
maintenance combinations for ruminants. See Chapter 31 for
 of dosing. Thiopental causes some cardiovascular and respiratory
recipes for equine feld anaesthesia, but use 1/10 the dose of
depression. The cardiovascular depression results in hypotension,
e n e si a s r s a
which is partly compensated for by a reflex (albeit somewhat
(especially for somatic pain), and is analgesic in sub-anaesthetic
damped), tachycardia.
concentrations.
 Pentobarbital is not licensed for cattle and is no longer available
 Although ketamine is often thought not to produce cardiovas-
as a veterinary licensed product in the UK. Best administered IV,
cular depression, it does cause direct myocardial depression
slowly, although it has also been administered intraperitoneally.
(negative inotropy), but this is not usually noticeable because it
Dose required is around 20 mg/kg without premed. Ruminants,
also stimulates the sympathetic nervous system. This is fine, until
especially sheep, tend to metabolise it very quickly, so it can be
the sympathetic nervous system is already working hard, or is
useful for short procedures. It is relatively slow to cross blood-
even exhausted, for example in very excited or shocky animals,
brain barrier, so be careful not to overdose when judging ade-
then be aware of its effects, because it will result in some reduction
quacy of depth of anaesthesia. Not much cardiovascular
in blood pressure and cardiac output just as most other agents
depression, but causes some respiratory depression.
will.
 Ketamine produces minimal respiratory depression but will
 Propofol
-o pe u soq i re ue unisod asni
Not licensed for cattle. Must be administered IV. The dose is
sionally you will see irregular breathing patterns, or apneustic
4-6mg/kg, but best administered slowly IV to effect. Good in
breathing (end-inspiratory pauses).
small and/or young ruminants, but often unwieldy volumes
 required in larger patients (IV catheter recommended). It causes
GGE
greater cardiovascular depression than thiopental, because the
Glyceryl guaiacolate ether (or guaiphenesin) is not licensed. Like
hypotension it causes (a lot due to venodilation), is not much
the benzodiazepines, it is a centrally acting muscle relaxant, with
compensated for by tachycardia, because it greatly reduces the
some sedative, but no analgesic, properties. Central muscle relax-
activity of the baroreceptors. It also causes respiratory depression.
ation (skeletal muscles), is again due to blockade of internuncial
 Its use has been associated with death in goats.
neurotransmission in the spinal cord and brainstem. It must be
 administered IV and is irritant if extravascular deposition occurs.
Saffan (alphadolone/alphaxalone)
It is administered by infusion of a 5%, 10% or 15% solution to
Was not licensed for use in ruminants and is no longer available.
effect (although the 15% solution will soon no longer be com-
 Best administered IV. Dose around 3 mg total steroids/kg. Short
mercially available). Usual doses are 30-100 mg/kg. It is cumula-
acting because rapidly metabolised. Some cardiovascular depres-
tive and high doses can cause problems (see below), so a maximum
sion, similar to that seen with thiopental, but less respiratory
dose of 100-150 mg/kg should not be exceeded in any 24 h period.
depression. Some muscle relaxation, and perhaps some analgesia
If doses in excess of 150mg/kg are given, recoveries can be pro-
via the alphadolone component. High therapeutic index and
longed and cardiac arrhythmias, CNS ^excitement reactions'
therefore was said to be very 'safe' (although there was a potential
(opisthotonus/paradoxical muscle rigidity), and apneustic breath-
for histamine release because it was solubilised in cremophor EL).
ing patterns (end-inspiratory pause rather than the normal end-
Was commonly used for anaesthetic induction (and often by con-
expiratory pause), can all occur. Excitement may be due to one
 tinuous infusion for anaesthetic maintenance because not very
of its metabolites: catechol (think of catecholamines). It can be
cumulative), in sheep and goats, especially in research setings,
administered along with either thiopental or ketamine for induc-
but occasionally caused pulmonary hypertension and laryngos-
tion and/or maintenance of anaesthesia (up to 1-2 hours′ dura-
e s  d  s o oe s i 
tion), or can be administered during anaesthesia to improve
anaesthetics in goat kids to enable disbudding.
284  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Alfaxalone (Alfaxan'")
 n o in  ni s nsd 
Not licensed for ruminants in the UK. Newly available and pos-
as the rumen contains especially methane, and possibly some H2
sibly will take over from Saffan for goat kid disbudding, but doses
(both of which are less soluble in the blood than NzO, so NO
(possibly c. 4-5 mg/kg), and safety are yet to be determined.
enters the rumen quicker than either of these two gases can leave).
High intra-abdominal pressure compromises venous return (and
 Inhalational induction
therefore cardiac output), and diaphragmatic movements (dia-
 Inhalational induction is possible, either via mask or via nasopha-
phragmatic splinting, resulting in hypoventilation).
ryngeal insufflation after passage of a nasopharyngeal tube. Oro-
Breathing systems
or naso-tracheal intubation may also be possible after sedation/
premedication. No inhalation agents are licensed for ruminants
For animals between 15 kg and 135 kg use standard small animal
in the UK. Any of the volatile agents in oxygen, administered by
circles but ensure the rebreathing bag's capacity is at least twice
mask, can be used to anaesthetise goat kids for disbudding, but
the animal's resting tidal volume. For animals >135 kg use a large
 ejo ad      
animal circle or to-and-fro with a rebreathing bag of 20-501
disbudding iron so take precautions to make an effective seal
capacity. For small lambs and kids (<10kg) use a T-piece. The
around the mask (e.g. wet cotton wool and wet down the hair),
anaesthetic breathing system chosen may be determined by the
Or remove the mask briefly for the moments of actual
size of ET tube inserted, and what it will connect to.
disbudding.
Endotracheal intubation
Halothane, isoflurane or sevoflurane
Deep sedation after 02 agonists (and possibly after benzodi-
Any can be used, but none is licensed for use in food producing
azepines) may be suffcient to allow endotracheal intubation.
animals.
 Usually, however, induction of anaesthesia is required.
 Halothane is more soluble in blood so that anaesthetic induc-
 day o rnd aidod as daus pe s 'se ng
tion (and recovery) theoretically take longer (more pollution),
patient in sternal recumbency, with the head raised by assistants.
but its smell is less pungent than, especially isoflurane, so it causes
The head/neck angle is straightened and a gag is placed in the
less breath-holding and resentment during induction so that the
mouth, or tapes are used to hold the jaws apart. A laryngoscope
induction times with halothane and isoflurane may actually be
with long straight blade is useful to help visualise the larynx. The
similar. However, if you can bypass the olfactory mucosa of the
labial fssure is small, as is the degree of mouth opening, so
nose, with a nasopharyngeal/nasotracheal tube, isoflurane should
without a laryngoscope it is often very diffcult to see the pharynx/
offer a faster induction. Sevoflurane is often said to be less pungent
larynx. Some people use the tip of laryngoscope blade to depress
than isoflurane, so should produce less breath-holding and with
the tip of the epiglottis in order to visualise the actual glottis. An
its even lower blood solubility, should provide an even faster
endotracheal tube stylette (stiffener or bougie) is often helpful.
 induction of, and recovery from, anaesthesia. Its higher cost may,
 Some operators prefer to try blind intubation. For this, the
however, preclude its use.
animal of often in lateral recumbency with the head and neck
 Isoflurane and sevoflurane are minimally metabolised and
extended. Straight ET tubes are often easier to use than curved
because of their low blood solubilities, anaesthetic depth can be
tubes. The ET tube is passed through the mouth to the pharynx,
changed quickly, both to lighter and deeper planes of anaesthesia.
and then the larynx is held’ externally with one hand, and
Recovery is theoretically quicker after isoflurane than halothane,
manoeuvred over the ET tube tip, whilst steadying the tube with
and after sevoflurane than isoflurane, which helps reduce the risks
the other hand.
associated with prolonged recumbency (e.g. bloat, reflux, aspira-
 Sheep and goats have more sensitive larynges than cattle, so
tion, myopathy, neuropathy). However, halothane undergoes
Knds Aq onae ieoi ieid a e Aidde on pu a no
substantial metabolism which helps to hasten recovery; and
or deposition of a small volume of solution down the ET tube
sevoflurane is more fat soluble than isoflurane, so that after rela-
after it is located with its tip just at the larynx), to ease tracheal
tively long anaesthetics, there may be little difference in recovery
intubation. If the surgical procedure is short and the larynx has
times between agents, especially in fatter animals (see Chapter 8).
been desensitised with topical local anaesthetic,be vigilant during
 Isoflurane MAC is 1.25% in adult cattle. Isoflurane and sevoflu-
the recovery from anaesthesia because the laryngeal reflexes may
rane minimally sensitise the myocardium to the arrhythmogenic
 still be numbed, so laryngeal protection may be poor. However,
effects of catecholamines, but cause similar/slightly less cardiovas-
as tracheal extubation is usually not performed until the animal
cular depression than halothane. Isoflurane and sevoflurane
is actively swallowing and chewing at the very least (and the
produce hypotension by vasodilation whereas halothane causes
actual trachea itself should still be sensitive to foreign material so
hypotension by direct myocardial depression. Isoflurane is slightly
the cough reflex should be minimally impaired), use of topical
more of a respiratory depressant than halothane or sevoflurane
local anaesthetic on the larynx should not create any great
because of its more pungent odour.
 problems.
 Some people prefer to perform tracheal intubation in these
Nitrous oxide
n rs    n i s r
 Possibly beware in ruminants for long procedures as nitrous oxide
 bency, with the head hanging over the edge of a table. Endotracheal
will partition into “low-solubility-gas'-filled spaces to increase
 intubation in adult cattle is often achieved by digital (per-oral)
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia 285
 palpation of the larynx and manually-guided passage of the ET
Maintenance of anaesthesia
tube into the trachea. Use Drinkwater gag/s to ensure your safety
 Anaesthesia may be maintained by injectable agents, given either 
from sharp cheek teeth, and also to help preserve the integrity of
as intermittent boluses or as infusion techniques (e.g. GGE/keta-
the ET tube cuff. Cattle seem much less prone to laryngospasm
mine/xylazine or GGE/thiopental type combinations, but be
than other species. Often when you palpate the epiglottis, the cow
aware of the total doses given, as recovery may be prolonged and
will wiggle the tip of its tongue. You can then guide a lubricated
its quality compromised by large cumulative doses). Anaesthesia
ET tube down between the vocal cords and into the trachea.
 may also be maintained by inhalational techniques with one of
Inflate the cuff as soon as possible. Some people prefer to try to
the volatile agents being supplied in oxygen. A combination of
keep cattle in sternal recumbency until the trachea is intubated,
inhalation and injectable agents may also be used. Normally aim
while others prefer lateral recumbency. Whatever you choose, just
to avoid unduly prolonged recoveries, therefore choose minimally
 be aware that regurgitation can be provoked. Occasionally,laryn-
cumulative injectable agents and inhalation agents with low blood
 geal spasm/obstruction is provoked, and sometimes a sympathetic
(and preferably low fat) solubility.
or even vagal response (which may even result in cardiac arrest),
occurs during tracheal intubation (and even extubation), as is
Monitoring
possible in all species, due to stimulation of the larynx.
See Chapter 18. Eyeball position is an excellent indicator of anaes-
 Another way of facilitating endotracheal intubation is to place
 thetic depth in cattle, but less reliable in sheep and goats. The
a stomach tube (smaller diameter than the intended ET tube), via
the mouth, into the trachea (often easier if the head-neck axis
eyeball rotates ventrally between the animal being awake and
kept straight). Verify the stomach tube's position in the airway
 being lightly anaesthetised. As anaesthesia deepens, it rotates back 
(you may see condensation forming inside the tube with each
centrally but palpebral and pupillary reflexes are absent. As anaes-
thesia is lightened,the changes occur in the reverse order,ie.frm
exhaled breath, or feel air movements through the tube with
breathing, or check with capnography). Then advance (rail-
   s a     d
road'), the ET tube over the stomach tube, using the stomach
ventrally rotated; and from light anaesthesia to awake, it moves
from the downwards rotated position to central again. Lacrimation
tube as a guide. Once the ET tube is in place, inflate the cuff and
then withdraw the stomach tube.
increases and palpebral reflexes become more active as the depth
of anaesthesia decreases.
Positioning
Other monitoring is as for small animals, for example heart
 Positioning is often dictated by surgery. If lateral, try to elevate
rate, pulse rate (auricular, radial, femoral or metatarsal arteries),
the poll to encourage drainage of saliva and refluxed material
breathing rate (although they often require IPPV), mucous
membrane colour and CRT Arterial blood pressure, capnography
away from the pharynx (Figure 33.1); also elevate the upper limbs
 and blood gases and electrolytes are monitored if the equipment
isavailable.
Monitor neonates  for hypoglycaemia and
the eyes from direct sunlight, dirt and trauma; and remember that
hypothermia.
animals, especially black-coated, can get heat stroke if left for
hours in full sun.
Recovery
Recoveries are usually smooth, due to the placid temperament of
these animals. Position the head so that drainage from the mouth
is possible (i.e. elevate the poll. Aim to get the patient into sternal
 recumbency as soon as possible because while in lateral recum-
bency, there is risk of regurgitation and especially of the develop-
ment of bloat. Usually left lateral is considered better than right
lateral to discourage bloat/encourage eructation because the
Leave the endotracheal tube in place for as long as posible, and
until you are absolutely sure that the pharyngeal/laryngeal reflexes
have returned. Most people try to remove the tube with the cuff
s  a mi   mm a i ie  
inflated), until the cuff reaches the larynx (where it gets a bit
stuck'), and then deflate the cuff partially or fully before finally
removing the tube completely. Some people will place a stomach
tube to relieve bloat, and some even trocarise the rumen if bloat-
ing is a problem and can't be relieved by passing a stomach tube.
Figure 33.1 Cow's head inclined over a support to allow saliva and regur-
gitatedmaterialto reely drain out ofthe mouth.Reproduced from Anaesthesia
Analgesia
of Cattle. In: Veterinary Anaesthesia. 10" Edition. Eds: Hall LW, Clarke KW.
Trim CM. Chapter 12. pp 315-339. Copyright 2001, with permission from
 Remember to practise balanced analgesia, that is the use of
Elsevier.
several different analgesic drugs which complement each other's
286   Veterinary Anaesthesia
actions to produce an overall optimum effect, whilst possibly
Similar (or slightly smaller) volumes of procaine 5% (with epine-
allowing reduced doses and therefore reduced side effects.
phrine) can, however, usually be substituted. Many of the tech-
Consider opioids, local anaesthetics, NSAIDs, X2 agonists and
niques described below are with adult catle in mind although the
ketamine.
techniques are applicable to other ruminants, but the doses must
 The following NSAIDs are licensed for cattle in the UK, but not
be reduced pro rata for smaller ruminants; and especially in young
for sheep or goats:
lambs and kids, the local anaesthetic solution can be diluted in
sterile saline to reduce risk of toxicity. Maximum (toxic) dose of
● Meloxicam (any age; one dose).
lidocaine is about 4-10 mg/kg, and towards the 4 mg/kg end of
● Carprofen (not in lactating cattle; one dose).
this range for young kids and lambs. Procaine is generally consid-
● Ketoprofen (cattle, including lactating animals; up to 3 days
ered to be less toxic than lidocaine; its toxic dose being in the
trea tment).
region of 5-10 (posibly up to 20) mg/kg.
● Flunixin (cattle, including lactating animals; up to 5 days
treatment).
● Tolfenamic acid (cattle, including lactating and beef cattle).
Local anaesthetic techniques around
 Aspirin (acetyl salicylic acid), has been used but its effcacy is
the head (based on cattle)
equivocal, especially at the lower dose. It is not licensed and may
Figure 33.2 shows the locations of perineural nerve blocks around
cause abomasal ulcers. Dose for average 500 kg cow is about 50
the head.
100 mg/kg u-bid (soluble aspirins can be dissolved in water to
make a drench).
Infraorbital nerve block
This desensitises the nose and upper lip. The infraorbital foramen
Local anaesthesia
can be diffcult to palpate through tough thick skin in large cattle,
but should lie just rostral to the facial tuberosity, on a line between
Having discussed the problems associated with general anaesthe-
the second upper cheek tooth and the nasomaxillary notch
sia in ruminants, it is easy to see why local anaesthetic techniques
(Figure 33.2; see C). This block may be useful for ringing bulls,
are much more commonly used. They require less expensive
Iddn au jo jed qes 1o asou ai on spunm suns io o
drugs and equipment, and can be easily performed on farm.
lip. Good restraint of the head is essential to perform this block.
Ruminants, and especially cattle, are very amenable to local anaes-
For adult cattle an 18 g needle would be appropriate and 15-20 ml
thetic techniques because they are generally docile; and local
of 2% lidocaine (with epinephrine is best, see Chapters 12 and 16)
anaesthetic techniques can still be combined with sedation if
necessary.
Local anaesthetic agents licensed for use
in ruminants
 Only procaine 5% with adrenaline (epinephrine) is licensed for
ruminants in the UK and this is only licensed for subcutaneous
use, so is used off licence for deep perineural blocks (such as para-
vertebral blocks), epidural administration, intravenous regional
anaesthesia and intra-articular blocks. A potential problem with
 procaine is that because it is an ester linked local anaesthetic, and
therefore a benzoic acid derivative, one of its metabolites is para
  n s    
reactions and can also antagonise the antibacterial effects of tri-
methoprim-potentiated sulphonamides.
 Lidocaine (1% or 2%) used to be licensed and was a popular
choice, offering better tissue penetration and longer duration of
action than procaine. Its licence for use in farm animal species
was, however, withdrawn and there were concerns over one of its
E
metabolites in cattle which had potential teratogenic effects in
laboratory rodents. However, because it is listed in Annex 2 and
Fgure 33.2 Local anaesthetic techniques used for bovine heads. Modified
 can be used in horses (which may go for human consumption),
fom wiliam J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb
and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4lh Edition. Copyright 2007.
some people prefer to use it in cattle, especially where procaine is
with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
not advised (e.g. for epidural blocks), or where they fee that
A = local infiltration of eyelids.
lidocaine would provide a superior block and better local anaes-
B = auriculopalpebral nerve block.
thesia than procaine. All the blocks described below are based on
C = infraorbital nerve block.
experience with 2% lidocaine (either with or without epinephrine; 
D = cornual nerve block.
and when epinephrine should be excluded will be highlighted).
E = mental nerve block.
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia 287
should be injected where the nerve leaves the foramen (fan out
the cornual branch of the lacrimal nerve, local anaesthetic must 
the injection volume over a small arc just rostral to the foramen);
be infiltrated half way between the lateral canthus of the eye and
 or 10-15 ml procaine 5% (with epinephrine).
the lateral horn base. To desensitise the cornual branch of the
 infratrochlear nerve, local anaesthetic must be infltrated half way
Mental nerve block
between the medial canthus of the eye and the medial horn base.
This block desensitises the lower lip, but not any teeth, unless you
 The dose for adult animals is 2-3 ml lidocaine 2% (with epine-
insert the needle a long way into the foramen (Figure 33.2; see E).
 phrine), or 1-2 ml procaine 5% (with epinephrine) at each site.
For an adult cow, 5-10 ml lidocaine 2% (with epinephrine), or
Eye blocks
2-8 ml procaine 5% (with epinephrine) is used.
The literature can be confusing as several different versions of
Cornual nerve block
similar techniques exist.
The cornual nerve is a branch of the lacrimal nerve (also called
 Zygomaticotemporal), which is a branch of the ophthalmic divi-
Retrobulbar block
sion of the trigeminal nerve. In calves, the best site to desensitise
 See Figure 33.4. This block ideally desensitises cranial nerves II,
this nerve is in the depression behind the lateral canthus of the
III, IV, VI and the ophthalmic and maxillary branches of V; and
eye, and beneath the temporal ridge, about one-third the way back
therefore all the extraocular muscles, the entire globe and the
along the ridge. An artery and vein also accompany the nerve, so
 conjunctivae. Evidence of successful block is by loss of corneal
beware intravascular injections. In adult cattle with well devel-
sensation, reduced lacrimation, exophthalmos and mydriasis.
oped horns, in addition to the cornual nerve block, extra infltra-
Retrobulbar block can be achieved by either a one-point tech-
tion of local anaesthetic into the subcutaneous tissues in an arc
 nique or a 4-point technique (or variations of these). Some opera-
around the caudal base of the horn is necessary in order to desen-
tors instill some topical local anaestheticagent into the conjunctival
sitise the cutaneous branches of the second cervical nerve. (Some
sac frst, for example ^ophthaine′ (proxymetacaine), or tetracaine
 people also suggest that in adult, well-horned cattle, an extra site
(amethocaine). Needles can be inserted either percutaneously
for infltration of the cornual nerve is beneath and half way along
through the eyelids, or through the conjunctiva and even through
the temporal ridge, to ensure block of the caudal branches of the
the base of the third eyelid.
nerve). A stout 1" (2.5 cm) needle should be used and between
 The 4-point technique involves making injections via the lateral
about 2 ml (small calves) and 10ml (adult cattle) lidocaine 2%
 and medial canthi and dorsally and ventrally around the orbit.
(with epinephrine) is necessary for each horn, or 1-8 ml procaine
The l-point technique uses a long curved needle, inserted either
 5% (with epinephrine). Ptosis of the eyelids signifies that you have
near the lateral or the medial canthus, and curved around the
blocked the auriculopalpebral nerve. See B and D in Figure 33.2:
 globe along the floor, roof, or side wall, of the orbit (depending
the nerves lie in close proximity, so eyelid droop often means your
upon personal preference). A long needle, about 4-6" (10-15 cm)
block was successful. (Lack of eyelid droop does not mean the
 long, is required, and 10-20 ml lidocaine 2% (with epinephrine)
block did not work though.)
 or 10-15 ml procaine 5% (with epinephrine); which should be
 Goat horns are supplied by the cornual branches of both the
injected as the needle is advanced as the injected local anaesthetic
lacrimal and infratrochlear nerves (Figure 33.3). To desensitise
 helps to push tissues out of the way and reduces the risk of intra-
vascular injection. It is, however, good technique to aspirate
before any injection is made, to reduce the chance of accidental
 intravascular injection.
Figure 33.3 Nerve blocks for dehorning goats. Reproduced from william J.
Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and Jones"
 Figure 33.4 Retrobulbar block. With needle placement through the medial 
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4l Edition. Copyright 2007, with per-
canthus (A), see how the needle tip reaches the orbital apex (B). Reproduced 
mission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
from William J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb
A = cornual branch of lacrimal nerve (ophthalmic V).
and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4l Edition. Copyright 2007.
B = cornual branch of infratrochlear nerve (ophthalmic V).
with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
288  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Complications include:
insert a needle (at least 10 cm long), into the depression through
the subcutaneous local anaesthetic bleb and aim rostroventrally
● Puncture of the globe.
towards the point of the ^cone^ made by the orbital contents, in
● Increased intra-ocular pressure because of exophthalmos and
the pterygopalatine fossa (Figure 33.5, a). About 15 ml lidocaine
 the volume of local anaesthetic solution deposited behind the
2% (with epinephrine), or 8-10 ml procaine 5% (with epine-
globe.
phrine) are required. Aspirate before injecting to ensure the
● Retrobulbar haemorrhage if blood vessels are damaged.
needle did not penetrate the ventral maxillary artery. The needle
● Optic nerve damage.
is then partly withdrawn after performing the Peterson block.
● Subarachnoid injection of local anaesthetic into CSF with
Once its tip lies just subcutaneously, it can be re-directed caudally,.
resultant toxicity (seizures; respiratory and cardiovascular
laterally to the zygomatic arch,forabout 2-3 cm, and further local
depression). There is a dural sheath (within which CSF is
anaesthetic can be injected as the needle is advanced. This effects
present), surrounding each optic nerve as it extends from the
the (auriculo)palpebral block, and requires about 5 ml lidocaine
brain. The lateral/dorsal approach carries a slightly lower risk
2% (with epinephrine), or 3 ml procaine 5% (with epinephrine).
of penetrating the optic nerve/meningeal sheath, as the optic
The block will reduce blinking, so the eye becomes vulnerable to
 nerve enters the globe more medially/ventrally.
dust entry or trauma, although this is not a concern if the block
● Occasionally the deposition of local anaesthetic solution behind
is performed before enucleation.
 the eye willstimulate the oculo-cardiac reflex, so keep a check 
on heart rate.
 If performed only for enucleation, there is less worry about the
Local anaesthetic techniques for limbs, digits,
increase in intra-ocular pressure increasing the risk of globe
tail and perineum
rupture.
Perineural infitration
Peterson's block
Perineural infltration is possible with good anatomical knowl-
edge. The skin, however, is tightly adhered to the distal limbs and
the retrobulbar block, it is less risky. If done correctly, and com-
the fascia is dense, which can sometimes make such injections
bined with an auriculopalpebral block, then it should desensitise
 difficult. f cellulitis is present, perineural injections may be con-
all three branches of cranial nerve V (ophthalmic, maxillary and
tra-indicated, not only because the local anatomy becomes unrec-
mandibular), cranial nerves III, IV and VI, and the palpebral
ognisable, but also because injections probably should not be
branch of the facial nerve VII (which provides only motor supply
made into potentially infected tissues.
to the orbicularis oculi muscle). (Sometimes, cranial nerve II will
be blocked too.) Anaesthesia of the eye and orbit is therefore
 Proximal limb nerve blocks
provided by the Peterson block (Figure 33.5; see A), with immo-
 For desensitisation of the hock and limb distal to the hock, the
bilisation of the globe. Total immobilisation of the eyelids requires
following nerves must be blocked (Figure 33.6): A, the common
additional (auriculo)palpebral block (Figure 33.5; see B), of which
peroneal nerve (branch of sciatic nerve) and B, the tibial nerve
only the palpebral part is really necessary. Note that this block also 
(branch of sciatic nerve). The common peroneal nerve passes
 produces almost complete anaesthesia of the side of the head/face.
caudal to the lateral collateral ligament of the stifle. It can be
Locate the depression where the caudal rim of the orbit meets
blocked at a point just behind the caudal most edge of the lateral
the zygomatic arch; rostral to the coronoid process of the mandi-
tibial plateau, just proximal to where the nerve passes between
ble, and inject a bleb of local anaesthetic subcutaneously. Then,
h ( s)  y rosxa  e aun pue sn snad
20g needle and 20ml lidocaine 2% (with epinephrine) will be
required.
The tibial nerve can be blocked about 10 cm proximal to the
point of the hock,between the common calcaneal and deep digital
flexor tendons, on the medial aspect of the limb. A 2" (5cm)
18-20g needle and 20 ml lidocaine 2% (with epinephrine) will be
required.
 Cattle usually cope well with a desensitised lower limb and will
remain standing.
 For desensitisation distal to the carpus, the following nerves
must be blocked (see Figure 33.7): the medial and dorsal antebra-
chial nerves which are branches of the musculocutaneous (A) and
Figure 33.5 Peterson eye block (A), with auriculopalpebral block (B).
radial (A) nerves, the ulnar nerve (B) and the median nerve (C).
To block A and A', inject 10-20ml 2% lidocaine (with epine-
Reproduced from william J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm
(eds), Lumb and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4" Edition.
phrine) in a line across the dorsal aspect of the distal radius. To
Copyright 2007, with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 block B, try to palpate the nerve about 10cm proximal to the
a = foramen orbitorotundum; b = pterygoid crest; c = coronoid process.
accessory carpal bone, on the caudolateral surface of radius
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia 289
a
Figure 33.7 Forelimb 'proximal' nerve blocks. Modified from William J.
Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and Jones'
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4l Edition. Copyright 2007, with per-
Figure 33.6 Hind limb 'proximal' nerve blocks. Reproduced from William J.
mission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and Jones^
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4l Edition. Copyright 2007, with per-
A = musculocutaneous nerve; A' = radial nerve; B = ulnar nerve; C = median 
nerve; D = axial digital nerves.
 mission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
A = common peroneal nerve; B = tibial nerve.
between flexor carpi ulnaris and ulnaris lateralis; inject about 5 ml
2% lidocaine (with epinephrine). To block C, feel about 5 cm
distal to the elbow on the medial aspect of the limb, along the
caudomedial radius, and inject about 20ml 2% lidocaine (with
epinephrine). Cattle usually cope well with a desensitised lower
limb and should remain standing.
Distal limb nerve blocks
To desensitise the interdigital cleft, inject 5-10 ml 2% lidocaine
(with epinephrine) at sites D (axial digital nerves) as depicted in
Figure 33.8 Nerve blocks of the lower forelimb. Reproduced from
Figure 33.7.
Anaesthesia of Cattle. In: Veterinary Anaesthesia. 10lh Edition. Eds: Hall LW.
To desensitise both medial and lateral forelimb digits, local
Clarke Kw, Trim CM. Chapter 12. pp 315-339. Copyright 2001, with permis-
anaesthetic must be injected at A, B, C, D and E in Figure 33.8. If
 sion from Elsevier.
only the lateral digit is to be desensitised, then injections at B, C,
 D and E are required, whereas for the medial digit, injections at
 to anatomical and other anaesthetic texts for more details on these
A, D and E are required. The reader is referred to anatomy and
nerve blocks.
further anaesthesia texts for more details on these blocks.
For desensitisation of the hindlimb digits (Figure 33.9), the
Ring block
superficial peroneal nerve (at A), the deep peroneal nerve (at B),
 Normally local anaesthetic solution without epinephrine is used
and the medial and lateral plantar metatarsal nerves (at C: medi-
for these blocks so as not to compromise the blood supply to the
ally and laterally), must be blocked. Again, the reader is referred
 distal limb and to allow greater spread of the local anaesthetic in
290  Veterinary Anaesthesia
A
8
Figure 33.9 Nerve blocks of the distal hindlimb. Reproduced from
Anaesthesia of Catle. In: Veterinary Anaesthesia. 10lh Edition. Eds: Hall LW.
Clarke Kw, Trim CM. Chapter 12, pp 315-339. Copyright 2001, with permis-
A
sion from Elsevier.
Fgure 33.10 Forelimb IVRA: superficial veins. Reproduced from Wwiliam J.
the tissues for a better block. This block can be performed proxi-
Tranquilli John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and Jones'
mal to regions of cellulitis, but injections should not be made into
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4lh Edition. Copyright 2007, with per-
 mission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
inflamed and potentially infected tissues.
aow uan lenibip ewid leael = q :uan jedeeaw jesop uowo = e
Intravenous regional anaesthesia
 commonly the medial palmar digital vein, a branch of the radial vein, is used;:
on the medial aspect of the limb); c = lateral palmar metacarpal vein; the
(IVRA or Bier's block)
 medial palmar metacarpal vein can also be used.
This is usually easiest to perform if the cow is cast into lateral
recumbency (e.g. by Reuff's method); or occasionally is possible
when cows are restrained in a crush, when the leg-hoist loop may
also be tight enough to provide the tourniquet. A superficial vein
must frst be identified; cellulitis may preclude this. Apply a tour-
niquet proximal to the area to be blocked (Figures 33.10 and
 33.11). Common sites are just above or below the carpus or tarsus.
If above the hock, then use bandage rolls to fll the bilateral
depressions between the Achilles tendon and the tibia, to reduce
damage to the tendons and to increase the efficacy of the tourni-
quet. Locate a superfcial vein distal to the tourniquet. Clip and
 prepare the injection site aseptically if possible, then, for an adult
cow, inject 20-30 ml lidocaine 2% (and without epinephrine is
best to allow maximum spread into the tissues) usually against 
the direction of blood flow in the vein (i.e. back towards the foot).
Volumes towards the lower end of the range are more suitable
when the tourniquet is placed distal to the hock or carpus; larger
volumes are indicated when the tourniquet is placed proximal to
the hock or carpus. For an adult sheep (50-70kg), 5-15 ml lido-
caine 2% is usually sufficient; the volume also depending, to some
i as adod a nrn aun o d a o a
more certain block is achieved if the limb is frst exsanguinated
B
(by raising the limb above the heart for a few minutes or better,
Fgure 33.11 Hindlimb IVRA: superficial veins. Reproduced from Skarda RT,
by applying an Esmarch bandage, but you might not want to do
Tranquili Wl. Local and Regional Anesthetic and Analgesic Techniques:
this to a very inflamed leg) before tourniquet application. It is
Ruminants and Swine. In: Lumb and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and
often helpful to ensure that a vein is cannulated before the limb
Anaigesia. 4lh Edition. Eds: Tranquilli wJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Chapter
 23, pp 643-681. Copyright 2007, with permission from Blackwell Publishing
applying and then unwrapping an Esmarch bandage. See also
Ltd.
Chapter 14.
'uan jenbip jenueld jeiatel = a :(sadse leianel) uian snouaydes jeiael = p
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia 
291
Once the local anaesthetic has been injected, allow a good 10-
20 min for full desensitisation to occur. Test for anaesthesia of the
digit/limb by needle pricking. The interdigital fossa is the last site
to become desensitised, therefore this is a useful test site to test to
assess if the block has worked. In addition, if the tourniquet is not 
tight enough this site will not block completely.
The toxic dose of lidocaine varies a little between species, but
 is probably between 4 and 10mg/kg. 30ml of 2% lidocaine only
3yoos saae ue iog (oz sn oe) aue suog su
Co-1
Co-2
cow, this is below the toxic dose, and thus if your tourniquet is
loose, or comes off too soon' and this lidocaine enters the circula-
tion, it is highly unlikely to have serious consequences. Many
books suggest that the tourniquet must not be removed for at least
15-20 min after local anaesthetic is injected to reduce the rush of
local anaesthetic into the general circulation, with ensuing signs
of toxicity. However, from the above you will see that this should
be a very rare problem, unless an animal has an individual sensi-
Figure 33.12 Epidural (extradural injection into intercoccygeal space Co1--
Co2. Reproduced from william J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A
tivity to the local anaesthetic. If however, large volumes of local
anesthetic that include epinephrine (usually at around 0.01 mg/
Grimm (eds), Lumb and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4lh
 Edition. Copyright 2007, with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
ml) are inadvertently injected intravascularly, there may be some
A = normal needle placement; B = needle placement for insertion of an 
cardiovascular effects.
epidural catheter.
There is a lot of debate about how long tourniquets can be
safely left in place so that you do not cause damage to distal limb
the needle advances so easily that its tip may hit the ventral floor
structures or get resultant reperfusion problems after their release.
of the vertebral canal before you can halt its progression. If this
 In horses and cattle, because they have relatively more tendons
 happens, you may need to withdraw it slightly, as otherwise injec-
and less muscle mass in the distal limbs than man, tourniquets
tion may be diffcult if the needle tip is hard against the floor of
can be left on safely for 2-2.5 h, and they have been left in place
 the canal. Always gently aspirate to ensure subsequent injections
for 3h without obvious problems. A useful 'side effect' of tourni-
are not intravascular.
    si   r e 
 The shaded area in Figure 33.12 shows the region of perineal
which is very useful for digit amputations.
desensitisation after injection of about 5 ml of 2% lidocaine (+/-
Epidural (or extradural) block
epinephrine), in an average 500kg cow. The tail should be desen-
sitised too. For similar effect in adult sheep and goats, 1-2 ml
Commonly local anaesthetics, but also opioids and c2 agonists,
lidocaine 2% is administered.
can be administered into the epidural
1  (extradural) space.
Epidural catheters can be passed cranially up the vertebral
Injections are usually made into the epidural space between the
canal by a premeasured length, and then injection of drugs results
last sacral and frst coccygeal vertebrae (Sa5-Col), or, between 
the first two coccygeal vertebrae (Col-Co2) as there may
in a belt of analgesia/anaesthesia in the proximity of the catheter's
tip. Catheters can also be left in situ (if asepsis is preserved) to
be fusion between the sacrum and the frst coccygeal vertebra
ssp dn-d use aq essee n u a
(Figure 33.12). As the spinal cord terminates at Lu6/Sa1 in cows,
and the meningeal sac continues only to Sa2-Sa3, there should
 Checking the needle is in the correct place
be no danger of entering the intrathecal space (and injecting
into CSF), with sacrococcygeal or intercoccygeal injections. The
● Loss of resistance to injection. Take a 5 ml syringe, into which
situation is similar for sheep and goats, so that sacrococcygeal
 is drawn 3 ml sterile saline and 1 ml air. Then attempt to inject
or intercoccygeal epidural injections can be performed; again
this via the needle as the needle is advanced into the space. A
 injecting via the Sa5-Co1 or Co1-Co2 interspace.
sudden loss of resistance to injection occurs when the needle
Lumbosacral injection is more rarely performed, at least in
tip enters the epidural space; the saline injects easily, and the
standing cattle, as there is an increased chance of performing an
cushion' of air (which sits on top of the saline when the syringe
intrathecal injection. However, this site is sometimes used in
is connected to the needle hub),is not compressed.
sheep, see below.
● The hanging drop technique. Once the needle tip is beneath
The Sa5-Co1 or Co1-Co2 space is located by pumping the
the skin, place a bleb of sterile saline into its hub. As the needle
tail-head up and down to feel for the intervertebral space with the
is advanced into the epidural space, the saline is sucked into the
 most movement. The site should be prepared aseptically.
 needle because there is normally a slight negative pressure at
 The needle, at least 2" (5 cm) long for adult cattle, is inserted
 this region of the epidural 'space.
into the space perpendicularly to the skin in both orthogona
● The whoosh test. Air or saline is injected rapidly, whilst listen-
 planes. The needle is advanced until the interarcuate ligament is
 ing to the area cranial to the needle with a stethoscope, and a
 penetrated, which is often felt as a popping sensation. Sometimes
whooshing sound should be heard.
292   Veterinary Anaesthesia
What to inject?
to enable better analgesia provision by the opioid but to prevent
Sometimes epidural blocks are quite patchy. It may be that uneven
too much rostral spread of the local anaesthetic block.
epidural fat deposits or fbrous tissue interferes with the even
spread of the injectate.
Epidural drugs
All drugs ntendedfor epidural injectin, especially if theinjectin
Local anaesthetics
is to be repeated, are best if preservative-free.
Remember that motor blockade as well as sensory block will
 ensue, so beware ataxia and recumbency. Some people hobble the
Contra-indications to epidural blocks
hind limbs of adult cattle to prevent them doing the splits, which
Obesity (rarely a problem for dairy breeds), local skin infection,
ps o alnns uu aau  io umop oa Aau se uaddey Aeu 
perhaps distant foci of infection too, distorted pelvic/tail head
whilst ataxic. For adult cattle, normally 5(-10) ml lidocaine 2%
anatomy, coagulopathies, pre-existing neuropathies.
is sufficient for most procedures involving obstetrical things or
the tail, and does not usually result in recumbency. Epidural
 Risks associated with epidural injections
anaesthesia abolishes the abdominal contractions (straining)
Nerve damage, hypotension, hypothermia, systemic toxicity
associated with the 'pelvic reflex, but will not reduce uterine
(inadvertent IV injection), introduction of infection with resultant
contractions secondary to the oxytocin release which follows
meningitis, osteomyelitis etc. Intrathecal (subarachnoid) injection
cervical stretch (the Ferguson reflex). Epinephrine may be
should be very rare at these (Sa-Col or Col-Co2) sites, as only
 included, and may offer some local anaesthetic action of its own,
cauda equina nerves are present. Ataxia/recumbency = nuisance.
as well as prolonging the block. It may also reduce cranial
spread/analgesia of the injected drug. Around 130 ml lidocaine
 Epidural block in sheep and goats
2% per average adult cow (500-600kg) will desensitise cranially
Lumbosacral epidural block is performed in sheep and goats
to at least the diaphragm, and will definitely result in recumbency.
(Figure 33.13), for procedures such as vasectomy and occasionally
Local anesthetic epidural blocks also block sympathetic nerves
  n a aa an roi s 
to the caudal end of the animal, resulting in peripheral and
1-2h after surgery which may delay the lambs suckling). The
splanchnic vasodilation and therefore some hypotension; heat
injection site is located similarly to its location in dogs (see
loss is also encouraged following peripheral vasodilation.
Chapter 14). Injection of 1 ml lidocaine 2% (or procaine 5%) per
For sheep and goats, 2ml lidocaine 2% injected at the sacro-
4.5 kg body weight (11-15 ml per 50-70 kg adult sheep), is usually
coccygeal or intercoccygeal site can be used for obstetrical/tail
required to ensure suffcient desensitisation. This will result in
procedures.
hindlimb weakness and recumbency. Occasionally, insertion of
the needle at this site will result in penetration of the dura and
α2 agonists, especially xylazine
therefore CSF willflow from the needle hub, orbe easily aspirated.
These can be used alone but the onset of action is slower than
If this occurs, even if the needle is withdrawn slightly, any drugs
after lidocaine (i.e. 20min for xylazine compared with about
5min after lidocaine), although the duration of action is longer
(i.e. 3-6h compared with 1-2h), probably because of the local
vasoconstriction caused. Xylazine also has some local anaesthetic
properties, which along with some systemic absorption (and seda-
tion) increases the risk of ataxia and recumbency. Alone, xylazine
(for adult cattle) can be used at around 0.05-0.07 mg/kg, usually
made up to a volume of around 5-7 ml in total, respectively, for
injection. Alternatively, it can be combined with lidocaine, i.e.
0.03 mg/kg xylazine plus c. 0.22 mg/kg lidocaine 2%. For adult
sheep (50-70kg body mass) a useful combination is 1.75 ml lido-
51
caine 2% plus 0.25 ml xylazine 2%.
Opioids
None are licensed, but morphine at 0.1-0.2 mg/kg provides anal-
 gesia, at least up to the last rib, and even up to the thoracic limbs.
Analgesia may be slow to onset (1-4h), but may last up to 24h.
Again, the final volume of injectate influences the rostral spread
of analgesia, and may need adjusting by addition of sterile saline
or sterile water. Epidural opioid analgesia is usually insuffcient
for surgical/incisional (ipicritic) pain, and must be combined with
Fgure 33.13 Goats and sheep: sites for epidural injection. Reproduced from
a local anaesthetic (or possibly an α2 agonist), if surgery is being
William J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and
contemplated. If using a combination at the sacro-coccygeal injec-
Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4 Edition. Copyright 2007, with
tion site, administer the opioid first and the local anaesthetic last
permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia 
293
injected may now have direct access to the CSF, therefore it is
advisable to either abandon this block, or reduce the dose injected;
normally only about a quarter of the intended epidural dose is
administered; and preferably only agents without epinephrine.
Sacrococcygeal epidural block (1-2 ml lidocaine 2% +/ 0.25 ml
xylazine 2%) is useful for vaginal prolapses.
Terminology
'Caudal, low or posterior epidural block is sometimes the term
applied to epidural injections where the animal retains its hind
 st ieida r, no ai, sm te ro q
term applied to epidural injections where the animal loses control
of its hind limbs. The difference depends upon the quantity of
drug injected when the injection site is the same (i.e. sacro-
coccygeal or intercoccygeal). Segmental belts’ of anaesthesia,
however, can also be produced by lumbar or thoracic injection at
specifc sites. Advancing epidural catheters cranially from a more
caudal insertion site also allows injection at the tip of the catheters,
 SO, again, more cranial belts of anaesthesia can be provided.
True spinal/subarachnoid/intrathecal
True spinal/subdural (subarachncid)/intrathecal injections are
performed more rarely in cattle, but may be accidental or indeed
Figure 33.14 Udder innervation. Reproduced from William J. Tranquilli.
intentional during injection at the lumbosacral site in sheep (e.g.
John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and Jones' Veterinary
 ssd   n m   (a 
Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4h Edition. Copyright 2007, with permission of
recumbency: the dose of local anaesthetic used should be about
 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
1/5 to 1/4 of that for epidural injection at this site (see above).
A, B, C and D = inguinal nerves; E = perineal nerve.
Local anaesthetic without epinephrine should be used. See Chapter
14 for comparison between epidural and intrathecal blocks.
Techniques for udder and teats
Udder
● Paravertebral +/- caudal epidural.
● Caudal epidural, but with slightly higher dose of injectate than 
for tail/obstetric procedures (but beware recumbency).
 The cranial portion of the udder receives its nerve supply from
branches of the frst two lumbar segmental nerves (Figure 33.14).
The bulk of the udder receives its innervation from branches of 
the third and fourth lumbar segmental nerves. The caudal most
area and escutcheon are innervated by branches of the perineal
and other nerves from the second, third and fourth sacral nerves.
Teats
● Ring block around the base of the teat. Use local anaesthetic
without epinephrine so as not to compromise teat blood supply
(A in Figure 33.15).
● IVRA if you can find a tiny local superficial vein; a tourniquet
(stretchy bandage) is placed around the base of the teat up
against the udder (D in Figure 33.15).
 Blunt teat
 cannula 
● Infusion of local anaesthetic into the teat cistern; after milk is
stripped out. (A tourniquet is placed around the teat base to
Figure 33.15 Local anaesthetic techniques for teats. Reproduced from
localise the local anaesthetic solution to teat canal.) This will
wWilliam J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and
desensitise the mucosal lining of teat canal (C in Figure 33.15).
● Inverted V' block proximal to the wound (B in Figure 33.15).
of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 294  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Local techniques for genitalia
in Figure 33.16). Then redirect the needle tip slightly more ven-
trally than the initial position, just distal to where the communi-
Epidural block can be used, but beware recumbency.
cating branch from the sciatic nerve (D in Figure 33.16) joins in,
Pudendal nerve block
and inject a further 5-10 ml.
 The ischiorectal fossae lie either side of the tail head; you can
 This is useful for penile examination or surgery and to reduce
 see them easily in boney cows as the depressions on either side of
straining after vaginal or cervical trauma. The block was originally
the tail head, just proximal to the pin-bones (ischial tuberosities).
described by Larsen The pudendal nerve comprises a main
 Each fossa is located between the ischial tuberosity ventrally, the
branch from the third and fourth sacral segmental nerves and
sacrosciatic ligament dorsolaterally and the rectal wall medially.
a communicating branch from the sciatic nerve (Lu6/Sa1/2)
Bilateral nerve blocks must be performed for total anaesthesia of
(Figure 33.16). The pudendal nerve is motor to the distal two-
a era si sau lnd a on de n a sd a
thirds of the retractor penis muscle and sensory to the penis. The
fossae (Figure 33.17), but there is also a lateral approach, through
caudal rectal nerve is motor to the proximal one-third of the
the broad sheet of the sacrosciatic ligament (Figure 33.18).
retractor penis muscle. The deep and superficial perineal nerves
 Local anaesthetic is deposited initially where A and B are
(branches of the pudendal nerve) are sensory to the perineum,
labeled in Figure 33.16 to block the internal pudendal nerve,
prepuce and scrotum of males, and the escutcheon and caudal
 then near C to block the caudal rectal nerve, and near D to block
udder of females.
the communicating branch from the sciatic nerve.
 Identify, during per rectum examination, the cranial part of the
 If performing penile surgery, at the end of the procedure the
lesser sciatic foramen which is located along the ventrolateral
penis should be replaced into the sheath and a piece of bandage
pelvic wall. (The obturator foramen lies on the floor of the pelvis.)
tied around the distal sheath to protect the penis from trauma
The caudal part of the lesser sciatic foramen is obscured by the
until the block has worn off (duration of lidocaine block around
coccygeus muscle. Palpate the internal pudendal artery pulsating:
1-2 h), at which time the bandage must be removed.
the pudendal nerve lies about a fnger width dorsally. Insert a long
(10-15 cm) needle via the ischiorectal fossa (see below), after
aseptic preparation and subcutaneous local anaesthetic bleb depo-
Local techniques for laparotomies
sition, and guide the needle tip to near the nerve with help from
Epidural block
the hand that is within the rectum. Inject 20 ml 2% lidocaine with
A “high' epidural block is required, so recumbency in more likely
epinephrine (8-15 ml procaine 5% with epinephrine), and
(with local anaesthetics). Other techniques are therefore preferred.
massage it around to ensure that the two branches (A and B in
 Figure 33.16) of the nerve are blocked. Then re-direct the needle
Paravertebral block
tip more dorsally (after slight withdrawal), and inject a further
5-10 ml lidocaine 2% with epinephrine (or 3-8 ml procaine 5%
This is commonly performed to desensitise the flank, which
with epinephrine), to effect blockade of the caudal rectal nerve (C
 requires that the thirteenth thoracic and first two lumbar segmen-
→caudal
Sacrosciatic
ligament
Lesser
sciatic
foramen
Figure 33.16 Nerves and vessels on medial surface of bovine pelvic wall. Modified from Textbook of Veterinary Anatomy. 3d Edition. Eds: Dyce KM, Sack
WO, Wensing CJG. Chapter 29, The pelvis and reproductive organs of female ruminants, pp 691-712. Copyright 2002, with permission from Elsevier.
Internal pudendal (pudic) nerve = A and B. Caudal rectal nerve = C. Communicating branch of sciatic nerve to pudendal nerve = D. Sciatic nerve = 5. Internal 
pudendal artery = 10. Obturator nerve = 6.
Sacrum = 1. Pubic symphysis = 2.
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia  295
Figure 33.19 Paravertebral block. Reproduced, with kind permission, from
Skarda RT, Local and Regional Analgesia. In: Principles and Practice of
Veterinary Anesthesia Ed: Short CE. Chapter 8, pp 91-133. Copyright
Williams and wilkins, Baltimore, MD, USA (1987).
Figure 33.17 Left pudendal and caudal rectal nerve block performed from
left ischiorectal fossa in a young bullock.
block the nerves as proximally as possible, whereas distal tech-
niques block the nerves a little further away from where they leave
the intervertebral foramina. Once the nerves have emerged from
their foramina, they divide into dorsal and ventral branches. The 
ventral branches then course beneath the lumbar transverse proc-
esses, diagonally caudally. The dorsal branches also course diago-
nally caudally, and supply cutaneous branches which innervate a
long way down the flank. Both dorsal and ventral branches supply
 muscle and skin. The ventral branches also supply the peritoneum
and carry sympathetic nerves. Thus both dorsal and ventral
branches must be blocked to anaesthetise the flank fully. (Block
of the sympathetic nerves results in vasodilation.)
The proximal technique was frst described by Farquharson,
 and was modifed by anaesthetists at Liverpool and Cambridge
veterinary schools (Figure 33.19). The lumbar transverse proc-
esses are initilly palpated. Normally the transverse process of the
fth lumbar vertebra is the first lumbar transverse process palpa-
ble cranial to the ^hook bone' (tuber coxae). From here you can
count the others cranially, but the transverse process of the first
Figure 33.18 Right pudendal and caudal rectal nerve block performed from 
lumbar vertebra is shorter and narrower than the others and is
the lateral approach.
often obscured behind the last rib. If you use your fngers like 
 calipers, having gauged the distance between say the second and
tal nerves must be desensitised (and possibly the third and fourth
third lumbar transverse processes, you can now determine where
segmental lumbar nerves if the caudal part of the sublumbar fossa
the transverse process of the first lumbar vertebra ought to be.
also needs to be desensitised). If the third and fourth lumbar
 The sites to prepare for injection are: from just cranial to the
segmental nerves are blocked, there may be some hind leg weak-
transverse process of the first lumbar vertebra; over and between
the transverse processes of the first and second lumbar vertebrae;
hind leg muscles.
and between the transverse processes of the second and third
The aim of the paravertebral nerve block is to desensitise the
lumbar vertebrae; and for each of these sites, about half way
segmental nerves as soon as possible after they leave the interver-
between the dorsal spinous processes and the lateral tips of the
tebral foramina, before they have had much time to branch
transverse processes. After aseptic preparation of the injection
(Figure 33.19). By keeping the injected local anaesthetic distant
sites, subcutaneous (and slightly deeper into the epaxial muscles)
to the site of surgery, there is less distortion of the surgical site 
blebs of local anaesthetic are injected at the sites where the larger
 and some believe that wound healing is therefore improved.
paravertebral needles will later be inserted. This helps to reduce
Several techniques have been described, broadly categorised
spasm of longissmus dorsi muscles when you subsequently insert
into proximal and distal techniques. Proximal techniques aim to
a paravertebral (p-v) needle.
296  Veterinary Anaesthesia
The Liverpool technique
The p-v needle can then be inserted at right angles to the skin,
at the site between the second and third lumbar vertebrae. Aim
to just hit the caudal edge of the transverse process of the second
lumbar vertebra and then walk off' the back of the process. As
you do this, the needle should pop' through the inter-transverse
ligament, and the ventral branch of the second lumbar segmental
nerve lies under here. For an adult cow, inject about 20-30 ml
lidocaine 2% with epinephrine, whilst gently moving the needle
around/redirecting it a little, to facilitate adequate spread of the
local anaesthetic solution. Before fully withdrawing the needle,
once its tip is above′ the intertransverse ligament, inject another
5-10 ml of local anaesthetic to block the dorsal branch. (For adult 
Fgure 33.20 when the paravertebral block has worked, the spine bows
sheep, the doses required are around 5 ml of local anaesthetic for
out on the blocked side.Reproduced from Anaesthesia of Cattle. In: veterinary
the ventral branch and 3-5ml for the dorsal branch of each seg-
Anaesthesia. 10lh Edition. Eds: Hall LWy, Clarke KW, Trim CM. Chapter 12,
 pp 315-339. Copyright 2001, with permission from Elsevier.
mental nerve.) Repeat this whole process, by next aiming off the
caudal edge of the transverse process of the first lumbar vertebra,
for blocking the frst lumbar segmental nerve. But then, before
cult to find. That said, the above techniques are also more tricky
removing your needle totally, walk it off the cranial border of the
in fatter or well muscled animals, and may require longer needles
transverse process of the first lumbar vertebra, slightly nearer the
and larger doses of local anaesthetic.
dorsal midline of the animal, and then block the thirteenth tho-
racic segmental nerve in a similar manner.
How can you tell if the block has worked?
 If you use spinal-type p-v needls, with a short bevel, and
The flank becomes warm (local vasodilation), and because of
therefore relative bluntness, you may better appreciate the sensa-
fank muscle relaxation, the flank bows out on the side of the
block so that the spine tends to curve, with the convexity to the
 After each segmental nerve has been blocked, as you finally
side of the block (Figure 33.20). Because of vasodilation, oozing
withdraw the needle from the skin, you should apply a little
haemorrhage may be increased, which can be a nuisance for
downward pressure on the skin, as this prevents separation of the
surgery. The muscle relaxation usually helps surgery, although the
connective tissue and aspiration of air through the needle as it is
bowing of the flank may make approximation of muscles and skin
withdrawn.
(at the end of surgery) more difficult without some tension.
The Cambridge technique
Inverse 'I' (or reverse 7) block
The p-v needle is inserted slightly nearer the dorsal midline of the
The flank is infltrated along the lines of black dots illustrated in
animal than in the Liverpool technique (about 1 cm closer to the
Figure 33.2la; hence the name inverted L' (or 'reversed 7") block
dorsal spinous processes), and is walked off the cranial borders
when operating on the left flank (When operating on the right
of the lumbar transverse processes instead. This time, to block the
side, the block would be a ^rotated L, or a standard 7' block.) The
second lumbar segmental nerve, the p-v needle is walked off the
open circle depicts the occasional caudal extent of the block
cranial edge of the transverse process of the third lumbar vertebra;
required.
to block the frst lumbar segmental nerve, the needle is walked
 About 100 ml lidocaine 2% (+/- epinephrine), is needed for an
off the cranial border of the transverse process of the second
adult cow; 18-20g, 1.5" (3.5 cm)+ needle; or around 25 ml for an
lumbar vertebra; and to block the thirteenth thoracic segmental
adult sheep (the local anaesthetic solution can be diluted to facili-
nerve, the needle is walked off the cranial edge of the transverse
tate the block).
 process of the frst lumbar vertebra. Local anaesthetic doses are
 Local anaesthetic is infltrated down' the flank along the caudal
as above.
 border of the last rib, and then along a horizontal line extending
caudally from the last rib, just ventral to the transverse processes
The Cornell technique
of the lumber vertebrae, and extending as far caudally as the
 Magda and Cakala described this distal p-v technique. The seg-
transverse process of lumbar vertebra 4 (or perhaps more caudally
 mental nerves are approached from the distal tips of the transverse
if required). Starting from one initial desensitised site (superficial
lumbar processes, advancing the needles parallel with the long
tissues, then deeper muscles and finally the peritoneum), you can
axes of the transverse processes, and depositing local anaesthetic
then advance the block along by next placing your needle at the
above and below them. Each injection is made in a fan shape, with
 edge of the previously desensitised area, so that the animal doesn't
the needle being moved around gently, to increase the success of
feel all the subsequent needle insertions.
the block. This approach is more difficult in well muscled or fat
One advantage of this block is that you do not need much
animals, as the tips of the transverse processes may be very diff-
anatomical knowledge. It gives decent muscle relaxation, but can
Ruminants: Local and general anaesthesia  297
be time consuming to perform and requires a lot of local anaes-
thetic. The toxic dose of lidocaine is 4-10 mg/kg, so for a 500 kg
cow, this would be a maximum of 5000mg, or 250ml of 2%
lidocaine (2% solution = 20 mg/ml). So if the cow looks slightly
 sleepy, and you did not sedate it but did use a large dose of local
anaesthetic, it may well be because of systemic absorption of the
lidocaine.
Line block (infiltration along proposed
incision site)
 Not much anatomical knowledge is required. Local anaesthetic
solution is infltrated along the intended incision line (e.g. Figure
33.21b). For an adult cow, around 100ml 2% lidocaine will be
 required.
For an adult (50-70kg) sheep, for a flank “line' block for
Caesarean section, 10-25 ml 2% (20 mg/ml) lidocaine should be
sufficient. It can also be diluted to a larger volume to facilitate
 performing the block.
 Problems include:
● Lack of muscle relaxation.
● Potential formation of haematomas, and presence of pockets?
(a)
of local anaesthetic along the incision line (makes surgery
harder as this can distort local anatomy).
● Possible interference with wound healing; beware especially if
adrenaline is included with the lidocaine.
● Systemic toxicity if large doses of local anaesthetic are used.
Further reading
Caulkett NA, MacDonald DG, Janzen ED, Cribb PN, Fretz PB
(1993) Xylazine hydrochloride epidural analgesia: a method for
 providing sedation and analgesia to facilitate castration of
mature bulls. The Compendium on Continuing Education for
the Practising Veterinarian: Food Animal Practice 15(8),
1155-1159.
Garcia-Villar R, Toutain PL, Alvinerie M, Ruckebusch Y (1981)
The pharmacokinetics of xylazine H
hydrochloride:
an
interspecific study. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and
Therapeutics 4, 87-92.
Hodgkinson O, Dawson L (2007) Practical anaesthesia and
analgesia in sheep, goats and calves. In Practice 29, 596-603.
Jedruch J, Gajewski Z (1986) The effect of detomidine hydrochlo-
ride (Domosedan) on the electrical activity of the uterus in
(b)
cows. Acta veterinaria Scandinavica Suppl. 82, 189-192.
Figure 33.21 (a) Injection sites for performing 'reverse 7 block. (b) Line 
 LeBlanc MM, Hubbell JAE, Smith HC (1984) The effects of xyla-
block of the flank. Reproduced from william J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon
zine hydrochloride on intrauterine pressure in the cow.
and Kurt A Grimm (eds), Lumb and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and
Theriogenology 21(5), 681-690.
Anaigesia, 4Edition.Copyright 2007,with permission of Blackwell Publishing
Peterson DR (1951) Nerve block of the eye and associated struc-
Ltd.
 tures. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
118, 145-148.
Riebold TW (2007) Ruminants. In: Lumb and Jones? Veterinary
 Anesthesia and Analgesia 4" Edn. Eds: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon
JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa, USA. Chapter 28,
Pp 731-746.
298  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007) Local and regional anesthetic
Self-test section
and analgesia techniques: ruminants and swine. In: Lumb and 
Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 4th Edn. Eds:
Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing.
Which of the following agents is usually not blamed
 Iowa, USA. Chapter 23, pp 643-681.
for increasing the risk of reticulorumenal reflux by
reducing lower oesophageal sphincter tone?
Torneke K, Bergstrom U, Neil A (2003) Interactions of xylazine 
A.
Xylazine.
and detomidine with alpha 2 adrenoceptors in brain tissues 
from cattle, swine and rats. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology
B.
Acepromazine.
C.
Diazepam.
and Therapeutics 26, 205-211.
D.
Atropine.
 Zaugg JL, Nussbaum M (1990) Epidural injection of xylazine: a
 new option for surgical analgesia of the bovine abdomen and
2.
 Which spinal segmental nerves are blocked with the
paravertebral block technique for laparotomy (for
udder. Veterinary Medicine 85, 1043-1045.
Caesarean section, abomasopexy or rumenotomy)?
A.
T12, T13, L1.
B.
T13, L1, L2.
C.
L1, L2, L3.
D.L2,L3,L4.
34
Lamoids (formerly South American camelids)
(llamas, alpacas, guanacos and vicunas)
Learning objectives
a jo si poe au pue spro jo se -asu pe -uni au ym re aq o 
anaesthesia.
 To be able to devise a protocol for sedation and general anaesthesia; recognising the need to provide analgesia.
1
Introduction
cheal ET tube, but lamoids are prone to nose-bleeds on intubation
and extubation, and beware the nasopharyngeal diverticulum (see
 Lamoids can be aggressive, especially the males; beware spits,
star mark in Figure 34.1).
bites, kicks and strikes.
 Lamoids are also prone to airway obstruction on intubation
 Only llamas and alpacas are farmed so far, mainly for their
and especially after tracheal extubation; possibly due to
fleece. Alpacas come in two varieties, distinguishable by their
laryngospasm/laryngeal oedema. Have a tracheostomy tube
fleece. Huacaya alpacas have shorter more crimpy, spongy fbres
available.
 Nasal oedema may develop during anaesthesia, as in horses,
with no crimp.
 Young lamoids are called crias. Parturition is referred to as
nasopharyngeal tubes can be used as for horses.
'unpacking' or criation.
 Lamoids are similar to ruminants in many respects, but are said
 It is hard to estimate their weight; the overall size can be
to be obligate nose-breathers like horses.
deceptive due to thick hair coat. Male llamas weigh 150-250kg:
 They have a placid/non-panicky nature, so often do not
female llamas weigh 100-200kg. Male alpacas weigh 60-80kg:
require sedation pre-induction or pre-recovery. They have a
female alpacas weigh 50-60 kg.
 3-compartment 'stomach' and are prone to salivation/drooling.
Jugular veins can be difficult to catheterise. There are no
 regurgitation, aspiration and bloat as ruminants. The same rules
 jugular grooves, lots of jugular venous valves; males have thick 
 apply for food and water withholding prior to general anaesthesia
tough skin, and cervical vertebral lateral processes can ^cover'/
ie. 18-24h (no more than 24h) food withdrawal, and around
fold over the vein. Aim high up the neck, towards the vein's
12-18h withholding of water if possible. They are also prone to
bifurcation at the angle of the mandible; or low down the neck
near the thoracic inlet. 16g catheters are commonly used. Cephalic
Regurgitation may occur during very light or very deep planes
veins may sometimes be used too; 18g catheters would be appro-
of anaesthesia; it can also be provoked during tracheal intubation
priate. Venous blood often looks more red’ than you would
attempts. Lamoids are said to respond to surgical stimuli, and
expect in lower altitude species (see further reading).
even tracheal intubation, with vagal (rather than sympathetic),
The trachea can be difficult to intubate. Desensitising the
responses; so may require anticholinergics: either atropine
larynx with topical local anaesthetic may help. A laryngoscope
0.02 mg/kg IV (or 0.04mg/kg IM), or glycopyrrolate 5-10μg/kg
with long blade and an endotracheal (ET) tube bougie will help.
IV. Anticholinergics, however, reduce gut motility, enhance
Hold the head and neck extended (aim for a 180° head-on-neck
oesophageal reflux (by reducing cardiac sphincter tone), reduce
angle); part the jaws as wide as possible using tapes to distract'
watery parts of respiratory secretions and saliva, reduce respira-
them (the labial fissure is narrow). Like ruminants, there is a
tory mucociliary activity, and result in bronchodilation (which
lingual 'torus′ to negotiate. If orotracheal intubation fails, try the
increases dead space and enhances rebreathing). Some people
nasotracheal route with tubes 1-2 sizes smaller than the orotra-
 place stomach tubes to direct any refluxed material away from the
299
 300  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Drugs and details for anaesthesia
Premedication
Xylazine 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV (up to 1 mg/kg IM) is commonly used;
the higher doses result in recumbency as with cattle. Beware if
pregnant, although not proven to cause abortion. Xylazine's
actions can be antagonised with atipamezole if problems occur,
such as prolonged recovery; dose c.50μg/kg and half of this can
be administered IM and half IV. Further doses may be adminis-
Nasopharynx
tered if necessary.
Butorphanol 0.1-0.2 mg/kg IV or IM.
Oesophagus
aenbun:
Induction
Oral
 Can be inhalational; some will tolerate a mask or nasopharyngeal
cavity
Tongue
tube insufflation.
HNE:92:
 Ketamine 2-5 mg/kg IV (5-10 mg/kg IM), is often combined
Oropharynx
with a benzodiazepine to reduce some of the muscle rigidity and
Figure 34.1 Sagittal section through lamoid head. Reproduced from:
help tracheal intubating conditions. Diazepam (or midazolam)
Riebold TW, Engel HN, Grubb TL, Adams JG, Huber MJ, Schmotzer WB (1994).
 dose around 0.05-0.2 mg/kg IV.
Orotracheal and nasotracheal intubation in llamas. Journar of the American
 Guaiphenesin may also be used, as may propofol, thiopental or
veterinary Medical Association 204 (5), 779-783. With kind permission of
 possibly even alfaxalone.
the American Veterinary Medical Association.
 Tracheal intubation 
pharynx/larynx, but I tend to find that they increase the amount
 See above. Use cuffed ET tubes of about 12 mm internal diameter
 of reflux and even provoke regurgitation, and it pours down the 
for adult llamas; may be down to 8-9 mm internal diameter for
outside of the tube too. In order to prevent the glottis from being
alpacas.
submerged by fluids in the pharyngeal/laryngeal region, the poll
should be raised above the stomach and nose levels with a sand 
Maintenance
bag under the throat region, much as for cattle. Cuffed endotra-
 Supplement oxygen, but beware NO as it partitions into spaces
cheal tubes should be used.
where gases of low solubility occur, e.g. methane in the gastroin-
 Lamcids are prone to stress-related third stomach compart-
testinal tract. Some degree of cardio-respiratory compromise can
ment ulcers. Minimise stress if possible, keep hospital stay as
occur if the gut volume and/or intra-abdominal pressure increase
short as possible and perhaps bring a companion animal from the
massively, secondary to compression of caudal vena cava and
herd. NSAIDs might form part of your analgesic protocol so anti-
'diaphragmatic splinting.
ulcer medications may feature in the treatment plan (see below).
Any of the volatile agents can be used, although recoveries are
 High altitude adaptations include elliptoid red blood cells with
quicker after isoflurane and sevoflurane. This author is not aware
relatively high haemoglobin content. When a lamoid is dehy-
of any studies with desflurane.
drated, the packed cell volume (PCV) often does not increase
Ensure careful positioning on a well padded bed. Beware
markedly because these very flexible cells can pack down well. If
 pressure points as neuropathy seems to be more of a risk than
in doubt, get a red cell count. Normal PCV is 27-40%.
myopathy.
Prophylaxis against third compartment ulcers has not been
The anaesthetic breathing system chosen will depend on the
 proven, but the following may help:
 patient's size, but for an adult llama weighing around 100 kg,
● Cimetidine 5 mg/kg q.i.d. IV only changed gastric pH for 2h
a 'small animal’ circle will be fine. Lamoids may hypoventilate
after each dose, so some people advocate 3.3 mg/kg every 2h.
under general anaesthesia, especially in dorsal recumbency,
● Ranitidine at 1.5 mg/kg IV produces minimal and transient
 so be prepared to assist ventilation. Some authors report slightly
(<1 h), reduction in gastric acidity.
worse respiratory depression with isoflurane than sevoflurane or
● Omeprazole (Losec) may help reduce gastric pH at 1.4 mg/kg
halothane, and that the respiratory depression may worsen as the
ti.d. PO; or 0.4-0.8 mg/kg IV, but must be given every 2 or so
duration of surgery progresses. Monitor closely: pulse rate,
hours.
breathing rate, ETCO, values, SpO, blood pressure, blood gases.
● Misoprostol (Cytotec) may be best (but expensive) at 10 μg/kg
 once daily, slowly IV, but beware side effects: collapse, recum-
Fluids
 bency, disorientation and regurgitation.
Although fluid therapy is important for compromised/hypovol-
● Sucralfate (antepsin) 20-40 mg/kg q.i.d. PO (sometimes given
aemic patients, Hartmann's solution is often administered at
 alongside miso prostol).
a ‘surgical maintenance rate of 5-10ml/kg/h. This helps to
● Non specific antacids: empirical dose.
replace losses from regurgitation, continued saliva production,
Lamoids 301
evaporation from the respiratory tract and the surgical site, and
laryngeal spasm), immense negative intrathoracic pressures can
 pre-operative starvation deficits.
be generated during inspiratory attempts. These huge negative
pressures can cause alveolar walls to shear such that pulmonary
Analgesia
oedema develops, seen as pink/white froth from the nose/mouth.
aissod raamou aeme  uusan o an sdd s 
Opioids
●Morphine (0.05-0.1 mg/kg IM or IV).
 a d d   
●Pethidine (1-5 mg/kg IM).
ing out the airways is helpful; furosemide c. 1 mg/kg IV is benefi-
● Butorphanol (0.1-0.5 mg/kg IV or IM).
cial; consider bronchodilators; and consider corticosteroids.
● Buprenorphine (0.01 mg/kg IM).
NSAIDs
Further reading
● Flunixin 1.1 mg/kg once daily IV
Bradbury L (2008) Field anaesthesia in camelids. In Practice 30,
● Phenylbutazone c. 5 mg/kg, possibly b.id. or t.i.d. IV.
460-463.
Cebra CK, Tornquist SJ, Van Suan RJ, Smith BB (2001) Glucose
Beware third compartment stomach ulcers (see above).
tolerance testing in llamas and alpacas. American Journal of
Veterinary Research 62(5), 682-686.
Local anaesthetics
Use local anaesthetic techniques where possible. Toxic doses
Christensen JM, Limsakun T, Smith BB, Hollingshead N, Huber
M (2001) Pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of antiul-
unknown, but stay with 1-4 mg/kg lidocaine, and ≤1 mg/kg bupi-
cer agents in llama. Journal of Veterinary Pharmacology and
vacaine. These can be diluted if necessary.
Therapeutics 24, 23-33.
Recovery
Grint N, Dugdale A (2009) Brightness of venous blood in South
 Some people recommend that tracheal extubation should be per-
American camelids: implications for jugular catheterisation.
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 36, 63-66.
formed while anaesthesia is relatively ^deep' so that regurgitation
Riebold TW, Engel HN, Grubb TL, Adams JG, Huber MJ,
 and laryngospasm are not provoked. Others recommend tracheal
extubation only when the animal is awake enough to be chewing
Schmotzer WB (1994) Orotracheal and nasotracheal intuba-
tion in llamas. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical
determinedly, to be sure that it can guard its own airway; however
this may stimulate laryngospasm. You may wish to remove the
Association 204(5), 779-783.
ET tube with the cuff inflated or partially inflated, especially if the
animal regurgitated during surgery,in order to try to avoid leaving
fluid within the trachea. Encourage the animal to sit in sternal
recumbency as soon as possible (as for ruminants). Lamoids are
 Self-test section
usually calm during recovery from anaesthesia, even assisted
recoveries. Maintain patient observation throughout recovery as
1.
 What features of the lamcid airway make endotra-
respiratory obstruction may occur after tracheal extubation. If
cheal intubation diffcult?
the upper airways are obstructed (by nasal congestion/oedema,
35
Pigs: Sedation and anaesthesia
Learning objectives
 To be able to discuss the problems associated with porcine chemical restraint.
 To be aware of the drugs available for sedation and general anaesthesia and the paucity of licensed products.
●To be able to discuss options for analgesia.
by using a snare around the snout (upper jaw, locate snare behind
Special considerations
canines), when they will usually pull back and sit down and just
Pigs come in a huge range of sizes, from 0.5 kg piglets to boars
squeal. Smaller pigs can be held in lateral or dorsal recumbency
weighing over 350kg, and you may meet them under a wide
by holding their legs. Although pigs can squeal deafeningly, this
variety of circumstances, as pet pigs, commercial farm pigs, or
 is not always associated with a massive stress response.
Sometimes you will have to do procedures on farm, and at
Temperament
other times you may be able to utilise all the facilities of a veteri-
This can vary enormously. Pigs are very intellgent and are easily
nary hospital.
trained, but can learn bad habits too. Pet Vietnamese pot-bellied
pigs have a tendency to get too fat, which exacerbates their
Weight
 problems of entropion. If they have sore eyes and cannot see you
Large variation and you may have to estimate it. Size may influ-
very well, they may become very grumpy and aggressive when
ence your choice of anaesthetic technique and equipment. Size
approached around the head. Temperament may be related to age
also has implications for heat loss.
 and sex also, with older boars being potentially more aggressive;
but sows can guard their litters too.
Plentiful subcutaneous fat
This can make intramuscular injections very difficult and intra-fat
Tracheal intubation is difficult
injections very common. If you see a poor response to a given
Pigs are prone to respiratory obstruction, especially if brachyc-
drug, it's often hard to know if the dose given was insufficient, or
 ephalic so endotracheal intubation is advised. Laryngospasm is
if it was just delivered into fat.
pared to theirbody size; a long soft palate often excesve cheeks,
Paucity of easily accessible superficial veins
jowls and tongue (like brachycephalic dogs); cannot open their
 This makes intravenous injections challenging. Auricular vessels
mouths very wide; have sharp teeth; and have interesting laryngeal
are usually the most accessible, but not easy to locate in small-
anatomy in that they have chunky arytenoids, a long downwards
eared breeds; and awake subjects tend not to keep still enough
sloping thyroid cartilage, a long thyrocricoid ligament on the floor
without good physical or chemical restraint.
of the larynx which acts as a blind end through the glottis, and
the trachea then slopes upwards away from the larynx. They also
Problems of handling
have a pharyngeal recess just above the larynx and a laryngeal
Pigs were designed to move about through dense undergrowth
recess between the base of the epiglottis and the thyroid cartilage
and thus have a slippery′ surface with short appendages which do
in the midline on the ventral floor of the larynx (Figure 35.1).
not make good handles. Pigs resent restraint by squealing loudly
The vocal cords are bi-partite longitudinally. Their relatively
and they will struggle for freedom too. Larger pigs can be restrained
short neck, and presence of an eparterial (tracheal) bronchus
302
Pigs: Sedation and anaesthesia  303
Epiglottis
● Prepare for positioning and padding the patient.
Arytenoid
● Protect the eyes from dust and direct sunlight.
Sedation and premedication
Respiratory obstruction
 This may occur even under sedation, especially in brachycephalic
pigs just as with brachycephalic dogs. It is therefore advisable to
have a number of ET tubes of various sizes to hand, an ET tube
stylette/bougie, a laryngoscope with a long (straight) blade, some
Laryngeal recess
Cricoid cartilage
- os 'uonqnu soy nde smf an Piou on ssn o ssepuq
Thyroid cartilage
caine spray for the larynx, and some means of inducing anaesthe-
sia/reducing the gag reflex. Although not always possible in the
Thyrocricoid ligament 
feld, it is reassuring to have oxygen and some means of ventila-
tion available. In the feld, emergency ventilation can be provided
Figure 35.1 Pig larynx sagittal section.
by mouth-to-tube (or mask, see below), or better, by using a self-
 inflating resuscitation type bag.
means that care must be taken to ensure that endotracheal (ET)
 Instead of topical lidocaine spray for the larynx, some people
tubes are not so long as to block this bronchus. The carina is also
 prefer to give a dose of suxamethonium (succinylcholine), a depo-
reported to be prone to puncture if you use a sharp intubating
larising muscle relaxant, to help achieve tracheal intubation. This
stylette.
 will, however, cause respiratory muscle paralysis, and so requires
that ventilation can be supported. Suxamethonium can also
Little hair but lots of subcutaneous fat
 trigger malignant hyperthermia (see later).
This can affect thermoregulation. Some breeds are prone to
Given that pigs are prone to respiratory obstruction, it might 
malignant hyperthermia (e.g. Landrace and Pietrain). Malignant 
seem appropriate to just anaesthetise all pigs and routinely
s ss d  on pi  oi sdde 
 perform tracheal intubation. Pigs are, however, prone to suffering
drome, so be careful of creating stressful situations, exertion or
laryngospasm not just at tracheal intubation but also after racheal
excitement (see later).
extubation, so this may not be a fool-proof approach. Instead,
be vigilant for the occurrence of respiratory obstruction in
sedated pigs and remain prepared to achieve tracheal intubation
Approach to chemical restraint: sedation and
in an emergency (which may require induction of anaesthesia
 general anaesthesia
or other means of reducing the gag reflex such as
● Withhold food from adult animals for at least 6h (up to 12h
suxamethonium).
If low-grade respiratory obstruction occurs, sternal recum-
if abdominal surgery contemplated). Access to water should,
bency may help to reduce airway obstruction. However, if you
however, be allowed up until the time of the procedure.
extend the head too far, you may compromise the airway by
● Think about minimising the stress of the procedure, especially
increasing the potential for laryngeal obstruction because of the
for Landrace and  Pietrain
n pigs; and in malignant
hyperthermia-prone breeds, consider avoiding exposure to
anatomy of the throat region. Turning a pig into dorsal recum-
bency may also improve air flow because all the excessive soft
inhalation agents.
tissues in the pharyngeal region flop away from the glottis; but
 n  s s s n  
this might not be easy in very large animals. It is reported that
enough'; up to 7cm long may sometimes be required.
ventilation by well-fitting facemask is most effcient if the pig is
 Intramuscular injection sites include the neck muscles (epaxi-
 in dorsal recumbency. This may also require that the tongue be
ally or laterally behind the ear),triceps, epaxial lumbar muscles,
 pulled forwards and out of mouth, and that forward’ pressure is
 gluteals and quadriceps. The choice of site may be determined
by the intended “use of the pig, ie. avoid the gluteals and
 put behind the vertical ramus of the mandible, to increase the
space available in the pharynx. Apparently this position leads to
quadriceps if the pig is intended for meat. Injections into neck
less stomach inflation (meteorism) than if mask-ventilation is
muscles are generally best tolerated. Pig boards or snares may
be necessary to restrain larger animals smaller animals can be
 attempted in sternal or lateral recumbency.
manually restrained.
Drugs available
● Be prepared to intubate the trachea A gag (tapes to distract the
Butyrophenones
jaws), laryngoscope, topical local anaesthetic and several sizes
Azaperone (40 mg/ml)
 of ET tube should be available.
● Check the environmental temperature, if possible avoid very
● Cheap and effective, and licensed for pigs.
cold or very hot conditions. Black pigs can get heatstroke on
● Azaperone can be used to control fighting among pigs when
hot sunny days; pink pigs are prone to sunburn. Pigs can easily
weanlings are mixed and can decrease maternal aggression/
become hypothermic on cold days.
rejection of piglets.
304   Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Dose range 1-8 mg/kg deep IM, but use smaller doses in larger
● Best given by deep IM injection, but the bioavailability of
animals (allometric scaling i.e. dose according to metabolic
diazepam after IM injection is poor, so midazolam is a better
body weight (related more to body surface area than mass)).
choice.
Doses less than 2.5 mg/kg are, however, commonly used; and
● Young piglets have been successfully sedated by intranasal and
the current data sheets suggest only 1-2 mg/kg be used, espe-
even rectal midazolam.
cially in brachycephalic breeds.
● Benzodiazepines can be used in combinations (see above), or:
● Doses >1 mg/kg are best avoided in boars, as they have been
midazolam 0.2++ mg/kg, ketamine c. 5+ mg/kg both together
associated with penile prolapse with secondary trauma.
 deep IM.
● After injection, pigs are best left undisturbed for at least 20 min.
02agonists
 Excitement reactions can still occur during the onset of seda-
tion, but are more likely if the pig is disturbed. Sedation, which
Xylazine
is suggested to occur in the absence of anxiolysis, is due to anti-
● Xylazine is said to be much less potent in pigs than in cattle or
dopaminergic and antinoradrenergic effects in the reticular
horses (potency: pig < horse < cow), although intrafat admin-
activating system in the CNS.
istration may be the cause of some of the reported failures.
● Azaperone sometimes causes increased salivation and panting.
● It is not often used alone.
especially after larger doses. It does cause some peripheral
● Occasionally it can induce vomiting in pigs, as in small animals.
vasodilation (αl receptor blockade), and hence expect some
● It is most often used in combination with ketamine, after which
degree of hypotension and an increase in heat loss. Vasodilation 
a good 10-20 min should be allowed for the effect to develop:
of the ear veins may, however, make them easier to find and
xylazine 1-3 mg/kg, ketamine c. 5 mg/kg, +/- butorphanol
catheterise.
 0.1-0.2 mg/kg all together deep IM.
Excerpts from the data sheet: ‘The use of Stresnil should
Detomidine Like xylazine, this is most often used in combina-
be avoided in very cold conditions because of a possible risk
tion with ketamine: detomidine 0.1 mg/kg, butorphanol 0.1-
of cardiovascular collapse due to peripheral vasodilation.
0.2 mg/kg, ketamine c. 5 mg/kg all together deep IM.
'Occasional deaths have been observed in Vietnamese pot-
Medetomidine (and dexmedetomidine) are most often used
bellied pigs'. It is thought that this may be caused by injection
in combinations: medetomidine 30-80 μg/kg, butorphanol 0.1-
into fat leading to slow induction and tendency to use additional
0.2 mg/kg, ketamine c. 5 mg/kg combination by deep IM is often
doses, leading to overdosage. (I also worry about respiratory
'uonepss isnf ueu roue eisausue piy, sonpoid on pies
obstruction in these brachycephalic breeds.)
For only sedation, it is suggested to omit the butorphanol.
Azaperone can be used in various drug combinations to
Romifidine A recently suggested combination is: romifidine
produce deeper’ sedation:
120μg/kg, butorphanol 0.1 mg/kg, ketamine 5-8 mg/kg all
● Azaperone 1-2 mg/kg, midazolam 0.3 mg/kg together deep IM.
together by deep IM injection.
● Azaperone 1 mg/kg, ketamine 5 mg/kg together deep IM.
Azaperone (c. 1 mg/kg) may be administered 20 min before
● Azaperone 1 mg/kg, midazolam 0.1 mg/kg, ketamine c.5 mg/kg
the above combinations.
 all together deep IM.
● Azaperone 1-2mg/kg, +/-butorphanol 0.1-0.2mg/kg, keta-
Induction and maintenance of anaesthesia
 mine c.5 mg/kg all together deep IM.
The sedation provided by some of the above combinations may
be of suffcient depth to allow tracheal intubation, and then anaes-
Phenothiazines
thesia can be maintained with an inhalational agent in oxygen
Acepromazine
(+/—nitrous oxide), if these are available. Alternatively, sedation
● Although the effects of this drug can be very unpredictable, it
should allow venous catheterisation (if this was not possible
has been used at 0.03-0.1 mg/kg deep IM.
beforehand), so that drugs may be administered intravenously for
● 20-40min must be allowed, during which the pig should
anaesthetic induction (and maintenance). Failing these, inhala-
 be left undisturbed, for the effect to become apparent/reach
tion agents may be administered by facemask once the animal is
 its peak.
at least sedated to some degree, or further drug doses of injectable
 agents may be given by the deep IM route to deepen or prolong
● Acepromazine (ACP) causes peripheral vasodilation, hypoten-
 sion and increases heat loss.
sedation or anaesthesia.
● It may be used in combination with other drugs, e.g.: ACP
 Injectable drugs
 0.03-0.05 mg/kg, ketamine c. 5+ mg/kg together deep IM.
Carboxylated imidazoles include metomidate and etomidate
Metomidate (Hypnodil) used to be available, and was adminis-
Benzodiazepines
tered intravenously following azaperone sedation, to effect surgi-
 Diazepam and midazolam
cal anaesthesia for about 30 min. It caused minimal cardiovascular
● When used alone do not tend to produce very reliable sedation
depression and only transient apnoea after rapid IV administra-
in adult animals.
tion. It was non-cumulative because of rapid plasma esterase
● Doses vary from 0.1 mg/kg up to 1(-2) mg/kg.
hydrolysis and hepatic metabolism. It occasionally caused pain on
Pigs: Sedation and anaesthesia  305
injection, probably because of the propylene glycol solvent, which
might provide some analgesia. Muscle relaxation was fair. The
was also blamed for occasional haemolysis. The disadvantages
dose depended on how well sedated the pig was after premed, but
were that it did not provide any analgesia and the quality of
around 2-6 mg total steroid/kg IV was expected. Saffan could also
muscle relaxation was poor.
be administered intramuscularly, but bigger doses and larger
Although metomidate is no longer available, etomidate (not 
injection volumes were required. Surgical anaesthesia lasted about
licensed) can be used in pigs; dose 200 μg/kg IV, and often with
15 min, but could be prolonged by further doses/infusion because
midazolam (or diazepam) at 0.1 mg/kg IV to improve muscular
Saffan was not greatly cumulative.
relaxation. Salivation may sometimes occur.
Alfaxalone (Alfaxan"m). Early reports suggest that, following
azaperone premedication at 1-2 mg/kg, alfaxalone administered
Phencyclidine derivatives
 at 2-3 mg/kg produces acceptable tracheal intubating conditions
Ketamine administered alone (10-20mg/kg IM or IV), causes
and anaesthesia.
muscle hypertonus. Therefore it is most often used in combina-
tion with centrally acting muscle relaxants (e.g. the benzodi-
Substituted phenols
azepines or even guaiphenesin (GGE) if you can secure an IV
 Propofol must be administered IV. Required dose is up to 6-
catheter). It produces minimal cardiovascular depression in
 8 mg/kg in unpremedicated animals, or less following sedation.
healthy animals, and even causes gentle stimulation. It provides
 Rapid injection can cause transient apnoea. Propofol is minimally
excellent analgesia (especially somatic). Although ketamine is
cumulative, so top-up doses or infusions can be administered,
supposed to maintain (or even enhance) laryngeal reflexes, this
although this might be expensive in larger pigs and IPPV is often
should never be relied upon for the maintenance of an airway, not
 required. Propofol causes hypotension and does not provide any
least because the other drugs administered may compromise
analgesia.
airway protection. Ketamine sometimes causes salivation. After
any of the above sedative combinations, if tracheal intubation
Inhalation agents
is not possible, then ketamine at 5 mg/kg IV (+/- diazepam or
●Halothane
midazolam at 0.1 mg/kg IV) will deepen sedation/produce
●Isoflurane
anaesthesia suffcient to allow intubation. If IV access is impos-
● Sevoflurane
sible to establish, 5 mg/kg ketarmine may alternatively be given
● Nitrous oxide
by deep IM injection. Large doses of ketamine will cause some
hypoventilation and short periods of apnoea are common after
These agents can all be administered by facemask, or via an ET
rapid IV injection.
tube. They can be employed for induction and/or maintenance
of anaesthesia and may be useful for longer procedures, where
Barbiturates
otherwise you would have to administer extra doses or infusions
 Thiopental must be administered intravenously; an intravenous
of injectable drugs, most of which are cumulative to some degree.
catheter is advised. The dose required depends a little on how well
The choice between the inhalation agents is as for other species
sedated the pig appears after its premedication, but probably lies
(see Chapter 8). Isoflurane is perhaps the most pungent of the
between 5 and 15 mg/kg IV. Recovery is highly dependent upon
above for mask induction, but nevertheless can be used
redistribution into muscle and fat (which are plentiful in most
successfully.
adult pigs) but large total doses will still prolong the recovery
 Nitrous oxide can be included to provide a little analgesia, but
period.
 has similar contra-indications for all species (see Chapter 8).
 Pentobarbital is no longer available in the UK. It is slower to
The anaesthetic breathing system must be chosen to suit the
cross the blood-brain barrier than thiopental, so should be
patient size. For pigs between 0.5kg and up to 135kg, small
administered slowly IV to effect. (Many books mention the intra-
animal non-rebreathing (for the smaller pigs) and rebreathing
peritoneal route of administration, but the drug is slightly irritant,
systems (for the larger pigs) will be adequate, ensuring that the
and it is hard to judge the dose required.) The total dose necessary
reservoir/rebreathing bag is of sufficient size (at least twice the
 again depends on what level of sedation was achieved with the
volume of a normal tidal breath). For pigs larger than 135kg, a
 premed, but between 5 and 30+ mg/kg would be expected.
large animal circle or large animal To-and-Fro is required.
 Pentobarbital has also been administered intra-testicularly for
castration, but the castration must be completed before too much
Malignant hyperthermia
is absorbed systemically, or drug overdosage may occur, or, at
The affected breeds are: Landrace, Pietrain, Duroc, Poland China.
least, the recovery may be prolonged. The dose for intratesticular
Malignant hyperthermia is triggered by stress, suxamethonium,
use is 40-50 mg/kg. (Careful disposal of the drug-laden testicles is
and all volatile agents (halothane most of all). Nitrous oxide may
also required.)
 be a very weak trigger. Malignant hyperthermia is caused by a
 problem with one type of calcium channel called the ryanodine-
Neurosteroids
sensitive calcium channel. The condition is hereditary and caused
 Saffan (Alphaxalone/alphadolone) is no longer available. Saffan
by a dominant gene with incomplete penetrance. It can be tested
caused mild cardiovascular depression with minimal respiratory
for by halothane/caffeine muscle contraction tests, but fresh
depression. It was thought that the alphadolone component
muscle tissue is usually required.
306  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Clinical signs
caine, however, at least 30s should be allowed before intubation
Muscle rigidity (the toes are often seen to splay or separate'), the
 attempts begin.
eyeballs become retracted deep into the orbits so the third eyelids
 Pigs have an eparterial (tracheal) bronchus (as do ruminants),
look obvious, the skin becomes very hot and pink/red (if pink
 n a si i   a e a d s 
skinned pig), and the mucous membranes also become very pink.
that bronchial root with a long ET tube (or its inflated cuff ), which
Tachypnoea, tachycardia and an increased core temperature
results in compromised ventilation of the right apical lung lobe.
develop. If monitoring includes capnography, then an increase
Therefore consider the length of the ET tubes that you are using.
in the end tidal COz (ETCO) tension may be one of the first
Be gentle if you use an ET tube stylette, especially if it is pointy as
 indicators of trouble, reflecting accelerated muscle metabolism.
you may damage the carina.
However, this early marked increase in ETCO, tension is com-
 Some people prefer to perform tracheal intubation in pigs when
monly reported for animals under neuromuscular blockade (and
they are held in sternal recumbency, whilst others prefer them in
therefore where a ventilation rate has been pre-set) whereas in
lateral or dorsal recumbency. The choice may also depend on the
 spontaneously breathing animals, a marked increase in respira-
size of the pig, the help you have available and your particular
tory rate and effort is usually observed frst. Respiratory muscles
experience and preference.
can, however, spasm, reducing spontaneous ventilation effciency
 If you use a flexible plastic bougie as a guide for the ET tube,
(see below).
then this can first be directed into the trachea, and then the ET
tube can be 'railroaded' over it. If you do not use a bougie in this
Treatment
manner, then tracheal intubation is a little more challenging (see
Malignant hyperthermia is diffcult to treat once clinically
Figure 35.2).
obvious.
 If you use curved ET tubes, then, with the pig in sternal recum-
Volatile agent administration must be stopped immediately;
bency, start off with the tube curving so that its tip points down-
 m e on p aq a ious s q 
wards. Advance the tube tip into the glottis, but then you will soon
sd   e aa a po u  
find resistance when its tip hits the thyrocricoid ligament (which
exhaled breath will still contain volatile agent). It may be neces-
forms the floor of the larynx) (Figure 35.2a) (beware also the
sary to assist ventilation, and the contents of the reservoir/
laryngeal recess). At this point turn the tube through 180 degrees
rebreathing bag should be ‘dumped’ frequently to reduce the
about its long axis, and gently advance it (Figure 35.2b). It should
build up of exhaled anaesthetic agent within the new breathing
start to enter the trachea, which continues on from the larynx in
system. Non-rebreathing systems are best (because soda lime
an upward sloping direction. Having advanced the tube about
"harbours? volatile agents).
1-2 cm, turn it back through 180 degrees again, to enable easy
 Cool/cold fluids should be administered IV, and consider cold
 passage on down the trachea (Figure 35.2c).
intravesical fluids (for bladder lavage), and cold fluids per-rectum
(for colon lavage), and even by gastric lavage, to enhance core
Local anaesthetic techniques
cooling. Application of cold water, ice packs or alcohol to the
 Local anaesthetic blocks can be used to provide analgesia as an
skin can help cooling; submergence in cold water is often not
 practically possible mid-surgery.
adjunct to sedation, or indeed general anaesthesia.
 Pigs develop metabolic acidosis (due to hypermetabolism), and
respiratory acidosis (because respiratory muscles can spasm
Lumbosacral epidural (extradural)
thereby reducing ventilatory efficiency), therefore ventilatory and
 Injection is commonly quoted for castration, obstetrical and
circulatory support should be provided; ventilatory support at
y si id au je ad on rsa si ii sains ied
least whilst still anaesthetised. Continue IV fluids to protect the
 sedated.
kidneys from myoglobin released from damaged muscles. If pos-
The landmarks are the same as those used for dogs (just caudal
sible, monitor for hyperkalaemia which can occur secondary to
t0 a transverse line joining the iliac crests), but can be hard to
 potassium release from dying muscle cells.
locate easily in very large or fat pigs. Therefore it is suggested to
Dantrolene at 2-10mg/kg IV may help, but is better given
 draw an imaginary vertical line up from the patellae, and then the
prophylactically. Dantrolene is very expensive and has a short
lumbosacral space should be 2-3 cm caudal to where this line
shelf-life, so often none is available. Dantrolene, however, is not
crosses the spine (Figure 35.3).
without its own side effects, such as arrhythmias, ataxia and
An intradermal bleb of local anaesthetic is placed prior to inser-
hepatopathy.
tion of the epidural needle, which may need to be 5-10cm long.
depending on the size of pig. Aspirate to ensure that no CSF
Endotracheal intubation
returns. Pigs have 5 or 6 lumbar vertebrae; the spinal cord termi-
A laryngoscope is required (long straight blades are often pre-
nates between the last two lumbar vertebrae but the meningeal
ferred), and it is advisable to have a large range of ET tube sizes
sac continues to mid sacral level, so occasionally the dura will be
to hand. An ET tube stylette/stiffener/bougie is also useful.
 penetrated and CSF will be obtained.
Because pigs are prone to laryngospasm, the larynx should be
10ml 2% lidocaine can be used in pigs of around 50kg. This
desensitised with topical local anaesthetic (usually lidocaine)
will cause recumbency because of motor as well as sensory block
before intubation is attempted. After topical application of lido-
to the hind end. The duration of block is 1-2h.
Pigs: Sedation and anaesthesia  307
(a) Initial passage of ET tube soon meets obstruction. The tube must 
 now be rotated through 180 degrees about its long axis in order to
advance it further.
Figure 35.3 Porcine epidural injection site and the extent of block posible.
 Reproduced from william J. Tranquilli, John C Thurmon and Kurt A Grimm
(eds), Lumb and Jones' Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia, 4lh Edition.
Copyright 2007, with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
(b) After ET tube rotation, it can be advanced a litle further until 
Local infiltration
 obstruction is met again.
 Local infltration into the flank is possible to aid Caesarean section
 or other laparotomies.
 Intravenous regional anaesthesia
 This has also been described. It is an excellent technique as long
 as a superficial vein can be located.
Monitoring
Several physiological variables should be monitored in addition
 to indicators of anaesthetic depth such as jaw tone, general muscle
tone and ocular position/reflexes. The physiological variables
(c) After rotation of the tube through 180 degrees again, it can now
monitored should include heart rate (stethoscopy), pulse rate
 be advanced down the trachea.
(often diffcult because of thick skin), breathing rate, mucous
membrane colour, rectal temperature and skin temperature (sub-
Figure 35.2 Insertion of a curved ET tube.
jective assessment is often good enough to tell if malignant hyper-
thermia is developing). Pulse oximetry, capnography, ECG and
 arterial blood pressure monitoring can also be helpful. Blood
Xylazine/lidocaine combinations can also be used. For example,
pressure can be monitored non-invasively with a Doppler flow
1 mg/kg xylazine made up to a total volume of 10ml with lido-
 probe or an oscillometric device. Superficial arteries, for direct
caine 2% provides analgesia for up to 6 h.
 blood pressure monitoring, can be diffcult to catheterise. As with
 Opioids may be used alone, or in combination with local anaes-
all monitoring, trends can be very useful.
thetic agents and/or α2 agonists. The reader is referred to the
literature for doses.
Intraoperative fluid therapy
 If intravenous access has been secured, then, at least in healthy
Intratesticular local anaesthetic for castration
This can be suitable in young pigs, possibly up to about 6 months
animals, Hartmann's solution at 5-10ml/kg/h is often adminis-
old. Older animals are often better castrated under general
tered. However, more specific fluid therapy should be directed to
the individual patient's requirements.
anaesthesia, but analgesia can still be augmented with local
anaesthetic.
Analgesia
 Depending on the size of the pig, the dose is 2-15 ml lidocaine
NSAIDs
2% per testicle, with most of the volume being injected into the
 Licensed drugs include:
body of the testicle and 1-2 ml deposited subcutaneously beneath
the scrotal skin (at the proposed incision site) as the needle is
● Ketoprofen once only by deep IM injection.
withdrawn. Allow the lidocaine a good 5min to work before
● Tolfenamic acid once only by deep IM injection.
 surgery is performed.
● Meloxicam once only by deep IM injection.
308  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Opioids
Flumazenil can be given to antagonise the effects of benzodi-
 None is licensed for use in pigs, but opioids can be used at similar
azepines. Doses are unknown, but lmg flumazenil for every
doses to those used for dogs (although pigs may often require
e si  s q u l doq  e
higher doses or shorter dosing intervals).
10μg/kg. Additional doses may be required as flumazenil has a
relatively short duration of action.
● Morphine 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM.
● Methadone 0.25+ mg/kg IM.
● Pethidine 3.5-5 mg/kg IM.
Further reading
● Butorphanol 0.1-0.5 mg/kg IM.
 Hodgkinson O (2007) Practical sedation and anaesthesia in pigs.
● Buprenorphine 0.006-0.02 mg/kg IM.
In Practice 29, 34-39.
 Keates H (2003) Induction of anaesthesia in pigs using a new
α2 agonists
alphaxalone formulation. Veterinary Record 153, 627-628.
These drugs provide analgesia alongside sedation, but both these
Skarda RT, Tranquilli WJ (2007) Local and regional anesthetic
 effects are antagonised by atipamezole.
and analgesia techniques: ruminants and swine In: Lumb and
Jones’ Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 4" Edn. Eds:
Local blocks
 Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing,
See above. Local blocks can provide excellent analgesia, but often
Iowa, USA. Chapter 23, Pp 643-681.
they are impractical to 'top up, so other forms of analgesia should
Thurmon JC, Smith GW (2007) Swine In: Lumb and Jones^
also be provided.
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia 4" Edn. Eds: Tranquilli
WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa,
Recovery
USA. Chapter 29, pp 747-763.
Close observation is important, especially after tracheal extuba-
tion because pigs can develop laryngeal spasm/obstruction much
in the same way as cats, and often in recovery such respiratory
 Self-test section
obstructions are ^silent. Once the righting reflex has been regained
and a sternal position can be maintained, monitoring can become 
 Different species show different sensitivities to the Q2
a little more hands off.
 agonist xylazine. From the least sensitive to the most
A warm environment is important, especially for small pigs and
sensitive, which of the following is the correct order?
young piglets. Blankets and heat lamps may be required. If a pig
4.
cow-pig-horse.
should be slow to recover, check its temperature as hypothermia
horse-pig-cow.
can certainly delay recovery. Pigs should not be recovered amongst
C.
pig-horse-cow.
'awake' pigs because their pen-mates may attack them whist they
D.
cow-horse-pig.
are still groggy. Only once fully recovered should a pigbe returned
Which breed is not usually susceptible to malignant
to its pen-mates.
hyperthermia?
Atipamezole can be administered to antagonise the effects of
A.
 Pietrain.
02 agonists. Recommended doses are 20-50μg/kg IV or IM,
B.
Large White.
although one reference quotes a dose as high as 250μg/kg IV or
C.
Landrace.
IM. Generally, start with a small dose first, and repeat after 5 min 
D.
Duroc.
if no improvement.
Rabbit anaesthesia
Learning objectives
 To be able to discuss the high risk of rabbit anaesthesia.
 To be able to devise an anaesthetic plan.
Risk of peri-anaesthetic morbidity
Endotracheal intubation
Challenging due to a narrow gape, long incisors and a fleshy
 Rabbits are famed for being high risk candidates for anaesthesia;
 tongue, all of which can make visualisation of the larynx difficult.
the morbidity rate was recently determined as 1 in 72. Some of
The glottis is also relatively small. Laryngospasm can occur during
the reasons for the higher risk of peri-anaesthetic morbidity com-
endotracheal intubation and may be influenced by the choice of
 pared to other species are given below.
anaesthetic protocol (see further reading). Gentle endotracheal
intubation is advised to avoid excessive laryngeal trauma.
Underlying disease
Pain
● Malnourishment (common in rabbits requiring dental treat
 Rabbits are a prey species and so will be unwilling to show signs
 ment) and dehydration.
of pain, especially when housed near cats and dogs. Pain assess-
● Sub-clinical respiratory disease (e.g. Pasteurellosis), can affect
ment in this species is still in its infancy, but should not prevent
the rabbit's oxygenation during anaesthesia, and may progress 
analgesia provision.
 to a clinical infection post-operatively.
 Gastrointestinal system
placing pressure on the great vessels and the thorax during
dorsal recumbency, affecting ventilation and blood pressure.
● Rabbits are caeco-colic fermenters.
● Post-operative ileus is common. Predisposing factors include
Lack of familiarity and expertise
 pain, starvation, stress and alteration of diet.
Anaesthetic dose requirements for pet rabbits will often be much
● Gastrointestinal tract tympany, due to gut stasis, can promote
lower than those published from experimental studies, where
 cardiovascular and respiratory embarrassment under anaesthe-
healthier (specific pathogen free) rabbits had been used (Table
sia due to diaphragmatic splinting and occlusion of the abdom-
36.1).
 inal great vessels.
Size
Approach to rabbit anaesthesia
● Ranges from dwarfs to giant French lops.
Pre-anaesthetic preparation
● Beware hypothermia (relatively large surface area : body mass).
● Intravenous catheterisation and endotracheal  intubation
· Stabilise condition before anaesthesia.
require appropriately sized equipment, but can also be techni-
● Allow food up to the point of premedication to help maintain
cally challenging. Beware excessive resistance and dead space
blood glucose concentration, sustain body heat production and
within the anaesthetic breathing system.
 prevent gut stasis.
309
310  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 36.1 Pre-anaesthetic medication and induction doses taken from
studies on pet rabbit populations.
 Pre-anaesthetic
Induction of anaesthesia
 Reference
medication
Ketamine 15 mg/kg + 
Grint & Murison (2008)
midazolam 3 mg/kg IM 
Ketamine 15 mg/kg +
Grint & Murison (2008)
medetomidine
Orr et al. (2005)
0.25 mg/kg IM or SC
Fgure 36.1 A mask can be used to pre-oxygenate a rabbit before endotra-
Ketamine 15mg/kg +
Orr et al. (2005)
 cheal intubation is attempted.
medetomidine
0.5 mg/kg SC
Fentanyl/fluanisone
Propofol IV to effect
Martinez et al. (2009)
Induction of anaesthesia
0.1 ml/kg IM
(mean dose 2.2 mg/kg)
Can be achieved by intravenous, intramuscular or inhalational
Fentanyl/fluanisone
Midazolam IV to effect 
Martinez et al. (2009)
drugs, all of which have relative advantages and disadvantages (see
0.1 ml/kg IM
(mean dose 0.7 mg/kg)
Table 36.1 and Chapters 5 and 8). Inhalational induction is pos-
 sible via facemask or chamber. The rabbit should be adequately
Buprenorphine
Alfaxalone 2-3 mg/kg IV
Grint et al. (2009)
0.03 mg/kg IM
 sedated before volatile agent is administered. Sevoflurane is often
preferred for a fast induction which appears to be well tolerated,
and it does not sensitise the myocardium to the arrhythmogenic
effects of catecholamines should the rabbit become stressed. With
inhalation induction by both techniques (mask or chamber), just
Pre-anaesthetic medication
oxygen should be delivered initially before slowly increasing the
 delivery of volatile agent; sudden large increases in volatile agent
● Rabbits are easily stressed. Struggling before anaesthesia can
 delivery may cause breath-holding.
result in: fractured vertebrae; catecholamine induced arrhyth-
 mias. Stress also promotes gut stasis.
Endotracheal intubation
● The provision of pre-anaesthetic medication will have all the
 Recommended for all except the shortest procedures where a
 same benefits as for other species (see Chapter 4).
 mask may be sufficient. A paediatric laryngoscope (e.g. the
● Drugs include acepromazine, benzodiazepines, α2 adrenergic
'Flecknell small animal laryngoscope@) or otoscope can be used
agonists and opioids. A neuroleptanalgesic combination of
to visualise the larynx, then a stylette or bougie can be introduced
fentanyl and fluanisone, (Hypnorm@), is licensed for use in
into the trachea and fnally the endotracheal tube can be rail-
rabbits in the UK. The administration of buprenorphine
roaded’ over this. An alternative technique is the blind’ method,
after this combination is sometimes practised ('sequential
where the anaesthetist relies on hearing breath sounds coming
analgesia'), so that there is lessening of fentanyl's respiratory
depression, but the continued provision of analgesia.
through the endotracheal tube as the tube is advanced. If the
breath sounds disappear, then endo-oesophageal intubation is
suspected; the tube should be withdrawn and redirected. When
Intravenous access
endotracheal intubation is successful, breath sounds will become
Facilitates accurate and 'to effect' dosing of intravenous induction
louder and the rabbit may cough. Topical lidocaine onto the
agents and administration of fluid therapy and emergency drugs.
larynx may prevent laryngospasm during endotracheal intuba-
Catheters (usually 22 or 24g) can be placed in the marginal ear
tion attempts. Laryngeal mask airways (LMAs) have also been
vein (see Chapter 7), or cephalic vein. Catheterisation is facilitated
used to maintain airways in rabbits with the advantages of
by topical local anaesthetic cream (e.g. EMLA?) applied to a
an easier technique and requiring less induction agent for
clipped area of the insertion site and covered with an occlusive
 placement.
dressing for 30-40 min before catheter placement.
Pre-oxygenation
Maintenance of anaesthesia
As sub-clinical respiratory infections are common in pet rabbits
● Some induction protocols may produce anaesthesia of suff-
(which may affect their gas exchange), and endotracheal intuba-
cient duration for short procedures, although oxygen should
tion may not be as swift in this species as in others, pre-oxygen-
always be supplemented.
 ation before induction of anaesthesia is a useful technique, usually
● For delivery of volatile agents, a non-rebreathing system (e.g.
by facemask (Figure 36.1). Flow-by oxygen provides lower levels
Jackson Rees modification of the Ayre's T-piece), should be
of inspired oxygen. Any pre-oxygenation achieved by placing a
used in all but the largest rabbits. Fresh gas flow calculations
rabbit in an oxygen' tent' is soon lost when the rabbit is lifted out
should be based on a higher minute ventilation rate compared
for induction.
with dogs and cats, approximately 250 ml/kg/min.
Rabbit anaesthesia  311
● Nitrous oxide may be used, although will limit the fraction of
● Short acting anaesthetic drugs promote shorter and more
inspired oxygen, so monitoring of pulse oximetry (SpO2) is
‘complete recoveries, which allow a rapid return of appetite
 recommended. Nitrous oxide may accumulate in the gas-filled
and thermoregulation.
gastrointestinal tract of the rabbit (similar to the horse, see
● Offer food as soon as the rabbit is sufficiently recovered, to
 Chapter 8), so monitoring for tympany during the anaesthetic
 prevent ileus and provide a source of glucose.
is advised.
· Continue analgesia.
Fluid therapy
The intravenous route is preferred. Subcutaneous or intraperito-
Further reading
neal routes are alternatives, although glucose containing fluids are
Brodbelt DC, Blissitt KJ, Hammond RA, Neath PJ, Young LE,
not recommended via these routes. The type of fluids and rates
Pfeiffer DU, Wood JLN (2008) The risk of death: the
of infusion will be determined by the likely imbalances present
Confidential Enquiry into Perioperative Small Animal Fatalities.
(see Chapter 23).
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 35, 365-373.
Clarke KW, Hall LW (1990) A survey of anaesthesia in small
Monitoring anaesthesia
animal practice. AVA/BSAVA report Journal of Veterinary
● Minimum: breathing rate, heart rate, pulse rate (see below),
Anaesthesia 17, 4-10.
and temperature. Steps should be taken to maintain body tem-
Cruz MI, Sacchi T, Luna SP, Braz JCR, Cassu RN (2001) Use of
perature (see Chapter 20).
a laryngeal mask for airway maintenance during inhalation
● Pulse oximetry, capnography and the ECG may be monitored.
 anaesthesia in rabbits. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 27,
Some monitors, especially pulse oximeters that have been
112-116.
designed for humans, may not be able to display the relatively
Grint NJ, Murison PJ (2008) A comparison of ketamine-
high pulse rates that occur in these small animals.
midazolam and ketamine-medetomidine combinations for
● The auricular artery (runs down the middle of the ear) can be
 induction of anaesthesia in rabbits. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
 palpated; and can be cannulated for direct blood pressure
Analgesia 35, 113-121.
 measurement. Due to the small size of some rabbits, oscillom-
Grint NJ, Smith HE, Senior JM (2009) Clinical evaluation of
etric blood pressure measurement may be diffcult, but blood
alfaxalone in cyclodextrin for the induction of anaesthesia in
pressure can be measured using the Doppler technique (see
rabbits. Veterinary Record 163, 395-396.
Chapter 18).
Lascelles BDX, Capner CA, Waterman-Pearson AE (1999) Current
 British veterinary attitudes to perioperative analgesia for cats
Analgesia
and small mammals. Veterinary Record 145, 601-604.
Multi-modal analgesia should be considered. Medetomidine,
Martinez MA, Murison PJ, Love E (2009) Induction of anaesthe-
ketamine and fentanyl/fluanisone, commonly used in premedica-
 sia with either midazolam or propofol in rabbits premedicated
tion/induction protocols, are inherently analgesic. Buprenorphine
with fentanyl/fluanisone. Veterinary Record 164, 803-806.
is a popular choice of opioid due to its relatively long duration of
Orr HE, Roughan JV, Flecknell PA (2005) Assessment of
action. NSAIDs such as meloxicam and carprofen will also provide
ketamine and medetomidine anaesthesia in the domestic
longer term analgesia. Local anaesthetic blocks can be used,
rabbit. Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 32, 271-279.
although accurate calculation of doses is critical to avoid over-
dose. Retrobulbar block is often contraindicated, as the rabbit
has a large venous plexus behind the globe which is easily
 penetrated.
Self-test section
Recovery from anaesthesia
1.
List five factors that contribute to the high risk of
● Ensure a warm, calm environment away from predators.
rabbit anaesthesia.
● Continue monitoring.
Neonates/paediatrics
Learning objectives
 To be able to discuss the physiological/pharmacological differences from adults.
To be able to discuss options for chemical restraint.
Definitions
 Limited stroke volume and vagal dominance provide limited
cardiovascular reserves, and a poor ability to respond to sudden/
● Neonates = up to 4 weeks old (pups, kittens), or up to 2 weeks
large changes in blood volume/pressure (i.e. poor haemodynamic
old (more precocious: foals and farm species).
stability).
● Infants = 2-6 weeks old.
● Juveniles = 6-l2 weeks old.
● Infants and juveniles are also paediatric patients.
 Respiratory system
 High basal metabolic rate means high O demand, which requires
high minute ventilation.
Physiological differences
 Neonatal chest wall is very compliant, yet lungs relatively stiff:
Central nervous system
limits the achievable tidal volume, high minute ventilation is
 Increased blood-brain barrier permeability to drugs.
of breathing easily suffer respiratory fatigue. Dead space foms
 Autonomic nervous system
a greater proportion of tidal volume than in the adult.
Parasympathetic system mature at birth, sympathetic system is
Intrapleural pressure less negative (compliant chest wall) than
adults, so alveoli can close easily between breaths. Low functional
not: vagal dominance.
adults. During recumbency, postural hypoxaemia is quite com-
Cardiovascular system
At birth, the right ventricle is equivalent in size to the left, or
monly seen in foals. Response to hypoxia is biphasic (i.e. initial
slightly larger. The ductus arteriosus can remain slightly patent
 response is unsustained):
for up to 5 days: machinery murmur.
● Transient increase in respiratory rate (respiratory muscle
 Pulmonary vasculature is very muscular and responsive/sensi-
fatigue is also a factor in this transient response).
tive to changes in blood gases, pH and temperature. In the first
● Decreased respiratory rate, even to apnoea.
few days of life, any increase in pulmonary vascular resistance
(pulmonary hypertension), can cause re-opening of the foetal
ducts which closed at birth, and reversion to right-to-left shunting
reduced muscle activity, bradycardia, bradypnoea etc.) which is
 of blood. This recreates a foetal-like circulation, and results in
thought to be protective in the short term.
systemic hypoxaemia, because now there is no placenta to rely on
for gaseous exchange. (Acidosis, hypoxaemia and hypothermia
Haematology
during the frst week of life can therefore pose a threat to the
 Small size means small total blood volume (c. 10-15% body mass
 neonate when the circulation is ^transitional.)
compared with about 8% for adult).
The neonatal heart is poorly compliant, but resistant to hypoxia.
 Dog, horse and ruminants do not have a distinct foetal type of
The stiff heart limits its ability to increase stroke volume, SO
haemoglobin, but have less red cell 2,3, diphosphoglycerate (2,3-
cardiac output is mainly heart rate dependent.
 DPG). After birth, new red cells are made with increasing amounts
312
Neonates/paediatrics  313
of 2,3-DPG. Coagulation cascades and their control loops are
metabolism (although piglets, and possibly foals, do not have
 immature, with an increased tendency for coagulopathies.
brown fat), because:
Kidneys
● Large body surface area: body mass ratio.
● Little insulating subcutaneous fat.
 Post-natal glomerular filtration matures over 2-3 weeks in dogs,
● Poorly matured mechanisms for shivering thermogenesis (incl.
compared to 1 week in horses and calves. Renal tubular (especially
secretory) function develops over 48 weeks in dogs, compared
low muscle mass).
● Limited ability for nonshivering thermogenesis .
to 4-6 weeks in horses.
 A higher proportion of extracellular water in neonates means 
● Susceptibility to hypoglycaemia.
● Immature control of vasomotor tone.
  ( p i s) s rm  
rate of water turnover and immature kidneys increase the suscep-
Hypothermia itself has detrimental effects (see Chapter 20).
tibility to dehydration and overhydration. Immature renal func-
tion means:
Neuromuscular junctions
Neonates are *mini-myasthenics′ (see Chapter 17).
● Poor ability to concentrate urine.
● Poor ability to excrete a water load.
● Poor acid-base regulation.
Pharmacological considerations
Liver
● Higher body water content and higher extracellular: intracel-
The liver is immature. It has poor gluconeogenic ability and
lular fluid ratio means increased volume of distribution of
limited glycogen stores; these in combination with a high meta-
water soluble/poorly protein bound drugs.
 bolic rate (and demand for glucose) make neonates very suscep-
● Relative hypoalbuminaemia (not seen commonly in foals),
tible to hypoglycaemia. Within the frst month of life, hepatic
leads to increased “free’ (active) concentration of protein-
function matures rapidly.
bound drugs. (Acidic drugs bind albumin, whereas basic drugs
 prefer to bind to cl acid glycoprotein.)
Thermoregulation
● Low body fat (and relatively poor muscling) limits drug
Thermoregulatory control is immature. Neonates are prone to
redistribution.
hypothermia despite their high metabolic rate and brown fat
 Immature renal and hepatic metabolism/excretion pathways
 delay drug elimination.
● Increased blood-brain barrier permeability (especially for the
Intracellular water
first month of life), increases drug access to the CNS.
(40% body weight)
● Receptor differences: 'mini-myasthenics'; adrenoceptors (may
Total body water
Interstitial water
respond poorly to endogenous and exogenous agonists).
(60% body weight) 
(15% body weight)
Extracellular water /
Considerations for chemical restraint
(20% body weight)
(sedation/anaesthesia)
 Intravascular (plasma) water 
● No starvation pre-operatively, monitor blood glucose.
(5% body weight)
● Weigh accurately.
Figure 37.1 Water distribution in the adult (dog/horse).
● Temperature conservation. Try to minimise heat loss (Chapter
Daily water requirement is c. 40-60 ml/kg/day. Urine output is c. 1.5 ml/kg/h.
20).
 much metabolism. Try to avoid drugs that reduce heart rate.
Intracellular water
Pethidine is often favoured. Benzodiazepines good. Some use
 (35% body weight)
anticholinergics to reduce risk of tracheal obstruction with
Total body water
Interstitial water
 mucus, but beware increased viscidity of mucus.
(80% body weight) .
(37% body weight)
● Induction. Secure IV access (small veins). Pre-oxygenate if
 possible without stresing the patient. Choose drugs that
Extracellularwater
require minimal metabolism and allow rapid recovery (e.g.
(45% body weight)
inhalation agents like isoflurane or sevoflurane). Intravenous
 agents should be given slowly and to effect.
Intravascular (plasma) water
● Maintenance. Oxygen. N,O may be included if patient oxygen-
(8% body weight)
 ation sufficient. (NzO role in pulmonary hypertension equivo-
Figure 37.2 Water distribution in the neonate.
  s a d e  (
Daily water requirement is c. 80-1 20 ml/kg/day. Urine output is c. 6 ml/kg/h.
 can be more easily titrated to effect and are non-cumulative.
314  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Anaesthetic breathing system. T-piece; Bain (depends on
Holden D (2007) Paeidatric patients. In: BSAVA Manual of
size); small animal circle for foals/calves. Try to minimise
Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia. 2"d Edition. Eds:
apparatus dead space.
Seymour C & Duke-Novakovski T. British Small Animal
● Endotracheal tubes or mask? Non-cuffed red-rubber tubes
Veterinary Association, Gloucester UK. Chapter 27, Pp
have a larger internal diameter (less resistance) than cuffed
296-302.
tubes of the same external diameter, because the cuff is bulky.
 Ousey JC (1990) Heat production and its clinical implications in 
This is less of a problem with plastic tubes. Non-cuffed tubes
neonates. Equine Veterinary Journal 22 (2), 69-72.
reduce the risk of tracheal damage. Beware over-long tubes
 Pettifer GR and Grubb TL (2007) Neonatal and Geriatric Patients.
(excess dead space and risk of endobronchial intubation).
 In: Lumb and Jones? Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. 4lh
● Ventilatory assistance (IPpV) is often required. Be gentle.
Edition. Eds: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell
IPPV is usually well-tolerated by the cardiovascular system
Publishing, Iowa, USA. Chapter 47, pp 985-991.
because of the compliant chest wall and lack of normal negative
 intrapleural end-expiratory pressure.
● Monitoring. See Chapter 18
● Fluids. Beware over- and under-hydration. The relatively stiff
myocardium means that the heart is not as responsive to fluid
loading (in terms of Starling's law, and increased inotropy) as
in adults, and overhydration and pulmonary oedema can be a
Self-test section
consequence of excess IV fluids. Fluid (usually Hartmann's or
normal saline) rates of 10-20 ml/kg/h are probably OK short
1.
term, if the patient was not previously hypovolaemic. Check
 neonates in the first two weeks of life?
 blood glucose regularly.
A.
Pethidine.
● Analgesia Provide balanced analgesia where possible, but few
B.
Benzodiazepines.
 agents are licensed. Beware local anaesthetic overdose toxicity
C.
NSAIDs.
(dilute solutions if necessary).
D.
Isoflurane.
2.
Which of the following anaesthetic breathing systems
Further reading
 is definitely not suitable for a 60 kg foal?
A.
Bain.
Dugdale A (2004) Sedation and Anesthesia of foals. In: Equine
B.
 Small animal circle.
 Neonatology: Medicine and Surgery. Eds: Knottenbelt DC,
C.
Magill.
Holdstock N, Madigan JE. Saunders, London, UK Chapter 8,
D.
 Jackson Rees modifed Ayre's T-piece.
pPp 441-453.
Geriatrics
Learning objectives
 Be aware of common ageing changes.
 To discuss the approach to anaesthesia for elderly patients.
Ageing changes
● Decreased cardiac output; decreased blood pressure:
O Increased vagal tone.
 Ageing changes are gradual, progressive and generall ireversible.
0 Decreased baro- and chemo-receptor sensitivity.
Lifespans vary, but an individual is considered geriatric when it
O Decreased responsiveness to catecholamines.
has completed 75-80% of its expected natural lifespan. Dogs >8
● Slight decreased blood volume.
years, cats >12 years and horses >15 years are often considered
● Cardiac output becomes preload dependent.
geriatric.
 Consider the chronological and physiological ages of an animal
Cardiac degenerative changes (endocardiosis, valvular insuff-
because factors other than its breed and genetics, such as nutrition
ciencies, cardiomyopathies etc.) can predispose to arrhythmias.
and work, can influence senescence. Watch out for animals that
look old for their years? With advancing age, chronic diseases
 Respiratory system
 may be superimposed on ageing changes.
 Decreased ventilatory reserves (decreased functional residual
 capacity (FRC); increased closing capacity; increased work of
Central nervous system/peripheral nervous system
breathing):
● Progressive CNS neuronal atrophy and decreased neurotrans-
● Decreased chest wall compliance (calcification of costochon-
mitter release lead to senility (can decrease the minimal alveo-
 dral junctions and muscular atrophy).
lar concentration (MAC) of inhalation agents).
● Decreased lung elasticity (calcification and fibrosis).
● Increased blood-brain barrier permeability (drugs reach CNS
● Increased airway dead space.
easily).
● Decreased diffusing capacity′ of alveclar/capillary gas diffusion
● Decreased thermoregulatory ability.
'membrane.
● Decreased reflex activity (baroreceptor/chemoreceptor).
●Decreased
chemoreceptor and protective reflexes  (e.g.
● Decreased visual and auditory acuity: patients are more anxious
coughing).
in strange places; approach these patients quietly and care-
fully so as not to startle them.
 Diseases (e.g. chronic bronchitis, neoplasia, laryngeal paresis)
● Decreased conduction velocity in peripheral nerves may lead to
may also reduce ventilatory reserves.
 some inco-ordination.
  i   d s  s
● Decreased number of nicotinic acetylcholine
restrict chest wall excursion, lung inflation and cardiac function
receptors at
neuromuscular junctions causes increased sensitivity to non-
(Pickwickian syndrome).
depolarising neuromuscular blocking agents.
Kidneys
Cardiovascular system
Reduced overall glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Decreased
Decreased cardiovascular reserves:
number of functional nephrons. Decreased cardiac output.
315
316  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● May be azotaemic.
● Obesity may obscure anatomical landmarks for local blocks:
● May be isosthenuric (pd/pu).
decreases epidural dose requirements.
● Decreased excretory ability.
There may also be chronic renal disease.
Approach to anaesthesia
● Time permitting, determine any existing organ dysfunction
Liver
 and stabilise before general anaesthesia to optimise anaes-
thetic management.
● Decreased hepatic blood flow (decreased cardiac output).
● Handle gently. Offer plenty of tender loving care (TLC)
● Decreased hepatocyte number and function.
in peri-operative period (geriatrics suffer more ^emergence
 0 Decreased albumin production (increased free'/active drug
delirium than any other patients, possibly due to senile
concentration).
 changes, increased blood-brain barrier permeability, increased
0 Decreased
clotting
factor production 
leading
to
anxiety).
coagulopathies.
● Premedication. Small doses (elimination prolonged). Drugs
0 Decreased metabolic functions (decreased basal metabolic
with minimal cardiovascular and respiratory side effects.
rate (BMR); decreased drug/toxin detoxification).
Opicids good; but some suggest caution with morphine (nausea
● Diseases (lipidosis; cirrhosis; neoplasia).
and vomiting). Low doses acepromazine (ACP) if needed (c.
0.01 mg/kg); or benzodiazepines (but some animals suffer
Endocrine
‘disinhibition-excitement').
● Pre-oxygenate if possible without stress.
● Decreased stress responses.
● Secure IV access.
● Endocrine disorders common.
● Induction. Give injectables slowly to effect. For inhalation
 induction, beware stress; MAC is reduced in old age.
● Maintenance. Supply O. Consider balanced anaesthetic tech-
Gl tract
niques. May need ventilatory support (IPPV). Intravenous
● Decreased lower oesophageal sphincter tone (increased risk of
fluids (preferably Hartmann's solution), at c. 5-10ml/kg/h if
reflux).
not previously hypovolaemic.
● Increased
gastric
acidity
(increased risk of reflux
●Analgesia.
Multimodal
approach. Check renal/hepatic
oesophagitis).
function.
● In horses, dental problems reduce food intake and decreased
● Monitoring see Chapter 18.
fbre digestion in large intestine significantly decreases heat
● Recovery. Ensure continued analgesia and good nursing.
 production.
Geriatric animals prone to emergence delirium: TLC often
works wonders. Quick return to owners beneficial. Check tem-
perature if recovery delayed. Possibly continue IV fluids until
Thermoregulation
 oral intake possible. Ensure empty bladder (improves comfort 
Geriatrics are prone to hypothermia, but laryngeal paresis and
impaired panting (dogs) can lead to hyperthermia:
in recovery). Older animals are often reluctant to defecate or
urinate in a strange place and arthritic, stiff or sore animals may
● Decreased muscle mass (less effective shivering).
be reluctant to stand and posture to urinate and defecate.
● Decreased BMR.
● Decreased temperature homeostasis (CNS changes).
Further reading
● Lack of brown fat (usually).
●Adiposity
(white
adipose
tissue)
variable
(variable
Brosnahan MM, Paradis MR (2003) Demographic and clinical
insulation).
characteristics of geriatric horses: 467 cases: 1989-1999. Journal
● Possible hormonal alopecia.
of the American Veterinary Medical Association 223, 93-98.
● Reduced fbre digestion in equine large intestine.
Carpenter RE, Pettifer GR, Tranquilli WJ (2005) Anesthesia for
Geriatric Patients. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
Animal Practice 35 (3), 571-580.
Musculoskeletal
Matthews NS (2002) Anesthetic considerations of the older
● Decreased muscle mass (sarcopenia) and increased fat mass
equine. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Equine Practice
(even in non-obese animals, see increased fat:lean ratio): alters
18 (3), 403-409.
the compartments for drug redistribution.
Neiger-Aeschbacher G (2007) Geriatric Patients. In: BSAVA
● Narrowed  intervertebral f
foramina
(fbrosis/ossification):
 Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia. 2nd
 decreases epidural dose requirements.
Edition. Eds: Seymour C and Duke-Novakovski T. British
● Ostecarthritis/spondylosis ^distorts anatomy for epidurals and
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester, UK Chapter
requires gentle positioning during anaesthesia.
28, pp 303-309.
Geriatrics  317
Self-test section
 1.Which of the following is the most commonly given
reason for why the doses of epidurally (extradurally)
administered drugs can often be reduced in older
 patients?
A.
 Decreased volume of distribution  for water
soluble drugs.
B.
Fibrous/bony tissues often build up in the
intervertebral foramina of older animals, effec-
tively allowing administered drugs to spread
further rostrally.
 Reduced hepatic metabolic capacity.
C.
D.1
 Increased blood-brain barrier permeability.
2.1
Although we commonly think of neonatal animals
being prone to hypothermia, can you list at least three
reasons why geriatric patients are also at risk of devel
oping hypothermia?
39
Pregnancy and Caesarean sections
Learning objectives
To be able to discuss the physiological changes occurring during pregnancy and their infuences on anaesthesia.
 To be able to devise an anaesthetic plan.
Physiological changes during pregnancy
the FRC during late pregnancy leading to an increased risk of
atelectasis.
Cardiovascular system
● Airway dilation (progesterone effect) reduces resistance, but
Increased cardiac output, increased myocardial work:
increases dead space.
● Increased heart rate.
● Decreased PaCO, theoretically shifts the Oz/Hb dissociation
● Increased stroke volume.
curve to the left; but increased 2,3 diphosphoglycerate (2,3-
● Decreased systemic vascular resistance (progesterone effect).
 DPG) offsets this.
Uterus
Blood
Perfusion (proportional to placental and foetal size):
 Physiological anaemia; decreased blood viscosity:
● Depends on the arterio-venous blood pressure difference.
● Increased plasma volume.
● Inversely proportional to uterine tone and vascular resistance.
● Slightly increased red cell mass.
 O Uterine contractions may decrease perfusion.
● Slightly decreased total protein.
● Uterine blood flow sensitive to PaCO (increased CO, leads to
Hypercoagulable state; increased clotting factors.
vasodilation; decreased CO, leads to vasoconstriction).
GI tract
Respiratory system
● Cranial displacement of stomach increases the risk of gastric
● Increased minute ventilation (increased O, demand, increased 
reflux and also ^splints’ the diaphragm leading to decreased
basal metabolic rate (BMR) and progesterone's effect on CO2
ventilatory reserves.
sensitivity);
● Delayed gastric emptying and decreased cardiac sphincter tone
0 Increased breathing rate; overcomes decreased tidal volume
(progesterone relaxes smooth muscle) leads to increased intra-
with advancing gestation.
 gastric pressure and increased risk of reflux (also increased by
0 Progesterone increases central chemoreceptor sensitivity
 raised intra-abdominal pressure).
to CO. PaCO, reduces (e.g. 40mmHg → c. 35 mmHg).
● Increased gastric acid secretion (effect of prolactin and foetal/
Blood pH remains normal (increased renal excretion of
bicarbonate).
placental gastrin').
● Decreased functional residual capacity (FRC) (as intra-
 Renal
abdominal pressure increases), decreases gas reserves? in the
Increased frequency of micturition:
lungs and increases potential for hypoxaemia although alveolar
gas composition can change more quickly in the smaller FRC
● Increased urine output (increased cardiac output).
during inhalational anaesthesia. Closing capacity ^approaches?
● Bladder squashed by increased intra-abdominal pressure.
318
Pregnancy and Caesarean sections  319
Hepatic
Caesarean sections
● Decreased serum proteins including plasma cholinesterase.
 The mother's life is usually the priority. Orphan neonates have
● Increased clotting factors, increased fbrinogen and plasmino-
decreased survival. For viable young you must avoid foetal
gen inhibitor, decreased antithrombin III and plasminogen 
hypoxia.
activator leading to hypercoagulability.
Foetal hypoxia
Aorto-caval compression syndrome/supine
Causes include
hypotensive syndrome
 During dorsal recumbency (if heavily pregnant),the weight of the
● Premature placental separation.
● Impaired maternal ventilation (drug- or position-induced res-
gravid uterus squashes the large blood vessels that run close to the
spine (caudal vena cava (most compressible) and descending
piratory depression).
aorta). Vena caval compression reduces venous return and so
Drug- or position-induced maternal hypotension.
reduces cardiac output and arterial blood pressure. Reflex tachy-
● Drug induced foetal depression (foetal cardiovascular depres-
cardia usually occurs in response to the hypotension but sudden
sion; neonatal cardio-respiratory depression).
severe reduction in venous return, especially if superimposed on
 Most anaesthetic agents (bar the highly ionised muscle relax-
pre-existing hypovolaemia (absolute or relative (e.g. sympathetic
ants), will readily cross the placenta, so an anaesthetised mother
block accompanying epidural anaesthesia)), can also stimulate
 means anaesthetised foetuses as well.
the Bezold-Jarisch reflex which results in inappropriate vasodila-
tion and bradycardia (and can result in vasovagal syncope).
Options
Compression of the abdominal aorta risks reducing uteroplacen-
Sedation+bcal anaesthetic technique
tal perfusion. Gentle slow changes in patient position are recom-
 Extra physical restraint often necessary. Sedative drugs given to
mended and rolling slightly to the left side of dorsal (away from
 dam will affect the foetus/es. Local anaesthetics can cross placenta
the vena cava), reduces pressure on the vena cava.
(bupivacaine least). Local anaesthetic epidurals lead to caudal
 sympathetic block which can decrease arterial blood pressure and
Other
placental perfusion; so ensure IV access, may require aggressive
fluid administration.
● Increased blood-brain barrier permeability (due to progester-
one) increases sensitivity to drugs (e.g. decreased minimal alve-
General anaesthesia
olar concentration (MAC)). Progesterone also sedates foetus/es.
● Engorged epidural (extradural) veins reduce epidural space?
 Often the most practical technique, but most drugs cross the
and decrease epidural dose requirements.
placenta to affect the young also. Technique should be aimed at
 maintaining maternal oxygenation and blood pressure (placental
perfusion).
Placental transfer of drugs
 Decreased placental perfusion → decreased foetal oxygen
The placental transfer of drugs depends on their physicochemical
supply → foetal bradycardia and acidosis.
 properties and the concentration gradient between maternal and
 Ketamine, opioids and local anaesthetics are weak bases. If the
foetal circulations.
foetus becomes very acidotic, ion trapping of these drugs is
promoted.
Physicochemical properties
●Molecular size.
 Approach to general anaesthesia
● Molecular charge (ionisation; pKa).
●History and clinical examination: emergency (recent meal?) or
● Fat solubility.
elective?
● Protein binding (blood and tissue proteins).
● Minimal, but effective, premed. Often opioid-based (pethi-
dine), at least until foetus/es delivered. Anticholinergics? (see 
Concentration gradient between maternal and 
below).
foetal circulations
● Ensure IV access; exhausted dams may require pre-operative
● Maternal drug dose.
stabilisation.
● Maternal  pharmacokinetics/pharmacodynamics (redistribu-
● Pre-oxygenate without stress if possible (increases oxygen
tion/elimination).
reserves).
● Placental blood flow.
● Try to pre-clip the belly if possible (saves time).
● Placental thickness and 'surface area' for exchange.
Induction
● The pH gradient between dam and foetus. Foetus usually more
 acidic leading to ion-trapping of basic drugs.
 Injectables
● Placental drug metabolism.
IV to effect, but do not unduly delay induction due to risk of
● Foetal pharmacokinetics/dynamics (redistribution/elimination).
 regurgitation. Propofol or alfaxalone are common choices for
320  Veterinary Anaesthesia
small animals; ketamine-based techniques for horses, but famili-
the gravid uterus is lifted, manipulated or exteriorised or the
arity with the agent also important.
foetus delivered (the sudden reduction in intra-abdominal
pressure can result in hypotension).
Inhalation
● Uterine traction occasionally results in vagal (rather than
For small animals, induction of anaesthesia with inhalation agents
sympathetic), reflexes: so anticholinergics may be indicated:
can be achieved by mask or chamber, following pre-oxygenation
glycopyrrolate often preferred, although slightly slower in
as long as the dam remains unstressed. Inhalation induction tends
onset, because it does not cross the placenta.
to be relatively quick because of the high minute ventilation and
● Monitor pulse rate, breathing rate, SpOz, arterial blood pres-
reduced FRC; but patients always traverse the stage I, involun-
sure if possible, ETCOz tension and arterial blood gases if
-s  re a  e p ss a 
possible (horses).
gle, so be prepared for this. Isoflurane and sevoflurane should
● Should gastric reflux occur, gently lavage the oesophagus with
result in fewer cardiac arrhythmias during a stressful (high cate-
warm water (ensure ET tube cuff inflated).
 cholamine) induction than halothane. A relatively rapid induc-
● Oxytocin is often administered to aid uterine involution.
 tion is important due to the risk of regurgitation.
Recovery
Tracheal intubation
Beware vomition/aspiration by the dam (especially smallanimals).
Cuffed ET tube as soon as possible.
If rapidly eliminated anaesthetic drugs were administered, then
Maintenance
recovery should be quick, and the young should be allowed to
● Inhalation agents usually preferred (less potential for pro-
suckle and bond as soon as possible. If not given already, NSAIDs
may now be given to the dam.
longed recoveries).
● Always supplement oxygen.
Neonatal resuscitation.
● NO controversial (theoretical possibility of diffusion hypoxia
 in the delivered young).
● You will need help, the more pairs of hands the better especially
● Careful positioning dorsal, with a slight tilt to the left.
for large litters and foals.
Changes of position should be done slowly and gently.
● Assess heart beat, muscle 'tonus, activity, mucous membrane
● Intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) may be
colour.
required: beware over-ventilation because excessive reduction
● Ensure the airway is clear; that membranes and mucus are
of end tidal CO, (ETCO2) tension (and therefore PaCO2) will
removed from nose and mouth. May need gentle suction (cath-
shift the Oz/Hb dissociation curve further to the left, and reduce
eter attached to syringe) to clear mucus from throat. Holding
O, transfer to the foetus; and hypocapnia results in vasocon-
head-down may help to clear the airways.
striction of uterine vessels, with possible compromise of foetal
● Umbilical cords are usually clamped.
oxygenation.
() q on sim nadd p siam A m jo so o
● Muscle relaxants? Neuromuscular blocking agents are highly
 especially over the ribs, to stimulate breathing.
 ionised and do not cross the placenta. (If used, the patient will
● Stimulation of the nasal philtrum (acupuncture point GV26),
require IPPV.) See Chapter 17.
with a towel, or something sharper (straw/needle for calves/
● Epidural local anaesthetic can afford excellent analgesia but
foals), may help to initiate breathing. Doxapram drops admin-
performing the technique may increase anaesthetic time.
istered sublingually were once commonly used, but doxapram
Reduce epidural doses and beware the side effect of hypoten-
may be detrimental in the presence of hypoxaemia because it
sion if local anaesthetics are used. Epidural opioids do not
increases myocardial and cerebral O demand, which is not
-od se ou op ose e up u u du npd
 good in hypoxic neonates. Etamiphylline gel (stimulates respi-
rary paraplegia which can complicate nursing. Epidural opioids
ratory activity by increasing sensitivity to CO, and enhances
alone, however, do not provide good ‘incisional’ analgesia/
 diaphragmatic activity), administered sublingually, is often
anti-nociception.
favoured in farm species for neonatal resuscitation. Naloxone
● Analgesia. Systemic opioids can be given to the dam after
and atipamezole can be considered if the neonatal respiratory
foetus delivery: they do cross the placenta and also enter milk
depression is thought to be related to the dam's analgesia or
to a small degree and theoretically make the offspring sleepy.
 sedation. If necessary,flow-by oxygen can be supplied. Tracheal
NSAIDs can be given after the young are delivered (some
intubation with a small ET tube or catheter, may also be
 people prefer to wait until the dam has recovered’ from the
attempted, followed by gentle insufflation with air (which
anaesthetic), and due to their high protein binding, they tend
usually suffices), exhaled breath, or O2.
to be only minimally transferred to milk. Even so, some people
● Keep neonate warm with warm insulative blankets, radiant
consider gastroprotectants in the delivered young (e.g.
heat lamp (beware burns though), forced warm air blanket or
sucralfate).
heat pad (young pups and kittens often not heavy enough to
● Intravenous fluids (Hartmann's solution often chosen), should
feel the warmth though).
be considered peri-operatively, and at c. 5-10 ml/kg/h intra-
● Re-unite with dam as soon as possible for suckling and
 operatively, although be prepared to increase the rate when
bonding.
Pregnancy and Caesarean sections  321
Further reading
Self-test section
Corley KT and Furr MO (2000) Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
 in newborn foals. Compendium on Continuing Education for
1.
Which of the following does not cross the placenta
the Practising Veterinarian 22 (10), 957-966.
from dam to foetus?
Johnston GM (1992) Perioperative care of mares subjected to
A.
Benzodiazepines.
Caesarean section. Part 1: Anaesthesia. Equine Veterinary
B.
Guaiphenesin.
Education 4,26-30.
C.
Neuromuscular blocking drugs.
 Johnston GM (1992) Perioperative care of mares subjected to
D.
Opioids.
Caesarean section. Part 2: Perioperative support of the mare
E.
Atropine.
and foal. Equine Veterinary Education 4,78-83.
 Describe what happens to the cardiovascular system
Kinsella SM, Tuckey JP (2001) Perioperative bradycardia and
when a heavily pregnant dam is placed into dorsal
asystole: relationship to vasovagal syncope and the Bezold-
recumbency.
Jarisch reflex. British Journal of Anaesthesia 86 (6), 859-868.
Luna SPL, Cassu RN, Castro GB et al. (2004) Effects of four
anaesthetic protocols on the neurological and cardiorespiratory
variables of puppies born by Caesarean section. Veterinary
Record 154,387-389.
Meyer RE (2007) Caesarean Section. In: BSAVA Manual of Canine
and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia. 2"d Edition. Eds: Seymour
C and Duke-Novakovski T. British Small Animal Veterinary
Association, Gloucester, UK Chapter 24, pp 265-273.
Considerations for ocular surgery
Learning objectives
To be able to list the factors affecting intra-ocular pressure (IOP).
To be able to discuss the effect of anaesthetic agents on IOP.
Introduction
● Decreased aqueous humour drainage e.g mydriasis (especially
if closed angle glaucoma tendencies).
Normal intra-ocular pressure (IOP) is about 15-20 mmHg and is
● Increased extraocular muscle tone e.g. succinylcholine (tran-
npd ino snonbe umiaq aueq e aq pun
sient), ketamine in some species (man and horse).
and absorption, and other factors such as pupil size, corneoscleral
rigidity, extraocular muscle tone, and vascularity of the orbit
Decrease in IOP
(itself affected by blood pressure (especially central venous pres-
Decreased IOP is brought about by:
sure (CVP), and blood gas tensions).
a Jo ssid Are au Aq pnpd s inuu sonby
● Decreased CVP.
ciliary body from where it flows into the anterior chamber of the
● Relief of any jugular vein occusion.
eye and is absorbed into the venous system mostly via the canal
●Mean arterial pressure <80 mmHg.
of Schlemm (through the trabecular meshwork of the pectinate
● Decreased PaCOz (and increased blood pH) (cause vasocon-
ligament at the drainage angle of the eye). There is some absorp-
 striction and decrease choroidal blood volume).
 tion of aqueous humour through uveoscleral pathways, which is
● Increased PaOz.
 the most important route of drainage in horses.
● Increased aqueous humour drainage e.g. miosis, osmotic
diuretics.
Changes in IOP
● Decreased aqueous humour production e.g. carbonic anhy-
drase inhibitors, β blockers, α2 agonists.
Increase in IOP
● Decreased extraocular muscle tone (allows increased aqueous
 Increased IOP is brought about by:
drainage) e.g. most sedatives and general anaesthetics (not
ketamine) and non-depolarising muscle relaxants.
● Increased CVP (causes increased episcleral/choroidal venous
pressure).
Factors altering CVP (and jugular venous pressure)
● Increased jugular venous pressure e.g jugular vein occlusion or
 Factors that can increase these pressures
head-down position (sedated horses) impedes venous return 
from head.
· Coughing.
● Increased arterial blood pressure (>80 mmHg) has minimal
●Gagging/retching (tracheal intubation/extubation).
effect.
●Vomiting.
● Increased PaCOz (and decreased blood pH) (cause vasodilation 
● Straining.
 and increase choroidal blood volume).
●IPPV/PEEP
● Decreased PaO, (through vasodilation).
● Pneumothorax.
● Increased aqueous humour production.
● Pericardial tamponade.
322
Considerations for ocular surgery  323
● Congestive heart failure.
vagomimetic and miotic effects of opioids (in dogs) pretty
● Pulmonary thromboemboli.
much offset this.) Opioid-induced vomiting can lead to
increased  IOP although cough-suppression  is a useful
Factors that can decrease these pressures
side-effect.
● α2 agonists decrease IOP (by reducing ADH (which helps
● Head up position.
reduce aqueous production) and increasing aqueous outflow)
● Hypovolaemia/hypotension (systemic β blockers).
 despite causing mydriasis. Beware low-head carriage in sedated
horses though.
Changes in pupil size
● Benzodiazepines decrease IOP.
Mydriasis
● Acepromazine (ACP) has minimal effects on IOP.
● Volatile agents cause a dose-dependent decrease of IOP (by
 This is dilation of the pupil and is caused by:
decreasing extraocular muscle tone, improving aqueous drain-
● Sympathomimetics: phenylephrine, adrenaline, α2 agonists.
age and causing miosis at surgical planes of anaesthesia).
●Parasympatholytics/anticholinergics: atropine, hyoscine, glyco-
● N,O causes little effect unless the eye has been ^open' and con-
 pyrrolate, tropicamide, ipratropium, propantheline.
 tains bubbles of air, as these will expand with NO to increase
● Opioids in horses and cats.
IOP.
● Ketamine.
● Etomidate, propofol, alfaxalone, thiopental reduce IOP
(similar to volatile agent anaesthesia).
Miosis
● Ketamine increases IOP (due to increased extraocular muscle
This is constriction of the pupil and is caused by:
tone and increased arterial blood pressure), but equivocal and
 possibly species-dependent. Its effects can be reduced by prior
● Sympatholytics: β blockers: timoptol, timolol.
administration of benzodiazepines, guaiphenesin (GGE), or α2
● Parasympathomimetics: cholinergics e.g. pilocarpine, bethane-
agonists (beware low head carriage in horses).
col; or anticholinesterases
s e.g. demecarium bromide,
● Nondepolarising neuromuscular blockers decrease IOP (due
ecothiophate.
 to decreased extraocular muscle tone).
● Most general anaesthetic agents (stage III anaesthesia), but
● Succinylcholine causes transient increase in IOP (during onset
ketamine and some opioids (in cat and horse) can cause
 of block when muscle fasciculations occur), then decreases IOP
mydriasis.
(as muscles relax).
Oculocardiac reflex
IPPV and intraocular pressure
● Afferent limb: long and short ciliary nerves of ophthalmic
● The positive intrathoracic pressure may dam-back venous
branch of trigeminal nerve (V).
return and increase CVP leading to increased IOP.
● Efferent limb: vagus nerve (X).
● Hyperventilation can reduce PaCO, which decreases IOP.
● Caused by: traction or pressure on eyeball.
● Results in: bradycardia, asystole, A-V
block,
other
 Requirements for eye surgery
dysrhythmias.
● More a problem in animals with high resting vagal tone:
● Central eye
o Very young.
● Akinetic/'still eye, i.e. no nystagmus or blinking.
o Very old.
● A ‘soft eye, if globe penetration is required or perforation
 Horses.
already exists.
 0 Respiratory diseases and disorders (e.g. brachycephalics).
● Quiet gentle recovery to reduce trauma to eye
0 Opioids and c2 agonists.
Consider
The reflex usually fatigues quickly upon cessation of stimulus.
May require emergency treatment with anticholinergics (atropine
●Age.
works fastest); or you may wish to administer anticholinergics
● Temperament.
 prophylactically; glycopyrrolate and atropine similarly effective.
● Other diseases (cataract surgeries are common for diabetics).
 Retrobulbar block should abolish the reflex (although injection
● Elective versus emergency procedure.
of local anaesthetic may cause it); whereas neuromuscular block-
ers may only reduce its occurrence by reducing the need to pull
 Drugs affecting pupil size
and push so vigorously on the globe.
ensure mydriasis), will preclude use of pupillary size for monitor-
Anaesthetic agents and IOP
ing. For dog cataract surgery, topical atropine drops must be
applied before premedication is given,because once other drugs
● Opioids can increase IOP (they depress the ventilatory response
(especially opioids) have had their effects on pupil size, they can
to COz; increased PaCO, leads to increased IOP although the
be hard to reverse. If pupil dilation is insufficient during surgery.
324  Veterinary Anaesthesia
intraocular epinephrine (adrenaline) may be used (also offers
Further reading
some haemostasis). Intraocular epinephrine may, however, cause
Collins BK, Gross ME, Moore CP, Branson KR (1995) Physiologic,
transient cardiac arrhythmias.
pharmacologic and practical considerations for anesthesia of
Anaesthetic options
domestic animals with eye disease. Journal of the American
Premedication
Veterinary Medical Association 207(20), 220-230.
 Jurk IR, Thibodeau MS, Whitney K, Gilger BC, Davidson MG
 Effective premedication leads to decreased struggling on induc-
 tion which prevents increased IOP. Antitussive effects of opioids
(2001) Acute vision loss after general anesthesia in a cat.
Veterinary Ophthalmology 4(2), 155-158.
are useful, but emetic effects are not.
Murgatroyd H, Bembridge J (2008) Intraocular pressure.
Induction
Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain.
Should be as stress free as possible. Gentle restraint important.
8(5),100-103.
IV induction usually preferred.
Raw D, Mostafa SM (2001) Drugs and the Eye. British Journal of
Anaesthesia CPED Reviews 1(6), 161-165.
 Roth S,Barach P (2001) Postoperativevisual loss- still noanswers,
Tracheal intubation
Aim for tracheal intubation with no gagging fairly deep anaes-
yet. Editorial. Anesthesiology 95(3), 575-577.
thesia or topical local anaesthetic (but spray application to the
larynx may cause coughing). Lidocaine IV (e.g. dog: 1-2 mg/kg)
 just before induction/intubation reduces gagging with laryngos-
 copy and tracheal intubation.
 Self-test section
Maintenance
ss a ni pre on e os nnd an 
1.
Which of the following can increase intraocular
Some people even use a 10° head up tilt. Are local anaesthetic
pressure?
blocks appropriate? Paralysis of the extraocular muscles may be
 Increased CVP.
required (see Chapter 17). Vigilant monitoring is important.
Decreased CVP.
Intravenous fluid therapy is usually provided. Analgesia is
Head down posture.
important; consider a multimodal approach.
Head up posture.
 Increased arterial PCO2.
Recovery
 Decreased arterial PCO2.
Ensure adequate reversal of neuromuscular block: respiratory
 Increased arterial PO2.
depression leads to increased IOP (hypercapnia and hypoxaemia).
 Decreased arterial PO2.
 Recovery should be smooth patient comfort (e.g. empty bladder)
Mydriasis.
and analgesia must be adequate. Tracheal extubation should be
Miosis.
gentle (with minimal gagging); useful antitussive effects of opioids.
Coughing/retching/vomiting.
If emergence delirium occurs, ensure adequate analgesia and
●
 Direct pressure on the globe.
 empty bladder, then try tender loving care (TLC); consider seda-
2.
Which of the following is often avoided in premedica-
tion (benzodiazepines, ACP or small doses of c2 agonists). Reduce
tion prior to canine cataract (intraocular) surgery?
 self-trauma to eyes: good analgesia, bandage paws (preferred over
A.
 Pethidine.
Elizabethan collars).
B.
Methadone.
C.
Morphine.
Note
D.
 Buprenorphine.
 Birds and reptiles have striated iris muscles so topical neuromus-
E.
Butorphanol.
cular blockers produce mydriasis for surgery.
Orthopaedic concerns
Learning objectives
 To be familiar with the different forms of embolism, its recognition and treatment.
 To be able to devise suitable analgesic plans.
Emboli
 previous trauma, such that gravitational exsanguination is often
preferred.
A rare, but life-threatening risk.
Air emboli (see also Chapter 7)
Fat/marrow
Facilitated by:
Marrow fragments can be seeded into the circulation during or
● Use of air drills.
after the fracture of long bones and during their repair. Usually
'silent, but severe embolism may result in:
marrow cavities (including skull diploe), are exposed (e.g.
● Severe respiratory compromise.
spinal or cranial surgery).
● Cerebral compromise.
● Where down the vein jugular vein catheters become uncapped
● Cardiovascular compromise/collapse/shock.
(e.g. in a standing horse).
● Skin/mucosal petechiation; retinal haemorrhages.
● During contrast cystography where air is forced into the bladder
● Renal compromise; may detect fat in urine.
under pressure.
● During laparosco pic surgery where the abdomen is inflated with
 Intramedullary pressure may reach peaks of 1400 mmHg
 gases (usually COz, which is the safest gas because it is highly
during bone instrumentation (e.g. reaming). Bone marrow
 i s q qppuns e qur
soluble in blood, so any bubbles are quickly ^dissolved').
macroemboli. Wherever they lodge they can interfere with organ
● Sometimes where intermittent positive pressure ventilation
(IPPV) is overzealous.
ds a ssds  e a  pe d
ing the systemic inflammatory response (SIRS), which can lead to
Treatment for venous air emboli
multiple organ failure.
● Reduce further air entry:
0 Flood/submerge surgical site with saline; occlude offending 
Bone cement
vessel if possible.
Hypotension and cardiac arrest can occur occasionally (actually
O Lower the operation site to below the heart if possible, tilt
quite rare) during insertion of prostheses with bone cement.
 operating table.
These ‘reactions’ may occur when free methylmethacrylate
0 If head/neck surgery, compress both jugular veins (increases 
monomer is forced into the circulation during insertion of
venous back-pressure).
cement, but may also be due to fat, air, thrombus and marrow
0 Rapid IV fluids (to increase CVP).
embolisation.
● Stop N,O.
● Ventilate (IPPV) with 100% Oz as hypoxaemia likely. Apply
Thrombi
 PEEP or CPAP to increase CVP.
Esmarch bandaging of limbs to ^exsanguinate’ them prior to
● Inotropic/vasopressor support if hypotensive.
surgery can also dislodge venous thromboses secondary to the
● Cardiocentesis to remove large air bubbles.
325
326  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Treatment for marrow/fat/thrombo-emboli
tion by pharyngotomy may be performed; the reader is referred
to the further reading.
Anticoagulants (heparin), thrombolytics (streptokinase/uroki-
nase) or mechanical fragmentation could be attempted if drugs 
and expertise are available. Respiratory and cardiovascular
Further reading
support are important; control of the systemic inflammatory
Abdul-Jalil Y, Bartels J, Alberti O, Becker R (2007) Delayed pres-
response more tricky.
entation of pulmonary polymethylmethacrylate emboli after
percutaneous vertebroplasty. Spine 32(20), E589-593.
Providing analgesia
 Donaldson AJ, Thomson HE, Harper NJ, Kenny NW (2009) Bone 
With all bone fractures, fracture-site stabilisation assists in pro-
cement implantation syndrome. British Journal of Anaesthesia
viding analgesia.
102(1), 12-22.
 Local anaesthetic techniques are often applicable for ortho-
Gupta A, Reilly CS (2007) Fat Embolism. Continuing Education
 paedic surgery. Thoracotomies, especially sternotomies, are
 in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain 7(5), 148-151.
amongst the most painful of bony surgeries. See Chapters 12, 14,
 Hartsfield SM, Gendreau CL, Smith CW, Rouse GP, Thurmon JC
(1977) Endotracheal intubation by pharyngotomy. Journal of
15 and 47.
 During spinal surgery epidural/spinal analgesia may be con-
the American Animal Hospital Association 13(1), 71-74.
       
templated but may complicate post-operative neurological assess-
ment. If the epidural space and the dura mater are going to be
practice and postoperative pulmonary complications. Acta
Anaesthesiologica Scandinavica 36(8), 812-818.
opened at surgery, then neuraxially administered analgesic drugs
Selcer BA, Buttrick M, Barstad R, Riedesel D (1987) The incidence
may be less efficacious anyway. With spinal surgeries there is a
 of thoracic trauma in dogs with skeletal injury. Journal of Small
worry of increased GI (large gut as much as stomach) perfora-
tion with NSAIDs. (Gastroprotectant drugs therefore not always
Animal Practice 28, 21-27.
effective.) Is this because NSAIDs are commonly administered
alongside corticosteroids? Or is it that with acute disc protru-
sions, spinal cord bruising leads to a form of spinal shock?
Remember that category of shock called neurogenic, which basi-
cally means a massive reduction in sympathetic tone, and thus
hypotension. Hypotension can certainly compromise splanchnic
(renal and GI) perfusion. Hypothermia is another common
 problem. Most disc protrusions occur in small dogs but spinal
shock-induced hypotension is partly due to peripheral vasodila-
Self-test section
tion, and this vasodilation would facilitate heat loss. Hind quarter
paresis also reduces shivering thermogenesis.
1.
 How might you recognise a pulmonary thromboem-
 Phantom limb pain is well recognised as one of the most debili-
bolic event in an anaesthetised patient? (Which of the
tating consequences of amputation in humans and may also
following apply?)
occur in veterinary species although it can be more difficult to
●Sudden fall in ETCO, tension.
recognise. Limb and tail amputations can result in this phenom-
鲁
 Sudden rise in ETCO, tension.
enon. Its development can be greatly reduced by performing true
Sudden decrease in systemic arterial blood
 pre-emptive analgesia by ensuring conduction blockade in the
 pressure.
peripheral nerves which are to be transected during the proce-
 Sudden increase in systemic arterial blood
dure: individual perineural blocks (local anaesthetic injected
pressure.
 beneath each nerve sheath) supplement regional techniques (bra-
 Bradycardia.
chial plexus block, neuraxial techniques). Allow time for the local
Tachycardia.
anaesthetic to work.
鲁
 Desaturation (low SpO reading with pulse oxime-
ter/cyanotic mucous membranes).
Securing an airway
 Tachypnoea (sometimes difficult to recognise if
lungs already being ventilated, but patient may
For facial and jaw fractures, occasionally orotracheal intubation
*buck' the ventilator).
 may not be possible. In these circumstances endotracheal intuba-
Renal considerations
Learning objectives
 To be familiar with the normal kidney functions.
 To be able to devise suitable anaesthetic protocols to preserve renal function.
Normals
● When renal failure occurs, nitrogenous waste products start to
accumulate in the blood: azotaemia (mild increase); uraemia
 Normal kidney functions
(large increase).
● Regulation of water balance (blood volume, osmolarity (Na+
 Azotaemia occurs when blood urea and creatinine are measur-
concentration), and blood pressure).
 ably high, but there are no obvious clinical signs of illness in the
● Regulation of electrolyte balance (some species variations);
 patient (bar pu/pd). Uraemia occurs when urea and creatinine are
sodium, potassium, calcium and phosphate.
high and clinical signs of systemic ill-health (see below) accom-
● Regulation of blood pH (acid (Ht) excretion; bicarbonate
[un jo sso %s v (pdnd sa) an peui o aso sud
'reabsorption').
nephrons is required for isosthenuria and azotaemia. Urine con-
● Gluconeogenesis and other metabolic functions (e.g reabsorp-
centrating ability may be lost before azotaemia appears in dogs,
tion/conservation of amino acids).
but cats may retain some urine concentrating ability in the pres-
● Assistance with red blood cell production (erythropoietin).
ence of azotaemia.
● Excretion of waste products (especially nitrogenous).
● Elimination of drugs (by fltration/secretion into urine).
Problems with the renal system
Endocrine functions
Uraemic syndrome features
These include the production of:
● High parathyroid hormone (PTH).
● Erythropoietin (erythrogenin in the kidney (juxtaglomerular
●High phosphates.
cells) converts erythropoietinogen  (from the liver)
to
● High urea and creatinine (halitosis).
erythropoietin).
● Increased protein catabolism (weight loss).
● Renin.
● Nausea and vomiting - increases the chance of hypovolaermia
● 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol; the active form of vitamin D.
and worsening of the condition (high PTH and phosphates 
lation of vitamin D3) is further hydroxylated in the kidney.)
 thought to enhance the feeling of nausea).
● Enhanced permeability of capillaries (uraemic pneumonitis (an 
 increased permeability type of pulmonary cedema), petechia-
Useful values
( pe sala so pe u
●Renal blood flow is c. 20% of cardiac output.
● Enhanced permeability ofblood-brain barrier (adds to uraemic
● Glomerular fltration rate is c. 125 ml/kg/h.
 encephalopathy).
● Normal urine production rate is about 1% of this, of the order
● Uraemia interferes with platelet function, so bleeding gums and
of 1-1.5 ml/kg/h. (Part of this is the minimum mandatory/
stomach lesions are more likely. Blood in stomach also causes
obligatory urine loss in order to excrete the solute load.)
emesis.
327
328  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Uraemia may also cause haemolysis and bone marrow suppres-
Approach
sion, which compound the anaemia from blood loss (from
 Foals are neonates too (see Chapter 37).
 bleeding gums and stomach).
● Stabilise pre-anaesthesia (aim for K+ < 6 mmol/l):
● High PTH is thought to be nephrotoxic so that the disease
0 IV fluids: saline (quite acidifying) or Hartmann's (will not
 process is self-perpetuating.
decrease potassium as fast as potassum-lacking fluids).
 Renal disease causes perturbations in many bodily functions.
Possibly deny suckling (milk has high potassium content).
The presence of anaemia, disturbances in blood volume and pres-
0 If hyperkalaemic arrhythmias: IV calcium; infuse glucose
sure and electrolyte abnormalities are most likely to cause concern;
(+/— soluble insulin); possibly sodium bicarbonate (see
but we also have to bear in mind the metabolism and excretion of
Chapter 24).
any drugs we administer. We ought to ask ourselves:
0 Once bladder drainage re-established and fluid therapy
● How does the renal disease affect our anaesthesia?
underway, furosermide increases potassium excretion.
 0 Drain belly, slowly (rapid release of previously raised intra-
● How does the anaesthetic affect the renal disease?
abdominal pressure can result in massive splanchnic vasodi-
 Patients should be 'stabilised’ pre-anaesthesia where possible,
lation, hypotension and syncope). Consider peritoneal
S0 address hypovolaemia, uraemia, anaemia and electrolyte dis-
 dialysis/lavage with normal saline.
turbances, especially of potassium, pre-induction of anaesthesia.
● Balanced anaesthesia/analgesia. Beware hypoventilation (respi-
ratory acidosis) which promotes hyperkalaemia.
Chronic renal failure
Problems
'Blocked' cats
● Polyuria/polydipsia (isosthenuric urine).
The problems are as above.
● Cats possibly hypertensive.
● Protein losing nephropathy (nephrotic syndrome) leads to
Approach
 hypercoagulability (loss of antithrombin Il), and hypoalbumi-
● Stabilisation includes bladder drainage (cystocentesis or via
naemia  (reduces drug-binding and promotes
oedema
urethral catheterisation); may require anaesthesia although
formation).
 benzodiazepine/opioid combinations provide useful sedation
 and may help to relax the urethra.
Approach
●Balanced anaesthesia/analgesia.
● Diurese pre-anaesthesia (Hartmann's solution but check
electrolytes); continue fluids intra- and post-operatively (until
voluntary intake resumes).
Further reading
● Balanced anaesthetic protocol aimed at minimising reduction
 Dickinson MC, Kam PCA (2008) Intravascular iodinated contrast
in arterial blood pressure (and renal perfusion). Analgesia:
media and the anaesthetist. Anaesthesia 63, 626-634.
beware NSAIDs and possibly give only once animal awakening
 Dobromylskyj P (2007) Urogenital Disease. In: BSAVA Manual
 in recovery. Urine output may be measured; bladder should be
of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia. 2"d Edition.
emptied before recovery to improve patient comfort.
Eds: Seymour C & Duke-Novakovski T. British Small Animal
Ruptured bladder foals (uroperitoneum)
Veterinary Association, Gloucester, UK. Chapter 23, PP
 Problems
257-264.
Greene SA, Grauer GF (2007) Renal Disease. In: Lumb and Jones?
● Hypovolaemia (decreased circulating volume, although 'third
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. 4" Edition. Eds: Tranquilli
space loss' of urine into the abdomen).
WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa,
●Hyponatraemia.
USA. Chapter 39, pp 915-919.
● Hypochloraemia.
Shelley MP, Robinson AA, Hesford JW, Park GR (1987)
● Hyperkalaemia (cardiac arrhythmias if K+ > 6.2-7 mmol/l).
 Haemodynamic effects following surgical release of increased
● Metabolic acidosis (lactic acidosis due 
 to hypovolaemia;
intra-abdominal pressure. British Journal of Anaesthesia 59,
reduced renal H secretion; K*/H+ transcellular exchange).
800-805.
● Azotaemia (usually urea > creatinine).
Webb ST, Allen JSD (2008) Perioperative renal protection.
 Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
 increased intra-abdominal pressure; +/- pleural effusion).
8(5), 176-180.
● Urine cannot be voided and contacts peritoneum; beware
Wilkins PA (2004) Respiratory distress in foals with uroperito-
active metabolites or drugs excreted unchanged into urine
 neum: possible mechanisms. Equine Veterinary Education.
(ketamine). Increased abdominal pressure adds to cardiovas-
16,293-295.
cular compromise.
Renal considerations  329
 Self-test section
1.List fve functions of the normal kidney.
What is normal urine production rate?
2.
A.
10 ml/kg/h.
10 ml/kg/min.
C.
1-1.5 ml/kg/min.
D.
1-1.5 ml/kg/h.
1-1.5 ml/kg/ day.
E.
Hepatic considerations
Learning objectives
 To be able to list the functions of the liver.
 To be able to discuss how hepatic dysfunction affects anaesthesia.
Normals
● Autoregulation at the microvascular level is poorly developed
in the liver, but the hepatocytes are better extractors of oxygen
Normal liver functions
than cells in any other tissue.
● Metabolism of carbohydrates, fats and proteins; gluconeogen-
● 80% functional liver mass must be lost for homeostasis of blood
esis an important source of blood glucose. Hepatic metabolic
glucose to be impaired.
activity an important source of heat.
● Stores glycogen, some fat and fat soluble vitamins and some
Hepatic dysfunction
minerals.
● Produces blood proteins: albumin, globulins (including acute
 Hepatic dysfunction can be associated with:
 phase proteins), and most clotting factors (e.g. I, VII, IX, X,
● Ascites/oedema/pulmonary oedema (especially with crystalloid
fibrinogen).
fluid overload) due to:
● Produces angiotensinogen; metabolises renin.
0 Hypoproteinaemia.
● Produces erythropoietinogen and some erythropoietin (15% of 
 0 Decreased hepatic destruction of renin (increased sodium
 total; kidneys produce 85%).
and water retention).
● Converts vitamins D2/D3 into 25-hydroxycholecalciferol
O Portal hypertension (cirrhosis).
(important, after conversion to 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
● Polyuria (+/- compensatory polydipsia), due to decreased urea
 in kidneys, for calcium absorption).
synthesis
and
 decreased   renal medullary
concentration
● Produces bile: salts and pigments.
gradient.
● Filters bacteria from portal blood (Kupffer cells important).
· Anaemia.
● Filters toxins and GABA-mimetic compounds from portal
● Hypocalcaemia (may be partly secondary to decreased albumin
blood.
(i.e. decreased albumin-bound calcium); and partly due to
● Converts ammonia (in portal blood) to urea.
 decreased vitamin D conversion).
● Hypoglycaemia.
Useful facts
● Tendency to hypothermia.
● The normal liver receives 25% of cardiac output.
● Reduced blood clotting.
● Portal venous blood contributes 70% of total blood flow, and
● Raised blood ammonia, yet low blood urea.
 50-60% of oxygen.
● Raised bile acids.
● The portal venous system has little smooth muscle, and is not
● Acid-base and electrolyte abnormalities.
 as responsive to sympathetic tone as the hepatic artery.
● Urinary bi-urate crystals.
Hepatic considerations  331
● Increased bacteraemias (increased risk of infections).
tions. Arterial hypotension can be diffcult to manage when
● Jaundice (especially increased unconjugated bilirubin).
 plasma oncotic pressure is low.
● Hepatic encephalopathy (increased ammonia; change in ratio
of branched chain to aromatic amino acids; increased
Recovery
absorption of false neurotransmitters/toxic metabolites (e.g.
Recovery may be prolonged due to slowed drug elimination,
mercaptans) from gut; increased blood-brain barrier
hypothermia, hypoglycaemia. Seizures may be diffcult to control
 permeability).
with benzodiazepines; try propofol, or even low doses of keta-
mine. Portal hypertension, intestinal ischaemia and increased 
If total protein <3.5g/dl; or albumin <1.5-2g/dl, then
 absorption of endotoxin from the gut manifest as vomiting/diar-
you can expect oedema/ascites (interstitial/third space fluid
rhoea/increased ascites and cardiovascular collapse. Continue
accumulation).
analgesia (beware NSAID toxicity).
Portal venous pressure and CvP
How does liver disease affect our choice of
 In some portosystemic shunt surgeries, the surgeons measure
drugs/technique?
 a  o sie   snd so eod
vessels. Nowadays, cellophane banding or ameroid constrictors
● Increased fluid retention leads to increased volume of distribu-
 tion for water soluble drugs.
tend to be favoured, which result in a slower shunt occlusion, so
the cardiovascular system has more time to adjust.
● Decreased plasma protein leads to increased free’ drug
 Normal portal venous pressure is about 7-10 mmHg. With
concentrations.
 portosystemic shunts, this pressure is lower, because blood
● Decreased drug metabolism slows drug elimination; but some 
bypasses the liver en route to the caudal vena cava.
drugs unaffected (remifentanil, atracurium).
During intraoperative shunt ligation, surgeons do not like the
● Decreased plasma cholinesterase leads to prolonged action of
 portal venous pressure increasing above 15 mmHg.
suxamethonium, mivacurium and 
ester-linked
local
CVP is normally 0-10 cmHO. With shunt ligation, the CVP
anaesthetics.
decreases, as the caudal vena cava is denied of some blood,
● Ascites/pleural effusion can compromise cardiovascular and
as more blood is now being forced to traverse the liver.
respiratory function; possibly drain slowly and restore plasma
CVP should not be >l cmHO below the pre-ligation value
oncotic pressure.
● Risk of oedema exacerbation with IV fluid therapy.
after 3 min post-ligation, otherwise there is a risk of portal
hypertension.
● Lactate in Hartmann's solution probably not a big problem.
● If coagulopathy exists (buccal mucosal bleeding time abnormal
if >4.2 min (dogs) or >2.4 min (cats), be careful with deep IM
Further reading
injections and IV catheter placements and avoid epidurals.
Aronson LR, Gacad RC, Kaminsky-Russ K, Gregory CR, Mullen
Surgery will also be tricky, and wound healing may be impaired.
 KD (1997) Endogenous benzodiazepine activity in the periph-
Fresh blood transfusion may be warranted.
eral and portal blood of dogs with congenital portosystemic
Portosystemic shunts
shunts. Veterinary Surgery 26(3), 189-194.
Commonly young animals, so precautions associated with
Bennett RC (2007) Gastrointestinal and hepatic disease. In:
neonates/paediatric patients also apply (see Chapter 37).
BSAVA Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia.
2nd Edition. Eds: Seymour C, Duke-Novakovski T. British Small
 Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester, UK Chapter 2,pp
Strategy
244-256.
● Stabilise medically frst (treat hepatic encephalopathy and
Center SA (2006) Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base disturbances in 
seizures).
liver disease. In: Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-Base disorders in
● Minimal premedication. Pethidine good choice for neonates.
small animal practice. 3rd Edition. Ed: DiBartola SP. Saunders,
● Inductionr inhalation (isoflurane/sevoflurane) or injectable
Missouri USA. Chapter 19, pp 437-477. (Useful tabulation of
(propofol). Ensure venous access.
putative‘toxins’in hepatic encephalopathy.)
Greene SA, Marks SL (2007) Hepatic Disease. In: Lumb and Jones^
Maintenance
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia. 4" Edition. Eds: Tranquilli 
Supply oxygen. Consider muscle relaxation as part of balanced
WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Blackwell Publishing, Iowa,
anaesthetic technique. Continue analgesia provision. Local
USA. Chapter 40, pp 921-926.
anaesthetic techniques may be appropriate. Epidural/spinal
 Perin M, Fletcher A (2004) Laparoscopic abdominal surgery.
 opioids may be useful for prolonged post-operative analgesia but
Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical Care and Pain
beware coagulopathies. Maintain body temperature. Monitoring
4(4), 107-110.
should include blood glucose. Central venous pressure (CVP)
 Ziser A, Plevak DJ (2001) Morbidity and morality in cirrhotic
may help guide fluid therapy, but beware positional effects epe-
patients undergoing anesthesia and surgery. Current Opinion
cially in patients with large peritoneal and pleural fluid accumula-
 in Anaesthesiology 14, 707-711.
332  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Self-test section
1.Which of the following depends entirely upon hepatic
metabolism for its elimination?
A.
Halothane.
B.
Vecuronium.
C.
Atracurium.
D.
Remifentanil.
Etomidate.
 2.  List five of the liver's normal functions.
Some endocrine considerations
Learning objective
 To be familiar with some of the challenges of endocrine diseases.
Diabetes mellitus
to chase' urine glucose values with huge daily changes in insulin
dose.
● Stabilise before anaesthesia, especially if ketoacidotic.
(Ketonaemia
canbe
present
without
demonstrable
ketonuria).
Insulinoma
● Schedule surgery for early morning.
● If pre-operative glucose <3.5 mmol/l (after food withheld): no
sympathetic tone (catecholamines are counter-regulatory to
 insulin yet, but if glucose >3.5 mmol/l: give a quarter to a half 
insulin), and include the increased possibility of arrhythmias.
of the morning's insulin dose. Response diffcult to predict:
0 The clinical signs of hypoglycaemia, proven by low measured
continue glucose monitoring throughout anaesthesia and
blood glucose and improved by administration of glucose,
recovery.
constitute Whipple's triad.
● If 'starve’ overnight pre-surgery, administer a glucose-
 Premedication
containing infusion.
Not too heavy to allow return to feeding as soon as possible
● Pre-operative work-up should be thorough. Check blood elec-
 post-operatively.
trolytes, especially potassium.
● Risk of post-operative pancreatitis and diabetes mellitus.
Induction
 Pethidine is often quoted as the best choice, but buprenorphine
 Choose drugs with rapid elimination and lack of hangover effect.
and butorphanol can also be used (minimal effect on sphincter 
of Oddi: present in cats, possibly not in dogs). Consider epi-
Maintenance
dural analgesia. There have been occasional reports of pancrea-
Choose drugs that allow rapid and hangover-free recovery.
titis following propofol anaesthesia in humans. Monitor blood
Neuromuscular blockers may be required (e.g. cataract surgery).
glucose (and potassium) regularly post-operatively.
Balanced analgesic approach. Dextrose-based IV fluids often pre-
ferred, but monitor blood glucose every c. 3045 min. The stress
asona poq aeu ueo aains pue eisauiue on suodsn 
Addison's disease (hypoadrenocorticism)
control very tricky. Hypoglycaemia (blood glucose < C.
 Is caused by a deficiency of aldosterone +/-glucocorticoids and
 derangements include:
0.25-0.5 g/kg). Hyperglycaemia (blood glucose ≥>10 mmol/l) may
warrant treatment with soluble insulin, especially when blood
● Hyponatraemia.
 glucose exceeds 15 mmol/l.
● Hyperkalaemia
and
cardiac
 arrhythmias
(especially
bradyarrhythmias; but some protection, as often slightly
Recovery
hypercalcaemic).
Monitor blood and urine glucose, and patient food and water
● Hypovolaemia and hypotension.
intake. Further insulin usually given with evening meal. Prepare
● Pre-renal/renal failure (azotaemia/uraemia).
the owner for hypoglycaemic and hyperglycaemic problems
● Lethargy/nausea/vomiting.
(Tables 44.1 and 44.2) over the following few days, but best not
● Poor tolerance to stress.
334  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Table 44.1 Causes, signs and treatment of glucose disturbances.
Disturbance
Causes
 Clinical signs
Treatment
Hyperglycaemia
Stress, exercise, excitement up to
Polyuria/polydipsia.
Treatment aimed at
(Glucose >6 but
15 mmol/)
Altered protein and fat metabolism 
underlying pathology
especially
Diabetes mellitus
Weight loss
Insulin may be appropriate
>8-10mmol/)
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's) or 
Glycosuria
glucocorticoid therapy (both mild,
Lactic acidosis
7-8 mmol/)
 Depressed mentation
Coma
Hypoglycaemia
Starvation or anorexia
Weakness
2 g/kg orally
(Glucose <3.5 mmol/l)
Insulin overdose
Lethargy
or 0.5-1 g/kg slow IV
Insulinoma
Collapse
Glucose can be added to
Idiopathic in toy breeds 
maintenance fluids
Table 44.2 Differentiation of hypo- and hyper-glycaemia.
● Often obese, with reduced exercise tolerance.
· May be anaemic.
Hypoglycaemia
Hyperglycaemia
● May have peripheral neuropathies (e.g. laryngeal paresis:
Slow insidious onset,
 beware respiratory obstruction especially in recovery).
Onset
 Sudden,
 often restless beforehand,
 dull and depressed,
weakness and trembling.
may vomit, may become
 effective panting; then prone to hyperthermia too).
seizures, may become 
comatose
● May present with bradycardias/arrhythmias.
comatose
● Prone to coagulopathies.
 Drinking
No noticeable change
Increased
Urine output
No noticeable change
Increased
Feline hyperthyroidism
 Urine glucose
Negative
Positive
● Often in older cats (see Chapter 38 on geriatrics).
Urine ketones*
Negative
Positive (depends
● Weight loss is common and has pharmacokinetic implications
somewhat on dipsticks)
(decreased tissues for redistribution of drugs).
Breath
● Polyuria/polydipsia common; but beware ‘contracted’ ECF
 Smells normal 
Smells sweet (acetone)
volume.
Breathing rate
Normal
Increased rate and depth
● Cats often hyperactive and diffcult to handle.
Mucous membranes
leWn
Tacky/dry (dehydration)
● Cardiac problems include:
Skin turgor
Normal
Skin pinch may 'tent'"
 0 Tachycardia +/- arrhythmias (gallop rhythm). (Right bundle
(dehydration)
branch block/left anterior fascicular block common).
 0 Cardiac murmurs; often indicative of cardiomyopathy
*Most urine dipsticks measure only acetoacetate and not beta hydroxybutyrate
(usually hypertrophic, but occasionally dilated). Cats may
{usually the most abundant ketone), so false negative test results may occur.
present with thromboembolic disease, or even congestive 
cardiac failure.
Stabilise pre-anaesthesia if possible (IV fluids; glucocorticoids/
 0 Hypertension, alongside tachycardia, may eventually lead to
mineralocorticoids).
reduced cardiac output because of increased afterload in the
face of possible reduced preload (reduced ventricular filling
Hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing's disease)
at high heart rates).
● Hyperdynamic circulation (with increased renal blood flow)
● Weak muscles including respiratory muscles; patients may
may mask early renal failure; so beware unmasking chronic
require ventilatory support under anaesthesia.
renal failure with your treatment.
● Coagulation abnormalities common; patients prone to throm-
● Thyroid hormones (T4/T3), promote expression/sensitivity
boembolic episodes.
of β adrenergic receptors, so potentiate catecholamine
● Tend to have expanded intravascular volume, despite pu/pd
actions.
leading to altered drug pharmacokinetics.
● Palpable thyroid tissue may be found in the throat region.
● Wound healing may be a problem: increased risk of infections.
The effective 'mass in the neck may:
Canine hypothyroidism
dyspnoea); and cause you problems for tracheal intubation.
 O press on the cesophagus and cause dysphagia.
● Reduced metabolic rate: prolonged drug actions and delayed
O cause laryngeal nerve dysfunction.
recovery.
 O result in Horner's syndrome.
Some endocrine considerations  335
Surgical and post-operative problems
● Sustained high heart rate can result in cardiomyopathy, so
beware arrhythmias.
● Tumours often very vascular; beware haemorrhage (blood
● High Oz and glucose demand (high metabolic rate).
 transfusion may be required).
● Tumour resection may result in disruption of vagosympathetic
Stabilise pre-operatively
trunk/s and consequent laryngeal paralysis.
Encourage an increase in blood volume i.e. gentle treatment with
● Tumour resection may result in disruption of blood supply to
alpha l antagonists (phenoxybenzamine or even acepromazine),
parathyroid glands (or inadvertent removal of parathyroid
and perhaps even beta blockers to reduce heart rate if very tachy-
glands) leading to risk of hypocalcaemia (monitor for up to 1
cardic. Magnesium is sometimes used in human medicine as it
week post-operatively, for signs of lethargy, muscle weakness
reduces catecholamine release, and has hypotensive effects.
or twitches (often see tetany progressing to paresis), anorexia,
convulsions).
Premedication
● Tumour removal
1 may result in poor thyroid function
 Should be aimed at anxiolysis; and a little vagomimetic activity is
post-operatively.
 good (but you cannot always override the high sympathetic tone).
● Trachea may suffer tracheomalacia, and collapse, especially
Acepromazine and an opioid is a common choice. Avoid
after tumour removal.
an ticholinergics.
● Post-operative tissue
 swelling may result in pressure on
airway and cesophagus; beware respiratory obstruction and
Induction
dysphagia.
Should be smooth. Pre-oxygenate where possible. Intravenous
Thyroid storm/crisis
agents: avoid thiopental  (arrhythmogenic) and ketamine
This can occur intra-operatively if tumour handling results in
(increases sympathetic tone). Etomidate can depress normal
release of a lot of thyroid hormone (T4/T3), which potentiates
 adrenal activity for several hours even following one dose which
catecholamine effects, to result in massive tachycardia and
may complicate post-operative care.
arrhythmias, hypertension, hyperthermia, and possibly progress-
ing to ^shock’ (massive O demand outstrips supply etc.) Have
Maintenance
esmolol available but aim to stabilise pre-operatively (antithyroid
Supply O2. Avoid NO (sympathetic stimulation). Use balanced
 anaesthetic techniques. Avoid neuromuscular blocking agents 
medications).
with ganglionic effects where possible, and reversal of neuromus-
Chronic renal failure
cular blockade normally requires anticholinergics which may
Underlying chronic renal failure may become apparent as the
result in adverse side effects. Epidural/extradural local anaesthet-
hyperthyroidism is treated. Monitor urine output and blood urea
Xsnonnes savsN asn Aaanerdo-sod (Nna uasonu 
epidural opioids do not. NSAIDs may be administered once blood
volume and arterial blood pressure are adequate. Monitor cardio-
 Approach to anaesthesia
vascular variables. Tumour handling may result in massive cate-
Stabilise pre-operatively with antithyroid and cardiac medications
cholamine release, such that a vasodilator (e.g. sodium
where possible.
nitroprusside) may be required. Tumours may invade local vas-
 Avoid negative inotropes and large changes in heart rate; main-
culature (including vena cava) the transient clamping-off of
tain preload and afterload.
which to resect tumour thrombi can reduce venous return and
 Premedication  facilitates  handling.  Opioid/benzodiazepine
cardiac output, and may cause tachycardic reflexes, or occasion-
combinations popular. Small dose ACP may be anti-arrhythmic
ally bradycardia through the Bezold-Jarisch (vasovagal) reflex.
but may lead to hypotension and reflex tachycardia; beware beta
blocker therapy which prevents tachycardia and promotes hypo-
Recovery
tension. Alpha 2 agonists are often avoided as they reduce cardiac
 Continue to monitor cardiovascular variables; also urine output.
output and heart rate, although they may provide some cardio-
 Post-operative circulatory suport with fluids, positive inotropes
protection and, in cases of septal hypertrophy, may actually
 and vasopressors may be required.
improve stroke volume and cardiac output because the increased
afterload relieves the dynamic outflow obstruction during systole.
Paraneoplastic syndrome hypercalcaemia
Phaeochromocytoma
(pseudo-hyperparathyroidism)
Tumours not always easy to recognise or diagnose: release of
 Often associated with lymphoid type tumours, peri-anal adeno-
hormones is not constant. Epinephrine (adrenaline) and nore-
mas, some bone tumours and multiple myelomas.
pinephrine (noradrenaline) production by tumour result in 'sym-
pathetic² effects:
Clinical signs of hypercalcaemia
● Hypertension, yet postural hypotension, because there's a rela-
·Bradyarrhythmias.
tive hypovolaemia (blood volume 'shrinks? into the ^contracted'
●Muscle weakness/twitches.
vasculature under the high sympathetic tone).
● Lethargy.
336  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Increased thirst (pu/pd).
Hyperaldosteronism (Conn's syndrome)
● Urolithiasis.
● Metastatic calcifcation.
● Seizures.
hypertension (retinal haermorrhage), pu/pd. If electrolyte changes
have occurred slowly, it is best to correct them slowly.
Treat the hypercalcaemia first
Further reading
● Rehydration, dilution/diuresis  (calcium-free fluids), and
calciuretics
furosemide.
(Corticosteroids are also
Evans RD, Niu Y (2008) Hypolipidaemic effects of high-dose
calciuretic.)
insulin therapy. Editorial. British Journal of Anaesthesia 100(4),
● Calcitonin reduces calcium mobilisation.
429-433.
● Chelate the excess calcium: tetracyclines.
Johnson C and Norman EJ (2007) Endocrine Disease. BSAVA
● Bisphosphonate compounds: bind to bone mineral, inhibit 
 Manual of Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia. 2nd
 osteoclast activity and enhance osteoblast activity.
Edition. Eds: Seymour C and Duke-Novakovski T. British
● Mithramycin (plicamycin), a chemotherapeutic drug/anti-
Small Animal Veterinary Association, Gloucester, UK Chapter
biotic: inhibits osteoclast activity (many side effects).
25, pp 274-283.
 Bone tumours, including metastatic bone tumours, can be
Kronen PWM, Moon-Massat PF, Ludders JW, Gleed RD, Kern
TJ, Randolph J, Erb HN (2001) Comparison of two insulin
painful, and bisphosphonates may have analgesic actions via
protocols for diabetic dogs undergoing cataract surgery.
NMDA receptor antagonism, in addition to inhibiting osteo-
clast activity.
Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 28(3), 146-155.
Simpson AK, Levy N, Hall GM (2008) Perioperative i/v fluids in
diabetic patients - don't forget the salt. Anaesthesia 63(10),
Diabetes insipidus
1043-1045.
Steiner JM, Bruvette DS (1996) Canine Insulinoma. The
● Insufficient antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release or activity.
● Animals present with polydipsia/polyuria (and renal medul-
Compendium on Continuing Education for the Practising
lary washout) and polycythaemia. Urine tends to be
Veterinarian 18(1), 13-23.
Van den Bergh G (2004) How does blood glucose control with
hyposthenuric.
● Animals are relatively vasodilated (Note: ADH = arginine vaso-
insulin save lives in intensive care? The Journal of Clinical
Investigation 114(9),1187-1195 (A good review of the side effects
 pressin); so these animals tend to be absolutely and relatively
hypovolaemic and hypotensive.
ofhyperglycaemiaand also hyperinsulinaemia.)
● Manage medically pre-anaesthesia where possible. dDAVP
often used. Thiazide diuretics paradoxically can reduce urine
output, but can also worsen hypovolaemia and cause severe
electrolyte depletions: beware hyponatraemia, hypokalaemia
 Self-test section
 and hypochloraemia.
● Under anaesthesia, especially if not stabilised on medical
1. List at least five problems associated with thyroid
treatment, careful fluid and electrolyte management is
surgery in hyperthyroid cats.
warranted.
Information chapter
Background to neuroanaesthesia for the brain
Introduction
o Dilate with increased PaCOz (up to 80 mmHg).
0 Constrict with decreased PaCO (down to 20 mmHg).
 Brain neurosurgery and neuroanaesthesia are very specialist fields
● With changes in PaOz:
requiring specialist facilities for preparation (advanced imaging
0 Dilate if PaO, <50 mmHg.
modalities), surgery and post-operative intensive aftercare The
0 Constrict if PaO2 >300mmHg.
notes here only overview factors influencing anaesthesia for
● With changes in temperature.
“brain” reasons.
Coupling of CBF and cerebral metabolic rate
The Monro-Kellie doctrine
As in many other tissues, CBF is influenced by cerebral metabo-
The skull is a non-compliant closed’ bony box, such that the
lism (products of metabolism affect vessel tone); and regional
volume of its contents is somewhat fixed. The intracranial volume
variations occur:
consists of:
● CBF in grey matter is c. 110 ml/100 g/min.
● Brain parenchyma (84%).
● CBF in white matter is c. 52 ml/100 g/min.
● Blood perfusing the brain (4%).
CBF also depends upon activity state (awake, asleep,
● Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) (12%).
anaesthetised).
An increase in the volume of one component is compensated
for (and may be incompletely), only by a decrease in another:
Cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP)
● The brain parenchyma cannot alter its volume easily.
CPP = Mean arterial pressure - Intra-cranial pressure
● The intracranial blood volume can alter a little.
CPP and CVR (cerebral vascular resistance), determine CBF:
● The intracranial CsF volume can alter a little.
For example, any change in intracranial blood or parenchymal
CBF = CPP/CVR
Vascular responsiveness
volume is accompanied by an opposite change in CSF volume,if
CBF = (MAP -i Cr P)/CVRj
 is important
intracranial pressure is to be maintained constant. Once the
intracranial  volume  compensation mechanisms  have  been
:puy
exhausted, however, then further increases in intracranial volume
lead to a rapid rise in intracranial pressure (i/Cr P) (Figure 45.1).
i/Cr P =MAP -CPP
The cerebral circulation
Cerebrovascular autoregulation is the maintenance of a fairly con-
Raised intracranial pressure
stant cerebral blood flow (CBF) over a wide range of arterial blood
pressures. Cerebral blood vessels, however, are normally respon-
 Normal i/Cr P is 5-15 mmHg. With intracranial pathology, there
sive′ to a number of stimuli (Figure 45.2), although abnormal
may be:
vascular reactivity may interfere with cerebral blood flow autoreg-
● Alteration of neural function because of the primary pathologi-
ulation in diseased' brain.
cal process itself.
 The vessels usually alter their tone:
● Impairment of function of the surrounding neural tissue
● With changes in arterial blood pressure.
because of oedema formation +/- the development of raised
● With changes in PaCO (changes in [H+]):
intra-cranial pressure (+/- impaired CSF drainage).
338   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Causes ofraised intracranial pressure
0 Poor cerebral autoregulation (CNS disease; anaesthetic
effects; extreme hypertension).
● Increased volume of brain parenchyma:
0 Greatly increased PaCOz greatly decreased PaO2.
o Oedema.
● Extraparenchymal:
O Haemorrhage.
 O Space occupying lesion.
O Infammation.
0 Haemorrhage (subdural/subarachnoid).
 0 Space occupying lesions (tumour/abscess).
● Increased volume of CSF (hydrocephalus):
 Once i/Cr P increases, a vicious circle may be entered (Figure
0 Increased production of CSF (choroid plexus tumours).
45.3).
0 Decreased drainage of CSF (brain 'swelling, space occupying
lesions).
Clinical signs of raised intracranial pressure
● Increased intravascular volume in cerebral vessels:
● Altered mentation; changes in behaviour.
0 Head down position; jugular occlusion; 
Valsalva-like
● Cranial nerve defcits (blindness/changes in pupil size and
manoeuvres which increase intra-thoracic pressure e.g.
reactivity/papilloederma (swollen/fuzzy optic discs), deafness,
intermittent positive pressure ventilation; abdominal com-
 partment syndrome. (All increase jugular/central venous
dysphagia, dysphonia (dyspnoea)).
● Other neurological deficits.
pressure.)
● Seizures.
● Circulatory and respiratory changes (Cushing's triad; cardiac
 arrhythmias; neurogenic pulmonary oedema).
       r 
 only one of many types of brain herniation).
 Steepness of slope
 depends on pathology
and treatment
Cushing's triad
interventions
● Systemic hypertension.
 pe isu an on ap x aed)  o
 also be partly due to compression of the vasomotor centre).
● Altered breathing patterns (usually due to compression of the
Intracranial volume 
respiratory centre).
Figure 45.1 How changes in intracranial volume affect intracranial
 The CNS response to rising intracranial pressure results in the
pressure.
'CNS hypoxic response'; in which there is a massive sympathetic
w,6
00
50
160 Aterial blood pressure (mmHg)
20
80 PaCO2(mmHg)
50 PaO2(mmHg)
Figure 45.2 Cerebral blood flow regulation by arterial blood pressure and blood gases.
Background to neuroanaesthesia for the brain   339
↑i/Cr P
↓ CPP
 Cerebral oedema formation 
 Cerebral vasodilation tries to maintain CBF
(but increases cerebral blood volume and i/Cr P)
Stimulates CNS ischaemic response 
which causes increased MAP, to try to maintain CPP
Figure 45.3 Vicious circle of raised intracranial pressure.
discharge, hence systemic hypertension with reflex bradycardia.
Diuresis
This massive increase in sympathetic tone may be responsible for
 Be aware of the patients hydration and intravascular volume
neurogenic pulmonary oedema and cardiac arrhythmias (neuro-
genic cardiomyo pathy).
status.
Mannitol
Aims of anaesthetic management
 A 20% solution is commonly used but must be warmed before
● Reduce i/Cr P (or prevent further increase in i/Cr P).
administration as it tends to crystallise out at room
● Promote cerebral autoregulation.
temperature.
●Control seizure activity.
● Reduces blood viscosity (shrinks red blood cells and promotes
● Provide neuroprotection, during potential ischaemic and
haemodilution through osmotic effects) and shrinks vascular
 reperfusion episodes. Control blood glucose.
endothelial cells, so may improve tissue perfusion (O, delivery),
 at the cellular level.
 Pre-anaesthetic 'stabilisation' is important.
● Scavenges free radicals - so possibly helps vs. reperfusion
injury.
Strategies to alleviate raised intracranial pressure
● A transient increase in i/Cr P occurs as water is drawn into
●Try to shrink the brain tissue (brain relaxation strategies').
 the intravascular compartment, before diuresis gets underway
● Reduce the CSF volume.
(and the direct effect of high osmolarity on blood vessels
● Reduce the volume of blood within the CNS.
 may cause some vasodilation, although this effect may be offset
● Increase the volume allowance of the skull.
by the vasoconstriction which follows a decrease in blood
viscosity). For this reason, many suggest slow administration
Nursing techniques
(15-30min), and a dose of furosemide pre-mannitol (see
 Nursing techniques can help to reduce blood volume within CNS,
below).
they include:
● Avoid multiple doses: rebound increased i/Cr P may occur as
 mannitol can get inside cells.
● Raising the head.
●Minimising jugular vein pressure/occlusion.
● Beware intracranial haemorrhage and increased blood-brain
●Reducing coughing/retching/straining (Valsalva-like manoeu-
barrier permeability - wherever blood goes, mannitol goes,
and water follows.
vres increase CVP and therefore i/Cr P).
● Judicious IV fluid therapy.
● Dose c. 1 g/kg.
· Control pain and anxiety.
Furosemide
● Control seizures. Seizures increase cerebral metabolic demands,
so tend to promote CBF. Controlling seizures also reduces the
● Potent diuretic.
risk of cerebral damage/inflammation. Benzodiazepines, bar-
● Resultant whole body hypovolaermia reduces cerebral blood
biturates, propofol and ketamine may each be useful.
volume and i/Cr P.
· Control pyrexia.
● Decreases CSF production too.
340  Veterinary Anaesthesia
● Potentiates effects of mannitol to improve overall ‘brain
Table 45.1 Effects of anaesthetic agents on intracranial pressure.
relaxation'
● Dose c. 1-2 mg/kg.
Drug
CMRO2
CBF:CMROz coupling
i/Cr P
Halothane
↑↑
↑
Uncoupled (favourably?)
↑个
Oncodiuretic therapy
Combination of diuretic and colloid to attempt to create normo-
Isoflurane
↑
↑个
Uncoupled (favourably)
↑
volaermic dehydration. Requires careful monitoring.
 Sevoflurane
ON
↑
↑
↑
Hypertonic saline
Barbiturates
↑个个
↑个个
Maintained
↑
May be useful to reduce cerebral oedema (cytotoxic/cellular
Propofol
↑个
Maintained
↑
oedema), without the risk of rebound oedema formation. (Also
useful for circulatory resuscitation in trauma cases, but beware its 
ketamine
↑
All but maintained
↑
use in cases with intra-cranial haemorrhage.)
Etomidate
↑个
个个
All but maintained
Benzodiazepines
↑个
↑个
 Maintained 
↑↑
Glucocorticosteroids
 Controversial. Multiple actions including:
Opioids
↑/↓
(②)↑
？
↑/↓
●Diuresis.
CMROz = cerebral metabolic rate for oxygen.
●‘Membrane stabilisation’ and anti-inflammatory activity: help
 to limit cellular damage following ischaemia.
● Reduce vasogenic inflammatory or tumour-associated cerebral
Further reading
oedema.
● Possibly modulate neurotransmitter release.
Bradshaw K, Smith M (2008) Disorders of sodium balance after
● Dexamethasone c. 0.5 mg/kg IV.
brain injury. Continuing Education and Anaesthesia, Critical
● Methylprednisolone sodium succinate c. 30 mg/kg.
Care and Pain 8(4), 129-133. (Explains the cerebral salt wasting
● Doses and dosing regimens stil controversial and undecided.
syndrome and brain-related causes ofthe syndrome ofinappropri-
● For some cases (usually tumours),best if given for several hours
ate ADH secretion.)
(preferably days), before general anaesthesia, for maximal
King JM, Roth L, Haschek WM (1982) Myocardial necrosis sec-
effect.
ondary to neural lesions in domestic animals. Journal of the
American Veterinary Medical Association 180(2), 144-148.
 Cerebrospinal fluid drainage
Leonard SE, Kirby R (2002) The role of glutamate, calcium and
Occasionally done as an emergency procedure, for example CSF
 magnesium in secondary brain injury. Journal of Veterinary
is aspirated from ventricles (to extend the time before surgical
Emergency and Critical Care 12(1), 17-32.
 intervention can be made).
Menon DK, Summors AC (1998) Neuroprotection (including
hypothermia). Current Opinion in Anaesthesiology 11,
Craniotomy and durotomy
485496.
Requires surgery and therefore anaesthesia.
Mishra LD, Rajkumar N, Hancock SM (2006) Current controver-
 sies in neuroanaesthesia, head injury management and neuro
Anaesthetic protoco!
critical care. Continuing Education in Anaesthesia, Critical
The reader is referred to specialist texts. Table 45.1 outlines the
Care and Pain 6(2), 79-82.
effects of the common anaesthetic drugs on intracranial
Moss E (2001) The cerebral circulation. British Journal of
pressure.
Anaesthesia CEPD Reviews 1(3), 67-71.
Some cardiac considerations
Learning objective
 To be able to outline the strategies for different cardiac problems.
General anaesthetic aims
often develop pleural and pericardial fuid too), leading to
 decreased pulmonary compliance.
 With cardiac compromise the general aims during anaesthesia
● Increased left atrial pressure and left ventricular volume
are:
overload.
●Maintain cardiac output.
● Increased right ventricular work (increased afterload due to
●Avoid hypotension or hypertension.
 d  n n  ( dm
·Avoid excessive tachycardia or bradycardia.
sided heart failure) eventually.
● Avoid increasing myocardial workload
(myocardial
O2
demand).
Anaesthetic considerations
● Avoid things which cause direct myocardial depression/nega-
● Pre-oxygenate (stress-free).
tive inotropy.
● Minimise inotropic changes (positive inotropes may actually
●Avoid arrhythmogens.
 increase the regurgitant fraction and increase myocardial
● Maintain good ventilation, with adequate oxygenation (and
work).
 avoid large changes in pH and PCO2).
● Aim to maintain heart rate near 'normal.
● Avoid fluid under- and over-load.
● A small decrease in afterload (systemic vascular resistance) may
A good cardiac workup before general anaesthesia is invaluable.
facilitate improved cardiac output (by encouraging forward
History of syncope or collapse is important. For dogs, exercise
flow, and reducing the regurgitant fraction), but if forward
tolerance is a good indicator of cardiorespiratory reserves, but
 blood velocity increases, turbulence and regurgitation may
 not always easy to determine if patients have painful orthopaedic
increase. Possibly avoid high doses of ketamine and NO (may
disease. Increased resting heart rate (with lack of respiratory sinus
increase systemic vascular resistance, thereby increasing the
arrhythmia) and increased resting breathing rate can be good
regurgitant fraction and reducing cardiac output).
 indicators of underlying cardiac disease. Attempt to resolve clini-
● Maintain central venous pressure (preload).
cal signs of congestive heart failure and arrhythmias before general
● IPPV may be helpful. In the face of pulmonary congestion and
anaesthesia (see also Chapter 25).
cedema, IPPV can displace some of pulmonary blood volume
 back to the systemic circulation, but care with peak inspiratory
 pressures so as not to decrease venous return too much.
Some particular problems
A-V valvular insufficiencies, especially
Cardiomyopathies
mitral insufficiency
The inotropic state of the heart is compromised in both hyper-
trophic and dilated forms. Reduced myocardial compliance
Common in older animals. Mitral insufficiency results in:
 means cardiac output becomes dependent on heart rate, so avoid
● Gradual increase in pulmonary venous pressure which causes
large changes in heart rate; and try to maintain preload/venous
pulmonary congestion and finally pulmonary oedema (cats 
341
342   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Pericardial effusions
buprenorphine. (In combination with acepromazine, morphine's
 Rate and volume of fluid accumulation in pericardial sac deter-
effect on heart rate is offset.) Avoid reduction in CVP (venous
mines if cardiac tamponade ensues.
return): IV fluids, often as bolus pre-operatively, but beware exac-
erbating oedema. Have inotropes, vasopressors and anticholiner-
gics on stand-by. If IPPV required, deliver small tidal volumes
Causes
(low peak inspiratory pressure), at a fast rate, for minimal reduc-
● Idiopathic (Golden retrievers).
tion of venous return/cardiac output.
● Neoplastic: haemangiosarcoma (primary or secondary), heart
Patent ductus arteriosus
base tumour/chemodectoma.
(Abdominal
ultrasonography
 may detect other tumours in liver/spleen.)
● Left to right shunting of blood (until shunt reverses).
● Traumatic.
● Pulmonary blood volume is augmented leading to pulmonary
● Cardiac rupture for example left atrial tears from jet lesions due
hypertension/congestion.
 to A-V valve incompetence.
● Systemic blood volume is diminished leading to systemic hypo-
● Iatrogenic (e.g. during cardiocentesis in CPCR) or during
tension which causes increased sympathetic tone, increased
 attempted pericardiocentesis.
renin, angiotensin, aldosterone and ADH production which
●Anticoagulant toxicity.
result in increased fluid retention in an attempt to increase
venous return and cardiac output.
Clinical signs
to the left atrium and ventricle leading to volume overload and
● Beck's triad: Increased jugular vein distension (increased
eccentric hypertrophy (and A-V valve incompetence).
CVP), mufled heart sounds (and reduced intensity of apex
● Slightly increased right ventricular afterload' causes slight pres-
beat), systemic hypotension (reduced pulse pressure).
sure overload of the right ventricle and possible concentric
● Ascites (hepatosplenomegaly), pleural effusion, pulmonary
oedema.
hypertrophy.
· Tachycardia.
If pulmonary vascular resistance is greater than systemic vas-
● Possible positive hepatojugular reflux If you gently squeeze
cular resistance, then the shunt reverses (becomes right to left
(hug) the abdomen over the liver region, you increase the
(Eisenmenger's syndrome)). The 'venous admixture’ of blood
filling of the venae cavae, which increases jugular distension.
results in systemic hypoxaemia; cranial mucous membranes are
Sometimes called Kussmaul's sign. Not to be confused with
pink, but caudal mucous membranes are cyanosed (the ductus
Kussmaul's respiration (see Chapter 48).
enters between ascending and descending parts of the aorta).
● Pulsus paradoxus. On inspiration, the negative intrathoracic
Prognosis is now poor, and surgery contra-indicated because the
 pressure and lung expansion tend to draw blood into the lungs,
ductus represents a pressure relief valve. Attempted closure would
so reducing venous return to the left atrium leading to reduced
result in acute right heart failure and death.
left ventricular filling which reduces left ventricular stroke
volume output which therefore reduces pulse pressure. Negative
 Anaesthetic considerations
intrathoracic pressure also ‘sucks’ blood towards the right
● Treat signs of congestive heart failure first.
atrium from the venae cavae, but the high pericardial pressure
●Patients often young, but not usually truly ^neonatal’: prevent
precludes much of this. However, any extra right ventricular
hypothermia.
flling also reduces left ventricular flling (ventricular interde-
● Try to avoid things which increase the degree of left to right
sd d u l pnu a nm os (d
shunting (e.g. hypoxaemia, hypercapnia, acidosis, stress (sym-
duringinspiration. The paradox is that this exaggerated reduc-
pathetic activation), ketamine and NO (sympathetic activa-
tion in pulse pressure (and perhaps absence of detectable
tion); but at the same time, you do not want to encourage
peripheral pulse) occurs when a heart beat can be
reversal of flow either (e.g. marked systermic hypotension).
auscultated.
Some people favour a slight decrease in peripheral vascular
● Electrical alternans on ECG.
resistance, and may use a low dose of ACP.
● Aim to use drugs with minimal C-V depressant effects as there
 Sedation/anaesthetic considerations
 is reduced cardiovascular reserve.
 Pre-operatively, drainage of even a small quantity of pericardial
● Pre-oxygenate (in as stress-fre a manner as possible).
fluid can greatly improve the patient's condition. Drainage can be
● For thoracotomies, neuromuscular blockade and IPPV will be
performed under sedation/local anaesthesia. Low dose acepro-
required. IPPV is actually very well tolerated because of the
mazine (ACP) 15 min before morphine (time delay reduces
 augmented pulmonary blood volume. Balanced analgesia can
emetic effect of morphine) works well; morphine causes pulmo-
include locoregional techniques. Consider NSAIDs as part of a
nary vasodilation which can help relieve the discomfort of
balanced analgesia regimen too. Interestingly, NSAIDs have
dyspnoea.
been used in neonates to try to encourage closure of the ductus
 Avoid reduction in heart rate. Opioids can reduce heart rate in
arteriosus by reducing prostaglandin production. If the shunt
 poonq < ad no <  o 
is to be ligated, beware the Branham reflex anticholinergics
 Some cardiac considerations  343
may be necessary. Amplatzer devices occlude more slowly, over
rhythm, and many sedatives, analgesics and anaesthetic agents
15 min, so less dramatic heart rate changes occur. Monitor
have vagomimetic properties and so tend to ^encourage atrial
cardiorespiratory variables closely. Following thoracotomy, the
fibrillation to recur If possible, vagolytic (e.g atropine) and sym-
chest drain will need attention post-operatively. The Branham
 pathomimetic (e.g. dobutamine) drugs should be avoided as these
'reflex'/sign is the sudden reduction in heart rate at shunt liga-
can increase the ventricular rate. Otherwise, the commonly used
tion. Possibly due to massive left ventricular back-pressure/
sedative and anaesthetic agents can be used. Close monitoring.
stretch; or due to sudden increase in systemic arterial pressure
especially of pulse rate and ECG, are important.
which initiates a baroreceptor reflex response.
Further reading
Atrial and ventricular septal defects
Left-to-right shunts again. Keep the shunt direction left to right;
Clutton RE (2007) Cardiovascular Disease. In: BSAVA Manual of
Canine and Feline Anaesthesia and Analgesia. 2"d Edition. Eds:
Seymour C and Duke-Novakovski T British Small Animal
Puimonic and aortic/subaortic stenoses
Veterinary Association, Gloucester, UK Chapter 19, Pp
 Pre-operative work up is again important. Aim to maintain pres-
200-219.
sure drop across the stenosis. Ensure adequate preload (CVP) is
Cross M, Plunkett E (2008) Cardiovascular Physiology. In:
maintained: fluids/vasopressors. Aim for minimal myocardial
Physics, Pharmacology and Physiology for Anaesthetists. Key
depression (minimal negative inotropy). Provide supplemental
concepts for the FRCA. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
oxygen. If balloon bougienage is to be performed, closely monitor
UK. Section 7, p 144-172.
the ECG intra-operatively and for 24+ h post-operatively.
Humm KR, Senior JM, Dugdale AH, Summerfield NJ (2007) Use
 of sodium nitroprusside in the anaesthetic protocol of a patent
Pacemaker implantation
ductus arteriosus ligation in a dog. The Veterinary Journal
Does the animal have any myocardial disease, or just a disorder
173(1), 194-196.
of contraction rate? It is always reassuring to have external pacing
James RA (2007) Use of pacemakers in dogs. In Practice 29,
electrodes available as severe bradycardia/asystole, for example
503-511.
 upon induction of anaesthesia, is the biggest risk.
Atrial fibrillation in horses
Commonest arrhythmia in horses, especially larger breeds.
 Self-test section
To determine its impact on cardiovascular function, measure
the pulse rate (ventricular response rate). If ventricular rate is
1.
What is Beck's triad?
normal (<45 bpm), then the horse is unlikely to be in heart failure
A.
 The three requirements for coagulation.
(but horses have a huge cardiovascular reserve). Auscultate for
B.
 The three common signs associated with raised
additional murmurs. If in doubt, echocardiography is indicated.
intracranial pressure.
The diagnosis of atrial fbrillation may alter the decision for
C.
The clinical signs associated with pericardial
surgery.
effusions/cardiac compression.
 If no other cardiac disease is present, then atrial fbrillation
D.
 The three classically described causes of hypoxia.
alone is not a contra-indication to anaesthesia; nor does it mean
E.
The three confrmatory tests commonly used in
 that normal sinus rhythm must be established before anaesthesia
hypoglycaemia (insulinoma) cases.
as there are risks associated with converting to normal sinus
Some respiratory considerations
Learning objective
 To outline anaesthetic strategies for some common respiratory problems.
Brachycephalic airway obstruction
● Polycythaemia.
syndrome (BAOS)
● Tachycardia/tachypnoea at rest.
Animals are prone to hyperthermia as panting is diffcult and
BAOS is also known as brachycephalic obstructive airway syn-
drome (BOAS) or brachycephalic upper airway syndrome
ineffective.
(BUAS). Breeds affected are: Bulldogs, Boxers, Pekingese, Pugs,
Anaesthetic considerations
Boston Terriers, Persian cats. Components of the syndrome:
Highest risks are associated with:
● Stenotic nares.
● Time between premedication and tracheal intubation.
● Excessive/redundant pharyngeal tissue.
● Tracheal extubation and recovery after extubation.
● Over-long soft palate.
● Hypoplastic trachea.
Premedication
 Chronic upper airway ostruction makes inspiration hard work
 Aim for sedation without marked respiratory depression. Try to
 and high negative pressures are generated:
avoid drugs that can induce vomiting, as this adds stress and the
possibility of aspiration to the situation. Continuous observation
● Pharyngeal soft tissues are sucked inwards, exacerbating the
after premedication is advised. The antitussive effect of opioids
obstruction.
●Laryngeal
is useful and can allow relatively “late’ tracheal extubation.
1  ventricle eversion leads to eventual laryngeal
collapse.
(ACP) can occasionally cause syncope. (Some people consider
Chronic alveolar hypoxia causes sustained hypoxic pulmonary
anticholinergics).
sion and ^cor pulmonale' (right sided heart failure). Animals try
reserves if you later struggle with tracheal intubation. Ensure
to compensate with postural adaptations (standing or sternal
intravenous access.
recumbency), and mouth breathing which help to minimise
resistance to airflow. If you try to restrain the animal in lateral
Induction
recumbency, you immediately destroy some of its compensatory
● Induction should be rapid to allow rapid tracheal intubation.
efforts. Excitement or exercise also increase the respiratory
 demands and can result in decompensation.
Choose drugs that also allow rapid and complete’ recovery
without hangover.
 Signs of chronic hypoxaemia include:
● Rapid tracheal intubation is required to gain control of the
●History of syncope.
 airway: be as gentle as possible. Have a number of sizes of ET
· Cyanosis.
tube to hand and also a laryngoscope, an ET tube stylette/
● Poor exercise tolerance (can the animal nose-breathe at rest?).
bougie and suction. Have tracheostomy tubes on standby.
344
Some respiratory considerations  345
● Consider peri-operative corticosteroids (beware concurrent
scope. You may need to re-insert an ET tube, supply a decent flow
NSAIDs).
of O and possibly provide the odd manual breath to restore the
saturation before you allow the surgeon to trespass down the
airways again.
Maintenance
Choose drugs which require minimal metabolism for elimination,
After bronchoalveolar lavage, any remaining saline is rapidly
 absorbed. Gentle chest coupage can help promote coughing and
and drugs which are rapidly eliminated so recovery will be quick/
complete (e.g. propofol, alfaxalone, isoflurane, sevoflurane).
expectoration once recovery is progressing.
 Practise balanced anaesthesia' and ensure good analgesia. Use of
 NO is debatable as it may increase pulmonary vascular resistance,
Laryngeal paresis/paralysis
and   possibly
more so with pre-existing pulmonary
● May be congenital or acquired. Commonest in Bouviers, bull
hypertension.
terriers and older dogs of large and giant breeds.
Recovery
● Breathing difficulty is exacerbated by hot weather and exercise:
Continue oxygen provision. Leave IV catheter in place until
 they cannot pant effectively, and easily get hyperthermic.
fully recovered Ensure quiet surroundings and continuous
 patient observation. Leave ET tube in place until you really have
 dose ACP +/-butorphanol). Oxygen supplementation methods
to remove it. Most patients are happy to wake up and be able to
must not increase stres: flow-by oxygen or nasal prongs often
breathe more easily than ever before so that they tolerate an
preferred to facemasks or nasopharyngeal tubes. Oxygen hoods/
endotracheal (ET) tube remarkably well. If possible, prop the
-punu jo dn pinqau jo sneaq sans-iu aseau ue saae
animal in a sternal position as this mimics their own postural
adaptations. Have equipment/drugs available for re-intubation
hyperthermic, instigate cooling methods (Also exhaled CO2
should it be necessary. If problems recur, consider corticoster-
builds up which stimulates ventilation.)
oids if not already given, and tracheostomy. Minor degrees of
● These patients may also suffer from aspiration pneumonia.
 post-extubation obstruction can be remedied by keeping the
● Similar considerations apply as to BAOS.
animal in sternal, extending the head/neck forwards, and
● These animals cannot guard their airways very well and even
 pulling the tongue out as far as possible. This helps to minimise
less so after tiebacks: so avoid drugs which induce vomition.
airway resistance. Pain (especially thoracic/abdominal), can cause
● Antitussives are often advocated after laryngeal surgery,
ventilatory embarrassment too, so ensure adequate analgesia.
although some people worry that they may increase the risk of
aspiration.
Bronchoscopy
● Surgeons often wish to assess laryngeal function just before
endotracheal intubation. Pre-oxygenate the patient where pos-
 It is important to note the degree of respiratory compromise that
Jui ipun xui a ssssy ruu sa-ssns e u as
exists pre-anaesthesia.
anaesthesia (see further reading). You may need to be patient
● Stress-free pre-oxygenation is advised.
as some induction apnoea is common especially after propofol.
C2 agonists will 'relax' laryngeal muscles, so avoid if possible.
For bronchoscopy in small patients (<10kg), some broncho-
scopes will not fit down small ET tubes, or if they do, they block
Tracheal collapse
a good proportion of oxygen and anaesthetic vapour from reach-
ing the patient's lungs. Therefore it will often be necessary to
● Commonest in small terriers.
remove the ET tube. This requires:
● Extra-thoracic and/or intra-thoracic portions of the trachea can
be affected which will affect clinical presentation (see Chapter
●Another plan to maintain anaesthesia (injectables).
48).
● Another plan to ensure an oxygen supply to the patient.
● The peri-anaesthetic danger times are again around premedica-
One way to do this is to pass a dog urinary catheter down the
 tion and in recovery, but intrathoracic tracheal collapse can also
 d a s  an  s d  os m
be a problem during the maintenance phase if the ET tube does
to a size 3.5.mm internal diameter ET tube connector, and
 not extend through the area of collapse.
 thence to the anaesthetic breathing system for oxygen delivery.
You can also attach the catheter to a manually controlled jet
ventilator (e.g. the Manujet). Just one note of caution though:
Thoracotomies
if the bronchoscope and catheter form a ‘tight fit’ down the
 trachea, you may block off any escape route for all the oxygen
● Open chest:
0 IPPV necessary.
you're supplying, so beware that you do not over-inflate the
O promotes heat loss.
lungs.
 O chest drain required post-operatively.
If the SpO, falls below 90% (and you may detect a tachycardia,
● For cases with pre-existing pleural space disease, try to drain at
 or even bradycardia, with hypoxaemia), then remove the endo-
least some fluid/gas/air pre-anaesthesia if possible, to increase 
346  Veterinary Anaesthesia
the respiratory reserve. If a tension pneumothorax is present,
Further reading
avoid NO until the tension in the pleural cavity has been
Cross M, Plunkett E (2008) Respiratory Physiology. In: Physics,
relieved.
● Ensure good analgesia: loco-regional techniques form
 Pharmacology and Physiology for Anaesthetists. Key concepts
a
common component of balanced analgesia. Coughing
for the FRCA. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
is
 painful, but cough suppression may not always be indicated.
Section 6, pp 115-143.
Jackson AM, Tobias K, Long C,Bartges J,Harvey R (2004) Effects
of various anaesthetic agents on laryngeal motion during laryn-
Diaphragmatic ruptures
 goscopy in normal dogs. Veterinary Surgery 33(2), 102-106.
 Debate exists over how soon to repair these. Cardiac contusions
Mills GH (2001) Respiratory Physiology and Anaesthesia. British
can lead to arrhythmias within the frst 72 h of injury, but waiting
 Journal of Anaesthesia: CEPD Reviews 1(2),35-39.
longer increases the risks of adhesions.
Robertson SA, Bailey JE (2002) Aerosolized salbutamol (albuterol)
● IPPV well tolerated because the negative intrapleural pressure
tive clinical trial in 81 horses. Veterinary Anaesthesia and
has been lost.
Analgesia 29(4), 212-218.
● Avoid NO until the stomach position can be verified/corrected 
(torsion/dilation can occur if within chest).
 Self-test section
Recurrent airway obstruction in horses
Recurrent airway obstruction was previously known as chronic
1.
Which of the following may cause bronchoconstric-
obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD). Most cases presenting
tion/bronchospasm?
with a heave line and chronic cough have only slightly increased
Sevoflurane.
anaesthetic risk. Horses presenting with respiratory distress and
 Propofol.
copious mucopurulent airway secretions are at greater risk. 02
Ketamine.
agonists may cause some degree of bronchoconstriction but keta-
Thiopental.
 mine and the inhalation agents tend to allviate this.
Atropine.
 If IPPV is required, slower lung inflation may allow time for
·Salbutamol.
less compliant lung areas to inflate, but be mindful of the cardio-
2.
 Explain the pathophysiology associated with the
vascular effects. IPPV also risks causing air-trapping and possible
brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome.
alveolar rupture and pneumothorax.
Respiratory
 emerdel
Learning objectives
To be able to discuss the reasons for respiratory insufficiency.
 To be familiar with the methods available for supplemental oxygen administration, and importance of humidification for
long term therapy.
To be familiar with the techniques for chest drainage and tracheostomy.
Glossary of terms
● Extra- or intra-pulmonary conditions affecting the process of
ventilation, for example CNS disorders affecting the control of
Eupnoea-
- normal quiet breathing.
breathing, neuromuscular or chest wall disorders affecting the
Tachypnoea
—
 increased respiratory rate.
 mechanical processes of breathing, airway problems or abnor-
Hyperpnoea —— i
 increased rate and/or depth of breathing (usually
mal pleural space or mediastinal filling affecting movement of
 indicating hyper-ventilation).
air into and out of the lungs.
 Polypnoea —— 1
 rapid, shallow, panting type of breathing.
● Intrapulmonary conditions affecting the process of gaseous
Bradypnoea
I —- slow regular breathing.
exchange across the alveolar-capillary barrier, for example
Hypopnoea —- slow and/or shallow breathing (usually indicating
hypo-ventilation).
 pulmonary oedema.
Apnoea-
--transient (or prolonged) cessation of breathing.
 Orthopnoea — diffculty in breathing when in any other position 
In addition, cardiovascular conditions may affect pulmonary
 than standing (e.g. increased breathing difficulty when lying 
perfusion so as to compromise the effcacy of gaseous exchange,
down).
for example pulmonary emboli (air or thrombi), or low cardiac
 Trepopnoea — diffculty breathing when in one laterally recum-
 output conditions such as cardiac failure or shock.
 bent position but not the other.
Clinical signs
Platypnoea —
- difculty breathing in the upright position.
Dyspnoea -
 laboured or distressed breathing.
As the degree of respiratory compromise increases, the clinical
Stertor-
 snoring sound.
signs (including exercise intolerance) displayed by the animal
Stridor
r - harsh, often wheezy, respiratory sound.
generally progress, usually through the following stages:
● Increased respiratory rate.
Respiratory insufficiency
● Changed breathing pattern (see below), may accompany
 increased rate.
Respiratory insuffciency may arise because of problems at any of
● Increased work of breathing. Cats recruit their abdominal
the following levels:
muscles early because their intercostal muscles are relatively
weak, whereas this happens much later in dogs.
● Upper respiratory tract.
● Postural changes. Animals become reluctant to lie down and
● Lower airways (lower respiratory tract).
   s   (s a 
● Lung parenchyma (lower respiratory tract).
●Pleural space.
arched and their elbows abducted.
● Animals adopt the air hunger stance' an exaggerated form of
These can also be thought of as:
the postural changes above with the head and neck extended
347
348   Veterinary Anaesthesia
and open-mouthed breathing. Cats usually prefer to ^crouch,
Breathing sounds and patterns
appearing to be in a sternal position, and open-mouthed
 During normal inhalation, both the chest and the abdomen
breathing is a sign of very serious respiratory compromise.
'expand' because of contraction of the intercostal muscles and the
Once breathing becomes laboured to the point of being
diaphragm (the latter pushes the abdominal contents caudally).
distressing to the animal, we talk of dyspnoea.
 The opposite movements ocur during exhalation. Different
● Cyanotic mucous membranes (cats often appear more
breathing patterns may help you to determine the site of
grey' than blue'). Cyanosis is defined as >5g/dl deoxyhae-
pathology.
dn spadp oude s os ‘poq au un uqoo
the animal's initial haemoglobin concentration (ie. very
Inspiratory stertor
anaemic animals cannot be cyanotic because there simply is
 This is associated with upper respiratory tract obstructions (nares,
  a d i a    
nasal passages, nasopharynx/soft palate problems, e.g. BAOS).
'white), and also on the state of perfusion of the vascular
bed (e.g. gums) being observed and the ambient lighting.
Although variable, cyanosis may be present at haemoglobin
Inspiratory stridor
This is associated with laryngeal and extrathoracic tracheal
oxygen saturations of <70%, or arterial oxygen tensions
 obstructions (e.g.  laryngeal paresis, extrathoracic tracheal
(PaO) of <50 mmHg.
collapse).
 Once the air hunger stance with open-mouthed breathing is
 To differentiate between the above two: does the animal breathe
adopted, it can be assumed that 75% of respiratory function has 
 quietly with its mouth open, yet noisily with its mouth closed? If
been lost.
 So, the problem is between the nares and larynx.
 Respiratory failure can be defined by dyspnoea with cyanosis
at rest, and Pa0, <60 mmHg (normal 95-105 mmHg), and
Expiratory stridor
PaCO, >46mmHg (normal 35-45 mmHg) in dogs/horses; or >c.
This is associated with intrathoracic airway obstruction (e.g.
40 mmHg in cats (normal c. 31 mmHg), whilst breathing room
intrathoracic tracheal collapse). Often accompanied by increased
air (inspired oxygen 21%).
expiratory efforts.
Other clinical signs include:
Inspiratory and expiratory stridor
● Tachycardia (response to hypoxaemia).
This is associated with combined extrathoracic and intrathoracic
● Decreased exercise tolerance +/- syncope.
airway obstructions.
moist; paroxysmal; associated with exercise/excitement or
Increased expiratory efforts
eating/drinking; honking cough characteristic of tracheal
These often occur with an abdominal push, and prolonged expira-
collapse).
tory phase: associated with intrathoracic airway obstructions,
● Change in voice (laryngeal paresis).
especially small airway disease (e.g. feline asthma).
● Prone to hyperthermia with exercise or hot weather if panting
 inefficient (e.g. brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome
Rapid and shallow breathing, but with a smooth motion
(BAOS) and laryngeal paresis).
 and where the chest wall and abdomen work together
This is associated with lung parenchymal disease (e.g. pneumonia,
Clinical examination of the respiratory system
pulmonary oedema). In cats, cupula motion may be accentuated.
The cupulae are the cranial apical portions of the left and right
● Observe the patient from a distance and note its breathing
pleural sacs where they extend through the thoracic inlet, the
pattern (see below).
left is usually larger than the right. When respiratory efforts are
● Listen from a distance frst of all. Can you hear any abnormal
dn au ieu  re m a na
respiratory noises without the aid of a stethoscope? Are they
pressures generated by exaggerated inspiratory efforts, the cupulae
inspiratory or expiratory?
are ^sucked in' more so than normal.
● Palpate and observe the chest wall for respiratory excursions
and note any asymmetry in left and right chest wall move-
Paradoxical abdominal movement
ments. Palpate the larynx and trachea along its extrathoracic
course. Is the anterior chest wall compressible in cats? Can you
● Rapid breathing but with greatly increased work of breathing
feel the cardiac apex beat in its normal position, and can you
(usually seen as a rippling effect along the ribs and the chest
feel any precordial thrills?
and abdomen move in a dys-synchronous fashion): associated
● Percuss the left and right chest walls (+/- simultaneous aus-
with pleural space disease (e.g pneumothorax, haemothorax,
cultation) to help detect and define areas of hyper-resonance
pyothorax, pleural effusions, chylothorax, diaphragmatic
or abnormal dullness. (Very difficult to perform in cats, and fat
herniae/ruptures). Breathing pattern is more choppy than the
 or thick-coated animals, and in dyspnoeic animals).
 smooth pattern seen with lung parenchymal disorders.
● Auscultate lung fields and larynx/trachea. (Again, can be
● Paradoxical abdominal movement can also be seen in cases of
difficult in fat or hairy animals and in dyspnoeic animals.)
diaphragmatic paralysis (because of the lack of normal dia-
Respiratory emergencies  349
phragmatic contribution to breathing), and also with upper
the medullary respiratory centre). Sometimes seen in anaesthe-
respiratory tract obstruction because huge negative intra-tho-
tised animals.
racic pressures are created in an attempt to suck air into the
lungs, so the diaphragm and abdominal contents tend to be
N.B. Horses normally have biphasic inspiration and expiration:
sucked towards the chest cavity, thus giving the appearance of
  a   sd  e   
inward abdominal movements accompanying outward chest
breathe ^around’ their functional residual capacity.
movements during attempted inhalation. The opposite occurs
during exhalation, i.e. the chest wall relaxes (moves ^inwards')
Diagnostic workup
and the abdominal contents can now move caudally so the
 Some form of stabilisation/resuscitation is often required: some
abdomen appears to expand.
useful techniques are considered later.
Chemical restraint may be necessary. Procedures include:
Anything which significantly increases the work of breathing
can result in fatigue of the respiratory muscles and consequently
● Thoracic radiography (Not the V/D view if the patient presents 
loss of synchronous movement of chest and abdominal walls,
with much respiratory embarrassment).
with outward movement of the cranial chest wall but inward
● Thoracic ultrasonography including echocardiography.
movement of the abdomen on inspiration (and the opposite on
● Thoracocentesis, and laboratory evaluation of any fluid
expiration). Normal lung expansion can be compromised and this
removed.
type of breathing pattern often signifies impending respiratory
● Airway endoscopy, tracheal wash, bronchoalveolar lavage.
failure.
● Haematology including coagulation tests.
●Biochemistry.
Flail segments of chest wall
● Blood gas analysis (arterial +/- venous).
 These move paradoxically (i.e. suck in on inspiration and bow out
on expiration).
biopsies).
Paradoxical breathing
Oxygen supplementation
 Inward movement of the chest wall, with outward bulging of the
abdomen on inspiration is often seen in anaesthetised animals at
 deep planes of anaesthesia, where the intercostal muscles are so
of increasing the inspired oxygen concentration (above that of
'relaxed’ that inspiration becomes diaphragmatic, and appears to
 21% in normal atmospheric air), in order to try to improve
be abdominal. During expiration, the opposite occurs, with
hypoxaemia.
 cranial excursion of the diaphragm tending to make the chest
 Hypoxaemia is poor oxygenation of the blood; usually defined
bulge out. This type of respiratory pattern is quite often seen in
in terms of an abnormally low partial pressure of oxygen in the
normal cats even in much lighter planes of anaesthesia, because
arterial blood (Table 48.1). The oxygen content of the blood
of their relatively weak intercostal muscles.
depends not only on the tiny amount of dissolved oxygen (directly
measured as the PaO), but also (and mainly) on the amount of
Apneustic breathing
This occurs when there is an inspiratory pause/breath-hold, and
determined from the oxygen-haemoglobin dissociation curve).
 is common under ketamine anaesthesia. (Normal awake patients
Hypoxia is poor oxygenation of tissues.
have an end-expiratory pause.)
The causes of tissue hypoxia were first classified by Barcroft as
follows:
Kussmaul's breathing
● Anoxic/hypoxaemic: due to low partial pressure of oxygen in
This describes regular deep and rapid breathing without much in
the blood.
the way of an expiratory pause. It is often seen in ketoacidotic
● Anaemic: due to reduced functional haemoglobin in the blood
diabetic patients which are attempting to achieve a secondary
(i.e. anaemia or haemoglobinopathies).
respiratory alkalosis (by blowing off CO), in order to try to com-
● Stagnant/ischaemic: due to insuffcient supply of blood to the
 pensate for a primary metabolic acidosis.
tissues.
Cheyne-Stokes breathing
Table 48.1 Grades of hypoxaemia.
This is characterised by waxing and waning breaths and often
accompanies CNS disorders, congestive heart failure or uraemia,
 PaO, (artenial blood oxygen partial pressure)
Level of hypoxaemia
but has been noted in normal sleeping horses and also in 'normal?
(FiOz = 0.21 (room air)
 anaesthetised horses.
<90 mmHg
Mild
Biot's breathing
60-80 mmHg
Moderate
This is characterised by runs of normal breaths interspersed by
<60 mmHg
Severe
 periods of apnoea. It is usually a sign of CNS disease (affecting
350  Veterinary Anaesthesia
 Peters and van Slyke later added:
Oxygen hood
 Requires an Elizabethan collar (or an Oxyhoodrm (Kruuse)) and
● Histotoxic/cytotoxic: problems with cellular oxidative proc-
then oxygen is delivered by tubing: ideall to enter the collar
 esses, whereby the cells cannot utilise oxygen even if sufficient
below the animal's chin so the oxygen flushes forwards past the
 is delivered by the blood such as happens with endotoxaemia.
animal's nose/mouth to displace exhaled breath/CO2. Cling film
 may be placed over the ^open rim of the Elizabethan collar to
Oxygen humidification
form a lid’ and turn the whole assembly into a kind of oxygen
Oxygen from cylinders is ^cold (room temperature at best; but
tent over the animal's head, but such a lid' can be omitted in an
cools on expanding as it is released from the higher pressure cyl-
emergency, as high oxygen flows delivered near the animal's nose/
inder) and dry. If it is to be breathed for prolonged periods of
mouth will still increase the inspired oxygen 'within' the collar to
time (more than a few (2-6)h); especially if the upper respiratory
above that of room air. If a lid’ is ftted, there is usually enough
tract (nasal passages which normally warm and moisten inspired
inherent leak' in the system not to have to worry about creating
 gases), is bypassed, desiccation of respiratory mucus and compro-
an escape hole in the hood for the large/excess volume of oxygen
mise of the mucociliary escalator function occur. The simplest
that you are delivering, however, to improve the exit of exhaled
  a q a i t ae on a
CO, and to reduce the build up of humidity/condensation within 
a chamber containing water, ideally sterile (Figure 48.1).
the collar (which may be distressing for the patient), a small
Techniques
segment of the lid' can be left 'open?.
 Facemask
Oxygen cage
Oxygen (from cylinder or oxygen concentrator) is delivered
 Incubators are usually capable of providing an oxygen-enriched
through tubing or an anesthetic breathing system to a facemask
which is 'snugly applied over the animal's nose and mouth.
environment, although some many only deliver oxygen up to a
maximum of 40%. A makeshift oxygen cage can be created by
Oxygen flows around 5-15 l/min (determined by patient size) can
placing a cat/small dog wire mesh carrying basket inside a plastic
bag into which a high flow of oxygen is delivered. Black plastic
snugness of fit of the mask/entrainment of ambient air. Excessive
bags are most robust and easily available but are opaque, so cut a
dead-space within the mask promotes re-breathing of carbon
window into them and sellotape a clear plastic piece in place so
dioxide.
that you can observe the patient. Two “holes in the bag/tent are
Flow-by oxygen
required: one for oxygen entry and one for escape of excess gases.
 Plastic sheeting can similarly be taped over larger kennel doors to
Oxygen is delivered through tubing or an anaesthetic breathing
try to make the kennel airspace into an area of oxygen enriched
system to near the animal's nose and mouth. Useful if the animal
 atmosphere. Shor-Linerm make special kennel doors which are
resents a facemask. Oxygen flows of 5-15l/min are commonly
 used (determined by patient size) and can increase the inspired
of oxygen cage, increasing CO, and humidity inside the cage can
oxygen percentage to around 50%.
increase respiratory demand and distress.
Veterinary-specific oxygen cages
Specially designed to control the percentage of oxygen within the
cage (although opening the cage door will temporarily alter that).
Fgure 48.2 Oxygen therapy kennel doors with humidifier and thermometer
Figure 48.1 Bubble humidifier and flowmeter attached to oxygen
and hygrometer. An ice-box/water bath (surrounds humidifier) is also avail-
regulator.
able to deliver cooled or warmed humidified gases.
Respiratory emergencies 3
351
Most also have humidity control (many patients also require
humidifed oxygen) and all have carbon dioxide absorber trays.
The best known are perhaps the oxygen cages made by Plas Labsm
(Figure 48.3).
Nasal prongs
Commercially available for humans (Figure 48.4), therefore only
suitable for patients with inter-nostril distance similar to humans
(i.e. dogs; but they do not fit brachycephalics very well). Two sizes
available. Not always well tolerated, especially at higher oxygen
flows.
Nasopharyngeal catheters
 Nasopharyngeal oxygen insuffation at 100 ml/kg/min oxygen can
 increase the inspired oxygen percentage to around 35%; at 200 ml/
kg/min, to almost 50%; and at 500 ml/kg/min, to around 80%.
 The exact inspired oxygen concentration will depend upon the
 Figure 48.3 ICS-DT oxygen cages in use at Royal Veterinary College. Photo
 size of tube used, the oxygen flow achieved, the position of the
courtesy of Robert Goggs.
tube tip within the nasopharynx, and the breathing pattern of the
animal. Soft feeding (naso-oesophageal) tubes are often preferred
(3-8Fr) to the somewhat stiffer oxygen catheters, and are placed,
with the aid of local anaesthetic, into the ventral nasal meatus, so
that the tip lies in the nasopharynx (Figure48.5a and b). The tube
 is pre-measured against the animal's face: the length to be inserted
 is noted as the distance between the nostril and the lateral canthus
of the eye. (Some people use 'nares to medial canthus, but the tip
 of the catheter then does not always reach into the nasopharynx.
Measuring to the lateral canthus gives the extra few millimetres
which allow optimum positioning of the catheter tip in the
nasopharynx.) With the animal facing you, gently push the nasal
planum upwards (make the animal 'snooty-nosed'), to bring the
ventral nasal meatus (where the tube should go) into a straighter
line with the nostril (Figure 48.6). The tube can then be inserted,
advanced and secured in place with superglue or sutures (espe-
cially with butterfly tapes), to the side of the nose (just behind/
beside the nasal planum), up over the bridge of the nose, and on
the top of the animal's head. Elizabethan collars may be required.
Tolerated better by dogs than by cats; least by brachycephalic
Figure 48.4 Nasal oxygen prongs (child: size 1).
breeds.
(a)
(b)
Figure 48.5 (a) Nasal oxygen catheter and (b) softer naso-oesophageal feeding tube.
352   Veterinary Anaesthesia
3.5 mm adapter
or
7-7.5 mm adapter
mhl.i.....
Figure 48.8 Needles can be attached to ET tube adapters for connection to
an oxygen source.
7-
with subsequent damage of the alveoli). Oxygen therapy with
Figure 48.6 Paramedian section through cat's head. Although a naso-
oesophageal feeding tube is shown in place, the route from nostril to
>60% oxygen should only be provided when absolutely necessary;
nasopharynx is the same for a nasopharyngeal oxygen catheter. Note how
 and the inspired oxygen percentage should be reduced to below
the path from ventral nasal meatus to nasopharynx is not straight just caudal
60% as soon as possible.
to the nasal planum: pushing the nasal planum'up' helps to smooth out this
course and facilitate tube passage. Reproduced from Fextbook of Veterinary
Useful techniques
Anatomy. 3" Edition. Eds: Dyce KM, Sack WO, Wensing CJG. Chapter 11, The
head and ventral neck of the carnivores, pp. 367-392. Copyright 2002, with
●Tracheotomy.
 permission from Elsevier.
● Thoracocentesis.
●Tube thoracostomy.
● Placing nasopharyngeal catheters.
● Stabilising a flail chest segment.
Tracheotomy
As ‘-ostomy’ usually pertains to making a permanent “hole
(ostium), the term 'tracheostomy′ should be confined to perma-
nent surgical tracheostomies. Therefore, even when tubes are
 employed for several days, the correct term appears to be tube
tracheotomy'
Figure 48.7 Mini-tracheotomy tube and introducer.
Needle tracheotomy
 In an emergency, transtracheal oxygen delivery can be achieved
Trans-tracheal oxygen delivery
through a needle or catheter placed through the tracheal wall. A
Oxygen delivery via needle tracheotomy. The bore of the needle/
wide bore needle/catheter is inserted, often without local anaes-
catheter limits the oxygen flow possible: try for 200ml/kg/min
 thesia, in the midline between any two tracheal rings: distal to the
although a maximum of only 2l/min flow is common. Oxygen
site of obstruction. The hub of the needle can be connected to
inflow may also be limited by the availability of escape routes for
 either a 3.5 mm ET tube adapter, or to a 2 ml syringe barrel which
 the extra gas volume administered, for example if the trachea is
is then connected to a 7mm or 7.5 mm ET tube connector, and
blocked above the site of needle entry, then care must be taken
 then either ET tube connector is attached to an anesthetic breath-
not to over-inflate the lungs. A second needle may need to be
 ing system for xygen delivery (Figure 48.8). The delivered oxygen
inserted to allow escape of gases so as to prevent such an over-
flow is limited by the size of needle and degree of obstruction of
 pressure situation.
 the upper airway.
Endotracheal oxygen delivery
Tube tacheotomy
Oxygen delivery via tracheo[s]tomy tubes or endotracheal tubes.
 Can be performed under local anaesthesia with the patient sitting
Inspired oxygen can be delivered at up to 100% by these means.
 or in sternal recumbency and offered oxygen supplementation
Mini-tracheotomy tube kits are also available (Figure 48.7).
(e.g. flow-by or mask), although it is often easier (especially for
small animals), under general anaesthesia, in which case, try to
Oxygen toxicity
pre-oxygenate the animal before inducing anaesthesia. Clip and
sad psd ro paq ane < sd uxo j
aseptically prepare the ventral neck. Make a longitudinal incision
(12-24 h), then lung damage can occur (free radical generation
along the ventral midline from the caudal border of the cricoid
Respiratory emergencies  353
i e a (d re o)   ao,
 able inner tube which facilitates the cleaning process.
Complications
These include: obstruction, air leakage (with development of sub-
cutaneous emphysema), coughing, respiratory infections (the
upper respiratory tract with its air-filtering, warming and humidi-
fication roles, is bypassed so that mucociliary stasis occurs), tra-
cheal stenosis/stricture.
The tube can be removed when the patient's condition allows.
This can be assessed by temporary occlusion of the tube (e.g. with
the obturator). For cuffed tubes, ensure the cuff is deflated before
the tube is occluded to allw airflow into and out of the lungs.
Once the tube is occluded, the patient must be monitored care-
fully for the return of respiratory distress. After the tube is fnally
removed, the wound is cleansed and allowed to heal by second
intention/granulation. (No swimming for a while.)
Thoracentesis
Figure 48.9 Non-cuffed 'single' tracheotomy tube with its obturator.
Needle thorac[oc]entesis
Is therapeutic as well as diagnostic.
cartilage extending caudally some 2-3 cm (depends upon patient
size and also on site of obstruction). Separate and retract the
Site
paired sternohyoideus muscles. Identify the trachea, and incise
Seventh or eighth intercostal space (mid to caudal intercostal
space, because of the neurovascular bundle closely associated with
rings: usually in the region of the third or fourth rings, and extend
the caudal border of each rib), half way up chest wall (or, if patient
the incision circumferentially but not further than 40% of the
in sternal recumbency, slightly higher for air, and slightly lower
circumference of the trachea. (Beware the vagosympathetic trunks
for fluid); and can be perform bilaterally.
lying either side of the trachea.) Place stay sutures around the
rings on either side of the incision to facilitate both placing the
Technique
tube and changing it for cleaning. Choose a suitable sized tube
Syringe needles or butterfly needles are often preferred to catheters
and insert it gently. Most tubes are of human design and are really
because catheters tend to kink/collapse. The animal may be con-
a bit too angled for animal tracheas, so beware not to insert the
scious and standing, sitting or sternal. Infltrating the intended site
tube so that the tip rubs tightly against the tracheal wall, or even
of needle puncture with a bleb of local anaesthetic solution is
gets occluded by abutting the tracheal wall (Figure 48.9). If you
helpful if time permits, but cyanotic moribund animals often will
cannot find a suitable tracheotomy tube, you can cut down an ET
not protest. A syringe can be attached to the needle (often via short
tube (you can use some of the excess length of the tube to peel
extension set and stopcock), to facilitate gentle aspiration as the
down flaps (like peeling a banana skin down) so that you can use
needle is advanced; or a drop of sterile saline placed in the needle
these flaps later to help secure the tube in place). If using a cuffed
hub (before its insertion) can act as an indicator for entry into the
tube, be careful not to overinflate the cuff. Secure in place with
 pleural space, because this drop will do one of the following:
neck ties and/or sutures. Ensure that nothing in the immediate
● Be sucked in, because of negative pressure in the space (intra-
vicinity of the animal is liable to be inhaled through the tube (care
 pleural pressure is normally negative).
with bedding, feed and water). Some dog breeds with excessive
skin folds on the ventral neck, make bad candidates for tracheo[s]
● Squirt out, because of positive pressure in the space (e.g. with
any degree of abnormal filling' of the space i.e. pneumothorax,
tomy procedures.
haemothorax, pyothorax). This response is more usual because,
normally, a build up of positive pressure within the pleural
Aftercare
 cavity is the reason for proceeding with chest drainage.
Suction may be required every 20 min initially to ensure the tube
 is patent. Before every suction episode, the animal should be pre-
Once in the pleural space, the needle should be advanced more
 oxygenated (if not already on supplementary oxygen). A small
parallel to the chest wall so as to cause least possible laceration to
volume of sterile saline may be instilled through the tube lumen
the lungs during breathing movements. The needle should be
  s  n    n 
attached to some sort of one way valve system. Such a system can
removed/replaced for cleaning at least twice daily: the stay sutures
be made easily as follows: the last 20 cm of a giving set (with Luer
are really helpful. Have at least two spare tubes (one of the same
connector) will attach to the needle hub, and the other end usually
size and one a size smaller), readily available before removing the
fits onto a three way tap. You can now drain the pleural space
tube which is in-situ.
(Figure 48.10). Fluid samples may require laboratory assessments.
354 Veterinary Anaesthesia
Fgure 48.11 Different types of chest tubes. Reproduced from Dugdale
A, Chest drains and drainage techniques. In Practice 22(1), 2-15. Copyright
 2000, with permission from BVA Publications.
Figure 48.10 Needle thoracentesis and removal of purulent fluid from the
pleural space. Five intercostal nerves were blocked (two either side of the
point of drainage), evidenced by the superficial bleeding.
Vast improvement in patient condition often follows even only
 partial drainage.
Tubethoracostomy
This is a surgical procedure involving entry of a body cavity, and
 aseptic technique is therefore crucial.
Site
Seventh or eighth intercostal space, and about half way up the
 (   a  n i a  i
the side which is most severely affected, as determined by clinical,
radiographic or ultrasonographic investigation, or that which was
most productive on needle thoracocentesis. The mediastinal
Fgure 48.12 Typical position of chest tube in situ.
pleura is often fenes trated, and is also very fragile, so that, usually,
both sides of the chest are affected. However, occasionally, espe-
cially with pyothorax, there will be pocketing' of the effusion, so
Table 48.2 A guide to which chest tube size to use.
that more than one site and possibly both sides of the chest may
Animal weight
Tube size (Fr) (mm diam)
 need to be tapped.
 Different types of tubes are available with or without trocars
<7kg
14-16Fr (4mm)
and with a different number of drainage holes (best have at least
7-15kg
16-20Fr (5 mm)
three side holes and an end hole). Further holes can be created,
 but must not be greater than a quarter of the tube's circumference 
16-30kg
20-26Fr (6 mm)
or else the tube will kink easily. Tube size is denoted by ^French
>30kg
26-32Fr (7 mm)
gauge (Figure 48.11 and Table 48.2).
 Some tubes have a radio-opaque marker strip. This may be
combined with a 'sentinel eye': an end to, or interruption of, the
the pleural reflection and tissues of the thoracic inlet (Figure
 marker strip at the position of the last (outermost when the tube
48.12). Figure 48.13 shows a chest drain in situ in a horse with a
is in situ) hole. All holes must lie within the chest cavity after 
pleural effusion.
placement.
 The internal diameter of the tube should ideally be about a half
Technique
to two-thirds of the width of one of the wider intercostal spaces.
The animal may be sitting, sternal or laterally recumbent. The
 procedure is easier to perform under general anaesthesia but local
thick and tenacious effusions. The length of tube should be such
 anaesthetic techniques are still helpful. ECG and pulse monitoring
that its tip is located cranioventrally in the chest, but not further
 are useful during tube placement as arrhythmias may occur (see
cranially than rib 2, or else the tube tends to become hindered by
below).
Respiratory emergencies  355
Figure 48.13 Chest drain in situ in a horse. A condom has been placed over
the end of the drain to act as a one-way valve for drainage. Site for insertion
Figure 48.15 Insertion of chest drain into thoracic cavity at eighth intercos-
is also seventh to eighth intercostal space, usually just dorsal to costochondral
tal space.
junctions.
Once the tube tip is positioned at the seventh or eighth inter-
costal space, the tube/trocar are then held almost perpendicular
to the body wall, aiming to slide off the cranial border of the rib
concerned (eighth or ninth). A short sharp blow to the trocar
"handle' with the heel of your hand may be necessary so the trocar
tip and tube tip penetrate the chest cavity; or push and twist firmly
if a shorter stylette is present (Figure 48.15).
 Once the trocar/tube tip is within the chest cavity, angle the
tube/trocar to lie more parallel with the chest wall and slide
dn deus au rao, o 'uz ioqe aq ieoo aun rao a a
The whole tube/trocar assembly can then be advanced cranially
into the chest cavity, whilst keeping it more parallel with the chest
wall so as to avoid damaging the structures within the chest.
Once the tube has been inserted up to the pre-measured depth,
withdraw the trocar whilst keeping a frm hold of the tube, and
be ready to clamp or kink off the tube as soon as the trocar is fully
withdrawn. 'Cap the tube securely.
Figure 48.14 Tunneling of chest drain beneath skin.
Secure the tube in place using sutures (Figure 48.16):
● At the site of tube entry into the chest, place a suture through
 deep fascia, even adjacent rib periosteum, so as to ensure a frm
anchoring for the tube. Tie several (e.g. six) knots to make a
Clip, aseptically prepare and drape the chest wall. Local anaes-
short stalk as a ^stand off' before completing a Chinese finger
thetic infltration/intercostal blocks are performed to desensitise
trap suture around the tube. The ^stand off'allows access to the
the sites of tube insertion through both the skin and the chest wall.
skin to clean and inspect the wound.
Pre-measure the length of tube to be inserted by holding it against
● Placea suture (but not too tightly) through the skin and around
the chest wall. Then do one of the following:
the tube within its subcutaneous tunnel, about half way along
● Make a small skin incision at the tenth intercostal space; insert
 the tunnel, for extra security against air leaks.
the tip of the tube/trocar through the incision and tunnel the
Some people like to place a suture circumferentially around the
whole assembly cranially through the subcutaneous tissues
skin incision site surrounding the tube to reduce the chance of
until the tip lies over the seventh or eighth intercostal space
air ingress. Such sutures are like purse string sutures, but must
(Figure 48.14).
not be over-tightened or else the skin blood supply will be
● An assistant pulls the skin of the lateral chest wall cranially by
compromised and necrosis may occur.
about two rib spaces so you can place the tube directly through
● Some people also pre-place a loose purse string suture in the
skin into the pleural cavity at the seventh or eighth intercostal
skin around the tube entry site, so that at tube removal, the
space. Later release of the skin automatically creates a tunnel.
suture can be tightened gently, to close the skin wound
356  Veterinary Anaesthesia
Hgure 48.17 Heimlich valve. Actual size: about 10cm long by about
2.5 cm diameter.
Chest drain
Figure 48.16 Chest drain secured in place with sutures.
To air
or suction device
 All connections of the tube to, for example, the three way tap
must be secure. Ligatures and/or superglue are often used. The
tube's position can be verifed with a chest radiograph.
Adequate analgesia must be provided, and may include inter-
costal nerve blocks and intrapleural instillation of local anaes-
thetic down the tube. See Chapter 15 on local blocks.
Aspiration from the tube can be intermittent or continuous.
Ideally, patients with chest drains should never be left unattended.
If intermittent drainage is performed, gate clamps placed over a
“folded’ section of tube can help to ensure that the tube remains
closed between drainage sessions. Chest bandages, Elizabethan
collars and neck braces help to reduce interference with the tube
by the animal.
↑2cm
The frequency of intermittent drainage will depend upon the
Water
rate of fluid or gas accumulation. A large syringe and three way
 tap may suffice and allows measurement of the volume removed,
Fgure 48.18 Underwater seal. The tube is normally submerged about 2 cm
but be careful not to apply excessive suction.
 below the surface of the water in the bottle.
 For continuous drainage, a Heimlich valve or underwater seal
 can be used: air and/or fluid are expelled during exhalation.
Heimlich valves are best suited to animals >15kg, and for
 Intrapleural pressure is normally negative so that the fluid in
 draining air (fluid tends to clog them). They consist of a one way
the tube is ^sucked up by a few (around five) cm. During inspira-
rubber flutter valve enclosed within a clear plastic tube, and must
tion the intrapleural pressure becomes more negative, so the fluid
be securely connected to the chest drain (Figure 48.17).
level in the tube rises, and during expiration the pressure becomes
 An underwater seal consists of a sterile glass or plastic bottle,
less negative, so that the fuid level falls again (ie. the fuid level
with a capacity of 500 to 2-3000 ml, containing sterile water or
swings slightly with breathing). With abnormal flling of the
saline to a depth of a few cm (Figure 48.18). The bung has two
pleural space (e.g. by fluid or air) the normally negative pressure
stiff tubes placed through it; the lower tip of one is submerged 
becomes less negative, or even positive, so the fluid level in the
about 2 cm below the level of the fluid, whilst the lower end of the
tube does not rise as far, or is even pushed down. If it is pushed
other tube must remain above the fluid level. The outer end of
down far enough (>2 cm), then its contents ^ermpty’ into the
the submerged tube is connected to the chest drain. Fluid in the
 bottle, and the éexcess contents of the pleural space empty during
submerged capillary tube imposes a back pressure on the pleural
successive expirations, without the need to apply suction.
cavity, and seals it from the atmosphere. The level that the fluid
Animals should be positioned above the level of the bottle to
attains in the tube, once connected to a chest drain, reflects the
reduce the chance of fluid siphoning back into the chest from the
 animal's intrapleural pressure. Bottles should be wide so that the
bottle. ‘Trap? bottles can be placed between the animal's chest
level of fluid in the bottle does not fluctuate too much during
drain and the underwater seal bottle to reduce this risk. Trap
breathing.
bottles also allow measurement of drained fluid, and, by keeping
Respiratory emergencies  357
Air vent tube
Chest drain
To air
JO
suction device
Water
0-20cm
Water
2 cm
Trap bottle
Underwater seal
Vacuum regulator
Figure 48.19 Three-botle system. A trap/collection bottle can be interposed between the underwater seal and the patient's chest. Finally a third bottle, the
vacuum regulator, can be added: the air vent tube is usually submerged by 10-20cm below the water surface to limit the vacuum applied to the chest to
10-20 cmH,O.
any fluid out of the underwater seal bottle, the water level in the
● Use chest bandages and other devices to prevent patient
underwater seal bottle (important for its function), will not rise,
interference.
S0 continued chest drainage is not compromised. A third bottle
● Ensure adequate analgesia.
 may also be included, to act as a vacuum regulator, when suction
● Ensure adequate patient observation.
is to be applied (Figure 48.19).
Tuberemoval
Remove as soon as possible because tube presence within the
pleural cavity stimulates the production of a serosanguinous
● Damage to heart, lung, blood vessels, nerves, diaphragm, or
pleural effusion, which can be of the order of 0.5-2 ml/kg/day. As
liver during placement.
● Arrhythmias (heart or pericardium irritation/trauma).
a rough guide, tubes should be removed when no air has been
aspirated for 12-24h, or when <2 ml/kg/day fluid has been
● Phrenic nerve irritation, with possible resultant diaphragm
hemiparesis.
drained. The tube could be clamped off for a trial period of say
● Damage to vagosympathetic trunk (Horner's syndrome has 
24 h, during which time the animal is monitored closely, and chest
radiographs can be taken to assess progress.
been described).
● Leakage of air around or through the tube, leading to iatrogenic
 subcutaneous emphysema/pneumothorax.
Technique for removal
● Infection.
To provide some analgesia (tube removal can be quite painful),
instill local anaesthetic down the tube about 30 min beforehand.
● Stimulation of pleural effusion.
The animal should be breathing quietly. Cut the tethering suture/s,
and ensure placement of a purse-string suture (under local anaes-
Reducing the risks
thetic)if not already placed. Gently rotate the tube about its long
· Careful aseptic technique.
axis, to free it up from any adhesions. One person pulls out the
● Slide off cranial edge of rib, to avoid neurovascular bundle.
capped tube in one quick smooth manoeuvre, whilst a second
● Choose seventh or eighth intercostal space (further cranial or
operator gets ready to gently tighten the purse string suture once
 caudal risks damaging heart, diaphragm, liver).
the tube is out. Cleanse the wound and apply antimicrobial oint-
● Create a subcutaneous tunnel between the sites of tube penetra-
ment, a sterile dressing and a light chest bandage for 24h.
tion of the body wall skin and of the chest cavity, to provide
 some protection against air leaks.
Flail chest wall segments
● Pre-measure the tube length required and ensure all holes will
lie within the chest cavity.
Flail segments of the chest wall occur when ribs are fractured at
● Secure the tube in place as firmly as possible.
two sites so that the mid-rib section becomes ^free, and cannot
● Ensure all connections/tube caps are secured.
therefore move in unison with the rest of the chest wall during
● Ensure patency and correct position of the tube.
breathing movements. Normally during inspiration the chest wall
358   Veterinary Anaesthesia
moves outwards, but flail segments are ^sucked in' by the increased
Koterba AM, Kosch PC, Beech J, Whitlock T (1988) Breathing
negative intrathoracic pressure, thus moving 'paradoxically.
strategy of the adult horse (Equus caballus) at rest. Journal of
During expiration, the opposite occurs, i.e. the normal chest wall
Applied Physiology 64(1), 337-346.
moves inwards,but the flail segment moves outwards. Stabilisation
 Nicholson I, Baines S (2010) Indications, placement and manage-
of flail segments greatly improves the efficacy of ventilation
ment of tracheostomy tubes. In Practice 32, 104-113.
(reduces the air-pendulum effect), and greatly improves the ani-
mal's comfort. The reader is referred to surgical texts for
 approaches to flail chest stabilisation.
Self-test section
Further reading
1.
 A neurovascular bundle is associated with the caudal
border of each rib: true or false?
 Dugdale A (2000) Chest drains and drainage techniques. In
2.
 How would you define hypoxaemia and hypoxia; and
Practice 22(1), 2-15.
 differentiate between the two?
Goggs R, Dugdale A (2006) Preliminary investigation of two
3.
What techniques are available to provide oxygen-
oxygen therapy devices. Abstract. Proceedings of 50" Annual
enriched 'air' for a patient?
BSAVA Congress, Birmingham, UK April 2006. P 467-468.
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPcR)
Learning objectives
To be aware of different types of arrests.
To be able to discuss Basic Life Support (A, B, C) strategies; and for differing sizes/chest shapes of animal
To be familiar with Advanced Life Support (D, E, F) strategies.
 To be familiar with the drugs commonly used and the newer approaches.
1
 To be aware of post-resuscitation problems.
Introduction
Chronic arrests are multifactorial, for example the old dog with
 a degree of renal failure and valvular endocardiosis perhaps now
The immediate goals of resuscitation during cardiopulmonary
 gets a little too deeplyanaesthetised, respiration slows respiratory
arrest (CPA) are to re-establish myocardial and cerebral perfusion
acidosis now develops on top of pre-existing metabolic acidosis),
 and oxygenation; hence cerebral is included.
the dog also gets a little cold under general anaesthesia and
 This chapter deals with small animal CPA. For more informa-
tion about horses, see further reading.
 posed, until a point is reached where the myocardium has just had
enough; arrhythmias may be undetected until the heart finally
stops. Prognosis is poor, as the internal milieu is far from normal
Types of arrest
and cannot be fixed easily and quickly.
Respiratory, cardiac or both
 These may occur almost simultaneously, or one may precede the
Prevention is better than cure
other, for example one of the following can occur:
Causes
o ix  x  sne  o
Why do 'arrests? happen?
cardiac arrhythmia/arrest
● cardiac arrest → reduced tissue perfusion/oxygenation →
● Hypoxia/hypoxaemia.
hypoxic medullary respiratory centre →> agonal gasping
●Hypercapnia (= hypercarbia).
→
respiratory arrest.
● Electrolyte imbalances (especially hyperkalaemia).
● Acid/base abnormalities (pH changes can also affect electro-
  si  sa e r  an r
lytes (K+ and ionised Cat)).
eventually arrest of both systems occurs (CPA).
● Acute hypotension/hypovolaemia.
●Hypoglycaemia.
Acute or chronic
● Hypothermia.
Acute arrests are those which are not at all expected, for example
● Autonomic nervous system imbalance (massive changes in
the healthy bitch spay which has got a bit too deeply anaesthetised
 either sympathetic or parasympathetic tone, often via reflexes?).
and stops breathing, or alternately, is too lightly anaesthetised and
the release of catecholamines after surgical incision results in
intestinal, cardiac, endocrine, haematological, toxaemias,
cardiac arrhythmia. Prognosis for resuscitation is excellent as long
septicaemias).
as arrest is recognised and treated early.
· Anaesthetic overdose.
655
360   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Thus, it is important to try to normalise as many of these as
B (breathing)
possible before attempting general anaesthesia and avoid their
Institute intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)ata rate
occurrence during anaesthesia.
near the 'normal' for that animal. Excessive rates raise the mean
intrathoracic pressure for a large proportion of each minute of
Recognising that a cardiac arrest has occurred
attempted resuscitation which reduces venous return and cardiac
output, increases intracranial pressure and can be detrimental.
● Unconscious patient.
 Recommendations vary, but initially 2-5 breaths are given in
● Respiratory arrest or agonal gasping ('tracheal tugs' describe
quick succession if only respiratory arrest had occurred, sponta-
 the neck-flexing breathing efforts when the medullary respira-
neous ventilation may be restored. If no return of spontaneous
tory centre is trying incredibly hard to recruit the accessory
ventilation, then continue IPPV at around 10-24 breaths per
respiratory muscles).
min.
● No heart beat, no pulse, no haermorrhage at surgical site and
 Aim to inflate the lungs over l s; the chest wall movement
the blood looks dark.
should be visible. Try not to exceed 20 cmH,O inflation pres-
● Grey, cyanosed or pale mucous membranes (may help indicate
 sure. Allow the chest to deflate suffciently after each inflation,
 the initiating cause), but a fairly normal CRT may be obtained
 or breath-stacking will hinder venous return, and hence any
for several minutes after death.
cardiac output you may establish.
● Central eye, unresponsive dilated pupils.
 If endotracheal intubation is impossible, as long as oxygen is
● No lacrimation (dry cornea), or salivation (dry mouth).
supplied by insufflation, via a long catheter if possible (the nearer
● No palpebral or corneal reflexes.
the carina the tip of the catheter, the better), then the act of chest
● Flaccid limbs, no reflexes.
compressions (see C below), will help to move gases into and out
● Absent capnograph trace, and minimal reading even with IPPV
of the lungs. In fact, A,C,B' may be as good as A,B,C.
 because no circulation.
For respiratory arrest you could try stimulating the Jen Chung
(GV26) acupuncture point at the base of nasal philtrum: insert
25 g needle until it hits bone, then twist gently (or use a hen-
What can we do?
pecking action).
 Doxapram, an analeptic (CNS stimulant/respiratory stimulant,
T note the Time
thought to increase the sensitivity of peripheral and central chem-
H call for Help
oreceptors to carbon dioxide and oxygen), increases cerebral and
 E follow the Emergency procedure ...
 myocardial oxygen demand and can be detrimental when a patient
A Airway
 is already hypoxaemic. Hence, it is no longer recommended.
B Breathing
Basic Cardiac Life Support
C Circulation
C(circulation)
D Drugs (and fluids)
 Place the patient in a suitable position: usually right lateral
 E Electrical defbrillation
recumbency or dorsal.
F Follow up (and fluids)
 Advanced Cardiac Life Support
 Before cardiac massage is begun, you may wish to try one pre-
G Go home!
cordial thump, directed over the usual position of the apex beat.
H Have a drink!
 Precordial thump is now discouraged in humans because it may
convert ventricular tachycardia into ventricular fibrillation or
For humans, electrical defibrillation is now included under
result in asystole; however the situation is less clear in animals.
basic cardiac life support (BCLS), because ventricular fbrillation
 Start compressions at 80-120/min (see below).
following myocardial infarction is the commonest cause of
If not already present, establish IV access. Central venous
out-of-hospital arrest.
access(jugular vein) is best for the quickest delivery of drugs to
the heart, but may not be possible in an emergency, so a periph-
eral venous catheter may have to suffice. Try not to suspend chest
Basic Cardiac Life Support
compression activity during venous catheterisation. Venous cut-
down may be required because of the collapsed circulation.
A (airway)
Consider intra-osseous access, esp. in young animals.
 Establish an airway: endotracheal tube, urinary catheter, trache
External or interna!
otomy. If the animal's trachea is already intubated, ensure the
tube is in the correct place and is patent. Suction and a laryngo-
compressions/cardiac massage?
Aosu  a s d o reu q  os
 Size of animal and chest 'shape'
is recommended to minimise laryngeal stimulation which may
For cats and young animals, external anterior chest compression
result in vagal or sympathetic reflexes.
('cardiac pump' recruitment), between finger and thumb can be
Turn off any volatile anaesthetic agents/N,O. For rebreathing
 effective.
systems: increase the oxygen flow, flush with oxygen and ^dump?
 For larger dogs under 15 kg, especially if narrow-chested, exter-
 the bag at least twice. Ideally aim to deliver 100% oxygen.
 nal CPCR may also be effective. Right lateral recumbency with a
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation  361
wedge placed under the chest is the preferred position. Techniques
>15 kg. Most effectively recruited by sternovertebral compressions
to recruit the 'cardiac'or 'thoracic' pumps (see below), may be
(with animals in dorsal recumbency, although this is a very unsta-
employed.
ble position to maintain), or by compressions of the chest over
 For dogs weighing over 15 kg, especially if barrel-chested, con-
the widest part (i.e sixth to seventh ribs) mid-way down the chest
servative external CPCR, recruiting the 'thoracic pump', is often
d n ou s  a (   ) 
 poorly effective when right lateral recumbency is chosen. External
CPCR may be slightly more effective if the animal is placed in
changes (swings from positive pressure (during chest compres-
dorsal recumbency.
sion), to more negative pressure (during expiration/chest wall
recoil) in the chest, to thereby facilitate alternating cardiac output
Acute or chronic arrest?
and venous return. Works best when adequate relaxation' period
Normally begin with external chest compressions for acute arrests,
allowed and ‘normal’ intrathoracic conditions exist (ie. no
but be prepared to be more aggressive in the absence of a response.
pleural/pericardial effusions etc.) One-way blood flow is thus
 For chronic arrests, it is often better to be more aggressive from
hopefully established, aided by the presence of heart valves (hope-
the start or perhaps have Do not resuscitate' orders.
fully not incompetent), and valves in the jugular veins.
Owner wishes?
May vary from do everything possible' (internal cardiac massage
Summary of techniques for basic cardiac
sooner than later), to ^do not resuscitate.
life support
Help available?
● Tilting the animal slightly head down (to increase blood flow
You need facilities, drugs and staff (TEAM) for the resuscitation
to the head), is no longer recommended (increases intracranial
 procedure and the aftercare to be optimal.
 pressure and decreases cerebral perfusion).
At least three people are needed, one to ventilate, one to
● Raising/binding the hindlimbs can increase venous return (see
perform cardiac massage, and one to locate, draw up and admin-
below).
ister drugs and monitor/record the animal's response. One person
● Recumbency either right lateral or dorsal. (Right lateral
should be in charge. Because performing external chest compres-
because if you decide to go for internal CPCR, left chest wall
sions is rapidly tiring, it is advised to change the compressor?
thoracotomy gives easier access to the heart through the lung
every 2 min.
window, and easy access to the left ventricle for intracardiac
injections.)
Equipment available?
● Ensure distal tip of ET tube lies outside thoracic inlet or else
Depending upon where the arrest happens, this may be a limiting
the tube and its cuff may occlude the carotid arteries as they
factor to the technique/s used.
traverse the thoracic inlet in trying to take blood towards the
 In a hospital, the following are likely to be available:
brain.
● IPPV at 10-24 breaths/min (nearer 10 for animals >15kg:
· ECG
 nearer 24 for animals <15 kg).
● Doppler blood flow detector
● Chest compressions 80-120/min (100-120/min preferred):
●Capnograph
O Compress the chest by 1/3 of its width then allow full recoil.
● DC defibrillator
O Compression:relaxation ratio of 1: 1.
● Surgical equipment for internal cardiac massage
 O Apply compressions for periods of 2min without interrup-
● Chest drains
tion. Change the compressor every 2 min to limit fatigue.
Interruptions should be minimised to <l0 s. The successful
cheal Oz administration or intra-tracheal deposition of drugs
return of spontaneous circulation (ROSC) is highly depend-
should IV access prove diffcult), intraosseous needles
ent upon maintenance of myocardial perfusion, hence the
● Drugs (see emergency dose charts)
importance of uninterrupted compressions.
● Selection of fluids (crystalloids, colloids, blood)
Techniques suggested to help increase the effectiveness of
external CPCR (which only generates around 20-30% of normal
cardiac output); but none yet highly recommended for use in
How to perform external CPCR
veterinary patients:
Cardiac pump versus thoracic pump?
● Simultaneous ventilation and compression (SVC). Aim to
The ‘cardiac pump’ is supposedly recruited by chest compres
coincide occasional chest compressions with peak lung infla-
sions centred over the heart (i.e. ventrally over the third to sixth
tions to increase the forward’ flow of blood.
ribs). The chest compressions are transmitted to the heart cham-
● Hind limb and abdominal binding can increase venous return
bers to simulate heart beats. Not usually very effective apart from
from the hind end of the animal to increase the blood volume
in very small and young animals (<15 kg), with compliant chests;
available for vital organ perfusion. It also directs any cardiac
and may incur rib or other damage.
output generated to the head end of the animal. Binding should
 The “thoracic pump' is the mechanism whereby most blood
 be performed from the hind toe tips cranially. If resuscitation
flow is established during external CPCR attempts in animals
 is successful, binding should be released slowly, from cranially
362  Veterinary Anaesthesia
to caudally, and beware reactive hyperaemia of the hind end of 
antidotes? (Naloxone for opioids, atipamezole for α2 agonists,
 the animal, systemic hypotension and reperfusion injury.
flumazenil for benzodiazepines). See dosage chart for more details
● Abdominal counterpulsations (interposed abdominal com-
of individual drug doses.
pressions). By compressing the abdomen during chest relaxa-
tion, blood is encouraged to flow towards the vessels in the chest.
Routes of drug administration
Then, by maintaining some abdominal pressure during chest
Intravenous
compression, blood is discouraged from returning to vessels
● Central vein > peripheral vein.
 in the abdomen, thus helping to maintain the headward fow.
● Follow injection with a flush' of 5-50 ml sterile saline (volume
● Active compression/decompression. Theoretically by decreas-
depends on patient size). If a peripheral vein is used, the limb
 ing intrathoracic pressure during chest decompression, venous
can also be raised for 2 min.
 return is increased.
● Impedance threshold valves. These limit air/oxygen entering
the lungs during chest recoil, supposedly increasing the volume
Intra-tracheal
of blood which returns to intrathoracic vessels.
Trans-mucosal absorption of drugs occurs into the broncho-
● Circumferential chest compression. May result in increased
oesophageal circulation which returns to both the left and right
cardiac output in smaller patients.
 sides of the heart.
How effective are your efforts?
● Use 2-2.5 times the IV dose, dilute in 5-10ml sterile water or
sterile saline (dogs), or 2-3 ml (cats).
Within 30-60s of starting CPCR, and at least every 30 s thereafter,
● Follow instillation at the carina (via male dog/cat urinary
 someone should check for:
catheter), with two good lung inflations.
● Improvement in mucous membrane colour.
● OK for epinephrine, atropine, lidocaine, methoxamine,
● Pupil constriction and return of pupillary light reflexes.
naloxone and vasopressin; but not bicarbonate (it is hypertonic
● Ventromedial relocation of eyes and return of corneal and
and inactivates surfactant), or calcium salts (they precipitate in
 palpebral reflexes.
surfactant).
● Return of lacrimation.
● ECG changes (beware movement artifacts).
Intraosseous
● Increased limb tone and other reflexes.
 Useful in small animals and young animals with soft bone corti-
● Return of spontaneous ventilatory efforts.
ces. Some people prefer this to the intra-tracheal route if direct
●End tidal CO value increasing
 (capnography/capnometry).
intravenous access is not available.
1noA puadsns on sa jou op noA :yasn Aiaa st Aqderlouden
resuscitation efforts. (Beware overzealous IPPV.)
Intracardiac
● A Doppler flow probe may be used to detect retinal blood flow,
 Not recommended unless open chest CPCR (allows direct visu-
but movement artifacts can occur.
alisation of injection site).
● Pulses are incredibly hard to detect during CPCR attempts and
femoral venous pulsations are commonly mistaken for arterial
Fluids
 pulses. When the compressor' changes every 2 min, in a period
'Shock doses (one blood volume of crystalloids or a quarter
of <10s, check for:
the blood volume of colloids) are no longer recommended.
O Audible heart sounds and palpable pulse (ROSC).
More conservative rates are now recommended
(unless
o ECG pattern.
hypovolaemia preceded arrest) because an increase in central
 If no success within 2 min, try resuscitative drugs. If no response
venous pressure can reduce coronary perfusion. Try either of
within 2-5 min, and especially if no ECG available, consider inter-
the following:
  s hu an s a,  s no arn r
● 20(-40)ml/kg bolus² of crystalloid for dogs; 10-20ml/kg for
may help to direct your choice of drugs).
Cease resuscitative efforts after 15-20min of no response.
cats.
● 5(-10) ml/kg bolus' of colloid for dogs; 2-5 ml/kg for cats.
Although the brain can normally only survive for about 3 min after
its glucose and oxygen supply has ceased, animals under anaesthe-
Coronary perfusion pressure equals aortic end diastolic pres-
sia, especially if a little hypothermic, should have longer than this,
sure (AEDP) minus left ventricular end diastolic pressure.
as the brain's energy requirements are reduced. Also, some of the
Therefore, coronary perfusion pressure is about equal to AEDP
 anaesthetic agents have so-called neuroprotective properties.
minus right atrial pressure (RAP). As RAP = CVP, and fluid over-
load increases CVP, coronary perfusion pressure is reduced by
D and E and F (done together); Advanced
excessive intravenous fluids.
Cardiac Life Support
Arrest arrhythmias and treatments
Drugs and fluids are chosen according to the problem for
ECG essential (unless you can visualise the heart i.e. during inter-
example if anaesthetic overdose is suspected, are there any specifc
nal cardiac massage).
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation  363
Asystole
poor. The cause is unknown, but may include acute hypovolaemia
The commonest arrest arrhythmia: poor prognosis. Causes
and/or hypothermia.
include hypoxaemia, hypothermia, hypovolaermia, vagal reflexes,
electrolyte abnormalities.
Treatment is often without success. Has included:
● Fluids.
Treatment
● Corticosteroids.
● Atropine especially if high vagal tone is suspected as the
● Naloxone (high endogenous opicids accompanying CPA may
cause of the arrest. Bradycardias due to hypoxaemia or
have a role in PEA).
● Electrical defibrillation is not effective.
hypothermia is suspected and open chest CPCR is being
  a is  a   
A-V block or sinus bradycardia
fluids may help.
The causes are hypoxaemia, vagal reflexes, hypothermia, electro
● Epinephrine can be given to induce ventricular fibrillation;
lyte problems.
then try electrical defibrillation (preferred to chemical defibril-
lation with lidocaine). High dose or low dose? High dose
(0.1-0.2 mg/kg), exerts both alpha effects (peripheral vasocon-
Treatment
 strictor effects, to ^centralise' blood volume to the vital organs,
● Atropine.
which is useful in CPCR), and beta effects (positive inotrope
● Beta agonists (e.g. dobutamine).
and chronotrope effects, which can be useful, but directly
● Ephedrine (an ino-constrictor): favoured for vaso-vagal
increase myocardial oxygen demand). However, high dose
reflexes.
epinephrine tends to be associated with worse myocardial (e.g.
● Atipamezole may be indicated.
re-fbrillation) and neurological outcomes in man. Many
 people start with one low dose, and if this is unsuccessful,
short term, but calcium is also less favoured in CPCR because
the following doses given are then “high. Can be re-dosed
 it can promote cell death.
every 3-5min.
● Electrical defibrillation is not recommended for asystole.
Other drugs
Vasopressin (ADH)
Ventricular tachycardia or ventricular fibrillation
 Potent vasoconstrictor (working on Vl receptors on smooth
Fine fbrillation can be mistaken for asystole, so if possible check
muscle), without direct positive inotropic effects on the heart;:
multiple orthogonal leads of the ECG.
therefore does not increase myocardial oxygen demand directly
(unlike epinephrine).
 Has become a first line treatment in CPCR where it can be used
Treatment
 instead of or alongside epinephrine. Whereas epinephrine, with
● Electrical D.C. defibrillation is preferred:
 its alpha and beta effects, is a positive inotrope, positive chrono-
O First shock: 2-5 Joules/kg if external paddles, or 0.2-0.5
 trope and can cause vasodilation (especially in skeletal muscles),
Joules/kg if internal paddles. Continue chest compressions/
and/or vasoconstriction (dose- and tissue-dependent), vaso-
cardiac massage for 2 min uninterrupted, then re-assess and
  rssd a  n d e s 
if necessary shock again. Repeat every 2 min.
vasopressin is not reduced by acidosis/hypoxia, whereas that of
O Successive shocks: 5-10 Joules/kg if external paddles or
 epinephrine is.
0.5-2 Joules/kg if internal paddles.
 It can be administered at 0.2-0.8 U/kg intravenously, although
● If no defbrillator, try lidocaine. Repeat boluses/infusion may
 the 0.8 U/kg dose seems to be preferred. A total dose of 0.8 U/kg
be necessary. (Lidocaine does not work well if hypokalaemia or
 should not be exceeded because of the worry of splanchnic reper-
hypomagnesaemia are present.)
fusion injury post-resuscitation.
● Amiodarone and magnesium sulphate (0.15-0.3 mEq/kg slow
 IV over 10min) also suggested for some ventricular arrhyth-
Others
mias which are refractory to other treatments (see further
 The use of steroids, calcium, and sodium bicarbonate are all con-
reading).
troversial, and depend upon the individual circumstances sur-
rounding the arrest. Calcium should be reserved for cases of acute
Electromechanical dissociation (EMD)
 hyperkalaemia.
EMD is encompassed in the term pulseless electrical activity
Sodium bicarbonate should be avoided unless there was a
(PEA). ECG rhythm may look normal or abnormal, but no heart
severe pre-existing metabolic acidosis with hyperkalaemia (dose
contractions or pulses result. Cats tend not to suffer ventricular
c. 0.5 mEq/kg). Glucose should be avoided unless severe hypogly-
fibrillation because their ventricular muscle mass is relatively
caemia preceded the arrest as hyperglycaemia itself is detrimental
small, however, their preferred crash rhythm is PEA. Prognosis
to neurological outcome.
364   Veterinary Anaesthesia
Open chest CPCR
Some of their findings:
Indicated
● Defbrillation within 5 min = class I in adult man.
● Immediately if:
● Chest compressions ≥l00/min = class IIb.
O Penetrating chest wounds.
● Synchronising ventilation with chest compression = class
O Rib fractures.
indeterminate.
● Interposed abdominal compression = class Ib.
O Pleural space disease.
● Normoventilation = class Ia.
O Pericardial effusion.
0 Owner wishes for ACLS, and especially for barrel chested
● Hyperventilation = class III (unless brain herniation where
dogs >15 kg.
hypocapnia can acutely reduce intracranial pressure).
● After 2-5 min if closed chest CPCR is not successful.
● High dose epinephrine = class indeterminate for adults.
● Epinephrine = class I for neonates, when combined with exter-
nal chest compressions (more like veterinary species?).
During open chest CPCR
● Amiodarone = class IIb.
● Lidocaine = class indeterminate.
● Cross-clamping or digital occlusion of the descending aorta is
● Post-resuscitation control of pyrexia = class IIa.
recommended to improve coronary and cerebral perfusion; but
● Post-resuscitation, no active rewarming if mildly hypother-
after successful resuscitation, remove the occlusion slowly and
mic = class IIb.
beware reperfusion injury if the descending aorta was occluded
● Post-resuscitation, active initiation of hypothermia = class
for >10 min.
indeterminate.
● Squeeze the heart from apex to base, and be careful not to
'twist' it, because in doing so you may twist/occlude the great
vessels and reduce the potential cardiac output.
Further reading
Small animal
Post-resuscitation problems
 Clutton E (1993) Management of perioperative cardiac arrest in
Re-arrest and arrhythmias are common. Reperfusion injury,
companion animals. Part 1. In Practice 15(6),267-277.
coagulopathies, and seizures can all occur. Neurological sequelae
 Clutton E (1994) Management of perioperative cardiac arrest in
may become apparent within hours to days. Active re-warming of
 companion animals. Part 2. In Practice and 16(1), 3-10.
 patients is discouraged, and indeed permissive hypothermia may
Cole SG, Otto CM, Hughes D (2002) Cardiopulmonary cerebral
improve outcome. Seizures must be controlled in order to avoid
resuscitation in small animals - a clinical practice overview
hyperthermia, hypoxaemia and hypoglycaemia. Tight glycaemic
(part 1). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
control is advised. Patient monitoring should include ECG, blood
12(4),261-267.
 pressure, urine output, blood gases and electrolytes.
Cole SG, Otto CM, Hughes D (2003) Cardiopulmonary cerebral
 It is important to have aftercare facilities and staff available
resuscitation in small animals - a clinical practice overview
to ensure adequate patient care; ideally in an intensive care
(part 2). Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care
setting.
13(1),13-23.
Hofmeister EH, Thompson BF, Brainard BM, Kegge A, Kube S,
Overall
Egger CM, Kimura YM, Jehn C, Green B (2008) Survey of
academic veterinarians? attitudes toward provision of cardiop-
 You need adequate staff, equipment, teamwork and regular
ulmonary cerebral resuscitation and discussion of resuscitation
practice (whether real or simulated), and excellent post-
with clientele. Journal of Veterinary Emergency and Critical
resuscitation intensive care facilities/nursing available.
Care 18(2), 131-141.
Penson PE, Ford WR, Broadley KJ (2007) Vasopressors for cardi-
New ideas
opulmonary resuscitation. Does pharmacological evidence
support clinical practice? Pharmacology and Therapeutics 115,
The 2000 International Guidelines for CPR and ECC (emergency
37-55.
cardiac care), later incorporated into the 2005 American Heart
 Plunkett SJ, McMichael M (2008) Cariopulmonary resuscitation
Association Guidelines for human cardiopulmonary resuscitation
 in small animal medicine: an update. Journal of Veterinary
Internal Medicine 22, 9-25.
overview which ranked therapeutic interventions:
 Schmittinger CA, Astner S, Astner L, Kossler J, Wenzel V (2005)
● Class I = definitely useful.
Cardiopulmonary resuscitation with vasopressin in a dog. (Case
● Class IIa = effective (often the preferred choice).
Report) Veterinary Anaesthesia and Analgesia 32, 112-114.
● Class Ib = acceptable alternative to Class IIa.
 Scroggin RD, Quandt J (2009) The use of vasopressin for treating
● Class indeterminate = no harm, but no benefit.
vasodilatory shock and cardiopulmonary arrest. Journal of
● Class II = unacceptable, not useful and potentially harmful.
Veterinary Emergency and Critical Care 19(2), 145-157.
Cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation  365
Horse
Frauenfelder C, Fessler JF, Latshaw HS, Moore AB, Bottoms D
Self-test section
(1981) External cardiovascular resuscitation of the anesthetized
1.
Now that minimal interruption of chest compressions
 pony. Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
is advised, which of the following monitoring devices
179(7),673-676.
can help detect ROSC (return of spontaneous circula-
Hubbell JAE, Muir WW, Gaynor JS (1993) Cardiovascular effects
tion) and will work despite the inevitable patient
of thoracic compression in horses subjected to euthanasia.
Equine Veterinary Journal 25(4), 282-284.
movement?
●ECG.
● Pulse oximeter.
鲁
 Oesophageal stethoscope.
鲁
 Capnograph.
●Doppler blood flow probe.
Vasopressin may be used as an alternative to epine-
 phrine for its potent vasopressor efects and is effica-
cious in an acidic environment. Is this true or false?
anine emergency
 CANINE EMERGENCY DRUG DOSES - FOR INTRAVENOUS INJECTION, or double dose and dilute to 5-10 ml for intratracheal deposition
DRUG
TRADE NAME
DOSE
REASON
5 kg
10 kg
25kg
50kg
ADRENALINE
 Adrenaline
c.0.1 mg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST - give i.v.
0.5 ml
1 ml 
2.5 ml
5 ml
1:1000 = 1mg/ml
(0.01-0.2 mg/kg)
asystole/fibrillation
can dilute
0.01 mg/kg
ANAPHYLAXIS - give i.m.
0.05 ml
0.1 ml 
0.25 ml
0.5 ml
VASOPRESSIN
 Pitressin
(0.2-)0.8 U/kg
VASOPRESSOR
0.2 ml
0.4ml
1 ml 
 2 ml
 20 units/ml 
(duing CPCR)
ATROPINE
Atropine
0.04 mg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST, asystole
0.33 ml
0.66 ml
1.66 ml 
3.33 ml
0.6 mg/ml
Vagally-induced arrhythmias
GLYCOPYRROLATE
Robinul
(5-)10μg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST, asystole
0.25 ml
0.5 ml
1.25 ml
2.5 ml
200 μg/ml
Vagally-induced arrhythmias
UDOCAINE
Xylocaine 2%
15 mg/kg slowly
Ventricular arrhythmias/
0.25-1.25 ml
0.5-2.5 ml
1.25-6.25 ml
2.5-12.5 ml
 20 mg/ml
Lidocaine 2%
then infusion at
Ventricular fibrillation
 25-100 μg/kg/min
PROPRANOLOL
Inderal
0.02-0.08 mg/kg
ARRHYTHMIAS
0.1-0.4 ml
0.2-0.8 ml
0.5-2 ml
1-4 ml 
1 mg/ml 
can dilute in 
slowly
 Supraventicular tachycardia
saline
ESMOLOL
Brevibloc
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
Supraventicular tachycardias0.025-0.05ml
0.05-0.1 ml
0.125-0.25 ml
0.25-0.5 ml
10 mg/ml
slowly
then infuse at
50-200 μg/kg/min
VERAPAMIL
 Securon
0.05mg/kg
Supraventricular
0.1 ml
0.2 ml
0.5 ml
1 ml 
2.5 mg/ml
slowly
tachyarrhythmias
ISOPRENALINE
 Saventrine
0.04-0.1 μg/kg/min
BRADYCARDIA / AV BLOCK
to effect
to effect
to effet 
to effect
1 mg/ml
infuse to effect
FUROSEMIDE 5%
Lasix 5%
(1-) 2 (-4)mg/kg
OEDEMA / DIURESIS
0.2 ml
0.4ml
1 ml 
 2 ml
 50 mg/ml
CALCIUM chloride 10%
0.1-0.2 ml/kg
HYPERKALAEMIA
 0.5-1 ml
1-2 ml 
 2.5-5 ml
 5-10 ml 
100 mg/ml
slowly
HYPOCALCAEMIA
1.36 mEq Ca/ml
CALCIUM gluconate 10%
0.5-1.5ml/kg
HYPERKALAEMIA
2.5-7.5 ml
 5-15 ml 
12.5-37.5 ml
 25-75 ml
100 mg/ml
slowly
HYPOCALCAEMIA
0.45 mEq Ca/ml
ATIPAMEZOLE
 Antisedan
5 x medet dose
REVERSE ALPHA 2 AGONISTS
5 mg/ml 
slowly
NALOXONE
Narcan
10 (-20)μg/kg
REVERSE OPIOIDS
0.125 ml
0.25 ml
0.625 ml
1.25 ml
0.4 mg/ml
366
Canine emergency drug dose chart 367
 CANINE EMERGENCY DRUG DOSES - FOR INTRAVENOUS INJECTION, or double dose and dilute to 5-10 ml for intratracheal deposition 
(Continued)
DRUG
TRADE NAME
DOSE
REASON
5kg
10kg
25kg
50 kg
DOXAPRAM
Dopram V
(1-) 5 (-10) mg/kg
 RESPIRATORY STIMULANT
1.25 ml
 2.5 ml
6.25 ml
12.5 ml 
 20 mg/ml
FLUMAZENIL
 Flumazenil injn 
10 μg/kg
 REVERSE BENZODIAZEPINES
0.5 ml
1.5 ml 
2.5 ml
 5 ml
 0.1 mg/ml 
may need repeat
CHLORPHENAMINE
 Piriton 
c. 0.5 mg/kg
ALLERGIC REACTIONS
0.25 ml
0.5 ml
1.25 ml
2.5 ml
10 mg/ml
SLOWLY
DEXAMETHASONE
 Dexadreson
0.5-4mg/kg
Shock / allergy
2 mg/ml
 CNS trauma
METHYL-PRED
Solu-Medrone
30 mg/kg
SHOCK/ ALLERGY
125 or 500 mg
 CEREBRAL/SPINAL OEDEMA
MANNITOL 20%
Mannitol 20%
(0.25-]1(-2)g/kg
CEREBRAL OEDEMA
25 ml
50 ml
125 ml
250 ml
200 mg/ml
slowly
diuresis
DIAZEPAM
 Diazepam/alium
0.5 mg/kg
 SEIZURES
0.5 ml
1 ml
2.5 ml
 5 ml
5 mg/ml
0.2 mg/kg
 POST-OP RESTLESSNESS
0.2 ml
0.4 ml
1 ml 
2 ml
PENTOBARBITONE
 Sagatal
(3-)5-10(-20) mg/kg 
SEIZURES
0.4-0.8 ml
0.8-1.7 ml
 2-4.2 ml
4.2-8.3 ml 
60 mg/ml
then infuse at
 status epilepticus
C.1 mg/kg/min
DEXTROSE 5-50%
 Dextrose/Glucose
0.25-0.5 g/kg
HYPOGLYCAEMIA
 50-500 mg/ml
slowly
 not by peripheral vein if
>10% soln
ine emergencv
ose
hart
FELINE EMERGENCY DRUG DOSES - FOR INTRAVENOUS INJECTION, or double dose and dilute to 2-3ml for intratracheal deposition
DRUG
TRADE NAME
DOSE
REASON
1 kg
2.5 kg
3.5kg
5 kg
ADRENALINE
Adrenaline
0.1 mg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST - give i.v.
0.1 ml
0.25ml
0.35 ml
0.5 ml
1:1000 = 1mg/ml
(0.01-0.2mg/kg)
asystole/fibrillation
can dilute
0.01 mg/kg
ANAPHYLAXIS - give i.m.
0.01 ml
0.025 ml
0.035 ml
0.05 ml
VASOPRESSIN
 Pitressin 
(0.2-) 0.8 U/kg
VASOPRESSOR
0.04ml
 0.1 ml 
0.14ml
0.2 ml
 20 units/ml
during CPCR
ATROPINE
Atropine
0.04+ mg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST, asystole
0.07 ml
0.17 ml
0.23 ml
0.33 ml
0.6 mg/kg
Vagally-induced arrhythmias
GLYCOPYRROLATE
Robinul
(5-) 10μg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST, asystole
0.05 ml
0.125 ml
0.175 ml
0.25 ml
 200 μg/ml
Vagally-induced arrhythmias
UDOCAINE
Xylocaine 2%
0.25-1.0 mg/kg slowly
VENTRICULAR arrhythmias 
0.01-0.05 ml
0.03-0.13 ml
0.04-0.18 ml
0.06-0.25ml
20 mg/ml 
Lidocaine 2%
then infuse at 
Ventricular fibrillation 
10-40 μg/kg/min
PROPRANOLOL
Inderal 
0.04-0.06 mg/kg
ARRHYTHMIAS
0.04-0.06 ml
0.1-0.15 ml
0.14-0.21 ml 
0.2-0.3 ml
1 mg/ml
can dilute
slowly
Supraventricular tachycardia
ESMOLOL
Brevibloc
0.05-0.1 mg/kg
Supraventricular tachycardiasdilute
to smaller
volume
0.025-0.05 ml
10 mg/ml
slowly
then infuse at 
 50-200 μg/kg/min
FUROSEMIDE 5%
Lasix 5%
(1-) 2 (-4) mg/kg
OEDEMA / DIURESIS
0.04ml
0.1 ml
0.14ml
0.2 ml
 50 mg/ml
Calcium chloride 10%
0.1-0.2 ml/kg
HYPERKALAEMIA
0.10.2 ml
0.250.5 ml
0.35-0.7 ml
 0.5-1 ml
100 mg/ml
slowly
HYPOCALCAEMIA
Calcium gluconate 10%
0.5-1.5 ml/kg
HYPERKALAEMIA
0.5-1.5 ml
1.25-3.75 ml
1.75-5.25ml
2.5-7.5 ml
100 mg/ml
slowly
HYPOCALCAEMIA
ATIPAMEZOLE
Antisedan
2.5 x medet dose
REVERSE ALPHA 2 AGONISTS
 5 mg/ml
slowly
NALOXONE
Narcan
10 (-20)μg/kg
REVERSE OPIOIDS
0.025 ml
0.06 ml
0.09 ml
0.125 ml
0.4 mg/ml
DOXAPRAM
Dopram V
(1-) 5 (-10)mg/kg
RESPIRATORY STIMULANT
0.25 ml
0.63 ml
0.88 ml
1.25 ml
 20 mg/ml
FLUMAZENIL
 Flumazenil injn
10μg/kg
REVERSEBENZODIAZEPINES
0.1 ml
0.25 ml
0.35 ml
0.5 ml
0.1 mg/ml
may need repeating
368
Feline emergency drug dose chart  369
FEUNE EMERGENCY DRUG DOSES - FOR INTRAVENOUS INJECTION, or double dose and dilute to 2-3ml for intratracheal deposition 
(Continued)
DRUG
TRADE NAME
DOSE
REASON
1 kg
2.5kg
3.5 kg
5 kg
DEXAMETHASONE
Dexadreson
0.5-4 mg/kg
shock/allergy/CNs trauma
 2 mg/ml 
MANNITOL 20%
Mannitol 20%
(0.25-) 1 (-2) g/kg
CEREBRAL OEDEMA
 5 ml 
12.5 ml
17.5 ml
25 ml
 200 mg/ml
slowly
DIURESIS
DIAZEPAM
Valium or
0.5 mg/kg
SEIZURES
0.1 ml 
0.25 ml
0.35 ml
0.5 ml
 5 mg/ml
Diazepam
0.2 mg/kg
POST-OP RESTLESSNESS
0.04 ml
0. 1 ml 
0.14 ml
0.2 ml
DEXTROSE 5-50%
Dextrose or
0.25-0.5 g/kg
HYPOGLYCAEMIA
50-500 mg/ml
Glucose
slowly
 not in peripheral vein if
>10% soln
ine emergency
 drua
oose
chart
 EQUINE EMERGENCY DRUG DOSES - FOR INTRAVENOUS INJECTION
DRUG
TRADE NAME
DOSE
REASON
300 kg
400kg
500 kg
600kg
ADRENALINE
 Adrenaline
0.01-0.02 mg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST, give i.v.
3ml +
4ml +
 5ml +
6ml +
1:1000 = 1mg/ml
up to 0.2 mg/kg
asystole/fibrillation
ANAPHYLAXIS, give i.m.
ATROPINE
Atropine
0.01-0.1 mg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST, asystole
5ml +
6.6ml + 
8ml +
10ml +
0.6 mg/ml
Vagally-induced arrhythmias
GLYCOPYRROLATE
 Robinul
2(-10)μg/kg
CARDIAC ARREST, asystole
3ml +
4ml +
5ml +
6ml +
 200 μg/ml
Vagally-ind uced arrhythmias
ATIPAMEZOLE
 Antisedan 
50 μg/kg
REVERSE alpha 2 agonists
Up to 3ml
Up to 4ml
Up to 5ml 
Up to 6ml
 5 mg/ml
up to 250μg/kg
CLENBUTEROL
Ventipulmin 
0.8 μg/kg
BRONCHODILATION 
8ml
10.6 ml
13.3 ml
16 ml 
30 μg/ml
SLOW i.v.
pulmonary oedema, COPD
beware sweating
SALBUTAMOL
 Albuterol
(1-}2 μg/kg 
BRONCHODILATION
3-6 puffs 
4-8 puffs 
5-10 puffs 
6-12 puffs
100 μg/metered
aerosolised into
dose
trachea
NALOXONE
Narcan 
10(-20)μg/kg
REVERSE opioids
7.5 ml
10ml
12.5 ml
15 ml
0.4mg/ml
DOXAPRAM
Dopram
0.5-1 mg/kg
 RESPIRATORY STIMULANT
 7.5- 15 ml
10-20 ml
12.5-25 ml
15-30 ml 
 20 mg/ml
DEXAMETHASONE
 Dexadreson 
0. 1-0.5 mg/kg
 ALLERGIC REACTIONS/
15-75 ml
 20-100 ml 
 25-125 ml 
 30-150 ml
 2 mg/ml
ANAPHYLAXIS / SHOCK
 FUROSEMIDE
Lasix
(0.5-) 1 (-4) mg/kg
OEDEMA/ DIURESIS
6ml
8 ml 
10 ml
12 ml
 5% = 50 mg/ml
DIAZEPAM
Diazepam or
10-100 mg/horse
SEIZURES
2-20 ml 
 2-20 ml 
2-20 ml 
 2-20 ml 
 5 mg/ml 
Valium
LIDOCAINE
Xylocaine 2% or
0.5-4mg/kg
Ventricular arrhythmias / fibrillation
7.5-60 ml
10-80 ml
12.5- 100 ml
15-120 ml 
 2% = 20 mg/ml
Lidocaine 2%
370
Answers to self-test questions
Chapter 1
Chapter 7
 See page 1
1.
2.
 See page 1
2
Drug/fluid
pH
Thiopental
10.5
Chapter 2
Hartmann's solution 
6.4
 Phenylbutazone
8.8
Ketamine
3.5-5.5
C
 Poor exercise tolerance
Chapter 3
Chapter 8
1.
See page 8
1.
 See page 64
2.
 See page 14
2.
B
Chapter 4
Chapter 9
1. C
1.
2.D
2.B
Chapter 5
Chapter 10
1. C
1.
 Fractional distillation of liquefied air.
2.B
 See page 102
Chapter 6
Chapter 11
Information only chapter
 Information only chapter
371
 372 Answers to self-test questions
Chapter 12
Chapter 18
1.
B
 The pressure reading will be higher by 30 cmH,O
2.
1 cmHO = 0.74 mmHg
RNH*> RN + H*
Therefore the 'new mean arterial pressure will read
Outside
82 + (30 × 0.74)
= 82 + c. 22
Membrane 
RN
= 104 mmHg
 Inside
2.
Answer on pages 172
RNH*<→ RN + H*
3.
Sodium channel
 ECG lead 
Electrode positions 
Lead I
Right arm to left arm
Lead II
Right arm to left leg
Lead III
Left arm to left leg
Chapter 13
1.
C
2.
 See page 121
Chapter 19
 Information only chapter
Chapter 14
1.
See page 131
2.
 See table on page 125
Chapter 20
1.
See text of chapter 179
Where the QRS complex meets the baseline.
Chapter 15
1.
Two or three
Chapter 21
1. pH = logu of 1/[H+] or pH = -logua of [H+] 
PCO2
Chapter 16
2.
PO=PO-
RQ
1.
C
Where PO=FOx(P-PH2o)
2.
Bupivacaine > Tetracaine > Mepivacaine >
 And where PaOz is alveolar partial pressure of oxygen;
 Prilocaine > Procaine
 PO is partial pressure of (humidifed (saturated)) inspired
oxygen; PaCO is alveolar partial pressure of carbon
dioxide (= systemic arterial blood CO tension); RQ is
respiratory quotient (around 0.8); FO is fraction of
Chapter 17
 oxygen in inspired air; Ps is atmospheric (barometric)
 pressure; Phzo is saturated water vapour pressure at body
1. Anaesthetise the patient and monitor neuromuscular
temperature (37°℃).
activity.
 Initiate IPPV.
 Administer the neuromuscular blocker.
 Reverse the neuromuscular blockade only when some
neuromuscular activity has returned.
Ensure return of adequate spontaneous ventilation.
Cease administration of anaesthetic.
2. C
Answers to self-test questions  373
Chapter 22
Chapter 25
1.
The Cori cycle is the cyclical use and production of
Information only chapter
lactate. In the liver, lactate is used in gluconeogenesis
to produce glucose. In the muscles, glucose can be
 metabolised anaerobically to produce lactate, which is
 returned to the liver for further gluconeogensis.
2. L-lactate.
Chapter 26
1.
See page 232
2.
See pages 232-3
Chapter 23
1.
 About 2/3 of body weight is water: this is distributed
 in a 1:2 ratio between the ECF and ICF compartments,
Chapter 27
respectively. Within the extracellular compartment,
Information only chapter
water is distributed in a 1:3 ratio between the
 intravascular (plasma) and interstitial compartments,
respectively.
2.
 The dextrose is metabolised effectively to leave just
water behind; some metabolic water is also created
Chapter 28
during the glucose metabolism: each gram of glucose
 metabolised produces 0.6 ml metabolic water, so that
1.B
 the glucose present in 1l of 5% solution (50mg/ml;
2. C
hence 50 g) can yield 30 ml.
Chapter 29
Chapter 24
Information only chapter
1.（
 Causes of hyperkalaemia
Increased administration:
 Iatrogenic (fluids or other medications)
Reduced excretion:
Chapter 30
Acute renal failure (anuric/oliguric stage)
Ruptured bladder
1.A
Addison's disease
2. C
Redistribution:
Hyperkalaemic periodic paralysis
 2.  Treatment of hyperkalaemia
If life-threatening arrhythmias, give calcium chloride (or
Chapter 31
gluconate) IV. Intravenous fluids to help dilution of
potassium alongside diuresis with potassium wasting
Information only chapter
diuretics such as furosemide. If metabolic acidosis is
present, then sodium bicarbonate may help. Under
anaesthesia, hyperventilation in the short term will
 produce a respiratory alkalosis to help reduce the blood 
Chapter 32
potassium concentration. Glucose +/- insulin can also be
administered to enhance cellular uptake of potassium.
1. See page 277
374 Answers to self-test questions
Chapter 33
Chapter 39
C
1.
C
2.
2.
 Sudden transition to dorsal recumbency can result in
aorto-caval compression which can reduce venous
return and cardiac output. The ensuing hypotension
should elicit reflex tachycardia but occasionally
vasovagal syncope occurs due to stimulation of the
Chapter 34
 Bezold-Jarisch reflex.
 Relatively small labial fssure (cannot open mouth
very wide).
Lingual torus.
Chapter 40
 Nasopharyngeal diverticulum.
Prone to laryngospasm.
1. Increased IOP with:
Increased CVP.
Head down posture.
 Increased PaCO2.
Decreased PaO2.
Chapter 35
Mydriasis.
1. C
Coughing/retching/vomiting.
 Direct pressure on the globe.
2.
B
2.
C
Chapter 36
Chapter 41
1.
Lack of familiarity.
1.
 Small size: technical problerms (vascular access and
 Sudden fall in ETCO, tension.
endotracheal intubation); prone to hypothermia.
 Sudden decrease in systemic arterial blood pressure.
 Underlying disease, may be subclinical.
Tachycardia.
 Prone to gastrointestinal ileus which can have
 Desaturation (low SpO, reading with pulse oximeter/
●
short term (tympany under anaesthesia), and 
cyanotic mucous membranes).
long term (inappetance in recovery) consequences.
Tachypnoea (sometimes difficult to recognise if lungs
 Problems associated with pain assessment.
already being ventilated, but patient may buck' the
●
ventilator).
Chapter 37
Chapter 42
1. C
2.D
1.
 Kidney functions:
Regulation of water, electrolyte and acid-base balance.
 Important in the regulation of arterial blood pressure.
A site of gluconeogenesis.
 Important for red cell production (erythropoietin).
Chapter 38
 Elimination of nitrogenous waste products and drugs.
2.D
B
Reduced muscle mass (reduced shivering); reduced
thermoregulatory ability (CNS changes); reduced
BMR.
Answers to self-test questions 375
Chapter 43
Chapter 46
1.
B
1. C
2.
Liver functions:
(A
Virchow's triad; B = Cushing's
sign/triad;
Metabolism of proteins, fats and carbohydrates
 D = Barcrofts classification, later expanded by Peters and
(gluconeogenesis); stores glycogen and fat soluble
van Slyke to include a fourth category; E = Whipple's
vitamins.
triad)
 Produces albumin, fibrinogen and clotting factors I,
VII, IX and X.
 Produces bile salts (for fat metabolism).
Produces erythropoietinogen.
Chapter 47
 Filters bacteria and toxins from portal blood.
1.
 Thiopental
2.
 See text on page 344
Chapter 44
1.
Chapter 48
Haemorrhage.
 Intra-operative thyroid storm.
1.
True
 Hypoparathyroidism (hypocalcaemia) post-
2.
 Hypoxaemia is an abnormally low partial pressure of
operatively.
oxygen in arterial blood; mild <90mmHg to severe
Tracheomalacia.
<60 mmHg.
Post-operative tissue swelling may compromise
3.
Oxygen supplementation can be by: flow-by, mask,
breathing/swallowing.
hood, cage; nasal prongs, nasopharyngeal catheter,
 Chronic renal failure may become apparent.
transtracheal needle/tube or endotracheal tube.
Chapter 49
Chapter 45
Capnograph
Information only chapter
2.True
A (airway)360
adrenergic receptors
A-V block 363
activities of drugs acting on 229
abdominal compartment syndrome 270
distribution in cardiovascular system 39, 229, 252
absorbents, soda lime 85
Advanced Cardiac Life Support 360
acceleromyography 149
age, chronological vs physiological/behavioural 5
acepromazine (ACP) 31-4
ageing changes 316
analgesia 33
air emboli 63,325
 anti-arrhythmic effects 249
airway see endotracheal intubation
anticholinergic effects 32
airway obstruction, horses/ponies 346
anti-emetic effects 32
albumin 206-7
 antihistaminic effects 32
aldosterone, release with ACE inhibitors 225
cardiovascular effects 32
 alfaxalone (alphaxolone) 49, 155
causing vasodilation 245
pigs 305
haematological effects 33, 249
rabbits 310
hepatic effects 33
ruminants 283, 284
hormonal effects 33, 249
 alfentanil
hypotension 248
 intra-operative infusions 55
hypothermia 32-3, 249
properties 16, 17
 and local anaesthetic behaviour 33
algogens 10
low and high doses 31-2
alkalaemia 183
mental calming 31, 248
alkalosis, metabolic/respiratory 183
metabolic effects 33
0l eukpoie
muscle relaxation 33, 249
allopurinol, vs. reperfusion injury 241
neurolept malignant syndrome 33
alpha-stat or pH-stat technique in blood gas analysis
onset of action 31
189
overdosage 250
alpha2 adrenoceptor agonists 24-5, 37-41, 252-8
pharmacology 31, 249-50
accidental self administration 40-1
pro- or anti-convulsant properties 32
anaesthetic sparing effect 38
renal effects 33
analgesia 38-9, 253
respiratory effects 32, 249
antagonism ('reversal') 257
 spasmolytic effects 249
arterial blood pressure 39
uses 34
bradycardia 39
te s0p/s1e3
cardiovascular effects 38-9, 252-3
horses/ponies 248-9, 270-2
ceiling effect 255
pigs 304
detomidine 252-257, 274-276, 281, 304
ruminants 282
dexmedetomidine 37, 40
acetylcholine (ACh) 142-3
epidural analgesia, plus opioids 128
acetylcholinesterase,and inhibition 152
GI tract effects 40, 254
acetylsalicylic acid/aspirin 24
haematological effects 40, 254-5
acidaemia 183
hormonal effects 40, 253
acidosis, metabolic/respiratory 183
in horses/ponies 252-8, 264
necessity for blood analysis 205
epidural administration 257
activated protein C 240, 243
equipotent sedative doses 255
acupuncture 29
with opioids 254
acute phase proteins 236
initial arterial hypertension 38-9
acute phase response 233
medetomidine 37, 40, 304, 310
CCC aseasip suosippV
metabolism 38, 252
adenosine, properties 228
muscle relaxation 39, 253
adrenaline
ocular effects 40, 254
canine emergency 366
peripheral vasoconstriction 38-9
equine emergency 370
pharmacology 37
feline emergency 368
in pigs 308
376
Index 377
in rabbits 310
safety checks 107-8
receptor selectivity 37
safety features 99
respiratory effect 39,253
anaesthetist, tiredness 45
romifdine 252-7, 274-6, 304
analgesia 13-25
in ruminants 281
adjuncts 27
sedative effects 37
analgesic infusions, quick reference guide 55-6
in small animals 40-41
 multimodal (balanced) vs sequential 14
thermoregulation/thermoregulatory effects 40, 254
types 14
uses and doses 40-1, 255-8, 281, 304, 310
angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI) 225
antagonism 41
anion gap 190
epidural administration 41
antibiotics, and neuromuscular blockade 150
results of administration 38
anticholinergics 43-4, 258, 363
uterine effects and pregnancy 40, 254
as antisialogogues 280
xylazine 37,40, 252-257,274-6, 281, 300, 304, 310
bradycardia, paradoxical 228-9
alpha2 adrenoceptor antagonists, alpha2:alphal selectivity: 257
cardiovascular effects 228-9
alphadolone see alfaxalone (alphaxalone)
anticholinesterases 152, 154
alveolar gas equation 186
anticoagulants,for blood donation 209
alveolar ventilation
anticonvulsants 6, 26
apparatus dead space 67
 and neuromuscular blockade 150
breathing rate 67
antidepressants 26
CO tension 167
antidysrhythmics
dead space volume 67
cardiovascular support 226-8
minute ventilation 67
 and neuromuscular blockade 150
tidal volume 67
anti-inflammatory drugs see corticosteroids; NSAIDs
amantadine 26
antioxidants, natural 241
American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA), physical status classifcation
anxiolytic/sedative agents 30
defined 248
amethocaine (tetracaine) 111, 112, 116 
aortic/subaortic stenoses 343
 amino-amides, properties 111
aorto-caval compression syndrome 319
amino-esters, properties 111
apnoea
aminosteroids 145
alarm 166
amiodarone, properties 227
cardiopulmonary arrest 360
amitriptyline 26
post-induction 47, 50, 52, 54
amlodipine, properties 228
arachidonic acid 18
amperometry 195
arrhythmias 158-9
arrest 363
anaesthesia
asystole 363
monitoring 172-3
bradyarrhythmias 175, 228
risk,ASA physical status classification4
detomidine and IV trimethoprim potentiated sulphonamides 257
troubleshooting 175-8
gastric dilation/volvulus (GDV) 244
anaesthetic breathing systems 76-92
‘malignant 246
choice 78
tachyarrhythmias 175, 227-8
continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) 82
arterial blood gas analysis 167
"flow-controlled’ vs 'valve-controlled’ 76
arterial blood pressure
fresh gas flow (FGF) 77
mean arterial (MAP) 158, 161-4
gas scavenging 88
measurement 161-5
minute respiratory volume 78
oscillometric devices 162
ss
arterial catheterisation 57, 1645
Bain (Mapleson D) system 82
arterial emboli 63
Magill and Lack 78-80
aryl-cyclohexylamines 51-3
T-pieces (Ayre's; Jackson Rees modification; other modifications)
t (keawoualdsoneday) sae
80-83
asystole 363
rebreathing systems 76-7, 84-8
atipamezole 257
 anaesthetic agent concentration 84
canine emergency 366
circle systems 85-6
equine emergency 370
F circuit 87
feline emergency 368
 pop-off or APL (adjustable pressure limiting) valves 845
horses/ponies 257
soda lime 85 
pigs 308
time constants 84-5
ruminants 281
Waters' To and Fro system 85
 atopic/allergic disease, and anaesthesia 6
rebreathing vs non-rebreathing systems 87-8
atracurium 146-7
safety checks 107-8
 elimination pathways 147
terminology77
atrial fbrillation 244, 255
types, UK and US 77
atrial septal defects 343
see also ventilation
atropine 43-4, 228
anaesthetic machines 98-106
arrhythmias 363
common gas outlet (CGO) 107
canine emergency 366
flow of gases 98
doses 44
flowmeters 99-100
equine emergency 370
high/intermediate/low pressure parts 98
feline emergency 368
path of oxygen 98
properties 228
378 Index
atropine (continued)
bood gas analysis 167, 182-91
results of administration 43-4
anion gap 190
 reversal of non-depolarising neuromuscular block 154
base excess 188
numinants 282
dogs, cats and horses 186, 190-1
auscultation 160
S6lnwadue zua
autonomic nervous system activity and anaesthetic monitoring
example 190
157
interpretation 187-8
AV valvular insufficiencies 341
bood loss 201, 213-14
Ayre's T piece 78-8
 anaesthetised animals 214
azaperone
healthy animals 213-14
horses/ponies 250
pigs 34, 303-4
bood pressure 158, 161-2
 see also butyrophenones 
bood/component transfusions
indications 209-12
B (breathing)360
and packed cell volume (PCV) 201, 209
Bain system, modifed 82
'storage lesions’ 211
safety checks 108
transfusion reactions 211
Bainbridge reflex 175
types 211-12
Bair hugger warm air blanket 180
body compartments 46
balanced anaesthesia 1
body heat, minimizing loss of 1801
barbiturates 46-8
Bohr effect 184
ruminants 283
Bourdon pressure gauge 97
baroreflexes
brachial plexus block 128-30
to hypertension 175
complications 131
tohypotension/vasodilation 175
brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome (BAOS) 5, 3445
base excess blood gas analysis 188
bradycardias 228
basic cardiac life support 360
causes 175, 177
Beck's triad, pericardial effusions 342
paradoxical 228
benzocaine 111
bradypnoea, causes 176
benzodiazepines 35-7, 250
a5 an adjunct to ketamine 36, 274
cerebral circulation 337-8
anaesthetic induction, horses/ponies 274-5
intracranial pressure, raised 337-9
 antagonists (e.g. flumazenil) 36, 251
Monroe——Kellie doctrine 337-8
anticonvulsant 36
 Branham reflex 176
anxiolytic/sedative agent 35-6
breathing
appetite stimulation 36
terminology 347
a5 co-induction agent 36
see aiso respiratory (emergencies, problems)
in combination with opioids 36
breathing rate
hepatic problems 36-7
monitoring 166-7
in horses/ponies 250-2
paterns in respiratory insufciency 348-9
mechanisms of action 35, 251
breathing systems seeanaesthetic breathing systems
muscle relaxation 142
breed susceptibilities 5
opioid combinations 6
bretylium 227
pharmacology 35, 251
bronchoscopy 345
results of administration 35
buffers 184
in ruminants 282
bupivacaine
 treatment of tetanus 36
cardiotoxicity 115
uses and doses 35-6, 251
effect of adding sodium bicarbonate solution 112
benzofurone derivative EO47/1 228
epidural administration, small animal 129
benzylisoquinoliniums 145
horses/ponies 56, 136
beta blockers 227
intercostal nerve block 132
esmolol 227, 366, 368
interpleural block 132-3
propranolol 227, 366, 368
physicochemical properties 112
beta cyclodextrins 155
sensorimotor dissociation/discrimination 113
beta2 adrenoceptor agonists 187
toxic dose 113
betamethasone, relative effects 18
see aiso morphine + bupivacaine
Bezold-Jarisch (B-J) reflex 175
buprenorphine 17, 43
bicarbonate see sodium bicarbonate
dose, duration and onset 129
Bier's block 115, 124
pigs 308
bisphosphonates 27
rabbits 310
bladder, ruptured, foals (uroperitoneum) 328
Buscopan 258
"blocked’ cats 328
Buscopan compositum 23
blood
butorphanol 17-18, 43
 see aiso cardiovascular system (CVS)
with acepromazine 17-18
blood administration 207
doses, small animals 43
uoeuop pooq
horses/ponies 271
anticoagulants for 209
lamoids 300
leukocyte-poor red cells 211
pigs 308
storage lesions' 211
ruminants 282
yolume of donor blood 209-10
butyrophenones 34, 250
yolume requirement 207-8
 see aiso azaperone; fluanisone
Index 379
C(circulation) 360
carprofen (Rimadyl) 23
C1-inhibitor 240
 acute hepatic dysfunction in Labradors 22
Caesarean sections 319-20
 catheters see intravascular catheters 
calcium 221-2
cats
 blood concentrations for common species 216
“blocked’cats 328
disturbances 221-2
chronic renal failure 335
calcium channel blockers 227-8
6-89g snap houasa
amlodipine 228
hyperthyroidism 3345
diltiazem 228
laryngeal paralysis 335
8zz Adonou Xdonouorp Xdonouoyo aaeau
median section through head 352
nifedipine 228
 see aiso small animal(s)
positive lusitropy 228
cattle see ruminants
verapamil 228
calcium chloride 10% 218, 223
(SND) uaisis snoriau qeuan
canine emergency 366
general anaesthesia 2
feline emergency 368
monitoring 157-8
calcium gluconate 10% 218,223
central sensitisation 10, 13
canine emergency 363,366
wind up 11
feline emergency 363, 368
central venous pressure (CVP)
see aiso small animal(s)
decreasing 323
capillary reill time 166
general anaesthesia 2
capnography/capnometry 167-71, 362
increasing 63,322-3
carbamazepine (Tegretol) 26
measuring 165, 201
carbamyl esters 152
cerebral circulation 337-8
carbon dioxide
CBF coupled with cerebral metabolic rate 337
capnography 167-71,362
cerebral perfusion pressure (CPP) 337
end tidal CO, (ETCO,) tension 167
chemical buffers 184
gas cylinders 93-94
chemoreceptor trigger zone (CTZ) 15
PCO:and PaCO, 188
chemoreceptors, peripheral 154-5
carbon monoxide (CO) 74, 167, 172, 233, 236
chest compliance 148
carbonic anhydrase 190
chest compressions 360-1
carboxylated imidazoles 53-4
chest tubes 3547
carboxylic acids 19
tube removal 357
cardiac arrhythmias see arrhythmias
chest wall, flail segments 357-8
Cardiac Life Support, Basic/Advanced 360
chloral hydrate,ruminants 282
cardiac massage 360
chloride 218-20
cardiac output 158-60
bood concentrations for common species 217
cardiac problems 341-3
disturbances 220
 anaesthetic aims 341
chloride shift (Hamburger shift) 184
atrial fbrillation in horses 343
chloroform, chemical formula 75
cardiomyopathies 341
2-chloroprocaine 111,115
pacemaker implantation 343
chlorphenamine, canine emergency 367
pulmonic and aortic/subaortic stenoses 343
chlorpromazine, local anaesthetic behaviour 33
see also pericardial effusions
cholinergic receptors (muscarinic and nicotinic)142
cardiac pump vs thoracic pump in CPCR 361
cincophen/prednisolone (PLT) 24
cardiopulmonary arrest (CPA) 359-64
clenbuterol 187, 240, 254
cardiopulmonary cerebral resuscitation (CPCR) 359-64
 a anba
 2000 International Guidelines 364
clonidine, receptor selectivity, alpha2 adrenoceptor agonists 37
te iroddns ayl seipies paueape
coagulation and DIC 241-2
basic cardiac life support 361-2
cocaine 111
cardiac pump vs thoracic pump 361
colic, in horses/ponies 272
open chest CPCR 364
colloids
post-resuscitation problems 364
 characteristics, iso-osmotic/hyperosmotic 206
routes of drug administration 362-3
colloid-associated side-effects 207
cardiovascular support 225-30
fluid therapy 214
adrenergic receptors
osmotic pressure 198, 205
activitie of drugs acting on 229
compartments (fluid) 198-200
distribution in cardiovascular system 229
compensatory anti-infammatory response syndrome (CARS) 234
complement activation 240
classical antidysrhythmics (or anti-arrhythmics)
Conn's syndrome 336
226-8
conotoxins 27
cardiac action potential 226
continuous peripheral nerve blockade(CPNB) 123
Sicilian Gambit classifcation 226
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) 88
Vaughan Wiliams classfcation 226
corneal reflex 157
positive inotropes 229-30
corticosteroids 18-19
vasopressors 230
effects/side effects 18, 19
cardiovascular system (CVS)
 and neuromuscular blockade 151
blood work 166
raised intracranial pressure 340
monitoring 158-66
shock 239, 241
peripheral perfusion assessment 166
site of action 19
 pre-existing disease 6
cromakalim 227-8
380 Index
cryoprecipitate 212
pigs 304
crystalloid solutions 203, 214
ruminants 282
deayi ny os 3s
 small animals 347
cuffed endotracheal tubes, problems in cats 91
dibucaine (cinchocaine) 147
curare' 144
digitalis glycosides 225-6
Cushing's disease 334
diltiazem 228
Cushing's triad 175
dimethyl sulphoxide (DMSO), vs. reperfusion injury 241
dipyrone 23
causes 167, 177-8
disseminated intravascular coagulopathy (DIC) 59, 241-2
mucous membrane colour 177-8
diuretics, and neuromuscular blockade 150
cyclo-oxygenase (COX) inhibition 20
 dobutamine, activities at adrenergic receptors 229, 230
COX-1 20-21
sop
COX-2 19-21
blood groups 210
cyclodextrins 155
blood volume 210
cyclopropane, chemical formula 75
breed susceptibilities 5
cytochrome P450, mutations/polymorphisms 27
99 ssnap kouaiaua
cytokines 233, 236
greyhounds 142
thiopental anaesthesia 47
Danilon Equidos 23
 see aiso small animal(s)
dantrolene 150
donkeys 277
dead space, apparatus 81
 dopamine, activities at adrenergic receptors 229
dead space'air 167
dopexamine 230
deferoxamine, vs. reperfusion injury 241
Doppler flow probes 161
dehydration, signs of 201
dorsal horn cells, somato-visceral convergence of information 12
depolarising neuromuscular blockers 147-9
We1dexop
incomplete blockade 148
action 360
 reversal, adequacy of reversal 153
canine emergency 367
descending pathways 11, 12
equine emergency 370
desensitisation 11
feline emergency 368
desflurane
ruminants 281-2
interaction with CO, absorbents 74
 minimal metabolism, potential toxicity 73
intra-tracheal 362
reflex tachycardia 70
intraosseous 362
vaporiser 105
sSnrp
 see also inhalational agents
 a 
desmopressin
choice of anaesthetic drugs/technique/s 6-8
yon Willbrand's disease 212
equine emergency 370
see also vasopressin
6-89c Aouaraa aus
detomidine 245
pH values 62
horses/ponies 139, 253-8
 Durran's sign 127
sedation/premedication 255, 274
standing sedation 276
echocardiography 160
pigs 304
edrophonium 152,154
receptor selectivity 37
horses/ponies 160
ruminants 281
electrical defibrillation
 see also morphine + detomidine
contra-indicated in asystole 363
dexamethasone
indications 363
29c Aouabiawa auuen
 electrical stimuli, ToF and double burst 149-50
equine emergency 370
electrocardiography 160
feline emergency 369
electroencephalography (EEG) 157-9
 relative effects 18
electrolytes 216-24
dexmedetomidine 37
abnormality-induced arrhythmias 244
uses and doses 41
concentrations for common species 216
dextran based colloids 205-7
and neuromuscular blockade 151
dextrose 203-4
electromechanical dissociation (EMD) 363
see aiso glucose
electromyography (EMG) 149
9 Kouaiawa au
eltenac (Telzenac) 23
emboli 325
diabetes insipidus 336
air 63, 325
diabetes mellitus 333
bone cement 325
 gucose disturbances, causes, signs and treatment 334
fat/marrow 325-6
hypo-vshyper-glycaemia334
thrombi, Esmarch bandage 325
diaphragmatic movements, and neuromuscular blockers 148
venous air emboli 325
diaphragmatic ruptures 346
 endocrine disease, and anaesthesia 6
diazepam
 endocrine functions of kidneys 327
 see also benzodiazepines
endogenous ligands, opioids 15
aa a
endotoxaemia 236-7
equine emergency 370
endotoxins, absorption 331
endotracheal intubation 90-2
horses/ponies 250-1
airway, loose teeth or tartar 4
muscle relaxation 142
alternatives to traditional ET tubes 91
Index 381
cuffed tubes 91
mental nerve block 136
 problems in cats 91
palpebral nerve block 138
safe cuff inflation 91
laryngoscope 90
retrobulbar nerve block 138
pigs 302-3
supraorbital/frontal nerve block 136
positional change 91
head-shaker horses 26
rabbit anaesthesia 310
heart murmurs 259
tracheal extubation 90-2
aortic regurgitation 259
tracheal secretions 92
mitral regurgitation 259
tube length 90
physiological/ functional flow murmurs 259
endotracheal oxygen delivery 352
tricuspid regurgitation 259
t0z uawainbai Asiaua Aep Xsiaua
yentricular septal defects 259
enolic acids 19
young racehorses in training 259
enteral/parenteral nutrition, shock 239
heparinised saline 60
Entonox cylinders 94
induction agents 262-3
lamination 94
 IV anaesthesia in the feld 274-5
Poynting effect 94
local anaesthetic techniques 135-40
 enzymic amperometry, lactate measurement 195
commonly available local anaesthetics compared 136 
enzymic spectrophotometry, lactate measurement 195
lidocaine 56
ephedrine 230
limb nerve blocks 135
epidural analgesia techniques, small animals 1247
maintenance of anaesthesia 263
complications 128-9
 inhalational anaesthesia 263
contra-indications 128
total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) 263-4
dilution of drugs 128
monitoring 264-8
Durran's sign 127
cardiovascular and respiratory systems 2645
factors affecting cranial spread 129
CNS/reflexes 264
horses/ponies 139
colic 272
opioids plus local anaesthetic 128
 pre-anaesthetic assessment 261
patient positioning 126
 pregnant mares 269
 proposed sites of drug action following 128
 premedication see sedation
ruminants 291
preparation 261-2
systemic absorption of drugs 128
catheter placement 261
vs intrathecal 125
mouthwash 262
epidural space, negative pressure 124
 pre-anaesthetic medication 262
epinephrine (adrenaline)230
pre-surgery check 261
 activities at adrenergic receptors 229-30
shoe removal/surgery clip 262
during CPCR 363-4
starvation 261
inclusion with local anaesthetics 113, 129
theatre headcollar/til bandage 261-2
equine anaesthesia 260-72
8-s9z potad Aianoat
atrial fbrillation 343
catheter or three-way tap damage or leakage 266
blood gas analysis 186, 190-1
CNS ischaemia 267
blood volume 210
environment 265
clipper-shy or box-shy horses 276
horse will not get up 267
colic 269-72
jugular venous thrombosis 267
 anaesthetic protocols 272
nasal mucosal hyperaemia/congestion/oedema 266
analgesics 271
positioning the horse 266
clinical examination and preparation 270
post-anaesthetic colic 267
endotoxaemia 269
 post-anaesthetic myopathy/neuropathy syndrome 267-8
fluid therapy 271
problems 266-8
inhalational anaesthesia 272
respiratory obstruction 267
monitoring 272
trauma 266-7
problems 269-71
recurrent airway obstruction 346
recovery 272
risk factors 260-5
third space fluid loss 269
age/breed/sex/size/temperament 260-1
donkeys, mules, hinnies 277-8
health status 261
emergency drugs 271, 370
surgery time 261
epidural (extradural) analgesia/anaesthesia 139
ruptured bladder foals (uroperitoneum) 328
 avoiding hind limb motor block 139
sedation and premedication 247-58, 262, 274
drug doses, volume, onset, duration 139
ideal drug 247
eyeball position 157
‘magic mixture’ 276
foals 268-9
standing sedation 275-6
hypotension 269
wild/feral Equidae 276
induction 268-9
see aiso acepromazine and alpha 2 agonists and analgesia
 pre-anaesthetic evaluation/preparation 268
Esmarch bandage 124
ruptured bladder (uroperitoneum) 328
esmolol
head blocks 135-9
canine emergency 366
auriculopalpebral nerve block 138
feline emergency 368
infraorbital nerve block 135
properties 227
ester linked local anaesthetics (benzoic acid derivatives)
mandibular nerve block 137-8
111
maxillary nerve block 135
etamiphylline gel 321
382 Index
ether
gas cylinders 93-7
 anaesthesia stages in dog 2
Bodok seals 95
properties 65
colour coding, UK/US 94
etomidate 53-4
down-regulation of pressure 96-7
 dose, small animals 54
Pin Index Safety System 95-6
pigs 304-5
Poynting (or overpressure) effect 94
properties 53-4
pressure gauges 97
etorphine 17
6人aes
Eutectic Mixture of Local Anaesthetics (EMLA) cream 116
safety checks 107-8
euthanasia 29, 48
size and valve fitments (UK) 94
exercise tolerance 5
valve blocks 95
extracellular fluid (ECF) 198-200
gases
loss 201
critical pressure defined 93
 extradural injection see epidural analgesia techniques
critical temperature defined 93
eyeball position 157
flow, Poiseuilles equation 99
flowmeters 100
fat compartment, pharmacokinetics 46
piped gas supplies 97
fentanyl
 pressure gauges 97
 intra-operative infusions 55
pressure units 94
patches 17, 55 
gastric dilation/volvulus (GDV) 244-6
properties 16, 17
gastro-protectants 21-2
fentanyl/fluanisone, rabbits 310
gate control theory 10
freworks phobias 36
gelatin based colloids 205-7
frocoxib (Previcox)24
general anaesthesia 1-3
flail segments, chest wall 357-8
balanced anaesthesia 1
flecainide 227
defined 1
flowmeters
depth 1-2
 anaesthetic machines 99-100
too light’ 157
safety checks 107-8
monitoring 156-74
fluanisone 34
CNS 156-8
fluid challenges 165
CVS 158-66
fluid compartments 198-200
neuromuscular system 173 
fluid flow, Poiseuille's equation 99
renal system 173
fluid losses 199-201
respiratory system 166-8
see also hypovolaemia
temperature 173
fluid therapy 198-215
see aiso blood gas analysis
colic in horses/ponies 271
stages of 3
hydroxyethyl starch 271
summary of effects 2
colloid solutions 205-9
triad of general anaesthesia 1
crystalloid solutions 202-3
troubleshooting 175-8
hypertonic saline 203-4
yasovagal syncope during 157
ECF replacement fluids 203
geriatrics 315-17
 electrolyte imbalances 216-24
glucocorticoids see corticosteroids
goals/priorities 212-13
glucogenesis 194, 203
maintenance fluids 204
parenteral fluids 202-3
blood 330, 3334
plan 212-5
diabetes mellitus 333-4
rabbits 311
insulinoma 333
 supplementary 205
glucose solutions 202-3
surgical maintenance 213-15
emergency 367, 369
treatment for shock 238-9
see also dextrose
variables to monitor 239
glutamate 25
yolume and rate 238-9
glutamine, oral 239
flumazenil 36, 251
glyceryl guaiacolate ether (guaiphenesin, GGE)
canine emergency 367
central muscle relaxation 142
feline emergency 368
feld anaesthesia 274-5
pigs 308
horses/ponies 264
uses and doses 36
ruminants 283
flunixin, horses/ponies 271
glycine, co-agonist for NMDA receptor 11
flunixin meglumine (Finadyne) 23
glycogenolysis 192
fluoride ions/radicals 73
glycolysis, pyruvate 192
fracture-site stabilization, analgesia 326
glycoprotein Ib (GpIb)242
furosemide
glycopyrrolate
canine emergency 366
canine emergency 366
Oe ouataa auna
doses and uses (small animals) 43-4
feline emergency 368
equine emergency 370
raised intracranial pressure 339-40
feline emergency 368
properties 228-9
gabapentin 26
reversal of non-depolarising neuromuscular block 154
 gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) analogues
ruminants 282
26
guaiphenesin see glycery guaiacolate ether (guaiphenesin, GGE)
Index 383
haemoglobin
respiratory obstruction and dysphagia 335
Hb-based solutions 207
tumour resection/removal, risks 335
oxygen dissociation curve 185, 208
Hypnorm 17
 pulse oximetry 161, 171-2
hypoadrenocorticism 333
a5 scavenger of nitric oxide 208
hypoalbuminaemia 205-6
haemoglobinuria, oxyglobin 208
hypoalgesia 13-14
haemorrhage 201
hypocalcaemia, after thyroid tumour resection in cats 335
haemorrhagic hypovolaemic shock 208, 213-15
hypocapnia (or hypocarbia), causes 176
haemostasis, natural modulators 243
hypocoagulation 209
Haldane effect 184
hypoglycaemia 7, 334
halo-ethers, chemical formulae 74-5
endocrine causes 333-4
halo-hydrocarbons, chemical formulae 75
hypoperfusion/hypoxia, susceptible tissues 5
halothane
hypotension
colic in horses/ponies 272
acepromazine 32, 248
corrosion within vaporiser 105
baroreflexes 175
and neuromuscular blockade 150
foals 269
see also inhalational agents
phenylephrine 32, 230, 248-9
halothane hepatitis 73
ruminants 280
Hartmann's solution 165, 203, 214
 supine hypotensive syndrome 319
with lidocaine 56
hypothermia 173, 179-81
with morphine-lidocaine-ketamine infusion (MLK) 56
acepromazine 32-3,249
head nerve blocks, small animals 118-22
adverse effects 179-80
head-shaker horses, increased trigeminal nerve sensitivity 26
hypothyroidism, canine 334
heart murmurs, horses/ponies 259
hypoventilation
heart rate, and rhythm monitoring 160-1
effect of general anaesthesia 2
heat loss 180-1
horses/ponies 265
heat and moisture exchanger 181
ruminants 280
heat shock proteins (stress proteins') 241
hypovolaemia 201
Heimlich valves 356
causing lactic acidosis 189
 heparin-incubated fresh plasma 240
 IV fluid therapy for hypovolaemic shock 208, 213-15
heparinised saline
hypovolaemic shock 208, 213-15
horses/ponies 60
 ACP-induced peripheral vasodilation worsens248
 small animals 60
clinical signs 237
hepatic function 330-2
hypoxaemia 176-7
Ie uonoun paiedu ji sanbruyasnp
 anticholinergic therapies not effective 176
balanced anaesthetic technique 331
causes 176, 187, 233
epidural/spinal opioids 331
 oxygen supplementation 349-50
muscle relaxation 331
hypoxanthine 240-1
portosystemic shunts 331
hypoxia
recovery problems 331
causes 233
strategy 331
mucous membrane colour 167, 177-9
neuromuscular blockade 151
ys hypoxaemia 176-7
normal liver functions 330
hypoxia-inducible factors (HIF) 233, 241
pre-existing disease 6-7, 331
hepatitis, halothane 73
Immobilon 17
hepatojugular reflux (Kussmaul's sign) 342
immunoglobulin, human 212
hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP)73
inflammatory response
Hofmann elimination 147
major participants 236
Huffner's constant 172
nuclear transcription factor kappa B 233
human immunoglobulin 212
in shock 233-4
hydroxyethyl starch based colloids 205-7
infraorbital nerve block
hyoscine 258
horses/ponies 135
hyperadrenocorticism 334
ruminants 286
hyperaldosteronism 336
small animals 118
hyperalgesia 10, 11
infratrochlear nerve block, horses/ponies 137
NSAIDS 21
inhalational agents 64-75
hypercalcaemia, paraneoplastic syndromes
69g usue
335-6
dose dependent cardio-respiratory depression 69-70
hypercapnia (or hypercarbia), causes 176
effects 69-71
hyperglycaemia 237,334
factors affecting alveolar uptake/induction of anaesthesia
neurological outcome 363
66-7
hyperlactataemia 194-5
factors affecting elimination/recovery from anaesthesia 68-9
hypertension
 context-sensitive decrement and half time 68
alpha2 adrenoceptor agonists 38-9
eduction 68
baroreflexes 175
interaction with COz absorbents 73-4
portal 331
 Lowe's equation 69
hyperthermia 173
wash-in/wash-out (uptake/elimination) 66, 70
malignant hyperthermia 303, 305-6
in horses/ponies
hyperthyroidism, feline 3345
colic 272
chronic renal failure masked by 335
maintenance 263
Se suaqod aneado-isod pue eins
monitoring 66-7,172
384 Index
inhalational agents (continued)
intravenous fluids
 and neuromuscular blockade 150
surgical maintenance 213-15
occupational exposure standards (OESs) 88
see atso fluid therapy
in pigs, sedation and anaesthesia 304
intravenous regional anaesthesia (IVRA), Bier's block 115, 124
properties 65
intubation see endotracheal intubation 
BP 101
IPPV see intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)
 chemical formulae 74-5
C-ot Ainut uoneuasxoaiuosnjadan-ewaust
recoveries 69
isoflurane see inhalational agents
reflex tachycardia 70
isoprenaline 230
in ruminants 284
activities at adrenergic receptors 229
 injectable agents 45-54
advantages/disadvantages 45-6
J point, ECG and hypothermia 179
 pharmacokinetic body compartments 46
J waves (Osborn waves) 179
properties 45
Jackson Rees modifcation of Ayre's T piece 81
response to administration 46
types
kappa opioid receptors 14
barbiturates 46-8
ketamine 25-6, 51-3
carboxylated imidazoles 53-4
action on NMDA receptors 11, 25
neurosteroids 48-9
analgesic and antihyperalgesic actions 26, 53
 phencyclidine derivatives/aryl-cyclohexylamines 51-3
horses/ponies 262-4, 271
substituted phenols 49-51
+ benzodiazepine, induction 274-5
ino-constrictors 230
intra-operative infusions 55
ephedrine 230
pigs 305
epinephrine (adrenaline) 230
post-operative 55
inotropes, in shock 239
rabbits 310
insulin resistance, shock 237
ruminants 282-3
insulinoma 333
uses and doses 53
hypoglycaemia 333
ketoprofen 23
post-operative pancreatitis, risk 333
pigs 307
intercostal nerve block 132
 post-operative use only 23
interleukins 236
Komesaroff machine 105-6
intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV) 187-8, 360
Kussmaul's breathing 349
facilitated by muscle relaxation 141
 Kussmaul's sign 342
interpleural “block 132-3
interstitial fluid 198
Lack non-rebreathing system 78-80
intestinal ischaemia, post surgery for porto-systemic shunts 331
lacrimal nerve blocks,horses/ponies 137
intra-articular analgesia 123
lacrimation, assessment 157
intracranial pressure, raised
lactate 192-7
anaesthetic management 339-40
balance 194
cerebrospinal fluid drainage 340
"bicarbonate sparing' effect 203
dinical signs 338
measurement 195
Ote Auojounp pue Auotoruen
metabolism 192-4
Cushing's triad 338-9
in neoplastic conditions 196
effects of anaesthetic agents 340
normal concentrations 196
furosemide 339-40
as possible prognostic indicator 196
gucocorticoids 340
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), isoenzymes 192
hypertonic saline 340
lactic acidosis 1945
mannitol 339
hypovolaemia 189
oncodiuretic therapy 340
laparotomies,ruminants 2947
Intra-epicaine see mepivacaine
laryngeal mask airways (LMAs) 90
intra-ocular pressure (IOP) 322-3
laryngeal paralysis
intra-pleural or pleural block' 132-3
cats 335
intrathecal/subarachnoid/'true spinal anaesthesia/analgesia
dogs 345
124
horses/ponies, post-operative 267
y5 epidural techniques 125
laryngoscopy 90
intravascular catheters 57-63
leukocyte-poor red cells 211
arteries 57
lidocaine 115-16
aseptic technique 59-60
analgesic effects with IV infusions 116
catheter materials 60
antidysrhythmic 226-7
complications 57-8
anti-inflammatory effects, in shock 116, 241
‘fbrin sleeve’ 60
effects of adding sodium bicarbonate solution 112
materials 60
epidural administration 12430,139,291-3, 306-7
over-the-needle 61
equine emergency 271, 370
 Seldinger technique 61
horses/ponies 56, 136,139
size 60
physicochemical properties 112
sources of infection 59
pigs 306-7
 stylette used as introducer 61
preparations for topical use 116-17
thrombophlebitis 59
 prokinetic effects, with pre-existing GI compromise 116
use of an extension set 60
ruminants 287-297
veins 57
 sensorimotor dissociation/discrimination 113
lndex 385
small animals 56, 115, 118-134, 245
mannitol 241
canine emergency 366
canine emergency 367
feline emergency 368
feline emergency 369
systemic toxicity 114
raised intracranial pressure 339
toxic doses 113,227
 Mapleson anaesthetic breathing systems 82
ligands, endogenous opioid 15
maxillary nerve block
limbs, small animals, local anaesthetic techniques 123-31
horses/ponies, and alternative technique 136 
lipocortin 1 18
 small animals 118-19
lithium, and neuromuscular blockade 151
mechanomyography 149
liver see hepatic function
mechanoreceptor fibres, gate control theory 11
llamas, alpacas, guanacos and vicunas (lamoids) 299-301
meclofenamic acid (Arquel V) 23
local anaesthetic agents 246, 109-17
medetomidine 245, 37
 adverse reactions and toxicity 114-15
horses/ponies, standing sedation 276
cumulative toxicity effects 114
pigs 304
local tissue injury/neurotoxicity 114
rabbits 310
systemic toxicity 11415
receptor selectivity, alpha2 adrenoceptor agonists 37
toxic doses 113-14
uses and doses 41
true allergic reactions 114
 see aiso morphine + medetomidine
baricity of solutions 124
melanocortin-1 receptor, MC1R mutations 27
chemical structure 110-11
meloxicam
dilution of drugs 128
horses/ponies 23
mantle effect 110
pigs 307
mechanism of action 109-10
ruminants 286
and neuromuscular blockade 150
small animals 23
physicochemical properties 111-13
mental nerve block
chemical linkage 112
horses/ponies 137
frequency/use-dependent blockade 112
ruminants 286
lipid solubility 112
 small animals 119-20
pKa 112
mepivacaine
protein binding 112
horses/ponies 136, 139
relationship with clinical effects 112
physicochemical properties 112
tissue penetration 112
metabolic acidosis/alkalosis 183-5
vasodilator potential 112
metamizole (dipyrone) 23
 preferential blocking of inactivated and open/activated sodium channels
methadone
109-10
pigs 308
quoted order of blockade of a mixed nerve 110
properties 16-17
resting, inactivated and open sodium channels 110
ruminants 282
sensorimotor dissociation/discrimination 113
small animals 43
sites of action 111
methaemoglobinaemia 115
uses 115-17
methohexital (methohexitone) sodium 48
dilution of solutions 115
dose 48
intravenous regional anaesthesia 115
methoxyflurane
non-specifc infltration 115
chemical formula 75
specific loco-regional nerve blocks 115
properties 65
surface or topical application 115
recoveries 69
 systemic administration 115
reflex tachycardia 70
yasoactive properties 112-13
wash-in/wash-out 70
local anaesthetic techniques
methylene blue 239
horses/ponies 135-40
methylprednisolone
pigs 306-7
canine emergency
367
ruminants 286-97
relative effects 18
small animals 132-3
methylxanthines (theophylline derivatives) 225
head 118-22
metoclopramide, and neuromuscular blockade 151
limbs 123-31
metomidate, pigs 304-5
Lowe's equation 69
mexiletine 227
lumbosacral space, insertion sites for dogs and cats
midazolam
125
see ais benzodiazepines
horses/ponies 250
MAC (see Minimal Alveolar Concentration) 65
muscle relaxation 142
magic mixture, horses/ponies 276
pigs 304
Magill non-rebreathing system 78-80
rabbits 310
magnesium 222-4
ruminants 282
 blood concentrations for common species 217
small animals 347
disturbances 222-4
 Miller anaesthetic breathing systems 82
magnesium sulphate 228
minimal alveolar concentration (MAC)
NMDA receptors 25, 228
definition 64
vs ischaemic/reperfusion/reoxygenation injury 228
factors affecting 64-5
malignant hyperthermia 303, 305-6
values 65
 mandibular nerve block
 minimal apparatus, dead space 81
horses/ponies 137-8
minute respiratory volume 78,166
 small animals 120
minute ventilation, defned 78, 166
386 Index
misoprostol 21
monitoring 148-50
mivacurium 146, 147
 stabilisation technique 149
monitoring
non-depolarising 1447
anaesthetic agents 667,90,17
order of blockade of muscle activity 143-4
neuromuscular blockade 148-50
 post-synaptic receptors 142-3
monitoring, under general anaesthesia 156-74
pre-synaptic receptors 142
anaesthetic depth in a paralysed patient 148-9
re-curarisation 154
cardiovascular system (Cvs) 158-66
reversal of non-depolarising neuromuscular blockade 152-3
central nervous system (CNS) 157-8
 adequacy of reversal 153
efciency of ventilation 167
Ss1 pasn ssn.rp
neuromuscular system 173
 problems with reversal 154
physiological status 150, 156
neuromuscular junction 143
renal system 173
neuromuscular system, monitoring, under general anaesthesia
respiratory system 166-73
173
temperature 173
neuroplasticity/neuromodulation 11
monoamine oxidase inhibitors 6
neurosteroids 48-9
monoclonal antibodies 240
alfaxalone (alphaxalone) 49
 Monroe-Kellie doctrine, intracranial pressure 337-8
Saffan (alphadalone/alphaxalone) 48-9
morphine 14-16
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors 142, 153
 contra-indicated in gastric dilation/volvulus (GDV) 245
nifedipine 228
horses/ponies 139, 271
nimesulide (Zolan) 24
pigs 308
nitric oxide (NO) 236
properties 16
nitric oxide synthase (NOS), various isoforms 236
ruminants 282
'nitrogen washout' or 'denitrogenation’ 84
small animals 43
nitrous oxide 26, 71-3
 morphine +bupivacaine, epidural doses, duration and onset
critical temperature 72
129
flling ratio for cylinders 72
morphine + detomidine, equine epidural doses 139
horses/ponies 272
morphine + lidocaine + ketamine infusion (MLK) 56
MAC 65, 72
 morphine + medetomidine, epidural dose, duration and onset 129
mechanisms of analgesic effects 72-3
mu receptors
occupational exposure standards (OESs) 88
agonists (morphine; pethidine) 14, 16
pigs 304
81 (auoxu) ssu
potential toxicities 73
partial agonists 17
properties 65
mucous membrane colour 167
rabbits 311
 and capillary refill time 166
ruminants 284
cyanosis 177-8
wash-in/wash-out 70
multiple organ dysfunction syndrome/failure (MODS/MOF) 234
with oxygen in Entonox 94
muscle relaxation 141-55
nitrous oxide : oxygen ratio, non-rebreathing systems 78
 centrally acting muscle relaxants 142
nitrous oxide cylinders 93-4
frosting 95
order of blockade of muscle activity 143
NMDA antagonists 25-6
muscle twitch responses, ToF and double burst stimulation 150
NMDA receptors 11
 mutations/polymorphisms, cytochrome P450 27
glycine 25
mydriasis 323
magnesium sulphate 25, 228
myography, phonomyography 149
nociceptin/orphanin FQ peptide (NOP) receptor: 15
nociceptors 10,12
naloxone 18, 239
non-depolarising neuromuscular blockers 144-7
canine emergency 366
 autonomic margin of safety 144
equine emergency 370
cardiovascular effects 144
 aa
fade 145
narcosis, defnition 30
incomplete block, characteristics 145
narcotics, defined 13
monitoring 148-9
needle thoracentesis 353-4
post-tetanic potentiation 145
needle tracheotomy 352
reversal 152-4
 negative pressure (air inlet) valve, anaesthetic machine 107
 adequacy of reversal 153
neonates 312-14
norepinephrine 230
physiological differences vs mature 212-13
activities at adrenergic receptors 229
resuscitation 320
NSAIDs 19-22
 sedation/anaesthesia 313
C-zz uounqusip/uodiosqe
 sodium bicarbonate 188-9
analgesia 23-4
thermoregulation 313
analgesia and antihyperalgesia 21
neostigmine 154
anti-inflammatory actions 21
doses for dogs (and cats) 154
antipyretic effects 21
neuraxial anaesthesia 124-5, 139, 291-3, 306-7
gastrointestinal (GI) effects 21
neurolept malignant syndrome 33
metabolism and excretion 23
acepromazine(ACP)33
platelet effects 22
neuromuscular blockade 141-55
renal effects 22
centrally acting muscle relaxants 142
in shock 240
dhoice of muscle relaxant 141-2
side effects 22
effect of various factors on 150-3
site of NSAID action 20-1
Index 387
spinal surgery,risks of GI perforation 326
oxygen-carrying solutions 207
types 19
oxygenation, mucous membrane colour 167
nuclear transcription factor kappa B, infammatory response 233
Oxyglobin(Hb glutamer 200)207-9
 nutrition, see aiso enteral/parenteral nutrition 
contra-indications 209
doses 209
obese animals, reduction of epidural anaesthetic dose 129
haemoglobinuria 208
occupational exposure limits (OELs) 89
P50 207
occupational exposure standards (OESs) 88
uses 209, 214
e suoiapisuo ans xeno
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) 27
omeprazole 21
pacemaker implantation 343
oncodiuretic therapy 340
packed cell volume (PCV) 201, 209
 and blood/component transfusions 209-10
packed red cells 211
ophthalmic nerve block, small animals 120-1
paediatrics see neonates
opioid receptors 12, 15, 42
pain 8-29
 effects of stimulation 15-16
assessment 29
sites 14
clinical/ pathological pain 9-10
subtypes 15
opioids 14-20
gate control theory 10
administration 42-3
Glasgow composite pain scale, short form 28
applications 18
nociception/ physiological pain 9
atypical (tramadol) 25
pain pathway 9,10, 11
classification 16
afferent fibres 10
effects 15-16
patient comfort 27-8
horses/ponies 262, 271
psychological component 13
pigs 308
signal acquisition, processing and recognition 9
plus local anaesthetic, epidural analgesia techniques 128
in social vs prey species 8
relative activities available at receptors 42
types
relative analgesic efficacies 16, 43
deep 8
relative analgesic potencies 43
8152J
relative receptor affnities 16, 42
ipicritic 10
ruminants 282
pathological 9
small animals 41-3
phantom 13,326
-roz saideiay uoepiuan jeno
physiological 9
organophosphate compounds, and neuromuscular blockade 151
protopathic 10
orthopaedic concerns 325-6
referred 12
analgesia 326
slow 8
Osborn waves 179
somatic 8
oscillometric devices, arterial blood pressure 162
superficial 8
861 
visceral 8, 12
osmotic agents and shock 241
palpebral reflex 157
osteoarthritis 6
pancreatitis
uaBAxo
analgesia 133
consequences of reduced celular availability 235
post-operative 333
delivery to tissues 235
propofol 50
pancuronium 146
hypoxia vs hypoxaemia 176-7, 349
papaveretum 43
indices of oxygenation 186
properties 17
tissue oxygen delivery 158
paracetamol 19, 24
tissue perfusion
 contra-indicated in cats 24
hypoperfusion/hypoxia 5, 178-9
 paraneoplastic syndrome, hypercalcaemia, clinical signs 335-6
mucous membrane colour 167, 177-9
parenteral nutrition 202-4
toxicity 352
shock 239
oxygen demand/requirement 84
partial pressures 185
oxygen demand valve 266
alveolar gas equation 186
oxygen failure device/alarm 107
 patent ductus arteriosus 342
oxygen flowmeter 99-100, 177
ligation, Branham reflex 176
oxygen gas cylinders 93-4
 Penaz technique (Finapres) 162
oxygen measurement devices 172
pentobarbital (pentobarbitone) sodium 48
 oxygen supplementation 349-51
canine emergency 367
cages 350-1
dose, euthanasia solution 48
endo- or trans-tracheal 352
pigs 305
facemask 350
ruminants 283
flow-by 350
pentoxifylline 240
hood 350
 peri-anaesthetic period 6
humidifcation 350-1
kennel doors 350-1
peribulbar block, small animals 121
nasal prongs 351
 pericardial effusions 342
nasopharyngeal catheters 351
ascites (hepatosplenomegaly) 342
oxygen-bridge 207
Beck's triad 342
388 Index
 pericardial effusions (continued)
respiratory obstruction 303
 clinical signs 342
special considerations 302-3
hepatojugular reflux (Kussmaul's sign) 342
subcutaneous fat 302-3
 pulsus paradoxus 342
superficial vein problems 302
sedation/anaesthetic considerations 342
temperament 302
tachycardia 342
tracheal intubation 302-3
 perineural nerve blocks, small animals 123
weight 302
peripheral chemoreceptors 154-5
placebo effect 13
peripheral nerve blockade, continuous (CPNB) 123
placenta, transfer of drugs 319
peripheral sensitisation 10
plasma
peripheral vasodilation, shock 237
 fresh/frozen plasma 211
peritoneal fluid, lactate concentration 196
heparin-incubated fresh plasma 240
Peterson's block, cattle 288
platelet rich plasma (PRP) 212
pethidine 14,16 
plasma colloid osmotic pressure 205
 action on NMDA receptors 11
plasma osmolarity 198
doses, small animals 43 
plasma volume expanders 205
horses/ponies 271
platelet activating factor (PAF) 18, 236
pigs 308
platelet rich plasma (PRP) 212
properties 16
platelets, surface receptors 242
ruminants 282
plethysmograph (pulse volume graph) 162
pH
pleural “block' 132-3
bood gas analysis 182-3
pleural effusion 341, 342, 348
t8l suaasueip
Poiseuille's equation 99
 and neuromuscular blockade 151
polymixin B 240
regulation 184, 187-8
polypharmacy' see balanced anaesthesia
values for drugs 62
pop-off (APL: adjustable pressurelimiting） vales
 pH-stat, or alpha-stat technique 189
84
phaeochromocytoma 335
portal hypertension 331
induction/maintenance 335
portosystemic shunts 331
 premedication 335
potassium 216-20
phantom pain 13,326
 blood concentrations for common species 216
pharmacogenetics 27-8
disturbances 218-9
pharmacokinetic body compartments 46
ECG changes 220
fat compartment 46
in RBCs 218
recovery from anaesthesia 46
potassium channel blockers 227
time constant 46
amiodarone 227
 phencyclidine derivatives/aryl-cyclohexylamines 51-3
bretylium 227
ketamine hydrochloride 51-2
8-c siauado qauueyo ungsseiod
phencyclidine (PCP)-binding site 25
adenosine 228
phenothiazines 31-4, 248
cromakalim 227-8
 see also acepromazine
nicorandil 227-8
phenoxybenzamine 335
potassium chloride, maximum rate for infusion 205
phenylbutazone 23
Poynting (or overpressure) effect, Entonox cylinders 94
phenylephrine 230
pre-operative assessment 47
activities at adrenergic receptors 229
pregabalin 26
infusion, treatment for hypotension 226
pregnant animals 318-21
yasoconstrictor for local anaesthetics 113
general anaesthesia 319-20
phenytoin, properties 227
physiological changes 318-19
phonomyography 149
placental transfer of drugs 319
phosphate 220-2
reduction of epidural anaesthetic dose 129
 bood concentrations for common species 216
 premedication see equine; small animal premedication 
disturbances 220-1
 pre-operative period 6
phosphodiesterase III inhibitors (ino-dilators) 225
prilocaine
phosphofructokinase (PFK) 192
horses/ponies 136
photoplethysmography 171
physicochemical properties 112
physical status classification, ASA 4
toxic doses 136
physiological status, monitoring 150, 156
procaine 111, 115
pigs, sedation and anaesthesia 302-8
 physicochemical properties 112
analgesia 307
toxic doses 113
castration 307
progestagens 6
endotracheal intubation 302-3, 306-7
propafenone 227
induction and maintenance of anaesthesia 304
propentofylline (Vivitonin）225
inhalation agents 304
propofol (2,6-di-isopropyl phenol) 49-51
 intraoperative fluid therapy 307
 dose, small animal 50
intratesticular local anaesthetic 307
 minimum infusion rate (MIR) 51
intravenous regional anaesthesia 307
optimal injection rates 51
local anaesthetic techniques 306-8
pancreatitis 50
lumbosacral epidural (extradural) 306-7
pigs 305
malignant hyperthermia 303, 305-6
rabbits 310
monitoring 307
with remifentanil, TIVA 55
premedication 303
ruminants 283
recovery 308
target-controlled infusion (TCI) 51
Index 389
time lag between injection and loss of consciousness 51
bronchoscopy 345
total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA) 51
diaphragmatic ruptures 346
propranolol227
laryngeal paresis/paralysis 345
 canine emergency 366
thoracotomies 345-6
feline emergency 368
tracheal collapse 345
protein-losing enteropathy 206-7
respiratory system
protein-losing nephropathy 5-6, 243
heat and moisture exchanger 181
proxymetacaine, topical use 116
monitoring, under general anaesthesia 166-74
pseudocholinesterase, activity 147
retrobulbar block
dibucaine number/test 115, 147
horses/ponies 138
pseudohyperparathyroidism 335
ruminants 287
pudendal nerve block, ruminants 2945
small animals 121
pulmonary oedema 267, 342, 348
ring blocks
pulmonic stenoses 343
ruminants 289, 294
pulse oximetry 161, 171-2
small animals 123-4
 pulse palpation 160-1
risk, ASA physical status classification 4
pulseless electrical activity 363
rocuronium 146
pulsus paradoxus 342
romifdine 245
pupil size 323
horses/ponies 253-8, 274
purified human immunoglobulin 212
pigs 304
L sisuoe rodaouape zeude iaajas oidaat
quinidine sulphate, side effects 226-7
sedation/premedication, horses/ponies 274
ropivacaine 117
rabbit anaesthesia 309-11
zll saadod eaumsy
analgesia 309, 311
toxic doses 113
endotracheal intubation 309, 310
Cae Auasiawa ut uoensuwpe snip jo sanar
fluid therapy 311
ruminants, eyeball position during general anaesthesia 157
induction of anaesthesia 310
ruminants, general anaesthesia 279-86
intravenous access 310
analgesia 285
maintenance/monitoring 310-11
anticholinergics as antisialogogues 280
pre-anaesthetic medication 310
breathing systems 284
pre-oxygenation 310
08-6/7 saqni (ia) leayoeniopua pan
recovery from anaesthesia 311
deny water/food pre-anaesthetic 279-80
risk of peri-anaesthetic morbidity 309
endotracheal intubation 284-5
wderlying disease 309
fluid and electrolyte losses in saliva 280-1
reactive radicals, potential immunotoxicity (inhalation agents) 73
hypotension 280
rebreathing, clinical definition 76
hypoventilation 280
inhalational induction 282, 284
refexes, assessment during anaesthetic monitoring 157
intravenous access 282
remifentanil
 maintenance/monitoring of anaesthesia 285
 contra-indicated in neuraxial route injection 130 
nitrous oxide 284
intra-operative infusions 55
positioning 285
properties 16,17
premedication/sedation 281
with propofol,TIVA 55
preoperative starvation 279
renal function 327-9
recovery 285
chronic renal failure in cats 328
recumbency 280
foals, ruptured bladder (uroperitoneum) 328
ruminants, local anaesthesia 286-97
monitoring, under general anaesthesia 173
 agents licensed for ruminants 286
neuromuscular blockade 151
around the head 286-8
normal values 327
cornual nerve block 287
 pre-existing renal disease and considerations for anaesthesia 5, 7, 327-9
eye blocks 287
renin, production 22
infraorbital nerve block 286-7
resiniferatoxin (RTX)27
mental nerve block 287
respiratory acidosis/alkalosis 183-4
Peterson's block 288
061 siskeue ses poog
retrobulbar block 287-8
respiratory arrest 359-64
distal limb nerve blocks 288-93
respiratory compromise, pre-existing 6
genitalia 294
respiratory depression 15
pudendal nerve block 294-5
general anaesthesia 2
laparotomies 2947
breathing patterns 348-9
inverse 'L (or reverse 7) block 296-7
chest tubes 3547
line block 297
nasal prongs 351
paravertebral block 294-6
nasopharyngeal catheters 351
Cambridge technique 296
Cornell technique 296
respiratory insuffciency, clinical signs 347-9
Liverpool technique 296
thoracentesis 353-4
limbs, digits,tail and perineum
thoracostomy 354-5
epidural block 291-3
tracheotomy 352-3
drugs to inject 292
trans-tracheal oxygen delivery 352
needle insertion technique 291-2
respiratory problems and approach to anaesthesia 3446
terminology 293
brachycephalic airway obstruction syndrome (BAOS) 344-5
sheep and goats 292-3
390 Index
ruminants, local anaesthesia (continued)
eyeball position 157
intravenous regional anaesthesia (IVRA or Bier's block) 290-1
fluid therapy 212-15
proximal anddistalimb nerve blocks 288-9
shock 213-15
ring block 289-90
geriatrics 315-17
true spinal/subdural/intrathecal 293
local anaesthetic techniques 118-34
udder/teats 293
monitoring 156-73
neuromuscular blockade
safety
order of blockade of muscle activity 143
anaesthetic machines 99
paediatrics 312-14
Control of Substances Hazardous to Health (COSHH) 88
small animal premedication 30-44
gas cylinders 97
acepromazine (ACP) 31-4
vaporisers 105
alpha2 adrenoceptor agonists 37-41
saffan see alfaxalone (alphaxalone)
benzodiazepines 35-7
Sagatal 48
defnitions/ideal criteria 30
salbutamol 187
opioids 41-4 
equine emergency 370
 soda lime, anaesthetic rebreathing systems 85
saline
sodium
hypertonic 203-4,214
 blood concentrations for common species
colic in horses/ponies 271
217
Sarapin 27
disturbances 216-7
saturated vapour pressure (SVP) 101
 sodium bicarbonate 203, 205
scavenging systems 88-9
administration 188-9
Schrader probe 97, 107
buffer system 190
scopolamine 258
cardiac arrest 363
sedatives 30
how much to give 205
defined 248
sparers or precursors of bicarbonate 203
 see aiso small animal and equine, sedation and premedication
sodium channel blockers 226-8
seizures, recovery 331
flecainide 227
Seldinger technique, intravascular catheters 61
lidocaine 227
Selectatec vaporiser interlock system 105
mexiletine 227
selective PDE (phosphodiesterase) II inhibitors (ino-dilators) 225
phenytoin 227
selective serotonin re-uptake inhibitors 6
propafenone 227
sensitisation 11, 13
quinidine sulphate 226-7
central/ peripheral 10,13
sodium channels
desensitisation 11
tetrodotoxin sensitive (TTXs) 27
septic thrombophlebitis 59-60
yoltage-gated, and local anaesthetics 109-11
serotonin syndrome, risk 26
 sodium nitroprusside 230
sevoflurane
 somato-visceral convergence of information, dorsal horn cells
 metabolism in liver to produce hexafluoroisopropanol (HFIP) 73
12
see aiso inhalational agents
spectrophotometry
shivering, Durran's sign 127
enzymic 195
shock 232-43
oximetry 171
tez sadki juanajip jo aouaisixa-oo
sphygmomanometry 161
compensated and decompensated stages 237
spinal anaesthesia/analgesia 1245
defined 232
 intrathecal/subarachnoid/'true spinal 124
 imbalance of oxygen supply/demand 233
surgery risks 326
as inflammatory response 233
spinal cord
early clinical signs 237
gate control theory 10
Sl-eiz seue news Xdeiay pin
malacia, horses/ponies 268
haemorrhagic hypovolaemic shock 208, 213-15
termination, small animals 126 
inappropriate bradycardia 176
spinal needles, features 127
lower cardiac output, affects inhalation induction speed 68
 starch based colloids 207
responses 237-8
 Stephens circle machine 105-6
treatment 238-43
 steroids, analgesic and anti-inflammatory action 18
circulatory support 238-9
 stethoscopy, oesophageal and precordial 160
glycaemic control 239
stifle, intra-articular analgesia injection in dogs 123
respiratory support 238
stress proteins 241
types 232-4
 stress response 237
cardiogenic 233
 stress-induced analgesia 12
distributive/maldistributive/vasculogenic 232
Il sewue ews ut Aqissod yoonq uouai-qns 
hypovolaemic 208,213-15,232
sufentanil 16, 17
metabolic/endocrine/hypoxaemic 233
Sugammadex 155
obstructive 232-3
 superoxide dismutase, vs. reperfusion injury 241
shoulder, brachial plexus block 128-9
supine hypotensive syndrome 319
shunts and inspired oxygen percentage 77
surgical maintenance, intravenous fluids 213-15
7-ioe ddo ut (as) uorsanduos pue uoeua snoaueinuis
suxamethonium (succinylcholine) 147-8
sinus bradycardia 363
68tl siaa ienseaipie
skin pliability 201
in different species 147
small animal(s)
suxibuzone 23
bood donation 209-10
(SIS) auorpus asuodsau Aroneuueut suass
bood volume 210
234, 236
Index 391
T-pieces 78-82
trigeminal nerve
Ayre's, Jackson Rees modification 82
branches, dog 119
characteristics of T-pieces 82-3
 sensitivity, increased in head-shaker horses 26
modifications 82
tromethamine (THAM) 189
TACE-inhibitors (TNFalpha-converting enzyme inhibitors)
TTXr antagonists 27
240
tumours (thyroid), haemorrhage 335
tachycardia
causes 175, 342
underwater seal 356
tachypnoea, causes 176
uraemic syndrome 327-8
target-controlled infusion (TCI), propofol 51
urine
temperature
production in hypovolaemia 201-2
critical temperature defined 93
7-l0 Al yids
monitoring, under general anaesthesia 173, 311, 313
woperitoneum 328
 see aiso hyperthermia; hypothermia
temperature compensation, vaporisers 102-3
vagal reflexes 175
 alpha-stat or pH-stat technique in blood gas analysis
Valtis-Kennedy effect 211
189
vaporisers 100-6
Tenon's capsule, sub-Tenon block 121
agent specifc calibration 104
TENS (transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation) 29
tepoxalin (Zubrin) 20, 24
carrier gas flow and composition 104
tetanus
dassification 102
benzodiazepines 36
t01 aal, suy iai
magnesium 222
desflurane vaporiser 105
tetracaine (formerly amethocaine) 111
draw-over 102
 physicochemical properties 112
effects of ambient atmospheric pressure 103
topical use 116
in-circuit (VOC)102,105-6
THAM (tromethamine) 189
 Stephens circle and Komesaroff machine 105-6
thermoregulation 173
intermittent back-pressure ('pumping) protection 103
thiopental (thiopentone) sodium 47-8
internal resistance 102
 dose, small animal 47-8
liquid agent use per hour 104
hangover 47
method of vaporisation 102-3
horses/ponies 262-3, 274
mounting on back bar 105
pigs 305
out-of-circuit (VOC) 102
thiobarbiturate 47
plenum type 102, 104
thioxanthenes 34
safety checks 107-8
thoracentesis 353-4
safety features 105
thoracic pump vs cardiac pump in CPCR 361
 Selectatec vaporiser interlock system 105
thoracostomy/thoracotomy 354-5
thrombocytopenia, therapies 21
tilt protection 103
thromboembolic disease, protein-losing nephropathy 243
vapour, defined 93
thrombophlebitis 59-60
saturated vapour pressure (SVP) 107
clinical signs/treatment options 62
vaso-vagal reflexes 175
thrombosis, Virchow's triad 241-2
yasoconstrictors, local anaesthetic agents 113
thyroid storm/crisis 335
vasodilators 230
tidal volume 167
ACE inhibitors 225
tiludronate 27
cromakalim 227-8
tissue perfusion see oxygen
magnesium sulphate 228
TNFalpha 236
nicorandil 227-8
tolfenamic acid 23
nifedipine
pigs 307
 sodium nitroprusside 230
ruminants 286
vasopressin 239, 363
 total intravenous anaesthesia (TIVA)
canine emergency 366
anaesthetic stress response 263
CPCR 363
maintenance, (triple drip), equine anaesthesia 263-4
feline emergency 368
propofol51
vasopressors 230
trachea, rupture, cats 91
in shock 239
Ste asdeos peauo1
vecuronium 145-6
tracheal extubation 90-2, 266, 285, 301, 308
vedaprofen (Quadrisol) 23
tracheal intubation see endotracheal intubation
veins, for catheterisation 57
'tracheal tugs' 360
venous air emboli 63
tracheomalacia 335
yentilation see alveolar ventilation; anaesthetic breathing systems;
tracheostomy/tracheotomy 352
intermittent positive pressure ventilation (IPPV)
tramadol 25
yentilation-perfusion ratios and mismatches, equine anaesthesia
 tranexamic acid, von Willebrand's disease 212
265
transient receptor potential non-selective cation channel, subfamily V,
ventricular fibrillation 363
member 1 (TRPV1) 24
ventricular premature contractions (VPCs) 245-6
trichloroethylene (trilene)
ventricular septal defects 343
chemical formula 75
verapamil 228
interaction with CO, absorbents 74
canine emergency 366
tricyclic antidepressants 6, 26
vincristine,thrombocytopenia therapy 21
trifuoroacetic acid (TFA), potential toxicity 73
St yoeodde yuawean yooys (dund uotsnju ruomeuan,) dl
392 Index
Virchow's triad 59
alone 139, 257
thrombosis 241-2
contra-indicated as a sedative prior to Somulose, euthanasia 257
volvulus (GDV) 244-6
sedation/premedication 255, 274
yon Willebrand's disease
standing sedation 276
desmopressin 212
pigs 304
tranexamic acid 212
receptor selectivity 37
ruminants 281
water compartments 198-200
uses and doses, small animals 40-1
water loss, normal and effects of dehydration 201
xylocaine (lidocaine), topical use 116
Waters' To and Fro rebreathing systems 85
wind-up, defined 11
yohimbine 257
xanthine oxidase 240-1
 zolazepam, dose, equine 250
xenon 26, 73
Zubrin 20, 24
xylazine (Rompun) 245, 37
Zuclopenthixol 34
horses/ponies 139, 253-8, 271
Zygomatic nerve block, equine 137
 20-40 ml/kg crystalloids - dogs (half this in cats)
 seconds, or continuously by capnography
 Unless hypovolaemic prior to arrest, infuse rapidly no more 
 Preferably within 2-3 minutes of arrest
IV (see chart for doses); aim for 'central vein' if possible;
 Deliver near to carina - via urinary catheter,
 5-10 ml/kg colloids - dogs (half this in cats)
 Dilute in water or saline to 2-3 ml cats
u yoean shnp diay on ysn auis ym mollo 
IF hypovolaemic pre-arrest, give faster rates
ACCIDENTS AND EMERGENCIES
 follow with 2 breaths
mostuseful
 Electrical defibrillation 
Internal cardiac massage
OR
Intra-tracheal route:
Monitor progress
Drugs
Fluids
than:
n
uw/tz-ol ie aneuan uay syeaiq pidei z< buieaiq ion
J uuz aa as ol lo suoisadu sayp dnuou o
snoassoenu! paau Aew siewjue llews - ssasre Al ys!lqeisa
- twizzle needle in base of nasal
Turn off anaesthetic & purge breathing system
<15 kg Right lateral recumbency
Note the Time; Call for Help
Intubate trachea - ET tube or urinary catheter
 Check mouth/throat is clear; remove obvious 
 Perform tracheostomy - with needle or tube 
No circulation - One precordial thump (equivocal)
 Start chest compressions at
Give reversal agents if suspect overdosage 
- Try acupuncture point
philtrum
 80-120/min
OR
Establish a patent airway
Monitor for signs of ROSC
obstructions
B Breathing
C  Circulation
A   Airway
Continue IPPV
possible
access