Practical
Veterinary
Urinalysis
Carolyn A. Sink and Nicole M. Weinstein
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Practical
Veterinary
Urinalysis
Practical
Veterinary
Urinalysis
Carolyn A. Sink, MS, MT (ASCP)
Nicole M. Weinstein, DVM, DACVP
llustrations by Ashley Marlowe
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley's global Scientific,
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered office: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19
8SQ, UK
Editorial offices: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atriurm, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services and for information about how to apply
for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at ww w.wiley.corm/
wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy iterms for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of
specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the
Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that
The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-4709-5824-7/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All
brand names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or
registered trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or
vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative
information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher
required, the services of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Sink, Carolyn A.
Practical veterinary urinalysis / Carolyn Sink and Nicole Weinstein ; illustrations by Ashley Marlowe.
p. : cm
ISBN 978-0-470-95824-7 (pbk. : alk. paper)
I. Weinstein, Nicole. Il. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Urinalysis-veterinary-Laboratory Manuals. SF 773]
LC classification not assigned
636.089'66-dc23
2011035231
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Wiley also publishes its books in a variety of electronic formats. Sorme content that appears in print
may not be available in electronic books.
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or
completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without
lirmitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or extended by
every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in rendering
a cormpetent professional person should be sought. Neither the publisher nor the author shall be liable
citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the author or the
publisher endorses the information the organization or Website may provide or recommendations it
may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Websites listed in this work may have
changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
12012
This book is dedicated to veterinary students, clinical laboratory profession-
als, clinical veterinarians, and all those who continue to develop and improve
the veterinary clinical laboratory.
Preface and Acknowledgments
ix
Chapter 1 Functional Renal Physiology and Urine Production
1
Glomerular filtration
1
Tubular reabsorption and secretion
3
Collecting tubules
5
Renal function and measures of renal function
5
Laboratory assessment of renal function
6
Chapter 2 Specimen Procurement
6
Laboratory definitions for collection methods
9
Urine specimen containers
12
 Specimen handling and preservation
15
Types of urine specimens
16
Chapter 3 Routine Urinalysis: Physical Properties
19
Solute concentration
19
Urine color
25
Chapter 4 Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis
29
pH
29
Protein
32
Glucose
38
Ketone
40
Blood
42
Bilirubin
45
Urobilinogen
48
Nitrite
49
Leukocyte esterase
50
Specific gravity
51
Chapter 5 Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements
55
Urine sediment preparation
55
Examination of urine sediment
57
Microscopic elements of urine sediment
59
vii
vi
Contents
Chapter 6 Proteinuria
113
Protein handling by the kidney
113
Significance of proteinuria
116
Laboratory diagnosis of proteinuria
117
Recommendations regarding diagnosis of proteinuria
126
Additional considerations for proteinuria
126
Chapter 7 Advanced Diagnostics
133
Detection of bacteriuria versus diagnosis of urinary tract
infection
133
Urinary tract cytology
136
Fractional excretion
147
Urinary biomarkers
149
Chapter 8 Laboratory Quality Assurance
155
Physical requirements of the laboratory
155
Laboratory equipment
157
Reagents and supplies for the urinalysis laboratory
160
Laboratory waste
160
Quality control in the urinalysis laboratory
161
Procedure manuals
163
Index
165
Preface
to the veterinarian, as a variety of disease states may produce abnormal
pensive, as well as reliable, when performed by a well-trained laboratory
professional.Practicaf Veterinary Urinatysisis intended to provide laboratory
and veterinary students-with a comprehensive study of all aspects of routine
urinalysis, including chemical analysis and microscopy. Those tasked with
performing routine urinalysis will find both consolidated and comprehensive
information needed to produce timely and accurate results.
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis is designed to provide the reader with a
concise, systematic overview of renal physiology and urine production. Both
by images,tables,and drawings. Specimen collection and handling are
frequently used methods.
An in-depth discussion of urine physical properties, chemical analysis, and
sediment analysis is covered in separate chapters. Summarized charts are
with cytology (Wright's stain), and Gram stain if indicated.
Abnormal orsuspiciousresults obtainedby routineurinalysis maymandate
additional or confirmatory tests. A chapter dedicated to advanced urine
diagnostics presents newer test methodologies,and associated laboratory
procedures are discussed.
PracticafVeterinaryUrinalysis alsoincludessectionsdedicated tolabora-
tory setup, including physical and functional requirements along with
instrument,reagent,and supply preferences.Quality assurance measures
and quality goals are defined, assuring laboratorians that the results they
produce are reliable.
iX
Preface
Acknowledgments
We are grateful for the support and guidance of Drs. Rachel Cianciolo and
would also like to acknowledge veterinary students Rachel Baum and Alicyn
Cross for their laboratory prowess in identifying interesting urine samples
used in this book.
Carotyn Sink and Nicole Weinstein
Chapter 1
Chapter
Functional Renal Physiology
and Urine Production
Urinalysis can provide insight into hydration status, renal function or dysfunc
tion, systemic disease, and toxic insults. Accurate interpretation of urinalysis
Given the complexity of both, a brief overview is presented below; more
detailed explanations can be found in a variety of references on which this
chapter is based (Gregory 2003; Kaneko 2008; Schrier 2007; Stockham and
Scott 2008: Watson 1998).
Descriptions of renal function and schematics of the kidney typically
portray a single nephron, which is the functional unit of the kidney; each
kidney contains hundreds of thousands of nephrons working in unison (Reece
1993). Each nephron requires:
(1)A blood supply
(2) A functional glomerulus, which filters a portion of the renal blood flow,
to form an ultrafiltrate
(3) Renal tubules that function to reabsorb water, electrolytes, and other
substances from the ultrafiltrate
and solutes and thus determine final urine concentration.
Urine formation starts as an ultrafiltrate formed by glomerular filtration. The
ultrafiltrate is then further altered by tubular reabsorption and secretion.
Glomerular filtration
The glomerulus is a collection of twisted capillaries that receive blood from the
afferent arteriole of the renal blood supply and exit the kidney via the efferent
arteriole (Figure 1.1). The high pressure within this system results in passage of
fluids and small substances out of the capillaries into a space around the glom-
erulus, known as Bowman's capsule, which together form a renal corpuscle.
Practicar Veterinary Urinafysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Podocyte
Afferent
Chapter
Arteriole
Capillaries
Blood Flow
Bowman's Space
Ultrafiltrate
Blood Flov
Proximal Renal
Efferent
Tubular Epithelial
Arteriole
Cells
Glomerular Capillary Wall
Figure 1.1  Glomerulus.
Glomerular filtration is driven by both blood volume and pressure and is con-
sidered a primarily passive process. Ultrafiltrate is the product of glomerular
filtration of blood following its passage through a glomerular filtration barrier,
the glomerular capillary wall (GCw). The GCw prevents entry of red and white
blood cells, platelets, and larger proteins into the ultrafiltrate. The exact com-
position and function of the Gcw is the subject ofintense research and debate
currently in the human literature. Additional information is presented about
glomerular filtration and the GCw in Chapter 6, "Proteinuria.'
Concentrations of urea, creatinine, amino acids, glucose, bicarbonate, and
electrolytes are similar between the ultrafiltrate and plasma. Specific gravity
(SG) which ranges from 1.008 to 1.012 and osmolality (300 m0sm/kg with a
range of 280-310 m0sm/kg) will also be similar between the two (watson
1998). Note the SG range of 1.008-1.012 is identical to the range described
for isosthenuria. For additional information regarding interpretation of urine
specific gravity (USG), see Chapter 3. Knowledge of this range is relevant for
the diagnosis of renal failure as well as the interpretation of urine with an SG
cusses USG in greater detail.
Renal blood flow ultimately determines the glomerular filtration rate (GFR)
or rate of blood flow within the glomerulus. GFR can be affected by numerous
factors such as a patient's blood volume, cardiac output, and total number
of functional glomeruli (Stockham and Scott 2008). GFR and direct and indi-
rect measures of GFR can therefore be influenced by renal disease as well
Functional Renal Physiology and Urine Production
Proximal
Loop of Henle
Distal
Collecting
Glomerulus
Convoluted
Descending Ascending
Convoluted
Tubule
Duct
Chapter '
Limb
Limb
Tubule
 Permea bility to Water!
High
Low
Variable
Afferent
Aite
300
200
300
300 mOsm
Na+
Na+
akos
Eferen
Water
100
C
Arteriele
s
Urea
Glucose
Amino Acids
Urea
Minerals
400
H2O H
tUrea +AD
H,O
Na+
Cr
Renal
1200
Interstitium
1200
To Ureter
Figure 1.2
Solute and water handling in the renal tubule.
Source: Gregory (2003); Kaneko (2008); Stockham and Scott (2008).
diuretic use, fluid therapy, and hypoalbuminemia to name a few.
Ultrafiltrate exiting Bowman's capsule enters into the proximal convoluted
tubule (PCT).
Tubular reabsorption and secretion
Tubular reabsorption and secretion employbothpassive and active mecha-
nisms to ultimately form urine, conserve water and necessary solutes, and
and descending loops of Henle,distal convoluted tubule,and the collecting
duct. Each segment serves to reabsorb and/or secrete water and various
solutes (Figure 1.2). Reabsorption serves to prevent water and solutes from
being excreted into the tubular fluid while secretion results in loss of either
into the tubularfluid.Water and solutesremaining in the tubular fluid are
excreted as urine.
Proximal convoluted tubule
The majority of water and solutes are reabsorbed in the PCT. Sodium is
actively reabsorbed in the PcT via several mechanisms and water follows
passively. In addition to sodium reabsorption, conservation of amino acids.
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
glucose, phosphate, chloride, potassium, and bicarbonate occurs in the PCT.
Chapter
Fluid in the PCT displays only mild increases in SG and osmolality relative to
the ultrafiltrate. Ultimately. water conservation reduces the volume of tubular
fluid by 70% (Kaneko 2008; Stockham and Scott 2008; Watson 1998).
Loop of Henle
The loop of Henle includes a descending loop and ascending loop that serve
to reabsorb more water and electrolytes through both passive and active
mechanisms. The renal medullary interstitium, which is the tissue and fluid
conservation of water and electrolytes.
The descending loop of Henle is permeable to water but is impermeable to
electrolytes. As the loop descends into the renal medulla, which is maintained
at a higher osmolality due to higher concentrations of both sodium and urea,
the water will exit the loop in an attempt to equilibrate with the surrounding
interstitium, thus serving to conserve water. As water exits the tubular fluid,
the osmolality and SG greatly increase as the tubular fluid prepares to enter
the ascending loop.
The ascending loop of Henle is opposite to the descending loop and
is permeable to urea and electrolytes (mostly sodium, chloride, and potas-
sium) but impermeable to water. Tubular fluid ascends the loop of Henle and
becomes increasingly more dilute as sodium and chloride are first
passively and then actively reabsorbed into the medullary interstitium.
concentration.
Blood vessels, specifically peritubular capillaries that parallel the loop of
Henle, are termed the "vasa recta." Blood in the vasa recta flows in the
opposite direction to the fluid in the loop of Henle. The loop of Henle,
together with the vasa recta and interstitium, comprise a countercurrent
system. The process of countercurrent multiplication is essential in main-
taining a concentration gradient within the medullary interstitium as both
the descending loop of Henle and collecting ducts require a hypertonic med-
ullary interstitium for water reabsorption. Therefore, the hypertonicity of
described above. A basic understanding of this gradient aids in interpreting
extrarenal influences on urine concentration and will be discussed below
Watson 1998).
Distal (convoluted) tubule
The epithelial cells of the distal tubule demonstrate minimal permeability to
water. Sodium and chloride, however, can be reabsorbed from the tubular
fluid in this segment primarilyunder the influence of aldosterone, antidiuretic
hormone (ADH), and other substances.
Functional Renal Physiology and Urine Production    5
Collecting tubules
hapter
and loop of Henle, the collecting tubules determine the final urine volume
广
ence of ADH, which results in reabsorption of water. ADH levels ultimately
determine whether urine will be dilute or concentrated. High concentrations
of urea, sodium, or chloride in the medullary interstitium facilitate ADH reab-
sorption of water, again reinforcing the necessity of a hypertonic renal med-
ullary interstitium. In the absence of ADH, dilute urine is produced.
Renal function and measures of renal function
In the normal state, the goal of the kidneys is to conserve water, glucose,
amino acids, sodium, chloride, bicarbonate, calcium, magnesium, and most
ions, ammonium, ketones, bilirubin, hemoglobin, and myoglobin (Stockham
and Scott 2008). Additional roles of the kidneys include, but are not limited
to, erythropoietin synthesis to stimulate red blood cell development, acid-
base regulation, renin secretion, calcium and phosphorous homeostasis, and
blood pressure regulation. Urea nitrogen (UN) and creatinine are both waste
products of metabolism and are filtered and excreted by the kidneys into the
urine.
Urea production and excretion
The liver converts ammonia, which is a product of intestinal protein catabo
    i l   ia     
filtered by the glomerulus and enters the ultrafiltrate. Urea follows water into
and out of the renal tubules. The amount of urea excreted in the urine varies
within the tubules (Schrier 2o07). At higher urine flow rates (i.e. increased
water or fluid intake). less urea is reabsorbed and so more is excreted in the
urine. Decreased urine flow rate (i.e. dehydration) results in a greater amount
of urea reabsorption and so less is excreted into the urine.
Creatinine excretion
2008; Stockham and Scott 2o08). Creatine concentrations are influenced by
an animal's muscle mass and underlying disease states. Similar to urea, cre-
atinine is freely filtered by the glomerulus, meaning it passes through the
glomerularfiltrationbarrier andentersinto thetubularfluid.Incontrastto
urea, creatinine is not reabsorbed by the renal tubules. A small amount of
  Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Laboratory assessment of renal function
Chapter
Urea and creatinine concentrations are the most commonly utilized tests to
plasma, is reported as UN or blood urea nitrogen (BUN). The amount of urea
in whole blood, serum, or plasma is identical because urea rapidly equilibrates
between compartments. Because of the variability in the amount of urea
measure of GFR given its constant rate of formation and lack of tubular
reabsorption (Kaneko 2008; Stockham and Scott 2008).
Azotemia
An increase in BUN and creatinine is termed azotemia. Azotemia can be
prerenal, renal, or postrenal in origin although causes may be multifactorial.
Prerenal azotemia results from decreased renal blood flow. Examples of
urine (USG > 1.030 in dogs and >1.035 in cats) is an expected finding with
prerenal azotemia. Renal azotemia can be due to acute or chronic renal
failure as a result of greater than 75% loss of functioning glomeruli. Renal
and <1.035 in cats): isosthenuria (USG 1.008-1.012) in the face of azotemia
is indicative of renal disease. Postrenal azotemia is caused by obstructed
urine flow from urethral or ureteral obstruction (i.e. urinary calculi), bladder
can vary with postrenal azotemia. BUN and creatinine concentrations tend
to parallel one another in renal and postrenal causes of azotemia. Increases
in BUN without a concomitant increase in creatinine or a disproportionally
higher increase in BUN relative to the increase in creatinine can be seen in
certain prerenal conditions, that is, increased protein catabolism and dehy-
dration. As described earlier, diminished renal tubular flow rate and the
can elevate BUN. Increased protein catabolism, especially in animals fed a
high-protein diet or with small intestinal bleeding, can result in elevated BUN
(Table 1.1)
Decreased BUN can hinder renal concentrating ability. Urea contributes
fluid, which facilitates water reabsorption from the tubular fluid. Decreased
BUN can result from hepatic failure or shunting of hepatic blood flow away
from the liver (i.e. portosystemic shunt) so that ammonia cannot be con-
verted into urea. Increased renal excretion of urea can also decrease BUN
such as with excess glucose in the renal tubular fluid (i.e. diabetes mellitus)
Functional Renal Physiology and Urine Production I
Table 1.1Pre-renal causes of an increased BUN
Chapter 1
Increased protein catabolism
Fever
Starvation
Corticosteriods
High protein diet
Prolonged exercise
Small intestinal hemorrhage
Decreased excretion due to decreased renal blood flow*
Shock
Hypotension
Decreased cardiac output (e.g.,heart failure)
Hypovolemia (dehydration, hemorrhage, hypoadrenocorticism)
* May also cause increase in serum creatinine concentration.
Source: Gregory (2003); Stockham and Scott (2008)
when interpreting USG. Similarly, low plasma concentrations of sodium and
chloride, termed hyponatremia and hypochloremia, respectively, can also
diminish renal concentrating function due to a less hypertonic renal medul-
lary interstitium.
Although routine, BUN and creatinine are relatively insensitive measures
of renal function. Renal azotemia does not develop until after 75% or greater
functional nephrons are lost or damaged. In renal failure, the diseased kidneys
mination of prerenal, renal, and postrenal causes of azotemia utilize USG as
well as historical, physical exam, and other clinicopathological data.
Osmolality
Osmolality is the concentration of solutes in a solution (Kaneko 2o08; Stock-
osmolality are sodium, urea, and glucose (Stockham and Scott 2008). Plasma
described above,impact urineformation.Increasedplasma osmolalityresults
in ADH release, which stimulates the collecting tubules and ducts to reabsorb
water. The opposite is true of decreased osmolality. with low plasma osmolal-
chapter provides only a brief summary of basic renal function so as to facili-
tate understanding of the physiologic processes that impact and determine
urine formation and to maximize interpretation of urinalysis.
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
References
Chapter
Gregory CR. 2003. Urinary system. In Duncan & Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory
Medicine Clinicar Pathofogy, 4th ed. Latimer KS, Mahaffe EA, Prasse KW, eds.,
pp. 231-59. Ames, IA: lowa State Press.
Kaneko JJ. 2oo8. Kidney function and damage. In Clinicai Biochemistry of Domes-
tic Animais, 6th ed. Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds., pp. 485-528. Burl-
ington, VT: Elsevier Inc.
Swenson MJ, Reece WO, eds., pp. 573-603. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press.
phia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2oo8. Urinary system. In Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinicat Pathofogy, 2nd ed. Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds., pp. 415-94. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing.
Watson ADJ. 1998. Urine specific gravity in practice. Austrafian Veterinary Journaf
76(6): 392-8.
Chapter 2
Specimen Procurement
Chapter
Urinalysis test results are influenced by many preanalytical variables, the
urine specimen containers and urine preservation techniques, and the poten
ables will allow for the most consistent and reliable urinalysis results
Laboratory definitions for collection methods
An overview of collection methods may be found in Table 2.1.
Voided or "free catch"
Natural micturition is the least invasive method of collecting urine (wamsley
and Alleman 2007). ldeally, urine is collected midstream as first-stream urine
is more likely to contain bacteria, cells, and other debris from the vulva,
urethra, or prepuce. To further minimize contamination, the patient's uro
tainer can be used to catch the urine. Free-catch samples are most at risk
for contamination by the genital tract, skin, or hair, which can result in a
false-positive urine bacterial culture (Osborne and Stevens 1999). If the only
should be performed (Reine and Langston 2005).
For an inexperienced person, timing the collection of a voided urine sample
cease urinating. Some recommend a long-handled ladle or shallow pie tin to
collect urine from a female dog or a large cup to collect urine from a male
dog (Mathes 2002). Collecting a free catch, midstream urine sample from a
cat is also challenging. Urine can be obtained from a clean litter box or one
Practicar Veterinary Urinatysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
10
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 2.1 Advantages and disadvantages of urine collection methods
Method of
Collection
Pro
Con
Free-catch
No risk to the
Unsuitable for bacterial culture
patient
Contaminants common
 Chapter 2
Easy to perform
Subject to patient's need to
Can be used to
urinate
localize lesion
Manual expression None
Risk of bladder injury
Possible reflux of urine into
kidneys, prostate
Difficult to impossible in awake
patients
Catheterization
Lower risk of
Technical skill required
contamination
Often requires sedation
Relatively safe for
 Challenging in a patient with
the patient
obstruction
Cystocentesis
Best sample for
Technical skill required
bacterial culture
Blood contamination in sample
Can be performed in
Increased risk to patient for
awake patient
hemorrhage, bladder rupture
Relatively safe
Avoid in patient with
coagulopathy
lined with a clean trash bag: no absorbent litter is used. An option for cats
that refuse to use a litter-free litter box is to add a nonabsorbable material
such as Nosorb? beads (Catco, Inc., Cape Coral, FL) or packing peanuts (Sty-
rofoamTM, Midland, Ml, or plastic). Urine collected by these methods would be
unsuitable for bacterial cultures given the many potential sources for con-
The urine should be collected from the litter box promptly so as to minimize
crystal formation and potential increases in urine specific gravity (USG)
Table collection
Recovering urine from the floor or exam table is occasionally a necessity as
patients, due to fear or excitement, may urinate unexpectedly. This is essen-
tially a free-catch sample with additional sources of contamination from the
site where the urine is collected. Bacteria, hyphal structures, and foreign
material, if identified, should be considered as such and another sample col-
lected, especially if bacterial culture is needed. Cleaning agents used to clean
various surfaces in the hospital or clinic can result in false-positive dipstick
reactions for protein, glucose, blood, or leukocyte esterase (Strasinger and
DiLorenzo 2008).
Specimen Procurement  11
Manual expression of the bladder
This method of urine collection is subject to many of the same considerations
is not advised (Reine and Langston 2oo5) as the pressure necessary to induce
micturition can result in reflux of urine (vesicoureteral reflux), potentially
containing bacteria from the genital tract, into the ureters, renal pelves,
indicated in patients with a urinary outflow obstruction or recent cystotomy.
Urinary catheterization
Catheterization of the urinary bladder is another method of urine collection
of technical skill than a urine sample obtained by free catch. Sterile technique
bacterialculture.Male dogs can oftenbe catheterized awake;themajority of
female dogs and both male and female cats must be sedated or anesthetized
for urinary catheterization and selection of urinary catheters, the reader is
directed to other resources(Reine andLangston 2005).Briefly,the external
and Langston 2o05). In the male, the prepuce should be retracted and the
tip of the penis cleaned with dilute chlorhexiderm solution prior to insertion
of a sterile, lubricated, catheter into the urethra (Reine and Langston 2005).
Once the catheteris inserted into the urethra,itis advanced into the bladder;
a sterile syringe is attached to the distal end of the catheter and is used to
withdraw urine. Catheters should be selectedbased on the specles as well as
the patient size and gender. When collected using a sterile technique, bacte-
rial contamination should be minimal to absent. The distal urethra, however,
contains some normal bacterial flora that can contaminate the collected urine
and confound bacterial culture results (Barsanti 1984). Increased numbers of
squamous epithelial cells may also be seen in urine collected by catheteriza
tion. Discarding the first portion of urine specimen collected may minimize
numbers of epithelial cells and/or bacteria.
For patients with indwelling urinary catheters, urine is collected in the
same manner as described above, through a sterile syringe attached to the
distal end of the catheter. The risk of bacterial infection in these patients,
however, increases with duration of catheterization warranting bacterial
culture in addition to urinalysis (Bubenik et al. 2o07).
Cystocentesis
Cystocentesis is ideal for collecting urine samples for bacterial culture and
ag Allensn ues il (a6el le ia jabnay) iooi 2lisoubeip algenjea e palapisuos s
12   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
and the skin of the ventral abdomen should be cleaned prior to each cysto
centesis attempt. In patients with abundant hair or fur, a small area should
be clipped. The bladder can be located either manually or with ultrasound, if
available; a bladder containing minimal urine may be difficult to detect. The
bladder can be palpated and immobilized by the palpating hand or immobi-
lized against the pelvis while the other hand is used to obtain the sample
Chapter
    g     )
八
the thumb and forefinger or compressing the bladder against the pelvic brim"
is recommended (Barsanti 1984; Kruger et al. 1996: Reine and Langston
2005).
Following immobilization, the needle, attached to a syringe, is inserted, at
an oblique angle, approximately 45°, through the wall of the ventral abdomen
and is advanced caudally toward the pelvic inlet (Barsanti 1984; Kruger et al.
1996: Reine and Langston 2005). By angling the needle caudally. the needle
1996; Reine and Langston 2005). Excessive digital pressure on the bladder
should be avoided while the needle is inserted into the lumen so as to prevent
leakage of urine around the needle site (Kruger et al. 1996). Urine can be
aspirated slowly via the attached syringe. Cystocentesis is best in a patient
with a somewhat distended bladder but not overly distended or obstructed
urinary bladder. Release pressure on the bladder prior to removal of the
needle from the bladder.
Depending on patient size, a 21-gauge (or smaller) 1 to 1.5-inch needle is
   n   s      
longer needle, that is, 1.5-2 inches (Reine and Langston 2005)
Although cystocentesis is generally considered safe, it is not entirely
without risk. Mild to moderate hematuria is the most common side effect and
may reflect the needle contacting the opposite wall of the bladder (Reine and
Langston 2o05). Uncommon but potential negative sequelae to cystocentesis
include rupture of an overly distended bladder, peritonitis secondary to
leakage of septic urine, laceration of the bladder wall, laceration of a major
vessel, and inadvertent puncture of the large intestine (Buckley et al. 2009;
Reine and Langston 2oo5). The presence of numerous mixed bacteria in the
urine sample would suggest sampling from the intestine
Urine specimen containers
Urine collection containers
Collection cups and devices are available in a variety of shapes and sizes
and are selected based on the collection method utilized and anticipated
sample size. while leak-resistant sample cups with snap or screw lid are
Specimen Procurement
UA Preservative or Plain UA Tube with Culture and Sensitivity (C&S) Tube
ativ
3.Pu
shUAP
e of transler staw in
nt'snam
shar ps collector.
Chapter 
Hold in position until
Hol in 
 until flow stops
+Shake tube vigoroushy.
Figure 2.1 BD Vacutainer? collection product utilizing transfer straw for urine samples.
(Provided by BD Diagnostics, with permission)
UA Preservative or Plain UA Tube and Culture & Sensitivity (C&s) Preservative Tube
2. • Push C&S Prese vative
3.Push U Preservative Tube
4. = Place protective sticker
+Hok in positon nil
flow stops.
Renoe tabe.
Hols in position nti flow stops.
He imove tu be.
Shake tube vigorously.
times to mix the sampke.
sabfochalt
institution.
Figure 2.2 BD Vacutainer? collection product utilizing transfer cup for urine samples.
(Provided by BD Diagnostics, with permission)
conventionally used for urine collection and transport, specialized urine
collection-transport containers are commercially available that provide a
unique approach to sample acquisition (Figures 2.1-2.4).
Urine containers for laboratory analysis
Depending on the urine collection method employed, urine samples are often
transferred from thecollection containertoa secondary containerto accom-
modate laboratory analysis. When selecting a secondary container, consider-
ation should be given to the type of laboratory test(s) that will be performed
on theurine sample.For example,the secondary container mustfitinto the
centrifuge head that is used to acquire sediment for microscopic analysis. If
microbial assessment is required in addition to urinalysis testing, all contain-
ers must be sterile. Sterile containers are also recommended if the urine
specimen will not be analyzed within 1 hour of collection.
Any container employed must be break resistant, leakproof, and clean.
Containers cannot be washed and reused as detergents interfere with chemi-
cal analysis and microscopic evaluation; artifacts can be acquired through
improper washing, chemical residue, or other contaminants. Flat bottom
containers prevent inadvertent overturning (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2o08).
4
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Urine-Monovette?
One disposabfe product with three functions
Hygienic urine collection 
 Chapter 2
Urine-Monovote includes a suclion tip for 
drawng urine from collechion contaners.
Alternatively, a Luer needle (not provided) 
can be attached for performing cystocentesis
without transfer.
Vessel for test strips
Test stnp may be immersed into the filed 
Urine-Monovette for urine analysis.
Centrifuge tube for sedimentation
Urine-Monovettes may be safely
centrifuged for sedimentatiorn.
After centrifugalion, sediment is
easily accessed by decaning
the supernatant and pushing the
plungor to the tubo opening.
SARSTEDT
Figure 2.3
3Sarstedt urine collection and testing product.(Provided by
Sarstedt, with permission)
The container should not leach interfering substances or particles into the
urine sample, and the exterior of the container must possess enough surface
area for labeling. To expedite evaluation of physical characteristics, a clear
container is mandatory. Tubes must withstand centrifugation, and if an
automated system is used, compatibility with the loading rack or carrier is
necessary.
Specimen Procurement 
Urine Collection from a Foley Catheter
BD Vacutainer
BD Vacutainer? Specimen
Luer-Lok" Access Device
Collection Assembly
· Sterile, pre-assembled multipke sample
 Sterile, pre-assembled BD vacutainer
 BD vacutainer Luer-Lok* adapter and holder
Multipke Sample Luer Adapter, BDx Blunt
● Provides the security of athreaded, locking
Plastic Cannula, and holder
uer connection (patented BD Vacutainer
● Compatible with any split-septum
Chapter 
Luer-Lok*), replacing luer slip devies
collection port designed for blunt
+ Compatible with the Bard Z-Lok* Foky
plastic cann ula access
 Cat heter Sarnpling Port
 Closed system reduces exposure of the healthcare worker to potentially
 mntam inated urine 
● Allovws colection of a fresh urine sample from a Foley catheter sampling port
without using a needle
● NCCLs Guidelines recommend testing urine within two hours of collction
BEEDER
+ Colection ito an evacuated tube allovs leak-proof transport
via a pneumatkc tube System
· A co mmon source of needlestick injury is through urine sampling via Foley
Catheterz "ldeally, the most effective way of removing the hazard of a
@ntaminated needle is to eliminate the needle completely by converting
to needlleles systems. "2
Ius In ury Rates. Adv Ex pos Prev2003:632·36.
gensstandand.
Figure 2.4(
Catheter collection devices.(Provided by BD Diagnostics,with
permission)
Specimen handling and preservation
Urine samples should be delivered to the laboratory and analyzed as soon as
possible; recent literature suggests analysis of urine within 1 hour of collec-
tion (Albasan et al. 2003). Considerations include deterioration of cellular
components and alterations in biochemical tests. The presence of bacteria in
tion, can result in a falsely negative urine glucose, due to bacterial over-
growth and metabolism of glucose, and falsely elevated urine pH, due to
bacteria that split urea and convert it to ammonia. pH can also alter other
cellular components in urine; alkaline urine can cause degradation of casts
as well as lysis of erythrocytes, the latter resulting in a potential false inter-
pretation of pigmenturia or hemoglobinemia rather than hematuria (Ben-
Ezra et al. 2007; 0sborne and Stevens 1999; Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008).
There is no substitute for fresh urine. If a delay in testing is imminent, the
used method of urine preservation. Although refrigeration can better pre-
serve cellular components and delay bacterial proliferation, it can result in
becausecold urineis denser thanroom temperature urine.Thecold tempera-
ture of the urine may inhibit enzyme reactions on the urine dipstick. Lastly,
refrigeration can cause precipitation of amorphous crystals. Warming the
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 2.2 Common urine preservatives
Preservation
Method
Pros
Cons
Refrigeration
Preserves chemical and
Increases specific gravity
formed elements
Precipitates amorphous
 Chapter 2
Inhibits bacterial growth
urates/phosphates
Formalin
Preserves sediment
Interferes with dipstick
tests: glucose, blood,
leukocyte esterase
Sodium fluoride
Inhibits glycolysis
Interferes with dipstick
tests: glucose, blood,
leukocyte esterase
reactions and dissolve crystal artifact (Ben-Ezra et al. 2o07: Osborne and
Stevens 1999; Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008).
Although not recommended for routine urinalysis, sample integrity can be
maintained by the addition of chemical preservatives; this may be necessary
for samples needing extended transport when refrigeration is not an option.
The appropriate preservative should not alter urine constituents or interfere
with analytical test methodologies (Table 2.2).
Types of urine specimens
Random
The random specimen is the most common type of urine sample evaluated
both in the veterinary clinic and clinical laboratory. As urine is frequently
collected on an as-needed basis or is collected when readily available,
several variables must be taken into consideration. Recent dietary or water
intake, physical activity. total time urine has resided in the bladder, and
recent therapeutic interventions can result in altered urine constituents
leading to test results that may not accurately reflect the patient's current
health status. For example, water intake can decrease specific gravity of
the urine, diluting chemical constituents and lysing cellular elements. More
controlled conditions for urine collection is often preferred for definitive
diagnosis.
First morning or 8 hour
A urine sample collected immediately upon awakening is known as the first
morning or 8-hour sample. First morning specimens are the most concen-
trated urine sample, allowing for evaluation of renal concentrating ability as
Specimen Procurement  17
well as detection of chemicals or formed elements that may not be easily
measured in a more dilute, random urine sample. It is presumed that the
animal has neither voided nor ingested food or water during the previous 8
hours while it has been asleep.
Fasting or second morning
hapter
Urine collected after a period of food deprivation is known as fasting or
second morning sample. It should not contain metabolites from dietary
ingestion.
Timed or 24-hour specimen
A 24-hour excretion study is used to determine urinary excretion of an
analyte,such as electrolytes orprotein,and is considered themost definitive
method of measurement (Stockham and Scott 2o08). Urine is collected for
a 24-hour period; timing starts after the bladder is completely emptied
(Stockham and Scott 2008). Collection of a 24-hour urine sample is, however,
impracticalinveterinary medicinefor several reasons.It necessitatesuse of
a metabolism cage to guarantee collection of all urine produced by an animal
(Adams et al.1992).Interpretationof laboratory results is dependent on
reference ranges that are not always available for all species; reference
aul laip jo adal aui jo pasn aesse aui uo bupuadap paseig ag aew sabueu
patient eats (Stockham and Scott 2008). In lieu of 24-hour urine collection,
either urine to plasma ratio or analyte to creatinine ratio is used (Stockham
and Scott 2008).
References
Adams LG, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, O'Brien TD. 1992. Correlation of urine protein/
creatinine ratio and twenty-four-hour urinary protein excretion in normal cats
andcats with surgically inducedchronic renal failure.Journaf of Veterinary
Internaf Medicine 6(1): 36-40.
Albasan H, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C, Ulrich LK, Carpenter KA.
2003.Effects of storage time and temperature on pH, specific gravity,and
crystal formation in urine samples from dogs and cats.Journaf of the American
Veterinary Medicaf Association 222(2): 176-9.
Barsanti JA. 1984. Diagnostic procedures in urology. Veterinary Clinics of North
America. Smaff Animaf Practice 14(1): 3-14.
Ben-Ezra J, Zhao S, McPherson R. 2OO7. Basic examination of urine. In Henry's
Clinicaf Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods,21st ed.McPherson
RA, Pincus MR, eds., pp. 393-409. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier.
Bubenik LJ, Hosgood GL, Waldron DR, Snow LA. 2OO7. Frequency of urinary tract
-daosns pue ainlino lejaioeg jo uosjiedwoo pue shop pazjaieuies ui uolioaju!
tibility testing results for catheterized and noncatheterized dogs with urinary
tract infections.Journafof theAmericanVeterinaryMedicafAssociation231(6):
893-9.
18   Practical  Veterinary Urinalysis
Buckley GJ, Aktay SA, Rozanski EA. 2oo9. Massive transfusion and surgical man-
bop e ul sisaiuasoisao ylm paleioosse uollelesel slloe 2lueboie! jo juewebe
Journal of the American Veterinary Medicaf Association 235(3): 288-91.
Kruger JM, Osborne CA, Ulrich LK. 1996. Cystocentesis. Diagnostic and therapeu-
tic considerations. Veterinary Clinics of North America. Smaff Animaf Practice
26(2): 353-61.
Chapter
Mathes MA. 2oO2. Home monitoring of the diabetic pet. Clinicaf Techniques in
Smaff Animal Practice 17(2): 86-95.
Osborne CA, Stevens JB. 1999. Urinafysis: A Clinicaf Guide to Compassionate
N
Patient Care. Shawnee Mission, KS: Bayer Corporation.
Reine NJ, Langston CE. 2005. Urinalysis interpretation: how to squeeze out the
maximum information from a small sample. Clinicar Techniques in Smaff Animal
Practice 20(1): 2-10.
Steinberg E, Drobatz K, Aronson L. 2oo9. The effect of substrate composition and
storage time on urine specific gravity in dogs. Journaf of Smaff Animaf Practice
50(10)1:536-9.
Stockham SL, Scott MA.20O8. Urinary system. In Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinical Pathology. 2nd ed. Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds., pp. 415-94. Ames, IA:
BlackwellPublishing.
Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS. 2oo8. Introduction to urinalysis. In Urinafysis and
Body Fluids, 5th ed. Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS, eds., pp. 29-40. Philadelphia:
FA Davis Company.
Wamsley H, Alleman R. 2OO7. Complete urinalysis. In BSAVA Manuaf of Canine and
Fefine Nephrofogy and Urology. 2nd ed. Elliot J, Grauer GF, eds., pp. 87-104.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Chapter 3
Routine Urinalysis:
Physical Properties
3
Chapter
A basic but essential component of routine urinalysis is assessment of the
physical properties of urine: color, clarity, specific gravity, and odor. This
chapter reviews methods of specific gravity measurement as well as inter-
pretation of urine specific gravity (USG), urine color, and clarity.
Solute concentration
Specific gravity
Specific gravity is one of two methods of measurement of urine solute con-
posed of numerous electrolytes as well as products of metabolism (urea and
  )  a  x   
Urine is composed of approximately 5% solutes and 95% water; solute
concentration is affected by the hydration status of the patient (Figure 3.1).
For example, when the kidneys must conserve water in a dehydrated patient,
the urine solute concentration would be expected to increase as the amount
of free water in the urine decreases. Solute number, size, and weight all
influence the specific gravity of a urine sample. Larger particles such as
or chloride. (See Chapter 1 for a detailed discussion of urine formation and
tu bular function.)
Measurement of specific gravity
To understand measurement of specific gravity, it may be easier to consider
it a relative density. as it is a comparison of the weight of a solution to the
weight of an equal volume of water. (Free 1987; Stockham and Scott 2008;
Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008)
Practicar Veterinary Urinafysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
19
20
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Urea
Creatinine
K+
PO4
5%
Solutes
NH4
Na+
CI-
Ca++
Chapter
95%
Water
Figure 3.1 Normal urine composition.
Direct measurement
Direct measurement of specific gravity is possible but not practical for clinical
purposes. Laboratory methods include urinometry and falling drop method.
Indirect measurement
Refractometry
Refractometry is an indirect method of USG determination and is based on
the refractive index of urine. Refractometry has replaced direct methods of
USG determination as refractometry is simple to perform, is relatively inex-
pensive, and provides a satisfactory estimate of USG when compared to
direct methods such as urinometry.
The refractive index of a solution is the degree to which light waves enter-
ing the solution are bent or refracted by the solutes or substances present
(Stockham and Scott 2008; Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008; Watson 1998).
Increasing amounts of solute in a solution cause the light to slow and refract
proportionally to the amount of solutes present; this increases the refractive
index. Thus, specific gravity of urine will increase with increasing solute con-
centration as it is the ratio of the refractive index of urine compared to water
(Gregory 2003; Stockham and Scott 2008; Watson 1998). Glucosuria and
proteinuria can both impact USG, resulting in overestimation of the USG.
Protein concentration of 1g/dL (3+ for Chemstrip? 10 MD, Indianapolis, IN;
Routine Urinalysis: Physical Properties   2t
Idexx UArM dry reagent strips, Westbrook, ME; 4+ for Multistix?, Tarrytown,
NY) increases USG approximately 0.003-0.005 (Stockham and Scott 2008).
Glucose concentration of 1000 mg/dL increases USG approximately 0.004-
0.005 (Stockham and Scott 2008). Suspended particles such as casts, crys
tals, or cells do not refract light and so do not directly affect the refractive
index or USG (Goldberg 1997). Light transmission, however, can be affected
by particle-induced turbidity, which can hinder visualization of the demarca
tion line in the refractometer, potentially resulting in an erroneous result
(Stockham and Scott 2008),
Along with solute concentration and composition, temperature can influ
hapter
automatic temperature compensation (ATC), manual temperature compen-
compensation increases the expense of the unit but generally gives accurate
the light beam passes through a temperature compensating liquid prior to
being directed to the specific gravity scale, provided the reading is obtained
within manufacturer-specified ambient temperature range. Refractometers
that are not temperature compensated tend to underestimate the USG value
with ambient temperatures greater than 68oF (20c); error increases as
temperature increases (Stockham and Scott 2o08).
Often,temperature-compensated refractometers provide scales that are
calibrated for normal human urine, but veterinary refractometers calibrated
for assessment of canine and feline urine are available. The USG difference
between dogs and humans is less pronounced than for cats; using the calibra
tion scale for dogs overestimates cat USG (Stockham and Scott 2008).Of
the veterinary refractometer models, two provide a distinct scale for deter-
mination of USG in cats (VETMED Refractometer, Misco Refractometer,
Cleveland, OH; VET 360, Leica Microsystems, Buffalo, NY) (George 2001)
(Table 3.1). Quality control and calibration methods for refractometers are
discussed in Chapter 8.
Refractometry test limitations
Urine specimens with a specific gravity reading greater than the upper limit
obtained by refractometry can be diluted with water and retested, although
the degree of concentration may be irrelevant (Table 3.2).
Dry reagenf strips
Dipstick methods for specific gravity assessment are inaccurate for veteri-
nary specimens and not recommended, although detailed information regard-
ing the dipstick test methodology can be found in Chapter 4.
Table 3.1 Procedure for determining urine specific gravity by refractometer
Title
Specific gravity procedure
Purpose
The concentrating and diluting function of the
kidney is reflected in the solute concentration of
the urine measured by specific gravity. Specific
gravity is defined as the ratio of the weight of a
volume of urine to the weight of the same
volume of water. Specific gravity is related to
refractive index, which can be measured
conveniently with a refractometer.
Specimen
Urine, centrifuged or uncentrifuged
Equipment/reagents/
Urinalysis Refractometer-Leica Vet 360
Chapter
supplies
Distilled water
Kimwipe
Disposable pipette
m
Quality control
Two levels of control are analyzed using the
procedure below on a daily basis.
Procedure
1. Lift the cover plate to expose the measuring
prism of the refractometer.
2. Place one drop of urine sample on the test
plate.
3. Close the cover plate over the prism without
delay.
4.To hold the instrument for reading, place
finger(s) on cover plate and press gently but
firmly. This spreads the sample in a thin, even
layer over the prism. Point the refractometer
toward a light source.
5. Take the reading at the point where the
dividing lines between light and dark field
cross the scale. Read the specific gravity from
the appropriate scale. There are two scales to
read from: the first from the left is for dogs
and other large animals; the second is for
cats.
6. Document results on the urinalysis report
form.
7. Using a few drops of distilled water and a
Kimwipe, clean the refractometer by wiping
the prism and bottom surfaces of the cover
plate.
Results
Results are reported to the third decimal place.
Since the result is a ratio, there are no units.
Results are recorded onto the urinalysis report
form; quality control results are recorded on the
quality control spreadsheet.
Sources: Data from Hubbard (1997); McClatchey (1994).
22
Routine Urinalysis: Physical Properties  23
Table 3.2 Calculation for dilution of USG
Procedure for dilution
Add 50μL of urine sample to 50μL deionized
water. (This is a 1:2 dilution.)
Mix well.
Read specific gravity (SG) using refractometry.
Calculation
Multiply decimal portion of specific gravity
reading by the dilution factor.
Example
Initial refractometer result: >1.050
Result after 1:2 dilution: 1.035
Calculation: 0.035 x 2
Final specific gravity result = 1.070
m
Chapter
Source: Data from Strasinger and DiLorenzo (2008).
Table 3.3  Clinical uses for USG
Confirm polyuria
Determine or confirm patient's hydration status
Assess renal function and the kidney's capacity to conserve or excrete
water
Allow for estimation of urine loss of protein or other substances (i.e,
bilirubin)
Urine volume related to UsG
Urine volume, which is also a physical characteristic of urine, is not easily
determined in clinical practice due to the necessity of a metabolic cage. Urine
volume can be inferred from USG as these are inversely related: low output
with increased volume.
Expected UsG
Adequate USG is >1.030 and >1.035 in dogs and cats,respectively, but
maximum concentrating ability is even greater. USG varies in normal animals
depending on water intake and hydration status: dogs (1.015-1.045) and cats
(1.035-1.065)(0sborne and Stevens1999: Stockham and Scott 2008; Wamsley
trate urine, knowledge of hydration status by physical exam and/or biochemi-
cal evaluation and awareness of current medications is necessary. Clinical
use and interpretation of USG are found in Tables 3.3 and 3.4, respectively.
Renal ability to concentrate urine persists until greater than two-thirds of
functioning nephrons are lost, and so adequate USG may not always reflect
kidney health. In some cats with renal disease, renal concentrating ability can
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 3.4 Interpretation of USG
USG
Significance
Interpretation
>1.030 (dog)
Urine is more concentrated than the
Hypersthenuria
>1.035 (cat)
glomerular ultrafiltrate.
Adequately
Adequate renal function
concentrated
Dehydration or hypoperfusion
urine
should be considered in a
dehydrated patient
1.013-1.029 (dog)
Urine is more concentrated than the
Hypersthenuria
1.013-1.034 (cat)
glomerular ultrafiltrate.
Moderately
Chapter
Renal function may be normal-USG
concentrated
 in dogs is more variable.
urine
If patient is dehydrated or
m
azotemic, renal insufficiency or
extra-renal impairment of
concentrating ability is likely
(Table 3.5).
1.008-1.012
Urine, plasma and glomerular
Isosthenuria
ultrafiltrate osmolality are similar.
Potentially normal renal function-
reevaluation is warranted.
If patient is dehydrated or
azotemic, renal failure is likely.
<1.008
Urine is more dilute than the
Hyposthenuria
glomerular ultrafiltrate.
Dilute urine
Renal tubules are able to reabsorb
solutes from tubular fluid.
Consider extrarenal causes of
inadequate urine concentration
(osmotic diuresis, decreased
medullary concentration gradient,
etc.) (Table 3.5).
Source: Data from Gregory (2003); Stockhar and Scott (2008); Watson (1998).
and 0sborne 1979: 0sborne et al. 1995). Causes of inadequate urine concen-
trating ability can be found in Table 3.5.
Osmolality
Osmolality is the concentration of solutes in a solution and provides a
Urine osmolality can be approximated from the refractive index of urine and
the USG, but osmometry, specifically freezing point osmometry, provides a
more accurate measure and is less influenced by solution properties. Labora
tory analysis of osmolality is impractical for clinical practice but is available
Routine Urinalysis: Physical Properties  25
Table 3.5 Causes of inadequate urine concentration
Renal failure
Prolonged diuresis
Lack of ADH (central diabetes insipidus)
Osmotic diuresis (glucosuria; treatment with mannitol)
Excess glucocorticoids (treatment with glucocorticoids,
hyperadrenocorticism)
Use of loop diuretics (alters sodium and chloride transport in the loop of
Henle)
Decreased renal medullary concentration gradient leading to medullary
Chapter
washout
Hyponatremia or hypochloremia
Low urea (hepatic failure or portosystemic shunt)
Lack of response by distal renal tubules to ADH (nephrogenic diabetes
insipidus)
e.g, canine pyometra, hypercalcemia, hyperkalemia
from referral laboratories. Specific measurement of urine osmolality is infre
quently necessary in clinical cases.
Urine color
Normal urine color is yellow, but can vary from pale to dark yellow or amber.
Pale yellow urine often corresponds to more diluteurine,and darkyellow
urine typically corresponds to more concentrated urine. The yellow color is
due to the presence of urochromes and urobilin in the urine; both are by-
products of normal metabolic processes (Osborne and Stevens1999). Another
its presence is not described in veterinary samples.
Inthelaboratory.urinesamplesshouldbeexamined forcolorthrougha
clear container utilizing a good light source and a white background. Techni-
charts.
Normal and abnormal urine color
The term pigmenturia is generally used to describe abnormal urine color,
which can vary from colorless to black. Variations may be due to normal meta
tions, although urine color is often used as an indicator of hydration status.
Table 3.6 lists differentials for various types of pigmenturia. As one color can
ation are necessary to identify the cause of pigmenturia (Figure 3.2).
26
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 3.6Laboratory correlations to urine color
Urine color
Differentials
Colorless or pale yellow
Dilute, poorly concentrated urine
Dark yellow to orange
Concentrated urine (dark yellow)
Bilirubinuria (orange to orange-brown)
Yellow green
Photo-oxidation of bilirubin in bilirubinuria
Biliverdin
Yellow-brown to brown
Bilirubinuria
Red
Hematuria
Chapter
Hemoglobinuria
Red-brown
Hematuria
Hemoglobinuria
m
Myoglobinuria
Methemoglobin
Brown to black
Methemoglobin
 Oxyglobin administration
Metronidazole administration?
Deep red to port wine
Porphyrins
Blue greena
Methocarbamol (Robaxin)
Methylene blue
Amitriptyline (Elavil)
? Reported in humans.
Sources: Data from Ben-Ezra et al. (2007); Gregory (2003); Stockhar and Scott (2008).
Clarity
Clarity pertains to the transparency or turbidity of a urine specimen. Visual
examination of a well-mixed urine sample should be evaluated through a clear
specimen container, and results should be reported using consistent terms.
malities not detected through visual assessment. Following storage or refrig
et al. 2003; Stockham and Scott 2008), amorphous phosphates, carbonates,
and urates; upon warming the specimen to room temperature, these are
expected to dissolve. Microscopic evaluation should always be performed on
any urine sample with diminished clarity.
Odor
Characterizing urine odor is not a physical property typically reported as a
part of urinalysis, but certain disease processes and drug metabolites can
alter urine odor and impact interpretation of test results. A pronounced
ammonia odor results from aged urine specimens or can be the result of
Pink, Red,
URINE COLOR
Red-brown
Dipstick Blood:
DIPSTICK RESULT
 Positive
POSSIBLE CAUSES
Hematuria 
Hemoglobinuria
Myoglobinuria
Chapter 3
MICROSCOPIC
Many RBCs
< 5 RBCs/HPF
<5 RBCs/HPF
FINDINGS
Red/pink
Clear
PLASMA COLOR
Clear
+/-casts
+/- casts
Anemia
ADDITIONAL DATA
+/-Heinz bodies
Increased CK
+/- Anemia
+/-Spherocytes
Incrcascd AST
+/- Ghost cells
Figure 3.2 Differential diagnosis of red color urine.
RBC, red blood cell; HPF, high power field; CK, creatine kinase; AST, aspartate
transaminase.
Table 3.7
Correlation to urine clarity
Urine
Possible clinical
transparency
Description
correlations
Clear
No turbidity
Normal
No visible particles
Inadequately
Newsprint visible
concentrated urine
through specimen
Hazy, cloudy,
No visible particles
Mucus
turbid
although clarity is
Cellular elements
increasingly obscured
Crystalluria
Milky
White, turbid specimen
Pyuria
Lipiduria
Chyluria (rare)
Flocculent
Many large particles
Precipitation of crystals
observed
Fecal contamination
27
28    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
bacterial urease. An acetone smell to the urine suggests ketonemia. Admin-
istration of various drugs could also result in an altered urine odor. Distinctive
chemical smells may indicate contamination via specimen preservatives,
strong disinfectants, or skin cleansers.
References
Albasan H, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C, Ulrich LK, Carpenter KA.
crystal formation in urine samples from dogs and cats. Journaf of the American
Chapter
Veterinary Medica1 Association 222(2): 176-9.
Ben-Ezra J, Zhao S, McPherson R. 2oO7. Basic examination of urine. In Henry's
Clinicaf Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods, 2ist ed. McPherson
RA, Pincus MR, eds., pp. 393-409. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier.
Free HM. 1987. Modern Urine Chemistry. Elkhart, IN: Miles Laboratories.
George JW. 2oo1. The usefulness and limitations of hand-held refractometers in
Clinical Pathofogy 30(4): 201-10.
Goldberg HE. 1997. Principfes of Refractometry. Buffalo, NY: Leica.
Gregory CR. 2O03. Urinary System. In Duncan & Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory
Medicine Clinicaf Pathofogy,4th ed. Latimer KS, Mahaffey EA, Prasse KW, eds.,
pp. 231-59. Ames, IA: lowa State Press.
Hardy RM, Osborne CA. 1979. Water deprivation test in the dog: maximal normal
values.Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association 174: 479-83.
Hubbard JD. 1997. A Concise Review of Clinicaf Laboratory Science. Philadelphia:
Lippincott williams & wilkins.
McClatchey KD.1994. Clinicaf Laboratory Medicine, 1st ed. Philadelphia: Lippincott
Williams & wilkins.
Osborne CA, Stevens JB.1999.Urinalysis: A Clinicaf Guide to Compassionate
Patient Care. Shawnee Mission, KS: Bayer Corporation.
Osborne CA, Stevens JB, Lulich JD et al. 1995. A clinician's analysis of urinalysis.
In Canine and Feline Nephrology and Urology.: Osborne CA, Finco DR, eds., Pp.
136-205. Baltimore, MD: williams and Wilkins.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2OO8. Urinary system. In Fundamentais of Veterinary
Clinical Pathofogy, 2nd ed. Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds., Pp. 415-94. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing.
Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS. 2oo8. Physical examination of urine. In Urinalysis
and Body Fluids, 5th ed. Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS, eds., pp. 41-51. Philadel
phia:FA Davis Company.
Wamsley H, Alleman R. 2OO7. Complete urinalysis. In BSAVA Manuaf of Canine and
Fefine Nephrofogy and Urology, 2nd ed. Elliott J., Grauer GF, eds., pp. 87-104.
Gloucester: British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Watson ADJ. 1998. Urine specific gravity in practice. Austrafian Veterinary Journaf
76(6): 392-98.
Chapter 4
Routine Urinalysis:
Chemical Analysis
Laboratory methods leading to the development of "dip and read" dry
reagent systems were invented in the 1940s and revolutionized urinalysis
testing during the next two decades. Present-day, dry reagent test strips, or
dipsticks, are reliable, easy to use, and provide a rapid means of performing
chemical analysis of urine.
hapter
Dipsticks consist of chemically impregnated test pads attached to a plastic
strip (Figure 4.1). when the test pad is immersed in urine, a color-producing
tion exclusively designed to read test strips. Test results are primarily semi-
quantitative although some tests can be estimated in milligrams per deciliter.
Laboratory guidelines for dry reagent strips can be found in Table 4.1.
Dry reagent strips are available in a variety of test configurations from
names Chemstrip? (Roche Diagnostic Corporation Indianapolis, IN), Idexx
UATM (Idexx Laboratories, Westbrook, ME), and Multistix (Siemens Health-
packet inserts and color charts as these are not interchangeable between
manufacturers.
individual dipstick chemistry tests as well as interfering substances that can
affect result interpretation. Variations between manufacturers are high-
lighted when differences exist.
pH
Clinical significance
In most species during health, various acids are produced as a result of
Practicar Veterinary Urinafysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
29
 Diazonium Salt Impregnated Mesh?
Leukocytes
iproves sensitivity
Nitrite
Urobilinogen
Mesh Larminate ?
Protein
Absorption Paper Layer ?
 Plastic Carrier a, b, c
Chapter 4
pH
lodate Impregnated Mesh a
Blood
eliminates Vitamin C interference
Specific Gravity
Ketone
 Bilirubin
Glucose
Compensation Pad
Figure 4.1 Features of urine dipsticks by manufacturer: (a) Chemstrip (Roche Diagnos
tic Corporation Indianapolis, IN), (b) Idexx UATM (ldexx Laboratories Westbrook, ME), and
(c)Multistix(Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics,Tarrytown,NY).
Sources: Chemstrip 10 MD Product Insert (2007); Idexx UA Strips Product Insert (2002);:
Multistix Product Insert (2oo9).
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   31
Table 4.1 Laboratory guidelines for dry reagent strips
Storage ofreagentstrips
Keep container securely sealed.
Do not remove desiccant packet from container.
Protect from temperature extremes and excessive moisture.
Care of reagent strips
Consult packet insert and color chart for changes in procedure, color
reactivity orinterferences.
Do not use past expiration date.
Remove stripfrom container immediatelyprior touse.
Verify test pads are not discolored as this may indicate loss of reactivity.
Do not touch test pads with hands.
Do not perform testing in the presence of alkaline fumes or volatile acids.
Testprocedure
Analyze fresh, well-mixed urine sample. If refrigerated, allow specimen to
warm to room temperature prior to testing.
Completely submerge test strip briefly (no longer than 1 second) into the
Chapter
urinesample.
Drain excess urine from the test strip by withdrawing the strip against
the rim of the container or blot the edge of the strip on absorbent paper.
Do not allow test pad reagents to leach.
specified time intervals. Use a good light source.
Perform confirmatory tests as necessary.
Interpretation of results
Understand the significance of each test result.
Be familiar with the sensitivity, specificity, and sources of error for each
test on the reagent strip
Relate physical, chemical, and microscopic findings.
Sources: Data from Ben-Ezra et al. (2007); Strasinger and DiLorenzo (2008).
result of total body acid-base balance and is influenced by diet, diurnal varia
tion, and disease state.
Precise urine pH measurement is best performed using a pH meter
(Johnson et al. 2oo7), but this method is impractical for clinical use since
frequent maintenance and calibration of the device is necessary. Thus, urine
Reagent strip methodology
All dry chemical reagent strips utilize an indicator system consisting of
methyl red and bromthymol blue; these indicators react specifically with
strip pH test pad.
32   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Dynamic range
readings increment by 1 pH unit. Results obtained by Multistix test strips
Expected value
The expected value is 6.0-7.5 in dogs and cats
Interferences
There are no known analytical interferences with dry chemical strip method-
values. Acidic urine is associated with high protein diet and is considered
Chapter 
normal in carnivores (Table 4.2).
Confirmatory testing
While confirmation of urine pH obtained by dry chemical analysis is rarely
indicated, a pH meter, litmus paper strips, or nitrazine paper can be used to
verify an unexpected or extreme value.
Protein
Clinical significance
Normal urine contains little to no detectable protein. The minute amounts of
protein sometimes present in urine are attributed to various low molecular
weight (LMw) plasma proteins (less than 40-60kD), proteins secreted by
renal tubular epithelial cells (i.e. Tamm Horsfall protein), proteins from the
detectable amounts of albumin. Albumin, a medium molecular weight protein
(65-70kD), is mostly absent from normal urine due to selective glomerular
filtration. Proximal renal tubular epithelial cells reabsorb the normal small
ultrafiltrate. The capacity of the proximal tubular cells to reabsorb this protein
merular filtration, and reabsorptive machinery of the proximal tubular epithe-
lial cells determine final urine protein levels (Stockham and Scott 2008).
Both albumin and non-albumin proteins may be detected during routine
urinalysis and/or acid precipitation (confirmatory) methods (osborne and
    1    1 
Protein is more likely to be detected by a urine dipstick when present in
concentrated urine specimens.
Table 4.2 Causes of varied urine pH
Acidic urine
High protein diet (meat or milk-based)
Increased protein catabolism
Starvation
Corticosteroids
Muscle wasting
Metabolic acidosis
Uremia (renal failure)
Ethylene glycol toxicosis
Lactate (severe tissue hypoperfusion)
Ketones (diabetic ketosis or ketoacidosis)
Paradoxical aciduria
Gastric outflow obstruction causing vomiting and dehydration
(see concurrent hypochloremia, metabolic alkalosis, hypokalemia)
Hypokalemia
Bacterial infection (E. cofi UTI)
Renal tubular acidosis
Proximal (if bicarbonate is depleted)
Diuretics
Furosemide
Chapter
Urinary acidifiers
Methionine
Ammonium chloride
Ascorbic acid (debatable)
Alkaline urine
Aged urine specimen
Degradation of urea and loss of CO2
Vegetable-based diet
Metabolic alkalosis +/- respiratory alkalosis
UTIs due to urease-containing bacteria (i.e., Proteus, Staphyfococcus)
Therapeutic agents
Acetazolamide
Potassium citrate
Sodium bicarbonate
Post-prandial alkaline tide (urine collected 1 hour after a meal)
Renal tubular acidosis
Distal (pH may or may not be alkaline)
Proximal (early)
Sources: Data from Gregory (2003);: Osborne and Stevens (1999); Stockharm and Scott
(2008).
33
34  Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Causes ofproteinuria
Causes of proteinuria can be classified based on origin of the protein and can
be a result of prerenal or overflow proteinuria, renal and postrenal causes,
and tubular secretion of protein.
Prerenal proteinuria
Prerenal or overflow proteinuria is caused by conditions that increase plasma
      a    
hemoglobin from intravascular hemolysis (IVH), Bence-Jones proteins (immu-
tions, and acute phase reactants increased due to inflammation and infection.
Prerenal proteinuria is not expected to directly result in hypoalbuminemia.
Some of these proteins and disease processes, however, may result in renal
injury.
Chapter
Renal proteinuria
A
This category of proteinuria is associated with true renal disease and may be
caused by glomerular disease, tubular disease, a combination of glomerular
and tubular disease, or, less often, renal interstitial disease. Renal proteinuria
can be transient (i.e. a result of fever) or persistent; persistent types of pro-
teinuria are of the greatest clinical concern (Lees et al. 2o05; Osborne and
Glomeruiardamage
Damage to the glomerular filtration barrier increases glomerular permeability
and so increases the amount of plasma proteins, including albumin, in the
urine. Causes of glomerular proteinuria are numerous and include both
acquired and inherited causes with prognosis depending on exact etiology
(Littman 2o11). Glomerular proteinuria typically causes a greater amount of
albumin loss, which can result in hypoalbuminemia and other complications.
Tubuiar damage
As mentioned above, proximal renal tubular epithelial cells normally reabsorb
and process small amounts of filtered LMw proteins and albumin, when
on the etiology of the disease or injury, other signs of renal disease may be
apparent as well (i.e. azotemia, inadequately concentrated urine, casts).
Inherited diseases should be suspected in a younger patient with proteinuria.
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   35
(Osborne and Stevens 1999: Stockham and Scott 2008: Strasinger and
DiLorenzo 2008).
Postrenal proteinuria
ureter, urinary bladder, or urethra) or from extraurinary sources (genital
tract) (Lees 2o05). Sources include inflammation due to bacterial or fungal
infections, idiopathic inflammatory processes, blood from trauma, neoplasia,
DiLorenzo 2008).
Tubular secretion
Renalepithelialcells in the distaltubulecanproduce and secrete Small
amounts of protein which may be detected in concentrated urine samples.
Chapter
The presence of these proteins is considered normal and does not reflect
renal disease.
Reagent strip methodology
The protein test methodology used for dry reagent strips is based on the
ability of protein to alter an acid-base indicator while the pH of the test
ogy, the acid-base indicator donates hydrogen ions to most proteins present
in the urine sample, although it more readily donates hydrogen ions to albumin
DiLorenzo 2008). The exchange of hydrogen ions results in activation of the
chromogen and produces visible color change on the test pad.
aaeban :angea paioadxa
Detection of less than 30mg/dL of protein can be a normal finding in a single
sistent proteinuria warrants investigation (Stockham and Scott 2o08). Urine
protein results should be interpreted in association with specific gravity. Any
positive protein result found in dilute urine should be investigated further
tary information on interpretation and additional testing.
Dynamic range
Negative to 3+ (500mg/dL) Chemstrip
Negative to 3+ (500mg/dL) Idexx UA
Negative to 4+ (>2000 mg/dL) Multistix
36
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 4.3 Differentials and interferences for urine protein (dipstick)
Positive reaction
Albumin
Myoglobin
Hemoglobin
Immunoglobulins
Bence-Jones proteins
Acute phase proteins
Mucoproteins
Tamm-Horsfall (uromodulin) in dogs
Cauxin in cats
False positive
Highly alkaline urine
Chlorhexidine (skin cleanser)
Blood substitutes (Oxyglobin@)
Highly pigmented urine samples
Chapter
Phenazopyridine (urinary tract analgesic)
Disinfectants (quaternary ammonium compounds)
Prolonged immersion of urine sample
4
Loss of reagents from dipstick
Highly buffered urine samples (Multistix?)
Runover between the pH and adjacent protein test pad
Negative reaction
Presence of nonalbumin proteins (these may or may not be detected)
Albumin concentrations of <3omg/dL (includes microalbuminuria)
Low pH (false negative)
Sources: Data from Gregory (2003): Miyazakiet al. (2003); Stockham and Scott (2008);
Interferences
Refer to Table 4.3.
Confirmatory testing
Sulfosalicylic acid method
The sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) method is a cold precipitation test: when acid
is mixed with protein, the protein immediately precipitates, resulting in
visual turbidity within the sample. The SSA test screens for all types of
protein, but any substance that is precipitated by acid can cause a false
positive reaction (Table 4.3). Precipitate from radiographic dyes can mimic
a positive reaction especially when the urine-SSA mixture is left at room
temperature.
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis  37
Table 4.4 Differentials and interferences for SSA testing
Positive reaction
Presence of:
Albumin
Hemoglobin
Myoglobin
Globulin
Bence-Jones proteins
Glycoproteins
Tamm-Horsfall (uromodulin) in dogs
Cauxin in cats
False positive
Antibiotics:
Penicillins
Cephalosporin
Sulfonamides
Radiographic contrast agents*
Chapter
Uncentrifuged urine sample
Thymol (urine preservative)
Tolbutamide (oral hypoglycemic agent)
False negative
Highly alkaline urine specimen
Increased pH interferes with acid precipitation
 Sources: Data from Gregory (2003); Miyazaki et al. (2003);: Osborne and Stevens (1999);
Stockhar and Scott (2008).
To perform the SSA test, urine supernatant is mixed with an equal part of
5% SSA, and the amount of precipitate is graded negative to 4+. It is impor-
tant to utilize centrifuged urine as formed elements or extraneous materials
found in uncentrifuged urine can cause false-positive results (Table 4.4)
Detection of microalbuminuria
Microalbuminuria is the presence of urinary albumin greater than normal
levels but below the detection level of dry reagent strips, typically 1-30 mg/
albuminuria in human patients at risk for renal disease (Futrakul et al. 2o09;
Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2o08). Microalbuminuria assays that employ
methods have been shown to be of variable utility in dogs and are not recom-
mended for use in cats (Pressler et al. 2002; Welles et al. 2006). Dipsticks
used to detect microalbuminuria with species-specific antibodies to albumin
cats (Lyon et al. 2010). The reader is guided to Chapter 6 for further discus-
sion of microalbuminuria.
38    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Glucose
Clinical significance
Glucose is a relatively small molecule and freely passes through the glomeru-
by both active and facilitated glucose transport systems (Lee et al. 2o08).
glomerular blood flow, tubular reabsorption rate, and urine flow will influence
glucose threshold level, which varies by species:
●Dogs:180-220 mg/dL
● Cats: 280-290mg/dL
(Gregory 2003; Stockham and Scott 2008)
Chapter
There are many conditions associated with glucosuria listed in Table 4.5.
Reagent strip methodology
employs glucose oxidase and peroxidase. In the initial reaction, glucose
a chromogen to produce color. Chromogens utilized for this methodology
vary by reagent strip manufacturer; as always, appropriate color charts must
will not detect reducing substances or other reducing sugars.
Dynamic range
Normal to 1000 mg/dL Chemstrip
Negative to 4+ (1000 mg/dL) Idexx UA
Negative to 4+ (2000 mg/dL or greater) Multistix
Expected value
Normal or negative
Interferences
Refer to Table 4.5.
False positives
Samples obtained from an examination table or floor are most susceptible
to contamination by oxidizing agents which may result in false positives
(Stockham and Scott 2008).
Table 4.5 Differentials and interferences for glucosuria
Positive result
Concurrent hyperglycemia
Mechanism: Plasma glucose level exceeds tubular reabsorption capacity
Causes:
Diabetes mellitus
Glucocorticoids-exogenous or endogenous (uncommon)
Excitement in cats (typically transient)
Intravenous glucose supplementation
+/- Acute pancreatitis
+/-Pheochromocytoma
+/- Ethylene glycol intoxication
Normal pfasma glucose (Euglycemia)
Mechanism: Decreased tubular reabsorption of glucose
Acquired causes:
Renal tubular injury, toxicosis, or necrosis of the proximal renal
tubular epithelial cells
Nephrotoxic drugs (aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, NSAIDs,
high dose amoxicillin)
Severe hypoxemia, hypovolemia or hypotension
Infectious agents
hapter
Neoplasia
Inherited/congenital causes:
Fanconi-like syndrome syndrome or primary renal glucosuria (e.g,
Basenji, Norwegian elkhound, Shetland sheepdog)
False positive
Oxidizing agents
Hydrogen peroxide
Hypochlorite (chlorine bleach)
False negative
Marked bilirubinuria
Formalin (used as a urine preservative)
Refrigerated specimens not warmed to room temperature prior to
testing
+/- Ketonuria in samples with low levels of glucosuria
+/-Ascorbic acid (endogenous or exogenous)
Sources: Data from Gregory (2003);: Osborne and Stevens (1999); Stockharm and Scott
(2008); Wamsley and Alleman (2007).
39
40   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
False negatives
False-negative results are due to substances that interfere with the enzy-
matic reactions of the dry reagent test and prevent oxidation of the chromo
gen. Most manufacturers have eliminated the interference from a high
specific gravity. ascorbic acid, or moderate levels of ketonuria (40 mg/dL;
Wamsley and Alleman 2007).
Confirmatory testing
Reducing substances
Copper reduction tests are utilized in human medicine to screen pediatric
patients for reducing substances in the urine, specifically galactose, although
other sugars will react (i.e. glucose, fructose, and lactose). In veterinary
medicine, copper reduction tests can be used to verify a questionable reagent
strip reaction in samples demonstrating significant pigmenturia (Stockham
Chapter
and Scott 2008).
The test methodology employs copper, which reacts with the reducing
4
substance to produce cuprous (Cu+) oxide and cuprous hydroxide, producing
tive to detection of reducing substances in urine than the single tablet Clinit-
est? copper reduction method.
Ketone
Clinical significance
Ketones are intermediate products of fat metabolism and form secondary to
hydrate metabolism, is shifted to break down and utilize lipid and free fatty
acids instead of carbohydrates. Ketone bodies include acetone, acetoacetic
tate and acetone have the chemical structure of ketones. Ketone bodies enter
only acetone has the ability to be reabsorbed after entering the tubular fluid.
Reagent strip methodology
Detection of ketones in the urine is based on the method of Legal: acetoacetic
acid reacts with sodium nitroprusside and produces pink to purple color on
the reagent pad. The test does not detect beta-hydroxybutyric acid.
Dynamic range
Negative to 3+ Chemstrip
Negative to 3+ (150mg/dL) Idexx UA
Negative to Large (160 mg/dL) Multistix
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   41
Expected value
Negative
Interferences
Refer to Table 4.6.
Confirmatory testing
Acetest
Acetest Reagent Tablets (Bayer Corporation,Elkhart,IN)utilizes the same
methodology as the strip method, but lactose is added to enhance color dif-
ferentiation.This method canbe employed for samples other than urine,
Chapter
Table 4.6
6Differentials and interferences for ketonuria
Positive
Ketosis
Lactation
Diabetes mellitus
Prolonged anorexia
Starvation (especially young animals)
Extreme exercise (i.e., endurance race)
Dietary
Low carbohydrate (higher in fat, protein)
Hypoglycemia
Insulinoma
Sepsis
False positive
Pigmenturia (Red)
Hematuria
Hemoglobinuria
Prior diagnostic procedures with bromosulphophthalein dye
Levodopa metabolites (uncommon)
Highly concentrated, acidic urine (trace reactions)
Compounds with sulfhydryl groups (i.e., captopril, cystine)
False negative
Presence of beta hydroxybutyrate
Beta hydroxybutyrate not detected by reagent strips
Aged urine specimen
Acetone is volatized
Prolonged exposure of reagent pad to moisture
Bacteriuria
Acetoacetic acid broken down by bacteria
Sources: Data from Gregory (2003); Osborne and Stevens (1999); Stockharm and Scott
(2008);: Warmsley and Alleman (2007).
42   Practical  Veterinary Urinalysis
80-100 mg/dL of acetoacetic acid (Acetest packet insert).
Blood
Clinical significance
A positive dipstick reaction for blood can result from hematuria, hemoglobin-
uria, or myoglobinuria; the presence of any of these substances in urine is an
abnormal finding. It is important to differentiate between these three causes,
given the very different etiologies. Hematuria can be macroscopic or micro
scopic and is due to the presence of intact red blood cells (RBCs); a minimum
number of 5-20RBCs/μL is needed to produce a positive heme reaction
(Stockham and Scott 2o08). Hematuria can result from bleeding anywhere
within the urinary tract and should be verified with microscopic evaluation.
Chapter
Hemoglobinuria results from the destruction of RBCs within blood vessels
(IVH). Severe muscle injury (rhabdomyolysis) can cause myoglobinuria. Urine
containing intact erythrocytes or hemoglobin tends to be red-tinged in color
寸
while urine containing myoglobin is often red-brown or brown in color (Archer
Reagent strip methodology
This test detects the presence of RBCs, free hemoglobin,and myoglobin in
urine. The methodology is based on the pseudoperoxidase activity of hemo
globin or myoglobin. On the reagent test pad, peroxide and a chromogen
produce a visible hue when catalyzed by hemoglobin or myoglobin. Two color
patterns maydistinguish between hematuriaorhemoglobinuria/myoglobinuria:
(1) An isolated reaction producing a speckled pattern ranging from sparse
to dense indicates intact RBCs. This pattern results from intact RBCs
making contact with the reagent pad, which lyses the cells,and free
hemoglobin is released.
(2) Uniform color is produced when free hemoglobin or myoglobin is detected.
Reagent strips can detect hemoglobin concentrations associated with as few
with the microscopic values for red cells since the absorbent pad examines
  
Dynamic range
Negative to about 250 Erythrocytes per microliter (Ery/uL) Chemstrip
Negative to 4+ (250Ery/μL) Idexx UA
Non-Hemolyzed: Negative to Moderate and Hemolyzed: Negative to Large
(3+) Multistix
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   43
Expected value
Negative
Interferences
Refer to Table 4.7.
False positives
Several substances can result in a false-positive reaction (Table 4.7).Extrau-
dogs.
False negatives
One preanalytic error resulting in a false-negative result is a failure to mix
napter
tainers, producing a false-negative test strip result (Strasinger and DiLorenzo
2008). Ascorbic acid, a strong reducing agent, can inactivate the hydrogen
C
and Roche have modified their test methodology to decrease interference to
Table 4.7 Interferences for occult blood (dipstick)
False positive
Oxidizing agents
Hypochlorite (chlorine bleach)
Hydrogen peroxide
Marked bilirubinuria (bilirubin > 64 mg/L)
Large amounts of bromide or iodide
Extraurinary hemorrhage
Contamination by digested hemoglobin (flea dirt)
+/- Presence of bacterial or leukocyte peroxidases
False negative
 Inadequately mixed urine
Failure of RBCs to lyse in reagent pad
Increased USG
Presence of:
Formalin (used as a urine preservative)
Formaldehyde
Captopril
+/- Ascorbic acid
Sources: Data from Stockharm and Scott (2008); Strasinger and DiLorenzo (2008); Warmsley
and Alleman (2007).
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
only high levels (25 mg/dL) of ascorbic acid (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008).
Idexx strips demonstrate no interference with ascorbic acid.
Differentiation of positive results
Refer to Table 4.8.
Hematuria
cystocentesis, catheterization, or manual expression can all result in iatro-
genic hemorrhage. Causes of pathological urinary tract hemorrhage include
trauma, inflammation, neoplasia, inherited and acquired primary and second-
ary hemostatic disorders, and idiopathic disorders.
Chapter
Hemogiobinuria
globin dimers (32 kD) form and are scavenged by haptoglobin. Haptoglobin
recovers the hemoglobin so as to conserve iron and prevent renal tubular
injury by hemoglobin. In severe cases of IVH, the haptoglobin recovery
Table 4.8 Differentials for positive occult blood and red/pink urine color
Urine
Plasma
Additional data
Condition
Color
Dipstick
Microscopic
Color
CBC/Chemistry
Hematuria
Pink,
+ Blood
Many RBCs
Normal
+/- Anemia
red,
+/-
brown
Protein
Hemoglobinuria
Pink,
+ Blood
None to few
Low PCv/Anemia
red,
+/-
RBCs
+/- Heinz bodies
brown
Protein
Occasional
+/- Spherocytes
pigmented
+/- Ghost cells
casts
+/- Hemic
parasites
Myoglobinuria
Red,
+ Blood
None to few
Normal
↑CK
brown
RBCs
+/-
Occasional
↑AST
Protein
brown casts
Source: Data frorm Stockharm and Scott (2008); Strasinger and Dilorenzo (2008); Wamsley and Allerman
(2007).
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   45
system is overwhelmed, and the excess hemoglobin dimers pass through the
glomerulus, enter the ultrafiltrate, and are either resorbed by the renal
tubules or are excreted into the urine.
portsa diagnosis of hemoglobinuria.Anemia is expected.Thepresence of
Heinz bodies, ghost cells, hemic parasites (i.e. Mycopiasma sp., Babesia sp.),
within urine that is very alkaline or dilute (urine specific gravity [USG] < 1.015;
Stockham and Scott 2008). Plasma should be clear.
Myoglobinuria
Myoglobin is released from myocyte (muscle cell) damage or necrosis; myo-
globin (17 kD) is freely filtered by the glomerulus and will be excreted in the
urine if not resorbed by renal tubules. Myoglobinuria imparts a brown or red-
brown-tinged color to urine. Distinguishing myoglobinuria from hemoglobin-
hapter
uria can be challenging. given the positive heme reaction for both and the
广
for differentiation of myoglobinuria and hemoglobinuria included an ammo-
nium sulfate precipitation test; it is generally considered unreliable, and other
clinicopathological measures (i.e. packed cell volume [PCV], CBC findings.
2007; Stockham and Scott 2008; Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008). In con-
trast to large animals, especially horses, myoglobinuria is relatively uncom-
mon in small animals, given the smaller relative muscle mass. Biochemical
changes that would be seen concurrently with myoglobinuria include
increased levels of plasma creatine kinase (Ck) and aspartate transaminase
(AST);: AST can also elevate with hemolysis so CK is preferred for diagnosis
muscle trauma or ischemia, and following intense exertion or severe convul-
globin.This is less common in small animals than in humans or horses
(Stockham and Scott 2008),
Bilirubin
Clinical significance
Bilirubinis a normal productof RBC breakdown.Senescent RBCs arephago
is extracted from the heme ring, ultimately resulting in the formation of bili-
rubin. Bilirubin bound to albumin (unconjugated or indirect bilirubin) is taken
to the liver for conjugation (conjugated or direct bilirubin), excreted into the
46   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
tine. Only conjugated bilirubin is water soluble and able to be freely filtered
by the glomerulus. Hyperbilirubinemia (conjugated or unconjugated) and bili-
rubinuria can result from hemolysis as well as obstructive or functiona
(i.e. the dog).
Reagent strip methodology
In the presence of bilirubin, diazotized dichloroaniline couples with bilirubin
and produces color on the reagent pad. A bilirubin concentration of 0.4 mg/
dL is considered negative; test methods with lower sensitivity should be
employed to detect lower levels. Reagent strip color reactions for bilirubin
are often difficult to discern in urine specimens of normal color; atypical urine
Chapter 4 
pigments intensify this challenge. Confirmatory testing is utilized to verify
positive or questionable results.
Dynamic range
Negative to 3+ Chemstrip
Negative to 3+ ldexx UA
Negative to 3+ Multistix
Expected value: Negative
Refer to Table 4.9.
Interferences
False positives
Metabolites of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug (NSAID) Etodolac can
result in false-positive bilirubin dipstick reactions. Intestinal bacterial trypto
phan metabolism can produce indican, which can also result in a positive bili-
rubin test.
False negatives
bilirubin; neither reacts with bilirubin tests employing diazo. Spontaneous
oxidation of bilirubin to biliverdin can result from exposure to ultraviolet light
and a prolonged processing delay of urine specimens. False negatives are
also observed when free bilirubin is present from the hydrolysis of bilirubin
diglucuronide (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2o08). Increased levels of either
nitrite or greater than 25 mg/dL of ascorbic acid reduces reaction of the test
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis    47
Table 4.9 Differentials and interferences for bilirubinuria
Positive
Normal (dogs)
Concentrated urine samples may contain small amounts of bilirubin (1+
or less)
Hemolysis (lntra- or extravascular)
Cholestasis
Obstructive hepatic or posthepatic lesions
Functional (sepsis)
False positive
Etodolac (NSAID)
Deeply pigmented urine
Indican (intestinal bacterial metabolite)
Hemoglobinemia
Tubular formation of bilirubin from hemoglobin
False negative
Delayed processing
Chapter
Exposure to ultraviolet light
Presence of:
Nitrite
Ascorbic acid (endogenous or exogenous)
Sources: Data frorm Archer (2005); Stockharn and Scott (2008); Strasinger and DilLorenzo
(2008).
pad with bilirubin as both combine with the diazonium salt in the test pad and
lowers the sensitivity of the test (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2o08).
Confirmatory test
lctotest?
The Ictotest (Siemens Medical Solutions Diagnostics, Tarrytown, NY) detects
levels of bilirubin as low as 0.05 mg/dL (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008),
toluene sulfonate, SSA, sodium carbonate, and boric acid.
Ictotestprocedure:Ten drops of urine are added to the cottony side of
one test mat; urine is absorbed on the test mat while bilirubin remains on the
surface of the mat. One tablet is centered on the absorbed urine, and one
drop of water is placed on the tablet. After 5 seconds, a second drop of water
is placed on the tablet, both of which spill onto the mat. The reaction should
continue for 60 seconds before the tablet is removed and color is evaluated.
Blue to purple is positive for bilirubin; any other color is considered a negative
reaction. The lctotest is less prone to interference than dry reagent strip
methods and should be employed when detection of bilirubin levels less than
)  
48   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Urobilinogen
Clinical significance
Conjugated bilirubin is delivered to the intestine where most is converted to
or excreted into the urine. Urine urobilinogen is colorless. A tetrapyrrole
metabolite of bilirubin, urobilinogen is unstable and may be oxidized to uro-
bilin in an acid environment. Additionally, urobilinogen may be converted to
urobilin when a urine sample is exposed to ultraviolet light, which turns the
urine sample green-tinged.
used in human medicine, urobilinogen is commonly incorporated in veteri-
nary urinalysis studies. In the dog. extreme cases of hemolysis may
produce high urobilinogen levels with detection possible approximately 3
Chapter
days after the onset of hemolysis (Tang et al. 2008). Hemolytic episodes
in other species do not consistently produce urobilinogenuria. Most inves-
寸
unreliable.
Reagent strip methodology
Based on the Ehrlich reaction, test pads contain a color enhancer and diazo
nium salt that reacts with urobilinogen to produce a visible pink-red tint.
approximately 1mg/dL. Urobilin or porphobilinogen are not detected by this
methodology. Multistix reagent strips can detect urobilinogen in concentra-
tions as low as 0.2EU/dL; however, the absence of urobilinogen cannot be
lytic and hepatic disease.
Dynamic range
Normal to 12 mg/dL Chemstrip
Normal to 4+ (12 mg/dL) Idexx UA
Normal to 8 mg/dL Multistix
Expected value
Normal
Interferences
Refer to Table 4.10.
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   49
Table 4.10Differentials and interferences for urobilinogen
Positive
Insignificant
False positive
Darkly colored urine
Sulphonamides (antibiotic)
Aminobenzoic acid (PABA)
Phenazopyridine (urinary tract analgesic)
Any substance that reacts with Ehrlich reagent
Aminosalicylic acid (derivative of salicylic acid)
False negative
Urine specimens exposed to sunlight
Formalin (used as urine preservative)
Sources: Data from Archer (2005); Stockham and Scott (2008); Strasinger and DiLorenzo
(2008); Wamsley and Alleman (2007).
Chapter
Nitrite
Clinical significance
Nitrate is normally present in the urine of humans and is derived from con-
sumption of nitrate-rich meat, vegetables, and drinking water. In the presence
urinary nitrate is converted to nitrite; detection of nitrituria is associated with
gram-negative bacteria infections inhumans.However,corroborative data
have not been observed in other species, and this test result is generally
Alleman 2007).
Reagent strip methodology
In the presence of nitrite, para-arsanilic acid forms a diazonium compound
which couples with1,2,3,4-tetrahydrobenzo(h)quinolin-3-ol to produce detect-
able coloron the reagent pad. This methodology is specificfor nitrite. A positive
result suggests the presence of 1,ooo,ooo or more organisms per milliliter.
Dynamic range
Negative or Positive Chemstrip
Negative to 3+ ldexx UA
Negative or Positive Multistix
Expected value
Negative.
50     Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Interferences
False positives
False-positive results are observed with dark-colored urine specimens, urines
 e i i       s  
(Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008).
False negative
False-negative results are obtained from patients who lack dietary nitrate or
from bacteriuric samples not retained in the bladder for enough time to
urine retention time is commonly unmanageable for veterinary patients, this
test a poor diagnostic tool (Archer 2005).
Chapter
Leukocyte esterase
Clinical significance
This reagent strip test was developed for use in human medicine to eliminate
fies pyuria but does not measure the concentration of leukocytes in the urine
sample. This parameter is deemed unreliable for veterinary samples (Archer
Reagent strip methodology
cytic leukocytes. When present in the urine, leukocytic esterase catalyzes the
hydrolysis of an amino acid ester to indoxyl on the reagent pad. Indoxyl reacts
cells. Most manufacturers have eliminated interference from non-leukocytic
esterases, but the manufacturer packet insert should be consulted for further
clarification if needed.
Dynamic range
Negative to 2+ Chemstrip
Not present on ldexx UA
Negative to 3+ Multistix
Expected value
Negative.
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   51
Interferences
Given this test is unreliable in veterinary species, false positive and negative
reactions have minimal relevance.
False positives
In humans, trace and other positive readings should be investigated. Con
    a  as  a  
positive readings (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2o08).
False negatives
False negatives may be caused by medications (cephalexin, cephalothin, tet-
racycline, oxalic acid), ascorbic acid, albuminuria, glucosuria, high specific
Chapter
Specific gravity
Clinical significance
Specific gravity assessed by dry chemical test strips is unreliable for veteri-
samples, it is standard test included on many dipstick configruations and is
therefore included in this discussion.
Reagent strip methodology
indicator to produce visible color.
Dynamic range
1.000-1.030 Chemstrip
Not present on ldexx UA
1.000-1.030 Multistix
Expected value
Not recommended for veterinary specimens.
Interferences
As the reagent strip method measures only ionic solutes, interference by
large organic molecules is discounted. For this reason, readings using reagent
52   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
strip methodology may differ from refractometer readings (Strasinger anc
DiLorenzo 2008).
False positives
False increases in USG by dry chemical analysis may be found with ketonuria
or proteinuria (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2o08).
False negatives
False decreases in USG are found in highly buffered alkaline urines due to
interference with the bromthymol blue indicator, and manufacturers recom-
mend adding 0.oo5 to specific gravity readings when the pH is greater than
or equal to 6.5. Automated strip readers can be configured to adjust results
following this algorithm (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008).
Chapter
References
Acetest@ Reagent Tablet Product Insert. 1995. Bayer Corporation, Elkhart, IN.
Archer J. 2OO5. Urine analysis. In BSAVA Manuaf of Canine and Fefine Clinicaf
Pathofogy, 2nd ed. Villiers E, Blackwood L, eds., pp. 149-55. Gloucester: British
Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Ben-Ezra J, Zhao S, McPherson R. 2OO7. Basic examination of urine. In Henry's
Clinical Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods, 2ist ed. McPherson
RA, Pincus MR, eds., pp. 393-409. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier.
Chemstrip@ 10 MD Product Insert. 2007. Roche Diagnostics, Indianapolis, IN.
Futrakul N, Sridama V, Futrakul P. 2oo9. Microalbuminuria: a biomarker of renal
microvascular disease. Renaf Faifure 31(2): 140-3.
Gregory CR. 2O03. Urinary system. In Duncan & Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory
Medicine Clinicaf Pathology. 4th ed. Latimer KS, Mahaffe EA, Prasse KW, eds.,
pp. 231-59. Ames, IA: lowa State Press.
Holan KM, Kruger JM, Gibbons SM, Swenson CL. 1997. Clinical evaluation of a
leukocyte esterase test-strip for detection of feline pyuria. Veterinary Clinicaf
Pathofogy 26(3): 126-31.
Idexx UArm Strips Product Insert. 2002. Idexx Laboratories, Westbrook, ME.
Johnson KY, Lulich JP, Osborne CA. 2Oo7. Evaluation of the reproducibility and
accuracy of pH-determining devices used to measure pH in dogs. Journaf of the
American Veterinary Association 230(3): 364-9.
Lee YJ, Lee YJ, Han HJ. 2008. Regulatory mechanisms of Na(+)/glucose cotrans
porters in renal proximal tubule cells. Kidney Internationaf 73(3): 361-2.
Lees GE, Brown SA, Elliott J et al. 2O05. Assessment and management of protein-
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 19: 377-85.
Littman MP. 2O11. Protein-losing nephropathy in small animals. The Veterinary
Clinics of North America. Smaff Animaf Practice 41(1): 31-62.
Lyon SD, Sanderson Mw, Vaden SL, Lappin MR, Jenese WA, Grauer GF. 2O10.
Comparison of urine dipstick, sulfosalicylic acid, urine protein-to-creatinine
ratio, and species-specific ELiSA methods for detection of albumin in urine
Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis   53
samples of cats and dogs. Journaf of the American Veterinary Association
236(8): 874-9.
Miyazaki M, Kamiie K, Soeta S, Taira H, Yamashita T. 2O03. Molecular cloning and
characterization of a novel carboxylesterase-like protein that is physiologically
present at high concentrations in the urine of domestic cats (fefis catus). 2o03.
The Biochemicaf Journal 370(Pt 1):101-10.
Multistix? Product Insert. 2oo9. Siemens Healthcare Diagnostics Inc. Tarrytown,
NY.
Osborne CA, Stevens JB. 1999. Urinalysis: A Clinicaf Guide to Compassionate
Patient Care.Shawnee Mission,KS:Bayer Corporation.
Pressler BM, Vaden SL, Jensen WA, Simpson D. 2OO2. Detection of canine micro-
albuminuria using semiquantitative test strips designed for use with human
urine. Veterinary Clinicaf Pathofogy 31(2): 56-60.
Prober LG, Johnson CA, Olivier NB, Thomas JS. 2O1o. Effect of semen in urine
specimens on urine protein concentration determined by means of dipstick
analysis.AmericanJournalofVeterinaryResearch71:288-92.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2Oo8. Urinary system. In Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinicar Pathofogy, 2nd ed. Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds., pp. 415-94. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing.
hapter
Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS. 2oo8. Chemical examination of urine. In Urinafysis
and Body Ffuids, 5th ed. Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS, eds., pp. 53-80. Philadel-
广
phia: FA Davis Company.
Tang X, Xia Z, Yu J. 2008. An experimental study of hemolysis induced by onion
(Alfium cepa) poisoning in dogs. Journaf of Veterinary Pharmacology and Thera-
peutics 31(2): 143-9.
detection of canine pyuria. Journaf of the American Veterinary Association
189(11): 1451-3.
Wamsley H, Alleman R. 2OO7. Complete urinalysis. In BSAVA Manuaf of Canine and
           5 
Gloucester:British Small Animal Veterinary Association.
Welles EG, Whatley EM, Hall AS, Wright JC. 2OO6. Comparison of Multistix PRO
dipsticks with other biochemical assays for determining urine protein (UP),
 a i e so u e  i e () a 
Pathology 35(1):31-6.
Chapter 5
Routine Urinalysis:
Microscopic Elements
Routine urinalysis testing culminates in microscopic evaluation of the urine
relevant results. This chapter contains guidelines for identification and quan-
tification of formed elements. Preparation and analysis of urine sediment is
prone to technical variation; protocols developed to standardize these vari-
ables are also contained in this chapter (Table 5.1).
Urine sediment preparation
Chapter
As with all phases of testing, fresh urine is preferred, but appropriate pres-
processing is anticipated. If refrigeration is employed, specimens should be
allowed to reach room temperature prior to testing as low temperature may
increase formation of amorphous crystals. Formed elements, such as cells
should be well mixed prior to transfer or testing.
Specimen volume
Approximately 5mL of urine is centrifuged to obtain sediment. Greater
obtain from some dogs and most cats. Also, centrifugation of larger amounts
of sediment results per milliliter of urine if desired, although this calculation
is not routinely performed (Table 5.2).
Practicar Veterinary Urinafysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
55
56   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 5.1 Technical variables affecting microscopic analysis of urine
Delay in testing
 Total volume of urine specimen
Method by which the sediment is prepared
Total volume of sediment examined
Quality of equipment used
Timeliness and method of result reporting
Table 5.2Calculation for reporting elements per milliliter of urine
1. Calculate area of Ipf or hpf.
2. Calculate the maximum number of fields in the viewing area.
3. Calculate the number of fields per milliliter of urine tested.
4. Calculate the number of formed elements per milliliter of urine.
Example:
1. Use the field of view specification supplied by the manufacturer and
Chapter
the formulas:
Area = I radius² and Diameter = 2 radius
Manufacturer specification for high power field (hpf) of
view = 0.35mm; thus:
3.14 x 0.175² = 0.096 mm²
2. Coverslip area (22mm × 22mm) = 484mm²
484/0.96 = 5040hpf in entire viewing area
3. 12mL of urine centrifuged; 0.02mL sediment examined
5040hpf/(0.02mL x 12 mL) = 21,000 hpf/mL of urine tested
4. For each element observed, multiply the number reported by 21,0o0:
5 WBC/hpf × 21,000hpf/mL =105,000 WBC/mL
Sources: Data from Free (1986); Strasinger and DiLorenzo (2008).
Centrifugation
laboratory results. To concentrate formed elements, specimens should be
centrifuged for 5 minutes at a relative centrifugal force (RCF) of 40o. Most
centrifuge speed settings are in the units of revolutions per minute (RPM),
5.1) by Sink and Feldman (2004):
RPM =(square r0ot [400 /28.38R])x1000
(Eq. 5.1)
where R = radius of centrifuge rotor in inches.
Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements   57
there is a small amount of precipitate (produces leveled sediment button)
ldeally. samples should be capped prior to centrifugation to prevent bio
hazardous aerosolization. Centrifuge deceleration should not be enhanced
by braking as this disrupts the urine sediment.
Sediment preparation
Optimally, a total residual volume of 0.5-1.0 ml of urine and sediment should
remain in the tube after the supernatant is aspirated. Pouring off the super-
tip of the tube with the finger is preferred. Complete and thorough resuspen-
formed elements for microscopic analysis.
Volume of sediment for microscopic analysis
Commonly, a plastic pipette is used to place a small drop of urine on a micro-
Chapter
scope slide; however, using the conventional glass slide method, the recom-
mended sediment volume is 20ul sequestered by a 22 x22mm glass
coverslip (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2oo8). Excessive sample volume must
be avoided as heavier formed elements (casts) can flow outside the viewing
cal, Garden Grove, CA) containing constant volume chambers allow for even
Stain
The decision to stain urine sediment is a matter of personal preference.
refractive index of formed elements, thus increasing their overall visibility.
The most frequently used supravital stain for urinalysis in veterinary medicine
is Sedi-Stain (BD Clay AdamsTM Sedi-Stain Concentrated Stain). This is a sta-
bilized modification of the Sternheimer-Malbin urinary stain typically used in
human medicine and can be used with typical wet mount preparations (Stras-
inger andDiLorenzo 2008).Air-dried urinesediments canbe stained with a
rapid Romanowsky stain such as Diff-Quik (Dade Behring Inc., Newark, NJ).
Examination of urine sediment
Unstained urine sediment is examined under subdued light with the con-
denser lowered. The lower condenser position provides the necessary con-
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 5.3  Recommended reporting guidelines for microscopic evaluation of
urine
Microscopic
power
Element
HPF
LPF
Quantification
RBC
Enumerate range up to 150 cells; if
>150 = 4+
WBC
Enumerate range up to 150 cells; if
>150 = 4+
Epithelial cells
Classify type and enumerate range
Casts
Classify type and enumerate range
Crystals
Rare, Small, Moderate, Large
Bacteria
Rare, small, moderate, large
Yeast
Rare, small, moderate, large
Parasites
Enumerate range up to 150 cells; if
>150 = 4+
Mucus
Rare, small, moderate, large
Other
Name and enumerate range
Chapter
Acceptable range values include 0-2, 3-5, 7-10, and so on.
(to just under the microscope stage), and the light can be increased with
stained sediment samples as the stain provides the necessary contrast to
visualize structures. Initial focusing on one large formed element provides a
point of reference and localizes the plane of view. Subsequent formed ele-
ments are often difficult to discern, but this is circumvented through acuity
of fine focus. The sediment is examined under low power field (lpf) in order
structures; identification of individual structures is accomplished under
  s  n    i  
larger elements tend to flow toward the perimeter of the cover glass neces-
sitating scan of this area. Constant volume chambers do not produce this
phenomenon.
Laboratory reporting
Examination of a minimum of 10 fields under both low (10x objective) and
high (40x objective) power is necessary to determine sediment content.
formed on 10x to look for regions with increased density or clumping, which
   i ii    l    sa
Tables 5.3 and 5.4).
Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements    59
Table 5.4 Procedure for sediment analysis
1. Obtain urine sample. If the sample is refrigerated, allow to warm to
room temperature. Mix sample well.
2. Using a pipette, transfer at least 4-5mL of urine into a clean tube
(12 ×75mm or conical tip centrifuge tube).
3. Centrifuge sample for 5 minutes at 400 x g.
4. If necessary, perform confirmatory tests using supernatant.
5. Decant supernatant, leaving approximately O.5-1mL of urine and
sediment.
6. Resuspend the sediment by gentle agitation.
7. Using a plastic pipette, transfer a drop of the sediment suspension
onto a clean glass slide and cover with a 22 x 2mm glass coverslip.
8. Lower the microscope condenser to enhance visualization of
unstained sediment.
9. Examine the sediment on 10x to evaluate for larger formed elements
(i.e. casts and crystals) and to determine overall cellularity. Some
parasites can also be identified on low magnification (i.e., microfilaria,
Dioctophyma renale).
10. Examine the urine sediment on 4Ox to enumerate RBCs, wBCs, and
epithelial cells, and to identify, enumerate, and characterize bacteria,
n
yeast/fungus, parasites, and smaller crystals.
Chapter
11. Record results.
Microscopic elements of urine sediment
Red blood cells
In unstained urine sediment, red blood cells (RBCs) are biconcave disks; nuclei
are lacking in dogs and cats but are present in some exotic species (Figure
5.1). In fresh urine, RBCs are pale in color, which diminishes with specimen
age. In hypersthenuric specimens, RBCs decrease in size due to loss of water;
urine (hyposthenuria), RBCs absorb water, swell, and eventually lyse, produc-
ing "ghost cells."
Microscopically. RBCs must be distinguished from similarly shaped ele-
ments including yeast, lipid droplets, and air bubbles (Figure 5.3a,b). RBCs
are most often similarly sized and are smaller than leukocytes. RBCs display
sediment; RBCs will lyse while yeast or lipid droplets remain and air bubbles
will dissipate. Additionally, non-RBC elements will be inconsistent in size,
particularly lipid droplets, which appear spherical and refractile. Yeast is
60■
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Q
O
OO
G0
O
0
O
O
C
O
?
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
00
O
O
Figure 5.1 Many RBCs, 40x.
Chapter
normal in dogs and cats. Increased numbers, unrelated to a pathological
White blood cells
In contrast to RBCs, white blood cells (wBCs) are approximately 1.5 times
pue ulieay ul (a' aunoii) snaionu paieingol oi punou e uieuoo pue jabiel
most disease processes, neutrophils predominate although any type of leu-
kocyte may be found. While WBCs are not differentiated in routine urinaly-
sis, knowledge of leukocyte morphology aids in overall classification.
Neutrophils contain cytoplasmic granules which swell and exhibit motility
when exposed to hypotonic urine, thus explaining the term "glitter cells."
Eosinophils are morphologically similar to neutrophils and are only distin-
guishable if the sediment is stained with Romanowsky-type stains. Small
lymphocytes, which possess a high nuclear to cytoplasm ratio, are easily
confused with RBCs. The addition of acetic acid to the urine sediment will
lyse RBCs and enhance nuclear detail of any WBc, including lymphocytes.
Monocytes may be present in low numbers in urine samples containing
abundant peripheral blood. Macrophages are the tissue form of monocytes
and are uncommonly identified in wet urine sediment preparations, although
they may be present in samples from patients with urinary tract
31
080
00
?
O
®
O
®
®
福
(a) -
Chapter 5
8
O
[b] -
Figure 5.2
(a) Normal and crenated RBCs, 4Ox; (b) crenated RBCs of varying
sizes,40x.
61
0
(a)
Chapter 5
(b)
Figure 5.3 RBCs with variably sized lipid droplets: (a) Focused on lipid
droplets (arrows), 40x; (b) focused on red blood cells (arrows), 40x.
62
O
O
(a)
Chapter 5
®
®
[b] 
D
Figure 5.4 (a) and (b) RBCs, WBCs (arrow), lipid droplets, 40x.
63
64■
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Figure 5.5 RBCs, WBCs (arrows), squamous epithelial cell (dashed arrow),
Chapter
bacteria in background.
inflammation. Macrophages are usually larger than a neutrophil with an
vacuolated or contain inclusions. Specimens containing mononuclear cells
that cannot be identified should be referred for cytologic evaluation. Greater
than 5 wBc/hpf is considered abnormal and suggests underlying urinary
tract infection (Figures 5.6a,b-5.11a,b).
Epithelial cells
Epithelial cells are normally found in urine sediment in low numbers and
result from sloughing of senescent cells from the genitourinary tract. The
three main types of epithelial cells are classified according to their point of
origin.
Renal tubular epithelial cells
Renal tubular epithelial cells (RTEs) are uncommonly identified in urine sedi-
ment; identification is often hindered by degeneration, which is a result of
the transit time from the renal tubule. RTEs vary in morphology depending
on the area of the renal tubules from which they originate but typically are
small and cuboidal in appearance.
a
Chapter 5
Figure 5.6 wBC clumps with bacteria, (a) 10x; (b) 40x.
65
®
88
®
®
8
O
Figure5.7
Many RBCs (arrowheads), WBCs (arrows), and bacteria (dashed
arrows),4ox.
Chapter 5
Figure5.8
Aged sample with bacterial overgrowth. Scattered RBCs (arrows),
aggregates of amorphous crystals (dashed arrows), many bacteria (arrow-
heads), few lipid droplets, 40x.
66
福
O
O
Figure5.9
WBCs (arrows) with transitional epithelial cells (arrowheads), 40x.
(Courtesy of Donna Burton)
Chapter 5
®
O
®
O
OP
®
®
囍
O
00
#0
®
®
Figure 5.10
Many RBCs, WBCs (arrows), and bacterial rods, one squamous
epithelial cell (arrowhead).
6
[a]
Chapter 5
(b)
Figure 5.11 (a) Urinary tract infection, many wBCs, and intra- and extracel-
lular bacterial rods. Air-dried and stained urine sediment, Diff-Quik, 5Ox;
(b) urinary tract infection, bacterial rods stain gram positive (dark purple)
air-dried and stained urine sediment, Gram stain, 50x.
68
Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements  69
Squamous epithelial cells
Squamous epithelial cells (SECs) originate from the lining of the urogenital
tract, either the urethraor vagina, and are present in free-catch urine samples
as a result of tissue sloughing from normal cell turnover and/or in samples
single nucleus and abundant cytoplasm. SECs can be present individually and
in variably sized sheets. Occasionally, cells begin to disintegrate or fold and
may resemble a large a cast, but routinely, SECs are easy to identify (Figure
5.12a-d).
Transitional epithelial (urothelial) cells
and are less frequently identified in urine sediment than SECs. These cells
arise from portions of the urethra, bladder, ureters, and renal pelves; some
glands in the prostate are also lined by TECs. Morphologic variety is caused
bythe abilityofthe cellto absorbwaterand stretching ofcellsbyafull
bladder. Various forms of TEcs include round, oval, and, less often, caudate
to polyhedral. Increased numbers of transitional cells may be present within
Chapter
bladder. Hyperplasia can result from inflammation with or without infection
as well as polyps. Cells will be cuboidal, round or ovoid, and fairly uniform in
appearance.Columnar-shapedcaudateTECs are thought to arisefrommore
sn   a  a  a a  s ao
The significance of increased numbers of these cells is not entirely clear but
cell carcinoma is a result of neoplastic transformation of TECs and can arise
from any place in the urinary tract these cells are present.Urine sediment
Urine cytology of an air-dried stained specimen is often necessary for defini-
figures (Figure 5.14a-c).
Casts
The presence of casts within urine sediment is termed cylindruria (Stockham
reflect a cast of the renal tubular lumen. Casts are most likely to form in the
[a]
Chapter 5
(b)
Figure 5.12  (a) Squamous epithelial cells, 4Ox (Courtesy of Donna Burton);
(b) squamous epithelial cells amid a background of many bacteria (arrowhead),
WBC (arrow), free-catch urine sample, 40x; (c) squamous epithelial cells and
bacteria. Same case as 5.12b, 40x; (d) squamous epithelial cells, urine obtained
via catherization, air-dried and stained urine sediment, Wright Giemsa, 2Ox.
70
Chapter 5
[d)
Figure 5.12 (Continued)
(a}
Chapter 5
(b]
Figure 5.13 (a) Transitional epithelial cells. Increased numbers of uniform-
appearing transitional epithelial cells may result from inflammation, infection,
or polyps, air-dried and stained urine sediment, Wright Giemsa, 2Ox (Courtesy
of Dr. Reema Patel); (b) transitional epithelial cells. Higher magnification
view of 5.13a, air-dried and stained urine sediment, Wright Giesma, 50x
(Courtesy of Dr. Reema Patel); (c) columnar-shaped caudate transitional
epithelial cells, in the urine from a dog with uncontrolled hypertension and
proteinuria, 40x; (d) columnar epithelial cells, same case as 5.13a, air-dried and
stained urine sediment, Wright Giemsa, 50x.
72
Chapter 5
(d) 
Figure 5.13 (Continued)
73
中
[a
Chapter 5
(b)
Figure 5.14 (a) Large cluster of neoplastic transitional cells, crenated RBCs
(arrows), and lipid droplets (arrowheads), 40x; (b) transitional cell carcinoma,
air-dried and stained urine sediment, Diff-Quick, 40x; (c) transitional cell
carcinoma, air-dried and stained urine sediment, wright Giemsa, 40x.
Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements
75
C
Figure 5.14 (Continued)
Chapter 5
ing etiology. Casts formed in the ascending loop of Henle and the distal
convoluted tubule produce structures with tapered ends. The width of the
cast is related to the size of the tubule from which it is formed (Stockham
    s    
structures of the tubular lumen, any element(s) present in the tubular filtrate
 a s    a    a 
contribute to cast formation: increased salt concentration, acidic environ-
ment, presence of protein matrix, and tubular fluid stasis (Figures 5.15a-c
and 5.16).
RBC Cast
As glomeruli become damaged or diseased or if hemorrhage occurs within
the kidney, RBCs and protein can leak into the filtrate. Free RBCs in the urine
renal pelvis and beyond) while the presence of RBC casts suggest bleeding
casts age, cells deteriorate but the red-orange hue remains. Large numbers
ofRBCsin the urine sedimentmust beexamined closelyfor thepresence of
(a]
Chapter 5
(b)
Figure 5.15 (a) Casts are best identified at low magnification with the
condenser lowered, 10x; (b) casts are more faint due to an incorrectly raised
condenser, 10x; (c) casts (same image as 5.15a), as well as background lipid,
are easier to identify when the condenser is lowered, providing more contrast
to the specimen, 10x.
Figure 5.15 (Continued)
Chapter 5
Figure 5.16 High magnification (40x) of unstained urine sediment is used for
identification of casts by evaluating cast contents. Although there is lipid
within this cast, the mucoprotein matrix suggests it is a hyaline cast, 40x.
了8■
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
mucoprotein matrix to support identification of RBC casts; RBC clumps can
be easily mistaken for RBC casts.
WBC Cast
WBC or leukocyte casts result from inflammation involving the renal tubules.
granular with multilobed nuclei attached to the mucoprotein matrix. Supra-
vital staining enhances nuclear detail and can assist in identification. Irregular
borders occur with increased numbers of wBCs; staining may be necessary
to demonstrate characteristic nuclei and is particularly helpful for differen-
tiating WBC casts from RTE casts. As increased numbers of wBCs often clump
cast matrix is visualized.
Epithelial cell cast
Epithelial cell casts, also commonly referred to as cellular casts, result from
degeneration of renal tubular epithelial cells. Disintegration of these casts
into coarsely and finely granular material is purely a function of time and
Chapter
infers stasis within the nephron. The presence of epithelial cell casts suggests
hypoperfusion, or hypoxemia (Figure 5.17).
Figure 5.17 Cellular cast amid numerous squamous epithelial cells (arrows),
20x.
Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements   79
Granular cast
Granular casts exhibit a variety of textural consistency. Both coarsely and
finely granular casts are frequently seen in urinary sediment. while it is not
many laboratories report this differentiation (Figures 5.18 and 5.19). Once
again, it is important to visualize the mucoprotein cast matrix, as amorphous
clumps or fecal debris can be mistaken for granular casts. The presence of
granular casts, similar to epithelial cell casts, supports underlying, and poten-
tially severe, renal tubular injury. Low numbers, <2/lpf, of granular casts are
occasionally seen in urine sediment from healthy animals or slightly increased
numbers following exercise (Stockham and Scott 2008). In cases of acute
anuric renal failure, urinary stasis may prohibit excretion of casts and cellular
material so the absence of granular or cellular casts does not rule out renal
tubular injury.
Waxycast
As granular casts remain in the tubules for extended periods, granule disin-
casts are gray, yellow, or colorless. They are highly refractile, broad in width
and appear very jagged, broken, or brittle in consistency, displaying irregular
Chapter
clefts. The diameter becomes broader, and ends occasionally have a cork
Figure 5.18 Finely granular cast with many spermatozoa, 40x
80    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Figure 5.19 Granular cast, 2Ox. (Courtesy of Donna Burton)
Chapter 
九
screw appearance. These casts result from extreme urine stasis; the waxy
cast matrix is surmised to result from degeneration of cellular or granular
hyaline casts. Supravital cytodiagnostic stains tinge waxy casts pink. Waxy
stasis (Figure 5.20).
Broad cast
Broad casts are up to six times wider than hyaline casts and can be of any
convoluted tubules, broad casts indicate the destruction or widening of the
tubule walls. These casts are believed to appear in the collecting tubules as
a result of extreme urinary stasis, presumably due to severe renal disease
(Chew and DiBartola 2004) (Figure 5.21).
Fatty cast
These casts contain fat droplets or oval fat bodies within the mucoprotein
matrix. They are highly refractile using bright field microscopy. The presence
of fatty casts may also signify renal tubular injury. given renal tubular epi-
thelial cells contain lipid (Figure 5.22).
Figure 5.20 Waxy cast, 4Ox.(Courtesy of Donna Burton)
Chapter 5
Figure 5.21 Broad cast, 40x. (Courtesy of Donna Burton)
81
82
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Figure 5.22 Fatty cast, 4Ox.(Courtesy of Donna Burton)
Chapter
Hyaline cast
Hyaline casts are colorless, semitransparent casts with typically rounded
ends. Best visualized with subdued light, these casts contain no cells, although
the classification. Hyaline casts are the most frequently seen cast and are
comprised primarily of Tamm-Horsfall protein(uromodulin) normally secreted
and Scott 2oo8). Rare hyaline casts containing one or two granules are not
considered abnormal (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008). An occasional recog-
nizable cell is not uncommon. The presence of pathological proteinuria can
increase numbers of hyaline casts present in urine sediment (Figures 5.23
and 5.24).
Bacterial cast
Identification of bacterial casts can be challenging, as casts filled with bacte-
ria can resemble granular casts. Gram stain or Diff-Quik staining of the sedi-
ment verifies the presence of bacteria-laden casts. Bacterial casts are an
infrequent finding: the presence of bacterial casts suggests severe renal
tubular infection.
Figure 5.23 Hyaline cast, 40x.(Courtesy of Donna Burton)
Chapter 5
口
Figure 5.24 Hyaline cast containing lipid, 40x.
83
84   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Mixed cellular casts
Crystals
A variety of crystals can be found in urine sediment, most with unique appear-
ance and solubility characteristics. The presence of many crystals is non-
microscopic identification.
Crystal formation
s  al       
organic compounds, or iatrogenic compounds (Strasinger and DiLorenzo
2008). Crystals are more likely to form in concentrated urine samples.
ated specimens often incur this in vitro interference. Unfortunately, formed
Chapter
crystals obscure other clinically significant microscopic elements. This pre-
analytic nuisance can be reversed by allowing the urine specimen to warm
to room temperature prior to analysis. Crystal formation is also affected by
associated with concentrated specimens.
Crystal identification
and colors, although the pH of urine specimens may assist in identifica
tion of urine crystals because this influences the type of chemicals pre-
cipitated (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008). An acidic environment favors
crystallization of organic and iatrogenic compounds, while inorganic salts
of calcium oxalate which precipitates in both acidic and neutral urine).
Chemically counteracting these properties in the laboratory causes crys
tals to dissolve, and these solubility characteristics can assist in crystal
identification. Astute microscopists aliquot sediment specimens for chemi-
cance of many of these crystals can be found in Table 5.6. (Figures
5.25-5.39)
The Lignin test confirms the presence of sulfonamide-induced crystalluria.
In the presence of sulfa drug metabolites, a drop of urine sediment on news
paper with one to two drops of dilute HCl added produces a bright yellow
orange color (Gregory 2o03).
Table 5.5  Characteristics of crystals found in urine sediment
Urine pH
Solubility characteristics
favoring
Name
Appearance
formation
Soluble in:
Insoluble in:
Ammonium (bi)
Brown, three-
Alkaline,
Acetic acid
urate
dimensional spheres
neutral, or
10% NaOH
with either smooth
slightly
 Strong alkali
edges or irregular,
acidic
horn-like projections
("thorny apple");
individual or clusters
Amorphous
Colorless to yellow-
Alkaline
Acetic acid
Alkaline
phosphate
brown, fine granules
(magnesium,
With centrifugation,
calcium)
pellet is white.
Amorphous
Colorless to yellow-
Acidic
Alkaline
Acetic acid
urate
brown, fine granules
(calcium,
With centrifugation,
ma gnesium,
pellet is pink-tinged.
sodium,
potassium)
Bilirubin
Amber,branching
Acidic
Acid
Alcohol
 needles resembling
Alkali
twigs or antlers
Acetone
5
Chapter
Calcium
Colorless to yellow,
Alkaline or
Acetic acid
carbonate
spherical or dumbbell
neutral
(effervesces
shapes
when added)
Rule out for dumbbell
shape: Ca oxalate
monohydrate
Calcium
Colorless, refractile,
Acidic, but
Dilute HCI
Acetic acid
exo
three-dimensional
any pH
dihydrate
octahedron, mail-type
possible
envelope
Calcium
Colorless,two
Acidic,but
Dilute HCI
Acetic acid
dimensional. Variable
any pH
monohydrate
forms: six-sided with a
possible
"picket fence" or
"stake" appearance,
dumbbell or ovoid,
some flat, elongate;
rare: "orzo" or "hemp
seed" shape
(Continued)
85
Table 5.5 (Continued)
Urine pH
Solubility characteristics
favoring
Name
Appearance
formation
Soluble in:
Insoluble in:
Calcium
Formed from:
Alkaline
phosphate
amorphous
phosphates and
calcium phosphates
Colorless, elongate,
thin prisms, spheric
(dog), +/- pointed end
Aggregates or
needle-like
Cholesterol
Colorless, transparent;
Any
Acetone
large, flat rectangular
plates with one or
more square notched
corners
Cystine
Colorless hexagonal
Acidic
Dilute HCI
Acetic acid
plates, can be
Ammonia
Acetone
 individual or present 
Alcohol
in clumps
Heat
Drug-
Chapter
associated
(antibiotics)
Ampicillin
Rare, colorless long
5
Acidic
Acetone
prisms that form
sheaves (refrigeration
accentuates sheave
formation)
Ciprofloxacin
Yellow to brown,long
Unknown
Acetic acid
needle-like crystals
HOeN %0L
forming sheaves, fans,
or butterflies
Sulfonamide
Pale yellow to
Acidic
Acetone
yellow-brown,
aggregates with
variable crystal
morphology: needles,
sheaves, or spherical
with radiating spokes
(confirm with lignin
test)
Drug-
Resemble cholesterol
Acidic
HOeN %L
associated
plates or long pointed
(radiographic
crystals
contrast
agents)
86
Table 5.5
(Continued)
Urine pH
Solubility characteristics
favoring
Name
Appearance
formation
Soluble in:
Insoluble in:
Leucine
Clear to yellow brown
Acidic to
HON %L
Dilute HCI
spheres with
neutral
concentric circles and
radial striations
Melamine
Brown to green brown
circular crystals with
radiating striations
originating in the
center of the crystal
Triple
Colorless, "coffin-
Any, more
Acetic acid
phosphate
lids"-three to six
so neutral
(Magnesium
sided prisms with
to alkaline
ammonium
oblique ends
phosphate;
Struvite)
Tyrosine
Rare, colorless or
Acidic
Ammonium
Acetic acid
yellow fine needles in
hydroxide
Alcohol
sheaves or rosettes
Dilute HCI
Uric acid
Rhomboid, oval with
Acidic
HOeN %0L
Acetic acid
pointed ends, prisms;
Alkaline
Dilute HCI
Chapter
less often 6-sided
Heat
(hexagonal plate)
Alcohol
which gives cystine
appearance
Note: Acetic acid
added to urine with
amorphous urates or
ammonium (bi)urate
crystals may result in
uric acid crystal
formation.
Xanthine
Similar to ammonium
Not
urate or amorphous
specified
urates, frequently
appear amorphous.
Yellow brown to
brown, varying-sized
spherules.
Sodium hydroxide = NaOH
Hydrochloric acid = HCI
Sources: Data from Albasan et al. (2005); Bannasch et al. (2008); Ben-Ezra et al. (2007); Brandt and
Blauvelt (2010); Casal et al. (1995);: Case et al. (1992); Cianciolo et al. (2008); Karmi et al. (2010); Mundt
and Shanahan (2011);: Osborne et al. (2008, 2009); Osborne and Stevens (1999); Pallatto et al. (2005);
Puschner et al. (2007); Sink and Feldman (2004); Strasinger and DilLorenzo (2008); Thompson et al.
(2008); VanZuilen et al. (1997); Yarlagadda and Perazella (2008).
87
Table 5.6 Clinical significance of crystals found in urine sediment
Name
Clinical significance
Ammonium (bi)urate
Hyperammonemia due to a portosystemic shunt or
hepatic failure.
Amorphous phosphate No clinical significance. May form cast-like
(magnesium, calcium) s
structures leading to misinterpretation.
Amorphous urate
No clinical significance, formed from salts of uric
(calcium, magnesium,
acid. Increased formation with refrigeration.
sodium, potassium)
May form cast-like structures leading to
misinterpretation
Bilirubin
Indicate some degree bilirubinuria.
Can be normal in highly concentrated urine
samples from dogs (low renal threshold for
bilirubin).
Other causes same as for bilirubinuria.
Calcium carbonate
An expected finding in urine sediment from horses
but not dogs or cats. These are seen, however,
anecdotally in dogs.
Calcium oxalate:
Can be a normal finding in dogs and cats, form in
dihydrate
urine samples upon standing.
Less often seen in ethylene glycol (EG) toxicosis.
Calcium oxalate:
Indicate hyperoxaluric disorders or hypercalciuria.
Chapter
monohydrate
Hyperoxaluria due to ethylene glycol(EG) toxicosis
or ingestion of oxalate-rich foods (e.g., peanut
butter, sweet potatoes, some whole grains). The
absence of these crystals does not rule out EG
toxicosis.
Calcium phosphate
Similar to triple phosphate (struvite).
Cholesterol
Suggests cell membrane breakdown as cell
membranes are comprised of cholesterol. May be
seen with some renal diseases and proteinuria
although are not a specific finding.
Cystine
Indicates cystinuria, an inherited defect in urinary
cystine transport (decreased reabsorption of
cystine from renal tubular lumen).
Breeds reported: Newfoundland, English Bulldog,
Dachshund, Chihuahua, Mastiff, Australian Cattle
Dog, Bullmastiff, American Staffordshire Terrier,
and mixed breeds.
Less soluble in acidic urine which increases
likelihood of urolith formation and obstruction.
88
Table 5.6
(Continued)
Name
Clinical significance
Drug-associated
Reported with ampicillin, sulfa-containing
(antibiotics)
(sulfonamide crystals), ciprofloxacin (one case
report)
Increased precipitation of crystals due to:
Urine that is highly concentrated and of low
volume
High dose of medication leading to high rate of
urinary excretion
Low drug solubility (may relate to urine pH)
Can confirm presence of sulfa crystals with lignin
test (see text).
Drug-associated
Reported with:
(radiographic contrast
Hypaque@
agents)
Diatrizoate meglumine (Renografin)
Hippuric acid
Rare; significance unknown
Leucine
Rare. In humans associated with severe liver
disease, aminoaciduria. Significance in dog:
unknown, liver disease also.
Melamine
Identified in patients with acute renal failure that
ingested melamine- and cyanuric-contaminated
pet food.
5
Triple phosphate
Often of no clinical significance.
Chapter
(Magnesium
Can see with urinary tract infection (urease-
ammonium
splitting bacteria).
phosphate; Struvite)
More likely to form in alkaline urine, refrigerated
specimens.
Tyrosine
Rare.Associated with severe liver disease in dogs,
aminoaciduria (humans); can co-occur with leucine
crystals in humans.
Note: May be mistaken for bilirubin crystals which
are more amber in color withless smooth edges.
Uric acid
Inherited defect in purine metabolism which leads
to hyperuricosuria.
Dalmations: Considered a "normal" finding. Other
predisposed breeds: Bulldog and Black Russian
Terrier.
Increases risk of uric acid uroliths (stones),
especially in acidic urine.
Liver disease-hepatic failure or portosystemic
shunt. (In the absence of liver disease, consider
genetic testing for mutation)
Can be normal in acidic urine containing
amorphous urates allowed to stand at room
temperature. Also, uric acid crystals can result
following addition of acetic acid added to urine
with amorphous urates or ammonium (bi)urate
crystals.
(Continued)
89
Table 5.6
(Continued)
Name
Clinical significance
Xanthine
High dose therapy with allopurinol (treatment for
hyperuricosuria with decreased conversion of
xanthine to uric acid).
Also reported in a family of Cavalier King Charles
spaniels (in absence of allopurinol).
Sources: Data from Albasan et al. (2005); Bannasch et al. (2008); Ben-Ezra et al. (2007);
Brandt and Blauvelt (2010);: Casal et al. (1995);: Case et al. (1992); Cianciolo et al. (2008):
Karmi et al. (2010); Mundt and Shanahan (2011); Osborne et al. (2008, 2009); Osborne and
Stevens (1999); Pallatto et al. (2005): Puschner et al. (2007); Sink and Feldman (2004);
Strasinger and DiLorenzo (2008); Thompson et al. (2008); VanZuilen et al. (1997);
Yarlagadda and Perazella (2008).
Chapter 5
Figure 5.25
5Ammonium biurate crystals, both smooth and irregular borders.
Arrow points to "thorny apple" form, other smooth forms present individually
90
Figure 5.26 Ammonium biurate crystals, 40x.
Chapter 5
Figure 5.27 Ammonium biurate crystal, 100x. (Courtesy of Dr. Reema Patel)
9
Figure 5.28 Amorphous crystals, 40x.
Chapter 5
Figure 5.29 Bilirubin crystal with numerous spermatozoa, 40x. (Courtesy of
Donna Burton)
92
Figure 5.30 Calcium oxalate dihydrate crystal, 40x.
Chapter 5
Figure 5.31 Calcium oxalate dihydrate crystals aggregated, 40x.
93
[a]
Chapter 5
(b)
Figure 5.32 (a) Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals, "picket fence"
appearance, in the urine from a patient with ethylene glycol toxicity, Wright
Giemsa, 5Ox (Courtesy of Dr. Reema Patel); (b) calcium oxalate monohydrate
crystals, same case as 5.32a, Wright Giemsa, 100x (Courtesy of Dr. Reema
Patel); (c) impression smear of a kidney from a dog that died following
calcium oxalate monohydrate crystal (arrowhead) shapes present amid
numerous renal epithelial cells and bare nuclei, Wright Giemsa, 40x; (d) "hemp
seed" or "orzo" shape of calcium oxalate monohydrate crystal (arrow), 40x.
94
中
Chapter 5
(d) -
Figure 5.32 (Continued)
95
96
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Figure 5.33 Cholesterol crystal, 40x.(Courtesy of Donna Burton)
Chapter
Bacteria
Both bacilli or cocci can be found in urine sediment, although identification
should be confirmed with staining of air-dried sediment smears (Diff-Quick
and/or Gram stain) and/or culture. Organisms are usually motile;however,
cocci can frequently be mistaken for amorphous crystals. Bacilli are typically
easy to identify, especially if mature forms are present (Figure 5.40).
Yeast or fungi
Although morphologically similar to both RBCs and lipid, when viewed micro-
variable in size, and frequently exhibit budding. In severe infections, mycelia
(hyphal structures) may be observed. When differentiation from RBCs cannot
be visualized, addition of acetic acid to urine sediment will lyse RBCs while
leaving yeast intact. Candida sp. is more frequently identified as it is consid-
ered normal flora of the urogenital tract. Increased numbers can result from
underlying urinary tract disease, recent antibiotic treatment, and glucosuria
due to diabetes mellitus (Figures 5.41a,b and 5.42). Fungal infections due to
blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, coccidioidomycosis, and aspergillosis rarely
manifest in urine specimens: if present, they reflect systemic fungal disease
Chapter 5
bO
便
卓
Figure 5.34 (a) Cystine crystal in the urine from a dog with cystinuria,
Wright Giemsa, 4Ox; (b) cystine crystals, aggregated, with RBCs, WBCs, and
few larger epithelial cells, 4Ox.
97
Figure 5.35
Leucine-like crystal from a dog with severe hepatitis, Wright
Giemsa,10ox.
Chapter 5
Figure 5.36 Struvite crystal, 10x.
98
Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements
¥■99
Figure 5.37 Struvite crystal, 20x.
Chapter 5
s     i    
Candida sp. may display formation of pseudohyphae. Stained air-dried
sediment specimens may allow for better evaluation of yeast or fungal
components.
Parasites
Parasite ova may be seen in urine sediment as a result of fecal contamination
and, less often, parasitic infections; they are large elements with distinctive
forms. They can be visualized from low magnification and should not be
confused with plant pollen (see "Contaminants and Artifacts" section below).
microfilaria (heartworm disease), Dioctophyma renale (giant kidney worm of
the dog), and Pearsonema (Capiffaria) sp. (bladder worm of the dog and cat)
(Stockham and Scott 2008) (Figures 5.43 and 5.44).
Mucus
Mucus appears as fine thread-like strands possessing low refractive index
when viewed using subdued light with bright field microscopy. Frequently
[a]
Chapter 5
(b)
Figure 5.38 (a) Uric acid crystals, 10x (Courtesy of Dr. Patricia McManus);
(b) uric acid (cystine-like) crystal from a male bulldog with hyperuricosuria and
uroliths,4ox.
100
Figure 5.39 Ciprofloxacin crystals, 40x. (Courtesy of Drs. Carolina Escobar
and Carol Grindem)
Chapter 5
Figure 5.40 Bacteria, lipid (at arrows), struvite crystals, 40x.
101
O?
®
09
90.0
O
®
5
00
80
99
9
(a)
Chapter 5
[b) 
Figure5.41
1  (a) Numerous yeast (Candida sp.) with frequent budding from a
 (s ) s      o o 
poorly preserved neutrophils (arrowhead), some yeast present within neutro-
phils (arrow), air-dried and stained urine sediment, wright Giemsa, 100x.
102
Figure 5.42 Lipid mimicking budding yeast. Note that lipid lacks internal
structure,4ox.
Chapter 5
Figure 5.43 Pearsonema (Capilfaria) fefiscati egg (bladder worm) in the urine
(stained) from a cat. High magnification reveals the terminal plugs (at either
end) which are slightly angled. (Courtesy of Dr. Anne Zajac)
103
104    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Figure 5.44 Dioctophyma renale, high magnification of egg of the giant
kidney worm of dogs. (Courtesy of Dr. Anne Zajac)
Chapter
confused with hyaline casts, mucus threads are longer and irregular in
shape. As single threads or en masse, mucus is found in the background
of the visual field, with other formed elements taking the forefront. Mucus
is proteinaceous and is produced by epithelial cells of the lower genitouri-
mucus.
Spermatozoa
The characteristic traits of spermatozoa are its long flagella-like tail attached
to an oval body by a central rectangular mid-piece. Spermatozoa may be
motile or stationary but rarely exhibit motility in urine sediment. The pres-
ence of spermatozoa is considered an expected finding in the urine collected
from intact male dogs.
Contaminants and artifacts
A wide variety of contaminants and artifacts can challenge even experienced
microscopists (Figures 5.45 and 5.46). Contaminants may include dust par-
ticles, hair, starch granules, glass shards, cotton and wool fibers, and pollen
(Figures 5.47-5.54).
88
0:08
O
80
O
8
8
8
8
O
50
800
Figure 5.45 Abundant lipid, 40x. (Courtesy of Donna Burton)
Chapter 5
Figure 5.46 Air bubbles (arrows) trapped under the coverslip, squamous
epithelial cells (arrowheads), 4Ox.
105
Figure 5.47 Various fungal conidia contaminants amid amorphous debris and
few bacteria in a free-catch urine sample from a dog, 40x.
Chapter 5
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
O
0
00
O
00
O
0
00
O
O
O
00
O
O
O
O
O
C
Q0
Figure5.48
An elongate fungal conidia (center), many RBCs (arrow), and
free lipid (arrowhead), 4Ox.
106
Figure 5.49 Glove powder (starch granules), 40x.
Chapter 5
Figure 5.5o Glass shards (arrow) between two calcium oxalate dihydate and
lipid droplet, 40x.
107
Figure 5.51 Cotton fibers,20x.
Chapter 5
Figure 5.52 Pollen, 10x.
108
Chapter 5
Figure 5.53 (a-d) Pollen 40x.
109
(c)
Chapter 5
(d}
Figure 5.53
(Continued) (c) Pine pollen, 40x; (d) fine pollen particulate
debris, 40x.
110
Routine Urinalysis: Microscopic Elements
■11
Figure 5.54 Plant material, likely chloroplasts, 40x.
Chapter 5
References
Albasan H, Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Lekcharoensuk C. 2005. Evaluation of the
association between sex and risk of forming urate uroliths in Dalmatians.
Journalof theVeterinaryMedicalAssociation227(4):565-9
Bannasch D, Safra N, Young A, Karmi N, Schaible RS, Ling GV. 2Oo8. Mutations
in the SLC2A9 gene cause hyperuricosuria and hyperuricemia in the dog. PLoS
Genetics 4(1l): e1000246. doi:10.1371/journal.pgen.1000246.
Ben-Ezra J, Zhao S, McPherson R. 2Oo7. Basic examination of urine. In Henry's
Clinicaf Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory Methods,21st ed.McPherson
RA, Pincus MR, eds., pp. 393-409. Philadelphia: Saunders Elsevier.
Brandt LE, Blauvelt MM. 2O1o. What is your diagnosis? Urine sediment from a
Southern California cat with weight loss.Veterinary Clinicaf Pathofogy 39(4):
517-8.
Casal ML, Giger U, Bovee KC, Patterson DF. 1995. Inheritance of cystinuria and
renal defect in Newfoundland. Journal of the American Veterinary Association
207(12): 1585-9.
Case LC, Ling GV, Franti CE, Ruby AL, Stevens F, Johnson DL. 1992. Cystine
containing urinary calculi in dogs: 102 cases (1981-1989). Journaf of the Ameri-
can Veterinary Association 201(1): 129-33.
Chew DJ, DiBartola SP. 2O04. Urinalysis interpretation. In Interpretation of Canine
and Fefine Urinafysis. Chew DJ, DiBartola SP, eds., p. 29. Wilmington, NC: The
Gloyd Group.
Cianciolo RE, Bischoff K, Ebel JG, Van Winkle TJ, Goldstein RE, Serfilippi LM. 2O08.
exposed to pet food contaminated with melamine and cyanuric acid. Journaf of
the American Veterinary Association 233(5):729-37.
112    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Forterre S, Raila J, Schweigert FJ. 2004. Protein profiling of urine from dogs with
tigation 16(4): 271-7.
Free HM. 1986. Modern Urine Chemistry.5th printing. Ames, IA: Miles Laborato-
ries, Inc.
Gregory CR. 2O03. Urinary system. In Duncan & Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory
Medicine Clinical Pathofogy, 4th ed. Latimer KS, Mahaffe EA, Prasse KW, eds.,
pp. 231-59. Ames, IA: lowa State Press.
Karmi N, Brown EA, Hughes SS, McLaughlin B, Mellersh CS, Biourge V, Bannasch
DL. 2o1o. Estimated frequency of the canine hyperuricosuria mutation in dif-
       
Mundt L, Shanahan K. 2o11. Microscopic examination of urinary sediment. In
Graff's Textbook of Routine Urinalysis and Body Ffuids, 2nd ed. Mundt L, Shana
han K, eds., pp. 62-8. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Osborne CA, Stevens J. 1999. Urine sediment: under the microscope. In Urinalysis:
A Clinical Guide to Compassionate Patient Care. Osborne CA, Stevens J, eds.,
pp. 125-50. Shawnee, KS: Bayer Corporation.
Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Swanson LL, Swanson LL, Albasan H. 2OO8. Drug-induced
urolithiasis. Veterinary Clinics North America. Smaff Animaf Practice 39(1):
55-63.
Osborne CA, Lulich JP, Ulrich LK, Koehler LA, Albasan H, Sauer L, Schubert G.
2009. Melamine and cyanuric acid-induced crystalluria, uroliths, and nephro
toxicity in dogs and cats. Veterinary Clinics North America. Smaff Animaf Prac
Chapter
tice 39(1): 1-14.
Pallatto V, Wood M, Grindem C. 2o05. Urine sediment from a Chihuahua. Veteri-
nary Clinical Pathofogy 34(4): 425-8.
Assessment of melamine and cyanuric acid toxicity in cats. Journaf of Veteri-
nary Diagnostic Investigation 19(6): 616-24.
Sink CA, Feldman BF. 2OO4. Microscopic analysis. In Laboratory Urinafysis and
Hematofogy for the Smalff Animaf Practitioner. Sink CA, Feldman BF, eds., pp.
20-44. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2oo8. Urinary system. In Fundamentais of Veterinary
Clinicaf Pathofogy. 2nd ed. Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds., Pp. 426-33. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing.
Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS. 2oo8. Microscopic examination of urine. In Urinaly
sis and Body Ffuids, 5th ed. Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo M, eds. pp. 81-126. Phila-
delphia: FA Davis Company.
Thompson ME, Lewin-Smith MR, Kalasinsky VF, Pizzolato KM, Fleetwood ML,
McElhaney MR, Johnson TO. 2O08. Characterization of melamine-containing
and calcium oxalate crystals in three dogs with suspected pet food-induced
nephrotoxicosis.Veterinary Pathofogy 45(3): 417-26.
VanZuilen CD, Nickel RF, VanDijk TH, Reijngoud DJ. 1997. Xanthinuria in a family
of Cavailier King Charles spaniels. Veterinary Quarterly 19:172-4.
Expert Opinion on Drug Safety 7(2): 147-58.
Chapter 6
Proteinuria
Proteinuria canresultfrom avarietyofproteins excreted orlostinto the
urine. Albuminuria, the presence of albumin within urine, is the main contribu-
and cats. Detection of proteinuria includes both routine urinalysis and more
advanced laboratory methods of urine testing. The ability to diagnose clini-
cally relevant proteinuria is impacted by types of protein present, systemic
disease, upper or lower urinary tract disease, and testing methodologies.
This chapter reviews protein handling by the kidney, types of proteinuria, and
diagnostic methods for identifying proteinuria.
Protein handling by the kidney
Normal urine contains little to no protein when compared to the amount
lapter
balance of selective glomerular filtration and tubular reabsorption, both of
which are intensely debated and researched topics in renal physiology and
filtrate as well as the impact of tubular reabsorption of albumin remain con-
interpretation as a glomerular disease, a tubular disease, or a combination
of both. In the coming years, additional research will likely further clarify the
is beyond the scope of this chapter, a brief synopsis of protein handling
by the glomerulus and tubules is presented below. The reader is directed
to any of a number of recent articles for greater understanding (Birn and
     
2003; Waller et al. 1989).
Practicar Veterinary Urinafysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
113
114■
Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Podocyte
Afferent
Arteriole
Capillaries
Blood Flow
Bowman's Space
Ultrafiltrate
Blood Flov
Proximal Renal
Efferent
Tubular Epithelial
Arteriole
Cells
Glomerular Capillary Wall
Figure 6.1 Gomerulus.
Chapter 6
Glomerular filtration barrier
The anastamosed, twisted loops of capillaries contained within Bowman's
capsule are the site of the glomerular filtration barrier (GFB) (Figure 6.1). As
riole that supplies the glomerular capillary tuft; blood then exits via an effer-
ent arteriole. The glomerular capillary wall (Gcw) separates blood within the
capillaries from the ultrafiltrate (in Bowman's space). The various layers and
Kaneko 2008; Miner 2011). The actions of the GFB result in the formation of
ultrafiltrate. The GCw is a complex, selective structure that determines the
amount of protein, as well as various solutes, present in the ultrafiltrate. The
exact composition and functions of the Gcw are intensely researched. This
research is rapidly altering the understanding of the selectivity of the filtra-
tion barrier (Abrahamson 1985, Comper 2009, Haraldsson and Jeansson
2009: Haraldsson et al. 2008; Miner 2011).
The basic components of the filtration barrier include an endothelial
surface layer, a podocyte layer, and an intervening glomerular basement
membrane (GBM), which is between the two cell layers. Endothelial cells line
the internal aspect of the glomerular capillaries. These endothelial cells have
pores (fenestrations) within the cells that allow for the passage of fluid. The
Proteinuria 15
cytes, also referred to as visceral epithelial cells, line the outside surface of
the capillary (and so are present within Bowman's space and contact the
ultrafiltrate). The podocytes encircle the outside of the glomerular capillaries
via cytoplasmic projections known as foot processes, which abut one another.
phragm, within a filtration slit, consists of many critical proteins that further
which is formed from the fusion of both the endothelial basement membrane
and the visceral epithelial(podocyte)basement membrane(Abrahamson
1985; Jarad and Miner 2009: Miner 2011). The GBM contains specific mole-
that are integral to the selectivity of the GFB. Abnormalities, either inherited
can result in proteinuria. Specific abnormalities of these components and
molecules are extensively researched and are well described in human,
rodent, and canine models of glomerular disease (Abrahamson 1985: Bader
variable.
Inthe classicalview of glomerularfiltration,the Gcwpreventslarger pro-
teins, greater than 7okDa, from entering the ultrafiltrate. The interactions
and specific attributes of the components of the GCw listed above collectively
determine glomerular selectivity. In general terms, selectivity is a result of
iapter
广
able to pass through the GFB and enter the ultrafiltrate. If present in the
capillary blood, these LMw proteins, including positive acute phase proteins
(alpha and beta globulins that increase with inflammation), Bence-Jones
protein,myoglobin,or hemoglobin (dimer),are able to pass into the ultrafil-
trate. Larger proteins of a high molecular weight (HMw) are excluded due to
most part, unable to pass into the filtrate due to both size (at ~65kD) and
concept, continued debate concerns the role of electrical charge selectivity
(Comper 2009; Comper et al. 2008; Haraldsson and Jeansson 2009).
Tubular reabsorption
Proximal renal tubular epithelial cells reabsorb, through the process of endo
tubular fluid (Birn and Christensen 2006; Comper 2008: Comper 2009;
Comper et al. 2008; Haraldsson and Jeansson 2009; Haraldsson et al. 2008;
116   Practical  Veterinary Urinalysis
the receptors megalin and cubilin (Nielsen and Christensen 2010; Saito et al.
2008; Haraldsson and Jeansson 2009: Haraldsson et al. 2008; Nielsen and
Christensen 2010; Saito et al. 2010). with increasing amounts of albumin
present in the renal tubular fluid, the limited reabsorption capacity is over-
whelmed and albuminuria ensues. Increases in LMw proteins will also be
detected in urine due to competition for megalin and cubilin binding sites
(Nielsen and Christensen 2010; Vinge et al. 2010). Excessive albumin within
given the increased demand on renal epithelial cells to process the excess
proteins (Abbate et al. 2006; Birn and Christensen 2006: Futrakul et al. 2009;
Ohse et al. 2006; Vinge et al. 2010). Although this has been demonstrated in
in vitro studies, the role that an increased amount of albumin in the renal
Medical treatments aimed at decreasing albuminuria seem to lessen the
progression of renal disease (Hou et al. 2o06). The relationship of albumin-
remains to be proven.
Significance of proteinuria
Normal urine contains only a small amount of protein that may not be
Chapter
epithelial cells, secreted into the tubular fluid, and excreted into the urine
Examples of these proteins include Tamm-Horsfall protein (in dogs), also
known as uromodulin, immunoglobulin A, urokinase, and cauxin in cats
(Biewenga et al. 1982; Nabity et al. 2011; Waller et al. 1989). Albumin is absent
or present in non-detectable amounts (<1 mg/dL).
In humans, even mild proteinuria, when due to albuminuria, is an indepen-
outcome in patients with even only a mild decline in renal function (Hem-
and cats, the recognition of persistent albuminuria is evidence of underlying
chronic kidney disease (CKD) (Grauer 2007; Jacob et al. 2005; Lees et al.
2005; Littman 2011). In addition to the standard diagnostic measures of renal
disease, such as azotemia and inadequately concentrated urine, the presence
of proteinuria, in both dogs and cats, is associated with decreased overall
survival and can be an independent predictor of disease progression (Jacob
et al. 2005: Kuwahara et al. 2006; Syme 2009; Syme et al. 2006; Vaden
et al. 1997: Wehner et al. 2008). In dogs with chronic renal failure, a urine
protein to creatinine (UPC) ratio of greater or equal to 1 had a greater risk
of uremic crises and death when compared to dogs with a UPC of less than
1 (Jacob et al. 2oo5). Three separate studies in cats with renal disease
Proteinuria   17
revealed similar findings; an elevated UPC, even when only mildly increased
(UPC > 0.2), was related to decreased survival (King et al. 2006; Kuwahara
et al. 2006; Syme 2009; Syme et al. 2006). Proteinuria may be identified
with various diseases were shown to have increased urine albumin concentra-
tions (Grauer 2007; Whittemore et al. 2006). Another study demonstrated
that diabetic dogs had higher urine albumin concentrations, and albuminuria
alone was a significant predictor of hypertension (Struble et al. 1998).
Clinical assessment of proteinuria includes determining the type, the
origin, the duration, and the severity of urine protein loss (Lees et al. 2o05).
mal plasma proteins that enter into the tubular fluid and overwhelm resorp-
tive capacity (overflow proteinuria); (2) altered or damaged GFB; (3) tubular
injury or dysfunction resulting in a lack of protein resorption; and (4) tubular
relevant (Table 6.1).
Pathological proteinuria with urinary loss of albumin is caused by disease
of the renal tubules, glomerulus, or a combination of both. Disease or damage
 to the renal interstitium can also result in proteinuria. Causes of pathological
proteinuria due to tubular and/or glomerular disease are caused by a diverse
and lengthy list of both inherited and acquired etiologies in dogs and cats
prompt consideration of an inherited abnormality in tubular reabsorption or
glomerular function. Acquired causes of pathological proteinuria can be seen
diagnoses may require biopsy with special processing and staining tech-
lapter
niques as well as concurrent workup for an underlying systemic disease.
of glomerular lesions in dogs and often result from infectious or immune-
mediated diseases, although other etiologies are described (Grauer 2o07;
result in glomerular changes and proteinuria (Waters et al. 1997). Interest-
ingly. glucocorticoids are used to treat some types of glomerulonephritis.
Lees et al. 2005; Littman 2011). In some cases, an inciting etiology may not
be identified.
Laboratory diagnosis of proteinuria
The significance of proteinuria, specifically albuminuria, is undeniable, but
An active sediment, urine pH, method of collection have been implicated, to
varying degrees, in altering protein levels in urine or impacting accurate
measurement. Influence of collection methods and urinary tract inflammation
Table 6.1 Sources of urine protein
Prerenal or
Preglomerular
Overfiow proteinuria
Various disease states can cause increased amounts of
nonalbumin plasma protein(s) of mostly a low molecular
weight (LMw). Small sized LMw proteins pass through
the glomerular filtration barrier and exceed the
resorptive capacity of the proximal renal tubule.
Examples:
Acute-phase reactants due to inflammation and/or
infection (e.g. pyometra, leptospirosis)
Hemoglobin from intravascular hemolysis
Myoglobin from rhabdomyolysis (severe muscle injury)
Immunoglobulin light chains (i.e., Bence Jones proteins)
from underlying plasma cell or B cell neoplasia or
infections
Renal
Proteinuria that results from abnormal handling by the
kidney. It can be functional or pathological.
Functional proteinuria reflects a response to a transient
event (i.e., fever, seizure, and uncommonly, exercise, or
is a result of altered renal protein handling.
The proteinuria is relatively mild and is transient, i.e.,
resolves following the resolution of the underlying
condition.
Pathological proteinuria (albuminuria) are due to altered
structure or function of the kidneys:
1.Glomerufar:Altered or damaged glomerular capillary
llem
2. Tubular: Impaired tubular reabsorption of low
Chapter 6
molecular weight proteins +/- albumin
3.Both glomerular and tubular
4. interstitial: Proteins enter the urine from peritubular
capillaries (i.e, acute or chronic interstitial nephritis)
Post-renal
Proteinuria is a result of protein entering the urine at the
renal pelvis (after urine has been formed) or further
downstream.
Post-renal proteinuria can be secondary to:
1. Urinary sources: proteins related to inflammation,
hemorrhage, and/or neoplasia affecting the renal
pelvis, ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra
2.Extraurinary sources:proteins originating from
inflammation or hemorrhage of the genital tract
and/or external genitalia and detected in urine
collected from a voided or catheterized sample
Tubular
Proteins are produced by renal tubular epithelial cells
secretion
and secreted into tubular fluid.
This type of proteinuria is mild and may only be detected
inhighly concentrated urine specimens.
Sources: Data from Bonfanti et al. (2004); Lees et al. (2005); Prober et al. (2010);: Stockham
and Scott (2008): Zaragosa et al. (2003, 2004).
118
Proteinuria   119
chapter.
Methods of measurement of urine protein
Techniques for urine protein measurement vary in terms of sensitivity, speci-
ficity, and availability. Often, more than one test may be indicated. Methods
include both routine measures and more advanced testing options:
Urine dipstick
Sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) precipitation
Urine protein to creatinine ratio
Microalbuminuria assays
Urine albumin to creatinine ratio
Urine dipstick
Urine dipsticks provide a semiquantitative measure of proteinuria but can
be influenced by preanalytical, patient, and analytical variables. Also, urine
dipstick measurement of protein may be of insufficient sensitivity to detect
ditional interpretation of urine dipstick values is presented in Table 6.2. Urine
"Routine Urinalysis: Chemical Analysis."
of the patient's USG; a small amount of protein in dilute urine suggests more
lapter
significant proteinuria when compared to the same amount in highly concen-
trated urine. Interpretation of urine dipstick protein is also influenced by the
due to frequent false-positive results (Lyon et al. 2010; Mardell and Sparkes
2006; Miyazaki et al. 2003, 2010; Moore et al. 1991). This increase in positive
dipstick protein reactions is attributed to the excretion of non-albumin pro-
teins, specifically cauxin (Miyazaki et al. 2003, 2010). Confirmatory tests are
used to support a diagnosis of proteinuria or to grade proteinuria following
Table 6.2  Interpretation of positive urine dipstick
Dipstick result
Interpretation
1
30mg/dL (0.3g/L)
2+
100mg/dL (1.0g/L)
3+
300mg/dL (3.0 g/L)
4+
1000mg/dL (10.0 g/L)
Source: Data from Gregory (2003).
120     Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
a positive dipstick result. Confirmatory tests include the SSA, UPC, or a
microalbuminuria assay. Basic recommendations on interpretation, based on
review of relevant literature, are provided below.
Sulfosalicylicacid
The SSA test, also known as the bumin test, is often used for confirmation
of proteinuria following a positive result on a urine dipstick. The SSA test is
a turbidometric assay and is traditionally considered a semiquantitative test.
ties of urine supernatant and 5% SSA are mixed together in a tube, and
degree of cloudiness (turbidity) is assessed. The acid denatures proteins
present in the urine which causes precipitation of proteins and turbidity
As little as 5mg/dL of protein is reported to cause visual turbidity (Garner
and Wiedmeyer 2007; Stockham and Scott 2008). To provide more quantita-
tive results a set of standard solutions (0, 5, 10, 20, 30, 40, 50, 75, and 100 mg
albumin/dL urine) (Cargille Modified Kinsbury-Clark Albumin Standards, Car-
gille Laboratories, Inc., Cedar Grove, NJ) can be used for comparison. The
use of standards or spectrophotometric methods to assess turbidity, while
providing more quantitative results is, admittedly, impractical in routine vet-
erinary practice. The SSA test with visual inspection of turbidity is a relatively
simple and reliable test, one that can be easily performed in practice.
to more advanced urine albumin testing methods have been recently pro-
Chapter
posed (Lyon et al. 2o1o). In dogs, positive results between the two tests
should be similar to consider it a true positive when <2+ (Lyon et al. 2010).
If either test result is ≥2+,the sample is likely positive for albumin in dogs
(Lyon et al. 2010). Positive results necessitate additional testing for grading
in a high number of false positives as previously mentioned. This may be a
result of normally excreted non-albumin proteins (Miyazaki et al. 2003, 2010).
For this reason, more specific testing for proteinuria, such as UPC or micro-
albuminuria assays, is recommended in cats (Lyon et al. 2010; Mardell and
Sparkes 2006).
Urine protein to creatinine ratio
UPC has been the customary test used to confirm and/or stage proteinuria.
The UPC, determined by measuring urine (total) protein and urine creatinine,
is a quantitative measure of urine protein loss. It is most often measured at
a reference laboratory. but some in-clinic options are available. Because
More specific measures of urine albumin, however, are available and are
discussed below. The gold standard in human medicine for urine protein
excretion/loss, a 24-hour urine collection and protein measurement, is
Proteinuria 
121
Confirmatory test
Protein result
Interpretation and
(SSA)
recommendation
Proteinuria suspected. Repeat in
Trace or 1+
Dipstick protein:
2-4 weeks &/or perform UPC
Trace or 1+
Negative
Proteinuria unlikely
Dipstick protein
Grading of proteinuria (UPC) is
or SSA:
indicated
2+
Figure 6.2 Interpretation of urine dipstick and SSA test in dogs.
Source: Data from Lyon et al. (2010).
typically impractical in veterinary medicine. The UPC correlates well with the
24-hour collection as the creatinine measurement accounts for variations in
urine volume throughout the day (Adams et al. 1992; Grauer et al. 1985; Lees
et al. 2005; Monroe et al. 1989).
lapter
recommendations from theInternational Renal Interest Society (IRiS)and
prior recommendations in the veterinary literature (www.iris-kidney.com).
It provides guidelines for interpretation of UPC values in both dogs and
significant for proteinuria in both dogs and cats, especially if it is persis-
tent and unrelated to prerenal or postrenal disease (Lees et al. 2o05)
(Table 6.3).
As mentioned earlier, UPC can be used both for confirmation or exclusion
of significant proteinuria following a positive dipstick test as well as for
grading overt proteinuria. When and if to perform a UPc is not always clear-
cut. The recommendations of one study advise UPC testing in the following
instances nces (Zatelli et al. 2010):
● Diagnosis proteinuria in dogs with a 1+ result and concurrent dilute urine
(USG <1.012)
● Grade proteinuria in dogs with a 2+ or greater urine protein result.
Additionaltesting was notindicated fordogswith 1 orlessproteinuria and
a USG greater than 1.012 (Table 6.4).
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 6.3 Guidelines for interpretation of UPC in dogs and cats
Guidelines for interpretation of UPC in dogs
UPC
Interpretation
<0.2
Negative for proteinuria
≥0.2 to 0.4
Borderline proteinuria
20.5
Overt proteinuria
Guidelines for interpretation of UpC in cats
UPC
Interpretation
<0.2
Negative for proteinuria
≥0.2 to 0.3
Borderline proteinuria
≥0.4
Overt proteinuria
Source: Data from Lees et al. (2005).
Table 6.4 Suggested interpretation of dipstick and USG results
Dipstick test results
USG
0 (0mg/dL)
1+ (30 mg/dL)
(P/bW00) +z
≤1.012
NP
UPC ratio
UPC ratio
 Chapter 6
>1.012;<1.030
NP
NP
UPC ratio
≥1.030
NP
NP
UPC ratio
NP, nonproteinuric, quantification of urine protein not required.
Source: Data from Zatelli et al. (2010).
UPC values may exhibit enough day-to-day variation in a patient to risk
misdiagnosis (Nabity et al. 2007). ldeally, urine should be sampled over
several days, using the same sampling method, to determine a patient's UPC
(Fernandes et al. 2005; Nabity et al. 2007). This may not be an option for all
patients given the added expense of submitting multiple urine samples for
UPC determination. Pooling urine samples of equal volumes from the same
dog over 3 days was demonstrated to be a reliable and cost-effective alterna-
tive for UPC testing over multiple days (Levine et al. 2010). Additionally, once
a baseline UPC is determined for a patient, the same methodology (i.e. ana-
lyzer and/or reference laboratory) should be used to monitor the patient's
UPC (Fernandes et al. 2005).
Proteinuria
■123
Table 6.5 Multistix PRO dipstick-protein interpretation
Test pad
Protein-low
Protein-high
Interpretation
Color change
No color change
15mg/dL
Color change
Color change
≥30-300mg/dL
No color change
No color change
Negativeb
 Sirmilar methodology to routine dipstick protein methodology: includes 30, 100, or
'7p/bU 00
Protein concentration is below the sensitivity of the “protein-low" reagent pad.
In-clinic UPC dipstick
A special urine dipstick test is available for in-clinic determination of UPc; it
was demonstrated to be useful in dogs, but not in cats (welles et al. 2o06)
Mulfistix PRO (Bayer Corporation, Eikhart, IN)
The Multistix PRo is similar to a routine urine dipstick with the addition of a
specific test pad for measurement of urine creatinine and two levels of urine
protein measurement. Reading of the test pad is by either visual examination
or by a Clinitek 50 analyzer (Bayer Corporation, Tarrytown, NY). For visual
are "negative" (Strasinger and DiLorenzo 2008) (Table 6.5). The UPC value
determined by the analyzer (denoted P: C) givesaresultin mg/g(divide protein
hapter
Normal: <150 mg protein/g creatinine
Abnormal: 150, 300, and >500 mg protein/g creatinine.
A chart, provided by the manufacturer, assists in interpretation. A UPC can
be calculated manually using the protein and creatinine values provided by
the dipstick (or analyzer): divide the protein value (mg protein/dL) by the
creatinine value (mg creatinine/dL). When compared to quantitative bio
chemical determination of UPC, a negative protein result using the Multistix
ofUPCvaluesfrombothmanual calculation and machine calculation,using
the Clinitek instrument, were recommended for confirmation and interpreta-
tion of positive results (welles et al. 2006). The Multistix PRO is not recom-
mended for determination of UPC in cats (Welles et al. 2006).
Additional considerations for UPC
UPC measurement may not detect very low levels of albuminuria, which may
124   Practical  Veterinary Urinalysis
questioned, and testing for microalbuminuria using a species-specifc anti-
body to albumin may offer greater sensitivity in both dogs and cats (Garner
and Wiedmeyer 2007; Langston 2004; Lyon et al. 2010; Syme et al. 2006)
Grading of overt proteinuria and recommendations for treatment or manage
ment of proteinuria rely on interpretation of UPC numerical results, which
support its continued use.
Microalbuminuria assays
Microalbuminuria is the presence of urine albumin that is not detected by a
standard urine dipstick, typically lower than 20-30 mg/dL (<200-300 mg/L)
(Futrakul et al. 2009; Ruggenenti and Remuzzi 2006; Vaden et al. 2001).
and 30.0mg/dL (10-300 mg/L) in urine normalized to a specific gravity of
1.010 (Gentilini et al. 2005; Murgier et al. 2009; Vaden 2003))
In humans, the presence of microalbuminuria is associated with increased
risk of mortality, progression to kidney failure, and myocardial infarction
(Futrakul et al. 2009: Hemmelgarn et al. 2010). Microalbuminuria has been
shown to be more prevalent in older dogs when compared to younger dogs
and, not surprisingly. in dogs with urinary tract disease, neoplasia, infectious,
inflammatory, or immune-mediated diseases, and other disease types (ERD
product insert 2003; Jensen et al. 2001, 2011; Pressler et al. 2001; Radecki
et al. 2003; whittemore et al. 2006). Over half of dogs with microalbuminuria,
but not proteinuria, were found to have an "underlying systemic disease"
(Whittemore et al.2003).Microalbuminuria is also associated with underlying
Chapter
systemic disease in cats, including urinary tract disease (whittemore et al.
2007). Earlier identification of renal disease, specifically albuminuria below
6
the limit of standard detection methods, allows for clinical intervention which
may slow disease progression (Vaden 2o03). Several tests are available fon
screening of patients for microalbuminuria.
Laboratory analysis of microalbuminuria
In-clinic tests include the Early Renal Detection (ERD)-Health Screen, Clinitek
Microalbumin reagent strip (Clinitek Microalbumin, Bayer Corporation,
specific antibody.
ERD or ERD-Health Screen (Heska, Fort Collins, CO): Canine
or feline specific
Methodology
ERD-Health Screen is a semiquantitative immunoassay. The testing pad uti-
lizes a species-specific(canine or feline) monoclonal antibody against albumin.
The test identifies urine samples containing greater than 1mg/dL of albumin
Proteinuria 125
diluted, in accordance with the provided procedure, to a specific gravity of
1.010;this helps to standardize themeasurement across a range ofurine
        
et al. 2oo9). This type of standardization is similar to comparison to urine
creatinine in UPC or urine albumin to creatinine (UAC) ratios and yields com-
parable prognostic information (Syme and Elliot 2o05). After the test device
with pad is inserted into the urine, colored lines develop and indicate if the
albumin concentration is less than 1mg/dL (negative) or greater than 1mg/
dL (positive). Positive reactions are further classified as low, medium, high,
tive (Mardell and Sparkes 2006).
Conclusion
and Sparkes 2006). Given the increased likelihood of false-positive urine
dipstick protein reactions in cats, this assay may be used as an in-clinic option
to confirm or identify proteinuria. It is less useful for overt proteinuria.
Clinitek Microaibumin reagent strip
Methodology
 The Clinitek Microalbumin reagent strip uses an antibody-impregnated pad
hapter
and creatinine concentrations; alternatively, results can be evaluated with
6
 a    a
Conclusion
Clinitek Microalbumin reagent strips demonstrate low sensitivity. This makes
them a poor screening testin dogs for detection of microalbuminuria(Pressler
et al. 2002).
Micral (Roche Diagnostics Corporation, IN)
Methodology
Micral test strips rely upon antibody-impregnated pads that bind to human
albumin. The series of reagent pads produce an antibody-enzyme complex
then compared to a reference chart.
Conclusion
This test should not be used as a screening test in dogs for detection of
microalbuminuria (Pressler et al. 2o02).
126   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Urine albumin or urine albumin to creatinine ratio
compared to traditional in-clinic tests (i.e. urine dipstick or SSA test), the UAC
provides similar information to the UPC. UAC results are also not directly
comparable to UPc, and recommendations for diagnosis and treatment of
tests and UAC measurement are limited to research and few reference
aboratorles.
Recommendations regarding diagnosis of proteinuria
Current recommendations regarding proteinuria are based on UPC values,
presence or absence of microalbuminuria, and other clinical or laboratory
findings pertinent to the patient such as concurrent azotemia (Lees et al.
2005). Recommendations include when to monitor for persistent or worsen-
cally intervene. Figure 6.3 provides a brief summary of the first phase,
the scope of this chapter, several resources provide detailed information for
both diagnostic and treatment options in patients with persistent proteinuria
Chapter 6
(Grauer 2007; Lees et al. 2005; Littman 2011; www.iris-kidney.com)
Additional considerations for proteinuria
Method of collection
Collection type has been previously reported to impact UPC in male dogs;
recently, however, it was demonstrated either free catch or cystocentesis
Semen contamination of urine
Semen-containing urine samples may result in a false-positive urine dipstick
protein result (Prober et al. 2010).
Urinary tract inflammation and hemorrhage
with an active urinary sediment, a positive protein result should not be attrib-
Proteinuria
127
Non-azotemic dogs or cats:
Monitor
Persistent microalbuminuria OR UPC≥ 0.5
Non-azotemic dogs or cats:
Investigate
Increasing degree of persistent microalbuminuria OR UPC ≥ 1.0
Dogs with chronic kidney disease and azotemia: UPC ≥ 0.5
Intervene
Cats with chronic kidney disease and azotemia: UPC ≥ 0.4
Non-azotemic dogs or cats: UPC ≥ 2.0 and persistent renal proteinuria
Figure 6.3 Consensus recommendations for proteinuria.
  )        1 
http://www.iris-kidney.com
inurinealbumincanresult frommacroscopichematuria with or without
pyuria, the UPC does not often increase (Vaden et al. 2004). Also, there is
poor correlation between UPC and degree of hematuria or pyuria (Bagley et
al. 1991). Both have been shown to contribute minimally to proteinuria or UPC
in dog. Even in the presence of macroscopic hematuria and in most cases of
pyuria, UPC remains less than 0.5 (Vaden et al. 2004).
References
Abbate M, Zoja C, Remuzzi G. 2006. How does proteinuria cause progressive renal
hapter
damage? Journal of the American Society of Nephrofogy 17: 2974-84.
Abrahamson DR. 1985. Origin of the glomerular basement membrane visualized
after in vivo labeling of laminin in newbornrat kidneys.Journaf of Ceff Biofogy
100:1988-2000.
Adams LG, Polzin DJ, Osborne CA, O'Brien TD. 1992. Correlation of urine protein/
creatinine ratio and twenty-four-hour urinary protein excretion in normal cats
and cats with surgically induced chronic renal failure. Journaf of Veterinary
Internal Medicine 6(3): 6-40.
Bader BL, Smyth N, Nedbal S, Miosge N, Baranowsky A, Mokkapati S, Murshed M,
Nischt R. 2o05. Compound genetic ablation of nidogen 1 and 2 causes basement
membrane defects and perinatal lethality in mice.Molecufar and Ceff Biology
25:6846-56
Bagley RS, Center SA, Lewis RM. 1991. The effect of experimental cystitis and
iatrogenic blood contamination on the urine protein/creatinine ratio in the dog.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 5: 66-70.
Barker DF, Hostikka SL, Zhou J, Chow LT, Oliphant AR, Gerken SC, Gregory MC,
Skolnick MH, Atkin CL, Tryggvason K. 199o. Identification of mutations in the
COL4A5 collagen gene in Alport syndrome. Science 248: 1224-7.
Barsanti JA, Finco DR.1979. Protein concentration in urine of normal dogs. Ameri-
can Journal of Veterinary Research 4o: 1583-8.
Beatrice L, Nizi F, Callegari D, Paltrinieri S, Zini E, D'lppolito P, Zatelli A. 2010.
Comparison of urine protein-to-creatinine ratio in urine samples collected by
128   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
cystocentesis versus free catch in dogs. Journaf of the American Veterinary
Medicaf Association 236(1): 1221-4.
Biewenga WJ, Gruys E, Hendicks HJ. 1982. Urinary protein loss in the dog. Nephro-
logical study of 29 dogs without signs of renal disease. Research in Veterinary
Science 33: 366-74.
Birn H, Christensen El. 2o06. Renal albumin absorption in physiology and pathol
Ogy. Kidney Internationaf 69: 440-9.
Bonfanti U, Zini E, Minetti E, Zatelli A. 2OO4. Free light-chain proteinuria and
ejuewysia7 oi pasodxa sbop ll ul uoiiouny pue Aboloyiedoisiy leual lewiou
infantum,Ehrfichia canis,and Babesia canis.Journal of Veterinary Internal Medi-
cine 18(5): 618-24.
Comper WD. 2oo8. Resolved: normal glomeruli filter nephrotic levels of albumin.
Journal of the American Society of Nephrology 19: 427-32.
Comper WD, Hilliard LM, Nikolic-Paterson DJ, Russo L M. 2008. Disease-dependent
mechanisms of albumuria. American Journal Physiofogy. Renal Physiofogy 295:
F1589-F1600
tension 18(4): 336-42.
ERD-HealthScreen Canine and Feline Urine Tests Product Insert. 2OO3. Heska
Corp, Loveland, CO.
Fernandes P, Kahn M, Yang V, Weilbacher A. 2005. Comparison of methods used
for determining urine protein-to-creatinine ratio in dogs and cats [abstract]
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 19(3): 431.
Futrakul N, Sridama V, Futrakul P. 2oo9. Microalbuminuria-a biomarker of renal
microvascular disease. Renaf Failure 31(2): 140-3.
Garner BC, Wiedmeyer CE. 2OO7. Comparison of a semiquantitative point-of-
care assay for the detection of canine microalbuminuria with routine
Chapter
semiquantitative methods for proteinuria. Veterinary Clinicar Pathology 36:
240-4.
Gentilini F, Dondi F, Mastrorilli C, Giunti M, Calzolari C, Gandini G, Mancini D, Ber-
gamini PF. 2oo5. Validation of a human immunoturbidometric assay to measure
canine albumin in urine and cerebrospinal fluid. Journaf of Veterinary Diagnostic
nvestigation 17:179-83.
Grauer GF. 2o07. Measurement, interpretation, and implications of proteinuria
and albuminuria. Veterinary Clinics Smaff Animal Practice 37: 283-95.
Grauer GF, Thomas CB, Eicker Sw. 1985. Estimation of quantitative proteinuria in
the dog, using the urine protein-to-creatinine ratio from a random, voided
sample. American Journal of Veterinary Research 46(10): 2116-9.
Grauer GF, Oberhauser EB, Basaraba RJ, Lappin MR, Simpson DF, Jensen WA
2oo2. Development of microalbuminuria in dogs with heartworm disease.
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 16: 352.
Gregory CR. 2O03. Urinary System. In Duncan & Prasse's Veterinary Laboratory
Medicine Clinicaf Pathofogy. 4th ed. Latimer KS, Mahaffe EA, Prasse KW, eds.,
pp. 231-59. Ames, 1A: lowa State Press.
Haraldsson B, Jeansson M. 2oo9. Glomerular filtration barrier. Current Opinion in
Nephrofogy and Hypertension 18:331-5.
Haraldsson B, Nystrom J, Deen WM. 2oo8. Properties of the glomerular barrier
and mechanisms of proteinuria. Physiologicaf Reviews 88: 451-87.
Hemmelgarn BR, Manns BJ, Lloyd A, James MT, Klarenback S, Quinn RR, Wiebe
N, Tonelli M. 2010. Relation between kidney function, proteinuria, and adverse
outcomes.Journal of the American Medicaf Association 303(5): 423-9.
Proteinuria  129
Hou FF, Zhang X, Zhang GH, Xie D, Chen PY, Zhang WR, Jiang JP, Liang M,
Wang GB, Liu ZR, Geng RW. 2OO6. Efficacy and safety of benazepril for
advanced chronic renal insufficiency. New England Journaf of Medicine 354:
131-40.
initialproteinuria and morbidity rate or death in dogs with naturally occurring
chronic renal failure. Journaf of the American Veterinary Medicaf Association
226: 393-400.
Jarad G, Miner JH. 20o9. Update on the glomerular filtration barrier. Current
Opinion in Nephrofogy and Hypertension 18(3): 226-32.
Jarad G, Cunningham J, Shaw AS, Miner JH. 2o06. Proteinuria precedes podocyte
abnormalities in Lamb2-/- mice, implicating the glomerular basement mem
brane as an albumin barrier. Journaf of Clinicaf fnvestigation 116: 2272-9.
Jensen WA, Grauer GF, Andrews J, Simpson D. 2OO1. Prevalence of microalbumin-
uria in dogs [abstract]. Journaf of Veterinary lnternaf Medicine 15: 300.
Jensen WA, Cleland WP, Donnelly R et al. 2O11. New data: identification of underly
ing disease in dogs that test positive with the E.R.D.-HealthScreen canine
urine test. Available at: www.heska.com/Documents/RenalHealthScreen/erd_
data572.aspx.
Kaneko JJ. 2008. Kidney function and damage. In Clinical Biochemistry of Domes
tic Animais, 6th ed. Kaneko JJ, Harvey JW, Bruss ML, eds., pp. 485-528. Burl-
ington, VT: Elsevier Inc.
King JN, Tasker S, Gunn-Moore DA, Strehlau G. BENRIC Study Group. 2OO6. Prog
nostic factors in cats with chronic kidney disease. Journaf of Veterinary fnternaf
Medicine 20: 1054-64.
Kuwahara Y, Ohba Y,Kitoh K, Kuwahara N, Kitagawa H. 20O6.Association of
laboratory data and death within one month in cats with chronic renal failure.
The Journal of Smafl Animal Practice 47: 446-50.
Kuwahara Y, Nishii N, Takasu M, Ohba Y, Maeda S, Kitawaga H. 2OO8. Use of urine
9
Chapter
of Veterinary Medicaf Science70(8):865-7.
Langston C. 2oo4. Microalbuminuria in cats. Journaf of the American Animaf
Hospitaf Association 4o: 251-4.
Lees GE et al. 2oo2. Persistent albuminuria precedes onset of overt proteinuria
in male dogs with X-linked hereditary nephropathy.Journaf ofVeterinary Inter-
nal Medicine 16: 353.
Lees GE, Brown SA, Elliott J et al. 2O05. Assessment and management of protein
uria in dogs and cats: 2oo4 ACVIM Forum Consensus Statement (small animal).
Journal of Veterinary Internal Medicine 19: 377-85.
aujn lejes sa palood jo asn aul oloz 'is uapeA '1 sjeh 'o bueuz 'wo aulaal
samples to measure urine protein: creatinine ratios. Veterinary Clinicaf Pathof-
ogy 39(1):53-6.
Littman MP. 2O11. Protein-losing nephropathy in small animals. Veterinary Clinics
of North America. Smaff Animaf Practice 41: 31-62.
Lyon SD, Sanderson MW, Vaden SL, Lappin MR, Jensen WA, Grauer GF. 2O10.
Comparison of urine dipstick, sulfosalicylic acid,urine protein-to-creatinine
ratio, and species-specific ELiSA methods for detection of albumin in urine
samples of cats and dogs. Journaf of the American Veterinary Medicaf Associa
tion 236: 874-9.
Mardell EJ, Sparkes AH. 2oO6. Evaluation of a commercial in-house test kit for
the semi-quantitative assessment of microalbuminuria in cats. Journaf of Fefine
Medicine and Surgery 8: 269-78.
130   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Miner JH. 2o11. Glomerular basement membrane composition and the filtration
barrier. Pediatric Nephrology 9: 1413-7. Epub February 15, 2011.
Miyazaki M, Kamiie K, Soeta S, Taira H, Yamashita T. 2O03. Molecular cloning and
characterization of a novel carboxylesterase-like protein that is physiologically
present at high concentrations in the urine of domestic cats (fefis catus). Bio-
chemicaf Journal 37o(Pt 1): 101-10.
Miyazaki M, Fujiwara K, Suzuta Y, Hobuko W, Taira H, Suzuki A, Yamashita T.
2010. Screening for proteinuria in cats using a conventional dipstick test after
removal of cauxin from urine with a Lens cufinaris agglutinin lectin tip. The
Veterinary Journaf. Available at: www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pil/
S1090023310002844.
Monroe WE, Davenport DJ, Saunders GK. 1989. Twenty-four hour urinary protein
American Journal of Veterinary Research. 5o(l1): 1906-9.
Moore FM, Brum SL, Brown L. 1991. Urine protein determination in dogs and cats:
Pathology 20(4): 95-7.
Murgier P, Jakins A, Bexfield N, Archer J. 2oo9. Comparison of semiquantitative
test strips, urine protein electrophoresis, and an immunoturbidimetric assay
for measuring microalbuminuria in dogs. Veterinary Clinicaf Pathofogy 38(4):
485-92
Nabity MB, Boggess MM, Kashtan CE, Lees GE. 2OO7. Day-to-day variation of the
urine protein : creatinine ratio in female dogs with stable glomerular proteinuria
caused by x-linked hereditary nephropathy. Journaf of Veterinary Internaf Medi-
cine 21: 425-30.
Nabity MB, Lees GE, Dangott LJ, Cianciolo R, Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM. 2011.
 Proteomic analysis of urine from male dogs during early stages of tubulointer-
stitial injury in a canine model of progressive glomerular disease. Veterinary
Chapter
Clinical Pathology 40(2): 222-36.
Nielsen R, Christensen El. 2010. Proteinuria and events beyond the slit. Pediatric
Nephrofogy 25: 813-22.
Fujita T, Nangaku M. 2006. Albumin induces endoplasmic reticulum stress
1447-55.
Osicka TM, Panagiotopoulos S, Jerums G, Comper WD. 1997. Fractional clearance
of albumin is influenced by its degradation during renal passage. Clinicar Science
(London) 93:557-64.
Pressler BM, Vaden SL, Jensen WA, Simpson D. 2oo1. Prevalence of microalbu
minuria in dogs evaluated at a referral veterinary hospital [abstract]. Journaf
of Veterinary Internaf Medicine 15: 300.
albuminuria using a semiquantitative test strips designed for use with human
urine. Veterinary Clinicaf Pathofogy 31: 56-60.
Prober LG, Johnson CA, Olivier NB, Thomas JS. 2O10. Effect of semen in urine
specimens on urine protein concentration determined by means of dipstick
analysis. American Journaf of Veterinary Research 71: 288-92.
prevalence of microalbuminuria in dogs (abstract). Journal of Veterinary Inter-
naf Medicine 17: 406.
Ruggenenti P, Remuzzi G. 2o06. Time to abandon microalbuminuria? Kidney
Internationaf 7o: 1214-22.
Proteinuria    131
Russo LM, Bakris GL, Comper WD. 2OO2. Renal handling of albumin: a critical
review of basic concepts and perspective. American Journal of Kidney Disease
39: 899-919.
Saito A, Sato H, lino N, Takeda T. 2010. Molecular mechanisms of receptor-
mediated endocytosis in the renal proximal tubular epithelium. Journaf of Bio-
medicine and Biotechnofogy2o1o:1-7.
Kidney and Urinary Tract, vol. 1, 8th ed. Schrier RW, ed., pp. 299-336. Philadel-
phia: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Smithies O. 2o03. Why the kidney glomerulus does not clog: a gel permeation/
diffusion hypothesis of renal function. Proceedings of the Nationaf Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 10o(7): 4108-13.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2OO8. Urinary system. In Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinicar Pathofogy, 2nd ed. Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds., pp. 415-94. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing.
Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS. 2oo8. Physical examination of urine. In Urinafysis
and Body Ffuids, 5th ed. Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS, eds., pp. 41-51. Philadel-
phia: FA Davis Company.
Struble AL, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, Kass PH. 1998. Systemic hypertension and
proteinuria in dogs with diabetes mellitus. Journaf of the American Veterinary
Medicaf Association 213(6): 822-5.
Syme HM. 2oo9. Proteinuria in cats: prognostic marker or mediator? Journaf of
Fefine Medicine and Surgery 11(3): 211-8.
Syme HM, Elliot J. 2o05. Comparison of urinary albumin excretion normalized by
creatinine concentration or urine specific gravity. Journaf of Veterinary fnternaf
Medicine 19(3): 466.
Syme HM, Markwell PJ, Pfeiffer D, Elliot J. 2OO6. Survival of cats with naturally
occurring chronicrenalfailure is related to severity of proteinuria.Journaf of
VeterinaryInternalMedicine2o:528-35.
6
Vaden S. 2o03. Microalbuminuria: what is it and how do I interpret it? Proceedings,
hapter
2ist American Coffege of Veterinary Internal Medicine Forum.
Vaden SL, Levine J, Breitschwerdt EB.1997. A retrospective case-control of acute
     s    
Vaden SL et al. 2oo1. Longitudinal study of microalbuminuria in soft-coated
Wheaten Terriers. Journal of Veterinary Internaf Medicine 15: 300.
Vaden SL, Pressler BM, Lappin MR, Jensen WA. 2OO4. Effects of urinary tract
inflammation and sample blood contamination on urine albumin and total
protein concentrations in canine urine samples. Veterinary Cfinicar Pathofogy
33:14-9.
Vinge L, Lees GE, Nielsen R, Kashtan CE, Bahr A, Christensen El. 2O10. The effect
of progressive glomerular disease on megalin-mediated endocytosis in the
kidney. Nephroflogy, Dialysis, Transpiantation 25(8): 2458-67. Epub March 2,
2010.
Waller KV, Ward MW, Mahan JD, Wismatt DK. 1989. Current concepts in protein
uria. Clinical Chemistry 35: 5.
Waters CB, Adams LG, Scott-Moncrieff JC, DeNicola DB, Snyder PW, White MR
Gasparini M. 1997. Effects of glucocorticoid therapy on urine protein-to-
Medicine11:172-7.
Wehner A, Hartmann K, Hirschberger J. 2oo8. Associations between proteinuria,
non-renal diseases. The Veterinary Record 162(5): 141-7.
132   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Welles EG, Whatley EM, Hall AS, Wright JC. 2OO6. Comparison of Multistix PRO
dipsticks with other biochemical assays for determining urine protein (UP),
urine creatinine (UC), and UP : UC ratio in dogs and cats. Veterinary Clinicaf
Pathofogy 35(1): 31-6.
Whittemore JC, Jensen WA, Prause L, Radecki S, Gill V, Lappin MR. 2003. Com-
parison of microalbuminuria, urine protein dipstick, and urine protein creatinine
ratio results in clinically ill dogs [abstract]. Journaf of Veterinary Internaf Medi-
cine 17: 437.
Whittemore JC, Gill VL, Jensen WA, Radecki SV, Lappin MR. 2O06. Evaluation of
the association between microalbuminuria and the urine albumin creatinine
ratio and systemic disease in dogs. Journaf of the American Veterinary Medicaf
Association 229:958-63.
Whittemore JC, Miyoshi Z, Jensen WA, Radecki SV, Lappin MR. 2O07. Association
of microalbuminuria and the urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio with systemic
disease in cats.Journaf of the American Veterinary Medical Association 23O(8):
1165-9.
Zaragosa C, Barrera R, Centeno F, Tapia JA, Mane MC. 2003. Characterization of
gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE) and Western blotting of the urinary proteins.
Journal of Comparative Pathology 129(2-3): 169-78.
Zaragosa C, Barrera R, Centeno F, Tapia JA, Mane MC. 2OO4. Canine pyometra:
a study of the urinary proteins by SDS-PAGE and Western blot. Theriogenology
61(7): 1259-72.
Zatelli A, Paltrinieri S, Nizi F, Roura X, Zini E. 2O10. Evaluation of a urine dipstick
Veterinary Research 71(2): 235-40.
zZenker M, Tralau T, Lennert T, Pitz S, Mark K, Madlon H, Dotsch J, Reis A, Munte-
fering H, Neumann LM. 2oo4. Congenital nephrosis, mesangial sclerosis, and
Chapter 6
distinct eye abnormalities with microcoria: an autosomal recessive syndrome.
American Journaf of Medicaf Genetics. Part A 13o: 138-45.
Webliography
www.iris-kidney.com Website of the International Renal Interest Society (IRIS),
shop ul aseasip Aaupiy yo puaweail pue sisoubeip uo uoiiewnoui sapiaoid
and cats.
Chapter 7
Advanced Diagnostics
Routine urinalysis, when performed in conjunction with a complete blood
count and chemistry panel, provides information about patient health and
can identify underlying disease, if present. Urinalysis and the standard mea
sures of renal function, blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine, may not
always be abnormal in cases of acute or subclinical renal disease. Monitoring
tic and therapeutic tool but may require tests of greater sensitivity and
specificity. An abnormal urinalysis itself may necessitate additional testing
(e.g. bacterial culture, urine cytology) to further characterize any abnormali-
ties detected.
As described in Chapter 1, inadequate concentrating ability and azotemia
typically develop only after greater than 66-75% of functioning nephrons
are impaired or lost (Stockham and Scott 2008). Evidence of tubular injury
in the form of cellular, granular, and/or waxy casts may not be present in all
described that more accurately assess renal function, monitor for renal
injury, and diagnose specific diseases. Many of these tests remain under
      a a  n
available and understood in the future. The following is not an exhaustive list
hapter
of options; the aim is to provide the reader with additional resources and test
methodologies for diagnostic consideration.
Detection of bacteriuria versus diagnosis of urinary
tract infection
Diagnosis of urinary tract infections (UTls) most often utilizes evaluation of
urine sediment to identify pyuria, the presence of neutrophils within urine,
and bacteriuria as reliance on biochemical methods (i.e. urine dipstick) is
unreliable in veterinary medicine (Klausner et al. 1976). Sediment evaluation
Practicar Veterinary Urinafysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
133
134   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
is a routine component of urinalysis and is described in Chapter 5, with
representative images provided. Bacterial culture can also be used for both
presence of bacteria within a urine sample is not equivalent to diagnosis of
UTl. A diagnosis of the latter is more likely when bacteria are identified upon
sediment examination of an aseptically obtained sample and/or in samples
or >5 WBCs/HPF in samples obtained by free catch or catheter) (Bartges
2004).
Stained air-dried sediment smears
Detection of bacteriuria via sediment examination can be challenging in some
instances despite clinical suspicion of a UTl. This is especially true in dilute
urine samples. Submission of urine for bacterial culture, while a sensitive test,
may not be the most cost-effective if the index of suspicion for a UTl is low
(Tivapasi et al. 2o09). Microscopic evaluation of an air-dried urine sediment
smear offers greater sensitivity and specificity in detection of bacteriuria
compared to evaluation of unstained urine sediment (Swenson et al. 2o04)
(Figure 7.1a,b).
Procedure:
1. Centrifuge urine (see Chapter 5 for the full procedure).
 2. Remove a small drop of urine sediment and place on a clean glass slide
A coverslip or pipette tip can be used to gently spread the sediment on
the slide to make a thin preparation.
3. Allow slide with sediment to air dry.
4. Stain slide (Diff-Quik, Dade Behring. Inc., Newark, NJ).
Chapter 7
         n  
decrease contrast (the stain provides the necessary contrast).
6. Evaluate for bacteria, leukocytes, and other elements under 100x oil or
place a drop of oil, followed by a coverslip and evaluate under 40x.
Bacterial culture of urine
Ideally. bacterial culture should be performed on urine samples collected in
a sterile manner, typically by cystocentesis. A veterinary reference labora-
in-clinic laboratories may offer this service. Quantitative bacterial cultures
organisms are determined. Samples should be contained within a sterile
container and kept refrigerated until processed as bacteria rapidly multiply
at room temperature.
68
福
Q
®
09
Q@
®
超
PO0O
®
®
9
480
a
Chapter
(b)
Figure 7.1 (a) Numerous WBCs, RBCs, few epithelial cells, and bacterial rods
in urine sediment from a dog with a urinary tract infection, 40x; (b) air-dried
and stained urine sediment. Neutrophils (arrows), bacterial rods (dashed
arrows), and one yeast (arrowhead), Diff-Quick, 100x.
135
136   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Urinary tract cytology
In some patients, urine cytology or aspiration of tissue (i.e. masses within the
urethra, bladder, or kidneys) will provide more specific information regarding
underlying disease(s). This is used most often to differentiate inflammation
and infection from neoplasia or investigate mass lesions or organomegaly. if
present.
Urine cytology
and infectious agents, differentiate types of epithelial cells, and evaluate
criteria of malignancy within a population of cells. Urine cytology utilizes
stained, air-dried urine sediment smears; the procedure described above is
disrupted or distorted. Cytocentrifugation of urine or urine sediment offers
superior preservation of cellular detail but requires special equipment found
primarily in clinical pathology laboratories. Staining with Romanowsky-type
stains (e.g. Diff-Quick or Wright Giemsa stain) allows for improved visualiza-
tion of cells and infectious agents within a sample. The condenser must be
impact preservation. Cells exhibiting "urine scald" display enlarged, swollen
nuclei with lacy chromatin, vacuolated cytoplasm, and irregular nuclear and
cytoplasmic margins. Because of their irregularity, they may be mistaken for
neoplastic cells (Figure 7.2a,b).
Clinical signs such as hematuria, pollakiuria, and stranguria, the presence
Chapter
of a mass at the trigone region of the bladder, a thickened urethra, or an
enlarged prostate, or the presence of atypical cells in urine sediment may
prompt cytological evaluation of urine to look for underlying neoplasia. Tran
sitional (urothelial) cell carcinoma (TcC) is most common. TcC can develop
from any portion of the urinary tract that is lined by transitional epithelial
cells, including the urethra, bladder, ureters, and parts of the kidney. Non-
neoplastic processes, that is, hyperplasia and dysplasia secondary to a UTI
or benign polyps, may display increased epithelial cellularity but only mild
pleomorphism as cells are mostly uniform in appearance (Figure 7.3a-c).
should be based on cytomorphologic abnormalities rather than clinical sus-
significant anisocytosis (variation in cell size) and anisokaryosis (variation in
cytoplasm ratio (N:C) in large cells, bi- or multinucleation, anisokaryosis
(a
Chapter 7
(b)
Figure 7.2 (a) Urine-scalded epithelial cells surrounding three more well-
preserved cells. Note the swollen, lacy nuclei (arrow) and faint cytoplasm of
the urine-scalded cells. Wright Giemsa, 5Ox (Courtesy of Dr. Reema Patel);
(b) urine-scalded epithelial cells. The poor cellular preservation results from
prolonged contact with urine, either in the bladder or due to a processing
delay. Note the remaining outline of the nucleus, hazy cytoplasm, and irregular
cytoplasmic margins. Wright Giemsa, 10Ox. (Courtesy of Dr. Reema Patel)
137
(a]
 Chapter 7
(b)
Figure 7.3 (a) Transitional epithelial cells. Hyperplasia of transitional
epithelium may result from inflammation from infection or irritation (i.e.
bladder stones) and polyps within the bladder. Although many cells are
present, cells are fairly uniform in appearance. Wright Giemsa, 5Ox (Courtesy
of Dr. Reema Patel). (b) Transitional epithelial cells. Although the N:C is
increased, cell size and nuclear size are uniform, suggesting the dysplasia is a
result of hyperplasia rather than neoplasia. Wright Giemsa, 5Ox (Courtesy of
Dr. Reema Patel). (c) Transitional epithelial cells. This cluster of transitional
epithelial cells exhibits the effects of prolonged exposure to urine given the
swollen nuclei and cytoplasm. Wright Giemsa, 5Ox. (Courtesy of Dr. Reema
Patel)
138
Advanced Diagnostics  139
(C)
Figure 7.3 (Continueo)
figures. Characteristic round to ovoid, magenta, stippled inclusions can some-
times be found in the cytoplasm of transitional epithelial cells. These inclu-
sions are not pathognomonic for transitional (urothelial) cells as similar pink
to magenta inclusions can also be identified in mesothelial cells. Their pres
ence, however, in cells exhibiting significant criteria of malignancy in urine,
certainly supports an interpretation of TCC (Figure 7.4a,b).
Lymphoma is also infrequently identified and can be present anywhere
within the urinary tract. Lymphoma would be suspected if lymphoblasts were
identified within a urine cytology specimen. Lymphoblasts are typically larger
hapter
than a neutrophil with immature finely granular chromatin and visible
nucleoli.
In some cases, urine cytology may not allow for definitive diagnosis, espe-
sometimes employed with slides prepared from either the resulting fluid and/
or impression smears of pieces of tissue. Percutaneous aspiration may also
sia, especially TcC, along the needle tract.
Renal cytology
A mass associated with a kidney or renomegaly, either uni- or bilateral, may
necessitate aspiration. Aspiration is typically ultrasound-guided, although
impression smears are sometimes prepared from biopsy samples or from
a
Chapter 7
(b)
Figure 7.4  (a) and (b) Transitional (urothelial) cell carcinoma. Neoplastic
transitional epithelial cells exhibit anisocytosis, anisokaryosis, bi- and
multinucleation, immature ropy chromatin with visible nucleoli. Transitional
inclusions (arrows). Several pyknotic cells also present (arrowheads),
cytocentrifuged urine sample, Wright Giemsa, 40x.
140
Advanced Diagnostics    141
deceased patients during necropsy. Normal structures that may be sampled
and thus visualized include glomeruli, intact renal tubules, renal tubular
epithelial cells, and potentially caudate transitional renal epithelial cells. It is
as a pathological process (Figures 7.5-7.9).
Mass-like renal lesions can result from inflammation, cysts, or neoplasia.
variably cellular sample. Significant inflammation would warrant search for
an underlying infectious etiology although cases of feline infectious perito-
nitis can reveal dramatic pyogranulatomous inflammation without an obvious
etiology. In some cases such as renal abscesses or, less frequently, with
pyelonephritis, evidence of inflammation may be apparent in the urine. Cystic
lesions are usually of lower cellularity with a pink proteinaceous background;
sometimes, macrophages, neutrophils, and erythrocytes are present in low
numbers. Neoplastic processes can include both primary and metastatic
lesions.
Renal lymphoma tends to produce highly cellular aspirates; either one or
both kidneys as well as other organs may be affected. Cytological diagnosis
is based on the presence of numerous lymphoblasts without a concomitant
increase in plasma cells or other inflammatory cell types. Lymphoblasts can
be recognized based on size (larger than a neutrophil), immature chromatin
(finely granular to granular or stippled), and visible nucleoli. Lymphoblasts
hapter
Figure 7.5  Intact glomerulus with a capillary tuft (arrow) and attached
tubular epithelial cells (dashed arrow). Platelet clumps (arrowhead) and
abundant background blood are also present. Wright Giemsa, 10x.
Figure 7.6 Higher magnificent view of an intact renal tubule from aspiration
of a cat's kidney. Cells are cuboidal with uniform-appearing nuclei, clumped
chromatin, and indistinct nucleoli. Cells can sometimes contain dark blue
coarsely granular pigment. Wright Giemsa, 40x.
Chapter 7
Figure 7.7 Intact renal tubule from a dog that died from ethylene glycol
intoxication. Few crystals (arrows) are noted in the background along with
abundant blood and bare nuclei from tubular epithelial cells. Wright Giemsa,
20x。
142
Figure 7.8  Renal tubular epithelial cells from a cat. Several variably sized
epithelial cells (arrows), bare nuclei (arrowheads), RBCs, and free lipid. Note
the epithelial cells frequently contain lipid vacuoles; this is a normal finding.
Aqueous Romanowsky stain, 4ox.
Chapter
Figure 7.9 Renal tubular epithelial cell, plasma cell (arrowhead), bare nuclei,
and RBCs.Aqueous Romanowsky stain, 4Ox.
143
144   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
must not be confused with bare nuclei or ruptured cells that quickly swell and
display both an increased size and visible nucleoli (Figure 7.10).
Renal carcinoma can vary from well to poorly differentiated and typically
presents as a unilateral mass or enlarged kidney. Cellularity is often high.
Cells may retain their cuboidal to ovoid shape and be present individually,
in clusters, or form tubular structures. Criteria of malignancy may be
minimal to pronounced, depending on the degree of differentiation (Figures
7.11-7.13)
Summary of urinary tract cytology
If urinalysis results do not provide a conclusive explanation in patients where
findings support underlying urinary tract disease, cytology of the urine or
urinary tract can be an extremely useful diagnostic tool. Urine tract cytology
does require an adequately preserved sample, proper sample preparation,
and skill in evaluating the slide to maximize diagnostic usefulness. Su bmission
and may be helpful in characterizing abnormal cells or identifying potential
organisms.
Chapter 7
Figure 7.10 Renal lymphoma. Aspirates of an enlarged kidney from a patient
with bilateral renomegaly. There is a predominance of large lymphoblasts
(arrows) that are larger than the neutrophils, few small lymphocytes (dashed
arrows), ruptured cells (arrowheads), many erythrocytes, abundant basophilic
globular cytoplasmic debris, Wright Giemsa, 5Ox.
Chapter
 a e go ois oe  ()  () l' an
from a dog reveals large clusters of neoplastic epithelial cells that form tubular
and acinar structures. Dark pink secretory product is present within tubular
lumen and acini. Epithelial cells exhibit an increased nuclear to cytoplasm ratio,
binucleation, anisokaryosis (variation in nuclear size), and visible nucleoli.
Wright Giemsa,4Ox.
145
Chapter 7
[b]
Figure 7.12 (a) Renal carcinoma. Highly cellular sample from aspiration of a
renal mass in a dog. Cells are individualized to loosely cohesive. Cells bear
some resemblance to normal renal tubular epithelial cells but exhibit an
increased nuclear to cytoplasm ratio,anisokaryosis,binucleation, and some
prominent large nucleoli. Wright Giemsa, 2Ox. (b) Renal carcinoma. Higher
size), aniskaryosis with variably shaped nuclei, immature stippled chromatin,
multiple nucleoli within the same nucleus, and giant nucleoli. wright Giemsa,
50x。
146
Advanced Diagnostics   147
Figure 7.13 Renal carcinoma. Aspiration of a renal mass from a dog contains individual
and clusters of neoplastic renal epithelial cells. Neoplastic cells exhibit a two- to threefold
variation in nuclear size and some prominent, large nucleoli. This population contains
lipid similar to the cells in Figure 7.6. Histopathology identified this mass as a tubular
carcinoma. Wright Giemsa, 5Ox.
Fractional excretion
Fractional excretion (FE) of an analyte (FEx), frequently an electrolyte, is
determined bybothglomerularfiltrationand tubularreabsorption.Electro-
lytes are freely filtered at the glomerulus and then can be reabsorbed or
hapter
secreted by renal tubules. FE provides an estimate, expressed as a percent-
age, of the amount of analyte excreted in the urine, and so indirectly assesses
the ability of the renal tubules to reabsorb an analyte. Plasma and urine
concentrations of the analyte are compared to plasma and urine creatinine
(Crt) values (Stockham and Scott 2008) (Eq. 7.1). As described for UPC, excre-
tion of creatinine is relatively constant and allows for a single urine collection
rather than a 24-hour urine collection, which is unrealistic in veterinary
practice.
Xurine XCrtplasma
FEx=
(Eq. 7.1)
XplasmaXCrturine
In general, if an analyte is freely filtered at the glomerulus and undergoes no
tubular reabsorption or excretion, the same amount in the plasma and urine
would be expected, that is, FE = 1. If some of the analyte were reabsorbed by
148     Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 7.1 Considerations for interpretation of increased and decreased FE
Increased FE
Increased urinary excretion of an analyte
Plasma concentration of analyte areincreased (kidneys
excrete more)
Decreased tubular reabsorption of analyte
Increased tubular secretion of analyte
Decreased creatinine excretion (i.e. decreased
glomerular filtration rate [GFR]]
Decreased FE
Low plasma concentrations of analyte (kidneys then
appropriately conserve analyte)
Increased tubular reabsorption of analyte
Decreased tubular secretion of analyte
Sources: Data from Lefebvre et al. (2008); Stockharm and Scott (2008).
Table 7.2 Normal values for fractional excretion in dogs and cats
Fractional excretion
Analyte
Dogs
Cats
Sodium
<1%
<1%
Chloride
<1%
1.3%
Potassium
<20%
24%
Phosphorous
<39%
73%
Sources: Data from DiBartola (2000): Finco et al. (1992).
Chapter 7
the renal tubules so that less remains in the urine than in the plasma, the FE
is expected to be <1 (Stockham and Scott 2008) (Table 7.1).
FE is greatly influenced by preanalytical and analytical factors that may
limit its usefulness (Braun et al. 2003; Lefebvre et al. 2008). Along with renal
impact FE (Hoskins et al. 1991; Lane et al. 2000; Lefebvre et al. 2008; Lulich
et al. 1991; Stevenson and Markwell 2001; Stockham and Scott 2008). FEs of
sodium (FEna), chloride (FEc), potassium (FEk), phosphorous (FEp), bicarbonate
(FEHco3), and calcium (FEca) are the analytes more often measured. "Normal"
values ultimately depend on the patient's clinical status, and there can be a
wide variability even within the same patient (Lefebvre et al. 2o08). Also,
of homeostasis and response to changing plasma concentrations (Finco
et al. 1992). FE values should always be considered in light of patient clinical
status, dietary and fluid intake, breed, age, and gender (Table 7.2).
Advanced Diagnostics    149
Use of FE in veterinary medicine
The primary clinical use of FE is to identify renal tubular dysfunction,
syndrome) and acquired diseases (nephrotoxic drugs, hypotension, infec
tion) may result inrenal tubular disease and increased loss ofelectrolytes
into the urine. FE of electrolytes may help in determining the degree of
renal disease in azotemic dogs (Buranakarl et al. 2o07). FEna has been used
in human medicine as well as veterinary medicine to differentiate prerenal
causes of azotemia from acute tubular necrosis (Carvounis et al. 2o02;
Waldrop 2008).FEna<1%is expected in cases ofprerenal azotemia,that
is, dehydration, while FEna > 2% is expected in severe acute tubular injury
(Waldrop 2008). Unfortunately. this is highly variable, and FE results may
are used (Carvounis et al. 2002). Measurement of FEna has been recom-
antibiotics, amphotericin B, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAlDs),
contrast media, and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors) renal injury
(Nolin and Himmelfarb 2010; Waldrop 2008). Although FEna can be impacted,
tubular injury should be relied upon to monitor drug-induced nephrotoxicity
            
markers below.)
Urinary biomarkers
The proximal convoluted tubule, the first portion of the renal tubules receiv-
ing ultrafiltrate from the glomerulus, is responsible for reabsorption of
numerous solutes including glucose, amino acids, electrolytes, urea, and
hapter
and process some low and intermediate molecular proteins that are able to
thelial cells can be measured in urine and used as markers of renal tubular
glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) are located in the lysosomes and brush border,
respectively, of the proximal convoluted tubule (Chemo 1998). Increases in
enzymes GGT and NAG and certain low and intermediate molecular weight
proteins in the urine can provide information regarding renal tubular injury
and dysfunction.
Urine enzymology: Urine GGT and NAG
GGT is commonly measured in plasma or serum to test for hepatic or
150    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
filtration barrier (Stockham and Scott 2008). Urine GGT, therefore, origi-
nates in renal tubular epithelial cells. NAG originates in the urinary tract,
urine. Urine concentrations of GGT and NAG are compared to urine creati-
nine concentrations to overcome the influence of urine specific gravity
good estimate of 24-hour urinary excretion (Grauer et al. 1995). For either
enzyme, a NAG or GGT index (U/g) or urine enzyme to creatinine ratio can
be calculated based on the following equation (Eq. 7.2, Urine enzyme [GGT
or NAG] index):
Urineenzvme (U / L)
NAG or GGT index (U/g) =
(Eq. 7.2)
Urineert (g / L)
Increases in GGT and/or NAG index may precede increases in standard mea-
sures of renal disease especially in cases of acute tubular injury (Chemo 1998;
Grauer et al. 1995: Grec0 et al. 1985: Rivers et al. 1996). An elevated NAG
index, greater than normal or baseline values, has been reported in dogs with
various diseases including chronic renal disease, leishmaniasis, and pyome-
tra, as well as dogs treated with aminoglycoside antibiotics, glucocorticoids,
and some NSAIDs (Grauer et al. 1995; Heiene et al. 2001; Sato et al. 2002a,b;
Smets et al. 2010). Reference ranges or expected values for NAG and GGT
indexes in normal dogs and cats have been published (Brunker et al. 2o09;
Sato et al. 2002a,b). Because of significant differences in urine NAG index
interpretation (Brunker et al. 2009). Also, pH can influence urinary GGT
where a low urine pH can decrease GGT due to inactivation of the enzyme
(Table 7.3)
In both dogs and cats with chronic renal disease, the NAG index was much
higher than the value in normal animals (Sato et al. 2002a,b). In the patients
with chronic renal disease, the NAG index ranged from 15.7 to 136.8 U/g in
Chapter
dogs and from 6.2 to 35.5 U/g in cat (Sato et al. 2002a,b). These increases
preceded changes in BUN and creatinine. While urine GGT is available at some
reference laboratories, NAG is mostly limited to research laboratories at this
future, both tests may become more widely available.
Table 7.3 Proposed normal ranges for NAG and GGT
Index
Male
Female
NAG-Dogs
0.02-3.65U/g
0.02-2.31U/g
NAG-Cats
1.5 +/- 1.0 U/g
1.7 +/- 1.8 U/g
GGT-Dogs
1.93-28.57U/g
Sources: Data from Brunker et al. (2009); Sato et al. (2002a,b).
Advanced Diagnostics  151
Urinary proteins as biomarkers for renal disease
The presence of increased amounts of certain proteins can be used to identify
the presence and determine the magnitude of renal disease. As described in
teins, including albumin, from entering into the tubular fluid. Proteins enter-
ing into the ultrafiltrate are reabsorbed, via specific receptors (i.e. megalin
undergo lysosomal degradation within the epithelial cells. An excess of fil-
uria. Measurement of various low, intermediate, and high molecular weight
filtration and tubular reabsorption. This practice is more common in human
ness (Forterre et al. 2004; Nabity et al. 2011; Smets et al. 2010; Vinge et al.
2010). In human nephrology,some biomarkers (both protein and nonprotein)
considered useful for the diagnosis of acute kidney injury include NAG, retinol
binding protein (RBP), kidney injury molecule-1 (KIM-1), urine and serum neu-
trophil gelatinase-associated lipocalin (NGAL), urinary interleukin-18 (IL-18),
biomarkers have been evaluated in veterinary medicine in a research setting.
et al. 2oio). Commercial tests may be developed as the methodologies and
understanding move forward.
Abumin
monly measured urine protein and remains a useful indicator of underlying
hapter
sitivity and specificity over routine tests for urine protein; these assays are
titative measure of urine albumin; increases are seen with chronic kidney
degree of specificity.
RBP
RBP is an LMw protein that is freely filtered at the glomerulus (Smets et al.
2010). Following entry into the tubular fluid, RBP is reabsorbed via specific
thyroid cats (Smets et al. 2010; Van Hoek et al. 2009). Increased urinary
152    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
inherited glomerular disease (Nabity et al. 2011).
Tamm-Horsfall protein
The absence of normally excreted proteins can also reflect renal tubular
disease. Tamm-Horsfall protein (THP), also known as uromodulin, is secreted
urine protein dipstick reactions sometimes observed in the highly concen-
trated urine specimens from dogs are attributed to THP, as well as other
with renal disease and is hypothesized to be a specific indicator of distal renal
tubular injury (Forterre et al. 2004). Routine testing for THP is not widely
available.
Summary of biomarkers
The presence of increased amounts of urinary albumin, RBP, GGT, or NAG
tubular disease although lack of reabsorption of low and intermediate molec-
ular weight proteins can occur with glomerular disease due to competition
for proximal renal tubular receptors. Currently. only urine albumin and urine
diagnose early or subclinical renal disease.
References
Bartges JW. 2oo4. Diagnosis of urinary tract infections. Veterinary Clinics of
Chapter
North America. Smaff Animaf Practice 4(4): 922-33.
Braun JP, Lefebvre HP, Watson AD. 2OO3. Creatinine in the dog: a review. Veteri-
nary Clinical Pathology 32: 162-79.
Brunker JD, Ponzio NM, Payton ME. 2oo9. Indices of urine N-acetyl-beta-D-
glucosaminidase and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activities in clinically
normal adult dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research 70(2): 297-301.
Buranakarl C, Ankanaporn K, Thammacharoen S, Trisiriroj M, Maleeratmongkol T,
Thongchai P, Panasjaroen S. 2oo7. Relationships between degree of azotaemia
and blood pressure, urinary protein : creatinine ratio and fractional excretion
of electrolytes in dogs with renal azotaemia. 2oo7. Veterinary Research Com
munications 31(3): 245-57.
Carvounis CP, Nisaw S, Guro-Razuman S. 2oo2. Significance of the fractional
excretion of urea in the differential diagnosis of acute renal failure. Kidney
International 62(6): 2223-9.
Chemo FAs. 1998. Urinary enzyme evaluation of nephrotoxicity in the dog. Toxi-
cologic Pathology 26(1): 29-32.
         ii 
cytosis in renal proximal tubule. Renaf Faifure 2o(2): 191-9.
Advanced Diagnostics     153
DiBartola SP. 2ooo. Clinical approach and laboratory evaluation of renal disease.
In Textbook of Veterinary Internaf Medicine, 5th ed. Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC,
eds., pp. 1600-14. Philadelphia: WB Saunders.
Dillon SC, Taylor GM, Shah V. 1998. Diagnostic value of urinary retinol-
binding protein in childhood nephrotic syndrome.Pediatric Nephrofogy 12:
643-7.
Finco DR, Barsanti JA, Brown SA. 1992. Solute fractional excretion rates. In
phia: WB Saunders.
Forterre S, Raila J, Schweigert FJ. 2004. Protein profiling of urine from dogs with
renal disease using ProteinChip analysis. Journaf of Veterinary Diagnostic lnves
tigation 16(4): 271-7.
Grauer GF, Greco DS, Behrend EN, Fettman MJ, Mani I, Getzy DM, Reinhart GA.
1996. Effects of dietary n-3 fatty acid supplementation versus thromboxane
synthetase inhibition on gentamicin induced nephrotoxicosis in healthy male
dogs. American Journal of Veterinary Research 57(6): 948-56.
Grauer GF, Greco DS, Behrend EN, Mani I, Fettman MJ, Allen TA.1995. Estimation
of quantitative enzymuria in dogs with gentamicin-induced nephrotoxicosis
using urine enzyme/creatinine ratios from spot urine samples. Journaf of Vet-
erinary Internaf Medicine 9(5): 324-7.
Greco DS, Turnwald GH, Adams R, Gossett KA, Kearney M, Casey H. 1985. Urinary
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase activity in dogs with gentamicin-induced neph-
rotoxicity. American Journal of Veterinary Research 46(1l): 2332-5.
Heiene R, Moe L, Molmen G. 20O1. Calculation of urinary enzyme excretion, with
Science 70: 129-37.
Hoskins JD, Turnwald GH, Kearney MT, Gossett KA, Fakier N. 1991. Quantitative
urinalysis in kittens from four to thirty weeks after birth. American Journal of
Veterinary Research 52(8): 1295-99.
Klausner JS, Osborne CA, Stevens JB. 1976. Clinical evaluation of commercial
reagent strips for detection of significant bacteriuria in dogs and cats. American
Journal of Veterinary Research 37(6): 719-22.
Lane IF, Shaw DH, Burton SA, Donald AW. 2OOO. Quantitative urinalysis in healthy
Beagle puppies from 9 to 27 weeks of age. American Journaf of Veterinary
Research 61(5): 577-81.
hapter
Lefebvre HP, Dossin O, Trumel C, Braun JP. 2oo8. Fractional excretion tests: a
critical review of methods and applicationsin domestic animals.Veterinary
Clinicaf Pathology 37(1):4-20
Lulich JP, Osborne CA, Polzin DJ, Johnston SD, Parker ML. 1991. Urine metabolite
values in fed and nonfed clinically normal Beagles. American Journaf of Veteri-
nary Research 52(10):1573-8.
Nabity MB, Lees GE, Dangott LJ, Cianciolo R, Suchodolski JS, Steiner JM. 2011.
Proteomic analysis of urine from male dogs during early stages of tubulointer
stitial injury in a canine model of progressive glomerular disease. Veterinary
ClinicafPathology 40(2):222-36.epub.
Nolin TD, Himmelfarb J. 2O10. Mechanisms of drug-induced nephrotoxicity. Hand
book of Experimental Pharmacofogy 1(196): 111-30.
Parikh CR, Lu JC, Coca SG, Devarajan P. 2O10. Tubular proteinuria in acute kidney
injury: a critical evaluation of current status and future promise. Annafs of Clini-
cal Biochemistry 47(4): 301-12.
 o            
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase-to-creatinine ratio as a diagnostic tool in an
154   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
bop aui u annie, leual aine panpul-apiso bouwe jo lapow leuawjadxa
Journal of the American Animal Hospital Association 32(4): 323-36.
netic changes in induced acute canine nephrotoxic glomerulonephritis. Antimi-
crobialAgents and Chemotherapy20(3):387-92.
Sato R, Soeta S, Miyazaki M, Syuto B, Sato J, Miyake Y, Yasuda J, Okada K, Naito
Y. 20O2a. Clinical availability of urinary N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase index
in dogs with urinary disease. The Journaf of Veterinary Medicar Science 64(4):
361-5.
Sato R, Soeta S, Syuto B, Yamagishi N, Sato J, Naito Y. 2002b. Urinary excretion
disease. The Journal of Veterinary Medicaf Science 64(4): 367-71.
Smets PM, Meyer E, Maddens BE, Duchateau L, Daminet S. 2O10. Urinary markers
in healthy young and aged dogs and dogs with chronic kidney disease. Journaf
of Veterinary Internaf Medicine24(1):65-72.
Stevenson AE, Markwell PJ. 2oo1. Comparison of urine composition of healthy
Labrador Retrievers and Miniature Schnauzers. American Journal of Veterinary
Research 62(11): 1782-6.
Stockham SL, Scott MA. 2oo8. Urinary system. In Fundamentals of Veterinary
Clinicaf Pathology, 2nd ed. Stockham SL, Scott MA, eds., Pp. 426-33. Ames, IA:
Blackwell Publishing.
Swenson CL, Boisvert AM, Kruger JM, Gibbons-Burgener SN. 2OO4. Evaluation of
modified Wright-staining of urine sediment as a method for accurate detection
of bacteriuria in dogs. Journal of the American Veterinary Association 224(8):
1282-9.
Tivapasi MT, Hodges J, Byrne BA, Christopher MM. 2OO9. Diagnostic utility and
cost-effectiveness of reflex bacterial culture for the detection of urinary tract
infection in dogs with low urine specific gravity. Veterinary Clinicar Pathofogy
38(3): 337-42.
Vaden SL, Levine J, Breitschwerdt EB.1997. A retrospective case-control of acute
renal failure in 99 dogs. Journaf of Veterinary Internaf Medicine 11(2): 58-64.
Van Hoek I, Lefebvre HP, Peremans K, Meyer E, Croubels S, Vandermeulen E,
Kooistra H, Saunders JH, Binst D, Daminet S. 2OO9. Short- and long-term follow-
ploayaday ui uoluny Aaupi jo siayiew eual jeingnl pue jeinawolb jo dn
Chapter
cats after treatment with radioiodine. Domestic Animaf Endocrinology 36(1):
45-56.
Vinge L, Lees GE, Nielsen R, Kashtan CE, Bahr A, Christensen El. 2O10. The effect
Nephrology. Dialysis, Transplantation 25(8): 2458-67. epub.
Waldrop JE. 2oo8. Urinary electolytes, solutes, and osmolality. Veterinary Clinics
North America. Smalf Animal Practice 38(3): 503-12.
Chapter 8
Laboratory Quality Assurance
Quality laboratory performance is a culmination of planned events executed
through daily activities of management and staff. This chapter offers sugges-
tions to accentuate performance in any clinical laboratory setting. Compli-
ance with local, state, and federal codes is always mandatory and supersedes
any advice set forth in this chapter.
Physical requirements of the laboratory
Laboratory design and arrangement
A well-designed laboratory utilizes space efficiently, following equipment
specifications and recognizing the needs of laboratory personnel (Lifshitz
et al. 2o07). Those with general knowledge of space requirements should be
involved in the design plan along with consultants, architects, and engineers
as necessary. with full input to the process, laboratory workers can benefit
from creating a safe work environment that is functional and aesthetically
pleasing (Mortland and Mortland 2010).
Work zones created by grouping equipment and instruments sharing the
and sink in close proximity streamline the workflow for the urinalysis section.
to replenish these items. Ergonomically compliant benches, shelving, cabi-
nets,chairs,andkeyboard drawersreduce theriskofrepetitive stressinjuries
hapter
to staff (www.labortorydesign.com).
广
Laboratory space allotted to house all equipment and personnel must
satisfy occupancy and fire codes. Broad isles and walkways facilitate staff
retreat in case of emergency; furniture or equipment cannot impede egress.
Wide doorways simplify equipment delivery and removal; floors must be
constructed to bear the weight load of the items and staff contained therein.
Practicar Veterinary Urinafysis, First Edition. Carolyn Sink, Nicole Weinstein.
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
155
156   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Spaces between cabinets, benches, and equipment permit access for clean-
ing and allow enough room for maintenance and service of equipment. A
supplies needed at technical workstations (www.laboratorydesign.com).
Climate control
Instrument specifications provide guidelines and restrictions on room tem
tilation purposes, they should be lockable and contain insect screens. Regular
(www.stanford.edu/dept/EHS.prod).
Electrical requirements
One of the obvious electrical needs for the laboratory is an adequate numben
tionally, the reviewing electrical demand of each item ensures proper gener-
ating capacity to satisfy demand and avoid power failure. Dedicated electrical
circuits may be needed for sensitive equipment or for those necessitating
high electrical demand. Line filters may be used to eliminate random fluctua
tion of an electrical signal. An uninterruptible power supply (UPS) provides
temporary power when the main power source fails; UPS are battery powered
tion with an emergency power generator, laboratory functionality can be
maintained during catastrophic power failure.
Electronic communication
Planning should include adequate number of data lines strategically located
located throughout the laboratory promotes efficiency. Anticipating demands
of future technologies assures success in transition to new applications when
Chapter
needed
C
Water and plumbing
Laboratory instrumentation often dictates the type of water needed in the
clinical laboratory. For smaller pieces of equipment, reservoirs containing the
"feedwater" may be purified on site. Clinical and Laboratory Standards Insti-
tute (CLSl) defines six grades of water purity each requiring specific compo-
nents and filters (Table 8.1). Additional steps may be needed to purify
Laboratory Quality Assurance
157
Table 8.1 Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSl) water types
CLSI water type
Intended use
Autoclave and wash water
Feedwater for autoclave and/or
automatic laboratory dishwashers
with heated dry cycles
Commercially bottled, purified
Laboratory must validate water for
water
acceptable performance for testing
throughout period of use
Water supplied by method
Specified on product label
manufacturer for use as a diluent
or reagent
Instrument feedwater
Internal rinse, dilution, and water bath
functions of automated analyzers
Clinical laboratory reagent water
Most routine laboratory analysis
Special reagent water
Trace organic or mineral analysis,
DNA and RNA testing, cell/tissue/
organ cultures
Source: Data frorn Miller et al. (2006).
feedwater with high mineral content or unique contaminates (Miller et al.
2006; Sunheimer et al. 2007).
Laboratory wastewater should be discharged in compliance with regula-
tory specifications. In the event wastewater is accumulated for disposal,
provisions should bemade tohousereceptaclesin laboratory areas to avoid
spills (www.stanford.edu/dept/EHS.prod).
Drench hoses, sink faucets, or bath showers are not suitable eyewash
facilities; safety showers and eyewash stations should be highly visible, well
lit, and possess a clear path of access (www.ehss.vt.edu).
Laboratory equipment
Equipment acquisition
Chapter 8
   a i a i  n  a s
ables in addition to payment for instrument service. A wide variety of finan-
cial options are available to obtain laboratory equipment including, but not
limited to, outright purchase, lease, or rental. The financial need of the orga-
nization should be considered when committing to one of these methods of
instrument acquisition. The same option may not be preferable for every
purchase (Travers 1997) (Table 8.2).
Outright purchase of equipment is advantageous if full ownership of the
instrument is the goal. A comprehensive cost analysis may prove helpful to
158
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table8.2
Methods of equipment acquisition
Acquisition type
Advantages
Disadvantages
Cost per
Pay only for reportable
Reportables may include
reportable
tests
repeats, quality control,
or calibration
Rental
Flexible usage time
May be costly in the
Hedge obsolescence
long term
Financial lease
Full ownership at end of
Payment of interest or
term
financing cost
 Acquire equipment
Noncancelable
otherwise unobtainable
agreement
True lease
Flexible financing
Nonownership
Option to include reagents
Interest payment or
and related supplies
financing costs
Purchase
Full ownership
Large capital outlay
Technical obsolescence
over time
Additional costs of
reagents and supplies
( s1    s1  1 
justifypurchase.Once an asset,the equipment may be viewed as a deprecia
tion expense and will most likely not be included in monthly budgetary docu
addition to risk that the technology purchased becomes obsolete prior to the
organization recovering the instrument purchase price through sale of labo
ratory tests (Jaros et al. 2007: Travers 1997).
An advantage of an operating (true) lease is that obsolescence is hedged
since the agreement is typically cancelable. Additionally, this method of
the full responsibility for the instrument is with the owner; repairs, reagents,
and related supplies are usually included in the lease price. The lessee may
C
or may not have a purchase option at completion of the lease agreement and
napter
or financing costs (Travers 1997).
Like the operating lease, the financial lease usually includes interest or
financing costs, but unlike the true lease, the organization usually will own the
equipment at the end of the lease agreement. This noncancelable agreement
laboratory equipment that may otherwise be unobtainable (Travers 1997).
Equipment rental offers flexibility in usage time; an organization may enter
equipment rental may prove to be costly in the long term. Some vendors offer
a reagent rental program that provides the instrumentation at "no cost" but
Laboratory Quality Assurance  159
increase reagent prices that ultimately provide instrument payment (Jaros
et al. 2007).
Some vendors allow instrument acquisition through cost per reportable
option; only the fees for reportable or billable tests are paid to the vendor.
Buyer beware! Repeats, calibration, and quality control samples may be
included, thus increasing the overall cost of this option.
Equipment for urinalysis
Veterinary refractometers
Reichert Rhino VET360 refractometer (Depew, NY) is a handheld unit con-
taining three scales that can determine protein concentration in serum,
plasma, or peritoneal fluid, urine specific gravity for cats, urine specific
Misco Vetmed Refractomter (Cleveland, OH ) is a portable digital unit also
plasma, or peritoneal fluid, urine specific gravity for cats, urine specifio
a digital readout.
Centrifuges
Centrifuge size often dictates selection, and many bench top units are avail-
el aui ui eaie pauuon e ui apisau llm iun aul f pauwexa ag pinous indino
A swing bucket rotor head provides leveled sediment and is preferred over
a fixed head rotor that produces an angled sediment meniscus.
Microscopes
A high-quality light microscope with 10x and 40x objectives is necessary for
er 8
camera can be attached through a photo tube.
Chapter
Electronic reagent strip readers
Visual interpretation of dryreagent strips used for urinalysis testingisprone
that automatically move the urine saturated strip into a reading head at
timed intervals using reflectance technology: recent models aspirate a
specific amount of urine,deposit it on a test strip, and read at appropriate
160   Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
strips may be used at a time. Depending on the manufacturer, throughput
ranges from 7 to 70 seconds per strip. Results are available for print or
download to an information system.
Reagents and supplies for the urinalysis laboratory
Reagents and supplies
able. Reagent and supply inventory is the responsibility of all who utilize the
lab; however, the task of ordering reagents or supplies may be assigned to
one individual to avoid duplication of orders. If the test volume is constant
and there is no staff member dedicated to inventory management, it may be
laboratory related items. This may reduce shipping costs and alleviate some
burden of monitoring stocklevels.
monetary benefit may be negated if testing is never actualized. As some
inventory may expire before use, staff should be encouraged to use short-
date reagents and supplies first. Short-date items should be strategically
located throughout the lab so that they are easily placed in the user's hand.
Reagents and supplies must also be stored in the correct environment so that
Commonly used supplies in the urinalysis laboratory
Sorbent wipes
3" ×1" ×1mm Microscope slides
22 × 22 mm Cover glass or 10-well constant volume chamber
Disposablepipettes
Commonly used reagents in the urinalysis laboratory
Chapter 8
5% Sulfosalicylic acid in dropper bottle
10% Sodium hydroxide in dropper bottle
10% Hydrochloric acid in dropper bottle
Laboratory waste
Biohazardous waste
to regulatory statures. For the most part, any biological agent that is
Laboratory Quality Assurance   161
suspected of or known to cause disease in humans or animals should be
or infectious agent (www.ehss.vt.edu).
Chemical waste
exposure to hazardous products. Compliance with the Occupational Safety
and Health Administration(OSHA)regulations is expected in an effort to
turers are required to provide recommendations for safe storage, use, and
disposal of hazardous materials which they sell. This is accomplished by
distribution of Material Safety Data Sheets (MSDSs). MSDSs should be readily
available for laboratory staff review and daily use (www.ehss.vt.edu)
sharps
Quality control in the urinalysis laboratory
Quality control for refractometers
Refractometer performance should be verified daily with at least two
levels of control materials. Assayed quality control materials are available
commercially. Readings outside acceptable levels may mandate refractom-
eter adjustment through calibration. Distilled water provides an inexpensive
zero calibrator: 5% sodium chloride (1.022 ± 0.001) and 9% sucrose
should (1.034 ± 0.001) provide mid- and high-level calibrators (Strasinger
and DiLorenzo 2008). Daily quality control readings should be recorded
ininstrument-specific quality control records along with calibration
adjustments.
Chapter
Quality control for dry reagent strips
A wide variety of assayed quality control material for dipsticks is available;
a few are listed in Table 8.3. Each laboratory should choose a product best
suited to its need. Often, these materials are also assayed for specific gravity
of defective strips.
 Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
Table 8.3 Popular assayed quality control materials for urine dipsticks
Name
Type
Analytes
Bio-Rad
Liquid, human urine
Bilirubin, blood, creatinine,
LiquichekTM
based
glucose, ketones, leukocyte
esterase, microalbumin,
microscopics, nitrite,
osmolality, pH, protein,
specific gravity, urobilinogen
Quantimetrix
Liquid, human urine
Bilirubin, blood, creatinine,
DipperTM
based
glucose, ketones, leukocyte
esterase, microalbumin,
nitrite, pH, protein, specific
gravity, urobilinogen
Siemens
Firm plastic strips with
Bilirubin, blood, glucose,
CHECK-
six separate dry
ketone (acetoacetic acid),
STIXTM
reagent areas affixed
leukocyte esterase, nitrite,
 Requires reconstitution
pH, protein, specific gravity,
in deionized water
urobilinogen
Quality control for technical staff
Assayed quality control materials are available for assessing quality of
challenge staff expertise, so it may be advantageous for management to
instead issue "homemade" challenge specimens on a daily, weekly, or monthly
basis.Specimens containing both normal and abnormal findings are
recommended.
Quality standards for centrifugation
Chapter
accept specimen tubes used for dipstick analysis. A swinging bucket cen-
trifuge head renders the specimen sediment level within the specimen
tube; capped specimens should be centrifuged at 4o0 x g for 5 minutes.
Centrifugation time in revolutions per minute (RPM) should be calculated
using this formula:
RPM =(square r0ot (400/28.38R))x1000
where R = radius of centrifuge rotor in inches (Sink and Feldman 2o04).
All members of the laboratory team should utilize the same centrifuge
while employing identical centrifugation time and speed for urine sediment
preparation.
Laboratory Quality Assurance   163
Table 8.4  Format for individual procedures contained in a procedure manual
Section
Explanation
Title
Name of the procedure
Cite commonly used abbreviations
Purpose
Reason for laboratory analysis
Include clinical relevance of the procedure
Specimen
List acceptable specimen(s), including
preservatives or anticoagulants
Equipment/reagents/
Inclusive list
supplies
Provide instructions for reagent preparation
Quality control
Detail quality control material(s) and
appropriate use
Procedure
Describe procedure step-by-step
Results
Provide raw data analysis or calculations used
to derive result
Specify units for reporting result
Reference(s)
Provide primary literature reference(s)
Procedure manuals
A procedure manual is a compilation of documents that contain step-by-step
instructions for a given discipline. In the clinical laboratory. procedure
tency of a repetitive task and reproducible test results.
"'how-tos," the procedure manual may be available in paper or electronically
but should reside at the laboratory testing bench to be used for frequent
reference.
Chapter
The format of the procedure manual should be consistent; a suggested
format for individual procedures is found in Table 8.4. In addition to technical
procedures, protocols for daily, weekly, and monthly standard operating pro-
cedures (SoPs) should be included to cite management's expectations for
execution of tasks (Flatland et al. 2010). These SOPs may reference a variety
of procedures including instrument maintenance, stock replenishing, and
inventory control.
Itis important to understand the difference betweenprocedure and pro-
tocol. A procedure contains sequential instruction to perform a given task. A
protocol is a system of rules that govern a procedure or procedures and
164    Practical Veterinary Urinalysis
overview function of a given laboratory task. A well-written procedure manual
should contain both by referencing laboratory procedures within the corre-
sponding protocol.
Procedure manuals are only effective when those performing a specifio
task follow instruction. For this reason, it is imperative that staff is involved
in formulating the documents contained and provide input to detail within.
procedures and protocols should be added to the procedure manual as
needed.
References
Flatland B, Freeman KP, Friedrichs KR, Vap LM, Getzy KM, Evans EW, Harr KE.
2010. ASvCP quality assurance guidelines: control of general analytical factors
in veterinary laboratories. Veterinary Clinical Pathology 39(3): 264-77.
Jaros ML, Lifshitz MS, De Cresce RP. 2OO7. Financial management. In Henry's
RA, Pincus MR, eds., pp. 122-33. Philadelphia: Saunders.
Lifshitz MS, DeCresce RP, Lutinger I. 2007. Optimizing laboratory workflow and
Methods, 2ist ed. McPherson R. A., Pincus MR, eds., pp. 12-9. Philadelphia:
Saunders.
Miller WG, Gibbs E, Jay D, Pratt K, Rossi B, Vojt C, Whitehead P. 2OO6. Preparation
ed. Wayne, PA: Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute.
Mortland K, Mortland D. 2O10. Lean architectural basics for labs. Advance for
Medicaf Laboratory Professionals 22(13): 6-8.
Sink CA, Feldman BF. 2OO4. Laboratory Urinalysis and Hematology for the Smaff
Animaf Practitioner. Jackson, WY: Teton NewMedia.
Strasinger SK, DiLorenzo MS. 2oo8. Quality assessment and management in the
urinalysis laboratory. In Urinalysis and Body Fluids, 5th ed. Strasinger SK,
DiLorenzo MS, eds., pp. 127-42. Philadelphia: FA Davis.
Sunheimer RL, Threatte G, Lifshitz MS, Pinus MR. 2OO7. Analysis: principles of
instrumentation. In Henry's Clinicat Diagnosis and Management by Laboratory
Methods, 21st ed. McPherson R. A., Pincus MR, eds., Pp. 56-63. Philadelphia:
Chapter
Saunders.
Mitchell CW, ed., pp. 333-73. Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins.
Webliography
www.laboratorydesign.com/public/labtopics.html Information on fume hoods, air
conditioning, and chemical storage for laboratories.
www.stanford.edu/dept/EHS/prod/ Information on general laboratory safety
topics.
www.ehss.vt.edu/ Information on general laboratory safety.
Note: Entries with "f" indicate figures; those with "t" indicate tables.
Acetest 41
differentials 47t
Acetic acid 60
dynamic range 46
Acetoacetic acid 40
expected values 46,47t
Acetone 40
interferences 46
Adenocarcioma, renal 145f
reagent strip methodology 46
ADH. See Anti-diuretic hormone
unconjugated 45
ADH 6
Biohazards 160
Air bubbles 105f
Biomarkers
Albumin 151
summary of 152
Albuminuria 113, 116
urinary 149-152
Ammonium biurate crystals 85t, 88t,
urinary proteins 151-152
90f, 91f
Bladder, manual expression 11, 43t
Ammonium sulfate precipitation 45
Blood 42-45
Amorphous crystals 66f, 92f, 106f
clinical significance 42
Amorphous phosphate crystals 85t, 88t
differentials 44t
Amorphous urate crystals 85t, 88t
dynamic range 42
Ampicillin crystals 86t, 89t
expected values 43
Anti-diuretic hormone (ADH) 5
interferences 43t
Ascorbic acid 43
reagent strip methodology 42
Aspartate transaminase 45
Bowman's capsule 114
Azotemia 6, 116
BUN, pre-renal causes 7t
Azotemia, post-renal 6
Azotemia, renal 6
Calcium carbonate crystals 85t, 88t
Calcium oxalate crystals
Bacteria 65f, 66f, 67f, 68f, 96,101f, 106f
dihydrate 85t, 88t, 93t
Bacterial culture 134
monohydrate 85t,88t,94t,95t
BD Vacutainer?
Calcium phosphate crystals 86t, 88t
catheter collection devices 15f
Candida sp 96,102f
transfer cup 13f
Capillaria plica 99, 103f
transfer straw 13f
Carcinoma, renal 144, 146f, 147f
Beta-hydroxybutyric acid 40
Cast(s) 69,75-84, 76f, 77f
Bilirubin 45-47
bacterial 82
crystals 85t, 88t, 92f
broad 80, 81f
clinical significance 45
cellular 78f
confirmatory testing 47
epithelial cell 78
conjugated 45
fatty 80,82f
@ 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Published 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
165
Index
Cast(s) (cont'd)
rental 158
granular 79.79f,80f
time lease 158
hyaline 77f, 82, 83f
ERD-Health Screen 124-125
mixed-cellular 84
RBC 75
Fat droplets. See Lipid droplets
waxy 79,81f
FE. See Fractional excretion
WBC 78
Fractional excretion (FE) 147-149
Catheterization
calculation 147
cat 11
clinical use 149
dog 11
considerations for interpretation
Cauxin 116
148t
Centrifugation 56
normal values in cats 148t
Centrifuge 159
normal values in dogs 148t
Chemstrip 29
Fungi 96,106f
Cholesterol crystals 86t, 88t, 96f
Ciprofloxacin crystals 86t, 89t, 101f
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT)
Clinitek Microalbumin reagent strip 125
149
Collecting tubules 5
proposed normal ranges 150t
Containers
GGT. See Gamma-glutamyl
 primary 12
 transpeptidase
secondary 13
Glass shards 107f
Copper reduction test 40
Glomerular, basement membrane 114
Cotton fibers 108f
capillary wall 114
Creatine kinase 44t, 45
filtration 1, 115
Creatinine excretion 5
filtration barrier 114
Crystal(s) 84-98
filtration rate 2
formation 84
Glomerulus 1f, 2, 114f, 141f
identification 84, 85-87t
damage 34
characteristics 85-87t
Glove powder 107f
clinical significance 88-89t
Glucose 38-40
Cystine crystals 86t, 88t, 97f
clinical significance 38
Cystocentesis 11
confirmatory testing 40
risks 12
differentials 39t
Cytology, renal 139
dynamic range 38
urine 136-139
expected values 38
interferences 39t
Diff-Quik 57
reagent strip methodology 38
Dioctophyma renafe 99, 104f
Glucosuria 20
Dip sticks. See Dry reagent strips
Dirofilaria immitis 99
Haptoglobin 44
Distal convoluted tubule 4
Hematuria 27t, 44
Dry reagent strips 29, 30f
Hemoglobinuria 27t, 44
guidelines 31t
3-hydroxybutyrate 40
Enzymes, urine 149-150
lctotest 47
Epithelial cells 64, 69, 97f
Idexx UATM 29
renal tubular 64,143f
International Renal Interest Society
squamous 64f, 67f, 69, 70f, 71f, 78f,
(IRIS) 121
105f
Intravascular hemolysis (IVH) 42, 44
transitional 67f, 69, 72f, 138f, 139f
IRIS. See International Renal Interest
transitional, neoplastic 69,74f
Society
urine-scalded 137f
Equipment 159-60
Ketone 40-41
acquisition 157-159
clinical significance 40
cost per reportable 158
confirmatory testing 41
financial lease 158
differentials 41t
purchase 157
dynamic range 40
Index  167
expected values 41
Odor. See under Physical property
interferences 41
Osmolality 2,7, 24
reagent strip methodology 40
KOVA Glasstic? slide 10 57
Parasites 99, 103f, 104f
Pearsonema (Capilfaria) feliscati egg 99.
Laboratory, Arrangement 155
103f
design 155
pH 29-32,33t
electrical requirements 156
clinical significance 29
electronic communication 156
confirmatory testing 32
plumbing 156
dynamic range 32
water 156,157t
expected values 32
work zones 155
interferences 32
Leucine crystals 87t, 89t, 98f
reagent strip methodology 31
Leukocyte Esterase 50-51
Physical property 19-28
clinical significance 50
clarity 26,27t
dynamic range 50
color 25, 26t
expected values 50
odor 26
interferences 51
pigmenturia 25, 27f, 44t
reagent strip methodology 50
volume 23
Lignin test 84
Pigmenturia. See under Physical
Lipid droplets 62f, 63f, 66f, 74f, 101f,
property
103f, 105f, 106f
 Plant material 111f
Loop of Henle 3
Podocyte 115
ascending 3
Pollen 108f, 109f, 110f
descending 3
Pre-analytical variables 9
Lymphoma 139
Preservatives, chemical 16t
renal 141, 144f
Procedure Manual 163-164
Protein Dry reagent strip 32-37
Malignancy, criteria of 136, 139
clinical significance 32
Melamine crystals 87t, 89t
confirmatory testing 36
 Metabolism cage 17
differentials 36t
Micral test 125
dynamic range 35
Microalbuminuria 37, 151
expected values 35
assays 124-125
interferences 36t
detection 37
reagent strip methodology 35
Microscope 159
Proteinuria 113
Misco Vetmed Refractometer 21,
causes 35-36
159
consensus recommendations 127t
Mucus 99, 104
glomerular damage 34
Multistix PRO 123
grading 119t
Multistix 29
guidelines for interpretation 119t
Myoglobinuria 27t, 44t, 45
laboratory diagnosis 119
post-renal 34, 118t
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase (NAG)
pre-renal 34, 118t
149-150
renal 34
proposed normal ranges 150t
significance of 116-118
NAG.See
sources of 118t
N-acetyl-beta-D-glucosaminidase
to creatinine ratio 120-121
Neoplastic cells 136
tubular secretion 35
Nephron 1
Proximal convoluted tubule 3
Nitrite 49-50
clinical significance 49
Quality control 161-162
dynamic range 49
expected values 49
Radiographic contrast agents, crystals
interferences 50
86t, 89t
reagent strip methodology 49
RBP. See Retinol binding protein
Nosorb beads 10
RCF. See Relative centrifugal force
168  Index
Red blood cells (RBC) 59, 60f, 61f, 62f,
collection methods 10t
63f, 64f, 66f, 67f, 74f, 97f, 106f
containers 12
Reducing substances 40
culture 9
Refractive index 20
cystocentesis 11
 Refractometer, automatic temperature
fasting 17
compensation (ATC) 21
first morning 16
veterinary 21, 159
free-catch 9
Refractometry 20-21
mid-stream 9
test limitations 21
random 16
Reichert Rhino VET 360 21, 159
second morning 17
Relative centrifugal force (RCF) 56
table collection 10
Renal lesions 141
voided 9
Renal tubule 142f
Spermatozoa 79f, 104
solute and water handling 3f
SSA. See Sulfosalicylic acid
Retinol binding protein (RBP) 151
Struvite crystals 98f, 99f, 101f
Revolutions per minute (RPM) 56
Sulfonamide crystals 86t, 89t
calculation of 56
Sulfosalicylic acid (SSA) 36-37
Rhabdomyolysis 45
test 119, 120
RPM. See Revolutions per minute
differentials 37t
Supplies 160
Sarstedt Urine-Monovete? 14f
Sediment smears, air dried 134
Tamm-Horsfall protein 82, 104, 116, 152
stained 134
TCC. See Transitional cell carcinoma
staining procedure 134
Transitional cell carcinoma (Tcc) 74f,
Sediment, artifacts 104
75f,136,140f
contamination 104
Triple phosphate crystals 87t, 89t
examination 57-58
Tubular reabsorption 3, 116
preparation 55-57
secretion 3
residual volume 57
Tyrosine crystals 87t, 89t
result reporting 58
resuspension of 57
Ultrafiltrate 115
specimen volume 55
UPC. See Protein, to creatinine ratio
stain 57
Urea, production 5
volume for microscopic analysis 57
Uric acid crystals 87t, 89t, 100f
Sedi-Stain 57
Urinary biomarkers 149-152
Solute concentration 19
Urinary tract cytology 136-139
Specific gravity 19
Urinary tract infection (UTl) 68f, 133,
Specific gravity. See Urine specific
135f
gravity
Urine albumin 126
Specific Gravity Dry reagent strip 51-52
albumin to creatinine ratio 126
clinical significance 51
Urine clarity. See Physical property.
dynamic range 51
clarity
expected values 51
Urine color. See Physical property.
interferences 51-52
color
 reagent strip methodology 51
Urine composition 20f
Specimen containers, characteristics of
Urine enzyme(s) 149-150
12-13
enzyme index, calculation of 150
primary 12
Urine specific gravity (UsG) 10, 19-22
secondary 13
clinical uses 23t
Specimen handling 15
decreased 25t
Specimen preservation 15
dilution 23t
chemical 16
expected ranges 23
refrigeration 15
interpretation 24t
Specimen, timed
measurement 19
8hour 16
measurement direct 20
24 hour 17
measurement indirect 20-21
collection 9-12
procedure 22t
Index 
169
Urine volume. See Physical property.
USG. See Urine specific gravity
volume
UTl. See Urinary tract infection
Urobilinogen 48-49
clinical significance 48
Water types, CLSI 157t
differentials 49t
White blood cells (WBC) 60, 63f, 64f,
dynamic range 48
65f, 66f, 67f, 68f, 97f, 102f
expected values 48
interferences 49t
Xanthine crystals 87t, 90t
reagent strip methodology 48
Uromodulin 82, 116
Yeast 96,102f