DiagnosticAtlas
of Veterinary
Ophthalmology
Dr Keith Barnett
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Diagnostic Atlas
of Veterinary
Ophthalmology
Second Edition
DrKeith Barnett
Consultantphthalmologist,entreformallnimal tudiesnimalHealthTrustBEAhD
DVOphthal,FRCVS,DipECVO
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
Edinburgh London NewYork Oxford Philadelphia St Louis Sydney Toronto 2006
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
KCBarnett 1990
2006,Elsevier Limited.All rights reserved
Noparfthipulicationmayberrodcedstoredinaretrievalsystemrtransmittednany
formorbyanmanslctronicmchanicalhtcpyingrdingrthrwisewithout
thepriorpermissionof thepublishersoralicence permittingrestrictedcopying intheUnited
Kingdom issued by theCopyright Licensing Agency,90 Tottenham CourtRoad,London W1T 4LP
Permissionsmaybe soughtdirectlyfromElsevier'sHealthSciencesRightsDepartmentin
Philadelphia,USA:phone:（+1）2152387869,fax:(+1）2152382239,e-mail:
healthpermissons@elsevier.com.Youmayalsocompleteyourrequeston-lineviatheElsevier
homepage(http://www.elseviercom）,by selectingCustomerSupport'and thenObtaining
Permissions.
First Edition 1990
Second Edition 2006
ISBN0723432805
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A cataloguerecord for thisbookis available from the British Library
Library of CongressCataloging in Publication Data
Acatalogrecord for this book is available from theLibrary of Congress
NOTE
Knowledge and best practicein thisfieldareconstantly changing.Asnewresearchand
experiencebroadenourknowledge,hangesinractice,treatmentanddrug therapymay
become necessary orappropriate.Readers areadvised to check the most current information
provided(ilon proceduresfeatured or (iby themanufacturer of each product to be
administered,toverifytherecommendeddoseorformulathemethod anddurationf
administration,andcontraindications.ltistheresponsibilityof thepractitioner,relyingonthei
own experienceand knowledgeof the patient,tomake diagnosesto determine dosagesand the
besttreatmentforeachindividualpatientandto takeallappropriatesafetyprecautins.
To thefullestextentof thelawneitherthepublishernortheauthorassumesanyliabilityforany
injury and/or damage.
The Publisher
Printed in Spain
The
your source for books.
Publisher's
ELSEVIER
journals and multimedia
policy is to use
SCIENCE
inthe health sciences
papermanufactured
www.elsevierhealth.com
from sustainable forests
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.com|www.bookaid.org|www.sabre.org
BOOKAID
ELSEVIER
SabreFoundation
Contents
Acknowledgements vii
Prolapse of the nictitans gland 26
Deformityof the cartilage26
Preface vili
Neoplasia 27
Chapter1
Globe and Orbit1
Chapter4 Lacrimal System 29
Introduction1
Introduction 29
Enophthalmos2
Punctalabnormalities30
Exophthalmos 2
Prolapse4
Chapter5
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera 35
Microphthalmos 4
Introduction 35
Buphthalmos 6
Conjunctivitis 35
Hydrophthalmos 6
Chemosis 37
Phthisis bulbi7
Conjunctival haemorrhages 37
Strabismus7
Subconjunctival masses 38
Nystagmus 8
Symblepharon 38
Foreign bodies 41
Chapter2
Upper and Lower Eyelids 9
Conjunctival dermoid 41
Introduction9
Conjunctival cyst 41
Entropion10
Neoplasia 42
Ectropion 13
Scleritis and episcleritis 42
Distichiasis 14
Ectopiccilia 14
Chapter6 Cornea47
Trichiasis 16
Introduction 47
Blepharitis 16
Keratitis 48
Meibomianitis 18
Cornealulcers 52
Hordeolum 18
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca(KCS) 53
Meibomian cyst 18
Corneal oedema60
Eyelid neoplasia 18
Lipid keratopathies 63
Congenital anomalies 21
Corneal sequestrum 65
Trauma and foreign bodies66
Chapter3
Nictitating Membrane 23
Neoplasia 68
Introduction 23
Congenital anomalies 68
Prominence of the nictitating
membrane 23
Chapter7
Uveal Tract 69
Trauma and foreign bodies 23
Introduction69
Inflammation 23
Clinical signs of anterioruveitis 70
Contents
Sequelae 70
Other types of cataract 113
Cysts 78
False cataracts 113
Neoplasia 78
Lens luxation 120
Congenital anomalies 78
Chapter 10 Vitreous 129
Chapter8
Glaucoma and Aqueous 89
Introduction 129
Congenital 129
Introduction 89
Clinical signs90
Acquired 131
Primary hereditary glaucoma
Chapter 11 Fundus 135
in theUK93
Introduction 135
Secondary glaucoma 93
Thenormal caninefundus 135
Gonioscopy 94
The normal feline fundus 150
Aqueous96
Thenormal equine fundus 153
Chapter9
Lens97
Thenormal bovine andovine
Introduction 97
fundus 157
Primary hereditary non-congenital
The fundus of other species 160
cataracts 98
Diseases of theretina-the
Congenital cataracts and
retinopathies 160
associated anomalies 106
Chapter 12 TheOpticNerve 203
Cataractssecondaryto another
Introduction 203
eye disease or condition 110
Conditions of the opticnerve 203
Metabolic,toxic and nutritional
cataracts 113
Acknowledgements
All the ilustrationsin this book are taken from theFleming,Sally Turner,Christine Heinrichand Heidi
collection at the Comparative Ophthalmology UnitFeatherstone.I alsoacknowledge the referring
of the Animal Health Trust. Several were taken by veterinary surgeons, the owners and breeders and,
colleagues and residents Igreatly enjoyed working most particularly, the animals themselves whose
withover a number ofyears.Thesenow well-
patienceenabledustophotographtheireyes.
recognisedveterinaryophthalmologistsincludeRoger
I should also like to thank the staff who were
Curtis,Arnold Leon,NickMillichamp,JaneSansom,involved in the production of this book at Mosby
TonyRead,Beverly Cottrell,David Williams,LorraineElsevierfor theirinterestandexpertise.
Preface
In my preface to the first edition, A Colour Atlas of help, together with the illustrations, in a more
Veterinary Ophthalmology published by Wolfe inaccurate diagnosis of the many eye conditions,
1990,I stated that thebookwas intended for both the including many hereditary eye diseases in the dog
practicing veterinary surgeon and also for the that have now been described.However,this book is
veterinary student with interests in eye disease.This still intended as an atlas,and I hope will provide a
edition was littlemore than a collection of favourite valuable pictorial resource for clinicians and
photographs and although the greatmajorityhavecompliment theincreasingnumber of textbooks on
been reproduced in this second edition, together veterinary ophthalmology.
with several further illustrations,I have also
included some text and tableswhichI believemay
KCBarnett
Chapter
Globe and Orbit
Introduction
Retropulsion,throughtheuppereyelid,willalsobe
Thisfirst chapter covers theglobe asa whole-and
ofhelp and the two eyes should be compared.A
the orbit -the following chapters dealing with
detailed examination of all the other parts of the
specific parts of the eye,e.g.eyelids, cornea,lens,
eye should follow and must include examination of
fundus,etc.Therefore, some overlap is inevitable
the contralateraleye,even if this appears normal on
between this chapter and those that follow and
naked-eye examination (Table 1.2).
certain figures depicted here could appear in
All three companion animals (horse, dog and
subsequent chapters.
cat)have largeglobes,very largeandprominent in
A naked-eye examination of the globe,perhaps
the horse.Both the dog and the cat have an open or
aidedbyapen torch,should notetheposition of the
incomplete orbit,whereas the horse has a complete
globe within the orbit and the size of the globe,
bony orbital rimand an enclosed orbit.
togetherwithocular movements and thepresence
Conditionsaffecting the globe and orbit can be
or absence of an ocular discharge or lacrimation.
divided into two groups:
Theglobeshouldbeexaminedfrombothdirectlyin
1.Position of theglobe inrelation to the orbit,
front and above, which will greatly assist the
e.g. exophthalmos (proptosis) and
differential diagnosis between increased size of
enophthalmos (Tables 1.1 and 1.2).
the globe and abnormal position of the globe.
2.Size of the globe,e.g.microphthalmos,
medical buphthalmos,hydrophthalmos,
phthisis.Also note strabismus and
Table 1.1-Position of globe: differential diagnosis
nystagmus.
Enophthalmos (+nictitating membrane prominence)
The differential diagnosis is not always obvious
1.Normal variant-breed-related,e.g.Flat-Coated Retriever
and the position,prominence or retraction of the
2.Unilateral or bilateral
3.Pain
nictitating membrane may help or confuse.
4.Microphthalmos,phthisis
Radiography and CT or preferably MRI scans can
5.Orbital neoplasia（uncommon)
be of considerable assistance.
6.Atrophy of orbital tissue
7.Horner's syndrome(+miosis,ptosis)
Table 1.2-The painful eye
Exophthalmos(+nictitating membrane prominence usual)
Signs
1.Normal variant -breed-related,e.g.Pekingese
2.Unilateral or bilateral
Lacrimation,blepharospasm,photophobia,enophthalmos (globe
3.Retrobulbar space-occupying lesion
retraction) in some cases.
Acute-
Pain
1.
Orbitaldisease[abcess,celllitis)
Abscess
2.
Endophthalmitis-uncommon
Haemorrhage
3.
Supernumerary eyelashes
Cellulitis
4.
Eyelid abnormalities and blepharitis
Chronic-
No pain
5.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca
Neoplasia
6.
Conjunctivitis-mild
4.Prolapse
Cornealulcers
Exophthalmos may also beconfusedwith an enlarged eye
8.
Uveitis (acute)
(hydrophthalmos and buphthalmos)
9.
Glaucoma (acute)
Globe and Orbit
Enophthalmos (Figs 1.2-1.3)
Enophthalmos is sinking or recession of the globe
into the orbit and has a variety of causes.Degrees of
enophthalmos are a normalvariant in a number of
dog breeds, such as the Rough Collie and Flat-
Coated Retriever, with deep-set eyes and often
mucus accumulation at the inner canthus.A painful
eyecanbewithdrawn into theorbit by theretractor
bulbi muscle and,in Horner's syndrome,enoph-
Fig.1.3 Enophthalmos Orbital adenocarcinoma pushing
the globe backwards into the orbit.Note that in this
case,due to theposition of the tumour,protrusion of the
nictitating membrane is not evident.
thalmos, together with ptosis and miosis, are the
classical presenting signs.Enophthalmos also accom-
panies a small globe in cases of microphthalmos and
phthisis and is an uncommon sign in cases of orbital
neoplasia with extensionof the tumourinto theorbit
pushing the globe more deeply into the orbit
(exophthalmosis a much more common signwith
Fig.1.1 The normal eye (Greyhound,young adult)
retrobulbar tumours).Atrophy of orbital tissue also
leads to degrees of enophthalmos. In all these cases,
Note the shape and perfect apposition of the eyelids to
the globe,the absence of any discharge and the regular
the enophthalmosis accompanied byprominence of
the nictitatingmembrane.
cornealreflection.
Exophthalmos (Figs 1.4-1.8)
Exophthalmos, or proptosis, is the prominence of a
normal-sized globe and associated with a retro-
bulbar space-occupying lesion. It is usually unilateral
and often, but not invariably （see later),accom-
panied by prominence of the nictitating membrane.
The degree of natural exophthalmos, and enoph-
thalmos, is related to breed differences,eg. the
Pekingese and the Pug. Obviously prolapse (dis-
location of the globe to a position in front of the
eyelids) occurs much more readily in the
brachycephalicbreedswith their prominent eyes and
shallow orbits.With a space-occupying retrobulbar
lesion protrusion of the nictitating membrane is
usual. Other clinical signs include strabismus,
Fig.1.2 Enophthalmos(Rough Collie,young adult)
periorbital swelling, conjunctival congestion and
The small eye normal in certain breeds.Note the small
chemosis,ocular discharge and pain, together with
sunken globe with prominence of the nictitating
difficulty in opening the mouth. Causes include
membrane.
Exophthalmos
Fig.1.4 Exophthalmos(Labrador Retriever,8years
Fig.1.6 Exophthalmos Prominenceof theglobeand
old) Note the prominence of both the globe,with
third eyelid with central exposurekeratitis and ocular
changed shape of the palpebral orifice,and the
discharge.This acute case was accompanied by pain and
nictitating membrane,together withmild lacrimation on
was due toaretrobulbar abscess.
the right side.This tumour proved to bea glioma of the
opticnerve which was closely applied to theback of the
globe and the causeofa small retinal detachment.
Fig.1.5 Exophthalmos(German Shepherd Dog,3years
Fig.1.7 Exophthalmos (English Springer Spaniel,
old) Obvious prominenceof both globe and third eyelid
aged) Chronic case with considerable prominence of the
together with periorbital swelling and ocular discharge.
globe,together with conjunctival congestion and
Theretrobulbar massproved to be a spindle cell
exposure keratitis due to inability to close the lids over
sarcoma.
the globe.The cause was a retrobulbar tumour.
Globe and Orbit
Fig.1.8 Exophthalmos (Domestic Shorthaired (DSH)
cat,9 years old) Prominence of the globe and
Fig.1.9 Eyeball prolapse (Miniature Poodleyoung
nictitatingmembranewith periorbital swelling and
adult)Following trauma,the globeistrapped in front of
change in the shape of thepalpebral aperture.Thecause
the eyelidsandprevented fromreturning tothe orbit.
is a retrobulbar lymphosarcoma.
Note the intraocular and subconjunctival haemorrhage.
cellulitis; all carrying an acute history. Other causes
include neoplasia,particularly in the dog,and have
a chronic, slowly progressive, and usually non-
painful, history.
Prolapse (Figs 1.9-1.10)
Prolapse, sometimes referred to as proptosis, is the
forward displacementoftheglobewhichbecomes
trapped between the eyelidsso preventingitsreturn
to the orbit.It always follows trauma,is rare in the
cat and horse, and is particularly seen in the
brachycephalicbreeds on account of their shallow
orbits.It is always a dire emergency;is often
Fig. 1.10 Eyeball prolapse (French Bulldog)Prolapse of
accompanied by optic nerve damage; and, following
both globes in this brachycephalic breed,following a
replacement, the eye often exhibits a divergent
road traffic accident.Note the absence of the
haemorrhage present in the previous figure and the
strabismus.
divergence of both globes following the prolapse.
Microphthalmos（Figs1.11-1.15)
Microphthalmos is an abnormally small globe;is
may well be the presenting sign.Microphthalmos
congenital, and in the dog, some cases are inherited; varies in the degree of severity from a small but
is unilateralorbilateral in which case the twoeyesotherwisenormal eye (nanophthalmos) to cases
may be similar or show differing degrees.It iswith multiple ocular defects(MOD).The microph
common in the dog, also occurs in the horse, but is thalmic eye usually shows degrees of enophthalmos
rare in the cat. Microphthalmos is often accompanied accompanied by prominence of the nictitating
by other ocular defects, particularly cataract whichmembrane.
Microphthalmos
Fig.1.11 Microphthalmos(Collie puppy)Severe
bilateral microphthalmos in a deaf and blind white
puppy resulting from a blue merlex blue merle mating.
Fig.1.13 Microphthalmos(Shetland Sheepdog.puppy)
Note the prominence of the third eyelid and
enophthalmos in thisShetland Sheepdog puppy.
2
3
6
Fig.1.12 Microphthalmos （Thoroughbred,foal)
Fig.1.14 Microphthalmoswith MOD(German
‘Button eye' occurs congenitally in all breeds of horse
Shepherd Dog.puppy) Note the dense white partial
and is often,as in this case, accompanied by other
non-progressive cataract,together with fine persistent
ocular defects.Thisfigure shows differing degrees in the
pupillarymembranes.
two eyes of the same foal;other cases may show only
one apparently affected.
6
Globe and Orbit
Hydrophthalmos （Figs 1.17-1.19)
Hydrophthalmos is also an enlarged globe due to
glaucoma,primary or secondary,but is not
congenital. The increased intraocular pressure occurs
usually in adult life. Corneal changes are usually
Fig.1.15 Microphthalmos with MOD(Cavalier King
Charles Spaniel,puppy)Note the iris hypoplasia and
anterior cataract.
Fig.1.17 Hydrophthalmos (Great Dane,7 months old)
Unilateral case following primary glaucoma.
Fig.1.16 Buphthalmos（DSH cat,9weeks old)
Bilateral congenital glaucoma.
Buphthalmos (Fig 1.16)
Buphthalmos is an enlarged globe due tocongenital
glaucoma;it is congenital but not inherited;it is
unilateralorbilateralandisseenmoreregularlyin
Fig.1.18 Hydrophthalmos (Sealyham Terrier,6 years
the kitten than the other species. The eye is
old)Due to secondary glaucoma following lens luxation.
prominent due to its increased size and the cornea is
Note the retraction of the nictitating membrane in both
usually opaque and may be vascularized. The
this and theprevious two figureswithrelativeincreased
nictitating membrane is oftenretracted and there is
size ofglobein comparison to thecases of exophthalmos
little evidence of pain,in spite of the increase in
inwhich theglobeisofnormal size.
eyeball size.
Strabismus
Fig.1.19 Hydrophthalmos (horse, grey) The cause of
this secondary glaucoma was a ciliary body melanoma.
Fig.1.21 StrabismusEnglish Springer Spaniel,
2yearsold) Convergent squint due toaretrobulbar
adenocarcinoma.
Fig.1.20 Phthisis bulbi （polo pony) Shrivelled and
sunken enophthalmic globe,again with prominence of
the third eyelid,following severe trauma.Note the
ocular discharge.
evident, in particular fractures in Descemet's
Fig.1.22 Strabismus（Boxer puppy.9 weeks old)
membrane seen as grey branching lines in a more
Divergentsquintfollowing trauma and prolapse of the
diffuse corneal oedema, sometimes with corneal
globe.
vascularization.Thecondition ispainful and the eye
is irreparablyblind.
Phthisis bulbi (Fig 1.20)
Strabismus（Figs1.21-1.23)
Phthisis is a shrunken and enophthalmic globe
following some severe insult, trauma,inflammation Convergent bilateral strabismus is said to be
or glaucoma.Again the eye is irreparably blind, the inherited in the Siamese breed and odd cases are
nictitating membrane prominent and the condition  seen in both the dog and horse and are sometimes
maybe accompaniedby an oculardischargedue to
congenital.Divergent strabismus ofa previously
the small eyein a normal-sizedorbit.
prolapsed globeiscommon.
Globeand Orbit
Nystagmus
Ocular nystagmus, intermittent and oscillatory,is
inherited in the Siamese breedwith or without
strabismus.Ocularnystagmus also often accompanies
casesofmicrophthalmoswithMOD.
Fig.1.24Neoplasia(Hereford cow,adult) Squamous
cell carcinoma of the globe.
Fig.1.23 Strabismus(Shetland Sheepdog,puppy)
Unilateral congenital strabismus.
Chapter
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Introduction
drooping of the upper lid, commonly seen as part
Eyelid disease is common in the dog,cat and horse,
of Horner's syndrome,together with miosis and
particularly the former which exhibits several
enophthalmos, usually presenting as prominence
inherited anomalies, basically entropion and
of the nictitating membrane; there is a remarkably
ectropion.Supernumerary eyelashes (distichiasis,
high incidenceofHorner'ssyndromeintheUKin
ectopic cilia and trichiasis)also account for much
the Golden Retriever.Ptosis is usually idiopathic.
eyelid disease and, in the dog, are due to an
Neoplasia affecting the eyelids is important in all
inherited factor.
the species, particularly the aged animal. The
Inflammation of the eyelid (blepharitis)
tumourmay bemalignant or,moreusually,benign
is
uncommon,as are other localized infections such as
and tumour types include papilloma,adenoma,
meibomianitis and cyst,chalazion and hordeolum
melanoma,adenocarcinoma,histiocytoma,lym-
or stye.The periorbital region carries a thin skin
phoma,mast cell, squamous cell carcinoma and
with a good blood supply and is sometimes
sarcoid in the horse.
involved with parasitic skin diseases such as
Congenital anomaliesinclude colobomas,which
sarcoptic and demodectic mange,ringworm
may affect anypart of thelid (centre or lateral),and
infection and also atopicdermatitis.
oneorboth lidsandeyes.Colobomasaremore
Injuries,often full thickness,occur frequently in
common in the cat than the dog or horse and may
all species, usually due to fight wounds,barbed
wellbeassociatedwithcolobomas affectingother
wire and other accidents. Suturing is often
parts of the eye. The other congenital anomaly of
required,particularly for vertical wounds as
the eyelid is the dermoidwhich may extend from
opposed to horizontal wounds,and the excellent t
the eyelid onto the conjunctiva and possibly
blood supply is an important factor in healing.A beyond.Dermoids are considered to beinherited in
further eyelid condition in this category is ptosis orthe Birman cat.
10
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Entropion （Figs 2.1-2.12)
affected by facial conformation,in particular the
Entropion,in-turning of the eyelid margin,is
desired eye shape,the amount of skin,usually
common,particularlyin the dog and is breed,and toexcessive,and wrinkles or folds in the periorbital
some extent age,related.Itmay affect upper or lower region.In the dog entropion occurs at different ages,
or both lids and one or both eyes. Entropion is usually up to 1 year, in different breeds;occasional
Fig.2.1 Entropion German Shorthaired Pointer,
Fig.2.3 EntropionRottweiler,4years old) Upper and
lower lid entropion.Note the age in this breed and
14weeksold)Simple lowerlid entropion.Note the
signs of irritation caused by the eyelid in-turning with
compare with the ages in the previous two figures and
consequent enophthalmos and prominence of the
following two figures.Also note the small corneal
nictitating membrane and lacrimation,butno corneal
opacity and ulcer.
changes.
Fig.2.2 Entropion(Chow,8months old） Classical
upper and lower lid entropion with profuse lacrimation.
Fig.2.4 Entropion(Great Dane,7 weeks old) Upper
and lowerlidentropionwithcornealchangesincluding
vascularization.
Entropion
Fig.2.7 Entropion (same dog as in previous figure)
Fig.2.5 Entropion (Cocker Spaniel,10years old)
Note themarked enophthalmos,prominent nictitating
Senile upper lid entropion.Seealso Fig 2.14.
membrane and severe corneal changes.
Fig.2.8 Entropion (Chow,13 months old)Corneal
granulation tissueresulting from the chronic irritation
duetoentropion.
Fig.2.6 Entropion (Shar Pei,12 months old) Entropion
associatedwith multiplefacial folds.Note theclosed eye
and lacrimation.
12
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.11 Entropion (DSH cat,adult) Lower lid
entropion.
Fig.2.9 Entropion （Golden Retriever,8months old)
Typical signofdepigmentation of thelower eyelidwhich
hasbeen rolled inwards and in contact with the tear film
forsometime.
Fig.2.10 Entropion （Pembroke Corgi,6weeks old)
Fig.2.12 Entropion（Dorset Horn lamb,3 days old)
Traumaticentropion followingasplit eyelid.
Lower lid entropion. Congenital and hereditary.
Ectropion
cases are not inherited and usually due to trauma
granulation tissue (Fig 2.8),ulceration and possible
(Fig 2.10).The mode of inheritance is not known but
globepenetration.Entropion israrein the cat.
islikelytobecomplexbecauseoftherelatedfactors.
In the horse and sheep (Fig 2.12) it is usually
Ectropion (Figs 2.13-2.17)
congenital.Entropion due to irritation caused by the
hairs of the lid margin on the cornea leads to pain
Ectropion,out-turning of theeyelidmargin,is
and often profuse lacrimation （Fig 2.2), corneal
uncommon but again breed and age related.It affects
oedema and vascularization (Fig 2.7) and even the lower lids and is usually due to too long a lid.
Fig.2.13 Ectropion (Beagle,young adult) Simple lower
Fig.2.15 Ectropion (CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel,
lid ectropion due to too long a lid
puppy) Ectropion of both upper and lowerlids with
eyelid swelling due to juvenilepyoderma.Note also the
affected muzzle.
Fig.2.14 Ectropion (Cocker Spaniel,aged)Senile
ectropionof thelower lid.Note thelow ear carriageand
Fig.2.16 Ectropion (Clumber Spaniel,young adult)
excess skin on the head and face.This situationis
typically seen in the English Cocker Spaniel and note
Diamond eye with ectropion at thekinkin the centre of
both upper and lower lids complicated by entropion on
also the senile entropion of the upper lid in Fig 2.5.
either side.This situation is also seen typically in the
StBernard,Bloodhound and Basset Hound.
14
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.17 Ectropion/entropion (St Bernard)Grossly
abnormal diamond eye.Note also corneal changes and
prolapsed nictitansgland.
Fig.2.18 Distichiasis Miniature Longhaired
Ectropion doesnot cause the irritation ofentropion
Dachshund,young adult) Note the long supernumerary
but exposure of conjunctiva leads to some inflam-
cilia in thelower lidproducing a slight increaseinthe
mation and normal tear drainage may be affected,
tear film butno other clinical signs andno corneal
leading to a degree of epiphora.
damage.
Distichiasis （Figs 2.18-2.25)
Distichiasis,extra or supernumerary eyelashes
arising from or near the meibomian gland orifices,is
common in the dog and inherited, usually occurring
at a fewmonthsof age,sometimesyounger.It israre
in other species.Distichiasis may or may not cause
a clinical problem,depending upon the length,
direction and number of the supernumerary
eyelashes.It may be accompanied by lacrimation,
blepharospasm and sometimes corneal ulceration
(Fig2.20).
Ectopiccilia （Figs2.23-2.26)
Ectopic cilia are extra lashes emerging from the
palpebral conjunctiva and usually impinging directly
Fig.2.19 Distichiasis (Miniature Longhaired
onto the cornea,often causing acute blepharospasm
Dachshund,1 year old) Several shorter cilia in the upper
and lacrimation, and sometimes corneal ulceration.
lid and of different lengths,but still not causing corneal
The ectopic cilia may be single or in groups and the
damage or any other clinical sign.Distichiasis is
condition is usually associated with degrees of
distichiasis.Again,there is a strong breed incidence.
particularly common in thisbreed.
Ectopiccilia
Fig.2.22 Distichiasis（Flat-Coated Retriever,2years
old)Two supernumerary ciliaarising from the
meibomian gland openings.
Fig.2.20 Distichiasis （Pekingese,young adult) Short
supernumerary lashescausing a corneal ulcer.
Fig.2.23 Distichiasis and ectopic cilia (Flat-Coated
Retriever,young adult) Note marked blepharospasm and
Fig.2.21 Distichiasis (Shetland Sheepdog.young
increased lacrimation.Anotherbreed often exhibiting
adult) Several lashes causing irritation.Note the
thisproblem.
enophthalmos and prominence of the nictitating
membrane.Another breed often involved with this
condition.
16
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.24 Ectopic cilia (Flat-Coated Retriever,
7months old) Note the origin of the aberrant cilia well
inside the upper eyelid margin.
Fig.2.26 Ectopic cilia (Shetland Sheepdog,4months
old) Several potential ectopic cilia lying beneath the
palpebral conjunctiva.
Trichiasis (Figs 2.27-2.28)
Trichiasis is normal facial hair in contact with the
cornea and/or conjunctiva from nasal folds;it is
occasionally traumatic in origin.
Blepharitis(Fig 2.29-2.30)
Blepharitis,eyelid inflammation,isusually associated
with a primary dermatological problem and with
secondary conjunctival involvement. Clinical signs
depend upon theprimary condition and thedegree
Fig.2.25 Distichiasis and ectopic cilia (Pekingese,
of severity and include ocular discharges sticking
1year old) These two conditions are frequently found in
to the lashes and periorbital region,irritation and
the same eye.
hair loss.
Blepharitis
17
Fig.2.29 Blepharitis(Cocker Spaniel,6years old)
Note the discharge sticking the eyelashes together,the
associated earlyvascularkeratitis and theprominenceof
the meibomian gland openings.
Fig.2.27 Trichiasis(Pekingese,puppy)Pronounced
nasal fold.Note the tear streak.
Fig.2.28 Trichiasis（Pekingese,4years old) Irritation
Fig.2.30 BlepharitisSecondary tokeratoconjunctivitis
and corneal ulcer due to a nasal fold.
sicca.
18
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Meibomianitis (Fig 2.31)
Meibomian cyst（Fig 2.33)
Meibomianitis,inflammation of the meibomian
Meibomian cystis thecysticdistension ofthegland
glands,maybe acute or chronic andmay accompany
and is mainly visible on the conjunctival side of
blepharitis or conjunctivitis.
thelid.
Hordeolum -external （stye)（Fig 2.32)
Eyelid neoplasia（Figs2.34-2.44)
Infection of one ormore of themeibomian glands.
Eyelidneoplasia iscommon,particularlyin theolder
Fig.2.31 Meibomianitis (CavalierKing Charles
Fig.2.33 Meibomian cyst（Beagle.young adult) Cystic
Spaniel,4years old) Note the secretion from the
distension ofmeibomian gland visible on the
meibomian glands.
conjunctival side of thelid.
Fig.2.32 Hordeolum or stye(Labrador Retriever,
Fig.2.34 Eyelid tumour(Golden Retriever.1 year old)
8weeksold) Infected and distended meibomian glands.
Viral papilloma.
Eyelid neoplasia
19
Fig.2.35 Eyelid tumour（lrishSetter,7years old)
Papilloma.
Fig.2.38 Eyelid tumour (Beagle,10 years old)
Melanoma.
Fig.2.36 Eyelid tumour(Pembroke Corgi,9years old)
Papilloma.Note the extension of the tumourinto the
substance of the lid visible only on the palpebral surface.
Fig.2.39 Eyelid tumour （Boxer,9years old)Mast cell
tumour.
Fig.2.37 Eyelid tumour(Labrador Retriever,9years
old) Squamouspapilloma.
20
Upper and Lower Eyelids
Fig.2.42 Eyelid tumour (New Forest mare,13years
old)Sarcoid.
Fig.2.40 Eyelid tumour（DSH cat,14years old,tabby
and white) Squamous cell carcinoma in the
unpigmented skin of the lower lid.Note the affected
area is in unpigmented skin and the age of the animal.
Fig.2.43 Eyelid tumour[Welshpony gelding.8years
old)Sarcoid.
Fig.2.41 Eyelid tumour（DSH cat,10 years old,white)
Lymphosarcoma of the upper lid.Note the chemosis
affecting thelower lid.
Congenital anomalies
21
dog,although occasionally tumours occur in
Congenital anomalies （Figs2.45-2.50)
younger animals, even puppies (Fig 2.34). The type
Colobomas and dermoids
oftumouris oftenrelatedtothe ageoftheanimal.
Tumours, depending upon their size and position,
may cause irritation,blepharospasm,lacrimation
andcorneal ulceration.
Fig.2.46 Coloboma or agenesis(DSH cat,13 months
old) Upper eyelid absence with consequent trichiasis
causing a mild vascularkeratitis.
Fig.2.44 Eyelid tumour(Welsh Cobstallion,5years
old)Sarcoid.Note the ulcerated surface ofpartof the
tumour.
Fig.2.47 Coloboma(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
Fig.2.45 Coloboma or agenesis （DSH cat,1 year old)
2weeksold) Congenital absenceofpart of thelower
Congenital absence of the outer half of both upper
lid.Rare in this species.
eyelids.
22
UpperandLowerEyelids
Fig.2.50 Dermoid （Birmankitten,10 weeks old) The
condition isinherited in this breed.
Fig.2.48 Eyelid deformity(Labrador Retriever,
6weeks old) Gross congenital deformity of the eyelids.
Fig.2.49 Dermoid (Labrador Retriever,6weeks old)
Pigmented and hairy dermoid of lid and conjunctiva.
Chapter
Nictitating Membrane
(almost invariably unilateral);dysautonomia in the
Introduction
cat (bilateral) and also,in some cases,chronic
The appearance of the nictitating membrane (third
diarrhoea in this species.
eyelid or haw) is often a presenting sign in
A non-pigmented third eyelid will look more
veterinary ophthalmology and prominence,or
prominent than a pigmented third eyelid and is a
protrusion,is the commonest clinical condition
common cause of concern,
particularly when
and is due to a variety of causes.
affecting one eye only (Fig 3.1).
Trauma and foreign bodies
(Figs 3.2-3.3)
Prominence of the nictitating
The third eyelid is prone to injury (Fig 3.2), both in
membrane (Table 3.1)
cats and by cats!Also the pocket at the inner canthus
Prominence,unilateral or bilateral, may be accom-
behind the third eyelid is afavourite sitefor foreign
panied by lacrimation and blepharospasm indicating
bodies,in particular grass awns (Fig 3.3)
pain,usually anterior segment, e.g.glaucoma (see
also Chapter 1).
Prominence also accompanies several conditions
Inflammation（Figs3.4-3.10)
affecting the globe,including some cases of enoph
Both surfaces of the nictitating membrane are
thalmos (Fig 1.2), also exophthalmos (Figs 1.4-1.8),
covered by conjunctiva (palpebral) and may therefore
microphthalmos (Fig 1.13)and phthisis (Fig 1.20).
exhibit forms of conjunctivitis(see also Chapter 5).
Prominence may also indicate tetanus (bilateral
These include follicular conjunctivitis (Figs 3.4-3.5),
and intermittent in the horse);Horner's syndrome
chemosis (Fig 3.6) and conjunctival cysts (Fig 3.7).
Table 3.1-Prominence of nictitating membrane
1.Unilateral or bilateral
2.Pain-anterior segment with globe retraction;lacrimation
and blepharospasm
3.Enophthalmos
4.Exophthalmos
5.Microphthalmos
6.Phthisis
7.Tetanus (bilateral)
8.Horner's syndrome （unilateral)+miosis,ptosis
9.Dysautonomia
10.Chronic diarrhoea (cat)（bilateral)
11.Cartilage deformity (scrolled)(dog)
Fig.3.1 Prominence ofa normal non-pigmented third
eyelid.
23
24
Nictitating Membrane
Fig.3.3 Nictitating membrane foreign body Grass awn
Fig.3.2 Torn and prolapsednictitans gland and
behind the third eyelid.Note the corneal granulation
nictitating membrane following trauma.
tissue.
Fig.3.5 Follicular conjunctivitis （DSH cat,1year old)
Note the depigmentation in theregion of the follicles
and the serous ocular discharge.
Fig.3.4 Follicular conjunctivitisUsually affecting both
aspects of the nictitating membrane and other palpebral
conjunctiva andanot uncommon causeof lacrimation
due to the irritation.
Inflammation
25
Fig.3.6 Chemosis(DSH cat,11 years old) Bulbar and
Fig.3.7 Conjunctival cyst(English Setter,8months
palpebral conjunctiva are affected.Unknown aetiology.
old)Subconjunctival cystatthe base of the third eyelid
resulting in mild prominence of the third eyelid.
Fig.3.9 Plasma cell infiltration (German Shepherd
Dog,7years old)Note depigmentation of the affected
area.This condition frequently accompanies pannus.
Fig.3.8 Granuloma of the nictitating membrane
(Persian cat,18months old) Bilateral,unknown
aetiology.
26
Nictitating Membrane
Fig.3.10 Plasma cell infiltration(German Shepherd
Dog,8years old) Again note depigmentation and the
accompanying pannus.
Fig.3.11 Prolapse of the nictitans gland (Bulldog.
2yearsold) Note the visiblefreeborder of the
A specific,immune-mediated,bilateral butnot
nictitating membrane.
necessarilysymmetrical conjunctivitisisplasma cell
panies pannus in the German Shepherd Dog and
others.Another important cause ofinflammation is
habronemiasis in the horse.
Prolapse of the nictitans gland
(Figs 3.11-3.12)
A condition mainly seen in the dog,unilateral or
more frequently bilateral,and usually one eye
following the other; often in young dogs including
puppies, and known as ‘cherry eye'.
Deformity of the cartilage
(Figs 3.13-3.15)
Sometimes referred to as scrolling of the cartilage; an
unusual but not uncommon condition, particularly
in the larger breeds of dog, but rare in other species.
Fig.3.12 Prolapse of the nictitans gland (Bulldog,
Bilateral orunilateral;the cartilagedeformity usually
10 weeks old) Note age and breed in this case.
Neoplasia
27
resultsin thefreeborderofthe third eyelidrolling
Neoplasia (Figs3.16-3.18)
outwards (Fig 3.13), and more rarely inwards (Fig
Various neoplasms may be involved but are
3.14).It is another cause of prominence of the
comparativelyrarein the dog and cat,although the
nictitatingmembraneis a common sitefor squamous
mild epiphora and mucoid discharge.
cell carcinoma in the horse （Fig 3.18), often
presenting as a case of persistent ocular discharge.
Fig.3.13 Cartilage deformity (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.3.14 Cartilage deformityWeimaraner,5years
7monthsold) Free border ofthe third eyelid rolled
old)Freeborderof thethird eyelidrolledinwards.
outwards.
28
Nictitating Membrane
Fig.3.16 Nictitating membrane tumour(Labrador
Retriever,3yearsold) Lymphosarcoma.
Fig.3.15 Cartilage deformity (Great Dane,8months
old)Similar to Figure 3.13,but note similarity to
prolapse of the nictitans gland（Figs 3.10-3.11) and
tumour(Fig3.15).
Fig.3.17 Nictitating membrane tumour (Siamese cat)
Adenocarcinoma.
Fig.3.18 Nictitating membrane tumour
(Thoroughbred, 8years old) Squamous cell carcinoma.
Note the ocular discharge in this case.The third eyelid is
a common site for this tumour in the horse.
Chapter
Lacrimal System
Introduction
The lacrimal system is responsible for two
2.
Thefluorescein test-fluorescein into the
important, and often presenting, clinical signs of
conjunctival sac and the appearance,or
'wet eye' and ‘dry eye'. The lacrimal system has
otherwise,of a green stain after a fewminutes
two functions: secretory (tear production)to
at theipsilateral nostril(Fig4.2)(when stain
produce the important pre-corneal tear film (ptf)
appearsit proves that the nasolacrimal duct
and excretory (lacrimal drainage)via the puncta,
system ispatent but when nostain appears it
canaliculi, sac, nasolacrimal duct and its opening.
doesnotprove that the system isblocked-
The dry eye, or keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS), is
resort then to irrigation,usually via the upper
described in Chapter 6 (Figs 6.35-6.44),as it usually
punctum).
presents as akeratitis with a considerable ocular
discharge. KCS is a relatively common eye disease
The wet eye has two components (Table 4.1):
in the dogbut seldom diagnosed in the cat or horse.
1.
Lacrimation,oroverproduction of tears,a
There aretwoimportant aidstodiagnosisfor the
common clinical condition denoting pain
lacrimal system:
and/orinflammation andoften accompanied
1.The Schirmer tear test 1 -one minute with no
by blepharospasm (Fig 4.3).
use of topical anaesthesia (Fig 4.1).
2.Epiphora, abnormal or impaired drainage.
Fig.4.2 Fluorescein patency test Fluorescein put into
Fig.4.1 Schirmer tear test Paper strip folded under the
lower lid and left for 1 minute.
the conjunctival sac and appearing at the nostril
(proving patency of the nasolacrimal duct system).
29
30
Lacrimal System
Table 4.1-The wet eye
Lacrimation (unilateral or bilateral)
1.Anterior segment pain with globe retraction
2.
Entropion
3.Ectropion
4.
Distichiasis
5.
Ectopic cilia
6.
Trichiasis
7.Foreign body
8.Eyelid tumour
Epiphora (unilateral or bilateral)
1.Imperforate ormicropuncta
2.Trauma
Fig.4.4 Epiphora (Golden Retriever,6 months old)
3.
Foreign body
Imperforate lower punctum.
4.
Infection
5.
Nasal neoplasia
6.Symblepharon (cat)
Fig.4.5 Tear streak (Golden Retriever,6 months old）
Typical brownstaining due toimperforatepunctum
Fig.4.3 Lacrimation An early sign of bovine
causing epiphora.See also Fig 5.5 and note the similarity
keratoconjunctivitis.
in the case of lacrimation associated with atopy.
Punctal abnormalities
upper punctum,with anormal lowerpunctum,the
Congenital imperforate and micropuncta may
presenting sign would be unlikely to occur asthe
present, depending upon whether both upper and
lower punctum drains the greater part of the tear
lower puncta areinvolved,asawet eye(Fig4.4)with
film under normal conditions, i.e. no increased
a typical tear streak or stain (Fig 4.5) or more
lacrimation. In the horse it is usually the nasal
commonly as a purulent discharge in the horse (Figs
opening of the nasolacrimal duct that is involved
4.6-4.7). One or both eyes may be involved,
in
and often with a variable distal portion of the
addition to one or bothpuncta which may be either
nasolacrimal duct.Inthe cat thecondition israre but,
imperforate or micro.In the dog there is almost
when present,is often accompanied by absence of
certainly a hereditary component with a definite
the canaliculi or part of the duct.
breed incidence in the Golden Retriever and the
Other causes of punctal occlusion include trauma
(Fig 4.12), foreign body (Fig 4.13) and infection of
lowerpunctum thatisinvolvedbutifitwerethe
some part of the nasolacrimal duct system (Figs
Punctal abnormalities
31
4.14-4.15), sometimes due originally to a foreign
body, or neoplasia affecting adjacent structures or
teeth. Perhaps the commonest cause of punctal
occlusion in the cat is symblepharon(Fig 4.16;see
also Figs 5.13-5.18).
Fig.4.6 Imperforate punctum (Thoroughbred foal,
Fig.4.8 Thenormal punctum in thelower eyelid ofa
8monthsold)Purulent ocular discharge with atresia of
6op
the nasal opening of the nasolacrimal duct-the usual
situation in the horse.
Fig.4.9 Micropunctum （CockerSpaniel,8monthsold)
Note the thickened edge of the small opening.
Fig.4.7 Ocular discharge(horse) Mild purulent ocular
discharge,the presenting sign of another case of absence
of the nasal openingof thenasolacrimal duct.
32
Lacrimal System
Fig.4.10 Imperforate punctum(Golden Retriever,
6 months old) Note absence of any opening.
Fig.4.12 Occluded punctum (Crossbred terrier,
6months old)Scar tissue following trauma.
Fig.4.11 Imperforate punctum (Basset Hound,
Fig.4.13 Nasolacrimal duct foreign body(Old English
14months old) Note the depression in the conjunctiva
Sheepdog,14 months old) Grass awn protruding from
covering theopening of the lower punctum.
the lower punctum following irrigation via the upper
punctum.
Punctalabnormalities
33
Fig.4.16 0ccluded nasolacrimal puncta (cat,young
adult) Due to severe symblepharon.The nictitating
membrane is fused to the cornea and the conjunctival
fornices obliterated,together with the nasolacrimal duct
puncta.
Fig.4.14 Nasolacrimal duct infection Mucus strand
from the lowerpunctum following irrigation of the
lacrimal systemvia the upper punctum.
4.15 Nasolacrimal duct infection (Rough Collie,
6years old) Note the persistent and purulent ocular
discharge and bead of pus from the lower punctum at
theinner canthus.
Chapter
Conjunctiva, Limbus, Sclera
Introduction
Table 5.1-The redeye
The conjunctiva (bulbar, palpebral and nictitating
Unilateral or bilateral
s   n 
Acute or chronic
the eyelids （Chapter 2）,nictitating membrane
Local ocular disease or systemic with pyrexia (bilateral)
(Chapter3),lacrimal system(Chapter4)and cornea
1
Conjunctivitis
(Chapter 6).Inflammation,or conjunctivitis,is
Primary or,more commonly,secondary(ocularor systemic)
probably the commonest eye condition in vet-
Traumatic (subconjunctival haemorrhage)
Glaucoma
2.
erinary ophthalmology, occurring in all species
Breed-pecificforprimary,some secondarycases
but with a difficult classification as the exact cause
Unilateral at first presentation
is often unknown (Table 5.1).
3.
Uveitis
The conjunctiva may indicate systemic disease in
Photophobia
all animals, the changes being bilateral. Examples
4.Episcleritis/scleritis
Uncommon,usually no pain
are canine distemper,respiratory tract viruses in
5.Keratitis
both the cat and the horse, blood dyscrasias,
Including corneal ulcer (pain)
jaundice and anaemia (Fig 5.6). Primary con-
6.Orbital disease
junctivitis has a varied aetiology-often bacterial
Endophthalmitis
Panophthalmitis
but also viral,trauma,etc.
Retrobulbar(inflammation,neoplasia)
Prolapse
Conjunctivitis (Figs5.1-5.5)
Conjunctivitismaybe acute(Fig5.1)with clinical
signs of hyperaemia,chemosis,lacrimation and a
Conjunctivitis may beunilateral or bilateral;affect
variable discharge, or chronic(Fig 5.2)with a dull
any age including the neonate; and may be primary
redness, thickening and less and drier discharge.
orsecondary to another eye disease and it may be
Follicular conjunctivitis (Fig 5.3) mainly affects the
difficult to decide which is theprimary condition,
palpebral conjunctiva and carries a non-specific
e.g.keratoconjunctivitis.Conjunctivitis is not nor-
aetiology.Atopic conjunctivitis also mainly affects
mally apainful conditionbut does causea degree of
the palpebral conjunctiva(Fig5.4)and accompanies
irritation and therefore maybe accompaniedby
atopicdermatitisoftenin theeriorbitalregionand
lacrimation and blepharospasm (Table 5.2).
with an increased lacrimation (Fig 5.5).
35
36
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
Fig.5.1 Acute purulent conjunctivitis （young dog)
Fig.5.3 Follicular conjunctivitis (cat)Note some
Note that the discharge is not adherent to the cornea
chemosisand ocular discharge.
and iswashed away onto the eyelid margins by the
increased lacrimation.
Fig.5.2 Chronic conjunctivitis Note the dryer nature of
Fig.5.4 Atopic conjunctivitis (Labrador Retriever,
the discharge and its position and the clear cornea.
adult) Note the involvement of the palpebral conjunctiva
onlyvisiblewhen the lid is everted.
Table 5.2-Conjunctivitis:differential diagnosis
Pupil
Intraocular pressure
Pain
Vision
Discharge
Conjunctivitis
No change
No change
No change
Serous-purulent
+
Glaucoma
Dilates
↑
Blind
Lacrimation
+++
Uveitis
Constricts
++
Minoreffect
Lacrimation
Conjunctival haemorrhages
37
Fig.5.5 Atopic conjunctivitis Note the excessive
lacrimation causing a typical tear streak and compare
with the tear streak due to epiphora inFig 4.5.
Chemosis (Figs 5.6-5.7)
Fig.5.6 Chemosis（DSH cat,3years old) Conjunctival
Chemosis, or conjunctival oedema, usually accom-
oedema in a cat positive for Chlamydia.
panies acute conjunctivitis or trauma and occurs
particularly in the cat (Fig 5.6) and horse (Fig 5.7).
Conjunctival haemorrhages
(Figs 5.8-5.10)
Trauma is probably the commonest cause of
conjunctival and subconjunctival haemorrhages and
may be quite spectacular (Fig 5.8). However, there
are a number of other causes of haemorrhage to
mucous membranes that may aid diagnosis of a
more serious condition (Fig5.9).
Fig.5.7 Chemosis （Pony) Severe case obscuring the
globe and due to trauma.
38
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Slera
Subconjunctival masses
(Figs 5.11-5.12)
junctivally and hasbeen reported in the horse in
association with thenictitatingmembrane.Fig5.12
shows a rare case of conjunctival calcinosis in the
dog causing a vascular keratitis and corneal ulcer.
Symblepharon (Figs 5.13-5.18;
see also Fig 4.16)
Symblepharon is a conjunctival adhesion to the
Fig.5.8 Subconjunctival haemorrhage (Spaniel)
conjunctiva or cornea.It is common in the cat but
Haemorrhage following a golf club injury.
rare in the dog and may be congenital or more
Fig.5.9 Subconjunctival haemorrhage (Cocker
Fig.5.10 Subconjunctival haemorrhage Thisparticular
Spaniel) Haemorrhage due to Warfarin poisoning (see
case was reaction to a paint stripper.
also Fig 11.206).
Symblepharon
39
Fig.5.11 Subconjunctival fat prolapse (Cairn Terrier,
8yearsold)
Fig.5.13 Symblepharon （DSH cat,2yearsold）
Adhesion ofpalpebral conjunctiva to the cornea
obliterating the conjunctival fornices.
Fig.5.12 Conjunctival calcinosis (Munsterlander,
Fig.5.14 Symblepharon(DSH cat,6months old）A
5monthsold) Calcinosis with bulbar conjunctiva and
mild case not affecting vision.
outer aspect of the nictitating membrane affected and
causing a vascular keratitis and corneal ulcer.A rare case
of unknown aetiology.
40
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
Fig.5.15 Symblepharon (cat,young adult) Severe case
Fig.5.17 Symblepharon(cat,young adult) Unilateral
causingblindness.
casecausing a narrowed palpebral aperture.
Fig.5.16 Symblepharon (DSH kitten,5weeksold)
Fig.5.18 Symblepharon (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
15weeks old) Congenital adhesion of conjunctiva to
cornea.This condition is rare in this species.
Conjunctival cyst
47
particularly due to neonatal infection with FEHV-1;
Foreign bodies (Fig 5.19)
burns areanotherfactor in aetiology.The conditionis
The conjunctival fornices are favourite sites for
painlessbutmay be accompaniedby discharge due
foreign bodies, particularly of organic origin, and
should always be searched under local anaesthesia in
mechanically causing blindness in severe cases.
casesofacute uniocular conjunctivitis oftenwith a
purulent discharge.
Conjunctival dermoid (Figs5.20-5.22)
Epibulbar dermoids occur on the conjunctiva in all
the species and three examples are shown.
Conjunctival cyst (Figs 5.23-5.24)
Two examples are shown; the first in a puppy and
the second,in a cat, associated with symblepharon.
Fig.5.19 Conjunctival foreign body (Yorkshire Terrier,
adult) Grass awn in the left upper conjunctival fornix.
Fig.5.21 Conjunctival dermoid (Dogue de Bordeaux,
1year old) Unusual case causing a corneal ulcer.
Fig.5.20 Conjunctival dermoid (Birman kitten,
Fig.5.22 Conjunctival dermoid (Crossbred puppy)
12weeksold)The condition ishereditary in thisbreed
Involvement of conjunctiva,limbus and lateral canthus.
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
42
Fig.5.24 Conjunctival cyst together with
symblepharon (DSH cat)
Fig.5.23 Conjunctival cyst (Golden Retriever,
Scleritis and episcleritis
6monthsold)
(Figs 5.33-5.35)
Classification and nomenclature is confusedand
Neoplasia(Figs5.25-5.32)
variablebuttheseareinflammatoryandusuallynon-
The conjunctiva,particularly palpebral, and limbus
painful conditions and are not neoplasticin spite of
are favoured sites for squamous cell carcinoma in thetheir appearance. Episcleritis may be nodular or
horse, a relatively common tumour in this species.simple (diffuse),occurring near to the limbus with
Examples are also shown of a haemangioma of thehyperaemia of conjunctiva and oedema of adjacent
conjunctiva in a dog and a lymphosarcoma of thecornea.The condition may be unilateral or bilateral
conjunctiva in a cat.In addition limbal melanoma in and there is a predilection in the Golden Retriever.
the dog is shown,a benign tumour to be Nodular episclerokeratitis is usually bilateral,
involvingmoreof thecornea and particularly occurs
in the Rough Collie and Shetland Sheepdog.
this and other species (see Chapter 7).
Scleritis and episcleritis
43
Fig.5.27 Conjunctival tumour(Hunter-type,17years
old) Squamous cell carcinoma in a similar position to
previousfigure.
Fig.5.25 Conjunctival tumour (Hunter-type,13 years
old,palomino)Squamous cell carcinoma of lower
palpebral conjunctiva and nictitating membrane.
Fig.5.28 Conjunctival tumour (Horse) Squamous cell
carcinoma at the limbus.Note the typical pale grey
appearance in this case.The horse was affected in both
eyes.
Fig.5.26 Conjunctival tumour(Connemara pony.
8yearsold) Squamous cell carcinoma at the limbus and
bulbar conjunctiva.
44
Conjunctiva,Limbus,Sclera
Fig.5.31 Conjunctival tumour (Labrador Retriever,
adult) Limbal melanoma.Note the appearance at the
limbus and adjacent sclera and particularlythe lackof
involvement of irisand pupil. Comparewith Fig 7.41
Fig.5.29 Conjunctival tumour (Gordon Setter,11
years old) Benign haemangioma.Lower conjunctival
fornix.
Fig.5.32 Conjunctival tumour(Golden Retriever,
adult) Limbal melanoma.Again note the appearance
with noevidence of iris involvement.Thistumour occurs
particularlyin thisbreed aswell asthe Labrador
Retriever(previous figure).
Fig.5.30 Conjunctival tumour （DSH cat 11year old)
Lymphosarcoma affectingpalpebral conjunctiva and
nictitating membrane.
Scleritisandepiscleritis
45
Fig.5.33 Episcleritis(Golden Retriever)Nodular
Fig.5.35 Episcleritis (Rough Collie,young adult)
episcleritis.Note the corneal oedema adjacent to the
Nodular episclerokeratitis,bilateral case.Note the
tumour.
adjacentcorneal arcus.
Fig.5.34 Episcleritis(Airedale Terrier,5years old)
Diffuse episcleritis.Note hyperaemia of overlying
conjunctiva.
Chapter
Cornea
Introduction
the reflection may be broken or irregular (Fig 6.1)
Corneal disease and keratitis are among the most
indicating a superficial lesion with interference
common eye diseases in all the domestie animals
of the corneal epithelium,or regular (Fig 1.1)
and with a widevariety of causes and appearances.
indicating no interference with the epithelium,the
The presenting signs of corneal disease vary
lesion being within the corneals
stromaor
considerably between case,severity and cause and
endothelium.
in a number, particularly in the dog, the aetiology
Keratitis may be accompanied by conjunctivitis
remains unknown.Pain is an important sign and
(keratoconjunctivitis)and also,if severe or chronic,
will accompany most forms ofkeratitis,whatever
byuveitiswhichmaywell require additional treat-
the cause,with the classical triad of blepharospasm,
ment.Forms ofkeratitis may occasionally indicate
photophobia and lacrimation.However,thedegree
systemicinvolvement.
of pain in corneal disease is again variable,from
Congenital and hereditary abnormalities affecting
severe in cases of cornealulceration and trauma,to
the cornea areuncommon-the epibulbar dermoid
non-existent in cases of corneal oedema and most
and microcornea being the most important of the
other forms of opacity.The presence or absence of
congenital anomalies. However,certain specific
oculardischarge,naddition tolacrimation,should
corneal conditions have an interesting and
be noted,as should the presence of pigment in the
significant breed susceptibility in the dog, for
cornea which is more commonin the dog than the
example keratoconjunctivitis sicca in the West
other species. Corneal opacity is another variable
Highland White Terrier, pannus in the German
and important presenting
sign (Table
Shepherd Dog, corneal lipidosis in the Shetland
6.1)
involvingthewholecornea,forexampleincasesof
Sheepdog and others. Corneal tumours are also
corneal oedema,or onlypart of thecornea in cases
relatively rare, although squamous cell carcinoma,
oflipid infiltration,abscess or scar formation.The
particularly in the horse, is important. Corneal
lipidkeratopathies are a complexbut an important
cysts are very rare.
group with different appearances, often familial in
The main responses to corneal insult are (1)
the dog and usually with little or no effect on
oedema,(2)vascularization and （3)pigmentation
vision.In fact,vision loss is an uncommon sign of
and any or all of these may act aspresenting signs
corneal disease generally in spite of the history
but arenot,in themselves,specific diseases.
from the owner who imagines the animal cannot
The classification of corneal disease is complex;
see because of the appearance of the eye(s). The
it is perhaps best categorized by aetiology but the
presence or absence of corneal ulceration should
cause of a number of conditions is still not known.
also be checked by suitable staining,both at the
Corneal disease will be described here and
initial clinical examination and subsequently,
if
illustrated under several headings, although it
considered necessary. The corneal reflection to a
must berealized that certain specific conditions can
light source can be most useful in deciding the
be included in more than one section.
depth of the lesion within the cornea;for example
47
48
Cornea
Table 6.1-Corneal opacity: differential diagnosis
Unilateral or bilateral
Partial or complete
Diffuse or dense
Temporary or permanent
1.Corneal oedema
Neonatepuppy
Endothelial degeneration,e.g.Chihuahua
Corneal ulcer with loss of epithelium
Corneal wound or burn
Uveitis (blue eye')
Glaucoma(+conjunctival oedema)
Descemet's membrane tears
Anterior lensluxation-subcentral,oval
Anterior segment neoplasia (uveal melanoma)
2.
Lipid keratopathies (infiltrations and degenerations)
3.
Corneal abscess
4.
Corneal scar
5.
Congenital anterior synechia (persistent pupillary membrane)
6.
Conjunctival adhesion (symblepharon)
7.
Epibulbar(corneal) dermoid
Fig.6.1 Superficial keratitis Note the blood vessel
crossing the limbus and the irregular branching:also the
uneven corneal surface with breakupof thecorneal
reflection.
Keratitis （Figs 6.1-6.5)
Superficial
Interstitial (stromal)
Punctate
Pigmentary
Exposure
Chronic superficial (pannus)
Eosinophilic keratitis (cat)
Fungal keratitis (horse)
Infectiousbovine keratoconjunctivitis (cattle).
Chronic superficial keratitis(pannus)
(Figs 6.6-6.12)
Pannus is a type of superficial vascularkeratitis often
with later pigmentation.It is usually bilateral but not
necessarily s
symmetrical;often one eye is more
severely affected than the other. Pain and discharge
aremoderate and blepharospasm is usually present.
The disease is immune-mediated with a strong
Fig.6.2 Interstitial keratitis Note the appearance of
tendency to recur with cessation of treatment.A
bloodvessels on the corneal side of the limbus,unlike
conjunctival component is invariably present and
frequently thenictitatingmembraneis involved with
Figure 6.1,and the typical more regularvascular
branching.
aplasma cell infiltration (Fig 3.10).The German
Keratitis
49
Fig.6.5 Exposure keratitis（Pekingese)Due to inability
to spread the tear film across the whole cornea in cases
of globe prominence,as depicted here;also with lid
paralysis(Fig 6.24) and keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
Fig.6.3 Punctate keratitis (Shetland Sheepdog)
Aetiology unknown but usually bilateral and the small
grey areasmay takefluorescein stain.Has been
described as an epithelial dystrophyand theShetland
Sheepdog,as in this case,ismainly involved.
Fig.6.4 Pigmentary keratitis Often accompanied by
Fig.6.6 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)(German
vascularization,as in thiscase,and also fibrosis.
Shepherd Dog,3yearsold) Early case with superficial
Pigmentation isa classical sign ofkeratitis,particularly
vascularization typically affecting thelower lateral
in the dog,and may accompany other forms of keratitis,
quadrant.
especially chronic cases,e.g.pannus （Fig 6.9),
keratoconjunctivitis sicca（Fig 6.42)or corneal oedema
(Fig6.48).
50
Cornea
Fig. 6.7 Chronic superficial keratitis (pannus)(German
Shepherd Dog,4years old) More severe than previous
case with granulation tissue.Note break-up of corneal
reflection and earlypigmentation from the lateral
limbus.
Fig.6.9 Chronic superficial keratitis(pannus)(German
Shepherd Dog,9years old) Chronic casewith
pigmentation.
Fig.6.8 Chronic superficial keratitis(pannus)(German
Shepherd Dog.6 years old) Note involvement of the
whole cornea and early scarring.
Fig. 6.10 Corneal granulation tissue (Crossbred,
6years old)Superficial keratitis following a chemical
burn.
Keratitis
Shepherd Dog is the breed usually affected but also
Eosinophilic keratitis(Figs 6.13-6.16)
Belgian Shepherd Dogs and Lurchers.Age incidence
Typically seen in the cat;the cause is unknown and
is the young adult (3-5 years) and pannus
recurrence following treatmentisusual,asis the case
commonly,but not invariably,starts in the lower
with pannus. Initially eosinophilic keratitis is
lateral quadrant,just occasionally medially.
unilateral, later becoming bilateral if left untreated.
Figures 6.10-6.12 show other forms of chronic
Diagnosis is aided by the appearance of a number
superficial keratitisfor differential diagnosis.
Fig.6.11 Corneal granulation tissue(Boxer,7years
old)Following recurrent corneal erosion (see also Figs
6.20-6.22)
Fig.6.13 Eosinophilickeratitis（DSH cat,1 year old)
Note vascular keratitis and grey plaque-like lesion.
Unilateral case and note slight prominence of nictitating
membrane due to retraction of the globe due to pain,
and mild ocular discharge.
Fig.6.12 Corneal granulation tissue(Chow,8 months
Fig.6.14 Eosinophilic keratitis （DSH cat,3years old)
old) Associated with long-standing case of entropion.
Bilateral case and note typical white spots.
Cornea
52
Fig.6.15Eosinophilickeratitis(DSH cat,4yearsold)
Fig.6.16 Eosinophilickeratitis （DSHcat,3years old)
An early case with finevascularization and raised
Severe case.Note ocular discharge.
irregularwhitespots.
ofsuperficialwhite round raised spots of different
Cornealulcers （Figs 6.20-6.34)
sizes and superficial vascularization;a conjunctival
Thecornealulcer is common,usuallyunilateral, the
component is present. Pain is mild with a slight
ocular discharge.
cause and stage of the ulcer.It is invariably painful
and accompanied byblepharospasm and lacrimation.
Fungal keratitis (Fig 6.17)
Diagnosis can be confirmed by staining with
Keratomycosis in thehorse has been well recognized
fluorescein to show areas of denuded epithelium
in theUSA for a number ofyears but only recently
(Fig 6.20) and Rose Bengal to show areas of
has been diagnosed with certainty in the UK.There devitalized epithelium (Fig 6.21). Causes include
are a number of different clinical presentations of trauma,including self-inflicted and that due to
ulceration with furrowing,ulceration with‘cake
eyelid abnormalities (supernumerary eyelashes,
frosting' appearance and stromal abscessation. The
neoplasia,entropion),thermal and chemical burns,
condition isunilateral with moderate to severe pain
immune-mediated, facial paralysis and forms of
and associated uveitis, corneal vascularization and
exposure keratitis and absence of the protective tear
film; also infections with bacteria,viruses and fungal
chemosis.
elements. The appearance of the corneal ulcer is
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
dependent upon size,depth and time,varying from
a faint opacity （oedema) to a clear, central,usually
(IBK) (Figs 6.18-6.19)
circular, deep and non-staining keratocoele.
IBK or New Forest disease in cattle is usually
Vascularization isusual,exceptin theindolent ulcer
unilateral with a central opacity,leading to(recurrent epithelial erosion,Fig 6.22).If severe or of
ulceration,surroundedby anopaque cornea,due tosome standing,an associated uveitiswith hypopyon
oedema,and circumcorneal hyperaemia.Pain can be (Figs 6.27-6.28)and hyphaema (Fig 6.29) will be
severe and there is an associated iritis. Ocular present. Pain is variable, from mild to severe,
discharge becomes mucopurulent, originally being
particularly when uveitis is present.
clear profuse lacrimation. Superficial vascularization
toward the primary lesion occurs and the cornea
clears from the periphery.
Keratoconjunetivitis sicca (KCS)
53
Fig.6.17 Fungal keratitis (Arab-cross mare,12 years
Fig.6.19 lnfectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
old)Large central deep area of ulceration with
(Friesian calf) Note central opaque area with
furrowing.
vascularization following a previousulcerin this
position.Peripheral cornea now clear.
Fig.6.18 Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis
Fig.6.20 Corneal ulcer Case of recurrent corneal
(Friesian calf) Note corneal opacity due to oedema,
erosion showing area of denuded epithelium stained
with fluorescein.
vascular fringe and mild conjunctival congestion.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Kcs)
common in chronic cases (Fig 6.42) and a con-
junctival component is always present. KCS of
(Figs6.35-6.44)
various causes is a common eye condition in the dog;
KCS is not primarily a keratitis but a deficiency of
most cases are immune-mediated and classically
thepre-ocular tear film(aqueous portion),although
occurring in the UK in the middle-aged,often
it usually presents as akeratitiswith a copious, tacky
female,WestHighland White Terrier.Other causes
(Fig 6.37),purulent-like, discharge adherent to the
are systemic disease（canine distemper),metabolic
cornea (Fig 6.38) and often present in the con-
disease (hyperthyroidism),surgical,traumatic,neu-
junctival fornices (Fig 6.39). Severity varies from
rogenic (often unilateral and accompanied by a dry
and with vascularization (Fig 6.41). Pigmentation isrecently a congenital form of KCS (Fig 6.44),together
54
Cornea
Fig.6.21 Corneal ulcer（Pembroke Corgi)Caseof
Fig. 6.23 Corneal ulcer(DSH cat,young adult)
recurrent cornealerosion stained with RoseBengal to
Superficial dendritic ulcersinacute feline herpesvirus-1
show large area of devitalized epithelium surrounding
infection.
theactualulcer.
Fig.6.22 Corneal ulcer (Boxer,7 years old) Recurrent
Fig.6.24 Corneal ulcer Ulceration and subsequent
corneal erosion case.Note mild corneal oedema of the
vascularization ina case of facialparalysis.
ulcerated area and the epithelium at the edge of the
ulcer.An early case,but see also Fig.6.11.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
55
Fig.6.25 Cornealulcer(Pug,8months old） The
coagulase or melting ulcer.Note the stromal involvement
Fig.6.27 Corneal ulcer Deep ulcer and iritis.Note the
and clearer central portion indicating very thin
hypopyon and themild miosis.
remaining cornea,together with marked corneal oedema
of the remaining non-ulcerated cornea.
Fig.6.26 Corneal ulcer (Hunter-type,7years old)
Coagulase or melting ulcer.Note the gelatinous
discharge over the lower lid and adherent to the
eyelashes;considerable pain.
Fig.6.28 Cornealulcer Deepulcerand note the dense
hypopyon and corneal vascularization.
56
Cornea
Fig.6.29 Corneal ulcer Note the hypopyon and
Fig.6.31 CornealulcerLargekeratocoelewith
hyphaema in this case.
surrounding granulation tissue and vascularization.
Fig.6.32 Corneal ulcer Small deep ulcer with clear
keratocoele;in this region the epithelium and stroma
have been lost leaving onlyDescemet'smembrane and
endothelium.Note also the vascular fringe and oedema
of thesurrounding stromal region.
Fig.6.30 Corneal ulcer Note the corneal oedema, small
clear circularkeratocoele and vascularization in the
lowerclearcornea.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)
57
Fig.6.33 Corneal ulcer Ruptured keratocoele with
clearer central area and surrounding corneal oedema and
Fig.6.35 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
vascular fringe.Note the shallowanterior chamber due
White Terrier,male,3years old) Early case with mucoid
to early anterior synechiae and loss of aqueous.
filaments on the cornea but no corneal pathology.The
Schirmer tear testresult waszero.
Fig.6.34 Cornealulcer（Thoroughbred mare)Deep
ulceration with surrounding granulation tissue,oedema
andvascularization.
Fig.6.36 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca Jack Russell
Terrier,female,4 years old) Advanced case of xerosis.
Cornea
58
Fig.6.37 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
Fig.6.39 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
WhiteTerrier,male8yearsoldModerately severe case
WhiteTerrier,female,2yearsold)Noteocular
with typical discharge.
discharge in the conjunctival fornix.
Fig.6.38 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Samoyed,female,
Fig.6.40 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca(Bichon Frise,
6years old)Typical discharge stuck on cornea andeyelid
male,3years old)Note typical conjunctival hyperplasia.
edge. Compare with Fig 5.1 of purulent conjunctivitis in
which the ocular discharge is washed off the cornea by
the associated lacrimation.
Keratoconjunctivitissicca (KcS)
59
Fig.6.41 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
Fig.6.43 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Yorkshire Terrier,
White Terrier,female,7 years old) Typical deep circular
female,2years old) latrogeniccase following
ulcer and keratocoele.
sulphasalazine therapy for colitis.
Fig.6.42 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (West Highland
Fig.6.44 Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (Cavalier King
WhiteTerrier,male,5yearsold)Long-standing case
Charles Spaniel,female,16 weeks old) Congenital case
withsecondary pigmentarykeratitis.
associated with skin condition.
60
Cornea
with a skin disease (ichthyosis),has been described.but many cases are idiopathic.It is, together with
KCS is usually bilateral but the two eyes may differ vascularization and pigmentation, one of the classic
in the degree of severity and the condition is moreresponses of the cornea to insult.
uncomfortable than painful.Diagnosis is based on
Corneal oedema may affect one or both eyes and
the clinical signs, together with a Schirmer tear test 1 to the same or differing degrees. Although the eye
to measure tearsecretion.
may appear blind',there is little or no effect on
vision.Other parts of the eye may well be involved
Corneal oedema (Figs 6.45-6.55)
with corneal oedema,including uveitis （Fig 6.45),
lens luxation (Fig 6.53) and glaucoma (Fig 6.54).
Corneal oedema is not a specific disease but results
Corneal oedema is not painful, but in severe cases
from a failure of the corneal pump mechanism,
usually damage to the corneal epithelium or,more
disruption of the bullae does cause pain (Figs
commonly,the endothelium.Corneal oedema is an
6.46-6.47). Corneal oedema leads to a thickened
opacity,and presents assuch,varyingndensityand
cornea and sometimes toanobvious keratoconus
iseither focal or diffuse.There are a number of
(Fig6.49).
known causes,including trauma and inheritance,
Fig.6.46 Cornealoedema Dense0edema,togetherwith
a fewclearbullae.
Fig.6.45 Corneal oedema (Airedale Terrier,4months
old)Densecornealoedema andvascular fringeoccurring
12 days after vaccinationwith live attenuated canine
adenovirus-type-1 vaccine;referred to as'blue eye
Cornealoedema
61
Fig.6.47 Corneal oedema Severe bullous keratopathy.
Fig.6.49 Corneal oedema Slit-lamp photograph
showing thickening of the central cornea due to the
oedema andkeratoconus.
Fig.6.48 Corneal oedema (Longhaired Dachshund,
Fig.6.50 Corneal oedema (English Springer Spaniel,
6monthsold) Long-standing case with corneal
9years old) Note the typical mottled appearance of the
pigmentation.Another post-vaccination case(see
oedema in the central region,together with one or two
Fig.6.45).
small bullae.This is a case of endothelial dystrophy
presenting as corneal oedema in this breed.
62
Cornea
Fig.6.51 Cornealoedema（Chihuahua,5years old) A
Fig.6.53 Corneal oedema Jack Russell Terrier,5years
bilateral case with severe oedema again due to an
old) Central or subcentral corneal opacity associated
inherited corneal endothelial dystrophy.
with primary lensluxation.The anteriorlydislocated lens
is pushed against the corneal endothelium causing the
oedema.lf thelenslaterbecomesdislocated into the
posterior segment,thiscorneal opacity will persist.
Fig.6.54 Corneal oedema (American Cocker Spaniel,
5years old)Diffuse oedema associatedwith primary
glaucoma.Note also the slightconjunctival oedema
(chemosis).
Fig.6.52 Cornealoedema （Friesian calf)Bilateral
condition inherited in this breed.Again,note an
associatedkeratoconus.
Lipid keratopathies
63
Lipid keratopathies (Figs 6.56-6.62)
Lipid deposition in the cornea,sometimes in-
correctlyreferred to asacorneal dystrophy(correctly
dystrophy is a primary inherited bilateral condition
affecting any part of the cornea and not associated
with inflammation),occurs in a number of not fully
understood conditions which present as a corneal
opacity.
The commonest form of lipid keratopathy,often
referred to as corneal lipidosis (Figs 6.56-6.59), is a
usuallybilateral,not alwayssymmetrical andsome-
times starting in only one eye,central or paracentral,
subepithelial (non-staining with fluorescein), silver-
grey metallic oval opacity. It is progressive to a stage
but not further and sometimes regressive, and not
associatedwith any inflammation orpain.Itusually
occurs in young adults and with a definite breed
incidence (Rough Collie, Shetland Sheepdog
Fig.6.56 Lipid keratopathy(corneal lipidosis)（Rough
CavalierKing Charles Spaniel,Afghan and Siberian
Husky) and is sometimes related to the oestral cycle,
Collie,3years old)Typical appearance,bilateral
condition,approximately symmetrical,central cornea.
although it also occurs in the male.
Note the perfect corneal reflection indicating normal
overlying epithelium.
Fig.6.55 Corneal oedema (Half-bred mare.7years
Fig.6.57 Lipid keratopathy （corneal lipidosis)
old)Bilateraland asymmetrical,partial oedema ina
(Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,female,3 years old)
vertical stripe and of unknown aetiology.This
Typical age,breed and sex.Note the crystalline
distribution of oedema has only been seen in the horse.
appearance of thelesion.
64
Cornea
Fig.6.60 Lipid keratopathy (corneal lipidosis)(German
Shepherd Dog) A case of primary hypothyroidism.Note
the perfect corneal reflection,the incomplete arcus
superiorlyand a clear band of cornea immediately inside
thelimbus.
Fig.6.58 Lipid keratopathy （corneal lipidosis)
(Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,female,3years old）
Larger and less dense lesion than that shown in the
previousfigure.
Fig.6.61 Lipid keratopathy （lipid and calcareous
degeneration)(Golden Retriever,3years old) Perilimbal
lesion with epithelial involvement andvascularization.
Fig.6.59 Lipid keratopathy （corneal lipidosis)
(Siberian Husky.3years old) Another typical breed.
Corneal sequestrum (cat)
65
Arcus lipoides Fig 6.60) is another bilateral, but obvious breed incidence with several of the corneal
not necessarily symmetrical,accumulation of lipid in conditions described above; for example,recurrent
the peripheral cornea adjacent to the limbus,in dogsepithelial erosion or indolent ulcer of the Boxer and
with hypothyroidism and secondary hyperlipopro-
Pembroke Corgi has also been called epithelial
teinaemia.It occurs particularly in the German basementmembrane dystrophy;corneal lipidosis or
Shepherd Dog but has been reported in other breeds.
crystalline stromal dystrophy in several breeds;and
Lipid and calcareous degeneration (Fig 6.61)
endothelial dystrophy presenting as corneal oedema
occurs in young adult Golden Retrievers presenting
in the Chihuahua and English Springer Spaniel,as
well as others.
peripheral cornea inside the limbus. They are
stromal in position and the overlying epithelium is
Corneal sequestrum (cat)
missing. They are often vascularized and may give
(Figs6.63-6.65)
discomfort and consequent blepharospasm.
A further lipid keratopathy,unilateral or bilateral
This can be unilateral or bilateral in predisposed
and also with vascularization present (Fig 6.62),
breeds such as the colourpoint and other Persian
occurswithavariety ofother anterior segment
breeds.It has a striking,but variable,appearance
abnormalitiesincludingforeignbody,focalkeratitis,
witha clearly defined darkbrown/blackplaque-
keratoconjunctivitissicca,tumour,etc.
like lesion often raised above the corneal surface,
There is confusion over the terminology of this
which is central or paracentral,stromal and of
group of lipid keratopathies', as well as the corneal
varying shapes, and often vascularized. There is
dystrophies, in the dog, partially due to lack of
some discomfort and often a slight black-stained
knowledge on aetiology and inheritance. However,
ocular discharge.
there is an interesting familial pattern with an
Fig.6.63 Corneal sequestrum (Colourpoint cat,4years
old) Small-medium sized,central and no vascularization.
Note the slight pigmented ocular discharge on the upper
lid immediately above the sequestrum.
Fig.6.62 Lipid keratopathy（Pug.13months old)
Unilateral,subepithelial and associated in thiscasewith
a corneal scar,pigment and anterior synechiae.
66
Cornea
Fig.6.64 Corneal sequestrum Large well-defined
Fig.6.65 Corneal sequestrum（Persian cat,4years old)
sequestrum surrounded by granulation tissue and much
Medium-sized sequestrum with vascularization.Both
corneal vascularization.Note also the prominence of the
eyes of this cat were involved.
nictitating membrane due to globe retraction due topain
and again the black discharge on the upper lid.
Trauma and foreign bodies
(Figs6.66-6.70)
Corneal foreign bodies are common in all the
domestic species and vary considerably in their
nature.Corneal reaction,usually following a sudden
onset,varies according to the size,depth and nature
of the foreign body:pain, blepharospasm or a closed
eye. The ocular discharge varies from clear
lacrimation to purulent.
Corneal trauma is also common in the horse, dog
and cat, particularly in the former with its large
prominent eyes.Trauma varies from blunt trauma
with corneal oedema toa penetrating injury with
Fig.6.66 Corneal foreign body （DSH cat,2years old)
loss of aqueous,haemorrhagewhich may beprofuse,
Small thorn foreign body,recent case.This cat presented
loss of anterior chamber and prolapse of iris.Pain
with acute blepharospasm.
may be severe.
Corneal abscess (Fig 6.70) appears as a small
focal non-painful raised swelling, associated with
vascularization,and usually adjacent to thelimbus.
Trauma and foreign bodies
67
Fig.6.67 Corneal foreign body （Border Terrier,7years
Fig.6.69 Corneal trauma(Cavalier King Charles
old)Leaf foreignbody of 3weeks'duration.Note the
Spaniel,3yearsold)Corneal rupture with irisprolapse
profound corneal reaction to thisforeign body oforganic
plugging the wound.Note the surrounding corneal
material.
oedema andvascular fringe.
Fig.6.68 Corneal trauma (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.6.70 Corneal abscess(English Springer Spaniel,
10weeks old)Penetrating corneal wound with
3years old)Note the raised appearance of the lesion
coagulated aqueous and prolapse of iris tissue but no
which is subepithelial and thevascularization. In this
haemorrhage in this case.Of recent origin.This injury
case the lesion was non-painful,the dog presenting with
was due to a cat scratch-a typical history.
a focal area of corneal opacity.
68
Cornea
Neoplasia (Figs 6.71-6.72)
Congenital anomalies (Figs 6.73-6.74)
Corneal neoplasia in the dog and cat is rare but
Microcornea is usually associated with microph
squamous cell carcinoma in the horse is an important
thalmos and multiple congenital anomalies (Fig 1.12.)
condition.The appearance is of a pinkish grey
Epibulbar dermoids (Figs 6.73-6.74) occur on the
   se s  
cornea,particularly in the dog. They are usually
usually associated with a slight ocular discharge and
pigmented and contain hair and cause surprisingly
a degree of blepharospasm.
littlediscomfort.
Fig.6.73 Corneal dermoid (German Shepherd Dog.
3months old) Pigmented epibulbar dermoid containing
hair but apparently causing little discomfort.
Fig.6.71 Corneal tumour (Hunter-type. 10 years old)
Squamous cell carcinoma of cornea and limbus.The
nictitating membrane of this horse had been removed,
probably also due to a squamouscell carcinoma.
Fig.6.74 Corneal dermoid (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.6.72 Corneal tumour(Pony,9years old)
3months old) Fleshyand hair containing.Epibulbar
Squamous cell carcinoma.Note the typical greyish
dermoids are typically seen in this breed (see also
appearance of the tumour.
Figs 2.49-2.50and5.20-5.22).
Chapter
Uveal Tract
Introduction
Table 7.1-Thered eye
The uveal tract consists of iris and ciliary body.
Unilateral or bilateral
togetherwith the choroid which is best included in
Acute or chronic
the fundus (Chapter 1l).
The uveal tract is
Local ocular disease or systemic with pyrexia （bilateral)
important in veterinary ophthalmology in dog,cat
1.Uveitis
and horse;it may present as a uniocular or
Photophobia
2.Glaucoma
binocular eye disease or condition and may
Breed-secififrrimaryomeecondarya
indicate local (ocular)or systemic disease (Table
Unilateral at first presentation
7.1).Diagnosis can be difficult and aetiology is
3.
Conjunctivitis
often obscure (Table 7.2).The uveal tract is prone to
Primaryor,more commonly,secondary（ocularor systemic)
trauma and also exhibits several congenital, some
Traumatic(subconjunctival haemorrhage)
hereditary, conditions in addition to cysts and
4.
Episcleritis/scleritis
Uncommon,usually no pain
tumours.
5.
Keratitis
The colour of the irisvaries considerably and is
Including corneal ulcer (pain)
associated with coat colour.Most irides in the dog
6.
Orbital disease
andhorseareshadesofbrown andinthecatyellow
Enophthalmitis
Panophthalmitis
or gold and often metallic. However, pale blue
Retrobulbar (inflammation,neoplasia)
irides,either partial or total,are not uncommon in
Prolapse
all three species and usually are accompanied by
areas of subalbinism in the fundus.Furthermore, a
change in iris colour may denote disease.The pupil
shape also differs considerably in the three species
and miay changewith disease.
Table 7.2-Uveitis:differential diagnosis
Pupil
Intraocular pressure
Pain
Vision
Discharge
Uveitis
个
Minor
Constricts
++
effect
Lacrimation
Glaucoma
Dilates
↑
Blind
+++
Lacrimation
Conjunctivitis
No change
No change
No change
Serous-purulent
69
Uveal Tract
70
Clinical signs of anterior uveitis
(iritis or iridocyclitis)
The clinical signsvarywith the cause,severity
and species but are not specific to the aetiology:
Pain-may be considerable and presenting
with the usual triad oflacrimation,
blepharospasm and photophobia.
Miosis (Figs 7.1-7.3,7.5).
二
Intraocular pressure low.
二
Iriscolour-in the brown iris the colour is
duller and darker,particularly evident in the
chronic case (Fig 7.2) and a useful clinical sign
to indicate a previous iritis;in the yellow (cat)
or blue iris the congested bloodvessels are
obvious (Figs 7.11 and 7.13),known as
rubeosis iridis.
Flare (Figs 7.7,7.11,7.29),hypopyon
(Fig 7.10),hyphaema (Figs 7.9,7.12-7.13)-
Fig.7.1 Iritis (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,10 years
cells(white andred blood cells)in the
old) Acute traumatic iritis.Note the marked miosis and
the conjunctival injection.
anterior chamber.
Conjunctival and episcleral hyperaemia
particularly in the ciliary region(ciliary flush)
(Fig 7.1).
Synechia formation-commonlyposterior
with adhesion to anteriorlens capsule
producing irregular pupil shapes (Figs
7.15-7.19);occasionally anterior (Fig 7.28)
leading to secondary glaucoma.
Chemosis and corneal oedema (Figs 7.5-7.6
and 7.24-7.25).
Vascularization-usually as a fringe in the
peripheral cornea (Figs 7.5-7.6); occasionally
blood vessels extending onto the anterior lens
capsule.
Vitreous- cloudy and turbid.
二
Chorioretinitis- see Chapter 11.
Sequelae
Cataract (Figs 7.23,7.26)-by far the most
Fig.7.2 lritis (Miniature Poodle,10yearsold) Chronic
common,usuallyanteriorcapsular,cortical,
iritis.Note the darkened iris,pigment on anterior lens
sometimes total.May or maynotbeassociated
capsule together with small posterior synechiae,and
with posterior synechiae.
miosis.
Sequelae
71
Fig.7.3Iritis（Thoroughbred,6years old) Equine
recurrent uveitis.Note occlusion of pupil due to miosis
and posterior synechiae and dull dark iris.
Fig.7.5 lritis (Weimaraner,3months old) Notemiosis,
fine vascularfringe from superior limbus,marked corneal
oedema and keratoconus.See also Figs 6.45-6.48 of
cornealoedema and uveitis associated with canineviral
hepatitis and vaccination.
Fig.7.4 lritis(Miniature Poodle,6years old)Vascular
Fig.7.6 lritis Equine recurrent uveitis.Note corneal
corneal fringe,together with haemorrhage on the lens
vascularization from the superior limbus and mild
and cataract.Note the herniated uveal pigment around
cornealoedema.
thepupil edge.
72
UvealTract
Fig.7.7 Iritis(Airedale Terrier,2years old) Acute iritis,
Fig.7.9 lritis[Crossbred dog,14years old)Note
showing plastic endothelial deposit and flare.Idiopathic
diffuse cloud of haemorrhage and dull iris.Idiopathic
case.
case.
Fig.7.8 Iritis(DSH cat,15yearsold)Acaseof
Fig.7.10 Iritis(DSH cat,10 months old) Note cloud of
toxoplasmosisshowing keratitisprecipitata (KP).
white cellsobscuring thepupil.Another toxoplasmosis
case.
Sequelae
73
Fig.7.11 Iritis Rubeosis iridis and flare(visible in the
Fig.7.13 Iritis（DSH cat,8years old) Hyphaema and
pupillaryarea).
rubeosis iridis.A further case of toxoplasmosis and note
the difference in presenting signs between Figs 7.8,7.10
and7.13
Fig.7.12 Iritis （DSH cat,1 year old) Hyphaema in a
Fig.7.14lritis(Crossbred dog,4years old) Casedue
cat with feline infectious peritonitis.
to trauma showing swollen iris,miosis and haemorrhage.
Uveal Tract
74
Fig.7.17 lritis(Jack Russell Terrier,6years old)
Posterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma.
Fig.7.15 Iritis(Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,4years
old)Posterior synechiae and eccentricpupil.
Fig.7.16 lritis (Miniature Poodle,10years old)
Fig.7.18 Iritis (Border Collie,9years old) Iris bombe
Posterior synechiae and cataract.
due toposterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma.
Sequelae
75
Fig.7.21 Iritis(Thoroughbred) Iris rests.Idiopathic
case.
Fig.7.19 Iritis （DSH cat)Posterior synechiae and mild
irregularity of pupil.Idiopathic case.
Fig.7.22 lritis Equine recurrent uveitis.Posterior
synechiae producing irregularity of the pupil.
Fig.7.20 Iritis (DSH cat,18months old) Iris rests
(posterior synechiae).
76
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.23 Iritis（Thoroughbred,12years old)Equine
Fig.7.25 Iritis (German Shepherd Dog.3years old)
recurrent uveitis.Posterior synechiae and cataract.
Ehrlichiosis.Note the multiple haemorrhages on the iris
and thecorneal oedema.
Fig.7.24 lritis (Connemara pony,3years old) Equine
recurrent uveitis. Dull and faintly opaque cornea with
miosis.
Fig.7.26 Iritis (Akita,young adult) A case of Harada's
disease,or Voght-Kayanaga-Harada(VKH).Note posterior
synechiae and cataract.
Sequelae
77
Fig.7.27 Iritis Lens-induced uveitis in a diabetic dog.
Note the irregularity of the anterior lens capsule,the
darkened iris and posterior synechiae.See also Fig 9.24.
Fig.7.29 Trauma Penetrating corneal injury.Note the
foreign body,flare particularly evident in the pupil,
miosis and herniation ofposterior uveal pigmentin the
superiorpartof thepupil.
Fig.7.28 Trauma Penetrating corneal injurywith
Fig.7.30 Trauma (English Springer Spaniel,3years
anterior synechiae and healed corneal scar with fine
old) Iris prolapse following a shot injury.Note the
vascularization.
subconjunctival haemorrhage.
78
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.31 Trauma (cat,young adult) Penetrating
corneal injury with iris haemorrhage.
Sequelae (continued from p.70)
Lens luxation.
Glaucoma(secondary)-uveitis commonly
Fig.7.32 Uveal cysts(Crossbred dog.7years old)Two
precedes cases of glaucoma in the horse.
attached atpupillarymargin and onefree in anterior
Phthisis-theresult of severe inflammation,
chamber.Dense cysts.
again usually in the horse.
The causes of uveitis are many and varied, and
include trauma （Fig 7.14),reflex (corneal ulcer),
immune-mediated,lens-induced,viral,Rickettsial,
bacterial, fungal and parasitic. Uveitis may be
uniocular or binocular and accompanies several
systemic diseases in the three species (Figs 7.8,7.10,
7.12-7.13,7.25-7.26).Many cases remain idiopathic.
Cysts (Figs 7.32-7.38)
Not uncommon in all three species.
Neoplasia (Figs 7.41-7.54)
Melanoma is the most common (particularly in grey
horses),butalsoadenoma,adenocarcinoma,medullo-
epithelioma and multicentriclymphosarcoma.
Congenital anomalies(Figs 7.55-7.67)
Fig.7.33 Uveal cyst(Labrador Retriever) Single thin-
Persistent pupillary membranes (Figs 7.59-7.67). Not
walled cyst.
uncommon in all three species and may cross part of
the iris or the pupil or be attached to anterior lens
capsule or posterior cornea and present as opacities
in these positions.
Colobomas (Figs 7.55-7.58) Occur in all species
but are rare in the cat.
Congenitalanomalies
79
Fig.7.34 Uveal cysts (Labrador Retriever,9 months
Fig.7.36Uveal cysts(DSH cat,5years old)Several
free cysts in the anterior chamber.
border following uveitis.
Fig.7.35 Uvealcyst（Labrador Retriever,adult)
Ruptured cyst adherent to the posterior cornea.
Fig.7.37 Uveal cysts(Hunter-type,9 years old) Cysts
attached to pupillary margin.
80
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.38Uveal cyst (Welsh pony.7years old,grey)
Fig.7.40 Corpora nigra trauma (Thoroughbred,
Stromal cyst or irishypoplasia.Typically occurs in the
4years old)Whiplash type injury resulting in tearing of
superior mid irisregion in a heterochromic iris.
thecorporanigra.
Fig.7.41 Tumour (English Springer Spaniel) Iris and
ciliary body melanoma.Note the early distortion of the
pupil and compare with the limbal melanoma (Figs
Fig.7.39 Corpora nigra hyperplasia (Hunter-type,13
5.31-5.32).
years old) Note the complete obliteration of the centre
part of the pupil.The other eye showed no abnormality
and there was no further progression.
Congenital anomalies
81
Fig.7.44 Tumour(Greyhound,7years old) Ciliary body
Fig.7.42 Tumour(Afghan Hound,7yearsold) Ciliary
body melanoma.Note the large swelling with gross
adenocarcinoma.Note the appearanceof the tumour
distortion of thepupil.
through the pupil.
Fig.7.43 Tumour(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,6years
Fig.7.45 Tumour(Labrador Retriever,9yearsold)
old) Ciliary body adenocarcinoma.Note the unpigmented
Ciliary body adenoma.Note the small haemorrhage on
pinkmass in the anterior chamber with distortion of the
the anterior lens capsule and the appearance of the
pupil.
tumour through the pupil.
82
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.48 Tumour (DSH cat,9years old) Diffuse iris
melanoma with pigmentary depositson theposterior
cornea.
Fig.7.46 Tumour（English Springer Spaniel,5years
old) Multicentriclymphosarcoma.Note the secondary
glaucoma due to obliteration of the angle of filtration.
Fig.7.47 Iris freckles(DSH cat) Flat pigmentary
Fig.7.49 Tumour (DSH cat) Iris melanoma.Note the
change of theanterioriris surface with no distortion of
raised areas of iris and pupil distortion.
thepupil.
Congenitalanomalies
83
Fig.7.50 Tumour (DSH cat,7years old) Iris melanoma.
Fig.7.52 Tumour （DSH cat,3years old)Multicentric
Note the pigmented mass appearing in the pupil and the
increased vascularization of the iris on that side.
lymphosarcoma.
Fig.7.53 Tumour(Pony.13years old,grey) Iris
melanoma.The tumouris touching the posterior cornea
and producing an area of cornealoedema.
Fig.7.51 Tumour（DSH cat,16years old) Multicentric
lymphosarcoma.Thekidneys were also involved.
84
Uveal Tract
Fig.7.54 Tumour （Pony.7years old,blue-eyed cream)
Amelanotic melanoma.
Fig.7.56 Coloboma (Miniature Poodle,3years old)
Partial thickness iris coloboma at 2o'clock.Note
distortion of the pupil shape.
Fig.7.55 Coloboma(Miniature Poodle,5years old)
Fig.7.57 Coloboma (Great Dane,3months old,blue
Mid-iris full thickness coloboma at 10o'clock.The
merle)Partial thicknesscoloboma at the typical position
cataract is unrelated.
of 6o'clock in the pale blue iris.Note the red fundus
reflex.
Congenitalanomalies
85
Fig.7.58 Coloboma(Pony.5years old) Complete
(1o'clock)and partial (10 o'clock) colobomas.Both eyes
Fig.7.60 PPM (Labrador Retriever,6months old)
of this animal were affected butasymmetrically.
MultiplePPMsorcongenital anterior synechiae,with
focal cornealopacities.
Fig.7.59 Persistent pupillary membranes(PPM)
Fig.7.61 PPM(Beagle,3 months old) Similar to the
(Rottweiler,11 weeks old) Fine PPMs crossing the pupil.
previousfiguresbutlesssevereand with a largerdiffuse
Note the irregular pupil due to irishypoplasia in addition
cornealopacity.
to the pupillary membranes.
86
UvealTract
Fig.7.64 PPM (Bull Mastiff,5weeksold) Persistent
pupillary membranes together with corneal opacity.
PPMsare known to be inherited in this breed,as well as
some other breeds including the Basenji.
Fig.7.62 PPM(Cairn Terrier,6years old) Pupillary
membrane attached to the anterior lens capsule with
associated focal cataract.
Fig.7.65 PPM (Bengal cat,9 months old)PPM and
cataract.
Fig.7.63 PPM(Old English Sheepdog,3 months old)
Pupillary membranesinapaleblueiris.
Congenitalanomalies
87
Fig.7.66 PPM (Cat,adult,white)PPM and obvious
Fig.7.67 PPM(Part-Arab mare, 8years old） PPMs and
associated pigmented capsular cataract.(See also Figs
cornealopacity.
9.43-9.44and9.46-9.47)
Chapter
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Introduction
Table 8.1-The redeye
The glaucomas are a complex group of diseases
Unilateral or bilateral
with an increased intraocular pressure (IOP) which
Acute or chronic
damages the opticnerve head andretinal ganglion
Local ocular disease or systemic with pyrexia (bilateral)
cells leading to irreversible blindness. In animals
1.Glaucoma
theraised IOPis due to a decrease in drainage not
Breed-specific forprimary,somesecondary cases
an over-production of aqueous).
Unilateral at first presentation
2.
Conjunctivitis
Glaucoma is an important disease in veterinary
Primary or,more commonly,secondary (ocular or systemic)
ophthalmology.It is a painful disease;acute
Traumatic (subconjunctival haemorrhage)
glaucoma in the dog can be extremely painful,
Uveitis
"
causing inappetance, depression and even vomiting.
Photophobia
Glaucoma can be a difficult diagnosis as several of
Episcleritis/scleritis
4.
Uncommon,usually no pain
the clinical signs may be found in other eye
5.
Keratitis
diseases (Tables 8.1 and 8.2) and a reliable diagnosis
Including corneal ulcer (pain)
requires tonometry;subjective symptoms are absent.
Orbital disease
6.
Endophthalmitis
the canine primary glaucomas.Furthermore, treat-
Panophthalmitis
Retrobulbar (inflammation,neoplasia)
mentbothmedical and surgical,isdifficult ando
Prolapse
often ends with a blind, swollen and painful eye.
The glaucomas are usually classified as:
Congenital (buphthalmos)(Fig 1.16)-rare in
the dog and horse.
Primary -rare in the cat and horse.
Secondary-themost common glaucoma in the
dog.
Table 8.2-Glaucoma:differential diagnosis
Pupil
Intraocular
Pain
Vision
Discharge
pressure
Glaucoma
Dilates
↑
+++
Blind
Lacrimation
Conjunctivitis
No change
No change
No change
+
Serous-purulent
Uveitis
Constricts
个
++
Minoreffect
Lacrimation
89
90
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Clinical signs
The presenting signs vary according to the
speed of onset of the disease, the severity of
the riseinIOP,the duration,thecause and the
age of the animal.Both primary and
secondaryglaucoma almost invariably
present as a uniocular disease,later becoming
binocular,particularly in the primary
(hereditary)cases.
The signs are:
Pain,evidenced by lacrimation and
blepharospasm and also degrees of
enophthalmoswithprominenceofthe
nictitating membrane.
Head-shyness and resentment to handling
may occur in severe cases.
Corneal oedema (Figs 8.1-8.2, 8.7-8.8).
Conjunctival chemosis （Fig8.2)
Fig.8.1 Primary glaucoma (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
Conjunctival and episcleral congestion
5years old) Note dilated pupil and'steamy'cornea due
(Figs 8.3, 8.5).
to mild oedema.
Deep corneal vascularization as a brush
border'advancingfrom thelimbus through
360°(Figs 8.4-8.8).
Superficial cornealvascularization with
branching vessels which can be seen crossing
the limbus, unlike the deep vessels of the
brush border (Fig 8.9).
Mydriasis (Figs 8.9-8.12)-not always
presentparticularlyinglaucoma secondary
to a uveitis.
Hydrophthalmos (Figs 1.17-1.19 and 8.12).
Fractures in Descemet's membrane (Figs
8.10-8.11).
Lenssubluxation withan aphakic crescent
(often in an inferior position) (Figs 8.10, 8.13).
Cataract (Fig 8.8).
Phthisis bulbi.
Optic disc cupping with retinal changes of
bloodvessel attenuation and tapetal hyper-
Fig.8.2 Primary glaucoma (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
reflectivity (Figs 12.8-12.9).
Vision loss due to the above fundus changes.
18months old) Note conjunctival chemosis,mild
corneal oedema and dilated pupil.
Introduction
16
Fig.8.5 Glaucoma Note earlyvascular fringe plus
conjunctival congestion and corneal oedema.
Fig.8.3 Glaucoma(Beagle,9yearsold)Note
conjunctival and episcleral congestion.
Fig.8.4 Primary glaucoma(English Springer Spaniel,
Fig.8.6 Primary glaucoma[Welsh Springer Spaniel,
9months old) Latervascular fringe.
11years old) Note early vascular fringe advancing from
thelimbus.
92
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Fig.8.7 Primary glaucoma Typical vascular fringe and
Fig.8.9 Secondary glaucoma (post-iritis)(Standard
corneal oedema.
Schnauzer.14years old)Note posterior synechiae
resulting in eccentric and dilated pupil.Also the
superficial vascularization with branchingvessels
crossing the limbus.
Fig.8.8 Glaucoma(Miniature Poodle,11 years old)
Fig.8.10 Primary glaucoma (Basset Hound,7 years
Late fringe and marked corneal oedema.
old)Fracturesin Descemet's membrane and dislocated
lens(secondary).
Secondary glaucoma-causes
93
Fig.8.11 Glaucoma (Thoroughbred,aged)Fractures in
Descemet's membrane and early hydrophthalmos.
Fig.8.13 Primary glaucoma (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
4years old) Secondary lens dislocation-note the
direction of the dislocation in thiscase.
Open angle glaucoma (chronic)
Norwegian Elkhound.
Thebreed and age areimportant factors in diagnosis.
Secondary glaucoma - causes
Fig.8.12 Hydrophthalmos and exposure keratitis
Primary lens luxation
(DSH cat).
Uveitis
 Intraocular haemorrhage
Intumescent cataract
Primary hereditary glaucoma in the
Neoplasia
UK-breeds affected
Pigmentary glaucoma or ocular melanosis in the
Cairn Terrier (Fig 8.14).
Closed angle or goniodysgenesis (acute)
Spaniels (English Cocker,American Cocker,
Gonioscopy
English Springer,Welsh Springer)
Examination of the angle of filtration using a
Retrievers(Labrador,Golden,Flat-Coated)
Basset Hound
goniolens and topical anaesthesia,and ofparticular
value in distinguishing primary glaucoma in the
Siberian Husky
dog, as in cases of primary glaucoma the second,
Great Dane
probably normotensive, eye will reveal evidence of
Samoyed
goniodysgenesis (abnormal or closed angle) (Figs
DandieDinmontTerrier
8.15-8.21).
Others,particularly in other countries.
94
Glaucomaand Aqueous
Aqueous
Hypopyon (white cells in the anterior chamber)
(Fig 8.22).
Hyphaema (red cells in the anterior chamber)
(Fig 8.23).
Fig.8.16 Goniophotograph(Crossbred,3years old)
Fig.8.14 Pigmentary glaucoma (Cairn Terrier).
Open angle.
Fig.8.15 Goniophotograph （lrishSetter,1 year old)
Fig.8.17 Goniophotograph (Welsh Springer Spaniel
Openangle.
2years old) Open angle.
Aqueous
95
Fig.8.18 Goniophotograph （DSH cat,6 years old)
Fig.8.20 Goniophotograph (Welsh Springer Spaniel.
Openangle.
2years old) Closed angle.
Fig.8.19 Goniophotograph(Welsh Springer Spaniel
Fig.8.21 Goniophotograph (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
4years old) Closed angle.
4years old) Closed angle.
96
Glaucoma and Aqueous
Fig.8.22 Hypopyon.
Fig.8.23 Hyphaema.
Chapter
Lens
Introduction
is,in part,due to the considerable number of
There are two main conditions that affect the lens:
primary (hereditary) cataracts which occur in many
cataract and luxation. Congenital anomalies
breeds of dogbutwhich,apartfrom cataractin the
（coloboma,microphakia),except forcataractwhich
Morgan horse, are not, to date, proven to be
is usually associatedwith another abnormality e.g.
inherited in theother species.Primarylensluxation
microphthalmos,are rare in all species.
is also inherited in several breeds of dogbutnot in
Cataract is simply defined as an opacity of the
theother species where it is secondary to some
lens and/or its capsule and with suitable equip-
other eye condition,in particular uveitis and
ment (ophthalmoscope, slit lamp biomicroscope)
glaucoma.
should not present any problem in diagnosis.
Cataract may be partial or complete;unilateral
However,senilenuclear sclerosis,a normal ageing
orbilateral; the two eyes similar in degree or not;
change in all animals,and not a true cataract as it
progressive or stationary or temporary or under-
is not an opacity,is often confused with cataract
goingresorption. There are a number of known
causes of cataract (heredity, trauma,other ocular
disease,metabolic) but a significant number, to
the lens in direct light (Figs 9.80-9.81). Distant
date, are of unknown aetiology. Other classifications
direct ophthalmoscopy should immediately
may rely on the age at onset (congenital,juvenile,
distinguish it from cataract.
senile) and the stage of development (incipient,
Cataract and lens luxation are common in the
immature,mature,intumescent,hypermature,
dogbutrelativelyrarein the cat andthehorse.This
Morgagnian).
97
98
Lens
Primary hereditary non-congenital
specific (see Table 9.1) and this, together with the age
ofonset,areimportantfactorsfor accuratediagnosis
cataracts (Figs9.1-9.31)
and therefore prognosis.As the title suggests,these
These are cataracts that are notpresent at birth but
cataracts are not associated with any other eye
develop later in life with a variable age onset
disease and areinheritedwithan importantbreed
according to breed. Their appearance is breed-
incidence.The cataracts are usually, but not
Fig.9.1 Posterior polar cataract (Golden Retriever,
Fig.9.3 Posterior polar cataract(Golden Retriever
1year old)Subcapsular,dense focal opacity.
4years old) Subcapsular faint inverted-Y opacity.
Fig.9.2 Posterior polar cataract (Golden Retriever,
4yearsold)Similarcataract to previous figure,butwith
few fine extensions.
Fig.9.4 Posterior polar cataract (Golden Retriever,
18months old) Subcapsular,dense triangle with
extensions along the suture lines.
Primary hereditary non-congenital cataracts
99
Fig.9.7 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever,
3years old)Subcapsular,dense focal opacity.
Fig.9.5 Posterior polar and cortical cataract(Golden
Retriever,4years old) Cortical and progressive opacities
and dense posteriorpolar cataract.
Fig.9.8 Posterior polar cataract(LabradorRetriever,
4years old) Typical example of subcapsular opacity.
Fig.9.6 Total cataract (Golden Retriever,2years old).
100
Lens
Fig.9.9 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.9.11 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever,
3years old) Subcapsular opacity.
9years old) Large cataract with extensions.This dog
retained good vision.
Fig.9.10 Posterior polar cataract (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.9.12 Total cataract (Labrador Retriever,4 years
6years old) Dam of the dog shown in theprevious
old) Note the density of the inverted-Yposterior suture
figure.
lines.Tapetal reflexstillvisible and dog retains
reasonable vision.
Primary hereditary non-congenital cataracts
101
Fig.9.13 Early cataract （Boston Terrier,8weeks old)
Fig.9.15 Total cataract (Boston Terrier,3years old)
Central opacity,bilaterally symmetrical cataract.
Mature cataract.
Fig.9.14 Early cataract (Boston Terrier,4 months old)
Fig.9.16 Cataract (Boston Terrier, 6years old) Late-
Progression of central opacity.
onset type cataract.
102
Lens
Fig.9.17 Cataract (Staffordshire Bull Terrier,2years
Fig.9.19 Central cataract (Leonberger,2years old)
old) Progressivebilaterally symmetrical cataract,similar
Some variation of the opacity occurs in thisbreed but is
inappearance to the first type in the Boston Terrier
usually central and bilateral.
(Figs 9.13-9.15).Note also the cataract associated with
persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous (PHPV) in this
breed (Figs10.4-10.5).
Fig.9.18 Total cataract (Afghan Hound,2years old)
Fig.9.20 Posterior polar cataract (Norwegian Buhund,
Bilaterally symmetrical cataracts.
10months old) With extensions.
Primary hereditary non-congenital cataracts
103
Fig.9.21 Posterior polar cataract(Norwegian Buhund,
Fig.9.23 Two foci of cataract (American Cocker
6months old) Large posterior polar opacity.
Spaniel,3years old) Cataract in this breed ismarkedly
pleomorphicand often asymmetrical butusually
bilateral.
Fig.9.22 Cortical cataract (Norwegian Buhund,
Fig.9.24 Total cataract(American Cocker Spaniel,
21months old) Progressive,peripheral,cortical cataract
5years old) Lensresorption withfolding of thelens
plusposterior polar opacity.
capsulevisible from 10o'clock.
104
Lens
Fig.9.25 Partial cataract (American Cocker Spaniel,
3years old) Note the normal iris colour.
Fig.9.27 Cataract(German Shepherd Dog,4months
old)Bilateral andprogressive.
Fig.9.26 Total cataract with associated uveitis
Fig.9.28 Cataract (German Shepherd Dog.9 months
(American Cocker Spaniel,4 years old) Note the iris
old) Bilateral;the two eyes are not always identical.
colourin comparison to thepreviousfigure and the
presence of multiplepupillary cysts.
Primaryhereditary non-congenital cataracts
105
Fig.9.29 Cataract(WelshSpringer Spaniel,8weeks
Fig.9.31 Cataract Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
old) Bilateral,symmetrical and progressive.
18months old) Bilateral,total and progressive.This
cataract is not congenital.See also Figs9.35-9.38.
Table 9.1-Primary hereditary cataracts
Congenital (with mild microphthalmos)
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel
Schnauzer,Miniature
Non-congenital （usually bilateral,equal and progressive)
Belgian Shepherd Dog
Boston Terrier (two forms)
国
Cavalier King CharlesSpaniel (two forms- see also
congenital)
German Shepherd Dog
Leonberger
Munsterlander,Large
Norwegian Buhund
Poodle,Standard
Retriever,Chesapeake Bay
Retriever,Golden
国
Retriever,Labrador
Setter,lrish Red and White
Siberian Husky
Spaniel,American Cocker
Fig.9.30 Cataract(Standard Poodle,12 months old)
Spaniel,Welsh Springer
Staffordshire Bull Terrier
Bilateral and progressive.The two eyes are similar.
106
Lens
invariably,bilaterally symmetrical and are
Congenital cataracts and associated
commonly progressiveproducing defective vision
anomalies（Figs9.32-9.49)
and often blindness, the exception being posterior
These cataracts arepresent at birth and are almost,if
polar cataractin the retriever breedswhich often
only progresses to a certain point and does not
not always,associated with some other ocular
interfere with vision.
anomaly,in particular microphthalmos,which may
Fig.9.32 Nuclear cataract (Miniature Schnauzer,
Fig.9.34 Nuclear cataract (Miniature Schnauzer,
6months old) Bilateral andassociatedmicrophthalmos.
14 months old) Cataract plus cortical wedge.
Fig.9.33 Nuclear cataract (Miniature Schnauzer,
Fig.9.35 Nuclear cataract (Miniature Schnauzer,
6months old) Note extension at 9 o'clock.
6months old) This type is usually non-progressive.Note
the wide clear peripheral lens.
Congenital cataracts and associated anomalies
107
Fig.9.36 Nuclear cataract (Cavalier King Charles
Fig.9.38 Cataract and posterior lenticonus(Cavalier
Spaniel,6months old) Microphthalmos and notealso
King Charles Spaniel, 7 weeks old) Post mortem
the anterior capsular involvement.
specimen showing mild posterior lenticonus.The same
eye as shown in the previous figure.
Fig.9.37 Cataract and posterior lenticonus(Cavalier
Fig.9.39 Cataract and posterior lentiglobusCavalier
King Charles Spaniel,7 weeksold)
King Charles Spaniel,7 weeksold) The other eye of the
same dog as shown in the previous figures.
108
Lens
Fig.9.40 Cataract and microphthalmos(Cocker
Fig.9.42 Cataract and microphthalmos (Cocker
Spaniel,14 weeksold) Bilateral andnote the
Spaniel,10 weeks old) Dense white anterior capsular,
prominence of the nictitating membrane,together with
sometimespyramidal,cataract.
irishypoplasia.
Fig.9.41 Cataract andmicrophthalmos (Cocker
Fig.9.43 Cataract and microphthalmos(English
Spaniel,14weeks old) Littermate to the animal shown
Springer Spaniel,13 weeks old) Microphthalmos,
in Fig.9.40 following mydriasis to demonstrate the
congenital cataract and persistent pupillary membranes.
extentof thecataract.
Congenital cataracts and associated anomalies
109
Fig.9.46 Cataract and microphthalmos(Old English
Sheepdog,6 months old) Microphthalmos,congenital
cataract and persistent pupillarymembranes.
Fig.9.44 Cataract and microphthalmos(West
Highland White Terrier,11 weeks old) Microphthalmos,
congenital cataract and persistentpupillary membranes.
Fig.9.45 Cataract and microphthalmos(Old English
Fig.9.47 Cataract and microphthalmos (Crossbred,
Sheepdog.9 months old) Note the marked miosis and
11months old) Microphthalmos,congenital cataract,
few small uveal cysts around the pupil,but no current
persistent pupillary membranes,lens coloboma and poor
evidenceofuveitis.
limbal differentiation.Multiocular defects(MoD),as with
allthe above examples of congenital cataract.
110
Lens
Fig.9.49 Nuclear cataract (Friesian calf) Bilateral and
congenital,of unknown aetiology.Non-progresive and
often affects several calves inaherd.
Fig.9.48 Nuclear cataract(Arab foal) Congenital
central cataract in the Arabian horse ismore common
than in the Thoroughbred and is usually bilateral.In this
animal the cataract is central but it may take other
forms.No direct evidence of inheritance.
Cataracts secondary to another eye
well be theprimarycondition.They are sometimes
disease or condition （Figs9.50-9.59)
included as multiocular defects but cataract is
common to all. Some of these congenital cataracts
This is a varied group, the commonest being
cataracts associated with uveitis,the cataract being
Schnauzer,others are suspected of being inherited as
either theresult or the cause of theuveitis (see also
they show a strongbreed predisposition (Cavalier
Figs 7.23 and 7.26). Included in this group are
cataracts in which the lens is undergoingresorption
whereasotherswouldseem tobeisolatedexamples
(Figs 9.73-9.76), a phenomenon that occurs
ofa congenital non-inherited anomaly,sometimes
particularly in young animals and which may
Occurring in crossbreds. Congenital cataracts may be
present as a uveitis which always accompanies the
bilateral and symmetrical or not; are usually non-
lens resorption.Cataracts secondary touveitis are
progressive; and have a limited effect on vision,
the commonest in the cat and horse.Traumatic
puppiesnot normally presenting with blindness
cataractsare also invariably associatedwithuveitis
Cataracts associated with other congenital lens
(Figs 9.71 and 9.77-9.79)and may be due to
anomalies,e.g.persistent hyaloid artery (Fig 9.59),
penetrating corneal injuries and rupture of the
coloboma (Fig 9.58) and lenticonus (Fig 9.57), are
anterior lens capsule; they often result from cat
further examples.
scratches and occur frequently in cats and puppies.
 Other congenital cataracts that may be included in
Cataract may also develop from blunt injury.
this category are capsular cataracts associated with
Traumatic cataracts are almost always unilateral and
persistent pupillary membranes (Figs 7.62,7.65 and
the uveitis may become quite severe following
7.67) and persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
damage to the lenscapsule and subsequent escape of
(Figs 10.4-10.5 and 10.7-10.8).
lens material.
Cataracts secondary to another eye disease or condition
111
Fig.9.50 Cataract secondary to retinal disease-
Fig.9.52 Cataract secondary to retinal disease-
generalized progressive retinal atrophy Miniature
generalized progressive retinal atrophy (Miniature
Poodle,7years old) Typical appearance of anteriorand
Poodle,5years old) Total cataract but note the tapetal
posterior cortical and progressive cataract.
glow visible through thelens.
Fig.9.51Cataract secondary toretinal disease-
Fig.9.53 Cataract secondary to retinal disease-
generalized progressive retinal atrophy (Tibetan Terrier,
generalized progressive retinal atrophy (Miniature
5years old) Typical wedges of cortical vacuoles.
Poodle,5years old) Total dense and mature cataract.
112
Lens
Fig.9.54 Cataractsecondary to retinal disease-
Fig.9.56 Cataract secondary to glaucoma[Border
central progressive retinal atrophy or pigment
Collie,5years old) Note the congested bloodvessels
epithelial dystrophy(LabradorRetriever,10yearsold)
and dilated pupil.
Anoccasional finding.
Fig.9.55 Cataract secondary toretinaldisease-
Fig.9.57 Cataract and posterior lenticonus (Labrador
multifocal retinal dysplasia (English Springer Spaniel,
Retriever,18 months old)Aunilateral case.
8months old) Again an occasional finding.
Lensluxation
173
Fig.9.58 Cataract and colobomaOld English
Fig.9.59 Cataract and persistent hyaloid artery
Sheepdog,3 months old) This case had multiple
(Border Collie,young adult) Another unilateral case.
congenital ocularabnormalities.
See alsoFigs 10.1-10.3
Secondary cataracts also occur with a number of
much slower in onset.Diabetic cataract in the cat
retinal diseases(Figs 9.50-9.55)including the
does occur but is much less common.
progressive retinal atrophies, retinal dysplasia and
There are a few reports ofnutritional cataract
retinal detachment. Glaucoma is another eye disease
(Figs 9.63-9.64)and severalreportsof toxic cataracts
in which cataract may occur(Fig9.56)and cataract
due to a variety of substances (Figs 9.65-9.67).
alsoaccompanies such congenital lens abnormalities
as lenticonus,coloboma and persistent hyaloid
Other types of cataract
artery (Figs 9.57-9.59).
(Figs 9.68-9.72)
Metabolic, toxic and nutritional
Cataract may be classified according to theposition
cataracts (Figs 9.60-9.67)
examples.
These cataracts are also secondary but to a systemic
disease or condition.Diabetic cataract in the dog is
False cataracts (Figs 9.80-9.86)
relatively common andmaybe the presenting sign of
The final group of lens opacities arenot true cataracts
the diabetes (Figs 9.60-9.62).It is always bilateral
but are often confused with cataract or are only
andusually symmetrical and oftensuddeninonset,
although there is also a pre-senile type which is
temporary opacities.
114
Lens
Fig.9.62 Diabetic cataract(Pembroke Corgi,9years
Fig.9.60 Diabetic cataract （Crossbred,12 years old)
old) Pre-senile type- slower in onset than the previous
Note thewater clefts.
diabeticcataracts.
Fig.9.61 Diabetic cataract (Labrador Retriever,6years
old)Again,note the obvious water clefts.
Fig.9.63 Nutritional cataract (Foxhound puppy)
Probably due to a deficiency of the vitamin B complex.
Several puppies in the packwere affected.Congenital.
Lensluxation
115
Fig.9.66 Toxic cataract (Beagle) Total bilateral
cataract.
Fig.9.64 Nutritional cataract (Tiger cub) Bilateral
cataract in a hand-reared animal.Cataracts of this type
have been examined in several,always hand-reared,big
cats.
Fig.9.65 Toxic cataract[Beagle)Partial cataract
Fig.9.67 Toxiccataract(Beagle) Unusual appearance
affecting theposterior cortex and the ends of the suture
of thelensnucleusdue to dimethyl sulphoxidetoxicity.
lines.Cataracts ofvarious forms are a common finding in
toxicitytrials and can be caused by many compounds.
116
Lens
Fig.9.68 Anterior polar cataract (Lurcher,6years old)
Bilateral in this case.
Fig.9.69 Lamellar cataract(English Springer Spaniel
6years old)Feather-like opacity around part of the
edge of the nucleus.
Fig.9.70 Subcapsular cataract(Border Collie,
Fig.9.71 Partial cataract (Hunter-type,7years old)
18months old)Multiple focal dots,particularly
Traumaticcataractandnote the corneal scarat5o'clock
involving the suture lines;bilateral.
near the limbus.
Lensluxation
117
Fig.9.72 Total cataract(Thoroughbred,5years old)
Fig.9.74 Cataract resorption (Lakeland Terrier)Green
Mature cataractofunknown aetiology(pupil dilated).
tapetal reflexnow visible.Note uveitis and posterior
synechia at9o'clock.
Fig.9.73 Cataract resorption (English Springer
Spaniel,18months old)Note the metallic appearance
of the lens and the pupillary cysts.
Fig.9.75 Cataractresorption (American Cocker
Spaniel,18months old) Note the slit beam on the
anterior lenscapsuleshowing it tobeflat and uneven
with a deep anteriorchamber.
118
Lens
Fig.9.76 Cataract resorption (Great Dane,4 years old)
Fig.9.78 Traumatic cataract Jack Russell Terrier,
Note thewrinkled anterior capsule and visible green
4months old) Note corneal puncture wound at
tapetal reflex.This eye was visual,although it had been
6o'clockwith bloodvesselsfromthelimbus and lens
blind prior to the cataract resorption.
material in the anterior chamber.The result ofa cat
scratch.
Fig.9.79 Traumatic cataract (DSH cat,9years old)
Corneal wound and cataractous lens materialin the
anterior chamberwhichwillpromoteasometimessevere
uveitis.
Fig.9.77 Traumatic cataract Jack Russell Terrier,
2years old) Note also the uveitis and irregular pupil.
Lensluxation
119
Fig.9.80 Senile nuclear sclerosis (Beagle,13 years
old)Lens appears opalescent in direct light but there is
noopacity on distant direct ophthalmoscopy.Anormal
age change.
Fig.9.82 Pigment on anterior lens capsule(Cocker
Spaniel,5years old) Particularly common in this breed.
Itappearsasa lensopacitywith distantdirect
ophthalmoscopybutisactuallyaremnant of the
pupillarymembrane.
Fig.9.81 Senile nuclear sclerosis(Labrador Retriever,
14years old) The appearance with a slit beam.
Fig.9.83 Temporary opacity(Miniature Longhaired
Dachshund,13 weeks old) Opacities(cataracts)at the
ends of the anterior suture lines.
120
Lens
Fig.9.85 Temporary opacity(Cardigan Corgi puppy)
Fig.9.84 Temporary opacity (Beagle,6 months old)
Similarto the previous twofigures.
Small focal cataractson both anterior and posterior
suture lines.
Lens luxation (Figs 9.87-9.112,
Table 9.2)
Lens luxation,or dislocation,occurs in the dog,cat
and horse butprimary or hereditary lens luxation
has only been reported in the dog and it is therefore
much more common in this species.Table9.2 lists the
breedsinwhichhereditarylensluxationisknown to
occur in the UK. Although a simple recessive
inheritance has been shown in the TibetanTerrier,it
is also seen,not uncommonly,in crossbred terriers.
Table 9.2-Primary lens luxation-breeds
Border Collie
BullTerrier (Miniature)
FoxTerrier (Smooth)
FoxTerrier (Wire)
Lancashire Heeler
Parson JackRussellTerrier
Fig.9.86 Temporary opacity (Miniature Longhaired
Sealyham Terrier
Dachshund,4months old)Extensive opacities affecting
Tibetan Terrier
the suture linesandviewed against the tapetal reflex.
WebsterTerrier
There was no sign of these opacities a fewweeks later.
Lensluxation
121
The clinical signs of lens luxation areillustrated in
opacity is permanent even when thelens haspassed
Figures9.87-9.112,with the exception of iridodonesis,
into the posterior segment of the eye.The clinical
a trembling of theiriswith eyemovement due to the
signs associated with the secondary glaucoma
change of position.The clinical signs can be divided
congestion,hydrophthalmos and eventual phthisis
into two groups: those which are associated with the(see also Chapter 8).
luxation of the lens (change in position of the lens),
Secondary lens luxation also occurs in the dog and
in themselves of little consequence, and those which the cat and horse.The causes are trauma, uveitis,
are associated with the secondary glaucoma
glaucoma and cataract. Dislocated lenses of some
following the lensluxation and which are the causes
standing also become cataractous and cataractous
of pain,often considerable, and,if uncontrolled,
lenses are more likely to dislocate than non-
eventual swelling of the globe and irreparable
cataractous lenses. The distinction between primary
to
glaucoma and lens luxation (secondary) and the
iridodonesis, include: the appearance of vitreal
secondary glaucoma due to hereditary (primary)
lens luxation can be difficult,particularly when it
margin; the aphakic crescent appearing in the pupil
occurs in breeds in which primary lens luxation
between its margin and the edge of subluxated lens;
occurs,e.g.terriers,
the totally luxated lens,either in the anterior
Primary lens luxation is essentially a bilateral
chamberof the eyebetween theiris and thecornea,
condition, although the lens luxation usually
or theposteriorly luxatedlensin thevitreous;finally
presents as a uniocular condition,the second eye
a classical subcentral corneal opacitywhere thelens
becominginvolvedsome time(days tomonths) later.
has been, or still is, in contact with the posterior
The age incidence of primary lens luxation is usually
cornea resulting in an area of corneal oedema-this
3-6years.
Fig.9.88 Vitreous in the pupil (Jack Russell Terrier.
5years old) Note the swirling vitreous in front of the
lens from the edge of the pupil.
Fig.9.87 Vitreous in the pupil Jack Russell Terrier,
4yearsold) Note the appearance ofvitreous on the
right side of the pupil.lridodenesiswas alsopresent
122
Lens
Fig.9.89 Early luxation （Tibetan Terrier,3years old)
Fig.9.91 Anterior luxation (Border Collie) Lens
Fine aphakic crescent superiorly and early breakdown of
dislocating through a dilated pupil.Again,note the
some of the zonular fibres.Pupil dilated with mydriatic.
swirling vitreous superiorly.
Fig.9.90 Anterior luxation (Crossbred terrier,5years
Fig.9.92 Anterior luxation(Sealyham,4years old)
old)Note the light on the edge of the lens asit passes
Lens completely through the pupil.Note the corneal
throughthepupil.
opacityjust below the centre of the cornea due to
pressure of the lens on the corneal endothelium and
subsequent area of corneal oedema.
Lensluxation
123
Fig.9.93 Anterior luxation(Wirehaired Fox Terrier,
Fig.9.95 Anterior luxation Jack Russell Terrier,
4years old)Note the distortion of the pupil due to the
4years old) Anteriorly dislocated lens becoming
position of thelens and the edge of thepupil visible
cataractous.Note the adhesion from the pupil edge to
through thelens.
the lens capsuleat2o'clock.
Fig.9.96 Subcentral corneal opacity (Tibetan Terrier.
3years old) Area of corneal oedema remaining where
thelens hasbeen in contact with the cornea.
Fig.9.94 Anteriorluxation JackRussell Terrier,
4years old) Pupil block and secondary glaucoma with
cornealvascularization.
124
Lens
Fig.9.97 Subcentral corneal opacity(Smooth-haired
Fox Terrier,4years old) Extensive area of corneal
oedema remains,although the lens isnow dislocated
posteriorly.
Fig.9.99 Aphakic crescent Jack Russell Terrier,
5years old) Note theruptured zonular fibresvisible on
the lens periphery.
Fig.9.98 Aphakic crescent Jack Russell Terrier,
Fig.9.100 Aphakic crescent (Shetland Sheepdog,
4years old) Tapetal reflexvisible over the upperborder
17 monthsold)Partial dislocation with stretching of the
of the lens.
zonularfibres.
Lensluxation
125
Fig.9.103 Secondary glaucoma (WelshTerrier,4years
Fig.9.101 Posterior dislocation (Sealyham Terrier,
old)Hydrophthalmoswithscleral ectasia in the ciliary
6years old) Aphakic dilated pupil with lens in the
region.
vitreous.
Fig.9.104 Secondary glaucoma (Sealyham Terrier,
Fig.9.102 Secondary glaucoma(Sealyham Terrier,
7years old) Phthisis bulbi following hydrophthalmos,
5years old) Note early conjunctival congestion and
the primary condition being lens luxation.
'steamy'cornea.
126
Lens
Fig.9.107 Lens luxation Jack Russell Terrier,5years
old) Primary lens luxation with secondary cataract
formation.
Fig.9.105 Extruded lens(Sealyham Terrier,5years
old) Lens dislocated anteriorly and forced out through
the cornea.An unusual case.
Fig.9.106 Luxated cataract (Cavalier King Charles
Fig.9.108 Lens luxation secondary to primary
Spaniel,6years old) The primary condition in thiscase
glaucoma Note thedilated pupil and conjunctival
is cataract,with luxation followed by glaucoma.
congestion.
Lensluxation
127
Fig.9.109 Anterior luxation (Persian cat) Early
cataractouschanges
Fig.9.111 Dislocated cataract (DSH cat,10 years old)
Fig.9.110 Anterior luxation （DSH cat,5years old)
Fig.9.112 Dislocated cataract (DSH cat,10 years old)
Note the evidence of a uveitis;probably theprimary
Mature cataract dislocated anteriorly.
condition.
10
Chapter
Vitreous
Congenital (Figs 10.1-10.8)
Introduction
Persistent hyaloid artery (PHA)(Figs 10.1-10.2)
Vitreal anomalies and conditions do not figure
protrudesinto the anteriorvitreousfrom a localized
highly in veterinary ophthalmology;few have an
non-progressiveposteriorcapsular opacity.No effect
effect on vision,unless particularly severe,and
on vision.
none are painful. Vitreal haemorrhage, particu-
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous and
larly in thecat,usually indicates hypertension and
persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa lentis
is probably the most important clinical sign.
(PHPV/PHTVL)(Figs 10.3-10.8) are hereditary and
Conditions of the vitreous can be conveniently
congenital conditions in the Staffordshire Bull Terrier
classified into congenital and acquired.
and Dobermann with odd cases in other breeds,
bilateralinthetwobreedsnamedbutwithvariable
clinical signs vary from pigment spots to a fibro-
vascular plaque on the posterior capsule,together
Fig.10.1 PHA (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,7weeks
Fig.10.2 PHA(Shetland Sheepdog,8weeks old)
Extensive hyaloid artery and haemorrhage.This puppy
old)Note the suture lines in relation to the position of
the hyaloid artery,i.e.not at the confluence of the
also had an optic disc coloboma (CEA).
suture lines.
129
130
Vitreous
Fig.10.3 PHPV/PHTVL(Staffordshire Bull Terrier.
Fig.10.5 PHPV/PHTVL(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
5months old) Posterior plaque and PHA.Bilateral and
6 months old) Posterior lenticonus and intralenticular
hereditary in this breed.
haemorrhage.
Fig.10.4 PHPV/PHTVL(Staffordshire Bull Terrier,
Fig.10.6PHPV/PHTVL （Dobermann,4yearsold)
5months old) Posterior plaque,secondary cataract and
Pigment foci on the posterior lens capsule.The condition
capsulopupillaryvessel.
is also hereditary in thisbreed.
Acquired
131
Fig.10.7 PHPV/PHTVL(German Shepherd Dog
Fig.10.9 Syneresis(Labrador Retriever,2years old)
6months old) Leucocoria-a differential diagnosisto
Inflammation of theanteriorvitreousofunknown
aetiology.
cataract.
with congenital anomalies of thelense.g.coloboma
and lenticonus,cataract and intralenticular haemor-
rhage and PHA.In the Dobermann progressive
cataract and blindness havebeenreported
Acquired (Figs 10.9-10.11)
Syneresis or liquefaction is shown in Fig 10.9.
Asteroid hyalosis (Fig 10.10) - small refractile
particles suspended throughout the vitreous. No
effectonvision.
Synchysis scintillans (Fig 10.11)-fine particles in
a liquefiedvitreouswhichsettleventrallyin the eye
at rest but become temporarily dispersed with eye
movement.Often found in conjunction with retinal
diseases.
Haemorrhage（Figs10.12-10.15)
Fig.10.8 PHPV（Cocker Spaniel,6 months old）
Causes: trauma; clotting abnormalities;hypertension
Unilateral case showing large persistenthyaloid artery.
- particularly important in the cat.Variable effect on
posterior plaqueandvascularrete.
vision depending on the severity;usually uniocular.
Foreign bodies (Figs 10.16-10.17)
Occasionally;uveal cysts and parasites have both
been recorded.
132
Vitreous
Fig.10.10 Asteroid hyalosis (Crossbred,6years old)
Fig.10.12Vitreal haemorrhage (Chihuahua,4years
Particles in the vitreous which are stationary,unlike the
old) Haemorrhage in the anterior vitreous due to
case in synchysis scintillans（Fig 10.11).
polycythaemia.
Fig.10.11 Synchysis scintillans (Golden Retriever.
Fig.10.13 Vitreal haemorrhage(English Springer
11years old) Extensive retinopathy also present with
Spaniel,3years old) Haemorrhage in the posterior
liquefiedvitreous.
vitreous following trauma (shot in the eye).
Acquired
133
Fig.10.14 Vitreal haemorrhage(cat) Diffuse
Fig.10.16 Cyst in vitreous Golden Retriever,9 years
haemorrhageina catwith hypertension.
old) Uveal cyst in front of the retina.
Fig.10.15 Vitreal haemorrhage(cat) Haemorrhage in
Fig.10.17 Cyst in vitreous (Flat-Coated Retriever,
the posteriorvitreous in front of theretinal vessels,
2years old) Oval non-pigmented cyst of unknown
origin.An incidental finding.
togetherwithsomesmallretinal haemorrhages.Another
cat with hypertension.
Chapter
Fundus
The normal canine fundus
Introduction
Thetapetal fundus（Figs 11.1-11.11)
The ocularfundus is theophthalmoscopicview of
The extent of the tapetal fundusin the dog is shown
the posterior segment of the globe.The fundus
comprises the tapetum, tapetum lucidum or
in Fig 11.1. It is best developed in dogs that hunt by
sight - the so-called'sight hounds' or'gaze hounds'.
tapetal fundus;the tapetum nigrum or non-
tapetal fundus; the optic disc, papilla or optic
In thetoybreeds,the tapetum maybeonlypartially
nerve head (Chapter 12);and the retinal blood
developed,extendingto about halfof thatshown in
vessels.Dependingupon the presence or absence
Fig11.1 and it is always the lateral half that is present
of pigment in the retinal pigment epithelium and
and themedial half absent.The tapetum may also be
the choroid, parts of the choroid and
completely absent, particularly,but not always,in
its
circulation,and the sclera,can be seen.
dogs with degrees of subalbinism and a merle coat
The ocular fundus differs considerably
colour.
between species and there is also considerable
The commonest colour of the tapetum lucidum is
variation in the appearance within each species,
yellow with a green and outer blue border (Fig 11.2),
particularly in the dog.This normal variation
but mainly yellow,green and blue colours do occur
(Figs 11.3-11.5). Sparsely scattered tapetal colours
must be known andunderstood beforea
over a pale fawn background occur in dogs of a
diagnosis of abnormality can be made. In certain
cases this variation can lead to difficulty
number ofbreeds,and in particular lines or families
in
diagnosis and in distinguishing between the
within a breed (Figs 11.6-11.7).
normal and abnormal fundus,and even to
Itshouldbeknownthatthetapetumispartofthe
misdiagnosis.
choroid and underlies the retina when viewed
Certain features and colours of the fundus are
related to both coat and iris colours,and even to
as,in this area,theretinal pigment pithelium lacks
coat length. In the dog and cat the development of
pigment and the appearance of the tapetum is
through the retina.It follows,therefore, that if the
the adult appearance of the fundus takes up to
12-14 weeks,but in the case of the horse,cow and
retina is missing (detachment) or thinned (atrophy or
sheep the adult appearance is present from birth,
degeneration), the reflection from the tapetal area is
enhanced and the situation is described as hyper-
the foal, calf and lamb being born with the eyes
reflectivity'.Hyper-reflectivity is a cardinal sign of
open.
retinal degeneration,ofwhatevercause.
Islands of pigment (non-tapetal fundus) may
sometimes occur within the tapetal fundus region
(Figs 11.5 and 11.10-11.11) and islets, or spots, of
tapetal colours may be found in the non-tapetal
region (Fig 11.10).
Changes in pigmentation and the presence of
abnormal pigment,in both tapetal and non-tapetal
areas, are further common signs of retinal degen-
erations,of both inherited and post-inflammatory
causes.
135
136
Fundus
Fig.11.1 The fundus (Greyhound,young adult)
Fig.11.3 The tapetum (Cocker Spaniel,2 years old,
Posterior segment of the canine eye showing the extent
gold)Yellow tapetal fundus.
of the tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.2 The tapetum (Greyhound.young adult,
Fig.11.4 The tapetum (Miniature Poodle,1 year old,
brindle) Mainly yellow tapetal fundus with a green and
black) Green tapetal fundus.Note the complete
blueborder.
pigmented border to the disc.
The normalcanine fundus
137
Fig.11.5 The tapetum(Boxer,3years old,red） Blue
Fig. 11.7 The tapetum(Shetland Sheepdog.1 year old,
tapetalfundus.
merle)Sparsely scattered tapetal colours.
Fig.11.6 The tapetum (Labrador Retriever,1 year old,
Fig.11.8 The tapetum(Shetland Sheepdog.5years
yellow)Sparselyscatteredcoloursoverapalefawn
old,merle with brown iris) Pale fawn fundus.
background.
138
Fundus
Fig.11.9 The tapetum(Shetland Sheepdog.2years
Fig.11.11 The tapetum (Golden Retriever,6years old)
old,merle)Similartothepreviousfigure,butwith
Demarcated island of non-tapetum within the tapetal
poorly developed tapetum.
fundus area.Note the normal course of the retinal blood
vessel.An unusual finding.
sudden change between the two areas (Fig 11.13).
Remarkably, the former usually occurs in long-
coated dogs and thelatterin short-coated dogs,even
in varieties of the same breed,e.g. the Border Collie
or Dachshund, and in comparison between the
Golden Retriever (long-coated)and Labrador
Retriever(short-coated).
Thenon-tapetalfundus（Figs11.14-11.19)
The usual appearance is of a dark grey/brown
homogeneous area (Fig 11.14), but the upper part of
the non-tapetal fundus may be paler and more
brown than the rest (Fig 11.15).
The non-tapetal fundus in dogs of a brown coat
Fig.11.10 The tapetum (Border Collie,1 year old,
colour (or chocolate or liver) is less heavily
tricolour) Break-up of tapetal fundus by patches of
pigmented and appears paler (Fig 11.16), sometimes
non-tapetal fundus.
with thetigroid choroidal vascular patternvisible
(Fig 11.17).
An unusual red fundus, known as ‘ruby eye
(Fig 11.18),and no tapetal development also occurs,
The tapetal junction（Figs 11.12-11.13)
as does the complete absence of any tapetal
The tapetal junction may appear as a gradual merging
development (Fig 11.19),in dogs and not associated
of tapetal into non-tapetal fundus (Fig 1l.12) or as a
with any degree of subalbinism.
The normal canine fundus
139
Fig.11.12 The tapetal junction (Golden Retriever,
Fig.11.14 The tapetum nigrum (Greyhound,4years
4 years old) Gradual merging of tapetal into non-tapetal
old,fawn)The usual appearance with a darkgrey-brown
fundus.
homogeneousregion.
Fig.11.13 The tapetal junction (Pembroke Corgi.
Fig.11.15 The tapetum nigrum (Labrador Retriever,
10months old,red) Sudden demarcation between the
4yearsold,yellow)The upper non-tapetal fundus may
tapetal and non-tapetal fundus.This picture is usually
be more brown and paler than below.
seen in short-coated dogs,whereas the previous figure
occurs in the long-coated varieties.
140
Fundus
Fig.11.16 The tapetum nigrum (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.11.18 Red fundus (Beagle,9 months old,tricolour
1year old,chocolate)The non-tapetal fundus in dogs
with pale lemon iris) Known as‘ruby eye'due to the red
ofa brown,chocolate or livercoat colour is lessheavily
ocular reflex.Rare.
pigmented than dogs of other coat colours and appears
paler,as does the iris.
Fig.11.17 The tapetum nigrum (Pointer.3years old,
Fig.11.19 Absence of tapetum (Boston Terrier,8years
liver)Moremarkedvariation than the previousfigure
old,brindle)Absence of any tapetal development in a
(Fig 11.6),with the choroidal vascular pattern producing
non-merle dog.Unusual.
a tigroid non-tapetal region.
Thenormal canine fundus
141
doesnot correspond to the amount of heterochromia
The subalbinotic fundus (Figs 11.20-11.25)
of the iris and often the two eyes are dissimilar.
Complete,orsegmentsof,subalbinismof thefundus
These subalbinotic areas may be confusing in the
commonlyoccurinmerle-coated dogswithpale blue
diagnosis of the chorioretinal dysplasia in cases of
or heterochromic irides. The degree of subalbinism
Fig.11.20 Subalbinotic fundus Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.22 Subalbinotic fundus(Shetland Sheepdog,
3years old,merle with pale blue iris) Absence of
1year old,merle) Note the absence of a tapetum and
tapetum andmuch of thechoroidal pigment showing
the segment of subalbinism at 2o'clock.
choroidal vessels superimposed on the scleral background.
Common in dogs with this coat and iris colour.
Fig.11.23 Subalbinotic fundus (Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.21 Subalbinotic fundus (Shetland Sheepdog.
5months old,merle)Subalbinism,mainly peripapillary
2years old,merle) Similar to previous figure (Fig 11.20).
andabove the disc.
142
Fundus
Fig.11.24 Subalbinotic fundus (Rough Collie,1 year
Fig. 11.25 Subalbinotic fundus (Shetland Sheepdog
old,merle)Subalbinism below the disc.
10 months old,merle) Similar to previous figures.Note
the haphazard distribution of the areas of subalbinism in
these examples and compare with pathological
chorioretinal dysplasia in Collie eye anomaly in a
subsequent section.
Collie eye anomaly (see later section). However,
visiblein the centre of the disc(Fig 11.37).Some discs
in the normal fundus they are haphazard in their
have a pigmented ring around part or the whole of
position, whereas in Collie eye anomaly the
their border (Figs 11.38-11.39); others have a hyper-
dysplasticregion is alwayslateral to the opticdisc
reflective ring (conus), an example of normal hyper-
(again, see later section).
reflectivity (Fig 11.40). Changes in colour, usually
pallor, occur with degeneration.
The optic disc（Figs 11.26-11.40)
The retinal blood vessels （Figs 11.41-11.44)
The optic disc in the dog exhibits great variation in
its appearance.Theposition isusuallyjust inside the
The canine retina is described as holangiotic,with a
tapetal fundus when viewed ophthalmoscopically
direct andvisibleblood supply.There areusually3-5
but, depending upon the extent of the tapetal1
major veins which may form a venous circle,
fundus, the disc may appear completely inside it or
partiallyorcompletelyvisible on thesurfaceofthe
11.26-11.28).The size and shape and colour of theof the disc.Tortuosity is variable and may be quite
disc are other variables and, to some extent, are marked in certain individuals.The tortuosity of the
dependent upon the degree of myelination of the arterioles is usually greater than the veins. The area
optic nerve fibres which can extend considerable centralis (greatest cone density) is an area devoid of
distances into the rest of the fundus. It should be retinal vessels, but encircled by fine branches,
remembered that myelination occurs postnatally andsituated lateral(temporal)and slightly dorsal to the
the sizes and shapes of the optic discs in Figures optic disc (Fig 11.44).
11.26-11.40 should be compared with those in
Attenuation,or narrowing,of the retinal blood
Figures11.4511.51,which show the development ofvessels,particularly thearterioles and later the veins,
the canine fundus. The normal physiological pit in occurs secondary to retinal degeneration. It may be
the dog is a small grey spot which is sometimesthe most obvious ophthalmoscopic change but it is
The normal canine fundus
143
Fig. 11.26 The optic disc(Greyhound,young adult,
Fig.11.28 The optic discCrossbred,6yearsold,black
fawn] The usual position of the disc is just inside the
and tan) Occasionally the disc appearsinside thenon-
tapetal fundus.These disc positions simply reflect the
tapetal fundus.
extent of the tapetal fundus and not the position of the
optic nerve as it enters the eye.
Fig.11.27 Theoptic disc(Labrador Retriever
Fig.11.29 Theoptic disc(Miniature Longhaired
7monthsold,yellow)Occasionally the discappears
Dachshund,10 months old,black and tan) The disc
variesconsiderablyin size from large(above) to small
completely inside the tapetal fundus.
(seeFig 11.30).
144
Fundus
Fig.11.30 The optic disc (Beagle,10 months old,
Fig.11.32 The optic disc（Chihuahua,4years old，
tricolour) Micropapilla-normal variantwith normal vision
black and tan) Pale disc but normal retinal blood vessels.
and pupillary light reflex.Compare the above discwith
Compare with optic atrophy (Figs 12.6-12.7).
pathological optic nerve hypoplasia（Figs 12.11-12.12).
Fig. 11.31 The optic disc (German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.11.33Theoptic disc（Briard,5yearsold,black）
1year old)Variations in colour range from deep pink
Physiological pit- small grey spot in the centre of the
(above) to white(see Fig 11.32).
disc.
The normal canine fundus
145
Fig.11.34 The optic disc (Yorkshire Terrier,1year old,
Fig.11.36 The optic disc（Golden Retriever,2years
old)Shape of the disc varies considerably in the dog.In
black and tan) Partial pigmented ring to the disc.
this figure the disc is oval with a pigmented area on one
side.
Fig.11.37 The optic disc(Labrador Retriever,1year
Fig.11.35 The optic disc(Beagle,6months old,
tricolour) Complete pigmented ring to the disc.
old,black) Hyper-reflectivity around the edge of the
disc,known asconus.
146
Fundus
Fig.11.38 The optic disc(German Shepherd Dog.
Fig.11.40 The optic disc(German Shepherd Dog
2years old,black and tan)Shamrock-shaped disc.
1year old) Medullated fibres extending some distance
awayfrom the disc.
Fig.11.39 The optic disc(German Shepherd Dog
Fig. 11.41 Retinal blood vessels (English Springer
10monthsold) Large discdue to medullated nerve
Spaniel,2years old)Well-developedvascular pattern
fibres, sometimes called pseudopapilloedema.This
above and below the area centralis.
appearance iscommonly seen in the GermanShepherd
Dog and the Golden Retriever.
The normal canine fundus
147
Fig.11.44 Retinal blood vessels (English Springer
Fig.11.42 Retinal blood vessels(Border Collie, 1 year
Spaniel,2yearsold,liver andwhite)An unusual
old,black and white)Four primary veins.
vascularpattern.
not the primary change. Changes in the appearance
of the vessels may indicate a systemic disease, e.g
anaemia,polycythaemia,lipaemia,etc.Thepresence
and appearance of retinal haemorrhages may also
indicate systemic disease,e.g.hypertension,
diabetes,etc.
Development of the canine fundus
(Figs 11.45-11.52)
The eye of the newborn puppy is normally closed at
birth;thekitten is similar but this is not the case in
thefoal,calf and lambwhere the eye isfully open at
birth and the fundus appearance is similar to that of
the adult. In the puppy it is difficult to examine the
fundus before 21 daysof age due to thepresence of
temporary corneal oedema and the pupillary
membrane.At first there is no differentiation between
tapetal andnon-tapetal areas,but at 4-5weeks the
Fig.11.43 Retinal blood vessels (Rough Collie,1 year
future tapetum lucidum appears as a homogeneous
old,tricolour) Note the tortuosity of the retinal
lilac colour with a darkening of the non-tapetal
arterioles in comparison to the veins.Normal variant.
fundus.The adult form is present by 12-16weeks of
age. Figs 11.45-11.52 depict the changing appearance
over the first 6 months of life of a Greyhound puppy
('gaze hound’), Figs 11.46-11.52 being the same
animal.
148
Fundus
Fig.11.45 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)Very
Fig.11.47 Canine fundus (Greyhound puppy)27 days
early appearance with no differentiation between tapetal
'pio
and non-tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.46 Canine fundus (Greyhound puppy)23 days
Fig.11.48 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy)51 days
old.
The normal canine fundus
149
Fig.11.49 Canine fundus (Greyhound puppy)58 days
Fig.11.51 Canine fundus (Greyhound puppy)3 months
old.
Fig.11.50 Canine fundus(Greyhound puppy) 65 days
Fig.11.52 Canine fundus（Greyhound puppy)6months
old.
old. Normal adult appearance.
150
Fundus
tapetum or withvisiblechoroidalvessels inplaces
The normal feline fundus
occursin the blue-eyedwhite,and there is a tigroid,
(Figs11.53-11.64)
due to the choroidal vessels,in the non-tapetal
The fundus of the cat exhibits considerably less fundus of the seal-point Siamese.The area centralis
variation than that of the dog. The cat has ais lateral to the optic discand is devoid of superficial
triangular and well-developed, highly reflective blood vessels. The vascular pattern is classified as
tapetum.The colour is usually yellow to green andholangiotic,asin the dog.The feline optic disc is
occasionally blue; subalbinism with absence of the small,usually circular, and cupped with a well-
Fig.11.55 Yellow-green tapetum (DSH cat,adult)
Fig.11.53 Yellow tapetum （DSH cat,adult)
Fig.11.54 Yellow-green tapetum(DSH cat,adult)
Fig. 11.56 Blue-green tapetum(DSH cat,adult)
Thenormal feline fundus
151
Fig.11.57 Retinal blood vessels (DSH cat,adult) Note
Fig.11.59 Tigroid non-tapetal fundus(Siamese cat,
the blood vessels surrounding,but not crossing,the area
2years old,seal-point)
centralis. Right eye (OD).
Fig.11.58 Retinal blood vessels (DSH cat,adult) Note
Fig.11.60 Subalbinism(DSH cat,tabby)Patch of
the region lateral and immediately opposite the optic
subalbinism around disc
disc,thearea centralis,withretinal vessels above and
below.Left eye(OS).
152
Fundus
Fig.11.61 Subalbinism(DSH cat,young adult,blue-
Fig.11.63 Subalbinism of the whole fundus DSH cat,
eyed white) Note appearance and colours of tapetal and
young adult,blue-eyed white)
non-tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.62 Subalbinism (DSH cat,young adult,blue-
Fig.11.64 Fundus development (kitten,8weeks old)
eyed white)Choroidal vessels innon-tapetal fundus
Note comparison to Fig 11.49.
region.
The normal equine fundus
153
defined edge. The disc is grey in colour and not
Sometimesthecourseof thechoroidalveins
myelinated, although occasionally myelinated or converging to a point dorsal to the optic disc appear
opaque nervefibres are visible ophthalmoscopically.
as blue to purple streaks through a thinned tapetum,
Pigmented and hyper-reflective peripapillary rings
particularly in the subalbinotic fundus. The non-
aresometimespresent.Developmentofthe felinet
tapetal fundus iswell pigmented,except for a small
fundus,inparticular thatof the tapetum,issimilar to
area above the upper disc border and the junction
with the tapetum. Irregular areas of subalbinism
show as reddish coloration in a less densely
The normal equine fundus
pigmented non-tapetal fundus. The optic disc is
usually roughly oval, sometimes more round. It is
(Figs 11.65-11.81)
granular and pink in colour with a variable edge,
Theocular fundus of thehorsevariessomewhat,as
sometimeswith a notch on theventral border and an
might be expected, but again not as widely as in the odd blood vessel or two on the surface. Myelination
dog. The tapetum is more extensive than in theof the optic nerve fibres is an occasional finding and
carnivores, is dorsal to the optic disc and varies from usually occurs at the lateral and medial ventral
yellowtogreen toblue,andsometimes twocolours
corners of the disc.The equinefundus is described as
appear in the same eye.The‘stars of Winslow'are
paurangiotic with many fine straight arterioles
frequently prominent in the horse, appearing as
radiating outwards from the disc margin.
small dark dots scattered throughout the tapetum.
Fig.11.65 The fundus （Thoroughbred,adult) Posterior
Fig.11.66 The tapetum (Hunter-type,6years old,
segment of theequine eye showing the extent of the
black)Yellow-green tapetal fundus.
tapetal fundus.Comparewith Fig 11.1.
154
Fundus
Fig.11.67 The tapetum (Hunter-type,6years old,
Fig.11.69 The tapetum(Thoroughbred,4years old,
grey)Blue-lilac tapetal fundus.
chestnut)Pattern due to underlying choroidal vessels.
Fig.11.70 The tapetum (Welsh pony.1 year old,
Fig.11.68 The tapetum (Welsh pony.7 years old,blue
roan) Two-coloured tapetum (green and yellow).
skewbald) Heterochromiciris;similarpattern to previous
figure.
The normal equine fundus
155
Fig.11.71 The tapetum (Hunter-type,6years old,
Fig.11.73 The optic disc（Thoroughbred,9years old,
grey) Island of non-tapetal fundus within the tapetum.
bay) Large and in the usual position just inside the non-
tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.72 Subalbinism (Palomino × albino pony.
Fig.11.74 The optic disc(Shetland pony,4years old,
8months old,white) Note the poorly developed
brown)Small irregular-shaped disc.
tapetum and the visible choroidal vessels in the non-
tapetal fundus.
The normal equine fundus
155
Fig. 11.71 The tapetum (Hunter-type, 6years old,
Fig.11.73 The optic disc（Thoroughbred,9years old,
grey) Island of non-tapetal fundus within the tapetum.
bay) Large and in the usual position just inside the non-
tapetal fundus.
Fig. 11.72 Subalbinism (PalominoX albino pony.
Fig.11.74 The optic disc (Shetland pony,4 years old,
8months old,white)Note the poorly developed
brown)Small irregular-shaped disc.
tapetum and thevisible choroidal vessels in the non-
tapetalfundus.
156
Fundus
Fig.11.77 The optic disc（Thoroughbred,3years old
Fig.11.75 The optic disc （Thoroughbred,1year old,
chestnut) Indentation along the lower border of the disc.
chestnut) Disc with a double edge in places.
Fig.11.76The optic disc（Pony.15years old,skewbald)
Fig.11.78 The optic disc(Thoroughbred,1 year old,
Darkred disc with heavypigment along thebase.
bay)Faint medullated nerve fibres around the disc,
givinga halo-like effect.
The normal bovineand ovine fundus
157
Fig.11.79 The optic disc(Welsh pony,8years old,
Fig.11.81 The fundus (donkey,young adult)
roan) Medullated nerve fibres particularly at the inferior
lateral angle.
The normal bovine and ovine fundus
(Figs 11.82-11.91)
The ocularfundusof the cow and sheep are similar
but quite unlike the previous species described.
Usually a tapetum is present and the non-tapetal
fundus is pigmented and dark.The optic disc occurs
at about the junction; in the bovine it is more or less
circular and the ovine disc tends to be kidney-
shaped.The colour of the disc varies from pale pink
to dense white, depending upon myelination of the
optic nerve fibres. In a number of cases the disc
appears dark grey and pronounced myelination is
rare.The retinal blood vessels show the greatest
difference to the dog, cat and horse. The veins are
large,relatively straight and dark bluish-red;the
arteriesnarrower andwith a distinct white reflective
line along their course and bright red in colour.The
difference between vein and artery is obvious in
Fig.11.80 The fundus（Thoroughbred foal,1 day old)
these species.The fundus of the calf and lamb is as in
Note the similarity to the adult fundusin thisspecies
theadult.
and compare with the dog in theDevelopment of the
canine fundus'section（Figs 11.45-11.52).
158
Fundus
Fig.11.82 The fundus (Shorthorn calf) Note the
Fig.11.84 The fundus (Jersey cow)Note the dark
obvious differencebetween artery andvein.
colour ofthe disc.
Fig.11.83 The fundus (Shorthorn calf) Note the conus
Fig.11.85 The fundus (Charolais calf) Note the
vestigialisin the centre of the disc.
absence of medullated fibres in thisyoung animal.
The normal bovine and ovine fundus
159
Fig.11.86 Theopticdisc（Friesian cow)Medullated
Fig.11.88 Sheep fundus (adult ewe) Note similarity to
fibresin thelower part of the optic disc.Unusual.
the bovinefunduswith obvious difference between
arteryandvein.
Fig.11.87 The optic disc（Friesian cow)Medullated
Fig.11.89 Sheep fundus(adult ewe) Note the
fibres of the whole optic disc.Unusual.
differencein colour of theoptic discwith the previous
figure(Fig 11.88)
160
Fundus
Fig.11.90 Sheep fundus （Clun cross,adult ewe) Non-
Fig.11.91 Sheep fundus[adult ewe)Note medullated
medullated opticdisc.
fibresfrom the discon the rightside and appearance of
the tapetum nigrum.
The fundus of other species
Diseases of the retina - the
(Figs 11.92-11.97)
retinopathies
Note the absence of a tapetum in all these animals,
The classification of retinal disease is complex and
including the pig, and the presence of an variable, and will be illustrated here according to
ophthalmoscopically visible macula in the primates.
species and the condition with notes on diagnosis.
In the dog there are four well-defined hereditary
diseases of the fundus, two abiotrophies (gener-
alized progressive retinal atrophy and retinal pig
ment epithelial dystrophy)and two congenital
conditions(Collie eye anomaly andretinal dys-
plasia). The non-hereditary retinopathies are mainly
post-inflammatory and with neither breed nor age
incidence. Unless very severe, they are rarely
presented to the veterinary surgeon with a history
of defective vision, particularly in the UK,and
carry a poorly understood aetiology.A few other
retinopathies, e.g. sudden acquired retinal degen-
eration (SARD),haemorrhages and detachments and
coloboma,are illustrated
The cat has two forms of a hereditary retinopathy,
bothintheAbyssinianbreed.Oneortwootherretinal
degenerations are shown as well as an unusual and
highly specificretinopathy due toa deficiency of the
sulphur-containing amino acid taurine.
In the horse post-inflammatory retinal degen-
erations are illustrated, together with a few other
odd conditions.
Diseases of theretina -the retinopathies
161
Fig.11.92 Human (young adult) Note the presence of
Fig. 11.94 Pig (Large White,adult) Note the absence
themacula.
ofa tapetum in this species.
Fig.11.93 Monkey (baboon,young adult) Note the
Fig.11.95 Rabbit (young adult,albino)
macula.
162
Fundus
Fig. 11.96 Rat (young adult, albino)
Fig. 11.97 Bird Tawny Owl) Note the pecten.
The sheep exhibits aninteresting toxic retinopathy
ultimately total blindness. Occasionally, owners
due to the ingestion of bracken, apparently specific
notice a glow in the eyes in certain lights due to the
to this species.
dilated pupils and increased tapetal reflectivity.
Cataractafrquntifnotnvariablequlin
The dog
species (Figs 9.57-9.60).
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy(RPED)or
(Figs 11.98-11.119)
central progressive retinal atrophy (CPRA)
In thedogGPRA ishereditary,bilateral andusually
(Figs 11.120-11.131)
symmetrical but, where the two eyes are not
RPEDorCPRA,is anotherbutdissimilar,bilaterally
identical,the difference in the degree of severity is
symmetrical or nearly so, progressive retinal
minimal, and always progressive. GPRA has been
degeneration causing defective vision and ultimately
subdivided into dysplasias and degenerations
endingin total blindness,althoughnotinall cases as
according tothetimeatwhich therodsandcones
somedogsretainusefulperipheralvision intoold
atrophy, and with a consequent difference in the age
age. The condition is not congenital, but affects
incidencein the different breeds.However,clinically
young adult dogs. There is a distinct breed predis-
(ophthalmoscopically)all theformslookalike.There
position and RPEDwas considered to be inherited in
isamarked andimportantbreed incidence(seeTable
those breeds named in Table 11.2, but recently an
11.1) and certain breeds may exhibit two types.
association of extremely low plasma levels of
GPRA is not congenital but occurs later in life
vitamin E in affected dogs has been shown and it is
(abiotrophy) and the age incidence varies from a few
this that may be inherited. Ophthalmoscopically the
months to several years. To date inheritance has
presence of brown spots of pigment scattered
alwaysbeen via a simple, autosomal,recessive gene
throughout the tapetal fundus,and with hyper-
(cf.the Abyssinian cat), except the Siberian Husky
reflectivity present between the spots,is the main
which has been reported asX-linked in theUSA.The
diagnostic sign. Attenuation of the retinal blood
history isusuallyofdefectivevisionnoticed either
vessels is a later change and the condition progresses
at night or in dim light, hence the term ‘night
toinvolve the non-tapetal fundus.Occasionally
blindness',always deteriorating to day blindness and
cataracts are present (Fig 9.61).
Diseases of theretina-the retinopathies
163
Fig.11.98 Rod/cone dysplasia (lrish Setter,3 months
Fig.11.100 Rod/cone dysplasia (Cardigan Corgi
3months old) Obvious and typical changes at an early
old)
ageas in Fig 11.98.
Fig.11.99 Rod/cone dysplasia (lrish Setter,3 months
Fig. 11.101 Rod dysplasia,cone degeneration
old) Littermate to the puppy in Figure 11.98.Note the
(Elkhound,20 months old) Typical changesof GPRA
obvious difference on comparison between normal and
abnormalinboth tapetal hyper-reflectivity andblood
vesselattenuation.
164
Fundus
Fig.11.102 Rod/cone degeneration(Miniature Poodle,
Fig.11.104 Rod/cone degeneration(Miniature Poodle,
5yearsold)Note the narrowed retinal bloodvessels
8years old)Advanced degeneration withpallor of the
away from the disc.
disc andvisible choroidal vessels.
Fig.11.103 Rod/cone degeneration (Miniature Poodle,
Fig.11.105 Rod/cone degeneration (Cocker Spaniel,
5years old) Typical appearance of the non-tapetal
2years old) Early ophthalmoscopicchangesof tapetal
fundus.
hyper-reflectivity.
Diseases of theretina- the retinopathies
765
Fig.11.106 Rod/cone degeneration(Cocker Spaniel,
Fig.11.108 Progressive retinal atrophy(Tibetan
4years old,blue roan]Right eye showing obvious
Terrier,15 months old)Early ophthalmoscopic signs.
ophthalmoscopicsignsofbloodvessel attenuation and
increased tapetal reflectivity.
Fig.11.107 Rod/cone degeneration (Cocker Spaniel,
Fig.11.109 Progressive retinal atrophy (Tibetan
4years old,blue roan]Left eye of the same dog as in
Terrier,18monthsold)Ophthalmoscopicsignsmore
Figure 11.106,showing lessobviousophthalmoscopic
obvious.
signs due to subalbinism of the fundus and absence ofa
tapetum.
166
Fundus
Fig.11.110 Progressive retinal atrophy(Tibetan
Fig.11.112 Progressiveretinalatrophy（English
Spaniel,4 years old) Typical signs.
Springer Spaniel,21 months old,liver and white)
Typical hyper-reflectivity in the tapetal area.
Fig.11.111 Progressive retinal atrophy (Tibetan
Fig.11.113 Progressive retinal atrophy (Miniature
Spaniel,4 years old) Changes in the non-tapetal fundus.
Schnauzer,4years old)
Diseases of theretina-the retinopathies
167
Fig.11.114 Rod/cone degeneration (Labrador Retriever,
Fig. 11.116 Cone/rod dystrophy(Miniature Longhaired
6years old) Tapetal hyper-reflectivity and early changes
Dachshund,8 months old) Earlyophthalmoscopic
in the non-tapetal fundus.
changes.
Fig.11.115 Rod/cone degeneration (Golden Retriever,
Fig.11.117 Cone/rod dystrophy (Miniature Longhaired
4 years old) Early changes in tapetum.
Dachshund,14months old) Poor differentiation of the
tapetum,but obvious bloodvessel attenuation.
168
Fundus
Fig.11.118 Cone/rod dystrophy(Miniature Longhaired
Fig.11.119 Cone/rod dystrophy (Miniature Longhaired
Dachshund,17 months old) Advanced case.
Dachshund,3years old)Very advanced case.
Collie eye anomaly(CEA)（Figs11.132-11.164)
Table 11.1-Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA):
breeds affected
CEA isboth inherited and congenital and it is non
progressive. CEA is bilateral but not infrequently the
AustralianCattleDog
two eyes aredissimilarin thedegreeofseverity.CEA
Collie (Rough)
affects basically the collie breeds (see Table 11.3).
Dachshund (Miniature Long-Haired)
Finnish Laphund
Ophthalmoscopically there are two main lesions.
IrishSetter
Chorioretinal dysplasia (CRD), or choroidal
Lhasa Apso
hypoplasia,isthe characteristic lesion always found
Norwegian Elkhound
lateral to theopticdisc,either adjacent tothedisor
Papillon
two to threediscdiameters awayfrom it.In themore
Poodle (Miniature)
Poodle (Toy)
severe cases of CRD,the lesion may extend to
Retriever(ChesapeakeBay)
surround the disc but in such cases the severest part
Retriever(Golden)
is always lateral to the disc.The second lesion is a
国
Retriever (Labrador)
coloboma which may affectapart ofthe discor the
Schnauzer,Miniature
whole of the disc and sometimes the peripapillary
Spaniel(American Cocker)
region. The visual deficit varies from no apparent
Spaniel (Cocker)
Spaniel (English Springer)
effect (mild CRD cases) to total blindness,the
Tibetan Spaniel
former being much more common than the latter.
Tibetan Terrier
Intraocular haemorrhage,including hyphaema,
Welsh Corgi (Cardigan)
and totalretinal detachment is also an occasional
finding.Although the condition is considered to be
congenital, these latter two signs of haemorrhage
and detachment,both causingblindness,may occur
Diseases of theretina-theretinopathies
169
Fig.11.120 Pigment epithelial dystrophy (Labrador
Fig.11.122 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Retriever,2years old Note the early changein the area
Retriever,5yearsold) Same dog asin Figure 11.121,but
centralis.
oneyearlater.
Fig.11.121 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.123 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Retriever,4years old) Note the pigmentary change in
Retriever,6 years old)Same dog as in Figs 11.121,
the tapetal fundus.
11.122.Note the progression of the pigmentary change
with fewer butmore dense pigment spots.
Fundus
170
Fig.11.124 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.126Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Retriever,10years old)Advanced stagewith a few
Retriever,6years old) Note the increased tapetal
dense pigmentspotson a hyper-reflective background.
reflectivity between the pigment spots.
Fig.11.125 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.127 Pigment epithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Retriever,5years old)Note the pigmentation along the
Retriever,4years old) Note the difference in the form
course of theretinal blood vessels.
orshapeof thepigment spots from theprevious two
figures(Figs11.125,11.126).
Diseases of theretina-theretinopathies
171
Fig.11.128 Pigmentepithelial dystrophy(Labrador
Fig.11.130 RPED （Rough Collie,5yearsold)
Retriever,3years old)Note thecystic appearance of the
pigmentspots.
Fig.11.129 RPED（Border Collie,6years old)
Fig.11.131 RPED（Briard,3′/2years old)
172
Fundus
Table 11.2-Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy（RPED):
breeds affected
Border Collie
Briard
Collie (Rough)
Collie(Smooth)
PolishLowlandSheepdog
Retriever（Golden)
Retriever (Labrador)
ShetlandSheepdog
Spaniel (Cocker)
Spaniel (English Springer)
Welsh Corgi (Cardigan)
in young adult dogs.Inheritance is thought to be due
to a simple autosomal recessive gene but recently
somedoubthasbeenexpressedas to thisopinion
and,although the lesions appear ophthalmoscopically
Fig.11.132 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Border Collie
the sameinall thebreedsaffected,thisfact hasyeto
4years old)Minor change in the typical position lateral
beprovedgenetically.
to the optic disc.
Retinal dysplasia,total （TRD)and multifocal (MRD)
(Figs 11.165-11.184)
Retinal dysplasia (RD) is the second congenital and
inherited abnormality of the retina in the dog and
with similarities to CEA.It is usually bilateral but by
no means always on ophthalmoscopic examination.
It is not progressive and the degree of severity of
MRD varies considerably.The types of RD and the
breedsaffected areshown in Table11.4.In total RD
both eyes are affected and an infundibular type of
retinal detachment is present in young puppies
whichareblindandmay showformsofocular
nystagmus. In multifocal RD,including the so-called
'geographic' form, retinal folds, varying in number
from one to many, occur in the tapetal fundus
usually immediately above the optic disc in the
central region. In the geographic form a large
circumscribed horseshoe-shaped to circular area,
sometimesassociatedwithseveralfine and tortuous
bloodvessels,is also found in the tapetal fundus,but
Fig.11.133 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Shetland
usually much further away from the disc and
Sheepdog.7 months old) More severe change away
towards the edge of the tapetum in the central
from the disc.
region.Sometimesretinal folds have been known to
disappear with time,evenin breeds with primary
Diseases of the retina- the retinopathies
173
Fig.11.134 Chorioretinal dysplasia(Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig. 11.136 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Rough Collie,
7months old) More severe change than in Fig 11.133,in
2years old,blue merle)Typical appearance of the lesion
a similar position but adjacent to the disc.
in a subalbinoticfundus.
Fig.11.135 Chorioretinal dysplasia(Shetland
Fig.11.137 Chorioretinal dysplasia(Border Collie,
Sheepdog.2years old)Severe change lateral but not
2years old) Posterior segmentof the eye showing the
adjacentto the disc.
pale patch'(dysplastic area)opposite the optic disc.
Note also the coloboma of the optic disc.
174
Fundus
Fig.11.138 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Rough Collie
Fig.11.140 Coloboma(Rough Collie,1year old,blue
8weeksold) Theappearance of the lesion inayoung
merle)Small coloboma at 12o'clock(note dipping of
puppy-note theearlytapetal development.
discvessels),together with chorioretinal dysplasia.
Fig.11.139 Chorioretinal dysplasia (Shetland
Fig. 11.141 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog.3years
Sheepdog,3years old.blue merle) Extensive
old,sable)Shallowcoloboma of the lowerpartof the
chorioretinal dysplasia in a subalbinoticfundus.
optic disc,together with chorioretinal dysplasia.
Diseases of the retina-the retinopathies
175
Fig.11.142 Coloboma (Border Collie,3yearsold)
Fig.11.144 Coloboma (Rough Collie,7years old)
Medium-sized coloboma in the centre of the disc,
Large disc coloboma,together with chorioretinal dysplasia
togetherwith chorioretinal dysplasia.
and retinal detachmentontheleft side of the figure.
Fig.11.143 Coloboma(Rough Collie,1year old,
Fig.11.145 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog.3 years
tricolour)Medium-sized coloboma of the ventral disc.
old)Shallow disccoloboma at 7o'clock.
176
Fundus
Fig.11.146 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog,9months
Fig.11.148 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog.4 years
old)Deep disccolobomaat 5o'clock.
old) Twosmallcolobomas at 6o'clock.
Fig.11.147 Coloboma(Shetland Sheepdog,16 months
Fig.11.149 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog.2years
old)Whole disccoloboma withmild chorioretinal dysplasia
and retinal detachment in the upper right quadrant.
with chorioretinal dysplasia.
Diseases of theretina -theretinopathies
177
Fig.11.150 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog,3years
Fig.11.152 Coloboma[Shetland Sheepdog.13weeks
old)Large disc coloboma and adjacent peripapillary
old)Same eye asthepreviousfigure butfocused to
region affecting both retina and choroid.
show the persistent hyaloid remnant-a frequent finding
in conjunction with colobomasin all species (seealso
Fig12.28).
Fig.11.151 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog.13weeks
Fig.11.153 Coloboma (Shetland Sheepdog.adult,blue
old)Extensive disccoloboma.
merle) Extensive coloboma,and note the retinal blood
vessels dipping over the edge of the crater.
178
Fundus
Fig.11.154 Coloboma (Rough Collie,6months old)
Fig.11.156 Retinal detachment(Shetland Sheepdog.
External appearanceofcolobomaoftheopticdisc-
9 months old) Extensive retinal detachment.
note the cystic appearance and theoptic nerve deflected
to the right-hand side.
Fig.11.155 Retinal detachment (Rough Collie,1year
Fig.11.157 Retinal detachment (Shetland Sheepdog.
old)Flatretinal detachmentto theleft of the opticdisc.
17monthsold) The appearance of total retinal
detachment through a dilated pupil.
Diseases of theretina-theretinopathies
179
Fig.11.158 Retinal detachment (Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.160 Excessive vascular tortuosity(Rough Collie,
9months old) Retinal detachment and disinsertion.
6months old) Note also the coloboma of the disc.
Fig.11.159 Retinal detachment(Rough Collie,
Fig.11.161 ExcessivevasculartortuosityRough
6months old)Detachment and disinsertion (post
Collie,6 months old) Again,excessive tortuosity and
mortemspecimen).
disccoloboma.
180
Fundus
Fig.11.162 Vascular anomaly (Shetland Sheepdog.
Fig.11.164 Hyphaema (Rough Collie,18 months old)
3years old) Aberrant arteriolar loop at the edgeof the
Intraocular haemorrhage,may be the presenting sign of
discat 7o'clockprotruding forwardsinto thevitreous.
collie eyeanomaly.
Table 11.3-Collie eye anomaly:breeds affected
BorderCollie
Collie (Rough)
口
Collie(Smooth)
LancashireHeeler
Shetland Sheepdog
hereditary MRD and in theyoung adult theretinal
folds may become hyper-reflective and even
pigmented with a distinct similarity to post-
inflammatory chorioretinitis. Furthermore,it has
been reported that the geographic lesion is not
Retinal foldsnot infrequently occur in association
with microphthalmos and other ocular anomalies
and in some breeds with skeletal abnormalities.
Hereditary RD,in those breeds in which it has been
Fig.11.163 Vascular anomaly (Rough Collie,7 weeks
studied,is due to a simple autosomal recessivegene.
old)Aneurysmon theretinal bloodvessels at 6o'clock.
Diseasesof theretina-the retinopathies
181
Fig.11.165 Total retinal dysplasia (Sealyham Terrier,
Fig.11.167 Infundibular detachment (Sealyham Terrier,
3monthsold)Similar toFig 11.166,showing funnel-
retinal detachment(TRD).
shaped total detachment around the edgeof the lens.
Fig.11.168 TRD (Labrador Retriever,puppy)Bilateral
retinal detachment.Total retinal dysplasia and similar to
previous three figures(Figs 11.165-11.167)ofSealyham
puppies.
Fig.11.166Infundibular detachment(Sealyham
Terrier,4monthsold)Postmortem specimen showing
total infundibular detachment(lensremoved).
182
Fundus
Fig.11.169 Multifocal retinal dysplasia (MRD)
Fig.11.171 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,5months
(Labrador Retriever,13 months old)Area of detachment
old) Typical retinal folds in tapetal fundus superior to
in the typical area of superior tapetal region,well above
disc.
the optic disc. Note the abnormal blood vessels.
Fig.11.170 MRD (Labrador Retriever,adult) MRD with
Fig.11.172 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,6months
minor changesof two small retinal folds.
old)Similar to Fig 11.171 but more severe.
Diseasesof the retina-theretinopathies
183
Fig.11.173 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,15months
Fig.11.175 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,2years
old)Retinal folds;note the area of retinal degeneration
old)More severe casewith someretinal detachment.
with hyper-reflectivity and pigmentation to the left of
the main retinalvein.
Fig.11.174 MRD(English SpringerSpaniel,2years
Fig.11.176 Extensive retinal detachment (English
old) Similar changes to Fig 11.173withfoldsand area of
Springer Spaniel,5months old)
increasedreflectivity andpigmentationabovethedisc.
184
Fundus
Fig.11.177 TRD （English Springer Spaniel,8months old)
Fig.11.179 MRD(Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
Ophthalmoscopic appearance ofinfundibular detachment.
7weeks old) Geographic lesion and folds superior to the
Note similarity to Fig 11.165 in a Sealyham puppy.
disc in an immature tapetal fundus.Note the vascular
tortuosity.
Fig.11.178 MRD (English Springer Spaniel,7weeks
Fig.11.180 MRD (Cavalier King Charles Spaniel,
old) Retinal foldsvisible in an immature tapetal fundus.
young adult) Geographic lesion of detachment in
superiortapetal fundus.
Diseases of the retina- the retinopathies
18.5
Fig.11.181 MRD(CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel,
Fig.11.183 Retinal folds（Rough Collie,10 weeksold)
5months old) Retinal folds in tapetal fundus.
Retinal foldsin the non-tapetal fundus.Originally,and
incorrectly,thought to be part of CEA.Possibly
associated with degree of microphthalmos.
Fig.11.182Retinal folds（GoldenRetriever(/)x
Fig.11.184 Retinal folds(Beagle,3months old)
Labrador Retriever(/) Congenital retinal foldsresembling
Transient retinal folds in the non-tapetal fundus.
hereditary MRD but in a cross-bred.Unknown aetiology.
Fundus
186
Table 11.4-Retinal dysplasia,total （TRD)and multifocal
(MRD):breeds affected
Bedlington Terrier-TRD
Cavalier King Charles Spaniel-MRD
Retriever(Golden）-MRD
Retriever (Labrador)-TRD and MRD
Rottweiler-MRD
Sehnauzer,Giant-MRD
Sealyham Terrier-TRD
Spaniel（English Springer)-TRD and MRD
Spaniel(American Cocker)-MRD
However, there are acquired forms of RD due to
other causes, e.g. canine herpesvirus, irradiation, etc.
Total RD causes completeblindnessbut it is rare for
MRD to have any effect on vision and most cases
showingretinal folds,and even geographic lesions,
Fig.11.185 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Sheepdog.
areonlydiagnosed onophthalmoscopicexamination
1year old) Note the area of increasedreflectivity,
andthe ownerisunawareofanyeffectonvision.
denoting retinal degeneration,in the upper right
quadrant.Aetiology unknown.
Other retinopathies(Figs 11.185-11.212)
Asstated above thenon-hereditaryretinopathiesin
the dog are mainly post-inflammatory, often of
unknown aetiology and rarely are active at the time
of examination.They must be distinguished from the
hereditary retinopathies as obviously they have no
significance as far asparents,progeny and relatives
are concerned.Non-hereditary retinopathies may
affect one orboth eyes and to considerably differing
degrees. In addition, the part（s) affected are often
clearly defined and haphazard in their distribution
in the fundus. There is, of course, no breed or age
incidence. Cases of bilateral severe retinal degen-
eration may sometimes be difficult to distinguish
from a hereditary retinopathy ina breed in which
GPRA is recognized,but a history of sudden
defective vision,as opposed to progressive loss of
vision,coupled with theage of the animal,may help
to distinguish one from the other.
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD) is
now a well-recognized retinopathy,but of unknown
aetiology. Cases present with sudden blindness and
with no changes in the ophthalmoscopic appearance,
but typical changes of aretinal degeneration appear
Fig.11.186 Post-inflammatoryretinopathy (Labrador
later atsubsequent examinations.
Retriever,8years old) Increased reflectivity in the
Retinal haemorrhages have a variety of causes and
tapetal region,togetherwith somepigmentary
occasionalcasesofanidiopathicretinal detachment
disturbance in the lower left quadrant adjacent to the
optic disc.Aetiology unknown.
may be seen.
Fig.11.187 Post-inflammatory retinopathy
Fig.11.189 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Border
(Greyhound,2years old) Generalized but patchy
Collie,13years old)Focal area ofpost-inflammatory
increased reflectivity,together with early changes of
retinal degeneration lateral to the disc.The other eye of
optic atrophy.This was an unvaccinated dog and other
this dog had a generalizedretinopathy.
littermateswere affectedwith retinal degeneration.
Fig.11.188 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Labrador
Fig.11.190 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(German
Retriever,5years old) Generalizedretinal degeneration.
Shepherd Dog,7years old) Typical changeswith increased
Note the changein colour from green to gold in the
reflectivity and abnormal pigmentation and of post-
more severely affected parts.
inflammatory origin.The othereye of this dog was normal.
188
Fundus
Fig.11.191 Chorioretinitis (Sheepdog,6years old)
Fig.11.193 Post-inflammatory retinopathy
Post-inflammatory chorioretinitis with heavy pigmentation
(Greyhound,2years old) Elongated focal area of retinal
in the centreof thelesion lateral to the disc.
degeneration,peripapillary and extending laterally.This
dog had shown clinical signs of canine distemper.
Fig.11.192 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Crossbred,
Fig.11.194 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Crossbred,
1year old) Abnormal reflectivity and pigmentation.This
6years old)Peripapillary lesion on the medial side of
dog wasknown to have had canine distemper.
thedisc.
Diseasesof the retina-the retinopathies
189
Fig.11.195 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Crossbred,
Fig. 11.197 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (English
6years old) The other eye of the dog in Fig 11.194,
Springer Spaniel,3 years old)Note the exudate and
showingmore extensive areasofretinal degeneration
neovascularization in the region above the disc.
and demonstrating the asymmetry of the two eyes.This
dogwasknown to have hadpyrexia andfitsata
youngerage.Lesionsin both eyes werenon-progressive
overseveralyears.
Fig.11.196 Post-inflammatoryretinopathy
Fig.11.198 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Labrador
(Dobermann,8yearsold) Advanced and severe retinal
Retriever,10 years old) Pigmentary retinopathy.Note
degeneration and optic atrophy.
the differenceto central PRA.
190
Fundus
Fig.11.199 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Labrador
Fig.11.201 Post-inflammatory retinopathy
Retriever,8years old)Another pigmentaryretinopathy
(Greyhound,18months old) Post-inflammatory
with focal areas of tapetal hyper-reflectivity.Again,quite
retinopathy with focalareasofdepigmentation in the
unlike central PRA.
non-tapetal fundus.
Fig.11.200 Post-inflammatory retinopathy(Afghan
Fig.11.202 Retinal degeneration (Smooth-haired Fox
Hound,5yearsold)
Terrier,7yearsold)Retinal degeneration due to
glaucoma.Note the dislocated lens in the lower part of
the photograph.
190
Fundus
Fig.11.199 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Labrador
Fig.11.201 Post-inflammatory retinopathy
Retriever,8years old)Another pigmentary retinopathy
(Greyhound,18 monthsold) Post-inflammatory
with focal areasof tapetal hyper-reflectivity.Again,quite
retinopathy with focal areas of depigmentation in the
unlike central PRA.
non-tapetal fundus.
Fig. 11.200 Post-inflammatory retinopathy (Afghan
Fig.11.202 Retinal degeneration(Smooth-haired Fox
Hound,5years old)
Terrier,7years old) Retinal degeneration due to
glaucoma.Note the dislocated lens in the lower part of
the photograph.
Diseasesof theretina-theretinopathies
191
Fig.11.203 Sudden acquired retinal degeneration
Fig.11.205 Retinalhaemorrhage(Standard Poodle,
[SARD)(Whippet,8yearsold] Note the earlyoverall
8years old) Diabetic retinopathy,the diabetes of several
reflectivity visible in the tapetal region.This dog was
yearsduration.
presented with sudden blindness but with no
ophthalmoscopic changesin the fundus until the
subsequentexamination.
Fig.11.204 Retinal haemorrhage [Crossbred,6years
Fig.11.206 Retinal haemorrhage(Cocker Spaniel,
old)Hypertensiveretinopathy with renal disease.
6years old) Warfarin poisoning-note the retinal
haemorrhage and anaemiaoftheretinal vessels.
192
Fundus
Fig.11.207 Retinalhaemorrhage (Crossbred,13years
Fig.11.209 Retinal detachment (Miniature Poodle,
old) Retinal haemorrhage in a case of generalized
4years old) Total retinal detachment in both eyes.
Aetiologyunknown.
lymphosarcoma.
Fig.11.208 Retinal haemorrhage (Labrador Retriever,
Fig.11.210 Retinal detachment (Crossbred,7years
12years old) Multiple retinal haemorrhages in an aged
old)Serous or exudativeretinal detachment with blisters
dog and of unknown aetiology.
ofdetached retinavisible through the dilatedpupil.
Diseases of the retina- theretinopathies
193
Fig.11.211 Retinal detachment (Crossbred,9 years
Fig.11.212 Coloboma（Beagle,14months old)
old) Another case of serous retinal detachment.
Atypical coloboma of retina and choroid.Both eyes were
affected,but asymmetrically.
Retinopathiesin otherspecies
The horse(Figs 11.233-11.243)
Retinopathies (chorioretinopathies)in the horse
The cat（Figs11.213-11.232）
rarelypresent with evidence of defectivevision,but
Thecatexhibitstwoformsofahereditary
arenoted ataroutine ophthalmoscopicexamination.
generalizedprogressiveretinal atrophy,bilateral and
They are almost invariably inactive and non-
symmetrical, with the classical signs of a retinal
progressive. Ophthalmoscopic signs are typically
tapetal hyper-reflectivity and pigmentary changes.
attenuation of theretinal blood vessels.Both forms
The aetiology is usually unknown. Occasional cases
are in the Abyssinian breed: the first,a rod/cone
ofretinal detachment,uniocularandbinocular,occur
dysplasia in kittens, is due to a simple autosomal
but again the aetiology is usually obscure apart from
dominant gene (Figs 11.213-11.218); the second is a
the odd case of known trauma.
degeneration occurring at a later agein young adults
and due to a simple autosomal recessive gene.
The sheep (Figs 11.244-11.246)
Odd cases of advanced retinal degeneration (Fig
11.219)and focal post-inflammatory degeneration
Bright blindness in sheep is a primary toxic
(Fig 11.220) occur occasionally, and hypertensive
retinopathy due to the ingestion of bracken. It is
bilateral, symmetrical and progressive unless the
retinopathy,usually
presenting
withsudden
causeisremoved.There is anassociatedleucopaenia
blindness due to haemorrhage and/or detachment,
and ophthalmoscopically the classical signs are
is now well recognized in this species.
evident.Pupilsare dilated and the eyes have abright
Taurine deficiency retinopathy(Figs 11.221-11.226),
starting at the area centralis and progressing in a
reflectiveglow.
band above the optic disc tobecome generalized in
advanced cases,is an interesting and unusual
condition only affecting the cat. Occasional cases
occurinpet cats.
194
Fundus
Fig.11.213 Progressive retinalatrophy(Abyssinian,
Fig.11.215 Progressive retinal atrophy (Abyssinian-
6months old)Rod/cone dysplasia showing classical
cross, 10 weeks old) Early changes.
ophthalmoscopic signsof tapetal hyper-reflectivity and
blood vessel attenuation.Hereditary and due to a
dominantgene.
Fig.11.214 Progressive retinal atrophy (Abyssinian,
Fig. 11.216 Normal fundus(Abyssinian-cross,10
12months old) Advanced rod/cone dysplasia.Note the
weeksold) Littermatecontrol tokitten in Fig 11.215.
tapetal degeneration in the area centralis region.
195
Diseases of theretina-theretinopathies
Fig.11.217 Progressive retinal atrophy(Abyssinian,
Fig.11.219 Retinal degeneration(DSH tabby and
6months old) Note increased tapetal reflectivity and
white,3yearsold)Advanced bilateral retinal
degeneration with only ghost vessels remaining.
attenuatedblood vessels.
Aetiologyunknown.
Fig.11.218 Normal fundus(Abyssinian,6months old)
Fig.11.220 Focal retinal degeneration(DSH,5years
Littermate to the cat in Fig 11.217,showingnormal
old)Several areas of focal retinal degeneration.
tapetal reflectivity and normal retinal bloodvessels.
Aetiology probably toxoplasmosis.
196
Fundus
Fig.11.221 Taurine deficiency retinopathy
Fig.11.223 Taurine deficiencyretinopathy
(experimental DSH) Note the early small focal spot at
[experimental DSH) Area ofretinal degeneration now
the area centralis,lateral to the optic disc.
approaching the optic disc.
Fig.11.222 Taurine deficiency retinopathy
Fig.11.224 Taurine deficiency retinopathy
[experimental DSH) Larger oval reflective area in the
(experimental DSH) The two areas of retinal
sameposition.
degeneration havenowmet inabridge immediately
superior to the optic disc.
Diseases of the retina-the retinopathies
197
Fig.11.225 Taurine deficiencyretinopathy
Fig.11.227 Hypertensive retinopathy（DSH,13years
(experimental DSH) Extension of the bridging
old]Serous retinal detachmentand sudden blindness.
degeneration above the disc.
Fig.11.226 Taurine deficiency retinopathy
Fig.11.228 Hypertensive retinopathy（DSH,12years
(experimental DSH) Generalized retinal degeneration in
old)Retinal haemorrhages.
an advanced case.Vision now defective but,prior to this
stage,no effect on vision was apparent.
198
Fundus
Fig.11.229 Diabetic retinopathy （DSH,10 years old)
Fig.11.231 Retinal detachment（DSH,4 months old)
Retinal haemorrhages and detachment visible through
Total detachment in both eyes.Note the central hole in
the pupil following prolonged administration(8years）of
theretina.Probably a congenital anomaly and rare.
megoestrolacetate.
Fig.11.230 Retinal haemorrhage（DSH,10years old)
Fig.11.232 Coloboma （DSH,12months old)
Retinal haemorrhage following trauma.
Colobomas affecting the retina,choroid and optic disc.
Diseases of the retina- theretinopathies
199
Fig.11.233 Chorioretinopathy(Hunter-type,7years
Fig.11.235 Chorioretinopathy （pony,25 years old)
old) Focal linear lesions in the non-tapetal fundus.
Peripapillary and pigmentary degeneration.
Fig.11.234 Chorioretinopathy(Hunter-type,7years
Fig.11.236 Retinopathy (Hunter-type,12yearsold)
old) Similar lesions to Fig 11.233,peripapillary and on
Focal lesions of retinal degeneration.Note the change in
both sides of the disc.The so-called butterfly'lesion.
colour and hyper-reflectivity,together with pigmentary
disturbance in the tapetal fundus.
200
Fundus
Fig.11.237 Retinopathy（Thoroughbred,8years old）
Fig.11.239 Retinopathy （Thoroughbred,1yearold)
Focal areas ofretinal degeneration in the non-tapetal
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy,bilateral and
fundus,peripapillary and away from the disc.Some optic
resulting in defective vision.Note the typical signs and
atrophy.
similarity to GPRA in the dog and cat.Arare case.
Fig.11.238 Senile retinopathy (Shetland pony,aged)
Fig.11.240 Retinal detachment (Hunter-type,
Peripapillary pigmentary changesand loss of choroidal
6months old) Total detachment in both eyes with total
circulation.
blindness,probably congenital.
Diseases of the retina -theretinopathies
201
Fig.11.241 Retinal detachment (Hackney pony.
Fig.11.242 Retinal haemorrhages (Thoroughbred foal,
3weeks old) Bilateral and congenital.
few days old) Multiple small retinal haemorrhages in
Convulsive Foal Syndrome (post mortem specimen).
Fig.11.243 Coloboma (Thoroughbred,2 months old)
Retinal colobomas in the typical position below the disc.
202
Fundus
Fig.11.244 Retinal degeneration(Hill Breed ewe)
Fig.11.245 Retinal degeneration(Hill Breed ewe)
Brightblindnessorprimary toxicretinopathy due to the
Note the attenuation of theretinal blood vessels.
ingestion ofbracken.
Aetiology as previousfigure.
Fig.11.246 Retinal degeneration(Hill Breed ewe)
Note the increased tapetal reflectivity.Aetiology as
previousfigures.
12
Chapter
The Optic Nerve
Introduction
The optic nerve (cranial nerve Il),or more
particularly the optic nerve head or optic disc as
it appears as part of the fundus (Chapter 11),
exhibitsa few important conditionswhichwill be
illustrated.The normal appearance of the optic
disc in all the species is shown in the previous
section and there will be a degree of overlap
between the two chapters,as conditions of the
fundus,in particular choroid and retina, not
infrequently involve the optic nerve and are
visible ophthalmoscopically.
The degree of medullation in all the species
varies considerably and this fact doesnot help in
diagnosis.Similarly,the size and colour of the disc
also exhibit normal variations, as well as being
important factors in pathology.
Fig.12.1 Papilloedema (West Highland White Terrier,
7years old)Note the enlarged size of the disc and
congestion of the retinal veins,in particular the fine
ones on the disc itself.The papilloedema was bilateral
and a pupillary light reflexwas present.
Conditions of the optic nerve
neuritis usually presents as sudden loss ofvision
(Figs 12.1-12.29)
with dilated pupils and absence of the pupillary light
reflex. Papilloedema is very rare in both the cat
Acquired conditions
and the horse,but is important in cattle as it is the
An increased size of disc occurs in papilloedema (as
first objective clinical sign in cases of vitamin A
well as pseudopapilloedema due to excessivedeficiency,withultimateopticatrophyand blindness
medullation）;in optic neuritis; in some disc developing if untreated. Blindness in one or two
colobomas (see Chapter 1l,section on CEA);and in animals in a group is usually the presenting sign of
tumours (see Fig 12.10).Papilloedema and optic hypovitaminosis A.
Decreasein size of the opticdiscoccursincasesof
However, the former is not accompanied by loss ofoptic atrophy in all the species;in optic disc cupping
vision unless and until optic atrophy develops, due to glaucoma,but mainly in the dog;and in optic
although theremaybeother signsof adisturbance of
nerve hypoplasia.
thecentralnervoussystem.On theotherhand,optic
203
204
TheOpticNerve
Congenital conditions
Congenital conditions affecting the opticdiscinclude
optic nerve hypoplasia (dog) and coloboma (dog, cat
and cattle);hereditary abnormalities include optic
nerve hypoplasia (dog) and coloboma of the optic
nerve (dog, cat and cattle).
For a summary of causes of blindness,see Table
12.1.
Fig.12.3 Papilloedema (Miniature Poodle,8years old)
Note the swollen disc protruding forward into the
vitreous.
Fig.12.2Papilloedema （Griffon,4yearsold)Again note
size of disc,fuzzy outline to disc and dipping of the blood
vessels as they pass over the edge of the raised disc.
Fig.12.4 Optic neuritis (Maltese Terrier,7 years old)
Presenting signswere sudden loss ofvision and absence
of the pupillary light reflex.Note the similar
ophthalmoscopic appearance to papilloedema.
Conditionsof the optic nerve
205
Fig.12.5Optic neuritis (Labrador Retriever,18months
Fig.12.7 0ptic atrophy (Lhasa Apso,18months old)
old) The other eye was affected but not as severely.This
Optic atrophy following prolapse of the globe several
eye showed optic atrophymonths later.
weeksprior to ophthalmoscopic diagnosis.The eyehad
been blind since the accident.
Fig.12.6 Optic atrophy (Border Collie,5years old)
Fig.12.8 Optic disc cupping (Welsh Springer Spaniel,
Post-inflammatory optic nerve atrophy and retinal
2years old)Severe cuppingof the disc due to primary
degeneration of unknown aetiology.The eye was blind.
glaucoma.
TheOpticNerve
206
Fig.12.9 Optic disc cupping (English Springer Spaniel,
Fig.12.11 Optic nerve hypoplasia （Toy Poodle,2years
5years old) Cupped disc,togetherwith retinal
old) Hereditary in this breed.There was absence of the
degeneration,due to primary glaucoma.
pupillary light reflex and the dog was blind.Note the
large size of the retinal veins on the disc and compare
this figure with micropapilla (Fig 11.30).
Fig.12.10 Optic nerve tumour (Miniature Poodle,
Fig.12.12 Optic nerve hypoplasia (Shetland
7years old) Retrobulbar meningioma.Note the vascular
Sheepdog.7 weeks old) Unilateral in this case,the
congestion on the surface of the disc and the vitreal
other eye being normal and with a good pupillary light
degeneration,particularly evident to the right-hand side
reflex.The affected eye had no direct pupillary reflex.
ofthedisc.
Conditionsof the optic nerve
207
Fig.12.15 Optic atrophy （Thoroughbred,6years old)
Fig.12.13 Coloboma （Basenji,10yearsold)Typical
coloboma of theoptic disc at 6o'clock.Note dipping of
Unilateral opticatrophy,the other eye being normal,and
vessels,particularly the one at 6 o'clock.Inherited in this
a consensual lightreflexpresent.Opticatrophy,usually
breed in association with persistent pupillary membrane.
due to trauma,is not uncommon in this species.
Fig.12.14 Coloboma （Beagle,1year old) Typical disc
Fig.12.160ptic atrophy（Thoroughbred,1year old)
coloboma at 6 o'clock.Unilateral in this case and with
Bilateral optic atrophy with secondary retinal degeneration.
Note the grey disc with absence of retinal vessels.
no evidence of heredity in thisbreed.
208
TheOpticNerve
Fig.12.17 Optic atrophy (Welsh Cob,5years old)
Fig.12.19 Proliferative optic neuropathy Thoroughbred,
Note the very pale disc （the shape of the disc is not
4years old)Extrusion ofglial materialinto thevitreous
significant).
following a massive haemorrhagenot involving the eye.
Fig.12.18 Normal disc(Welsh Cob,5years old) The
Fig.12.20 Papilloedema (Ayrshire calf) Papilloedema
other eye of the same horse shown in Fig 12.17,to
in vitamin A deficiency.Note the small flame-shaped
compare the disc colour and shape.
haemorrhageat5o'clock.
Conditionsof the optic nerve
209
Fig.12.21 Papilloedema(Shorthorn calf)Advanced
Fig.12.23 0pticatrophy(Shorthorn heifer,18months
papilloedema due to vitamin A deficiency.Note the
old)Opticnerve degeneration followingpapilloedema
enlarged disc with fuzzy outline,congested vesselson
due tovitamin A deficiency.
the disc and vessels dipping over the edge of the disc.
Fig.12.22 Papilloedema（Friesian bullock)Note the
Fig.12.24 0ptic atrophy and retinal degeneration
(Guernsey calf) Linear pale areas in the non-tapetal
large haemorhage at the edge of the disc.Another
vitamin A deficiency case.
fundus in anadvanced case ofvitamin A deficiency with
early optic disc atrophy.Note the similarappearance to
the secondaryretinal degeneration with optic atrophy in
thehorse(Fig12.16).
210
TheOpticNerve
Fig.12.25 Coloboma （Charolais,2years old)Mild
Fig.12.26 Coloboma (Charolais,male) Mild coloboma
colobomatous change with pigmentary disturbance in
at the lower edgeof the disc and againnotethe
the non-tapetal fundus below the disc.
pigmentary change below the disc similar to Fig 12.25.
Fig.12.27 Coloboma (Charolais,male) Triangular
Conditions of the optic nerve
211
Fig.12.29 Coloboma (Charolais bull) Severe coloboma
Fig.12.28 Coloboma [Charolais,female,4 months
old)Coloboma of the whole disc and peripapillary
of the disc and the surrounding area.This was the only
region.Note the abnormal and persistent hyaloid artery.
animal in thisserieswith evidence of defective vision.
Table 12.1-Theblind eye
Vision loss as apresenting sign is usually due to a bilateral
at presentation but flat ERG
condition,asuniocularblindnessisrarelynoted byowners unless
Intracranial lesion-neoplasia:ERGmay be normal
Toxicity,e.g.bright blindnessin sheep
theeye.
Taurine deficiency (cat)
Generalized progressive retinal atrophy (GPRA)- slowly
Causes
progressive:breed incidence
Retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy (RPED)-progressive but
Trauma,e.g.prolapse
Uveitis-red,painful eye
total blindnessuncommon:breed incidence
Glaucoma-dilated pupil and pain
Collie eye anomaly (CEA)-blindness rare:breed ineidence
Cataractdiabetic cataract can be sudden in onset and is
Retinal dysplasia:breed incidence
bilateral)
-Total retinal dysplasia (TRD)-total blindness
Haemorrhage
trauma,coagulopathy,neoplasia,Collie eye
Multifocal retinal dysplasia (MRD)-defective vision rare
anomaly(CEA)
Papilloedema-eventual vision loss
Retinal detachment
Optic neuritis-blindness
Chorioretinitis-inflammatory lesion,sudden or progressive
Opticatrophy-blindness
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration(SARD)-fundus normal
A
and cataracts 113
corneal68
eyelids21
eyelids22
Abscess, corneal 67
fundic176-8,193,198
Development
Acute purulent conjunctivitis36
optic disc206-7,209-10
of canine fundus 147-9
Adenocarcinoma,ciliary body81
retinal201
of feline fundus 152
Adenoma,ciliary body 81
uveal tract78,84-5
Diabetic cataract 114
Amelanoticmelanoma 84
with chorioretinal dysplasia174-5
Diabeticretinopathy198
Anterior polar cataract 116
Cone dysplasia 163
Dislocation of lens 113,120-7
Aphakic crescent 124
Cone/rod dystrophy 167-8
Distichiasis14-16
Aqueous94,96
Conjunctiva
Dry eye29-30
Asteroid hyalosis 131-2
calcinosis39
Atopic conjunctivitis36-7
cysts25,41-2
E
dermoids41
B
Ectopiccilia 14-16
haemorrhages37-8
Blepharitis 16-17
Conjunctivitis 35-7
Enophthalmos 2
Blind eye211
Epiphora 29-30
acute purulent36
Blood vessels,retinal142,146-7,151
Episcleritis 42,45
atopic36-7
Excessive vascular tortuosity 179
Buphthalmos 6
chronic36
Exophthalmos2-4
follicular24,36
Extensive retinal detachment 183
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis(IBK)
C
Eyelids
52-3
Cartilage deformity 26-7
blepharitis 16-17
keratoconjunctivitis sicca(KCS）29-30,53,
Cataracts 70,78
distichiasis 14-16
57-60
andmicrophthalmos108-9
ectopiccilia 14-16
Cornea
bilateral 104-5
ectropion 13-14
congenital anomalies 68
central102
entropion 10-13
dermoids68
cortical 103
hordeolum-external 18
granulation tissue50-1
dislocated 127
introduction9
introduction 47
early101
meibomian cyst 18
keratitis48-52
late-onset101
meibomianitis18
keratoconjunctivitis sicca（KCS）53,57-60
nuclear 106-7,110
neoplasia18-21
lipidkeratopathies 63-5
partial104
trichiasis16-17
lipidosis63-5
posterior polar98-100,102-3
neoplasia68
posterior synechiae and76
oedema60-2
F
progressive 104-5
opacity 123-4
secondary toglaucoma 112
Fluorescein patency test 29
sequestrum65-6
secondary to retinal disease 111-12
Focalretinal degeneration195
trauma and foreign bodies 66-7
symmetrical105
Follicular conjunctivitis24,36
ulcers52-7
total99-105
Foreign bodies
Corpora nigra 80
two foci of103
conjunctival fornices41
Cysts
Central progressive retinal atrophy(CPRA)
corneal66-7
conjunctival 25,41-2
nictitating membrane23-4
162
uveal tract78-80
vitreal131-3
Chemosis25,37
vitreal133
Chorioretinal dysplasia(CRD)168,172-4
Freckles,iris82
Chorioretinitis188
Fundus
D
Chorioretinopathy 199
diseasesof the retina 160-202(see also
Chronic conjunctivitis36
Deformity of cartilage26-7
specific disease)
Collie eye anomaly (CEA）162,168-72,180
Dermoids
introduction 135
Colobomas
conjunctival 41
normal bovine and ovine 157-9
213
214
Index
Fundus,cont'd
eosinophilic51-2
optic nerve206
normalcanine 135-49
exposure49
uveal tract 78,80-5
normal equine153-7
fungal52
New Forest disease52-3
normal feline 150-3
infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis(IBK)
Nictitans gland 24
other species160
52-3
Nictitating membrane
interstitial48
inflammation 23-6
G
pigmentary 49
introduction23
punctate49
prominence of 23
Generalizedprogressiveretinal atrophy
Keratitis precipitata (KP)72
trauma and foreign bodies23-4
（GPRA）111-12,161-2,168,200
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS)29-30,53,
Non-tapetal fundus138-40,151
Glaucoma
57-60
Normaleye2
cataract secondary to 112
Nutritional cataract 114-15
clinical signs 90-2
Nystagmus8
gonioscopy 94-6
L
introduction 89
Lacrimal system
0
primary hereditary-breeds affected 93
introduction 29-30
secondary 93,125
punctal abnormalities30-3
Occluded nasolacrimal puncta 33
Globe and orbit
Lamellar cataract 116
Occluded punctum 32
buphthalmos6
Lens
Ocular discharge31
enophthalmos 2
Oedema,corneal 60-2
cataracts secondary to another condition
exophthalmos2-4
110-13
Opacity
hydrophthalmos6-7
congenital cataracts 106-10
corneal123-4
introduction 1
false cataracts 113
temporary119-20
microphthalmos4-6
introduction97
Optic atrophy 205,207,209
nystagmus8
lens luxation 113,120-7
Opticdisc
phthisis bulbi7
metabolic,toxic and nutritional cataracts
bovine159
prolapse4
113
canine142-6
strabismus7-8
primary hereditary non-congenital
cupping205
Gonioscopy 94-5
cataracts98-106
equine155-7
Granuloma,nictitating membrane 25
Limbal melanoma 44
Opticnerve
Lipid keratopathies63-5
acquired conditions203
H
Liquefaction 131
congenital conditions204-11
Lymphosarcoma 44,82,83
hypoplasia 206
Haemangioma 44
Haemorrhages
introduction 203
tumour206
conjunctival 37-8
M
Opticneuritis204
retinal186,191-2,198,201
Meibomian cyst18
Orbit see Globe and orbit
vitreal 131-3
Meibomianitis18
Orbital adenocarcinoma 2
Harada's disease 76
Melanoma
Hordeolum,external 18
amelanotic84
Hydrophthalmos6-7
P
ciliary body 80,81
Hypertensive retinopathy 197
iris80-3
Pannus 48-51
Hyphaema73,94,96,180
Papilloedema203-4,208-9
limbal44
Hypopyon 94,96
Microcornea 68
Persistent hyaloid artery（PHA）113,129
Persistent hyperplastic primary vitreous
Microphthalmos 4-6,108-9
Micropunctum31
(PHPV)102,129-31
Persistent hyperplastic tunica vasculosa
Multicentric lymphosarcoma 82,83
Imperforate punctum 30,31,32
lentis(PHTVL)129-31
Infectious bovine keratoconjunctivitis(IBK)
Multifocal retinal dysplasia (MRD)112,172,
Persistent pupillary membranes (PPM）78,
52-3
180,182-6
85-7
Inflammation of nictitating membrane 23-6
Phthisis bulbi7
Infundibular detachment 181
N
Pigment epithelial dystrophy 112,169-71
Iridocyclitis70-8
Nasolacrimal duct
Pigment on anterior lens capsule 119
Iris
foreign body 32
Plasma cell infiltration 25-6
freckles82
infection 33
Post-inflammatory degeneration 193
hypoplasia 80
Neoplasia
Post-inflammatory retinopathy 186-90
iritis70-8
conjunctival 42-4
Posterior lenticonus 107,112
corneal68
Posteriorlentiglobus107
K
eyelid18-21
Posterior synechiae74-6
Keratitis
globe8
Progressive retinal atrophy 111-12,165-6,
chronic superficial (pannus)48-51
nictitating membrane27-8
194-5
Index
215
Prolapse
Synchysis scintillans131-2
Akita76
American CockerSpaniel 62,103,104,117
globe4
Syneresis131
nictitans gland 26
subconjunctival fat 39
T
B
Proliferative opticneuropathy208
Tapetum
Basenji 206
Pseudopapilloedema 203
canine 135-9
Basset Hound32,92
Punctal abnormalities 30-3
Beagle 13,18-19,85,91,115,119-20,140,
equine153-5
Pupil,vitreous in the 121
144-5,185,193,207
feline 150
tapetal fundus 135-8
Bichon Frise 58
R
BorderCollie5,74,112-13,116,122,138
tapetal junction 138-9
147,171-3,175,187,205
Red eye89
tapetum nigrum139-40
Taurine deficiency retinopathy 193,
Resorption,cataract 117-18
BorderTerrier67
196-7
BostonTerrier 101,140
Retina
Tear streak30
Boxer7,19,51,54,137
blood vessels 142,146-7,151
Temporary opacity119-20
Briard144,171
degenerationof190,193,195,200,202,
Tigroid non-tapetal fundus151
Bull Mastiff 86
209
Total retinal dysplasia（TRD)172,180-1,184,
Bulldog26
detachment of178-9,183,192-3,198,
201
186
diseases of the (see also specific disease)
Toxic cataract 115
canine160-93
Toxoplasmosis72
Cairn Terrier39,86,94
equine 193,199-201
Trauma
Cardigan Corgi 120,163
feline193-8
corneal66-7
CavalierKing CharlesSpaniel 6,13,18,40,
nictitating membrane 23-4
ovine193,202
59,63-4,67,70,74,105,107,126,
traumatic cataract 118
haemorrhage 186,191-2,198,201
129,184-5
multifocalretinal dysplasia(MRD) 172,
uveal tract 77-8
Chihuahua 62,132,144
180,182-6
Trichiasis 16-17
Chow10.11,51
retinal atrophy 111-12
Tumour see Neoplasia
Clumber Spaniel 13
retinal folds185
Cockerani11,13,17,31,38,108,119
retinal pigment epithelial dystrophy
U
131,136,164-5,191
(RPED)162,171-2
Crossbred 41,50,72-3,78,94,109,114,
Ulcers,corneal527
total retinal dysplasia（TRD)172,180-1,
132,143,188-9,191-3
Uveal tract
184,186
clinical signs of anterior uveitis70
Crossbred terrier32,122
Retrobulbar meningioma 206
congenital anomalies78-87
Rod/cone degeneration164-5,167
cysts78-80
D
Rod/cone dysplasia163,193
introduction 69
Dobermann 130,189
Rubeosis iridis73
neoplasia78,80-5
Dogue de Bordeaux 41
sequelae70.76,78
S
trauma77-8
E
Schirmer tear test 29
Uveitis70-8,104
Elkhound 163
Scleritis 42,45
EnglishSetter25
Senile nuclear sclerosis 119
V
EnglishSpringerSpaniel3,7,61,67,77,80
Senile retinopathy 200
Vascular anomaly 180
82,91,108,112,116-17,132,146-7,
Sequelae 70,76,78
Vitreous
166,182-4,189,205
Squamous cell carcinoma
acquired131-3
conjunctival 43
congenital 129-31
globe8
F
in the pupil 121
nictitating membrane 27-8
introduction 129
Flat-Coated Retriever 15,16,133
Strabismus7-8
Foxhound 114
Voght-Kayanaga-Harada (VLH)76
Stromal cyst80
French Bulldog4
Stye18
W
Subalbinism151-2,155
G
Subalbinotic fundus 141-2
Warfarin poisoning38
Wet eye29-30
German ShepherdDog 3,5,25-7,49-50.64
Subcapsular cataract 116
67-8,104,131,144,146,187
Subconjunctival fat prolapse39
German Shorthaired Pointer 10
Subconjunctival haemorrhage38
IndexofDog Breeds
Goldeneriv12180,32,42,44564
Subconjunctival masses 38
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration SARD)
A
98-9,132-3,138-9,145,167,185
Gordon Setter 44
186,191
Afghan Hound 81,102,190
GreatDan6,0,841
Symblepharon 38-41,42
AiredaleTerrier45,60,72
216
Index
Greyhound2,81,136,139,143,148,187-8
R
D
190
Rottweiler 10.85
Donkey 157
Griffon204
Rough Collie2,33,45,63,142,147,171
173-5,178-80,185
H
Horse5,7,20-1,28,31,37,43,53,55,57
IrishSetter19,94,163
S
63,68,71,75,76,79-80,83-5,87,
Samoyed58
93,110,116-17,153-7,199-201,
SealyhamTerrier6,122,125-6,181
207-8
JackRussellTerrier57,62,74,118,121,
Shar Pei11
Human161
ShetlandSheepdog58,15-16,49,124.
123-4.126
129,137-8,141-2,172-80,206
M
Siberian Husky64
L
Smooth-hairedFoxTerrier 124.190
Monkey 161
LabradorRetriever3,18-19,22,28,36,44
St Bernard14
78-9,81,85,99-100,112,114,119
Staffordshire BullTerrier21,81,102,130
P
131,137,139-40,143,145,167
Standard Poodle105,191
Pig161
169-71,181-2,186-7,189-90,192,
Standard Schnauzer 92
204
R
Lakeland Terrier 117
T
Leonberger 102
Rabbit 161
Tibetan terrier111,122-3,165-6
Lhasa Apso 205
Rat162
Toy Poodle206
Longhaired Dachshund 61
S
Lurcher 116
W
Sheep12,159-60,202
M
Weimaraner27,71
WelshSpringerSpaniel90-1,93-5,105,
T
Maltese Terrier204
205
Miniature Longhaired Dachshund 14,119-20,
Tiger115
WelshTerrier125
143.167-8
West Highland WhiteTerrier57-9,109,203
MiniaturePoodle 4,70-1,74,84,92,111,
Whippet 191
Indexof Conditions
136,164,192,204,206
WirehairedFoxTerrier 123
Miniature Schnauzer 106,166
C
Munsterlander39
CongenitalAbnormalities5,6,8,12,212
Y
30,40,47,59,68,78,84-7,89,97.
YorkshireTerrier41,59,145
N
106-10,113,114,129-31,160,162,
Norwegian Buhund 102,103
168,172-86,198,201,204,206-7
B
209-10
Bird 162
0
H
Old EnglishShepdog32,86,109,113186,
Hereditary Conditions12,14-17,22,30,41,
Species Index
188
47,62,93,97,98-106,135,160
C
161-2,163-86,193-5,200,204
P
206-7,209-10
Cat6,12,20-2,24-5,28,33,36-7,39-42
Pekingese 15-17,49
44,51-2,54,65-6,72-3,75,78-9,
Pembroke Corgi 12,19.54,114,139
82-3,86-7,95,118,127,133
N
Pointer140
150-2,194-8
NeoplasiaCases2,3,47,8,18-21,278,
Pug55,65
Catl853211910
42-4,47,68,78,80-4,206
Diagnostic Atlas
of Veterinary
Ophthalmology
This second edition of the outstandingreference,
Features:
VeterinaryOphthalmology,hasbeenrenamed
·Completelyrewrittenandexpanded
DiagnosticAtlasofVeterinary Ophthalmology,
Over 7o0 colourphotographsfrom the author's
reflecting thecompletelyrewrittenandexpanded
unique collection
Additionof tablesof differential diagnoses
Nowwithover7o0exclusivephotographs,the
defining the most significant facts
book isnot just a simple collection of imagesbut
A numberof new conditionsillustrated
an aid to diagnosis and differential diagnosis,
Remainsonlyveterinaryophthalmicatlas
providing most non-specialists andveterinarians
coveringall domesticspeciesand entirelyaimed
with all theyneed toknow.The textis also used
at diagnosis
todrawthereadertofeaturesassociatedwith
diagnosis.
DiagnosticAtlasofVeterinaryOphthalmology
includesextensiveserieson thewidevariation
ofthenormal fundusparticularlyinthedogbut
also the cat,horse and cowaswell asexamples
ofotheranimals.Many ofthepathological
conditions featuredin thenewedition illustrate the
variations anddiffering degrees inseverityofthe
abnormalitiesconsideredvital inleadingthereader
to an.accurate diagnosis.
MOSBY
ELSEVIER
www.elsevierhealth.com