Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
FIVE
MINUTE
SmallAnimal
Dermatology
SECOND EDITION
Supplementary
CD
Karen Helton Rhodes
withCLIENT
&Alexander H.Werner
HANDOUTS
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
This page intentionally left blank
Blackwell's Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
SmallAnimal
Dermatology
Second Edition
This page intentionally left blank
Blackwell's Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
Smal Animal
Dermatology
Second Edition
Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM
 Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Dermatology
Riverdale Veterinary Dermatology
Riverdale, New Jersey
and
Alexander H. Werner, VMD
Diplomate, American College of Veterinary Dermatology
Animal Dermatology Center
Studio City California 
WILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Publication
This edition hrst published 20l l @ 20l l by Blackwell Publishing Lid.
Blackwell Publishing wa5 acquired by John Wiley &r Sons in February 2007. Blackwells publishing program has been merged
with Wileys global Scientifc, Technical and Medical business lo form Wiley-Blackwell.
Registered office: John Wiley &r Sons Lid, The Atrium, Southern Gale, Chichester, West Sussex, POl9 SSQ, UK
Editorial offces: 212l Slale Avenue, Ames, lowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, POl 9 SSQ, UK
9600 Garsinglon Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For delails of our global editorial ofhces, for customer services and for information about how lo apply for permission lo reuse
the copyright malerial in lhis book please see our websile al www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization lo photocopy ilems for internal or personal use, or the inlernal or personal use of specifc clients, is granted by
Blackwell Publishing, provided thal the base fee is paid direcly lo the Copyrighl Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive,
Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC,a separale syslm of
payments has been arranged. The [ee codes for users of the Transaclional Reporting Service are 1SBN-13:
978-0-8138-1 596-1/2011.
Designalions used by companies lo distinguish their producls are oflen claimed as lrademarks. All brand names and producl
names used in his book are trade names service marks, trademarks or registered trademarks of their respective owners. The
publisher is nol associatled with any product or vendor mentioned in Uhis book. This publication is designed lo provide accurale
lou st raus[qnd aun neun Bugpueisrapun aqn uo pros s l paraAos rameu palqns aqn ol preaar u uoreuwroju aAneiroqine pue
engaged in rendering professional services. lf professional advice or other experl assislance is required, the services of a
compelenl prolessional should be sought.
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientifc research, underslanding, and discussion only and are not
intended and should not be relied upon as recommending or promoting a specihc melhod, diagnosis, or lrealment by
praclilioners for any parlicular patient. The publisher and the author make no represenlalions or warranties with respecl lo the
Xue uonenrus[ nmoqnim auspnput 'sanueirex [e wre[osip Aeoyrads pue yron siun jo suajuos aun jo ssauana[duos ro Aoernsse
ur sagueuo 'suoneoyspow juawudrmba 'qpreasar guroguo jo Mara ul 'asodind re[nonred e roj ssauny jo sanuerrex pas[du!
governmental regulations, and the constant low of information relating lo the use of medicines, equipment, and devices, the
reader is urged to review and evaluale lhe inlormalion provided in lhe package inserl or instruclions for each medicine,
saururex pappe roj pue agesn jo uogesrput ro suogonrsur aun ut sagueuo Aue sauryi rauno guowe roj aorap ro huawdnba
and precaulions. Readers should consul with a specialisl where appropriale. The facl thal an organizalion or Websile is referred
lo in Uhis work a5 a cilalion and/or a potential source of further informalion does nol mean Lhal the author or the publisher
endorses the inlormation he organization or Website may provide or recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be
aware thal lnlernel Websiles listed in this work may have changed or disappeared belween when this work was willen and
when it is read. No warranty may be crealed or exlended by any promolional stalements for lhis work. Neither the publisher
nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herelrom.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Rhodes, Karen Hellon.
 Blackwells hve-minule velerinary consull clinical companion. Small animal dermalology / Karen Hellon Rhodes and
Alexander H. Werner. - 2nd ed.
P- ; cm.
Other title: Five-minute veterinary consult clinical companion
Other title: Small animal dermatology
Rev. ed. of: The hve minule velerinary consull clinical companion : small animal dermalology / Karen Helon Rhodes. c2002.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1SBN 978-0-8138-1596-l (pbk. alk. paper) l. Dogs-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals, elc. 2. Cals-Diseases-Handbooks,
manuals, elc. 3. Exolic animals-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals, elc. 4. Velerinary dermalology-Handbooks, manuals,
elc. l. Werner, Alexander H. ll. Rhodes, Karen Helon. Five minule velerinary consull clinical
companion. ll. Title. IV. Tile: Five-minule velerinary consul clinical companion. V. Tile: Small animal dermalology.
[DNlM: Il. Dog Diseases-Handbooks. 2. Skin Disease-veterinary-Handbooks. 3. Cal Diseases-Handbooks. SF 992.S55]
5F992.555R46 2011
636.089′65-dc22
201002656 1
A calalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in I0.5/l3 pl Berkeley by Toppan Best-sel Premedia Limiled
11071
This text is dedicated to:
■
 Steven, as an expression of gratitude for his continued support in every endeavor.
■ Cameron, may she continue to explore her talent and mastery of the written
expression.
 My parents, Anne and Bill, in appreciation for the gift of an education.
■And, as always ... to Authur I. Hurvitz who, even in his absence, continues to be
my mentor, friend, and muse.
Karen Helton Rhodes
■To Rita Werner, our family's first author, who always believed in me, and to my
mentors who believe in me still.
■To my siblings who always had faith in me, and to Mike who has faith in me still.
■
 And to my children, Jacob and Gregory, who will have faith in me again when they
are no longer teenagers.
Alexander H. Werner
This page intentionally left blank
Contents
Preface
Acknowledgments
section 1
Basics
chapter
Lesion Description/Terminology. .
4
chapter
2
Practical Cytology. . .
17
chapter
3
Diagnostic Culture and Identification (Bacterial and Fungal) .
27
chapter
4
Obtaining a Diagnostic Biopsy . .
36
chapter
5
Lesional and Regional Differentials .
44
chapter
6
Zoonosis.
88
section 2
Allergic and Hypersensitivity Dermatitis
chapter
Atopic Dermatitis
94
chapter
8
Contact Dermatitis .
104
chapter
9
Eosinophilic Granuloma Complex .
110
chapter
10
Food Adverse Reactions .
125
section 3
Endocrine Dermatoses
chapter 
11
Canine Hyperadrenocorticism.
132
chapter
12
Feline Hyperadrenocorticism/Skin Fragility Syndrome
142
chapter
13
Hypothyroidism .
147
chapter
14
Noninflammatory Alopecia.
159
section 4
mmunologic and Autoimmune Disorders
chapter 
15
Canine Familial Dermatomyositis . :
172
chapter
16
Discoid (Cutaneous) and Systemic Lupus Erythematosus 
179
chapter 
17
Drug Eruption, Erythema Multiforme, and Toxic
Epidermal Necrolysis. .
188
chapter 
18
Granulomatous Sebaceous Adenitis 
193
chapter 19
Panniculitis .
197
vii
vili
CONTENTS
chapter z
20
Pemphigus Complex and Bullous Pemphigoid
203
chapter
21
Sterile Nodular Granulomatous Dermatoses
232
chapter 22
Uveodermatologic Syndrome
242
chapter 23
Vasculitis.
247
section5
Infectious Dermatoses
chapter 24
Bacterial Folliculitis and Emerging Resistant Pyoderma .
256
chapter
25
Dermatophytosis.
275
chapter 26
Intermediate and Deep Mycosis . :
.283
chapter
27
Leishmaniasis: Protozoan Dermatitis .
294
chapter
28
Malassezia Dermatitis .
298
chapter 29
Mycobacterial Infections. 
305
chapter 30
Nocardiosis.
. 313
chapter 31
Viral Dermatoses
317
section 6
Neoplasias, Cutaneous/Paraneoplastic Dermatoses
chapter 32
Actinic Dermatoses. .
：324
chapter 33
Canine Pre- and Paraneoplastic Syndromes
338
chapter 34
Common Skin and Hair Follicle Tumors
351
chapter 3
35
Epitheliotropic Lymphoma .
363
chapter 36
Feline Paraneoplastic Syndromes
375
chapter 37
Histiocytosis . .
381
chapter 38
Mast Cell Tumors .
388
section7
 Parasitic Disorders
chapter 39
Biting and Stinging Insects .
398
chapter
40
Demodicosis (Canine and Feline)
413
chapter
41
Sarcoptid Mites (Sarcoptes, Cheyletiella, Notoedres,
and Otodectes).
. 426
section 8
Selected Topics
chapter
42
Acne, Canine and Feline.
434
chapter
43
Anal Sac Disorders/Perineal Fistulas .
437
chapter
44
Behavioral or Self-lnjurious Dermatoses . :
443
chapter 45
Disorders of Keratinization
459
chapter
46
Otitis Externa, Media, and Interna .
486
chapter
47
Pododermatitis and Claw Disorders
515
chapter 48
Superficial Necrolytic Dermatitis (Hepatocutaneous Syndrome). . : . . . 527
CONTENTS
ix
section 9
Exotic Pet Dermatology
chapter
49
Ferret
536
chapter
50
Guinea Pig.
545
chapter
51
Hamster
551
chapter !
52
Hedgehog
553
chapter
53
Mouse/Rat
556
chapter 54
Rabbit.
558
appendixes
appendix A
Clinical Management of Pruritic Inflammatory Skin Disease
568
appendix B
Canine Genodermatoses/Breed-Predisposition Dermatoses.
575
appendix C
Drug Formulary
586
appendix D
Client Education Handouts (also available on companion CD)
.. 684
Allergic Dermatitis, Canine & Feline.
685
Allergy Vaccine: Hyposensitization (General Information)
687
Antihistamine/Antipruritic Therapy..
690
Bacterial Infections.
692
Bloodwork Monitoring...
695
Chemotherapyllmmunosuppressive Therapy.
696
Contact Dermatitis
697
Demodex Mites
698
Dermatophytosis (Ringworm)
701
Elimination Diet Trial.
703
Granulomatous Sebaceous Adenitis . . .
. 705
House Dust Mite: Controlling Exposure
706
Malassezia Dermatitis (Yeast)
708
Mold Allergies: Controlling Exposure
. 709
Otitis (Ear Disease)
710
Pemphigus Foliaceus.
712
Scabies.
714
Shampoo Therapy: Instructions.
716
Surgical/Procedure Discharge Instructions. .
717
Symptoms of Cushing's Syndrome .
718
Treatment: Pituitary Cushing's Syndrome .. ..
. 720
Video-Otoscopy for the Surgical Management of Otitis Media
and Chronic Otitis Externa . .
.725
Suggested Reading
727
Index
728
Preface
I hope you find this new book an informative and vital resource for your clinical prac-
tice. The text is not meant to replace the more comprehensive dermatology textbooks
available but rather to augment your current library with a quick clinical resource of
the more common dermatologic disorders.
The second edition is a completely new compilation of information assembled in a
slightly different format. We have retained the “easy to scan" bullet layout although
redundancy has been eliminated. Numerous color photographs are still found through-
out the text to illustrate the clinical descriptions. The first edition consisted primarily
of excerpts drawn from Blackwells Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline.
Some of those chapters have been retained and updated yet most have been completely
replaced, thus making the second edition able to stand as a new text. I think the reader
will find the information current and clinically relevant.
Client education handouts used daily in my practice, Riverdale Veterinary Dermatology
have been included in the text and on the companion CD in the back of the book. These
handouts can be used as is or as a template of information for your own compilation.
i   s  n   a      
tion available to take home and read. I wish to thank Wiley-Blackwell, and specifically
  n         n  
than insisting on an update of the existing text.
I welcome and introduce Alexander Werner as a co-author in the compilation of this
manuscript. His clinical experience is centered along the western coast of the United
States while mine is along the northern and southeastern regions, which allows for a
 more diverse perspective. Karen Rosenthal continues to author the exotics section in
this edition. Her expertise and friendship is, as always, invaluable. I thank both of them
for assisting in this project.
Karen Helton Rhodes
Acknowledgments
Portions of chapters in the first edition of this book were provided by material contrib-
uted to the Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine and Feline by the following authors:
Albert H. Ahn
Stephen C. Barr
Karin M. Beale
Ellen N. Behrend
Karen L. Campbell
Edward G. Clark
Ellen C. Codner
Paul A. Cuddon
Elizabeth A. Curry-Galvin
David Duclos
 Robyn E. Elmslie
Carol S. Foil
Sharon F Grace
Elizabeth Goldman
John G. Gordon
 Joanne C. Graham
W. Dunbar Gram
Deborah Greco
 Jean Swingle Greek
Nita Kay Gulbas
Steven R. Hansen
Keith A. Hnilica
Johnny D. Hoskins
Richard J. Joseph
Robert J.Kemppainen
Peter P Kintzer
Karen Ann Kuhl
Suzette M. Leclerc
Alfred M. Legendre
Steven A. Levy
Dawn Elaine Logas
John MacDonald
Kenneth V. Mason
Xi
xii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Linda Medleau
Linda Messinger
Daniel O. Morris
K. Marcia Murphy
Gary D. Norsworthy
James O. Noxon
Allan J. Paul
Kenneth M. Rassnick
Lloyd M. Reedy
Keith P. Richter
Wayne Stewart Rosenkrantz
Karen L. Rosenthal
Fred W. Scott
Kevin Shanley
Francis W. K. Smith Jr.
Paul W. Snyder
Margaret S. Swartout
Sheila M. Torres
John W. Tyler
 Alexander H. Werner
J. Paul Woods
Karen M. Young
Anthony Yu
Blackwell's Five-Minute
Veterinary Consult
Clinical Companion
SmallAnimal
Dermatology
Second Edition
This page intentionally left blank
section
Basics
chapter
Lesion Description/
Terminology
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Definition and organization of dermatologic lesions is paramount for diagnosis and
monitoring of patients.
■ From the macroscopic pattern to the specific lesion type, an overall picture should
emerge.
■ Concise documentation in the record of the history and physical findings permits
formulation of the differential list leading to a final diagnosis.
■Example case description of flea allergic dermatitis: dorsal lumbosacral patch of
alopecia with papules, crusting, excoriations, and lichenification
DERMATOLOGIC TERMINOLOGY
■ Overall hair coat
■Shiny
■ Dull
■ Oily
■
Dry
Brittle
Thick
Thin (partial alopecia)
■
Absent (alopecia)
■ Color
■ Generalized changes from normal
■ Associated with specific colored hair
■ Distribution of lesions
 Symmetrical or asymmetrical
Regional (examples)
Feet
■Face
■Pinnae
■
Dorsal muzzle
■ Nasal planum
CHAPTER 1: LESION DESCRIPTION/TERMINOLOGY
 Mucous membrane
Mucocutaneous junction
■Footpad
■Dorsal
■
Ventral
■Truncal
■ Abdominal
■Head
■Neck
■Tail
Extremity
Pattern
■
Diffuse
■
Generalized
Focal
 Localized
■Patchy
■Regional
CLINICAL FEATURES: PRIMARY LESIONS VERSUS
SECONDARY LESIONS
 Primary lesions develop directly from the disease process:
 Scale: a thin accumulation of keratinocytes; further defined as fine, coarse, greasy.
dry, adherent, or loose (Fig. 1-1)
■ Crust: a thick accumulation of cells with dried exudate of serum, blood, pus, or
medications (Fig. 1-2)
■ Follicular cast: accumulation of follicular material above the level of the follicular
ostia; may be adherent to hair shaft
 Comedo: dilated hair follicle blocked by sebaceous and epidermal debris; when
the follicular ostia is open to the air, debris will darken to form a “Blackhead"
(Fig. 1-3)
 Lesions under lcm in diameter:
■ Macule: nonpalpable change in skin color; increased or decreased pigmentation,
hemorrhage, or erythema (Fig. 1-4)
 Papule: solid elevation of the skin (Fig. l-5)
■Vesicle: cellular fluid-filled lesion, within or just below the epidermis (Fig. 1-6)
■
 Pustule: acellular fluid-filled lesion, within or just below the epidermis; fluid most
often contains neutrophils, but may also contain eosinophils (Fig. 1-7)
Nodule: solid elevation of the skin that extends into deeper layers (Fig. 1-8)
1 Lesions over l cm in diameter:
■Patch: nonpalpable change in skin color; large macule (Fig. 1-9)
■Plaque: flat, palpable and solid elevation; large papule (Fig. 1-10)
Figure 1-1Scalecoarse accumulation of keratinocytes.
 Figure 1-2 Crust—thick accumulation of dried exudate on the nasal planum.
 Figure 1-3 Comedo—dilated hair follicle blocked by epidermal debris.
 Figure 1-4 Maculenonpalpable change in skin color.
 Figure 1-5 Papulesolid elevation of the skin (human with lesions from canine scabies)
 Figure 1-6 Vesicleacellular fluid-filled lesion (pemphigus foliaceus).
Figure 1-7  Pustule cellul ar fluid-filled lesion.
 Figure 1-8 Nodule—solid elevation of the skin that extends into deeper layers (Fibropruritic nodules)
10
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 1-9 Patch—large lesion of nonpalpable change in skin color (epitheliotropic lymphoma)
 Figure 1-10 Plaqueflat palpable and solid elevation (lipid)
■ Wheal: temporary accumulation of fluid in the dermis that creates a sharply
demarcated (steep-walled) raised area (Fig. l-1l)
■ Bulla: large accumulation of fluid, often extending into the dermis (Fig. l-12)
■ Abcess: very large accumulation of cellular fluid that extends deep into the dermis
and subcutaneous tissues
CHAPTER 1: LESION DESCRIPTION/TERMINOLOGY
11
 Figure 1-11 Wheal—temporary accumulation of fluid.
 Figure 1-12 Bulla—large accumulation of fluid, often extending into the dermis.
 Cyst: epithelium-lined cavity with fluid or semisolid matter often just beneath the
epidermis (Fig. 1-13)
■ Tumor: large mass that may involve the skin and deeper tissues (Fig. l-14)
1Pigmentation change
■ Hyperpigmentation: increase in cutaneous pigmentation
12
SECTION 1: BASICS
Figure 1-13 Cyst—epithelium-lined cavity with fluid (apocrine cyst).
 Figure 1-14 Tumor—large mass that may involve the skin and deeper tissues (Plasma cell tumor)
 Hypopigmentation: decrease in cutaneous pigmentation
Leukoderma: white skin
■Leukotrichia: white hair
Secondary lesions develop from primary lesionsmost often induced by the patient
or by the environment
CHAPTER 1: LESION DESCRIPTION/TERMINOLOGY
13
 Figure 1-15 Epidermal collarette—annular accumulation of scale.
■Figure 1-16 Lichenification—thickening of the skin with accentuation of normal pattern (primary
seborrhea).
Epidermal collarette: annular accumulation of scale, resulting from the enlargement
of a ruptured vesicle or pustule (Fig. 1-15)
■ Excoriation: linear erosion with erythema and crusting as a result of self-trauma
■  Lichenification: thickening of the skin with accentuation of the normal skin pattern
caused by chronic inflammation and self-trauma (Fig. 1-16)
14
SECTION 1: BASICS
■Figure 1-17 Erosion—defect in the skin that does not penetrate the dermal-epidermal junction
(pemphigus)
Figure 1-18 Ulcer—defect in the skin that penetrates the dermal-epidermal junction
■ Erosion: defect in the skin that does not penetrate the dermal-epidermal junction
(Fig. 1-17)
■  Ulcer: defect in the skin that penetrates the dermal-epidermal junction (Fig. 1-18)
■Fissure: linear defect penetrating the epidermis to the dermis (Fig. 1-19)
 Figure 1-19 Fissure—inear defect penetrating the epidermis (panniculitis)
 Figure 1-20 Fistula—deep. often draining lesion (metatarsal fistula).
15
16
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 1-21 Scar—area of fibrous tissue that has replaced normal skin (vaccination reaction)
■Fistula: deep lesion with a draining site (Fig. 1-20)
■ Scar: area of fibrous tissue that has replaced normal skin; often palpates as a thinned
or depressed defect (Fig. 1-21)
COMMENTS
■ Examination findings should be recorded in an organized and consistent manner
descriptions should provide a clear “picture” of the previous dermatologic condition
during subsequent examinations.
■ Findings should be organized from the “larger" to the “smaller" picture.
■ Identifying specific lesions correctly and understanding how they develop provides
invaluable pathophysiologic information.
■ Many dermatoses have pathognomonic appearances that, when correlated with sig-
nalment and history, can provide an appropriate and limited differential diagnosis
list.
■ Alternatively many dermatoses share similar physical findings: accurate record
descriptions may permit the clinician to develop a concise plan for the diagnosis and
treatment of patients with dermatologic disease.
Author: Alexander H. Werner
chapter
Practical Cytology
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Cutaneous cytology is an essential diagnostic tool. Samples should be obtained in
almost every dermatologic case. The technical aspects of sample collection and slide
preparation are critical for interpretative value. Skin scrapings and trichograms, otic
swabs/ smears, direct impression smears, fine-needle aspiration, and acetate tape prepa-
ration samples are the most frequently employed cytologic techniques in dermatology.
SKIN SCRAPINGS: SUPERFICIAL SAMPLE
 This sample is often used to diagnose infestations with sarcoptes, notoedres, cheyleti-
ella, demodex gatoi, demodex cornei, otodectes:
Select lesional skin.
 Place a small amount of mineral oil on a glass slide.
■ Use a scalpel blade #l0 or spatula.
Apply a small amount of mineral oil either to the blade or directly onto the selected
lesional skin.
1 Scrape the area in the direction of hair growth and transfer the resultant material to
the glass slide.
 Select several sites for sampling and, in the cases of a suspect sarcoptes infestation,
sample a large surface area.
 Certain sampling sites may be preferable depending on the suspect clinical diagnosis.
i.e., sarcoptes-pinnal margins and elbows/demodex dorsal midline or focal alopecic
sites.
■ Scan the slide using the l0x objective. Sometimes it is helpful to lower the micro-
scope condenser to provide greater contrast.
■Note the proportion of live/dead mites and egg/young/adult forms present (Fig. 2-1).
SKIN SCRAPINGS: DEEP SAMPLE
This sample is often used to diagnose infestations with demodex canis, demodex injai.
demodex cati:
17
18
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 2-1 Sarcoptes scabies mite and ova found on a superficial skin scraping of the ear margin.
■  The technique is the same as that for a superficial scrape except that an extra step
is added:
■ After the initial material is placed on the slide, squeeze the site between the thumb
and the forefinger, which initiates capillary oozing; scrape the area scraped again
to collect any material and place on the prepared slide.
■ This pressure theoretically forces the mites toward the surface of the hair
follicles.
■ Scan the slide using the l0x objective. Sometimes it is helpful to lower the micro-
scope condenser to provide greater contrast (Fig. 2-2).
■Note the proportion of live/dead mites and egg/young/adult forms present.
■ Caurion: edema and swelling, often seen with pododemodicosis, may make finding
 the mites more diffcult; sample at the margins of lesions.
TRICHOGRAMS: HAIR PLUCKS
Trichograms are often used as an adjunct to other types of sampling or when obtaining
periocular samples:
■
 Place a small amount of mineral oil on a glass slide.
■ Pluck a small sampling of hairs from lesional and/or perilesional skin with a hemostat
and place directly in the mineral oil; demodex mites may be seen clustered around
the hair bulb of extracted hairs.
■ Scan the slide using the l0x objective. Sometimes it is helpful to lower the
condenser to provide greater contrast.
CHAPTER 2: PRACTICAL CYTOLOGY
19
■Figure 2-2 Demodex canis mites. Skin scraping. Note the different stages of the mite, including an egg.
OTIC SWABS/SMEARS
Otic swabs are often used to diagnose bacterial and yeast overgrowth yet may aid other
differentials (neoplasia, keratinization disorders, mites, fungal infections). Otic cytology
should be performed on each otitis case and every time they are reexamined:
■ Obtain the sample for cytology by positioning a cotton swab at the juncture of the
vertical canal and the horizontal canal (approx. 75° angle—use caution straightening
the canal to avoid puncturing tympanum).
■ Roll the sample onto a glass slide; form letters R and L to identify which ear the
Heat-fix the slide by passing a flame under the slide for 2-3 seconds.
■1
 Use Diff-Quik stain (modified Wrights stain) and gently rinse the slide, being careful
not to dislodge the sample
 Initially examine the slide under l0x objective to identify the best field for observa-
tion; then use 40x, 100x, or oil immersion to identify the organisms and/or cellular
population.
Note the following:
 1. Inflammatory cells degenerate with infection yet often remain intact with immune-
mediated skin disease.
2. Acantholytic cells may be present in large numbers and lend diagnostic information
(e.g., pemphigus foliaceus).
3. If you see large number of epithelial cells with few bacteria, consider keratinization
disorder or hypothyroidism.
20
SECTION 1: BASICS
TABLE 2.1 Arbitrary scale for quantifying bacteria/
yeast (external canal)
Scale Bacteria
Per High power (400X) field
0
none
less than 1-2 organisms
2-5 organisms 
5-20 organisms
greater than 20
Scale Yeast
 Per High power (400X) field
none
less than 1
1-5
5-10
greater than 10
4. Remember that keratinocytes may have melanin granules.
5. Remember normal cerumen does not stain.
6. Neutrophils without bacteria may indicate a hypersensitivity reaction to medications
being placed in the ear canal (e.g., neomycin, propylene glycol).
DIRECT TMPRESSION SMEARS: TOUCH
IMPRINTS/TZANCK PREPARATION
Direct impression smears are often used to diagnose Malassezia overgrowth or evaluate
ulcers and plaques:
■ Press a glass slide directly onto the surface of the skin several times in the same
site (often used if the surface of the skin is greasy) (Figs. 2-3, 2-4) or press the slide
onto a cut surface of a biopsy specimen or directly onto a plaque/ulcer/ erosion
(Fig. 2-5A,B).
■ If obtaining sample from cut surface of a biopsy specimen, gently blot excess blood
from the surface using a dry gauze sponge prior to making the imprint and then air
dry the slide prior to staining.
■ Heat-fix samples obtained from a greasy surface prior to staining unless adhesive
slides are used.
■You may also collect samples for yeast identification via cotton swab or spatula (espe-
cially sensitive areas such as the perivulvar and perianal regions) and rolled onto the
slide or via superficial skin scraping (without the use of mineral oil) (Fig. 2-6).
■ Sample crusts and epidermal collarettes by gently removing the surface or margins of
the lesion with a sterile needle and imprinting the subjacent surface on a glass slide.
■Use the same arbitrary scale for quantification of yeast as used with otic swab.
 Figure 2-3 Impression smmear for yeast on a dog with Malassezia dermatitis. Notice the use of the latex glove
to avoid fingerprints on the back of the slide. (Courtesy of Drs. J. Noxon and E. Goldman)
■ Figure 2-4 Cytologic specimen (oil emersion, 1000x) from a patient with Malassezia pododermatitis.
(Courtesy of Drs. J. Noxon and E. Goldman)
21
 Figure 2-5 (A) Feline patient with numerous crusts and pustules on the head. (B) Cytology from this cat.
Notice the numerous neutrophils without infectious agents and the numerous acantholytic cells, which are
keratinocytes without their cellular attachments to other epithelial cells. This slide is strongly suggestive of
pemphigus foliaceus. (Courtesy of Drs. J. Noxon and E. Goldman)
2Z
CHAPTER 2: PRACTICAL CYTOLOGY
23
 Figure 2-6 Cytology slides from the ear, interdigital space, etc., are made by rolling the cotton-tipped appli-
cator across the glass slide. (Courtesy of Drs. J. Noxon and E. Goldman)
FINE NEEDLE ASPIRATION
Fine needle aspiration is often used to examine pustules, nodules, and tumors. The
author prefers the use of a 22 gauge needle and a 6cc syringe for nodules/ tumors and
a 23 gauge needle with a 3cc syringe for softer lesions such as pustules:
 Carefully insert the needle into the center of the lesion, the plunger pulled back to
provide negative pressure; then release the negative pressure and repeat the process
several times (sometimes while redirecting the needle). Always release the negative
pressure prior to removing the needle from the lesion so that the sample collected
remains in the needle or needle hub.
 Remove the needle from the syringe, fill the syringe with air, replace the needle onto
the syringe, and expel the sample onto a clean microscope slide.
Sample small lesions (ex. pustules) by simply dripping alcohol onto the surface of
the lesion, allowing it to air dry, lancing the lesion with a sterile needle, and "scoop-
ing up" the contents with the needle and placing on a glass slide (Fig. 2-7A,B).
ACETATE TAPE PREPARATION
This preparation is often used for identification of mites (Cheyletiella) and yeast; *clear
acetate tape is best:
24
SECTION 1: BASICS
B
 Figure 2-7 (A) Pustule from a canine patient. (B) Cytology from the same patient showing cocci within one
of the neutrophils, signifying pyoderma. (Courtesy of Drs. J. Noxon and E. Goldman)
■ For Malassezia identification, press the suspect area multiple times with the sticky
side of the tape; the tape is processed with Diff-Quik stain yet omits the first (light
blue) alcohol solution, which would dissolve the adhesive. Then press the tape
(sticky side down) onto a glass slide (Fig. 2-8).
■ For cheyletiella identification, apply the tape to multiple sites (collecting as much scale
as possible) and then directly press it (sticky side down) onto a glass slide (Fig. 2-9).
CHAPTER 2: PRACTICAL CYTOLOGY
25
Figure 2-8 Adhesive microscope slides come with a paper covering that is removed prior to use. (Courtesy
of Drs. J. Noxon and E. Goldman)
 Figure 2-9 Cheyletiella yasguri (dog)
COMMENTS
1. With direct impression, forcefully press the sample onto the surface of the slide for
greater adherence.
3. The staining process should be gentle to avoid dislodging the material from the slide
(immerse the slide in each fixative/stain and hold for the allotted time rather than
repeated dippings).
4. Use caution when rinsing the slide (low pressure).
SECTION 1: BASICS
5. Stain maintenance is important to prevent artifacts—change the stains on a routine
basis (weekly or when contaminated).
6. Organisms will be clearer when using oil immersion (e.g., 1000x) or when a drop
of immersion oil is placed on the slide with a cover slip applied when using high
dry objective (e.g., 400x).
7. Permanently save the slide by applying a small amount of mounting medium (ex.
Permount) with a cover slip.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
3
Diagnostic Culture and
Identification (Bacterial
and Fungal)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■Culturing dermatologic lesions for dermatophytes is always appropriate.
 Samples for culture should be submitted if fungal organisms (non-Malassezia spp.)
are identified in epidermal or aural exudates.
 Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing is often not required for the treatment of
routine bacterial folliculitis in the dog.
Bacterial culture and sensitivity is indicated when cases fail to respond to an
appropriate antibiotic choice.
Bacterial culture and sensitivity is appropriate if rod bacteria are identified in
epidermal or aural exudates.
DERMATOPHYTE CULTURE AND IDENTIFICATION
Culture Media
tion of antimicrobials to discourage the growth of non-dermatophytes, and phenol
red as a pH indicator
■ Sabouraud's dextrose agar or Rapid Sporulating Medium (RSM): agars used to
encourage development of conidia for dermatophyte identification
 DTM delays the development of conidia; products with a combination of agars are
recommended.
■
 Media plates allow better access for inoculation of samples than small glass bottles.
 Incubate cultures at room temperature (75-80°F), kept away from ultraviolet light,
and prevented from desiccation; a small food storage container can act as an informal
incubator.
Sample Collection
Hair pluck (Figs. 3-1, 3-2)
■ Remove hairs at the periphery of lesions with sterile forceps
■ Gently press samples onto test medium.
27
28
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 3-1 Hair shaft infected with Microsporum gypseum hyphae
 Figure 3-2 Positive Wood's lamp fluorescence. Note bright staining of hair shafts on head.
■Toothbrush (Fig. 3-3)
■ Samples from large or poorly demarcated lesions may be collected with a sterile
toothbrush.
■ Brush hair against the direction of growth to encourage removal of fragile (infected)
hair shafts.
67
■ Figure 3-3 Toothbrush technique for inoculating media. Note tracks produced by light pressing of brush
onto the media.
Gently stab the bristles into the test media—a large amount of debris does not
need to be transferred.
Colony Growth and Identification (Figs. 3-4-3-6)
■ Monitor culture plates for color change and colony growth daily.
■
 Observe for growth for up to 28 days.
■ DTM color changes from yellow to red prior to or at the same time as macroscopic
colony growth.
 Dermatophyte colonies are white, creamy, or lightly tan but not pigmented.
■Colonies may be cottony, woollike, or powdery.
Fungal Identification
■Transfer colonies to a glass slide using clear acetate tape or a sterile loop.
 Lactophenol cotton blue stain is most often recommended to enhance the appearance
of hyphae and conidia, but any dark stains will suffice (Fig. 3-7).
 Examine slides for hyphae, macroconidia, and/or microconidia for identification
(Figs. 3-8-3-10).
 Microsporum canis, Microsporum gypseum, and Irichophyton mentagrophytes are the
most common dermatophytes isolated from lesions of dogs; Microsporum canis is
most commonly isolated from cats.
■Colonies that cannot be identified should be submitted to a reference laboratory for
identification; consult with your laboratory prior to submitting samples.
 Figure 3-4 Microsporum canis. Media color change in excess of colony size.
 Figure 3-5 Microsporum gypseum. Colonies are nonpigmented with a woollike appearance.
30
31
■Figure 3-6 Trichophyton mentagrophytes. Powdery and cream-colored colony.
 Figure 3-7 Clear tape sampling of colony for identification with lactophenol cotton blue stain
BACTERIAL CULTURE
■ Submit samples to a reference laboratory experienced in the culture, identification,
and sensitivity testing of bacterial organisms of veterinary significance.
 Inform the laboratory if you suspect an unusual or a zoonotic organism; obtain
information regarding laboratory preferences for submission of samples suspected of
being methicillin-resistant staphylococcus spp.
 Obtain samples from superficial lesions using sterile swabs.
 Figure 3-8 Microsporum canis macroconidia.
■Figure 3-9 Microsporum gypseum macroconidia.
32
EE
Figure 3-10 Trichophyton mentagrophytes microconidia
1 Excessive debris that may contaminate results should be gently removed with alcohol-
soaked gauze; do not scrub lesions with antiseptic solutions prior to sample
collection.
 Samples for bacterial culture, identification, and sensitivity testing from the external
and middle ear canals are discussed below and in chapter 46.
Samples from Superficial Lesions
Apply sterile submission swab directly to a lesion (Fig. 3-1l).
■ Collect sample from within a lesion by needle aspiration and apply to a sterile swab
(Fig. 3-12).
 Samples may be collected from
■ Superficial exudates
■ Beneath crusts and scabs
■ The periphery of epidermal collarettes
■Pricked pustules
Samples Obtained from Tissue
1 Use sterile biopsy technique.
 Place tissue sample on a sterile gauze and remove the epidermis by scalpel (the epi-
dermis may be submitted with additional tissue for histopathologic examination).
■ Submit remaining dermis and subcutaneous tissue in a sterile container; if an
extended transport time is anticipated, a small amount of sterile saline should be
added to the container to prevent tissue dehydration.
Figure 3-11 Sampling for bacterial culture directly from skin fold
Figure 3-12 Sampling for bacterial culture and cytology from pustule
34
CHAPTER 3: DIAGNOSTIC CULTURE AND IDENTIFICATION (BACTERIAL AND FUNGAL)
35
Myringotomy Catheter 
Edge of tympaum 
 Figure 3-13 Insertion of a sterile catheter through the tympanum to collect sample for culture and cytology
 Note catheter tube penetrating tympanic membrane in the upper right quadrant.
Samples Obtained from the Ear Canal
■  Indicated with persistent infection
■Indicated when rod bacteria are identified in cytology samples
 Samples obtained from the proximal and distal external ear canal, from the middle
ear, as well as from individual ears, may be different; submission of samples from
each location may be necessary for accurate assessment of otitis externa and otitis
media, especially if cytology results demonstrate disparate populations 
of
organisms.
Samples from the horizontal canal may be obtained by protecting a sterile swab with
the cover of a intravenous or spinal catheter during insertion through the vertical
canal.
■ A spinal needle or sterile catheter may be inserted through the tympanic membrane
to sample fluid within the bulla (Fig. 3-13).
Author: Alexander H. Werner
4
chapter
Obtaining a Diagnostic
Biopsy
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
The skin biopsy is one of the most important diagnostic tools available. Three factors
are key to obtaining a diagnostic biopsy: site selection, tissue handling, and a good
dermatopathologist. There are a number of recognized dermatopathologists available
through a variety of commercial and private laboratories. Your local board certified
dermatologist(s) may be helpful in providing names and locations of laboratories. The
 art of site selection and tissue handling are the responsibility of the submitting
veterinarian.
THE DECISION TO BIOPSY
There are a number of cutaneous disorders for which the biopsy is the only helpful diag-
nostic tool. The biopsy is equally important for what appears to be a “classic case” that
continues to fail conventional therapy. The following “rules" apply to this decision.
When to Biopsy
1. Persistent lesions
2. Any neoplastic or suspected neoplastic disorder
3. Any scaling dermatoses
4. Vesicular dermatosis
5. Undiagnosed alopecias
6. Any unusual dermatoses
SITE SELECTION
It is often diffcult to decide which area to biopsy. We have been taught to sample the
periphery of the lesion so that both normal and abnormal areas will be available for
inspection. This is a problem in many cases and may facilitate a poor section when only
a small portion of the pathology is present in the tissue. It is more productive to choose
representative lesions and submit multiple pieces of skin for evaluation. Most labora-
tories will allow the clinician to submit up to four or five sections of skin for the same
36
CHAPTER 4: OBTAINING A DIAGNOSTIC BIOPSY
37
fee because multiple sections will aid the pathologist in making a diagnosis. Remember.
if the lesion is present on the planum nasale, submit a section of the planum nasale,
not the surrounding skin. Although the area bleeds quite profusely when cut, it heals
nicely with minimal scarring and increases the likelihood of an accurate diagnosis. The
following “rules" apply to this decision.
Where to Biopsy
1. Choose several representative lesions because they may represent various stages of
the same disorder or multiple problems.
2. Include lesions characterized by scale, crust, erythema, erosion, ulceration, etc.
(Fig. 4-1A-C).
■Figure 4-1A Ten-year-old DsH with a history of progressive, nonresponsive, erosive, and ulcerative dermatosis
with mild to moderate reported pruritus
 Figure 4-1B View of the ventrum of same cat revealing multifocal areas of erosions, ulcerations, and rare
plaquelike lesions associated with generalized erythema.
38
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 4-1C Eight-year-old German shepherd with nonpruritic ulcerative and crusting dermatosis
3. It is not always necessary to biopsy the edge of a lesion, although a sample taken
within the center of an ulcer is rarely diagnostic.
4. Pustules and vesicles should not be biopsied with a punch technique because the
twisting motion of the punch will rupture or remove the roof of the lesion and disrupt
the architecture of the sample; these lesions should be excised in toto.
5. Ulcers or deep draining lesions are best taken by excision, rather than by punch
technique, because the twisting motion may separate the pathologic tissue from the
more normal tissue, leaving important clues behind (i.e., vasculitis, panniculitis.
etc.).
6. Do not be afraid to biopsy a footpad or the planum nasale-wedge samples are easier
to close than circular punched samples.
7. Crusted lesions are good sites for biopsy. Remember, if the crust separates from the
lesion during sampling. be sure to include it in the formalin jar and make a notation
for the technician to "please cut in the crust."
8. Heavily scaled areas are often good diagnostic sites.
BIOPSY TECHNIQUE
One of the most important points to remember is that cutaneous biopsy sites should
not be scrubbed and cleaned, because this will remove clues regarding the diagnosis
It is often difficult for veterinarians to feel comfortable cutting through crust and scale
without scrubbing the area. Most cutaneous biopsies can be done with local anesthesia
via lidocaine injection into the subcutaneous region (Fig. 4-2A,B). Some fractious
 Figure 4-2A Cutaneous biopsy revealing epidermal lymphocytic exocytosis supporting a diagnosis of epider-
motrophic lymphoma.
 Figure 4-2B A cutaneous biopsy indicating the etiology as pemphigus vulgaris. Note the cleft of the epidermis
leaving the cells of the stratum basale along the base of the vesicle ("tombstone" appearance).
6E
40SECTION 1: BASICS
animals may need a sedative. Avoid the 2 mm and 4 mm punches because the sections
are too small for good sample size. The following “rules" apply to this technique.
How to Biopsy
1. Never scrub or cleanse the area before excision—the surface crust may contain the
pathologic changes necessary to make a diagnosis.
2. Use a surgical blade to obtain a wedge-shaped or elliptic biopsy specimen when
sectioning the nose, footpad, vesicles, bullae, or deep lesions (vasculitis, panniculitis,
etc.).
3. When using a punch biopsy, choose the 6mm size.
 4. When using a punch biopsy, rotate in one direction only and do not reuse the tool,
because the blade is easily dulled and may cause the tissue to tear during the
procedure.
 5. When using lidocaine, place the anesthesia in the subcutaneous compartment, not
intradermally.
6. Iry not to handle the tissue with forceps (crushing artifact) but rather use a small-
gauge needle to manipulate the tissue (Fig. 4-3).
7. Place the sample immediately in the formalin.
8. Small or thin specimens may be placed on a small piece of a tongue depressor with
 the haired portion to the outside to prevent curling and then floating upside down
in the formalin.
9. Avoid freezing.
 Figure 4-3 Avoid the use of forceps to handle the tissue because they are often associated with crushing
artifacts.
CHAPTER 4: OBTAINING A DIAGNOSTIC BIOPSY
41
 Remember to provide your pathologist with a thorough history and clinical descrip-
tion of the lesions. I routinely include a copy of the referral letter with the biopsy
request. This letter outlines the history, clinical signs, differential diagnoses considered.
and a plan. You and your pathologist should become a diagnostic team. It is unrealistic
 t0 expect the pathologist to consistently provide answers if we do not supply the appro-
priate tissue or information.
TABLE 4-1 Dermatohistopathology Report
Description
Summarizes of the histologic changes noted in the tissue
Morphologic Diagnosis
Reports the overall histologic pattern recognized
Etiologic Diagnosis
Identifies a causative agent if recognized (e.g., bacteria, demodicosis.
fungal, etc.)
Comments:
The pathologist draws a correlation between the clinical features of
the case (provided by the clinician) and the histopathologic features
oy le si ueiup aun Ag paoid uoeuoui aul Asdog aun jo
a valid condusion to be given.
TABLE 4-2 Common Histopathologic Terminology
Acanthosis
Increased thickness of epidermis (epidermal hyperplasia); often 
noted with chronic inflammation
Acantholysis
Loss of adhesion of keratinocytes (acanthocytes); often due to
autoimmune diseases such as Pemphigus foliaceus yet may also
be seen in inflammatory disease)
Amyloid
Hyaline, amorphous, eosinophilic material
Apoptosis
Individual keratinocyte death
Atrophy, Epidermal
Thin epidermis; often associated with corticosteroid use
Ballooning Degeneration
Koilocytosis, swollen cytoplasm without vacuolization;
characteristic of viral infection
Bullae
Fluid-filled acellular spaces within or below the epidermis (vesicles
are smaller bulla)
Cholesterol clefts
uim uaas uao isaoeds padeus-ainoids sealp se seaddy
xanthomatosis, panniculitis, and ruptured follicular cysts
Civatte bodies
Apoptotic cells in the stratum basale of the epidermis
Clefts
Slitlike spaces within the epidermis or dermoepidermal junction;
caused by acantholysis or hydropic degeneration of basal cells or
even processing artifacts
Collagenolysis
Denatured collagen, homogeneous, eosinophilic, often attracts 
mineralization 
Crust
 Surface accumulation of epidermal cells, serum proteins, RBC,
WBC
TABLE 4.2 Continued
 Dermoepidermal junction 
Interface between epidermis and dermis
Dell
Small depressions on the surface of the epidermis
Desmoplasia
Fibroplasia induced by neoplasia
Diapedesis
RBs within the intercellular spaces of the epidermis; implies loss of
vascular integrity
 Dyskeratosis
Premature faulty keratinization; may be seen with neoplasia or
keratinizaiton disorders
 Dystrophic mineralization 
Deposits of calcium along collagen fibers
Exocytosis
Migration of inflammatory cells, RBC, or both into intercellular
spaces
Flame figures
Area of altered collagen surrounded by eosinophilic material, see
collagenolysis; often noted with eosinophilic granulomas, also
called excessive trichilemmal keratinization 
Fibroplasia
Increased amounts of fibrous tissue
Fibrosis
Advanced fibroplasia, thick parallel strands of collagen;
characteristic of acral lick dermatitis
Grenz zone
Marginal zone of collagen that separates the epidermis from an
underlying dermal alteration; often seen in neoplastic and
granulomatous disorders
Hyperkeratosis
Increased thickness of stratum corneum layer of epidermis, often
divided into ortho-(nuclei lost) and para-(nuclei retained), which
helps identify an etiology (zinc responsive dermatosis is
characterized by parakeratosis)
Hyper- and hypogranulosis
Denotes thickness of stratum granulosum (ex., areas of
lichenification reveal hypergranulosis)
Hydropic degeneration
Vacuolar damage to the stratum basale; frequently seen with
discoid lupus erythematosus
Hypomelanosis
Decrease in pigment; as seen in vitiligo
Melanosis
Hyperpigmentation; seen in chronic inflammation
 Microabscess—spongiform 
Accumulation of neutrophils within stratum spinosum often seen
 with superficial suppurative necrolytic dermatitis of schnauzers 
Microabscess-Munro's
Accumulation of neutrophils within or below the stratum
corneum; often seen in psoriasiform lichenoid dermatosis of
springers
Microabscess--Pautrier's
Accumulation of abnormal lymphoid cells; often seen in
epidermotropic lymphoma
Microabscess—eosinophilic
Seen in EGC, allergy, pemphigus complex, Malassezia,
eosinophilic folliculitis, etc.
Mucinosis
Increased amounts of amorphous basophilic material in the
 dermis; characteristic of normal skin in the shar-pei dog and
hypothyroidism
Necrolysis
Epidermal coagulative necrosis with no dermal involvement and
minimal inflammation; often seen with TEN
42
CHAPTER 4: OBTAINING A DIAGNOSTIC BIOPSY
43
TABLE 4.2 Continued
Papillomatosis
Epidermal proliferation due to papilloma virus infection, often 
exophytic yet may me endophytic
Pigmentary incontinence
Melanin pigment has dropped from the epidermis into the dermis
and phagocytized by macrophages; often seen with DLE
Reticular degeneration
 Multilocular intraepidermal edema with keratinocyte swelling;
often seen with superficial necrolytic dermatitis/hepatocutaneous
syndrome
Satellitosis
 Cytotoxic lymphocytes surrounding an apoptotic cell; indicates
cell-mediated immune response 
Spongiosis
Epidermal intercellular edema
Sclerosis
 Scar formation
Vacuolar degeneration
Intracellular edema
TABLE 4-3 Histopathologic Patterns in Dermatology*
Perivascular
Interface
Vasculitis
Interstitial Dermatitis
Nodular/Diffuse
Intraepidermal Vesicular/ Pustular
Subepidermal Vesicular/Pustular
Folliculitis/Perifolliculitis/Furunculosis
Panniculitis
 Fibrosing Dermatitis
Atrophic Dermatopathy
*Used in the morphologic description in the report.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
5
chapter
Lesional and Regional
Differentials
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Characteristics and patterns of lesions can often help narrow the differential list when
examining a patient. The bulleted lists below are included as a tool to aid in formulat-
ing a differential list. Obviously, it is impossible to make such a list all inclusive and
completely accurate because many diseases/conditions have overlapping clinical signs
This chapter is intended to function as a preliminary guideline for some of the more
common dermatoses.
PATCHY ALOPECIA
■ Demodicosis: often accompanied with hyperpigmentation, comedones, erythema,
folliculitis
 Dermatophytosis: associated with scaling and folliculitis
 Staphylococcal folliculitis: papules, pustules, crusts, epidermal collarettes, hyperpig-
mented macules, individual or “spreading'
■ Injection reaction: may be induration and/or atrophy at the site, often associated
with repositol corticosteroid injection
■ Vaccine-induced vasculitis: lesion may or may not be associated with erythema.
 often rabies vaccine-induced, may be observed 2-3 months after injection
■ Alopecia areata: noninflammatory complete focal alopecia, lymphocyte attack on
hair bulb
1Localized scleroderma: shiny, smooth sclerotic patch
 Sebaceous adenitis (short-coated breeds): annular to polycyclic areas, often associ-
ated with scaling
■ Anagen defluxion: sudden onset, stressful
event or medication reaction,
noninflammatory
■ Bowenoid carcinoma: squamous cell carcinoma “in situ"; often in cats, pigmented
scaling patches, often the head and pinnae (Figs. 5-1-5-5)
44
 Figure 5-1 Demodicosis characterized by multifocal patches of partial to complete alopecia.
■ Figure 5-2 Generalized demodicosis causing severe erythroderma. partial to complete alopecia, and
Crusting.
45
46
SECTION 1: BASICS
Figure 5-3 More typical pattern of superficial pyoderma demonstrating multifocal patches of alopecia
(papules, pustules, epidermal collarettes, and hyperpigmented macules).
SPECIFIC LOCATION ALOPECIA
 Traction alopecia: Associated with hairclips or rubber bands, dorsum of head
Postclipping alopecia: failure to regrow hair after clipping
■
 Melanoderma/alopecia of Yorkshire terriers: alopecia and hyperpigmentation of
pinnae, bridge of nose, sometimes tail and feet, puppies and young adults
 Symmetric flank alopecia: localized cyclic serpiginous, follicular dysplasia on the
flank associated with hyperpigmentation and comedones
■Black hair follicular dysplasia: black hair only
■ Dermatomyositis: symmetric alopecia on the face, tip of tail, digits, carpi, tarsi, and
pinnae; often associated with erythema and scarring: primarily in shelties
Pinnal alopecia: miniaturization of hair, periodic or progressive, common in Siamese
cats and dachshunds
■ Pattern baldness in dogs: Portuguese water dogs, American water spaniels, grey-
hounds, whippets, Boston terriers, Manchester terriers, Chihuahuas, Italian
greyhounds, miniature pinscher
■  Tail gland (supracaudal gland) alopecia: located approximately 2 inches from the
base of the tail along the dorsal surface (Fig. 5-6)
Figure 5-4 (A) Feline squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowenoid Carcinoma). Slightly elevated, pigmented,
slightly scaled lesions are often overlooked by the owner until an advanced stage. Note the areas of partial
alopecia with hyperpigmentation of the preauricular region. (B) Feline squamous cell carcinoma in situ. Close-up
view of the preauricular region in Fig. 5-4A.
47
B
■ Figure 5-5 (A) Feline alopecia areata. Noninflammatory complete alopecia in a patchy pattern. Note the
of alopecia of the trunk.
48
 Figure 5-6 Three-year-old F/s Maltese with a patch of alopecia subsequent to rabies vaccine vasculitis
 Figure 5-7 Eight-year-old sheltie with generalized superficial pyoderma demonstrating diffuse alopecia and
erythema.
6t
50
SECTION 1: BASICS
GENERALIZED/DIFFUSE ALOPECIA
Demodicosis: severe cases
■ Dermatophytosis: severe, chronic cases (Figs. 5-7-5-21)
 Figure 5-8 Dorsal trunk of a standard poodle demonstrating diffuse partial alopecia with matting of
indicative seb aceous adenitis
 Figure 5-9 Hyperadrenocorticism: truncal alopecia and hyperpigmentation.
 Figure 5-10 Large-breed dog with hyperadrenocorticism and secondary superficial pyoderma
 Figure 5-11 Growth hormone-responsive dermatosis. Note the predominance of alopecia around the neck
region as well as the tail and perineum.
51
 Figure 5-12 Five-year-old M/C Pomeranian with adrenal sex hormone imbalance.
Figure 5-13 Sertoli cell tumor. Note the alopecia and associated hyperpigmentation.
52
 Figure 5-14 Partial to focally complete alopecia of the trunk associated with severe hypothyroidism.
(Note: hypothyroidism is often "overdiagnosed" as a cause for canine alopecia.)
 Figure 5-15 Twelve-year-old mixed-breed dog with epidermotrophic lymphoma. Note the areas of partial to
 Complete alopecia with heavy scale and erythematous plaques.
53
 Figure 5-16 Fourteen-year-old cocker spaniel with epidermotrophic lymphoma. Note the lack of plaques and
nodules. Lesions consist of multifocal patches of alopecia (coat has been shaved) with adherent scale and mild
erythema.
 Figure 5-17 Primary keratinization disorder with secondary yeast dermatitis of the perineum and tail region
of a 6-year-old cocker spaniel.
54
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
55
B
Figure 5-18 (A) Epidermatrophic lymphoma on the ventral abdomen of a 14-year-old cat demonstrating
the partial alopecia and adherent scale characteristic of the earlier phases of the disease. (B) Epidermatrophic
lymphoma. Advanced stage of the disease demonstrating the plaque and nodular phase
 Sebaceous adenitis: associated with phrenoderma (keratin casts), diffuse scaling.
dorsum is always more affected than ventrum, dorsum of head involved
 Cushings syndrome (typical and atypical): truncal alopecia, comedones, rattail,
atrophic skin, phlebectasia, potbelly, pyoderma, hyperpigmentation, curling of tips
of pinnae and skin fragility in the cat
56
SECTION 1: BASICS
areas of alopecia—as noted along lateral aspect of the forelimbs. (B) Feline hyperthyroidism. This 9-year-old cat
had not other clinical signs commonly recognized with hyperthyroidism other than excess grooming. Note the
alopecia along the forelimbs.
 Alopecia X: adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome, symmetrical trunkal alopecia
■ Hypothyroidism: “tragic-facies"/myxedema in the dog. bilateral and symmetrical
trunkal and cervical alopecia
■Hyperthyroidism: cat, unkempt hair coat with partial alopecia, barbering along
forelimbs, may mimic OCD
■ Growth hormone responsive dermatoses: symmetrical trunkal alopecia with
hyperpigmentation; neck is often initial site of alopecia
■ Hyperestrogenism: rare symmetric alopecia of perineum, inguinal, flank regions;
mammary glands and vulvar hyperplasia, cystic ovaries
■ Estrous-related: intact female dogs, perineal and flank alopecia that may progress to
generalized, cyclic
■ Testosterone responsive dermatoses: progressive trunkal alopecia of castrated male
dogs
■ Sertoli cell tumor: male feminization, gynecomastia, alopecia of perineum and
genital region
 Castration responsive dermatosis: hair loss in collar area, perineum, caudomedial
thighs, flanks
■ Diabetes mellitus: partial diffuse alopecia, may be associated with miliary dermatitis
in the cat
R
 Figure 5-20 (A, B) Feline hyperadrenocorticism. Note the potbellied appearance and the partial trunkal
alopecia. (C) Feline hyperadrenocorticism. Note the curling of the tips of the pinnae.
58
SECTION 1: BASICS
F
Figure 5-20 (D, E) Feline skin fragility syndrome associated with hyperadrenocorticism. Note the large
denuded area of the trunk and the ease with which the skin "peels." There is often minimal pain associated
with these lesions, which may occur with routine gentle handling. (Courtesy of Dr. Rod Rosychuck)
■Color dilution alopecia: thinning of haircoat, associated with folliculitis, progressive,
often associated with blue coat color (common in Yorkshire terriers, Dobermans)
■ Follicular dysplasia: slow progressive alopecia (Irish water spaniels, Italian spinone)
■ Follicular lipidosis: red points, young dogs, rottweilers
■ Congenital Alopecia: Bichon frise, beagle, basset hound, French bulldog, rottweiler;
some breeds selected for this disorder—Chinese crested, Mexican dogs. American
hairless terrier, Abyssinian cat, Sphinx cat
■ Telogen defluxion: associated with stressful event (e.g., pregnancy)
■Keratinization disorder: associated with hyperkeratosis and excessive greasiness,
most common in cocker spaniels
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
65
 Figure 5-21 Paraneoplastic syndrome associated with pancreatic exocrine adenocarcinoma. Note the hyper-
pigmentation and the glistening appearance of the alopecic skin. Predominant ventral distribution common.
(Courtesy of Dr. Karen Campbell)
■ Pemphigus: hair loss accompanied by scale, crust, pustules, erythema
■
 Cutaneous lymphoma: scale and alopecia initial stage; progresses to plaques and
nodules and ulceration, associated with depigmentation of mucous membranes
■ Feline hereditary hypotrichosis: autosomal recessive, Siamese, Devon Rex, Burmese,
Birman; thin sparse haircoat
■ Feline alopecia universalis: hereditary defect, complete absence of primary hairs.
decreased secondary hairs, thickened epidermis, oily skin, no whiskers, downy fur
at tip of tail, paws, scrotum (Sphinx, Canadian hairless)
■ Feline symmetrical alopecia: psychogenic or allergic dermatitis most common
etiology
 Feline thymoma; exfoliative dermatitis, erythematous, nonpruritic, starts on the head
and neck, becomes generalized, older cats
■ Feline paraneoplastic alopecia: acute onset, rapidly progressing, ventrally (also eyes,
nose, footpads) complete alopecia, smooth and glistening skin, pancreatic exocrine
adenocarcinomas and bile duct carcinomas
 Feline lymphocytic mural folliculitis: alopecia, scale, hyperpigmentation, ±pruritus
may be a reaction pattern or paraneoplastic syndrome
 Pseudopelade: lymphocytic attack on hair follicle isthmus with resultant alopecia
nonpruritic, noninflammatory
■ Alopecia mucinosa: mucinosis of hair follicle outer root sheath and epidermis
■ Trichorrhexis nodosa: excessive trauma to the hair, focal hair shaft swelling associ-
ated with cuticular damage
09
SECTION 1: BASICS
EXFOLIATIVE DERMATOSES (SCALING)
 Dermatophytosis: can manifest as any clinical presentation, commonly exfoliative
■Ectoparasites: cheyletiellosis, demodicosis, scabies mite infestation (Figs. 5-22-5-30)
Figure 5-22 (A) Feline sebaceous adenitis characterized by adherent scale and partial alopecia.(B) Pigment
accumulation along the eyelid margins associated with sebaceous adenitis.
 Figure 5-23 Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis characterized by multifocal patches of excess keratin.
 Figure 5-24 Standard poodle with generalized granulomatous sebaceous adenitis demonstrating follicular
casting of keratin that effectively mats the hair down onto the skin and gives the clinical appearance of
alopecia.
61
 Figure 5-26 Severe adherent scale as a result of a chronic dermatophytosis in a Yorkshire terrier
62
 Figure 5-27 Epidermotrophic lymphoma in a cocker spaniel. Note the areas of depigmentation and diffuse
Scaling on the shaved skin of this dog.
 Figure 5-28 This cocker spaniel has been clipped to reveal the multifocal areas of depigmentation and diffuse
scaling characteristic of cutaneous lymphoma.
63
64
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 5-2g The ventral abdominal region of this cat with cutaneous lymphoma reveals erythematous plaques
 and ulcerations associated with advanced disease.
depigmentation (especially the planum nasale).
 Feline thymoma: erythema, face, neck; older cats, nonpruritic, exfoliative
■
Keratinization disorders: keratin casts, secondary Malassezia overgrowth
■ Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis: nutritionally responsive; cocker spaniels, westies,
dalmatians, Labradors, shar-pei, fox terriers
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
65
 Zinc-responsive dermatosis: alopecia, scale, crust, erythema; periocular, pinnal, lips,
Alaskan breeds predisposed
■ Follicular dysplasias: alopecia associated with hyperkeratosis and abnormal hair
morphology (structure/ melanization)
 Idiopathic canine nasodigital hyperkeratosis: accumulation of scale of the planum
nasale and digital pad margins, generally asymptomatic
Sebaceous adenitis: diffuse keratin casts that mat the hair to the surface of the skin,
dorsum of the body most affected including head
 Ichthyosis: severe congenital disorder of keratinization, golden retrievers, West
Highland white terriers, Cavalier King Charles spaniels, Jack Russell, Norfolk terrier,
Yorkshire terriers; tightly adhered scale secondary pyoderma, poor prognosis
■ Cutaneous lymphoma: scaling is the first clinical sign of CTCL in many cases, stages-
scaling. plaques, nodules; also associated with depigmentation
■Actinic keratosis: erythema and scaling
■ Lichenoid psoriasiform dermatosis: springer spaniels and German shepherds predis-
posed, medial aspect of pinnae and groin
 Schnauzer comedone syndrome: scaling and comedones along the dorsal trunk
■]
 Ear Margin Dermatosis: dachshunds, idiopathic, ±vasculitis/vasculopathy, alopecia.
fissures, keratin casts, notching
 Hereditary nasal parakeratosis of Labradors: may fissure and cause some discomfort,
often nonsymptomatic, 6-12 months of age
 Superficial necrolytic dermatosis: “hepatocutaneous syndrome"; hyperkeratosis,
crusting, ulceration; pinnae, face, MCJ, joints, footpads
 Dirty face syndrome of Persian cats: erythematous and exfoliative, pruritic, red/
brown sebaceous accumulation, often Malassezia overgrowth, also recognized in
Himalayan cats
■Acne: feline and canine; pyoderma variant in dogs; keratinization defect in cats
 Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers): exfoliative, crusting.
and scaling: facial distribution; young dogs, wax and wane
CRUSTING AND EROSIVE/ULCERATIVE DERMATOSES
 Pemphigus foliaceus: often more crusted than ulcerative; bridge of nose, footpads
pinnal initial presentation, IMSD, drug-induced (Promeris), dermatophyte-induced
Pemphigus vulgaris: ulcerative with adherent crust, may have oral lesions, IMSD
 Bullous pemphigoid: autoantibody directed against the basement membrane zone,
ulcerative, mucocutaneous junctions often affected
Discoid lupus erythematosus: immune complex deposition; nasal planum, pinnae,
footpads; depigmentation
 Systemic lupus erythematosus: multisystemic disease, immune complex deposition
targeting basement membrane zones (Figs. 5-31-5-42)
 Figure 5-31 (A) Cutaneous xanthomatosis may be associated with an endocrine imbalance (cortisol, thyroid,
DM, etc.) or idiopathic hyperlipidemia. This 10-year-old DSH M/C cat demonstrates small coalescing yellow-pink
nodules and plaques along the caudal ventral trunk. (B) Cutaneous xanthomatosis associated with diabetes
mellitus. Note the linear to popular yellow-pink lesions along the ventral region of this 7-year-old DsH F/S cat.
66
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
67
 along the caudal aspect of the pinnae and neck region.
■Hereditary lupoid dermatosis ofGerman shorthaired pointers: facial erythema, crust,
scale, young dogs
■ Cold agglutinin disease: tips of extremities most often affected; ulceration/necrosis
■ Vasculitis: idiopathic, immune-mediated, FeLV associated (necrosis of ear tips and
tail) neoplasia associated, drug-induced, vaccination-related (rabies), hereditary-
juvenile polyarteritis syndrome of beagles, neutrophilic leukocytoclastic vasculitis of
Jack Russell terriers, familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German shepherds, cutane-
ous and renal glomerular vasculopathy of greyhounds, thrombovascular pinnal
necrosis of dachshunds, diabetes-associated vasculitis, rickettsial-associated vasculi-
tis, uremia-associated vasculitis, eosinophilic (insect), rheumatoid arthritis
]
 Erythema multiforme: serpiginous or target "bulls eye" lesions; idiopathic, vaccine-
or drug-induced, herpesvirus-induced in the cat
■ Toxic epidermal necrolysis: confluent epidermal necrosis; idiopathic, drug-
induced
■ Mucous membrane pemphigoid: subepidermal blistering disease; oral cavity, nasal,
 pinnal, anus, eyes, genitalia
 Eosinophilic nasal furunculosis: acute onset; insect/spider bite?; alopecia, erythema,
erosive, nodular, ±pruritus/pain
erosive, ulcerative; face, pinnal, peripheral lymph nodes
 Cutaneous histiocytosis: bridge nose, nasal mucosa, trunk, limbs; Bernese mountain
dogs and golden retrievers predisposed
68
SECTION 1: BASICS
B
 Figure 5-33 (A) Eight-year-old male mixed breed dog with pemphigus vulgaris affecting oral mucosa and
(B) scrotum.
■
■ Deep and Intermediate Mycoses: sporotrichosis, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis,
coccidiomycosis, etc.)
■ Atypical mycobacteriosis: trauma predisposes, feline more common, ulcerative
nodules with fistulous tracts, adipose tissue thickened
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
69
 Figure 5-34 Five-year-old male miniature schnauzer with tribrissen-induced toxic epidermal necrolysis of the
ventrum.
Actinomycetic bacteria: Nocardia spp., Actinomyces spp., Streptomyces spp.)
■ Pythiosis: animals exposed to stagnant water, ulcerative nodules, severe pruritus
■ Protothecosis: saprophytic algae, stagnant water, ulcerative MCJ, depigmentation
■]
 Paecilomycosis: saprophytic yeastlike fungus; decaying vegetation; ulcerative
nodules and otitis externa
■ Leishmaniasis: protozoan parasite, zoonotic disease, exfoliative, crusting, ulcerative
dermatosis
■ Feline cowpox: rare, cats become infected via bite wound, Europe, ulcerated papules
and nodules
■ FeLV- and FIV-associated dermatoses: giant cell dermatosis (ulcerative, pruritic;
face, neck, pinnae) and FeLV vasculitis of the pinnal tips and tail
 Feline calici virus-associated dermatoses: feline orofacial pain syndrome (trigeminal
neuralgia, unilateral facial pruritus—Siamese and Burmese)
 Demodicosis: severe generalized cases become crusted and ulcerative
Sarcoptid mites: severe pruritus induces generalized excoriation and crusting
 Flea bite hypersensitivity: caudodorsal trunk
■ Feline mosquito bite hypersensitivity: lesions are facial, erythematous, and ulcer-
ative nodules
■Pelodera and hookworm migration: erythema, ulceration; footpads, ventrum
70
SECTION 1: BASICS
B
 Figure 5-35 (A) Two-year-old male golden retriever with generalized erosive facial and (B) groin dermatitis
caused by drug-induced (cephalexin) pemphigus foliaceus-like dermatosis.
■ Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex: indolent ulcer, linear granuloma, eosino-
philic plaque
■ Allergic Dermatitis: severe pruritus predisposes the patient to erosion, ulceration,
crusting
 Figure 5-36 Five-year-old M(n) DSH with "rodent ulcer" of the upper lip.
Figure 5-37 Three-year-old M(n) DLH with ulcerated nasal planum resulting from mosquito bite
hypersensitivity.
71
Figure 5-38 Pemphigus foliaceus demonstrating the typical pattern of cutaneous involvement along the
bridge of the nose and periocular region.
 Figure 5-39 Papules, pustules, epidermal collarettes, and hyperpigmented macule characteristic of superficial
pyoderma.
72
 Figure 5-40 Intact pustule on the ventrum of a dog with pemphigus foliaceus
 Figure 5-41 Pustules and crusts representative of pemphigus foliaceus.
73
74
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 5-42 Mixed-breed dog with a thermal burn of the dorsum resulting from heating pad injury
 Dermatomyositis: hereditary ischemic dermatopathy; face, ears, tail; megaesophagus
muscle disease/atrophy, dropped gait
■ Epidermolysis bullosa aquisita: young Great Danes; urticaria, vesicles, ulcers—face,
 groin, footpads, oral cavity MCJ
■ Cutaneous asthenia: skin hyperextensibility and fragility; both dogs and cats;
ulcerations and scarring
■ Cutaneous xanthoma: cholesterol clefts in the dermis; yellow-pink alopecic plaques
and nodules that tend to ulcerate, often associated with diabetes or idiopathic
hyperlipidemia
Superficial  necrolytic dermatosis  (hepatocutaneous syndrome): hyperkeratotic
ulcerative dermatosis associated with liver disease and/or pancreatic glucagonoma
 Calcinosis cutis: mineral deposits within the dermis associated with collagen degen-
eration induced by corticosteroid administration or hyperadrenocorticism; intense
pruritus, erosion, ulceration
■ Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma: depigmentation, scale, plaques, nodules, and ulcer-
ation; slowly progressive; dogs and cats
■Ulcerative dermatosis of collies and shelties: may be variant of dermatomyositis or
a vesicular cutaneous form oflupus erythematosus; serpiginous erythema with flaccid
bullae that ulcerate; groin, axillae, genitalia, pinnae, oral mucosa, footpads
■  Feline ulcerative linear dermatosis: solitary lesion over neck and shoulder region,
intense pruritus, refractory to therapy
■ Feline plasma cell pododermatitis: metatarsal and metacarpal pads, swollen and
spongy ulcerative; may be FIV-associated
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
75
■  Idiopathic nodular panniculitis: subcutaneous nodules and draining tracts over the
trunk; dachshunds predisposed, dorsum often more severely affected, lesions are
sterile, heal with crusting and scarring
■Erythema ab igne: radiant heat damage
■ Actinic dermatitis: erythema and scaling that progresses to nodules/erosion/
ulceration; lightly pigmented skin predisposed
■ Solar, thermal, chemical burns: erythema, scale, erosion, ulceration, necrosis
■ Acral mutilation syndrome in Springer spaniels: severe ulceration of extremities;
self-induced, hereditary sensory neuropathy
PIGMENTARY ABNORMALITIES
  Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia (vitiligo): skin and hair affected; Belgian shep-
herds, German shepherds, Dobermans, rottweilers predisposed; be permanent or wax
and wane
 Canine uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt Kayanagi Harada-like Syndrome): panu-
veitis, leukoderma, leukotrichia, meningoencephalitis; immune-mediated attack on
melanocytes; Husky and Akitas predisposed (Figs. 5-43-5-49)
 Figure 5-43 Five-year-old M(n) Akita with discoid lupus erythematosus
 of the planum nasale characteristics of discoid lupus.
 Figure 5-45 Close-up view of Fig. 5-44. Discoid lupus erythematosus.
76
 Figure 5-46 Uveodermatologic syndrome (Vogt Kayanagi Harada-like syndrome). Note the characteristic
 pattern of depigmentation and lack of associated inflammation, common in the early phases of the disease.
 Figure 5-47 Vitiligo (idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia)—progressive depigmentation with no inflammation.
Rarecases mayrepigment spontaneously.
77
78
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 5-48 Vitiligo. Note the depigmentation of the mucocutaneous junction regions.
 Figure 5-49 Cutaneous lymphoma in an 11-year-old dog with generalized scaling and depigmentation of
the planum nasale.
 Nasal hypopigmentation (Dudley nose—permanent, Snow nose—transient): idio-
pathic; cobblestone texture of the planum nasale retained
 Cutaneous T-cell lymphoma (epidermotropic lymphoma): mucocutaneous junc-
tions are often depigmented
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
6
 Discoid lupus erythematosus: depigmentation and ulceration of the planum nasale
often clinical features
 Systemic lupus erythematosus, bullous pemphigoid, pemphigus vulgaris, pemphigus
erythematosus: immune-mediated diseases that affect the dermoepidermal junction
region of the skin (melanocyte collateral)
Dermatomyositis: collies and shelties; scarring dermatosis, megaesophagus, dropped
gait, muscle weakness, depigmentation of skin and coat
 Drug-induced pigment changes: ketoconazole induces graying of the coat
Lentigo: asymptomatic patches of black pigment in older dogs and orange cats;
lesions are flat macules, hypermelanosis
  Post inflammatory hyperpigmentation: normal response of the skin to inflammation,
indicative of the healing process
 Color dilution alopecia (color mutant alopecia): associated with blue or fawn coat
colors
 Melanoderma and alopecia of Yorkshire terriers: alopecia, shiny skin, melanoderma
■ Macular melanosis: associated with testicular neoplasia
 Chediak-Higashi syndrome: Persian cats (blue smoke color), white tigers, Hereford,
cattle, Aleutian mink; macromelanosomes; photophobia, immunodeficiency, bleed-
ing disorders
 Oculocutaneous albinism: white Persian cats with heterochromic irides and deafness
colored nose often diagnostic; hepatic and renal failure; most die before 2 years of age
 Color dilution and cerebellar degeneration in Rhodesian ridgeback dogs: bluish coat
color associated with Purkinje cell degeneration; lethal
■ Acquired aurotrichia of Miniature schnauzers: young adults, patchy golden hairs of
the trunk, unknown cause
■ Nevus/nevi: hyperpigmented macules and patches, nonsymptomatic
 Melanoma: pigmented tumors
7
CLAW AND CLAWFOLD DERMATOSES
DIFFERENTIAL LIST
The differential list may be narrowed if the pattern of distribution is considered: sym-
metrical vs. assymetrical. Symmetrical nail problems (multiple claws on multiple paws)
often indicate immune-mediated, metabolic, genetic, nutritional, or viral etiologies. An
assymetrical distribution (one or multiple claws on one paw) is more likely to identify
infections, trauma, or neoplasia. The categorization by symmetrical and assymetrical
distribution is somewhat arbitrary yet helpful when formulating a differential list for
diagnostic workup.
■ Bacterial infections: often secondary to trauma
■ Fungal infections: dermatophytes, Malassezia, candida, blastomyces, cryptococcus,
geotrichosis, sporothrix
 Parasitic disease: demodicosis, hookworm dermatitis, ascarids (Figs. 5-50-5-54)
 Figure 5-50 Pododermatitis caused by bacterial foliculitis and furunculosis with demodicosis. Note the
involvement of the entire digit, nailbed region, and interdigital spaces with edema of the tissues, alopecia.
hyperkeratosis, and focal erosions and ulcerations.
pads.
80
 Figure 5-52 Pemphigus vulgaris in a 9-year-old mixed breed dog. Note the market degree of ulceration of
the pads with peripheral hyperkeratosis and crusting.
Figure 5-53 Hepatocutaneous syndrome in the dog. Note the marked degree of confluent hyperkeratosis
to the footpads.
81
82
SECTION 1: BASICS
Figure 5-54 Cutaneous lymphoma affecting the digits of a cat. No lesions were noted in any other areas of
the body.
Protozoal disease: leishmaniasis
Viral disease: FeLV, FIV
 Trauma: chemical (fertilizers, floor cleansers, salt), acquired arteriovenous fistula
pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, vasculitis, adverse
drug reactions, vaccine reactions, cryoglobulinemia, eosinophilic plaque (EGC)
Metabolic diseases: hypothyroidism (dog), hyperthyroidism (cat), diabetes mellitus,
hyperadrenocorticism, superficial necrolytic dermatitis, acromegally (macronychia
and onychogryposis)
■ Genetic diseases: epidermolysis bullosa, dermatomyositis, seborrhea, linear epider-
mal nevus, anonychia, supernumerary claws, onychorrhexis in dachshunds
 mast cell tumors, melanoma, keratoacanthoma, lymphosarcoma, hemangiopericy-
toma, osteosarcoma, myxosarcoma
■Miscellaneous: deficiencies, lethal acrodermatitis, zinc=responsive dermatosis, dis-
seminated intravascular coagulopathy, idiopathic onychodystrophy, idiopathic ony-
chomadesis, ergotism, thallotoxicosis, feline plasma cell pododermatitis
NASAL (PLANUM NASALE) DERMATOSES
 Discoid lupus erythematosus: primarily affects nasal area, depigmentation, exacer-
bated by sunlight, loss of cobblestone architecture
 Systemic lupus erythematosus: multisystemic disease; face, nose, MCJ, generalized
Pemphigus complex: immune-mediated skin disease, often more crusted than
ulcerative, variable depigmentation; footpad crusting common
■ Bullous pemphigoid: often associated with crusting and depigmentation; MCJ
common (Figs.5-55-5-59)
■Figure 5-55 Pemphigus erythematosus showing mild depigmentation and erythema of the junction of the
planum nasale and the bridge of the nose.
 Figure 5-56 Uveodermatologic syndrome revealing uveitis, depigmentation, mild inflammation, and focal
erosions/ulcerations.
E8
84
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 5-57 Plastic food bowl hypersensitivity in a Chinese shar-pei.
 Figure 5-58 Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia.
■ Nasal solar dermatosis: starts at poorly pigmented junction of planum nasale and
bridge of the nose, heavy sunlight exposure, must r/o DLE
■ Contact dermatitis: not common; rubber dish; rare ulceration, erythema and
depigmentation of the anterior planum nasale and lips
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
85
 Figure 5-59 Vesicles, erosions, ulcers, and crusts in a dog with pemphigus vulgaris
 Dermatomyositis: nasal, facial, extremities; scarring depigmentation/ulceration;
polymyositis and megaesophagus may be seen
■ Uveodermatologic syndrome: uveitis; depigmentation, ulceration nose, lips, eyelids
footpads, MCJ. pressure points
 Nasal pyoderma: primarily haired portions—bridge of the nose yet inflammation
may rarely extend to the planum nasale
 Nasal hypopigmentation: light brown or tan color, may be seasonal, breed fault
■
 Adverse drug reaction: topical sensitivity (neomycin) or systemic reaction
 Cutaneous lymphoma: depigmentation and induration associated with epidermo-
tropic lymphoma
Histiocytosis: infiltrates often affect the nares and nasal turbinates, Bernese moun-
tain dog predisposed
 Idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis: often older dogs; nasal planum and marginal
footpads
■Hereditary nasal parakeratosis: Labradors, young dogs
 Allergy: mosquito bite hypersensitivity in cats
■Viral: Herpes, calici
86
SECTION 1: BASICS
NODULES AND DRAINING SINUS ETIOLOGY
 BACTERIAL
Furunculosis secondary to Staphylococcal spp. most common
 Actinomyces/nocardia
■
 Mycobacteria
 Foreign body
 Feline mycoplasma abscess
 Bacterial granulomas
 Focal adnexal dysplasia secondary to chronic folliculitis/furunculosis
FUNGAL
 Majocchi granuloma-dermatophyte granuloma
■
 Sporotrichosis
Eumycetoma
Phaeohyphomycosis
Zygomycosis
Hyalohyphomycosis
Cryptococcosis
Coccidiodomycosis
■
 Blastomycosis
■
 Histoplasmosis
 PARASITIC
Demodicosis
Leishmaniasis
■
Rhabditic dermatitis
 Protista, pythiosis, protothecosis
VIRAL
■ Viral papillomas
■ HYPERSENSITIVITY
Urticaria
Angioedema
Eosinophilic granuloma
Arthropod bite hypersensitivity
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity (cat)
VASCULAR
 Arteriovenous fistula
■
Vasculitis
 Thrombosis
Clotting disorders
METABOLIC
Cutaneous xanthomatosis
■
Calcinosis cutis
Calcinosis circumscripta
■Nodular cutaneous amyloidosis
CHAPTER 5: LESIONAL AND REGIONAL DIFFERENTIALS
8
■ MISCELLANEOUS
■
 Sterile nodular panniculitis
■ Traumatic panniculitis
■  Postinjection panniculitis
■
 Sterile nodular periadnexal pyogranulomatous dermatitis
Canine juvenile cellulitis syndrome
Reactive histiocytosis—cutaneous/systemic
■
 Nodular dermatofibrosis of German shepherd dogs
■
 Benign nodular sebaceous hyperplasia
■
Skin tag
 Nevi/hamartoma (collagenous, vascular, follicular, sebaceous)
■ Fibroadnexal dysplasia
■
Dermoid cyst/sinus
Cysts (follicular, epidermal, inclusion)
■
Lipomatosis
■Apocrine cystomatosis
■NEOPLASIA
■ Round cell tumors: mast cell tumors, plasmacytomas, lymphomas, histiocytomas,
malignant histiocytosis, histiocytic sarcomas, transmissable venereal tumors
 Melanocytic tumors: benign dermal melanocytoma, malignant melanoma
 Epithelial origin: squamous cell carcinoma, squamous papillomas, Bowen's
syndrome ("in situ"), basal cell tumor, keratoacanthoma, intracutaneous cornify-
ing epithelioma, trichoepithelioma, pilomatrixoma, sebaceous gland/hepatoid/
 Mesenchymal: hemangiopericytomas, schwannomas, fibroma/fibrosarcomas, myxo-
sarcoma, hemangioma/hemangiosarcomas, lymphangiomas/lymphangiosarcomas,
lipomas/liposarcomas,
fibropapilloma
(feline sarcoid).leiomyosarcoma,
dermatofibroma
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
6
chapter
Zoonosis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Zoonosis can be defined broadly (any disease shared by animals and humans) or
narrowly (a disease transmitted directly from animals to humans).
■Distinction can blur with diseases affecting the skin, especially if vectors are included
in this category.
■ Further consideration is whether external parasites carried by companion animals
 that can irritate but not infest humans are included in this category.
■ Recent discussions include the concept that genes coding for multidrug resistance
may transfer from the bacterial populations on companion animals to humans, and
vice versa.
■ Similar drug-resistance patterns have been found in bacterial populations residing
  pi    s  e  s o p od o
zoonosisthe transfer of drug resistance directly from animal to human may affect
(though not cause) disease in people.
■ Zoonotic diseases and their vectors vary significantly geographically
The lists in the following sections are not meant to be exhaustive and list dermato-
logic diseases more commonly acquired directly from dogs and cats, diseases trans-
mitted by their ectoparasites, or dermatitis caused by ectoparasites carried on dogs and
cats (Figs. 6-1-6-3).
PARASITES
■Cheyletiella spp.
 Sarcoptes scabei
■Otodectes cynotis
■Leishmania
 Notoedres cati
Ctenocephalides felis and canis
Pulex spp.
■
 Echnidnophaga gallinacea
 Dipylidium caninum
Cutaneous larval migrans
■Ancylostoma caninum
88
CHAPTER 6: ZOONOSIS
68
 Figure 6-1 Erythematous papules on the abdomen from cheyletiellosis
 Figure 6-2 Erythematous and excoriated papules on the forearm from canine scabies.
Ancylostoma brazilense
■Uncinaria stenocephala
BACTERIA
Tuberculosis
Dermatophilus congolensis
90
SECTION 1: BASICS
 Figure 6-3 Annular (ring-) slowly expanding (-worm) lesion of erythema and scaling due to Microsporum
canis.
■Streptococcusspp.
Staphylococcus spp.
■L-form/Mycoplasmaspp.
■
Yersinia pestis
■Brucella canis
FUNGI
Sporotrichosis
■
Cryptococcosis
■
Blastomycocis
■
Histoplasmosis
■
 Rhinosporidiosis
■
Aspergilosis
■
 Penicilliosis
 Protothecosis
Coccidioides immitis
Malasseziapachydermatis
 Dermatophytosis
■
Microsporum canis
■
unasdag unodsoun
■
Trichophytonmentagrophytes
Epidermophyton spp.
CHAPTER 6: ZOONOSIS
16
VIRUSES
 Orthopoxvirus (feline cowpox virus)
■Parapoxvirus (Contagious viral pustular dermatitis)
Author: Alexander H. Werner
This page intentionally left blank
section
Allergic and
Hypersensitivity
Dermatitis
7
chapter
Atopic Dermatitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Atopic Dermatitis is a predisposition to become allergic to normally innocuous sub-
stances, such as pollens (grasses, weeds, and trees), molds, house dust mites, epithelial
allergens, and other environmental allergens.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Susceptible animals become sensitized to environmental allergens by producing allergen-
specific IgE, which binds to receptor sites on cutaneous mast cells; further allergen
exposure (inhalation and, more importantly, percutaneous absorption) causes circulat-
ing basophil and tissue mast cell degranulation, which is a type I immediate hypersen-
sitivity reaction, and results in the release of histamine, heparin, proteolytic enzymes.
cytokines, chemokines, and many other chemical mediators.
Non-IgE antibodies (IgGd) and a late-phase reaction (8-12hr) may also be involved.
■ Canine: although there is an inherited predisposition, the exact mode of inheritance
is unknown and other factors may also be important.
■ Feline: unclear
■ Allergic threshold principle: Cumulative pruritogenic factors may lower the
individual threshold for each animal.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Canine: true incidence unknown; estimated at 3-15% of the canine population;
reported to be the second most common allergic skin disease
■ Feline: unknown; generally believed to be much lower than that for dogs
■ Canine: any breed, including mongrels; because of genetic predisposition, it may be
recognized more frequently in certain breeds or families, which can vary
geographically
■ In the United States (canine): Boston terriers, Cairn terriers, dalmatians, English
bulldogs, English setters, Irish setters, Lhasa apsos, miniature schnauzers, pugs.
Sealyham terriers, Scottish terriers, West Highland white terriers, wire-haired fox
terriers, and golden retrievers
94
CHAPTER 7: ATOPIC DERMATITIS
95
 Canine: mean age at onset 1-3 years; range 3 months-6 years; signs may be so mild
the first year that they are not noted but are usually progressive and clinically appar-
ent before 3 years of age
■Both sexes are probably affected equally.
Historical Findings
■ Facial, pedal, perineal, or axillary pruritus
■Early onset
Family history of atopy
■
May be seasonal or nonseasonal
■
 Recurring skin or ear infections (bacterial or yeast overgrowth)
 Temporary response to glucocorticoids
 Symptoms progressively worsen with time
CLINICAL FEATURES
Hallmark sign: pruritus (itching, scratching. rubbing,licking) (Fig. 7-1)
 Primary lesions may occur, but most cutaneous changes are believed to be produced
by self-induced trauma. (Fig. 7-2)
■ Figure 7-1 Marked erythema, alopecia, and excoriation associated with environmental allergen
hypersensitivity.
96
 Figure 7-2 Hypersensitivity with subsequent self-inflicted alopecia. Note lack of excoriation in this patient
 Figure 7-3 Severe periocular alopecia, erythema, and excoriation.
■ Areas most commonly affected: interdigital spaces, carpal and tarsal areas, muzzle,
periocular region, axillae, groin, and pinnae (Fig. 7-3)
■ Lesions: vary from none to broken hairs or salivary discoloration (porphyrin
staining) to erythema, papular eruptions, crusts, alopecia, hyperpigmentation,
CHAPTER 7: ATOPIC DERMATITIS
6
 Figure 7-4 Diffuse partial alopecia with erythema and secondary Malassezia hypersensitivity associated with
environmental aero-allergens.
lichenification, excessively oily or dry seborrheic changes, and hyperhidrosis (apo-
crine sweating)
 Secondary bacterial and yeast skin infections (common) (Fig. 7-4)
Chronic relapsing otitis externa
Conjunctivitis may occur with secondary blepharitis.
■ Cats: often present with miliary dermatitis, alopecia from excessive grooming, facial
excoriation, otitis externa, eosinophilic plaque (Figs. 7-5-7-9)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
  Food hypersensitivity: may cause identical lesion distribution and physical exami-
nation findings but should be nonseasonal; may occur concurrently with atopy:
differentiation is made by noting response to hypoallergenic diet
■ Flea bite hypersensitivity: most common cause of seasonal pruritus in many geo-
graphic regions; may occur concurrently with atopy; differentiation is made by
noting lesion distribution, response to flea control, and results of intradermal skin
test-based antigen-specific immunotherapy
Sd s s  o s  e  s o  oos
of the ventral chest, lateral elbows, lateral hocks, and pinnal margins; multiple skin
rule out sarcoptic mange
86
Figure 7-5 Feline symmetrical alopecia. Note the well-demarcated area of alopecia with no associated
inflammation.
 Figure 7-6 This cat groomed the ventrum excessively and caused complete alopecia of the ventrum.
Secondary pyoderma: usually caused by Staphylococcus pseudintermedius; charac-
terized by follicular papules, pustules, crusts, and epidermal collarettes
Secondary yeast infections: usually caused by Malassezia pachydermatis; character-
ized by erythematous, scaly, crusting. greasy, lichenified, and very malodorous body
folds and intertriginous areas; demonstration of numerous budding yeast organisms
CHAPTER 7: ATOPIC DERMATITIS
66
 Figure 7-7 Patchy areas of alopecia with no inflammation resulting from psychogenic dermatoses
 Figure 7-8 Eosinophilic plaque in an adult cat.
by skin cytology and obtaining a favorable response to antifungal therapy are
diagnostic
■ Contact dermatitis (allergic or irritant): may cause severe erythema and pruritus of
the feet and thinly haired areas of the ventral abdomen; history of exposure to a
known contact sensitizer or irritant, response to a change of environment, and patch
testing may be diagnostic; thought to be rare in dogs and cats
100
excoriation from intense pruritus.
DIAGNOSTICS
 The following lists are major and minor diagnostic criteria for diagnosis (adapted from
Willemse, 1986).
Major Criteria (at least 3 should be present)
■Pruritus
  Typical distribution (facial, pedal, lichenification of flexor surfaces of tarsal joint and/
or extensor surface of carpal joint)
■ Chronic or relapsing dermatitis
■Breed predisposition or family history
Minor Criteria (at least 3 should be present)
■Onset of symptoms < 3yr old
■
Bilateral conjunctivitis
■
Facial erythema
■
 Bacterial pyoderma
■Hyperhidrosis
■ Positive IDST reactions
■ Elevated allergen-specific IgE
 Elevated allergen-specific IgGd
CHAPTER 7: ATOPIC DERMATITIS
101
Identify Causes
 Airborne/percutaneous absorption of pollens (grasses, weeds, and trees)
■ Mold spores (indoor and outdoor)
■]
House dust mites
■ Animal dander
■ Insects (controversial)
Serologic Allergy Tests
■ Tests to measure the amount of allergen-specific IgE antibody in the patient's serum
are commercially available.
■ Advantages over IDST: availability; large areas of hair do not have to be shaved
 Disadvantages: frequent false-positive reactions; limited number of allergens tested;
inconsistent assay validation and quality control (may vary with the laboratory used);
current laboratory data appears to be more reliable than noted in the past
■ Reliability and reproducibility vary with each laboratory/test utilized. Often used in
conjunction with intradermal skin test results to augment findings.
[DsT (Intradermal Skin Testing)
■ Small amounts of test allergens are injected intradermally and wheal formation is
measured.
■ This is the most accurate method of identifying offending allergens for possible
avoidance or inclusion in an immunotherapy prescription.
■ Results are sometimes difficult to interpret in cats owing to the relatively small
wheals.
Skin Biopsy
Skin biopsy may help rule out other differential diagnoses, results are usually not
pathognomonic. Dermatohistopathologic changes include acanthosis, mixed mononu-
clear superficial perivascular dermatitis, sebaceous gland metaplasia, and secondary
superficial pyoderma.
THERAPEUTICS
■ EFA (Essential fatty acid) supplementation may be beneficial in some cases.
■ Topical therapies (shampoos) help mechanically to remove environmental allergens
that may contribute to percutaneous exposure.
■ See Appendix A for management of pruritic diseases.
[mmunotherapy (Allergen-Specific Immunotherapy)
■ Administration (usually SubQ injections) of gradually increasing doses of the
causative allergens to affected patients in an attempt to reduce their sensitivity
102  SECTION 2: ALLERGIC AND HYPERSENSITIVITY DERMATITIS
■ Allergens selected based on allergy test results, patient history and knowledge of
local flora
■ Indicated when it is desirable to avoid or reduce the amount of corticosteroids
required to control signs, when signs last longer than 4-6 months per year, or when
nonsteroidal forms of therapy are ineffective
■ Successfully reduces pruritus in 60-80% of dogs and cats
Response usually slow, often requiring 3-6 months or up to l year to induce a
beneficial competitive inhibition
Corticosteroids
■  May be given for short-term relief and to break the itch-scratch cycle
■S
Should be tapered to the lowest dosage that adequately controls pruritus
■Best choices—prednisone or methylprednisolone tablets (0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg po q48h)
■Repository injectable corticosteroids should be avoided in dogs.
Antihistamines
■ Less effective than corticosteroids
■ May act synergistically with essential fatty acid supplements
■ Corticosteroid therapy can often be avoided or given at a reduced dosage when used
concurrently.
Alternative Drugs
■Frequent bathing in cool water with antipruritic shampoos can be beneficial.
Supplementation with essential fatty acids helps some pruritic patients
Tricyclic antidepressants (doxepin 1.0-2.0 mg/kg po ql2h or amitriptyline 1.0-2.0 mg/
kg po ql2h) have been given to dogs as antipruritics but their overall effectiveness
and mode of action is unclear.
COMMENTS
 This is a frustrating disease for the client as well as the clinician.
Control versus cure.
Explain the progressive nature of the condition to the client.
 Inform client that atopy rarely goes into remission and cannot be cured.
 Inform client that some form of therapy may be necessary for life.
Examine patient every 2-8 weeks when a new course of therapy is started.
Monitor pruritus, self-trauma, pyoderma, and possible adverse drug reactions.
■ Once an acceptable level of control is achieved, examine patient every 3-12 months.
■ CBC, serum chemistry profile, and urinalysis recommended every 6-12 months for
 patients on chronic corticosteroid therapy.
CHAPTER 7: ATOPIC DERMATITIS
103
■ If the offending allergens have been identified through allergy testing. the owner
should undertake to reduce the animals exposure as much as possible.
■Minimizing other sources of pruritus (e.g., fleas, food hypersensitivity, and secondary
skin infections) may reduce the level of pruritus enough to be tolerated by the
animal.
■ Secondary pyoderma and concurrent flea allergy dermatitis are common.
■ This is not life-threatening unless intractable pruritus results in euthanasia.
■ If left untreated, the degree of pruritus worsens.
■ Only rare cases spontaneously resolve.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
8
chapter
Contact Dermatitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD) and allergic contact dermatitis (ACD) are two rare and
possibly different pathophysiologic syndromes with similar clinical signs.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Differentiation between ICD and ACD may be more conceptual than practical.
■ ICD: results from direct damage to keratinocytes by exposure to a particular com-
pound; damaged keratinocytes induce an inflammatory response directed at the skin.
 ACD: classically considered a type IV (delayed hypersensitivity) and is an immuno-
logic event requiring sensitization and elicitation: Langerhans cells interact with
 antigens that penetrate the skin, leading to the activation of T lymphocytes following
reeexposure and the release of cytokines (most notably TNF-α).
■ Recent reports blur the distinction between ICD, ACD, and atopic dermatitis.
■  Inflammatory dermatitis: may increase the penetration of antigens through the skin
facilitating ACD; there is increased incidence of ACD in atopic animals.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
ICD
■ Occurs at any age as a direct result of the irritant nature of the offending compound
■ Acute condition: may occur after only l exposure; can manifest within 24 hours
■ Corticosteroids rarely helpful
 Lesions resolve l-2 days after removal of irritant.
ACD
■ Rare in young animals; most animals chronically exposed to the antigen (months
 to years); extremely rare in cats, except when exposed to d-limonene-containing
insecticides
■  Increased risk of ACD: German shepherd dog. poodle, wire-haired fox terrier, Scottish
terrier, West Highland white terrier, Labrador and golden retriever
104
CHAPTER 8: CONTACT DERMATITIS
105
Requires months to years of exposure for hypersensitivity to develop
 Reexposure results in development of clinical signs 3-5 days following exposure;
signs may persist for several weeks.
■ Responds well to corticosteroids; pruritus returns after discontinuation if the
antigenic stimulus persists.
Hyposensitization: not effective
Prognosis: good if the allergen is identified and removed; poor if the allergen is not
identified, which may then require lifelong treatment
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Location determined by antigen contact; commonly limited to glabrous skin and
regions frequently in contact with the ground (chin, ventral neck, sternum, ventral
abdomen, inguinum, perineum, scrotum, and ventral contact regions of the tail and
interdigital areas) (Figs. 8-1, 8-2).
■ Thick hair coat of dogs is an effective barrier against contactants; extreme erythro-
derma stops abruptly at the hairline (Fig. 8-3).
 Initial erythema and swelling, leading to papules and plaques; vesicles uncommon
 Chronic exposure leads to lichenification and hyperpigmentation.
 Reactions to topical medications (e.g. otic preparations) usually localized (Figs. 8-4,
8-5).
Generalized reactions, resulting from shampoos or insecticide sprays, less common.
Pruritus: moderate to severe
Figure 8-1 Contact dermatitis. Erythema in glabrous area of axilla
106
 Figure 8-2 Contact dermatitis from exposure to plants
■Seasonal incidence may indicate a plant or outdoor antigen.
■ Reported offending substances: plants, mulch, cedar chips, fabrics, rugs, carpets,
plastics, rubber, leather, nickel, cobalt, concrete, soaps, detergents, floor waxes,
carpet and litter deodorizers, herbicides, fertilizers, insecticides (including newer
topical flea treatments), flea collars, topical preparations (especially neomycin)
CHAPTER 8: CONTACT DERMATITIS
107
■Figure 8-4Contact reaction to topical medication in a cat.
 Figure 8-5 Contact dermatitis from application of a steroid ointment to the flank region.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■
Atopy
■
Food allergy
■ Drug reaction
108  SECTION 2: ALLERGIC AND HYPERSENSITIVITY DERMATITIS
Parasite hypersensitivity or infestation
 Insect bites
■Bacterial folliculitis
■ Malassezia dermatitis
■Dermatophytosis
■Demodicosis
 Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
■ Seborrheic dermatitis
Solar dermatitis
■Thermal injuries
■Trauma from rough surfaces
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Closed-patch testing: sometimes helpful (corticosteroids and NSAIDs must be dis-
continued 3-6 weeks before testing); use materials directly from the environment
or a standard patch test kit for humans applied to the skin under a bandage for
48 hours
■ Best diagnostic test: eliminate contact irritant or antigen, follow with provocative
exposure testing
■ Bacterial cultures to define secondary bacterial folliculitis if indicated.
■ Clipping a patch of hair in a nonaffected region should result in development of a
local reaction by facilitating contact with the antigen.
■Skin biopsy
■  Intraepidermal  vesiculation  and  spongiosis; superficial  dermal  edema  with
perivascular mononuclear cell infiltrate in ICD and ACD
ICD: polymorphonuclear cell infiltrate with leukocyte exocytosis
ACD: lymphocytic spongiotic or eosinophilic and lymphocytic spongiotic infil-
trate with intraepidermal eosinophilic pustules
THERAPEUTICS
Eliminate offending substance(s).
■
 Bathe with hypoallergenic shampoos to remove antigen from the skin.
Create mechanical barriers, if possible—socks, shirts, restriction from environment.
■ Systemic corticosteroids: prednisolone (0.25-0.5 mg/kg po q24h for 3-5 days; then
q48h for 2 weeks; then twice weekly as needed)
■
 Topical corticosteroids for focal lesions
■ Pentoxifylline 10 mg/kg po q8-12h initially; may be reduced to q24h to maintain;
may cause gastric irritation; do not administer with alkylating agents, cisplatin, and
CHAPTER 8: CONTACT DERMATITIS
109
COMMENTS
Abbreviations
■ ACD = allergic contact dermatitis
■ ICD = irritant contact dermatitis
TNF-α = tumor necrosis factor-α
■NSAID = nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
Author: Alexander H. Werner
9
chapter
Eosinophilic Granuloma
Complex
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Cats: often confusing term for 4 distinct syndromes grouped primarily according to
their clinical similarities, their frequent concurrent (and recurrent) development.
and their positive response to corticosteroids:
■ Eosinophilic plaque
■ Eosinophilic granuloma
■ Indolent ulcer
■ Allergic miliary dermatitis
■ Dogs: eosinophilic granuloma (EGD) rare; not part of a disease complex; specific
differences from cats are listed separately
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Eosinophilic plaque: hypersensitivity reaction, most often to insects (fleas, mosqui-
tos); less often to food or environmental allergens; exacerbated by mechanical trauma
■ Eosinophilic granuloma: multiple causes, including genetic predisposition and
 possibly hypersensitivity
■
 Allergic miliary dermatitis: very common hypersensitivity reaction, most often to
fleas
 Eosinophil: major infiltrative cell for eosinophilic granuloma, eosinophilic plaque,
 and allergic miliary dermatitis, but not indolent ulcer; leukocyte located in greatest
numbers in epithelial tissues; most often associated with allergic or parasitic condi-
tions, but has a more general role in the inflammatory reaction
■ Several reports of related affected individuals and a study of disease development
in a colony of specific pathogen-free cats indicate that genetic predisposition
(perhaps resulting in an inheritable dysfunction of eosinophilic regulation) may
be a significant component for development of eosinophilic granuloma and indolent
ulcer.
■A heritable dysfunction of eosinophil proliferation has been proposed.
in nongenetically susceptible breeds)
110
CHAPTER 9: EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
111
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Cat
 No breed predilection
■
Eosinophilic plaque: 2-6 years of age
Genetically initiated eosinophilic granuloma: less than 2 years of age
 Allergic disorder: greater than 2 years of age
■
■  Indolent ulcer: no age predisposition
Predilection for females reported.
■  Lesions of all 4 syndromes may develop spontaneously and acutely; lesions of more
than l syndrome may occur simultaneously.
 Development of eosinophilic plaques may be preceded by periods of lethargy.
Waxing and waning of clinical signs is common.
 Seasonal incidence in some geographic locations may indicate insect or environmen-
tal allergen exposure.
 Distinguishing among the syndromes depends on both clinical signs and dermato-
histopathologic findings.
Dog
■ Siberian husky (76% of cases). Cavalier King Charles spaniel, possibly German
shepherd dog
■ Usually less 3 years of age
■ Males predisposed: 72% of cases
CLINICAL FEATURES
Cat
 Eosinophilic plaque: alopecic, erythematous, erosive patches or well-demarcated,
steep-walled plaques; usually occur in the inguinal, perineal, lateral thigh, ventral
abdomen, and axillary regions; frequently moist or glistening: regional lymphade-
nopathy common; condition may spontaneously resolve in some cats, especially with
the inheritable form of eosinophilic plaque (Figs. 9-1-9-3)
Eosinophilic granuloma: five, occasionally overlapping presentations:
(a    a  (a  o r a
 Individual or coalescing plaques located anywhere on the body, ulcerated with a
"cobblestone" or coarse pattern; white or yellow, possibly representing collagen
degeneration (Figs. 9-5-9-8)
■ Lip margin and chin swelling ("pouting") (Fig. 9-9)
■ Footpad swelling. pain, and lameness (most common in cats under 2 years of age)
(Fig. 9-10)
 Figure 9-1 Well-demarcated and erosive eosinophilic plaque on the ventral abdomen.
 Figure 9-2 Eosinophilic plaque secondary to food allergy.
112
■Figure 9-3 Large erythematous eosinophilic plaque at the lip margin.
 Figure 9-4 Linear granuloma on the caudal thigh.
113
 Figure 9-5 Eosinophilic granuloma. Coalescing punctate erythematous plaques.
 Figure 9-6 Eosinophilic granuloma (case in Fig. 9-5). Plaques produce a "cobblestone" appearance.
114
CHAPTER 9: EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
115
 Figure 9-7 Eroded and exudative eosinophilic granuloma
 Figure 9-8 Eosinophilic granuloma with exudation on the pinnal margin of patient in Fig. 9-7.
 Oral cavity ulcerations (especially on the tongue, palate, and palatine arches); cats
with oral lesions may be dysphagic, have halitosis, and may drool (Fig. 9-11)
Allergic miliary dermatitis: multiple brown/black crusted and erythematous papules;
lesions more often palpated than visualized; may be associated with alopecia; usually
associated with pruritus; frequently affects the dorsum (Figs. 9-12, 9-13)
116
 Figure 9-9 Swollen rostral chin ("pouting") form of eosinophilic granuloma
 Figure 9-10 Eosinophilic granuloma at margin of metacarpal pad.
Indolent ulcer: classically concave and indurated ulcerations with a granular, orange-
yellow color, confined to the upper lips adjacent to the philtrum (Figs. 9-14, 9-15)
Dog
■ EGD: ulcerated plaques and masses; dark or orange color; most often affects the
tongue and palatine arches; reported cutaneous lesions on the prepuce and flanks
(Figs. 9-16, 9-17)
Figure 9-11 Eroded and well-demarcated eosinophilic granuloma on the tongue.
 Figure 9-12 Allergic miliary dermatitis on dorsal lumbosacral region
117
Figure 9-13 Allergic miliary dermatitis with multiple crusted papules on the dorsum.
 Figure 9-14 Indolent ulcer causing swelling of the upper lips with erosions and an "orange" color to tissues
118
 Figure 9-15 Indolent ulcer-scabbed surface as a result of self-trauma
 Figure 9-16 Canine eosinophilic granuloma plaque in caudal pharynx.
119
120
 Figure 9-17 Eosinophilic granuloma, dog. Erythematous plaques on caudal pharynx.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Includes the other diseases in the complex
■ Herpesvirus dermatitis
■FeLV or FIV
■
 Unresponsive lesions:
■ Pemphigus foliaceus
■
 Dermatophytosis or deep fungal infection
■
 Demodicosis
■
 Bacterial folliculitis
■ Neoplasia (especially metastatic adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, and
cutaneous lymphosarcoma)
■ EGD: neoplasia, histiocytosis, infectious and noninfectious granuloma, trauma
DIAGNOSTICS
 CBC/Biochemistries/Urinalysis: mild to moderate eosinophilia; routine serum chem-
istries and urinalysis usually normal
■FeLV and FIV serum testing.
CHAPTER 9: EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
121
Diagnostic Procedures
  Impression smears from lesions: large numbers of eosinophils (Fig. 9-18)
■ Comprehensive flea and insect control: assist in excluding flea or mosquito bite
hypersensitivity
■Food-elimination trial: for all cases; feed a novel protein or hydrolyzed diet; use
exclusively for 8-l0 weeks; challenge to induce development of new lesions
■Atopy: intradermal testing (preferred); inject small amounts of dilute allergens intra-
dermally: positive reaction indicated by the development of a hive or wheal at the
injection site; serum testing when intradermal testing is unavailable
■  Dermatohistopathologic diagnosis: required for distinguishing the syndromes
■ Eosinophilic plaque: severe epidermal and follicular spongiosis and mucinosis
with eosinophilic exocytosis; intense perivascular to diffuse dermal eosinophilic
infiltrate; eroded or ulcerated epidermis
■ Eosinophilic granuloma: distinct foci of eosinophilic degranulation and collagen
 degeneration similar to granuloma formation (*flame figures"); keratinocyte apop-
tosis associated with eosinophils, eroded, ulcerated, and exudative acanthotic
epidermis
■ Indolent ulcer: severe ulceration of the epidermis or mucosa with eosinophilic
degranulation at the level of necrosis; fibrosing dermatitis and neutrophilic inflam-
mation; significant eosinophilic infiltration unusual
 Allergic miliary dermatitis: discrete foci of epidermal erosion and necrosis with
brightly eosinophilic crusts; dermal perivascular to interstitial eosinophil-rich
infiltrate
Figure 9-18 Exudate from eosinophilic plaque demonstrating large numbers of eosinophils (cells with multiple
red intracellular granules) 400x.
122  SECTION 2: ALLERGIC AND HYPERSENSITIVITY DERMATITIS
■ EGD: foci of palisading granulomas and flame figures surrounding collagen fibers:
infiltrate with eosinophils mixed with macrophages, mast cells, plasma cells, and
lymphocytes
THERAPEUTICS
General Considerations
■ Outpatient unless severe oral disease prevents adequate fluid intake
■ Identify and eliminate offending allergen(s) before providing medical intervention.
■ Hyposensitization of intradermal or serum test-positive cats: successful in a majority
of cases; preferable to long-term corticosteroid administration
 Decrease patient from damaging lesions by excessive grooming with behavior
modification techniques and/or distraction.
■ EGD: individual lesions may be excised if being mechanically traumatized and
medically unresponsive
Drugs of Choice
Eosinophilic Plaque, Eosinophilic Granuloma and
Allergic Miliary Dermatitis
■ Some cases improve with antibiotics: trimethoprim-sulfadiazine 15mg/kg BID
cephalexin 22 mg/kg BID, amoxicillin trihydrate-clavulanate 12.5 mg/kg BID, or
clindamycin 5.5 mg/kg BID
■ Injectable methylprednisolone: 20 mg/cat, repeat in 2 weeks (if needed); common
treatment; tachyphylaxis with repeated injections; not advised for long-term
therapy
■Prednisolone (2-4 mg/kg q48h), dexamethasone (0.1-0.2 mg/kg q24-72h) or triam-
cinolone (0.1-0.2 mg/kg q24-72h); maintenance dosing required to control lesions;
steroid tachyphylaxis may occur and may be specific to the drug administered; may
be useful to change the formulation; higher induction dosages may be required but
should be tapered as quickly as possible
■ Topical: fluocinolone/DMSO (Synotic@ lotion) to individual lesions; not practical
 and/or may cause systemic effects in patients with large numbers of lesions
■ Adequate flea control measures paramount to manage a majority of cases.
Indolent Ulcer
  Injectable or oral corticosteroids: see eosinophilic plaque and granuloma (above)
■ Q-interferon: 30-601U daily in cycles of 7 days on, 7 days off; limited success; side
effects rare; no specific treatment monitoring required
 Some cases improve with antibiotics: trimethoprim-sulfadiazine 15mg/kg BID
cephalexin 22 mg/kg BID, amoxicillin trihydrate-clavulanate 12.5 mg/kg BID, or
clindamycin 5.5mg/kg BID.
CHAPTER 9: EOSINOPHILIC GRANULOMA COMPLEX
123
 Figure 9-19 Severe epidermal atrophy. tearing. and secondary infection from administration of megestrol
acetate and application of a topical corticosteroid.
Alternate Drugs
Eosinophilic Plaque, Eosinophilic Granuloma, Allergic Miliary
Dermatitis, and Indolent Ulcer
Chlorambucil 0.1 to 0.2mg/kg q48 to 72 hours
Cyclosporine 5 mg/kg daily to q48 hours
 Doxycycline 5 to 10mg/kg q24 hours
              
effects (diabetes, mammary cancer, epidermal atrophy) preclude use in all but
severe, recalcitrant cases (Fig. 9-19)
EGD
■ Oral prednisone: 0.5-2.2 mg/kg/day initially; then taper gradually
Intralesional corticosteroids: 5 mg/lesion methylprednisolone
Cessation of therapy without recurrence is common.
 Surgical excision of appropriate lesions
COMMENTS
Patient Monitoring
■ Corticosteroids: baseline and frequent hemograms, serum chemistry profiles, and
urinalyses with culture
124 SECTION 2: ALLERGIC AND HYPERSENSITIVITY DERMATITIS
■ Selective immunosuppressant drugs: frequent hemograms (biweekly at first, then
 monthly or bimonthly as therapy continues) to monitor for bone marrow suppres-
sion; routine serum chemistry profiles and urinalyses with culture (monthly at first,
then every 3-6 months) to monitor for complications (renal disease, diabetes mel-
litus, and urinary tract infection)
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Lesions should resolve permanently if a primary cause can be identified and
controlled.
■ Most lesions wax and wane, with or without therapy, an unpredictable schedule of
recurrence should be anticipated.
■ Drug dosages should be tapered to the lowest possible level (or discontinued,
if possible) once the lesions have resolved.
■  Lesions in cats with the inheritable disease may resolve spontaneously after several
 years.EGD: lesions may be recalcitrant to medical intervention.
Abbreviations
■FeLV = feline leukemia virus
■FIV = feline immunodeficiency virus
■ CBC = complete blood count
■ EGD = eosinophilic granulomas in dogs
■ DMSO = Dimethyl sulfoxide
Author: Alexander H. Werner
chapter
10
Food Adverse Reactions
 Food adverse reactions are pruritic, nonseasonal reactions associated with ingestion of
one or more substances in the animal's food.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Pathogenesis not completely understood: immunologic vs. idiosyncratic
Immunologic reactions: immediate and delayed reactions to specific ingredients
immediate reactions presumed to be type I hypersensitivity reactions; delayed reac-
tions due to type Ill or IV reactions
 Nonimmunologic: food intolerance, idiosyncratic reaction; involves metabolic, toxic,
or pharmacologic effects of offending ingredients, result of ingestion of foods with
high levels of histamine or substances that induce histamine either directly or
through histamine-releasing factors
Food hypersensitivity is the most common term used because it is not easy to
distinguish between immunologic and idiosyncratic reactions.
 Immune-mediated reactions: result of the ingestion and subsequent presentation of
one or more glycoproteins (allergens) either before or after digestion; sensitization
may occur at the gastrointestinal mucosa, after the substance is absorbed, or both
  It is speculated that, in juvenile animals, intestinal parasites or intestinal infections
may cause damage to the intestinal mucosa, resulting in the abnormal absorption of
allergens and subsequent sensitization.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Approximately 5% of all skin diseases and 10-15% of all allergic diseases in dogs
and cats are the result of food hypersensitivity.
■]
 Percentages vary greatly with clinicians and geographic location.
■ A wide range of clinical signs that can mimic any of the other hypersensitivity
reactions (the adage of “ears and rears" is inaccurate).
 Skin/exocrine: pruritus in any location on the body; otitis externa
 Gastrointestinal: vomiting: diarrhea; more frequent bowel movements; flatulence
125
126
 Nervous: very rare; seizures have been documented with food hypersensitivity/
intolerance
■Nonseasonal pruritus of any body location
■ Poor response to anti-inflammatory doses of glucocorticoids suggests food
hypersensitivity.
■ Facial pruritus often common clinical feature in the cat
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Malassezia dermatitis, pyoderma, and otitis externa
■
Plaques
 Pustules
■
 Erythema
Crusts
■
 Scale
Self-induced alopecia
Excoriation (Fig. 10-1)
■Lichenification (Fig. 10-2)
■Hyperpigmentation
■Urticaria
 Angioedema
■ Pyotraumatic dermatitis
 Figure 10-1 Note marked excoriation associated with food hypersensitivity.
CHAPTER 10: FOOD ADVERSE REACTIONS
127
 Figure 10-2 Severe food allergy dermatitis with secondary Malassezia hypersensitivity. Note the degree of
hyperplasia/lichenification associated with chronicity
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Flea bite hypersensitivity: usually confined to the caudal half of the body; often
seasonal
 Atopy: associated with pruritus on the face, ventrum, and feet; often seasonal; if
pruritus first occurs at <6 months or >6 years of age, food hypersensitivity may be
more likely than inhalant allergy (not consistent)
■ Scabies: pruritus often very specific in the location (ears, elbows, and hocks); mites
in skin scrapings and response to specific therapy confirm the diagnosis
■  Drug eruption/reaction: history of drug administration before the development of
pruritus and resolution on withdrawal supports diagnosis
■
Malassezia hypersensitivity
DIAGNOSTICS
Food Elimination Diet
■
Most definitive test for food hypersensitivity
■
 Tailored to the individual patient
 The diet must be restricted to one protein and one carbohydrate to which the animal
has had limited or no previous exposure.
128  SECTION 2: ALLERGIC AND HYPERSENSITIVITY DERMATITIS
■ It may take up to 12 weeks for maximum improvement of the clinical signs. (8
weeks=common length of trial).
■ If the patient is sensitive to one or more foods, noticeable improvement will be seen
by the 4th week of the diet.
Challenge and Provocation Diet Trials
■Used if the patient improves on the elimination diet
■ Challenge: feed the patient with the original diet; a return of the signs confirms that
something in the diet is causing the signs; the challenge period should last until the
signs return but no longer than lo days
■ Provoke (provocation diet trial): if the challenge confirmed the presence of a food
hypersensitivity add single ingredients to the elimination diet; test ingredients
include a full range of meats (beef, chicken, fish, pork, lamb), a full range of grains
(corn, wheat, soybean, rice), eggs, and dairy products; the provocation period for
each ingredient should last up to l0 days or less if signs develop sooner (dogs usually
develop signs within 1-2 days); results guide the selection of commercial foods that
do not contain the offending substance(s)
THERAPEUTICS
■ Avoid any food substances that caused the clinical signs to return during the
provocation phase of the diagnosis
■ Make sure the client understands the principles involved in each phase of the
diagnostic test diets.
  Inform client to eliminate treats, chewable toys, vitamins, and other chewable medi-
cations (e.g., heartworm preventative) that may contain ingredients from the patient's
previous diet. Pill Pockets (used in medication administration) should be avoided
during food trials
■ Outdoor pets must be confined to prevent foraging and hunting, which might alter
the test diet.
■ Provide handouts for clients to take home (see Appendix D).
■Advise client that all family members must be aware of the test protocol and must
help keep the test diet clean and free of any other food sources.
■ Systemic antipruritic drugs may be useful during the first 2-3 weeks of diet trial to
control self-mutilation.
■ Antibiotics or antifungal medication are useful  for secondary pyodermas or
Malassezia infections; avoid those that are known to have anti-inflammatory effects
(e.g., tetracycline, erythromycin, and trimethoprim-potentiated sulfas).
■ Glucocorticoids and antihistamines must be discontinued during the last month
(weeks 48) while on the diet trial to allow correct assessment of the animal's
response.
■Chewable vitamins and heartworm medications may contain offending food
substances.
CHAPTER 10: FOOD ADVERSE REACTIONS
129
COMMENTS
a ss p  sd n n   e d a
4 weeks.
■ Avoid intake of any of the proteins included in the previous diet.
■ Treats and chewable toys should be limited to known safe substances (e.g., apples,
vegetables).
■ Other causes of pruritus (e.g., flea bite hypersensitivity, atopy; and external parasites
such as sarcoptic, Notoedres, and Cheyletiella mites) can mask the response to the
food elimination diet trial.
 Prognosis is good, if food ingredients are the only cause of the pruritus and offending
ingredients are avoided. Rarely, a dog or cat may develop hypersensitivity to new
substances, which may require a new elimination diet trial.
 Any other hypersensitivities (flea or atopy) must also be treated.
■ Animals who develop pruritus for the first time at <6 months or >6 years of age may
be more likely to have food hypersensitivity than atopy.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
This page intentionally left blank
section
3
Endocrine Dermatoses
11
chapter
Canine
Hyperadrenocorticism
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) is a disorder caused by excessive produc.
tion of cortisol by the adrenal cortex and has two forms: adrenal-dependent (ADH)
and pituitary dependent (PDH).
  latrogenic HAC results from excessive exogenous administration of glucocorticoids
■  In all forms, clinical signs are a result of the deleterious effects of the elevated cir-
culating cortisol concentrations on multiple organ systems.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ 85-90% of cases of naturally occurring HAC are caused by uncontrolled prolifera-
tion (tumor)of the basophilic or chromophobic cells of the pars intermedia and
the pars distalis of the pituitary gland resulting in hypersecretion of adrenocorti-
cotrophic hormone (ACTH) causing bilateral adrenocortical hyperplasia. Most of
these tumors are small and are termed microadenomas. Approximately 15% are
 macroadenomas. Clinical signs are similar with both sizes, yet the macroadenomas
may have associated central nervous system signs due to a space-occupying mass
effect.
■ 10-l5% of cases are caused by a cortisol-secreting adrenocortical neoplasia (cortical
adenoma/carcinoma); approximately one-half of these tumors are malignant. The
normal adrenal gland atrophies because of excessive cortisol production by the
adrenal tumor
■ latrogenic HAC is clinically indistinguishable from the naturally occurring disease
and results from excessive or prolonged exogenous administration of glucocorti-
coids, which causes adrenal atrophy and suppressed ACTH levels.
■HAC is a multisystemic disorder—the degree to which each system is involved varies
considerably; in some patients, signs referable to one system may predominate;
others have several systems involved to a comparable degree
■ Signs referable to the urinary tract or skin often predominate.
132
CHAPTER 11: CANINE HYPERADRENOCORTICISM  133
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Considered one of the most common endocrine disorders in dogs
■ Dogs: poodles, dachshunds, Boston terriers, boxers, and beagles are reportedly at
increased risk
 No predilection for pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH) in dogs; two-
thirds to three-quarters are female
■ HAC is generally a disorder of middle-aged to older animals yet PDH can be seen in
dogs as young as l year.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Polyuria and polydipsia: occurs in 85-95% of cases; glucocorticoids interfere with
antidiuretic hormone (ADH) release and activity resulting in polyuria with polydipsia
being compensatory
  Polyphagia: direct stimulatory effect on the appetite
■ Pendulous “potbelly” abdomen-abdominal distension occurs due to the redistri-
bution of fat to the abdomen, muscle wasting of the abdominal muscles, and
hepatomegaly.
■Hepatomegaly: accumulation of glycogen
■ Hair loss: bilateral and symmetrical truncal alopecia with sparing of the head and
extremities; atrophy of the hair follicles, epidermis, and adnexal structures; may see
alopecia along the bridge of the nose (Fig. 1l-1)
 Atrophy of the skin: decreased epidermal turnover/regeneration; lacks elasticity
■ Phlebectasia: small red slightly raised spots that represent abnormal vessel dilatation,
extension, or reduplication
 Demodicosis: overgrowth of demodex mites likely due to sluggish immune response 
in controlling normal flora/fauna
■  Poor wound healing: excessive glucocorticoids suppress the inflammatory response,
fibroblast proliferation, and collagen deposition
 Comedones: plugged follicular ostia with keratin, may be black or white; sometimes
associated with demodicosis (Fig. 1l-2)
 Calcinosis cutis: accumulation and deposition of calcium in the dermis and/or sub
cutis and along the follicular epithelium, which is palpable as firm gritty nodules or
plaques, often yellow pink in color; cause subsequent foreign body reaction; severe
cases often have lesions over the dorsal neck, mild cases are often most pronounced
in the ventral intertriginous areas (axillae, groin) (Fig. 1l-3)
 Pyoderma: excess glucocorticoids predispose to skin infections from bacterial
overgrowth and a sluggish immune response (Fig. ll-4)
 Dystrophic mineralization may occur in other tissues than the skin: renal pelvis.
skeletal muscles, gastric walls, bronchial walls, heart muscle, blood vessels, and
liver
 Figure 11-2 Hyperadrenocorticism. Markedly atrophic skin of the ventral abdomen revealing prominent
vessels and comedones.
134
■Figure 11-3 Hyperadrenocorticism. Early calcinosis cutis. Note the yellow-pink coloration of the papules.
They will palpate as firm "gritty" |esions in many cases and may become quite extensive and severe.
 Figure 11-4 Secondary pyoderma associated with hyperadrenocorticism. Often recurrent and persistent.
135
136SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
Se     s   s  n
cruciate ruptures can occur with little stress; high levels of cortisol may cause myo-
tonia characterized by stiff extensor muscles
■ Anestrus: glucocorticoids exhibit a negative feedback on pituitary gonadotropin
secretion
■ Testicular atrophy and decreased libido: glucocorticoids exert a negative feedback
on pituitary gonadotropin secretion, which causes a decrease in testicular androgen
production
■ Clitoral hypertrophy: excess androgen production; major source of androgen pro-
duction in the female is the adrenal gland
■ Perianal gland adenomas: females and neutered males; overproduction of
androgens
■ Panting: common finding and may be due to wasting of the muscles of respiration
as well as reduced capacity for thoracic expansion from the distended abdomen;
other possible causes include pulmonary hypertension and decreased compliance,
primary CNs disturbance, or pulmonary mineralization
■ Dyspnea: uncommon; associated with pulmonary thromboembolism, which may be
 a life-threatening complication of HAC; may occur secondary to a hypercoagulable
state, erythrocytosis, and hypertension
■ Hyperpigmentation: may be due to the fact that ACTH is similar to melanocyte-
stimulating hormone (MSH)
■ Blindness and papillary light reflex changes: pressure exerted on the optic chiasm,
which is adjacent to the pituitary gland
■ Central nervous system signs: seizures, pacing. head pressing, circling, behav-
ioral change (timid/aggressive), impaired thermoregulation (unexplained fever
or hypothermia), ataxia, coma, death; usually due to pituitary macroadenoma
and space-occupying effect; can occur after initiation of antiadrenal therapy
due to lack of negative feedback and subsequent tumor expansion (Nelson's
syndrome)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Depends on the clinical and laboratory abnormalities displayed
■Hypothyroidism
Sex hormone dermatoses
■Acromegaly
■Diabetes mellitus
■Hepatopathies
■ Renal disease
■ Other causes of polyuria/polydipsia
■Follicular dysplasias
■Alopecia X/atypical hyperadrenocorticism
CHAPTER 11: CANINE HYPERADRENOCORTICISM
DIAGNOSTICS
Hemogram: eosinopenia, lymphopenia, neutrophilic leukocytosis, erythrocytosis.
thrombocytosis
1Serum chemistry: may show elevated alkaline phosphatase, mild increase in ALT.
hypercholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia; 5-10% of dogs may have hyperglycemia
(diabetes), decreased blood urea nitrogen concentration (BUN), thyroid values may
be low
■ Urinalysis: may reveal decreased  specific gravity proteinuria secondary  to
glomerulopathy/glomerular sclerosis, hematuria, pyuria, or increased numbers of
bacteria in urine
B    n        
nonadrenal diseases may also cause an elevated UCC)
■ Abdominal radiographs: may show hepatomegally, approximately 50% of adrenal
tumors will be mineralized and visible on radiographs
 Thoracic cavity radiographs: may show bronchial calcification or metastasis from an
adrenal adenocarcinoma; osteopenia may also be identified
 Ultrasonography/CT/MRl: useful for differentiating PDH from ADH and for staging
ADH
 CT and MRl: often useful for demonstrating macroadenomas
1 Pathology (PDH): gross examination reveals normal-sized pituitary to pituitary
macroadenoma and bilateral adrenocortical enlargement; microscopically, see pitu-
itary adenoma or corticotroph hyperplasia of pars distalis or pars intermedia and
adrenocortical hyperplasia
■ Pathology (ADH): gross examination reveals variable-sized adrenal mass, atrophy
of contralateral gland (rarely, bilateral tumors), and metastasis in some patients
with adrenal carcinoma; microscopically see adrenocortical adenoma or
carcinoma
Screening Tests
■ Screening tests for HAC include LDDST and ACTH stimulation tests; once the
screening test is done, the next test discriminates between PDH or ADH.
ACTH stimulation test:
■ Cannot distinguish between PDH and ADH, used to identify HAC
■Best test for monitoring response to therapy
■ Less sensitive than low-dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST)—LDDST
is 95% sensitive but not specific (44-73%), and ACTH is 80% sensitive with a
specificity of 85%; therefore many clinicians will utilize the ACTH stimulation
test as a first step because the test may yield valuable information and is a shorter
test (l-2 hours vs. 8 hours)
■ Only test able to distinguish between idiopathic and iatrogenic (baseline cortisol
levels will be below normal and not increase with stimulation)
138SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
 Testing methodology: patient should be fasted; check samples carefully for hemo-
lysis and lipemia, which may affect values; promptly spin and separate the serum
or plasma before refrigeration
■Baseline blood sample
pounds, 250 mcg/vial cortrosyn).
■ Collect second blood sample 60 minutes later.
 Test interpretation: poststimulation cortisol >22 ug/dL is consistent with HAC for
most labs; <15ug/dL is not consistent; yet remember 20-30% of patients with
HAC stimulate below the cutoff; nonadrenal illness may yield a false positive
result; if both pre- and postcortisol values are blunted, consider iatrogenic HAC;
will likely miss an adrenal tumor
■ LDDST:
■ 95% sensitive and 44-73% specific
■Do not use if the dog has received glucocorticoids or phenobarbital
■ Screening test to identify HAC, sometimes valuable in discriminating between
PDH and ADH
 Testing methodology: patient should be fasted; check samples for hemolysis and
lipemia; promptly spin and separate serum/plasma before refrigeration
■Baseline blood sample
■ Inject 0.0l mg/kg of dexamethasone intravenously (dilute in 0.9% sodium
chloride solution for accuracy in dosing).
■ Collect a second sample 4 hours later.
■Collect a third sample 8 hours later.
■ Test interpretation: an 8-hour cortisol concentration >l/4 ug/dL is consistent with
HAC; a 4-hour cortisol concentration <l.4 ug/dL with an 8-hour sample >l.4ug/
dL supports PDH; failure to suppress at 4 hours does not differentiate ADH from
PDH; nonadrenal illness can affect the test.
Tests to Differentiate PDH from ADH
■ HDDST:
■ Suppression of cortisol levels likely indicates PDH, but remember that 25% of
 dogs with PDH do not suppress with HDDST and almost 100% of dogs with ADH
will suppress.
■ If there is no suppression, you cannot tell whether the patient has ADH or PDH.
■ PDH: a high dose of corticosteroids results in a decrease in ACTH release from
the pituitary and a resultant decrease in plasma cortisol
■ ADH: the tumor secretes cortisol autonomously, thus suppressing ACTH produc-
tion, so dexamethasone has no effect on plasma cortisol because ACTH is already
suppressed.
  Testing methodology: same as for LDDsT but the dose of dexamethasone is higher
@ 0.1 mg/kg given intravenously
■Testing interpretation: an 8-hour cortisol of less than 1.0-1.4 ug/dL
CHAPTER 11: CANINE HYPERADRENOCORTICISM139
1 Endogenous ACTH:
Very accurate but highly susceptible to sample mishandling causing the ACTH
levels to be falsely low and giving the false impression that the dog has ADH; use
of a preservative in EDTA tubes called Aprotinin may result in fewer handling
errors
■ PDH cases have normal to high levels of endogenous ACTH.
■ ADH cases have low to undetectable levels of endogenous ACTH because the
adrenal tumor produces high levels of cortisol, which suppress ACTH production
by the pituitary gland.
■Abdominal Ultrasound:
■ Evaluate adrenal size (normal width should be less than 7 mm), symmetry and
invasion of adjacent structures.
■ Some adrenal tumors are mineralized.
■ Often used in place of HDDST or endogenous ACTH levels
THERAPEUTICS
Surgical Considerations
■Hypophysectomy: described, but generally not recommended for treatment of PDH
because of the difficulty of the procedure and the need for intensive monitoring and
lifelong hormonal supplementation
■ Adrenalectomy is a demanding procedure not generally used for the treatment of
PDH in dogs; given the appropriate personnel and facilities, it is one of the treatments
of choice for feline PDH
■ Surgery is probably the treatment of choice for adrenocortical adenomas and small
carcinomas unless the patient is a poor surgical risk or the client refuses surgery.
Radiation Therapy for Pituitary Tumors
■Radiation therapy can be used for pituitary tumors.
Drugs of Choice
1. Mitotane (o,p'-DDD) (cytotoxic drug) often remains the drug of choice for medical
      s       
lethargy weakness, vomiting, diarrhea, ataxia, and iatrogenic hypoadrenocorticism.
Give with food to increase absorption. Monitor ACTH stimulation test cortisol levels
every 1-6 months as a maintenance protocol.
■ PDH: give an initial loading dose of 25 mg/kg/day (for approximately 3-8 days,
watch for subtle changes in appetite or thirst, and then test) until both basal and
post-ACTH cortisol levels are in the normal resting range (l-5g/dL); then give
occurs, as indicated by cortisol levels outside the normal resting range, reload for
140
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
5-7 days and increase weekly maintenance dose by approximately 50%; give
prednisone (0.2mg/kg/day) during initial and subsequent loading periods
■ ADH: use mitotane (goal is low-to-undetectable basal and post-ACTH cortisol
levels) or administer mitotane at highest tolerated dosage, start at 50 mg/kg/day
as a loading dose; give prednisone at 0.2 mg/kg/day
2. Trilostane (enzyme inhibitor): active steroid analogue that competitively inhibits
3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase and thus the production of cortisol and aldo-
sterone; competitive inhibition is reversible and dose-dependent; adrenal enzymes
may also be inhibited by trilostane; give with food for maximum absorption; do not
use in pregnant or nursing bitches, animals intended for breeding, or patients with
renal or hepatic disease or evidence of anemia
  Dosage guidelines: vary widely in the literature:
<3kg body weight = starting dose of 10 mg daily
>3kg and <l0kg = starting dose of 30 mg daily
■ >10kg and <20kg = starting dose of 60 mg daily
■ >20kg and <40kg = starting dose of 120 mg daily
  y  s = t< 
■Another dosage recommendation is 2-5 mg/kg/day
■Doses can be given once daily or divided twice daily
Dose is then adjusted based on ACTH stimulation cortisol levels. Most patients show
clinical improvement within 7 days. Post-ACTH cortisol levels should be in the
1-5ug/dL range. Repeat ACTH stimulation test 1-2 weeks after starting medication
(3 hours post-pill); monitor levels via ACTH stimulation at 1 month, 2 months, 3
months, 6 months postinitiation of medication and then every 3-6 months if the
levels are stable. Post-ACTH stimulation test cortisol levels:
■<0.7 ug/dL, then stop medication
■ 0.7-1.5ug/dL, then stop for 48 hours/restart @ 1/2 dose
 1.5-5.5ug/dL, continue present dose
■ 5.5-9.0 ug/dL, increase dose by 50%
 >9.0 ug/dL, increase dose by 50-100%
Generally safe and effective medication; side effects include hypocortisolism, acute
death, acute adrenal necrosis. Do not use in breeding animals. Must maintain a daily
(or bid) dosing for maintenance therapy as opposed to twice weekly for mitotane
Iopeka) (monamine oxidase inhibitor): may be used as an alternative treatment for
PDH; decreases pituitary ACTH secretion by increasing dopaminergic tone to the
hypothalamic-pituitary axis, thus decreasing serum cortisol concentrations; indi-
cated only for the treatment of uncomplicated PDH; not recommended for treatment
of PDH in dogs with concurrent illnesses such as diabetes mellitus; cannot be used
to treat cortisol-secreting adrenocortical neoplasia; initiate therapy with l mg/kg
daily and increase to 2mg/kg/day after 2 months if the response is inadequate; if
 this dose is also ineffective, give alternative therapy; disadvantages include the need
for lifelong daily administration, the expense of the medication, and the frequent
lack of clinical response. Side effects are uncommon.
CHAPTER 11: CANINE HYPERADRENOCORTICISM 141
4. Ketoconazole: (inhibit steroid synthesis) inhibits mammalian steroidogenesis by
blocking cytochrome p450 enzyme system, which is responsible for both androgen
and cortisol production; ketoconazole also inhibits ACTH secretion from pituitary
corticotrophs; 10 mg/kg bid initially: up to 20 mg/kg bid in some dogs: indicated for
dogs unable to tolerate mitotane at doses necessary to control HAC and preoperative
control of HAC in dogs with ADH scheduled for adrenalectomy; may be useful for
palliation of clinical signs of HAC in dogs with AT; over one-third of dogs reportedly
fail to respond adequately to the drug: adverse effects include anorexia, vomiting.
diarrhea, lethargy decrease libido/reproductive hormones, and an idiosyncratic
hepatopathy
5. Alternative therapies with minimal or unknown effectiveness: melatonin, flax seed oil
with lignins, metapyrone, mifepristone, bromocriptine, cyproheptadine, cabergoline
COMMENTS
Patient Monitoring (see each drug)
 Response to therapy: use periodic ACTH response testing: test after the initial 7-10
days therapy to ensure adequate response, then at 1, 3, and 6 months of maintenance
mitotane therapy and every 6-12 months thereafter; adequacy of any necessary
reloading period is checked with an ACTH response test before higher maintenance
dose initiated; depending on the problem, clinical signs resolve within several days
to months of appropriate therapy; current label recommendations are to evaluate the
efficacy of l-deprenyl therapy solely on the basis of resolution of clinical signs of
HAC(the ACTH stimulation test is not indicated for assessing the response to
treatment)
■ Some clinicians choose to do low-dose dexamethasone suppression tests every 4-6
weeks to evaluate for normalization (or improvement) of the pituitary-adrenal
axis.
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Untreated HAC: generally a progressive disorder with a poor prognosis
■  Treated PDH: usually a good prognosis; the average survival time for a dog with PDH
treated with mitotane is 2 years; at least 10% survive 4 years; dogs living longer than
6 years tend to die of causes unrelated to their HAC
■ Macroadenomas and neurologic signs: poor to grave prognosis
■ Adrenal adenomas: usually a good to excellent prognosis; small carcinomas (not
metastasized) have a fair to good prognosis
■ Large carcinomas and ADH with widespread metastasis: generally a poor to fair
So    s    s  
seen
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
12
chapter
Feline Hyperadrenocorticism/
Skin Fragility Syndrome
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
A disorder of multifactorial causes characterized by extremely fragile skin
■Tends to occur in older cats that may have concurrent hyperadrenocorticism, diabe-
tes mellitus, or excessive use of megestrol acetate or other progestational compounds,
 or paraneoplastic syndrome
A small number of cats have had no biochemical alterations.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Naturally occurring disease tends to be recognized in old cats.
■ latrogenic cases have no age predilection.
■ No breed or sex predilection
Risk Factors
■Hyperadrenocorticism: pituitary or adrenal dependent
■latrogenic: secondary
toexcessive corticosteroid
or
  progestational  drug
administration
■ Diabetes mellitus: rare, unless associated with hyperadrenocorticism
■  Possibly idiopathic or paraneoplastic syndrome
Historical Findings
■Gradual onset of clinical signs
Progressive alopecia (not always present) (Fig. 12-1)
 Often associated with weight loss, lusterless coat, poor appetite, and lack of energy
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ The skin becomes markedly thin and tears with normal handling. (Figs.
12-2-12-4)
■ The skin rarely bleeds upon tearing.
■ Multiple lacerations (both old and new) may be noted on close examination.
142
CHAPTER 12: FELINE HYPERADRENOCORTICISM/SKIN FRAGILITY SYNDROME
143
Figure 12-1  Feline hyperadrenocorticism. Truncal alopecia
 Figure 12-2 Feline hyperadrenocorticism. Marked skin fragility from routine handling. Note large areas of
denuded skin. (Courtesy of Dr. Rod Rosychuk.)
Partial to complete alopecia of the truncal region may be noted.
Sometimes associated with rat tail, pinnal folding, potbelly appearance
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Cutaneous asthenia
cinoma
 Figure 12-3 Close-up view of Fig. 12-2. The skin easily degloves with minimal pain or hemorrhage. Suturing 
of these lesions is often futile. (Courtesy of Dr. Rod Rosychuk.)
 Figure 12-4 Hyperadrenocorticism with concurrent diabetes mellitus. Note the alopecia, "rattail." 3potbelly
abdominal appearance, and debilitated nature of this disease.
144
CHAPTER 12: FELINE HYPERADRENOCORTICISM/SKIN FRAGILITY SYNDROME
145
DIAGNOSTICS
CBC/Biochemistry/Urinalysis
■ Of little diagnostic significance in most cases
 Approximately 80% of cats with hyperadrenocorticism have concurrent diabetes
mellitus (hyperglycemia, glucosuria)
Other Laboratory Tests
■ACTH-stimulation test: 70% of cats with hyperadrenocorticism have an exaggerated
response
■ LDDsT: 15-20% of normal cats may fail to decrease cortisol levels; typically unsup-
pressed with hyperadrenocorticism and nonadrenal illness
 HDDsT: normal cats show decreases in cortisol concentrations; typically decreased
with nonadrenal illnesses; considered by many clinicians to be the best screening
test for hyperadrenocorticism; unreliable for discriminating between adrenal tumors
and pituitary-dependent causes of hyperadrenocorticism, because both conditions
fail to show suppression
 Endogenous ACTH levels: normal range for most labs is 20-l00 pg/mL
Imaging
Abdominal ultrasonography: adrenal masses are often small until end-stage disease
CT and MRI: small pituitary tumors may be difficult to visualize; MRI may be more
successful
Pathologic Findings
 Histopathology: suggestive, not diagnostic; epidermis and dermis are thin; attenuated
collagen fibers are evident
THERAPEUTICS
Underlying metabolic disease should be ruled out.
■
 Many patients are debilitated and require supportive care.
■
Surgical correction of the lacerations: not helpful because the tissue cannot withstand
pressure from sutures
 Protect skin: clothing, reduce activities that can traumatize the skin, remove
sharp edges from the environment, prevent damage from interaction with other
animals
■ Hyperadrenocorticism: adrenalectomy is the preferred treatment
 Cobalt 60 radiation therapy: variable success in the treatment of pituitary tumors
146
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
Drugs of Choice
■ Medical management: may be useful for preparing patient for surgery and for
 minimizing postoperative complications (e.g., infections and poor wound healing)
■No known effective medical therapy for feline hyperadrenocorticism
■ o,p'-DDD (mitotane): 12.5-50mg/kg po ql2h; response has been equivocal; side
effects include anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea
■ Ketoconazole (Nizoral): 10-15 mg/kg po ql2h; variable response
■ Metapyrone: 65mg/kg po ql2h; clinical improvement noted more often with this
drug than the others
■ Trilostane has been trialed in cats with variable success.
Precautions/Interactions
■ Hyperadrenocorticism: closely monitor diabetic cat; adjust insulin to prevent
hypoglycemia when the cortisol levels fall.
COMMENTS
Abbreviations
■ HDDsT = high-dose dexamethasone-suppression test
■ LDDST = low-dose dexamethasone-suppression test
 0o,p'-DDD = 1,1-(o,p'-dichlorodiphenyl)-2,2-dichloroethane
Author:Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
13
Hypothyroidism
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■Decreased
production
thyroid
hormones
(tetraiodothyronine—T4;
triodothyronine—T3) by the thyroid gland
 Inadequate thyroid hormone affects many metabolic processes and nearly every organ
system.
■ Lack of a single and reliable test for hypothyroidism (other than thyroid gland
 s  on jo s  o ss  s  (o
overdiagnosis.
 Dermatologic signs most often include lack of hair coat growth, hyperkeratosis, and
bacterial folliculitis.
 Treatment is by thyroid hormone (T4) supplementation.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
     d    ( o
secretion by the thyroid gland; T3 inhibits TSH secretion
 Effect of thyrotropin-releasing hormone from the hypothalamus on overall activity of
the thyroid gland unclear; tertiary hypothyroidism not documented in dogs or cats
 Thyroid hormones in plasma primarily protein-bound; less than 1% are “free" in
circulation; pituitary-thyroid axis functions to maintain free T4 (fT4) levels
■ I4: over 80% of secreted hormone; biologic activity up-regulated by conversion to
the active form (T3) in peripheral tissues; conversion to reverse T3 (rT3) reduces
activity
 Only unbound hormone penetrates cells and has biologic activity.
 Lymphocytic thyroiditis (primary hypothyroidism): most common cause; immune-
mediated destruction of the thyroid gland; may be a cause of idiopathic thyroid
atrophy (second most common cause of hypothyroidism); autoantibodies to thyroid
antigens (antithyroglobulin antibodies, ATAs): measured in 50% of cases (breed
discrepancies reported); also detectable in normal, euthyroid dogs
Secondary hypothyroidism (impaired ISH secretion): rare; may be caused by
medications (glucocorticoids, sulfonamides, phenobarbital)
 Hypothyroidism due to neoplasia, dietary iodine deficiency, and congenital abnor-
malities of the gland or of hormonogenesis: very rare (Fig. 13-1)
147
148
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
 Figure 13-1 Pituitary dwarfism.
 Alternative proposed causes include impaired conversion to active T3 and/or increased
 conversion to rT3 due to steroid hormone abnormalities (corticosteroid or estrogen)
or poor absorption of replacement supplementation.
■Hypothyroidism in cats most often follows bilateral thyroidectomy or radioactive
iodine therapy for thyroid neoplasia.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Most common endocrinopathy of dogs
 Increased risk: golden retriever and Doberman pinscher
■上
Heritable: beagle, borzoi, Great Dane
■卫
 Predisposed breeds: mostly medium and large-breed dogs: golden retriever, Great
Dane, Doberman pinscher, Irish setter, Airedale terrier, Old English sheepdog, dachs-
hund, miniature schnauzer, Brittany and cocker spaniel, shar-pei, chow chow.
poodle, Irish wolfhound, English bulldog, Newfoundland, malamute, and boxer
■ Peak age of onset at 5 years (mean 7 years)
Sexually intact animals: decreased risk of developing hypothyroidism
Nonspecific and slow progression of signs often delays diagnosis
Initial symptoms: malaise, mental dullness, exercise and cold intolerance, behavior
change, and obesity; intact animals may demonstrate reproductive dysfunction
Nondermatologic symptoms reported with moderate frequency: peripheral neu-
ropathy (occasionally acute), cranial nerve deficits (Horners syndrome), generalized
u sn q o pn u og d   ons 
consistent with megesophagus or laryngeal paralysis
CHAPTER 13: HYPOTHYROIDISM
149
CLINICAL FEATURES
Early symptoms (Figs. 13-2-13-6)
■ Dull, brittle hair coat
■ Change in coat quality; loss of primary hairs may appear as a return to a “puppy"
coat
Excessive scaling
■ Easily epilated hairs
 Figure 13-2 Hypothyroid-induced scaling and lightening of coat color.
 Figure 13-3 Excessive scaling with dull brittle hair coat in hypothyroidism.
150
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
 Figure 13-4 Thin, scaly hair coat associated with hypothyroidism.
 Figure 13-5 Patient in Fig. 13-4 with thin, brittle hair coat and scaling.
■ Failure to regrow hair coat after clipping: loss of coat in areas of friction or
pressure (e.g., collar, lateral elbows, lateral hocks)
 Reduced hair coat growth following shedding: hypertrichosis has been described
in boxers and Irish setters due to retention of dead hair coat
■ Hair coat color change (most often lightening)
■ Initial alopecia may be patchy and asymmetric.
CHAPTER 13: HYPOTHYROIDISM
151
Figure 13-6 Hypothyroidism-induced thinning of the tail hair coat ("rattail")
LAUNDRY
■Figure 13-7 Truncal alopecia with hyperpigmentation.
Advanced symptoms (Figs. 13-7-13-13)
 Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia; usually truncal, sparing head and extremities
 Pinnal alopecia and scaling
 Edematous appearance to skin (myxedema and mucinosis)
■“Tragic" facial expression
 Significant hyperkeratosis/seborrheic dermatitis
 Hyperpigmentation, lichenification, and comedones in alopecic regions
 Bacterial folliculitis
152
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
 Figure 13-8 Patient in Fig. 13-7 with truncal alopecia and hyperpigmentation.
 Figure 13-9 Facial edema with hypothyroidism.
Malassezia dermatitis
■Otitis externa
Poor wound healing: bruising
 Pruritus uncommon unless associated with secondary infection
 Figure 13-10 Edema of the extremity of patient in Fig. 13-9.
 Figure 13-11 "Tragic facial expression."
153
154
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
Figure 13-12 Pyoderma secondary to hypothyroidism.
 Figure 13-13 Patient in Fig. 13-12. Note "motheaten" appearance to the hair coat with punctate lesions of
alopecia and scaling.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Hyperadrenocortisolism: often associated with other systemic symptoms; exogenous
or endogenous source
CHAPTER 13: HYPOTHYROIDISM
155
Sex-hormone abnormalities (adrenal, extra-adrenal, and gonadal)
Follicular dysplasia
■Telogen effuvium
■ Alopecia due to systemic illness or secondary to medical therapy
 Pattern alopecia including cyclic flank alopecia
■Primary keratinization disorder
DIAGNOSTICS
CBC/Biochemistries
■ Normocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia
 Fasting hypercholesterolemia
■ Fasting hypertriglyceridemia; gross lipemia
Thyroid Hormone Concentration
ITotal T4:
■  Usually below normal range in hypothyroidism
■  Low T4 measurement must be associated with appropriate clinical signs for pre-
sumption of hypothyroidism; additional tests (e.g., TSH measurement) recom-
mended to aid diagnosis
Autoantibodies to T4 will affect results
■ Lower ranges in certain breeds (e.g., greyhound)
■ Wide fluctuations occur in normal dogs.
■ Declines noted with age, estrus, pregnancy obesity, and malnutrition
Sick euthryoid syndrome: low serum T4 due to nonthyroidal illness
■
 Specific disease known to decrease baseline I4: renal failure, hepatic failure,
systemic and cutaneous infection, diabetes mellitus, hyperadrenocortisolism, and
hypoadrenocortisolism
■ Lowered measurement:
glucocorticoids, sulfonamides, nonsteroidal  anti-
inflammatory drugs, phenobarbital, and tricyclic antidepressants
■Total T3/fT3/rT3:
■ Total T3 levels fluctuate widely; measurement not an accurate indicator of
thyroid gland status
■ Reverse T3 levels expected to be increased in sick-euthyroid conditions
■
Autoantibodies to T3 will affect results.
fT4:
 Measured by equilibrium dialysis
■Less
 affected
by
concurrent
diseases
(withtheexception
of
hyperadrenocortisolism)
■ Less affected by autoantibodies to thyroid antigens and hormones
■ Not recommended as a stand-alone test; interpret with T4 measurement
156 SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
1 Measurement of both total T4 and fT4 preferred protocol for the diagnosis of
hypothyroidism by many experts
■ TSH:
Testing sensitivity improving: interlaboratory ranges for normal variable
Hypothyroid dogs may have normal TSH results; normal dogs may have elevated
TSH results
■ Elevated TSH in conjunction with low T4 consistent with diagnosis of
hypothyroidism
■ Further evaluation for thyroiditis or repeat measurement of values in l to 3
months warranted for incongruent results
 Measurement of both total T4 and TSH preferred alternative protocol for the
diagnosis of hypothyroidism by many experts
■TSH-Stimulation Test
■Determines thyroid function
 Baseline and postadministration of TSH measurement of T4
■ Euthyroid: post-T4 result within or above high normal range for T4
■Nonthyroidal illness (sick-euthyroid): blunted response, but post-T4 result within
normal range for T4
■ Hypothyroid: pre- and post-T4 results below normal range
■Recombinant TSH: very expensive; not currently practical for use
■Additional Tests
■ TRH-stimulation test: response variable and smaller than with TSH; not practical
for use; may help differentiate primary hypothyroidism from secondary or tertiary
hypothyroidism
■ Thyroid gland biopsy: definitive diagnostic test; impractical with potential com-
plications; pathologic findings in lymphocytic thyroiditis include infltration of
lymphocytes, macrophages and plasma cells with eventual destruction of thyroid
 parenchyma and replacement with fibrous connective tissue
 Thyroid gland ultrasound: useful, but often not sensitive adjunctive test; decreased
thyroid gland size in hypothyroid dogs
 Antithyroglobulin antibodies: found in 50% of hypothyroid dogs (anti-T3 in 30%;
anti-T4 in 15%); can occur in euthyroid dogs: may indicate developing thyroiditis
in dogs with normal thyroid hormone levels; may be useful in dogs with equivocal
thyroid hormone levels; may interfere with hormone assays resulting most often
in increased test results
 Therapeutic trial: unreliable for diagnosis of hypothyroidism based on dermato-
logic abnormalities; thyroid hormone supplementation produces similar initial
effects (e.g., hair growth, increased activity) in both euthyroid and hypothyroid
dogs: prompt measurement of post-pill T4 levels may reveal significantly elevated
results in euthyroid dogs
■Dermatohistopathology: often not specifically diagnostic for hypothyroidism
more indicative of endocrinopathy; epidermal and follicular infundibular hyper
plasia and hyperkeratosis; predominance of telogen follicles; sebaceous gland
hyperplasia; mucinosis, frequent finding of bacterial folliculitis
CHAPTER 13: HYPOTHYROIDISM157
THERAPEUTICS
General Considerations
■  Diet: reduced-fat as indicated by abnormalities in serum lipid measurements
■ Lifelong treatment necessary
 Response to therapy: within 7 days for neuropathy and severe systemic signs; 4 to 6
weeks for laboratory abnormalities and general systemic signs; 1 to 3 months for
dermatologic conditions
■Thyrotoxicosis: seen as tachycardia, diarrhea, polyuria, polydypsia, polyphagia.
 pruritus, and anxiousness or behavioral changes
Drugs of choice
 Synthetic L-thyroxine (levothyroxine): supplement of choice
 Synthetic T3 (liothyronine; 4 to 6μg/kg tid) administration is not recommended
unless impaired absorption of T4 is suspected (very rare); thyrotoxicosis more likely
with T3 supplementation
■Levothyroxine: serum half-life 12 to 16 hours; peak concentration 4 to 6 hours after
administration
■ Initial dosage of levothyroxine: 15-20 mcg/kg bid
■ Lowered initial dosage required for patients with congestive heart failure, renal
disease, diabetes mellitus, seizure conditions, and hypoadrenocortisolism—initial
    q osp rnd on p ot i
cardiac demands
 Absorption of levothyroxine supplementation may vary with formulation.
 Low-dose corticosteroid administration proposed but not documented to increase
absorption of T4 in patients with poor response to levothyroxine administration.
Monitoring of Therapy
 Initial measurement 4 weeks after initiation of supplementation
■
 Sample collection 4 to 6 hours after levothyroxine administration
■ I4 level should be within the normal range; reported parameters for treatment
monitoring vary by laboratory, results near the middle of the reference range
preferred
 Alternative method of monitoring: I4 measurement of trough (just prior to admin-
istration of levothyroxine) and 4 to 6 hours postadministration; trough level should
be at the low end and peak level should be at the upper end of the reference
range
■]
 Repeat measurements 4 weeks after each dosage change.
■
Measurement of stable patients recommended at 6-month intervals
 TSH levels, if elevated prior to supplementation, should return to normal to low with
therapy; interpretation of adequate supplementation cannot currently be based solely
on measurement of TSH levels.
158
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
Alternative Therapy Options
■ Iwice-daily supplementation considered standard
 Once-daily supplementation may be attempted when symptoms of hypothyroidism
have resolved.
■ Variability of drug absorption may not permit effective once-daily treatment.
■ Studies on monitoring of once-daily supplementation are lacking.
■  Determination of success of once-daily treatment based on continued resolution of
clinical symptoms of hypothyroidism
■ Intravenous L-thyroxine (4 to 5mcg/kg bid) used to treat hypothyroid crisis
(myxedema coma)
COMMENTS
Abbreviations
 T4 = tetraiodothyronine, L-thyroxine
■
 T3 = triiodothyronine, liothyronine
■ TSH = thyroid-stimulating hormone, thyrotropin
■ TRH = thyrotropin-releasing hormone
■ fT4 = free T4
■ rT3 = reverse T3
Author: Alexander H. Werner
chapter
14
Noninflammatory
Alopecia
■ Uncommon disorders associated with abnormal hair follicle cycling
 Multiple disorders produce similar patterns of alopecia affecting the trunk but sparing
the head and distal extremities.
Associated with both endocrine and nonendocrine causes
■ Diagnosis of nonendocrine alopecia is often by exclusion of common endocrine
causes.
■Nonendocrine causes include pattern baldness and follicular dysplasia.
Endocrine causes include
hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism,
castration-
responsive alopecia, sex-hormone imbalance, and Alopecia X (synonyms: growth
hormone [GH]-responsive alopecia, adrenal hyperplasia-like syndrome, pseudo-
Cushing's, adrenal sex-hormone imbalance of plush-coated breeds).
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
General Considerations
1 Hyperadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism are discussed elsewhere (chapters 1l, 12,
and 13).
1Many factors affect the hair cycle, both hormonal and nonhormonal.
Imbalances in sex hormones, especially elevations, can affect the hair cycle; sex
glucocorticoid receptors, and may suppress the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis
(HPA).
1 Abnormalities in the HPA-axis may produce elevations in glucocorticoid-
precursor hormones (notably androgens) with or without measured elevations in
glucocorticoids.
 Alterations of hormones, in the absence of causality, may temporarily affect hair
follicle cycling: these changes often do not persist.
Alopecia x
 Term often used interchangeably with GH-responsive alopecia and adrenal sex-
hormone imbalance of plush-coated breeds
159
160  SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
■ May be caused by elevated levels of progesterone or androgen producing decreased
GH production
■Hyposomatotropism is an inconsistent finding.
■ Adrenal sex-hormone imbalance of plush-coated breeds and adrenal hyperplasia-like
syndrome may result from adrenal 2l-hydroxylase enzyme deficiency producing
excessive secretion of steroid-hormone precursors.
■Hypopituitary dwarfism: defect in or destruction of secretory capability of the adeno-
hypophyseal cells; may be associated with other hormone deficiencies; distinct from
the syndromes considered in Alopecia X
Estrogen Imbalances
■ Estrogen is produced by ovarian follicles and cysts, Leydig cells, and zona
glomerulosa and fasciculata of the adrenal gland.
■ Estrogen excess is associated with
Cystic ovaries and ovarian tumors (females)
Sertoli cell tumor, seminoma, or interstitial cell tumor (males)
 Abnormal production in the adrenal cortex
■ Exogenous estrogen supplementation (diethylstilbestrol)
■ Exposure to hormone replacement topical medications
■ Estrogen is an inhibitor of anagen initiation in dogs (stimulates scalp hair growth
in human beings) and potentiates the action of androgens in the prostate and
progesterone in the endometrium.
 Animals with normal serum estrogen concentrations may have increased numbers
of estrogen receptors in the skin.
■  Peripheral conversion of estrogen and/or excess androgens, as well as regulation of
hormone receptors, is affected by growth factors; abnormalities may cause estrogen
excess or deficiency.
■ True estrogen deficiency is uncommon; it is primarily seen following ovariohyster-
ectomy; serum estradiol concentrations may be normal.
Hyperandrogenism and Hyperprogesteronemia
■ Elevated level of testosterone does not cause alopecia in dogs.
Elevated level of progesterone has been associated with alopecia; most often caused
by exogenous administration (megestrol acetate).
■ Progesterone effect likely due to binding of glucocorticoid receptors and/or conver-
sion to cortisol within canine hair follicles.
■ Castration-responsive alopecia as well as testosterone-responsive alopecia may result
 from proximate relative changes in hormone levels;, response may not persist.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Hypopituitary dwarfism: German shepherds, spitz, miniature pinscher, Carnelian
bear dog: noted by 3 months of age (Fig. 14-1)
CHAPTER 14: NONINFLAMMATORY ALOPECIA
161
 Figure 14-1Fituitary dwarfism.
AlopeciaX.
coated breed such as pomeranian, chow chow, Akita, samoyed, Keeshonden, Alaskan
malamute, and Siberian husky; occurs primarily between 1 to 5 years of age in intact
162
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
 Figure 14-3 Female-spayed malammute with Alopecia X with loss of primary hairs and patchy retention of
undercoat
 Figure 14-4 Truncal patches of alopecia with Alopecia X in a bichon frise with normal hair coat on the head
andextremities.
        
middle-aged to old intact dogs (Figs. 14-5, 14-6)
■ Hyperestrogenism: older intact female dogs (granulosa cell tumor, other ovarian
tumor, ovarian cysts); older intact male dogs (testicular tumor); younger intact
CHAPTER 14: NONINFLAMMATORY ALOPECIA
163
Figure 14-5 Castration-responsive alopecia in a Pomerarian.
female dogs (ovarian cysts); toy breeds (exposure to owner medication); spayed
female dogs (exogenous administration of diethylstilbestrol) (Figs. 14-7-14-9)
■ Testicular tumors: boxer, Shetland sheepdog, Weimaraner, German shepherd, cairn
terrier, Pekingese, collie; increased risk in cryptorchid dogs (Figs. 14-10, 14-11)
 Figure 14-7 Ovariohysterectomy-responsive alopecia in a 4-year-old Labrador with thinning of the hair coat
aff ecting the caudal thighs and perineum.
Figure 14-8 Alopecia of the caudal thighs and inguinal region in a 7-year-old female Maltese prior to OVH
164
 Figure 14-9 Alopecia caused by administration of diethylstilbestrol—symptoms appear similar to patient in
Fig. 14-7 with thinning of hair coat of the perineum.
■ Figure 14-10 Asymmetrical testicular size in a patient with Sertoli cell tumor. Note loss of hair coat on the
 caudal thighs and perineum similar to other cases
165
166
SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
 Figure 14-11 Perianal and caudal thigh alopecia in patient of Fig. 14-10.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Hair coat: dry or bleached because hairs are not being replaced; lack of normal
shed; usually diffuse and bilaterally symmetrical truncal alopecia sparing the head
and distal extremities; primary coat lost first resulting in patchy retention of the
undercoat; complete alopecia eventually develops
■ Variable secondary seborrhea, pruritus, bacterial folliculitis, and comedones
■
Epidermal and dermal atrophy; mild lichenification and scaling
■F
Hyperestrogenism: enlargement of nipples, mammary glands, vulva, prepuce; linear
preputial dermatitis; testicles may palpate normal or irregular in size; petechia due
t )      
may be normal
■ Alopecia X: striking hyperpigmentation very common (*black skin disease")
 Systemic signs (polyuria/polydypsia/polyphagia) usually not present; urinary incon-
tinence may occur in estrogen-responsive cases.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Hypothyroidism
■Hyperadrenocorticism
CHAPTER 14: NONINFLAMMATORY ALOPECIA
167
Figure 14-12 Linear preputial dermatitis in Pomeranian with Sertoli cell tumor. Note erythema affecting the
skin along the ventral aspect of the prepuce
■ Bacterial folliculitis
■
Demodicosis
 Follicular dysplasia:color-dilution alopecia, black hair follicular dysplasia
 Pattern alopecia: dachshund, Boston terrier, greyhound, water spaniel, Chihuahua
 Cyclical flank alopecia: boxer, English bulldog, Airedale
 Postclipping alopecia
■Telogen defluxion
■ Keratinization disorder
DIAGNOSTICS
 CBC/biochemistries/urinalysis: normal except as associated with hypothyroidism or
hyperadrenocorticism; anemia and/or bone marrow hypoplasia or aplasia with
hyperestrogenism
 Serum sex hormone concentrations: often normal; treat according to suspected diag-
nosis based on clinical signs and ruling out other disorders
 Serum estradiol concentrations: sometimes elevated in male dogs with testicular
tumors or female dogs with cystic ovaries; however, normal daily fluctuations of
estradiol make interpretation of estradiol concentrations difficult; prolonged eleva-
tion demonstrated by repeated tests more conclusive
■ ACTH stimulation test or LDDS test: for exclusion of hyperadrenocorticism
Serum thyroxine, fT4, and TSH: for exclusion of hypothyroidism
168SECTION 3: ENDOCRINE DERMATOSES
■ ACTH stimulation test with measurement of adrenal sex hormones: may indicate
overproduction of cortisol precursors
■Dermatohistolopathologic changes commonly associated with endocrine dermatoses:
telogenization of hairs, follicular keratosis, tricholemmal keratinization (flame fol-
licles), epidermal and dermal atrophy, sebaceous gland atrophy; usually distinct from
changes associated with pattern baldness and follicular dysplasia
■ Abdominal ultrasound: adrenal gland hyperplasia or neoplasia, and gonadal
neoplasia
THERAPEUTICS
General Considerations
■ Frequent bathing with antiseborrheic shampoos to reduce scaling, comedones, and
bacterial folliculitis
■ Treatment of secondary bacterial folliculitis with appropriate antibiotics
■ With exception of tumors, conditions are cosmetic, resulting in hair coat loss and
hyperpigmentation; consider risk of treatment before initiating therapy.
Alopecia X
■Melatonin: 3mg bid for small breeds and 6-12 mg bid for large breeds; hair regrowth
should occur within 3 months, effective in approximately 40% of cases; once hair
regrowth has occurred, discontinue treatment; begin supplementation again if hair
loss redevelops
■ Melatonin at high doses can cause insulin resistance; use with caution in diabetic
patients.
■ Mitotane: 15-25 mg/kg daily as induction: followed by twice weekly maintenance;
hair regrowth occurs in a portion of dogs; use of this drug can result in an
Addisonian crisis; electrolytes and ACTH stimulation testing should be monitored
regularly
■ Trilostane: dosages as described for treatment of Cushings syndrome; hair regrowth
occurs in a portion of dogs; use of this drug can result in an Addisonian crisis;
electrolytes and ACTH stimulation testing should be monitored regularly
■Synthetic growth hormone (0.15IU/kg subcutaneously twice weekly for six weeks):
can cause diabetes mellitus
Sex-hormone Imbalances
■ Diagnose and surgically excise ovarian cysts or tumors and abdominal or scrotal
testicular tumors.
■Neutering of intact animals may stimulate hair coat regrowth (possibly temporary).
■Methyltestosterone (l mg/kg—maximum dosage of 30mg/dog): every other day
until hair regrowth; then once every 4-7 days; can result in behavioral changes.
cholangiohepatitis, and seborrhea oleosa; monitor hepatic chemistries
CHAPTER 14: NONINFLAMMATORY ALOPECIA
169
■Diethylstilbestrol (0.1-1 mg/kg po): q24h for 14-21 days; discontinue 7 days: repeat
until hair coat regrowth, then administer 2 to 3 times weekly; monitor blood count
frequently
COMMENTS
Abbreviations
■GH = Growth hormone
■
ACTH = Adrenocorticotropic hormone
■
LDDs = Low-dose dexamethasone suppression
■
TSH = Thyroid stimulating hormone
 HPA = Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal
■fT4 = free tetraiodothyronine
Author: Alexander H. Werner
This page intentionally left blank
section
Immunologic and
Autoimmune Disorders
15
chapter
Canine Familial
Dermatomyositis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
An inherited idiopathic inflammatory condition of dogs that involves the skin and
muscle (rarely, blood vessels)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Exact pathogenesis unknown
■ Although it is well accepted that there is a genetic predisposition, some researchers
suspect that an infectious agent (i.e., a virus) triggers the clinical signs; others believe
an immune-mediated or autoimmune process may be involved.
■ Skin: initially, variable dermatitis on the face, ears, and tail tip and over the bony
prominences of the distal extremities
■Musculoskeletal: later, myositis, which can be subtle to severe; usually, the temporal
and masseter muscles are involved; in more severe cases, generalized muscle disease
and involvement of the esophageal muscles may occur resulting in megaesophagus;
generally, the more severe the dermatitis, the more severe the myositis
■ Thought to be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait with variable expression in
collies, Shetland sheepdogs, and Beauceron shepherds
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Breed Predilection
■ Collies, Shetland sheepdogs, Beauceron shepherds, and their crossbreeds
■ Isolated reports: Australian cattle dogs. Welsh corgis. chow chows, German
shepherds, and the Kuvasz
Mean Age and Range
■ Cutaneous lesions usually develop between 7 weeks and 6 months of age
■Mild disease: lesions may resolve in 3 months
■ Moderate disease: lesions may persist for 6 months or more
172
CHAPTER 15: CANINE FAMILIAL DERMATOMYOSITIS
173
 Severe disease: lesions usually persist throughout life and become progressive
■Adult-onset disease: much less common
Risk Factors
Trauma
■
Sunlight
■
 Estrus
Parturition
■Lactation
CLINICAL FEATURES
 The clinical signs vary from subtle skin lesions and subclinical myositis to severe
skin lesions and generalized muscle atrophy.
Waxing and waning skin lesions: in dogs <6 months old; around the eyes, lips, face,
inner ear pinnae, tail tip, and bony prominences of distal extremities; healing may
lead to residual scarring: primary vesicular lesions are rare yet ulceration can occur
in severe cases
 Muscle atrophy of the masseter and/or temporal muscles may be evident.
■
Severely affected dogs may have difficulty eating. drinking, and swallowing: have
stunted growth; be lame; have widespread muscle atrophy and be infertile.
 Several litermates may be affected, but the severity of the disease often varies
 significantly among the affected dogs.
Skin lesions: characterized by papules and vesicles (rare); variable degrees of ery-
thema, alopecia, scaling. crusting. ulceration, and scarring on the face, around the
lips and eyes, in the inner ear pinnae, on the tail tip, and over bony prominences on
the distal extremities (Figs. 15-1-15-5)
■  Footpad and oral ulcers rare
■ Myositis: varies from none to a bilateral symmetric decrease in the mass of the
temporalis muscles to generalized symmetric muscle atrophy; lameness
 Aspiration pneumonia: with megaesophagus
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Demodicosis
■
 Dermatophytosis
■
 Bacterial folliculitis
■ Juvenile cellulitis
■]
 Discoid lupus erythematosus
■
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Polymyositis
174
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Figure 15-1 Dermatomyositis in a collie. The dermatologic lesions consist of alopecia, crusting. and scarring.
(Courtesy of Gail Kunkle, University of Florida College of Veterinary Medicine.)
 Figure 15-2 Skin lesions on the pinnae consisting of crusts and alopecia. Scarring may be a sequela of this
disease. (Courtesy of Gail Kunkle, University of Florida College of Veterinary Medicine.)
DIAGNOSTICS
■Nonregenerative anemia may occur with severe disease.
■
Serum creatine kinase may be normal or slightly high.
ANA titers and lupus erythematosus tests negative
■I
EMG: abnormalities in affected muscles; fibrillation potentials; bizarre high-frequency
 discharges; positive sharp waves
■ Skin biopsy: choose papules, vesicles, or lesions that show alopecia and erythema;
avoid infected and scarred lesions
CHAPTER 15: CANINE FAMILIAL DERMATOMYOSITIS
175
 Figure 15-3 Crusting alopecic lesions on the distal extremities. (Courtesy of Gail Kunkle, University of Florida
College of Veterinary Medicine.)
 Figure 15-4 Tail tip lesions often consist of alopecia and crusting. (Courtesy of Gail Kunkle, University of
 Florida College of Veterinary Medicine.)
 Muscle biopsy: difficult because pathologic changes may be mild, multifocal, or (in
early states) absent; ideally, use EMG to select affected muscles; otherwise, use atro-
phied muscles; if muscles appear clinically normal, random biopsies may not be
diagnostic
Skin Biopsy
■ Scattered necrotic basal cells (colloid bodies) or vacuolated individual basal cells
 Occasionally, vesicles that contain small amounts of RBCs
176
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
■ Figure 15-5 Dermatomyositis in a collie puppy. Note the areas of scarring and hypopigmentation around
the eyes.
 Superficial, mild, and diffuse dermal inflammatory infiltrates composed of lympho-
 cytes and histiocytes with variable numbers of mast cells and neutrophils (especially
perifollicular)
Usually, follicular basal cell degeneration and follicular atrophy
 Secondary epidermal ulceration and dermal scarring
■
 Combination of perifollicular inflammation, epidermal and follicular cell degenera-
tion, and follicular atrophy strongly suggest the diagnosis.
Muscle Biopsy
■ Variable multifocal accumulations of inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes,
macrophages, plasma cells, neutrophils, and eosinophils
 Myofibril degeneration characterized by fragmentation, vacuolation, and increased
eosinophilia of the myofibrils
■  Myofiber atrophy and regeneration
THERAPEUTICS
■ Nonspecific symptomatic therapy includes treating secondary pyoderma and avoid-
ing trauma and intense sunlight.
■Avoid activities that may traumatize the skin.
CHAPTER 15: CANINE FAMILIAL DERMATOMYOSITIS
177
Keep indoors during the day to avoid exposure to intense sunlight.
■ Because estrus exacerbates the disease, neutering intact females is recommended.
Drugs of choice
■ The therapeutic efficacy of medical treatment can be difficult to assess because the
disease tends to be cyclic and is often self-limiting.
■ Vitamin E @ 100-4001U po q12-24h
■ Prednisone @ 1-2 mg/kg po ql2h until remission; then alternate-day administration
with the lowest dosage possible for long-term control
■Pentoxifylline (Trental) @ 200-400 mg po with food q24h; human drug that increases
microvascular blood flow and tissue oxygenation by lowering blood viscosity, inhib-
iting platelet aggregation, increasing RBC deformability, and reducing serum fibrino.
gen levels; beneficial in some dogs, but improvement may not be seen for 1-2 months
Precautions/Interactions
■Pentoxifylline should not be used in dogs that are sensitive to methylxanthine
derivatives (e.g., theophylline).
■ Pentoxifylline: can cause gastric irritation; animals with prolonged clotting times and
those receiving anticoagulant therapy should be monitored carefully
 Glucocorticoids: discuss possible side effects with the owner
COMMENTS
■ Discuss the hereditary nature of the disease.
■ Note that affected dogs should not be bred.
■ Inform owner that the disease is not curable, although spontaneous resolution can
occur.
 Discuss prognosis and possible complications, especially in severely affected dogs.
 Advise that medications may not help
Client Education
■Prevention/avoidance
■ Minimize trauma and exposure to sunlight.
 Spay intact females to prevent estrus, parturition, and lactation (all precipitating
causes of active dermatomyositis).
■ Do not breed affected animals.
Possible Complications
 Secondary pyoderma and demodicosis
1 Mild to moderate disease: residual foci of alopecia, hypopigmentation, and hyper-
pigmentation in areas of previously active skin lesions; occurs most frequently on
the bridge of the nose and around the eyes
178 SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
■ Severe disease: extensive scarring: trouble chewing, drinking, and swallowing if the
masticatory and esophageal muscles are involved; megaesophagus may develop
predisposing the dog to aspiration pneumonia
■ Generalized myositis: growth may be stunted
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Long-term prognosis: varies, depending on the severity
■ Minimal disease: prognosis good; tends to spontaneously resolve with no evidence
of scarring
■ Mild to moderate disease: tends to eventually spontaneously resolve; usually with
residual scarring
■ Severe disease: poor prognosis for long-term survival; dermatitis and myositis are
severe and lifelong
Associated Conditions
■  Idiopathic ulcerative dermatosis of Shetland sheepdogs and collies: poorly under-
stood disease; described in adult collies and Shetland sheepdogs; characterized by
well-demarcated serpiginous ulcers in the intertriginous areas of the groin and
axillae; may occur alone or concurrently with dermatomyositis; may be a subgroup
of dermatomyositis
Pregnancy
■Do not breed affected dogs.
■ Pregnancy exacerbates clinical symptoms.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
16
Discoid (cutaneous) and
Systemic Lupus
Erythematosus
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Discoid (Cutaneous) Lupus Erythematosus (DLE/CLE)
■ Considered to be a benign variant of SLE
 One of the most common immune-mediated skin diseases in dogs
Predominantly involves the planum nasale; face, ears, and mucous membranes less
commonly affected; rarely other areas
Characterized primarily by depigmentation and erosion/ulceration of the planum
nasale
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE)
■ Multisystem autoimmune disease characterized by the formation of autoantibodies
and circulating antigen-antibody complexes
            p
vasculitis is often a predominant clinical feature
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Exact mechanism undetermined
Genetic predisposition likely
Suspected causes: drug reactions, viral initiation, and UV light exposure
 Seasonal exacerbations: associated with increased photoperiod and UV radiation
■ UV exposure is a major concern.
 Antigen/antibody deposition at the dermal-epidermal junction in DLE
Antigen/antibody complexes are deposited in the glomerular basement membrane,
skin, blood vessels, and synovial membranes.
 Tissue injury is a direct result of activation of complement by immune complexes
and infiltration of inflammatory cells as well as by direct cytotoxic effect of
autoantibodies against membrane bound antigens.
179
180
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Predominantly in dogs; rarely in cats
■ Predominant breeds: collies, German shepherds, Siberian huskies, Shetland sheep-
dogs, Alaskan malamutes, chow chows, and their crosses
■ Young adults predisposed
■May wax and wane
■SLE often associated with lethargy anorexia, shifting leg lameness, fever, ulcerative
dermatosis
CLINICALFEATURES
DLE/CLE
■  Usually starts with depigmentation of planum nasale and/or lips (Fig. 16-1); depig-
mentation progresses to erosions and ulcerations; tissue loss and scarring can occur
(Fig. 16-2, Fig. 16-3), may also involve pinnae and periocular region; rarely feet and
genitalia
German short-haired pointer lupoid dermatosis: variant of DLE, generalized exfolia
tive dermatosis with a secondary bacterial folliculitis, recognized in first l-2 years
of life, progressive, ANA-negative, lymphocyte-rich interface dermatitis, often called
exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ECLE)
 Figure 16-1 Discoid lupus erythematosus. Note the depigmentation of the planum nasale.
E       AS
181
Figure 16-2 DLE/CLE. Note the extensive alopecia and scarring evident in this case
 Figure 16-3 Advanced case of DLE demonstrating the remodeling of the planum nasale characteristic of
chronicchanges.
■ Ulcerative dermatosis of Shetland sheepdogs and rough collie (UDssC), formerly
considered a variant of dermatomyositis but now considered to be a vesicular
variant of DLE (cutaneous LE), ulcerative dermatosis involving the thigh, groin,
axillae, and ventral abdomen; lesions are often serpiginous or polycyclic; lymphocyte-
rich interface dermatitis with dermoepidermal junction vesiculation
182
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
SLE
■ Joints are often swollen and painful; cutaneous lesions are characterized by ery-
thema, erosion, ulceration with mucocutaneous and oral lesions common (Figs.
carditis, pericarditis, pleuritis; Fig. 16-9). Ulcerations of the lateral aspect of the
tongue representative of SLE.
intermittent fever of greater than 1049F.
 Figure 16-5 SLE. SLE in a dog. Focal ulceration over a pressure point area (elbow)
 Figure 16-6 SLE. Oral mucosal and lingual ulcerations are extensive in this dog.
Figure 16-7 Systemic lupus erythematosus in an 8-year-old dog. Note the erythema, ulceration, and crusting 
 of the planum nasale, bridge of the nose, and periocular region.
183
 Figure 16-8 SLE. Close-up view of the bridge of the nose from Fig. 16-7.
 Figure 16-9 Ulcerations of the lateral aspect of the tongue representative of SLE
184
185
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Other immune-mediated diseases: Pemphigus foliaceus, pemphigus erythematosus,
and uveodermatologic syndrome
  Drug reactions, erythema multiforme, and toxic epidermal necrolysis: nasal and facial
lesions
■ Mucocutaneous pyoderma
Dermatomyositis: affects some of the same predisposed breeds (collies and Shetland
sheepdogs)
 Nasal pyoderma and nasal dermatophytosis: infectious conditions; can mimic discoid
lupus erythematosus
■
 Contact allergy
 Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Metabolic epidermal necrosis
I-cell epidermotropic lymphoma: may start on the planum and rostral aspect of the
muzzle and lips
Squamous cell carcinoma: may affect the planum; may occur at a slightly higher
incidence in chronic discoid lupus lesions
■ Idiopathic leukoderma leukotrichia (vitiligo): may cause depigmentation of the
tissue and hair without concurrent inflammation
■ Neoplasia-induced vasculitis
■ Infectious diseases must be differentiated from SLE
DIAGNOSTICS
■ ANA, LE preparation, and Coombs tests: usually normal or negative in DLE/ positive
in SLE
■
SLE: nonerosive polyarthritis, proteinuria from glomerulonephritis, hemolytic
anemia, leucopenia, thrombocytopenia, polymyositis, high concentration of beta and
gamma globulins on serum electrophoresis
 Biopsies of nonulcerated, slate-gray depigmented lesions: often characterized by
interface lichenoid dermatitis with pigment incontinence, apoptosis, and variable
degrees of dermal mucin in cases of DLE
Cutaneous biopsies of SLE include features seen in DLE as well as vasculitis and
panniculitis
 Immunopathologic examination of nonulcerated DLE samples preserved in Michel's
solution: may reveal positive basal laminal fluorescence as well as vessel fluorescence
in SLE
186 SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs of Choice
■Tetracycline and niacinamide: 250 mg each po q8h for dogs <10kg: 500 mg po q8h
for larger dogs
■ Vitamin E: 10-20IU/kg po ql2h; may help reduce inflammation
■Topical corticosteroids: initially potent fluorinated steroid q24h for 14 days; then
q48-72h for 28 days; if in remission, switch to less-potent product (e.g., 0.5% or
2.5% hydrocortisone)
■ Prednisone: consider for severe or nonresponsive cases; 2-3 mg/kg daily either solely
or in combination with azathioprine 1-2 mg/kg po on alternate days; taper predni-
u ps oz) u - g vtb od yl io on as
be used in cats)
Chlorambucil (Leukeran) small dogs and cats: 0.2 mg/kg/day
■ Pentoxyfilline (Trental) dogs and cats: 10-15 mg/kg po tid
■ Cyclosporine @ 5-l0mg/kg/day dogs (withdraw if side effects occur: gastritis,
papillomatosis, gingival hyperplasia, lymphocytoid dermatitis) and 25mg/cat/day
■Tacrolimus (topical) 0.03% to 0.1%
COMMENTS
■ Recheck 7-14 days after initiating treatment for clinical response.
■ CBC and biochemistry: every 3-6 months if using topical or oral corticosteroids for
control
■ CBC and platelet counts: every 2 weeks for the first 3-4 months; then every 3-6
months while on azathioprine or chlorambucil
■Serum chemistry: every 3-4 months when using cyclosporine
■Avoid using affected animals for breeding.
■May be disfiguring
■ May create a source of trauma-induced bleeding
■ Avoid direct solar exposure and use waterproof sunblocks with an SPF greater than
15.
■ ANA in SLE remains high during remission and is not useful for monitoring the
 progression of the disease
Possible Complications
■Scarring
■Secondary pyoderma
■Bleeding
■ Disfgurement
187
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ DLE is progressive but not usually life-threatening if left untreated
■With proper treatment, expect remission in most cases of DLE.
■
   s    ss    
prognosis, but remissions are common with more aggressive therapy.
■ The presence of hemolytic anemia, glomerulonephritis, bacterial septicemia in SLE
warrants a poor prognosis
Abbreviations
■ANA = antinuclear antibody
■ LE = lupus erythematosus
■ SLE = systemic lupus erythematosus
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
17
chapter
Drug Eruption, Erythema
Multiforme, and
Toxic Epidermal Necrolysis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
and pathophysiology
■ Drug eruption: likely that many mild drug reactions go unnoticed or unreported;
thus, incidence rates for specific drugs are unknown and most of the facts available
on drug-specific reactivities have been extrapolated from reports in the human
literature
■ Erythema multiforme (EM): severe ulcerative disease associated with drug adminis-
tration, viral disease, bacterial infection, and neoplasia; often idiopathic; lesions
varied in clinical appearance and severity
■ Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN): some investigators believe that TEN is a more
severe clinical form of EM; others feel they are distinct diseases.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Drugs of any type: topical, oral, injectable (Fig. 17-1)
■
Exfoliative erythroderma: most often associated with shampoos and dips
■ Can occur after the first dose after weeks to months of administration of the same
drug
■ Immunologic versus physiologic reaction
 Apoptotic diseases (individual keratinocyte necrosis)
 Pathophysiology considered to involve a variety of mechanisms such as the up-
regulation of expression of MHC 1I and ICAM-l adhesion molecules on keratino-
cytes. T lymphocytes are thus recruited to the epidermis and dermis and result in
apoptosis.
■ EM is characterized by individual epidermal and follicular keratinocyte necrosis
(apoptosis) with dermal inflammatory cell infiltrate/TEN typically has more conflu-
ent and severe epidermal necrosis with minimal dermal inflammation.
■ EM and TEN are often considered severe forms of drug eruption, yet the clinician
must keep in mind that there may be other etiologies as well as idiopathic
188
CHAPTER 17: DRUG ERUPTION, ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME, AND TOXIC EPIDERMAL NECROLYSIS
189
 Figure 17-1Cephalexin drug eruption.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs and cats
■
 Age, breed, and sex predispositions: unknown
■
 Some types of drug reactions appear to have a familial basis (e.g., rabies vaccine
reactions in dogs have been diagnosed in littermates).
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Depression, anorexia, fever, lameness
■
 Mucocutaneous ulceration/erosion, oral cavity, footpads, pinnae
 Pruritus: can be activated by a wide variety of compounds; most common symptom
of drug eruption in humans
 Macular and papular rashes: commonly accompany pruritus as a nonspecific sign of
inflammation (Fig. 17-2)
1
 Exfoliative erythroderma: a diffuse erythematous response caused by vasodilation;
often leads to exfoliation (diffuse scaling)
 Urticaria/angioedema: results from an immediate (type I) hypersensitivity; requires
prior sensitization; increased vascular permeability leads to fluid leakage into the
interstitium (Figs. 17-3, 17-4)
190
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Figure 17-2 Severe diffuse erythematous papular eruption secondary to cephalexin administration
 Figure 17-3 Diffuse urticarial reaction secondary to trimethoprim sulfamethoxazole.
 Hypersensitivity vasculitis: inflammation of cutaneous vasculature; results in poor
blood flow and anoxic injury to recipient tissue; in most cases, thought to represent
a type Ill hypersensitivity response
■ Erythema multiforme (EM): macules or plaques expand peripherally and may clear
(serpiginous and polycyclic)
CHAPTER 17: DRUG ERUPTION, ERYTHEMA MULTIFORME, AND TOXIC EPIDERMAL NECROLYSIS
¥191
 Figure 17-4 Vesicular eruption secondary to griseofulvin exposure.
 Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN): extensive necrosis and sloughing of the epidermis
in sheets; results in a moist and intensely inflamed skin surface
 Drug-induced pemphigus/pemphigoid: least common drug reaction in animals; can
closely mimic the autoimmune (spontaneous) forms of these diseases
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Pruritus, macular/papular rashes, and urticaria/angioedema: allergic diseases (atopy.
food allergy, contact allergy) and reactions to ectoparasites (scabies, flea bite allergy.
stinging insects)
■ Exfoliative erythroderma: rule out cutaneous T-cell lymphoma in old dogs and cats
Vasculitis: infectious, neoplastic, and autoimmune diseases; many cases of vasculitis
are idiopathic
 EM: rule out respiratory infections and internal neoplasms
 Pemphigus/pemphigoid: consider drug reaction whenever these diseases are diag-
nosed; however, spontaneously occurring autoimmune disease is much more common
 Thermal or chemical burns may give similar clinical appearance.
DIAGNOSTICS
1 Serum biochemistry and complete blood count (especially when cutaneous vasculitis
is suspected or diagnosed: potential for concurrent hepatic, renal, and gastrointesti-
nal disease)
192  SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
■Rickettsial serology ANA
■ Cats FIV and FeLV serology
■ Bacterial and fungal cultures and sensitivity testing: (especially if pyogranulomatous
inflammation is a clinical feature)
■ Skin biopsy for histopathology: mandatory for diagnosis of most drug-induced
 diseases (vasculitis, EM, TEN, pemphigus/pemphigoid)
THERAPEUTICS
■ Discontinue use of the potential offending drug.
protein exudation and risk of sepsis
■Corticosteroids: controversial
Cyclosporine is often considered the drug of choice for erythema multiforme
(5-10mg/kg/day).
■ Human intravenous immunoglobulin (IVlG) may be helpful in refractory cases;
5-6% solution is prepared with 0.9% NaCl according to manufacturers recommenda-
tions and infused IV over a 4-6 hr period @ 0.5-1 g/kg (one or two treatments given
24 hours apart).
■Pentoxifylline (Trental) may be helpful in some cases.
COMMENTS
■ Inpatient: if debilitated
Outpatient: regular rechecks, depending on physical condition
 Some reactions appear to activate self-perpetuating immune responses.
■ Some drug metabolites may persist for days to weeks and provoke a continued
response.
■ TEN: prognosis poor
■Vasculitis: prognosis guarded when there are systemic complications associated with
arthropathy, hepatitis, glomerulonephritis, and neuromuscular disorders, among
others
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
18
Granulomatous Sebaceous
Adenitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
An inflammatory disease process directed against the sebaceous glands (cutaneous
holocrine adnexal structures).
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 May be genetically inherited/congenital, immune-mediated, or metabolic (initial
defect may be a keratinization disorder or an abnormality in lipid metabolism, which
leads to accumulation of toxic intermediate metabolites)
Unknown
■ Autosomal recessive mode of inheritance proposed in standard poodles and Akitas
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Young adult to middle-aged dogs
 No sex predilection noted
 Two forms: one in long-coated and one in short-coated breeds
 Predisposed: standard poodles, Akitas, Samoyeds, vizslas, German shepherd dogs.
Hovawarts (Figs. 18-1, 18-2)
Reported to occur in the cat and the rabbit
CLINICAL FEATURES
Long-Coated Breeds
Symmetrical, partial alopecia
Dull brittle hair
■
Tightly adherent silver-white scale
 Follicular casts around hair shaft (accumulation of adherent scale that tracts the hair
as it exits the hair follicle; likely due to lack of sebum in the infundibular part of the
hair follicle where epithelial keratinization of the outer root sheath takes place)
193
 Figure 18-1 Standard poodle with generalized granulomatous sebaceous adenitis demonstrating follicular
casting of keratin that effectively mats the hair down onto the skin and gives the clinical appearance of
alopecia
 Figure 18-2 Loss of guard hairs (partial alopecia) with tightly adherent scale on the surface of the skin with
follicular casts around hair shafts. Standard poodle.
194
CHAPTER 18: GRANULOMATOUS SEBACEOUS ADENITIS
195
 Small tufts of matted hair/loss of hair and matting with scale on the tail gives the
appearance of a rattail
■ Lesions: often first observed along dorsal midline and dorsum of the head
■
 Severe: secondary bacterial folliculitis, pruritus, and malodor
■
Akitas: often relatively severely affected
Short-Coated Breeds
 Alopecia: typically a moth-eaten pattern, circular/serpiginous, or diffuse
Mild scaling: fine and rarely adherent
Affects the trunk, head, and ears
■
 Secondary bacterial folliculitis rare
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Primary seborrhea: keratinization disorder
Bacterial folliculitis
■]
 Demodicosis
■
 Dermatophytosis
Endocrine skin disease
■Ichthyiosis
■Follicular dysplasias
DIAGNOSTICS
 Skin scrapings: normal
■]
 Dermatophyte culture: negative
■]
Endocrine function tests: normal
■Skin biopsies are diagnostic.
Pathologic Findings
■Nodular granulomatous to pyogranulomatous inflammatory reaction at the level of
the sebaceous glands (isthmus region of hair follicles)
 Orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis and follicular cast formation; more prominent in
long-coated breeds
 Advanced: complete loss of sebaceous glands; periadnexal fibrosis
Destruction of entire hair follicle and adnexal unit rare
THERAPEUTICS
Clinical signs may wax and wane irrespective of treatment.
■ Controlled studies have not been done to document effcacy of any therapy.
196  SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
■ Results extremely variable; response may depend on severity of disease at the time
of diagnosis.
■ Akita: breed most refractory to treatment
Drugs of Choice
■ Propylene glycol and water @ 50-75% mixture; spray every 24hr to affected areas
(messy)
■ Baby oil: soak affected areas for lhr; follow with multiple shampoos to remove oil
and scales (messy)
■ EFA (essential fatty acid supplementation) possible side effects include vomiting.
diarrhea, and flatulence
■ Retinoids @ 1 mg/kg ql2h P0; reduce to 1mg/kg q24h after 1 month and to 1 mg/kg
q48h after 2 months; continue as needed for maintenance
■ Cyclosporine @ 5 mg/kg ql2h P0; often best therapeutic option, side effects include
vomiting、 diarrhea, gingival hyperplasia, hirsutism, papillomatous skin lesions,
increased incidence of infections, nephrotoxicity (rare), and hepatotoxicity
(infrequent)
 Tetracycline and niacinamide combination @ 250-500 mg po of each tid
■ Bactericidal antibiotics and benzoyl peroxide shampoo: for secondary bacterial
folliculitis
COMMENTS
■Urge owners
s to register affected dogs so that mode of inheritance can be
determined.
■ Sebaceous glands are not able to regenerate after complete destruction; therefore.
lifelong therapy is necessary to help remove excess scaling and replace lost sebum.
Hair regrowth is not always achieved and it is frequently a different texture than the
original hair coat (i.e., loss of curl in poodles).
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
19
Panniculitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 An inflammation of the subcutaneous fat tissue/not a specific disease
Uncommon in dogs and cats
Multiple causes; one specific form is idiopathic (sterile nodular panniculitis, SNP)
Single or multiple subcutaneous nodules or draining tracts
Usually involves the dorsal trunk if SNP
The lipocyte (fat cell) is susceptible to trauma, ischemic disease, and inflammation
from adjacent tissues.
Histology: divided into lobular (involves the fat lobules), septal (involves the inter-
lobular connective tissue septa), and diffuse (involves both lobular and interlobular
septa) types
Diffuse most common in dogs
 Septal most common in cats
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Infectious: bacterial, fungal, atypical mycobacteria, infectious embolism
■]
 Immune-mediated: lupus panniculitis, erythema nodosum, drug reaction, vasculitis
 Idiopathic: sterile nodular panniculitis
Trauma, foreign body
 Neoplastic: multicentric mast cell tumors, cutaneous lymphosarcoma, pancreatic
panniculitis
 Arthropod bite
■
 Nutritional (vitamin E deficiency: steatitis in cats)
■ Postinjection: corticosteroids, vaccines (rabies, etc.), other subcutaneous injections
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ No age, sex, or breed predilection
Sterile nodular panniculitis: dachshunds are predisposed; collies and miniature
poodles are at risk; can occur in any breed
197
198
Figure 19-1 Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis. Note the large ulcerative area on the dorsum of the dog
characterized by a greasy exudate indicating fat necrosis.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Lesions: usually occur over the trunk; most dogs have a single nodular or discreet
multifocal lesions over the dorsolateral trunk; may become cystic and develop drain-
ing tracts; may be painful before and just after rupturing: ulcerations often heal with
crusting and scarring
■ Early cases of single or multifocal disease: nodules are freely movable underneath
the skin; skin overlying the nodule is usually normal but may become erythematous
or (less often) brown or yellow
Nodules: vary from a few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter; may be firm
and well circumscribed or soft and poorly defined; as they enlarge and develop, may
fix to the deep dermis (thus, the overlying skin is not freely movable)
■ Involved fat may necrose (Fig. 19-1).
■Exudate: usually a small amount of oily discharge; yellow-brown to bloody
■
Multiple lesions (dogs and cats): systemic signs common (e.g., anorexia, pyrexia.
lethargy, and depression) (Figs. 19-2, 19-3)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Deep Pyoderma
■ More common than panniculitis
■ More likely over pressure points, often more generalized
 Figure 19-2 Sterile nodular panniculitis. Multifocal lesions before clipping the hair in the affected area (trunk)
This dog wasfebrile and anorexic.
 Figure 19-3 Panniculitis. Same dog as in Fig. 19-2 after the area was clipped. Note the abrupt demarcation
between lesional and nonlesional skin.
199
200
■ May have associated lesions of superficial pyoderma (e.g.. papules, pustules, and
epidermal collarettes)
■ Aspirates and impression smears: marked numbers of neutrophils with variable
numbers of mononuclear cells and bacteria
 Culture/sensitivity and biopsies: confirm diagnosis
Cutaneous Cysts
■ Usually nonpainful
■ Well-demarcated and usually not characterized as “melting." as is often noted with
 panniculitis
■  Usually no inflammation
■Aspirates: amorphous debris; no inflammatory cells, not usually characterized as fat
necrosis but rather a thick sebaceous secretion
■ Biopsies: confirm diagnosis
Cutaneous Neoplasia
■ Lipomas: soft; usually well demarcated
■No inflammation or draining tracts
■ Aspirates: lipocytes; no inflammatory cells
■Biopsies: confirm diagnosis
Mast Cell Tumors/Cutaneous Lymphosarcoma/Pancreatic Panniculitis
■Multifocal
■ May affect the head, legs, and mucous membranes
Often erythematous
■
Variable presentations
 Aspirates: often suggestive
■ Biopsies: confirm diagnosis
Sterile Nodular Panniculitis
■  A diagnosis made by ruling out other causes of panniculitis
■ Biopsies, cultures are negative; special stains are negative and other diagnostic tests
as indicated by the clinical presentation
DIAGNOSTICS
■(
Occasional regenerative left shift or eosinophilia
■ Mild leukocytosis
■ Mild normochromic, normocytic nonregenerative anemia
■Antinuclear antibody
■Direct immunofluorescence testing
CHAPTER 19: PANNICULITIS
201
 Figure 19-4 Histopathologic panniculitis. Note the massive influx of inflammatory cells around the fat lobules
 Serum protein electrophoresis
Serum lipase/amylase levels
Ultrasound: pancreatitis may be a contributing factor (rare)
■]
 Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing: necessary for identifying primary or
secondary bacteria
 Fungal and atypical mycobacteria culture
■ Biopsies: negative cultures help diagnose sterile nodular panniculitis
■
 Special stains of histologic samples: help identify causative agent
 Surgical excisional biopsies: much more accurate than punch biopsy specimens in
most cases; punch biopsies do not provide a sample deep enough to make the
diagnosis
 Histologic lesions: required to make a diagnosis of panniculitis; determine septal,
lobular, or diffuse inflammatory infiltrate by neutrophils, histiocytes, plasma cells.
lymphocytes, eosinophils, or multinucleated giant cells; identify necrosis, fibrosis, or
vasculitis (Fig. 19-4).
THERAPEUTICS
Single lesions: cured with surgical excision
■
 Multiple lesions: require systemic medications
■ Positive culture results require appropriate antifungal, antibacterial, or antimycobac-
terial treatment.
202
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Sterile nodular panniculitis: systemic treatment with steroids: prednisone (2.2 mg
kg daily) until lesions completely regress (36 weeks); after remission, gradually
taper dosage over 2 weeks; occasionally may need slower taper to minimize chance
of recurrence; many patients cured; some patients need low-dose alternate-day
treatment to maintain remission
■ Oral vitamin E: may control mild cases
Oral azathioprine (l mg/kg daily): alternatives when steroids are contraindicated
Cyclosporine @ 5-10 mg/kg/day is an option for sterile idiopathic panniculitis
 Tetracycline and niacinamide @ 250 mg of each po q8h for dogs <10 kg and 500 mg
of each po q8h for dogs >10kg (cases of SNP)
■Doxycycline has been anecdotally reported to be effective in some cases @ 10 mg/kg
q12hrs (cases of SNP)
COMMENTS
■ Monitor CBC, platelet count, chemistry profile, and urinalysis if immunosuppressive
agents or long-term glucocorticosteroids are used.
■ Infectious cases may require long-term therapy with high doses of medications.
Sterile idiopathic nodular panniculitis often responds quite rapidly to high doses of
corticosteroids. Young animals have a more rapid recovery than older animals, which
often require a maintenance protocol.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
20
Pemphigus Complex and
Bullous Pemphigoid
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Pemphigus Complex
■ A group of uncommon to rare autoimmune dermatoses
 Epidermal pustule and vesicle formation leads to varying degrees of erosion, ulcer-
ation and crusting.
 Forms identified in animals:
 Pemphigus foliaceus (PF)
■
 Pemphigus erythematosus (PE)
 Pemphigus vulgaris (PV)
■
 Panepidermal pustular pemphigus/vegetans (PEP)
■
 Canine Benign Familial Chronic Pemphigus (Hailey-Hailey disease)
■ Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PP)
Bullous Pemphigoid (BP)
■ Very rare, subepidermal vesicular disease; affects the mucous membranes in more
than half of cases
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Pemphigus Complex
1 Acantholytic process: tissue-bound autoantibody directed at interepidermal cell
antigens (desmogleins) and acetylcholine receptors is deposited within the inter-
cellular spaces, reacting with cadherins (cell-to-cell adhesion molecules) and
causing epidermal cell separation and cell rounding (acantholysis)
 Loss of intracellular cohesion produces vesicles, pustules, and/or bullae
Severity of erosion, ulceration and disease: related to depth of autoantibody depo-
sition (specific cadherin molecule targeted) within the skin
 Types: foliaceus, vulgaris, erythematosus, and panepidermal pustular (vegetans)
 PF: autoantibody targets Dsg 1 (desmoglein l: a component of desmosomes) in the
superficial layers of the epidermis
 PE: autoantibody targets Dsg l and antigens expressed on epidermal cells following
ultraviolet light exposure
203
204 SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
■ PV: antibody targets cadherins Dsg l and Dsg 3 (strongly expressed in the supra-
basilar keratinocytes and mucous membranes); autoantibody deposition just above
the basement membrane zone results in ulcer formation
■ PEP: variant of PF and may represent involvement of additional molecules targeted
by autoantibodies (plakoglobin, antikeratinocyte IgG4)
■ PP: multiple plakin family proteins and desmogleins targeted; I-cell-mediated
keratinocyte apoptosis may contribute to lesion development
■  Implicated trigger factors are varied: genetics, hormones, neoplasia, drugs, nutrition,
viral, emotional stress, and physical factors (burns, UV radiation)
Bullous Pemphigoid
■ IgG autoantibodies target the “bullous pemphigoid antigen."
 o    j       
keratinocytes.
■ Subepidermal vesicles and bullae form from separation at the dermal-epidermal
junction.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Pemphigus Complex
 Uncommon group of diseases
■ Usually middle-aged to old animals
■PF
■Most common type
Akita, bearded collie, chow chow, dachshund, Doberman pinscher, Finnish spitz,
Newfoundland, English springer spaniel, cocker spaniel, shar-pei, and schipperke
■ Median age of onset 4 years
■ Most commonly implicated drug causes: antibiotics (sulfonamides, cephalexin),
methimazole, Promeris@
■PE
■Uncommon
■ May be a more benign variant of PF or may be a crossover syndrome of pemphigus
and lupus erythematosus
■ Collie, German shepherd dog, and Shetland sheepdog
 Aggravated by ultraviolet light exposure
■PV
■Rare
■Most severe form
■German shepherd dog, collie
■ Males predisposed
■  Median age of onset 6 years
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
205
■ PEP: rarest type; course of disease may be more severe than PF
PP: rare; clinical signs vary from severe to relatively benign crusted lesions
 Benign Familial Chronic Pemphigus (Hailey-Hailey disease): may have a genetic
predisposition (autosomal dominant genodermatosis in humans)
Bullous Pemphigoid
■Very rare
■ Collie, Shetland sheepdog, Doberman pinscher and dachshund
CLINICAL FEATURES
Pemphigus Complex
PF
 Transient waves of vesicles and pustules coalescing to crusted patches (Fig.
20-1)
■ Scales, crust, pustules, epidermal collarettes, erosions, erythema, alopecia, and
footpad hyperkeratosis with fissuring
■ Ulcerations indicate a deeper disease and/or secondary bacterial infection
■Dogs
 Facial lesions: nasal planum, dorsal muzzle, periorbital ("butterfly" pattern)
and pinnae (Figs. 20-2-20-8)
■ Footpad margins (Figs. 20-9-20-11)
Figure 20-1 Multiple vesicles with superficial pustular pemphigus foliaceus
206
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Figure 20-2 Pemphigus foliaceus producing periocular, dorsal muzzle, and pinnal crusting
 Figure 20-3 Pemphigus foliaceus with crusting on dorsal muzzle.
Truncal patches of crusts, scales, vesicles, and pustules (Figs. 20-12-20-16)
■ Mucosal and mucocutaneous lesions rare; due to secondary infection
■ Cats: facial as well as nipple and ungual fold involvement common (Figs.
20-17-20-23)
  Lymphadenopathy, edema, depression, fever, and lameness (if footpads involved)
in more severe or chronic cases; however, patients are often in good health
■ Variable pain and pruritus
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
207
Figure 20-4 Crusting of lip margins, muzzle, dorsal muzzle, and face with pemphigus foliaceus mimicking
zinc-responsive dermatitis or contact dermatitis.
PE
■Similar to PF
■ Facially confined lesions; rarely footpads
 Aggravated by ultraviolet light; seasonality possible in certain geographic locations
 Figure 20-6 Pemphigus foliaceus patient in Fig. 20-5 with crusts removed.
 Figure 20-7 Crusting on pinna with pemphigus foliaceus.
208
 Figure 20-8 Pinnal crusting with pemphigus foliaceus
 Figure 20-9 Footpad margin crusting with pemphigus foliaceus.
60Z
 Figure 20-10 Pemphigus foliaceus crusting on footpads
Figure 20-11 Pemphigus foliaceus—patient in Fig. 20-10 after 4 weeks of treatment (normal footpads).
210
■Figure 20-12 Pemphigus foliaceus. Generalized lesions of crusting and erythema.
 Figure 20-13 Generalized coalescing crusted, erythematous, and hyperpigmented lesions with pemphigus
foliaceus.
211
212
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Figure 20-14 Pemphigus foliaceus patient in Fig. 20-13 prior to treatment.
 Figure 20-15 Pemphigus foliaceus patient in Fig. 20-13 after 16 weeks treatment.
Depigmentation of the nasal planum, dorsal muzzle, lip margins, and eyelid
margins common, and may precede crusting (Figs. 20-24-20-26)
■ No oral or mucosal lesions
ANA rarely positive
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
213
 Figure 20-16 Pemphigus foliaceus patient in Fig. 20-13 after 16 weeks treatment
 Figure 20-17 Pemphigus foliaceus "butterfly" lesion pattern.
PV
 Oral ulceration frequent and may precede skin lesions
■Ulcerative lesions, erosions, epidermal collarettes, blisters, and crusts (Figs. 20-27,
20-28)
214
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Figure 20-18 Facial crusts and scabs in patient of Fig. 20-17
 Figure 20-19 Ungual fold exudation in patient of Fig. 20-17.
1 Vesicles and bullae may persist longer due to thickness of the overlying
epidermis.
 Rupture leads to deep crateriform erosions progressing quickly to ulcerations.
■ More severe than PF and PE; patients often ill
■ Affects mucous membranes, mucocutaneous junctions, and skin; may become
generalized
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
215
■Figure 20-20 Footpad margin crusts and scabs in patient of Fig. 20-17
 Figure 20-21 Pemphigus foliaceus. Footpad vesicle.
■ Positive Nikolsky sign (new or extended erosive lesion created when lateral
pressure is applied to the skin near an existing lesion)
 Friction and trauma areas (axillae, inguinum, limb pressure points)
■ Paw pads and nails may slough.
216
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Figure 20-22 Ungual fold exudate with pemphigus foliaceus.
Figure 20-23 Pemphgis foliaceus. Pinnal crusting.
Variable pruritus and pain
Anorexia, depression, and fever
■ Secondary bacterial infections common
■PEP
■ Rare, more aggressive variant of PF
Vesicles and bullae develop in all layers of the epidermis, including follicles
 Figure 20-25 Pemphigus erythematosus. Significant depigmentation of nasal planum and dorsal muzzle.
217
 Figure 20-26 Patient in Fig. 20-25. Depigmentation and crusting on the dorsal muzzle, and loss of tissue
on the nasal planum.
 Figure 20-27 Pemphigus vulgaris. Note ulcerations on the mucous membranes and tongue.
218
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
219
 Figure 20-28 Patient in Fig. 20-27 with ulcerations on hard palate and on lip margins.
 Figure 20-29 Pan-epidermal pemphigus producing thick crusts on the dorsal muzzle
 Pustule groups become eruptive papillomatous lesions and vegetative masses
(thick, adherent crusts) that o0ze (Figs. 20-29-20-31).
No oral or mucosal lesions
■ Systemic illness associated with secondary bacterial infection
PP
■Veryrare
220
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Figure 20-30 Crusts and erosions at footpad margins with pan-epidermal pemphigus.
 Figure 20-31 Pan-epidermal pemphigus producing eroded plaques on ventrum.
Blistering disease affecting the mucosa and mucocutaneous junctions (Figs. 20-32.
20-33)
 Seen in conjunction with neoplasia
Systemic signs associated both with neoplasia and cutaneous lesions
Reported neoplasia: thymoma, thymic lymphoma, splenic sarcoma
 Figure 20-33 Paraneoplastic pemphigus producing erosions and crusting on vulva.
221
222
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Figure 20-34 Bullous pemphigoid. Note erythema under shallow bulla on pinnal surface.
 Figure 20-35 Bullous pemphigoid. Ulcerations lead to hemorrhage and crusts.
Bullous Pemphigoid
■Very rare
Signs similar to PV, although blisters are less fragile (Figs. 20-34-20-39)
Chronic, clinically benign disease may be the most common.
 Figure 20-36 Anal mucosal ulcerations with bullous pemphigoid.
■ Figure 20-37 Footpad ulceration from bullous pemphigoid.
223
224
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Figure 20-38 Bullous pemphigoid. Patient in Fig. 20-35 after 2 weeks treatment.
Figure 20-39 Bullous pemphigoid. Patient in Fig. 20-35 after 2 weeks treatment.
 Macules lead to vesicles and bullae that rupture to reveal ulcerations.
Common sites: head, ears, axillae, ventral abdomen, inguinum
■ Uncommonly affects footpads and ungual folds
■ Mucous membrane vesicles rapidly lead to ulcerations of the oral cavity and lip
margins.
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
225
Scarring is common.
Variable pruritus and pain
Anorexia, depression, and fever
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Pemphigus Complex
■PF
Bacterial folliculitis
■Neutrophilic or eosinophilic furunculosis
 Dermatophytosis
■
 Demodicosis
Candidiasis
Sebaceous adenitis
■
Keratinization disorders
■
 Discoid or Cutaneous Lupus erythematosus
■
 Pemphigus erythematosus
■
 Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
 Drug eruption
 Erythema multiforme
 Zinc-responsive dermatitis
■
Dermatomyositis
■
Tyrosinemia
 Epitheliotropic lymphoma
■
Lymphoreticular malignancies
■
 Superficial necrolytic dermatosis
■1
Uveodermatologic syndrome
■
 Sterile eosinophilic pustulosis
■
Linear IgA dermatosis
PE
 Pemphigus foliaceus (facially oriented)
■
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Discoid lupus erythematosus
■
Bacterial folliculitis
Neutrophilic or eosinophilic furunculosis
Demodicosis
■
 Dermatophytosis
 Eptheliotropic lymphoma
Epidermolysis bullosa simplex
■ Uveodermatologic syndrome
■PV
■ Bullous pemphigoid
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
226
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
 Paraneoplastic pemphigus
 Toxic epidermal necrolysis
■
 Drug eruption
■
 Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
 Lymphoreticular neoplasia
Ulcerative stomatitis causes
Erythema multiforme
■PEP
 Pemphigus vulgaris
■
Erythema multiforme
■
 Bacterial folliculitis
■
 Pemphigus foliaceus
■Lichenoid dermatoses
 Cutaneous neoplasia
PP
 Pemphigus vulgaris
■Bullous pemphigoid
■Erythema multiforme
Bullous Pemphigoid
■ Pemphigus vulgaris
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Drug eruption
Erythema multiforme
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Lymphoreticular neoplasia
■ Ulcerative stomatitis
DIAGNOSTICS
CBC/Biochemistry/Urinalysis
■Abnormalities uncommon; occasional leukocytosis and hyperglobulinemia
Other Laboratory Tests
■Antinuclear antibody: may be weakly positive in PE only
Diagnostic Procedures
■ Cytology of aspirates or impression smears of pustules or crusts (Figs. 20-40.
20-41)
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
227
 Figure 20-40 Pemphigus foliaceus. Exudate demonstrates intact neutrophils and acantholytic keratinocytes
100×.
■Figure 20-41 Acantholytic keratinocytes. Dark-staining cells with prominent nuclei producing a "fried-egg′
appearance400x
■ Acantholytic keratinocytes, neutrophils and eosinophils
■ Acantholytic keratinocytes appear as rounded, darkly stained cells with prominent
nuclei (“fried egg").
■No acantholytic cells in BP; rare in PV due to depth of clefting
■Bacteriologic culture: identify secondary bacterial infections
■ Biopsy of lesions with dermatohistopathologic examination required for diagnosis
■ Biopsy samples should be obtained from lesional or perilesional skin.
Pathologic Findings-Pemphigus Complex
■ PF: acantholytic keratinocytes in crusts; acantholysis and intraepidermal clefting:
microabscess or pustule formation that spans and extends into follicles; acantholytic
keratinocytes may be individual, associated together into “rafts.," or adherent to
the overlying epidermis (*cling-ons"); dermal inflammation mixed and perivascular
neutophilic and eosinophilic
■ PE: findings similar to PF; lichenoid interface dermatitis with basal cell damage;
pigmentary incontinence
■  PV: suprabasilar clefting with acantholytic keratinocytes; individual keratinocytes
remain attached to the basement zone creating a “tombstone" pattern; secondary
■ PEP: pustules present throughout the epidermal layers and includes the follicular
epithelium
■ PP: transepidermal pustulation with suprabasilar and superficial acantholysis;
prominent apoptotic keratinocytes; dermal or submucosal infiltrate of lymphocytes.
macrophages, and plasma cells; variable numbers of neutrophils
immunohistochemical testing
 Positive staining in the intercellular spaces (PF) in 50-90% of cases
          
immunosuppressive drug) administration.
Indirect immunofluorescence usually negative
 PE may demonstrate staining of basement membranes and intercellular spaces.
Transepidermal staining in PV
Pathologic Findings-Bullous Pemphigoid
■Vesicle formation at the dermal-epidermal junction with inflammatory infiltrates
 Predominantly eosinophilic inflammatory infiltrate
 No acantholyic keratinocytes: defect is subepidermal
THERAPEUTICS
General Considerations
■ Outpatient treatment with initial frequent hospital visits (every 1-3 weeks); taper to
every l-3 months when remission is achieved and the patient is on a maintenance
medical regimen
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
229
Severely affected patients may require antibiotics.
 Hydrotherapy and soaks very helpful and soothing.
■ Low-fat diet: to avoid pancreatitis predisposed by corticosteroids and azathioprine
therapy
■Avoid ultraviolet light—may exacerbate lesions (PE).
Drugs of choice-Pemphigus Complex
■ PF and PV
■Corticosteroids
■Prednisolone: 1.1-2.2 mg/kg/day po divided ql2h to initiate control
■Minimum maintenance: 0.5mg/kg po q48-72hr.
■Taper dosage at 2- to 4-week intervals by 5-10 mg/week
Cytotoxic Agents
■ More than half of patients require the addition of other immunomodulating
drugs.
■ Synergistic with corticosteroids, allowing reduction in dose and side effects
■
 Azathioprine (2.2 mg/kg po q24h, then q48-72hr); rarely used in cats due to
 marked bone marrow suppression; feline dose 1mg/kg q24-48hr
■ Chlorambucil (0.2mg/kg daily): primary choice for cats
Cyclophosphamide (50 mg/m² po q48h): dogs
 Dapsone (lmg/kg po q8h until remission; then as needed): dogs: limited
application
■Chrysotherapy
■ Often used in conjunction with prednisone
■Auranofin (0.1-0.2 mg/kg po q12-24h)
 Cyclosporine
■  Alternative or supplemental therapy with corticosteroids
 Initial dosage 5 mg/kg po daily
■ Tacrolimus topical (Protopic?): apply to individual lesions daily to twice
weekly
■ PE and PEP
■ Prednisolone (1.lmg/kg po q24h; then q48h); reduce to lowest maintenance
dose possible; may be stopped when in remission
■ Topical steroids or tacrolimus may be sufficient in mild cases.
■
 Tetracycline and niacinamide: 500 mg po q8h (dogs greater than 10 kg); half doses
for dogs less than 10 kg: limited application in PE
■PP
■ Identify underlying neoplasia and resolve or control.
■ Additional treatment similar to PF/PE
Drugs of Choice-Bullous Pemphigoid
 Tetracycline and niacinamide: 500 mg po q8h (dogs greater than 10 kg); half doses
for dogs less than 10 kg: limited application
■ Additional treatment similar to PF/PE in recalcitrant cases
■ Many cases are chronic and mild, necessitating minimal intervention
Alternative Corticosteroids
■ Use instead of prednisolone if undesirable side effects or poor response occur.
■ Methylprednisolone (initial dosage 0.8-1.5 mg/kg po ql2h): patients that tolerate
prednisolone poorly
Triamcinolone (0.2-0.3 mg/kg po q12h; then 0.05-0.1 mg/kg q48-72h)
■Dexamethasone (0.1-0.2 mg/kg po q24h; then 0.05 mg/kg q72h)
■ Glucocorticoid pulse therapy (1l mg/kg IV methylprednisolone sodium succinate
for 3 consecutive days to induce remission); limited application; used in acute
conditions
Topical Steroids
■Hydrocortisone cream
■ More potent topical corticosteroids: 0.1% betamethasone valerate, fluocinolone
acetonide, 0r 0.1% triamcinonide; ql2h; then q24-48h to twice weekly
COMMENTS
Patient Monitoring
■ Monitor response to therapy at 2- to 4-week intervals initially; monitor less
frequently as lesions heal and medication dosages are reduced.
■ Routine hematology and serum biochemistry, especially patients on high doses of
corticosteroids, cytotoxic drugs, or chrysotherapy; check every 2-4 weeks, and then
every 1-3 months when in remission
Common side effects:
 Corticosteroids: polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, temperament changes, diabetes
mellitus, pancreatitis, and hepatotoxicity
1
 Azathioprine: pancreatitis, bone marrow suppression
Cytotoxic
drugs:
leukopenia.
thrombocytopenia,
 nephrotoxicity   and
hepatotoxicity
 Chrysotherapy: leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, nephrotoxicity, dermatitis, stoma-
titis, and allergic reactions
■Cyclophosphamide: hemorrhagic cystitis
■
 Immunosuppression: can predispose animal to demodectic mange, cutaneous and
systemic bacterial and fungal infection
Expected Course and Prognosis-Pemphigus Complex
■ PV and PF
■Lifelong therapy with corticosteroids and cytotoxic drugs needed; remission rare.
■ Routine monitoring paramount
CHAPTER 2O: PEMPHIGUS COMPLEX AND BULLOUS PEMPHIGOID
231
 Side effects of medications may affect quality of life.
■ May be fatal if untreated (especially PV)
■Secondary infections cause morbidity and possible mortality (especially PV).
■ PE and PEP
■ Relatively benign and self-limiting
 Oral corticosteroids may eventually be tapered to low maintenance doses or may
be stopped in some patients.
■
 Dermatitis worsens if untreated; systemic symptoms are rare.
■
 Prognosis fair
Expected Course and Prognosis-Bullous Pemphigoid
■Lifelong therapy necessary
■  In severe cases, aggressive initial intervention is usually required; some cases do not
respond to treatment.
■Chronic cases may be controlled with tetracycline/niacinamide and/or topical therapy.
■Morbidity is associated with secondary bacterial infection.
Abbreviations
■ PF = Pemphigus foliaceus
■]
 PE = Pemphigus erythematosus
■]
 PV = Pemphigus vulgaris
 PEP = Panepidermal pemphigus
■]
 PP = Paraneoplastic pemphigus
■ BP = Bullous pemphigoid
Author: Alexander H. Werner
21
chapter
Sterile Nodular
Granulomatous
Dermatoses
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Diseases whose primary lesions are nodules that are solid, elevated, and generally >l cm
 in diameter.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Nodules: usually result from an infltration of inflammatory cells into the dermis
and subcutis; may be secondary to endogenous or exogenous stimuli
■ Inflammation typically, but not always, granulomatous to pyogranulomatous
Causes
■Amyloidosis
■Foreign body reaction
Spherulocytosis
 Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma (Fig. 21-1)
Canine eosinophilic granuloma
Calcinosis cutis (Figs. 21-2, 21-3)
Calcinosis circumscripta (Figs. 21-4-21-6)
Malignant histiocytosis
Cutaneous histiocytosis (Figs. 21-7, 2l-8)
■Sterile panniculitis (Figs. 21-9-21-11)
■ Nodular dermatofibrosis
■Cutaneous xanthoma (Fig. 2l-12)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Nodular dermatofibrosis: German shepherds, 3-5 years old
 Calcinosis circumscripta: German shepherds, <2 years old
■
Malignant histiocytosis: Bernese mountain dogs
■ May affect any age, breed, or sex, although Bernese mountain dogs are at higher risk
for malignant histiocytosis and German shepherds are at higher risk for nodular
dermatofibrosis
232
 Figure 21-1 Sterile idiopathic periadnexal pyogranulomatous dermatitis of the axilla in a dog
■ Figure 21-2 Calcinosis cutis in a dog with hyperadrenocorticism. Note the small firm nodule along the
dorsum of the trunk.
233
 Figure 21-3 Inguinal region of the dog in Fig. 21-2 demonstrating coalescing erythematous plaques with a
yellow-pink discoloration.
 Figure 21-4 Miniature pinscher with swollen digits caused by calcinosis circumscripta.
234
CHAPTER 21: STERILE NODULAR GRANULOMATOUS DERMATOSES
235
 Figure 21-5 Rear view of the dog in Fig. 21-4 revealing the extent of the swelling of the metatarsal pad.
 Figure 21-6 View of the footpad showing marked deformity caused by calcinosis circumscripta.
Risk Factors
■ Foreign body reaction: induced by exposure to any irritating material (e.g., concrete
dust or fiberglass)
■Hair foreign bodies: increased risk for large dogs that rest on very hard surfaces
■ Calcinosis cutis: increased risk with exposure to high doses of exogenous
glucocorticoids
■ Panniculitis: increased risk with vitamin E-deficient diet
 Figure 21-7 Bernese mountain dog with cutaneous histiocytosis
 Figure 21-8 Cutaneous nodules caused by histiocytosis on the extremities.
236
 Figure 21-9 Panniculitis in a 3.5-year-old Weimeraner. (Courtesy of Drs. Marcia Schwassmann and Dawn
Logas.)
 Figure 21-10 Ulcerative nodule of the trunk caused by sterile nodular panniculitis. (Courtesy of Drs. Marcia
Schwassmann and Dawn Logas.)
237
238
SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
Figure 21-11 Scarred lesion from a healed wound secondary to panniculitis. (Courtesy of Drs. Marcia
Schwassmann and Dawn Logas.)
of this cat.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Sterile nodular dermatoses: must be differentiated from deep bacterial and fungal
infections and dermal neoplasias
■All of these diseases can be diagnosed by histopathology and deep tissue cultures.
CHAPTER 21: STERILE NODULAR GRANULOMATOUS DERMATOSES 239
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Amyloidosis: possible changes in biochemistry and/or urinalysis if internal organs
are affected
■ Malignant histiocytosis: pancytopenia, serum ferritin levels may be high with
malignant histiocytosis but not with cutaneous histiocytosis
Calcinosis cutis: changes characteristic of hyperglucocorticoidism (e.g.、 stress
leukogram, high ALP, hyperglycemia, low urine specific gravity)
 Cutaneous xanthomas: glucosuria, hyperglycemia, and/or lipid profle abnormalities
Radiology and ultrasonography: delineate involvement of internal organs in
amyloidosis and histiocytosis
 Radiology: identify other areas of dystrophic calcification in dogs with calcinosis
cutis and renal disease in calcinosis circumscripta
  Ultrasonography: identify cystadenocarcinomas in dogs with nodular dermatofibrosis
 Skin biopsies for histopathology and cultures (fungal, aerobic, and mycobacterial)
are essential for nodular dermatoses.
THERAPEUTICS
■ Most of these disorders can be treated on an outpatient basis.
■ A few of these disorders (e.g., malignant histiocytosis, amyloidosis, and nodular
dermatofibrosis) are almost always fatal.
1 Dogs with calcinosis cutis may need to be hospitalized for sepsis; intense topical
therapy (DMsO) is frequently helpful.
Drugs of Choice
■ Amyloidosis: no known therapy, unless the lesion is solitary and can be surgically
removed
Spherulocytosis: only effective treatment is surgical removal
 Idiopathic sterile granuloma and pyogranuloma: prednisone (2.2-4.4 mg/kg divided
po ql2h) is the first line of therapy; continue steroids for 7-14 days after complete
remission; then taper dose; for cases that are refractory to glucocorticoids, azathio-
prine (2.2mg/kg po q48h) in combination with prednisone or sodium iodide may
be tried
 Foreign body reactions: best treated by removal of the offending substance if possible:
for hair foreign bodies, the dog should be placed on softer bedding. and topical
therapy with keratolytic agents should be initiated; many dogs with hair foreign
bodies also have secondary deep bacterial infections that need to he treated with both
topical and systemic antibiotics
■ Canine eosinophilic granuloma: prednisone (1.1-2.2 mg/kg po q24h) produces a
good response
  Malignant histiocytosis: no effective therapy; it is rapidly fatal
240 SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
■ Cutaneous histiocytosis: high-dose glucocorticoids and cytotoxic drugs result in
remission; recurrences are common; L-asparginase has been helpful in some cases,
cyclosporine is often the treatment of choice @ 5 mg/kg/day
■ Calcinosis cutis: underlying disease must be controlled if possible; most cases
require antibiotics to control secondary bacterial infections; hydrotherapy and
 frequent bathing in antibacterial shampoos minimize secondary problems; topical
DMSO is useful (applied to no more than one-third of the body once daily
until lesions resolve); if lesions are extensive, serum calcium levels should be
monitored closely
■ Calcinosis circumscripta: surgical excision is the therapy of choice in most cases
■ Sterile panniculitis: single lesions can be removed surgically: prednisone (2.2 mg/kg
po q24h or divided po ql2h) is the treatment of choice; administered until lesions
prolonged alternate-day therapy; a few cases respond to oral vitamin E (400 IU ql2h)
(see chapter 19).
■  Nodular dermatofibrosis: no therapy for most cases, because the renal cystadenocar-
cinomas are usually bilateral; for rare unilateral case of cystadenocarcinoma or a
cystadenoma, removal of the single affected kidney may be helpful
■ Cutaneous xanthoma: correction of the underlying diabetes mellitus or hyperlipo-
 proteinemia (often via diet manipulation) is usually curative
Contraindications
■ Corticosteroids and other immunosuppressive drugs should be avoided, if possible,
in any animal with a secondary infection.
Precautions
■ DMSO: handle with care; monitor serum calcium levels if used to treat calcinosis
cutis.
COMMENTS
Patient Monitoring
■ Patients on long-term glucocorticoids should have a CBC, chemistry screen,
urinalysis, and urine culture done every 6 months
■ Dogs being treated with DMSO for calcinosis cutis should have calcium levels
 checked every 7-14 days, starting at the beginning of therapy.
Possible Complications
 Systemic amyloidosis, malignant histiocytosis, and nodular dermatofibrosis: invari-
ably fatal
CHAPTER 21: STERILE NODULAR GRANULOMATOUS DERMATOSES
241
Associated Conditions
■Calcinosis cutis: hyperglucocorticoidism, chronic renal failure, and diabetes mellitus
 Calcinosis circumscripta: (occasionally) hypertrophic osteodystrophy and idiopathic
polyarthritis
■Nodular dermatofibrosis: renal cystadenocarcinomas
■Cutaneous xanthoma: diabetes mellitus and hyperlipoproteinemia
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
22
chapter
Uveodermatologic
Syndrome
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Rare syndrome similar to Vogt Koyanagi Harada syndrome in humans
■ Considered to be an autoimmune disorder resulting in concurrent granulomatous
uveitis and depigmenting dermatitis (skin and hair) and rare meningoencephalitis
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Thought to be an autoimmune disease with hereditary factors: autoantibodies
against melanocytes results in panuveitis, leukoderma, and leukotrichia
■ Retinal antibodies have been found in affected dogs.
■Exposure to sunlight-exacerbates symptoms.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Reported in dogs, especially Akitas, Samoyeds, and Siberian huskies
■Most prevalent in young adult and middle-aged dogs. No sex predilection reported
(Fig. 22-1)
■ Rarely reported in other breeds: chow chow, Irish setter, fox terrier, dachshund,
Shetland sheepdog, St. Bernard, Old English sheepdog, Brazilian Fila
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Sudden-onset uveitis: may be painful and progress to blindness
Concurrent or subsequent leukoderma of the nose, lips, and eyelids (Figs.
22-2-22-4)
■ Footpads, scrotum, anus, and the hard palate may also become depigmented.
■ Ophthalmic signs: photophobia, diminished or absent papillary light reflexes.
blepharospasm, anterior uveitis, hyphema, chorioretinitis, conjunctivitis, retinal
detachment, iris bombe, glaucoma, blindness
242
 Figure 22-1 Uveodermatologic syndrome (YKH-like). Note the early evidence of uveitis, which is often the
initial clinicalfeaturerecognized.
■ Figure 22-2 VKH Note the depigmentation of the planum nasale and the periocular mucocutaneous
junctions.
243
 Figure 22-3 VKH Depigmentation of the periocular region.
 Figure 22-4 VKH Note the depigmentation of the mucous membranes in this case.
244
CHAPTER 22: UVEODERMATOLOGIC SYNDROME
245
  Dermatologic signs: symmetrical depigmentation of the planum nasale, perioral/oral
(lips and oral mucosa), and periocular tissue; less frequently: scrotum, vulva, anus,
footpads may be depigmented
■ Generalized skin and haircoat may depigment.
Skin lesions may ulcerate and become crusted.
Meningoencephalitis is reported rarely.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
  Immune-mediated diseases: pemphigus complex, systemic lupus erythematosus, and
discoid lupus erythematosus, bullous pemphigoid, vitiligo (idiopathic leukoderma/
leukotrichia), vasculitis
 Neoplasia (cutaneous lymphoma) and numerous other inflammatory and infectious
skin diseases that can cause depigmentation
Skin biopsies are most diagnostically helpful.
Retinal examination will help differentiate these diseases.
DIAGNOSTICS
 Biopsy and dermatopathology: best interpreted by a veterinarian experienced in
detecting the sometimes subtle differences in pathologic patterns; early lesions have
a lichenoid interface pattern with large histiocytes and pronounced pigmentary
incontinence; hydropic degeneration of the epidermal basal cell layer rare
1 Evaluate the retina; often the first abnormal clinical feature
THERAPEUTICS
■ Aggressive and rapid initiation of immunosuppressive therapy is recommended to
prevent formation of posterior synechiae and secondary glaucoma, cataracts, or
blindness. Subconjunctival or topical glucocorticoids (i.e., 0.1% dexamethasone oph-
thalmic solution q4h/dexamethasone 1-2 mg subconjunctivally) until the uveitis has
resolved. May also need 1% atropine ophthalmic solution every 6-24 hours.
■ Retinal examinations: most important means of monitoring progress; improvement
 in dermatologic lesions may not reflect the retinal pathology
■ Enucleation: sometimes recommended because of pain
Drugs of Choice
■ Corticosteroids: initial high doses of prednisone (1.1-2.2 mg/kg po q12-24h) and
to every other day for chronic use, some patients may improve with the initial
use of prednisone alone, but the potential sequelae of delayed aggressive therapy
warrants the additional use of azathioprine
■ Cyclosporine @ 5-l0mg/kg/day is an alternative to azathioprine or may used in
conjunction in severe cases.
■ Topical or subconjunctival steroids and cycloplegics:m may be indicated with
anterior uveitis.
Precautions/Interactions
■ Prednisone and azathioprine: anemia, leukopenia, thrombocytopenia, high serum
alkaline phosphatase levels, vomiting. and pancreatitis; conduct biweekly serum
chemistries and CBCs, including platelet counts, initially; decrease after the condi-
tion has stabilized and the dose and frequency have been tapered
COMMENTS
 Weekly or biweekly examinations including retinal evaluations: recommended ini-
tially for monitoring side effects associated with therapeutics; retinal examinations
improvement in the retinal lesions
■Azathioprine may be discontinued after a few months of therapy, prednisone may
be necessary indefinitely.
■ latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism: often a result of the steroid therapy
Cyclosporine may be used as a steroid sparing protocol.
■
 Prognosis is fair to guarded. Lifelong therapy is needed.
■
Blindness is a common sequela.
■ Depigmentation of the skin/hair is often permanent yet may improve in some cases.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
23
Vasculitis
inflammation
of   blood
vessels
with
neutrophilic
(leukocytoclastic/
nonleukocytoclastic), lymphocytic, rarely eosinophilic, granulomatous, or mixed cell
types
 Pathomechanisms: type Ill (immune complex) and type I (immediate) reactions
■ Endothelial damage by infectious agent, parasite infestation, eridotoxin, or immune
complex deposition initiates local inflammation, neutrophil accumulation, and com-
plement activation. Neutrophils release lysosomal enzymes leading to necrosis of
vessel wall, thrombosis, and hemorrhage. In humans and dogs with polyarteritis
nodosa, intimal proliferation and vessel wall degeneration and necrosis predominate
and lead to hemorrhage, thrombosis, and necrosis of involved vessels and adjacent
tissues in most patients
Nondermal vasculitis (e.g., renal, hepatic, and serosal surfaces of body cavities) may
be the mechanism leading to development of clinically apparent signs of systemic
disease (e.g.. polyarthritis and proteinuria) without causing obvious external lesions.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Any age, breed, or sex may be affected.
 Dachshunds and rottweilers may be predisposed.
Varies depending on cause
 Provocative drug exposure (e.g. penicillin, sulfonamides, streptomycin, and hydrala-
zine) given to sensitized animal
Exposure to ticks
■Dirofilariasis
■ Recent vaccination
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Palpable purpura
■Hemorrhagic bullae
247
248
23-1
23-2
Out" areas of ulcer ation.
■ Necrosis and “punched-out" ulcers (Figs. 23-l, 23-2)
 Affects the extremities (paws, pinnae, lips, tail, and oral mucosa) and may be painful
■
 Anorexia, depression, pain/pruritus, pyrexia, pitting edema of the extremities, poly-
arthropathy, arthropathy, hepatopathy, neuropathy, thrombocytopenia, anemia, and
myopathy-dependent on the underlying cause
■ Systemic signs reflecting organ involvement (e.g., hepatic, renal, and CNS)
■Systemic signs of illness (e.g., lethargy, lymphadenopathy, pyrexia, vague signs of
pain, and weight loss)
■ Cutaneous lesions of polyarteritis nodosa (subcutaneous nodules: less common in
dogs than in people)
CHAPTER 23: VASCULITIS 
Signs associated with underlying infectious or immune-related disease (e.g., throm-
bocytopenia and polyarthropathy)
■ Nasal arteritis of Saint Bernard dogs and schnauzers
■ Juvenile polyarteritis syndrome of beagle dogs (JPS) is a multisystemic necrotizing
vasculitis of small vessels
■ Ear margin vasculitis/vasculopathy/seborrhea in dachshunds
■Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of German shepherd dogs
 Cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy of greyhound dogs
■ Neutrophilic leukocytoclastic vasculitis of Jack Russell terriers
Causes and Risk Factors
Systemic lupus erythematosus
■ Cold agglutinin disease
■Frostbite
■Disseminated intravascular coagulopathy
■ Lymphoreticular neoplasia
■ Drug reactions (Figs. 23-3, 23-4); ex. itraconazole-induced necrotizing vasculitis
in cats
■ Post-vaccine reaction (rabies vaccine-induced vasculitis may induce generalized
diffuse ischemic dermatopathy 1-5 months post-vaccination)
■Spider bites
Immune-mediated disease
 Erythema nodosum-like panniculitis
 Figure 23-3 Vasculitis caused by drug eruption. Note both confluent areas of necrosis and target-type lesions
250
 Figure 23-4 Vesicular eruption secondary to griseofulvin exposure.
■ Rheumatoid arthritis
Rocky Mountain Spotted fever
Staphylococcal hypersensitivity
 Food hypersensitivity causing urticarial vasculitis
■ FeLV- and FIVassociated vasculitis in cats
■ 50% of all cases are idiopathic.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Ear margin seborrhea, chemical and thermal burns, toxic epidermal necrolysis, ery-
thema multiforme, dermatomyositis, ulcerative dermatosis of collies and Shelties.
and sepsis (Fig. 23-5A,B)
DIAGNOSTICS
 Biopsy representative lesions (wedge-type biopsy rather than "punch-biopsy” sample)
 Sepsis, disseminated intravascular coagulation, systemic lupus erythematosus, Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, and rheumatoid arthritis: abnormalities may be noted.
■(
Consider immunodiagnostics: ANA titer, Coombs test, and cold agglutinin tests
■Serologic tests may aid diagnosis of tick-related (i.e., rickettsial) disease.
systemic illnesses
B
 Figure 23-5 (A) One-year-old Shetland sheepdog with ulcerative dermatosis affecting the oral mucosa
(B).and affecting the groin.
251
252  SECTION 4: IMMUNOLOGIC AND AUTOIMMUNE DISORDERS
■ Occult heartworm test positive in patients with dirofilariasis
■  Angiostrongylus infestation diagnosed by fecal examination and cytologic examina-
tion of tracheal wash
■Radiographs help diagnose dirofilariasis and Angiostronglyus infection
■S
Skin scrapings: possible demodicosis (with secondary sepsis)
Biopsy of early lesion: submit to a dermatopathologist; findings depend on the under-
lying cause, but usually include neutrophilic (leukocytoclastic/nonleukocytoclastic),
lymphocytic, eosinophilic, or granulomatous, mixed cells in and around the vessels;
 d        
and edema may occur, ischemic dermatopathy
■ Vasculitis: perform representative cultures (blood, urine, skin, etc.) if CBC, chemis-
try screen, or urinalysis reveal systemic disease
THERAPEUTICS
■ Underlying disease: first priority in clinical management
■ No systemic abnormalities: treat as outpatient with no alterations in food or water
intake
■ Systemic disease: inpatient care must be recommended
■  Inform owner that the prognosis is guarded until a cause is found; prognosis is based
on the cause.
Drugs of Choice
 Antibiotics: first line of therapy while awaiting histopathology results; if no drug
reaction is suspected—antibiotics
■ Prednisone: immune-mediated disease with concurrent vasculitis—prednisone @
1-2 mg/kg q24h in dogs and 2-4 mg/kg q24h in cats
■ Dapsone: dogs only; no known underlying cause or prednisolone alone does not
work—try dapsone @ 1 mg/kg q8h for 2-3 weeks, and then taper to 1 mg/kg q12h
for 2 weeks, and then taper further to 1 mg/kg q24h for 2weeks, and then 1 mg/kg
every 48 hrs
■ Sulfasalazine 10-20 mg/kg po q8h (maximum of 3 g/day), once remission is achieved
the dose is tapered by giving 10 mg/kg q12h for 3 weeks, followed by 10mg/kg po
q24h
■ Pentoxifylline (dogs); 10-15 mg/kg po q8h with vitamin E @ 4001U po q12hr
 Alkylating agents including chlorambucil and azathioprine (dogs only) have been
added to regimens to decrease the need for corticosteroids.
s p y ti> sop  b od ya p s o  a p a 
po q8h for dogs >10 kg
■Cyclosporine @ 5-10 mg/kg/day
CHAPTER 23: VASCULITIS
253
Precautions/Interactions
 Dapsone and sulfasalazine: not recommended with preexisting renal disease, hepatic
disease, or blood dyscrasias
Sulfasalazine: not recommended with preexisting or borderline keratoconjunctivitis
sicca; use with caution in cats; may displace highly protein-bound drugs (e.g., metho-
trexate, warfarin, phenylbutazone, thiazide diuretics, salicylates, probenecid, and
phenytoin); bioavailability decreased by antacids; may decrease bioavailability of folic
acid or digoxin; blood levels may be decreased if concurrently administering ferrous
sulfate or other iron salts
■ Pentoxifylline: may increase prothrombin times; may decrease blood pressure
COMMENTS
■ Frequent monitoring of serum chemistry, complete blood count, and urinalysis is
recommended.
■ Vasculitis may be difficult to treat and the prognosis is often guarded.
Immunosuppressive therapies should always be reduced to the lowest possible
therapeutic dose.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
This page intentionally left blank
section
5
Infectious Dermatoses
24
chapter
Bacterial Folliculitis
and Emerging
Resistant Pyoderma
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Common bacterial infections of the skin and adnexal structures
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Skin infections occur when the surface integrity of the skin has been broken, the skin
has become macerated by chronic exposure to moisture, normal bacterial flora have
been altered, circulation has been impaired, or immunocompetency has been
compromised.
■ Primary types of cutaneous bacterial colonies: resident and transient
Infection vs. colonization:
■ Infection: the offending organism is present and causing an immunologic reaction
(degenerating neutrophils and/or phagocytized bacteria noted in a direct smear or
aspirate of a pustule)
■ Colonization: the potential pathogen is living on the skin but is not producing a
reaction by the host
■ Normal skin flora actually serve as a component of the immune defense system.
■F
Bacteria are located in the superficial epidermis and infundibulum of the hair follicle
and receive nutrients via sebum and sweat. These organisms live in symbiosis and
help inhibit colonization by invading bacteria via bacteriocines.
 The normal flora can be altered by pH, temperature, salinity, moisture, albumin, fatty
acid levels, etc.
■Normal skin surface/hair follicle flora resident organisms (dog):
■Micrococcus
Coagulase-negative staphylococci (S. epidermidis, S. xylosus)
Alpha hemolytic streptococci
Acinetobactor spp.
 Clostridium perfringens
Propionibacterium acne
 Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (often identified in hair follicle)
 Normal skin surface/hair follicle flora resident organisms (cat):
■Alpha-hemolytic streptococci
■Micrococcus
256
CHAPTER 24: BACTERIAL FOLLICULITIS AND EMERGING RESISTANT PYODERMA
257
Coagulase-negative and -positive staphylococci
■Acinetobactor spp.
Causes
■ Primary reasons that cutaneous bacterial infections are more common in dogs as
compared to other mammalian species:
 Thin compact stratum corneum
■
Relative lack of intercellular lipids in the stratum corneum
■  Lack of a lipid-squamous epithelial plug in the ostia of the canine hair follicle
■ Relatively high cutaneous pH (basic, 7.5)
■ Three main types of bacterial infections:
Surface (epithelium):
■Acute moist dermatitis (*hot spot")
 Skin fold pyoderma (intertrigo)
Superficial pyoderma (epidermis and follicles):
 Impetigo (puppy pyoderma)
■
 Mucocutaneous pyoderma
 Superficial spreading pyoderma
■  Superficial folliculitis
■ Deep pyoderma (ruptured hair follicle and extension of infection into the dermis
and subQ):
■ Muzzle folliculitis and furunculosis
■
 Nasal and pedal pyoderma
 Generalized deep pyoderma
■]
Bacterial granulomas ("acral lick dermatitis")
■ Pressure point pyodermas
■ Pyotraumatic folliculitis and furunculosis
Predisposing factors:
 Systemic immuno-incompetence (metabolic disease)
Trauma (pressure, licking, scratching, parasites, etc.)
Follicular damage (demodex mites, scratching, etc.)
 Dermal damage (collagen disruption, extension of disease, etc.)
 Physical factors (poor grooming, maceration of the skin, heat, humidity, etc.)
 Inappropriate antibacterial therapy: too short a course, poor drug choice,
inappropriate dose
 Staphylococcus pseudintermedius: most frequent; also recognize other spp. of staph.
causing pyoderma—S. schleiferi and S. aureus (methicillin resistance among staphy-
 lococcal species is an emerging clinical problem in canine patients and is addressed
later in this chapter
 Pasteurella multocida: an important pathogen in cats
■]
      (  s
(e.g., E. coli, Proteus spp., Pseudomonas spp.).
■Rarely caused by higher bacteria (e.g., Actinomyces, Nocardia, mycobacteria,
Actinobacillus)
258  SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Dogs: very common; cats: uncommon
■ Breeds with short coats, skin folds, or pressure calluses
■ German shepherds develop a severe, deep pyoderma that may respond only partially
to antibiotics and frequently relapses; a similar problem is noted in the pit bull in
the interdigital regions.
■ Acute or gradual onset
■Variable pruritus: underlying cause may be pruritic (aeroallergens—atopic dermatitis)
or the staphylococcal infection itself may be pruritic (bacterial hypersensitivity)
CLINICAL FEATURES
Acute moist dermatitis ("hot spot"): self-induced traumatic skin disease with second-
ary bacterial infection; maceration of the skin may lead to folliculitis and furunculosis
(facial region in large breed dogs)
 Intertrigo: skin fold dermatitis caused by maceration of tissue from chronic moisture/
anatomical predisposition (facial folds, interdigital, perivulvar, axillae, etc.
  Impetigo (nonfollicular subcorneal pustules): Puppy impetigo (poor nutrition, dirty
environment, etc.) and bullous impetigo in older dogs (large flaccid nonfollicular
pustule often caused by E. coli or pseudomonas on the nose or glaborous skin; older
patients may be immunocompromised)
■ Mucocutaneous pyoderma (MCP) is an idiopathic ulcerative mucosal dermatitis
with crusting and variable degrees of depigmentation. Lesions often involve the
lips, perioral, perivulvar, prepuce, anal regions.
■ Superficial pyoderma: usually involves the trunk; extent of lesions may be obscured
by the hair coat; papules, pustules, epidermal collarettes, and hyperpigmented
macules
  s a s n  s r 
along the lateral trunk; common in collie and sheltie breeds; look for underlying
metabolic disease
■ Deep pyoderma: often affects the chin, bridge of the nose, pressure points, and feet;
hair follicle release of hair shaft antigen into the dermis
■ Pseudomonas ("postgrooming furunculosis") is a unique presentation of deep pyo-
 derma initiated by bathing and/or grooming. The syndrome is acute and extremely
painful. Patients are often febrile. Combing. clipping. or overly aggressive bathing
against the direct of growth of the hair may cause traumatic rupture of the hair fol-
licle inciting a foreign body reaction. Short-coated breeds are predisposed. The dorsal
midline is often the most severely affected region. Bacterial contamination of sham
poos or equipment may be important in the etiology of this condition. Lesions often
occur within 24-48 hours after grooming.
259
 Figure 24-1 Deep pyoderma with lesions predominant on the extremities. Furunculosis and cellulitis
 Figure 24-2 Close-up view of deep pyoderma in Fig. 24-1
Bacterial overgrowth syndrome (BOG) is usually due to overgrowth of staphylococ
cus species on the surface of the skin. Bacterial toxins can have an allergenic role
and can act as superantigens triggering nonspecific inflammatory reactions. "Quorum
Sensing" may also be an important factor in this syndrome. Quorum sensing occurs
when a certain density level of staphylococci is exceeded, which causes the bacteria
260
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 to express characteristics that switch their metabolism from cell proliferation to toxin
production. Primary clinical signs are pruritus, erythema, and lichenification. Primary
lesions such as papules and pustules are typically absent. Cases are often associated
with Malassezia overgrowth as well and often have underlying diseases such as aller-
     o     s
absolutely vital to therapeutic success.
Lesions
■Papules
■Pustules
Hemorrhagic bullae
Serous crusts (miliary dermatitis in the cat)
Epidermal collarettes: footprints of pustules (Fig. 24-3)
Circular erythematous or hyperpigmented macules (Fig. 24-4)
■ Target lesions
■ Alopecia, moth-eaten hair coat, large spreading collarettes
■Scaling, follicular casts
■Lichenification
■
Abscesses
■
 Furunculosis, cellulites
■Draining tracts
■Greasy skin
 Figure 24-3 Superficial pyoderma. Note crust with peripheral epidermal collarettes
CHAPTER 24: BACTERIAL FOLLICULITIS AND EMERGING RESISTANT PYODERMA
261
of superficial pyoderma.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Atopic dermatitis
■
 Parasitic dermatitis (fleas, scabies, demodicosis, cheyletiellosis, etc.)
■Food allergy
■ Neoplasia (cutaneous lymphoma)
hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, etc.)
Cornification/keratinization defects (seborrhea, vitamin A-responsive dermatosis,
sebaceous adenitis, etc.)
Color dilution alopecias/follicular dysplasias
Immune-mediated diseases (pemphigus, lupus erythematosus, vasculitis, etc.)
 Immunosuppression (glucocorticoids, chemotherapy, metabolic, etc.)
Panniculitis
 Nodular dermatosis (histiocytosis, etc.)
DIAGNOSTICS
 Identifying risk factors:
■ Allergy: flea; atopy; food; contact
■ Fungal infection: dermatophyte
262
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
1Endocrine disease: hypothyroidism; hyperadrenocorticism; sex hormone
imbalance
■ Immune incompetency: glucocorticoids; young animals
Seborrhea: acne; schnauzer comedo syndrome
Conformation: short coat; skin folds
Trauma: pressure points; grooming: scratching: rooting behavior; irritants
Foreign body: foxtail; grass awn
Superficial: normal or may reflect the underlying cause (e.g., anemia owing to
hypothyroidism; stress leukogram and high serum alkaline phosphatase owing to
Cushing's disease; eosinophilia owing to parasitism)
 Generalized, deep: may show leukocytosis with a left shift and hyperglobulinemia;
also changes related to the underlying cause
Diagnostic tests:
 Complete physical examination
9
Skin scrapings, trichogram, dermatophyte culture, intradermal allergy testing.
■Skin biopsy
■ Cytology: direct smear from intact pustule: neutrophils engulfing bacteria; dif-
ferentiate bacterial infection from pemphigus foliaceus (acantholytic keratino-
cytes) and deep fungal infections (blastomycosis, cryptococcosis); tissue grains
may identify filamentous organisms characteristic of higher bacteria
■ Therapeutic diagnostic trials
 Culture and sensitivity: obtained as an aspirate from intact pustule, swab from the
ventral surface of an epidermal collarette, tissue biopsy, or freshly expressed
exudate from a draining tract or beneath a crust; may yield the pathogen
THERAPEUTICS
■ Severe, generalized, deep: may require IV fluids, parenteral antibiotics, or daily
whirlpool baths
Benzoyl peroxide or chlorhexidine shampoos: remove surface debris
■
Whirlpool baths: deep pyodermas; remove crusted exudate; encourage drainage
■ Hypoallergenic diets if secondary to food allergy, otherwise a high-quality well
balanced dog food
■ Fold pyodermas may require surgical correction to prevent recurrence.
Superficial pyodermas: initially may be treated empirically with one of the recognized
common therapeutic antibiotics (see Table 24.1)
■ Recurrent, resistant, or deep pyodermas: base antibiotic therapy on culture and
sensitivity testing
■Multiple organisms with different antibiotic sensitivities: often best to choose anti-
biotic on basis of staphylococcal susceptibility yet may need to find a medication to
cover multiple pathogens in severe cases
TABLE 24-1 Common Systemic Antibiotics Used in Veterinary Dermatology
Drug
Mode of Action I
Elimination
Notes
Amikacin 
-cidal
renal 
Renal toxicity
15 mg/kg/daily
Ototoxicity controversial
subQ
Gram+ cocci/gram- rods
Injectable/painful
Ciose monitoring 
Amoxicillin/Clavulanate
-cidal
renal
Expensive for large dogs
15-20mg/kg po
Dose higher than label dose
bid-tid
Azithromycin
-static
liver > kidney
Anaerobes, some gram+ cocci
5-10mg/kg po
Toxoplasmosis
(7-14 days)
Daily
Absorption decreased w/food
Cross resistance with
erythromycin
 Used for papillomatosis and 
gingival hyperplasia
Cephalosporins cephalexin
-static
renal
 Overuse and abuse leading to
(Keflex)
resistant strains
25-30mg/kg
Possible glucosuria
po bid-tid
Good broad spectrum 
cef adroxil (Cefa tabs/drops)
Often 1st choice for 
22-25mg/kg
pyoderma
po bid
Injectable Convenia excellent
cefpodoxime (Simplicef)
choice for cats/small dogs
5-10mg/kg
po daily cefovecin (Convenia)
80 mg/kg
q10-14days
Clindamycin
-static
liver > kidney
Gram+ cocci and gram+
11 mg/kg/po daily or bid 
anaerobes absorption 
decreased w/food
Cross-resistance with
erythromycin
 Chloramphenicol 
-static
liver
Gram+ and gram- spectrum
40-50 mg/kg po tid 
crosses blood/brain barrier
Concern about human
exposure (aplastic anemia)
Hindlimb weakness
Often drug of choice in
 methicillin resistance 
Doxycycline
-static
renal > GI
Gram+ cocci
 5mg/kg po bid 
 Bacterial resistance develops
easily vomiting/diarrhea
Use only if C/s indicate
Used with niacinamide for
immunomodulatory effects
Erythromycin 
-static
liver > renal
Gram+ cocci, mycoplasma
10mg/kg pot id
Vomiting in 20% cases
263
264
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
TABLE 24-1 Continued
Drug
Mode of Action
Elimination
Notes
Fluroquinolones
-cidal
renal > liver
 Good tissue penetration 
Enrofloxacin (Baytril)
Pseudomonas often resistant
5-20 mg/kg po daily
Save for deep pyoderma or
ciprofloxacin (Cipro)
 mixed infections 
15-20mg/kg po daily
-cidal
liver
Used in multiresistance
orbifloxacin (Orbax)
2.5-7.5mg/kg po daily
Use w/another antibiotic (start
@ low dose)
marbofloxacin (Zenequin)
2.75-5.5mg/kg po daily
Easily develops resistance
cause hepatitis, hemolytic
difloxacin (Dicural)
 5-10 mg/kg po daily
 anemia, thrombocytopenia,
anorexia, V/D, orange-
colored sweat, urine, tears,
feces, saliva
Sulfonamides
-cidal
liver > renal
Gram+ cocci
Sulf amethoxazole+
May cause KCs—not Primor
Trimethoprim
Causes drug eruptions
15mg/kg po bid
Hepatic necrosis
sulf adimethoxine+
Avoid in Dobermans and
 ormetoprim
rottweilers arthropathies
(Primor)
 Altered thyroid activity
27.5 mg/kg po daily
■ Steroids: will encourage resistance and recurrence when used concurrently with
 antibiotics
■Erythromycin, lincomycin, and oxacillin often induce vomiting: administer with
small amount of food.
■ Gentamicin and kanamycin: renal toxicity usually precludes their prolonged
systemic use
Trimethoprim: sulfa antibiotics associated with keratoconjunctivitis sicca, fever,
hepatotoxicity polyarthritis, and hematologic abnormalities; may lead to low thyroid
test results
■ Chloramphenicol: use with caution in cats; may cause mild, reversible anemia
in dogs (rare); hindlimb weakness noted in large-breed dogs (resolves when the
medication is discontinued)
■ Staphage lysate, staphoid AB, or autogenous bacterins: may improve antibiotic
efficacy and decrease recurrence in a small percentage of cases
Administer antibiotics for a minimum of 2 weeks beyond clinical cure; this is usually
 about 1 month for superficial pyodermas and 2-3+ months for deep pyodermas.
Routine bathing with benzoyl peroxide or chlorhexidine shampoos: may help prevent
recurrences
n s  p   n n  n   
concentrations of antibiotics (long-term/low-dose).
■Padded bedding: may ease pressure-point pyodermas
  Topical benzoyl peroxide gel or mupirocin ointment may be helpful adjunct thera-
pies. Topical sprays with chlorhexidine have been beneficial as well as Vetericyn VF
spray (dilute bleach product).
■ Likely to be recurrent or nonresponsive if underlying cause is not identified and
effectively managed
■  Impetigo: affects young dogs before puberty; associated with poor husbandry; often
requires only topical therapy
 Superficial pustular dermatitis: occurs in kittens; associated with overzealous
"mouthing" by the queen
  Pyoderma secondary to atopy: usually begins at l-3 years of age
■Pyoderma secondary to endocrine disorders: usually begins in middle adulthood
COMMENTS
Emerging Resistant Bacterial Pyoderma-Methicillin-Resistant
Staphylococcus Infection
■ An emergence of bacterial infections in the dog (infrequently in the cat) that are
resistant to the usual antibiotic susceptibility patterns
■
 These infections often pose a therapeutic challenge.
 Emerging infections include methicillin-resistant staphylococcus, pseudomonas sp..
enterococcus sp., and corynebacterium sp., with staphylococcal infections being the
most widespread and problematic at this time.
The most frequently noted problematic bacterial infections include the methicillin-
resistant staphylococci (MRSaureus, MRSpseudintermedius, MRSschleiferi)
■“Methicillin resistance" implies a resistance to other antibiotics in the same drug
class such as penicillin, amoxicillin, and oxacillin.
Staphylococci are gram-positive cocci that exist as part of the normal cutaneous and
mucosal microflora of mammals.
 Numerous species of staphylococcus can be detected on canine skin, with the most
common species being S. pseudintermedius
 Coagulase-positive species have been considered to be more pathogenic than
coagulase-negative species, yet recent data suggests that coagulase-negative species
■ MRSA/MRSP is suspected to be associated with overuse of antibiotics. Broad spec-
trum antibiotics such as cephalexin, cefazolin, cefadroxil, amoxicillin, penicillin, and
even fluoroquinolones may hasten the development of oxacillin/methicillin resis-
tance. Unnecessary prescriptions, poor client compliance in the use of antibiotics.
and feed additives in livestock production are also suspect.
 Three mechanisms of resistance in methicillin-resistant staphylococcus organisms:
1) penicillin-binding proteins (PBP) and the mecA gene, 2) cell wall thickening noted
in all MRS organisms, 3) efflux pump
266  SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ Transmission of the mecA gene encodes for an altered defective protein (PBP2a),
which is involved in cell wall peptidoglycan synthesis. All penicillins and cephalospo.
rins (beta-lactams) require binding to the PBP in the bacterial cell wall to initiate the
drug's activity. MRSA produces a defective PBP due to the presence and activation of
staphyloccal chromosomal cassette (SCCmec). The spread of MRSA is usually through
 clonal expansion rather than the normal process of mutation or plasmid transfer. All
MRSA strains can be traced back to a single clone found in Europe in the mid-l960s.
■ Efflux pump: MRS organisms often have proteins involved in active removal of anti-
biotics through a membrane-bound pump. which effectively limits the activity of
many antibiotics that focus on internal cellular structures.
Staphylococcal Virulence Factors
Staphylococcal virulence factors aid in production of disease:
■Hyaluronidase degrades hyaluronic acid damaging connective tissue.
 Coagulase increases production of fibrin thrombi in tissue.
Kinase convert plasminogen to plasmin, which digests fibrin.
Streptolysin disrupts phagocytosis.
Streptokinase activates plasmin-like proteolytic activity.
Hemolysin destroys cells by lysis.
■ Protein A binds IgG in a dysfunction pattern and thus avoids phagocytosis (adhesion
molecule).
■ Exfoliative toxin causes blistering. dermonecrotoxin, (i.e., staphylococcal scalded
skin syndrome).
 Exotoxin causes local tissue damage and incites inflammation.
■ Super antigens (toxic shock syndrome toxins. TSST-l) cause severe,fatal
inflammation.
■Alpha toxins (cytolysin) form pores in the keratinocytes.
Historical Background Tracking Methicillin Resistance
       n     
population.
■Approximately 0.84% of the United States population (2 million people) have nasal
colonization with MRSA with no clinical signs.
■  Individuals in close contact (spouse, parent/child, caregiver) with a human patient
   p          s
individuals with a casual relationship (roommates, friends, etc.).
■The incidence of methicillin-resistant has increased rapidly in human hospital strains
of Staphylococcus aureus since the early 1960s
Two main categories: hospital-acquired (HA-MRSA) and community-acquired
(CA-MRSA)
■ HA-MRSA is the #l pathogen causing nosocomial infections in people. Risk factors
include immunosuppressive disease/medications, surgery, hospitalizations, etc.
CHAPTER 24: BACTERIAL FOLLICULITIS AND EMERGING RESISTANT PYODERMA  267
1CA-MRSA has significantly increased in recent years with at least 50% of those indi-
viduals known to be colonized with MRSA carrying the CA-MRSA strains.
Community-acquired strains differ genetically from HA-MRSA and may express a
toxin called Panton-Valentine Leukocidin. Risk factors for the community form are
crowded living conditions, military facilities, prisons, sports equipment/locker rooms,
geriatric/nursing homes, daycare facilities, etc.). This form is usually more responsive
to antibiotics than HA-MRSA, yet life-threatening necrotizing fascitis, necrotizing
pneumonia, and sepsis can develop.
■ There has been a recent shift in the traditional strain locations with HA-MRSA being
found in the community setting and CA-MRSA in hospital environments. Thus a
new term, HCA-MRSA (health care associated-MRSA), has evolved.
 2007 report by the American Medical Association (AMA) estimated that MRSA infec-
tions occurred in 95,000 Americans in 2005 with 18.650 resulting in death, a higher
death rate than that noted with HIV/AIDS, which killed approximately 17,000 in the
same year. The highest rate, 58%, of MRSA-related deaths in human patients was
found in the hospital environment.
 Methicillin resistance has been recognized in domestic animals since the early
1970s yet became of clinical importance in the 1990s. There has been a precipi-
tous increase in reports of methicillin resistance in recent years. In 2005, one
national laboratory reported only 19% of Staphylococcus aureus isolates were
methicillin-resistant, yet in 2007, the percentage had increased to 42%. In a
similar time frame (2004), less than 0.6% of Staphyloccus intermedius (likely
psuedintermedius) were methicillin-resistant, yet that number jumped to 10.2% in
2007.
■ Most canine cases involve MRSP and MRSS, rarely MRSA.
■ Most canine clinical presentations involve pyoderma, otitis, and surgical wound
infections (deep soft tissue, body cavities, and orthopedic repairs).
■ MRSP and MRSS are most commonly associated with superficial infections (skin and
ear canal) in dogs (Figs. 24-5-24-8).
 MRSA in canine patients is more commonly associated with deep infections-
genitourinary, respiratory, joint space, body cavity, and wounds.
Transfer of Infection Between Species: Increasing Concern
The zoonotic potential of Staphylococcus pseudintermedits, S. aureus, and S. schleiferi
is becoming increasingly concerning. All three species have the potential to cause
disease in both humans and animals.
■It is important to remember that not all transfers result in actual disease yet may
represent only colonization. One study found MRSP in 4.5% of healthy dogs and
1.2% of healthy cats.
1As a zoonotic example, household cats have been identified with MRSA isolates that
contain the staphylococcal chromosome cassette (SCC) mec element that is associ
ated with nosocomial MRSA infections in people. These 2006 findings suggest that
there was reverse zoonotic transmission from people.
268
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
Figure 24-5 Chronic recurrent melting ulceration over the bridge of the nose, secondary to methicillin-
resistant staphyloccal infection.
 Figure 24-6 Closer view of Fig. 24-5
■ Often, the owners are employed in the health care field suggesting a possible mode
of transmission from the person to the pet. Likewise, S. pseudintermedius has been
isolated from pet owners with and without active infection.
■ S. schleiferi has the ability to develop multidrug resistance and is a known cause of
infection in both dogs and man independent of interspecies transfer.
■ Concern has been raised about dogs involved in hospital visitation programs, in
terms of increased risk to both the animal and the hospitalized patient. Current
recommendations are to avoid contact between visiting animals and patients infected
   d     s    
CHAPTER 24: BACTERIAL FOLLICULITIS AND EMERGING RESISTANT PYODERMA
269
 Figure 24-7 Severe "melting" dermatitis associated with methicillin-resistant staphylococcus infection.
 Figure 24-8 Superficial folliculitis and focal furunculosis due to methicillin-resistant staphylococcal infection
 Transmission can happen by many paths: environment to human, human to environ-
ment, human to pet, pet to human, pet to environment, and environment to pet.
Transmission is usually by direct contact with the nasal passages, throat, and skin
or by indirect contact from walls, floors, counters, bedding, dishes, etc.
■ At this time, routine decolonization therapy is not recommended for humans or
animals that have mucosal colonization with MRSA. There is currently no evidence
that such treatment is effective, even with mupirocin topical. Adequate topical
270  SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
clear MRSA colonization spontaneously.
Risk Reduction for Zoonosis/Reverse-Zoonosis
1. Wash hands thoroughly with soap and water for at least 15 seconds (avoid bar
soap).
2. Use an alcohol-based hand sanitizer (62% alcohol).
3. Use gloves when handling suspect patients.
4. Avoid reusing contaminated clothing (lab coats, neckties, scrubs, etc.).
5. Do not share food with pets or use the same dishes.
6. Do not allow a pet to lick your face or open wounds.
 7. Take extra caution with individuals that are immunocompromised.
8. Sterilize surgical equipment.
9. Sanitize all cages and equipment routinely (ex.: stethoscope).
10. Launder bedding @ 60°C (140F).
1l. Clean the clinic surfaces on a routine basis (table surfaces, anesthetic machines
floors, walls, cages, keyboards, telephones, clippers, leashes, muzzles, etc.).
Client Education
There are several excellent sources on the Internet:
■www.wormsandgermsblog.com has a handout called MRsP for Pet Owners.
■ www.CCAR-ccra.org provides useful clinical information including client education
handouts.
MRSA Facts
■ Can be found in the environment up to 42 days in carcasses and 60 days in meat
products
■Remains viable on glass for 46 hours.
■Remains viable for 17 hours in direct sunlight
■Remains viable on the floor for 7 days
■ Can survive up to 12 months in clinic bedding and clothing
Systemic Treatment Options for Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus
(Based on Culture and Sensitivity Testing)
■ Chloramphenicol: often best choice
■ Potentiated sulfonamides: often second best choice
■Amikacin: injectable, painful, potential for nephrotoxicity
■
Doxycycline
 Clindamcyin: limited use
■Fluoroquinolones: limited use
■ Vancomycin: sensitive to the vast majority of MRS ssp., yet it is nephrotoxic in
dogs
CHAPTER 24: BACTERIAL FOLLICULITIS AND EMERGING RESISTANT PYODERMA
271
TABLE 24-2 In the public domain from the Canadian Committee on Antibiotic
Research (20o8) infection Control and Best Practices for Small Animal Veterinary
Ginics, First Printing. November 2008
Hand Washing
Most transient bacteria present on the hands are removed during the mechanical action of
washing. rinsing, and drying hands. Hand washing with soap and running water must be
performed when hands are visibly soiled. If running water is not available, use moistened
towelettes to remove all visible dirt and debris, followed by an alcohol-based hand rub
Bar soaps are not acceptable in veterinary practice settings because of the potential for
should be used.
I Soap should be dispensed in a disposable pump dispenser.
■ Soap containers should not be refilled without being disinfected, since there is a risk of
contamination.
 Antibacterial soaps should be used in critical care areas such as ICU, and in other areas
where invasive procedures are performed
Technique:
 Remove all hand and arm jewelry
2. wWet hands with warm (not hot) water. Hot water is hard on the skin and will lead to
dryness and additional skin damage.
Apply liquid or foam soap
4. Vigorously later all surfaces of hand for a minimum of 15 seconds. This is the minimum
amount of time required for mechanical removal of transient. bacteria. Pay particular
attention to fingertips, between fingers, backs of the hands and base of the thumbs. These
are the most commonly missed areas. A simple way many people time their hand-washing
is by singing "Happy Birthday":
 5. Using a rubbing motion, thoroughly rinse soap from hands under warm running water.
Residual soap can lead to dryness and cracking of skin.
6. Dry hands thoroughly by blotting hands gently with a paper towel. Rubbing vigorously with
paper towels can damage the skin.
7. Turn off taps with paper towel to avoid recontamination of your hands.
 NOTE: If air hand dryers are used, hands-free taps are necessary, as turning taps off without
using paper towel as described will result in recontamination of hands after washing.
When Hand Hygiene Should Be Performed
 Before and after contact with a patient
 Especially before performing invasive procedures
 Before and after contact with items in the patient's environment
After any contact with or any activity involving the body fluids of a patient
■ Before putting on and especially after taking off gloves
■ Before eating food
■ After personal body functions, such as using the toilet, or blowing one's nose
Linezolid: excellent activity, oral or parenteral, low toxicity yet very expensive, con-
 troversy regarding veterinary use since it is often the only effective drug in “life-
threatening" human cases
Topical Treatment Options
■Mupirocin 2%: excellent penetration, mostly gram-positive sensitivity, bacteriostatic
Jo uo!njos snoanbe ue ue pasn
 environmental disinfection
Primarily used as antiseptics
 environmental disinfection 
Primarily used as antiseptics
 environmental disinfection 
Some residual activity after 
Some residual activity after
as a gas (fumigation)
 Only commonly available
sporicidal disinfectant 
Commonly used primary
Used to disinfect clean 
Not appropriate for 
Not appropriate for
 Excellent choice for 
Comments
drying
drying
asn
Requires ventilation 
 produce toxic gas 
Mixing with other 
 x jou o
Precautions
Flammable
Corrosive
Corrosive
bleach
Irritant
Irritant
Irritant 
 anionic detergents 
Inactivated by cationic 
Breakdown with time
nonionic detergents 
Frequent application 
 anionic detergents 
Rapid evaporation
Incompatible with 
 Incompatible with
 Incompatible with
Unpleasant odor
Unpleasant odor
 Disadvantages
 and sunlight 
cationic and 
 Highly toxic 
Toxic to cats
required 
Irritating 
Relatively noncorrosive
Environmentally friendly
 preparation surfaces
preparation surfaces
temperatures and pH
pooj uo pasn aq ue
Nonirritating to skin
an be used on food
 Relatively nontoxic
 including spores
Broad spectrum
 Stable in storage 
 Stable in storage
 Broad spectrum,
 Broad spectrum
Broad spectrum 
Effective at high
Noncorrosive
Advantages
Inexpensive
 toxicity
Nontoxic 
 Activity in Presence
 of Organic Matter
 Rapidly inactivated
 Rapidly inactivated 
 Rapidly inactivated 
Moderate 
Printing, November 2008
poog
poop
Disinfectant Category
Isopropyl alcohol 
Alkalis: Ammonia
Oxidizing Agents 
Formaldehyde
Gutaraldehyde
Ethyl alcohol
Aldehydes:
Halogens:
Quaternary
Ammonium
Alcohols:
Phenols
(QACS)
272
Quaternary
Ammonium
+
Phenols 
±
士
H
Oxidizing
Agents
++
++
十
chlorite
Halogens:
(Bleach)
士
土
Ammonia
Alkalis:
++
Aldehydes
丰
士
 Alcohols
Qinics, First Printing, November 2008
±
十
Enveloped viruses
Acid-fast bacteria
Gram-negative
Pseudomonads 
Fungal spores
Bacterial spores 
Mycoplasmas
Gram-positive 
Nonenveloped 
Chlamydiae
bacteria  
bacteria  
viruses
Coccidia
Agent
 Most susceptible
Most resistant
273
274
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ Fusidic acid
■ Chlorhexidine gluconate: less irritating than benzoyl peroxide, good residual effect,
good for gram-positive, poor against pseudomonas
■ Benzoyl peroxide: oxidizing agent, caution—may bleach fabrics, lowers skin pH, can
 be drying, disrupts bacterial cell membranes
■Ethyl lactate 10%: lowers skin pH
 Retapamulin (Altabax): excellent penetration, gram-positive bacteria, expensive
Vetericyn VF spray (dilute bleach formulation)
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
25
Dermatophytosis
 A cutaneous fungal infection affecting the cornified regions of hair and nails and the
superficial layers of the skin (ringworm)
 Most commonly isolated organisms: Microsporum canis, Irichophyton mentagrophytes
and Microsporum gypseum
■ The source of M. canis is usually an infected cat.
The source of I. metagrophytes is often direct or indirect contact with rodents.
The source of M. gypseum is from soil- digging in contaminated areas.
Caution owners that dermatophytosis is a zoonotic disease.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Exposure to or contact with a dermatophyte does not necessarily result in an
infection.
I Infection may not result in clinical signs.
 Dermatophytes: grow in the keratinized layers of hair, nail, and skin; do not thrive
in living tissue or persist in the presence of severe inflammation; incubation period:
1-4 weeks
 An affected animal may remain as an asymptomatic carrier for a prolonged period
of time; some animals never become symptomatic.
1 Corticosteroids can modulate inflammation and prolong the infection.
Incidence/Prevalence
1 Lesions can mimic many dermatologic conditions; inaccurate overdiagnosis may be
common.
 Infection rates vary widely depending on the population studied. Catteries and
shelters are at risk.
Although ubiquitous, the incidence is higher in hot and humid regions
■ Incidence of the geophilic dermatophytes may vary geographically.
 Dermatophytes spread between animals and people via direct contact with infected
hair and/or scale.
275
276
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 d       n    
infection
■Clinical signs are more common in young and older animals.
 Lesions may begin as alopecia or a poor hair coat.
 pn p  o sa    n j   
 environment (e.g., a cattery) is a useful but not consistent finding.
Causes
 Cats: M. canis most common agent
■ Dogs: M. canis, M. gypseum, and I. mentagrophytes; incidence of each agent varies
geographically
Risk Factors
■ Immuno-compromised condition caused by disease (FeLV, FIV) or by medications
(corticosteroids)
FIV infection (3 times higher prevalence)
■High population density
■Poor nutrition
■ Poor management practices
■ Lack of an adequate quarantine period
■Excessive bathing and grooming
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Vary from an inapparent carrier state to a patchy or circular alopecia, which may
rapidly progress to generalized lesions
Classic circular alopecia: common in cats; often misinterpreted in dogs
Scales, erythema, hyperpigmentation, and pruritus: variable
Granulomatous lesions (pseudomycetoma), or kerions may occur (often M. gypseum)
■Folliculitis
 Miliary dermatitis in cats
■ Nailbed inflammation and nail deformity
■ Facial folliculitis and furunculosis may mimic an autoimmune disease (Figs. 25-1-
25-3)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Cats: allergic dermatitis, lymphocytic mural folliculitis, and most other dermatoses
■ Dogs: bacterial folliculitis (epidermal collarettes) and most causes of alopecia
 Figure 25-1 Persian cat with M. canis. This breed is considered predisposed to dermatophytosis. (Courtesy
of Dr.Carol Foil.)
 Figure 25-2 Dermatophytosis (M. canis) in a dog. Circular patches of alopecia and scale are more
characteristic in humans and cats. (Courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil.)
277
278
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 Figure 25-3 Disseminated dermatophytosis caused by Trichophyton metagrophytes (Courtesy of Dr. Carol
Foil.)
■ Demodicosis: grossly enlarged follicular ostia with furunculosis
■ Immune-mediated/autoimmune skin diseases: similar to the severe inflammation
associated with dermatophytosis affecting the face or feet
DIAGNOSTICS
Wood's Lamp Examination
■  Variable screening tool
Many pathogenic dermatophytes do not fluoresce
■
 False fluorescence is common; medications, keratin associated with epidermal scales.
and sebum may produce false-positive fluorescence.
■ Lamp should warm up for a minimum of 5 minutes and then be exposed to
suspicious lesions for up to 5 minutes.
■ A true positive reaction associated with M. canis consists of apple-green fluorescence
of the hair shaft.
Microscopic Examination of Hair
Examination of plucked hairs after using a clearing solution can help provide a rapid
diagnosis.
■Time-consuming and often produces false-negative results
■ Use hairs that fluoresce under Wood's lamp illumination to increase the likelihood
of identifying the fungal hyphae associated with the hair shaft.
CHAPTER 25:DERMATOPHYTOSIS279
■ Remember, dermatophytes never form macroconidia in tissue (saprophytic fungal
spores may be visualized).
Fungal Culture with Identification
■“Gold standard" for diagnosis
■ Hairs that exhibit a positive apple-green fluorescence under Woods lamp examina-
tion are considered ideal candidates for culture.
■ Pluck hairs from the periphery of an alopecic area; do not use a random pattern.
■Use a sterile toothbrush to brush the hair coat of an asymptomatic animal to yield
better results.
 Dermatophyte test media (Sabourauds dextrose agar with phenol red indicator:
dermatophyte growth changes media color to red as it becomes alkaline; dermato-
phytes produce color change simultaneously with the early growing phase of the
culture; saprophytes cause color change after significant colony growth, thus it is
important to examine the media daily
 Microscopic examination of the growth for microconidia and macroconidia is neces-
sary to confirm pathogenic dermatophyte and to identify genus and species and helps
identify the source of infection. A suspect colony that fails to produce spores or is
difficult to identify is probably Irichophyton spp.
 Dermatophyte colonies are white to buff in color and contaminants are often blue,
green, black, or dark brown.
■  Positive culture indicates presence of a dermatophyte; organisms may be transient
(i.e., geophilic dermatophytes on the feet).
Skin Biopsy
Not usually required for diagnosis
■ Can be helpful in confirming true invasion and infection, or to diagnose suspicious
cases with negative fungal culture
 Most helpful in cases of granulomatous dermatophytosis (kerion, pseudomycetoma)
Histopathology results: folliculitis, perifolliculitis, or furunculosis are common;
hyperkeratosis, intraepidermal pustules, and pyogranulomatous reaction pattern may
occur
 Fungal hyphae may be observed in H&E-stained sections; special stains allow easier
visualization of the organism.
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs of Choice
■ Griseofulvin: no longer the drug of choice: microsized formulation: 25-60 mg/kg po
q12-24h for 4-10 weeks; ultramicrosized formulation: 2.5-15 mg/kg po q12-24h;
absorption is increased by dividing the dose twice a day and giving with a fatty meal;
280  SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
the higher doses are associated with an increased likelihood of toxicity and should
be used with extreme caution; gastrointestinal upset is the most common side effect;
alleviate by reducing the dose or dividing the dose for more frequent administration;
has been associated with idiosyncratic toxicity (bone marrow suppression) in the cat
and is thus not recommended
■ Ketoconazole: true efficacy unknown; dose: 10mg/kg po q24h or divided ql2h for
4-8 weeks; anorexia and vomiting are the most common side effects; not recom-
mended in cats; many clinicians' treatment of choice for medium- to large-sized dogs
■ Itraconazole is similar to ketoconazole, but with fewer side effects, more effective,
and expensive; dose of itraconazole capsules in dogs is 5-10 mg/kg po q24h for 4-8
weeks; dose in cats is 10mg/kg po q24h for 4-8 weeks or until cured; dose of 20 mg/
kg q48h may be considered for both cats and dogs. In some cats, the dosage regimen
is altered after 4 weeks of therapy to an every-other-week schedule for a total of 8-10
weeks of therapy; alternative schedule is one-week-on, one-week-off with apparent
efficacy to reduce drug cost or 2 days per week; available in l00 mg capsules and as
10 mg/ml liquid containing cyclodextrin; liquid preferred over compounded formula-
tions due to absorption variability. Itraconazole has become many clinicians' pre-
ferred therapeutic choice for dermatophytosis in small dogs and cats (kittens as
young as 6 weeks)
■ Topical therapy and clipping is recommended used with concurrent systemic therapy:
it may help prevent environmental contamination and is often associated with an
initial exacerbation of signs after the procedures are initiated; lime sulfur (l:16 dilu-
chlorhexidine) are the most effective generalized topical agents; lime sulfur is odor-
iferous and can stain; enilconazole is not available in the U.s. for household use.
Miconazole-containing solutions are available in both shampoo and “leave-on" prep
arations; use of an Elizabethan collar, particularly in cats, is recommended to prevent
ingestion of these products. Chlorhexidine alone has been shown to be ineffective
with miconazole to increase its effectiveness.
Precautions
■Griseofulvin
■Highly teratogenic
 Bone marrow suppression (anemia, pancytopenia, and neutropenia) can occur as
an idiosyncratic reaction or with prolonged therapy.
■ Neutropenia: most common fatal reaction in cats; can persist after discontinuation
of drug: can be life-threatening in cats with FIV or FeLV infection
■ Neurologic side effects
■Do not give to pregnant animals (teratogenic).
■Ketoconazole
  Hepatopathy has been reported and can be quite severe.
Inhibits endogenous production of steroid hormones in dogs
CHAPTER 25: DERMATOPHYTOSIS281
1 Itraconazole
■ Vasculitis and necroulcerative skin lesions were reported in 7.5% of dogs with
blastomycosis that were treated with itraconazole doses of 5 mg/kg ql2h. Lesions
were not noted in patients receiving 5 mg/kg q24h.
 Hepatotoxicity has been reported in dogs in approximately 5-l0% of cases being
treated for blastomycosis.
■ Vasculitis has been reported in the cat.
Lime sulfur solution: topical solution
 There is clinical evidence that ingestion of lime sulfur can lead to oral mucosa
irritation and thus an Elizabethan collar should be placed on animals (especially
cats) while drying.
Alternative Drugs
■*Ringworm vaccine": no longer available in the U.S.; apparently was only of benefit
in decreasing signs and perhaps encouraged development of the inapparent carrier
state
■  Lufenuron: a chitin synthesis inhibitor used in flea control; proven not effective in
controlled studies
■ Fluconazole: effectiveness not well-documented in studies; less expensive than
itraconazole
 Terbinafine: may be helpful in cases resistant to azole drugs @ 30mg/kg/day or as
an alternative therapy
 Clotrimazole, miconazole, and terbinafine topical creams/lotions may be helpful
COMMENTS
Client Education
■Inform owner that many shorthaired cats in a single-cat environment and many dogs
will undergo spontaneous remission.
  Long-haired animals may be clipped to reduce environmental contamination
■ Advise that treatment can be both frustrating and expensive, especially in multiani-
mal households or with recurrent cases.
■  Inform owner that environmental treatment, including fomites, is important, espe-
cially in recurrent cases; dilute bleach (reports vary as to strength needed) is a practi-
cal and relatively effective means of providing environmental decontamination;
concentrated bleach and formalin (1%) are more effective at killing spores, but their
d n  sn  rs   d sn n s 
studies.
■Inform owner that in a multianimal environment or cattery situation, treatment and
control can be very complicated; referral to a veterinarian with expertise in this type
of situation should be considered.
282  SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ Dermatophytosis is a zoonotic disease.
■http://www.wormsandgermsblog.com is an excellent website for client education
Patient Monitoring
■ Dermatophyte culture is the only means of truly monitoring response to therapy:
many animals will clinically improve but remain culture-positive.
■ Repeat fungal cultures toward the end of the treatment regimen and continue
treatment until at least l culture result is negative.
■In resistant cases, the culture may be repeated weekly, using the toothbrush tech-
nique; continue treatment until 2-3 consecutive culture results are negative.
Weekly or biweekly CBC if treating with griseofulvin; periodic evaluation of liver
enzymes if treating with ketoconazole or itraconazole
Prevention/Avoidance
■ Initiate a quarantine period and obtain dermatophyte cultures of all animals entering
 the household to prevent reinfection from inapparent carriers.
Consider the possibility of rodents aiding in the spread of the disease.
■
Avoid infective soil if a geophilic dermatophyte is involved.
■  Consider prophylactic treatment of exposed animals.
■ Many animals will "self-clear" infection over a period of a few months.
■
Treatment hastens clinical cure and helps reduce environmental contamination.
Some infections, particularly in long-haired cats or multianimal situations, can be
persistent.
■ Environmental cleanup is vital to prevent reinfection. Dermatophyte arthrospores
liberated from broken and shedding hair/scale are extremely long-lived. Vacuuming
to remove hair and surface cleaning with household bleach are important. Clothing
and bedding should be thoroughly laundered with bleach or discarded. Carpeted
scratching posts for cats should be discarded.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
26
Intermediate and
Deep Mycosis
INTERMEDIATE MYCOSIS: SPOROTRICHOSIS
Zoonotic fungal disease affecting the integument, lymphatics, or generalized
Caused by the ubiquitous dimorphic fungus Sporothrix schenchii, by direct
inoculation.
n  n po   n   p   o 
tissue
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Causes and Risk Factors
■ Dogs: hunting dogs from puncture wounds associated with thorns or splinters
Cats: intact male outdoor cats from fights
Exposure to infected animals or clinically healthy cats sharing a household with an
affected cat is a risk factor.
 Immunosuppressive disease is a risk factor.
Increased prevalence in tropical and subtropical zones
CAUTION: this is a zoonotic disease and proper precautions should be taken to
prevent infection. An absence of a break in the skin does not protect against the
disease
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Cutaneous form, dogs: numerous nodules that may drain or crust, typically affecting
the head or trunk (Fig. 26-1).
 Cutaneous form, cats: lesions appear initially as wounds or abscesses mimicking
wounds associated with fighting on the head, lumbar region, or distal limbs
283
284
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 Figure 26-1 Sporotrichosis in a cat. Note the ulcerated lesion along the nailbed and footpad. (Courtesy of
Dr. Carol Foil.)
 Cutaneolymphatic form: usually an extension of the cutaneous form through the
lymphatics, resulting in the formation of new nodules and draining tracts or crusts;
lymphadenopathy is common.
 Disseminated form: systemic signs of malaise and fever
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Infectious: bacterial and fungal diseases presenting with nodules and draining tracts
(e.g., cryptococcosis, blastomycosis, feline leprosy, histoplasmosis)
Neoplasia
 Deep bacterial infection
■Parasites: demodex, pelodera
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Cultures of the deeply affected tissue
■ CAUTION: this is a zoonotic disease; laboratory personnel must be warned of
the potential differential diagnosis; cultures should not be attempted until other
differential diagnoses have been eliminated.
■ Cytology of exudates: cigar- to round-shaped yeast found intracellularly or free in
the exudate
CHAPTER 26: INTERMEDIATE AND DEEP MYCOSIS
 Biopsy: organisms usually numerous, especially in cats; fungal stains (PAS or GMS)
may aid in the diagnosis; the absence of demonstrable organisms in tissues from dogs
does not preclude diagnosis
THERAPEUTICS
■ The zoonotic nature of sporotrichosis should be considered when treating an animal
with this disease.
■ Outpatient therapy may be a consideration but increases the potential for human
exposure.
Drugs of Choice
■ Supersaturated Solution of Potassium Iodide (SSKI)
   od oo     o  
■ Treat for at least 2 months and continue therapy for 30 days after resolution of
the clinical lesions.
■ In the dog, if signs of iodism are noted (dry hair coat, excessive scales, nasal or
ocular discharge, vomiting. depression or collapse), the drug should be discon-
tinued for l week. If the symptoms are mild, reinitiate at the same dose. If the
symptoms are severe or recurrent, other drugs should be considered.
■ In the cat, the symptoms of iodism (depression, vomiting, anorexia, twitching.
hypothermia, and cardiovascular collapse) are more common and this drug should
be discontinued if noted.
■ Ketoconazole and Itraconazole
■ Encouraging results in the treatment of fungal disease in cats and dogs
■ Dogs: ketoconazole: dose 5-15 mg/kg po ql2h until 1 month after clinical resolu-
tion or for a minimum of 2 months. Resolution should occur within approximately
3 months. Side effects are relatively mild with anorexia being the most common.
Fewer side effects are noted at the lower dose of 5 mg/kg q24h. Often better toler-
ated than ketoconazole; however, acute hepatopathy and vasculitis have been
reported (see dermatophytosis)
■Cats: ketoconazole dose is 5-10 mg/kg po q12-24h for 1-2 months beyond clinical
cure. Gastrointestinal disturbances are more commonly seen in cats as are other
side effects such as depression, fever, jaundice, and neurological signs. Itraconazole
(15 mg/kg po q24h for a minimum of 1 months beyond clinical cure) is the treat-
ment of choice for cats because of efficacy and fewer side effects. Itraconazole oral
suspension (containing cyclodextrin) dosage is 1.25-1.5 mg/kg q24h. The com-
pounded formulation is not recommended due to potentially inconsistent absorp-
tion. The oral suspension is best administered on an empty stomach to improve
absorption. It is sometimes necessary to alternate drug classes when treating cats
with this disease.
286
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
COMMENTS
Patient Monitoring/Prognosis
■ Reevaluations, including assessment of liver enzymes, are recommended every 2-4
weeks to monitor clinical signs and side effects associated with treatment.
■ Failure of response to therapy should not be unexpected. Alternative treatment or
combined treatment regimens (SSKl and ketoconazole) should be considered.
Fluconazole and terbinafine remain relatively untested but may show promise for
treatment.
Zoonotic Potential
■ CAUTION: this is a zoonotic disease and proper precautions should be taken to
prevent infection.
■ Client education is of paramount importance.
■An absence of a break in the skin does not protect against the disease.
■ Zoonotic transmission from bites and scratches from rodents, parrots, cats, dogs.
horses and armadillos have been reported.
■ Clinically healthy cats sharing a household with an infected cat may be a source of
infection.
DEEP MYCOSIS: CRYPTOCOCCOSIS
COCCIDIOIDOMYCOSIS, BLASTOMYCOSIS
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
  Localized or systemic fungal infections
Coccidioides immitis (southwestern U. S.) and Blastomyces dermatitidis (Mississippi,
Ohio, Tennessee river basins, and parts of Wisconsin) are soilborne fungal
organisms.
■ Clinical signs vary with the organ system involved.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Cryptococcosis (Figs. 26-2, 26-3)
Cats are 7 times more likely to have this infection than dogs.
■ Dogs and cats inhale the yeast organisms, which usually causes a foci of infection in
the nasal passages.
CHAPTER 26: INTERMEDIATE AND DEEP MYCOSIS
287
■ Figure 26-2 Cryptococcosis in the cat. Note the focal ulcerated nodule of the philtrim and lip region
as well as the disseminated nodules of the chin area. (Courtesy of Dr.Carol Foil.)
Figure 26-3 Seven-year-old DSH with ulcerative facial dermatitis caused by Cryptococcus neoformans
infection.
 A disseminated form is hematogenously spread from the nasal passages to the brain,
eyes, lungs, and other tissues or by extension to the skin of the nose, eye, retro-orbital
tissue, and draining lymph nodes.
■ Often associated with fever, anorexia, nasal discharge, skin nodules/ulceration,
lethargy, neurologic signs (seizures, ataxia, paresis, blindness)
288SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ Subcutaneous lesions present in 5o% of feline cases and consist of papules and
nodules as well as abscesses, ulcers, and draining tracts.
Aoq on  e se ssd  pn i a u uo axa an ssn sn 
swelling of the bridge of the nose causing facial assymmetry; upper respiratory signs
are common.
Coccidioidomycosis
■ Dogs have a higher incidence rate than cats, although it is a rare disease in both
species.
■ Inhalation of infective arthroconidia is the primary route of infection.
■  Clinical signs manifest within 10 days of exposure, although asymptomatic infections
may occur resulting in the development of immunity without clinical disease
■ Clinical signs dependent on the organ system affected yet include lethargy, fever,
anorexia, productive or dry cough/ dyspnea, joint pain, seizures, uveitis/keratitis
 paraparesis, neck or back pain, bone swelling, cardiovascular signs, renal failure,
lymphadenopathy, and cutaneous lesions characterized by nodules with draining
tracts
Blastomycosis (Figs. 26-4, 26-5)
A small spore (conidia) is inhaled from the soil where at body temperature the spore
becomes a yeast, which initiates the infection in the lungs (mycotic pneumonia). The
 Figure 26-4 Focal ulcerated and draining skin lesions of the facial region in this dog owing to blastomycosis.
(Courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil.)
CHAPTER 26: INTERMEDIATE AND DEEP MYCOSIS
 Figure 26-5 Severe ulceration of the footpad in the cat owing to blastomycosis. (Courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil.)
yeast then disseminates hematogenously throughout the body. The host immune
response results in a pyogranulomatous reaction.
 85% of affected dogs have lung disease/40% of dogs have cutaneous disease
(granulomatous).
 Clinical signs include fever, lethargy, anorexia, harsh dry cough, lymphadenopathy.
lameness (fungal osteomyelitis), uveitis/glaucoma, testicular enlargement, and
prostatomegaly.
Cutaneous lesions consist of ulcerated nodules or plaques, subcutaneous abscesses.
draining tracts, or large firm papules.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Pneumonia
■ Neoplasia
■Heart failure
 Other systemic mycoses (histoplasmosis, etc.)
 Bacterial infections
 Neurologic disease (rickettsial, granulomatous meningoencephalitis, bacterial menin-
 goencephalitis, tumors, etc.)
Distemper
■
Immune-mediated diseases
DIAGNOSTICS
 Complete blood count and serum chemistry: anemia, eosinophilia, neutrophilic
leukocytosis, hyperglobulinemia, hypoalbuminemia, azotemia, hypercalcemia
290  SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 Urinalysis: low specific gravity and proteinuria with inflammatory glomerulonephri-
tis in C. immitis/; blastomyces yeasts may be found in the urine of dogs with prostatic
involvement
■Radiographs: cryptococcal granuloma often behind the soft palate in cats or dense
material filling the nasal passage often with bone destruction; coccidioidomycosis
causes pulmonary interstitial infltrates with osteolysis; blastomyces cause notable
lesions in the lungs as well as bony tissue; generalized interstitial to nodular pulmo-
nary infiltrate, tracheobronchial lymphadenopathy lytic and proliferative focal bone
lesions
■ CSF culture and measurement of capsular antigen (cryptococcosus)
 Serology: Latex agglutination or ELISA (cryptococcosus), serologic tests for antibody
to C. immitis, AGID for blastomyces
■ Cytology: aspirates of mucoid material from nasal passages are diagnostic, lymph
node aspirates, impression smears from skin lesions or draining exudates or even
tracheal wash fluid are often diagnostic
■Histopathology: skin, bone, enucleated eye, lymph node: most diagnostic test along
with cytology
■ Culture/sensitivity: caution when culturing coccidioides because the mycelial form
is highly contagious
THERAPEUTICS
■Generally treated as outpatients. Patients treated with amphotericin B, however, will
require hospitalization several times a week during their treatment period. Concurrent
clinical symptoms (e.g., seizures, pain, coughing) should be treated appropriately
Restrict activity until clinical signs begin to subside.
Feed a high-quality palatable diet to maintain body weight.
 The necessity and expense of long-term therapy of a serious illness with the possibil-
ity of treatment failure should be reviewed. In addition, the client should be made
aware of the possible side effects of the drugs used.
■ In cases of focal granulomatous organ involvement (e.g., consolidated pulmonary
lung lobe, eye, kidney), surgical removal of the affected organ may be indicated.
■ Coccidioidomycosis is considered the most severe and life-threatening of the
systemic mycoses. Treatment of disseminated disease requires at least l year of
aggressive antifungal therapy.
■ Cryptococcus pyogranulomatous lesions in the nasopharynx may require surgical
removal to reduce respiratory difficulties.
Drugs of Choice
■Dogs
■ Several oral medications in the azole family of drugs are currently available for
the treatment of deep fungal infections in dogs.
CHAPTER 26: INTERMEDIATE AND DEEP MYCOSIS291
Ketoconazole (KTZ) is dosed at 5-10 mg/kg po ql2h. The medication may be given
with food, and there is some belief that coadministration of high doses of vitamin
C may improve the absorption of the drug. Treatment should be continued for a
protracted period of time.
■ Itraconazole (ITZ) is dosed at 5-10mg/kg po ql2h. The drug is administered
similarly as KTz. It has been reported to have a higher penetration rate than
ketoconazole, but a better clinical response has not been observed.
An on pou ua su pe u od y/lg 1e pasop si (h) aozo 1
increase the success of treatment, especially in neurologic infections. The drug is
extremely expensive, and the client should be prepared for the expense. After
extended use, the frequency of dosing in some cases may be lowered to once a day.
Amphotericin B (AMB) is less commonly recommended because of the high risk
of renal damage and the availability of effective oral medications. Amphotericin B
can be administered at a dosage of 0.5mg/kg IV 3 times a week, for a total cumu-
lative dosage of 8-l0 mg/kg. It is given IV either as a slow infusion (in dogs that
are gravely ill) or as a rapid bolus (in fairly healthy dogs). For slow infusion, add
AMB to 250-500 mL of 5% dextrose solution and administer as a drip over a period
of 4-6 hours. For a rapid bolus, add AMB to 30 mL of 5% dextrose solution and
administer over a period of 5 minutes through a butterfly catheter. To lessen the
adverse renal effects of AMB, give 0.9% NaCl (2 mL/kg/hr) for several hours before
initiating AMB therapy.
■A combination of AMB and KTZ may be used in dogs that have not responded to
either drug alone or have exhibited significant toxicity. It is not clear that combi-
nation therapy is any more effective than single drug therapy in the treatment of
coccidioidomycoses. For combination chemotherapy, administer AMB as described
to a total cumulative dosage of 4-6mg/kg, together with KTZ at 10mg/kg po
divided daily for at least 8-12 months.
 Flucytosine @ 100 mg/kg po divided into 3-4 doses per day in addition to triazoles
may be helpful if the infection is especially stubborn.
1Cats
■ Any of the following azoles may be used in cats:
■ Ketoconazole 50 mg total dose po ql2h
■ Itraconazole 25-50 mg total dose po ql2h
■ Fluconazole 25-50mg total dose po q 12h
■Alternatively, AMB can be administered by rapid IV bolus at a dosage of 0.25 mg/
followed by long-term KTZ therapy, depending on the clinical response.
Precautions/Interactions
■ Drugs metabolized primarily by the liver should not be administered along with
ketoconazole.
■  Drugs metabolized primarily by the kidneys should not be administered along with
AMB.
292SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ Side effects of azoles include inappetence, vomiting, and hepatotoxicity. The drugs
Ss q   p r e i p p  ss r s  
increased to the recommended dose if the animal is able to tolerate the drug.
■ Side effects of AMB therapy can be severe and include renal dysfunction, fever
inappetence, vomiting. and phlebitis.
■ Pulmonary disease resulting in severe coughing may temporarily worsen after therapy
has begun owing to inflammation in the lungs. Low-dose short-term prednisone and
cough suppressants may be required to alleviate the respiratory signs.
■ Itraconazole has been associated with ulcerative dermatitis due to drug-induced
vasculitis
■Flucytosine has been associated with drug eruptions manifesting as depigmenting
lesions of the skin, lips, and nose, as well as bone marrow suppression.
COMMENTS
Patient Monitoring
 Serologic titers should be monitored every 2-3 months. Animals should be treated
until their titers fall. Animals displaying poor response to therapy should have a 2-4
hour post-pill drug level measured to assure adequate absorption of the drug.
■ BUN and urinalysis should be monitored in all animals treated with AMB. Treatment
should be temporarily discontinued if the BUN rises above 50 mg/dL or granular casts
are noted in the urine.
Expected Course and Prognosis
Cryptococcus
■ Inform clients that this is a chronic disease that requires months of therapy.
 Patients with CNs disease require lifelong maintenance therapy.
Although not considered a zoonotic disease, it may be transmitted via bite wounds,
especially if to an immunocompromised human.
 Capsular antigen titers determine response to therapy. If titers do not substantially
decrease within 2 months treatment protocol may need to be changed. Measure
every 2 months until 6 months after therapy: continue treatment for 2 months
after antigen is nondetectable or 3-4 months after significant reduction in case
the titers are never negative.
Cats with concurrent FeLV or FIV have a graver prognosis
Coccidiodomycosis
The prognosis is guarded to grave in disseminated disease. Many dogs will improve
following oral therapy; however, relapses may be seen, especially if therapy is
shortened. The overall recovery rate has been estimated at 60%, but some report
a 90% response to fluconazole therapy.
  The prognosis for cats is not well documented, but rapid dissemination requiring
long-term therapy should be anticipated.
CHAPTER 26: INTERMEDIATE AND DEEP MYCOSIS
293
■ Serologic testing every 3-4 months after completion of therapy is recommended
to monitor the possibility of relapse.
■ Spontaneous recovery from disseminated coccidioidomycosis without treatment
is extremely rare.
 Zoonosis: The spherule form of the fungus, as found in animal tissues, is not
directly transmissible to people or other animals. Under certain rare circum-
stances, however, there could be reversion to growth of the infective mold form
of the fungus on or within bandages placed over a draining lesion or in contami-
nated bedding. Draining lesions can lead to contamination of the environment
with arthrospores. Care should be exercised whenever handling an infected drain-
ing lesion. Special precautions should be recommended to households where the
owners may be immunosuppressed.
Blastomyces
■ 25% of dogs die within the first week of therapy. Dogs that recover from infection
are afforded lasting immunity.
 Severity of lung involvement and invasion into the brain affect prognosis
 20% of treated patients will relapse within 3-6 months after completion of therapy.
■Thoracic radiographs are often the best monitor of therapeutic duration; continue
treatment for 30 days if lesions present. Continue therapy for at least 30 days after
clinical/ radiographic resolution.
■ Not considered a zoonotic threat unless transmitted via a bite wound.
■ Warn owners that blastomycosis is acquired from an environmental source and
that they may have been exposed at the same time as the pet; common source
being 10 times that of humans.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
27
chapter
Leishmaniasis: Protozoan
Dermatitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Flagellate protozoal infection causing cutaneous and visceral disease
Affects dogs, cats, rodents, horses, cattle, and human beings; canids are important
reservoirs for human disease.
■Public health concern; zoonotic potential for fatal disease
■ Uncommon in the United States-varies by geographic location
Dermatologic lesions caused by protozoa other than leishmania are extremely rare,
primarily occur as secondary symptoms, and are not discussed in this chapter.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
L. infantum: Mediterranean basin, Portugal, and Spain; sporadic cases in Switzerland.
northern France, and the Netherlands
■ L. donovani complex or L. braziliensis: endemic areas of South and Central America
and southern Mexico
     sod    s
■ Canine cases reported in Texas, Maryland, Oklahoma, and North Carolina.
■ Flagellated parasites transferred into the skin of a host by sandfly vectors
(Phlebotomus—Old World; Lutzomyia—New World); insect vector in the United
States not definitively identified
■ Organisms are intracellular in macrophages within various tissues.
Cats: often localizes in skin
■ Dogs: invariably spreads throughout the body to most organs; renal failure is the
most common cause of death
■  Incubation period: 1 month to several years
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Iravel to endemic regions inside or outside of the United States
■ Infection through transfusions of contaminated blood
1and transplacental
transmission
294
CHAPTER 27: LEISHMANIASIS: PROTOZOAN DERMATITIS
295
1Almost all dogs develop visceral, or systemic, disease; 90% have cutaneous
involvement.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Visceral
Exercise intolerance
Severe weight loss and anorexia
■
Diarrhea, vomiting
Epistaxis and melena
 Lymphadenopathy
 Emaciation
■
Renal failure (polyuria, polydipsia)
 Neuralgia
Lameness due to polyarthritis, polymyositis, osteolytic lesions, and proliferative
periostitis
■Pyrexia
■
Splenomegaly
■
Ocular disease
Cutaneous (Figs. 27-1, 27-2)
Exfoliative dermatitis
 Depigmentation
 Figure 27-1 Leishmaniasis—crusted cutaneous nodules
296
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 Figure 27-2 Leishmaniasis—crusted cutaneous nodules
 Thickening and scaling of the muzzle and footpads
Alopecia and coat-quality changes
 Cutaneous nodules and ulcers over pressure areas
Abnormal nails (rare)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Visceral
Mycoses (blastomycosis, histoplasmosis)
Systemic lupus erythematosus
■Ehrlichiosis
■ Multiple myeloma
 Metastatic neoplasia
Distemper virus
Systemic vasculitis
1Cutaneous
Keratinization disorder
Nutritional dermatoses (vitamin A-responsive, zinc-responsive)
■]
 Idiopathic nasodigital hyperkeratosis
■  Lichenoid-psoriasiform dermatosis
CHAPTER 27: LEISHMANIASIS: PROTOZOAN DERMATITIS
DIAGNOSTICS
emia; elevated liver enzymes; azotemia; thrombocytopenia, nonregenerative anemia
  Urinalysis: proteinuria
■ Coombs, ANA, LE cell tests: rare positive
Serologic diagnosis: IFAT titer of l:64; recombinant antigen immunoassay (where
available)
 Cultures or identification of organism from aspirates: skin, spleen, bone marrow,
lymph node
 Dermatohistopathology from biopsy: histiocyte and macrophage infiltrate with intra-
cellular amastigote forms in tissues from skin, lymph nodes, liver, spleen, and kidney
 Mucosal ulcerations: stomach, intestine, and colon (occasional)
THERAPEUTICS
 Treatment controversial due to potential zoonotic transmission of organism to human
beings from persistently infected dogs.
 Prognosis very poor in emaciated, chronically infected animals.
 Pentavalent antimonial therapy provides increased quality of life but rarely cures.
 Cats: surgical excision of individual dermal nodules
 Inform client that organisms will never be eliminated; relapse is inevitable.
Monitor therapy with frequent CBC, serum albumin, globulin, and creatinine, and
urine protein:creatinine.
Base continued treatment on clinical improvement, identification of organisms in
repeat biopsies, and change in serum titers.
Relapses occur often within months to a year; recheck at least every 2 months after
completion of treatment.
Drugs of choice
■Sodium stibogluconate (30-50 mg/kg intravenously or subcutaneously q24h for 3-4
weeks): available in the United States through the Centers for Disease Control
■ Meglumine antimoniate (100 mg/kg intravenously or subcutaneously q24h for 3-4
weeks)
 Allopurinol (30mg/kg po q24h for 3 months; then 20mg/kg q24hr for 1 week per
month): usually administered with pentavalent antimonials
■
 Miltefosine (2mg/kg po q24h)
 Alternative drugs include: Y-interferon, amphotericin-B, enrofloxacin, marbofloxa-
cin, metronidazole, and spiramycin
Author: Alexander H. Werner
28
chapter
Malassezia Dermatitis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Malassezia pachydermatis (syn. Pityrosporum canis): yeast; normal commensal of the
skin, ears, and mucocutaneous areas; can overgrow and cause dermatitis, cheilitis.
and otitis in dogs and cats
■ M. pachydermatis is lipid-loving, but several species isolated from the cat and dog
are lipid-dependent (Fig. 28-1).
■ Yeast numbers in diseased areas are usually excessive, although this is a variable
finding.
■The causes of the transformation from harmless commensal to pathogen are
poorly understood but seem related to allergy, seborrheic conditions, and possibly
congenital and hormonal factors.
■ Malassezia Overgrowth syndrome (MOG)- clinical disease due to overgrowth and
colonization of a commensal organism
■ Malassezia produce many enzymes (lipases and proteases) which contribute to cuta-
neous inflammation by altering the lipidic cutaneous protective barrier, change
cutaneous pH, eicosanoid release and complement activation
s ( I a e  e d e aq  ss 
ity. Skin testing with Malassezia extract can reveal an immediate hypersensitivity
reaction. There is also a delayed hypersensitivity pathway proposed.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
cocker spaniel, and dachshund are predisposed
■ Cats: less common than in dogs; disease and predisposing causes are speculated to
be similar to those in the dog as in young to middle-aged cats; aged cats may have
Malassezia dermatitis associated with internal neoplasia; any breed may be affected;
however, young Rex cats are predisposed
■ No gender predilection
■ Canine Malassezia dermatitis and  Malassezia-associated seborrheic dermatitis:
common in all geographic regions of the world
298
CHAPTER 28: MALASSEZIA DERMATITIS
667
 Figure 28-1 Tape preparation 400x showing Malassezia yeasts.
Risk Factors
a       i 
■
 Concurrent hypersensitivity disease (particularly atopy flea allergy, and some food
allergy/intolerances): may be a predisposing factor
d e     s   p s 
breeds
■ Endocrinopathies (especially in older dogs): suspected to be associated predisposing
factors
■ Genetic factors: suspected for young onset in predisposed dog breeds and Rex cats
 Concurrent increase in cutaneous Staphylococcus pseudintermedius population and
resultant bacterial folliculitis: confirmed finding: in selected cases, canine seborrheic
dermatitis is proposed to be a result of this combination of pathogen overgrowth;
treatment of one alone does not result in resolution of all signs, but just unmasks
the other; anti-yeast treatment alone resolves all signs of Malassezia dermatitis yet
underlying allergy may still manifest
■Cats have both a young- and adult-age disease, which can be allergy-associated. In
Rex cats, genetic features related to their unique coat or skin features or their pre-
disposition to a mast cell abnormality called urticaria pigmentosa may be factors.
Aged cats may have Malassezia dermatitis associated with thymomas and carcinomas
of the pancreas and liver.
■ Medications: treatment with glucocorticoids or antibiotics without addressing the
present yeast component
Ectoparasitic skin disease: demodicosis, scabies, etc.
300
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 Figure 28-2 Erythema of the pinna and canal with excess wax production and ceruminous gland hyperplasia
secondary to allergic dermatitis-induced Malazzezia otitis externa. (Courtesy of Dr. Kevin Shanley.)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■Pruritus: with varying degrees of erythema, alopecia, scale, and greasy, malodorous
exudation; affects lips, ears, feet, axillae, inguinal area, and ventral neck Figs.
28-2-28-7
■ Hyperpigmentation and lichenification: chronic cases
■Concurrent black waxy to seborrheic otitis: frequent
■I
Facial pruritus: uncommon but characteristic (frequent in cats)
Often a history of suspected allergy that worsens and seems to develop resistance or
is resistant to glucocorticoid treatment
 Concurrent bacterial folliculitis, hypersensitivity, and endocrine and keratinization
disorders
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Diagnosis is made by demonstrating excessive numbers of the organism on diseased
skin, and by a significant improvement in clinical signs following removal of the
yeast.
■Allergic dermatitis: including flea allergy, atopy, and food allergy
■ Superficial bacterial folliculitis
CHAPTER 28: MALASSEZIA DERMATITIS
301
 Figure 28-3 Allergic otitis externa with secondary yeast overgrowth. Note the copious amounts of creamy
 yellow exudate. (Courtesy of Dr. Kevin Shanley.)
■Figure 28-4Typical Malassezia pododermatitis in a boxer dog
 Primary and secondary seborrhea/keratinization disorders
■
Drug reaction
■
Cutaneous lymphoma
■
Demodicosis
■Scabies
302
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 Figure 28-5 Typical periocular lesion of Malassezia dermatitis.
Figure 28-6 Basset hound with Malassezia seborrheic dermatitis in the fold regions.
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Fungal culture: use contact plates (small agar plates made from bottle lids and
  as e i      m p
cat): press plates onto the affected skin surface; incubate at 32-37°C for 3-7 days:
count the distinctive yellow or buff, round, domed colonies (1-l.5 mm); provides
semi qualitative data; often not necessary
CHAPTER 28: MALASSEZIA DERMATITIS
 Figure 28-7 West Highland white terrier with generalized Malassezia dermatitis.
■Nonquantitative culture methods: no value because Malassezia is a normal
commensal
■CBC/Biochemistryto
0  detect underlying diseases  (e.g.、 hypothyroidism,
hyperadrenocorticism)
■ Ultrasonography and radiography to investigate possible internal malignancy
Most Valuable Procedures
1 Skin cytology: touch, cotton swab, or cellophane tape preparation stained with
Diff-Quik; apply stain as a drop directly onto the slide (yeast may wash off
during staining); pass a flame under the slide to improve stain penetration and
visualization
Greasy and/or scaly areas are most likely to produce positive results.
 Numbers of yeast organisms may not be as valuable a tool as previously thought
because a few organisms may incite a hypersensitivity reaction
■Histopathology is a less sensitive method of diagnosis than cytology yet is considered
significant if yeast organisms are found within the hair follicles.
THERAPEUTICS
 Identify and treat any predisposing factors or diseases.
■
 Topical therapy: yeast is principally located in the stratum corneum
 Shampoo treatment: to remove scale, exudation, and malodor
304SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
creams and chlorhexidine shampoo most effective; selenium sulfide shampoo less
effective but useful; twice-weekly treatments
■ Other topical antifungal and antibacterial shampoo treatments may be of value if
given with suitable systemic medications.
■Alternative combinations: topical keratolytic shampoo treatment with systemic anti-
 yeast and antibacterial drugs
Drugs of Choice
■ Localized cases: may respond to creams and lotions containing imidazole
compounds
cases
 Fluconazole and itraconazole @ 5-l0 mg/kg/day are also effective.
 Terbinafine is equally effective for both dogs and cats.
■ Topical antimicrobial antibacterial shampoo: to maintain remission in chronic cases
Precautions/Interactions
■Ketoconazole: rarely may cause hepatic reaction; masks signs of hyperadrenocorti-
cism and interferes with adrenal function tests due to blocking of cortisol produc-
tion (via inhibition of P-450) in the adrenal gland; contraindicated in cats with
hepatic and severe debilitating internal malignancy because they may not be able
to metabolize the drug
COMMENTS
Patient Monitoring
■ Physical examination and skin cytology: after 2-4 weeks, to monitor therapy
              
response is achieved. Some patients will relapse as soon as the medication is discon-
tinued and may require long-term pulse therapy. These patients must be monitored
via routine blood work for any adverse hepatic effects.
■Pruritus and odor: usually noticeably improved within 1 week
Recurrences: common when underlying dermatoses are not well controlled; regular
bathing with antifungal antibacterial shampoo combinations (miconazole plus
chlorhexidine) helps decrease recurrence
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
29
Mycobacterial Infections
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
obligate or sporadic pathogens in humans and animals
 Tuberculosis: caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis (humans), M. bovis (cattle and
some wild mammals), and M. microri (voles), and M. microti-like; dogs and cats
exposed to infected primary hosts sporadically infected; disseminated or multiorgan
disease caused by obligate parasitic organism; rare in dogs and cats in developed
countries.
■Leprosy: M. lepraemurium (from rodents) and 2 unnamed leprosy organisms
(M. visibilis (provisional)
 Cats: 2 syndromes: syndrome l affects young cats with localized nodular disease,
affecting limbs with sparse to moderate numbers of acid-fast bacilli present in lesions
(M. lepraemurium); syndrome 2 affects older cats with generalized skin lesions and
large numbers of acid-fast bacilli in lesions (unnamed species with affinity to
M. malmoense)
 Dogs: canine leproid granuloma syndrome caused by unnamed and uncultured
Mycobacterium spp. identified by DNA sequencing
 Systemic or noncutaneous infection with non-tuberculosis mycobacteria: M. chelonae-
abscessus group, M. avium complex, M. fortuitum, M. genavense, M. kansasii, M. mas-
siliense M. simiae, M. smegmatis, M. thermoresistibile, M. xenopi; sporadic infections
in dogs and cats; some patients with concurrent or immunosupression or the result
of traumatic tissue introduction of saprophytic organism; syndromes include
pleuritis, localized or disseminated granulomas, disseminated disease, neuritis.
bronchopneumonia
 Cutaneous/subcutaneous infections due to rapidly growing mycobacteria: also known
as mycobacterial panniculitis.
 Dogs and cats: caused by saprophytic mycobacteria M. fortuitum group. M.
chelonae-abscessus group, M. smegmati groups, M. phlei, M. terrae complex, M.
thermoresistibile,M.ulcerans.
305
306 SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Tuberculosis
■Cats and dogs of any age
■ Basset hound and Siamese cat reported as most susceptible; evidence unclear
(possible statistical aberration)
■Feline leprosy
■ Adult free-roaming cats and kittens; kittens and young adult cats in syndrome l;
older cats (average 9 years) in syndrome 2.
■ Canine leproid granuloma
Reported cases have been mostly in short-haired outdoor-housed large-breed
dogs, especially boxerx and German shepherds.
 Systemic non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis
 A sporadic disease that can affect dogs and cats of any age
 Mycobacterial panniculitis
Adult cats and dogs
Causes and Risk Factors
■Tuberculosis
■ Source of exposure: always an infected typical host
 Dogs: usually exposed from an infected person in the household (M. tuberculosis);
route is ingestion of expectorated infectious material; aerosol exposure possible;
patients most often found in urban areas with immigrants from the developing
world
■ Cats: classically exposed by drinking unpasteurized milk of infected cattle (M.
bovis); much less common now than in the past; may be exposed by predation on
infected small mammals (M. bovis, undefined tuberculosis species)
■Feline leprosy
■ In syndrome l, cases have been reported from temperate coastal areas and port
cities; cool climate may facilitate growth of the organism in extremities.
  In syndrome 2, cases are from rural or semirural environments; old age or immu-
noincompetence may be a risk factor. The exact risk factors remain undefined;
exposure to rodents is postulated.
Canine leproid granuloma
■ Cases have been associated with fly bites and may seasonally fluctuate; short coat
may predispose.
■ The disease is likely to be worldwide, but most cases have been reported from
Australasia and Brazil. In the United States, cases have been reported in California,
Hawaii, and Florida.
■ Systemic non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis
■ Most reported patients are immunosuppressed or have concurrent systemic
diseases.
■ Exposure: routes of exposure in pulmonary and systemic disease are unknown
CHAPTER 29: MYCOBACTERIAL INFECTIONS
 Mycobacterial panniculitis
■
 Most infections have had antecedent trauma or surgical wound. Most patients are
immunocompetent.
 Trauma and accidental inoculation of the subcutaneous fat may result in infection:
history of bite wound is possible (subcutaneous disease).
■  Fat animals may be more at risk than lean ones.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■Tuberculosis
 Correlated with the route of exposure; major sites of involvement: oropharyngeal
lymph nodes, cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues of the head and extremities;
pulmonary system; gastrointestinal system
■ Dogs: respiratory, especially coughing: dyspnea uncommon
Cats: from contaminated milk: weight loss, chronic diarrhea, and thickened
intestines; from predation: cutaneous nodules, ulcers, and draining tracts
■ Virtually all dogs and many cats: pharyngeal and cervical lymphadenopathy;
unproductive effort to vomit, ptyalism, or tonsillar abscess; lymph nodes are
visible or palpably firm, fixed, tender; may ulcerate and drain
■Pyrexia
■ Depression
■Partial anorexia and weight loss
■
Hypertrophic osteopathy or hypercalcemia may occur
 Disseminated disease: body cavity effusion; visceral masses; bone or joint lesions:
 dermal and subcutaneous masses and ulcers:; lymphadenopathy and/or abscesses;
CNS signs; sudden death
■Feline leprosy
■ Syndrome l: initial localized nodules on limbs; progress rapidly, may ulcerate;
 aggressive clinical course; recurrence after surgical excision; widespread lesions
develop in several weeks
 Syndrome 2: initial localized or generalized skin nodules that do not ulcerate,
slowly progressive over months to years
 Feline multisystemic granulomatous mycobacteriosis: diffuse cutaneous thicken-
ing and multiple organ system involvement
■ Canine leproid granuloma
 One or more well-circumscribed painless nodules (2mm-5 cm) in dermis or sub-
cutis; often on head or ear, but may be anywhere on the body; only very large
lesions ulcerate
No systemic signs of illness
 Systemic non-tuberculous mycobacteriosis
Pulmonary and systemic infections with AM are reported rarely in dogs, in which
case the signs are as for TB.
■ With M. avium infection, disease is most often disseminated.
80E
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
Mycobacterial panniculitis
 Cutaneous: traumatic lesion that fails to heal with appropriate therapy; spreads
locally in the subcutaneous tissue (panniculitis); original lesion enlarges, forming
a deep ulcer that drains greasy hemorrhagic exudate; surrounding tissue becomes
firm; satellite pinpoint ulcerations open and drain (Figs. 29-1, 29-2)
Figure 29-1 Atypical mycobacteriosis. Note the "melting" lesion, which extends throughout the subcutane-
Ous tissue.
 Figure 29-2 Atypical mycob acteriosis. Multifocal ulcerations with satellite lesions.
CHAPTER 29: MYCOBACTERIAL INFECTIONS  309
■ Wound dehiscence at surgery sites
■ Systemic signs uncommon
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Mycobacterial infections have different prognoses, treatment recommendations, and
public health consequences but may initially have similar signs, especially cutaneous
lesions.
■ All manifestations: fungal and other actinomycotic infections should be considered
■Panniculitis: nocardiosis can be clinically identical
DIAGNOSTICS
Intradermal skin Testing
■ Tuberculosis (dogs): intradermal skin testing with PPD or BCG on inner pinna
 May produce false-positive results owing to cross-reactions with non-tuberculous
mycobacteria
Radiography
■ Thoracic, abdominal, or skeletal lesions: suggest granulomatous infectious disease
■ No specific lesions for the mycobacterioses
■ Pulmonary tuberculosis lesions: may become calcified or cavitated
Cytology/Histopathology
■ Based on histopathologic and microbiologic evaluation of biopsy material from
affected tissue
■Aspiration of purulent material from any site after disinfection of overlying skin may
 be used for microbiological identification. Ultrasound-guided aspiration techniques
may be warranted.
Biopsy specimens: should be uncontaminated by surface bacteria; must incorporate
the center of a granulomatous focus
Smears from infected tissues: for detection with acid-fast carbolfuchsin or auramine-
rhodamine fluorochromes. On routine staining, organisms are negatively stained,
showing “ghosts" of bacilli within macrophages; swabs or aspirations of draining
cutaneous lesions or lymph nodes, transtracheal wash; endoscopic brushings:
rectal cytology; impressions taken at surgical biopsy Heat-fixed smears should
be submitted along with tissue for culture.
Culture
 Culture: special media and techniques required; referral to specialized laboratories
may be required for non-tuberculous organisms (Mycobacterium.Mycology Referral,
University of Texas Health Center at Tyler, Microbiology Section)
310
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
Special Testing (PCR)
  PCR methodologies: useful for any of the mycobacterial infections using tissue speci-
mens or fluids; for canine leproid granuloma and the 2 feline leprosy syndromes the
primers are not commercially available, but can be used to identify the suspect
organisms
THERAPEUTICS
■Tuberculosis
■ Permission of local health authorities should be obtained in cases of Mycobacterium
tuberculosis infection, and zoonotic potential should always be considered
■ Multiple-agent chemotherapy with drugs used to treat human tuberculosis has
been successful. M. avium complex infections are diffcult to treat.
■Feline leprosy
■ Before widespread dissemination, individual lesions may be excised with
aggressive margins, which may be curative.
  Canine leproid granuloma
■Excision is curative; lesions may self-cure; antimicrobial therapy may assist
healing.
■ Subcutaneous and systemic non-tuberculous infections
■ Treatment should be based on organism identification and antibiotic sensitivity
testing.
 Multiple drug therapy is often warranted.
intraoperatively is recommended.
Drugs of Choice
■Tuberculosis
■Always use double- or triple-drug oral therapy, never attempt single-drug therapy
for any organism.
■ Current recommendation: fluoroquinolone (e.g., enrofloxacin), clarithromycin,
and rifampin for 6-9 months
■ Enrofloxacin, orbifloxacin, marbofloxacin, moxifloxacin and ciprofloxacin:
5-15 mg/kg po q24h
Rifampin: 10-20 mg/kg po q24h or divided q12h (maximum, 600 mg/day)
 Clarithromycin: 5-10 mg/kg po q24h
■ Isoniazid and rifampin: combinations have been used; little is known about their
use in cats; l recent report of treatment (cat) with isoniazid, rifampin, and dihy-
drostreptomycin for 3 months noted weight loss but eventual successful outcome
■ Isoniazid: 10-20mg/kg (up to 300 mg total) po q24h
■ Ethambutol: 15 mg/kg po q24h
CHAPTER 29: MYCOBACTERIAL INFECTIONS
¥311
■]
 Pyrazinamide: instead of ethambutol; 15-40 mg/kg po q24h
 Dihydrostreptomycin: 15mg/kg IM q24h
■Feline leprosy
■ Rifampin 10-20 mg/kg q24h or divided q12h.
■  Possibly useful: clarithromycin as above
 Subcutaneous and systemic non-tuberculous infections
■  In vitro sensitivity testing may be used to choose chemotherapy for these cases.
Among antibiotics reported to be effective against various AM isolates are macro-
lides, sulfonamides, tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, and fluoroquinolones.
■ Anti-TB drugs are not generally effective.
■ In the past, single-agent therapy has been recommended, but owing to poor
response over the long term, double-agent therapy is now recommended.
■ Fluoroquinolone antibiotics, trimethoprim-sulfonamides, aminoglycosides, tetra-
cyclines, and clarithromycin are useful for some individual isolates. To some
extent, response may be predicted by which species is isolated, but long-term
therapy should be based on sensitivity testing
 Treatment should be continued for 2-6 months. Relapses upon cessation of
treatment or during the course of treatment are common.
COMMENTS
Client Education/Prognosis
■ Tuberculosis: guarded, but in reality, currently undefined because experience with
modern drugs that are better tolerated for long courses is limited
■ Feline leprosy: guarded to poor for syndrome l; fair for syndrome 2, especially if
lesions are amenable to surgical excision
 Canine leproid granuloma: prognosis is good
 Subcutaneous and systemic non-tuberculous infections: relapses are common, but
aggressive surgical approaches and multiple drug therapy may improve the outlook
over what is reported in the literature
Patient Monitoring
 Antituberculosis and antileprosy drugs: examine at least monthly; monitor for
anorexia and weight loss
■Monitor liver enzymes monthly.
■  Instruct owners to report cutaneous lesions immediately.
Zoonotic Potential
■ Tuberculosis: affected domestic pets are possible serious zoonotic threats to owners;
public health authorities should be notified of any antemortem or postmortem diag-
nosis (may be required by law); do not attempt treatment without agreement of
public health authorities
312
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ M. tuberculosis: greatest potential for zoonosis, especially with draining cutaneous
lesions
■ Disease transmission from dogs and cats to humans: very rarely recorded; in recent
outbreaks of tuberculosis in cats, no such case was documented
■ Clinicians aware of human tuberculosis in the household with dogs and cats should
counsel owners about the risk of reverse zoonosis.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
30
Nocardiosis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
An uncommon infection of dogs and cats
Organism: soil saprophyte; enters body through contamination of wounds or by
respiratory inhalation
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 A compromised immune system enhances the likelihood of infection.
Systems affected: respiratory, skin/exocrine, lymphatic, musculoskeletal, nervous
Nocardia asteroides (dogs and cats)
N. brasiliensis (cats only)
■Proactinomyces spp. (rare)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Dogs and cats of any breed
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Depends on the site of infection
Pleural: pyothorax, resulting in dyspnea, emaciation, and fever
 Cutaneous: chronic, nonhealing wounds (Fig. 30-1); often accompanied by fistulous
tracts (Figs. 30-2, 30-3); if extended, may result in lymphadenopathy draining
lymph nodes, and osteomyelitis
 Disseminated: most common in young dogs; usually begins in the respiratory tract;
lethargy, fever, and weight loss; cyclic fever may be characteristic; CNS may be
affected; pleural and/or abdominal effusion may occur
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Cutaneous: Actinomycosis
■Atypical mycobacteriosis
313
Figure 30-1 Focal nonhealing lesion characteristic of nocardiosis. (Courtesy of Dr. Carol Foil.)
 Figure 30-2 Nocardiosis. Eleven-year-old M/N Balinese with fistulous tracts associated with multifocal ulcers.
(Courtesy of Dr. Dawn Logas and Dr. Marcia Schwassmann.)
314
CHAPTER 30: NOCARDIOSIS
315
 Figure 30-3 Nocardiosis. Close-up view of Fig. 30-2. (Courtesy of Dr. Down Logos and Dr. Marcia
Schwassmann.)
■Leprosy
■ Bite wound abscesses
■ Draining tracts resulting from foreign bodies
■Pleural: Bacterial pyothorax
 Thoracic neoplasia
■ Chronic diaphragmatic hernia
■  Disseminate: Systemic fungal infections
■Feline infectious peritonitis
DIAGNOSTICS
 Neutrophilic leukocytosis
 Nonregenerative anemia: with longstanding infections (anemia of chronic disease)
 Chemistries: usually normal; hypergammaglobulinemia may be seen with longstand-
ing infections
 Radiographs: may reveal pleural or peritoneal effusion, pleuropneumonia,
or
osteomyelitis
Cytology: thoracentesis or abdominocentesis for samples; stain these or other exu-
dates with Romanowsky gram, and modified acid-fast stains for rapid diagnosis; may
reveal gram-positive branching filamentous rods and cocci; cannot be distinguished
from Actinomyces spp.
1 Culture: diagnostic; aerobic culturing on Sabouraud medium
316  SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ N. asteroides: more suppurative pyogranulomatous reaction than with Actinomyces
spp.N. brasiliensis: granulomatous reaction with extensive fibrosis
■ Although the organism is usually present, it cannot be distinguished
■histopathologically from Actinomyces spp.
THERAPEUTICS
■Pleural or peritoneal effusions and disseminated form: inpatient until clinically stable
and effusion removed; fluid therapy for rehydration and maintenance often needed
■  Long-term antibiotic therapy and draining fistulous tracts: outpatient
■ Diet: encourage consumption by offering foods with appealing tastes and smells;
forced enteral feeding for anorectic inpatients essential; orogastric tube feeding
preferred
■ Surgery: when feasible, surgical drainage should accompany medical therapy; impor-
tant to place a thoracotomy tube for pleural effusion; attempt surgical drainage and
debridement of draining tracts and lymph nodes; take care to identify foreign bodies
Drugs of Choice
■Cultured organism: antibiotic sensitivity testing
■ No culture or results pending: good first-choice drugs are sulfonamides (e.g., sulfa-
diazine at 100 mg/kg IV, po as a loading dose followed by 50 mg/kg IV, po ql2h) and
sulfonamide-trimethoprim combinations (30 mg/kg po q24h)
■Aminoglycosides: gentamicin (3 mg/kg IV, IM, SC q8h); amikacin (6.5 mg/kg IV, TM,
SC q8h)
■ Tetracyclines: doxycycline (10mg/kg po q24h); tetracycline hydrochloride (15-
20 mg/kg po q8h); minocycline (5-12.5 mg/kg po ql2h)
■ Erythromycin: 10-20 mg/kg po q8h; or combined with ampicillin (20-40 mg/kg po
q8h) or amoxicillin (6-20 mg/kg po q8-12h)
■ Amoxicillin plus an aminoglycoside: synergistic combination; consider in any serious
infection when culturing is not possible or is pending
■ Average treatment period is 6 weeks; however, medical treatment should extend
several weeks past apparent remission of the disease
COMMENTS
■ Tetracyclines (cats): may cause fever up to 41.5°C (107°F); discontinue and replace
if fever increases during therapy
■ Monitor carefully for fever, weight loss, seizures, dyspnea, and lameness the first year
after apparently successful therapy because of the potential for bone and CNS
involvement.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
31
Viral Dermatoses
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Dermatoses caused by viral infection within keratinized structures. These dermatoses
are often underdiagnosed due to difficulty in identifying an exact causative viral
agent.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
  Viral replication within keratinized structures may cause cytosuppressive effects or
up-regulate keratinization resulting in hyperplastic or crusted conditions.
 Most of the recognized viral dermatoses in veterinary medicine involve poxvirus.
coronavirus, papillomavirus, retrovirus, herpesvirus and calicivirus associated
disease.
There are some widely recognized cutaneous syndromes in animals that have not
been proven to be direct result of viral infection, yet there appears to be a strong
association suggestive of a causal effect.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Facial involvement or involvement of the head is common.
Feet and/or footpads may be affected.
 Clinical dermatologic signs are variable with each specific virus yet often involve
s su n  s i se s s  
Causes
Feline FeLV-associated vasculitis (retrovirus): severe necrosis of the pinnae and tail
tip
Feline giant cell dermatosis(retrovirus): pruritic; ulcerative dermatosis of face, neck.
pinnae FelV-associated
 Feline plasma cell stomatitis: (retrovirus) painful, proliferative lesion on palatoglos
sal folds and arches; FIV-associated
317
318SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■ Feline plasma cell pododermatitis (retrovirus): spongy metacarpal and metatarsal
pads, ± painful and ulcerative, FIV-associated
■ Plasma cell chondritis (retrovirus): symmetrical painful swelling of the pinnae.
■ Epidermal horns: feline multicentric horns usually on the footpads and sometimes
facial
■Feline cowpox virus infection (poxvirus): erythematous macule that rapidly ulcer
ates; 20% of cases have oral lesions, depression, anorexia, pyrexia, respiratory signs;
lesions usually resolve in 3-8 weeks
Feline infectious peritonitis (coronavirus): ascites, pleural effusion, hepatitis, uveitis
and, rarely, skin lesions characterized by vasculitis causing ulcers and necrosis
 Feline papillomavirus (papillomavirus): hyperplastic plaques in older Persian cats:
implicated multicentric squamous cell carcinoma in situ (Bowen's disease) and char-
acterized by hyperpigmented hyperkeratotic plaques of primarily the face, shoulders.
extremities (Fig. 3l-1)
■ Canine papillomavirus (papillomavirus): oral or MCJ viral papillomas, young
dogs or immunologically naive patients, associated with cyclosporine drug use
(Fig. 31-2)
 Canine exophytic horns (papillomavirus): cocker spaniel and Kerry blue terrier
 Canine distemper (morbillivirus): nasodigital hyperkeratosis, pustular dermatitis,
fever, anorexia, oculonasal discharge, pneumonia, diarrhea, neurologic
 Figure 31-1 Multiple lesions of Bowen's disease (feline cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in situ) in an
aged cat. (Courtesy of Dr. Candace Sousa.)
CHAPTER 31: VIRAL DERMATOSES
319
■Figure 31-2 Young beagle with oral papillomas and a single cutaneous papilloma at the mucocutaneous
 junction of the eyelid.
 Contagious viral pustular dermatitis (parapoxvirus): sheep and goat reservoir;
pustules, ulceration and crusts typically on the head; both dogs and cats affected
■
 Pseudorabies (herpesvirus): dogs and cats, intense self-mutilating pruritus; pigs are
main reservoir; acute and fatal
■Feline rhinotracheitis infection (herpesvirus): vesicles, blisters, ulcerations of facial
and nasal regions, often associated with URI
 Feline herpesvirus-associated erythema multiforme : skin lesions appear 10 days after
herpesvirus infection causing respiratory signs and conjunctivitis; generalized erosive
and exfoliative dermatosis that resolves within a few weeks
   d s   
membranes, acute death in puppies, keratitis and conjunctivitis in adult dogs
Feline calicivirus infection (calicivirus): oral and facial vesicles that rapidly ulcerate,
URI, pneumonia, acute death or spontaneously resolution (Fig. 31-3)
■ Feline orofacial pain (FOP) syndrome (calicivirus): Burmese and Siamese cats pre-
disposed, trigeminal neuralgia, unilateral intense pruritus, may be associated with
oral disease
Risk Factors
■Fighting or hunting behavior
■]
 Exposure to an infected animal
■ Ingestion of infected materials
320
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
 Figure 31-3 Calicivirus infection in the cat. Note the erythema and erosions along the periocular and facial
region. (Courtesy of Dr. J. Taboada.)
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Crusts
Associated superficial bacterial folliculitis
Abscess
Paronychia
■Poor wound healing
Seborrhea
 Exfoliative dermatitis
Cutaneous horns
Exophytic papillomas
Gingivitis/stomatitis
Cutaneous or oral (MCJ) ulceration
■
 Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
 Pigmented macules or plaques
■ Progression to bowenoid in situ carcinoma (papillomavirus)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Crusting diseases: if crust formation precedes other symptoms, consider drug erup-
tion, pemphigus foliaceus, systemic lupus erythematosus and causes for exfoliative
dermatitis
CHAPTER 31: VIRAL DERMATOSES321
 Allergic disorders: if pruritus is the initial clinical sign, consider flea allergic derma-
titis, cutaneous adverse reaction to food or atopic dermatitis, or Malassezia
overgrowth/hypersensitivity
■ Parasitic diseases: canine and/or feline scabies, demodicosis, cheyletiellosis
 Infectious diseases: superficial and deep bacterial and fungal infections; consider
leishmaniasis
■Keratinization disorders: nasodigital hyperkeratosis, zinc responsive dermatoses
 Neoplasia: with extensive crusting and ulceration, consider mast cell tumors and
epitheliotropic lymphoma
  Metabolic disorders: hepatocutaneous syndrome (superficial necrolytic dermatitis)
DIAGNOSTICS
CBC/Biochemistry/Urinalysis
■ Often normal; abnormalities present may reflect severity of other systemic disease
processes
Cytology/Serology/Virus Isolation
■ Skin scrapings and trichograms, dermatophyte culture, epidermal cytology: used to
rule out other differentials
Viral serology: FeLV and FIV are the most common tests utilized in veterinary medi
cine; hemagglutination inhibition, virus neutralizing, complement fixation, Western
blot (immunoblot), or ELISA ; demonstrate rising titers indicative of active infection
on paired serum samples
■ Virus isolation from crusted material is often diagnostic (90% positive in poxvirus
infection)
■ Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR) or Reverse Transcriptase Polymerase Chain
Reaction (RT-PCR)
 Cerebrospinal spinal fluid analysis, bone marrow aspirate sometimes helpful
Histopathologic Findings
■Light Microscopy
■Hyperplasia
■Ballooning degeneration
■ Hydropic interface dermatitis
 Syncytial-type giant cell formation within the epidermis and/or outer root sheath
of the hair follicle
■ Keratinocyte inclusion bodies
■  Immunohistochemistry: immunofluorescent or avidin-biotin complex method
often employed for detection of papillomavirus group related antigens
322
SECTION 5: INFECTIOUS DERMATOSES
■Electron Microscopy
 Highly selective and diagnostic yet not always readily available
■ May be performed on crust, biopsy specimen, or exudate
THERAPEUTICS
Usually outpatient, except for systemically ill patients
■ Systemically ill: may require IV fluids, parenteral antibiotics, or daily whirlpool baths
to aid in crust removal
■ Supportive care and treatment of secondary infections
■ L-Lysine 200 to 500 mg/cat bid
AZT or zidovudine (Retrovir or Retrovis—Glaxo SmithKline, Philadelphia, PA):
direct antiviral agent, most effective against acute FIV infections, monitor for bone
marrow suppression; 5-15 mg/kg po ql2h (primarily FIV, FeLV)
■ Interferon-α: 60-120 units/day orally (immunomodulating dose) or 1-2 million
units/meter squared subQ 3 times weekly
■ Topical imiquimod (Aldara): primarily used for Bowens syndrome (SCC in situ)
■  Immune sera from a recovered patient (herpesvirus)
Vaccinations as preventative for certain virus infections (distemper, FeLV, etc.)
Immunomodulators often trialed: proprionibacterium acnes (ImmunoRegulin
Neogen, Lansing, MI) and acemannan (Carrisyn—Carrington Labs, Irvington, TX)
Ophthalmic antivirals: vidarabine (Vira-A—Parke-Davis, Morris Plains, NJ); used for
herpetic ulcers q2h
Precautions/Interactions
■Corticosteroid therapy
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
section
Neoplasias, Cutaneous/
Paraneoplastic Dermatoses
32
chapter
Actinic Dermatoses
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Actinic radiation, most often associated with ultraviolet light (UVL), is absorbed by
and causes damage to many molecules in skin cells.
 Nonpigmented and/or glabrous areas of both dogs and cats are most affected.
Common actinic dermatoses include solar dermatitis, actinic keratoses (AK), actinic
comedones and furunculosis, hemangioma (HA), hemangiosarcoma (HSA), and
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC).
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Both UVA and UVB cause actinic (or solar) dermatitis by
Direct phototoxicity (sunburn)
Alteration of cell markers (seen with discoid lupus erythematosus and pemphigus
erythematosus)
■Damage by photoactive compounds (photosensitivity)
neoplasia)
■ Natural barriers to UVL (e.g., melanin) are overcome by chronic and prolonged
exposure to sunlight.
■ UVL causes DNA damage directly and indirectly by free radicals; specific UVL-
 induced mutations have been documented in the tumor suppressor gene p53, leading
 to expansion of mutated keratinocytes.
■ Patients often develop a spectrum of UVL-caused disorders concurrently, includ-
ing nonneoplastic (actinic comedones and furunculosis), preneoplastic (actinic
keratoses), and neoplastic (hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma, and squamous cell
carcinoma)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Most affected dogs and cats are known sunbathers; dogs may preferentially expose
one side when sunbathing resulting in asymmetrical lesions.
324
CHAPTER 32: ACTINIC DERMATOSES
■ Lesions develop in sun-exposed lightly pigmented or unpigmented skin (naturally
or scarred) in areas not sufficiently protected by hair and in junctions between haired
and nonhaired skin.
■ Dogs: nasal planum, dorsal muzzle, axillae and glabrous areas of the ventral abdomen
and medial thigh
■ Cats: pinnal margins and nasal planum
■
 No sex predilection
 Age: usually older animals; reported as young as 2 years
Geographic distribution: outdoor animals in tropical, desert, or mountainous regions
(higher levels of UVL)
■ Breed predilections: Dalmatian, whippet, Italian greyhound, greyhound, American
Staffordshire and bull terrier, beagle, German short-haired pointer, boxer, basset
hound
CLINICAL FEATURES
1Solar dermatitis (Figs. 32-1, 32-2)
■ Erythema, swelling, crusting. erosion, ulceration, and exudation
 Pruritus variable; develops more in chronic lesions
Vasculopathy may be underrecognized.
 Lesions may expand as adjacent skin becomes inflamed, depigmented, and
alopecic.
■ Severe cases develop secondary bacterial folliculitis and scarring.
■Figure 32-1 Scarred and depigmented plaques of chronic solar dermatitis.
326
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
Figure 32-2 Solar dermatitis on pinnae. Note erythema, thickening, and slight curling of the ear margins.
 Figure 32-3 Actinic comedones seen as inflamed and dilated, debris-filled follicles
Cats: pinnal margins, eyelids, nasal planum, and lip margins in white cats develop
erythema, scaling., and scabbing: pinnal margins may curl
Actinic comedones and furunculosis (Figs. 32-3-32-6)
■ Seen in conjunction with other chronic actinic dermatoses
■ Inflamed and dilated follicles with caseous debris result from dermal fibrosis
Nonfolliculocentric dermal cysts and nodules
Ruptured comedones and cysts lead to furunculosis (bacterial)
CHAPTER 32: ACTINIC DERMATOSES
327
 Figure 32-4 Actinic comedones and furunculosis
 Figure 32-5 Ruptured actinic comedones leading to bullae and furunculosis.
 Scabs, hemorrhage, and scarring are common sequelae.
■ Large, hemorrhagic bullae develop with chronicity.
■Actinic keratoses (Figs. 32-7, 32-8)
■ Actinic keratoses (AK) may be a precursor to squamous cell carcinoma (SCC), or
represent SCC in situ.
328
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 32-6 Hemorrhagic bullae, dermal cysts, and nodules
 Figure 32-7 Actinic keratoses with multiple crusted, indurated, and exfoliating plaques.
■  Early erythematous patches appear slightly lichenified or roughened.
 Epithelial plaques may be palpable as firm thickenings prior to becoming visible
and may be distinguishable from nonthickened (normal) adjacent pigmented skin.
Crusted, indurated, and exfoliating plaques
■ Severe hyperkeratosis may be seen as cutaneous horns.
CHAPTER 32: ACTINIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 32-8 Actinic keratoses on the medial aspect of the foreleg.
1 Individual plaques and nodules (often with actinic comedones) coalesce to larger
lesions.
■ Affected areas become extensive; inflammation and exudation develop with
secondary furunculosis.
 Axillae, ventral abdomen, and medial thigh primary sites; less often dorsal muzzle
and eyelid margin
■ Cats: preauricular regions, as well as pinnal margins, nasal planum, and eyelid
margins; lesions often traumatized resulting in scabs and crusts
Solar-induced hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma (Figs. 32-9-32-12)
■ UVL-induced HA and HSA are superficial and dermal in location; behavior differs
from non-UVL-induced tumors.
HA is more common than HSA.
Early lesions mimic telangiectasia.
■ Lesions are well-demarcated, reddened, or dark-appearing nodules to masses.
■ Often multiple
 Associated with other actinic dermatoses
■HA: behaviorally benign
 HSA: metastasis in fewer than 2o% of superficial (solar-induced) cases
Squamous cell carcinoma (Figs. 32-13-32-19)
■
80% of cases arise in association with AK.
 Most common cutaneous malignant neoplasm in cats (15-49%); second most
common in dogs (3-20%)
■ Single or multiple
■ Initial lesions: shallow, crusted ulcerations with peripheral alopecia and
erythema
330
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 32-9 Multiple hemangiomas on the ventrum.
Figure 32-10 Solar-induced hemangiosarcoma on the nictitans
Intermediate lesions: eroded and exudative plaques; scabbed surface
Late lesions: deep, crateriform and indurated patches or plaques
Cutaneous horns (rare)
Cats: external nares may be proliferative and scabbed or ulcerative; pinnal lesions
often traumatized
CHAPTER 32: ACTINIC DERMATOSES
331
 Figure 32-11 Solar-induced hemangiosarcoma. Well-demarcated reddened and/or blood-filled nodules.
 Figure 32-12 Ulcerated, discrete mass of solar-induced hemangiosarcoma.
  s  e     o s
tissue may extend beyond visible boundaries
■ Hemorrhage may be severe from erosion through local blood vessels.
■Metastasis is rare.
 Secondary bacterial infection results in pain and systemic symptoms.
 Figure 32-13 Eroded plaque of squamous cell carcinoma.
 Figure 32-14 Additional squamous cell carcinoma in patient of Fig. 32-13.
332
 Figure 32-15 Ulcerated plaques and nodules of squamous cell carcinoma in the axillae
 Figure 32-16 Feline squamous cell carcinoma. Note punctate scabs on the external nares and muzzle.
333
 Figure 32-17 Squamous cell carcinoma producing swelling of the nasal planum and dorsal muzzle.
 Figure 32-18 Rostral aspect of patient in Fig. 40.16 demonstrating swelling and scaling of the nasal planum.
334
CHAPTER 32: ACTINIC DERMATOSES
335
 Figure 32-19 Scabbed patch of squamous cell carcinoma on the pinna
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
1Solar dermatitis: lupus erythematosus (discoid, cutaneous, systemic), pemphigus
erythematosus, dermatomyositis, vasculitis, thermal burn, neoplasia, and bacterial
folliculitis
 Actinic comedones and furunculosis: deep bacterial, fungal, or mycobacterial furun-
culosis, demodicosis, schnauzer comedo syndrome, endocrinopathy, and neoplasia
■ Actinic keratoses: bacterial furunculosis, lichenoid keratosis, squamous cell carci-
noma, topical drug eruption, and severe contact dermatitis
 Hemangioma and hemangiosarcoma: bacterial furunculosis, other vascular abnor-
malities, and non-solar-induced vascular neoplasia
Squamous cell carcinoma: other neoplasia, deep vessel thrombosis, vasculitis, sterile
granulomatous disease, deep bacterial, fungal, or mycobacterial furunculosis
DIAGNOSTICS
Cytologic examination of aspirated samples: demonstrate infectious organisms
 Bacterial culture and sensitivity from draining tracts (recurrent infections)
 Solar elastosis: replacement of collagen of the superficial dermis by basophilic fibers;
characteristic of UVL damage; may be associated with laminar fibrosis
  Dermatohistopathology of representative tissues necessary to establish diagnosis
 Solar dermatitis: decreased melanocytes, epidermal hyperplasia, intraepidermal
edema, apoptotic keratinocytes, thickening or obscuring of the dermal-epidermal
junction, vascular dilatation, and solar elastosis
■ Actinic comedones and furunculosis: epidermal hyperplasia, plugging of fol-
licular ostea and intrafollicular accumulation of keratin debris, perifollicular
fibrosis, solar elastosis; ruptured comedones produce furunculosis with accom-
panying dermal inflammation and infiltration with neutrophils (similar to
bacterial furunculosis); should be associated with other actinic dermatoses
Actinic keratoses: epidermal hyperplasia and dysplasia with severe hyperkeratosis
and/or “stacked" parakeratosis; keratinocytes appear distorted and/or apoptotic:
perivascular to lichenoid dermal infiltrate with solar elastosis and fibrosis; absence
of invasion through the dermal-epidermal junction
■ Hemangioma: blood-flled vascular ectasia lined by endothelial cells; endothelial
cells may show varying degrees of atypia representing a continuum from HA to
HSA; less well-circumscribed than non-UVL-induced HA; associated with dermal
solar elastosis and fibrosis
■ Hemangiosarcoma: invasive vascular ectasia not uniformly confined by endo-
thelial cells; endothelial cells demonstrate marked cellular and nuclear pleo-
morphism and mitotic activity; associated with dermal solar elastosis and
fibrosis
■ Squamous cell carcinoma: trabeculae of squamous cells invade into the dermis;
neoplastic cell aggregates; keratin pearls (accumulations of compact keratin):
keratinocyte cellular and nuclear pleomorphism; mitotic activity higher in dogs
than cats; associated with dermal solar elastosis and fibrosis
THERAPEUTICS
■ Avoid exposure to UVL by keeping patients indoors and by applying sunblock.
■Use protective clothing.
■ Individual tumors should be surgically excised; large areas may require extensive
procedures.
■Vitamin E (200 mg bid less than 10kg: 400mg bid greater than 10kg body weight):
vitamin C (500 mg bid); β-carotene (30 mg bid to q24h); vitamin A (400 IU/kg q24h);
may have a protective effect
 Topical corticosteroids may reduce localized areas of inflammation.
■Prednisolone (0.5mg/kg tapered dosage): reduce significant inflammation
 Cephalexin (22 mg/kg bid): secondary bacterial furunculosis; alternative antibiotics
selected by culture and sensitivity testing results
■Iretinoin 0.1% (Retin-A@): apply daily to individual lesions for 14 days; then 2 t0
3 times weekly; may cause irritation
■ Isotretinoin (Accutane?) 1mg/kg q24h for 30 days; then alternate days or as needed
to control lesions
CHAPTER 32: ACTINIC DERMATOSES
337
COMMENTS
■]
Routinely screen for the development of suspicious lesions; remove individual tumors
as soon as identified.
■ Prognosis is fair to guarded in cases with extensive disease.
 Patients with severe disease may have affected areas reduced in size with medications
to permit more effective surgical intervention.
■ Most cases are euthanized due to secondary complications of open lesions and neo-
plasia, not due to metastasis.
 Isotretinoin: oral synthetic retinoids have become difficult to dispense due to very
strict prescription procedures; may cause keratoconjunctivitis sicca; extreme terato-
gen; do not use in intact females because of severe and predictable teratogenicity and
 the extremely long withdrawal period; women of childbearing age should not handle
this medication; monitor serum chemistries including triglycerides, and tear
production
Author:Alexander H.Werner
33
chapter
Canine Pre- and
Paraneoplastic
Syndromes
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Preneoplastic dermatoses: lesions with a malignant predisposition; a tendency to
become tumors (not consistent)
Paraneoplastic dermatoses: lesions associated with internal malignancy; often a
marker for specific neoplasia
  o   d    ss
inconsistent
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■  Preneoplastic dermatoses
■ Actinic keratoses: ultraviolet light (UVL) causes DNA damage directly and
indirectly by free radicals; specific UVL-induced mutations have been docu-
mented in the tumor suppressor gene p53, leading to expansion of mutated
keratinocytes (see chapter 32)
■ Cutaneous lymphocytosis: expansion of I cells in response to persistent antigenic
stimulation such as drugs or vaccines; clonal rearrangement may result in overt
lymphoma
 Nodular fascitis: benign reactive lesion, possibly due to trauma; occasionally used
to describe proliferative processes including reactive histiocytosis
■ Papular mastocytosis: a specific mutation in mast cells leading to systemic mas-
tocytosis has not been identified; associated with mutations of the c-kit oncogene
in human beings
1 Paraneoplastic dermatoses
Cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis: increased production of amyloidogenic
immunoglobulin light chains by proliferating plasma cells; associated with
multiple myeloma and extramedullary plasmacytoma
 Cutaneous mucinosis (secondary): excessive accumulation of mucin in the dermis
rarely associated with mast cell tumors
 Paraneoplastic pemphigus: multiple epidermal plakin family proteins and desmo-
gleins targeted; T-cell-mediated keratinocyte apoptosis may contribute to lesion
development
338
CHAPTER 33: CANINE PRE- AND PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
6E8
■ Nodular dermatofibrosis (canine): potential increase in local production of TGF-
βl cytokine resulting in excess collagen as a result of genetic defect and renal or
uterine muscle tumors
■Superficial necrolytic dermatitis: rare association with glucagon-secreting pancre-
atic or extrapancreatic neoplasia; glucagonemia-induced glycogenesis results in
hypoaminoacidemia, causing keratinocyte degeneration
Erythema multiforme: immunologic reaction often to a drug or internal neoplasia;
up-regulation of MHC 1I and ICAM-l expression on keratinocytes cause recruit-
ment of I-cells; results in keratinocyte necrosis
 Cutaneous changes due to hyperadrenocorticism are discussed in chapters 1l
and 12
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Preneoplastic dermatoses
■Actinic keratoses
■ Lesions develop in sun-exposed lightly pigmented or unpigmented skin (natu-
      s    (s n s
between haired and nonhaired skin.
■ Nasal planum, dorsal muzzle, axillae and glabrous areas of the ventral abdomen
and medial thigh
■ No sex predilection
■
Age: usually older animals: reported as young as 2 years
■]
 Breed predilections: dalmatian, whippet, Italian greyhound, greyhound.
American Staffordshire and bull terrier, beagle, German short-haired pointer,
boxer, basset hound
 Cutaneous lymphocytosis
Very rare; older female dogs
 Golden retriever, Shetland sheepdog, Chinese crested, Welsh corgi
 Papular mastocytosis
 Rare; reported primarily in dogs under l year of age
 Newfoundland, cocker spaniel, Labrador retriever, Jack Russell terrier, other
breeds
■ Nodular fasciitis
■ Very uncommon; reported in young, large breed dogs
Paraneoplastic dermatoses
 Cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis
Very rare; older dogs
 Cocker spaniels may be predisposed.
 Cutaneous mucinosis (secondary)
 Rare; may be associated with mast cell tumors
 Nodular dermatofibrosis (canine)
■ Rare; middle-aged to older dogs
340
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
German shepherd dog (autosomal dominant inheritance);: golden retriever,
boxer, other breeds
■ Associated with renal cysts, cystadenomas, and cystadenocarcinomas, and
uterine leiomyomas
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Very rare; too few reports to characterize
 Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
Rare; primarily old dogs (mean age 10 years)
 Males possibly overrepresented
 Small breeds possibly overrepresented: West Highland white terrier, Scottish
terrier, American cocker spaniel, Shetland sheepdog, Lhasa apso, border collie;
syndrome also identified in large breeds
 Lesions often precede systemic symptoms.
 Erythema multiforme
 Very rarely seen as a reaction pattern to neoplasia
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Preneoplastic dermatoses
Actinic keratoses (Fig. 33-1)
 Early erythematous patches appear slightly lichenified or roughened.
 Epithelial plaques may be palpable as firm thickenings prior to becoming visible
and may be distinguishable from nonthickened (normal) adjacent pigmented
skin.
 Figure 33-1 Actinic keratosis seen as erythematous and slightly lichenified patches on the ventral abdomen.
341
 Crusted, indurated, and exfoliating plaques
Severe hyperkeratosis may be seen as cutaneous horns.
■  Individual plaques and nodules (often with actinic comedones) coalesce to
larger lesions.
■ Affected areas become extensive; inflammation and exudation develops with
secondary furunculosis
■ Axillae, ventral abdomen, and medial thigh primary sites; less often dorsal
muzzle and eyelid margin
Cutaneous lymphocytosis (Fig. 33-2)
Patches of erythema or erythematous plaques on head, neck, thorax, and axillae
1Papular mastocytosis (Fig. 33-3)
■ Cutaneous lesions in dogs similar to urticaria pigmentosa of human beings
 Small erythematous macules, papules or plaques, wheals, and hemorrhagic
bullae on the head, neck, trunk, and legs
■
 Manipulation induces erythema and induration,
■
 Nonmalignant conditions are more likely to have multiple lesions as opposed
to a single, discrete neoplasm.
■ Nodular fascitis
■ Solitary, subcutaneous mass often less than 2cm in diameter
Paraneoplastic dermatoses
 Cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis
 Solitary, firm, dermal, or subcutaneous nodules on the pinnae, oral mucosa
digits, legs, and trunk; cutaneous hemorrhage
Cutaneous mucinosis (secondary) (Fig. 33-4)
■ Excessive dermal accumulation of mucin often asymptomatic
 Figure 33-2 Erythematous plaques in the axilla with cutaneous lymphocytosis.
342
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 33-3 Erythematous macules with papular mastocytosis.
 Figure 33-4 Cutaneous mucinosis seen as multiple "puffy" vesidles.
 Rare reports of papular mucinosis seen as puffy, thickened, nonpitting patches
with vesicles or bullae
■Nodular dermatofibrosis (canine) (Figs. 33-5, 33-6)
 Multiple, firm, well-demarcated nodules varying in size from very small to large
on the head, legs, and ears; may be alopecic and ulcerated in areas of trauma
or friction
 Figure 33-5 Nodular dermatofibrosis with multiple firm, well-demarcated nodules on the pinna.
 Figure 33-6 Large lesions of nodular dermatofibrosis.
343
344
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
Paraneoplastic pemphigus (Fig. 33-7)
Blistering disease affecting the mucosa and mucocutaneous junctions
■
Systemic signs associated with both neoplasia and cutaneous lesions (weight
loss, lethargy purulent discharge)
■Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (Figs. 33-8, 33-9)
 Figure 33-7 Paraneoplastic pemphigus producing erosions and crusting on vulva.
 Figure 33-8 Patch of erythema with crusting and scaling with superficial necrolytic dermatitis
345
 Figure 33-9 Striking erythroderma and crusting at footpad margins with superficial necrolytic dermatitis
 Progressive development of erythema, hyperkeratosis, and exudation at the
margins of the footpads
■Dermatitis may be striking.
■ Lesions affecting the mucocutaneous junctions, most notably of the lips, eyes,
and anus, develop at the same time or immediately following footpad lesions.
 Erosions and ulcerations, often from excoriation
 Fissuring on footpads results in pruritus and pain.
 Hyperpigmentation and lichenification common with chronicity and continued
self-trauma
 Secondary bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis
■ Lesions develop on pressure points, pinnae, and external genitalia.
 Dermatitis often precedes systemic signs by weeks.
Systemic signs include lethargy. polyuria, polydipsia (when associated with
diabetes mellitus), anorexia, and weight loss.
Erythema multiforme (Figs. 33-10, 33-11)
 Pleomorphic appearance; classic lesion is erythematous macules or plaques;
central clearing, erosions, or hyperpigmentation may develop ("target lesion")
■Mucosal lesions begin as vesicles progressing to ulceration.
 Systemic signs associated with pain and secondary infection, or due to the
underlying cause
346
 Figure 33-10 Erythema multiforme secondary to metastatic adenocarcinoma seen as oral ulcerations.
ip sapouydl leuais pabeua buesuap oi-t b ui uaied jo ydesroen isau ll-ee anne 
nosed by fine needle aspirate as metastatic adenocarcinoma.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
■ Preneoplastic dermatoses
■Actinic keratoses
 Bacterial furunculosis, lichenoid keratosis, squamous cell carcinoma, topical
drug eruption, severe contact dermatitis
CHAPTER 33: CANINE PRE- AND PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
347
Cutaneous lymphocytosis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma, lymphocytic leukemia with cutaneous involvement,
hypersensitivity reaction, drug eruption, bacterial folliculitis
Papular mastocytosis
■ Nodular fasciitis
■ Infectious granuloma, sterile granuloma, local trauma, dermal neoplasia,
fibroma, fbrosarcoma, spindle cell lipoma
 Paraneoplastic dermatoses
 Cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis
■ Dermal neoplasia, infectious granuloma, sterile granuloma, pyogranulomatous
dermatitis
 Cutaneous mucinosis (secondary)
Causes of diffuse dermal edema, vesicular or bullous dermatitis
Nodular dermatofibrosis (canine)
 Dermal neoplasia, infectious granuloma, sterile granuloma, pyogranulomatous
dermatitis, fibroma, hematoma, nodular scar
■
 Paraneoplastic pemphigus
 Pemphigus vulgaris, bullous pemphigoid, erythema multiforme
 Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
 Pemphigus foliaceus, zinc-responsive dermatosis, systemic lupus erythemato-
sus, erythema multiforme, drug eruption, generic dog food dermatosis, irritant
contact dermatitis, demodicosis, dermatophytosis, vasculitis, epitheliotropic
lymphoma, toxic epidermal necrolysis
 Erythema multiforme
■ Bacterial folliculitis, cutaneous hypersensitivity (urticarial), dermatophytosis,
demodicosis, pemphigus foliaceus, bullous pemphigoid
DIAGNOSTICS
■ CBC/Biochemistry/Urinalysis: depends upon specific condition and involvement of
other organ systems
 Cytology of lesions: rarely definitive; pattern of cellular aggregation significant to
determination of cause
■ Imaging: depends upon specific condition and involvement of other organ systems
 Dermatohistopathology required for diagnosis; immunohistochemical studies from
tissues may be required to distinguish nonmalignant from malignant cell populations
Dermatohistopathology
Preneoplastic dermatoses
■Actinic keratoses
        
"stacked" parakeratosis; keratinocytes appear distorted and/or apoptotic;
348
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
perivascular to lichenoid dermal infiltrate with solar elastosis and fibrosis;
absence of invasion through the dermal-epidermal junction
Cutaneous lymphocytosis
Perivascular to diffuse infiltration of small lymphocytes in the superficial dermis
with a zone of acellularity (Grenz zone); immunohistochemistry demonstrates
CD3+ T cells
■Papular mastocytosis
 Perivascular to diffuse infiltration with well-differentiated mast cells
■ Nodular fasciitis
 Poorly demarcated and disorganized accumulation of spindle cells attached to
fascia; highly vascular; immunohistochemistry consistent with fibroblasts
 Paraneoplastic dermatoses
Cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis
Accumulations of amorphous-appearing eosinophilic deposits in β-pleated
configuration (electron microscopy); associated with plasma cells; deposits
may be surrounded by macrophages and giant cells; immunohistochemistry
demonstrates amyloid derived from light-chain immunoglobulin
Cutaneous mucinosis (secondary)
lagen fibers in the superficial dermis with scattered focal, large accumulations;
Nodular dermatofibrosis (canine)
■ Increased and thickened collagen b
bundles; subcutaneous lesions may be
well-demarcated as opposed to less distinct dermal lesions; collagen bundles
surround adnexal structures
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
Transepidermal pustulation with suprabasilar and superficial acantholysis:
prominent apoptotic keratinocytes; dermal or submucosal infiltrate of lympho-
cytes, macrophages, and plasma cells; variable numbers of neutrophils
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
 Parakeratosis and neutrophilic crusting: pallor of epidermis above the basal
layer due to intracellular and intercellular edema; hyperplastic basal cell layer
producing a distinctive “red/white/blue” pattern; clefting within the epidermis;
mild neutrophilic superficial to perivascular dermal infiltrate; marked parakera-
tosis with absence of epidermal pallor noted in chronic cases
Erythema multiforme
Keratinocyte apoptosis and lymphocyte satellitosis; secondary interface derma-
titis and neutrophilic infiltration; ulceration occurs in more severe cases
THERAPEUTICS
■ Preneoplastic dermatoses
■Actinic keratoses
CHAPTER 33: CANINE PRE- AND PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
■ Avoid exposure to UVL by keeping patients indoors and by applying
sunblock.
■ Vitamin E (200mg bid less than 10kg: 400 mg bid greater than 10kg body
weight); vitamin C (500 mg bid): β-carotene (30 mg bid to q24h); vitamin A
(400 IU/kg q24h))—may have a protective effect
■ Topical corticosteroids: reduce localized areas of inflammation
■ Prednisolone (0.5mg/kg tapered dosage): reduce significant inflammation
■ Cephalexin (22 mg/kg bid): secondary bacterial furunculosis; alternative anti-
biotics selected by culture and sensitivity test results
■Tretinoin 0.1% (Retin-A@): apply daily to individual lesions for 14 days; then
2 to 3 times weekly; may cause irritation
■Isotretinoin (Accutane@) 1 mg/kg q24h for 30 days; then alternate days or as
needed to control lesions
 Cutaneous lymphocytosis
 Undetermined; too few cases documented
 Papular mastocytosis
Spontaneous resolution
■
 Antihistamines (hydroxyzine l mg/kg bid)
Corticosteroids (prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg tapered dosage)
■ Nodular fasciitis
 Surgical excision curative
 Paraneoplastic dermatoses
 Cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis
 Surgical excision of individual lesions
Application of DMSO may inhibit amyloid synthesis
 Cutaneous mucinosis (secondary)
 Antihistamines (diphenhydramine 1 mg/kg bid; hydroxyzine 1 mg/kg bid)
■Corticosteroids (prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg tapered dosage)
 Nodular dermatofibrosis (canine)
 Surgical excision of internal neoplasia
 Surgical excision of individual lesions
Paraneoplastic pemphigus
■
 Treatment similar to pemphigus foliaceus (chapter 20)
■ Prednisolone: 1.1-2.2 mg/kg/day po divided ql2h to initiate control, tapering
to maintenance at 0.5 mg/kg po q48-72h
■ More than half of patients require the addition of other immunomodulating
drugs.
■Azathioprine: 2.2 mg/kg po q24h, then q48h
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis
 Surgical excision of tumor
■ Patient survival: 6 months without tumor excision; euthanasia most often due
to diabetic crisis or hepatic failure
  Treatment of secondary bacterial folliculitis and/or Malassezia dermatitis with
appropriate antimicrobials
350
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
■ Prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg q24h; taper dosage and discontinue as soon as pos-
sible): temporary relief of pruritus and inflammation; may exacerbate diabetes
 mellitus; may aggravate hepatopathy
 Octreotide (2 to 3.2μg/kg bid to qid by subcutaneous injection): somatostatin
analogue; nonresected glucagon-producing pancreatic tumor
 Amino acid infusion: intravenous administration of amino acids to replenish
serum levels from excessive hepatic catabolism
 10% crystalline amino acid solution; 25ml/kg over 8 hours
 3% amino acid and electrolyte solutions: 25 ml/kg over 8 hours
  Initial replacement therapy twice weekly until symptoms improve
■Erythema Multiforme
■
Treatment and/or removal of initiating cause (e.g., neoplasia)
COMMENTS
  Preneoplastic dermatoses require regular monitoring for early detection of develop-
ing neoplasia.
 Paraneoplastic dermatoses require treatment of underlying etiology (if identified) to
prevent recurrences of symptoms.
 Corticosteroids: may cause polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, temperament changes,
diabetes mellitus, pancreatitis, and hepatotoxicity
Azathioprine: may cause pancreatitis
■ Isotretinoin: oral synthetic retinoids have become difficult to dispense due to very
strict prescription procedures; may cause keratoconjunctivitis sicca; extreme terato-
gen; do not use in intact females because of severe and predictable teratogenicity
and the extremely long withdrawal period; women of childbearing age should not
handle this medication; monitor serum chemistries including triglycerides, and
tear production
Author: Alexander H. Werner
chapter
34
Common Skin and Hair
Follicle Tumors
Epithelial and adnexal neoplasias are quite numerous. The tumors discussed in this
chapter are some of the more common tumors encountered in clinical practice. These
tumors involve the epidermis, dermis, hair follicles, and adnexal structures. This chapter
is not intended to be an all-inclusive list of tumors arising from the skin and adnexa
1
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Squamous cell carcinoma/Bowens disease
 Malignant neoplasm of keratinocytes
■
 Benign, premalignant form called Bowens disease which is focal to multifocal;
more common in the cat; “in situ" histopathology (the dysplastic cells do not
extend past the epidermal basement membrane)
 May have a viral etiology: papillomavirus type 16 noted in head and neck SCC in
 people; papilloma virus DNA detected in 20% of canine and feline cutaneous and
mucosal SCC
■ Ultraviolet light can mutate a tumor suppressor gene (p53) that may be a factor
in development of SCC. This gene encodes a protein that arrests the cell cycle
can cause mutations of p53, which allows the damaged cell to continue to replicate
leading to the accumulation of other mutations and increasing the chance of neo-
plasia. A mutant form of p53 has been detected in 82% of feline pinnal SCC.
1Melanoma (skin/digit)
  s    n   
 Most melanomas arise from haired skin
Xooa ai ui au e Ad oi sadde ou saop ansdxa noi nan 
■ Genetic susceptibility may be a factor because breed and familial clustering is
noted.
 An antigen identified as MAB IBF9 is a cell surface protein present during all
phases of the cell cycle in malignant canine melanoma cell lines. This antigen may
be helpful in studying melanoma etiology as well as aid in immunotherapeutic
options.
351
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
■Basal cell tumors
■ Basal cell tumors may be benign (basal cell epithelioma) or malignant (basal cell
carcinoma);
■ These cells arise from basal cells of the epidermis, hair follicle epithelium,
sebaceous gland, or sweat glands.
■ The majority of these tumors are benign, solitary, and slow-growing.
■ Sebaceous gland tumors
■ Primarily benign (rare malignant) tumors of the sebocytes
■ Forms: nodular sebaceous hyperplasia, sebaceous epitheliomas, sebaceous adeno-
mas, sebaceous gland adenocarcinoma
■Hair follicle tumors
■Tumors, typically benign, that arise from germinal hair follicle cells
 Classified according to adnexal differentiation
 Trichoepitheliomas, pilomatrixoma, trichoblastoma, tricholemmoma, trichofl-
liculoma, Dilated Pore of Winer
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Breed Predilection
Squamous cell carcinoma/Bowens disease
 Cats: none reported; patients often have light or unpigmented skin with SCC, yet
black cats may be predisposed to Bowen's disease
■ Dogs: Scottish terriers, Pekingese, boxers, poodles, Norwegian elkhounds, dalma-
tians, beagles, whippets, and white English bull terriers may be predisposed; large
breeds with black skin and hair coats may be predisposed to multiple squamous
cell carcinoma involving the digits
■ Melanoma
■ Dark-skinned dogs predisposed
■ Airedale terriers, Boston terriers, boxers, chow chows, Chihuahuas, cocker
spaniels, Dobermans, Irish setters, springer spaniels
■ Basal cell tumors
■ Cocker spaniels, poodles, shelties, Kerry blue terriers, Siberian huskies
■ Siamese, Himalayan, and Persian cats predisposed
■ Sebaceous gland tumors
Common in older dogs
 Adenomas/hyperplasia: poodles, cocker spaniels, miniature schnauzers, terriers,
shih tzus, Lhasa apsos, Siberian huskies, wheatens, beagles, dachshunds
 Sebaceous epitheliomas: Irish setters, malamutes, shih tzus
■ Sebaceous adenocarcinomas: rare; cocker spaniels, Cavalier King Charles spaniels,
Scottish terriers, huskies
■ Uncommon in older cats; Persians predisposed
E5E
Hair follicle tumors
Trichoepithelioma: basset hounds, golden retrievers, German shepherds, minia-
ture schnauzers, standard poodles, spaniels; cats-Persians
■ Pilomatrixoma: Kerry blue terriers, poodles, Old English sheepdogs
■
 Trichoblastoma: poodles, cocker spaniels
■
Tricholemmoma: Afghan dogs
Trichofolliculoma: none
 Dilated Pore of Winer: older cats, no breed predispositon
Mean Age and Range
Squamous cell carcinoma/Bowens disease
■Dogs 9 years of age
■ Cats 9-12.4 years (Bowens disease is found in older cats)
■Melanoma
■Dogs average age 9 years (common)
 Cats 8-14 years (rare)
■ Basal cell tumors
■ Older cats predisposed
■ Uncommon in older dogs
 Sebaceous gland tumors
■ Common in older dogs: 8-ll years
■ Uncommon in older cats; 10-13 years
■ Adenocarcinomas, rare in both dogs and cats
■Hair follicle tumors
■ 5-13 years of age; dogs and cats
Historical Findings
Squamous cell carcinoma/Bowen's disease
SCC represents 15% of all skin tumors in cats and 4-18% in dogs.
■ More prevalent in sunny climates and high altitudes (high ultraviolet light
exposure)
■ Crusts, ulcer, or mass that may have been present for months and unresponsive
to conservative treatment
■ Bowen's disease (cats): skin becomes pigmented; ulcer forms in the center;
followed by a painful scabby lesion that may expand peripherally
■ Lips, nose, and pinnae involvement: may start out as a shallow crusting lesion
(Fig. 34-1) that progresses to a deep ulcer (Fig. 34-2)
■ Facial skin involvement (cats)
 Claw fold involvement (dogs)
■Melanoma
■ Melanoma represents 4-20% of all skin tumors in dogs and 1-7% in cats.
■Slow or rapidly growing mass
■ Patient may be lame if a digit is involved
Figure 34-1 Early squamous cell carcinoma of the tip of the pinnae with minimal erythema and crusting
 Figure 34-2 Advanced squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) that has eroded much of the pinnae
354
CHAPTER 34: COMMON SKIN AND HAIR FOLLICLE TUMORS
355
Figure 34-3 Solitary raised mass of the medial aspect of the forelimb diagnosed as pilomatrixoma
 Basal cell tumors
■ 15-26% of all skin tumors in the cat
■ 6% of skin tumors in dogs
■ Sebaceous gland tumors
■ Often considered incidental finding in certain breeds; cocker spaniel and poodle
■Hair follicle tumors
■ Trichoeithelioma: common in dogs, uncommon in cats
 Pilomatrixoma: uncommon in dogs, rare in cats (Fig. 34-3)
 Trichoblastoma: uncommon in middle-aged dogs and cats
 Tricholemmoma: rare in dogs and cats
 Trichofolliculoma: rare in dogs and cats
■Dilated Pore of Winer: uncommon in older cats
CLINICAL FEATURES
Squamous cell carcinoma/Bowens disease
■  Proliferative tumors have a cauliflower appearance that is friable and bleeds easily.
■ Ulcerative tumors may appear shallow and erosive yet rapidly progress to deep
craters with tissue remodeling.
■ Most common sites: cats—nasal planum, eyelids, lips, and pinna; dogs—toes,
scrotum, nose, legs, and anus
■ Flank and abdomen involvement
■ Bowen's disease (cats): may note 2 to >30 lesions on the head, digits, neck, thorax.
shoulders, and ventral abdomen; hair in the lesion epilates easily; crusts cling to
the epilated hair shaft
■ Digital lesions are typically swollen and painful and have a misshapen or absent
claw.
 Figure 34-4 Solitary oral nonpigmented melanoma located at the mucocutaneous junction
■ Figure 34-5 Melanoma of the inguinal region in a dog.
356
357
Figure 34-6 Close-up view of Fig. 34-5.
■ Lesions may also be found in the oral cavity, cornea, lungs, esophagus, and urinary
bladder
1Melanoma (Figs. 34-4-34-6)
■
85% of melanomas are benign.
■]
 Benign, locally invasive, or metastatic (bone, lung, regional lymph nodes)
■ Pigmented or nonpigmented
■ Benign tumors are typically brown macules, plaques, or dome-shaped nodules that
are well circumscribed and less than 2cm diameter.
■ Malignant melanomas are rapidly growing, nonpigmented to black, ulcerated or
pedunculated masses or nodules that are usually greater than 2cm in diameter.
 Most common on the head, trunk, digits yet may occur anywhere on the body
(most common on the head of cats)
■ More common in male dogs
1 Basal cell tumors
■ Typically manifests as a solitary, well-circumscribed firm to fluctuant nodule;
1-l0cm diameter
■ Often alopecic, may be pigmented, and may be ulcerative
■ Lesions most commonly found on the head (lip, cheek, pinnae, periocular) neck.
thorax, dorsal trunk
 Malignant forms may be locally invasive yet rarely metastasize (Fig. 34-7)
 Sebaceous gland tumors
 Adenoma/hyperplasia: distinctive wartlike or cauliflower appearance in most cases
■ Adenocarcinomas: firm raised nodules that ulcerate; may have metastasized from
a primary bronchogenic site to the digits; in cats, swelling of multiple digits may
358
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 34-7 Small solitary firm dermal nodule located on the neck of a dog. Basal cell tumor
occur due to multicentric ungual metastasis, solitary metastasis is more common
than multicentric in dogs
 Often on the head, eyelid, and extremities of cats
Most common on the head, neck, trunk, legs, and eyelids of the dog
 Few millimeters to several centimeters in diameter, typically multiple in number
Yellow in color, alopecic, oily; may be ulcerated
Adenocarcinomas are usually solitary, alopecic, ulcerated, or erythematous
intradermal nodules (Fig. 34-8).
■ Hair follicle tumors
■ Single to multiple, alopecic, firm, white to gray multilobulated nodules that may
ulcerate; typically well circumscribed
■Location: head, tail, trunk, limbs
■ Some of the tumors (trichofolliculoma and Dilated Pore of Winer) tend to have a
central depression or opening that contains keratin, hair, or sebaceous material.
■ Dilated Pore of Winer may appear to form a cutaneous horn.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Squamous cell carcinoma/ Bowens disease
 Draining abscesses or infected wounds
■
Claw bed infection/osteomyelitis
 Other neoplasia (lymphoma, mast cell tumor)
Melanoma (Bowens disease)
Eosinophilic plaque
CHAPTER 34: COMMON SKIN AND HAIR FOLLICLE TUMORS
658
 Figure 34-8 Sebaceous gland adenocarcinoma affecting the digits of a dog
■Melanoma
■Amelanotic melanomas may look similar to undifferentiated sarcomas.
■ Other neoplasias as well as infection
■ Basal cell tumors
■ Other neoplasias: mast cell tumors, melanoma, hemangioma, hemangiosarcoma,
epidermal cyst
 Sebaceous adenomas
■ Other tumors, cellulites
■ Nevus
■ Apocrine adenomas, adenocarcinomas
Hair follicle tumors
Cysts, other tumors
DIAGNOSTICS
 Routine blood work: hemogram and serum chemistry
Urinalysis
Thoracic radiography: detects lung metastasis (3 view)
 Abdominal radiography: evaluates and monitors sublumbar lymph nodes, if clinically
relevant (3 view)
 Radiography of extremities: with digital tumor; determines extent of underlying bone
involvement
■ Ultrasonography and CT/MRI may be helpful (especially tumors invading the ear
canal, oral cavity, sinonasal cavity)
■ Cytologic examination: fine-needle aspirate of the mass; evaluate regional and/or
large lymph nodes for metastasis
■Biopsy: needed to confirm diagnosis
Histopathology
■ SCC/Bowen's disease: cords or irregular masses of epidermal cells infltrating into
the dermis and subcutis, large numbers of horn (keratin) pearls in well-differentiated
tumors, desmosomes and mitotic figures common; Bowens disease, dysplastic, highly
ordered keratinocytes proliferate, replacing normal epidermis, but do not penetrate
the basement membrane into the surrounding dermis
■ Melanoma: neoplastic melanocytes that may be spindle, epithelial, or round in
appearance with variable degrees of pigmentation; cells arranged in clusters, cords,
 or whorls; infiltration of pigment-laden macrophages; variable mitotic figures and
pleomorphism related to the degree of malignancy; mitotic index most reliable way
to predict tumor behavior, yet 1o% of histologically benign tumors may behave in a
malignant manner
■ Basal cell tumor: nonencapsulated dermal to subcutaneous mass composed of cords
 or nests of neoplastic basal cells; may be pigmented of cystic; may have central areas
of squamous differentiation; nuclear hyperchromasia; frequent mitotic figures
■Sebaceous gland tumors
 Hyperplasia: multiple enlarged mature sebaceous lobules with single peripheral
layer of basaloid epithelial cells, no mitotic cells
Sebaceous adenoma: large mature sebaceous lobules with increased numbers of
basaloid epithelial cells, low mitotic activity
 Epithelioma: lobules of basaloid epithelial cells with reactive collagen, high mitotic
activity
■ Adenocarcinoma: poorly defined lobules of large epithelial cells with varying
degrees of differentiation, high mitotic activity
■Hair follicle tumors
■Trichoepithelioma: germinal hair follicle cells differentiate toward hair follicles
and shaft structures
■Pilomatrixoma: germinal cells tend to differentiate toward hair bulb/matrix
 Trichoblastoma: germinal cells differentiate toward hair bulb
Trichofolliculoma: may actually be a follicular or pilosebaceous hamartoma rather
than a true neoplasm
■ Dilated Pore of Winer: benign hair follicle tumor or cyst
THERAPEUTICS
■ SCC/ Bowen's disease
■  Invasive tumors: inpatient; require aggressive surgical excision or radiotherapy
■ Superficial tumors: surgery, cryosurgery photodynamic therapy or irradiation
CHAPTER 34: COMMON SKIN AND HAIR FOLLICLE TUMORS
361
 Plesiotherapy (topical radiation, strontium-90)
Photodynamic therapy
■ Topical synthetic retinoids or imiquimod: may be useful for early superficial
lesions
■ Wide surgical excision: treatment of choice; skin flaps and body wall reconstruc-
tion sometimes required
Digit involvement: amputation
 Pinna involvement: may require partial or total resection
 Invasive tumors of the nares: removal of the nasal planum recommended
 Radiotherapy: recommended for inoperable tumors or as adjunct to surgery
■ Adjunctive chemotherapy: recommended with incomplete surgical excision,
nonresectable mass, and metastasis
Cisplatin (dogs, do not use in cats), carboplatin, and mitoxantrone: reported to
induce partial and complete remission; generally of short duration; small number
of patients; do not use with concurrent renal disease
either 5-fluorouracil or cisplatin; effective
■Etretinate
■COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) inhibitors may be helpful in conjunction with chemo-
therapeutic agents.
■ Vitamin E may help stabilize cell membranes @ 400-6001U po ql2h.
■  Cimetidine has been reported to have some benefit as a biologic response modifier
in malignant melanoma by reversing suppressor  I-cell-mediated immune
suppression.
COMMENTS
Client Education/Prognosis
Squamous cell carcinoma/Bowens disease
■ Discuss risk factors associated with the development of the tumor (ultraviolet light
exposure).
■ Monitor patient with physical examination and radiography-1, 3. 6, 9, 12, 18, and
 24 months after treatment or if the owner thinks the tumor is recurring.
■ Thoracic and abdominal radiography: at each recheck examination, if the lesion
is on the caudal portion of the patient
■ Limit sun exposure, especially between the hours of 10:00 A.M. and 2:00 PM.
■
 Sunscreens: usually licked off by the patient; may help in some areas (e.g., pinnae)
■ Prognosis: good with superficial lesions that receive appropriate treatment;
guarded with invasive lesions and those involving the claw fold or digit
■Melanoma
 Prognosis good for benign tumors and poor for malignant especially if the tumor
is large
362  SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
■ Breed may be prognostic: 85% of miniature poodle melanomas are behaviorally
malignant, >75% of melanomas in Dobermans and schnauzers are benign
■ Location may be prognostic: most oral, scrotal, and mucocutaneous (except the
eyelid) melanomas are malignant, 50% of claw fold melanomas are malignant
■35-50% of melanomas in cats are reported to be malignant.
■Basal cell tumors
■ Not problematic; even the malignant tumors are slow-growing and of low-grade
malignancy and rarely metastasize
■Sebaceous gland tumors
■ Prognosis is good.
■ Malignant form (adenocarcinoma) rarely metastasizes and is locally infiltrative
involving regional lymph nodes.
■Hair follicle tumors
■ Prognosis is good, and surgical or laser excision is curative.
Tumors are not locally invasive and they do not metastasize.
■Rare report of a pilomatrixoma that was metastatic with neurologic complications
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
35
Epitheliotropic Lymphoma
 An uncommon cutaneous neoplasia affecting many species, including dogs and cats
 Characterized by infiltration of the epidermis and adnexal structures with malignant
T cells
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
"Classical" MF (mycosis fungoides): most common Icell lymphoma in dogs
 Caused by epitheliotropic  & I cells in 70% of cases (100% in pagetoid form)
 I-cell-specific surface antigen CD3 is consistently expressed; CD8 is expressed in
80% of cases.
■ Differs from disease of human beings (predominantly α β I cells with CD4
expression)
 Allergic skin disease producing chronic T-cell activation and proliferation leading to
clonal expansion of neoplastic cells may be a cause; initial lesions often develop in
areas associated with atopic dermatitis.
Spread of malignant cells to lymph nodes and organs common in the late tumor
stage
Sezary syndrome: rare form of epitheliotropic lymphoma; cutaneous lesions: invasion
of peripheral lymph nodes  by  neoplastic lymphocytes; leukemia  develops
simultaneously
■ Pagetoid reticulosis: rare form of epitheliotropic lymphoma; lymphoid infiltrate
confined to the epidermis and adnexal structures in the early stages of the disease
and extends to the dermis in the late stages
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Dogs: age range 6-14 years; mean 1l years
■Cats: age range 12-17 years
■ No apparent breed or sex predilection
363
364
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
Historical Findings
Chronic skin disease: months before diagnosis
Rarely acute
Mimics other inflammatory dermatoses
■ Pruritus is uncommon except in Sezary syndrome (severe).
■ Initial findings include erythema, scaling, depigmentation, alopecia, and crusting.
junctions, and oral cavity.
S  p    ss    o ns 
ranges 3 months to 4 years.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Classical MF: 4 clinical categories of presentation
■ Exfoliative erythroderma: generalized erythema, scaling, depigmentation, alope-
cia; lesions begin predominantly on the body; often pleomorphic and initially
static to slowly progressive (Figs. 35-1-35-5)
■ Mucocutaneous: erythema, erosion, and ulceration affecting facial mucocutaneous
junctions; depigmentation may be extensive, leading to leukoderma; single, mul-
tiple, and bilaterally symmetrical patches appear; additional mucocutaneous junc-
tions may be affected (Figs. 35-6, 35-7)
 Tumoral: solitary or multiple erythematous plaques, nodules and masses; lesions
often scaly or crusted, may ulcerate; lesions may rarely cycle (Figs. 35-8-35-12)
 Figure 35-1 Marked erythema and scaling Shetland sheepdog with exfoliative erythroderma
 Figure 35-2 Patches of alopecia and scaling with exfoliative erythroderma.
 Figure 35-3 Extensive patches of alopecia and scaling of patient in Fig. 35-2.
365
366
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 35-4 Patchy of leukoderma in patient of previous figures
 Figure 35-5 Discrete patch of erythema and scaling demonstrating progression to tumoral stage.
 Oral cavity ulceration: severe ulceration of gingiva, palate, and/or tongue
(Fig. 35-13)
 Lesions: throughout the skin; marked tendency for involvement of mucocutaneous
junctions (lip, eyelids, nasal planum, anorectal junction, or vulva) or oral cavity
CHAPTER 35: EPITHELIOTROPIC LYMPHOMA
367
and lipmargin.
■Figure 35-7 Lip margin lesion progressing to tumoral stage.
(gingiva, palate, or tongue); lesions can be limited to the mucocutaneous junctions
or oral mucosa
compared to human beings.
■Mucocutaneous and oral mucosa forms merge with chronicity.
368
 Figure 35-8 Multiple discrete plaques and nodules with MF.
 Figure 35-9 Enlarged digits with ulceration in tumoral MF.
■ Rarely the nodular form develops without a preexisting patch or plaque stage
(d'embleeform).
■ Nodular stage may occasionally progress to a disseminated form with lymph node
involvement, leukemia,and (rarely) other organs.
CHAPTER 35: EPITHELIOTROPIC LYMPHOMA
69E
 Figure 35-10 Ulcerated patches of depigmentation on the ventral abdomen.
 Figure 35-11 Multiple oral tumors of MF.
Sezary syndrome: rare; leukemic variant with simultaneous development of cutane-
ous lesions, invasion of peripheral lymph nodes by neoplastic lymphocytes, and
circulating tumor cells: generalized and severe erythroderma, scaling. alopecia, and
severe pruritus reported; visceral involvement causes systemic illness (Figs. 35-14.
35-15)
370
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 35-12 Irregular patch of depigmentation and scaling on the footpad of patient in Figs. 35-2-35-4
 Figure 35-13 MF producing oral cavity ulcerations and plaques
■ Pagetoid reticulosis: rare; lymphoid infiltrate is confined to the epidermis and
adnexal structures in the early stages of the disease and extends to the dermis in
the late stages; exfoliative erythroderma without nodules and masses; mucocutane-
   a a  d so  s os
CHAPTER 35: EPITHELIOTROPIC LYMPHOMA
371
 Figure 35-14 Sézary syndrome. Note generalized and severe erythroderma
 Figure 35-15 Sézary syndrome with irregular and patchy erythroderma.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
372  SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative
■Allergic dermatitis
■Ectoparasitism (especially sarcoptid mites)
■Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Erythema multiforme
Vasculitis
■
Nonneoplastic chronic stomatitis (infectious)
■ Other cutaneous neoplasia: histiocytoma, cutaneous histiocytosis, mass cell tumor
DIAGNOSTICS
  Laboratory abnormalities: vary depending on the stage and form of cutaneous I-cell
lymphoma, and whether disease has disseminated
 Seézary cells : small (8-20μm) neoplastic lymphocytes with convoluted nucleus with
a cerebriform appearance are present in peripheral blood of patients with Sézary
syndrome
 Flow cytometry for detection of T-cell lineages in blood
Generally unremarkable if only the skin or mucosa is affected
■ Radiographs and ultrasound: not commonly used in the early stages; imaging is
eventually necessary to confirm systemic disease and/or for tumor staging
Diagnostic Procedures
■ Skin scrapings and fungal culture: rule out demodicosis and dermatophytosis, if
applicable
 Figure 35-16 Atypical lymphocytes in MF. Abnormal cells are enlarged, with hyperchromatic nuclei and
nuclear infolding (400x)
CHAPTER 35: EPITHELIOTROPIC LYMPHOMA
373
Figure 35-17 Sheets of large atypical lymphocytes with pale nuclei (400x)
■Cytology: increased numbers of atypical lymphocytes with large and infolded nuclei
(Figs. 35-16, 35-17)
■ Skin biopsy: definitive diagnosis, sample multiple different-appearing lesions, avoid
eroded/ulcerated and infected lesions
Pathological Findings
■ Hallmark finding: tropism of neoplastic cells for the epithelium (epidermal and
mucosal)
■  Infiltrate of neoplastic lymphocytes: into epidermis and epithelium of hair follicles
and adnexal structures; distributed diffusely or as discrete Pautrier microaggregates
within the epithelium
■ Follicular and adnexal structures can be obliterated by infiltrate.
■ Keratinocyte apoptosis may be mild to marked.
■ Interface dermatitis mimics inflammatory processes in early stages; the dermal-
epidermal junction becomes obscured by neoplastic lymphocytes  in later
stages.
■ Tumor cells are typically larger than normal with infolded nuclei and increased
cytoplasm.
■ Dermal infiltrate: polymorphous; in the patch and plaque stages, limited to the
superficial dermis; in the nodular stage, extends to the deep dermis and
subcutis
  Epitheliotropism of neoplastic lymphocytes: usually remains prominent throughout
all stages
374
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
THERAPEUTICS
Drugs of Choice
 Lomustine (CCNU): several studies published in the veterinary literature indicate an
overall response rate of 80% with complete remission achieved in about 25% of cases
(60 to 70 mg/m' orally every 3-4 weeks for a mean of 3-5 treatments)
■ High doses linoleic acid (e.g. sunflower oil): 3ml/kg orally twice weekly demon-
strated improvement in 7 of 10 dogs for up to 2 years
 Topical chemotherapy: mechlorethamine (nitrogen mustard) some success in man-
aging early lesions; however, lack of long-term efficacy; carcinogenic potential for
human beings
■ Corticosteroids: topical and/or systemic may result in symptomatic relief
Retinoids: isotretinoin (3mg/kg/day) or acitretin (2 mg/kg/day) may be beneficial;
cost can be a limiting factor; extreme teratogen; do not use in intact females because
of severe and predictable teratogenicity and the extremely long withdrawal period;
women of childbearing age should not handle this medication
 Imiquimod: a topical immunomodulator with antineoplastic and antiviral effects may
be useful for localized disease; no published reports in veterinary literature
■Seek advice from a veterinary oncologist or dermatologist before initiating therapy
if you are unfamiliar with cytotoxic drugs and/or to learn about the most recent
treatment protocols.
COMMENTS
  Prognosis is guarded to grave; cure is extremely unlikely unless a solitary, early lesion
can be surgically excised.
■
 The goal is to maintain a good quality of life for as long as possible.
■ Radiation therapy: total skin electron beam therapy (ISEBT) or orthovoltage
radiation is well-tolerated and may be beneficial in some cases
 Average survival time for dogs depends upon stage of disease at diagnosis, therapeu-
tic choice, and response to therapy which varies from a few weeks to longer than
18 months; dogs and cats may live for longer than 2 years after diagnosis (rarely).
■Death is usually the result of euthanasia.
Synonyms
■ Lymphoma, epidermotropic
■ Mycosis fungoides
Author:Alexander H.Werner
chapter
36
Feline Paraneoplastic
Syndromes
 Rare conditions characterized by cutaneous lesions, which serve as markers of inter-
d   a d    s 
adenocarcinoma, paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis secondary to thymoma)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Most affected cats with pancreatic adenocarcinomas with metastases to liver, lungs.
pleura, and/or peritoneum; also reports of bile duct and hepatocellular carcinomas
The link between internal malignancies and cutaneous lesions is unknown; may
involve cytokines producing atrophy of the hair follicles in pancreatic paraneoplastic
syndrome; proposed association caused by immature autoreactive I-cell attack on
keratinocytes as pathogenesis in exfoliative dermatitis associated with thymoma
 Skin lesions often precede systemic signs.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Domestic shorthair cats
Median age: 13 years; range of 7-16 years
Significant number of cats with paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis associated with
thymoma are orange/ginger colored cats.
Risk Factors and Causes
 Pancreatic/hepatic paraneoplastic syndrome: the majority of cases are associated with
an underlying pancreatic adenocarcinoma; other internal carcinomas, such as bile
duct and hepatocellular carcinomas, may be involved
 Exfoliative dermatitis associated with mediastinal mass: thymoma
Historical Findings
 Pancreatic/hepatic paraneoplastic syndrome:
 Decrease in appetite followed by rapid 2-5 week history of anorexia, weight loss,
lethargy, and excessive shedding
375
376
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
■Pruritus: variable; sometimes with excessive grooming
■ Hair loss: rapidly progressive with sudden onset leading to total in affected region;
primarily ventral distribution (ventral trunk, medial aspect of limbs
 r  d o   on ni   s  a m
footpads.
Paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis associated with thymoma:
 Slowly progressive scaling dermatitis
■
Nonpruritic
 Cats present with skin lesions and no evidence of neoplasia
■ Systemic signs develop late in the course of disease; coughing. dyspnea, anorexia,
lethargy
CLINICAL FEATURES
Pancreatic/hepatic paraneoplastic syndrome (Figs. 36-1-36-3)
Hairs epilate easily.
 Severe alopecia: ventral neck, abdomen, and medial thighs
 The stratum corneum may "peel.," leading to a glistening appearance to the skin.
Alopecic skin is shiny inelastic and thin, but not fragile.
 Gray lentigines may develop in alopecic areas.
 Footpads may be fissured and/or scaly, often painful.
May have secondary Malassezia overgrowth
 Figure 36-1 Twelve-year-old MC DsH with severe ventral alopecia in association with pancreatic adenocar-
cinoma. (Courtesy of Dr. Karen Campbell.)
 Figure 36-2 Rear limbs of cat in Fig. 36-1: hairs epilate easily revealing the thin. glistening appearance of
the skin. (Courtesy of Dr. Karen Campbell.)
■Figure 36-3 Note the thin glistening appearance of the footpads of the cat from Fig. 36-1. (Courtesy of
Dr.Karen Campbell.)
377
378
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
Figure 36-4 Generalized hyperkeratosis associated with thymoma
1 Paraneoplastic exfoliative dermatitis associated with thymoma (Figs. 36-4, 36-5)
Nonpruritic; fine, nonadherent, white scaling dermatitis
 Primarily the head and neck yet can become generalized
Erythema mild initially and then becomes severe
Brown waxy deposits adhere around the eyes and lips as well as the ear canal.
■ My have secondary Malassezia overgrowth
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Hyperadrenocorticism: polyuria, polydipsia, and skin fragility
■
 Hyperthyroidism: polyphagia
 Hypothyroidism: spontaneous condition rare in cats; not associated with glistening
skin
■ Feline symmetrical alopecia: hair loss self-induced; not associated with easy
epilation
■Demodicosis: mites are not associated with paraneoplastic alopecia.
■I
Dermatophytosis: hair loss often associated with breakage, not spontaneous
shedding: inappetence and weight loss rare
CHAPTER 36: FELINE PARANEOPLASTIC SYNDROMES
 Figure 36-5 note hyperkeratosis with associated partial alopecia in this cat with exfoliative dermatitis assoc
with a thymoma.
1 Alopecia areata: rarely involves the entire ventral surface; inappetence and weight
loss rare
■ Telogen effluvium/defluvium: not associated with miniaturization of hair follicles
 Skin fragility syndrome: fragile skin not associated with paraneoplastic alopecia
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis:  not associated  with marked exfoliation and
miniaturization of hair follicles
■ Alopecia mucinosa
]
 Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Erythema multiforme (idiopathic and herpes-virus associated)
■Sebaceous adenitis
DIAGNOSTICS
■ CBC, serum chemistry unremarkable
■ Ultrasonography: pancreatic mass and/or nodular lesions in the liver or peritoneal
cavity; failure to demonstrate nodules does not exclude the diagnosis, because they
may be too small for detection; mediastinal mass in thymoma cases
 Thoracic radiographs: metastatic lesions in the lungs or pleural cavity in pancreatic/
hepatic cases
CT scans
  Laparoscopy or exploratory laparotomy: identify primary and metastatic tumors.
■ Histopathologic examination of the skin: pancreatic/hepatic-nonscarring alopecia:
severe atrophy of hair follicles and adnexa; miniaturization of hair bulbs; mild acan-
thosis; variable absence of stratum corneum; variable mixed superficial perivascular
380
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
infiltrates of neutrophils, eosinophils, and mononuclear cells; some have secondary
Malassezia infections/primary tumor—usually pancreatic adenocarcinoma, rarely
primary bile duct or hepatocellular carcinomas/ metastatic nodules-common in the
liver, lungs, pleura, and peritoneum
■Histopathologic examination of the skin: thymoma—cell-poor hydropic interface
dermatitis with apoptosis of basal keratinocytes, pockets of satellitosis, and lympho-
cytic dermal infiltrate
THERAPEUTICS
■Pancreatic/hepatic paraneoplastic syndrome
 Removal of tumor via partial pancreatectomy may be curative; however, prognosis
is guarded, as majority of cases have metastatic disease.
Chemotherapy or other medications: no reported response
Affected animals rapidly deteriorate; euthanasia should be suggested as a humane
intervention.
■ Supportive care: only if owners refuse to consider euthanasia; feed highly palat-
able, nutrient-dense foods and/or tube feed
■ Poor prognosis—death most often occurs within 2-20 weeks after onset of skin
lesions
 Exfoliative dermatitis with thymoma
 Prognosis remains guarded, yet complete surgical removal of the thymoma and
sternal lymph nodes has produced resolution of clinical signs within months
(average 4-5 months).
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Progressive deterioration
Supportive care: ultrasonography and thoracic radiographs may demonstrate pro-
gression of metastatic disease
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
37
Histiocytosis
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Rare disorder resulting from proliferation of cells from the monocyte/macrophage
lineage
■ Three primary forms recognized: cutaneous, systemic, and malignant
 Organ systems affected include skin, hemic/lymphatic, nervous, ophthalmic, and
respiratory.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Cutaneous histiocytosis: single or multiple masses that may wax and wane over years
and often requires immunotherapy
 Systemic histiocytosis: familial, slowly progressive disease of predominately Bernese
mountain dogs, nonneoplastic, characterized by multiple cutaneous nodules, other
organ systems may also be affected
 Malignant histiocytosis: rapidly progressive, multisystem disease that affects Bernese
mountain dogs as well as retrievers, rottweilers, Labradors, and flat-coated retrievers:
disease affects the skin (nodules) and subcutis, spleen, lymph nodes, lung, bone
marrow; usually leads to death in a matter of weeks
 All forms may represent variable manifestations of a common underlying defect
and may represent stages in a range of histiocytic proliferative disorders, although
intermediate stages have not been identified.
 Familial disease of Bernese mountain dogs: polygenic mode of inheritance; heritabil-
ity of 0.298; accounts for up to 25% of all tumors in this breed
Histiocytoma: single solitary cutaneous mass in young dogs that spontaneously
resolves
■ Histiocytic sarcoma: localized rare malignant neoplasm reported in Bernese moun-
tain dogs, retrievers and rottweilers; solitary or multiple rapidly growing nodules
occur around joints
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Cutaneous form
 Recognized in the Bernese mountain dog. beagle, collie, golden retriever, and
Shetland sheepdog
381
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 37-1 Bernese mountain dog with systemic histiocytosis
■ Range in age from 2-13 years
■ Systemic form
■Young adult to middle-aged dogs (mean age at onset, 4 years)
■ Usually male
■Usually Bernese mountain dogs (Fig. 37-1)
■  Malignant form
■ Older male dogs (mean age at onset, 7 years)
■  Most commonly reported in Bernese mountain dogs (also recognized in Labradors.
rottweilers, golden retrievers, and flat-coated retrievers)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■Cutaneous histiocytosis
 Multiple dermal, rarely subcutaneous, erythematous nodules or plaques
 Nodules/plaques may be alopecic or ulcerated.
Nodules range in size from l-5 cm.
 Not pruritic or painful
 The number of lesions is variable and may range from a few to hundreds.
■ Lesions occur most frequently on the head, neck, perineum, scrotum, and
extremities.
CHAPTER 37: HISTIOCYTOSIS
383
■ Lesions tend to wax and wane.
■
Nasal mucosa involvement may occur.
■ Systemic and lymph node involvement does not occur in this form.
1Systemic histiocytosis
■Lethargy
■Anorexia
Weight loss
 Respiratory stertor
Coughing
 Dyspnea
■ Dogs with systemic disorder may not have signs of systemic illness
■ Marked predilection for skin and lymph nodes
 Cutaneous masses: multiple; nodular; well-circumscribed; often ulcerated, crusted
or alopecic; nodules often extend into the subcutis, occur commonly on the
muzzle, nasal planum, eyelids, flank, and scrotum (Figs. 37-2, 37-3); nodules are
not painful or pruritic
 Ocular manifestations: conjunctivitis, chemosis, scleritis, episcleritis, episcleral
nodules, corneal edema, anterior and posterior uveitis, retinal detachment, glau-
coma, and exophthalmos
 Abnormal respiratory sounds and/or nasal mucosa infiltration
Organomegaly occurs with systemic involvement.
 Figure 37-2 Advanced histiocytic lesion of the axillae and chest region.
384
SECTION 6: NEOPLASIAS, CUTANEOUS/PARANEOPLASTIC DERMATOSES
 Figure 37-3 Advanced lesions on the extremities.
1 Lesions may also develop in the lung, liver, spleen, bone marrow, and nasal cavity
■May have alternating episodes of exacerbation and remission
■  Malignant histiocytosis
■
 Pallor
■Weakness
■Lethargy
■Weight loss.
 Dyspnea with abnormal lung sounds
Neurologic signs (e.g., seizures, central disturbances, and posterior paresis)
common
Moderate to severe lymphadenomegaly
Hepatic, splenic, renal, and pulmonary involvement common
 Occasionally, masses are palpated in the liver and/or spleen.
 Eyes and skin are rarely affected.
Multiple firm dermal to subcutaneous nodules that may be alopecic or ulcerated;
lesions occur anywhere on the body
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
 Histiocytic lymphoma: differentiation and definitive diagnosis often require special
staining for immunohistochemical markers
CHAPTER 37: HISTIOCYTOSIS385
Lymphomatoid granulomatosis: extensive pulmonary infltrate of lymphocytes
plasma cells, histiocytes, and atypical lymphoreticular cells; affects young to middle-
aged dogs, with respiratory disease as the chief complaint; lack of lymph node, organ,
or bone marrow involvement
 Periadnexal multinodular granulomatous dermatitis: benign, well-demarcated cuta-
neous nodules, commonly on the muzzle and may affect the eye; histologically
distinct granulomas and variable numbers of inflammatory cells; may be indistin-
guishable from cutaneous histiocytosis
 Cutaneous histiocytoma: common benign skin tumor of young dogs; solitary.
alopecic, frequently ulcerated lesions; may regress without treatment
 Granulomatous diseases: dogs with infectious diseases (e.g., nocardiosis, actinomy-
Malignant fibrous histiocytoma: locally aggressive soft tissue sarcoma composed of
histiocytes and fibroblasts; no breed predilection; distant metastases rare
■ Fibrous histiocytoma: lesion involving the eye(s). generally appearing as a raised
limbal mass; involvement of the cornea, conjunctiva, nictitans, eyelid, and periocular
areas possible
Hemophagocytic syndrome (histiocytosis): benign histiocytic proliferation second-
ary to infectious, neoplastic, or metabolic disease; can affect bone marrow, lymph
nodes, liver, and spleen; causes cytopenia of at least two cell lines
■ Anaplastic carcinoma or sarcoma: histopathologic findings in dogs with histiocytosis
may indicate a poorly differentiated tumor; immunostaining for tissue-specific
markers will differentiate
DIAGNOSTICS
■ Mild to severe anemia (regenerative or nonregenerative) and thrombocytopenia
common
 Biochemistry results reflect the degree of organ involvement.
Serum ferritin: may be a tumor marker for malignant histiocytosis; one affected
dog had very high serum ferritin concentration, suggesting secretion by neoplastic
mononuclear phagocytes
 Thoracic radiographs: well-defined, nodular pulmonary opacities (single or multi-
ple), pleural effusion, lung lobe consolidation, diffuse interstitial infltrates, medias-
tinal masses, and sternal and bronchial lymphadenomegaly
■Abdominal radiographs: hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, abdominal effusion
Biopsy of affected organs and/or lymph nodes
 Cytologic examination of bone marrow aspirate or biopsy may show histiocytic
infiltration.
Immunohistochemistry: diagnosis of histiocytosis may be difficult because results of
cytologic/histologic examinations not always definitive; cytochemical staining may
be useful in determining the histiocytic origin of the cells
Histopathological Findings
■Cutaneous
■ Diffuse or periadnexal/periavascular accumulations of large vesicular histiocytes;
mitotic figures are numerous; vascular involvement or thrombosis may occur
■Systemic
■ Similar pattern as for cutaneous form yet exhibits other organ system
involvement
■Histiocytic infiltrates fail to demonstrate the bizarre cytologic characteristics of
the mononuclear cells typical of malignant disorder.
Histiocytes appear to target small blood vessels.
Multinucleated giant cells are rarely seen.
■ Immunohistochemistry: special stains for histiocytic markers such as lysozyme or
cr-1-antitrypsin may be required for a definitive diagnosis
■Malignant
 Cytologic atypia is the hallmark characteristic in affected dogs.
 n      s
 The mitotic index is generally high and abnormal mitotic figures may be present.
Multinucleated giant cells are often seen.
 Classically, erythrophagocytosis by neoplastic histiocytes is evident.
■ Occasionally, leukophagocytosis and thrombophagocytosis are evident
THERAPEUTICS
  p p   s o o   
findings.
■ No definitive treatment
■  Immunotherapy with a human leukemic T-cell line is being investigated.
■
50% of cutaneous forms respond to corticosteroids, lasting from 4 to 18 months.
■
Anecdotal responses to bovine thymic extract are reported.
Cyclosporine is the drug of choice @ 5mg/kg/day po; doses will sometimes be
increased to 10mg/kg/day; dose may be tapered slowly over time; maintenance
therapy usually necessary; liver enzymes must be monitored for hepatotoxicity.
vomiting is the most common side effect.
■ Leflunomide (Arava) @ 2-4mg/kg/day po: trough levels of 20mcg/mL may be
optimum; dogs metabolize the drug differently, thus trough levels must be moni-
tored; lymphopenia and anemia are uncommon side effects yet must be monitored;
 most common side effect is vomiting
■ Mild cases may respond to tetracycline and niacinamide combination both 250mg
po every 8 hours for small dogs and 500 mg of each po every 8 hours for large dogs
 Malignant histiocytosis is typically nonresponsive, rapidly progressive, and fatal;
fails to respond to therapy yet chemotherapy often trialed such as corticosteroids.
cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and doxorubicin-based protocols
CHAPTER 37: HISTIOCYTOSIS
387
COMMENTS
 Effectiveness of treatment is determined by repeated physical examinations, CBC and
 biochemistry profiles, and diagnostic imaging.
■  Patients with systemic disorder have a fluctuating debilitating disease that can be
 characterized by multiple clinical episodes and asymptomatic periods.
■ Prognosis for malignant disorder is extremely poor; death usually occurs within a
few months of diagnosis.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
38
chapter
Mast Cell Tumors
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Neoplasia arising from dermal tissue mast cells
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Histamine and other vasoactive substances released from mast cell tumors may cause
erythema and edema; histamine may cause gastric and duodenal ulcers
Heparin release: increases likelihood of bleeding
Skin and subcutaneous tissue most common tumor sites in dogs and cats
■Hemic/lymphatic/immune-spleen: common primary location in cats and uncommon
primary location in dogs; common location for metastasis from the skin or subcuta-
neous sites
■ Gastrointestinal: intestinal mast cell tumor uncommon in cats and rare in dogs;
gastric and duodenal ulcers possible
■Etiology unknown: viral etiology suspected by some investigators; current emphasis
on genetic mutations of the tumor suppressor gene p53 and c-kit (stem cell factor
            i
tumors in dogs; not all dogs with mast cell tumors have mutations; often positive
for mutation in higher grades of mast cell tumors
■Histopathologic grading system valuable yet controversial in the dog, not valuable
in the cat
■ Canine grading system: grade I—well differentiated; grade Il-intermediate; grade
IIl—undifferentiated
■ Grading system considered best prognostic factor in the dog
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Most common skin tumor in the dog: 20-25% of all skin and subcutaneous tumors
in dogs
■ Second most common skin tumor in cats (often benign in skin)
■ Boxers and Boston terriers predisposed
888
CHAPTER 38: MAST CELL TUMORS389
Siamese cats: predisposed to histiocytic cutaneous mast cell tumors (young cats)
■]
 Himilayan cats predisposed to urticaria pigmentosa (benign proliferative mast cell
disorder seen in young cats)
■Dogs: mean age, 8 years
   d   na s oe    
mast cell tumors
■ Reported in animals <l year old and in cats as old as 18 years
Dogs
 Patient may have had skin or subcutaneous tumor for days to months at the time of
examination.
■  May have appeared to fluctuate in size
 Recent rapid growth after months of quiescence common
 Recent onset of erythema and edema most common with high-grade skin and
subcutaneous tumors
Cats
■ Often no demonstration of systemic signs
Anorexia: most common complaint with splenic tumor
■ Vomiting: may occur secondary to both splenic and gastrointestinal tumors
CLINICAL FEATURES
 Mechanical manipulation or extreme changes in temperature can lead to degranula-
tion of mast cells with subsequent erythema and wheal formation (Dariers sign) and
gastrointestinal ulceration causing anorexia, vomiting. and melena (Figs. 38-1,
38-2).
Dogs
■ Well-differentiated tumors are often slow-growing. usually <3-4 cm in diameter,
without ulceration of overlying skin, variably alopecic, and commonly are present
for more than 6 months.
 Poorly differentiated mast cell tumors are rapidly growing, variably sized with ulcer-
ation of the overlying skin and inflammation/ edema of the surrounding tissue, and
are rarely present for more than 2-3 months prior to presentation.
 Extremely variable; may resemble any other type of skin or subcutaneous tumor
(benign and malignant); may resemble an insect bite or allergic reaction, subcutane-
ous form that is soft on palpation may be mistaken clinically for a lipoma
1Primarily a solitary skin or subcutaneous mass, but may be multifocal
 Figure 38-1 Mast cell tumor (MCT).
 Figure 38-2 Pin-feathered spongiotic digital mass/grade ll mast cell tumor.
390
CHAPTER 38: MAST CELL TUMORS
391
 Figure 38-3 Multifocal mast cell tumors on the pinnae of a cat. These lesions were benign in behavior
■ Approximately 50% located on the trunk and perineum; 40% on extremities; 10%
on the head and neck region (often considered that tumors on the perineum, prepuce,
scrotum, groin, axillae, and digits have a poorer prognosis)
 Regional lymphadenopathy: may develop when a high-grade tumor metastasizes to
draining lymph nodes
 Hepatomegaly and splenomegaly: features of disseminated mast cell neoplasia
Cats
■ Cutaneous: primarily found in the subcutaneous tissue or dermis; may be papular
or nodular, solitary or multiple, and haired or alopecic or have an ulcerated surface;
slight predilection for the head and neck regions (Figs. 38-3-38-6)
■ Clusters of nodules that appear on the face and ears may regress spontaneously.
■ Most feline tumors are well-differentiated and benign.
around the mouth, chin, neck, and eyes (spontaneous regression).
  Intestinal mast cell tumor: firm, segmental thickenings of the small intestinal wall;
measure 1-7 cm in diameter; metastases to the mesenteric lymph nodes, spleen, liver
and (rarely) lungs
Figure 38-4 The other pinnae from the cat in Fig. 38-3. Mast cell tumor (MCT)
Figure 38-5 Ulcerative mast celltumor an the face of a cat. Metastatic lesion from primary gastrointestinal
MC T.
392
CHAPTER 38: MAST CELL TUMORS
E6E
Figure 38-6 Nonulcerated MCT an the face of a cat.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Any other skin or subcutaneous tumor, benign or malignant, including lipoma
■ Insect bite or allergic reaction
DIAGNOSTICS
  Cytologic examination of fine-needle aspirate: most important preliminary diagnostic
 test; reveals round cells with basophilic cytoplasmic granules that do not form sheets
or clumps; if malignant mast cells are often agranular, occurrence of a large eosino-
philic infltrate may suggest mast cell tumor; granules do not stain well with Diff
Quick Stain unless the slide is placed in methanol for at least 2 minutes prior to
regular staining (sending an unstained slide to the laboratory is often best if not
reading the slide “in house")
11
 Use of buffy coat cytology and liver/spleen fine needle aspirate is controversial and
often not considered important in staging of disease.
 Tissue biopsy: necessary for definitive diagnosis and grading
Staging: to determine the extent of disease and appropriate treatment; involves full
physical exam, bloodwork/urinalysis, fine-needle aspirate of any local lymph nodes
even if they are not palpable, and abdominal ultrasound
1
 Additional tests to achieve complete staging: cytologic examination or biopsy of local
draining lymph node; cytologic examination of bone marrow aspirate is controver-
sial; thoracic radiography and abdominal ultrasonography
■ Histopathologic examination (dogs): grading of tumor to predict biologic behavior:
graded I-Ill (Ill is the most aggressive type)
■Negative clinical prognostic factors include advanced stage, caudal half of body loca-
tion, high tumor growth rate, aneuploidy, presence of systemic signs
 Negative molecular: based prognostic factors include increased AgNOR (silver nucle-
olar organizing regions), increased PCNA/Ki67 immunohistochemistry expression
(proliferation markers), increased vascularity and/or mitotic index, and increased
predictive ability for both development of metastasis as well as recurrence
■ Cats: grading system not beneficial; no correlation between histopathologic appear-
ance of cutaneous tumor and prognosis
THERAPEUTICS
Dogs
■Aggressive surgical excision: treatment of choice
■ Histopathologic evaluation of the entire surgically excised tissue: essential to deter-
mine completeness of excision and predict the biologic behavior; if tumor cells extend
close to the surgical margins, perform a second aggressive surgery as soon as possible
■ Lymph node involvement but no systemic involvement: aggressive excision of the
affected lymph node(s) and the primary tumor required; follow-up chemotherapy
useful to prevent further metastasis
■ Primary tumor and/or affected lymph node cannot be excised: chemotherapy has
minimal benefit
■ Systemic metastasis: excision of primary tumor and affected lymph nodes and
follow-up chemotherapy have minimal effect on survival time.
■ Radiotherapy: external beam radiation therapy is a good treatment option for cutane-
 ous tumor in a location that does not allow aggressive surgical excision; if possible,
 os  n roi a  r  a s 
tumors on an extremity respond better than do tumors located on the trunk
Cats
 Surgery: treatment of choice for cutaneous tumors
■Some forms will spontaneously regress.
 Cats should be staged to insure that they do not have splenic primary mast cell tumor
that is metastasizing to cutaneous locations as well as other sites
Drugs of choice
■ Prednisone: has been mainstay, recent evidence suggests that, used alone, achieves
only short-term remission
CHAPTER 38: MAST CELL TUMORS395
1 Recent studies suggest that lomustine (CCNU), vinblastine, and cyclophosphamide
have limited activity against mast cell tumors, yet they are still offered as therapeutic
options.
 Toceranib phosphate (Palladia, Pfizer Pharmaceuticals) has shown therapeutic
promise: a kinase inhibitor with both antitumor and antiangiogenic activity through
inhibition of KIT, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2, and PDGFRbeta
Some drugs (e.g., vinbiastine and cyclophosphamide): add to lengthen the remission
of prednisone-sensitive tumors
■ Cutaneous tumor not controlled by surgery or radiotherapy: medical treatment
appropriate; in author's experience, prednisone and chemotherapy not beneficial for
aggressive tumors in cats
 Intestinal tumor and systemic mastocytosis after splenectomy (cats): prednisone and
chemotherapy indicated
■ Measurable tumor (dogs): vincristine alone induced partial remission in 21% of
patients
■ Prednisone: 1mg/kg po q24h; taper slowly after 4 months; discontinue after 7
months
1Vinblastine: 2-3 mg/m' IV; administer on day 1 of each 2l-day cycle; initiate at a
dosage of 2 mg/m'; increase by 10-30% with each subsequent cycle, depending on
tolerance and response (e.g., check CBC 1 week after administration);: perform CBC
before each administration; continue for 6 months
1 Cyclophosphamide: 250-300 mg/m' po divided over 4 days; administer on days 8.
9, 10, and 1l of each 21-day cycle; initiate at 250 mg/m' for two cycles; increase to
300 mg/m² for cycle 3 if well tolerated; continue for 6 months
 Lomustine (CCNU)@ 90 mg/m² po q4weeks for 4-5 treatments; CBC pretreatment
and 1 week posttreatment; if the l week posttreatment is too low, postpone the next
dose by l week; monitor serum chemistry for hepatotoxicity.
Histamine-blocking agents (e.g., cimetidine): helpful, particularly for systemic mas-
tocytosis or when massive histamine release is a concern; helps to prevent Gl ulcers
 and negative effects of histamine on fibroplasia in wound healing
■ Sucralfate helpful if gastrointestinal ulceration present: binds to ulcer site
COMMENTS
Client Education/Patient Monitoring
■ Warn client that a patient that has had more than one cutaneous tumor is predis-
posed to developing new mast cell tumors.
 Advise client that fine-needle aspiration and cytologic examination should be per-
formed as soon as possible on any new mass.
■ Inform client that appropriate surgical excision should be done as soon as
possible.
Evaluate any new masses cytologically or histologically.
■  Evaluate regional lymph nodes at regular intervals to detect metastasis of grade II or
III tumor.
Expected Course and Prognosis
■Dogs
   ss    n  p n i s 
tumors in other locations; always consider to have the potential to metastasize
 Survival times 6 months after surgery (Bostock): grade 1, 77% alive; grade 11, 45%
alive; grade 111, 13% alive
■ Lymph node metastasis: survival may be prolonged if prednisone and chemo-
therapy are given after the primary tumor and affected lymph node(s) are
aggressively excised
■Prednisone alone: effectively induced remission and prolonged survival time in
20% of patients with grade II or Il tumors; only one of the five responding patients
had documented lymph node metastasis when prednisone was initiated.
■Cats
 Solitary cutaneous tumor: prognosis excellent; rate of recurrence low (16-36%)
despite incomplete excision; <20% of patients develop metastasis
■
 Survival after splenectomy for splenic tumor: reports of >l year
■ Concurrent development of mastocythemia: prognosis poor, prednisone and
chemotherapy may achieve short-term remission
■  Intestinal tumor: prognosis poor; survival times rarely >4 months after surgery
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
section
Parasitic Disorders
39
chapter
Biting and stinging
Insects
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Insects produce dermatitis by bite, sting. or percutaneous absorption of allergens.
■
Allergenic substances are present in saliva, feces, and body parts, as well as in venom.
 Atopic patients commonly have positive in vitro reactions to insect allergens.
■
There is significant cross-reactivity between mite and insect allergens and between
the various insect allergens.
■In vivo reactions to these allergens may be due to direct irritation and/or injury to
tissues (non-immune-mediated response) or due to hypersensitivity (immune-
mediated response)
■ Of most importance to the small animal practitioner are reactions to fleas, spider,
flies, mosquitoes, and hymenoptera.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Fleas
■Flea bite dermatitis (FBD) and flea bite hypersensitivity (FBH) are the most common
causes of pruritic skin disease in dogs and cats.
■Fleas are small, wingless parasites that require a blood meal to reproduce; adult fleas
 remain on the host although most life stages of the parasite occur in the environment.
■More than 90% of fleas found on dogs and cats are Ctenocephalides felis felis; other
species are often associated with atypical environmental situations.
■ FBD: caused by direct irritation at the site of bites
osq snoao pe ( adh) paa ^(i ada) aea Aq pasn Hh 
hypersensitivities
■ Flea saliva contains histaminelike compounds, several complete allergens, and
haptens that bind to form complete antigens.
Spiders
Medically important species include the common brown spider (Loxosceles unicolor),
brown recluse (Loxosceles reclusa), black widow (Latrodectus mactans), and red-
legged widow (Latrodectus bishopi).
■ Bites of Loxosceles spp. produce localized tissue necrosis.
868
CHAPTER 39: BITING AND STINGING INSECTS 
■ Spider bites occur most often on the face and forelegs.
Flies
■ Besides their role as vectors for many diseases, flies can produce significant dermatitis
by direct damage and irritation to the skin.
■ Most often caused by bites from stable flies (Stomoxys calcitrans) and black flies
(Simulium spp.)
■May also be caused by horseflies and deerflies (Iabanus and Chrysops spp.)
 Fly strike (myiasis) is a distinct and separate dermatitis caused by laying of eggs by
dipterous flies on warm, wet skin, and subsequent larval (maggot) invasion of tissues.
Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
■ Protection by the hair coat usually prevents dogs and cats from mosquito and gnat
bites (Culicoides spp.).
A distinct syndrome of mosquito bite hypersensitivity documented in cats
Hymenoptera
■ Order includes ants, bees, wasps, yellow jackets, and hornets.
Only a few species of ants cause venomous reactions.
 Bees and some wasps die after a single sting: other hymenoptera can sting multiple
times.
 Toxins released into the skin cause acute inflammation and pain.
and death.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Fleas
■FBD
■ No age, sex, or breed predisposition
■ Related to presence of significant numbers of fleas
■FBH: Dogs
■Age of onset usually between 3 and 5 years
■ FBH is more likely to develop with intermittent (versus continuous) exposure to
fleas.
■FBH: Cats
■ No age, breed, or sex predisposition
Spiders/Flies/Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity/Hymenoptera
 No age, breed, or sex predisposition except as related to exposure to insects
400
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
CLINICAL FEATURES
Fleas
■ FBD: dogs and cats
■Fleas may or may not be evident based on infestation severity and self-grooming
behavior.
■ Mild papular dermatitis and mild hair barbering
■Incisors may be worn down with chronic chewing on hair coat (Fig. 39-1).
■Anemia in young or debilitated animals
■Tapeworm infestation
■Flea feces
■FBH: Dogs
Significant pruritus of the caudal lumbosacral region (triangular patch), tail folds.
caudal thighs, and inguinum (Figs. 39-2, 39-3)
Pyotraumatic dermatitis (acute moist dermatitis or *hot spot") (Fig. 39-4)
■Pyotraumatic folliculitis (deep *hot spot") of the head and neck in young golden
retriever and Saint Bernard dogs (Fig. 39-5)
Fibropruritic nodules (Fig. 39-6)
■ FBH: Cats
 Papulocrustous dermatitis (miliary dermatitis): generalized or confined to the
dorsal lumbosacral region or the head and neck (Fig. 39-7)
 Hair coat barbering of the ventral abdomen and caudal thighs
■ Lesions of the eosinophilic granuloma complex
Figure 39-1 Worn incisors from chronic self-chewing on hair coat
 Figure 39-3 Flea allergic dermatitis. Significant alopecia and lichenification of the dorsal lumbosacral region.
401
402
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
Figure 39-4 Pyotraumatic dermatitis.
 Figure 39-5 "Deep" pyotraumatic folliculitis lesion on the neck of a golden retriever
Spiders
Dogs and cats (Figs. 39-8, 39-9)
 Loxoceles spp.: initial local erythema surrounding puncture marks leading to tissue
necrosis and slough; lesions are painful
■ Latrodectus spp.: initial local erythema surrounding puncture marks leading to
granulomatous nodules; systemic effects due to neurotoxin release
 Systemic signs include salivation, vomiting, convulsions, and death.
Figure 39-6 Fibropruritic nodules.
 Figure 39-7 Erythematous plaques on the dorsum of a cat due to flea bites.
403
 Figure 39-8 Spider bite resulting in a central scar and surrounding zone of depigmentation caudal to the
axilla.
 Figure 39-9 Exudative and necrotic plaques on the dorsal muzzle secondary to a spider bite.
404
CHAPTER 39: BITING AND STINGING INSECTS
405
 Figure 39-10 Alopecia and crusting at the pinnal margin from fly bites
Flies
■Dogs
 Outdoor exposure, particularly warmer weather
■ Face and ears most affected
■
 Bites most frequent on the tips of erect pinnae and the exposed ridge of skin on
dogs with folded pinnae (Fig. 39-10)
■
 Severe erythema, ulceration, and scabbing
■ Lesions are often painful.
Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
■Cats
■ Outdoor exposure, specific to seasonality of mosquitoes
■Preference for darker hair coat and skin color
■
 Pruritic lesions of papules and crusts leading to erosions and scabs
■ Lesions most often affect less-haired regions of the dorsal muzzle, medial pinnae.
and lip margins (Figs. 39-11, 39-12).
■ Lesions often well-demarcated and symmetrical
'aadde senpou on ended e aau ae auud pepan 
■
 Occasional involvement of footpads with crusting
■ Lesions resolve when cat is confined/protected from mosquitoes.
Hymenoptera
■ Ants: dogs and cats
 Species of fire ants (Solenopsis spp.) aggressively attack when anthills are
disturbed.
406
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
Figure 39-11 Mosquito-bite hypersensitivity facial lesions.
 Figure 39-12 Scabs on the dorsal muzzle due to mosquito bite hypersensitivity.
 Ants attach to the skin by jaws and may sting up to 10 times; hundreds of stings
may occur in one attack.
■ Stings may initially be painless.
■ Individual stings result in pruritic and erythematous urticaria and papules leading
to sterile vesicles/white pustules; they may lead to focal necrosis (Fig. 39-13).
CHAPTER 39: BITING AND STINGING INSECTS
407
Figure 39-13Focal lesion caused by ant bite.
 Figure 39-14 Pyotraumatic dermatitis on the face associated with black ant hypersensitivity
 Lesions tend to be grouped and nonfollicular.
Anaphylactic shock is possible.
Venom contains Solenopsin D, an alkaloid piperidine derivative.
Hypersensitivity reactions to ant allergens (similar to house dust mite) are reported
(Figs. 39-14-39-16).
408
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
 Figure 39-15 Interdigital exudation and inflammation due to black ant hypersensitivity.
 Figure 39-16 Intradermal testing of dog in Figs. 39-14 and 39-15. Note strong positive reactions (urticarial
wheal) to multiple insect antigens including black ant (top row, right)
■ Bees, wasps, yellow jackets, hornets: dogs and cats
 Animal sensitivity and number of stings determine severity of reaction.
 Single stings result in localized pain, erythema, and severe edema.
Anaphylactic shock can result.
■ Stings occur most often on the muzzle and the extremities; if on the muzzle,
angioedema can result in respiratory compromise (Fig. 39-17).
 Some wasps, yellow jackets, and hornets can sting multiple times.
CHAPTER 39: BITING AND STINGING INSECTS
409
■ Figure 39-17 Facial swelling due to bee sting.
Agitated behavior of dogs during an attack may stimulate further response from
Africanized bees and hornets.
■
Severe attacks can result in death directly from the venom
■
Venom contains melittin and phospholipase A that act on cellular membranes
causing hemolysis, rhabdomyolysis, and kidney tubular necrosis.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Fleas
■Food allergy
■Atopy
 Sarcoptic/notoedric mange
Cheyletiellosis
■
 Demodicosis
 Pediculosis
 Dermatophytosis
■ Bacterial folliculitis
■Malassezia dermatitis
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex (cats)
Spiders
■
 Snakebite
 Localized physical, electrical, thermal or chemical trauma
410
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
■ Localized abscessation
■ Localized vasculitis
Flies
 Sarcoptic/notoedric mange
■
Cheyletiellosis
■
 Demodicosis
■Pediculosis
■ Pemphigus foliaceus/erythematosus
■
 Leproid granuloma
■Neoplasia
Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
■Food allergy
■
Atopy
Demodicosis
 Dermatophytosis
 Pemphigus foliaceus
■ Herpesvirus ulcerative dermatitis
■ Plasma cell pododermatitis
■
Squamous cell carcinoma
■ Eosinophilic granuloma complex
Hymenoptera
Sarcoptic/notoedric mange
Cheyletiellosis
Bacterial folliculitis
 Demodicosis
■Pemphigus foliaceus
DIAGNOSTICS
Fleas
■ Biopsy: superficial, perivascular to diffuse inflammation with eosinophils and mast
cells
■ Allergy testing (intradermal and/or serum) positive to flea antigen: not reliable
especially if negative
Elimination of other causes of pruritus
■
Fecal identification of Dipylidium caninum segments
Response to adequate flea control
CHAPTER 39: BITING AND STINGING INSECTS
¥411
Spiders
 Biopsy: epidermal and dermal necrosis with inflammation extending into the
subcutaneous tissue; vasculopathy and mixed inflammatory infiltrate
Visualization of puncture marks
■ History of exposure to arachnids
Flies
■ Biopsy: hyperkeratosis with erosions and serocellular crusting; dermal fibrosis, often
with interstitial and perivascular plasma cell and eosinophil infiltrate
Elimination of other causes of lesions
■ Response to appropriate fly control
Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
 Biopsy: severe, eosinophil-rich superficial and deep dermal infltrate; foci of eosino-
phil degranulation with flame figures and eosinophilic mural folliculitis
 Allergy testing (intradermal and/or serum) positive to culicoides antigen: not reliable
especially if negative
■ Response to application of insect repellants or being placed in a mosquito-free
environment
Hymenoptera
■ Biopsy: intraepidermal neutrophilic pustule with superficial and deep dermal
interstitial neutrophilic dermatitis and collagen degeneration
 Presence of stinger(s) or adherent ants
 History of exposure
 Intradermal allergy testing with hymenoptera antigens
THERAPEUTICS
Fleas
■Flea control
■ All dogs and cats in the household must be treated.
■ Flea control measures should be tailored to the individual situation.
■ Multiple effective products are available.
■
 Client education is paramount for successful control of fleas on both the pets and
in the environment.
 Topical corticosteroid sprays (with or without antibiotics) effective for individual
lesions
Prednisolone (2 to 4 mg/kg q24h tapering dosage)
■Antibiotics for deep bacterial folliculitis (see chapter 24)
Antihistamines rarely effective for complete control of symptoms
412
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
Spiders
1 Local infusion of early lesions with corticosteroids and/or lidocaine
Systemic support with antibiotics, anti-inflammatory medications and analgesics
■
Wound treatment
■ Environmental cleanup (eliminating outdoor sites and insecticide spraying)
Flies
■Fly avoidance
■ Application of repellants to pinnae
Wound treatment
■ Environmental cleanup to remove fly breeding sources
Mosquito Bite Hypersensitivity
■Mosquito avoidance
■
Application of repellants to face and pinnae
 Topical corticosteroid sprays effective for individual lesions
 Prednisolone (2 to 4mg/kg q24h tapering dosage) or dexamethasone (0.1 mg/kg
q24h tapering dosage)
■ Environmental cleanup to remove mosquito breeding sources
Hymenoptera
Remove stinger(s).
Antihistamines (see Appendix A)
Corticosteroids
Topical corticosteroid sprays effective for individual lesions
Prednisolone (2 to 4 mg/kg q24h tapering dosage)
■ Reduce exposure
■Systemic support
■ Hyposensitization can be very effective in patients with prior incidences of
anaphylaxis.
 Portable epinephrine-administration devices are available for use by the owner when
reexposure is unavoidable.
COMMENTS
■ Insect avoidance and control should be stressed as the primary method to prevent
recurrences.
■ Symptoms may be seasonal and/or geographical variation dependent on insect
populations.
■ In situations where complete avoidance of insects is not possible, reduction in
exposure will simplify and reduce medications needed to control symptoms.
Author: Alexander H. Werner
chapter
40
Demodicosis (Canine
and Feline)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 An inflammatory parasitic disease of dogs and, less frequently, cats that is character-
ized by an increased number of mites in the hair follicles, adnexa, and on the surface
of the skin, which often leads to folliculitis, furunculosis, and alopecia
■ May be localized or generalized
■ Part of the normal fauna of the skin; typically present in small numbers
Pathology develops when mite numbers exceed that tolerated by the immune system.
The initial proliferation of mites may be the result of a genetic or immunologic
disorder.
■ Dead or degenerate mites may be found in noncutaneous sites (e.g., lymph node.
intestinal wall, spleen, liver, kidney, urinary bladder, lung. thyroid gland, blood,
urine, and feces) and are considered to represent drainage to these areas by blood
and/or lymph.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Dogs
1 Demodex canis: most common mite identified; typically present in small numbers;
resides in the hair follicles and, rarely, in the sebaceous glands of the skin (Figs.
40-1, 40-2)
■ Demodex injai: large-bodied demodex species; these mites tend to reside in the
sebaceous glands; often associated with a seborrheic dermatitis along the dorsal
midline; most often identified in West Highland white terriers and wire-haired fox
terriers (Fig. 40-3)
 Demodex cornei: short-bodied demodex species; resides in the superficial layers of
the epidermis; clinical presentation similar to D. canis (Fig. 40-4)
Cats
■ Demodex cati: similar in appearance to D. canis; resides in the hair follicles
(Fig. 40-5)
 Demodex gatoi: similar to D. corneum; resides in the stratum corneum layer of the
epidermis; considered potentially contagious to other cats (Fig. 40-6)
413
■Figure 40-1 Demodex canis mites. Skin scraping. Note the different stages of the mite, including an egg.
Figure 40-2 Demodex canis. (Courtesy of Katy Tater.)
414
 Figure 40-3 Demodex injai. (Courtesy of Katy Tater.)
415
416
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
 Figure 40-5 Demodex cati. (Courtesy of Katy Tater.)
Figure 40-6 Demodex gatoi. (Courtesy of Katy Tater.)
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Dogs and rarely cats
Potential increased incidence in Siamese and Burmese cat breeds
 Categorized as juvenile onset/adult onset as well as localized vs. generalized
■Juvenile onset less than 18 months of age
■ Localized: usually in young dogs; median age 3-6 months
■ Generalized: both young and old animals and often is defined as involving the feet.
sd  nd   s  s     
CHAPTER 4O: DEMODICOSIS (CANINE AND FELINE)
¥417
Dogs
 Exact immunopathologic mechanism unknown
 Studies indicate that dogs with generalized demodicosis have a subnormal percentage
of IL-2 receptors on their lymphocytes and subnormal IL-2 production.
■ Genetic factors, immunosuppression, and/or metabolic diseases may predispose
animal.
Cats
■ Often associated with metabolic diseases (e.g., FIV, systemic lupus erythematosus,
diabetes mellitus)
 Both systemic and topical immunosuppressive therapy may trigger demodicosis.
 D. gatoi is rarely a marker for metabolic disease; individual reports indicate that it
 may be transferable from cat to cat within the same household.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Alopecia, scaling, follicular casts (keratosebaceous material adhered to the hair
shaft), crust, erythema, hyperpigmentation, lichenification
■ Secondary bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis are often noted in severe canine
demodicosis with concurrent lethargy fever, lymphadenopathy, and pain.
 Demodex corneum and Demodex gatoi may be associated with pruritus.
 Ceruminous otitis externa has been associated with Demodex mites in both dogs and
cats.
Dogs
■Localized
 Lesions: usually mild; consist of erythema and a light scale
■ Patches: several may be noted; most common site is the face, especially
around the perioral and periocular areas; may also be seen on the trunk
and legs
1Generalized
 Can be widespread from the onset, with multiple poorly circumscribed patches
of erythema, alopecia, and scale (Fig. 40-7)
■ As hair follicles become distended with large numbers of mites, secondary
bacterial infections are common, often with resultant rupturing of the follicle
(furunculosis) (Fig. 40-8).
■ With progression, the skin can become severely inflamed, exudative, and granu-
lomatous (Figs. 40-9-40-12).Demodex injai often causes a seborrheic strip along
the dorsal midline.
 Figure 40-7 Patch of alopecia with erythema and scaling secondary to demodicosis.
 Figure 40-8 Swelling of the digits caused by demodicosis and secondary furunculosis.
418
CHAPTER 4O: DEMODICOSIS (CANINE AND FELINE)
419
 Figure 40-9 Demodicosis with severe secondary bacterial infection of the facial and periauricular region.
 Figure 40-10 Facial demodicosis.
Cats
■ Often characterized by partial to complete multifocal alopecia of the eyelids,
periocular region, head, forelimbs, dorsal or ventral trunk, and neck; may be
generalized
 Demodex gatoi infections are often indistinguishable from allergic dermatitis and
 psychogenic dermatoses. Multiple cats in the household may be affected.
420
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
 Figure 40-11 Note areas of excoriation secondary to generalized demodicosis.
 Figure 40-12 Severe diffuse generalized demodicosis.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSES
Dogs
Bacterial folliculitis/furunculosis
 Dermatophytosis
Contact dermatitis
 Pemphigus complex
CHAPTER 4O: DEMODICOSIS (CANINE AND FELINE)
¥421
 Dermatomyositis
 Systemic lupus erythematosus
Cats
 Allergic dermatitis
■Psychogenic dermatoses
DIAGNOSTICS
■ May be useful for identifying underlying metabolic diseases in both dogs and cats
 FeLV and FIV serology: identify underlying metabolic diseases in cats
Skin scrapings and/or trichograms (hair plucks): diagnostic for finding large numbers
of mites in the majority of cases; the intrascapular region may be the most productive
site in the cat since the area is not easily groomed
 Superficial scrapings are best for D. corneum (dog) and D. gatoi (cat); deep scrapings
or trichograms are best for D. canis (dog), D. injai (dog, and D. cati (cat).
 Acetate tape preps may be used to identify Demodex corneum and Demodex gatoi.
Otic swabs will identify demodex as a cause of otitis externa.
 Fecal exams may be helpful in cats due to the grooming behavior.
 Cutaneous biopsy: may be needed when lesions are chronic, granulomatous, and
fibrotic (especially on the paw)
THERAPEUTICS
 Localized: conservative; most cases (90%) resolve spontaneously with no treatment
■]
 Evaluate the general health status of dogs/cats (serum chemistry, CBC, FeLV/ FIV,
urinalysis, heartworm testing).
  a d      
with the chronicity of the problem are issues; many cases are medically controlled,
not cured
 Antibiotic therapy in conjunction with adjunctive topical therapy (antibacterial
shampoo/spray) is frequently warranted to control secondary infections
 Remember to treat for l month past a clinical cure and negative skin scraping.
Drugs of Choice: Dogs
Amitraz (Mitaban; Taktic-EC)
■ A formamidine, which inhibits monoamine oxidase and prostaglandin synthesis:
an alpha2-adrenergic agonist
■ FDA-approved for treating dogs over 4 months of age
■ Small dogs may exhibit marked lethargy 12-24 hours after application. Patients
with respiratory disease or diabetes should not use amitraz.
422SECTION 7:PARASITIC DISORDERS
■Use weekly (the label reads every other week) at 1/2 vial (5mL)/gal water until
resolution of clinical signs and no mites are found on skin scrapings; do not rinse
off; let air-dry.
Treat for l month following negative skin scrape.
 Apply a benzoyl peroxide shampoo before application of the dip as a bactericidal
therapy and to increase exposure of the mites to the miticide through follicular
flushing activity.
■  The efficacy is proportional to the frequency of administration and the concentra-
tion of the dip.
■ It may be mixed with mineral oil (3mL amitraz to 30mL mineral oil) for
application to focal areas, such as pododemodicosis.
■ Success with the 9% amitraz collar has not been established, although there are
positive anecdotal reports. The collar is generally not recommended.
■ Between 1ll% and 30% of cases will not be cured; may need to try an alternative
therapy or control with maintenance dips every 2-8 weeks
■ Promeris (Fort Dodge Animal Health spot-on treatment containing amitraz and
        ne  
variable with this product and is still under investigation; promeris does not
been associated with this product
■ Ivermectin (Ivomec; Eqvalan Liquid)
■ Considered best current therapeutic option except for select breeds
■ A macrocyclic lactone with GABA agonist activity Binds to chloride channels in
the mite's nervous system causing paralysis and death. Safety in mammals is due
to the lack of glutamate-gated chloride channels in the peripheral nervous system
and the restriction of GABA-gated channels in the central nervous system (which
is protected by the blood-brain barrier)
Daily oral administration of the injectable form of ivermectin is given @ 0.3-
0.6 mg/kg and is very effective, even when amitraz fails.
■ Start @ l/2 the dose for the first week and then increase to the full dose for the
p m sp o an on  n  n  j 
sensitivity.
■ Ireat for 60 days beyond negative skin scrapings (average 3-8 months).
■  Ivermectin is contraindicated in collies, Shetland sheepdogs, Old English sheep-
dogs, white German shepherds, other herding breeds, and crosses with these
breeds; sensitive breeds appear to tolerate the acaricidal dosages of milbemycin.
Ivermectin sensitivity is derived from a deletion mutation of the multidrug resis-
tant gene (MDRl or ABCBl)resulting in a truncated non-functional protein called
the blood-brain barrier. P-glycoprotein pumps ivermectin within the brain back
into the blood. Testing for this mutation, and thus drug sensitivity, is available
through Washington State Universitys Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology
Laboratory (www.vetmed.wsu.edu.vcpl).
CHAPTER 4O: DEMODICOSIS (CANINE AND FELINE)  423
 Demodex otitis can be treated with 0.0l% ivermectin solution (Acarexx-Idexx).
 Milbemycin (Interceptor, Norvartis Animal Health)
■ A macrocylic lactone with GABA agonist activity
■ Dosage of 1mg/kg po q24h cures 50% of cases; 2mg/kg po q24h cures 85% of
cases; oral dose recommendations range between 1.5-3.1 mg/kg/day
■Treat for 60 days beyond multiple negative skin scrapings.
■  Ivermectin-sensitive breeds generally tolerate milbemycin.
Side effects are similar to ivermectin (depression, stupor, coma, ataxia, seizures).
■The major limitation of the drug is expense.
■Demodex otitis can be treated with 0.1% milbemycin oxime topical (MilbeMite
Otic Solution, Novartis Animal Health)
Moxidectin (Cydectin injectable, Fort Dodge)
■ Few studies available regarding efficacy
■ Injectable form given orally @ 400 ug/kg/day
 Do not use for ivermectin-sensitive breeds.
■ Imidacloprid and moxidectin spot-on product (Advantage Multi, Bayer HealthCare)
is reported to be effective in 87% of treated dogs in a recent study where the dogs
were treated monthly at the recommended dose of 0.l mL/kg. Dogs received 2-4
 treatments in the study. Further investigation limits the usefulness of this product
from the treatment of demodicosis except in mild cases.
■Doramectin
■ New injectable avermectin being tested as weekly subQ injections @ 600 ug/kg
■ Should not be considered for ivermectin-sensitive breeds
Drugs of Choice: Cats
■  Lime sulfur dips
 Current treatment of choice
■ Topical 2% lime-sulfur dips are the safest and most effective.
■ Once weekly for at least 4-6 weeks and continuing for 1-2 months after clinical
cure and negative scrapings
■All in-contact cats should be treated in cases of Demodex gatoi.
■ An Elizabethan collar should be used to prevent ingestion until the dip is dry to
avoid irritation.
Amitraz
■ Amitraz solutions applied weekly for 4 treatments may lead to good resolution of
clinical signs yet at the risk of toxicity.
■Doramectin
■ Anecdotal report of resolution of D. cati in 3 cats treated with Doramectin @
600ug/kg subQ weekly for 3 injections.
Ivermectin
■Anecdotal reports of efficacy @ 300-600 ug/kg/daily or every other day given orally
■ Risk of neurotoxicosis and propylene glycol sensitivity
 Ivermectin use is discouraged at this time.
424 SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
Drug Toxicities
■ The combined use of medications (amitraz and ivermectin) is strongly discouraged
and should be avoided due to potential toxicity.
■Amitraz
■ Most common side effects: somnolence, lethargy, depression, anorexia seen in
 30% of patients for 1236 hr after treatment
 Other side effects: vomiting, diarrhea, pruritus, polyuria, mydriasis, bradycardia,
hypoventilation, hypotension, hypothermia, ataxia, ileus, bloat, hyperglycemia.
convulsions, death
■ The incidence and severity of side effects do not appear to be proportional to the
dose or frequency of use.
■ Humans can develop dermatitis, headaches, and respiratory difficulty after
exposure.
■Use of alpha2-adrenergic antagonists can reverse signs of toxicosis. Atipamezole
(Antisedan) @ 0.05 mg/kg intramuscularly can reverse adverse signs in 10 minutes;
may repeat every 4-8 hours.
Yohimbine at 0.1l mg/kg IV is an antidote, administered slowly; may repeat every
4-8 hours.
■ Avoid antidepressants and MAOls, such as selegiline, in dogs receiving amitraz.
Shampoo with mild soap to remove the topical product (dip or spot-on).
  Ivermectin and milbemycin
 Breed: related toxicities (see above)
 Signs of toxicity: salivation, vomiting, mydriasis, confusion, ataxia, hypersensitiv-
ity to sound, weakness, recumbency, coma, and death
■Ivermectin should not be given in conjunction with P-glycoprotein inhibitors:
antidepressants (fluoxetine, paroxetine, St. Johns Wort), antimicrobials (erythro-
mycin, itraconazole, ketoconazole). opiods (methadone, pentazocine), cardiac
drugs (amiodarone, carvedilol, nicardipine, quinidine, verapamil), immunosup-
pressants (cyclosporine, tacrolimus), miscellaneous (bromocriptine, chlorproma-
zine, grapefruit juice, tamoxifen, spinosad: Comfortis, Eli Lilly)
■ Therapy for toxicosis: supportive and symptomatic care; atropine or glycopyrolate
as needed to treat bradycardia; avoid other drugs that stimulate the GABA recep-
tors (benzodiazepam tranquilizers)
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Prognosis (dogs): depends heavily on genetic, immunologic, and underlying
diseases
■Localized: most cases (90%) resolve spontaneously with no treatment; <10% progress
to the generalized form
■Adult-onset (dogs): often severe and refractory to treatment
CHAPTER 4O: DEMODICOSIS (CANINE AND FELINE)
425
■Adult-onset: sudden occurrence is often associated with internal disease,malignant
neoplasia, and/or immunosuppressive disease; approximately 25% of cases are idio-
pathic over a follow-up period of 1-2 years
■ Avoid breeding dogs with the generalized form of demodicosis
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
41
chapter
Sarcoptid Mites
(Sarcoptes, Cheyletiella,
Notoedres, and Otodectes
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■Nonseasonal, intensely pruritic, highly contagious parasitic skin diseases of dogs and
cats caused by infestation with the mites Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis (dogs—sarcoptic
mange), Notoedres cati (cats-notoedric mange), Cheyletiella yasguri (dogs-"walking
dandruff"), Cheyletiella blakei (cats—"walking dandruff"), and Otodectes cynotis
(dogs and cats—ear mites)
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■  Mites burrow through the stratum corneum and cause intense pruritus by mechani-
cal irritation, production of irritating by-products, and secretion of allergenic sub-
stances that produce a hypersensitivity reaction. These mites can transiently affect a
species other than the host species (dog, cat, rabbit, human) via direct contact.
Considered highly contagious within the host species
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
1 Animals of all ages and breeds
          s
Catteries and multiple cat households
 Living outside
Boarded at kennel
Visits to veterinarian's office
1Visits to groomer
■ Residence at animal shelter
 Nonseasonal extremely intense pruritus
 Zoonosis
CLINICAL FEATURES
■  Sarcoptes scabei infestation
Alopecia and erythematous rash: pinnae, elbows, hocks, ventral abdomen, and
chest (Fig. 41-1)
426
CHAPTER 41: SARCOPTID MITES (SARC OPTES, CHEYLETIELLA, NOTOEDRES, AND OTODECTES)
427
 Figure 41-1 Young mixed-breed dog showing the typical total body distribution of cutaneous lesions associ-
ated with sarcoptes scabei infestation. Alopecia, erythema, papules, crusts, and scale are evident.
as pue sisnn jo bussuon suoisal uibie ea yissl l-it b ui se bop awes zit ane 
  Lesions on ear margins: vary from barely perceptible scaling to alopecia or crusts;
ear canals not affected (Fig. 4l-2)
■ Chronic: periocular and truncal alopecia; secondary crusts, excoriations, and
pyoderma; diffuse papular eruption
■Possible peripheral lymphadenopathy
428 SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
Frequently bathed dogs will often have chronic pruritus with minimal skin lesions
("scabies incognito")
■ Dogs: often minimal or no response to anti-inflammatory doses of steroids
■Multiple dog households: more than one dog usually shows signs
 Notoedres cati infestation
■  Intense pruritus with thick adherent crusting dermatitis
Areas most affected include the pinnae, head, face, and neck, yet it may become
generalized.
■  Peripheral lymphadenopathy is common. Cats may become anorexic and emaci-
ated if left untreated.
  Cheyletiella infestation
■  Characterized by excessive scaling and variable pruritus
■ Large mite size has helped coin the term "walking dandruff" because the mite is
 sometimes visible with the naked eye.
■ Cocker Spaniels, poodles, long-haired cats, and rabbits in the household may be
asymptomatic carriers.
■ Young animals seem to be most at risk.
■ Dorsal orientation of lesions (scale with minimal erythema) is most common.
■ Some cats may exhibit bilateral and symmetrical alopecia (Fig. 4l-3).
■Otodectes infestation
■ Pruritus and resultant excoriation usually located around the ears, head, and neck
yet it may become generalized.
■ Thick, red-brown or black crusts within and around the ear canal
 Figure 41-3 Cheyletiellosis in a cat. Note the excessive scaling within the hair coat.
CHAPTER 41: SARCOPTID MITES (SARC OPTES, CHEYLETIELLA, NOTOEDRES, AND OTODECTES)
429
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■Food allergy
■Atopy
■Malassezia dermatitis
■]
 Flea-allergic dermatitis
 Dermatophytosis
 Pyoderma
■
 Demodicosis
 Contact allergy
Pelodera dermatitis
Pruritic impetigo
■Otitis externa/media
■Pediculosis
■Seborrhea
DIAGNOSTICS
 ELISA technique: identify Sarcoptes-infested dogs; detection of circulating IgG anti-
bodies against Sarcoptes antigens available yet high false positive results in dogs
successfully treated for scabies mites and false negative results in young dogs and in
dogs receiving corticosteroids; not widely used
 Positive pinnal-pedal reflex: rubbing the ear margin between the thumb and forefin-
ger should induce the animal to scratch with the ipsilateral hind leg; occurs in 75-
90% of cases of scabies, notoedres, and otodectes; not diagnostic
■
 Superficial skin scrapings: scabies and notoedres (Fig. 41-4)
Touch tape prep and “flea combing": cheyletiella (Fig. 41-5)
Ear swab in mineral oil: otodectes (Fig. 41-6)
Fecal flotation: occasionally reveals mites or ova
Favorable response to scabicidal treatment: often an effective method for tentative
diagnosis in sarcoptes infestation
 Any dog with nonseasonal pruritus that responds poorly to steroids should be treated
with a scabicide (even if skin scrape results are negative) to definitively rule out
sarcoptic mange. Feline notoedres mites are easier to find on skin scraping than
canine sarcoptes mites and thus rarely require treatment to rule out the diagnosis.
THERAPEUTICS
Scabicidal dips: the entire dog must be treated; treatment failures often linked to
 owner's reluctance to apply dip to the patient's face and ears; do not let the patient
430
SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
Figure 41-4 Sarcoptes scabiei mite and ova found on superficial skin scrapings of the ear margin.
 Figure 41-5 Cheyletiella yasguri (dog)
■ All in-contact dogs, cats, rabbits: should be treated, even those with no clinical signs:
may be asymptomatic carriers
■ Thoroughly clean and treat environment; mites can survive for up to 3 weeks off of
a host animal.
■Corticosteroids may be used concurrently with miticidal therapy.
431
Figure 41-6 Otodectes mite from an ear swab
Drugs of Choice
 Ivermectin: highly effective; 0.2-0.4 mg/kg subQ every 1-2 weeks for 4 treatments:
do not use in ivermectin-sensitive breeds (collies, Shetland sheepdogs, white German
shepherds, Australian shepherds, Old English sheepdogs); effective for Sarcoptes
scabei infestation (dogs)
 Ivermectin topical (Acarexx, Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica): useful in otodectes
■ Selamectin (Revolution, Pfizer): the only systemic treatment licensed for canine
scabies; best results obtained when product @ 6-12 mg/kg applied topically every 2
weeks for 3-4 treatments (dogs and cats)
■ Moxidectin (Cydectin, Wyeth): @ 200 ug/kg po or subQ q2weeks for 2 treatments
is a less used option for sarcoptid and psoroptid mite infestation
■ Milbemycin (Interceptor): effective when used at 0.75mg/kg po q24h; may be
effective at 2 mg/kg po every week for 3 weeks (dogs)
■ Milbemycin topical (MilbeMite, Novartis): may be helpful in Otodectes
            
treatments; make sure entire body is covered, including the face and ears (dogs)
■ Whole-body rinse solution: 2-3% solution of lime sulfur (LymDip) apply for 5-6
weeks; make sure entire body is covered, including the face and ears (best treatment
option for cats; approved for dogs and cats)
 Fipronil Spray @ 3mL/kg applied as a pump spray to the entire body 3 times @
2-week intervals, or 6mL/kg applied as a sponge-on once weekly for 4-6 weeks
(canine scabies)
clinical resolution of the lesions.
432SECTION 7: PARASITIC DISORDERS
■Systemic antibiotics: may be needed for 2l days or longer to resolve any secondary
pyoderma
■ Antihistamines or low-dose glucocorticoids (0.5mg/kg ql2h for lst week of
treatment), if mites were identified; may make pruritus diminish more quickly
COMMENTS
 Bedding should be disposed of and the environment thoroughly cleaned and treated
with parasiticidal sprays/foggers/bombs (flea insecticides for the environment are
effective).
■  Ivermectin: use with extreme caution in collies, Shetland sheepdogs, Old English
sheepdogs, Australian shepherds, white German shepherds, and their crossbreeds;
toxicity is more likely to occur in herding-type breeds.
 It may take as long as 4-6 weeks for the intense pruritus and clinical signs to resolve,
owing to the hypersensitivity reaction.
■ Topical treatments are prone to failure, owing to incomplete application of the
treatment solution.
■ Reinfection can occur if the contact with infected animals continues.
■ Always consider mites as a possible cause of pruritus in allergic dogs that cease to
respond to steroid therapy.
Approximately 30% of dogs with Sarcoptes infections will also react to house dust
mite antigens. People who come in close contact with an affected animal may develop
a pruritic, papular rash on their arms, chest, or abdomen; human lesions are usually
transient and should resolve spontaneously after the affected animal has been treated
 If the lesions persist, clients should seek advice from their dermatologist.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
section
8
Selected Topics
42
chapter
Acne, Canine and Feline
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Chronic inflammatory disorder of the chin and lips of young animals
Characterized by folliculitis and furunculosis; may not be true acne since not always
associated with comedone formation except in the cat
■  Recognized almost exclusively in short-coated canine breeds
■ Once thought that hormones (increased androgen turnover) played a triggering role;
■ Mechanical irritation may facilitate development of lesions by causing breakage of
 the short hairs below the surface of the epidermis and subsequent follicular rupture.
The exposed keratin may then trigger a foreign body inflammatory reaction. Secondary
bacterial invasion is common.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Canine predisposed short-coated breeds: boxers, Doberman pinschers, English bull-
dogs, Great Danes, weimaraners, mastiffs, eottweilers, German short-haired pointers,
and pit bull terriers
■ Feline: no breed predisposition
Young dogs: under l year of age; cats: all ages. often in conjunction with
allergy
■ Initial stages: accentuation of follicular ostia, comedones, mild scabbing, mild
erythema of rostral chin
The area may become minimally to markedly swollen with numerous erythematous
 papules and pustules (folliculitis); if chin swelling is noted in the cat, consider
eosinophilic granuloma as a differential.
■ Advanced stages: lesions may be exudative and indicate a secondary deep bacterial
infection, furunculosis
■ Lesions may be painful on palpation yet are most frequently nonpainful and
nonpruritic.
■Resolved lesions may remain scarred, thickened, and lichenified.
Chronic lesions may develop recurrent infection.
434
CHAPTER 42: ACNE, CANINE AND FELINE
435
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■]
Dermatophytosis
■
 Demodicosis
■Foreign body
■Contact dermatitis
■]
 Eosinophilic granuloma complex
 Juvenile cellulitis
■Malassezia dermatitis
DIAGNOSTICS
Skin scrapings: demodicosis
■
Fungal culture: dermatophytosis
 Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing: in patients with suppurative folliculitis and
furunculosis that are nonresponsive to initial antibiotic selection
■ Impression smear for Malassezia overgrowth
 Biopsy: histopathologic confirmation for cases in which diagnosis is in question-
dilated keratin filled hair follicles, perifolliculitis, folliculitis and furunculosis;
fibrosis in chronic cases
 Initial lesions: hairless follicular papules; characterized histopathologically by marked
follicular keratosis, plugging, dilatation, and perifolliculitis
 Bacteria: in the early stages: not seen and cannot be isolated from lesions
As disease progresses: papules enlarge and rupture, promoting a suppurative
folliculitis and furunculosis.
THERAPEUTICS
Depends on the severity and chronicity of the disease
 Reduce behavioral trauma to the chin (e.g., rubbing on the carpet, chewing bones
that increase salivation).
 Frequent cleaning with benzoyl peroxide shampoo or gel to reduce the bacterial
numbers on the surface of the skin
 Application of mupirocin ointment to eroded lesions and lip folds (if colonized by
bacteria)
 Instruct owners to avoid expressing the lesions, which may cause internal rupture
of the papule and massive inflammation.
Other topical antibiotics (clindamycin, metronidazole)
■Isotretinoin (retin-A), tazolac, tretinoin (vitamin A acid, retinoic acid gel): may
reduce follicular keratosis yet may also be irritating
 Corticosteroids: may be necessary to reduce inflammation
436
 SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Antibiotics appropriate for deep bacterial infection: especially clindamycin 1l mg/kg/
day for a minimum of 4-6 weeks or cephalosporins (cephalexin, 22 mg/kg po q8h
for 6-8 weeks)
■ May need to perform bacterial culture and sensitivity test
Precautions/Interactions
■Benzoyl peroxide: may bleach carpets and fabrics; may be irritating
■Mupirocin ointments: greasy
■
 Topical retinoids: may be drying and irritating
■  Topical steroids: may cause adrenal suppression with repeated use
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
43
Anal Sac Disorders/
Perineal Fistulas
PERIANAL FISTULAS
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Characterized as a chronic inflammatory disease causing multiple chronic fistulous
tracts or ulcerating sinuses involving the perianal region
 These tracts may involve deep tissues and actually perforate the anus.
■  They are extremely malodorous, ulcerative, suppurative, and painful.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Etiology unknown; apocrine gland inflammation (hidradenitis suppurativa), impac-
tion and infection of the anal sinuses and crypts, infection of the circumanal glands
and hair follicles, and anal sacculitis have all been implicated.
 An association with colitis in German shepherd dogs has been proposed similar to
the association of perianal fistulas and Crohns disease in people. It is often consid-
ered to be an immune defect.
■ The gastrointestinal system becomes involved when excessive scar tissue formation
around the anus results in tenesmus, dyschezia, or other problems associated with
defecation.
 Self-mutilation can be a major problem.
 One theory involves low tail carriage and a broad tail base as proposed risk factors
predisposing the dog to inflammation and infection because of poor ventilation,
accumulation of feces, moisture, and secretions; yet other breds with similar tail
carriage are not predisposed.
■ High density of apocrine sweat glands in the cutaneous zone of the anal canal of
German shepherd dogs, yet this theory has lost emphasis.
 Hidradenitis suppurativa may be associated with immune or endocrine dysfunction,
genetic factors, and poor hygiene.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Dogs
 German shepherd dog and Irish setter most commonly affected breds
437
438
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Mean age, 7 years; range, 7 months to 12 years
■
■A genetic basis has been proposed but not proven.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Vary with the severity and extent of involvement
Dyschezia
Tenesmus
1Hematochezia
■
 Constipation
 Diarrhea
 Malodorous mucopurulent anal discharge
 Painful tail movements
Licking and self-mutilation
 Reluctance to sit, posturing difficulties, and personality changes
 Fecal incontinence
 Anorexia
Weight loss
1 Perianal fistulous tracts
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Chronic anal sac abscess
■ Perianal adenoma or adenocarcinoma with ulceration and drainage
■ Rectal fistula
DIAGNOSTICS
Presumptive diagnosis: based on clinical signs and results of physical examination
 Definitive diagnosis: made by biopsy of the affected area
■ Colonoscopy with biopsy may reveal associated colitis
THERAPEUTICS
：
Clipping hair from the affected area
■
Daily antiseptic lavage
■
 Systemic and topical antibiotics
■Hydrotherapy
■ Elevation of the tail
CHAPTER 43: ANAL SAC DISORDERS/PERINEAL FSTULAS 439
Analgesics
■  Dietary modification: stool softeners if pain/tenesmus; fiber-enhanced or hypoaller
genic diet if associated colitis/proctitis
 Warm-packing the affected area
Surgical Options
 Surgery was once considered the most effective treatment, yet medical protocols have
become more effective.
Which surgical method to use is controversial; none of those currently used
consistently resolves the problem
 Surgical options include electrosurgery, cryosurgery, surgical debridement with ful-
guration by chemical cautery exteriorization and fulguration by electrocautery.
surgical resection, radical excision of the rectal ring, tail setting, tail amputation, and
laser surgery.
■ Perform anal sacculectomy with the above-selected procedure.
■ Each technique has advantages and disadvantages that must be weighed when making
a choice.
■ The primary objective of surgery is complete removal or destruction of diseased
tissue while preserving normal tissue and function. Postoperative complications
include rectal stenosis, fecal incontinence, and high recurrence rate.
Multiple procedures may be necessary for complete resolution.
Medical Options
■Cyclosporine (2-5mg/kg po q24h): most dogs improve; up to 50% may clear com-
pletely; some patients may still require surgery because of inadequate clearing of
fistulas or an anal stricture. If a poor response is noted, serum levels may be evalu-
ated; appropriate levels are 200-300 ng/mL (trough level taken 12 hours after dosing).
Levels greater than loo0 ng/mL are considered toxic and those levels greater than
3.000 ng/mL may cause hepatic or renal damage. A modified form of cyclosporine
must be used for good success (Neoral or Atopica, Novartis); do not use Sandimmune;
major disadvantage of cyclosporine is cost; often requires maintenance therapy (use
as low a dose as possible); therefore it is recommended to monitor serum chemistry
every 3-6 months dependent on the necessary dose/frequency of maintenance cyclo.
sporine; monitor clinical side effects—i.e., gingival hyperplasia, viral papillomas.
vomiting/diarrhea.
1Ketoconazole may be given in conjunction with cyclosporine to help alleviate cost.
yet the dose of cyclosporine must be lowered. Ketoconazole @ 2.5-5 mg/kg per day
in conjunction with cyclosporine @ 3-5mg/kg/day. Ketoconazole has been shown
microsomal enzymes and can double the half life of cyclosporine
■Antibiotics and analgesics may be indicated in some cases. Clindamycin is currently
the antibiotic of choice @ ll mg/kg/day or sometimes given bid for a higher
therapeutic dose.
440
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Corticosteroids (2mg/kg po ql2h); rarely effective
■ A hypoallergenic diet for 6 weeks may yield partial or complete resolution (about
33% of cases); most dogs do not improve.
 on  p aa s e     s 
Possible Treatment Complications
■Recurrence
■ Failure to heal
■ Dehiscence of surgical site
Tenesmus
■Fecal incontinence
■Anal stricture
■Flatulence
■The incidence of postoperative complications is directly related to severity of disease.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Guarded for complete resolution except in mildly affected patients
■ Clients often become frustrated with the difficulty of attaining definitive
resolution.
ANAL SAC DISORDERS: IMPACTION, INFECTION, NEOPLASIA
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Anal sac diseases include impaction, sacculitis, abscessation, fistulation, and
neoplasia.
■  Inflammatory anal sac disorders are more common in dogs (small breeds) than cats.
Impaction occurs when the anal sacs fail to empty and become distended causing
discomfort/pain. Sacculitis is inflammation that can lead to abscessation and second-
ary bacterial infection. Sacculitis is characterized by blood-flecked prurulent content
 and often leads to rupture and fistulation.
■ Anal sac adenocarcinoma is a malignant proliferation of the apocrine cells of the anal
sac. A mass is not always visible externally.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ The exact cause is unknown.
■ Often associated with chronic diarrhea, constipation, anal sphincter laxity
CHAPTER 43: ANAL SAC DISORDERS/PERINEAL FISTULAS
441
■ May be associated with hypersecretion as well as obstruction
■ Anal sacculitis has a proposed association with food hypersensitivity.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Painful defecation, constipation, scooting, malodor; tenesmus or constipation may
result from simply inflammation or metastasis to the sublumbar or iliac lymph nodes
 Anal sac adenocarcinomas may secrete a parathormone-like substance that causes
pseudo-hyperparathyroidism with hypercalcemia, which may cause polyuria, poly
dipsia, weakness, lethargy, or gastrointestinal signs. Renal calcification may produce
signs of renal failure.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Allergy: food hypersensitivity, inhalant/percutaneous, flea
 Parasites: tapeworms, tail fold pyoderma causing discomfort
■Neoplasia
■ Perianal fistulas
DIAGNOSTICS
■]
 Rectal exam
■ Expression of anal sacs: impaction—thick pasty brown contents; sacculitis—creamy
yellow/green, blood-flecked
■ Cytology of contents
■Culture and sensitivity of contents or draining tract; often gram-negative bacteria
 CBC, serum chemistry: azotemia, hypercalcemia, hypophosphatemia associated with
adenocarcinoma
 Urinalysis and sediment: hypercalciuria, urine specific gravity increased
■]
Radiography: pulmonary metastasis, dystrophic calcification of bones with
adenocarcinoma
■ Biopsy to rule out adenocarcinoma
THERAPEUTICS
■ Medical management of impaction by expression and infusion of an anti-inflamma-
tory; often recommend high-fiber diet
 Sacculitis managed with antibiotics; clindamycin often the drug of choice @ ll mg/
kg/day for at least 4 weeks; sac expression, lavage, and infusion of antibiotic ointment
into the region
442
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Anal sacculectomy may be necessary if medical management fails; complications
include incontinence.
■Adenocarcinoma: surgical excision/debulking, radiation, chemotherapy, electroche.
motherapy: poor prognosis
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
44
Behavioral or Self-Injurious
Dermatoses
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Self-injurious behavior or compulsion refers to any voluntary action resulting in
self-damage.
 Compulsive disorders are characterized by repetitive behaviors in excess of what is
required for normal function, especially if severe enough to interfere with normal
function.
disease or trigger.
Diagnosis and treatment include identifying the underlying trigger, treating second-
ary dermatoses, and modifying behavior to prevent recurrence; medications are a
helpful adjunct if anxiety interferes with normal activities or learning.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOLOGY
 Psychodermatoses are a diagnosis of exclusion.
■ Skin is one of the channels of communication through which anxiety is
modulated.
 Stress-vulnerable pathways trigger the release of neuropeptides that mediate behavior
(scratching, biting, licking) and contribute to increased sensation (pain, pruritus)
through histamine release, central lowering of the itch threshold, vasodilation, and
immunologic reactions.
 The resulting excoriation releases mediators of inflammation and endogenous opioids
and may become a conditioned response.
 Serotonin activity has been postulated as a specific effector of compulsive disorders.
■ Factors involved in the etiology of psychodermatoses include breed (emotional or
nervous), lifestyle (stressful, boring, isolating), and individual personality (anxious.
fearful).
■ Occasionally the owner may be able to correlate a specific physical (injury) or
emotional event just prior to the onset of symptoms.
■ Psychodermatoses primarily include acral lick dermatitis, feline symmetrical
 alopecia, flank sucking, tail biting or chasing, and anal licking.
■ The primary role of physical versus psychogenic cause is controversial, especially
with acral lick dermatitis.
443
444 SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Acral lick dermatitis: variable to older age of onset; no sex predilection; common in
large breed dogs: Labrador and golden retriever, English and Irish setter, dalmatian,
Doberman pinscher, Great Dane, Akita, shar-pei, boxer, Weimaraner, primarily of
psychogenic origin in the Great Dane and Doberman pinscher
 Feline symmetrical alopecia: variable age of onset; no sex predilection; possibly more
common in Siamese and Oriental breeds
■ Flank sucking: variable age of onset; no sex predilection; seen primarily in the
Doberman pinscher
 Tail biting or chasing: young (socially mature) dogs and cats; neutered males; long-
tailed or herding breeds, predominantly German shepherd dog, Australian cattle dog.
Staffordshire and English bull terrier
d ad p ( ano oa   
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Acral lick dermatitis
■ Compulsive licking of the distal extremity: most often carpus or metacarpus; less
commonly radius, tibia, tarsus or metatarsus
■ Often a singular lesion; multiple lesions have a poorer prognosis for complete
resolution
■  Early lesion: well-circumscribed area of alopecia and erythema (Fig. 44-1)
 Typical lesion: proliferative, eroded, scabbed and firm plaque; previous lesions
may heal with palpable scarring as new areas are traumatized (Figs. 44-2-44-5)
 Severe lesion: extensive area of ulceration and exudation; thickened and prolifera-
tive tissue may surround a central crateriform ulcer (Figs. 44-6-44-8)
■ Severe lesions may cause lameness.
■ Often associated with allergic dermatitis, localized trauma, arthropathy, endocri-
nopathy, neuropathy, and neoplasia
■ Perpetuated by secondary deep bacterial infection, secondary arthritis and/or
osteomyelitis, altered sensation within scar tissue, and learned behavior
■  Feline symmetrical alopecia
■ Skin often remains undamaged; suspect other conditions if associated with
significant dermatitis (Fig. 44-9).
■Alopecia results from overgrooming and less often is seen as chewing or
hair-pulling.
■ Behavior may be obvious or secretive to avoid a negative response; if clandes-
growth.
■Evidence of self-grooming may be noted by frequent vomiting of hair balls, exces-
sive hair in feces, and visualization of short stubble in areas of alopecia
 Figure 44-1 Early lick lesion with mild staining of the hair.
 Figure 44-2 Arm alopecic acral lick dermatitis plaque.
445
 Figure 44-3 Alopecic, eroded plaque over hock.
 Figure 44-4 Large acral lick lesion affecting one metatarsus (normal foot included for comparison)
446
 Figure 44-5 Scabbed and eroded acral lick dermatitis lesion on carpus.
 Figure 44-6 Multiple large eroded plaques of acral lick dermatitis.
447
448
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 44-7 Crateriform ulcer with surrounding proliferation of acral lick dermatitis.
 Figure 44-8 Multiple self-induced lesions of proliferation and exudation on one distal extremity.
■ Well-demarcated patches of alopecia develop in accessible areas; patches may
t    
■ Regrowing hair may appear darker in breeds with darkened “points" (Fig.
44-11).
■Common regions affected: ventral abdomen, thighs (medial, lateral, and caudal),
ventral trunk, and dorsal aspects of the forelegs (Figs. 44-12-44-13)
 Figure 44-9 Epitheliotropic lymphoma misdiagnosed as psychogenic alopecia.
 Figure 44-10 Mild self-induced lesions on forelimbs
449
450
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Figure 44-11Darker hair regrowth in overgroomed area
 Figure 44-12 Self-induced alopecia of entire trunk and forelimbs.
1 Often associated with allergic dermatitis; behavior as a primary cause is
uncommon
 Diagnosis as a psychodermatosis requires exclusion of other causes; significant
history may include hair coat regrowth in response to use of an Elizabethan collar
or administration of a corticosteroid.
■Flank sucking
■ May occur in response to a specific trigger or be a generalized activity
■ Dogs suck or nurse on a portion of the flank fold (Fig. 44-14).
S
451
 Figure 44-13 Self-induced alopecia of the ventral abdomen and rear legs.
 Figure 44-14 Alopecic and lichenified flank fold (Doberman pinscher)
■ Skin often remains undamaged; alopecia and lichenification may result from
chronic behavior.
■ Secondary bacterial folliculitis and reaction to topical treatments may perpetuate
the process.
■Tail biting or chasing
■ Most dogs chase, but do not catch, the tail.
■Tail trauma may be severe in some patients (Fig. 44-15).
■
 Secondary bacterial folliculitis and pain may perpetuate the process.
452
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 44-15 Severe mutilation of the tail.
 Figure 44-16 Permanent malformation of the tail causing self-trauma.
Any portion of the tail may be injured; location of lesions (tail fold, area of tail
gland, tail tip) may assist in determining the cause (Fig. 44-16).
■Behavior may be difficult to disrupt and may specifically occur in the presence of,
or in the absence of, the owner.
■ Lesions seen as scabbed and exudative patches; extensive hemorrhage from the
tail tip: extreme tenderness to the touch
CHAPTER 44: BEHAVIORAL OR SELF-INJURIOUS DERMATOSES
453
 Figure 44-17 Perianal erythema from licking (toy poodle)
Anal licking
 Alopecia and erythema affecting the tail folds and perianal area (Fig. 44-17)
Lichenification and hyperpigmentation in chronic cases
 Exudation and crusting with secondary bacterial folliculitis and/or Malassezia
dermatitis
■Behavior may be difficult to disrupt.
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Acral lick dermatitis
■  Allergic dermatitis
■ Bacterial folliculitis/furunculosis
 Dermatophytosis
■
 Pressure callus (appropriate location)
■ Underlying osteomyelitis or arthritis
■
 Neuropathy or referred pain
■ Focal, traumatized neoplasia (sebaceous adenoma, mast cell tumor, histiocytoma,
squamous cell carcinoma)
■Foreign body reaction
■
 Endocrinopathy (hypothyroidism)
■  Localized demodicosis
454
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Feline symmetrical alopecia
Allergic dermatitis
■
 Ectoparasitism (Cheyletiella, Demodex)
■
 Dermatophytosis
 Malassezia dermatitis
Endocrinopathy (hyperadrenocortisolism, hyperthyroidism)
 Neoplasia (paraneoplastic alopecia)
1Flank sucking
Contact dermatitis (especially topical medication)
Trauma
■
 Neuropathy
■
 Dermatophytosis
■
Bacterial folliculitis
 Psychomotor epilepsy/CNS disorder
Tail biting or chasing
Allergic dermatitis
 Neuropathy (central or peripheral)
Trauma
■
Anal sac disorder
 Degenerative disease (arthritis, disc)
Tail gland infection
Vasculitis/vasculopathy
Anal licking
Anal sac disease
Malassezia dermatitis
 Allergic dermatitis
 Intestinal parasitism
Colitis/gastrointestinal disorder
 Degenerative disease (arthritis, disc)
DIAGNOSTICS
■ CBC/Biochemistry/Urinalysis: usually normal unless associated with a specific cause
(e.g., hypothyroidism); occasional eosinophilia in cats
■ Other laboratory tests
■Serum thyroxine
■FeLV/FIV (feline symmetrical alopecia)
ACTH-stimulation or LDDS test
■Imaging
 Radiology: evidence of osteomyelitis or arthropathy (acral lick dermatitis);
degenerative disease (tail biting or chasing, anal licking)
■ Behavioral history considerations
■ Household composition (animals and people); include recent changes
CHAPTER 44: BEHAVIORAL OR SELF-INJURIOUS DERMATOSES 
455
Description of patients interactions with other animals
 Description of patients temperament
Daily routines (feeding, exercise, interactions)
 Patient's response to routines (i.e., separation anxiety)
 Onset and progression of symptoms; accurate description of behavior (frequency.
duration, situation, triggers)
 Previous history of dermatoses
■
 Previous history of therapies and responses
 Owner's response to behavior
 Diagnostic procedures
■Acral lick dermatitis
■ Allergy workup: adequate flea control; intradermal allergen testing: restricted-
ingredient food trial
■ Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing: results from surface and tissue cultures
frequently differ; significance of results obtained from surface cultures
controversial
■Fungal culture
■Skin scraping
ness undetermined
■ Dermatohistopathology: exclude neoplasia and/or infectious granuloma; severe
epidermal hyperplasia with compact hyperkeratosis; dermal fibrosis ("vertical
streaking"), follicular thickening and elongation; mixed dermal (especially
perivascular) inflammation
■  Feline symmetrical alopecia
 Allergy work up: adequate flea control; intradermal allergen testing: restricted-
ingredient food trial
■ Trichogram: presence of broken hairs (self-trauma); anagen follicles (active hair
 growth); fungal hyphae (dermatophytosis); Demodex mites
 Skin scraping: superficial and deep
 Fungal culture
 Skin cytology: evidence of yeast and/or bacteria
■
 Dermatohistopathology: most often normal; mild trichomalacia; evidence of
 inflammation supports an underlying cause
■Flank sucking
■Association with topical therapy
■ Fungal culture
■Bacterial culture/sensitivity
■ Neurologic assessment
 Tail biting or chasing
 Allergy workup: adequate flea control; intradermal allergen testing: restricted-
ingredient food trial
■ Bacterial culture and sensitivity testing (especially if tail gland affected)
■Neurologic assessment
456
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Orthopedic assessment
■ Anal sac palpation and examination of contents (cytology culture and
sensitivity testing)
■Anal licking
■ Anal sac palpation and examination of contents (cytology culture and
sensitivity testing)
 Skin cytology: evidence of yeast and/or bacteria
 Allergy workup: adequate flea control; intradermal allergen testing: restricted-
ingredient food trial
 Fecal parasite and ova testing
 Gastrointestinal assessment: exclude colitis or colon neoplasia
■
 Neurologic assessment
Orthopedic assessment
THERAPEUTICS
 Diagnosis and management of underlying causes paramount for successful control
of symptoms
■ Glucocorticosteroids and antihistamines may be helpful in allergic patients; not
recommended for use with acral lick dermatitis; see specific chapters regarding use
of these medications
■  Response requires lengthy treatment periods
■ Relapses not uncommon; maintenance therapy necessary
■ Behavior-modifying medications are adjunctive therapy; discussed below
 Additional treatments for acral lick dermatitis listed separately
Behavior Modification
Identify and remove triggers.
Provide exercise and stimulation with toys.
Increase calm and social interaction with owner
■ Avoid punishment or attention for the behavior.
■
 Increase supervision to reduce opportunities for the behavior; distract rather than
punish the behavior when it occurs.
Drugs of Choice
■ Acral lick dermatitis
Topical
 Rarely effective as sole-source therapy
Fluocinolone-DMSO combined with flunixin meglumine or antibiotics
 Capsaicin: may decrease reinforcing sensation and discourage licking
■Mupirocin ointment
CHAPTER 44: BEHAVIORAL OR SELF-INJURIOUS DERMATOSES
457
Systemic
■ Long-term antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity testing (e.g., cephalexin
22 mg/kg bid)
■May be required for several months
■ Pulse-dose therapy may be necessary.
Alternatives
■  Intralesional injections: not recommended
■
 Physical restraints may help during initial intervention therapy to reduce tissue
damage; not a long-term solution
 Surgical excision: removal of exuberant tissue useful only if primary disease is
identifed and resolved; severe postoperative complications possible
Behavior-modifying medication
■ Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors
■Fluoxetine-dog: 0.5-2.0 mg/kg q24h; cat: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg q24h
■Paroxetine—dog: 0.5-1.0mg/kg q24h; cat: 0.5-1.0mg/kg q24h
■Sertraline: dog: 1.0-3.0 mg/kg q24h; cat: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg q24h
■  Tricyclic antidepressants
■Amitriptyline: dog: 2.2-4.4 mg/kg q12-24h; cat: 0.5-1.0 mg/kg q12-24h
■Clomipramine: dog: 1.0-3.0 mg/kg q12-24h; cat: 0.5-1.0mg/kg q24h
■Doxepin: 3.0-5.0mg/kg q12h (maximum 150 mg bid)
COMMENTS
 Serotonin-enhancing medications: long-acting anxiolytics
 Interrupt the conditioned response while resolving the organic disease and/or modi-
fying the behavior.
■ Reports of success with other psychoactive medications is more limited (e.g..
hydrocodone).
■Few of these medications are FDA-approved for use in animals.
■ Avoid use in patients with history of seizures.
■
 Do not use with MAO-inhibitors (e.g., amitraz, selegiline).
■ Obtain a minimum database to ascertain the patients ability to metabolize and
excrete medications (especially hepatic disease).
■Monitor patients regularly during therapy.
■ Avoid concomitant use of multiple serotonin-enhancing medications to prevent side
effects including fatal serotonin syndrome.
■ Use cautiously with other highly protein-bound medications (anticonvulsants,
thyroid medications, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs) as well as with general
anesthesia, anticholinergics, antihistamines, and anticoagulants.
 Avoid use of tricyclic antidepressants in patients with cardiac conduction abnormali-
ties or with glaucoma.
■ Avoid sudden changes in dosages: gradual increases and decreases are
recommended.
458
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Common side effects include reduced appetite and sedation, rare increased
agitation,
■Medications may take 4 to 8 weeks to achieve efficacy.
■ Symptoms of overdose include behavioral changes (agitation, depression), tremors.
ataxia, seizures, hyperthermia, and diarrhea; fatal serotonin syndrome reported.
■  Treatment of toxicosis is supportive and symptomatic; cyproheptadine hydrochloride
(1.1 mg/kg po) is a nonspecific serotonin antagonist.
Abbreviations
■ CBC = complete blood count
■ FeLV = feline leukemia virus
■ FIV = feline immunodeficiency virus
■
ACTH = adrenocorticotropic hormone
■ LDDs = low-dose dexamethasone suppression test
■ CNS = central nervous system
■ DMSO = dimethyl sulfoxide
■ MAO = monoamine oxidase
Author: Alexander H. Werner
chapter
45
Disorders of
Keratinization
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Alterations in the formation, maturation, and desquamation of the epidermis result
in visible abnormalities in the appearance of the skin
Commonly referred to as seborrhea, a nonspecific term describing excessive scaling
and crusting. with or without greasiness
■ Excessive or abnormal shedding of epidermal cells results in the clinical presentation
of cutaneous scaling.
Epidermal lipid abnormalities may cause excessive greasiness or dryness of the skin,
disrupt the epidermal barrier, and encourage development of secondary infection.
Keratinization disorders may be acquired or congenital.
 Treatment includes correction of the underlying etiology (if not primary) control
of secondary infection, reduction in epidermal turnover, reduction of inflamma-
tion, restoration of epidermal barrier function, and removal of excessive epidermal
accumulations
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Keratinization disorders include a large number of syndromes and encompass
dermatoses caused by a disruption in the normal and orderly process by which
keratinocytes divide in the basal cell layer, mature, die, and are ultimately shed.
Cornification disorders include both keratinization disorders (abnormalities of kera-
tinocyte differentiation) and defects in the epidermal barrier formation (e.g., includ-
ing lipid formation); however, these terms are frequently used interchangeably
 Increased production (epidermopoesis), increased or decreased desquamation, and/
or decreased in the cohesion of keratinocytes results in abnormal shedding of
epidermal cells individually (fine scale) or in sheets (coarse scale).
 Normal epidermal turnover in the dog is 2l days; this may decrease to 7 days in
primary seborrhea.
 Increased transepidermal water loss and decreased epidermal water content (hydra-
tion) result in xerosis; normal skin hydration is 20% to 35%.
 Secondary infection (bacterial or yeast) produces inflammation and pruritus with
excoriation and further epidermal damage.
459
460SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Abnormalities of sebaceous or apocrine gland function alter intercellular lipids and
disrupt the epidermal barrier function.
 Primary disorders: keratinization defects, in which the genetic control of epidermal
cell proliferation and maturation and/or epidermal barrier formation is abnormal
 Secondary disorders: effects of disease alter the normal maturation and proliferation
 of epidermal cells; most keratinization disorders result from an underlying etiology
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Primary: apparent by 2 years of age; characteristic in affected breeds; no sex
predilection
■Secondary: any age; any breed of dog or cat; any disorder affecting the skin can result
in symptoms described as “seborrheic'
■  Numerous syndromes have been identified; more frequent disorders listed below.
Primary Keratinization Disorders
■ Ichthyosis
Present at or near birth
 Nonepidermolytic and epidermolytic; nonepidermolytic most common and asso
ciated with defects in various components of the epidermis; epidermolytic caused
by a defect in keratin synthesis (Figs. 45-1, 45-2)
 Nonepidermolytic: West Highland white terrier, golden retriever, Doberman pin-
scher, Irish setter, collie, American bulldog, American Staffordshire terrier, Boston
Figure 45-1 Ichthyosis producing thick adherent scales
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
461
Figure 45-2 Epidermolytic ichthyosis with fishlike adherent epidermal scales and erythroderma
terrier, cairn terrier, Norfolk terrier, Yorkshire terrier, soft-coated wheaton terrier
 Epidermolytic: Rhodesian ridgeback, Labrador retriever, Norfolk terrier
 Epidermolytic: lesions localized or generalized; large thick scales adhere to the
epidermis and appear scalelike; underlying epidermis thickened with accentuated
furrows and irregular texture (lichenification); erythema and exudation often
present; fssures develop, especially with secondary infection; debris entrapped in
the hair coat resulting in severe and generalized scaling: progressive alopecia may
develop in severely affected areas; thick crusting of the footpads and nasal planum;
keratin fronds produce hornlike projections
 Single case reported in an Abyssinian kitten
■  Primary  seborrhea (primary keratinization disorder, idiopathic seborrhea and
seborrheic dermatitis)
■ Accelerated epidermopoiesis and hyperproliferation of the epidermis, follicular
infundibulum, and sebaceous gland due to a cellular defect (Figs. 45-3-45-6)
■ American cocker spaniel, English springer spaniel, West Highland white terrier,
basset hound, English bulldog, German shepherd dog, Doberman pinscher, Irish
setter, Chinese shar-pei, miniature schnauzer, Cavalier King Charles spaniel,
dachshund, Labrador retriever
■ Mild to severe accumulations of scales, crusts, and greasiness; lesions discrete and
focal with thickly crusted plaques and erythema, or diffuse and generalized
■ Ceruminous otitis externa
 Alopecia and erythema, with lichenification, hyperpigmentation, and greasy
exudation
  Lesions predominantly truncal
 Figure 45-3 Accumulations of scales and greasy exudate in primary seborrhea (cocker spaniel)
 Figure 45-4 Discrete and focal crusted plaques of primary seborrhea (cocker spaniel).
462
 Figure 45-5 Primary seborrhea affecting the ventral neck fold (cocker spaniel).
 Figure 45-6 Lichenification and exudation in the cranial aspect of the foreleg with primary seborrhea (basset
hound).
463
464SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Secondary bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis common, especially in
the folds of the ventral neck, axillae, and inguinum; treatment for infection
reduces discomfort and malodor, but does not resolve lesions
■ Vitamin A-responsive dermatosis: rare; cocker spaniels; clinical signs similar to
severe idiopathic seborrhea but usually adult-onset; identified by the response to oral
vitamin A supplementation
■Epidermal dysplasia (hyperplastic dermatosis) of West Highland white terrier: often
associated with Malassezia infection and cutaneous hypersensitivity; may be a cause-
and-effect and not a distinct syndrome; symptoms begin prior to l year of age;
generalized and severe patches of alopecia, erythema, lichenification, and hyperpig-
mentation with greasiness, malodor, and pruritus; lesions begin on the trunk and
skin folds; otitis externa common (Figs. 45-7-45-9)
■ Ear margin dermatosis: often secondary to hypothyroidism; primary disorder of
dachshunds; thick and adherent crusts form on the medial and lateral edges of
the pinnae; follicular casts; removal requires effort and produces erosions, pain,
■ Acanthosis nigracans: dachshunds; less than 2 years of age; symmetrical lesions of
alopecia, striking hyperpigmentation and lichenification beginning in the axillae
and often extending to the ventral neck and inguinum; lesions may generalize further;
secondary bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis common (Fig. 45-12)
■ Nasodigital hyperkeratosis: excessive accumulation of scale and crust on the nasal
planum and footpad margins; possibly a senile change of the cocker spaniel, beagle.
English bulldog, basset hound; lesions generally asymptomatic; cracking and second-
ary bacterial infection cause severe pain; similar in appearance but distinct from nasal
 Figure 45-7 Epidermal dysplasia of West Highland white terrier. Note generalized lesions of severe alopecia
erythema, lichenification, and exudation.
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
465
 Figure 45-8 Epidermal dysplasia West Highland white terrier with lesions of alopecia and lichenification
affecting theforelegs.
 Figure 45-9 Similar lesions affecting the rear legs of patient in Fig. 45-8.
parakeratosis of Labrador retrievers (begins at less than l year of age; often more
severe) (Figs. 45-13, 45-14)
 Footpad hyperkeratosis: severe keratin proliferations of all pads: fissuring results in
secondary infection; Irish terrier, Dogues de Bordeaux, Kerry blue terrier, Labrador
retriever, golden retriever less than 6 months of age (Fig. 45-15)
 Figure 45-10 Ear margin dermatosis producing thick adherent crusts and alopecia on the pinnae
(dachshund).
 Figure 45-11 Pinnal margin crusting with ear margin dermatosis (dachshund)
466
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
467
 Figure 45-12 Acanthosis nigracans: note lichenification, hyperpigmentation, and exudation affecting the
axillae and sternum of a dachshund.
 Figure 45-13 Nasal hyperkeratosis seen as frondlike accumulations of scale on the nasal planum
Zinc-responsive dermatosis: supplement-responsive; alopecia, dry scaling, crusting,
and erythema around the eyes, ears, feet, lips, and other external orifices; two syn-
dromes: young adult dogs (mainly Siberian husky and Alaskan malamute) and
rapidly growing. large-breed puppies (Figs. 45-16-45-19)
1 Color dilution alopecia: abnormal melanization of the hair shaft and structural hair
growth; large melanosomes result in structural damage to the hair shaft and bulb;
468
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 45-14 Nasal parakeratosis of Labrador retrievers. Note crusting and associated inflammation
 Figure 45-15 Large frondlike keratin proliferations in digital hyperkeratosis.
keratinization defect theorized as causative for several syndromes; blue and fawn
Doberman pinscher, Irish setter, dachshund, chow chow, Yorkshire terrier, poodle.
Great Dane, whippet, Saluki, Italian greyhound; failure to regrow blue or fawn hair
with normal "point" hair growth, excessive scaliness, comedone formation, second-
ary pyoderma (Figs. 45-20-45-22)
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
469
 Figure 45-16 Seven-month-old husky with zinc-responsive dermatosis. Scaling on face and lip margins is
 simmil ar to lesions seen in pemphigus foliaceus.
 Figure 45-17 Zinc-responsive dermatosis: Erythema associated with alopecic lesions.
Sebaceous adenitis: inflammatory disease targeting sebaceous glands and ducts
■ Standard poodle and Samoyed: patchy or diffuse hair loss and excessive scaling:
tightly adherent follicular casts; commonly begins on the muzzle, dorsal head and
neck; most dogs are healthy and asymptomatic (Figs. 45-23-45-25)
 Flgure 45-18 Zinc-responsive dermatosis: Similar lesions affecting the forelegs.
 Flgure 45-19 Zinc-responsive dermatosis: Crusted lesions and erythema on the pinna.
470
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
471
 Figure 45-20 Color dilution alopecia producing thinning of the "blue" hair coat (Doberman pinscher)
 Figure 45-21 Patient in Fig. 45-19. Note brittle and thinned hair coat.
■ Akita: initial lesions similar to those of poodles but more generalized; significant
alopecia; severe and deep bacterial pyoderma common as well as systemic signs
of illness (Figs. 45-26, 45-27)
■ Vizsla: distinctly different and granulomatous; firm, coalescing plaques with fine
adherent scales; lesions primarily on the trunk; also on the pinnae and face (Figs.
45-28.45-29)
472
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■Figure 45-22 Color dilution alopecia. Hair shafts have large melanosomes (accumulations of pigment in
clumps).
 Figures 45-23-45-28 Sebaceous adenitis. Standard poodle with thinning of the hair coat on the head.
Schnauzer comedo syndrome: miniature schnauzer; small comedones develop on the
dorsal spine; lesions may coalesce and appear as large patches of hyperpigmentation;
secondary bacterial follicultis leads to alopecia and crusting (Fig. 45-30)
■ Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatosis: predominantly in springer spaniel; also reported
in English pointer, Irish setter, poodle; coalescing. crusted, erythematous papules
form plaques with adherent debris; predilection for the pinnae and ventrum; may
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
473
 Figure 45-24 Truncal loss of hair coat with adherent crusts (standard poodle)
 Figure 45-25 Keratin-collaring of the hair shafts. Debris adheres to (surrounds) the base of the hair shafts
(standard poodle).
represent a staphylococcal hypersensitivity; similar pattern reported as an adverse
reaction to cyclosporine (Fig. 45-31)
Acrodermatitis of bull terrier: rare; exclusively in white dogs; usually fatal; associated
 q  s ss    o   s
474
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 45-26 Diffuse accumulations of thick crusts and scales (Akita).
Figure 45-27 Thick keratin collaring of hair shafts (Akita)
severe than other metabolic and nutritional dermatoses (e.g., zinc-response derma-
tosis and superficial necrolytic dermatitis); thick crusts, papules, pustules, erythema,
and erosions on distal extremities and mucocutaneous junctions; associated with
mental dullness, behavior abnormalities, diarrhea, bronchopneumonia, arched hard
palate, secondary bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis: pinnal lesions and
otitis externa
 Figure 45-28 Sebaceous adenitits: Coalescing plaques with fine adherent scales on the head (viszla)
 Figure 45-29 Sebaceous adenitits: Coalescing plaques with fine adherent scales (viszla)
475
476
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■Figure 45-30 Schnauzer comedo syndrome seen as multiple erythematous papules with secondary
folliculitis.
 Figure 45-31 Crusted and erythematous pinnal plaques with psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatitis.
■  Facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalyan cats: greasy, adherent debris accumulates
in facial and nasal folds; ceruminous otitis externa, secondary bacterial folliculitis
and Malassezia dermatitis, significant pruritus; begins between 10 months and 6
years of age (Fig. 45-32)
■ Primary seborrhea in newborn Persian kittens
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
 Figure 45-32 Facial dermatitis in Persian cats.
 Figure 45-33 Alopecia with scaling secondary to food allergy.
Secondary Keratinization Disorders
 Cutaneous hypersensitivity: atopy, flea allergic dermatitis, food allergy and contact
dermatitis; pruritus, secondary skin trauma and irritation (Fig. 45-33)
Ectoparasitism: scabies, demodicosis, and cheyletiellosis; inflammation and exfolia-
tion (Fig. 45-34)
478
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Bacterial folliculitis: bacterial enzymatic disadhesion and increased exfoliation of
keratinocytes in the attempt to shed pathogenic organisms (Fig. 45-35)
■Dermatophytosis: usually exfoliative; increased shedding of affected keratinocytes as
primary skin mechanism in resolving fungal infection (Fig. 45-36)
Figure 45-34 Cheyletiellosis producing large scales
 Figure 45-35 Bacterial folliculitis.
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
479
Endocrinopathy
 Hypothyroidism: abnormal keratinization resulting in accumulation of scales.
secondary bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis (Fig. 45-37)
 Figure 45-36 Patch of crusting and alopecia with dermatophytosis.
 Figure 45-37 Thinning of the hair coat and excessive scaling secondary to hypothyroidism
480
 SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
hyper adrenocortisolism.
 Hyperadrenocorticism: abnormal keratinization and decreased follicular activity:
excessive scaling and secondary bacterial folliculitis; calcinosis cutis initially seen
as firm, white, plaques with scale (Fig. 45-38)
■ Other hormonal abnormalities (e.g., sex hormone abnormalities, hyperthyroid-
ism, and diabetes mellitus) associated with excessive scaling from metabolic
abnormalities (Fig. 45-39)
Age: geriatric animals may have a dull, brittle, and scaly hair coat; alterations caused
by natural changes in epidermal metabolism associated with age; no specific defect
identified
■ Nutritional disorders: malnutrition and generic dog food dermatosis; scaling from
abnormalities in keratinization
■ Autoimmune dermatoses: pemphigus complex: may appear exfoliative: vesicles
become scaly and crusty; cutaneous and systemic lupus erythematosus: cutaneous
signs often appear as areas of alopecia and scaling (Fig. 45-40)
 Neoplasia: primary epidermal neoplasia (epitheliotropic lymphoma); alopecia and
 scaling from epidermal structures damaged by infiltrating lymphocytes; preneoplastic
conditions (actinic keratosis) initially appear exfoliative (Fig. 45-41)
■ Miscellaneous: any disease process may result in excessive scale formation owing to
metabolic dyscrasia or cutaneous inflammation
■ Exfoliative disorders: rare in cats: tail gland hyperplasia, thymoma-associated
exfoliative dermatitis
 Figure 45-40 Pemphigus foliaceus producing crusts at footpad margins.
481
482
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 45-41 Crusted and alopecic patches of epitheliotropic lymphoma
CLINICAL FEATURES
■Syndromes may be visually distinctive or appear very similar.
■ Focal or generalized, visible accumulations of epidermal debris
 Small scales or large rafts of keratin
Excessive greasiness
 Lichenification and hyperpigmentation with chronicity
Thickening of the footpads or nasal planum
 Erosions beneath adherent keratinaceous debris
Fissures within thick crusts
 Ceruminous otitis externa
■ Follicular casts
 Comedones
 Malodor
Variable pruritus leading to excoriation
■
Secondary bacterial folliculitis or Malassezia dermatitis
■Nondermatologic symptoms dependent on etiology
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Often based on the following criteria:
■ Signalment and history: paramount in distinguishing the possible causes of
keratinization defect
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
483
■  Presence or absence of pruritus: noted with cutaneous hypersensitivity; primary
keratinization defects often not pruritic unless secondary bacterial folliculitis or
Malassezia dermatitis develop
 Concurrent signs: lethargy, weight gain, polyuria/polydipsia, reproductive failure,
change in body conformation, lack of hair regrowth
■Response to therapy: antibiotics, antiyeast medication, thyroid supplementation
 Differentiation between primary and secondary keratinization disorders based on
exclusion of underlying etiology and dermatohistopathology results
DIAGNOSTICS
1 CBC/Biochemistries/Urinalysis: usually normal with primary keratinization disor-
ders: mild, nonregenerative anemia and hypercholesteremia (hypothyroidism):
neutrophilia, monocytosis, eosinopenia, lymphopenia, elevated serum alkaline
phosphatase, hypercholesterolemia, and hyposthenuria (hyperadrenocorticism)
Thyroid hormone levels and adrenal function tests: see specific chapters for test
recommendations
Skin scraping: ectoparasitism
Intradermal allergy test: atopy
 Restricted-ingredient food trial: food hypersensitivity
 Cytology of skin surface: bacteria folliculitis and/or Malassezia dermatitis
Examination of plucked hairs: macromelanosomes and structural abnormalities in
follicular dysplasia and color dilution alopecia
 Dermatohistopathology: strongly recommended for diagnosis
THERAPEUTICS
 Frequent and adequate topical therapy is the cornerstone of proper treatment.
■ Underbathing, rather than overbathing, is a common error.
 Diagnose and control all treatable primary and secondary diseases.
Recurrence of secondary infections may require repeated therapy and further
diagnostics.
 Maintaining control is often lifelong.
 Recent treatment emphasizes restoring epidermal barrier integrity and function.
Topical Therapy
■ Shampoos:
 Contact time: 5-15 minutes; greater than 15 minutes discouraged: may result in
epidermal maceration, loss of barrier function, and excessive epidermal drying
and irritation
■ Hypoallergenic: useful only in mild cases of dry scale and to maintain secondary
exfoliation after the primary disease has been controlled
484
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■Sulfur/salicylic acid: keratolytic, keratoplastic, and bacteriostatic; excellent first
choice for the moderately scaly patient; not overly drying
 Benzoyl peroxide: strongly keratolytic; antimicrobial; may cause irritation and
severe dryness; best for recurrent bacterial infection and/or greasiness
 Ethyl lactate: antimicrobial; not as irritating or drying as benzoyl peroxide; most
useful for moderate bacterial folliculitis and dry scale
Chlorhexidine: antimicrobial; mildly drying: useful for moderate bacterial follicu-
litis and Malassezia dermatitis; often used with antifungal agents (e.g., miconazole,
ketoconazole)
■ Moisturizers
 Excellent for restoring skin hydration (frequent shampooing may result in exces-
sive dryness and itch) and increasing effectiveness of subsequent bathings
■Humectants: enhance hydration of the stratum corneum by attracting water from
the dermis; high concentrations may be keratolytic
 Propylene glycol spray (50-75% dilution with water) applied frequently
■ Emollients: coat the skin; smooth the roughened surfaces produced by excessive
scaling: usually combined with occlusive compounds to encourage hydration of
the epidermis
 Ceramides (e.g. phytosphingosine) and fatty acids: components of normal epidermal
intracellular matrix; antimicrobial; necessary to maintain stratum corneum hydra-
barrier function
Systemic Therapy
Specific causes require specific treatments (e.g., L-thyroxine for hypothyroidism; zinc
supplements for zinc-responsive dermatosis)
■ Systemic antibiotics: secondary bacterial folliculitis
■
 Ketoconazole (10mg/kg q24h): Malassezia dermatitis
■ Prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg q24h tapered and discontinued when possible): inflamma-
tory or hypersensitivity causes
vidual response to retinoids in refractory cases: isotretinoin (1 mg/kg po ql2-24h);
if response is seen, taper dosage (1 mg/kg q48h or 0.5 mg/kg q24h); synthetic reti-
 Cyclosporine (5 mg/kg q24h until controlled, and then decreased to minimal effective
maintenance dosage): keratinization disorder associated with hypersensitivity
sebaceous adenitis, epidermal dysplasia, ichthyosis and/or Malassezia dermatitis
 Essential fatty acid supplementation
COMMENTS
■ Corticosteroids: may be used judiciously to control inflammation; masks signs of
bacterial folliculitis and prevents accurate diagnosis of primary disease
CHAPTER 45: DISORDERS OF KERATINIZATION
485
■ Vitamins A and D analogs: side effects can be severe; patients should be referred to
a dermatologist for treatment
■ Antibiotics and topical therapy: monitor response every 3 weeks; patients may
respond differently to various topical therapies
Seasonal changes, development of additional diseases (e.g., cutaneous hypersensitiv-
ity), and recurrence of bacterial folliculitis: may cause previously controlled patients
 to worsen; reevaluation critical for determining whether new factors are involved
and whether changes in therapy are necessary
■ Endocrinopathy: routine thyroid monitoring 4 to 6 hours after pill administration
or adrenal function tests; see specific chapters
■ Selective autoimmune disorders: reevaluate frequently during the initial phase of
induction; less often after remission; clinical evaluation and laboratory data required
■ Immunosuppressive therapy: monitor hemograms, serum chemistries, and urinalysis
with culture
■ Retinoid drugs: monitor serum chemistries, including triglycerides, and tear
production
■
Ketoconazole: monitor serum chemistries
 Skin aging may worsen keratinization disorders or increase frequency of relapses.
■ Dermatophytosis and several ectoparasites have either zoonotic potential or the
ability to produce lesions in human beings.
use in intact females because of severe and predictable teratogenicity and the
extremely long withdrawal period; women of childbearing age should not handle
this medication
Synonyms
■ Keratinization disorders = seborrhea, idiopathic seborrhea, keratinization defect,
dyskeratinization, and incorrect human terms (eczema, psoriasis, dander, dandruff):
sebopsoriasis: appropriate term to describe the similarities between some human and
canine keratinization defects
Author: Alexander H. Werner
46
chapter
Otitis Externa, Media.
and Interna
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Otitis externa: inflammation of the external ear canal; includes anatomic structures
 of the pinna, horizontal and vertical canals, and the external wall of the tympanic
membrane
■ Otitis media: inflammation of the middle ear; includes anatomic structures of the
medial wall of the tympanic membrane, bulla (tympanic cavity), auditory ossicles,
and auditory tube
■ Otitis interna: inflammation of the inner ear; includes anatomic structures of the
cochlea, semicircular canals, and associated nerves (cranial nerves Vll and VI11)
Terms are descriptions of clinical signs, not diagnoses.
■
 Ototoxicity: impairment or damage of the inner ear and/or eighth cranial nerve;
neurotoxicity (specifically during treatment of otitis externa/media) damage of the
eight cranial nerve
8
ETIOLOGY/PATHOLOGY
 External ear canal: auricular cone-shaped cartilage creates the pinna and the proxi-
mal section of the vertical canal; annular cartilage overlaps with the auricular carti-
lage and extends to the external wall of the tympanum; sebaceous glands and
modified apocrine glands (cerumen glands) line the canal and produce a secretion
with varying amounts of lipid (higher levels in dogs with otitis externa)
 Tympanum: divided into the pars flaccida and pars tensa; pars flaccida (alternatively
called the dorsal membrane) small portion dorsal to the osseous ring of the external
acoustic meatus; may swell with inflammation or increased pressure in the middle
ear; pars tensa thin firm structure attached to the osseous ring of the external acoustic
meatus; manubrium of the malleus on the medial surface curves rostrally
 Otitis externa: chronic inflammation results in alterations of the normal environment
of the canal; with inflammation, glands enlarge and produce excessive wax, epider-
mis and dermis thicken and become fibrotic; thickened canal folds effectively reduce
canal width; end-stage calcification of the auricular cartilage
  Middle ear canal: medial surface of the tympanic membrane, bulla (tympanic cavity-
normally air filled) and auditory ossicles; dog-incomplete septum (bulla ridge) and
promontory (contains cochlea and communicates with the bulla through the oval
486
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
487
and round windows); cat—bulla divided by an intact septum (associated with post-
ganglionic sympathetic nerves); three auditory ossicles transfer movement from the
tympanum to the inner ear; bulla connected to the nasopharynx by the auditory tube
 Otitis media: often an extension of otitis externa through a ruptured tympanum; may
occur without membrane rupture; may occur from polyps or neoplasia within the
middle ear or auditory tube
■ Inner ear: anatomic structures of the cochlea, semicircular canals, and associated
nerves (cranial nerves Vll and Vll1)
Otitis interna: extension of otitis media or hematogenous spread of infection; exten-
sion of neoplasia from surrounding tissue
■ Causes of otitis externa are frequently classified as predisposing. primary. or
perpetuating:
■ Predisposing causes change the environment of the ear canal facilitating inflam-
mation and encouraging secondary infection.
 Primary causes directly initiate or cause inflammation within the ear canal.
■
 Perpetuating causes prevent resolution of the inflammation and/or infection of the
ear canal.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Breed Predilections
■ Pendulous-eared dogs: spaniels, retrievers, and hounds (Fig. 46-1)
Hirsute-canals: terriers and poodles
■
Stenotic canals: shar-pei
■ Primary secretory otitis media: Cavalier King Charles spaniel
 Figure 46-1  Pendulous pinna (basset hound)
488  SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Historical Findings
 Pain (shying from touching of the head or refusing to open the mouth)
■Head shaking
■Scratching at the pinnae
■ Malodor
■  Peripheral vestibular deficits
■Facial nerve deficits and/or Horners syndrome
Risk Factors/Predisposing Causes
 Abnormal or breed-related conformation of the external canal (e.g., stenosis, hirsut-
ism, and pendulous pinnae) restricts proper airflow into the canal
Excessive moisture (e.g., swimming, environmental humidity, or frequent cleanings)
can lead to infection; overzealous client compliance with recommendations for ear
cleanings and/or use of inappropriate solutions
■ Topical drug reaction and irritation or trauma from abrasive cleaning techniques
Underlying systemic diseases producing abnormalities in the microenvironment of
the ear canal environment and in the immune response
 Otitis media is a frequent sequela of chronic otitis externa.
 Nasopharyngeal polyps, and inner, middle, or external ear canal neoplasia
 Inhalant anesthesia may change middle ear pressure.
CLINICAL FEATURES
Otitis Externa
■Deafness
■ Purulent and malodorous exudates
■ Inflammation, pain, pruritus, and erythema of the pinnae and external canals
■ Aural hematoma
■ Swelling of the canal leading to stenosis
 Scarring and calcification of the auricular cartilage; canals palpated as firm and
thickened
■ Holding of the pinnae down and/or head tilt toward an affected side (if unilateral)
■ Chronic otitis externa in dogs results in tympanic membrane rupture (7l%) and
otitis media (82%) (one study)
■ Allergic dermatitis: most common cause of otitis externa in dogs
■ Polyps and ectoparasites: most common cause of recurrent otitis externa in cats
Otitis Media
■ Intact tympanic membrane: bulging tissue with evidence of fluid and/or gas caudally:
membrane may be opaque; fluid may be purulent or hemorrhagic
 Swelling of the pars flaccida: may indicate increased pressure in the middle ear; com-
monly seen with primary secretory otitis media in the Cavalier King Charles spaniel
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
Ruptured tympanic membrane: discharge into canal or bullae filled with debris
■
Deafness
■ Pain on palpation of bullae or opening of the mouth
■]
 Pharyngitis, tonsillitis, or discharge through auditory tube
■Lymphandenopathy if severe or chronic
Otitis Interna
■Deafness
Neurologic findings
Vestibular (cranial nerve Vl1) deficits: nystagmus, head tilt (ipsilateral), ataxia,
anorexia or vomiting, and reluctance to move the head
■ Facial nerve deficits: paresis/paralysis of eyelids, lips, tongue, nares; reduced tear
 production; miosis, ptosis, protrusion of the nictitans, and enophthalmos (Horner's
syndrome)
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Otitis Externa and Media
Primary causes
■ Parasite: Otodectes cynotis, Demodex spp., Sarcoptes scabie and Notoedres cati, and
Otobius megnini (Figs. 46-2-46-5)
 Hypersensitivity: Atopy food hypersensitivity, contact allergy and systemic or
local drug reaction (Figs. 46-6-46-11)
■ Foreign body: plant material, accumulation of hair, medication
 Figure 46-2 Purulent otitis externa secondary to demodicosis.
 Figure 46-3 Otitis externa secondary to demodicosis.
 Figure 46-4 Pinnal crusting and otitis externa secondary to scabies.
490
 Figure 46-5 Trauma-induced otitis externa from Notoedres cati.
 Figure 46-6 Food hypersensitivity-induced trauma.
491
 Figure 46-7 Food hypersensitivity and secondary Malassezia otitis externa.
 Figure 46-8 Tapazole reaction producing pinnal urticaria and scabbing
492
■ Figure 46-9 Urticaria secondary to atopy.
■ Figure 46-10 Pinnal crusting due to erythema multiforme.
493
494
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 46-11 Pinnal atrophy secondary to chronic corticosteroid ointment application.
Figure 46-12 Cerumen gland hyperplasia (cocker spaniel)
 Obstruction: neoplasia, polyp, cerumen gland hyperplasia, accumulation of hair
(Figs. 46-12-46-14)
Keratinization disorder: increased cerumen production resulting in functional
obstruction of the canal, endocrinopathy (Figs. 46-15, 46-16)
■ Autoimmune disease: frequently affect the pinnae and less often the external ear
canal (Figs. 46-17, 46-18)
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
495
 Figure 46-13 Canal obstruction due to hyperplasia and calcification of pinnal cartilage (cocker spaniel)
Canal Lining
Cerumen Gland Adenocarcinoma
■Figure 46-14Cerumen gland adenocarcinoma.
1Perpetuating causes
■ Bacterial infection: Staphhylococcus pseudintermedius, Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
Enterococcus spp., Proteus mirabilis, Streptococcus spp., Corynebacteria spp., and
Escherichia coli (Fig. 46-19)
■  Pseudomonas aeruginosa most commonly cultured in otitis media
496
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Figure 46-15 Keratinization disorder producing thick adherent crusts on the pinna
 Figure 46-16 Coalescing plaques of sebaceous adenitis on the head and pinna (viszla)
 Fungal infection: Malassezia pachydermatis, Candida albicans, and rarely other
fungi (Sporothrix schenchii, Cryptococcus neoformans)
■ Chronic changes: stenosis of the canal due to cerumen gland hyperplasia and
polyp formation, swelling from inflammation, scarring and calcification (Figs
46-20.46-21)
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
497
 Figure 46-17 Pinnal margin crusts due to pemphigus foliaceus.
 Figure 46-18 Facial crusting and otitis externa secondary to pemphigus foliaceus.
 Chronic change increases retention of debris in the ear by increased cerumen
production and decreased removal by epidermal migration and by physical
obstruction (Figs. 46-22, 46-23)
Otitis media (Figs. 46-24-46-26)
 Figure 46-19 Otitis externa with secondary pseudomonas infection.
 Figure 46-20 Calcified cartilage from the external ear canal (excised tissue)
498
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
499
Cerumen Gland Cyst I
Figure 46-21Obstruction of external ear canal by cerumen gland cyst
Sebaceous Epithe
Mallof
 Figure 46-22 Sebaceous epithelioma obstructing the external ear canal (springer spaniel)
Otitis Interna
 Extension of infection from otitis externa/media (Figs. 46-27, 46-28)
Central vestibular disease: differentiated by brain stem signs such as stupor and
lethargy
500
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Mass Contents I
Wall of Mass
 Figure 46-23 Ruptured sebaceous epithelioma from patient in Fig. 46-22
 Swollen Dorsal
Membrane
 Opaque Tympanum 
 Figure 46-24 Purulent fluid in bulla visualized through the tympanum.
 Neoplasia and nasopharyngeal polyps: diagnosed by imaging studies
■Endocrinopathy:
:polyneuropathyandHorners syndrome
associatedwith
hypothyroidism
■Metronidazole toxicity
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
501
Manubrium of the Malleolus l
ocket Behind Tympanum
? WnuedwAl pulag ping gbeyuowaH?
 Figure 46-25 Otitis media with hemorrhagic fluid visualized through the tympanum.
Wall of Tonsilar Crypt 
Squamous Cell Carcinoma 
otitis media seen in Fig. 46-25
Thiamine deficiency (cats)
Trauma
■Idiopathic vestibular disease (older dogs and middle-aged cats): diagnosis made by
exclusion of other causes
■ Figure 46-27 Head tilt and Horner's syndrome due to otitis interna.Patient resists normal head
positioning.
 Figure 46-28 Head tilt and Horner's syndrome due to otitis interna.
502
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
503
DIAGNOSTICS
CBC/Biochemistry/Urinalysis: usually normal; may indicate a primary underlying
 Allergy testing: restricted-ingredient food trial for food hypersensitivity; intradermal
allergy testing for atopy
 Neurologic examination: may indicate otitis interna
■Imaging
■ Bulla radiographs: not highly sensitive for diagnosis of otitis media; useful for
evaluating chronic changes; bullae may appear cloudy if flled with exudate; ste-
nosis of external ear canal; thickening of bullae and petrous temporal bones with
mineralization; presence of bone lysis with osteomyelitis or neoplastic disease
■ CT or MRl: detailed evidence of fluid or tissue density (e.g. polyp) in the bulla.
adjacent tissues, or auditory tube; CT more useful for bony changes; MRl more
useful for evaluation of the tympanic membrane and soft tissues, and helpful to
differentiate central versus peripheral vestibular disease
 Direct otoscopy: visualization of the external canal, tympanic membrane, and bulla
(if tympanum ruptured)
■ Video otoscopy: permits magnified view of the canal and more controlled sample
collection (Figs. 46-29-46-31)
 Skin scrapings from pinnae: ectoparasites
 Dermatohistopathology: autoimmune disease, neoplasia, cerumen gland hyperplasia;
pinnae difficult to biopsy, avoid damaging auricular cartilage
Manubrium of the Malleolus 
Normal Tympanum 
Wax in Normal Canal 
 Figure 46-29 Normal tympanum and wax as viewed through the otoscope.
Pars Flaccida
Boney Shelf of Bulla 
  Manubrium of 
the Malleolus
Wax in Canal
 Figure 46-30 Normal tympanum—boney shelf of the bulla visualized through the tympanum—manubrium
of the malleolus upper right.
Bulging I
ars Flaccida 
Prominent Vasculature 
inflammation.
504
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
505
■Figure 46-32 Aural exudates from otitis externa. Bacterial and yeast exudates cannot be distinguished by
gross appearance.
■ Microscopic evaluation of exudates: single most important diagnostic tool after
complete examination of the ear canal
Appearance of the exudates: yeast infections commonly produce a yellow-tan thick
exudate; bacterial infections commonly produce a brown-black thin exudate; gross
appearance of exudates does not allow an accurate diagnosis of the type of infection;
microscopic examination is necessary (Fig. 46-32)
■Culture of exudates for identification and sensitivity: useful with persistent infection;
most indicated when rod bacteria found in exudate samples
Samples obtained from the proximal and distal external ear canal, as well as from
the middle ear, are frequently different; cytological examination and submission of
samples from each location may be necessary for accurate assessment of otitis externa
and otitis media.
Exudates and infection within each canal can differ; samples should be examined
from each canal; separate samples may need to be submitted for culture and sensitiv-
ity if cytology results demonstrate disparate populations of organisms
examination of exudates is required in chronic cases.
 Myringotomy: spinal needle or sterile catheter is inserted through the ventral aspect
of the pars tensa caudal to the manubrium of the malleolus to sample fluid within the
bulla for cytologic examination, culture and sensitivity testing (Figs. 46-33-46-35)
 Histopathologic examination of tissue obtained by biopsy forceps from the external
ear canal or middle ear (Figs. 46-36, 46-37)
■BAER: detect hearing loss
CSF analysis: detect CNS involvement
506
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Myringotomy Catheter 
dge of tympaum
 Figure 46-33 Myringotomy. Manubrium of the malleolus left of the catheter tip: catheter piercing ventral
aspect of the pars tensa.
Perforation in Tympanum
 Figure 46-34 Postmyringotommy. Note defect in tympanum created by catheter.
Microscopic Examination
■ Preparations: made from both canals: contents of each canal may differ; spread
samples thinly on a glass microscope slide; examine both unstained and modified
Wright-stained samples
Perforation in Tympanum
 Figure 46-35 Postmyringotomy tympanum.
Ob structive Mass
Normal Canal
 Figure 46-36 Mass obstructing external ear canal
507
508
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Biopsy Forceps 
Obstructive Mass I
Figure 46-37 Biopsy of mass in Fig. 46-36
 Figure 46-38 Aural exudate—Mafassezia organisms.
Heat fixing may help with waxy debris.
■Mites: presumptive diagnosis
 Type(s) of bacteria or yeast: assist in the choice of therapy as well as determine
whether culture is needed (Figs. 46-38-46-42)
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA
605
 Figure 46-39 Aural exudate—coccal and rod bacteria.
 Figure 46-40 Aural exudatecoccal bacteria
■Note findings (e.g., type of organisms; cells present) in the record; rank the number
of organisms and cell types present on a standardized scale (e.g., 0 to 4) to allow
treatment monitoring
WBCs within the exudate indicates active infection; systemic therapy may be
indicated.
510
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 46-41 Aural exudate—mixed populations of bacteria.
Figure 46-42 Aural exudate—Candida organisms.
THERAPEUTICS
■ Diet: no restrictions unless a food allergy is suspected
■ Client education: instruct clients, by demonstration, the proper method for cleaning
and medicating ears (especially the volume of medication to instill)
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA 
¥511
 Figure 46-43 Post-surgical lateral ear resection (excised tissue in Fig. 46-20)
■ Surgical considerations
■ Indicated when the canal is severely stenotic or obstructed, or when neoplasia or
a polyp is diagnosed
■
 Severe, unresponsive otitis media may require a bullae osteotomy.
■  Lateral ear resection or total ear ablation required with obstructed canals or neo-
plasia (Fig. 46-43)
■ Chronic otitis externa frequently leads to ruptured tympanae and otitis media.
■ Postexternal ear canal flushing complications in cats (vestibular signs) are not
uncommon; clients should be warned of possible residual effects.
Corticosteroid use is controversial with otitis media/interna.
Avoid vigorous flushing of the ear with otitis media/interna.
■
             
antibiotics.
■ Uncontrolled otitis externa and media, as well as treatment complications, can lead
to deafness, vestibular disease, cellulitis, facial nerve paralysis, progression to otitis
interna, and rarely, meningoencephalitis.
■Vestibular signs usually improve within 2 to 6 weeks.
Tympanum integrity should be assessed prior to introduction of solutions and/or
medications into the external ear canal.
Ear cleanser ingredients
■ Tympanum not intact: saline solution and 2.5% acetic acid (l:1 vinegar/water)
rinses; acetic acid solutions may be irritating if not buffered
 Intact tympanum: ceruminolytic: dioctyl sodium sulfosuccinate, squaline.
propylene glycol; antiseptics: acetic acid or 0.2% chlorhexidine gluconate;
512
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Figure 46-44 Red rubber catheter with syringe for flushing of ear canal
trisaminomethane ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (tris-EDTA) has antibacterial
and synergistic properties with certain antibiotics
 Astringents: isopropyl alcohol, boric acid, salicylic acid
■Ear flushing
■ Anti-inflammatory therapy may be necessary prior to flushing to reduce swelling.
■ Sedation may be required in painful cases and to prevent further trauma to the
canal.
■ Gentle solutions should be used initially.
■ A bulb syringe or properly trimmed French red rubber catheter is used to flush
in solution and remove debris (Fig. 46-44).
■ A catheter can be introduced into the bullae to permit flushing of the middle
 s         
administered.
■ Repeat cleansing at a tapering frequency during therapy.
■
 Treatment of primary secretory otitis media by complete flushing of the middle
ear; repeat flushing may be required
Drugs of choice
■ Topical medication
■ Caution when using with nonintact tympanum
CHAPTER 46: OTITIS EXTERNA, MEDIA, AND INTERNA  513
■ Ointments and lotions may be occlusive and perpetuate disease unless used
judiciously.
■ Antibiotic: based on cytologic evaluation, culture and sensitivity testing, and/or
empiric choice; common commercial formulations contain gentamicin, neomycin,
marbofloxacin, enrofloxacin, or silver sulfadiazine
■ Additional antibiotics used topically: amikacin, ticarcillin, and tobramycin
■ Antifungal: imidazoles: clotrimazole, ketoconazole, miconazole, thiabendazole;
also nystatin, terbinafine
Anti-inflammatory: corticosteroids: dexamethasone, fluocinolone, betamethasone.
triamcinolone, hydrocortisone, and mometasone; also dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
■Antiparasite: ivermectin, amitraz, and thiabendazole
■Systemic medication
■ Cytological examination of exudates helps determine the type of systemic medica-
tion needed.
■ Inflammation perpetuates disease requiring anti-inflammatory therapy.
Otitis interna, otitis media, and chronic/severe otitis externa may require systemic
medication for at least 4 to 6 weeks.
■An antibiotic choice should be based on culture/sensitivity with recurrent
infections.
■Staphylococcal bacteria: cephalexin (22mg/kg bid), amoxicillin trihydrate-
clavulanate potassium (10-15 mg/kg bid); clindamycin (1l mg/kg q24h to bid for
 bone involvement); and chloramphenicol (55 mg/kg tid: reserve unless indicated
by culture and sensitivity testing)
■ Rod bacteria: fluoroquinolone: enrofloxacin (dogs 10 to 20mg/kg/day; cats
maximum 5mg/kg/day). ciprofloxacin (10-25mg/kg bid), orbifloxacin (2.5-
7.5 mg/kg q24h), marbofloxacin (5.5 mg/kg/day); higher-range dosages recom-
mended for Pseudomonas infection
■ Additional antibiotic choices: amikacin (20mg/kg q24h): β-lactam: ticarcillin
(10-25 mg/kg bid to tid), imipenem (10mg/kg tid), ceftazidime (30 mg/kg tid to
(pb
          
q24h to bid), fluconazole (5mg/kg q24h to bid), itraconazole (5mg/kg/day);
usefulness of oral antifungal medications controversial
■ Anti-inflammatory: tapering dosages: prednisolone (0.5-l mg/kg q24h), dexa-
methasone (0.1mg/kg q24h), triamcinolone (0.1 mg/kg q24h); intralesional
triamcinolone (0.1 mg/kg total dosage placed in multiple sites)
■ Parasiticide: ivermectin (300mcg/kg po 1-2 weeks for 4 treatments), selamectin
(as labeled), moxidectin (as labeled)
Maintenance Therapy Goals
■ Keep canals clear of debris with routine cleanings weekly to every other week.
■Reduce bacterial and yeast colonization of the ear canal environment with cleansing
solutions or judicious use of topical medications.
514SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■Reduce inflammation and wax production with topical corticosteroids and treatment
 of underlying causes of ear canal disease.
■  Examine ear canals at routine intervals to detect changes prior to the onset of clinical
symptoms.
COMMENTS
■ Do not use ivermectin in heartworm-positive dogs, or in collies, Shetland sheepdogs.
Old English sheepdogs, Australian shepherds, and their cross-breeds; there is
increased risk of avermectin toxicity in herding breeds: prevent ingestion of topical
avermectins in herding dogs and their crossbreeds (due to possible ABCBl [MDR1]
gene mutation).
■ Ototoxicity has been reported with a large number of topical medications and ingre-
dients, avoidance (if possible) is recommended if the tympanae are not intact (or
cannot be properly assessed); commonly reported ototoxic medications include
aminoglycoside and macrolide antibiotics, antineoplastic (platinum-based) agents,
and loop diuretics.
Author: Alexander H. Werner
chapter
47
Pododermatitis and
Claw Disorders
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Paronychia: inflammation of soft tissue around the claw
Pyonychia: purulent exudates from the claw
 Ungual fold: crescent-shaped tissue that surounds the proximal claw
 Coronary band and dorsal ridge: produce most of the claw
 Onychomycosis: fungal infection of the claw
 Onychorrhexis: brittle claws that tend to split or break
 Onychoschizia: splitting and/or lamination of the claw, usually beginning distally
Onychomadesis: sloughing of the claw
Onchodystrophy: deformity caused by abnormal growth; often a sequela of a
disorder
■
 Onychomalacia: softening of the claws
Onychoclasis: breaking of the claw
■ Onychocryptosis: ingrown claw
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
1 Claw, claw/ungual folds, footpads: subject to trauma, infection, vascular insuff-
ciency, immune-mediated disease, neoplasia, defects in keratinization, and congeni-
tal abnormalities
A particular deformity may be caused by a variety of diseases.
■ A single disease can present with various claw lesions.
■ Sometimes the cause is unknown and there is no response to treatment.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
Collies and Shetland sheepdogs: dermatomyositis
Dachshund: onychorrhexis
 German shepherd dog, rottweiler, possibly giant schnauzer and Doberman pinscher:
symmetrical lupoid onychodystrophy
Siberian husky, dachshund, Rhodesian ridgeback, rottweiler, cocker spaniel: idio-
pathic onychodystrophy (keratinization defects)
515
516 SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■ Bull terriers: acrodermatitis
 Irish terriers, French mastiffs, Kerry blue terriers, Labrador retrievers, golden retriev-
ers: familial footpad hyperkeratosis
■ English bulldogs, Great Danes, dachshunds: idiopathic sterile granulomas
■ German shepherd dog, whippet, English springer spaniel: idiopathic onychomadesis
■Devon Rex cats: Malassezia paronychia
■German shepherd dogs: nodular dermatofibrosis
Risk Factors
■ Paronychia (infectious): immunosuppression (endogenous or exogenous), FeLV
infection (plasma cell pododermatitis), trauma, and diabetes mellitus
 Bacterial onychomadesis: excessively short nail trimming postulated to predispose
Dogs that dig or hunting dogs
■ Dogs with conformational disorders and obesity are at risk due to abnormal weight
distribution and increased friction.
■ Concurrent diseases increase risk: allergy immune-mediated diseases, keratinization
disorders, parasites (demodex, Leishmania, hookworms, etc.), metabolic disease
(hepatocutaneous syndrome), neoplasia (epitheliotropic lymphoma, metastatic bron-
chogenic adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, keratoacanthoma, inverted
papilloma, melanoma, mast cell tumor)
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Licking at the feet and/or claw/ungual folds; nail biting
■Lameness
Pain
 Swelling, erythema, and exudate of claw/ungual fold/footpad
 Deformity or sloughing of claw or footpad
■I
Discoloration of the claw (red-brown discoloration associated with Malassezia)
■Hemorrhage from the claw or at loss of a claw
Hyperkeratosis, crusting, ulceration, fissuring of the footpad or claw fold
■Odor
Paronychia
■ Infection: bacteria, dermatophyte, yeast (Candida, Malassezia)、 demodicosis,
leishmaniasis
■ Immune-mediated: pemphigus, bullous pemphigoid, SLE, drug eruption, symmetri-
cal lupoid onychodystrophy
■ Neoplasia: subungual squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma, eccrine carcinoma,
osteosarcoma, subungual keratoacanthoma, inverted squamous papilloma
■ Arteriovenous fistula
CHAPTER 47: PODODERMATITIS AND CLAW DISORDERS
517
Onychomycosis
■  Dogs: Irichophyton mentagrophytes—usually generalized
■Cats: Microsporum canis
Onychorrhexis
■  Idiopathic: especially in dachshunds; multiple nails
■
Trauma
■ Infection: dermatophytosis, leishmaniasis
Onychomadesis
■Trauma
■ Infection
■]
 Immune-mediated: pemphigus, bullous pemphigoid, SLE, drug eruption, symmetri-
cal lupoid onychodystrophy
Vascular insufficiency: vasculitis, cold agglutinin disease
■ Neoplasia: see above
■Idiopathic
Nail Dystrophy
■Acromegaly
■ Feline hyperthyroidism
 Zinc-responsive dermatosis
 Congenital malformations
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
Clinician may find it useful to classify cases based on clinical presentation.
Interdigital erythema with pruritus
■ Atopic dermatitis
■ Food hypersensitivity
■ Demodicosis
■Bacterial overgrowth
■ Nonpruritic alopecia
■
 Demodicosis
■
 Bacterial overgrowth
Dermatophytosis
■ Ischemic folliculopathy (dermatomyositis, postvaccination)
Crusted/hyperkeratotic/fissured footpads
■ Pemphigus foliaceus
518
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Superficial necrolytic dermatitis (hepatocutaneous syndrome)
Erythema multiforme
 Feline paraneoplastic pancreatic adenocarcinoma
 Feline thymoma-associated exfoliative dermatitis
 Idiopathic/hereditary hyperkeratosis
 Dermatophytosis
 Drug eruption
■
 Plasma cell pododermatitis (feline)
Viral (distemper)
■Sloughing/ulcerative footpads
■ Epitheliotropic lymphoma
■
 Ischemic vasculopathy
Erythema multiforme
■
 Drug eruption
■Feline plasma cell pododermatitis
■Nodular disorders
■ Sterile granuloma syndrome
■Pyoderma
 Demodicosis
■
Dermatophytosis (kerion)
 Nodular dermatofibrosis in German shepherd dogs
Calcinosis cutis
Xanthomatosis
Asymmetrical claw disorders
 Bacterial paronychia/pyonychia
■
Onychomycosis
 Trauma: physical, chemical, pedicure
Arteriovenous fistula (postsurgical declaw or trauma)
Neoplasia (squamous cell carcinoma, melanoma, mast cell tumor, metastatic
bronchogenic adenocarcinoma, keratoacanthoma)
 Symmetrical claw disorders
 Bacterial infection
Metabolic disease
Symmetric lupoid onchodystrophy (SLO)
 Autoimmune disorders (especially pemphigus foliaceus in the cat)
Keratinization disorders
Viral diseases
 Leishmaniasis
 Severe ascarid infestation, hookworms
Nutritional deficiencies (zinc)
Toxins (thallium)
■Idiopathic (breed-related and senile changes)
CHAPTER 47: PODODERMATITIS AND CLAW DISORDERS
519
DIAGNOSTICS
Antinuclear antibody (ANA) to explore systemic lupus erythematosus
Complete blood count and urinalysis
 Serum chemistry to evaluate for diabetes mellitus, thyroid function, liver function,
or other systemic illness
FeLV and FIV
■Radiographs: osteomyelitis of third phalanx, neoplastic change
 Biopsy: often involves a third phalanx amputation; inclusion of the coronary band
required for diagnosis of most diseases
Cytology of exudate from the nail and/or fold
 Skin scraping
■]
 Bacterial and fungal culture
■Fecal examination
■  Limited allergen diet trial
 Intradermal skin testing/serologic testing
Ultrasonography  of  the  kidneys  if  dermatofibrosis/cystic renal  adenoma/
 Figure 47-1 Pododermatitis caused by bacterial folliculitis and furunculosis with demodicosis. Note the
involvement of the entire digit, nailbed region, and interdigital spaces with edema of the tissues, alopecia.
hyperkeratosis, and focal erosions and ulcerations.
 Figure 47-2 Eosinophilic plaque (feline
eosinophilic granuloma complex) involving
the digital and metacarpal pads as well as
extension to the nailbed regions.
 Figure 47-3 Pemphigus foliaceus in a
3-year-old dalmatian. These lesions are
within 3 weeks of the onset of clinical
signs. Note the erosions, superficial separa-
tion of the pads, and mild to moderate
erythema.
520
 Figure 47-4 Pemphigus vulgaris in 9-year-old mixed breed dog. Note the marked degree of ulceration of
the pads with peripheral hyperkeratosis and crusting.
■ Figure 47-5 Hepatocutaneous syndrome in the dog. Note the marked degree of confluent hyperkeratosis
of the footpads.
521
 Figure 47-6 Cutaneous xanthomatosis of the footpads in a cat associated with idiopathic hyperlipidemia.
Note the yellow-pink plaques along the margins of the footpads
 Figure 47-7Cutaneous lymphoma affecting the
digits of a cat. No lesions were noted in any other
areas of the body.
■ Figure 47-8 Plasma cell pododermatitis, pri-
marily affecting the metacarpal and metatarsal
pads, leaving the digital pads within normal limits.
Affected pads are swollen and spongy and may or
may not have focal erosions and ulcerations.
522
■Figure 47-9 Plasma cell pododermatitis. Note how
easily the affected pad compresses.
 Figure 47-10 Footpad erosion and ulceration sec-
ondary to rock salt exposure along the streets of New
York City after a snowstorm.
 Figure 47-11 Paronychia/pyonychia of a cat with pemphigus foliaceus (PF). PF in cats is often characterized
by a cheesy exudate that is expressed when the nail is extruded.
523
 Figure 47-12 Interdigital dermatitis characterized by erythema and secondary bacterial infection as a result
of aller gic dermatitis.
 Figure 47-13 Folliculitis and furunculosis with associated alopecia of the extremity of this young dog with
deep staphylococcal infection.
524
CHAPTER 47: PODODERMATITIS AND CLAW DISORDERS
525
Figure 47-14 Pododemodicosis and bacterial furunculosis.
THERAPEUTICS
Paronychia
■
 Surgical removal of nail plate (shell).
■ Antimicrobial soaks
■ Identify underlying condition and treat specifically.
Onychomycosis
■ Antifungal soaks: chlorhexidine, povidone iodine, lime sulfur
■Surgical removal of nail plate: may improve response to systemic medication
■
 Amputation of third phalanx
Onychorrhexis
■
 Repair with fingernail glue (the type used to attach false nails in humans).
■ Remove splintered pieces.
■Amputate third phalanx.
■Treat underlying cause.
■ Onychomadesis
 Antimicrobial soaks
Treat underlying cause.
■Neoplasia
■
■ Surgical excision
■Amputation of digit or leg
■Chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy
526  SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
■Nail dystrophy
■Treat underlying cause.
Drugs of Choice
■ Bacterial paronychia: systemic antibiotics based on culture and sensitivity
■Yeast paronychia: Candida or Malassezia paronychia—ketoconazole (5-l0 mg/kg po
q12-24h); topical nystatin, miconazole, terbinafine
■ Onychomycosis: ketoconazole (5-10 mg/kg po q12h) for 6-12 months until negative
cultures; itraconazole (5-10mg/kg po q24h) for 3 weeks and then pulse therapy
twice a week until resolved
■ Onychomadesis: determined by cause; immunomodulation therapy for immune-
mediated diseases; medications include cyclosporine, tetracycline with niacinamide,
pentoxifylline, vitamin E, essential fatty acid supplementations, and chemotherapeu-
tic agents (e.g., azathioprine, chlorambucil)
■  Symmetric lupoid onchodystrophy- options include essential fatty acid supplementa-
tion, tetracycline and niacinamide @ 250mg of each po tid for dogs weighing <10 kg
and 500mg of each for dogs weighing >10kg. pentoxyfilline @ 10-15 mg/kg po bid
 to tid, corticosteroids, and cyclosporine @ 5 mg/kg/day po
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Bacterial or yeast paronychia and onychomycosis: treatment may be prolonged and
response may be influenced by underlying factors
■ Onychorrhexis: may require amputation of the third phalanx for resolution
■ Onychomadesis: prognosis determined by underlying cause; immune-mediated dis-
eases and vascular problems carry a more guarded prognosis than do trauma or
infectious causes
■ Nail dystrophy: prognosis is good when underlying cause can be controlled
■ Neoplasia: excised by amputation of the digit; malignant tumors metastasize by the
time of diagnosis
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
chapter
48
Superficial Necrolytic
Dermatitis (Hepatocutaneous
Syndrome)
 Necrotizing dermatitis resulting from cutaneous nutritional deprivation
 Predominantly associated with hepatic disorder; rarely with glucagonoma
Hypoaminoacidemia consistently measured
 Diagnosis based on dermatohistopathologic findings
 Poor to grave prognosis
 Supportive therapy includes amino acid supplementation.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 Plasma amino acids significantly reduced from normal in affected animals
■ Metabolic hepatopathy resulting in increased hepatic catabolism of amino acids
proposed
Predominantly associated with severe vacuolar hepatopathy; often with pathogno-
monic ultrasound findings
 Rarely associated with phenobarbital or phenytoin administration
Rarely associated with severe hepatic insult
 Rarely associated with glucagon-secreting pancreatic or extrapancreatic neoplasia;
these cases do not exhibit signs of hepatopathy
 Occurs with or without diabetes mellitus; development of diabetes mellitus may be
an indicator of disease progression and worsening prognosis
Hypoaminoacidemia, with or without deficiencies in zinc, essential fatty acids, or
other nutrients, results in keratinocyte degeneration.
Resolution by excision of a glucagon-secreting pancreatic tumor reported.
Symptoms temporarily relieved by intravenous infusions of amino acid solutions
supporting pathogenesis.
 Associated with secondary bacterial follicultis and Malassezia dermatitis
Feline cases very rare; most often associated with neoplasia (pancreatic carcinoma,
intestinal lymphoma) and hepatopathy
527
528
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Rare dermatitis
■Primarily old dogs: mean age 10 years
■Males possibly overrepresented
■S
 Small breeds possibly overrepresented: West Highland white terrier, Scottish terrier,
American cocker spaniel, Shetland sheepdog, Lhasa apsos, border collie; syndrome
also identified in large breeds
■ Lesions often precede systemic symptoms.
CLINICAL FEATURES
■ Progressive development of erythema, hyperkeratosis, and exudation at the margins
of the footpads (Figs. 48-1-3)
■
Dermatitis may be striking.
■ Lesions affecting the mucocutaneous junctions of lips, eyes, and anus; develop at the
same time or immediately following footpad lesions (Figs. 48-4, 48-5)
■ Erosions and ulcerations often from excoriation
■ Fissuring on footpads results in pruritus and pain (Fig. 48-6).
■F
Hyperpigmentation and lichenification common with chronicity and continued
self-trauma
 Secondary bacterial folliculitis and Malassezia dermatitis common (Fig. 48-7)
 Figure 48-1 Superficial necrolytic dermatitis-induced erythema and crusting at footpad margins.
CHAPTER 48: SUPERFICIAL NECROLYTIC DERMATITIS (HEPATOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME)
529
 Figure 48-2 SND-induced self-trauma at footpad margins causing exudation and hemorrhage
■Figure 48-3 Thick crusting of footpads similar to pemphigus foliaceus with superficial necrolytic
dermatitis.
 Lesions develop on pressure points, pinnae, and external genitalia (Fig. 48-8).
 Dermatitis often precedes systemic symptoms by weeks.
■
Systemic signs include lethargy. polyuria, polydipsia (when associated with diabetes
mellitus), anorexia, and weight loss.
530
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 48-4 Lip margin crusting and exudation with SND
Ons yim uoepnxa pue buisnn uibhew dn 5-tt anh 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS
■ Pemphigus foliaceus
Zinc-responsive dermatosis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
CHAPTER 48: SUPERFICIAL NECROLYTIC DERMATITIS (HEPATOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME)
531
 Figure 48-6 Erosions of footpads with severe symptoms of SND
Figure 48-7 Secondary bacterial folliculitis with crusting from superficial necrolytic dermatitis
Erythema multiforme
■
Drug eruption
■
Generic dog food dermatosis
■ Irritant contact dermatitis
■
Demodicosis
■Dermatophytosis
532
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
 Figure 48-8 Pressure point (lateral elbow) crusting and erosions from superficial necrolytic dermatitis
■Vasculitis
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
Toxic epidermal necrolysis
 Cats: exfoliative dermatitis (thymoma-associated), epitheliotropic lymphoma, ery-
thema multiforme, pemphigus foliaceus
DIAGNOSTICS
■ CBC: occasional normochromic, normocytic, nonregenerative anemia
■Biochemistries:
■ Hepatic: elevated serum alkaline phosphatase, alanine aminotransferase, aspartate
aminotransferase
■I
Hyperglycemia
■ Elevated total bilirubin and bile acids
■Hypoalbuminemia
■Elevated plasma glucagon levels: consistently noted with glucagon-secreting pancre-
■Hypoaminoacidemia
■ Abdominal ultrasound: pathogonomic “honeycomb" hepatic appearance; consistent
with parenchymal collapse, vacuolar hepatopathy, and nodular hyperplasia; rare
pancreatic or extrapancreatic neoplasia (Figs. 48-9, 48-10)
■Dermatohistopathology
■ Parakeratosis and neutrophilic crusting
CHAPTER 48: SUPERFICIAL NECROLYTIC DERMATITIS (HEPATOCUTANEOUS SYNDROME)
533
3:32:48
 Figure 48-10 Pancreatic nodule on ultrasound with superficial necrolytic dermatitis
■ Pallor of epidermis above the basal layer due to intracellular and intercellular
edema
■Hyperplastic basal cell layer
■Clefting within the epidermis
■  Mild neutrophilic superficial to perivascular dermal infiltrate
■ Marked parakeratosis with absence of epidermal pallor noted in chronic cases
 Hepatic histopathology
■Vacuolar hepatopathy (not seen with pancreatic tumor)
■Hepatocyte degeneration
■ Parenchymal collapse
■Nodular hyperplasia
534
SECTION 8: SELECTED TOPICS
THERAPEUTICS
Excision of pancreatic or extrapancreatic neoplasia
■Supportive care for systemic symptoms
■ Poor prognosis; worsening prognosis associated with the development of diabetes
mellitus
■Appropriate management of diabetes mellitus (if present)
■ Nutritional support: high-quality protein supplement; cooked whole eggs or yolks
■I
Dietary supplementation of zinc (10 mg/kg q24h as sulfate; 5 mg/kg q24h as gluco-
nate), essential fatty acids, and vitamin E (200 to 400IU bid)
S-adenosylmethionine (18 to 22mg/kg q24h)
■S
Silymarin (1 to 2 mg/kg q24h)
Drugs of choice
■Treatment of secondary bacterial folliculitis and/or Malassezia dermatitis with appro-
 priate antimicrobials
■ Prednisolone (0.5 mg/kg q24h; taper dosage and discontinue as soon as possible):
temporary relief of pruritus and inflammation; may exacerbate diabetes mellitus; may
aggravate hepatopathy
■ Octreotide (2 to 3.2 μg/kg bid to qid by subcutaneous injection): somatostatin ana-
 logue; nonresected glucagon-producing pancreatic or extrapancreatic neoplasia
■ Amino acid infusion: intravenous administration of amino acids to replenish serum
levels from excessive hepatic catabolism
 10% crystalline amino acid solution or 3% amino acid-electrolyte solution: 25 mL/
kg over 8 hours
■  Initial replacement therapy twice weekly until symptoms improve
■ Maintenance infusions every 7 to 14 days as indicated by patient response
COMMENTS
 Frequent monitoring of serum chemistries needed to monitor for hepatic failure and/
or development of diabetes mellitus
■Repeated treatment for secondary infection
Patient survival: 6 months (mean) to 2 years (hepatopathy patients); euthanasia most
often due to diabetic crisis or hepatic failure
Synonyms
■ Hepatocutaneous syndrome
■Necrolytic migratory erythema
■  Metabolic epidermal necrosis
Author: Alexander H. Werner
section
Exotic Pet Dermatology
49
chapter
Ferret
SARCOPTIC MANGE
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
1 Sarcoptic mange is uncommonly seen in pet ferrets in the United States. Sarcoptes
scabiei, which affects dogs and cats, is the cause of sarcoptic mange in ferrets. Two
syndromes are seen with sarcoptes mites, either a generalized infestation or one that
is localized to the feet only.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
 The localized form of sarcoptic mange is seen more frequently than the generalized
form.
■ Both forms are caused by Sarcoptes scabiei.
The generalized form of sarcoptic mange is likely a secondary disease process, and
the existence of a primary disease should be investigated.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ In the localized form, only the feet show signs of disease:
■ Feet are swollen and erythematous, and the ferret may feel pain when walking.
■ Pads may be cracked and bleeding.
■ Nail beds become very swollen and nails may be lost.
■ In the generalized form, there are patches of alopecia and the ferret is intensely
pruritic:
■ The skin may be erythematous and ulcerated because of the severe pruritus.
DIAGNOSTICS
Typically, the complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are not
affected by this disease except for an eosinophilia.
■If secondary bacterial dermatitis is present, the white blood cell count may be slightly
elevated.
536
CHAPTER 49: FERRET 537
  If the generalized form is present, the primary disease process may cause changes in
the hematologic and/or biochemistry results.
■  This disease is diagnosed by a skin scrape revealing either the mite or ova.
■ It can be difficult in chronic cases to demonstrate the mite on skin scrapes.
 A biopsy of the skin may show evidence of the mites and/or severe inflammation.
■ In the localized form, it may be difficult to find areas on the foot to scrape for
evidence of mites.
 It is not uncommon to use response to treatment as a diagnostic test for sarcoptic mites.
THERAPEUTICS
■Treat sarcoptic mites with ivermectin at 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg SubQ once and repeat in 7
to 10 days; some clinicians recommend selamectin at 6-18 mg/kg. repeat once in 28
days.
■ Other animals in the house may need to be treated, too, including other ferrets, dogs.
and cats.
■ The environment the ferret lives in should be cleaned.
 If a primary problem is present, this must be addressed before successful treatment
of sarcoptic mange can be attained.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
The prognosis for a cure is excellent in the localized form.
■  In the generalized form, unless the primary problem is resolved, the prognosis is
more guarded.
MAST CELL TUMORS
 Cutaneous mast cell tumors are common causes of skin masses in ferrets
 This is almost always a benign disease in ferrets; rarely does cutaneous mast cell
tumor disease lead to or result from mast cell metastasis (Fig. 49-1).
■ Ferrets with cutaneous mast cell tumors have no other signs of disease.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
  Cutaneous mast cell tumors have histopathologic characteristics common to mast
cell tumors in other animals.
538
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
Figure 49-1 Mast cell tumor (MCT): Note the mildly erythematous base with dried blood adhered to
the surface.
■ The mast cells are well differentiated, round to oval in shape, and are usually
arranged in sheets.
■ Because this is usually a benign disease, mitotic figures are rare.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■  Mast cell tumors appear as individual skin nodules.
 A ferret can have one or many nodules on different skin areas; the most common body
area in which to find the nodules is the dorsum, especially near the shoulders.
'e on dn on siu jo ano e  ais u a sno 
 Although they can appear just as a nodule, typically, the mass is erythematous.
■ Dried blood on and around the nodule is common (see Fig. 49-1).
■ Mast cell tumors can either be flat or raised and both can appear at the same time
on the same ferret. Occasionally, the area of the mast cell tumor will be pruritic.
■ Infrequently, localized alopecia will accompany the mast cell tumor.
DIAGNOSTICS
■ The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are not affected by
cutaneous mast cell tumors.
CHAPTER 49: FERRET539
 The diagnostic test of choice is biopsy of the mast cell tumor. The ferret is sedated
or anesthetized, a local block is placed on the skin, and the biopsy specimen is taken.
 An impression smear can also be used to diagnose this disease, but histopathology
is preferred over cytology.
THERAPEUTICS
Removal of the cutaneous tumor(s) is the treatment of choice.
 Tumors do not require chemotherapy or radiation therapy.
In some cases, these cutaneous tumors have been seen to dissipate without
treatment
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
The prognosis for cutaneous mast cell tumors in ferrets is excellent
 Even without surgery, these cutaneous tumors do not appear to metastasize.
 Removal is still indicated; if the nodules are pruritic, removal will improve the quality
of life. Although it has not been shown that metastasis from cutaneous to systemic
disease occurs, prevention by removal of the tumors is warranted for precautionary
reasons (Fig. 49-2).
 Figure 49-2 Mast cell tumor (MCT): Note the mildly erythematous base with dried blood adhered to the
surface. There is a small amount of alopecia associated with this MCT.
540
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
 Figure 49-3 Note the generalized partial to complete alopecia in this ferret associated with advanced gland
disease.
ADRENAL GLAND DISEASE
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Adrenal gland disease is common in pet ferrets older than 3 years.
One or both adrenal glands are affected.
■The most common sign in both sexes is alopecia (Fig. 49-3).
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■
Alopecia is caused by the overproduction of adrenal androgens from the diseased
adrenal gland(s).
■ One or more of these compounds are known to be elevated in ferrets with adrenal
gland disease: estrogen, androstenedione, 17-OH-progesterone, and DHEAS.
CHAPTER 49: FERRET
541
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
The most common sign in ferrets with this disease is alopecia
■Hair loss typically starts at the base of the tail or on the tail; over a period of weeks
or months, the alopecia progresses in a symmetrical fashion to include the rump.
thigh area, ventrum, and finally along the dorsum to the shoulder blade area.
 In extreme cases, only guard hairs are left on the entire body (see Fig. 49-3).
■ In females, an enlarged vulva is another common sign.
 In both males and females, pruritus may be present. Ferrets do not have to have
alopecia to be pruritic.
DIAGNOSTICS
 The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are not affected by this
disease.
Typical tests for adrenal gland disease such as the ACTH stimulation test and the
urine cortisol:creatinine ratio do not diagnose this disease.
 Abdominal ultrasound can detect an enlarged adrenal gland in many cases; not all
adrenal glands that are diseased are enlarged.
1 Measurement of adrenal androgen concentrations is a more consistent method to
diagnose this disease; in ferrets with adrenal gland disease, one or more adrenal
androgens will be elevated above the normal range.
 Skin biopsies can be performed to rule out other diseases, but age, history, an
enlarged vulva, and ultrasound results along with the adrenal androgen panel are
used to diagnose this disease.
THERAPEUTICS
There are both surgical and medical treatments for this disease. Both forms of
treatment should result in hair regrowth.
 Surgical removal of the diseased adrenal gland is currently the only treatment that
can cure this disease.
If both adrenal glands are diseased, the clinician has the option of removing both
glands or one whole gland and part of the other.
 In some ferrets, mineralocorticoid supplementation may also be needed when both
glands are removed.
■ If one whole gland and part of the other is removed, then supplementation may not
be necessary. However, in this instance, the signs of disease may not entirely dissipate
if some of the diseased gland remains and hair may not regrow.
542SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
■ Mitotane treatment is no longer recommended because there are other, less toxic
treatments.
■ There are oral, injectable, and long-acting depot treatments for adrenal gland disease
 Some treatments are more effective than others and results may vary with each ferret.
The goal of medical treatment is hair regrowth and to relieve the pruritus if it is
present.
 Medical treatment does not cure this disease and must continue for the life of the
ferret.
■Not all medical treatments will cause all of the hair to regrow.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
1The prognosis with this disease is usually excellent.
 Once the diseased adrenal gland is removed, the clinical signs resolve; if the entire
gland cannot be removed, depending on the amount of diseased gland remaining.
signs may fully or partially resolve.
■ In some ferrets, medical treatment will be sufficient to resolve all or most clinical
signs.
■ Some ferrets become refractory to medical treatment and hair loss and pruritus
returns; in those cases, signs will resolve only with surgical therapy (Fig. 49-4).
 Figure 49-4 Note the generalized alopecia in this ferret associated with advanced adrenal gland disease.
Also evident are enlarged mammary glands; this is infrequently seen in female ferrets with adrenal gland disease.
CHAPTER 49: FERRET
543
CANINE DISTEMPER VIRUS
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Canine distemper virus is fatal in ferrets.
 Early manifestations of this disease are dermatologic changes on the chin and feet.
Given the seriousness of this fatal disease, the dermatologic signs are minor, but
these changes are important for diagnostic purposes.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Canine distemper is caused by a morbillivirus.
Canine distemper virus causes respiratory dermatologic, gastrointestinal, and
neurologic disease in ferrets.
■Ferrets die from the effects of the viral infection on the neurologic system or a severe,
secondary bacterial pneumonia.
■  Inclusion bodies can be found in all tissues postmortem but are most common in
the epithelium of the gastrointestinal tract, bladder, and skin.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
  The dermatologic clinical signs of canine distemper virus are mainly observed on the
chin and footpads.
■ The first signs of this disease are a mild upper respiratory infection including ocular
and nasal discharges.
■ In typical infections with distemper, the dermatologic changes follow the upper
respiratory signs.
 Skin changes can appear first:
■ A chin rash including erythema and alopecia develops.
■ The skin in this area then becomes swollen and crusty and may take on a yellow
appearance.
■ As the disease progresses, hyperkeratosis of the footpads ensues; footpads become
hard, swollen, and crusted.
■ In most cases, other clinical signs of disease accompany hyperkeratosis of the
footpads, including neurologic signs and severe lower respiratory disease.
DIAGNOSTICS
■  The complete blood count may be elevated, reflecting the secondary bacterial pneu-
monia that accompanies canine distemper virus.
544
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
Depending on the progression of the disease at the time of venipuncture, various
biochemical abnormalities will be seen, including elevated hepatic enzymes.
The definitive diagnosis of canine distemper virus is usually made postmortem.
■ Inclusion bodies are found in epithelial cells on histopathology.
■F
History of exposure to this virus in an unvaccinated ferret is common.
■ Serum antibody tests and fluorescent antigen tests aid in the diagnosis.
■F
 Biopsy of the affected areas of the skin is usually not practical because the ferret
commonly succumbs to the disease before histopathology results are known.
■ Very rarely, ferrets will develop atypical canine distemper virus infection. This
usually is the result of improper vaccination procedures. In these ferrets, the only
sign of disease may be the dermatologic changes.
■  In the early stages of canine distemper virus infection, the mild upper respiratory
signs can mimic those of the much less serious disease, influenza virus infection;
dermatologic disease is not part of influenza viral infections.
■ If a ferret has a mild upper respiratory infection accompanied by a chin rash, this
should cause a high level of suspicion that canine distemper viral infection is present
rather than a benign influenza viral infection.
THERAPEUTICS
■There is no treatment for canine distemper virus; It is almost always fatal.
■Antibiotics can be used to treat the secondary bacterial infections.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ The prognosis for this disease is very poor
Author: Karen Rosenthal
chapter
50
Guinea Pig
FOLLICULAR OVARIAN CYSTS
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Follicular cysts are not uncommon in middle-age to older female guinea pigs.
 The only clinical sign of this disease may be alopecia.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Ovarian follicular cysts are derived from preovulatory follicles that fail to
ovulate.
 One or both ovaries can have follicular cysts.
 Some follicular ovarian cysts are functional and produce hormones that cause an
endocrine pattern of alopecia in female guinea pigs.
■ Not all follicular cysts are functional and in those guinea pigs, alopecia does not
occur.
Guinea pigs can get a related type of ovarian disorder, “cystic rete ovarii.," but
alopecia is not always characteristic of that disease.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
1 The first sign of this disease is hair thinning near the tail base and symmetrically
along the flanks
 Alopecia can progress along the sides and dorsum toward the neck (Fig. 50-1).
 On abdominal palpation, a round, firm mass is felt in the area of the ovary:
■ Masses can vary in size depending on the length of illness. At first, masses are
pea-sized but if not treated, can reach the size of a golf ball or even larger.
■Masses can be unilateral or bilateral.
■ Guinea pigs usually resent palpation of the mass.
 In a breeding sow, usually a follicular cyst will disrupt breeding cycles.
545
546
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
Figure 50-1 Ovarian cyst (advanced
stage). Note confluent ventral alopecia
along withcytologic examinationof the
fluid. Radiographs and abdominal ultra-
sound will confirm the presence of these
cysts. Response to treatment (hair regrowth)
is also considereda diagnostic test for
determining the presence of ovarian cysts.
A skin biopsy will show histopathologic evi-
dence of an endocrine alopecia.
DIAGNOSTICS
 The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are not affected by this
disease.
■If the cyst(s) is large enough, it can be seen on radiographs.
■ Abdominal ultrasound is the most useful technique for the diagnosis of a cyst.
■A percutaneous aspirate of the cyst can be performed either blindly or with the aid
of abdominal ultrasound.
■Cytology reveals cystlike fluid with no to few cells.
■卫
Rule-outs for a cyst would be cystic rete ovarii, but that is not always associated with
alopecia.
■ Ovarian neoplasia may present with cystlike structures, with or without alopecia,
but ultrasound would reveal not just a cyst but a more heterogeneous type of
structure.
■ Cytology is useful to determine whether neoplasia is present.
CHAPTER 5O: GUINEA PIG
547
THERAPEUTICS
■
The cure for ovarian follicular cysts is abdominal surgery with removal of the ovarian
cyst(s) and uterus.
■ Nonsurgical treatment includes percutaneous aspiration of as much of the cystic
          so s 
guinea pig more comfortable but will not stop the return of the cyst or the signs
of disease.
 The goal of medical treatment is to cause the cyst to respond and involute with
resulting regrowth of hair.
 Human chorionic gonadotropin (HcG) has been given to guinea pigs at a dose of
1000 IU/guinea pig IM repeated once or twice in 7-10 days; this does not work for
every guinea pig.
 Some have advocated the use of GnRH (Cystorelin) at a dose of 25ug/guinea pig
every 2 weeks for 2 injections if HcG is not effective.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ If the cysts are removed, the prognosis is excellent.
 If medical treatment is attempted, even if the signs regress, disease can recur.
■Surgery is the only cure for this disease (Fig. 50-2).
 Figure 50-2 Alopecia along the flanks
and extending along the dorsum of this
intact female guinea pig. A follicular cyst,
seen as a bulge in the right abdominal
wall, was the cause of the alopecia.
548
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
 Figure 50-3 Infestation of Trixacarus in a guinea pig.
ECTOPARASITE
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ The most common ectoparasite causing disease in guinea pigs is the sarcoptic mite,
Irixacarus caviae, a burrowing mite that can cause an asymptomatic infection or
severe disease(Fig. 50-3).
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ The guinea pig sarcoptic mite can cause disease in solitary pet guinea pigs or in a
group of guinea pigs.
 It spreads easily within a colony.
■When a clinical infection with Trixacarus caviae becomes apparent in a solitary older
guinea pig, a primary disease process should be considered.
■ Other ectoparasites are found on guinea pigs and can cause disease, including the
mite Chirodiscoides caviae and lice Gliricola porcelli and Gyropus ovalis.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Guinea pigs can be infected with Trixacarus caviae but show no signs of disease.
■ In mild cases, a thinning hair coat and scaly skin is apparent, usually along the
dorsum but also on the sides and on the neck.
CHAPTER 50: GUINEA PIG549
 In more severe cases, excoriations and erythema caused by intense pruritus are seen
(see Fig. 50-3).
■ As the disease progresses, the skin becomes deeply ulcerated and a mucopurulent
discharge may be present.
d   s  a sd s i  a s a
can lead to seizure-like activity, which is preceded by a severe pruritic episode.
DIAGNOSTICS
 The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are usually not affected
by this disease.
If pruritus has led to a secondary bacterial dermatitis, a leukocytosis and even an
eosinophilia may be observed in some guinea pigs. In the older, solitary guinea pig
that breaks with an ectoparasite infection, there may be changes in the blood picture
due to a primary disease process.
Diagnose this disease by observing the mite, Irixacarus caviae, or its ova. Use skin
scrapes or the “scotch tape”" method—scotch tape is applied to the skin and the debris
stuck to the tape is observed under the microscope.
 In some cases, the mites cannot be identified, and response to treatment is used to
diagnose this disease.
■ For the nonburrrowing lice, examination of the hair shafts, and not a deep skin
scrape, should be sufficient for diagnosis.
THERAPEUTICS
 Various topical antiparasiticidal treatments have been recommended to treat guinea
pig ectoparasites. These should be viewed with caution because guinea pigs can be
very susceptible to the negative side effects of some preparations.
 The safest method to treat this disease is with subcutaneous injections of ivermectin.
Use a dose of 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg once every 7-10 days for up to 4 treatments.
■ Resistance to ivermectin has been reported and some clinicians have used dosages
of up to 1 mg/kg.
■ Selamectin has also been used at 6mg/kg given once and repeated in 28 days.
■ All guinea pigs in the house should be treated, even if clinical signs are not
apparent.
■If a secondary bacterial dermatitis is present, treat with topical antibiotic
preparations.
 If severe, systemic antibiotics may be necessary.
■ Do not use steroids in guinea pigs to treat secondary dermatitis. Guinea pigs, like
rabbits, are very susceptible to the immunosuppressive side affects of steroids, and
 steroids can cause great morbidity and mortality in guinea pigs.
550
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
 Figure 50-4 Infestation of rixacarus in a guinea pig causing alopecia. The resulting pruritus has led to mild
skin exoriations.
■ The environment should also be cleaned. All materials that are disposable should be
replaced. The cage and the housing areas should be treated with antiparasiticidal
applications. Care should be taken to cleanse these areas of all antiparasiticidal
preparations before reintroducing the guinea pigs.
■ If an older guinea pig has an acute mite infestation, a primary disease should be
investigated before successful treatment of Trixacarus caviae can be accomplished.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ Excellent if there is no primary disease process (Fig. 50-4)
Author: Karen Rosenthal
chapter
51
Hamster
CUSHINGS DISEASE
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
Cushing's disease occurs infrequently in pet hamsters. It may be more common than
we recognize, but pet hamsters in the United States are not routinely brought to the
veterinarian for treatment (Fig. 5l-l).
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Both adrenal glands appear enlarged with this disease and it is likely the result of
pituitary abnormalities.
■High cortisol concentrations are present in these hamsters.
 Figure 51-1 Advanced Cushing's disease; partial to complete alopecia.
551
552
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Bilateral, nonpruritic alopecia is seen with this disease in hamsters. Eventually, a
hamster will lose all of its hair, except the whiskers.
■The skin may be flaky with hyperpigmentation.
■ Other signs of this disease include profound polyuria and polydipsia.
■Polyphagia may also be present.
DIAGNOSTICS
■ High cortisol and alkaline phosphatase concentrations have been reported in ham-
sters with this disease.
■ Because of their small size and the limitation of how much blood can be obtained.
it is not always practical to perform such diagnostic tests as the ACTH stimulation
test.
■An abdominal ultrasound should reveal bilateral adrenal gland enlargement.
THERAPEUTICS
■ Mitotane therapy can be attempted, but the pharmacokinetics of this drug for
hamsters has not been determined.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■ The prognosis for hamsters with this disease is not known.
Author: Karen Rosenthal
chapter
52
Hedgehog
■ African pygmy hedgehogs have only recently entered the pet trade. Therefore, there
is a lack of data on many of the diseases seen in pet hedgehogs.
A commonly reported problem in hedgehogs is quill loss (Fig. 52-l); the most
common reason for quill loss is an ectoparasite infestation.
 Figure 52-1 Note absence of quills along internal trunk
553
554
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ There is some confusion on the species of mite that is most common on pet hedge
d        si s  s
hedgehogs are most commonly infected with Caparinia tripolis.
■ The most common presentation is a young hedgehog, recently purchased from a pet
store that starts losing quills once it is brought into the home.
 This ectoparasite easily infects an entire colony or pet store if hedgehogs are kept
close together.
 Infected bedding is implicated as the cause of transmission in many cases.
■If an older, solitary hedgehog breaks with disease, a primary problem should be
suspected.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ Mite infestation can range from asymptomatic to mild or severe.
■ In mild cases, the skin becomes flaky and a few quills are lost. In these cases, pruritus
is usually not present.
■ As the disease progresses, pruritus becomes severe and many quills fall out in patches
around the body.
 The skin may become ulcerated due to severe excoriations.
DIAGNOSTICS
■It is unknown whether there are any blood count or biochemistry changes associated
with this disease.
■It is common to find the mites on either a skin scrape or microscopic examination
 of the quills.
■ If the mites are not seen on examination, response to treatment is used as a
diagnostic test.
THERAPEUTICS
■ The treatment of choice appears to be ivermectin at 0.2 to 0.4 mg/kg SC given once
and repeated 1 to 2 times at 7- to 10-day intervals.
■ Environmental cleanup along with treatment of all other hedgehogs in the house is
important to cure this infestation.
CHAPTER 52: HEDGEHOG
555
tripolis.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
Prognosis is good for this disease.
■ If an older, solitary hedgehog acutely develops signs of a mite infestation, a primary
problem may be present (Fig. 52-2).
Author: Karen Rosenthal
53
chapter
Mouse/Rat
MICE: ECTOPARASITES
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Pet mice can develop infestations with fur mites. There are three species of mites
that are commonly seen in mice: Myobia musculi, Myocoptes musculinus, and
Rhadfordia affinis.
■ More than one species can be present and cause clinical disease at the same time.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Mite infestations are commonly seen in young, recently purchased mice.
■  Infestations can also be a severe problem in mouse colonies because transmission is
common between mice and between cages.
 Contaminated bedding is a common cause of transmission.
■ A mite infestation in an older, solitary mouse usually indicates a primary problem
is present causing immunosuppression.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■ As with other ectoparasites, a mite infection may range from asymptomatic to mild
or severe.
■ A mild infection is characterized by slight pruritus, hair thinning, and white, flaky
skin. This is most common around the head and trunk.
■ A severe infection includes alopecia and severe pruritus leading to excoriations and
ulcerated skin.
 pq  e      s o  
occurs.
DIAGNOSTICS
■ The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are usually not affected
by this disease.
556
CHAPTER 53: MOUSE/RAT557
■ In severe disease, the white blood cell count may be elevated and an eosinophilia
may be present.
■Diagnose this disease by observing the mites or their ova. This can be done by skin
scrapes or the “scotch tape” method—scotch tape is applied to the skin and the debris
stuck to the tape is observed under the microscope.
■ In some cases, the mites cannot be identified and response to treatment is used to
diagnose this disease.
THERAPEUTICS
■  Various topical antiparasiticidal treatments have been recommended to treat mouse
ectoparasites. This should be viewed with caution as mice can be very susceptible to
 the negative side effects of these preparations.
 The safest method to treat this disease is with subcutaneous injections of ivermectin.
Use a dose of 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg once every 7 to 10 days for up to 4 treatments.
■ Resistance to ivermectin has been reported and some clinicians have used dosages
of up to l mg/kg.
■All mice in the house should be treated, even if clinical signs are not apparent.
■If a secondary bacterial dermatitis is present, treat with topical antibiotic
preparations.
■ If severe, systemic antibiotics may be necessary. If pruritus has caused a severe
inflammation, some clinicians recommend using a short-acting steroid preparation
until the inflammation resides.
1 The environment should be cleaned. All materials that are disposable should be
replaced. The cage and the housing areas should be treated with antiparasiticidal
applications; however, be sure to cleanse these areas of all antiparasiticidal
preparations before reintroducing the mice.
  If this is an older mouse that acutely has this disease, a primary disease should be
investigated before successful treatment of mites can be accomplished.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
 s a oq s n  s s m po  si si a 
environment are treated properly.
■ If this is an older mouse, the primary disease entity needs to be treated.
Author: Karen Rosenthal
54
chapter
Rabbit
DERMATOPHYTOSIS
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
 Dermatophytosis (ringworm) is uncommon in rabbits.
■ It is commonly included in the differential diagnosis of hair loss in rabbits but is
seen much less frequently than other causes of hair loss.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Irichophyton mentagrophytes is the more common dermatophyte in rabbits.
■Microsporum species is less common.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
It is thought there may be asymptomatic carriers where the disease may be self-
limiting and subclinical.
■ In rabbits that show signs of disease, there may be predisposing factors such as
malnutrition and a primary illness.
■ Younger rabbits are more likely to develop signs of dermatophytosis than older
rabbits.
■ Signs include hair loss, scaly skin, and occasionally pruritus.
■ Hair loss can be in a ring pattern but patches of alopecia with easily epilating hair
can also occur. This can occur anywhere on the body but the most commonly
reported areas include the head, feet, legs and nail beds.
■ If pruritus is intense, a secondary bacterial dermatitis may also be present.
DIAGNOSTICS
 The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are not affected by this
disease.
558
CHAPTER 54: RABBIT559
 Diagnose dermatophytosis in rabbits by culture of hair or skin samples or by
identifying organisms in skin scrapings treated with 10% potassium hydroxide.
THERAPEUTICS
 The safest treatment of this disease is by use of topical antifungal preparations.
 If the skin areas affected are small, this is the treatment of choice:
Carefully clip a wide margin of hair in the affected areas and then have owners
apply topicals such as clotrimazole or miconazole twice a day.
signs.
■ These preparations should not cause rabbit gastrointestinal disease if ingested.
 If there is a more generalized infection, griseofulvin can be used:
■ As with all off-label use of drugs, the owners should be warned of potential
negative side effects.
■ It has been recommended to use griseofulvin at 25 mg/kg po every 24 hours.
Other oral medications that have been used in rabbits include itraconazole at 5-10 mg/
kg every 24 hours and terbinafine at 8-20 mg/kg every 24 hours.
1 Do not use steroids to treat as rabbits are very sensitive to the immunosuppressive
effects.
 The environment should be thoroughly cleaned and vacuumed.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
1 The prognosis for this disease is good except in cases where there is a primary disease
process.
■ If the primary disease process is not resolved, there is a more guarded prognosis for
a cure.
FUR MITES
■ Cheyletiella parasitovorax is one of the most common dermatologic problems in pet
rabbits.
■ Other ectoparasites are found on rabbits, but the fur mite is the most frequently
diagnosed.
560
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
■ Disease can be asymptomatic to mild to severe. Secondary bacterial dermatitis can
occur in severe infestations
■Rabbit owners may know this disease as “walking dandruff."
4
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
Cheyletiella parasitovorax is the most common of the ectoparasites found on rabbits.
Other species include Leporacarus gibbus
■ The rabbit fur mite can cause disease in solitary rabbits and in colonies.
■ In a rabbitry, this disease will spread quickly from cage to cage.
■
 In the older, solitary rabbit that acutely develops disease caused by the fur mite, a
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
A rabbit with a fur mite infestation may be asymptomatic.
■ When clinical signs are apparent, the owner usually reports seeing dandruff.
In affected areas, the skin is white and scaly.
■F
Patches of alopecia are common and broken hairs can be seen around the areas of
alopecia (Fig. 54-1).
 Figure 54-1 Note large flake dandruff associated with Cheyletiella infestation.
CHAPTER 54: RABBIT
561
The rabbit may or may not be pruritic
The rabbits hair will easily epilate.
■ Hair loss can occur anywhere along the body, but the most affected areas include
the flanks and dorsum.
DIAGNOSTICS
 The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are usually not affected
by this disease.
 Diagnose this disease by observing the mite, Cheyletiella parasitovorax, or its ova.
 This can be done by a skin scrape or the "scotch tape" method—scotch tape is applied
to the skin and the debris stuck to the tape is observed under the microscope.
■ In a heavy infestation, combing some dandruff onto a dark paper may show up the
movement of the mites.
 In some cases, the mites cannot be identified and response to treatment is used to
diagnose this disease.
THERAPEUTICS
 Various topical antiparasiticidal treatments have been recommended to treat the fur
mite. This should be viewed with caution as rabbits can be very susceptible to the
negative side effects of these preparations.
■ The safest method to treat this disease is with subcutaneous injections of iver-
mectin. Use a dose of 0.2 to 0.4mg/kg once every 7-l0 days for up to four
treatments.
■ Resistance to ivermectin has been reported and some clinicians have used dosages
of up to l mg/kg.
 Selamectin at 6 to 18 mg/kg given twice, 28 days apart, has reported to be used very
successfully in the treatment of fur mites.
■ All rabbits in the house should be treated, even if clinical signs are inapparent.
■ The environment should also be cleaned.
■ If this is an older rabbit that acutely has this disease, a primary disease should
be investigated before successful treatment of Cheyletiella parasitovorax can be
accomplished.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
 The prognosis for this disease is excellent. If a primary disease is present, that must
be addressed first before a fur mite infestation can be cured (Fig. 54-2).
562
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
Figure 54-2 Rabbit with alopecia, broken hair shafts, and evidence of dermatitis due to pruritus from
Cheyletieffa parasitovorax infestation.
URINE SCALD ULCERATIVE DERMATITIS)
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ When rabbit skin is exposed to urine for an extended length of time, inflammation
of the skin with a secondary bacterial dermatitis, can occur (Fig. 54-3).
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■ Any systemic or bony disease that causes a rabbit to sit for extended periods in a
hunched position will expose skin to urine.
■ In some cage settings, the perineal and ventral skin never dries out and remains
soaked in urine.
■Rabbits with cystitis, urinary calculi, and *bladder sludge syndrome" are also prone
to urine scald.
■ Some of the more common systemic diseases that are primary to urine scald include
any urinary tract disease, gastric stasis, and hepatic lipidosis
■ Bony disease such as arthritis in the hindlimbs or severe vertebral spondylosis are
also primary causes of urine scald.
CHAPTER 54: RABBIT
563
 These diseases cause the rabbit to restrict its movements and the rabbit becomes
increasingly sedentary. This lack of movement causes increased contact of urine with
the skin leading to urine scald
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
 Rabbits with urine scald emit a foul odor
The perineal and ventral skin can be erythematous and ulcerated.
■  Palpation of this area can be painful and a mucopurulent discharge may be present.
■  In most cases, there is significant hair loss along the areas of skin affected by urine
scald.
DIAGNOSTICS
■ In most cases, the complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are not
affected by this disease.
 If a severe secondary bacterial dermatitis is present, an increase in the white blood
cell count may be observed.
■ Urine scald is always caused by a primary disease and these diseases may cause
abnormalities in the biochemistry panel.
 Diagnosis is made by observing the lesions.
A skin biopsy shows inflammation and, possibly, intralesional bacteria
564
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
THERAPEUTICS
Treatment has to include therapy for the primary disease; otherwise, urine scald
cannot be cured.
■The severity of the skin lesion dictates how aggressive the therapy should be.
■ In mild cases, drying agents and topical antibacterial preparations can be used.
■ In more severe cases, systemic antibiotics should be added to the treatment regimen.
 Hydrotherapy, if inflammation is severe, aids in healing of urine scald. However, the
owners must understand that if the primary problem is not addressed, urine scald
cannot be cured.
COMMENTS
Expected Course and Prognosis
■Prognosis is excellent for a cure if the primary problem is resolved.
BARBERING
DEFINITION/OVERVIEW
■ Rabbits will barber themselves for a variety of reasons. The most common reason is
because of pregnancy or pseudopregnancy.
■ Dominant rabbits will barber subordinate rabbits in a group.
■ Infrequently, some rabbits appear to pull hair as a displacement reaction.
ETIOLOGY/PATHOPHYSIOLOGY
■Barbering during gestation is used to build a nest.
■ Barbering in a group is performed by the dominant rabbits on the subordinates.
■ Rabbits can also self-barber.
SIGNALMENT/HISTORY
■Fur loss is the only sign of this disease.
■
The skin is unaffected.
■ In gestating rabbits, fur is typically pulled from the dewlap, forelegs, and abdomen.
■If a rabbit is being barbered by another rabbit, hair loss can occur anywhere on the
body (Fig. 54-4).
CHAPTER 54: RABBIT
565
■Figure 54-4 This rabbit demonstrates barbering by more dominant members of the group.
DIAGNOSTICS
The complete blood count and plasma biochemistry findings are not affected by this
disease.
There are no specific tests for this disease.
 The removal of a rabbit from the group and cessation of signs is evidence for
dominance barbering.
 In gestating rabbits, hair loss will stop once the rabbits are born.
Skin biopsies have normal histologic characteristics; in some rabbits, this is a
diagnosis of exclusion.
THERAPEUTICS
There is no specific treatment for this disease.
 Separation of group members will stop dominance barbering.
 Improve husbandry conditions, including the diet, if no other causes are found for
this condition.
566
SECTION 9: EXOTIC PET DERMATOLOGY
■ Figure 54-5 A rabbit with evidence of barbering on his face. Note hairloss and broken hair shafts but
normal-appearing skin. The owner observed the cagemate grooming this rabbit's face.
COMMENTS
Prognosis
 The prognosis for this disease is excellent once the primary cause is identified and
corrected (Fig. 54-5).
Author: Karen Rosenthal
Appendixes
A
appendix
Clinical Management of
PruriticInflammatory
Skin Disease
The pruritic patient is a common problem in veterinary medicine. Many of the diseases
that promote pruritus are not curable and must therefore be controlled over a long
 duration of time. An underlying etiology must first be determined before considering
long-term antipruritic therapy. Corticosteroids are the most frequently used drugs in
veterinary medicine, yet should not be used as a maintenance form of therapy until an
etiology has been determined and other medications have been trialed.
Canine and feline allergic dermatitis is the hallmark of pruritic inflammatory diseases
in veterinary medicine and will be used as the model for the following discussion. The
discussed medications are not meant to replace appropriate “diagnostic" procedures
(i.e., food elimination diet trials, intradermal skin testing, etc.) but rather to augment
the therapeutic management protocol chosen for the individual patient.
Much of the confusion in the management of the pruritic patient stems from the fact
that the exact mediator(s) and pathophysiology of pruritus are unknown. Limited
information is available in the veterinary literature on pruritus in the dog and cat. The
selection of an appropriate medication is therefore difficult and often depends on thera-
peutic trials. This trial and error method of drug selection is both costly and frustrating
for the client.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF PRURITUS
Pruritus is an extremely common feature of many dermatologic diseases. The pro-
posed sequence of events is initiated by a stimulus in the superficial layers of the
skin that induces the release of inflammatory mediators and the stimulation of neu-
roreceptors. Various mediators are known to induce pruritus. These include histamine.
endopeptidases (trypsin, papain), serotonin, bradykinin, neurotransmitters (substance
P vasoactive intestinal peptides), opiates, prostaglandins, etc.
Inflammation of the skin may be associated with the transformation of the cell mem-
brane component arachidonic acid in a number of cell types, including keratinocytes.
into a variety of pro-inflammatory fatty acids. These include the prostaglandins
polymorphonuclear chemoattractant monohydroxy fatty acids, and leukotrienes.
 Prostaglandins, primarily PgEl, amplify pharmacologically induced itching by lowering
the threshold of the free nerve ending receptors to the effects of histamine and proteo-
lytic enzymes. Pro-inflammatory mediators also include 12-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic
acid, 5-hydroxyeicosatetraenoic acid, and leukotrienes C4, D4, and E4. Serotonin
injected intradermally can cause pruritus.
568
APPENDIX A: CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF PRURITIC INFLAMMATORY SKIN DISEASE 569
The influence of skin temperature on itch remains unclear. Empirical observations
B  n           n 
bathing in lukewarm or cool warm water). Itching may also be influenced by diurnal
rhythms of the body, which have been attributed to both diurnal skin temperature
fluctuations as well as epinephrine fluctuations. UVA and UVB may influence pruritus
by inactivating pruritogens. UVB has also been reported to alter vitamin D metabolism.
 causing an alteration in ions and thereby decreased itching.
The immunologic aspects of pruritus are also less than conclusive. Immunologic
defects associated with allergic dermatitis in the animal are under investigation.
Antipruritic medications may be directed at a specific alteration in the immune
system of the patient. Suspected alterations include endothelial cells that abnormally
express adhesion molecules, increase in T helper cells, hyperstimulatory epidermal
Langerhans cells, B-cell overproduction of IgE, increased dermal levels of eosinophil-
derived MBP, serum IgA alterations, local stimulation of Langerhans cells in the
epidermis, increased phosphodiesterase activity lowered plasma triglyceride levels.
and so forth.
This limited knowledge forms the basis behind many of our therapeutic choices to
etiology and pathogenesis of allergic dermatitis are still relatively unknown.
DRUGS USED IN CONTROLLING PRURITUS
Glucocorticoids
 Glucocorticoids are without question the most effective drugs in controlling pruritus.
Because of potency and the potential for side effects, they should not be used as a first
a myriad of side effects: PU/PD, polyphagia, muscle weakness/atrophy tachypnea,
increased susceptibility to infections, epidermal/dermal atrophy, pancreatitis, calcinosis
cutis, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, pulmonary thrombosis, delayed wound healing, and
exercise intolerance. Steroids are best used for acute situations and for as short a time
period as possible.
Concurrent use of adjunct medications (antihistamines, essential fatty acids, topical
therapy, etc.) may help decrease the necessary therapeutic dose of steroids.
Anti-inflammatory effects of steroids include the following:
1. Decreased migration of neutrophils into the tissue
prostaglandins)
3. Inhibited phagocytosis by macrophages
4. Inhibited migration of eosinophils into tissue
5. Decreased numbers of lymphocytes in circulation
6. Depressed lymphocyte activation
7. Decreased expression of cytokines from lymphocytes
570
APPENDIXES
TABLE A-1 (
Components of Steroid Potency (Commonly Used Medications)
Drug (Oral)
Starting Dose/Dog
Starting Dose/Cat
Prednisone
0.5-1 mg/kg q24h
1-2 mg/kg q24h
Methylprednisolone
0.4-0.8mg/kg q24h
0.5-1.5mg/kg
Dexamethasone
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q48h
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q48h
Triamcinolone
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q48h
0.05-0.1 mg/kg q48h
Trimeprazine-pred (Temaril-p *Pfizer)
(0.1-0.2 mg/kg PO)
(0.1-0.2mg/kgIM/PO)
8. T cells more affected than B cells
9. Improved vascular integrity by antagonism of vasoactive amines
10. Decreased synthesis of inflammatory mediators
1l. Inhibited synthesis of cyclo-oxygenase enzyme and inhibition of phospholipase A2.
which lowers concentrations of prostaglandins, prostacyclin, thromboxane, and
Progesterone Compounds
Ovaban (megastrol acetate) and DepoProvera (medroxyprogesterone acetate) have been
used in cats to control pruritus but are currently not recommended due to potential
severe side effects. The mechanism of action is unclear, but it probably produces a
potent glucocorticoid-like effect.
Dosage
5 mg/cat/day for 1 week, then 2.5 to 5.0 mg/cat every other day for 1 week, then gradu-
ally decrease to 5mg once or twice a week, and finally decrease to 2.5 to 5.0mg/cat
every 7-14 days.
Side effects include the following:
1. PU/PD, adrenal suppression
2. Mood alterations
3. Diabetes mellitus
4. Pyometra
5. Hair coat color change
6. Diarrhea
Medications and Supplements Affecting the Biosynthesis and
Metabolism of Arachidonic Acid (AA)
NSAIDs and Lipoxygenase Inhibitors (Affect Metabolism of AA)
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin appear to have limited use in
controlling pruritus. One study reported a 2% success rate when buffered aspirin was
APPENDIX A: CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF PRURITIC INFLAMMATORY SKIN DISEASE 571
administered to dogs at a dosage of 25 mg/kg q8h. NSAIDs block the arachidonic acid
Lipoxygenase inhibitors (e.g., Benoxaprofen) block the lipoxygenase pathway. Very
a od pnd (o sxodio) op ai i n p
Essential Fatty Acid Metabolites
Essential fatty acid metabolites also affect the biosynthesis of arachidonic acid (AA)
Supplementation with EFA causes an alteration of the epidermal lipid barrier and
attempts to push the production of inflammatory mediators from pro-inflammatory to
less inflammatory (PGE2 to PGEl and LTB4 to LTB5). Success rates in management of
pruritus are quite variable among the individual patients and various published reports.
Essential fatty acids for the dog are linoleic and linolenic. For the cat, they include
linoleic, linolenic, and arachidonic acid sources of fatty acids: GLA (gamma-linolenic
acid), an omega-6 fatty acid contained in evening primrose oil); EPA (eicosapentaenoic
acid), an omega-3 fatty acid contained in marine fish cil; and ALA (alpha-linolenic
acid), an omega-3 fatty acid contained in vegetable oil (soy, canola, linseed). Most
essential fatty acid supplements use a combination of EPA and GLA. In theory, increased
quantities of EPA and GLA may help decrease pruritus and inflammation by altering
the potency and quantity of eicosanoids (PG and LT). EPA can displace AA in cell
membrane and when the cells are activated during inflammation, more EPA is metabo-
lized by cyclo-oxygenase and lipoxygenase than is AA. EPA breakdown products are
less inflammatory than is AA products.
EPA—prostaglandins of the 3 series and leukotrienes of the 5 series (less
inflammatory)
AA—prostaglandin 2, 12-HETE, leukotriene 4 (very inflammatory)
GLA is metabolized to DGLA (dihomo-gamma linolenic acid), which is further
metabolized to PGEl (anti-inflammatory). ALA can be metabolized to EPA
Clinical trials with EFA supplementation are varied and best used in combination
with other medications. Antihistamines may produce a synergistic effect with EFAs.
Side effects include the following:
1. Transient decreased platelet aggregation after 3 months of use (no clinical effects)
2. Increased risk of pancreatitis
3. Fish odor on breath
Antihistamines
Antihistamines are grouped into two classes: Hl receptor antagonists and H2 receptor
antagonists. Often, in severe cases, Hl and H2 receptor blockers may be used simulta-
neously to help control pruritus. Antihistamines are recommended as adjunctive therapy
to help decrease or eliminate the need for corticosteroids (Table A-2)
Side effects:
1. Sedation
2. Dry mouth
3. Blurred vision
572
APPENDIXES
TABLE A-2 Antihistamines Grouped into Two Classes: H1 Receptor Antagonists and
H2 Receptor Antagonists
Drug
Dosage
Dog/Cat
H1 Receptor Antagonists (First Generation)
Chlorpheniramine/
2-12 mg/dog q8-12h
Dog
Chlor-Trimeton
2-4mg/cat q12h
Cat
Diphenhydramine/Benadryl
2-4 mg/kg q8-12h
Dog
Hydroxyzine/Atarax
1-2 mg/kg q6-8h
Dog
Clemastine/Tavist
0.5-1.0mg/kg q12h
Dog
 Cyproheptadine/Periactin
2-8mg/kg q8-12h
Dog and Cat
 Doxepin/Sinequan
2.2 mg/kg q12h
Dog
H1 Receptor Antagonists (Second Generation)*
Astemizole/Hismana1
1 mg/kg q 12h
Dog
Loratidine/Claritin
5-20mg/day
Dog
2.5mg
Cat
Cetirizine/Zyrtec
5-20mg/kg q12h
Dog
5.0mg/kg q12h 
Cat
H2 Receptor Antagonists
Cimetidine/Tagamet
6-10mg/kg q8h
Dog (use in combination
with Atarax)
*less sedating because lack the antimuscarinic properties and do not cross the blood brain barrier easily. H2 receptors are
normally used for their antisecretory effects, yet there is some evidence the may be helpful for dermatologic disease. Tagamet
and Atarax can be used in combination to treat pruritus. Cimetidine or ranitidine may enhance relief from pruritus and wheal
H sisiuoheue joidaoal lh jo wsogeaw taluui uen sisuoheue joidaal zh aul eyenn jo sasen Aoioejal ui uoewiog
they are coadministered, thus increasing plasma levels of the H1 receptor antagonist. Synergistic effect wvith corticosteroids
and thus allowing lowering of the steroid dose needed (30% reduction).
4. Urinary retention
5. Appetite stimulation
6. excitability
Psychotropic Drugs
Psychotropic drugs are primarily used for obsessive/compulsive disorders (OCD). Many
pruritic cases may have a component of OcD. Some of these drugs can also bind to
histamine as well as serotonin receptors and are thus powerful antihistamines as well
(i.e., amitryptiline). These medications have varied effectiveness and should not be the
first line of defense. Avoid use with monoamine oxidase inhibitors (Table A-3).
APPENDIX A: CLINICAL MANAGEMENT OF PRURITIC INFLAMMATORY SKIN DISEASE
573
TABLE A-3 Psychotropic Drugs Used to Treat Obsessive/Compulsive Disorders
Drug
Dosage
Dog/Cat
Effects
Amitryptiline/Elavil 
1-2 mg/kg/day
Dog, cat
 Dry mouth, constipation, urine
retention (contraindicated in patients
with cardiac disease & seizure history)
 Buspirone/Buspar
2-4mg/kg q1 2h
Cat
Fluoxetine/Prozac
1-2 mg/kg/day
Dog
Limited success ... Anuria
Clomipramine/Anafranil
1-2 mg/kg/day
Dog
Limited success ... Anuria
Miscellaneous Drugs
1. Psychotropic Medications
 This class of medications is often used to help control any aspect of obsessive
compulsive disorder associated with chronic pruritus.
2. Misoprostol (Prostaglandin El Analogue)
■Dosage: 6 ug/kg q12h (dogs)
 Side effects are mild.
PGEl has been demonstrated to inhibit the late-phase reaction in allergic disease.
Inhibits granulocyte activity, lymphocyte proliferation, and cytokine production
(ILl and TNF-alpha)
 Might prove synergistic with antihistamines, which inhibit the immediate
phase
 One study showed excellent efficacy in 6l% of cases (18 dogs).
3. Erythromycin/Antibiotic
 Dosage: 10 mg/kg q8h
■]
Dog
 Anti-inflammatory properties involve an inhibition of neutrophil chemotaxis
 A mast cell-derived neutrophil chemotactic factor is present in some hypersen-
sitivity disorders and neutrophils are frequently found in the skin of atopics.
4. Ketoconazole/Antifungal
■ Dosage: 10 mg/kg ql2h
■Dog
Used primarily in cases ofpruritic yeastdermatitis in the dog (yeast hypersensitivity/
overgrowth)
          s
anti-inflammatory properties similar to those of hydrocortisone.
 Inhibits 5-lipoxygenase activity and all-trans-retinoic acid
5. Trental/Pentoxifylline
■ Dosage: 10-15 mg/kg BID
 Best for contact dermatitis, often used in conjunction with vitamin E
574
APPENDIXES
6. Gabapentin
■Dosage: 15 mg/kg po q8h (dog and cat)
■ Avoid human liquid formulation due to xylitol content (potential toxicity); may
be compounded into a liquid by a veterinary compounding pharmacy
7. Dextromethorphan (Opioid Antagonist)
■ May be a useful adjunct therapy
■
 Dosage: 2mg/kg po q12h
■ Should see beneficial effect within 2 weeks
8. Cyclosporine/Atopica
■Dosage: 5mg/kg/day dog: 25 mg/day cat(off label in the cat)
■ Expensive yet often excellent response
■May be able to lower dose if used with Ketoconazole at 2.5-5 mg/kg/day (cyclo-
 sporine dose can be lowered to 3 mg/kg/day)
■ Side effects: hepatotoxicity gingival hyperplasia, viral papillomas
9. Topicals: Shampoos, Rinses, Lotions, Gels, Sprays, Creams
■ All systemic medications should be used with topical therapy to help control
pruritus.
perhaps the most important part of the treatment protocol.
Owner compliance is extremely important.
10. Chinese Herbal Therapy
Double-blinded placebo-controlled studies have failed to demonstrate a benefi-
cial effect yet there are anecdotal reports of success.
Author: Karen Helton Rhodes
appendix
B
Canine Genodermatoses?
Breed-Predisposition
Dermatoses
This list represents some of the more common canine dermatologic (or dermatologic-
related) disorders recognized within certain breeds. Some of the diseases have a genetic
etiology whereas others seem to have a breed predisposition. The exact etiologies/
pathogenesis of many of the conditions are changing as canine dermatologic research
progresses.
Affenpinscher
Hyperadrenocorticism
Afghan Hound 
Hypothyroidism
Demodicosis
Airedale Terrier
Lymphoma
Primary hypothyroidism 
Cyclic flank alopecia
Akita
Juvenile onset polyarthritis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Deafness
Thyroid disease
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
Alaskan Malamute
Anemia with chondrodysplasia
Dwarfism
American Foxhound
Deafness
Thrombocytopenia
Microphthalmia
American Staffordshire
 Cutaneous mast cell tumors 
Terrier
Demodicosis
Deafness
Cyclic flank alopecia
American Water Spaniel
Hermaphroditism
 Australian Cattle Dog
Deafness
Keratinization disorders
Australian Kelpie 
Microphthalmia
Cutaneous asthenia (Ehlers-Danlos syndrome)
Australian Shepherd
Microphthalmia
Deafness
Dwarfism
Nasal solar dermatosis
ABCB1 gene defect/drug sensitivity
Australian Terrier
Diabetes mellitus
575
576
APPENDIXES
Basenji
Immunoproliferative enteropathy (alopecia, hyperkeratosis, pinnal
necrosis)
Basset Hound 
Platelet disorders
Achondrodysplasia
Congenital hypotrichosis
 Black-hair follicular dysplasia
Beagle
Lymphocytic thyroiditis
Demodicosis
Cutaneous asthenia
Congenital hypotrichosis
Atopic dermatitis
Amyloidosis
Deafness
Hemolytic anemia 
 Systemic necrotizing vasculitis
Bearded Collie
Hypopigmentation
Pemphigus foliaceus
Black-hair follicular dysplasia
Beauceron
Epidermolysis imperfecta
Dermatomyositis
Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Bedlington Terrier
Lacrimal duct atresia
Melanotrichia
Senile perifollicular mineralization
 Belgian Sheepdog
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
 Belgian Tervuren
 Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia 
Hypothyroidism
Bernese Mountain Dog
Color dilution alopecia 
Histiocytosis: cutaneous, systemic, malignant
 Bichon Frise
Pemphigus
Congenital hypotrichosis
Bloodhound
Malassezia hypersensitivity
Atopy
Otitis externa/media
Border Collie
Deafness
Black-hair follicular dysplasia
ABCB1 gene defect/drug sensitivity
Border Terrier
Mast cell tumors
 Pituitary tumors 
Borzoi
Hygromas
Calcinosis circumscripta
Hypothyroidism
Boston Terrier
Atopic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Mast cell tumors
 Pituitary tumors 
Deafness
Lymphopenia/eosinopenia
Stenotic nares
Pattern baldness
577
 Bouvier de Flanders
Cyclic flank alopecia
Lymphosarcoma
Boxer
Allergic dermatitis
Canine acne
Cutaneous asthenia
Demodicosis
Mast cell tumors
Histiocytomas
 Gingival hyperplasia
Dermoid cysts
Vaginal hyperplasia
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Deafness
Fibrosarcoma
Melanoma
Cyclic flank alopecia
Briard
Hypothyroidism
 Brittany Spaniel
Lip fold dermatitis
Cryptorchid
Complement deficiency (C3 immunodeficiency)
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Bull Terrier
Deafness
Lethal acrodermatitis
Nasal furunculosis
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome (amelanotic skin, blue eyes, deafness)
Bulldog
Demodicosis
Vaginal hyperplasia
Canine acne
Blepharitis
Allergic dermatitis 
Malassezia hypersensitivity
Bacterial folliculitis
Lymphoma
Mast cell tumor
Hypothyroidism
Deafness
Fold dermatitis
Cyclic flank alopecia
Lymphedema
Bullmastiff
Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia
Cairn Terrier
Allergic dermatitis
Canaan Dog
Diabetes
Hypothyroidism
Cardigan Welsh Corgi
Cutaneous asthenia
Cavalier King Charles
Diabetes mellitus
Spaniel
Curly coat syndrome with keratoconjunctivitis
Persistent secretory otitis media (PsoM)
Syringomyelia
Black-hair follicular dysplasia
Canine eosinophilic granuloma
578
APPENDIXES
Chesapeake Bay
Entropion
Retriever
Follicular dysplasia
Chihuahua
Color dilution alopecia (follicular dysplasia)
Pattern baldness
Demodicosis
Chinese Crested
Allergic dermatitis
Comedones
Chinese Shar-pei
Cutaneous mucinosis
Renal amyloidosis (Mediterranean fever)
Bacterial folliculitis
Allergic dermatitis
Demodicosis
Malassezia hypersensitivity
Chow Chow
Pemphigus foliaceus
Color dilution alopecia (follicular dysplasia)
Hypothyroidism
Microphthalmia
Uveodermatologic syndrome (VKH)
Post-clipping alopecia
Tyrosinase deficiency (depigmentation)
Cocker Spaniel
Hermaphroditism 
Allergic dermatitis
Proliferative otitis externa
Keratinization disorder (seborrhea)
Malassezia hypersensitivity
Lip fold dermatitis
Sebaceous adenomas
Idiopathic facial paralysis (may be related to otitis)
Primary hypothyroidism
Deafness
Cyclic hematopoiesis (immunodeficiency)
Black-hair follicular dysplasia
Vitamin A responsive dermatosis
Collie Dog
Dermatomyositis
Ulcerative dermatitis (vesicular cutaneous lupus erythematosus)
 DLE (cutaneous lupus erythematous)
Deafness
Demodicosis
Bullous pemphigoid 
Systemic lupus erythematosus
Autosomal recessive cyclic neutropenia
Dwarfism
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome (blue eyes, amelanotic skin, deaf)
ABCB1 gene defect/drug sensitivity
Curly-Coated Retriever
Hyperadrenocorticism
Hypothyroidism
Pattern baldness
Cyclic flank alopecia 
579
 Dachshund
 Diabetes mellitus 
Hypothyroidism 
Deafness
Dermoid cysts
Idiopathic sterile nodular panniculitis
"Acanthosis nigricans"
Color dilution alopecia
Cutaneous asthenia
Demodicosis
Pattern baldness
Sensory neuropathy
Hyperadrenocorticism
Pemphigus foliaceus
 Linear IgA pustular dermatosis
 Pemphigus foliaceus
Vasculitis
Alopecia areata
 Black hair follicular dysplasia
Juvenile cellulitis
Ear margin dermatosis
Idiopathic onchodystrophy
Dalmatian
 Dalmatian "bronzing syndrome"
Deafness
Globoid cell leukodystrophy
Allergic dermatitis
Waardeburg-Klein syndrome (amelanotic skin, blue eyes, deaf)
Dandie Dinmont Terrier
Hyperadrenocorticism
Lymphoma
Doberman Pinscher
Hypothyroidism
"Flank sucking"
Immune complex disorders
Drug sensitivity (trimethoprim-sulfur antibiotics)
Follicular dysplasia
Deafness
Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia
Granulocytopathy (immunodeficiency)
Selective IgM deficiency
Pemphigus foliaceus 
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
Ichthyosis
 Dogue de Bordeaux 
Footpad hyperkeratosis
English Foxhound
Deafness
 English Setter
Deafness
Carcinoma and lymphoma of the oral and nasal cavity
Canine benign familial chronic pemphigus
English Springer Spaniel
Keratinization disorder
Otitis
 Psoriasiform lichenoid dermatosis of Springer spaniels
Acral mutilation syndrome (sensory neuropathy)
Finnish Spitz
Pemphigus foliaceus
580
APPENDIXES
 Flat-Coated Retriever
Histiosarcoma
Symmetric lupoid onchodystrophy
Fox Terrier
Deafness
Allergic dermatitis
 French Bulldog
Allergic dermatitis
Congenital hypotrichosis
Follicular dysplasia
Cyclic flank alopecia
German Shepherd
Symmetric lupoid onchodystrophy
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Perineal fistulas
Metacarpal/metatarsal fistulas
Allergic dermatitis
Pituitary dwarfism
Hypothyroidism
Nodular dermatofibrosis with renal cystadenocarcinoma
Calcinosis circumscripta
Mucocutaneous pyoderma
Deafness
Nasal furunculosis
German Shepherd dog folliculitis/furunculosis
Vasculitis
Lymphedema
ABCB1 gene defect/drug sensitivity (white German shepherds)
German Shorthaired
Lymphedema
Pointer
Hereditary lupoid dermatosis of German shorthaired pointers
Fibrosarcoma
Melanoma
Acral mutilation syndrome (sensory neuropathy)
Giant Schnauzer
Keratinization disorder
Hypothyroidism
Vitamin A responsive dermatosis
Golden Retriever
Lymphoma
Allergic dermatitis/otitis
Hypothyroidism
Ichthyosis
Footpad hyperkeratosis
Juvenile cellulitis
Gordon Setter
Hypothyroidism
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Juvenile cellulitis
Great Dane
Acral lick dermatitis
Deafness
Calcinosis circumscripta
 Color dilution alopecia 
Lymphedema
Epidermolysis bullosa aquisita
Great Pyrenees
Deafness
581
Greyhound
Low normal thyroid values
Pattern baldness
Cutaneous and renal glomerular vasculopathy
Ventral comedone syndrome
Irish Setter
Allergic dermatitis
Granulocytopathy (immunodeficiency)
Irish Terrier
Footpad hyperkeratosis
Irish Water Spaniel
 Follicular dysplasia
Jack Russell Terrier
Familial vasculopathy
Allergic dermatitis
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Vaculitis
Keeshond
Melanoma
Hypothyroidism
Sebaceous cysts
Keratoacanthomas
Kerry Blue Terrier
 Hair follide tumors
Spiculosis
Footpad hyperkeratosis
Kuvasz
Deafness
Labrador Retriever
Color dilution alopecia (" silver labs")
Allergic dermatitis/otitis
Hypothyroidism
Diabetes
Melanoma
Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia
Mast cell tumors
Congenital hypotrichosis
Keratinization disorders
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis
Lymphedema
Vitamin A responsive dermatosis 
"Well's syndrome (eosinophilic dermatitis and edema)
 Lakeland Terrier
 Dermatomyositis
Lhasa Apso
Allergic dermatitis
 Malassezia hypersensitivity
Hypotrichosis
Malamute
Follicular dysplasia-(coat turns reddish)
Maltese
Deafness
Allergic dermatitis
Vaccine-induced vasculitis
Manchester Terrier
Cutaneous asthenia
Follicular dysplasia
Pattern baldness
Mastiff
Bacterial folliculitis
Vaginal hyperplasia
Miniature Pinscher
Leukoderma/leukotrichia
582
APPENDIXES
Miniature Schnauzer
Schnauzer comedone syndrome
Allergic dermatitis
Sertoli cell tumor
Aurotrichia (hairs become gold in color)
Subcorneal pustular dermatosis
Pigmented viral plaques
Newfoundland
Pyotraumatic dermatitis
Allergic dermatitis
Pemphigus foliaceus
Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia
Norwegian Elkhound
Subcutaneous cysts
Keratinization disorders
Keratoacanthomas
Norwich Terrier
Allergic dermatitis
 Old English Sheepdog
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
ABCB 1 gene defect/drug sensitivity
Lymphedema
Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia
Otter Hound
Sebaceous cysts
Papillon
Deafness
Microphthalmia with lacrimal duct atresia
Pekingese
Vaccine-induced vasculitis
Pembroke Welsh Corgi
Cutaneous asthenia
Dermoid cysts
Pointer
Calcinosis circumscripta
Deafness
Dwarfism
Nasolacrimal puncta atresia
Sensory neuropathy (acral mutilation syndrome)
Black hair follicular dysplasia
Pomeranian
Alopecia X
Cyclic hematopoiesis (immunodeficiency)
Poodle, Miniature and
Rabies vaccine-induced vasculitis
Toy
Allergic dermatitis
Deafness
Lacrimal duct atresia
 Pattern baldness
Adult onset growth hormone deficiency/alopecia X
Hyperadrenocorticism
Lymphedema
Senile perifollicular mineralization
Congenital hypotrichosis
Pseudoachondroplastic dysplasia
Epidermolysis bullosa
583
 Poodle, Standard 
Allergic dermatitis
Otitis externa/media
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
Lacrimal duct atresia 
Microphthalmia
Color dilution alopecia
Hypothyroidism
Adult onset growth hormone deficiency/alopecia X
Portugese Water Dog
Follicular dysplasia
Pug
Demodicosis
Hypothyroidism 
Allergic dermatitis
 Pigmented viral plaques 
Puli
Deafness
Rhodesian Ridgeback
Dermoid sinus
Hypothyroidism
Deafness
Color dilution follicular dysplasia associated with cerebellar
degeneration
Rottweiler
Idiopathic leukoderma/leukotrichia 
Hypothyroidism
Symmetric lupoid onchodystrophy
Diabetes
Vasculitis
Follicular lipidosis (hypotrichosis of red-colored points)
Follicular parakeratosis
Saint Bernard
Vaginal hyperplasia
Lip fold dermatitis
Deafness
Nasal arteritis
Lymphoma
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Diabetes
Acromegally
Elbow hygroma
Saluki
Color dilution alopecia
Samoyed
 Uveodermatologic syndrome
 Sebaceous cysts
Dwarfism
Alopecia X
Diabetes
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis
Schipperke
 Pemphigus foliaceus 
Hypothyroidism 
584
APPENDIXES
 Scottish Terrier
Melanoma
Deafness
Allergic dermatitis
Histiocytomas
Hyperadrenocorticism
Vasculitis
Cyclic flank alopecia
 Familial vasculopathy
Sealyham Terrier
Deafness
Allergic dermatitis
Waardenburg-Klein syndrome (deaf, blue eyes, amelanotic skin)
 Shetland Sheepdog
Dermatomyositis
Ulcerative dermatitis of Shelties (vesicular cutaneous lupus
erythematosus)
Systemic and cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Epidermolysis bullosa
Hypothyroidism
ABCB1 gene defect/drug sensitivity
Shih Tzu 
Sebaceous adenomas
Allergic dermatitis
Malassezia hypersensitivity
Siberian Husky
Uveodermatologic syndrome
Zinc responsive dermatosis
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Postclipping alopecia
Follicular dysplasia (coat turns red)
Canine eosinophilic granuloma
Idiopathic onchodystrophy
 Silky Terrier
 Color dilution alopecia
Diabetes mellitus
Vaccine-induced vasculitis
Short-hair syndromefollicular dysplasia
Skye Terrier 
Autoimmune thyroiditis
Spinoni
Hypothyroidism 
Staffordshire Terrier
Allergic dermatitis
Actinic dermatosis
 Follicular dysplasia
Cyclic flank alopecia
 Standard Schnauzer
Atresia of nasolacrimal puncta
 Perianal adenomas
Hypothyroidism
Tibetan Terrier
Hypothyroidism
Vizla
Sebaceous adenitis
 Facial nerve paralysis 
 Allergic dermatitis
585
Weimaraner
Syringomyelia
Melanoma
Fibrosarcoma
Mast cell tumors
Dwarfism
Granulocytopathy (immunodeficiency)
Welsh Springer Spaniel
Hypothyroidism
Welsh Terrier
Onychodystrophy
West Highland white
Allergic dermatitis and malassezia hypersensitivity
Terrier
Epidermal dysplasia/ichthyosis
Keratinization disorders
Demodex injai
Wheaton Terrier
Cutaneous asthenia
Allergic dermatitis 
Ichthyosis 
Whippet
Pattern baldness
ABCB1 gene defect/drug sensitivity (long-haired whippets)
Yorkshire Terrier
Melanoderma
Vaccine-induced vasculitis
Short-hair syndrome-follicular dysplasia
appendix
Drug Formulary
586
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
587
Dog: 0.5-2.2mg/kg po
exceed 3mg total dose
Dog: 15mg/kg po q8h.
Cat: not recommended.
Cat: 1.13-2.25mg/kg 
Dogs and Cat)
Follow dosing.
codeine. 
q24h, po.
in dogs.
6
acetaminophen plus 
100, 300mg tablets
 5, 10, 25mg tablet 
forms, for example:
Oral solution and 
.30, or
and 10mg/mL
120, 160, 325,
 500 mg tablets 
60 mg codeine.
 Formulations
tablets. Many 
either 15, 
injection
300mg.
Dosing Information and
combination with other 
 OTC formulations 
Used in people primarily
ordinarily 0.02-0.2 mg/
decrease formation of 
 Acetaminophen with
have
See Codeine and 
animals, used to
uric acid uroliths.
Usually used as
preanesthetic in
codeine may 
Comments
vailable.
IM,
Many 
common side effect.
 adrenergic blockade.
patsll sasop ie sbop
Do not administer to
 Effects and 
 Phenothiazines can 
D
extrapyramidal side
caused liver toxicity.
Well-tolerated in 
High doses have
effects in some 
 See Codeine and 
May cause skin 
(hypersensitivity).
 Precautions
8
individuals.
Adverse E
Produces 
eactions
cats.
 mechanism of action 
is not known. Not a
Decreases production 
 Pharmacology and
added to enhance 
inhibiting enzymes 
 See Corticotropin.
 Phenothiazine 
preanesthetic 
 acid synthesis.
Indications
 See Aspirin.
purposes.
 analgesia.
(PromAce and many 
Acetaminophen with
codeine (Tylenol with
Allopurinol (Lopurin,
(Tylenol and many 
codeine and many 
Acetylsalicylic acid
Acepromazine
generic brands)
Acetaminophen
generic brands)
generic brands)
Zyloprim)
ACTH  
588
APPENDIXES
Dog: 15-30mg/kg q24h 
Cat: 10-14mg/kg q24h 
10.6mL per 7.5L water
dose has been exceeded
: Doses that have
concentration applied 2x
 week and 0.125% 
Dose Is the Same for
refractory cases, this
increased
been used include:
body
(0.025% solution).
Apply 3-6 topical
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
one-half of the 
IV, iM, SC;
IV, IM, SC
produce
months
Icacy.
5
50, 250mg/ml 
 Formulations
injection
10.6 mL
 Dosing Information and
peak minimum inhibitory 
designed to maximize
chronic
hould be used initially.
Once-daily doses are 
Manufacturer's dose 
 exceeded to produce
ratio. Consider 
Comments
6
B
nephrotoxicosis with
vestibulotoxicity. (See
Gentamicin suifate.)
pruritus, polyuria and
Adverse Effects and
atipamezole. When
high doses are used,
Causes sedation in 
hyperglycemia, and
(suobe-2o) sbop
reported include 
May also cause
(rarely) seizures.
high doses or 
yohimbine or
bradycardia,
hypothermia.
recautions
May cause
ectoparasites. Used for
Mechanism
entamicin sulfate),
Inhibits monoamine
 Pharmacology and 
 similar to other
 but may be more 
 Aminoglycoside
(inhibits protein
oxidase in mites.
Indications
active than 
 gentamicin.
G
Amikacin (Amiglyde-V
[veterinary] and Amikin 
Drug Name (Trade or
Amitraz (Mitaban)
Other Names)
[human]]
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
685
Cat: 2-4mg per cat/day 
6.6-20mg/kg q8-12h 
Cat: 62.5mg/cat q12h
Dog: 1-2 mg/kg po 
doses q8h for gram-
negative infections.
Consider
q12-24h.
8
 375 mg tablets and 
tablets; 10 mg/ml 
10, 25, 50, 75,
 oral suspension
62.5, 125, 250,
100,150mg
(human forms)
62.5mg/ml 
 suspension 
injection
There are no controlled
 Dose recommendations 
more frequent or higher 
preferred for behavior 
 Same as for amoxicillin.
There is
evidence for success
 are primarily
infection. Generally,
treating idiopathic
doses needed for 
ystitis in cats.
animals.
 problems.
infections.
Doses
based c
for
 Multiple side effects 
antidepressants, such
antihistamine effects
cardiotoxicity. In cats,
sedation are possible.
doses can produce
reduced grooming,
 antimuscarinic 
weight gain, and
tolerated. Allergic 
possible with oral
life-threatening
Usually well-
 Same as for 
 amoxicillin.
tricyclic 
'sasop
6
Tricyclic antidepressant
nimals to treat variety
spectrum activity. Used 
(clavulanate/ clavulanic
serotonin and other 
for chronic idiopathic
Inhibits bacterial: cell
β-lactam antibiotic +
disorders, such as
enerally broad-
transmitters at
for a variety of
 infections in all 
behavioral
cystitis.
species. 
acid).
#
G
clavulanate potassium 
hydrochloride (Elavil)
[Omnipen, Principen,
Totacilin are human
Amoxicillin (Amoxi-
Tabs, Biomox, and
Amitriptyline
other brands.
Amoxicillin +
(Clavamox)
forms])
590
APPENDIXES
-50mg/kg g12-24h
Dog: 2-3mg/kg IV 3
0.5 mg/kg IV (slow 
Ampicillin sodium:
q8h po. Ampicillin 
 q12-24h IM, SC.
右
cumulative dose c
to a
trihydrate: Dog:
Dogs and Cat)
4-8mg/kg.
treatments 
 50 mg injectable vial 
125, 250,
ampicillin sodium.
 trihydrate: 10 and 
100mg/20ml in
 lipid formulation
+
 Formulations 
250, 500mg_
Ampicilin
injection.
preparing IV solution, do
not mix with electrolyte
r example); administer
frequent or higher doses 
Dosing Information and 
Dose requirements vary
Absorbed approximately
Administer IV via slow
When
pue
with amoxicillin, when 
Higher doses can be
aCI fluid loading
used compared to 
1mg/ml, 
administered orally.
administer IV over 
negative infections.
function closely. 
before therapy.
Generally, more
Comments
hours.
6
nephrotoxicosis. Also
Adverse Effects and 
 Renal toxicity is the
 most dose-limiting
Produces a dose-
Use cautiously in 
produces fever,
phlebitis, and 
 Precautions
tremors.
related 
effect.
formulations may be
 Same indications as
increased. Expense is
much higher than for
, by damaging 
fungal membranes.
 Pharmacology and 
Antifungal drug.
for conventional
amphotericin B.
 wall synthesis.
conventional
formulations.
Indications
fungi,.
liposomal formulation
Drug Name (Trade or
Ampicillin (Omnipen,
Amphotericin B
Amphotericin B,.
(ABLC, Abelcet)
[human forms]
Other Names)
(auozibung)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
591
 10-20mg/kg IV, IM q8h
10,000 U/m2 weekly × 3
Cat: 400 U/kg SC weekly
0.02-0.04 mg/kg IV IM,
 0.25 mg in conjunctiva
tablet in 1-2 mL of 
Dog: 400U/kg IM 
weekly or 
saline).
vveeks
2:1 combination
1.5
10,000 U per vial
for injection.
 and 3g vials.
 6mg tablets 
 for injection
 amoxicillin + clavulanate.
combination with other 
chemotherapy protocols.
Consult local poison
 availability. Not as
Usually used in.
 Same as for 
 adverse effects occur.
that may be sensitive
 Produces emesis 
 allergic reactions.
Hypersensitivity,
 Same as for 
 ampicillin.
to opiates.
(β-lactamase inhibitor
 Magnesium
chemoreceptor trigger 
has similar activity as
 Purified enzyme from
interferes with protein
 Emetic drug. Causes 
lIymphoma protocols.
Ampicilin plus a.
r direct
Anticancer agent.
See Aluminum
. co/l. Used in 
davulanate.
hydroxide,
carbonate.
release or 
synthesis.
zone.
E
Ampicillin + sulbactam
hydrochioride (generic)
L-Asparaginase (Elspar)
Antacid drugs 
Apomorphine
(Unasyn)
265
APPENDIXES
used for medetomidine.
Dose Is the Same for
Mild analgesia: (dog)
cat: 81 mg q48h.
Dogs and Cat)
81, 325mg tablets
 5mg/mL injection 
Formulations
lammatory doses have
same volume as used for 
 Dosing Information and
spirin, giving buffered 
forms or administering 
decrease
recommended for dogs 
primarily been derived 
 are
When used to reverse
Analgesic and anti-
spirin on platelets.
9
prolonged effect 
from empiricism
with food may
Enteric-coated
medetomidine.
Comments
and cats.
ver
E
3
 cautiously in patients
 Effects and 
Narrow therapeutic
because of platelet 
excitement in some 
 animals shortly after
 can include
frequently cause
because of slow
ulceration and 
 clearance. Use 
leeding. Cat
Yecautions
 some initial
inhibition.
Adverse 
effects 
reversal.
6
D2-antagonist. Used to
 such as medetomidine
generally considered
 prostaglandins. Used 
 Pharmacology and
reverse d2-agonists,
 Nonsteroidal anti-
 be caused by
 antiplatelet drug.
(NSAID). Anti-
inhibition of
 and xylazine.
Indications
Aspirin (many generic
Drug Name (Trade or
[Bufferin, Ascriptin])
Other Names)
Continued
(Antisedan)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
593
48-9b 6y/6w t0 0-200
0.1-0.2 mg/kg q12h po
organophosphate and 
 (as needed) for 
19
400, 500, 540mcg/
mL injection; 15 mgy
 3mg capsules
Use of this drug has not
adjunct with anesthesia 
controlled clinical trials
 not mix with alkaline
product (oral) is not as
determine efficacy in 
effective as injectable
 Used ordinarily as
been evaluated in 
products, such as
aurothioglucose.
solutions.
 Potent anticholinergic 
glaucoma, intestinal 
include xerostomia
 include dermatitis,
 nephrotoxicity, and
chycardia, urine
 blood dyscrasias.
patients with 
retention.
adjunct to anesthesia
or other procedures to
. Also used as
 Used for gold therapy
effect on lymphocytes.
 Anticholinergic agent
(blocks acetylcholine 
unknown, but may
effect at muscarinic
immunosuppressive
parasympatholytic.
increase heart rate
organophosphate
Used primarily for
immune-mediated
gastrointestinal
(chrysotherapy).
 and
and decrease
respiratory 
antidote for 
intoxication.
receptor),
secretion.
diseases.
Atropine (many generic 
(triethylphosphine 
gold) (Ridaura)
Auranofin
brands)
594
APPENDIXES
1 mg/kgy
Cat: 0.5-1 mg/cat every
initially then 0.5-1 mg?
every 5 days, or 3.3mgy
1 mg/kg/ week 
. 2mg IM
careful monitoring
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
maintenance.
Week,
 days IM.
kg q48h 
initially,
week,
:600
first
q48h
 50 mg/mL injection 
 250mg capsules,
250 and 600mg 
100 or
Formulations
injection
injection 
Dosing Information and 
Use of this drug has not 
combination with other 
combination with other 
concentrations achieved.
treat
 drug is
Azithromycin may be
 better tolerated than
 from other
 is the high
been evaluated in
corticosteroids) to
immune-mediated
disease. Doses of
produced toxicity.
are available to
Usually used in
drugs (such as.
drugs, such a
intracellular
difference
antibiotics
 Adverse Effects and
suppression is most
 include dermatitis,
There
pancreatitis when
Vomiting is likely
with high doses.
 in some patients.
Adverse effects 
 particularly are
been some
sociation with
corticosteroids.
Precautions
Bone marrow
nas
Used for gold therapy
effect on lymphocytes.
drug. Acts to inhibit T
immunosuppressive 
unknown, but may
dermatologic disease).
 This drug is
Used to treat
Similar mechanism of 
rythromycin), which
immunosuppressive
immunosuppressive
 to inhibit bacteria
protein synthesis via
 primarily
 Pharmacology and
immune-mediated
6-mercaptopurine,
diseases (such as
various immune-
mediated disease.
Azalide antibiotic.
(chrysotherapy).
cell lymphocyte
metabolized to
 gram-positive.
Indications
Thiopurine
inhibition (
relate to 
function.
M
Azathioprine (Imuran)
Aurothioglucose
Azithromycin
(Zithromax)
(Solganol)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
595
effects: 0.2-0.5mg/kg
Immunosuppressive
 Anti-inflammatory
q12-24h po.
q12-24h po.
600 mcg (0.6mg)
 sodium phosphate 
 3mg/mL
tablets;
 injection 
effects at 0.2-0.5 mg/kg.
immunosuppressive
Anti-inflammatory
suppression. Adverse
protein synthesis and
immunosuppression.
corticosteroids are
 many and include
polyphagia, PU/PD,
 Side effects from
 and hypothalamic
effects include Gl
decreased thyroid
ulceration,
Anti-inflammatory and 
inflammatory cells and 
immunosuppressive
mediators. Use is for 
Potent, long-acting 
more than cortisol
Anti-inflammatory
inflammatory and
immune-mediated
suppression of
inhibition of
inflammatory
treatment of
effects are
disease.
(sulfamethoxazole 
十
trimethoprim) (See
Betamethasone
Trimethoprim-
combinations)
sulfonamide 
(Celestone)
Bactrim 
596
APPENDIXES
0.125 mg/kg q6-8h, po.
Dog: 0.006-0.02 mg/kg
hours when condition 
1 mL of 0.5% solution 
Cat: 0.005-0.01 mg/kg
0.01-0.02 mg/kg q12h.
increased to every 12
IV, IM, q4-8h Buccal
per 10 cm for an
IV, iM, SC q4-8h.
Dogs and Cat)
improves.
epidural 
 0.3 mg/mL solution 
 2.5 and 5mg/ml
 solution injection 
 Formulations
 3mg capsule
Dosing Information and
: coating on the drug
 Used for local infiltration
When administering to
r the intestinal release
r infusion into epidural
'Hd aseaipui ot uonnjos 
morphine. Only partially
 may be compromised.
bicarbonate per 10mL 
 and increase
 reversed by naloxone.
from
 analgesia,
I conjunction with
general anesthesia.
Longer acting than
The capsules are
0.1 mEq sodium 
after mixing with 
decrease pain f
Comments
bicarbonate.
injection, 
for :
Used
the 
6
9
High doses absorbed 
cause nervous system 
respiratory paralysis is
: Effects and 
effects are reported.
 adrenal suppression).
Adverse effects rare
No serious adverse
Adverse effects are
be
less than with pure 
signs (tremors and 
convulsions). After
Dependency from 
However, some.
ystemically can 
administration,
opiate agonists,
chronic use may 
respiratory
Precautions
naycause
depression.
Adverse 
epidural 
agonists.
doses.
55a
Budesonide is a locally 
acting corticosteroid. It 
 designed to release
-after oral
administration. Only a
Budesonide is used to
conduction via sodium 
cause less respiratory
 depression than other 
agonist, k-receptor
 antagonist. 25-50x
 Pharmacology and 
Buprenorphine may
ocal anesthetic.
 channel blockade.
Longer-acting and
more potent than 
Opioid analgesic.
more potent than 
small fraction is
-in the
bowel disease.
Corticosteroid.
Inhibits nerve
Indications
anesthetics.
intestine4-
morphine.
 opiates.
ocally-
Drug Name (Trade or
(Buprenex [Vetergesic
Other Names)
(Marcaine and 
Buprenorphine
hydrochloride
hydrochloride
Budesonide
(Enterocort)
Bupivacaine
in the UK])
generics)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
597
Dog: 4.4mg/kg/day po,
administered either once 
administered
Cat: not recommended.
Dog: 22mg/kg q12h, up
Cat: 2.5-5 mg/cat q24h
Cat: 22mg/kg q24h po.
to 30mg/kg q1 2h po.
daily for some cat).
administer prior to
12h. To control.
12h po.
kg/day 
surgery.
chewable); 50mg/
 tablet. Availability
 5, 10mg tablets 
 50 mg/ml oral
51
of some oral 
formulations 
 questionable.
solution 
gistration data. Clinical
for surgery may be given 
 cephalothin as test drug.
 in cats. There may be a
 bujAeads auun bunean
 sufficient safety
information available t
recommend carprofen.
susceptibility test, use
 Some efficacy trials
 conducted with
nine patients with
lover relapse rate
compared to other 
osteoarthritis and
trials and U.s.
1st-generation 
procedure.
surgical μ
'sonp
! asn o,
is not :
mal
9
car
2
ruossaibbe pasnu
increased affection to
clinical patients have 
effects
Perioperative
 not adversely
times. Avoid use with
other NSAIDs or with
 more rare and
Cefadroxil has been 
diarrhea)
hepatotoxicosis. If 
Some cats show
Mous
hepatotoxicosis
 administration in 
common
corticosteroids.
affected renal
some cats s
owners.
nausea,
dogs.
are
asn
serotonin receptors. In 
used for treatment of 
urine spraying in cats.
treatment of pain and 
osteoarthritis. Shown
surgical pain either by
veterinary medicine,
particularly pain and 
 perioperative use for 
 Antianxiety agent.
 Acts by binding to
nas been primarily.
Carprofen's action 
explain its efficacy.
NSAID. Used for.
associated with
 be safe and
relatively COX-1
sparing. Other
 broad-spectrum 
inflammation,
inhibition but i
Cefadroxil is a 
inflammation 
 antibiotic with
effective for
may be via
activity.
efadroxil (Cefa-Tabs,
 Buspirone (Buspar)
Novox (generic)
Cefa-Drops)
598
APPENDIXES
 20-35 mg/kg q8h IV, IM.
Human dose is 7mg/kg 
Dose not established.
Cat: 20-80 mg/kg q6h
30mg/kg q8h IV, SC 
Dogs and Cat)
q12-24h po
q12h po.
surgery.
Iv, Im.
 and 400 mg tablets 
: 2, and 10g vials
100 mg/50mL for 
300 mg capsules,
 20 mg/mL oral 
Formulations
 suspension
50 and
injection 
injection
Dosing Information and
ported. Use and doses 
medicine has not been 
 Although not approved 
harmacokinetic studies
recommended dosages.
cephalosporin similar to
Cefoxitin, but may have 
prophylaxis for surgery
longer half-life in dogs.
are extrapolated from 
 well as for acute 
cephalosporin used 
cephalosporin as
Use in veterinary
human medicine.
Commonly used
3rd-generation 
when resistance
2nd-generation 
cephalosporins.
 2nd-generation.
Comments
infections.
1
n
 other cephalosporins.
other cephalosporins.
 other cephalosporins.
 other cephalosporins. 
Adverse Effects and 
For Cefazolin, use 
 cephalothin to test 
 Similar to those of
 Similar to those of
 Similar to those of
 Similar to those of
Precautions
susceptibility.
cephalosporin. Activity
includes staphylococci
encountered to other 
infection is in central 
Oral 3rd-generation 
pue Abojosewieyd
Cefazolin is a 1st-
Cefixime is a 3rd-
when resistance is
and many gram-
nervous system.
Cefotetan is 2nd-
negative bacilli.
Cefotaxime is a
 cephalosporin.
 cephalosporin.
cephalosporin.
 cephalosporin.
Indications
Drug Name (Trade or
(Ancef, Kefzol, and 
Cefotaxime sodium 
Cefotetan disodium 
Cefazolin sodium 
Cefdinir (Omnicef)
Cefixime (Suprax)
Other Names)
(Claforan)
(Cefotan)
generic)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
665
2.2-4.4mg/kg SC q24h
Dog: 30mg/kg q4-6h 
10-30mg/kg q6-12h
 30mg/kg q6-8h IV 
(for urinary tract
Cat: dose not
established.
infections)
 2, and 10g vials
100, 200mg tablets
. 2, 6g)
 50 mg/mL injection 
reconstituted to 
Vials (0.5, 1,
250, 500mg.
capsules; 250,
280mg/ml
suspension
often used when activity 
reconstitution, stable for
soft-tissue infections in 
reconstitution prior to
refrigerated or 12 hr at 
 Although not approved
for veterinary use, trials
room temperature, or
frozen for 8 weeks.
bacteria is desired.
 2nd-generation 
 3rd-generation 
lidocaine for IM 
cephalosporin.
injection. After 
days when
 show efficacy.
injection.
dogs.
=
 other cephalosporins.
diarrhea are the most 
 other cephalosporins.
 other cephalosporins.
 other cephalosporins. 
 Similar to those of
 Similar to those of 
 Similar to those of 
 Similar to those of
common adverse
Vomiting and
effects.
ephalosporin. Activity
 aebau-wen sapnpus
resembles many of the 
Ceftazidime has more 
cephalosporin. May 
Oral 3rd-generation 
Cefoxitin is a 2nd-
activity than other
Ceftiofur spectrum 
against anaerobic
 staphylococcus.
 3rd-generation
 3rd-generation
 cephalosporins.
Cephalexin is a
cephalosporin.
eudomonas
 1st-generation
 cephalosporin.
generation 
aeruginosa.
bacteria.
 bacilli an
Excenel [ceftiofur' HC]).
Cephalexin (Keflex and 
Cefpodoxime proxetil
Ceftazidime (Fortaz, 
Cefoxitin sodium 
Ceftiofur (Naxcel
[ceftiofur sodium];
Ceptaz, Tazicef)
generic forms)
(Mefoxin)
(Simplicef)
009
APPENDIXES
6-12mL/kg (suspension)
1-4 g/kg po (granules);
 2.5-5mg per animal, 
Dogs and Cat)
 once daily po
1 mg/ml oral syrup;
 and 10mg tablets 
 Oral suspension 
 Formulations
5
 Dosing Information and
based on experimental
treatment of poisoning.
There are no studies
 Available in variety of
preparations contain
5e9
demonstrate clinical
cats. Clinical use is
sorbitol, which acts 
Many commercial 
published that 
animals.
catharsis.
ystemically. Safe for
No adverse effects 
have been reported
I dogs or cats.
Not absorbed 
 administration.
in
inflammatory reactions
The H1 -blockers have
been used to control
ntihistamine, which 
blocker). It acts by 
drugs and toxins in
intestine to prevent
Antihistamine (H-1
pruritus and skin
 2nd-generation 
than older drugs.
Adsorbent. Used 
their absorption.
inflammation,
inflammation.
Indications
dote, Toxiban, generic)
Charcoal, activated 
Cetirizine (Zyrtec)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
601
Dog: 2-6mg/m2 q24h 
initially, then q48h po.
initially, then q48h po.
Dog: 40-50mg/kg q8h
Cat: 2mg/cat q12h po.
po.
8
capsules, and 100,
30 mg/mL oral 
 4, 8mg tablets 
2mg tablets 
uolsuadsns
tablets 
 Consult anticancer drug 
 chloramphenicol are no
included as ingredient in 
many OTC cough/ cold 
 protocol for specific
sted (or anorectic)
animals. Note: Some
Chlorpheniramine is
 administered to 
Chloramphenicol 
 regimens.
0.5.
possible. Cystitis does 
 Myelosuppression is
 Chlorambucil as with 
treatment (especially
 Avoid use in
barbiturates) possible
hloramphenicol will
microsomal enzymes.
cyclophosphamide.
 doses or prolonged 
other drugs (e.g.,
Antimuscarinic
effects) also are
 animals. Drug.
Bone marrow
cats).
because 
common.
.
6
alkylating agent. Used 
 in similar manner as
lechanism of action
various tumors and 
immunosuppressive
protein synthesis via
receptors. Also may
Broad spectrum of
action
Used most often to
 Antibacterial drug.
 pruritus therapy in 
For treatment of
 of histamine on 
have direct anti-
prevent allergic
dogs and cats.
therapy.
activity.
M
Chloramphenicol and 
Trimeton, Phenetron,
chloramphenicol 
(Chloromycetin,
generic forms)
Chlorambucil 
(Leukeran)
and others)
palmitate
602
APPENDIXES
Dog: 0.5mg/kg q6-8h 
10 mg/kg q6-8h IV, IM,
Cat: 0.2-0.4mg/kg 
Dosage (unless
二...
q6-8h IM, SC.
q12h IV, po) 
IM, SC.
 25 mg/mL injection 
oral solution; 6mg/
100, 200, 300,
Formulations
800mg
mL injection 
solution 
400,
 Dosing Information and
caused by toxins, drugs,
doses than listed in dose 
Precise doses needed to
section have been used
hemotherapy (2mg/kg 
 Used for vomiting
 been established.
with cancer
q3h 5C).
 signs may occur
theophylline) because
 adrenergic blockade.
dlearance. In people,
Causes sedation.
usually seen only
interactions.
concurrently (e.g.,
 Adverse effects.
high doses.
hepatic enzymes.
effects in some 
 of inhibition of 
May cause o. 
May increase
Precautions
 individuals.
Produces 
SND
vith
Histamine-2 antagonist
tranquilizer/antiemetic.
Also used for sedation
f gastric parietal cells 
acid secretion. Used to
(H2-blocker). Blocks
histamine stimulation
central antiemetic.
and preanesthetic
decrease gastric
Inhibits action of
Phenothiazine
Indications
purposes.
gastritis.
[OTC and prescription]
Drug Name (Trade or
Cimetidine (Tagamet 
Chlorpromazine
(Thorazine)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
09
 10-20mg/kg q24h po,
diuresis with therapy)
Dog: 60-70mg/m2
every 3-4 weeks IV
Cats.
250, 500, 750mg
 1 mg/mL injection 
injection
plasma concentrations 
 pinjy Xapixot piore ol
sodium chloride should
itiemetic agents are
concentration above
MIC. Efficacy studies
Doses are based on
needed to achieve 
often administered 
before therapy to
 decrease vomiting
have not been 
loading before
 performed.
specially in animals
 Nephrotoxicity is the
Avoid use in dogs 
cause CNS toxicity.
factor
primary pulmonary
toxicosis. Vomiting 
 administr ation.
thrombocytopenia
may occur in dogs.
with renal failure.
epileptic patients.
should be given 
cats, causes a
of age. High 
limiting t
dose-related,
Transient
150w
的
9
similar to bifunctional 
DNA in tumor cells.
 antimicrobial activity.
 Bactericidai. Broad 
Anticancer agent.
Used for treating 
 Fluoroquinolone 
is believed to be
including
6
Ciprofloxacin (Cipro)
Cisplatin (Platinol) 
604
APPENDIXES
Dog: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg
7.5mg/kg q12h po 
Dogs and Cat)
q12h po
 0.134 mg/mL syrup 
1.34 mg tablets 
tablets (Rx), and 
 Formulations
250, 500mg 
 suspension 
 Dosing Information and 
human or empirical use.
recommendations are
combined with other
Used for short-term 
dogs. May be more
extrapolated from
anti-inflammatory 
efficacious when
Doses are not
5.5% alcohol.
Comments
trials. Dose 
Adverse Effects and 
 common side effect.
Well-tolerated in
 Sedation is most 
animals. Most
 and diarrhea.
Precautions
gram-positive bacteria.
common use in people 
 is expected 
clavulanate potassium.
 clavulanate potassium.
tissues. Used primarily
Macrolide antibiotic
Pharmacology and 
S for treatment of
Antihistamine (H,-
lemastine is more 
 effective than other
includes primarily
for treatment of.
 antihistamines for
 See Amoxicilin/
 See Amoxicillin/
and respiratory
of histamine on 
 pruritus in dogs.
for most gram-
animals. Most
Indications
Resistance i
infections.
Clarithromycin (Biaxin)
Drug Name (Trade or
 Allergy, and generic)
Clemastine (Tavist, 
Other Names)
Clavulanic acid 
Clavamox
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
605
h
5.5-33mg/kg q12h po.
Cat: 11-33mg/kg q24h 
Dog: 11-33mg/kg q1z
0; for
Dog: 1-2 mg/kg q12h 
 tissue infection,
5
Cat: 1-5 mg per cat
2
: for skin and
q12-24h po.
day po
 5, 20, 80mg tablets 
10, 25,
osz pinbil leo
 50 and 100mg 
(veterinary);
(Cleocin)
capsules
(human)
on manufacturer's drug
 extrapolation of human 
 increase gradually. There
nerapy before beneficial
When adjusting doses,
delay after initiation of.
Most doses are based
dosing column for
Doses based on 
effects are seen.
empiricism or
studies.
h
tolerated in dogs and 
 clindamycin may alter 
 administer to rodents 
not been reported in
lost serious adverse
appetite. Other side
 antimuscarinic effects
bacterial population
 antihistamine effects 
(sedation). Overdoses
unpalatable to cats.
: for
Reported adverse
fects associated
(dry mouth, rapid
 Generally well-
cats. Oral liquid 
Lincomycin and
intestine and 
cause diarrhea;
effects include 
with TCAs are
heart rate) and
life-threatening 
can produce..
cardiotoxicity.
or rabbits.
 Primarily bacteriostatic,
Mycobacteriumleprae.
 people to treat anxiety
the lincosamide class
 bacterial ribosome.
 gram-positive 
bactericidal effect on 
and depression. Used
obsessive compulsive
Action is via inhibition 
Antimicrobial agent 
used to treat feline
behavioral
 including 
 presynaptic nerve 
 Antibacterial drug 
with spectrum of
separation anxiety.
(similar in action 1
bacterial protein 
activity primarily
oacteria and
leprosy. Slow
disorders and 
anaerobes.
varietyof比
disorders,
terminals.
against g
6
t
 Clindamycin (Antirobe
(Clomicalm [veterinary];:
Anafranil [human]]
Clomipramine
Clofazimine
(Lamprene)
[human]
909
APPENDIXES
Dog: 0.5mg/kg q8-12h 
 0.01-0.03 mg/kg q24h
 20-40mg/kg q8h po 
Cat: 0.1-0.2 mg/kg 
Dogs and Cat)
q12-24h po 
8
po
capsules, 25mg/ml 
0.5, 1, and 2mg 
500, 600mcg
 Formulations
250, 500mg
tablets and
injection
tablets 
 Dosing Information and 
from human medicine,
clinical efficacy studies 
administer on empty
 studies in veterinary
2
vailable for dogs.
 Doses are based 
Doses based on 
 Doses based on 
empiricism, or 
dogs or cats.
empiricism or
Comments
empiricism.
stomach.
species.
E
 Do not administer to
not well documented
may cause dermatitis
Adverse Effects and 
 Side effects include 
.Some
 Use cautiously in 
 animals allergic to
Precautions
animals may
 polyphagia.
experience
paradoxical
excitement.
 in people. 
 gram-positive bacteria,
 antiseizure action,
 agent. Used primarily
(possibly by inhibiting.
ormation of collagen)
y-aminobutyric acid 
Inhibits bacterial cell 
and
 Pharmacology and
treatment of some 
 Anti-inflammatory 
 Benzodiazepine.
 treat gout. In 
animals, used to
development of 
Wall synthesis.
hepatic failure
staphylococci.
Indications
inhibitory
 especially 
Clonazepam (Klonopin)
Drug Name (Trade or
(Cloxapen, Ortoenin,
Colchicine (generic)
Cloxacillin sodium 
Other Names)
Tegopen)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
607
collect pre-ACTH sample 
.125 mg) IM (cat). Cat:
collect sample at 60 and
q12h SC or IV infusion 
Response test: Collect
pre-ACTH sample and
 inject 5mcg/kg IV 
administration and 30
post sample at 30 and
ACTH response test: 
and 60 min after IM 
after Iv
administration. (
60min.
cats.
and
(Neupogen) and
 250mcg per vial 
300 mcg/ml 
1a6 7w/n 08 
(Leukine)
swirl, do not shake; then
further dilute with sterile
 Doses based on limited 
intended for treatment 
reconstitute with 1 mL
sterile water to make
 Doses established by 
Maximum dosage for 
solution of 250 or 
adrenal response in 
 measuring normal
Use for diagnostic 
purposes only; not 
0mcg/mL for IV
0.9% saline to
 aq pinoys shop
experimental
in dogs.
infusion.
250mcg.
animals.
diagnostic purposes.
unlikely when used
Adverse effects
Same as for 
corticotropin.
development in bone 
 primarily to regenerate
humans, it is preferred 
blood cells to recover
 purposes to evaluate
Used for diagnostic
corticotropin (ACTH)
used for diagnostic
synthetic form of
purposes only. In.
Cosyntropin is a 
marrow. Used
other therapy.
from cancer 
 allergenic.
normal s
gland.
factor; Sargramostim
Filgrastim (Neupogen)
Corticotropin (ACTH)
Colony-stimulating.
Cosyntropin
(Cortrosyn)
(Acthar)
608
APPENDIXES
Dog: anticancer: 50mg/
once daily 4 days/week.
Dog: 3-7 mg/kg/day po.
Cat: 6.25-12.5mg/cat 
q48h in some patients.
Cat: 3-5 mg/kg/day po.
 300mg/m2 IV, and 
changed to 5 mg/kg
Dogs and Cat)
 for atopic
week po,
lerapy:
Dose
6
100mg capsules
10,25, 50 and 
Formulations
 Dosing Information and 
with other drugs (other 
 therapy. Consult specific 
anticancer protocols for 
 Suggested trough blood
300-400 ng/mL. Neoral 
 Cyclophosphamide is 
corticosteroids) when
concentration range
aun aie sionpoid jeio
same formulation as 
cyclosporine has been
usually administered 
immunosuppressive
used successfully as
keratoconjunctivitis
Atopica. Topical 
protocols or 
treatment for 
Comments 
used for
sicca.
 Adverse Effects and 
suppression is most 
effect. Can produce 
Can cause vomiting,
 immunosuppressive
increase cydosporine
concentrations when
(sterile hemorrhagic
May cause
hair loss when used
and diarrhea may
chemotherapeutic
diarrhea, anorexia.
ketoconazole may
used concurrently.
bladder toxicity
erythromycin, or 
in some
 Bone marrow
Precautions
Cystitis).
in some 
protocols.
ien
cause
inhibits DNA and RNA
other rapidly dividing
cells. Used primarily as
Iymphocytes. Used in
amunosuppressive
Immunosuppressive 
 pue Abojosewneud
 adjunct for cancer
drug. Suppresses
mediated diseases.
Cytotoxic agent.
agent. Disrupts
and
Indications
dermatitis, 
therapy.
u
name for Cyclosporine 
Cyclophosphamide
[ophthalmic]. Other 
(Cytoxan, Neosar)
[human], Atopica
is cycdlosporin A)
[veterinary],
Optimmune.
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
609
or 50mg/m2 twice daily
Cat: 100mg/m2 once
Dog: 200mg/m2 for 5 
 5-10mg/kg q12h po 
Antihistamine: 0.5-
Appetite stimulant:
asthma: 1-2 mg/cat
daily for 2 days.
q12h po.
7
50, 100, 200mg 
200 mg vial for 
 4mg tablet; 
100mg vial
injection
capsules
Clinical studies have not
veterinary medicine. Use
 conjunction with other 
is based primarily on 
human results. Syrup
 contains 5% alcohol.
protocols for precise
When used to treat
autoimmune disease,
extrapolation from 
Consult anticancer 
Consult anticancer 
usually used in 
corticosteroids).
drugs (e.g.,
regimens. 
May cause increased
 suppression. Causes
'easneu pue bunjwon 
Leukopenia, nausea,
Adverse effects have
vomiting, diarrhea.
 Do not use in cats.
androgenic drugs.
May cause signs
similar to other
 Bone marrow
onadotropin 
inhibitor.
animals.
gain.
G
 inhibits DNA synthesis.
(probably by altering
 Probably
 Used for lymphoma
inhibitor. Suppresses 
l of
 Phenothiazine with
serotonin activity in
 Exact mechanism is.
(FSH) and estrogen 
endometriosis. May
antihistamine and 
 Anticancer agent.
Anticancer agent.
egucedestructon
platelets or RBC in
immune-mediated
appetite center).
Monofunctional
 antiserotonin
 and leukemia 
 Gonadotropin 
protocols. 
used for
disease.
arabinoside) (Cytosar)
Cytarabine (cytosine
Dacarbazine (DTIC)
 Danazol (Danocrine)
Cyproheptadine
(Periactin)
610
APPENDIXES
2-3 mg/kg IV For muscle
Dog: 1.1mg/kg q8-12h 
cat: 0.5-
 For prevention of 
Cat: do not use.
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
q8h po;
po.
100mg capsule and 
 25 and 100mg 
Formulations
.33mg/mL
injection 
tablets 
Dosing Information and
clinical trials available in 
 Doses are derived from
 extrapolation of human 
No
well-controlled clinical
primarily extrapolated
of human studies. No
veterinary medicine.
from experimental
urethra in cats used
dantrolene relaxed
 Doses have been 
studies have been 
Studies in which 
Comments
1 mg/kg IV.
medicine.
Muscle relaxants can
Adverse Effects and 
Hepatitis and blood 
dyscrasias may occur.
reactions have been
seen in people. Drug
cause weakness in
Toxic dermatologic 
trimethoprim (may 
concentrations). Do
not administer to
some animals.
administer with 
increase blood
Precautions
cats.
to muscle relaxation, it
reticulum. In addition
dermatologic diseases
jeen used to relax 
Antimicrobial drug
properties or inhibit 
pue Abojoseweyd
has been used for 
urethral musdle in
used primarily for
inflammatory cells.
Used primarily for
Muscle relaxant.
in dogs and cats.
Inhibits calcium 
leakage from 
 See Selegiline.
sarcoplasmic
treatment of
Indications
have some 
Function of 
malignant
cats.
Drug Name (Trade or
Deprenyl (L-depreny)
Dantrolene sodium 
Dapsone (generic)
Other Names)
(Dantrium)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
611
1.5-2.2mg/kg every 25
long-term treatment
 eadotsod) boa
Cat: safe dose not 
over 7 days.
established.
7 days.
days IM
 25, 100mg tablets;
 25 mg/mL Injection 
 chewable tablets
Recommended doses are
not been established for
electrolytes in patients.
Actual interval between
lactating dogs, or for 
doses may range from
Initial dose based on
studies performed in 
dogs used for
clinical patients.
14-35 days.
age,
cats.
K叫
been Gl (vomiting 
vomiting occurred.
 and diarrhea). In 
safety studies at
mineralocorticoid
effects with high
Most common
Excessive
doses.
E
postoperative pain and
 See Diethylistilbestrol.
NSAID of the coxib
 COX-1:
orthopedic surgery
Mineralocorticoid.
 glucocorticoid 
inhibitory ratio.
Indicated for the
associated with
associated with
and pain and 
 adrenocortico-
inflammation
inflammation
osteoarthritis.
insufficiency
control of
Used for
 activity.
 Deracoxib (Deramaxx)
Desoxycorticosterone
pivalate (Percorten-V,
DOCP, or DOCA 
pivalate)
DES
612
APPENDIXES
10-20mL/kg IV to effect 
0.03-0.05 mg/kg IM.
 Fluid solution for IV 40-50mL/kg q24h IV 
 Anti-inflammatory:
q12-24h IV, IM po.
.15mg/kg
Dosage(urlescs
Dexamethasone
21-isonicotinate
Dogs and Cat)
0.07-0.
250, 500, 1000 ml
mg/ml. Sodium
 phosphate forms 
 Injectable solution 
 Azium solution,
4, 6mg 
Formulations
0.5,
2.5
7
care situations. Delivered 
 Dosing Information and 
 Doses based on severity 
0.1 mg/kg IV, and collect 
Used primarily in critical
Dexamethasone is used
usion slowly. Monitor
0.1 mg/kg, cat 1.0mg/
cardiopulmonary status 
f underlying disease.
hyperadrenocorticism.
suppression test: dog
 Commonly used fluid
constant rate infusion.
hours. For high-dose
Not a maintenance 
a constant rate
dexamethasone
carefully during
administration.
Comments
for testing 
patient's
solution.
kg.
ystemic side effects
 from chronic therapy.
Adverse Effects and
 and adverse effects 
 Only limited use in 
veterinary medicine,
 and adverse effects
people,
coagulopathies are
Anaphylactic shock
High doses produce
decreased platelet 
also has occurred.
 pulmonary edema.
produce multiple 
Corticosteroids
have not been
recautions
function.
High molecular weight
 Synthetic colloid used
inflammatory effects.
for volume expansion.
 Pharmacology and
 approximately 30x
potency of cortisol.
acute hypovolemia
solutions. lsotonic 
Corticosteroid.
Multiple anti-
Indications
and shock.
 Dextran (Dextran 70,
Dextrose solution 5%
Drug Name (Trade or
sodium phosphate)
Dexasone. Tablets
Dexamethasone
(Dexamethasone
dexamethasone 
Other Names)
solution and 
exavet, and
Gentran 70)
generic)
{D-5-VV)
口
口
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
613
 Preanesthetic: 0.5mg/kg
1mg/kg
1-4 mg per cat q12-
11-55 mg/kg q8h po 
Appetite
IV. For behavior
 treatment in cats:
rectal; repeat if
0.5mg/kg iV, 
necessary.
24hr po.
N
6
125, 250, 500mg,
12.5mg/
 for injection 
r than 
dogs or cats. In dogs,
Administer, if possible,
5
 in people (half-life in
dogs less than 1 hr)
treatment of status
studies available for
suitable for therapy.
 on empty stomach.
administration. For
administered IV or 
requires frequent 
rectally. Avoid 
 excitement in dogs.
 In cats, idiopathic
has been reported.
 animals allergic to
 penicillinlike drugs.
 Sedation is most 
 Use cautiously in 
May cause 
paradoxical
Diazepam metabolized 
 gram-positive bacteria,
sedation, anesthetic 
(β-lactam, antibiotic.
Inhibits bacterial cell
anticonvulsant, and 
appears to be via
(nordiazepam) and
 Benzodiazepine.
potentiation of 
.Used for
wall synthesis.
staphylococci.
depressant.
diazepam
oxazepam.
especially
adjunct,
Diazepam (Valium and 
Dicloxacillin sodium 
(Dynapen)
generic)
614
APPENDIXES
Dog: 5-10mg/kg q24h 
Dose Is the Same for
Dog: 0.1-1.0mg/dog
Cat: 0.05-0.1 mg/cat 
Dogs and Cat)
q24h po.
q24h po.
po.
from compounding
 5 mg tablets;
11.4, 45.4, and
136 mg tablets 
Formulations
(no longer 
 pharmacist)
Titrate dose to individual
Dose range can be used
depending on severity of 
Dosing Information and
patients. Although used 
administered 75 mcg/kg.
susceptibility of bacteria.
rather than urine (urine
 Sarafloxacin is an active
incontinence and vary 
to induce abortion, it 
Difloxacin is primarily
is <5% of clearance).
 desmethyl metabolite.
 Doses listed are for
treating urinary
study that
 adjust dose,
infection and 
Comments
occur that are caused
 arthropathy in young
with di- and trivalent 
 Effects and 
theophylline if used
decrease absorption.
by excess estrogen.
estrogen-sensitive
 include seizures in 
 epileptic animals, 
concentrations of 
 Ocular safety not
established in cats.
 Side effects may 
high doses. Drug
 effects
sucralfate) may
pyometra and 
concurrently.
(e.g..
Precautions
tumors.
Adverse 
increase
cations 
 DNA gyrase in bacteria
Bactericidal with broad
 estrogen replacement 
most commonly used 
incontinence in dogs.
Acts via inhibition of
 inhibit DNA and
 activity.
infections, including
 Pharmacology and
 Synthetic estrogen
 animals. DES is 
to treat estrogen-
induce abortion in
 antibacterial drug.
Used for variety of
 auojounboioni 
RNA synthesis.
Indications 
responsive
pneumonia.
dogs.
.6
Diethylstilbestrol (DES)
hydrochloride (Dicural)
1o apexi) awen bnid
Other Names)
Difloxacin
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
615
Dog: 4-8mg/kg q8h po,
Cat: 12.5mg/cat q8h Iv,
Dog: 25-50mg/dog q8h
Cat: 2-4mg/kg q6-8h
Cat: 0.05-0.1 mg/kg 
 2-10mcg/kg/min IV 
IV, iM, po.
q1 2h po.
IM, IV.
IM, po.
infusion
8M
..5 mg/ml elixir; 25,
 2.5 mg tablets 
injection 
empirically for treatment
dose is not high enough
 of dimenhydrinate.
r significant systemic
(minutes) and therefore
studies have not been
Contains atropine, but
must be administered
I carefully monitored 
performed in animals.
nstant rate infusion.
 There have been no
 primarily for allergic
When mixing, avoid
Antihistamine used 
disease in animals.
 or extrapolation of
dextrose solution or
 Doses are based 
lactated Ringer's
 500 ml of fluid.
of vomiting.
effects.
solution.
Col
 Primary side effect is
 Primary side effect is
Adverse effects have
veterinary medicine.
systemic side effects.
cause constipation.
arrhythmias at high
nsitive
vasoconstriction via
individuals. High
o-receptor action.
poorly absorbed
systemically and 
tachycardia and 
in sen
produces feww
asnep sasop
May cause
itricular
sedation.
sedation.
osasop
Antihistamine used for
lergy treatment and 
muscle segmentation
electrolyte absorption.
stimulate myocardium
nonspecific diarrhea.
Action is primarily to
I action on cardiac
 There is
1e41 uopsab6ns awos
Used for antiemetic 
 Adrenergic agonist.
dopamine increases
renal perfusion via
receptors; however,
clinical evidence for
diphenhydramine.
beneficial effect is
 Opiate agonist.
Used for acute 
action on renal
dopaminergic
treatment of 
treatment.
antiemetic. 
lacking.
 Diphenoxylate (Lomotil)
hydrochloride (Intropin)
Diphenhydramine
Dimenhydrinate
ydrochloride
(Benadryl)
Dopamine.
Canada])
2
616
APPENDIXES
 aeuou Ai by/bwiol-s 
sublingual,
Dose Is the Same for
 or via umbilical vein 
Cat: 20mg/m² (or
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
use 1mg/kg.
eeks.
 20 mg/mL injection 
 2mg/mL injection 
Formulations
Dosing Information and
liphenhydramine) prior
 therapy. Monitor ECG
 anticancer protocol for
longer available from 
Dose must
during therapy Dose
weight may be more
 Used for short-term 
 treatment only. No
Regimen listed may
and antihistamine
according to body
Consult specific 
manufacturer.
Comments
guidelines.
Adverse Effects and
Adverse effects not
reported in animals.
Most common acute
related toxicity also
marrow suppression,
 occurred with high
hair loss (in certain 
Cardiotoxicity limits
 convulsions have 
 doses in people.
Cardiovascular
vomiting, and
cardiotoxicity.
the total dose
not to exceed 
 Precautions
effects and 
and
200 mg/m²).
includes 
breeds),
subsequent stimulation 
respiratory depression 
Respiratory stimulant
 chemoreceptors and
 of respiratory center.
postanesthesia. May
disrupting DNA and
Doxorubicin also may
via action on carotid
treatment of various 
heoplasias, including
 Pharmacology and 
RNA synthesis in 
or to stimulate 
bases on DNA,
ean ot pasn 
Indications
respiration
tumor cell.
lymphoma.
output. 
Drug Name (Trade or
(Dopram, Respiram)
Other Names)
hydrochloride
Doxorubicin
(Adriamycin)
Doxapram
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
617
 t-e ne sawn t uonnjos
 3-5mg/kg q12h po IV
Dermatophytes: dilute
and wash lesion with 
Nasal aspergillosis:
 5mg/kg q12h 
day intervals.
water).
100mg
 Doxycycline hyclate
monohydrate 50 or 
10 mg/mL oral 
10% or 13.8% 
suspension;
injection vial
 cap sules.
capsules.
 emulsion 
50
and experimental studies
Ordinarily considered the
Imaverol is available only
 is available
Many pharmacokinetic
ettsia and Ehrlichia
stable for only 12 hr at
 snuis jeseu oui uon
small animals, but no 
Dilute solution to at
ast 50:1, and apply
72 hr if refrigerated.
Enilconazole also has 
for nasal aspergillosis.
 of choice for
Canada as 10%
solution.
clinical studies.
Clinaf arm EC i
ofo
f
.n
renal tubular necrosis
general may cause 
teeth formation in 
topically. Adverse
 Severe adverse
reported with
at high doses.
 been reported.
reactions not
Administered
doxycycline.
 5!41
 Azole antifungal agent
Mechanism of action 
bind to 30s ribosomal
Usually bacteriostatic.
subunit and inhibit 
 Broad spectrum of
protozoa, Rickettsia,
for topical use only.
inhibits membrane
synthesis.
Highly
dermatophytes.
 effective for 
in fungus.
Ehrlichia.
protein s
Enilconazole (Imaverol, 
(Vibramycin and 
 generic forms)
Clinafarm EC)
Doxycycline
618
APPENDIXES
Dog: 5-20mg/kg/ q24h
IM Do not administer to 
Cat: 5mg/kg q24h po,
500-2000 U/kg/day po
than 5mg/kg and do
Dogs and Cat)
po, Iv, IM.
400 U tablets (OTC);
22.7, and 68mg
136mg. 22.7mg/
 Formulations
mL injection.
500,000 U/mL
(12.5 mg/mL)
(1.25mg);
injection
 Dosing Information and 
Solution is not approved 
 Should not be used for
compound. Available as
administered via this 
slowly. Do not mix IV
-uoes ynim suopnjos 
hypoparathyroidism
 oral solution, tablets,
route safely if given
patients should be
convert to active 
Mg++, Ca++)
serum calcium
concentrations.
Comments
renal
Blindness in cats has
been reported. Drug 
with di- and trivalent 
 Adverse Effects and 
arthropathy in dogs
4-28 weeks of age,
heophylline if used
decrease absorption.
cautiously with high
interactions: May
concentrations of 
oadministration
Use
epileptic animals,
use in pregnant
doses of calcium-
Adverse effects
nay cause fetal
 abnormalities.
 preparations.
 Precautions
containing 
increase
ations 
cats i
acts via inhibition of
utilization of calcium.
 inhibit DNA and 
 spectrum of activity.
 Pharmacology and
deficiency and as 
 Fluoroquinolone 
hypothyroidism.
 absorption and
hypocalcemia,
especially that
associated with
Indications
Drug Name (Trade or
Enrofloxacin (Baytril)
Other Names)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
619
Dog: 22-44mcg/kg IM
10-20mg/kg q8-12h 
Cat: 250mcg/cat IM
between 40hr and 5
exceed 1.0mg).
days of mating.
8
 2mg/mL injection 
250 or 500mg.
There are several forms
Ficacious than 22mcg/
 convincing data to
There
s.n
stearate salt for oral
absorbed better than 
, a dose of 
4mcg/kg was more
ethylsuccinate and 
during days 3-5 of
 erythromycin,
estolate esters, an
 included for all.
 diestrus.
administration.
 including the 
ne study,
estrus or 
2
6.5
9
Most common side
(probably caused by
cholinergiclike effect
 motilin-induced
rodents or rabbits.
doses can produce
thrombocytopenia,
animals. Do not 
and fatal aplastic
hyperplasia and 
High risk of
leukopenia,
anemia.
6
E
 Spectrum of 
bacteria. Used for skin 
 Semisynthetic estrogen
 Macrolide antibiotic.
Inhibits bacteria by
primarily to gram-
 primarily to induce
 abortion in animals.
protein
binding to sOs
positive aerobic 
ibosome and
inhibiting
infections.
compound.
synthesis.
Erythromycin (many
Estradiol cypionate 
(ECP, Depo-Estradiol
Cypionate, generic)
620
APPENDIXES
Dog: 10-15mg/kg q24h 
 or 0.01 mg/kg IV, IM,
0.04 mg/kg IV q2h IM 
diazepam); Analgesia:
acetylpromazine or 
Dogs and Cat)
Cat: dose not
q2h IV, IM, SC
established.
(vwith
150 and 300mg 
Formulations
250 mg/5 ml
 injection 
tablets 
efficacious than placebo
for ulcer prevention and 
experimental studies. No
 Dosing Information and 
 Studies in dogs showed 
fentanyl is available (see
famotidine have not 
injection, transdermal
Doses are based on
clinical studies have
Clinical studies for 
addition to fentanyl
been reported. In
been performed,
empiricism and 
Comments
arthritis.
below).
NSAIDs may cause Gl 
platelet function and 
etodolac, some dogs
doses showed weight
Adverse Effects and 
Keratoconjunctivitis 
 None reported for 
 similar to morphine.
ulceration. Other 
caused by NSAIDs
decreased
at recommended 
adverse effects
doses, etodolac 
 Adverse effects.
sicca has been
Precautions
renal injury.
include 
in dogs.
 animals.
'550
Histamine Hz-receptor 
Approximately 80-100
pyranocarboxylic acid
Used to
prevention of ulcers.
 Pharmacology and
An NSAID of the 
potent
group. Inhibits
 Synthetic opiate 
 prostaglandins.
 than morphine.
inflammatory
 antagonist. 
times more p
Indications
 analgesic.
Famotidine (Pepcid)
(Sublimaze, generic)
Etodolac (EtoGesic,
veterinary; Lodine,
Fentanyl citrate
human)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
621
Dog: 10-20kg, 50mcg/
Cat: 25mcg patch every
Dog: 5mg/kg po, q24h.
Long-term safety in cats
hr patch every 72 hr.
has not been 
determined.
118hr.
100mcg/hr patch
25, 50, 75, and
 Tablets 57 or 
277 mg
 Patches available in sizes
6
termined that 25mcg/
carefully when applying 
study. Not registered for 
related to release rate 
ntanyl. Studies have 
 Dose for cats has been
propriate for cats;
and
recommendations 
 patches are
'05
patches.
25:
cats.
.6
 Adverse effects have
 effects are observed
 sedation, excitement
 administer
Gl problems are the 
most often adverse 
ulcers, and erosions 
effects associated
cats), remove
include vomiting
diarrhea, nausea,
 of the Gl tract.
 patch and, if
necessary, a
naloxone.
.=
 Same as for fentanyl.
into adhesive patches
have determined that
108
patch is equivalent to
inflammatory effects 
nours in dogs and 
inflammatory drug
(NSAID). Like other
 analgesic and anti-
selective for COX-2.
drugs in this dass,
by inhibiting the 
 Firocoxib is highly
patches release
prostaglandins.
Firocoxib is a
synthesis of
q4h IM.
Fentanyl, transdermal
Firocoxib (Previcox)
(Duragesic)
622
APPENDIXES
Dog: 20mg/kg q6h po,
Cat: 22mg/kg q8h IM,
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
IM, q6h.
'o0
injectable solution 
Formulations
300 mg/mL
 Dosing Information and
 animals. Doses listed are
pharmacokinetic studies.
for use only in cattle,
valuated in small
derived from 
 may
florfenicol. However,
has been limited;
therefore adverse
effects have not
dose-dependent
depression, and
similar reactions
been reported.
 linked to
bone marrow
there does not
been 
spectrum.
derivative with same
mechanism of action
 Chloramphenicol
synthesis) and broad 
Ianimals
 has been infrequent.
Chloramphenicol
antibacterial
Indications
Florfenicol (Nuflor)
Continued
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
623
 Dog: 10-12mg/kg q24h,
 25-50 mg/kg q6-8h po
dose
of 100mg/kg q12h po)
5mg/kg q12h po has
po. For Malassezia,
been used.
r40mg/mL oral
suspension; 2mgy
 250mg capsule;
mL IV injection 
suspension
 concentrations in
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
are primarily based on
r other infections has
Doses for fluconazole
between fluconazole
based on flucytosine's
 attain high
fluconazole attains 
 Flucytosine is used 
animals. Efficacy is 
concentrations in.
Flucytosine may be
primarily to treat 
cryptococcosis in
synergistic with
amphotericin B.
CNS.
ability to
not 
the 
Adverse effects have
However, increased 
ver enzyme plasma
concentrations and 
Compared
not been reported
 other oral azole
 an empty stomach.
from fluconazole
ketoconazole, has 
ytopenia
administration.
fluconazole is 
absorbed more
predictably and
Compared to 
Anemia and
antifungals,
 are possible.
ossible. (
55al
8
 other azole antifungal
fungal cell membrane.
and variety of systemic
Similar mechanism as
 Antifungal drug. Used 
 other antifungal drugs 
Action
ells and is converted 
acts as antimetabolite.
Active
agents. Inhibits 
Aspergillus sp.
8
Fluconazole (Diflucan)
 Flucytosine (Ancobon)
624
APPENDIXES
 or 0.02mg/kg q24h
Cat: 0.1-0.2 mg per cat
Anti-inflammatory uses:
Dog: 0.2-0.8 mg per 
Dogs and Cat)
q24h po.
 6op
 0.5 mg/mL injection 
100 mcg (0.1mg)
Formulations
tablets
paisnipe aq pinous asog
concentrations). In some
monitoring electrolyte
 Doses are based on
 pue pionososnie
 supplementation.
response (i.e.
sodium 
disease.
Long-term treatment 
hypoadrenocorticism
systemic side effects.
Adverse effects are
primarily related to
glucocorticoid side 
 Adverse effects are
with high doses.
 produce multiple 
Corticosteroids
 chronic therapy.
may result in
common with
effects. 
with adrenal atrophy/
glucocorticoid activity.
 potent drug is needed.
Used as replacement
activity compared to
 Potent glucocorticoid
that of cortisol. Used 
 pue Abojosewieyd
Mineralocorticoid.
mineralocorticoid
adrenocortical
Indications
 Flumethasone (Flucort)
Acetate (Florinef)
Fludrocortisone
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
625
Dog: 1-2 mg/kg per day. 
.1 mg/kg/day 3
Ophthalmic: 0.5 mg/kg 
Dog: 150mg/m2 once/ 
Cat: 0.5-4mg/cat q24h 
1.1 mg/kg once IV, IM,
Cat: do not use.
day/week po.
once IV. 
week IV.
po.
po.
solution Veterinary
16,
formulations: 10
 250mg packet 
 50 mg/mL vial 
 4mg/mL oral 
Human 
tablets 
may take several days to
effective prostaglandin 
 plasma 
animals, but has been 
 anticancer treatment 
dosage and regimen.
 synthesis inhibitor.
Used in anticancer
Weeks.
are potentiated when
Most severe adverse
 effects related to Gl
 doses or prolonged
. Renal ischemia
to
 consecutive days.
 CNS toxicity. Do not 
administered with 
thrombocytopenia.
 pregnant animals 
reduced appetite,
 diarrhea,
 nervousness and 
 anxiousness have
Corticosteroids.
Most common
were lethar gy,.
been observed.
also been
Avoid use in
interactions:
Causes mild 
leukopenia,
use in cats.
restlessness,
shaking,
increased
NSAID. Acts to inhibit
(XO)) a
prostaglandins. Other 
leukocytes), but have
 nucleic acid synthesis.
behavioral disorders,
compulsive disorders
f serotonin reuptake
characterized. Used 
 is via inhibition with
Antidepressant drug.
moderate pain and
f 5-HT1 receptors.
effects may occur 
primarily for short-
term treatment of 
Anticancer agent.
such as obsessive-
cyclooxygenase
enzyme, which
and dominance
not been well 
jean oi pasn
synthesizes
6
Fluoxetine (Reconcile
Flunixin meglumine
[veterinary], Prozac
(Banamine)
[human]]
626
APPENDIXES
Cat: 1-4mg/kg q8-24h 
Otherwise Indicated,
Anticonvulsant dose:
 For analgesia:
Dosage (unless
IV, Im, sc, po.
 PO.
100, 300,400mg 
100, 300,
:10mg/ml
400, 600, 800mg
12.5, 20, 50mg
 50 mg/mL oral
Formulations
tablets;
solution.
 Furosemide may be used
with other cardiovascular
 Gabapentin has been
refractory epilepsy and
(with other drugs).
pimobendan.
的
diuretic effect (loss of 
 xylitol, which may be
Effects and 
primarily related to
Warning: oral
toxic to dogs.
electrolytes).
fluid and 
Administer
azotemia.
Loop diuretic. Inhibits 
produces diuresis. Also
may have vasodilating
 analgesic. Gabapentin 
 an analogue of the
GABA. The mechanism
action and analgesic
effects are not known.
,and
sodium and water
decreasing preload.
Anticonvulsant and
neurotransmitter
of anticonvulsant 
hibitory
.n
Furosemide (Lasix,
Gabapentin
(Neurontin)
generic)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
627
r day (2-4 capsules of
Dog: 1-2 RS capsules
Cat: 1 RS capsule daily.
Regular (RS) and 
double strength 
(DS) capsules.
 injection 
organisms. Some studies 
doses into a single daly
persistently high trough
 used with NSAIDs for
primarily on empiricism 
Dosing regimens are
have suggested that
(combining multiple
ctivity against some
multiple treatments.
and manufacturer's
seudomonas) is
Nephrotoxicity is
enhanced when
 Doses are based
combined with 
increased with
concentrations.
bacteria (e.g..
5! (a5
vestibulotoxicity also
used with anesthetic
 Do not mix in vial or
Adverse effects have
toxicity. Ensure that
adequate fluid and
electrolyte balance
teractions: when
 not been reported,
hypersensitivity is
during therapy.
neuromuscular
patients have
 antibiotics.
possible.
agents,
inhibit bacteria protein 
and anaerobic bacteria
name for combination
synthesis via binding
sulfate. According to
manufacturer, these 
synovial
spectrum of activity
Cosequin is brand 
improve healing of
 305 ribosome.
Used primarily for
degenerative joint
 inhibit 
fluid and i
disease.
Gentamicin sulfate
Chondroitin sulfate 
(Gentocin)
628
APPENDIXES
week, then 2-10mg IM 
1 mg/kg once/week IM 
 30mg/kg/day in divided 
110-132 mg/kg/day in 
1-5mg IM on first 
divided treatments)
Dosage (unless
 treatments po 
maintenance
250, 330mg tablets 
10, 25 and 50mg/
125,165,
Formulations
 mL injection 
syrup
00. 1
Clinical studies have not 
animals. Aurothioglucose
 often than Myochrysine.
extent, and doses should
 Dosing Information and
sasop jo abuei api 
with food to enhance
 less than microsize.
animals. Efficacy and
product
are not available for 
represent the current 
been performed in 
been reported.
 Doses listed here
Same as above.
Ultramicrosize is
safety of this p
absorption.
has
 See Aurothioglucose.
teratogenicity in cats; 
Adverse Effects and 
 animals include 
vomiting, and
Same as above.
administer to 
pregnant cats.
 anemia and
 See Aurothioglucose,
Incorporates into skin 
Pharmacology and 
layers and inhibits
Gold therapy (for
mechanism, see
Aurothioglucose)
Antifungal drug.
dermatophytes.
 Same as above.
thiomalate, or 
Gold sodium 
Indications
Auranofin.
Griseofuvin (microsize)
(Fulvicin P/G, Gris-PEG)
(ultramicrosize)
Gold sodium 
(Myochrysine)
Gold therapy 
(Fulvicin U/F)
thiomalate
Griseofulvin
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
629
maintenance: 0.5-1.5% 
Dog: 10-20mL/kg IV per 
Cat: 5-10mL/kg IV per 
Dog: 0.22 mg/kg q4-8h 
Cat: no dose available.
Induction: 3%;
day.
day.
po
 5mg tablets and 
 250mL bottle 
1 mg/mL syrup
 Injection 
 careful monitoring. Dose
HES appears to be more
 combined with atropine
determined by depth
in the product Hycodan.
situations. Infused via
constant rate infusion.
dextran. Infuse slowly.
but probably does not
effects at doses in this
homatropine per 5mg 
anesthetics requires 
Use of inhalant 
Hydrocodone is
 anesthesia.
tablet).
6
cause systemic opiate
related to anesthetic 
Hepatotoxicosis has
 Only limited use in 
veterinary medicine;
cardiovascular and
Coagulopathies are
adverse
'sasop lensn xe aiel
been reported in 
effects have not 
 Oral opiate. May 
Adverse effects
effects (e.g..
cause allergic 
'espiratory
depression).
therefore,
reactions.
people.
effects.
starch (HES). Synthetic 
primarily to treat acute
 Opiate agonist. Used 
Inhalant anesthetic.
expander (used in 
other combinations
See Hydroxyethyl
same manner as 
hypovolemia and
 See Hydrocodone 
antitussive action.
Hycodan contains
but
colloid volume
 guaifenesin or 
acetaminophen.
homatropine, 
primarily for 
may contain
bitartrate.
dextran).
shock.
Halothane (Fluothane)
Hydrocodone bitartrate 
(Hydroxyethyl starch)
Hetastarch 
(Hycodan)
Hycodan 
630
APPENDIXES
Anti-inflammatory: 5mg/
pain treatment. A dose
Replacement therapy:
2.5-5mg/kg q1 2h po.
Dose Is the Same for
Anti-inflammatory:
q8h for two days.
 absorption in dogs.
Dogs and Cat)
but there is no
1 q12h IV.
pasn
5, 10, 20mg tablets 
Various size vials for
 Injection: 1, 2, 4, 
Formulations
10mg/ml.
injection 
Dosing Information and
hydrocortisone. Prepare
ydromorphone may be
with morphine, provided 
that doses are adjusted 
 for potency differences.
related to severity of
used interchangeably
vials according to
manufacturer.
Same as for 
Comments
disease.
 Hydromorphone is an 
Adverse Effects and 
Adverse effects are
 opiate agonist, with
norphine. However 
morphine and
effects similar to
 should be used at 
is more potent 
hydrocortisone.
attributed to
glucocorticoid
 Same as for 
lower doses.
excessive
effects.
ian
E.
h
hydrocortisone, except
her opiates, it binds
kappaopiate receptors.
 potent than morphine.
inflammatory effects 
used for replacement
 Pharmacology and
mineralocorticoid
that this is a rapid-
 anti-inflammatory
has weaker anti-
acting, injectable 
to muopiate and
prednisolone or
 Glucocorticoid 
Indications
and greater 
therapy
Same as
product.
oth
6
Hydrocortisone (Cortef 
succinate (Solu-Cortef)
Drug Name (Trade or
Hydrostat,
Hydromorphone
Other Names)
and generic)
and generic)
Dilaudid,
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
631
Dog: 1-2 mg/kg q6-8h 
 3-10mg/kg q6-8h IV,
SC or IM; usually 5mg/
S 1o I  48-gb 6
Cat: safe dose not
days/week
days/week.
established.
established.
IM, po.
250 or 500mg vials 
 500mg capsules 
2mg/mL
10,25, 50mg 
 oral solution
for injection 
tablets; 
Limited use in veterinary
 treatment of pruritus 
be somewhat effective
 Avoid use, especially in 
Observe manufacturer's
istructions carefully for
administration, add 2ml
Reserve the use of this
drug for only resistant,
proper administration.
suspension is stable for 
shown hydroxyzine to
Clinical studies have 
refractory infections.
For IV administration,
 medicine.
in dogs.
 only 1 hr.
dogs.
antihistamine effects.
Vomiting and nausea
terinary medicine.
have been reported.
hydroxyurea causes
 anemia,
therapy are related 
lactam antibiotics.
 Only limited use in
 adverse effects
thrombocytopenia.
With rapid infusion
Gl ulceration and
 patients with
injections may
cause pain in dogs.
been reported in
Allergic reactions 
neurotoxicity may
 Side effects of 
may occur with
some animals.
 and cats.
occur (seizures).
leukopenia, @
primarily to
In people,
oeen
 56op
'sbop
.
2
6
 piperazine class. Used 
action via inhibition of
 Antineoplastic agent.
with other anticancer
Antihistamine of the 
β-lactams except that
imipenem is the most
active of all β-lactams.
Used in combination
treatment of certain
with broadspectrum
polycythemia vera.
pruritus in animals.
β-lactam antibiotic
Used primarily for 
resistant infections.
been
primarily to treat
NSAID. Produces 
anti-inflammatory
activity. Action is
serious, multiple-
modalities for
prostaglandins.
5eH
 treat
tumors.
used to
(eapAH) eanAxopA 
Hydroxyzine (Atarax)
Imipenem (Primaxin)
Advil, Nuprin)
632
APPENDIXES
Dog: 2.5 million units/kg 
Cat: 1 million units/kg IV
Maintenance: 1.5-2.5% 
Dog: 1-3 mg/kg/day (up
Cat: no dose established 
recommended dose of
Dose Is the Same for
days 0, 14, and 60.
once daily for 5 
Dogs and Caty
Induction: 5%
to a maximum
 and 10 million U/
10, 20, 40mg 
Formulations 
capsules
vial
5
 pue uoeoui buisoa
primarily been based on
medicine is confined to
extrapolation of human 
 million U to 1L sterile
 Doses and indications 
ots and freeze.
r animals have
Use in veterinary.
 extrapolation from 
30 U/mL solution.
experience and
limited clinical 
 human reports.
Comments
jonb!e
Adverse effects have 
ported for animals,
Adverse Effects and
Adverse effects not
experimental studies
 contraindicated in
 demonstrated
pregnant animals.
nat it can cause
myocardium and
100 ml bottle.
Precautions 
Absolutely 
(such as in
animals.
vessels).
have
h
fo
Used to stimulate the
and inhibits sebaceous 
treat acne. In animals, 
sebaceous gland size
 See Ferrous sulfate.
Inhalant anesthetic.
Isotretinoin reduces
 gland activity, and
 primarily used to
it has been used to 
pue Abojosewieyd
Human interferon.
immune system in
 stabilizing drug.
Keratinization
Indications
patients.
adenitis.
Isotretinoin (Accutane)
Interferon (interferon-
Isoflurane (AErrane)
ron
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
633
kg/day po for 15 days.
Cat: 5mg/kg q12h po.
3.0mg/kg (up to 5mg)
Malassezia dermatitis.
 5mg/kg q24h po for
Dermatophytes: 3mg/
repeated each
infection in cat: 1.5-
) q24h po for 15 
week for 3 weeks.
For dermatophyte
Dog:
days, 1
days.
not be absorbed as
 well as proprietary
formulations may
Compounded 
 formulations.
liquid.
blastomycosis in dogs. In 
hich itraconazole has 
uses or doses are based
been used to treat
been effective for 
1 empiricism or 
extrapolation from
6
 is better 
and hepatotoxicosis
levels. High doses in
more likely at high
10-15% of
especially at high 
 enzyme
hepatotoxicosis 
ketoconazole.
are possible.
 anorexia.
'aconazole
doses.
and
39
against dermatophytes 
Coccidioides. Also 
Azole (triazole)
dermatitis.
Itraconazole (Sporanox)
634
APPENDIXES
Heartworm preventative:
o in dogs and 24mcg/
 every 30 days po in 
Microfilaricide: 50mcg/
po
and
cat): 200-400 mcg/kg 
300mcg/kg IM, SC,
and increase dose by
adulticide therapy.
Endoparasites (dog
fol
po 2wk after
60-120 days po.
Dosage (unless
600 mcg/kg/day
Dogs and Cat)
8
ml oral paste; 68,
200, 500 mg/ml 
1% (10mg/mL)
10mg/mL oral 
Formulations
Dosing Information and 
 Doses vary, depending
 injectable products are
often administered po,
 therapy, it is advised to
100mcg/kgy
day and increase dose
prevention is lowest
require higher doses.
approved for small
nimals; for other 
 or SC to small 
600 mcg/kg/day.
 See Gentamicin.
Comments
start with 1
IM,
Toxicity may occur at
Australian shepherds,
 is neurotoxic,
Ivermectin appears to
Adverse Effects and 
 properties with other
 aminoglycosides (see
ivermectin crosses
blood-brain barrier.
 English sheepdog.
and signs include
may show adverse
breeds in which 
Sensitive breeds
animals. Do not
include collies,
 Shares same.
Precautions
Gentamicin).
Amikacin,
Toxicityi
doses.
 Pharmacology and
 Antiparasitic drug.
neurotransmitter
 Aminoglycoside
 broad-spectrum 
Indications
GABA.
activity.
Ivermectin (Heartgard,
Drug Name (Trade or
Kanamycin (Kantrim)
Continued
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
635
Dog: 5.5-22 mg/kg IV,
adjunctive sedative or
tranquilizer treatment)
Wi Al by/bwsz-z 4e
sedative or tranquilizer
Dog and cat: Dose for
constant rate infusion:
0.5 mg/kg IV followed
 combination
1-2 ml/kg q2-6h po
with other analgesics.
IM (recommend
treatment).
.
used
3.
100 mg/mL injection 
 Oral suspension, 
solution 
120z
treatment of diarrhea in 
 combination with other 
Efficacy has not been 
 acepromazine, or 
 anesthetics and 
established for
 Often used in 
 as xylazine,
animals.
'sasop
Causes pain with IM
output compared to
 agents. Do not use in
have been reported.
elevate CSF pressure.
injection. Tremors,
Formulations may
 contain salicylate.
convulsive seizures
 animals with head
 Side effects are 
Increases cardiac
spasticity, and 
uncommon.
oth
for endotoxins, and 
. Kaolin
pectin may protect
intestinal mucosa.
antagonist. Exact 
is not known, but 
appears to act as
dissociative agent.
 and eliminated in 
Antidiarrheal
most animals.
compound.
Ketamine (Ketalar, 
Ketavet, Vetalar)
Kaolin + pectin 
(Kaopectate)
636
APPENDIXES
Cat: 5-10mg/kg q8-12h 
1 mg/kg q24h po for up
injection at up to 2 mgy
Dog: 10-15mg/kg 
infection: 5mg/kg
can be given via
Dogs and Cat)
kg SC, IM, IV.
po.
8
Canada)
injection for horses 
 200 mg tablets;
(only
oral
12.5 mg tablet 
 Formulations
100mg/mL 
)uoisuadsns 
 available in (
Oral absorption depends 
Dosing Information and 
Although not approved 
ketoprofen 
 available as OTC drug
 not administer with
 approved for small 
 countries. Doses listed
itacids. Because of
hyperadrenocorticism.
used for short-term 
idocrine effects,
nimals in other 
treatment of
Comments
Ketoconazole causes
inhibit metabolism of
Ketoprofen has been
adverse effects. Most 
Adverse Effects and 
 abnormalities, most 
 cortisol synthesis.
consecutive days in 
common side effect 
 Adverse effects in 
/omiting, diarrhea,
and hepatic injury.
Enzyme elevations 
 pregnant animals.
Drug interactions:
Ketoconazole will 
 o ss
(anticonvulsants,
All NSAIDs share 
animals include 
 some animals.
administer to
 Precautions
dose-related
ndocrine
cisapride).
 Similar mechanism of 
action as other azole
against dermatophytes
inflammatory agent.
Used to treat arthritis
 pue Ahogoseweud
Azole (imidazole)
 antifungal agents.
Blastomyces, and 
Coccidioides. Also
 antifungal drug.
fungi, such as
Histoplasma,
active against 
NSAID. Anti-
inflammatory
Indications
membrane.
Malassezia.
and other
disorders.
Ketoconazole (Nizoral)
Ketoprofen (Orudis KT
Drug Name (Trade or
Ketofen [veterinary 
Other Names)
injection])
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
637
Dog: 0.5mg/kg q8-12h
Cat: 10-20mcg/kg/day
days); microfilaricide,
: 18-22 mcg/kg
Cat: safe dose not
po (adjust dose via
treatments po.
established.
monitoring).
po, IM, IV.
6-10 days;
monitoring!.
week po.
10mg tablets; 15
njection, in 10%
tablet (Ergamisol)
 and 30mg/mL
0.184g bolus;
11.7 g per 13g
 increments)
 alcohol
三
 Available as 10mg tablet
 and injection for IV or
IM use. Clinical studies
recommended to avoid 
 In heartworm-positive
 dogs have shown
dogs, it may sterilize 
 guided by
monitoring to adjust 
safety and efficacy.
Dosing q12h is
postmedication 
diagnosis and
 problems.
female aduit 
heartworms.
should b
testing t
dose.
G
 NSAIDs may cause Gl
ulceration. Ketorolac 
than q8h.
thyrotoxicosis, which
interactions: Patients 
administered more 
more than 2 doses.
olinergic toxicity.
corticosteroids may
ability to convert T4
Do not administer 
astrointestinal
High doses may 
May produce
 some dogs.
is uncommon
people). Drug
may cause
frequently t
ions if 
produce
receiving
'EI
6
.
M
6
M
.=
inflammation. Acts by 
). Use of
neuromuscular toxicity
 evaluated clinically in
 Antiparasitic drug of
the imidazothiazole
reports of its efficacy
Replacement therapy
short-term relief of
Levamisole has also 
for treating patients
with hypothyroidism.
ketorolac has been
dogs but not cats.
immunostimulant;
Levothyroxine is T4,
NSAID. Used for 
however, clinical
are not available.
cydlooxygenase
enzyme (CoX).
se pue sbop'
action due to 
microfilaricide.
to parasites.
inhibiting
.n
(Soloxine, Thyro-Tabs,
(Levasole, Tramisol, 
tromethamine 
hydrochloride
Levamisole
Ketorolac 
Ergamisol)
Synthroid)
(Toradol)
638
APPENDIXES
maximum dose of 8mgy
infusion; 6mg/kg q1.5h
:(teo pue bop) jeinpida
15-25 mg/kg q12h po.
low as 10mg/kg q12h
Dog (antiarrhythmic):
min infusion. For
4.4mg/kg of 2% 
have been used.
Dogs and Cat)
solution.
95
M
For 
100, 200, 500mg 
Formulations
 tablets
Action of lincomycin and 
 Dosing Information and 
activity at injection site.
 clindamycin are similar.
 can be substituted for 
When used for local
formulations contain 
rrhythmias. Note tha
increase
 of action, and 
bicarbonate to 10mL
Avoid epinephrine i
decrease pain from 
infiltration, many
immediately after 
lidocaine (use
 contain 
Comments
 lincomycin.
mixing).
onset c
may
6
 effects (tremors, 
Adverse Effects and 
can produce cardiac
nythmias but has 
tissue. Cat are more
 caused vomiting and
diarrhea in animals.
 orally to rodents and
seizures). Lidocaine
 adverse effects, and
lower doses should 
High doses cause
abnormal cardiac
 Do not administer 
 Adverse effects 
Lincomycin has
and
Precautions
uncommon.
vitches,
be used.
rabbits.
SND
arrh
3
Lincosamide antibiotic,
Lidocaine is also used
commonly for acute
similar in mechanism 
pyoderma and other 
 soft tissue infections.
 pue Ahojoewieyd
Class 1
 clindamycin and 
Spectrum includes 
bacteria. Used for 
Local anesthetic.
antiarrhythmic.
arrhythmias. (
erythromycin.
Indications
Drug Name (Trade or
Lincomycin (Lincocin)
Lidocaine (Xylocaine
and generic brands)
Other Names)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
689
3 suppression test in 
administer
25mcg q8h for 7 doses,
Dog: 70-90mg/m2 every 
10mg/kg, q8-12h, po 
cats: collect presample 
for Tg and Ta after last 
weeks po. For brain 
Cat: 50-60mg/m² po
4.4mcg/kg q8h po.
for Ta and
vveeks.
or Iv.
ForT;
dose.
m
 2 mg/ML injection.
400 and 600mg
 oral suspension.
 60 mcg tablets 
10, 40, 100mg 
 capsules 
drug-resistant infections
Administering on empty
the basis of monitoring 
hemogram for evidence
 Doses of liothyronine 
T, concentrations in 
 of myelosuppression.
stomach decreases 
e in animals is
other drugs are 
nausea. Monitor 
 ineffective.
patients.
Use
been observed. Use
nonoamine oxidase
nausea. Rarely in
serotonergic drugs.
(see Levothyroxine
Myelosuppression,
effects
cautiously with
hepatotoxicosis, 
sodium).
vomiting.
Adverse 
include 
E
positive spectrum that
includes drug-resistant
alkylating agent in the
and Staphylococcus.
High expense limits 
 Thyroid supplement.
soluble and crosses
blood-brain barrier.
Used for lymphoma
nitrosourea class.
 and brain tumors.
 equivalent to Tg.
Anticancer drug-
Oxazolidinone
routine use.
Liothyronine (Cytomel)
Lomustine (CCNU)
Linezolid (Zywox)
(CeeNU)
640
APPENDIXES
 Dog: 10mg/kg po every
Cat: This product is not
1-2 mL po to adult cats
Antifungal dose—dog:
Each tablet formulated 
 days Cat injection:
areas
 Dog: administer one
1 30 days.
Cat: 400mg po/day.
 and 1 ml to kittens.
registered for cats.
endemic a
for size of dog.
Dogs and Cat)
 a month.
30 days.
6mos.
9. In e
tablet,
6
30
6
45,90, 135, 204.9,
Milbemycin oxime/
5.75/115,
23/460 mg Flavor 
 250mg/ml paste 
Formulations
follows: z
pack
Tabs
1.
 Dosing Information and 
 Lufenuron may control 
 Doses listed will reduce
can be mixed with food.
flea development with
 administration once
 See Lufenuron or 
Comments
animals.
directly.
2
Adverse effects have 
relatively safe during
Adverse Effects and
 not been reported.
 pregnancy and in 
Well-tolerated in 
Appears to be
 young animals.
Precautions
cats.
Antiparasitic. Used for 
hatching fleas. May be
dermatophytes in dogs
questioned by some
Combination of two
supplementation for
 pue Ahojosewieud
and cats, although 
See Lufenuron or 
Milbemycin oxime.
with reduced viral
animals. Inhibits 
hookworms, and
Used to protect
Amino acid for 
infections. Oral 
cats with feline 
against fleas,
neartworms,
oundworms
whipworms
Indications
used for
shedding.
experts.
Drug Name (Trade or
Lufenuron (Program)
(Sentinel tablets and 
I-Lysine (Enisyl-F)
Other Names)
Lufenuron + 
Flavor Tabs)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
641
 2.75-5.55mg/kg q24h 
 po q24h for up to 5
6u
administer 1 hr prior to
Cat: 12.5mg q24h po.
Cat: not recommended.
od byog 'ssrs
5 days:
Cat: dose not 
established.
for up to 
traveling).
po
12.5, 25, 50mg 
 Formulations for 
0
dogs are rarely
 available any
50, 100mg
capsules
tablets 
longer. 
Use susceptibility testing
 effective antiemetics for
Results of clinical studies
anecdotal experiences in 
 Results of clinical studies
experience in people or 
experience in people or
anecdotal experiences in
animals. Administer with 
been reported. Use in 
been reported. Use in 
s u ss
 inhibitors to be
in animals have not
animals is based on
 a variety of stimuli.
in animals have not
 to guide therapy.
animals.
NK-1
food.
In clinical trials, there
 Salivation and musdle 
I and vomiting 
 at high doses. Avoid
recommended dose.
Adverse effects have
not been reported in 
tremors occurred in 
Adverse effects have 
animals, but adverse 
May cause some
other NSAIDs are 
effects in dogs.
Anticholinergic
may cause side
in young
some animals.
nausea a
 animals.
possible.
1asn
Neurokinin
from both central and
Action may be caused
anticholinergic actions.
 gram-negative bacilli. 
motion sickness. It is 
peripheral stimulation.
inhibitor.
laropitant acts to
 inhibiting vomiting
 antihistamine. Used 
hemotherapy and
lsomay suppress
Fluoroquinolone
 prevent vomiting 
for treatment of 
motion sickness.
 NSAID. Used for 
Pseudomonas.
Antiemetic and 
staphylococci,
 antimicrobial.
zone (CRTZ)
inflammatory
caused by
by central 
 and other 
disorders.
2
p
Meclofenamate sodium
Maropitant (Cerenia)
Meclizine (Antivert,
Marbofloxacin 
(Zeniquin)
generic)
642
APPENDIXES
1000 mcg/m? IM. Lower 
short-term sedation and 
-20 mg/kg is injected 
SC. For prostatic disease
1.1-2.2 mg/kg q7d IM. 
 750mcg/m² IV or
Dosage (unless
 analgesia.
IM,
1.0mg/mL injection 
150, 400mg/ml
Formulations
10mg tablets 
uoisuadsns
edation, analgesia, and
volume of atipamezole.
acetate may have fewer 
 Should be
versed with equal
May be used for
Clinical studies in.
megestrol acetate.
reproductive use
side effects than 
minor surgical
and effects on 
behavioral use.
procedures.s
primarily the
 02-agonists decrease
 sympathetic output.
ccur. Medetomidine 
Effects and 
will cause an initial
 polydipsia, adrenal
 depression may 
bradycardia and
Adverse effects 
 increased risk of 
ardiovascular
hypertension.
 neoplasia.
D2-adrenergic agonist.
adjunct, and analgesia.
progesterone hormone
dermatologic disorders
(such as urine spraying 
sedative, anesthetic
 acetoxyprogesterone.
 Progestin hormone.
treatment to control
for management of 
in cats and alopecia).
 animals, used as
Used primarily as
 Derivative of 
二
Medroxyprogesterone
acetate (Depo-Provera
[injection]; Provera
Medetomidine
(Domitor)
[tablets])
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
643
Dog--proestrus: 2mg/kg
dose for maintenance).
Injection: 0.2 mg/kg IV 
q24h po for
then reduce to 5mg 
Dog: 0.2mg/kg initial
q24h po for 8 days;
0.5mg/kg
behavior: 2-4 mg/kg
Cat—dermatologic 
once or twice/week;
loading dose, then 
1 mg/kg q24h po.
5mg/m² (or 0.1-
nestrus: 
10 weeks.
one time.
weeks).
m
(human) Veterinary
 5mg/mi injection 
7.5 mg tablets.
uonsuadsns leno
 5mg tablets 
 2mg tablets 
 problems is discouraged.
 0.5 mg/kg) were more
Avoid chronic use. Use
for controlling behavior 
associated with a higher
dogs, higher doses (up 
incidence of Gl adverse
is in a palatable flavor.
Used to treat multiple 
 and certain 
doses but were
pet's food.
carcinomas.
yeloma a
8
Long-term use may
related to its action 
produce adverse
effects including
 as an anticancer
myelosuppression.
increased risk of
Adverse effects
 and ulceration.
agent. Causes.
neoplasia and 
diabetes.
COx-1: COx-2 ratio. It 
sparing and has high
has been used in dogs
NSAID of the oxicam 
and cats for pain and
 Progestin hormone.
 class. Meloxicam is
 Anticancer agent.
 cyclophosphamide.
relatively COx-1-
osteoarthritis.
Metacam [veterinary
Melphalan (Alkeran)
Meloxicam (Mobic 
[human drug],
(Ovaban)
drug])
644
APPENDIXES
 Dog: 5-10mg/kg IV, IM 
. For epidural,
Variable dose for local
0.5mL of 2% solution
Cat: 3-5 mg/kg IV, IM 
q2-4h (or as needed).
Dog: 50mg/m2 q24h
reflexes are absent.
Cat: do not use.
Dogs and Cat)
needed).
po.
50, 100mg tablets; 
2% (20mg/mL)
 50mg tablets 
Formulations
 injection
 injection 
 Dosing Information and
clinical studies have not
For epidural use, do not
 Although comparative
animals, meperidine is 
considered an effective
 Used for various forms 
nalgesic in dogs and 
exceed 8mg/kg total
 epidural is 2.5-3hrs.
cancer, induding 
lymphoma. Consult 
protocol for specific
dose. Duration of
leukemia and 
Comments
duration.
regimen.
 Side effects similar to
 Many side effects are
Adverse Effects and 
cause lessiritation
marrow suppression
and anemia. Do not
 anticancer therapy
 Mepivacaine may
possible that are
 tissues than 
including bone
 other opiates.
common to
unavoidable),
Precautions
lidocaine.
use in cats
6
Local anesthetic of the 
 similar
. Medium 
 potency and duration 
 action, compared 
Antimetabolite agent
that inhibits synthesis
 activity
the potency. 75mg
f purines in cancer
 pue Abojosewieyd
/as 10mg
lidocaine, longer-
acting, but equal
Anticancer agent.
 Synthetic opioid.
primarily at the 
bupivacaine.
agonist with a
Compared to 
amide class.
Indications
morphine,
morphine.
potency
cells.
f
f
Drug Name (Trade or
Meperidine (Demerol)
6-Mercaptopurine
Other Names)
(en)
Mepivacaine
(Purinethol)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
645
Pseudomonas: 12mg/kg 
then 5-10mg per cat po
8.5mg/kg q12h 5C up 
 q8h 5C or
 44mg/kg q8h po on 
the first day, then
concentrations.
 5 and 10mg tablets 
tablets; 100mg/mL 
500mg/20mL or
500, 750mg
 injection 
injection
effective than once daily
Results of clinical studies 
been extrapolated from
 Meropenem is 
imipenem and can be
rather
 based on
replaced
 aow aq on umous sie
animals (and doses) is
based on experience in 
 administered in 
lethimazole has, for 
Twice daily dosing in
experience in animals.
in animals and not
people or anecdotal
more soluble than
injected via bolus l
maintenance dose b
Use
fluid solutions.
most part,
 cats. Adjust 
Use in cats is b
experimental :
animals.
dosing.
 uey
6
=
Risks similar to those
Meropenem does not 
injections may cause
 sedation of the CNS.
f other β-lactam 
agranulocytosis and
leukopenia. In cats,
lupuslike reactions 
vasculitis and bone
cause seizures as
slight hair loss at 
 people, it has 
 depression and 
injection site.
Causes some
 antibiotics.
imipenem.
caused
dogs.
are 
6
carbapenem antibiotic;
Antithyroid drug. Used 
f iodide into tyrosine
Used for treatment of
to serve as
relaxant. Depresses 
polysynaptic reflexes.
resistant infections
drugs. Bactericidal.
 Broad-spectrum
resistant to other
More active than
primarily in cats.
peroxidase and
 Skeletal muscle 
imipenem and 
skeletal muscle 
ertapenem.
for treating 
molecules.
Action is '
spasms.
6
Meropenem (Merrem
Methocarbamol
Methimazole 
(Robaxin-V)
(Tapazole)
{AI
646
APPENDIXES
 2.5-5 mg/m² q48h po
Dog: 0.3-0.5mg/kg 
 depends on 
Dosage (unless
once/ week IV.
(dose (
 2.5mg tablets; 2.5
Formulations 
or 25mg/ml 
injection
Use in animals has been 
anticancer protocols for 
experimental
 There is only 
precise dosage and 
Consult specific 
limited clinical
based on e
regimen.
severe methotrexate
effects that include
Anticancer drugs
 cause predictable
unavoidable) side
ukopenia, and 
 been reported in 
toxicity. Do not 
administer with
pyrimethamine,
trimethoprim, or
bone marroww
methotrexate
herapy. Drug
 sulfonamides.
teractions:
6
carcinomas, leukemia,
is also commonly used 
 antimetabolite action.
 protein synthesis. In 
rheumatoid arthritis.
Anticancer agent.
Used for various 
 and lymphomas.
DNA, RNA, and 
for autoimmune 
Action is via
dihydrofolate
that binds
Methotrexate (MTX,
Mexate, Folex,
generic)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
647
1.5mg/kg IV, slowly.
 0.22-0.44 mg/kg 
Induction: 3%
q12-24h po
% S′
once
2, 4, 8, 18,
 32 mg tablets
 inhalation 
(/b101)
1
for intoxication has been
One study demonstrated
isoflurane, sevofiurane)
 Comparison of effects
blue also was helpful in 
 Other inhalants (e.g..
experimental studies.
methylprednisolone is
corticosteroids. Dose
adjustment should be
made to account for
 methoxyflurane for 
performed only in
that acetylcysteine
produced the best 
(See dose section.)
 have replaced
 routine use.
some cats.
Use of
Methoxyflurane has
cause hepatic injury
recommendationsin
some countries state
not be administered
 Methylene blue can 
cause Heinz body
herapeutic doses
 Same as for other
causes less PU/ PD
 than prednisolone.
 animals. Drug.
methoxyflurane 
 glucocorticoids. 
Manufacturer
anesthesia.
listed here.
anemia i
h
Methylene blue acts as
intoxication. Used to
methemoglobinemia.
 Inhalant anesthetic.
drug. Compared to 
.25x more potent.
reducing agent to 
anti-inflammatory
Glucocorticoid 
 Antidote for 
hemoglobin.
 prednisolone,
educe
treat
M
Methylene blue 0.1% 
(generic, also called
new methylene blue)
Methylprednisolone
Methoxyflurane
(Metofane)
(Medrol)
648
APPENDIXES
20-40 mg/dog) IM every 
Cat: 10-20mg/cat IM 
15mg/kg in 2-6 hr,
For emergency use:
Dog: 1 mg/kg (or 
every 1-3 weeks.
Dosage (unless
tM
and 2g and 125
 20 or 40mg/mL 
suspension for 
Formulations
 for injection 
injection
Results of clinical studies
effects that persist for 
based on experience in 
 because one injection
several days to weeks.
experience in animals.
 methylprednisolone
in animals have not.
been reported. Use 
people or anecdotal
evaluated carefully
Use of
Many adverse effects
 possible from use
been associated with
 single administration;
 in cats. Chronic
methylprednisolone
heart failure) have
 acetate may cause
long-term adverse
Adverse effects are
 not expected from 
ardiovascular
Precautions
effects.
possible.
6
are
asn
a5n
For 3-4 weeks in some
glucocorticoid effects 
 methyl-prednisolone.
intraarticular therapy.
ormulation intended 
methylprednisolone,
 except that this is a
animals. Used for
 and inflammatory
treatment of shock 
IM injection site,
effect. Used for 
and CNS trauma.
Depot form of 
vater-soluble
conditions.
Same as
 acute
.6
acetate (Depo-Medrol)
Methylprednisolone
Methylprednisolone
(Solu-Medrol)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
69
1.0mg/kg/hr have been
CRI: loading.
Cat: 2.5-5 mg/cat 
q24-48h po.
used.
10, 25mg tablets 
10, 5mg tablet; 
1 mg/mL oral 
injection
Testosterone
yeterinary medicine. Use
has not been evaluated
Most use is for general
 prevent vomiting during
 experiences in people.
based on experience in 
 also Testosterone
experience in animals.
kg have been used to
is based primarily on 
 cancer chemotherapy.
 propionate. Use of
 in clinical studies in
 in animals have not
animals (and doses)
jeople or anecdotal
antiemetic purposes,
Use
cypionate,
See
1
androgenic action of
dogs. Masculinization 
caused by excessive
 occur in female.
 possible in male
more common with
primarily related to 
acepromazine) have
receptors. Adverse
behavioral changes.
effects similar to
been reported, in 
/ Gl obstruction.
effects 
I methylated 
dopaminergic
testosterone.
formulations.
Adverse 
can
8
3
testosterone hormone
Testosterone has been 
receptors and enhance
 Anabolic androgenic
anabolic actions or
replacement therapy
: is not effective for 
tract. Action is to
 Gl tract. Used
gastroparesis and 
agent. Used for
 erythropoiesis.
Prokinetic drug.
Centrally acting
(androgenic
deficiency).
primarily for
ation.
Methyltestosterone
(Android, generic)
(Reglan, Maxolon)
Metoclopramide
650
APPENDIXES
(1/3 tablet per cat) q24h
-25 mg/kg q24h po.
Dog: (2.6-5 mcg/kg/day
2 mg/kg q8h po; cat:
For anaerobes—dog:
: 23-45.3kg,
:6op-
Cat: safe dose not 
Dogs and Cat)
for 8 days.
established.
180 mcg.
5
8
250, 500mg tablet; 
benzoate = 12.4 mg 
/6wis uoisuadsns 
must be obtained
 metronidazole 
metronidazole.
 55 mcg/mL oral 
 Formulations
 available
50 mg/mL
 solution 
10u
.6
Metronidazole is one of 
pigoaeue ioj shnup pasn
metronidazole benzoate.
initiated 30 days prior to
 Dosing Information and 
quinacrine. CNS toxicity 
hould be administered
palatability is a problem
onset of estrus. It is not 
fective for giardiasis,
laximum dose that
any species. Aithough
 or crushed for
Treatment ordinarily is
 used for 
 cats, they find these
recommended to be 
used for more than 2
ral administration t
dose-related.
bendazole,
Comments
broken 
other (
years.
心
n
Adverse Effects and 
Most severe adverse
recommended doses,
tablets unpalatable.
perianal adenoma or
be mutagenic. Fetal
bitches show clitoral 
doses have caused
depression, ataxia,
but use cautiously
demonstrated in 
Do not use with 
enlargement or 
lethargy, CNS
Do not use in 
recautions
animals with
weakness.
been 
use in cats.
at may
not 
however, other drugs,
such as fenbendazole,
metabolite. Action is
bacteria. Resistance
 pue Abojoeweyd
rare. Active against 
have been used for 
vith intracellular
 Androgenic steroid.
 Antibacterial and 
Used to suppress
Disrupts DNA i
some protozoa,
antiprotozoal
Indications
Giardia.
estrus.
6
3
Drug Name (Trade or
Metronidazole (Flagyl
Mibolerone (Cheque 
Other Names)
Metronidazole 
benzoate 
Drops)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
651
endoparasites: 0.5mg/kg 
tworm and
2.0mg/kg every 30 days
 5-12.5mg/kg q12h po 
endoparasite control, 
 Dog: microfilaricide:
every 30 days po.
and control of 
Cat: for heart
po.
2
2.3, 5.75, 11.5, and
50, 75 and 100mg
10mg/mL oral 
suspension
Minocycline has received 
 properties are similar to
Demodex
administered daily. See
use in North America.
 Clinical use has not
 milbemycin oxime.
been reported, but 
 also Lufenuron + 
Treatment of 
 doxycycline.
cross the blood-brain
barrier and produce 
coma). At doses used
Adverse effects have
 susceptible dogs
effect is less likely.
not been reported
 absorption is not
other tetracyclines.
milbemycin may.
 Similar to other 
products as with
prevention, this 
(collie breeds),
CNS toxicosis 
tetracyclines
(doxycycline).
preventative, miticide,
Tetracycline antibiotic.
 Similar to doxycycline.
whipworms. At high
Antiparasitic drug.
ivermectin. Acts as
doses, it has been
infections in dogs.
parasite. Used as 
Used to control 
neartworm
infections of
Interceptor Flavor Tabs,
hydrochloride (Minocin
Milbemycin oxime
and SafeHeart)
Minocycline
Solodyn)
652
APPENDIXES
Dog—for PDH: 50mg/
Cat: 6.5mg/m2 IV every
Dogs and Cat)
kg/week po.
 2mg/mL injection 
 500 mg tablets 
 Formulations 
 Dosing Information and 
absorption. Maintenance 
Consult specific protocol 
 the basis of periodic
jenui buunp uowuon
measurements
and ACTH stimulation
 Cat usually have
 Dose and frequency
Adverse effects are
mitotane treatment.
mitoxantrone usually
often are based on
 anticancer protocol.
follows a specific
 Proper use of
Comments
tests.
6
6
depression, vomiting.
.g., hydrocortisone
minimize side effects.
 As with all anticancer 
 Adverse Effects and 
 prednisolone) may
action. Mitoxantrone 
 effects are 
 include lethargy.
upplementation 
unavoidable, and 
myelosuppression,
and Gl upset, but
Adverse effects,
especially during
induction period,
 anorexia, ataxia,
Precautions
 predictable, 
may be less
 doxorubicin
produces
agents,
adverse
2
6
adrenal cortex. Used 
 and pituitary-
leukemia, lymphoma,
 pue Abojosewieyd
 action. Used for 
to treat adrenal 
and carcinomas.
Adrenocortical
Indications
tumors a
Drug Name (Trade or
Mitotane (o,p'-DDD)
Other Names)
Mitoxantrone
hydrochloride
(Novantrone)
(Lysodren)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
653
IM, sC (dose is escalated
followed by 0.1 mg/kgy
Cat: 0.1 mg/kg IM, SC
vention: 3mcg/kg
Demodex: 400mcg/kgy
Dog: 0.1-1 mg/kg IV,
provide consistent 
heartworm 
25-300 mcg/kg.
1-22 weeks
Dog-
#
忆
injection; 30, 60mg
I and 15mg/mL 
30, 68, 136mcg 
mL cattle pouron
delayed-release
tablets 
administration has been 
caution is recommended 
 (0.1-0.25 mg/kg)
equine formulation is
Effects from morphine 
dose-dependent. Low
analgesia
Higher doses (up to
nd sedation. Usually
unreliable. Epidural
ivermectin. Extreme
u asn
administration are
small animals. Toxic
because the equine
inconsistent and
 Similar use as
considered for 
lorphine is
 concentrated.
procedures.
sasop
Like all opiates, side 
 more sensitive to
Toxicity may occur at
administration. Cat 
difficulty with vision,
unavoidable. Side
high doses and in 
ermectin crosses
blood-brain barrier
constipation, and
occurs
excitement than 
 species in which
 and signs indude
coma, and death.
predictable and 
include sedation,
I doses.
morphine are
administration
and
 other species. 
(collie breeds).
effects from 
effects from 
radycardia.
vith chronic
morphine
espiratory
a
Toler an
are
6
2
inhibit release of some
Neurotoxic to parasites
and inhibit release of
(μ-receptor effects in 
ectoparasites, as well 
analgesic. Prototype 
agonists. Action of
receptors on nerves 
neurotransmitters
mediators. Central
(μ- and k-opiate 
effects related to
Antiparasitic drug.
'asuobe pioido
for other opioid 
involved wwith
substance P).
heartvworm
endo- and 
prevention.
brain.
form: ProHeart; equine
oral gel: Quest; cattle
Moxidectin (canine 
Morphine sulfate
pour-on: Cydectin)
(generic)
654
APPENDIXES
Dog: 10mg/kg q8h po.
 0.01-0.04 mg/kg IV, IM,
10mg/kg q24h po
Dogs and Cat)
Cat: no dose 
reverse opiate
established.
 20 or 400 mcg/ml 
 250mg capsule 
 400 mg tablet 
 Formulations
injection
Administration may have
 Dosing Information and 
Mycophenolate is used 
sauoxolen sueled ypea
short in animals (60min)
recommendations are
 some patients that
annot tolerate other 
based on response in
duration of action is 
and may have to be
immunosuppressive
from
be individualized
based primarily on 
cyclophosphamide.
limited clinical
experience and 
human studies.
extrapolation 
Comments
Doses and
repeated.
8
Adverse Effects and 
vomiting) have been
effects reported. Use
 increased spectrum
 anaerobic bacteria,
expected from oral 
ledicine has been 
Adverse effects are
hypertension have
 Similar to those 
fluoroquinolones.
Tachycardia and
 been reported in 
 Because of the 
gastrointestinal
 action on
veterinary
not reported.
recautions
greater Gl 
other
's6op
people.
rare.
6
E
Used to reverse effects
from opiate agonists 
adverse effects caused
antibiotic of the new
except with greater
anaerobic bacteria.
is used to suppress 
transplantation and 
(such as morphine).
 reverse sedation,
 pue Abojosewieyd
fluoroquinolones,
 gram-positive and 
 Mycophenolate is
immune-mediated
 See Gold sodium
Opiate antagonist.
 Fluoroquinolone
(4th) generation
Similar to other 
for treatment of 
 anesthesia, and
metabolized to 
immunity for 
from opiates.
Indications
thiomalate.
diseases.
Drug Name (Trade or
Moxifloxacin (Avelox)
Mycophenolate (Cell 
Naloxone (Narcan)
Other Names)
Myochrysine
(da)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
655
Cat: 1 mg/kg/week IM.
q12h po.
50, 100, 200mg/ml
 50mg tablets 
injection
 Treatment for obsessive-
 Results of clinical studies
compulsive disorders in 
 based on experience in
 experience in animals.
 in animals have not.
Use
animals has been
reported with
may be high.
 Adverse effects have
not been reported in 
harmacologic action 
 anabolic steroids can
effects are common.
 of some tumors has
f these steroids.
been reported in 
 animals.
people.
6
 compulsive behavioral
minimizing androgenic
used for treatment of
opiae antagoite.
naloxone,
catabolic conditions,
maximize anabolic
agents have been 
increasing weight
some obsessive- 
Anabolic steroid.
 gain, increasing
Derivative of
effects while 
erythropoiesis.
acting and 
 disorders.
Nandrolone decanoate 
Naltrexone (Trexan)
(Deca-Durabolin)
656
APPENDIXES
Dog: 5 mg initially, then
10-20mg/kg q6-12h po
Cat: not recommended.
2mg/kg q48h po.
,500mg
25mg/mL
 500mg bolus;
 200mg/ml oral
 220mg tablet
 Formulations
tablets (Rx)
:(010)
 Results of clinical studies 
use the tablet size is 
pharmacokinetic studies
 caution when using
used for oral treatment
this indication (especially
 hepatic encephalopathy.
animals (and doses) is
220mg
 OTC formulation 
designed for people.
equivalent to 200 mg
Neomycin is primarily
 in animals have not
naproxen sodium is
questionable.
dose for dogs.
asedon
naproxen.
caus
much
Use
the 
n
f
has produced serious
absorption is so small
effects attributed to
adverse
some oral absorption 
(calves). Alterations 
in intestinal bacterial
NSAIDs. Naproxen
effects are unlikely.
may cause diarrhea.
people or horses.
demonstrated in
Gl toxicity are
 slower than in 
young animals
has been 
Systemic absorption is
 NSAID. Action is via
 prostaglandins. Used 
antibiotic. Neomycin 
administered only
minimal from oral 
for treatment of
Aminoglycoside
aminoglycosides
topically or orally.
(e.g.,. arthritis).
inhibition of
because it is 
absorption.
Naproxen (Naprosyn,
[naproxen sodium]]
Neomycin (Biosol)
Naxen, Aleve
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
657
, then 1mgy
1 mg/kg, po, daily as
10 mg/kg/day divided
needed to kill fleas
into four daily
kg at night po 
 ml oral suspension
Macrodantin and
capsules;
Tablet: 11.4 or 
100 mg tablets;
150, 300mg 
capsules
57 mg
Results of clinical studies
Administer with food to
Nizatidine and ranitidine
Do not use in dogs or 
Two dosing forms exist.
causes less Gl irritation.
based on experience in 
less than 4 weeks of 
.5
experience in animals.
emptying and colonic
increase absorption.
 animals have not
been reported. Use
animals (and doses)
people or anecdotal
stimulate gastric
anticholinesterase
and completely 
lacrocrystalline
slowly absorbed 
motility via 
absorbed.
activity.
age.
凸
.0
No adverse reactions
 are reported. t was 
. Turns urine
 nizatidine have not 
which up to 10x
color rust-yellovw
 Side effects from
 been reported in 
Adverse effects
include nausea,
brown. Do not
 administered.
pregnancy.
dose was
diarrhea.
 animals.
 Antiparasitic drugs. It
rapidly kills adult fleas.
for systemic infections.
Histamine Hz blocking 
cimetidine, except up 
Action is via reactive
: 10x more potent.
I stomach. Used for
Antibacterial drug.
reached only in the 
ulcers and gastritis.
metabolites that
drug. Same as
Therapeutic
 Nilenpyram (Capstar)
(Macrodantin, Furalan,
Furatoin, Furadantin,
Nizatidine (Axid)
Nitrofurantoin
and generic)
658
APPENDIXES
 Dog: 20mg/dog q24h
2.5 to 7.5mg/kg q24h
22 mg/kg q12h po 
Cat: 0.5-0.7 mg/kg
Dogs and Cat)
q24h, po.
 20mg capsules and
 400mg tablets
 Formulations
equine paste 
 68 mg tablets
6.n
 account for susceptibility
 Dosing Information and 
accumulation in gastric
 experience in people,
ecdotal experience i
 Use in animals (and 
 Due to omeprazole's 
hould be guided by
 is based on 
 susceptibility tests.
cells, infrequent 
administration is
potency and
Comments
 animals.
possible.
(5a50p
 Adverse effects have
effects are expected
 be similar to cipro/
 Adverse Effects and 
 interactions: Do not
 on stomach acid for
bunjwoA pue 
drugs that depend
animals. Blindness in
reported with doses
May cause some.
animals. Some 
administer with 
administration.
 animals. Drug
 in young.
Precautions
enrofloxacin 
nausea 
a5n
spectrum of activity is
 Proton pump inhibitor.
ciprofloxacin, except.
with
gastric acid secretion 
pump. Omeprazole is
and prevention of Gl 
gram-negative bacili,.
pue Aogosed
longer acting than 
antisecretory drugs.
Used for treatment
antimicrobial. Same
antibacterial drug.
Fluoroquinolone
 as broad as 
Fluoroquinolone
enrofloxacin and 
most available
 See Mitotane.
mechanism as
ciprofloxacin.
staphylococci,
Pseudomonas.
Indications
ciprofloxacin
and some 
ulcers.
not
Drug Name (Trade or
Norfloxacin (Noroxin)
Omeprazole (Prilosec)
Orbifloxacin (Orbax)
Other Names)
O,p-DDD
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
659
-0.02mg/
q12h;20mg/kg q12h po
Analgesia: 0.1-0.2 mg/
-2h;
 22-40mg/kg q8h po 
needed), redose with
preanesthetic: 0.025-
acepromazine) IM, SC.
1-5 mg/kg q24h po 
(with or without
IV, SC, IM (as
7.5-10mg/kg IV
1.5 and 1 mg/mL 
 250mg tablets;
250, 500mg 
 oral solution 
Use is based primarily on  50mg tablets 
 injection 
 injection 
clinical efficacy studies
 There is some evidence 
that oxymorphone may 
anecdotal experience.
compared to morphin
available for dogs or 
cardiovascular effects
readily absorbed from
Oral dose forms are
extrapolation from
On saipnis ueuny
lipophilic, it i
epidural injection.
Use of injectable 
Doses based on
empiricism or
small animals.
fewer
possible.
have
more
 Produces androgenic
 Same adverse effects
 penicillinlike drugs.
 and precautions as
Generally safe. Use 
 cautiously in young
Use cautiously in 
 animals allergic to
 injury is possible.
precautions for 
 animals. See 
tetracycline.
 morphine.
Trimethoprimlike drug
 gram-positive bacteria,
Anabolic steroid. See
S in efficacy
Opioid agonist. Action
is similar to morphine,
morphine and 10-15x
Tetracycline antibiotic.
used in combination
(β-lactam antibiotic.
Oxytetracycline may
more potent than 
wall synthesis.
staphylococci.
lipophilic than 
(See Primor.)
spectrum as 
differences
tetracycline.
especially
morphine.
steroids).
Oxacillin (Prostaphlin 
sulfadimethoxine 
Ormetoprim + 
Oxymetholone
Oxymorphone
Oxytetracycline
and generic)
hydrochloride
(Numorphan)
(Terramycin)
(Anadrol)
099
APPENDIXES
Dog: 0.5mg/kg q24h
10 mg tablet q24h po.
Cat: 1/8 to 1/4 of a 
 24,000 U/kg q48h IM 
 20,000-40,000 U/kg
20,000-40,000 U/kg
q6-8h Iv or IM 
Dogs and Cat)
q12-24h IM 
po.
 5-20 million U vials 
150,000 U/mL of
 Formulations 
150,000 U/mL
300,000 U/ml 
suspension 
 Dosing Information and 
 recommendations are 
concentrations are too
low to be therapeutic.
See other penicillins.
penicillins (amoxicillin)
procaine penicillin G.
against most small
animal pathogens.
Same as for other
therapy because
Comments
 empirical.
Dosing
Adverse Effects and 
 fluoxetine, but in 
paroxetine is better 
 Same as for other 
 Same as for other 
 Same as for other 
 penicillins (see
 Precautions
Amoxicillin).
tolerated.
 penicillins.
 penicillins.
 procaine penicilin G in 
luoxetine (Prozac) in
obsessive-compulsive
 Spectrum of penicillin 
 Same as other forms
 pue Abojoseweyd
reuptake inhibitor
β-lactam antibiotic.
absorbed slowly,
concentrations for
See Pralidoxime
(SSRI) much like
action. Used for
other penicillins.
 All benzathine
 combined with
is limited to
12-24hr after
Indications
commercial
formulation.
chloride.
problems.
Action is s
producing 
injection.
G
Penicillin G benzathine
Penicillin G potassium;
Drug Name (Trade or
(Benza-Pen and other 
Penicillin G procaine 
sodium
Paroxetine (Paxil)
(many brands)
Other Names)
Penicillin G
(generic)
2-PAM
names)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
661
Dog--10mg/kg q12h 
Cat: 1/4 of a 400mg
 od ygb by/bwi01 saqen 6w00s '057 
0.2-1.0mg/kg/hr
for most animals.
po.
400 mg tablets 
 50 mg/mL 
Results of clinical studies
penicillins (amoxicillin).
Penicillin V should be
maximum absorption
 experience in animals.
empty stomach for 
narrow therapeutic
in animals have not
 Same as for other.
Pentobarbital has
gradually, until
lex. Wwhen
achieved.
Nausea and vomiting
 cats,
 Same as for other
Adverse effects are
action. Cardiac and 
 May cause similar
 people. when 
broken tablet is 
 administered to
penicillins (see
depression is
 signs as other
Amoxicillin).
the taste is 
unpleasant.
 common.
Pentobarbital usually is
 other
 barbiturate anesthetic.
 control severe 
have anti-inflammatory
action via inhibition of
Used in dogs for some 
(dermatomyositis) and
10N
pue
penicillin derivatives.
3liadhsaqe
 narrow spectrum in.
 Pentoxifylline is used 
heological agent in 
nonselective CNS 
Duration of action 
other penicilins.
may be 3-4 hrs.
Methylxanthine.
Oral penicillin.
 Short-acting
Action is via
depression.
AI
dermatoses
vasculitis.
used as
Used to
E
1
(Nembutal and sodium 
Penicillin V (Pen-Vee)
Pentoxifylline (Trental)
Pentobarbital
generic)
662
APPENDIXES
Cat: 2-4mg/kg q12h po
administer in increments
Cat: 6-8mg/kg q12h IV
of 10-20mg/kg IV (to
q8-12h (44mg/kg/day)
Dog: 2-8mg/kg q12h 
po or IV (800 mg/dog 
Status epilepticus:
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
maximum).
effect).
po.
100, 200, 400mg 
oral elixir solution
and 130mg/mL
1 g tablets;
 Formulations
 Dosing Information and 
adjusted via monitoring
recommendations and
 Phenobarbital doses
 should be carefully 
joj abuei wnwndo 
 effect is
 clinical experience.
 Doses are based
 concentrations.
manufacturer's
serum/plasma
Comments
primarily on 
 Phenobarbital causes
 sedation
some dogs receiving
administer injectable
causes bone marrow
which also is possible
Adverse Effects and
Adverse effects are
 ataxia, and lethargy.
but there is no data
effects after initial
Hepatotoxicity has
 Phenylbutazone is 
fects possible are
I toxicity. Do not
to side
formulation IM.
Precautions
dose-related.
 polyphagia, 
high doses.
develops
nerapy.
in dogs.
工
 Phenobarbital's major
inhibitory actions of
arthritis and various
musculoskeletal pain
 Pharmacology and 
 anticonvulsant, in
 Phenylbutazone is
used primarily for
 and inflammation.
NSAID. Inhibits 
prostaglandin 
Indications
 synthesis.
forms of
GABA.
Phenobarbital (Luminal 
Drug Name (Trade or 
Phenylbutazone
(Butazolidin and 
Other Names)
generic)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
899
 Dog: 1mg/kg, q12h, po
1.5-2.0mg/
kg as needed, q8h, po.
 q8h po or 10mg/kg
 40mg/kg IV or IM q6h
 Dog: (Antiepileptic)
 over 5min.
Increase to1
capsules; 50mg/ml
 25mg/mL oral 
30, 100mg.
injection and 
 suspension 
solution 
Because of short half-life
has been removed from
nticonvulsants are used 
refrigerated). Piperacillin 
 Phenylpropanolamine
Reconstituted solution 
. first choice before
should be used within 
safety in cats, other
formulations. Only
formulations are
 combined with 
tazobactam (β.
phenytoin.
available.
Zosyn.
adrenergic (α and β)
appetite suppression.
 se suonnenad aes
Adverse effects are 
ssaoxa o painque
 tachycardia,
 effects, CNS
 other injectable 
restlessness, and 
 pregnant animals.
. Side 
Adverse effects:
reactions, CNS
toxicity. Do not 
stimulation of 
administer to 
excitement, 
 penicillins.
cardiac e
for
Used as decongestant, 
 (β-lactam antibiotic of
the acylureidopenicillin 
Denicilins, except with
 mild bronchodilator, 
 and to increase tone
 Adrenergic agonist.
 of urinary sphincter.
blockade of sodium 
dlassified as dlass 1
Commonly used as 
Depresses nerve
anticonvulsant in
not used in cats.
Anticonvulsant.
conduction via
Also
Pseudomonas
nannels.
 Phenytoin (Dilantin)
 Piperacillin (Pipracil)
(Proin PPA,
Propalin syrup)
PPA)
664
APPENDIXES
Cat: 0.3mg/kg q24h po.
Antihypercalcemic (dog
(slow infusion) over
q24h IV (slow infusion)
 Dog: 0.3mg/kg q48h
(dog): 25-30mcg/kg
Otherwise Indicated,
Dose Is the Same for
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
for 8-10 days.
10 mg capsules 
 Results of clinical studies  2.5 mg injection 
Formulations
 Dosing Information and 
conditions, but there are
reports of its activity for
 treating certain tumors
carcinoma of bladder).
animals (and doses) is
 based on experience in
Piroxicam is primarily
used to treat arthritis
 experience in animals.
 people or anecdotal 
musculoskeletal
and other 
dogs. Adverse effects 
 Adverse effects have
hypocalcemia and Gl
. May cause
 Drug interactions: Do
 Effects and 
 Flunixin meglumine.
animals. In people,
toxicity have been 
shnp yi asn nou
piroxicam is slow;
use cautiously in
are primarily Gl
 anticoagulants).
 Elimination of 
recautions
Adverse 
reported.
NSAIDs. Piroxicam has
f divalent cations and
osteodlasts to decrease
 NSAID of the oxicam
 Desmopressin acetate.
inhibit DNA and RNA
.May
nave direct action on
class. Prostaglandin
pasn
 Pharmacology and 
carcinoma in dogs.
Anticancer agent.
Lowers
similar to other
been used for 
transitional cell 
treatment of 
hypercalcemia.
Indications
synthesis.
6
Piroxicam (Feldene and 
Plicamycin (old name is
Drug Name (Trade or
Other Names)
Pitressin (ADH)
mithramycin)
(Mithracin)
generic)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
665
 20mg/kg q8-12h; initial 
Il dose): <6.8kg: 
e 25mg/kg q8h po for 
or
: 5mg/kg IM 
once; >1.8kg: 5mg/kg
Cat (injection): 5 mg/kg 
Paragon imus infection 
 4.4mg/kg IM, twice
dose IV slow, or IM
once;
Cat (oral dosage):
once;:
.3kg:
IM or sc.
Weeks
D?
100 mg/mL injection
 50 mg/mL injection 
in 5mL vial (for
horses, vials are
250mg/ml)
 injection 
 poison control center for 
 Doses are derived from 
r acute arthritis, may
and clinical studies in
chronic arthropathy.
intoxication, consult 
based on label dose
precise guidelines.
When treating
 manufacturer.
 supplied by 
 PSGAG has
 Adverse effects have
Adverse effects are 
and may potentiate
 not been reported.
diarrhea have been
 Safe in
 pregnant animals.
rare. Allergic
reactions are
 some animals.
and transient
possible.F
reported.
constituents of healthy
may degrade articular
Used for treatment of
neuromuscular toxicity
alcium. Used primarily
prevent degenerative
caused by tapeworms.
weight compounds 
primarily to treat or 
Action on parasites
 similar to normal.
organophosphate
Large molecular
cartilage. Used
and paralysis via
joint disease.
related to 
toxicosis.
joints.
北
 Praziquantel (Droncit)
(PSGAG) (Adequan
 Pralidoxime chloride
(2-PAM) (Protopam)
glycosaminoglycan
Polysulfated 
Canine)
999
APPENDIXES
 Dog (cats often require 
Shock: 15-30mg/kg IV
CNS trauma: 15-30mg/
 Dog convert prednisone
 q12-24h' Iv, IM, po
initially, then taper to
2.2-6.6 mg/kg/day IV,
 prednisolone, and
-anti-
immunosuppressive:
taper to 2-4mg/kg 
(repeat in 4-6 hr).
Dogs and Cat)
prednisone to
prednisolone.
day po.
q12h.
q48h;
66
2
 5 and 20mg tablets 
100, 200mg vials 
 for injection (10
,2.5, 5, 10, 20,
 and 50 mg/mL)
 25, and 50mg 
solution (in 5%
 Formulations
1 mg/mL oral
alcohol)
prednisolone. In cats use
Dosing Information and 
 Doses for prednisolone
 Although shock doses
underlying condition.
 are listed, efficacy for
treatment of shock is
questionable.
 Same as for 
prednisolone.
Comments
Adverse Effects and 
/ may lead to 
Adverse effects are
not expected from 
 Adverse effects are
All glucocorticoids
unavoidable) side 
(and sometimes
effects. Chronic 
ver, with
 prednisolone.
recautions
 for
possible.
 same as
howev
prednisolone, except
therapy when high IV
prednisolone, except
 soluble formulation 
 pue Abojosewieyd
intended for acute 
treatment of shock 
anti-inflammatory
doses are needed
 and CNS trauma.
Glucocorticoid
drug. Potency
 administration,
 Same as for
 Same as for
.S
converted to
prednisolone
Indications
that this is a
prednisone i
that, after 
cortisol.
Prednisone (Deltasone 
Drug Name (Trade or
Prednisolone (Delta-
Prednisolone sodium 
(Solu-Delta-Cortef)
Cortef and many 
Other Names)
and generic;
succinate
injection)
others)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
667
followed by 13.5mg/kg 
 0.2-0.4mg/kg q6-8h IV, 
 27mg/kg on first day.
maximum dose of 
 11 mg/kg q12h po 
IM, po (up to a
q24h po
mg/kg)
Combination tablet 
sulf adimethoxine)
 50mg
 50 and 100mg
mL injection 
tablets 
12
Results of clinical studies
 once-daily
Doses listed are based 
demonstrated efficacy
based on experience in 
Controlled trials have 
n.s
 experience in animals.
in animals have not 
people or anecdotal 
Use
of
for treatment (
 methimazole.
schedule.
been associated with
include sedation and
effects are possible in
 CNS adverse effects.
 Both phenothiazine
Adverse effects in 
hemolytic anemia,
immune-mediated 
 Several adverse
Ormetoprim has
Adverse effects
 anticholinergic
 and other signs c
reported from 
 sulfonamides.
antimuscarinic
some patients.
effects and
cats indlude
disease.
reductase, sulfonamide
synthesis of
antibacterial spectrum 
Medroxyprogesterone
bacteriostatic. Broad
 Phenothiazine with
 strong antihistamine
 Antibacterial drug.
 and active against 
 and as antiemetic
(motion sickness).
 Antithyroid drug.
 methimizole, PTU
competes with 
some coccidia.
nucleic acids.
Bactericidal/
(PABA) for
acetate.
effects.
T3.
See
 Primor (ormetoprim +
Progesterone, repositol
 Propylthiouracil (PTU)
sulfadimethoxine)
Promethazine 
Propyl-Thyracil)
(Phenergan)
(Primor)
(generic,
668
APPENDIXES
 5mg/kg q12-24h po or 
Dog: 2 mg/kg q8h IV, 
3.5mg/kg q12h po.
 5-15 mg/kg q24h po 
Dogs and Cat)
po.
75, 150, 300mg
Formulations 
tablets; 150, 
150, 300mg
Rifadin IV
secretion. Ranitidine may
Results of clinical studies
 Dosing Information and
 auipnjuei jeun sisab6ns
based on experience in
may be administered
cimetidine to achieve
.5
perience in animals.
 intracellular infections.
animals (and doses)
id-soluble and has 
stimulate stomach
 animals have not
anticholinester ase
fampin is highly
been used to treat
 Pharmacokinetic 
of stomach acid
less often than
Comments
motility via
action.
Adverse Effects and 
 Ranitidine may have 
hypersensitivity and
drug interactions are
endocrine function
 Adverse effects not 
possible. Induces 
 corticosteroids.
 Precautions
iteractions, 
barbiturates,
 and drug
compared 
cimetidine.
.n
 Antibacterial. Action is
4-10x more potent 
 See Isotretinoin and 
Spectrum of action 
Used in
 people primarily for
 pue Abojosewieyd
 cimetidine except 
and longer acting.
 inhibit bacterial
bacteria include
Histamine H2-
 See Vitamin A.
streptococci.
treatment of 
Indications
Vitamin A
tuberculosis.
hydrochloride (Zantac)
Drug Name (Trade or
Rifampin (Rifadin)
Other Names)
Ranitidine
Retinoids 
Retinol
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
699
 maximum of 2mg/kg 
months, increase dose
 6-12 mg/kg topically
response within 2
 every 30 days
q24h po.
 5, 10, 15, and 
 Available in six 
 separate dose
 strengths
in dogs 6 weeks of age
selegiline controlled the
 Recommended for use 
 or older and in cats 8
weeks of age or older.
 In the multicenter trial
performed by Deprenyl
hyperadrenocorticism.
However, other 
as low as 20%
dogs with
at or near the site of
Adverse effects have 
not been reported in 
 experimental animals.
rved
(doses >3mg/kg). Do
lethargy, salivation,
hyperactivity
has been observed
not use with other
MAO-inhibitors or
 serotonin reuptake.
Transient localized
Other signs obsen
rarely included Gl 
amphetaminelike 
dogs. However, 
At high doses in.
observed in 
 can be
produced in
su615
's6op
 primarily used to treat
 dopamine in CNS.
levodopa). In dogs, it
hyperadrenocorticism
 and to treat cognitive
 Topical parasiticide
 specific monoamine
Parkinson's disease
neurodegenerative
pituitary-dependent 
 Action is to inhibit 
combination with
 and heartworm 
In people, it is
 See Aspirin.
prevention.
 and other 
diseases (in 
dogs.
0.4
 Selamectin (Revolution)
Selegiline (Anipryl [also
known as deprenyi and
dose form is Eldepryl)
L-deprenyl]; human 
Salicylate
670
APPENDIXES
Maintenance: 3-6% to 
po;25 mg/cat/week IM.
dicated,
Dose Is the Same for
Cat: 1 mg/cat q12h
 30 mg/kg/day po
Dogs and Cat)
Induction: 8%
effect.
 Silymarin tablets are
formulations (Marin)
and vitamin E in a
phosphatidylcholine
Commercial
zinc
 dogs and cats.
widely available
 Formulations
100mL bottle 
veterinary
V10
05le
 Dosing Information and 
be variable content and
Monitor liver enzymes in
 Silymarin is available in 
 treated animals.
several dietary
Comments
products.
No adverse reactions
Adverse Effects and
Action and adverse
have been reported.
effects with chronic
cats being at higher 
effects similar to
increased risk of
other inhalant 
 Stanozolol will
Precautions
anesthetics.
risk.
It is
七
 Inhalant anesthetic.
 Silymarin, contains 
silybin as the most 
 also known as Milk
 derived. Silymarin 
 Pharmacology and 
active ingredient.
used to decrease
 negative nitrogen
intihepatotoxic
Indications
 mixture of 
Silybum).
Stanozolol (Winstrol-V)
Drug Name (Trade or
Marin, “milk thistle")
Silymarin (Silybin,
Other Names)
 Sevoflurane 
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
671
(loading dose), followed
by 50mg/kg q12h IV, po
 sulfadiazine section for
Cat: 0.25 g q8-12h po.
Mesalamine, Olsalazine).
Cat: 20mg/kg q12h po.
Dog: 0.5-1 g q8-12h 
100mg/kg IV, po
(see Trimethoprim
 additional dosing).
po.
 oral suspension 
500mg tablets and 
120, 240, 480 and 
 trimethoprim—
available as 30,
 500 mg tablets 
sulf adiazine
(although
not been clinical trials of
produce a synergistic 
combination with dietary
 There have
 treatment of idiopathic
recommendations are 
Usually, sulfonamides
are combined with
 Sucralfate may be
based largely on
concurrently with
nethoprim or
 Usually used for
hibitors (e.g..
colitis, often in.
empiricism.
administered
cimetidine).
Dosing
therapy.
effect.
trime
 Adverse effects have 
fluoroquinolones and 
sulfonamides include 
decrease absorption
hypothyroidism (with 
administered drugs 
keratoconjunctivitis
Adverse effects are
Keratoconjunctivitis
 been reported.
/stemically. Drug
 Sucralfate may
Adverse effects
associated with
ypersensitivity,
I attributed to
 absorbed 
helation with
pe Il and I
interactions:
sulfonamide 
component. 
aluminum.
ctions.
reported.
(e.g...
110u
10N
ot
9
rea
司
sucralfate may act as a
 Sulfonamides compete
with PABA for enzyme
ulcerated tissue in Gl 
tract to aid healing of
ulcers. There is some 
 Used for treatment of 
 protectant. Antiulcer 
bacteria. Synergistic
 Sulfonamide + anti-
 colitis. sulfonamide
with trimethoprim.
(mesalamine) has
 anti-inflammatory
Gastric mucosa
agent. Action of
some protozoa.
has little effect, 
landin
 Bacteriostatic.
prostagl
effects.
(Azulfidine [Salazopyrin 
Sulfadiazine (generic,
combined with
trimethoprim in 
mesalamine)
Sulfasalazine
in Canada])
Tribrissen)
672
APPENDIXES
Human dose
: 10-20mg/kg po.
Cat: 30-40 mg/kg po
Veterinary dose not
is 10mg q12h po.
Cat: safe dose not
Dogs and Cat)
po thereafter.
established.
established.
Wweeks.
(tamoxifen citrate)
(Zydis freeze-dried
 250mg tablets, 
Formulations 
10mg tablets 
 topical cream 
tablet)
 Dosing Information and 
r protocols for 
 When switching animals
from another NSAID or
 established in
Doses used in dogs and
tepoxalin, allow 7-day 
safely of tepoxalin has 
cats much higher than 
 those used in humans.
doses and regimens.
 Long-term
Consult specific 
 corticosteroid to
Comments
washout.
not been e
cats.
the clinical trials have
: Effects and 
Adverse effects have 
 not been thoroughly
reported. Do not use
 pregnant animals.
 Reacts with antiulcer 
 adverse effects from
reported in animals.
: tamoxifen 
 increased
Drug interactions:
, vomiting,
documented in 
Gl-related
Most common 
Vomiting and 
 Hepatotoxicity 
recautions
Adverse E
(nausea,
diarrhea).
anorexia.
people,
causing
drugs.
been
pain and inflammation 
lipoxygenase-inhibiting
receptor blocker. Also
prostaglandins), which
Nonsteroid estrogen
 treatment for certain 
 Used to treat
active metabolite has
 pue Abojosewieyd
normone (Gn-RH).
Used as adjunctive 
 dermatophytes and 
effects. Tamoxifen 
may also increase
effects (decreases
cydlooxygenase-
inhibiting effects
is longer acting.
 effective against 
osteoarthritis.
Tepoxalin has 
Indications
release of 
decreases
Malassezia.
tumors.
hydrochloride (Lamisil)
Drug Name (Trade or
Tamoxifen citrate 
Tepoxalin (Zubrin)
Other Names)
(Nolvadex)
Terbinafine
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
Testosterone cypionate
2-4
weeks IM (see also
Methyltestosterone).
1-2 mg/kg every 
week IM.
200 mg/mL injection 
capsules; 100mg/
cypionate 100,
 mL suspension 
Testosterone
Testosterone 
250, 500mg.
have been conducted in
 chronic diseases have
 not been evaluated in 
small animals, but no
ou og
use outdated solutions.
 Pharmacokinetic and 
experimental studies 
 small animals.
clinical studies.
Adverse effects are 
occur at high doses
Tetracyclines bind to
general may cause 
teeth formation in
been implicated in
calcium-containing
Tetracyclines have 
 drug fever in cats.
affect bone and
individuals. Drug 
 anabolic effects.
 Tetracyclines in
young animals.
high doses.
 decreases oral 
attributed to
 also possible.
teractions:
 absorption.
二
Testosterone esters are
 effects.
 absorbed more slowly 
Tetracycline antibiotic.
Mechanism of action
: 305 ribosomal
Usually bacteriostatic.
methyltestosterone.
subunit and inhibit
protozoa, Rickettsia,
from IM injection.
hydrolyzed to free
 protein synthesis.
 Broad spectrum of
activity, induding
Similar effects as
 avoid first-pass 
 Esters in oil are
Esters are then
bacteria, some
testosterone.
bind to
Ehrlichia.
Testosterone cypionate
Tetracycline (Panmycin)
, [Malogen in 
ester (Andro-Cyp,
Andronate, Depo-
Testosterone, and
other forms) and 
propionate ester 
Testosterone 
[anada])
))
674
APPENDIXES
followed by 0.1 mg/kg 
Dose according to rate
Dog: collect baseline
sample, followed by 
Collect baseline T4.
sample at 4hrs.
For human
Dogs and Cat)
for ticarcillin.
asop
0.11
/6m)_ 000'l sujenuo
difficult to obtain.
recombinant form
 Formulations
Old forms
 Injection
(rh TSH) 
injection
 Dosing Information and 
 prepare solution, add
 10U vial
testing laboratory for
 Same as for ticarcillin.
Used for diagnostic 
retain potency for 2
thyroid testing. For
For Thytropar: To
mL NaCI to
Comments
purposes.
water.
Adverse Effects and 
Adverse reactions 
 allergic reactions 
 Adverse effects 
rare. In people, 
have occurred.
 Precautions
uncommon.
 Same as for 
ticarcillin.
hyperthyroidism when
Clavulanate does not 
against Pseudomonas,
Thyroid-stimulating
secretion of thyroid
 pue Abojosewieyd
has been added to
See Gold sodium
See Levothyroxine 
 Same as ticarcilin,
(β-lactamase and 
ncrease spectrum
Used to detect 
inhibit bacterial
increase activity
thiomalate.
sodium and 
Liothyronine.
Indications
hormone.
owever.
Ticarcillin + clavulanate 
Drug Name (Trade or
Thyrotropin, thyroid-
stimulating hormone
Thiomalate sodium 
Thyroid hormone 
Thyroid-releasing
(TSH) (Thytropar,
hormone (TRH)
Other Names)
Thyrogen)
(Timentin)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
675
 33-50 mg/kg q4-6h IV,
 Dog: 2-4mg/kg q8h IV,
Cat: 3mg/kg q8h IV, IM,
14mg/kg 
q24h IV, IM, SC. 
SC or 9-1
IV, Im, SC.
established.
IM
M
tablets are available
 40 mg/mL injection 
immediate release
 in 50mg tablets.
Tramadol 
Extended-release tablets 
Ticarcillin is synergistic
lidocaine may be used
decrease pain from IM
 Dosing requirements 
bacterial susceptibility.
Dosing information is
and often combined 
r reconstitution to 
experience in dogs.
are not equivalent.
.g., amikacin,
 injection.
amikacin.
possible. High doses 
not combine in same
 syringe or in vial with
Adverse effects are
 Sedation may occur
similar to those of 
behavior
.. At very high
 seizures may occur.
allergic
platelet function.
aminoglycosides.
especially at high 
 mydriasis may be
observed at high
Adverse effects 
 doses in dogs,
are
uncommon.
reactions a
gentamicin.
amikacin,
vomiting, b
can
and
.n
 opiate effects than the
carbenicillin. Ticarcillin
 Similar mechanism of
infections, especially
norepinephrine (NE)
and serotonin (5 HT).
(β-lactam antibiotic.
 Spectrum similar to
is primarily used for
(desmethyltramadol)
(μ-opioid receptor 
Action similar to.
may have greater 
 Aminoglycoside
 Analgesic drug.
The metabolite 
Pseudomonas.
 parent drug.
gentamicin.
Ticarcillin disodium 
Tobramycin sulfate
(Ticar, Ticilin)
and generic)
Tramadol
(Nebcin)
676
APPENDIXES
nanufacturer
to 0.22 mg/kg/day.)
injection: 0.1-0.2 mg/kg
0.5-1 mg/kg q12-24h
r dose to
recommends doses of 
Dose Is the Same for
tumor every 2 weeks.
Otherwise Indicated,
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
3
(However,
IM,
Veterinary (Vetalog)
 or 6mg/
0.5 and 1.5mg 
Human
mL suspension
Formulations
16 mg tablets; 
~
tablets. .
injection.
Dosing Information and 
than dogs (sometimes 
require higher doses
Note that cats may
Comments
corticosteroids. when 
Adverse Effects and
Adverse effects are 
 injections, there is
 some concern that
similar to other
used for ocular
Precautions
site.
approximately equal to 
(about 5x cortisol and 
methylprednisolone
intralesional injection
drug. Triamcinolone
intralesional therapy.
Pharmacology and
anti-inflammatory
has potency that is
See Trimethoprim
although some 
 See Liothyronine.
Glucocorticoid
site. Used for
+ sulfadiazine.
Indications
n
Triamtabs, Aristocort,
Triamcinolone and 
acetonide (Vetalog,
Triodothyronine
Triamcinolone
Continued
generic)
Tribrissen
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
paseq parsnlpe s! up!um
measurements. General
skg and 60mg q24h 
Dog: median dose is
15mg/kg q12h po, or
 dogs that weigh
 0.5mg/kg q12h po 
for dogs that 
 q12h po)
on cortisol
.5
8
60mg capsules. No
2.5mg/5ml syrup;
sulfa : trimethoprim).
formulations have 
longer available in 
approved in the 
formulations
1.5 mg tablet 
Trimethoprim-
ratio of 5 : 1
sulfadiazine
Some 
U.S.
忆忆
5T
: for treatment of
Combination product is 
commercially available
 time in the U.s. It 
 been imported by
There is evidence that 
efficacious and safe
trimeprazine is more
treatment of pruritus.
for other
been
terinarians after 
30mg/kg/day is
 Trilostane is an 
medication for 
not
measurements.
prednisone for 
has
recommended.
.5
on cortisol
combined w
pyoderma; t
twice daily 
 nq.
Temaril-P.
PD H. It i
Europe
Dosage
lere
.HO
this 
nas
90
 In one study, adverse
effects consisted of 1
dog with transient
 electrolyte levels in 
 primarily caused by
Otherwise, it has
 should check
because trilostane
 similar to those of 
treated patients 
 Adverse effects 
Adverse effects
 promethazine.
 aldosterone.
sulfonamide
component.
decreases
One 
Used for treatment of 
inhibitor, in dogs, for
treatment of pituitary-
peradrenocorticism 
 antihistamine activity
promethazine). Used
 Phenothiazine with
for treating allergies
 and motion sickness.
 and a sulfonamide.
hypercortisolemia
broad spectrum of
dehydrogenase
Combines the
Together, the.
combination is
in dogs. β-(β
activity.
(PDH).
sulfadiazine (Tribrissen,
Trimeprazine tartrate
Tucoprim, and others)
(Temaril [Panectyl in
Trilostane (Vetoryl)
Trimethoprim +.
Canada])
678
APPENDIXES
 30mg/kg q12-24h po
Dog and cat: 7-15mg/
response, increase the
interval to q12-24h.
1 mg/kg q12h po 
food; if there is a
kg q12-24h po.
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
480, 960mg tablet;
 Available as soluble
(tablets for dogs in 
 240mg/5 mL oral 
formulations have
lel uosuadsns
powder 3 g/tsp
Formulations
Canada)
Dosing Information and
small animals. Powdered 
recommendations vary.
veterinary medicine. No
Tylosin is rarely used in 
icacious than other 
for control of signs of
Tablets
for treatment of colitis.
 for other
There are no cdinical
administered on food
been
formulation (tylosin
 drugs in this class.
mg/kg/day is
recommended.
colitis in dogs.
pyoderma; f
Dosage 
are
Members of this class 
(ethanolamines) have
antimuscarinic effects 
Adverse Effects and
 in some animals. Do
not administer orally
 to rodents or rabbits.
primarily caused by
Adverse effects 
Adverse effects 
similar to other
 antihistamines.
 antihistamines.
Precautions
component.
an other 
eater
gre
h
Histamine (H,) blocker.
 other antihistamines.
Used to treat allergic
 Macrolide antibiotic.
been administered to
treat chronic diarrhea
 Pharmacology and 
 antibacterial drug
and a sulfonamide.
synergistic, with a
broad spectrum of 
Tylosin is not used
 See Thyrotropin.
Combines the 
Together, the.
Indications
activity.
disease.
in dogs.
Tripelennamine citrate
stimulating hormone)
Tylosin (Tylocine, Tylan,
sulfamethoxazole
Trimethoprim +.
(Pelamine, PBZ)
generic forms)
Tylosin tartrate)
SH (thyroid-
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
69
(Human dose is 75 units/
 Doses not established.
10-15mg/kg q24h po
day IM for 7 days.)
administered with
q24h po when
 phenobarbital.
 and 250mg tablets
 75 U per vial for 
 300mg capsules 
250mg capsules; 
(Depakene)
 injection 
125.
Results of clinical studies
Results of clinical studies
based on experience in
Administer with meals.
 Divalproex is composed
experience in animals.
and sodium valproate.
ivalproex sodium and
experience in people.
.n.s
people or anecdotal 
Valproic acid is listed
 both valproic acid
 in animals have not 
in animals have not
been reported. Use 
lproic acid deliver
valproate ion.
f
 Side effects have not 
thromboembolism or
syndrome has been
Adverse effects not 
 May cause diarrhea.
.n
 animals. In people,
 animals, but hepatic
animals. Do not use
Aay cause bleeding
reported in people.
at inhibit platelets.
Sedation may be
Drug interactions:
used with drugs
hyperstimulation
failure has been
severe ovarian 
 seen in some 
reported.
Adve
M:
f
h
with phenobarbital, to
 Stimulates ovulation.
ovulation and induce
Hydrophilic bile acid.
for treatment of liver
 bile acids,
displacing the more
Action is not known,
 concentrations
 people, it is used in 
epilepsy in animals.
but it may increase
 Contains FSH. In 
 combination with
 pregnancy.
circulating 
gallstones.
 CNS.
GABA
in the 
Urofolitropin (FSH)
(ursodeoxycholate)
acid]; Depakote
Canadian brand])
Valproic acid
(Metrodin)
Ursodiol  
(Actigall)
089
APPENDIXES
Dog: 15mg/kg q6-8h IV
Cat: 12-15 mg/kg q8h 
infusion) once/week
 2 mg/m2 IV (slow
Dosage (unless
IV infusion.
infusion.
Otherv
 Vials for injection
 1 mg/mL injection 
 Formulations
(0.5 to 10 g)
 common in animals, but 
treatment
pharmacokinetic studies
to ensure
above 5mcg/mL Infusion
Vancomycin use is not
chemotherapy protocol
staphylococci that are
antibiotics. Doses are 
 trough concentration 
alkalinizing solutions.
Vinblastine is used in
cancer chemotherapy
protocols for various
 enterococci or 
 jou ing 'asoinxap
 is valuable for t
trough plasma
concentrations
recommended t
derived from 
for regimens.
Adverse effects have
 not been reported in
 administered IM or
with
 older products that
 contained impurities)
vincristine does, but 
 administer rapidly;
include renal injury
higher incidence of
IV; causes severe
use slow infusion,
30min). Adverse
effects in people
Does not produce
myelosuppression.
(more common 
 and histamine 
neuropathy as
anssin sasney
SC. Do not
outside vein.
release.
+
includes staphylococci,
 Sometimes used as an 
mechanism different 
actams). Spectrum 
enterococci (but not 
 Similar to vincristine.
nd cause bacterial
staphylococci and 
 increase platelet 
thrombocytopenia).
from that of (β -
and
 gram-negative
alternative to
numbers (may
actually cause 
cell lysis (via
streptococci,
of resistant
enterococci.
bacteria).
M
Vancomycin (Vancocin,
Vinblastine sulfate
Vancoled)
(Velban)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
681
0.05 mg/kg) once/week.
For thrombocytopenia:
 625-800 U/kg q24h po
(see dosing information 
 00-400 U q12h po (or
immune-mediated skin 
 0.02 mg/kg IV once/
400-600 U q12h po f
m2 IV (or 0.025-
section).
disease)
week.
RE)/0.1 mL; 10,000, 
1 mg/mL injection 
 50,000 U tablets 
Wide variety of
1000 U/capsule)
oral solution 
 available (e.g.,
,000 and.
5
tumors. Consult specific 
hemotherapy protocol
 U or retinol
= 1mcg 
evidence for efficacy in
vitamin A = 3.33 U of 
Vincristine is used in 
protocols for various
 Dosing of vitamin is
human illnesses, but 
Vitamin E has been 
6
 animals is lacking.
3
for regimens.
 se passaidxa
retinol. 1 
 retinol.
retinol.
9
6
than other anticancer 
occur. Very irritating 
 apisino uoneseaenxa
 Side effects have not 
 cause bone or joint 
myelosuppressive
been reported
Constipation can
 tissues. Avoid
 pain, dermatitis.
tolerated. Less 
administration.
 been reported.
but is rare.
vein during.
8
r analogues used for
division by binding to
rotocols. Vincristine
Vitamin considered as
Used in combination
ee also lsotretinoin
 antioxidant. Used as
rculating platelets
microtubules and
thrombocytopenia.
treatment of some
Vincristine causes
 or Ergocalciferol.
immune-mediated 
 other conditions.
chemotherapy
of functional
dermatoses.
司
tocopherol) (Aquasol E
Vitamin A (retinoids)
Vincristine sulfate
(Oncovin, Vincasar,
Vitamin E (alpha
(Aquasol A)
and generic)
Vitamin D
generic)
682
APPENDIXES
(emetic [cat only] dose is
Cat: 15mg/kg q12h po
30mg/
0.25-0.5 mg/kg SC, IM
kg/day also have been
Cat: 1.1mg/kg IM 
Dosage (unless
Dogs and Cat)
used).
20 and 100mg/ml 
10mg/mL injection 
 2mg/mL injection 
10mg/ml syrup:
Formulations
injection
Dosing Information and 
 combination with other 
 sedation and anesthesia 
 caused by c2-agonists.
 viral disease in
more detailed reference
prevent persistent FeLV.
Consult a
r guidance. It may
 Reverses signs of
 experimental or 
 Often used in 
Comments
ecdotal.
injection, especially in 
High doses can cause 
tremors and seizures.
Monitor the packed
cell volume in treated
 Adverse Effects and
and ataxia. Cardiac
 and perform a 
 Produces sedation 
depression, heart
possible with high
hypotension are 
 count periodically.
doses. Produces
emesis after IV
complete blood
 Precautions
Anemia and
block, and 
cats.
8
 D2-adrenergic agonist.
 short-term anesthesia
specific as a reversing
acts to inhibit the viral
actions of xylazine or
infection in cats. AZT
1 of
Atipamezole is more 
sey
been experimentally 
immunodeficiency
 transcriptase, which
viral RNA into DNA.
Pharmacology and
Used primarily for
 antagonist. Used 
Antiviral drug. In
(FeLV) and feline 
 enzyme, reverse
and analgesia.
 D2-adrenergic
virus (FIV) viral
Indications
detomidine.
agent.
Xylaxine hydrochloride
Drug Name (Trade or
Yohimbine (Yobine)
Zidovudine (AZT)
Other Names)
(Retrovir)
APPENDIX C: DRUG FORMULARY
89
Key to Table Abbreviations:
ACE
angiotensin-converting enzyme
CHF
 congestive heart failure
SND
central nervous system
COX
cyclooxygenase
CSF
cerebrospinal fluid
6
gram
GABA
 gamma amino butyric acid 
15
gastrointestinal
IM
intramuscular
INR
international normalization ratio
IV
intravenous
mcg
micrograms
mg
milligram
MIC
minimum inhibitory concentration
mL
milliter
NSAID
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug
OTC
over the counter (without prescription)
po
per os (oral)
PU/PD
 polyuria and polydipsia
every, as in q8h = every 8 hours
RX
 prescription only
SC
subcutaneous
U
units
DISCLAIMER FOR DOSE IABLES:
Note: Doses listed are for dogs and cats, unless otherwise listed. Many of the doses listed
are extra-label or are human drugs not approved for animals administered in an extra-
label manner. Doses listed are based on best available information at the time of table
editing. The author cannot ensure efficacy or absolute safety of drugs used according
to recommendations in this table. Adverse effects may be possible from drugs listed in
this table of which authors were not aware at the time of table preparation. Veterinarians
using this table are encouraged to consult current literature, product labels and inserts.
and the manufacturers disclosure information for additional information on adverse
effects, interactions, and efficacy that were not identified at the time these tables were
prepared.
Modified from material provided for Blackwell's Five-Minute Veterinary Consult: Canine
and Feline by Mark Papich.
appendix
Client Education
snopueh
Allergic Dermatitis, Canine & Feline
Allergy Vaccine: Hyposensitization (General Information)
Antihistamine/Antipruritic Therapy
Bacterial Infections
Bloodwork Monitoring
 Chemotherapy/Immunosuppressive Therapy
Contact Dermatitis
Demodex Mites
Dermatophytosis (Ringworm)
Elimination Diet Trial
Granulomatous Sebaceous Adenitis
House Dust Mite: Controlling Exposure
Malassezia Dermatitis (Yeast)
Mold Allergies: Controlling Exposure
Otitis (Ear Disease)
 Pemphigus Foliaceus
Scabies
Shampoo Therapy: Instructions
Surgical/Procedure Discharge Instructions
Symptoms of Cushings Syndrome
Treatment: Pituitary Cushings Syndrome
Video-Otoscopy for the Surgical Management of Otitis Media and Chronic Otitis Externa
*Note: Editable versions of the Client Education Handouts are available on the com-
panion CD attached to the inside back cover.
684
Allergic Dermatitis,
Canine & Feline
Allergy is a common and frustrating problem in veterinary practice. A wide variety of
breeds suffer from allergic dermatitis and otitis. The usual, yet not exclusive, age of
onset is between 2 and 6 years of age. Purebred dogs will often exhibit clinical signs at
 an earlier age.
HOW DOES AN ALLERGIC REACTION OCCUR?
1. The body is constantly exposed to environmental allergens (molds, pollen, dust
mites, fleas). Both healthy and allergic dogs will produce antibodies (IgE, IgG, IgM)
to combat these foreign proteins.
2. The allergic dog is thought to produce significantly higher levels of IgE (considered
the most important antibody in producing allergic signs/symptoms) than the
clinically normal dog.
 3. There is no specific level of IgE that will produce pruritus (itching); each dog has
its own “threshold" (an allergic dog is often thought to have a lower threshold or
tolerance, which makes it more susceptible).
4. Classic clinical signs of allergy: biting, chewing, scratching, licking
 Feet, face, axillae, inguinal regions are predominant.
■ Chronic ear infections/inflammation
■ Chronic irritation from pruritus may lead to lichenification (thickened & pig-
mented skin).
 Flea allergy: often near the tail and rump region
5. You cannot clinically tell the difference between food allergy and inhalant/percutane-
ous allergy (NOTE: there is no valid serum test for food allergy from any lab. You
must do a food elimination diet trial.)
6. Pathway of allergic reaction: allergen exposure; body produces IgE specific for that
allergen.
■  IgE binds to the mast cells in the skin and "coats" the cell.
■ Reexposure to the allergen
■Allergen binds to the allergen-specific IgE.
■ Allergen: IgE: mast cell binding causes the mast cell to degranulate (rupture)
■ Mast cells contain pruritic (itchy) compoundshistamines, leukotrienes, prosta-
glandins, etc.
685
686
APPENDIXES
TYPES OF ALLERGY TESTING
1. In vitro (serum/plasma): RAST (radioallergosorbant test): uses radioactive tag:ELISA
(enzyme linked immunosorbant assay): uses an enzyme tag
2. In vivo (intradermal skin testing):
 The pet is sedated and an area is shaved on the side of the chest.
 From 50-80 allergens are then injected intradermally (into the skin).
 The reactions are measured against a positive and negative control.
■ IDsT is considered the "gold standard" of allergy testing.
PREPARATION FOR THE PROCEDURE IDST)
Certain medications may interfere with the test results and should be withdrawn prior to
the test date (see the chart below for guidelines)
Approximate withdrawal time prior
Medication
to testing
Steroids (oral, otic, ophthalmic, topical)
3-4 weeks
Steroids (injectable-DepoMedrol)
6-8 weeks
Antihistamines
1-2 weeks
 Phenobarbital
>3 weeks
Acepromazine
1 week
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
Allergy Vaccine:
Hyposensitization
(General (nformation)
TECHNIQUE FOR INJECTIONS: SUBCUTANEOUS
(UNDER THE SKIN)
1. Keep the vaccine refrigerated.
 2. Syringes and needles are disposable and should only be used once. Please bring the
used syringes and needles to us or your referring veterinarian for safe disposal as
medical waste.
3. Insert the needle underneath the skin over the neck, shoulder, or back area. Once
in position, push the plunger and release the contents under the skin. Pull the needle
out of the skin and discard. Vary your injection sites to avoid pain.
HOW DO ALLERGEN EXTRACTS WORK?
1. Hyposensitization (allergy vaccine) is an attempt to induce immunologic tolerance
to allergens that currently cause allergic symptoms.
2. The rate in which an animal may respond to allergy vaccine is quite varied and may
take up to 6 months or even a year to build up enough “protective” antibodies to
eliminate the allergic symptoms.
3. Hyposensitization is not a cure for allergies. Maintenance injections must be contin-
ued for the life of the pet. The interval between injections will vary with each animal
but is generally given on a monthly basis once a good clinical response is achieved.
DO NOTSTOP THE VACCINEUNLESS YOU AND YOUR VETERINARIAN DECIDE
THAT HYPOSENSITIZATION IS NOT ACCCEPTABLE FOR YOUR PET.
4. Try to adhere to the suggested schedule of injections.
ADVERSE REACTIONS
1. Reactions to allergy vaccine are rare.
2. There may be mild itchiness or irritation at the injection site for a few minutes after
the injection.
3. Always give the injection when you will be able to watch your pet for at least l hour
afterward.
687
688APPENDIXES
4. During the early stages of hyposensitization an increase in itchiness is common 1 or
2 days after the injection. If this is a problem for your pet, you may need to use
topical therapy or antihistamines to help control the clinical signs.
B    e          i
amounts of allergens slowly to help prevent this occurrence. If anaphylaxis occurs.
it will manifest within 30 minutes to 1 hour after the injection is given. This severe
reaction will appear as vomiting, diarrhea, generalized hives, swollen face, and/or
difficulty breathing and weakness. Take your pet to a veterinarian immediately. This
reaction is extremely rare.
INTERACTIONS WITH OTHER MEDICATIONS AND VACCINES
1. Allergy vaccines will not interfere with other routine vaccines (distemper, parvo.
rabies, etc.)
2. Large doses of prednisone or other corticosteroids may decrease or retard the effec-
tiveness of the vaccine and should therefore be avoided if at all possible. Low doses
are certainly acceptable.
BACTERIALINFECTIONS
1. Superficial pyoderma (bacterial folliculitis) is an infection of the skin and hair fol-
licles recognized by the appearance of a rash, pimples, pustules, scabs, and “hot
spots."
 2. In certain short-coated breeds, these infections can appear merely as patches of cir-
cular hair loss.
3. Staphylococcus pseudintermedius (staph infection) is the frequent cause of this
condition and is often seen in association with allergies.
4. Staphylococcal bacteria are part of the normal flora of the skin and are thus not
considered contagious to you or other pets in the household.
5. Shampoo therapy and, often, oral antibiotics are needed to control superficial
pyoderma in allergic patients.
6. Bacterial infections can contribute to your pets itchiness.
FLEA CONTROL
1. Flea control is vitally important for the allergic pet.
2. You do not have to see fleas in order for them to be a contributing factor in your
pet's itchiness.
 3. A flea-allergic pet does not generally have a severe flea infestation but rather a
massive reaction to the saliva of the flea.
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS
689
YEAST INFECTION
1. Malassezia pachydermatis (yeast) overgrowth is a common cutaneous opportunist
in allergic patients.
2. The organism may colonize the skin and/or the ear canal.
3. Allergic patients produce excess amounts of wax in the ear canal, which is a good
microenvironment for yeast and bacterial overgrowth.
4. Yeast organisms may cause excessive pruritus and inflamed skin.
5. These organisms are not contagious to you or other pets in the household.
REMEMBER
1. Hyposensitization is only a component or an integral part in controlling your pet's
allergic symptoms.
2.
 Shampoo therapy should be part of your routine protocol.
3. Antihistamines or other medications may be necessary.
4. Hyposensitization is effective for approximately 75% of all tested patients. Vaccine
therapy should be continued for at least l year before results can be evaluated.
5. Please contact your veterinarian or the dermatology service if you have any questions
or problems with your pet. A recheck appointment is generally recommended 2-3
months into the vaccine protocol.
***** KEEP ALL VACCINES REFRIGERATED ..
DO NOT FREEZE *****
It is not harmful to the vaccine if kept at room temperature for several days, but please
note that extreme heat and extreme cold are to be avoided.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
Antihistamine/
Antipruritic Therapy
PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS
1. Hydroxyzine (ATARAX)
 2. Trimeprazine-prednisone (TEMARIL-P). The combination allows for a lower dose
of cortisone
3. Doxepin (SINEQUAN)
4. Cyproheptadine (PERIACTIN)
5. Amitriptyline (ELAVIL)
 6. Pentoxifylline (TRENTAL)—most helpful for contact allergy
7. Cyclosporine (ATOPICA)—very effective yet costly
8. Genesis spray (very low dose triamcinolone spray 0.015%)
9. Gabapentin (NEURONTIN)
10. Fluoxetine HCL (PROZAC)
11. Montelukast (SINGULAIR)
12. Fexofenadine HCL (ALLEGRA)
OVER-THE-COUNTER ANTIHISTAMINES:
AVOID DECONGESTANTS
1. Diphenhydramine (BENADRYL) 25mg capsules: use
caps 3 times daily
for 7-10 days &r then as needed
2. Chlorpheniramine (CHLORTRIMETON) 4 mg tabs: use
tabs 3 times daily
for 7-l0 days &r then as needed
3. Chlorpheniramine (CHLORTRIMETON) 8mg tabs: use
tabs 3 times daily
for 7-10 days &r then as needed
4. Clemastine (IAVIST-1 not TAVIST-D) 1.34 mg: Use
tabs twice daily for 7-10
days &r then as needed
5. Loratadine (CLARITIN) 10mg tab: Use
tabs twice daily. (Without
decongestant)
6. Cetirizine (ZYRTEC) 10mg. Use
tabs twice daily. (Without decongestant)
690
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS
691
MAY BE USED IN COMBINATION WITH ABOVE MEDICATIONS
(AT VETERINARY DISCRETION ONLY)
1. Cimetidine (TAGAMET) 200 mg tabs: use
tabs twice daily for 7-10 days,
then as needed.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
Bacterial Infections
Bacterial infections (pyoderma, folliculitis, furunculosis) of the skin and hair follicles
are very common problems in the dog. These lesions often represent an infection or
overcolonization of the skin by staphylococcus sp. Bacterial infections often manifest
in a characteristic sequence of lesions: follicular papule, pustule, crust from a ruptured
pustule, epidermal collarette (central clearing with peripheral ring of scale) and a final
hyperpigmented macule. In certain breeds, these infections can appear as merely patchy
and circular areas of hair loss. The frequent causative organism ("staph") is considered
normal “resident" flora. There are a number of reasons that staph organisms are given
the opportunity to cause disease, and those reasons must be identified in order to
 prevent recurrences. Common causes include: allergies, parasite infestation, hormonal
imbalances, keratinization disorders, immunodeficiencies, metabolic disorder, etc.
SUPERFICIAL PYODERMA FOLLICULITIS)
Superficial pyoderma may be a primary condition or secondary to other underlying
diseases such as allergic dermatitis, endocrine abnormalities, immunosuppression, etc.
    s   s r  
although some dogs may experience marked pruritus due to a presumed hypersensitiv-
ity to the staphylococcal bacteria. When pruritus is a feature, it is often necessary to
evaluate the response of the patient to antibiotic therapy in order to determine whether
an underlying problem may be contributing to the clinical picture. Antibiotics must be
used for a minimum of 3 weeks and given in conjunction with topical shampoo therapy.
Steroids should be avoided during this evaluation period.
RECURRENT SUPERFICIAL PYODERMA
Recurrent superficial pyoderma is a common and frustrating problem in the dog. If a
specific underlying etiology cannot be determined (allergy. hypothyroidism, hyperad-
renocorticism, diabetes mellitus, neoplasia, etc.), efforts must be made to control the
cutaneous bacterial population and/or stimulate the patients immune status. Various
methods may be trialed to manipulate the patients response to their normal flora?
intermittent antibiotic therapy. subminimal inhibitory concentrations of antibiotics,
aggressive shampoo and other topical therapy, immunomodulators, etc. An important
692
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS693
aspect of managing these chronic cases is the establishment of an effective and accept-
able therapeutic maintenance protocol.
DEEP PYODERMA
Folliculitis and furunculosis, deep pyoderma, is a common and frustrating problem in
the canine patient. Most of these cases involve a staphylococcal infection of the hair
follicles that has become severe and caused a rupture of the follicular epithelium. This
allows the hair shaft, keratin, and damaged collagen access to the dermis and thus initi-
ates a “foreign body” reaction. The massive amount of inflammation accumulated as a
result of this reaction accounts for the clinical signs of erythema and swelling with
exudation. The tendency for this type of inflammation to be granulomatous causes a
therapeutic problem because treatment must be specific and continued for an extended
period of time.
of underlying disease acting as a contributory factor. A cutaneous biopsy and surgically
obtained culture are sometimes helpful in characterizing this disease.
Systemic antibiotic therapy is often necessary for a minimum of 6-8 weeks. Shampoo
therapy with benzoyl peroxide or chlorhexidine product should be used in conjunction
with oral therapy. Often, the hair must be shaved to prevent the formation of a sealing
crust and to allow the topical agents to contact the diseased skin. Hydrotherapy (soaks
and/or whirlpool) with an antiseptic is beneficial in the early stages of therapy to allow
for removal of crusts, decreasing the surface bacterial counts, promoting epithelializa
tion, and decreasing discomfort.
PODODERMATITIS
Pododermatitis is a form of deep pyoderma that affects the interdigital areas of the paws.
Often in cases of deep pyoderma, this will be the last area to respond to therapy. A
complete diagnostic workup is necessary to rule out causes other than bacterial (i.e.
demodicosis, Malassezia, etc.). Oral antibiotics for an extended period (6-8 weeks)
requires commitment from the owner due to the extensive protocol involved:
Step 1. Shampoo the feet with a benzoyl peroxide or chlorhexidine product; allow the
feet to soak in the shampoo for at least 15-20 minutes initial protocol daily.
and then the interval can be lengthened.
Step 2. Dry the feet and apply an astringent liberally to the area (i.e., domboros) Let
air dry. This step may be needed on a once-daily or 3x daily regimen.
Use a 3x daily regimen in the initial stages and then the frequency may be
tapered.
(NOTE: Step 2 may be eliminated when the area becomes less moist and exudative.)
694
APPENDIXES
Remember that a maintenance protocol should be instituted that includes both
shampoo and topical therapy. The frequency of application required to control the
clinical lesions will vary with the patient
NOTES:
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
Bloodwork Monitoring
Your pet has been prescribed
This
medication(s) is metabolized by the liver/kidney. We require that
have
bloodwork done every 3-4 months while on this medication on a daily or every-other-
day basis. If we are later able to taper the medication further, we can extend the blood-
work requirement to every 6 months.
*Please note: Bloodwork monitoring is very important. It allows us to be sure that
 the medications we are using to help your pet are not harming him/her in the process.
With frequent monitoring, bloodwork abnormalities can be addressed to prevent more
serious problems.
Bloodwork required:
Your
next
bloodwork
appointment
should
be
 scheduled
for
* For the safety of your pet, we will not be able to refill your medications if
bloodwork is not done by the above date. *
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
695
Chemotherapy/
Immunosuppressive
Therapy
Your pet has been placed on chemotherapy. This means that the doctor feels the benefits
of this medication outweigh the potential side effects.
You should always wear latex gloves when handling chemotherapy pills.
We use chemotherapy to treat a range of immune-mediated diseases, cancers, and
occasionally severe allergies when all other options have been exhausted.
The most common side effect we see is bone-marrow suppression, which can cause
a drop in red and white blood cell production leading to anemia and the inability to
fight of infection. We can also see changes in liver and kidney function.
In order to prevent these side effects from becoming an issue for your pet, we require
frequent bloodwork monitoring for all of our chemotherapy patients. A CBC or com-
plete blood count is required every 3-4 weeks, and a full blood screen (including a
serum chemistry to check liver/kidney values) is required every 2-3 months. These tests
are often dependent on the type of medication being monitored.
Your next CBC should be scheduled by
Your next full blood screen/progress exam should be scheduled for
* For the safety of your pet, we will not be able to refll your medications if
bloodwork is not done by the above date. *
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
+
/BLACKWELL
696
Contact Dermatitis
Contact hypersensitivity is the result of sensitization to an environmental allergen with
subsequent reaction upon contact. It is classically a delayed (type IV) hypersensitivity.
which may be the result of sensitization to any number of substances. Sensitization
often results from introduction of new materials into the animal's environment; however.
cases of hypersensitivity after previously uneventful contact with a substance for periods
of time (months to years) are also reported. Fabrics and chemicals are probably the
 most common offending agents. Leafy plants used for ground cover have also been
incriminated. Very thorough investigation is often necessary to determine the material
responsible for the hypersensitivity. Patch testing, as is used in humans, has been used
in dogs but the results have been equivocal. Isolation from suspect substances with
subsequent challenge is the best method to detect an offending agent.
Plan:
2. Oral Medications:
3. Topical Medications:
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
697
Demodex Mites
          s
 greater than normal numbers of demodex mites in the hair follicles and on the skin.
The reason for this proliferation is poorly understood but a genetic defect in the I-cell
portion of the immune system is suspected
There are two forms of demodicosis: l) localized and 2) generalized. The localized
form is characterized by small focal regional lesions. The lesions associated with local-
ized demodicosis are typically focal mild erythema with partial alopecia and variable
amounts of scale. The most frequently affected sites of lesions in this form are the
periocular and perioral regions; the forelegs and the trunk are the second most common
sites. Most of the localized demodicosis cases are mild and regress spontaneously:
however, approximately 10% of cases will progress to the generalized form. The gen-
eralized form may be divided into juvenile (dogs less than l year of age), adult onset,
and pododemodicosis (paws). Generalized demodicosis can be quite severe, and the
lesions include erythema, alopecia, crust, scale, and exudation. Pruritus (itchy) is
ment of other sites. Secondary pyoderma (bacterial infection) is a consistent feature
of generalized demodicosis.
Localized Demodicosis Therapy
Treatment of localized demodicosis is not always necessary because the majority of
cases will spontaneously resolve. Treatment will not prevent progression to the gen-
eralized form. The general health status of the patient should be evaluated (i.e.,
intestinal parasitism, diet, etc.) to insure that underlying abnormalities do not con-
tribute to the animals predisposition to demodicosis. Topical therapy is frequently
used for localized.
Generalized Demodicosis Therapy
Therapy for generalized demodicosis requires dedication over an extended period of
time. In many cases, only control of the disease may be established rather than a com-
 plete cure or resolution. The following steps are recommended for the treatment of
generalized demodicosis:
1. Shave the pet (long-haired pets) if the skin is markedly crusted and exudative.
2. Gently remove all heavy crusts from the skin.
3. Protect the eyes with ophthalmic ointment.
869
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS699
4. Shampoo the dog with a benzoyl peroxide shampoo and/or soak in a whirlpool bath
with an antiseptic solution.
5. Towel dry.
6. Repeat on a weekly or twice weekly basis.
7. Systemic antibiotics should be given for an extended period of time.
Medication Options
at a higher dose to treat demodicosis. This medication has been reported to cause
side effects in some breeds more often than others (collies, shelties, and Old English
sheepdogs). Side effects to watch for include tremors, muscle weakness, dilated
pupils, vomiting. diarrhea, and seizures. The use of ivermectin in breeds other than
those recognized as being sensitive is common practice in veterinary dermatology
Ivermectin is considered one of the most effective forms of therapy in the treatment
of demodicosis. Testing for ivermectin sensitivity can be done via Washington State
University's Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory (www.vetmed.wsu.edu.
vcpl).
The dose is often lowered during the first week of therapy to make sure no adverse
clinical signs occur:
Ist week of therapy dose (test dose)
Routine therapy dose after lst week
2. Mitaban dips (amitraz): Mitaban is a dip that is applied topically to the skin on a
weekly or every-other-week basis. Small dogs may experience marked lethargy for
12-24 hours after application. The dip should be applied in a well-ventilated area.
 It is often difficult to effectively apply the dip to certain affected areas such as the
facial region.
3. Promeris spot-on (amitraz): similar side effects as noted with the topical dip (Mitaban)
4. Interceptor (milbemycin): Interceptor is a medication commonly used for the pre-
vention of heartworm disease. Ivermectin-sensitive breeds often tolerate this medica-
tion. Side effects are similar to ivermectin (depression, ataxia, seizures).
5. LymDip (lime sulfur dips): This protocol is the treatment of choice for cats (not
dogs). Lime sulfur dips are very safe yet quite messy and malodorous. Cats must be
prevented from licking the fur while wet from the dip because it may cause oral
irritation.
6. other (new products under clinical trials)
Prognosis
 Prognosis depends on a number of factors including severity, age of onset, duration of
disease, and presence of underlying disease. Adult onset demodicosis is often difficult
to treat and may require long-term therapy. It is preferred that affected young dogs be
eliminated from the breeding population (castration/OHE) to prevent any hereditary
propensity.
000
APPENDIXES
Recheck Appointments
Monthly or every-other-month recheck appointments are important to monitor the
progress of the disease. It is essential to perform frequent skin scrapings and/or tricho-
 grams because many dogs may look “cured" and still have mites visible microscopically.
It is often recommended that the pet be treated for at least l month after a negative
sample.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
Dermatophytosis
(Ringworm)
Dermatophytosis (Microsporum canis, M. gypseum, Trichophyton mentagrophytes)
implies a cutaneous infection with a number of keratinophilic species of fungi
Transmission is by direct contact or contact with infected hairs and scale in the envi-
ronment. Infected hairs in the environment may remain contagious for months to
years. Zoonosis (contagion to human) is a frequent problem and is most often associ-
ated with the Persian breed and other long-haired cats, which can be as asymptomatic
carriers.
Treatment should be aimed at eliminating the infection from the host and cleaning
the environment. Optimally, affected animals should be separated from other pets in
the household. Every confirmed case of dermatophytosis should be treated topically.
Total body clipping may be beneficial to decrease environmental contamination by
infected hairs and to allow for topical applications. The efficacy of topical antiseptic
baths and rinses varies, but each is effective in removing scale, crust, exudates, and
loose infected hairs. Systemic therapy is often needed to hasten recovery Medications
most often used include ketoconazole, itraconazole, terbinafine, and griseofulvin
(serious side effects may be associated with the use of this medication in the cat-
leukopenia). Fungal vaccines have shown little efficacy in controlling dermatophytosis
Animals receiving this vaccine may demonstrate suppressed clinical signs but will
culture positive posing a zoonotic threat.
and recontamination are a constant problem. All contaminated equipment, toys, feed
containers, transport cages, scratching posts, grooming supplies, bedding, etc., must
be removed from the environment. Any item that cannot be washed in a bathtub or
washing machine should be destroyed. Salvaged items must be washed in hot water
using an antifungal soap (nolvasan scrub), rinsed, and then soaked in a l:30 dilution
of 0.5% sodium hypochlorite (chlorox) for 10 minutes. This should be repeated a
minimum of 3 times. All surfaces in the environment should be vacuumed, scrubbed,
rinsed, and wiped down with a l:30 dilution of chlorox. Vacuum bags should be
burned or saturated with chlorox. Furnace and air conditioner filters will need to be
changed and discarded once a week. Daily spraying of filters with a nolvasan (2%
chlorhexidine) solution at a l:4 dilution will help decrease the number of fungal spores
that are recirculated. Books, lamps, bric-a-brac, bed linens, and furniture must also be
vacuumed and wiped once a week with an antifungal liquid (chlorox, nolvasan). Rugs
that cannot be destroyed or removed should be washed with an antifungal disinfectant
Steam cleaning fails to maintain water temperatures of above 43°C at the carpet level
and may not be a reliable method to kill fungal spores unless an antifungal disinfectant
701
702
APPENDIXES
(nolvasan) is added to the water. This massive cleanup is mandatory if the owner
wishes to effectively remove fungi from the premises
For additional information: www.wormsandgermsblog.com (ringworm)
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
Elimination Diet Trial
Food allergy is a relatively uncommon problem in the dog and only accounts for
approximately 3-15% of all allergies. Feline food allergy tends to be more common and
has been reported to cause up to 40% of cases. Food allergies can occur in animals as
a reaction to any ingredient in their food. This most often is a protein component (i.e..
beef, chicken, fish, egg. etc.), or a carbohydrate (i.e., corn, wheat, soy, etc.), but may
also be an additive or preservative. The onset of the problem is usually not related to
any diet change, because most animals have been eating the offending food for 2 or
more years. The problem can start at any age.
The most common sign is itching. This is seen as foot licking. leg chewing.
face rubbing. and armpit, belly, and groin licking. Inflammation and redness of
the skin may occur. Head shaking and ear infections are also common. Food
allergy may also cause unusual signs such as vomiting and diarrhea. Clinical
signs associated with food allergy persist as long as the aggravating food item is
present.
There is no quick and simple test available to diagnose food allergy. Blood
tests and intradermal skin tests are not useful in diagnosing food allergy. The
only method to identify food allergy is to feed the pet a restricted diet for 812
weeks to determine whether there is improvement of clinical signs. If there are
any secondary infections present (bacteria/yeast), they need to be treated during
the diet trial.
Since most commercial diets contain similar types of ingredients, simply changing
the brand of food is unlikely to help. A diet that contains a protein source that the
pet has NEVER eaten must be fed exclusively for 8-12 weeks. This is called a hypoal-
lergenic diet, because an allergic reaction should not occur with a food that the
animal has never eaten. It often takes the full 8-l2 weeks for the diet to work and
alleviate the clinical signs. No other foods, treats, table scraps, rawhides, chewable
medications (such as flavored heartworm medication), or anything that is flavored
can be fed during the trial.
 Diets should be introduced slowly over a 4-5 day period by gradually mixing the
new food in with the former diet. This will minimize the change of gastrointestinal
upset (such as vomiting or loose stool). Once the diet is being fed as the only food
source, this is considered Day 1 of the 8-12 week trial.
If there has been slight to no improvement after the 8-12 week trial, the pet has
eaten nothing but this diet, and all the infections that have been present during the trial
have been concurrently treated, then there is most likely another underlying cause of
the skin problem, such as airborne pollens.
E0Z
704
APPENDIXES
The following points are key to the success of this diagnostic protocol:
■ Feed your pet only the prescribed diet. No other foods or treats are allowed.
■ Make sure that all family members and friends know that your pet is receiving a
special diet, and they should not give outside food.
■ If you need to use treats for rewards or training purposes, use some of the prescribed
diet.
■ If you have other pets of the same species in your house, feed them the same diet
or feed them separately.
■ Keep your pet out of the room during meals to keep him or her from picking up
dropped food.
■ If pills are prescribed for your pet, don't hide them in anything other than the
prescribed diet. If giving medication is a problem, please discuss with your
veterinarian.
■ Flavored products, such as those found in medications, toothpaste, and certain
plastic toys, must be avoided during the diet trial.
■ If your pet is in the habit of eating dropped food or garbage when exercised outside,
keep him/her on a leash.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
Granulomatous Sebaceous
Adenitis
1. Alopecic and scaling disorder of the skin due to a granulomatous destruction of the
sebaceous glands
2. Breeds affected include: standard poodle, Akita, Samoyed, vizsla, and other pure and
mixed breeds
3. Suspect an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance
4. Cause/pathogenesis: Unknown. Theories include:
■ Sebaceous gland destruction is a developmental and inherited defect.
■ Sebaceous gland destruction is an immune-mediated disease directed against a
component of the sebaceous gland.
■ The initial defect is a keratinization defect that leads to obstruction of the seba-
ceous glands and the keratinization defects are the result of a defect or abnormality
in lipid metabolism (toxic intermediate metabolite, etc.).
5. Clinical presentation: Bilaterally symmetrical heavy adherent scale on the dorsum of
the body to include the head and the extremities (silver white scale that encases tufts
of matted hair-keratin casting: lesions are usually not malodorous and are not greasy
6. Secondary bacterial infections are common, especially in the Akita breed.
 DIAGNOSTIC TESTS CURRENTLY AVAILABLE: Cutaneous biopsy
TREATMENT: This dermatosis is not curable; only controllable (in some cases).
TOPICAL THERAPY
1. Keratolytic shampoos
2. Keratolytic rinses and sprays.
3. Emollient rinses, soaks, sprays, topical spot-on preparation_
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY
/BLACKWELL
705
House Dust Mite:
Controlling Exposure
House dust mites are microscopic and ubiquitous. They feed on human and animal
dander, skin scales, and hair. They are frequently found in beds, mattresses, carpets,
sofas, and pet bedding. Mites can flourish in the home environment because the tem-
perature and humidity are optimum (50-70% relative humidity)
Hypersensitivity to house dust mites is a common problem for both animals and
man. It is difficult and even impossible to eliminate mites from the environment of an
allergic patient. An effective environmental control regimen can help to decrease the
numbers of mites and therefore minimize the patients' discomfort. Hyposensitization
therapy (allergy vaccines) also can be effective in controlling or reducing the clinical
symptoms associated with mite allergy.
The following steps may help control mite populations (special attention should be
given to the sleeping areas of the allergic pet):
1. Avoid the use of carpeting. Bare floors, such as hardwood, vinyl, or tile are best; if
carpet must be used, low pile is preferable.
 2. Remove upholstered furniture, books, records, piles of newspapers and maga-
zines, stuffed animals, wall hangings. and other “dust collectors" from the
room.
3. Use only synthetic material in the pets bedding. Feathers, wool, or horsehair stuff-
ing should be avoided. Remember, cedar shavings are often a source of allergic
dermatitis in the dog.
4. Wash all bedding frequently in hot water.
5. If your pet sleeps on the bed, encase mattresses and box springs in airtight plastic
and seal zippers on these casings with tape. Use washable blankets and mattress
pads. The most dust-free type of bed is a waterbed.
6. Plants can also be “dust collectors" and should be removed.
7. Change the furnace and air conditioning filters frequently Electrostatic filters may
be more effective in filtering out dust, mites, and inhalant particles. No specific
research has been performed on these filters and their performance in controlling
clinical signs of allergy in the dog.
8. Use air conditioning to control the temperature during warm months. Central
air conditioning is preferred, but window units are also helpful. Try to main-
tain the humidity levels between 30% and 50%. Dehumidifiers may prove
beneficial.
9. Vacuum floors, wet-mop, and dust with a damp cloth daily. The room should be
properly aired after vacuuming.
10. Groom animal frequently, preferably outside of the house environment.
706
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS
707
HOUSE DUST ALLERGY
House dust allergy is common even in clean homes. House dust is a mixture of many
substances. Its content varies from home to home, depending on the type of furniture,
building materials, presence of pets, moisture and other factors. A speck of dust may
contain fabric fibers, human skin particles, animal dander, microscopic mites, bacteria,
parts of cockroaches, mold spores, food particles and other debris. In people, house
dust is a major cause of year-round runny or stuffy nose, itchy, watery eyes and sneez-
ing for allergy sufferers. Dust also makes people with asthma experience wheezing.
coughing and shortness of breath.
Is dust allergy a sign of a dirty house?
No. A dirty house can make a house dust allergy worse, however, normal housekeeping
procedures may not be enough to get rid of house dust allergy symptoms. This is
because many of the substances in dust cannot be removed by normal cleaning proce-
dures. Vigorous cleaning methods can put more dust in to the air making symptoms
worse.
Is house dust allergy seasonal?
In the United States, dust mite populations tend to peak in July and August, and their
allergen levels stay high through December. Mite allergen levels are lowest in late
spring. Some dust mite-sensitive people report that their symptoms get worse during
the winter. Thats because mite fecal particles and pieces of dead mites, both of which
trigger dust mite allergy, are still present. Mold levels tend to peak during the summer
months depending on where you live since some tropical areas have molds year-round
There is also evidence that cockroaches have a seasonal pattern, peaking in late summer.
Why is mold present in house dust?
Molds are commonly found in outdoor air. However, any house can develop a mold
problem given the right conditions. You might not see it growing on the walls, but it
may still be present in your home. Molds require 2 factors to grow indoors: (1) free
moisture that can occur in the form of relative humidity above 50 percent, leakage from
pipes or foundation, or any ongoing source of water; and (2) something to grow on.
Molds particularly like to grow on wallboard, wood or fabrics, but will grow virtually
any place if they are given a chance.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
Malassezia Dermatitis
(Yeast)
Malassezia pachydermatis is a saprophytic yeast that is commonly found on both normal
and abnormal skin. It is often difficult to ascertain whether the yeast organisms are a
primary contributor (yeast hypersensitivity) to the clinical lesions present or whether
they function as merely secondary invaders (underlying etiology; allergic dermatitis.
etc.) of compromised skin. Clinical lesions most commonly associated with Malassezia
dermatitis include: erythema (red skin) scaling dermatitis (yellow-gray), greasy surface,
crusting, and malodor. The animal is extremely pruritic (itchy) and uncomfortable.
P s          
control pruritus. Approximately 50% of affected animals have an underlying etiology
(ex.: allergy), which must be explored.
Specific and accurate diagnosis of Malassezia dermatitis is often difficult and may
rely heavily on clinical evaluation of the cutaneous lesions. Treatment involves a com-
bination of oral (ketoconazole, fluconazole, itraconazole, or terbinafine) and topical
shampoo/antifungal medications. Many of these cases require chronic maintenance
shampoo therapy to maintain the yeast population at an acceptable and nonclinical
level. Some patients require long-term oral medication as well to control these
symptoms.
NOTES:
RECHECK
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
804
Mold Allergies:
Controlling Exposure
Most fungi, molds, grow best in warm and humid climates, yet they may be found in
all types of regions from the tropics to the arctic and desert regions. Because of their
ubiquitous nature, molds may be a source of environmental inhalant/percutaneous
allergens in the home. Fungi are generally dependent on other organic substances for
nutrients and energy. Molds are often found in refrigerators, shower stalls, basements.
houseplant mulch, filters used with evaporative coolers, and humidifiers.
The following are most often found in the home:
1. Alternaria: window, doorway basement, evaporative cooling and humidifier
2. Aspergillus: houseplants, kitchen mold
3. Cladosporium & Hormodendrum: bathrooms, shower stalls, condensate on tile,
behind baseboards, wood paneling and wood floors
4. Penicillium: kitchen mold
5. Rhizopus: kitchen mold
6. Christmas trees are frequently a source.
7. Water damage from flooding can potentiate mold growth.
Mold allergies can contribute to year-round clinical symptoms with flare-ups during
the winter months or during humid seasons. Change filters on cooling systems, fur-
naces, and humidifiers frequently. Use dehumidifers to reduce the population of mold
 spores. Avoid houseplants because the mulch tends to encourage mold growth.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
60
Otitis (Ear Disease)
Otitis externa is a common clinical problem among dogs (less frequent in cats) and is
often a frustrating disease to cure or even control.
PRIMARY AND PREDISPOSING CAUSES OF OTITIS EXTERNA
1. Parasites
2. Allergy
3. Contact Irritant
4. Keratinization disorders (epidermal maturation problems)
5.Autoimmune disorders
6. Foreign body
7. Metabolic diseases
8. Conformational abnormalities (alter the microenvironment)
 9. Microanatomy variability among species (cockers, Labs and spaniels have been
found to have more apocrine glands and hair follicles than mongrel dogs)
10. Excessive moisture (medications, swimming, etc., can macerate the tissue)
1l. Obstructive ear disease can trap moisture and debris.
12. Overzealous cleaning
SECONDARYINVADERS
1. Yeast (Malassezia pachydermatis)
2. Gram-positive bacteria (ex.: staphylococcus)
3. Gram-negative bacteria (ex.: pseudomonas, proteus, etc.)
COMPLICATIONS THAT CONTRIBUTE TO CHRONICITY
OF LESIONS
1. Chronic inflammation causes the epithelial lining of the ear canal to be thrown into
proliferative folds, which hinders cleansing.
 2. Chronic inflammation stimulates epidermal thickening, enlarged ceruminous glands
and fibrosis (scar), which may lead to a stenotic (narrowed) canal.
 3. Scar tissue and calcification may result from chronic inflammation: may cause exces-
sive discomfort and trap infection.
710
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS
711
THERAPY
1. Routine
cleansing with
number of times per
week
*Remember to wait 15 minutes after cleansing before medication is applied (the cleanser
may dilute the medication)
2. Topical Medication(s)
#of drops.
#times per day.
for
weeks
#of drops.
#times per day.
for
weeks
 Alternate daily
Otitis {Ear Disease) Levels
LEVEL I
Stages of Severity
Diagnosed/Therapeutic Option
Otitis externa 
Cytology.
Flush without sedation 
Topical therapy
LEVEL II
Stages of Severity
Diagnosed/Therapeutic Option
 Recurrent Otitis Externa
Cytology
C/S of external canal
Flush under sedation
Topical ± oral therapy
LEVEL III
Stages of Severity
Diagnosed/Therapeutic Option
Severe Otitis Externa
Cytology
(Initial or Recurrent)
C/s from external canal
 Suspect/Confirmed Otitis Media
C/s from middle ear
Video-otoscopy (diagnose therapeutic)
 procedure under general anesthesia
 Topical & oral therapy
LEVEL IV
Stages of Severity
Diagnosed/Therapeutic Option
'End Stage" Otitis Externa/Media
Total ear canal ablation (TECA)
Inability to Medically Treat the Ears
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
Pemphigus Foliaceus
Pemphigus foliaceus (PF) is noncontagious disease that affects the skin of dogs, cats.
horses, and people. PF is a disease of both the immune system and the skin. The
problem begins when the animals body recognizes parts of its own skin as foreign. As
a result of this abnormal immune response, the skin is damaged. In a sense, the animal
is trying to reject its skin, just as it would try to reject a viral or bacterial infection.
Why does the immune system recognize its own body as foreign? Various explana-
tions have been proposed and include genetic, environmental, drug, and viral factors.
 In dogs, there is some evidence for a genetic component, as PF is seen most commonly
in certain breeds. In particular, Akitas, Doberman pinschers, schipperkes, dachshunds.
and chow chows may have a higher incidence of PF than other breeds. To date, no
breeding studies have been performed to document a hereditary role for PF and, in
man, genetic studies have shown PF is not a purely hereditary disease. It is more often
thought of as a hereditary ability to develop PF, assuming that certain other necessary
ingredients are present.
PF may occur in both males and females. The age of onset is variable, because the
disease has been seen in dogs and cats less than 1 year of age and over l0 years of age;
however, most cases start in mature adults. The skin lesions first start as small red spots
that rapidly form a pustule (pimple), then crust. In most cases, the major lesions noted
by the owner are the red spots and the thick crusts (scabs) that form over the spots.
The crusts are most common on the nose, face, ears, and scrotum of male dogs, but
they can be found all over the body. Itchiness is variable; some animals are not bothered
at all and others are constantly rubbing and scratching their skin. Some animals may
develop secondary bacterial infections as a result of the damage to the skin caused by
the disease or the rubbing.
Occasionally the owner will notice that the pet is depressed, lethargic, and does not
want to eat. During this time numerous areas will develop crusts almost as if a wave of
crusting spread over the body. Rarely, these animals will also develop swelling of the
legs and/or abdomen. Lameness from sore or stiff joints may be seen during flare-ups.
The definitive diagnosis of PF should always be made prior to treatment because
numerous other more common diseases can look like PF A diagnosis via biopsy should
be made so that the correct and appropriate treatment(s) can be started as soon as
possible.
To diagnose PF, small pieces of skin will have to be surgically removed (biopsy) and
sent to labs where the diagnosis can be confirmed. Occasionally multiple biopsies may
need to be taken to find one that will confirm the diagnosis. Site selection for the biopsy
is very important.
712
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS
713
Once the diagnosis of PF has been made, several treatment options are available. All
are therefore called immunosuppressive drugs. Each drug available has positive and
negative effects. Rarely, serious side effects can occur, but frequent monitoring reduces
chances of treatment complications. In most cases PF can be controlled so that the skin
is normal with only rare flare-ups; however, treatment is usually needed for life. Periodic
monitoring will be required to watch for any side effects of the drug therapy that is
being used. In addition, there are some cases that cannot be controlled with the treat-
ments currently available.
There is no test that will determine what form of treatment your pet will best respond
to. Several different drugs or combinations of drugs may need to be trialed before you
know whether your pets disease can be controlled.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
Scabies
Scabies (sarcoptic mange) is caused by the mite, Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis. Mites live
in the superficial layers of the skin where they burrow, breed, and lay eggs. Scabies
mites do not survive for prolonged periods without the host, so they are generally
passed by direct contact with other dogs. This contact may occur through play, board-
ing. grooming, or any place that you dog has had contact with other dogs. However,
in a number of cases no known contact has occurred.
The hallmark of this disease is intense pruritus (itching) that may only be partially
responsive to steroids or other drugs. Classic scabies will manifest as red papules
(bumps) to the chest, abdomen and, as time progresses, a thick scale or crusting will
develop on the ears, elbows, and hocks. Fever, lymph node enlargement, and weight
loss with secondary bacterial infection may occur.
DIAGNOSIS
To definitively diagnose this disease, the mites must be seen microscopically on skin
scraping or fecal exam. However, because the number of mites may be very small, this
may be very difficult to do. Inability to find mites does NOT eliminate this disease. If
sarcoptic mange is suspected, it should be treated. This may be the only way to diagnose
the disease and cure your dog.
Once the adult female lays an egg, it takes 17-2l days for that egg to hatch and grow
into an adult mite. As a result, treatment is continued throughout the life cycle.
TREATMENT
Several medications are effective in killing sarcoptes mites. Some of the choices include
injectables, topical spot-on products, oral medications, and body dips/rinses.
Medication chosen
Frequency of application
ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL
Clean the animals immediate environment and bedding. No specific disinfectant/
product is needed. Scabies mites do not thrive off of a host yet large numbers of mites
714
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS
715
on the dog may increase the chance of mite populations present in the environment
This may increase transmission to other pets or people in the household. The area
should thus be fumigated/treated with a “flea product" to eliminate mite numbers in
the household.
ZOONOSIS (CONTAGION TO PEOPLE)
Sarcoptes mites much prefer the pet in the household to the human inhabitants. Some
people are more susceptible than others. In the event of zoonosis, contact your physi-
cian and notify him/her that your pet has been diagnosed with sarcoptes scabiei mite
infestation. They will likely prescribe a topical permethrin cream to eliminate the mites.
 The clinical signs often associated with human exposure are small red papules (bumps
along the waist, chest, and arms) that are often very itchy. Scabies infestation in people
 is often self limiting and may require therapy.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
BLACKWELL
Shampoo Therapy:
Instructions
A specific shampoo therapy has been selected for your pet. This shampoo is medicated.
and the instructions must be followed closely if your pet is to receive the full benefit
 of the treatment. Most shampoos and topical rinses are to be used as an adjunct to other
forms of therapy. Shampoos are often recommended as a maintenance protocol to guard
against relapse of the dermatologic condition and to prolong the health of the skin.
STEPS TO FOLLOW:
1. The air temperature in the bathing area should be warm; the water temperature
should be lukewarm, unless otherwise specified. Wet the coat thoroughly.
2. Pay particular attention to the affected areas of your pets skin. Apply sufficient
shampoo to these affected areas and rub in well. Then proceed to lather the rest of
your pets haircoat. Some shampoos will lather better than others although the active
ingredients may be equally effective.
3. Allow the shampoo to remain on the coat for l5-20 minutes. Contact time with the
shampoo is very important. For best results, use a timer. If bathing in the backyard,
you may allow the dog to run free while soapy for the required 15-20 minutes.
4. Rinsing is as important as shampooing. Unrinsed shampoo may cause irritation to
the skin.
5. Apply a medicated conditioner or rinse to the skin and coat. If indicated, lightly rinse
the coat after application.
6. Towel dry. You may use a blow dryer, but be sure that the temperature is warm and
not hot.
7. Repeat the shampoo every
days for
weeks.
And then
days for
weeks
Medicated shampoo
Medicated Rinse
Topical Ointment/Spray/etc.
Additional
Tx:
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
XWILEY-
/BLACKWELL
716
Surgical/Procedure
Discharge Instructions
 Your pet had general anesthesia today so you can expect him/her to be very sleepy
for the next day or two. If you are concerned or feel your pet is abnormally lethargic,
please contact the office immediately.
 Please provide a quiet area for your pet to rest tonight (away from other animals.
children, etc.)
Give only small amounts of food and water tonight. Excited or stressed patients tend
to overeat/drink, which can lead to serious problems.
 Your pet has a bandage on the front leg from where the IV catheter was placed. This
can come off later tonight.
 On the rear leg is the Fentanyl patch, which is a time-release pain medication. This
should be removed on
 To remove, pull the tab of the tape covering the
patch and discard. Grasp the patch by the edges to peel off Dispose of by flushing.
Wash the area with soap and water after removing.
* The Fentanyl patch can cause excess sedation/euphoria in some patients. Please
call us immediately if your pet's behavior is abnormal.
1
Begin all medications tomorrow.
■The sutures are absorbable and do not need to be removed. Sometimes there can be
a delay in absorption, in that case they can be manually removed.
■ It is important that he/she does not lick or scratch at the sutures, because this may
cause the incision to open or a scar to develop.
 Keep the incision clean/dry. Do not bathe your pet for 2 weeks following surgery. If
bathing is absolutely necessary, apply ointment to the surgery site prior to wetting
pet for the bath.
■ The histopathology results take between 7-l4 days. We will contact you as soon as
we receive the results
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
BLACKWELL
717
Symptoms of
Cushing's Syndrome
DOES YOUR DOG HAVE CUSHING'S SYNDROME?
There are many clinical signs associated with Cushings syndrome (also called hyperad-
renocorticism) in dogs. These signs usually come on very gradually and, because of this
slow onset, these changes are often written off as part of the normal aging process. The
following is a list of common symptoms that owners might observe in their pet at home.
1. Owners often notice that the water bowl must be filled more frequently than in the
past. Some dogs are unable to hold their bladder all night and begin crying to go
outside during the night when previously this was unnecessary.
 2. Urinary tract infections may also be detected and true urine leaking may be observed.
How Much Water Consumption Is Normal?
Each day a dog should drink about l cup of water for each l0 pounds of body weight.
Increased or Even Ravenous Appetite
This symptom often leads dogs to beg incessantly or steal food from the garbage. It is
important for an owner not to be fooled by the pet's good appetite; eating well is not
necessarily a sign of normal health.
Potbellied Appearance
This symptom, present in over 90% of Cushings syndrome dogs, results from hormonal
redistribution of body fat plus a breakdown of abdominal musculature.
Muscle Weakness
Muscle protein is broken down in Cushings syndrome. The result may be seen as
exercise intolerance, lethargy or reluctance to jump up on furniture or climb stairs.
Skin Disease
1. The classical signs of endocrine (hormonal) skin diseases are
a. Hair loss on the main body sparing the head and legs
b. Thin, wrinkled skin with poor wound healing
718
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS
719
c. Hair that does not grow back after clipping.
d. Blackheads and darkening of the skin, especially on the abdomen.
e. Persistent or recurring skin infections (especially if the dog is not itchy during
times when the skin infection is cleared)
2. Another condition of the skin that may be observed is called Calcinosis Cutis, in
which calcium deposits occur within the skin. These are raised, hard, almost rocklike
areas that can occur almost anywhere on the body.
3. Some other notable findings might include: excessive panting and shortness of
breath, infertility, extreme muscle stiffness (called pseudomyotonia—a very rare
symptom in Cushing's disease), and high blood pressure.
WHEN CATS DEVELOP CUSHING'S DISEASE
In cats, the clinical features of Cushings disease are similar to those in dogs: excess
water consumption, muscle wasting, potbellied appearance, thin coat, and skin abnor-
malities. Some cats develop a peculiar curling-in of their ear tips. An important differ-
ence to note is that while only 10% of dogs with Cushings disease develop diabetes
mellitus, 80% of cats with Cushings disease develop diabetes mellitus. Diabetes in an
animal with Cushing's disease is very difficult to control until the Cushings disease is
controlled.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
Treatment: Pituitary
Cushing's Syndrome
LYSODREN: THE TRADITIONAL THERAPY
Lysodren (generically known as mitotane and chemically known as o.p'-DDD) has been
the only treatment for pituitary-dependent Cushings disease until relatively recently.
It is convenient to use and relatively inexpensive, though it does have the potential for
very serious side effects. Because this medication has been in use for canine Cushing's
disease for decades, most veterinarians have extensive experience with its use and with
the monitoring tests needed to prevent side-effect difficulties. One of the disadvantages
How This Medication Works
Lysodren should be considered as a chemotherapy drug. It actually erodes the layers
of the adrenal gland that produce corticosteroid hormones. The pituitary tumor con-
tinues to secrete excess stimulation, but the adrenal gland is no longer capable of excess
hormone production in response. Problems result when too much of the adrenal cortex
is eroded. Short-term lysodren reactions are common (approximately 30% of dogs will
have a problem at some point), necessitating the use of prednisone as an antidote pill
In event of such short-term reactions, lysodren is discontinued until the adrenal gland
can regrow and therapy is resumed, possibly at a lower dose. Sometimes excess adrenal
erosion is permanent and the dog must be treated for cortisone deficiency. This is more
serious and the potential for this kind of reaction has been the driving force behind the
search for better medications for the treatment of pituitary-dependent Cushings disease.
How This Medication Is Used
There are two phases to the treatment of Cushings disease with lysodren: an induction
phase to gain control of the disease and a lower dose maintenance phase, which ideally
lasts for the animals entire life.
Induction
1. During induction, the pet owner receives a prescription for lysodren plus a bottle off
prednisone tablets to be used as antidotes should any lysodren reactions occur. Be
sure you understand which pill is which. Lysodren is given daily with meals during
this period so that the plump, excessively stimulated adrenal gland can be rapidly
720
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS721
shaved down to the desired size. It is very important that ;lysodren be given with
food or it will not be absorbed into your dog's body. A test called an ACTH stimula-
tion test (the same test that may have been used to diagnose Cushings disease origi-
nally) is used to confirm that the induction endpoint has been reached. An ACTH
stimulation test is generally scheduled for the 8th or 9th day of induction; however.
it is important that you recognize the signs of endpoint should they occur sooner.
2. You should call your veterinarian if any of the following signs of induction endpoint
are observed:
a. Diarrhea or vomiting
b. Appetite loss (this may be as subtle as less enthusiasm toward eating when the
food is served, not running for the bowl, etc.)
c. Decrease in water consumption (it may be helpful for you to measure water
consumption during the induction period)
d. Lethargy or listlessness
3. If any of these signs occur, let your veterinarian know. It may be time for an early
ACTH stimulation test or possibly even for an antidote pill. It is a good idea to main-
tain close email or telephone contact with your vet during induction because it is at
this point that a dog becomes at risk for reaching an early induction endpoint
4. If none of the above signs are noted, the ACTH stimulation test proceeds as scheduled
on the 8th or 9th day of induction. If this test indicates that sufficient adrenal erosion
has taken place, the lysodren dose is given once or twice a week instead of daily and
the dog has successfully entered maintenance. If the test indicates that more adrenal
10th-l6th day of induction, but others require more time, especially if they are taking
concurrent drugs that alter the metabolism of lysodren (such as phenobarbital).
Maintenance
1. After achieving maintenance, another ACTH stimulation test is recommended after
about a month and then at least twice a year. Approximately 50% of dogs will
experience a relapse at some point and require a second round of induction.
a. Full reversal of clinical signs associated with Cushing's disease can be expected after
4 to 6 months of lysodren therapy. Usually the first sign to show improvement is the
excess water consumption. The last sign to show change will be hair regrowth.
b. If appetite loss, vomiting. diarrhea, or listlessness occur at any time during
maintenance, a lysodren reaction should be suspected. The veterinarian should
be notified; it may be time for one of the prednisone antidote pills. A lysodren
reaction generally reverses within 30 minutes after an antidote pill
TRILOSTANE
1. Trilostane is an inhibitor of an enzyme called 3-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase.
This enzyme is involved in the production of several steroids, including cortisol.
722APPENDIXES
Inhibiting this enzyme inhibits the production of cortisol. Several studies have deter-
mined this medication to be effective in the treatment of pituitary-dependent
Cushing's disease, probably as effective as lysodren.
2. Trilostane is given once or twice a day with food. Common side effects are mild
lethargy and appetite reduction, especially when medication is started and the body
adapts to its hormonal changes. Addisonian reactions have been reported in which
the adrenal cortex dies. Most reactions are minor and can be reversed with discon-
tinuation of trilostane; however, permanent Addisonian reactions are possible, just
as with lysodren. Although these permanent reactions are generally dose-dependent
with lysodren, they are idiosyncratic with trilostane, meaning that they can occur
unpredictably and at any dose. For this reason, monitoring blood tests are just as
important with trilostane as they are with lysodren. In two studies, the risk of a
permanent or life-threatening Addisonian reaction was 2-3% with trilostane and
2-5% with Lysodren.
3. For many years trilostane was not available in the U.s. and had to be obtained
from another country (usually the U.K.) with permission from the FDA. As of
2009, trilostane (brand name Vetoryl@) has become licensed as a veterinary product
in the U.S. and is readily available to most veterinarians through their regular
distributors.
4. As with lysodren, the dose is modified according the results of periodic ACTH stimu-
lation tests (at 10-14 days, 30 days, 90 days, and then every 6 months). One might
ask why one might consider trilostane given that its monitoring is similar to that of
lysodren while its dosing schedule is less convenient. Initially it was believed that
because trilostane uses an enzyme inhibitor with reversible effects, trilostane would
not have the potential to cause a life-threatening Addisonian reaction. This is no
longer felt to be true, but at least there is an alternative effective medication for pets
that do not tolerate lysodren or who have had difficulty achieving regulation with
lysodren.
Advantages of Trilostane over Lysodren
Trilostane does not erode the adrenal cortex. It acts as an enzyme inhibitor and the
inhibition it causes is fully reversible. It is unclear why Addisonian reaction is still
possible with this medication. In theory it should be safer.
Disadvantages of Trilostane Compared to Lysodren
1. Because initial references to trilostane suggested it was safer than lysodren, it is pos-
sible for a pet owner to have a false sense of security and ignore important signs of
drug reaction.
 2. A precise dosing regimen for trilostane has not yet been worked out.
3. Lysodren costs substantially less since it is given less frequently
4. Trilostane is given once or twice daily: lysodren is given only once or twice a week
5. There is currently little experience with trilostane in the U.S. veterinary community.
Your veterinarian may require periodic consultation with other experts.
APPENDIX D: CLIENT EDUCATION HANDOUTS723
L-DEPRENYL (BRAND NAME: ANIPRYL)
1. For the treatment of Cushings disease, L-Deprenyl represents a completely different
approach. Rather than trying to interfere with the adrenal gland's overproduction of
steroid hormones, L-Deprenyl addresses the pituitary tumor directly.
2. Studies with L-Deprenyl began when it was found that this medication might be
helpful in treating humans with Parkinson's disease. Research in dogs, however,
uncovered some surprising results involving ACTH release from the pituitary
gland.
3. Research using L-Deprenyl showed us that ACTH secretion in the “intermediate
area" of the pituitary is governed by the neurotransmitter: dopamine. When
dopamine levels are high, ACTH secretion shuts down
4. Pituitary tumors are not very responsive to normal regulatory mechanisms in the
body, but most pituitary tumors in dogs with Cushings disease are not located in
the intermediate pituitary area. This means the intermediate area is still able to
respond normally to dopamine regulation.
5. So how do we raise dopamine levels in the pituitary gland? L-Deprenyl inhibits the
enzymes involved in degradation of dopamine. This means that the dopamine present
lasts much longer. It also stimulates the production of other neurotransmitters that
serve to stimulate dopamine production. It is also able to synergize with dopamine
as dopamine binds to the intermediate pituitary gland. More dopamine means less
ACTH release overall, which means less steroid production by the adrenal glands.
Side Effects Have an Especially Low Incidence with L-Deprenyl Use
(APPROXIMATELY 5% EXPERIENCED MINOR NAUSEA, RESTLESSNESS, OR
REDUCED HEARING CAPACITY)
Does it really work? The metabolic breakdown products of L-Deprenyl are amphet-
amine and methamphetamine (strong stimulants that also suppress hunger). When
dogs with Cushings disease become more active and their excessive appetites become
more normal, is it because their Cushing's disease is controlled or because of the stimu-
lant by-products of L-Deprenyl? No one knows and because of the way L-Deprenyl
works in the pituitary, the usual monitoring tests to evaluate Cushings treatment prog-
ress are not helpful. In independent studies, about 1 dog in 5 was felt to improve on
L-Deprenyl. In studies funded by the manufacturer, about 1 dog in 5 did not improve
on L-Deprenyl.
Advantages of L-Deprenyl over Lysodren
Because of the unique mechanism of this medication, Addisons disease is not a concern
and thus no monitoring tests are required with the use of L-Deprenyl. L-Deprenyl is
the only medication approved by the FDA for the treatment of Cushings disease in the
dog. For frail dogs with only minor Cushings symptoms, L-Deprenyl may be an excel-
lent choice.
724
APPENDIXES
Advantages of Lysodren over L-Deprenyl
L-Deprenyl is substantially more expensive than lysodren. Response to L-Deprenyl is
not reliable or may be partial or may take some time. The usual protocol if no response
has been seen after 2 months of therapy is to double the dose and continue for l more
month before determining the patient to be a nonresponder and selecting another
 medication. With lysodren, response is rapid and documentable with testing.
WHAT IS ADDISONS DISEASE/ADDISONIAN CRISIS?
1. Addison's disease, also called hypoadrenocorticism, is the opposite of Cushings
disease; Addisons results from a deficiency of cortisone. If lysodren erodes away too
much of the adrenal gland, Addisons disease can be a permanent result. If this
occurs, hormone supplementation becomes needed indefinitely to prevent life-
threatening shock as the body becomes unable to adapt to any sort of stress.
Medications to treat Addisons disease can be very expensive, especially for larger
dogs, and it is generally felt that the induction of Addisons disease is undesirable.
2. It should be noted that there are some specialists who feel that the treatment of
Addison's disease is much simpler than the treatment of Cushings disease. They use
lysodren at high doses on purpose with the goal of inducing Addisons disease and
administering long-term treatment accordingly. This is not a common method of
 treating Cushings disease, and our hospital chooses the more traditional therapy
goals of not treating Cushings disease in this extreme way. Still, should this com-
plication arise, one should be aware that it is a treatable condition.
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
Video-Otoscopy for the Surgical
Management of Otitis Media
and Chronic Otitis Externa
Video Otoscopy offers superior optics and magnification to provide greater detail for
evaluating the condition of the external canal, tympanum, and bullae.
OTITiS MEDIa IS A SURGICAl DISEASe
1. Otitis media is present in approximately 82% of patients with chronic and recurrent 
otitis externa lasting longer than 6 months.
2. The leading cause of treatment failure in otic disease is unrecognized concurrent
otitis media.
INDICATIONS FOR SURGICAL/ANESTHETIC VIDEO OTOSCOPY
1. Chronic recurrent ear infections
2. Purulent otitis externa/media
3. Evaluation of a painful ear
4. Bulging or abnormal tympanum: (may indicate need for myringotomy)
5. Polyps/otic masses
6. PSOM (primary secretory otitis media): primarily Cavalier King Charles spaniels
7. Clinical signs of otitis media: facial nerve palsy, Horners Syndrome, conductive
hearing loss
 8. Clinical signs of otitis interna: ataxia, horizontal or rotary nystagmus (fast away from
the affected ear), strabismus, head tilt toward affected side, circling toward affected
ear, neurologic hearing loss (as documented with Brainstem Auditory Evoked
Response)
9. Final diagnostic/therapeutic option prior to total ear canal ablation (TECA)
ADVANTAGES OF VIDEO OTOSCOPY EVALUATION
UNDER ANESTHESIA
1. Otitis media is always a surgical disease.
2. Able to manipulate the canal and evaluate the patency and health of the proximal
horizontal canal
725
726
APPENDIXES
 3. Evaluate the tympanum and extent of disease into the middle ear; may require myr-
ingotomy (puncture of the pars tensa to remove fluid pressure behind the tympanum
and evaluate bullae content)
4. Removal of exudate to allow for appropriate medication of the bullae and proximal
canal (flush and suction with infusion of medication directly via catheter into the
deep canal)
5. Samples for cytologic evaluation and culture/sensitivity are obtained from the ventral
bullae (the organism and/or antibiotic sensitivity of bacteria obtained from the
middle ear may differ as much as 89.5% from sample collection from the external
canal).
6. Removal of chloesteatoma (congenital or result of chronic otitis media) from the
middle ear cavity
7. Last diagnostic/therapeutic step prior to TECA
ANESTHETIC VIDEO OTOSCOPY/MYRINGOTOMY
■ Improved visualization
Enhanced flushing and debris removal
 Precise sample collection: cytologic sample/culture &r sensitivity from the deep canal
(bullae)/biopsy
 Myringotomy
Increased accuracy of diagnosis
■
Specific therapeutic plan
 Photographic recording for the patient record
■(
Outpatient procedure
Authored by Karen Helton Rhodes, DVM, Dip. ACVD.
WILEY-
/BLACKWELL
Suggested Reading
Ackerman, LJ. Immune-mediated skin diseases. In: Morgan, RV, ed. Handbook of Small Animal Practice,
3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saumders, 1997:941-943.
Angarano, DW. Autoimmune dermatosis. In: Nesbitt, GH, ed. Contemporary Issues in Small Animal
Practice: Dermatology. New York: Churchill Livingstone, 1987:79-94.
De Lorimier, LP Updates on the management of canine epitheliotropic cutaneous I-cell lymphoma.
Vet Clin NA 2006;36:213-228
Fontaine, J, Bovens, C, Bettenay, S, et al. Canine cutaneous epitheliotropic I-cell lymphoma: A review.
Vet Comp Oncol 2009;7:1-14.
Frank, LA. Sex hormone and endocrine look-alike dermatoses. In: Birchard, SJ, Sherding, RG, eds.
Saunders Manual of Small Animal Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia: Saumders, 2006:517
Gross, IL, Ihrke, PJ, Walder, EJ, Affolter, VK. Skin Diseases of the Dog and Cat, 2nd ed. Oxford:
Blackwell Science, 2005.
Gumn-Moore, DA, et al. Cystitis in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 1998;213:1282-1286.
Hartmann, K, Donath, A, Kraft, W. AZT in the treatment of feline immunodeficiency vinus. Feline
Pract 1995;23:16.
Veterinary Therapy IV. St. Louis: Saumders, 2009:468-473.
Moore, PF, Affolter, VK, Vermau, W. Immunophenotyping in the dog. In: Bonaguar, JD. Kirks Current
Veterinary Therapy XIll: Small Animal Practice. Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, 2000:505-509.
         'o  '  '
histologically confirmed superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND). Vet Denmatol 2002;(13):177-86.
Power, HT, Ihrke, PJ. Selected feline eosinophilic skin diseases (eosinophilic granuloma complex)
In: Kunkle, G, ed. Feline dermatoses. Vet Clin North Am Sm Anim Pract 1995;25:833-850.
Rosenkrantz, Ws. Feline eosinophilic granuloma complex. In: Griffn, CE, Kwochka, KW, MacDonald,
JM, eds. Current Veterinary Dermatology: The Science and Art of Therapy. St. Louis: Mosby, 1993.
-. Pemphigus foliaceous. In: Griffin, CE, Knochka, KW, MacDonald, JM, et al., eds. Current
Veterinary Denmatology. St. Louis: Mosby, 1993:141-148.
Scott, DW, Miller, WH, Griffn, CE. Muller & Kirks Small Animal Dermatology, 6th ed. Philadelphial
Saunders, 2001:608-615.
Scott-Moncrieff, JC. Hypothyroidism. In: Bonagura JD, Iwedt DC, eds. Kirks Current Veterinary
Therapy XIV. St. Louis: Saunders, 2009:185-191.
Slappendel, RJ, Fermer, L. Leishmaniasis. In: Greene CE, ed. Infectious Diseases of the Dog and Cat.
Philadelphia: Saumders, 1998:450-458.
Willemse, A. Atopic skin disease: A review and a reconsideration of diagnostic criteria. J Small Anim
Prac 1986;27:771.
727
mdex
Page numbers in bold font indicate pictures. Page numbers followed by "t" indicate tables.
AA. See Arachidonic acid
hyperadrenocorticism (canine)
Abelcet. See Amphotericin B
clinical [eatures of, 133-136, 134-135
ABLC. See Amphotericin B
diagnostics for, 137-139
Abscesses, 10, 440-442
diflerential diagnosis for, 136
Acantholysis, 41t, 203,227,228
overview of, 132-133, 141
Acanthosis, dehned, 4lt
treatment of, 139-141
Acanthosis nigricans, 463, 466
hyperadrenocorticism (feline), 142-146, 143-144
Accutane. See Isotretinoin
neoplastic, 132, 137, 145
ACD. See Allergic contact dermatitis
noninflammatory alopecia and, 160
Acemannan, for viral infections, 322
Adrenal sex-hormone imbalance, 159-16l, 161-162,
Acepromazine, 587t
166, 168
Acetaminophen, 587t
Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (ADH),
Acetate tape preparations, 23-24, 25
132-133, 136-141
Acetylsalicylic acid. See Aspirin
Adrenalectomy, 139, 145
Acid-{ast bacteria, disinfectants [or, 273t
Adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH), 132, 139,
Acitretin, 374
145. See also ACTH stimulation tests
Acne, 434-436
Adriamycin. See Doxorubicin
Acral lick dermatitis, 443-445, 444-448, 453-457
AErrane. See Isoflurane
Acrodermatitis of bull terrier, 473-475
AK. See Actinic keratoses
ACTH. See Adrenocorticotrophic hormone;
Alcohols, 272t, 273t
Corticotropin
Aldehydes, 272t, 273t
ACTH stimulation tests, 137-138, 145, 541
Aleve. See Naproxen
Acthar. See Corticotropin
Alkalis, 272t, 273t
Actigall. See Ursodiol
Alkeran. See Melphalan
Actinic comedones and furunculosis, 324, 326-327,
 Allergen-specihc immunotherapy, 101-102
326-327, 335-336
 Allergic and hypersensitivity disorders 
Actinic dermatoses
atopic dermatitis
dinical [eatures of, 325-335, 325-335
clinical [eatures of, 95-97, 95-100
diagnostics for, 335-336
diagnostics [or, 100-101
diflerential diagnosis or, 335
dilferential diagnosis or, 97-99
overview of, 324, 337
overview of, 94, 102-103
signalment/history ol, 324-325
signalment/history of, 94-95
treatment of, 336
treatment of, 101-102
Actinic keratoses (AK), 324, 327-329, 328-329,
client education handouts for
338-341, 340, 346
allergic dermatitis, 685-686
Addisons disease, 724
allergy vaccines, 687-688
Adenitis, sebaceous, 193-196, 194, 468-470, 471-
an tihistamine/antipruritic therapy, 698-699
474,495, 705
contact dermatitis, 697
Adenocarcinoma, 59, 240
elimination diet trials, 703-704
Adequan. See Polysullated glucosaminoglycan
mold allergies, 709
ADH. See Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
contact dermatitis, 104-109, 105-107
Adrenal gland disease
dust mites and, 706
in [errets, 540, 540-542, 542
cosinophilic granuloma complex
in hamsters, 551, 551-552
clinical [eatures of, 111-120, 112-120
728
INDEX
diagnostics for, 120-122, 121
Analranil. See Clomipramine
differential diagnosis for, 120
Anal licking, 443, 444, 451-452, 452, 453-457
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 110
Anal sac disorders, 440-442
overview of, 110, 123-124
Ancel. See Cefazolin sodium
signalment/history of, 111
Ancobon. See Flucytosine
treatment of, 122-123, 123
Andro-Cyp. See Testosterone
food adverse reactions, 125-129, 126-127,
Androgens, 159-160
703-704
Android. See Methyltestosterone
mold allergies and, 709
Anemia, nonregenerative, 174
otitis media, externa and, 487, 488, 490-493
Angioedema, drug eruption and, 189, 191
uveodermatologic syndrome, 242-246, 243-244
Anipryl. See Selegiline
vasculitis, 247-253, 248-251
Antibiotics, common systemic, 263-264t. see also
 Allergic contact dermatitis (ACD), overview ol,
Specifc antibiotics
107-109
Antidepressants, for self-injury disorders, 456-457
Allergic miliary dermatitis, 110, 115, 117-118, 121,
Antifungals, for otitis, 512
122-123
Antihistamines
Allergic threshold principle, 94 
for atopic dermatitis, 102
Allopurinol, 297, 587t
for biting and stinging insects, 41l-412
Alopecia
client education handout Ior, 698-699
color dilution, 470-471
for cutaneous mucinosis, 349
[eline symmetrical, 443, 444, 446-449, 448-450,
food adverse reactions and, 128
453-457
for papular mastocytosis, 349
in [errets, 540, 540-541, 542
[or pruritus, 571-572, 572t
generalized/diffuse, 49-59, 50, 55-56, 58-59
for sarcoptid mites, 432
hyperadrenocorticism and, 133, 134
for self-injury disorders, 455
hypothyroidism and, 150-151, 151-152, 154
Antimicrobials, disinfectants for, 273t
noninflammatory
Antinuclear antibody, 226
dinical [eatures of, 166, 167
Antirobe. See Clindamycin
diagnostics Ior, 167-168
Antisedan. See Atipamezole
differential diagnosis Ior, 166-167
Antithyroglobulin antibodies (ATAs), 147, 156
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 159-160
Antivert. See Meclizine
overview of, 159
Ants, 399, 405-407, 407-408
signalment/history of, 160-166, 161-166
Anxiety. See Self-injury disorders
treatment of, 168-169
Apomorphine hydrochloride, 591t
patchy, 44, 45-48
Apoptosis, T-cell-mediated keratinocyte, 204, 228
specihc location, 46, 49
Aprotinin, 139
Alopecia X, 159-161, 161-162, 166, 168
Aquasol A. See Vitamin A
Alpha toxins, 266
Aquasol E. See Vitamin E
Amiglyde-V. See Amikacin
Arachidonic acid (AA), 568, 570-571
Amikacin, 263t, 270, 316, 512, 588t
Aristocort. See Triamcinolone
Amikin. See Amikacin
Arquel. See Meclofenamate sodium
Amino acid infusion, 349, 533
L-Asparaginase, 591t
Aminoglycosides, 31l, 316
Aspiration, overview of, 23, 24
Amitraz, 421-422, 423, 424, 431, 588t
Aspirin, 570-571, 592t
Amitriptyline, 102, 456, 573t, 589t
Astemizole, for pruritus, 572t
Amoxicillin, 316, 589t
Atarax. See Hydroxyzine
Amoxicillin/clavulanate, 122, 263t, 512, 589t
ATAs. See Antithyroglobulin antibodies
Amphotericin B, 290, 291-292, 590t
Atipamezole, 592t
Ampicillin, 316, 590t
Atopic dermatitis
Ampieillin/sulbactam, 591t
clinical [eatures of, 95-97, 95-100
Amyloid, defned, 41t
diagnostics for, 100-101
Amyloidosis
differential diagnosis for, 97-99
cutaneous (primary nodular), 338, 339, 341,
overview of, 94, 102-103
347-350
signalment/history ol, 94-95
sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses and,
treatment of, 101-102
239
Atopica. See Cyclosporine
Anadrol. See Oxymetholone
Atrophy, epidermal, dehned, 41t
730
INDEX
Atropine, 593t
Biaxin. See Clarithromycin
Auranohn, 229,593t
Biomox. See Amoxicillin
Aurothioglucose, 594t
Biopsies, overview ol, 36-4l, 41l-43t
Autoimmune disorders. See Immunologic and
 Biosol. See Neomycin
autoimmune disorders
Bites. See Insects, biting and stinging
Avelox. See Moxilloxacin
Black skin disease, 166
Axid. See Nizatidine
Black widow spiders. See Spider bites
Azathioprine
Blastomycosis, 285-286, 288-289, 288-293
overview of, 594t
 Blindness, uveodermatologic syndrome and, 246
for panniculitis, 202
Bloodwork monitoring, client education handout for,
lor paraneoplastic pemphigus, 349
695
for pemphigus complex and bullous pemphigoid.
Bowen's disease. See Squamous cell carcinoma
229,230
Breed-predisposition dermatoses, 575t-585t
Jor sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses, 239
Brown spiders. See Spider bites
for uveodermatalogic syndrome, 245-246
Budesonide, 596t
[or vasculitis, 252
Bull terrier, acrodermatitis of, 473-475
Azithromycin, 263t, 322, 594t
Bulla, 10, 11, 41t, 485, 502
Azium. See Dexamethasone
Bullous pemphigoid
AZT. See Zidovudine
clinical [eatures of, 222-224, 222-225
Azulhdine. See Sulfasalazine
diagnostics Ior, 226-228, 227
differential diagnosis [or, 226
Bacteria, 31, 34, 273t
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 204
Bacterial infections
overview of, 203, 228-230
 client education handout for, 693-694
signalment/history ol, 205
mycobacterial
treatment of,228-230
cinical [eatures of, 307-309, 308
Bupivacaine hydrochloride, 596t
diagnostics for, 309-310
 Buprenex. See Buprenorphine hydrochloride
differential diagnosis for, 309
Buprenorphine hydrochloride, 596t
overview of, 305, 311312
Buspirone, 573t, 597t
signalment/history ol, 306-307
Butazolidin. See Phenylbutazone
treatment of, 310-311
otitis and, 20t, 494, 497, 504, 507, 508-509, 512
Cadherins, 203-204
pododermatitis and claw disorders Irom, 518, 523,
Calcilerol. See Ergocalcilerol
525
Calcinosis circumscripta, 232, 234-235, 240
zoonotic, 89-90, 267-270
Calcinosis cutis, 133, 135, 232, 233, 235, 239-240
Bacterial overgrowth syndrome (BOG), 259-260
Caliciviruses, 319, 320
Bacterins, 264
CA-MRSA. See Community-acquired MRSA
Bactrim. See Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole
Canine distemper virus, 543-544
 Ballooning degeneration, defned, 41t
Canine [amilial dermatomyositis, 172-178, 174-176
Banamine. See Flunixin meglumine
Caparinia tripolis, 554, 555
Barbering. 564-566, 565-566
Capsaicin, 456
Basal cell tumors
Capstar. See Nilenpyram
dinical [eatures of, 357, 358
Carafate. See Sucralfate
diagnostics Ior, 359-360
Carbocaine-V. See Mepivacaine
diflerential diagnosis for, 359
Carboplatin, 361
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 351
Carcinoma. See Squamous cell carcinoma
overview of, 362
β-Carotene, 336, 349
signalment/history ol, 352, 353, 355
Carprofen, 597t
Baytril. See Enrolloxacin
Castration, alopecia and, 160, 16l, 163
Bees, 399,408-409, 409
CCNU. See Lomustine
 Behavior. See Self-injury disorders
CeeNU. See Lomustine
Benadryl. See Diphenhydramine hydrochloride
Ce[adroxil, 263t,597t
Benign Jamilial chronic pemphigus, 203, 205
Ce[azolin sodium, 598t
Benoxaprolen, 571
Celdinir, 598t
Benzoyl peroxide, 262, 264-265, 274, 435-436, 483
Cefxime, 598t
Bermese mountain dogs, 38l-387, 382
Celotan. See Celotetan disodium
Betamethasone, 230, 595t
Celotaxime sodium, 598t
INDEX
731
Celotetan disodium, 598t
Claw disorders, 514-518, 518-524, 524-525,
Celovecin, overview of, 263t
693694
Celoxitin sodium, 5991
Claw olds, 79-80, 80-82
Ce[podoxime, overview ol, 263t
Claws, 79-80, 80-82
Ce[podoxime proxetil, 599t
CLE (cutaneous lupus erythematosus). See Discoid
Celtazidime, 512, 599t
lupus erythematosus
Celtiolur, 599t
Clelts, dehned, 4lt
Celestone. See Betamethasone
Clemastine, 572t, 604t
Cell Cept. See Mycophenolate
Cleocin. See Clindamycin
Central vestibular disease, 498
Clinalarm EC. See Enilconazole
Cephalexin
Clindamycin
for actinic dermatoses, 336
for acne, 435, 436
[or actinic keratoses, 349
[or eosinophilic granuloma complex, 122
061-68t 'pue uodnua Sn.p
for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus, 270
Jor eosinophilic granuloma complex, 122
for otitis, 512
for otitis, 512
overview ol, 263t, 605t
overview of, 263t, 599t
[or perineal hstulas, 439
[or self-injury disorders, 456
[or sacculitis, 441
Cephalosporins, 263t, 266, 436
Clofazimine, 605t
Ceptaz. See Celtazidime
Clomicalm. See Clomipramine
Ceramides, 483
Clomipramine, 456, 573t, 605t
Cerebrospinal Mluid analysis, 321
Clonazepam, 606t
Cerenia. See Maropitant
Closed-patch testing, 108
Cerumen gland hyperplasia, 493, 493, 494, 495, 498
Clotrimazole, 28l, 559
Cetirizine, 572t, 600t
Cloxacillin sodium, 606t
Challenge diet trials, 128, 703-704
Cloxapen. See Cloxacillin sodium
Charcoal, activated, 600t
Coagulase, 265, 266
Chemotherapy 374, 696, 720-724
Coccidia, disinfectants for, 273t
Cheque Drops. See Mibolerone
Coccidiomycosis, 285-286, 288, 289-292
Cheyletiellosis
Colchicine, 606t
cytology for, 24, 25
Collagenolysis, defned, 4lt
human papules Irom, 89
Colonization, inlection vs., 256
overview of, 426-432, 428, 430, 477, 477
Colony-stimulating [actor, 607t
in rabbits, 559-561, 560, 562
Color dilution alopecia, 470-471
Chinese herbal therapy, 574
Comedo, defined, 5, 7
Chirodiscoides caviae, 548
Comedo syndrome Io Schnauzer, 471, 475
Chlamydiae, disinfectants for, 273t
Comedones
Chlorambucil, 123, 186, 229, 252, 601t
actinic, 324, 326-327, 326-328, 335-336
Chloramphenicol, 263t, 264, 270, 512, 601t
canine hyperadrenocorticism and, 133, 134
Chlorhexidine, 262,264,274,281,483
Community-acquired MRSA, 266-267
Chloromycetin. See Chloramphenico]
Compulsive disorders. See Self-injury disorders
Chlorpheniramine, 572t
Contact dermatitis, 104-109, 105-107,697
Chlorpheniramine maleate, 572t, 601t
Cornification disorders, 458. See also Keratinization
Chlorpromazine, 602t
Chlor-Trimeton. See Chlorpheniramine maleate
Cortel. See Hydrocortisone
Cholesterol clefts, 4lt
Corticosteroids. See also Specifc drugs
Chorioptes spp., 554
for acne, 435
Chrysops spp. See Fly bites
[or actinic dermatoses, 336
Chrysotherapy, 229, 230
for actinic keratoses, 349
Cimetidine, 36l, 572t, 602t
for atopic dermatitis, 102
Ciprolloxacin, 264t, 512, 603t
∫or biting and stinging insects, 411-412
Cisplatin, 361, 603t
for contact dermatitis, 108
Civatte bodies, 41t
for cutaneous mucinosis, 349
c-kit. See Stem cell factor receptor
for drug eruption, erythema multilorme, toxic
Claforan. See Celotaxime sodium
epidermal necrolysis, 192
Clarithromycin, 310-311, 6041
[or eosinophilic granuloma complex, 122-123
Clavamox. See Amoxicillin/clavulanate
for epitheliotropic lymphoma, 374
732
INDEX
or keratinization disorders, 483
[or keratinization disorders, 483
lupus erythematosus and, 186
lupus erythematosus and, 186
or otitis, 512
overview of, 608t
[or papular mastocytosis, 349
for panniculitis, 202
for pemphigus complex and bullous pemphigoid,
for pemphigus complex and bullous pemphigoid,
229-230
229
[or perineal hstulas, 440
[or perineal fstulas, 439
pinnal atrophy secondary to, 493
for pododermatitis and claw disorders, 525
[or sarcoptid mites, 430
for pruritus, 574
for uveodermatalogic syndrome, 245
[or uveodermatalogic syndrome, 246
Corticotropin, 607t
for vasculitis, 252
Cortrosyn. See Cosyntropin
Cydectin. See Moxidectin
Cosequin. See Glucosamine/chondroitin
Cypionate. See Estradiol
sullate
Cyproheptadine, 572t, 609t
Cosyntropin, 607t
Cystadenocarcinomas, 240
COX-2 (cyclooxygenase-2) inhibitors, 361
Cystic ovaries, 160
Creatine kinase, 174
Cysts, defned, 1l, 12
Crust, 5, 6, 41t, 65-75, 73
Cytarabine, 609t
Cryptococcosis, 285-288, 287, 289-292
Cytology
CT scans, for otitis, 502
acetate tape preparation and, 23-24, 24, 25
Ctenocephalides felis felis, 398
[or bacterial folliculitis, 262
Culture and identification
direct impression smears and, 20, 21-23
for actinic dermatoses, 335
[or epitheliotropic lymphoma, 372-373
[or bacteria, 31-35
fne-needle aspiration and, 23, 24
[or bacterial folliculitis, 262
for histiocytosis, 385
for dermatophytosis, 279, 282
[or Malassezia dermatitis, 303
for [ungi, 29, 30, 32-33
[or mast cell tumors, 393
for Malassezia dermatitis, 300
[or mycobacterial infections, 309
[or mycobacterial infections, 309
or nocardiosis, 315
[or nocardiosis, 315-316
otic swabs/smears and, 19-20, 20t
otitis and, 512
overview ol, 16
overview of, 27-29, 28-31
for pododermatitis and claw disorders, 518
Ior pododermatitis and claw disorders, 518
for pre- and paraneoplastic syndromes, 347
sample collection for, 27, 33, 35
[or skin and hair follicle tumors, 360
Culture and sensitivity, 262, 335
skin scrapings and, 17-18, 18-19
Cushing's disease. See Hyperadrenocorticism
trichograms and, 18
Cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis, 338, 339,
[or viral infections, 321
341, 347-350
Cytolysin, 266
Cutaneous histiocytosis, 381-387, 383-384
Cytomel. See Liothyronine
Cutaneous lupus erythematosus (CLE). See Discoid
Cytosar. See Cytarabine
lupus erythematosus
Cytoxan. See Cyclophosphamide
Cutaneous lymphocytosis, 338, 339, 341, 341,
347-350
D-5-W. See Dextrose solution 5%
Cutaneous mucinosis, 338, 339, 341-342, 342,
Dacarbazine, 609t
347-350
Danazol, 609t
Cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma in situ, 318,
Dandruff, walking, 426-432, 428, 430
318,322
Danocrine. See Danazo]
Cutaneous supersensitivity, keratinization disorders
Dantrium. See Dantrolene sodium
secondary to, 476,476
Dantrolene sodium, 610t
Cutaneous xanthoma, 232,238,239,240,521
Dapsone, 229, 252, 253,610t
Cyclophosphamide, 229, 230, 395, 608t
 Decadron. See Dexamethasone
Cyclosporine
Deca-Durabolin. See Nandrolone decanoate
Jor drug eruption, erythema multiforme, toxic
Decaject SP. See Dexamethasone
epidermal necrolysis, 192
Dells, defined, 42t
[or eosinophilic granuloma complex, 123
Delta-Cortel. See Prednisolone
[or granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 196
Deltasone. See Prednisone
[or histiocytosis, 386
D'emblee form of epitheliotropic lymphoma, 368
INDEX
733
Demerol. See Meperidine
generalized/diffuse, 49-59, 50, 55-56, 58-59
Demodex canis, 413, 414, 421
patchy, 44, 45-48
Demodex cati, 413, 416
specihc location, 46, 49
Demodex comei, 413, 415,421
for atopic dermatitis, 97-99
Demodex gatoi, 413, 416, 417, 419, 421
[or bacterial folliculitis, 261
Demodex injai, 413, 415, 416, 421
[or biting and stinging insects, 409-410
Demodicosis
for bullous pemphigoid, 226
acetate tape preparation and, 23-24, 25
[or canine [amilial dermatomyositis, 173
client education handout for, 698-700
[or claw and clawfo]d dermatoses, 79-82, 80-82
clinical [eatures of, 417-419, 418-420
for contact dermatitis, 107-109
diagnostics for, 421
for crusting and erosive/ulcerative dermatoses,
diflerential diagnosis or, 420-421
65-75, 66-74
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 413, 414-416
[or cryptococcosis, coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis,
otitis media, externa and, 488, 488-489
289
overview of, 413, 424-425
[or demodicosis, 420-421
signalment/history ol, 416-417
[or dermatophytosis, 276, 278
skin scrapings for, 17-18, 19, 414-416
for drug eruption, erythema multiforme, toxic
treatment of, 421-424
epidermal necrolysis, 191
Depakene. See Valproic acid
[or epitheliotropic lymphoma, 371-372
Depakote. See Valproic acid
for food adverse reactions, 127
Depo-Estradiol. See Estradiol
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 195
Depo-Medrol. See Methylprednisolone
[or histiocytosis, 384-385
Depo-Provera. See Medroxyprogesterone acetate
[or hyperadrenocorticism (canine), 136
Depo-Testosterone. See Testosterone
[or hyperadrenocorticism (Ieline), 143
Deprenyl. See Selegiline
[or keratinization disorders, 481-482
Deracoxib, 61lt
[or leishmaniasis, 296
Deramaxx. See Deracoxib
for lupus erythematosus, 75, 76, 185
Dermatofbrosis, nodular, 339-340, 342,343,
[or Malassezia dermatitis, 300
347-350
[or mycobacterial infections, 309
Dermatomyositis, canine [amilial, 172-178, 174-176
[or nasal dermatoses, 82-85, 83-85
Dermatophyte Test Medium (DTM), 27, 279
for nocardiosis, 313, 315
Dermatophytosis (ringworm), 275-282, 277-278,
[or nodules and draining sinuses, 86-87
478, 478, 558-559, 701-702
for panniculitis, 198, 200
Dermoepidermal junction, defined, 42t
[or paraneoplastic syndrome (feline), 378-379
DES. See Diethylstilbestrol
[or pemphigus complex, 83, 225-226
Desmogleins (Dsg), 203-204
for pigmentary abnormalities, 75-78, 75-79
Desmoplasia, dehned, 42t
for pododermatitis and claw disorders, 516-517
Desoxycorticosterone pivalate, 61lt
[or pre- and paraneoplastic syndromes, 346-347
Desquamation, 458
for sarcoptid mites, 429
Dexamethasone, 122, 230, 512, 570t, 612t
for scaling, 60, 60-64
Dexamethasone suppression tests, 137-138
[or self-injury disorders, 453
Dexasone. See Dexamethasone
for sporotrichosis, 284
Dexavet. See Dexamethasone
for sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses, 238
Dextran, 612t
for uveodermatalogic syndrome, 245
Dextromethorphan, 574
[or vasculitis, 250
Dextrose solution 5%, 612t
[or viral infections, 320-321
Diapedesis, dehned, 42t
Diff-Quik stain, 19
Diazepam, 613t
Dilloxacin, 264t, 614t
Dicloxacillin sodium, 613t
Dillucan. See Fluconazole
Dicural. See Dilloxacin hydrochloride
 Dihydrostreptomycin, Ior tuberculosis, 311
Diet, 125-129, 126-127, 703-704. See also Food
Dilantin. See Phenytoin
elimination diets
Dilated Pore of Winer. See Hair follicle tumors
Diethylstilbestrol (DES), 160, 165, 168, 614t
Dilaudid. See Hydromorphone
Differentials
Dimenhydrinate, 615t
[or acne, 435
Diphenhydramine, 572t, 615t
for actinic dermatoses, 335
Diphenoxylate, 615t
for alopecia
Direct impression smears, 20, 21-23, 121, 121
734
INDEX
Diroflariasis, vasculitis and, 252
diagnostics for, 137-139
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE)
diflerential diagnosis for, 136
cinical [eatures of, 180-18l, 180-181
overview of, 132-133, 141
diagnostics for, 185
treatment of, 139-141
dillerential diagnosis for, 185
[eline hyperadrenocorticism, 142-146, 143-144
overview of, 179-180, 186-187
hypothyroidism
treatment of, 186
clinical [eatures of, 149-154, 149-154
Disinfectants, 271-274,272t, 273t
diagnostics [or, 155-156
Distemper, 318, 543-544
dilferential diagnosis or, 154-155
DLE. See Discoid lupus erythematosus
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 147-148, 148
DMSO (dimethyl sulloxide), 240, 349, 512
overview of, 147
DOCA pivalate. See Desoxycorticosterone pivalate
signalment/history of, 148
DOCP See Desoxycorticosterone pivalate
treatment of, 157-158
Domitor. See Medetomidine
noninflammatory alopecia
Dopamine hydrochloride, 615t
clinical [eatures of, 166, 167
 Dopram. See Doxapram hydrochloride
diagnostics for, 167-168
Doramectin, 423
diflerential diagnosis [or, 166-167
Doxapram hydrochloride, 616t
etiology/pathophysiology of, 159-160
Doxepin, 102, 456, 572t
overview of, 159
Doxorubicin, 616t
signalment/history of, 160-166, 161-166
Doxycycline, 123, 202, 263t, 270, 316, 617t
treatment of, 168-169
Dramamine. See Dimenhydrinate
Enilconazole, 28l, 617t
Drisdol. See Ergocalciferol
Enisyl-F See L-Lysine
Droncit. See Praziquantel
Enrolloxacin, 264t, 310, 512, 618t
Drug eruption, 188-192, 189-191, 249, 249-250
Enterocort. See Budesonide
Dsg. See Desmogleins
Eosinophilic granuloma complex
Duragesic. See Fentany]
clinical [eatures of, 1ll-120, 112-120
Dust mites, 705-706
diagnostics [or, 120-122, 121
Dwarhsm, 148, 160, 161
differential diagnosis for, 120
Dynapen. See Dicloxacillin sodium
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 110
Dyskeratinization. See Keratinization disorders
overview of, 110, 123-124
Dyskeratosis, dehned, 42t
signalment/history of, 111
Dysplasia, epidermal, 463
treatment of, 122-123,123,239
Dyspnea, 136
Eosinophilic granuloma (EGD), 110, 114-117, 116,
Dystrophic mineralization, 42t, 133
119-120, 122-123
Eosinophilic plaque, 80, 110-111, 112-113, 121,
Ear canals, culture and identihcation Irom, 35, 35
519
Ear infections. See Otitis
Eosinophils, 1l0, 121
Ear margin dermatosis, 463, 465
Epidermal collarette, dehned, 13, 13
Ear mites, 426-432, 431, 488
Epidermal dysplasia, 463, 463-464, 493
ECLE. See Exfoliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus
Epidermal horns, 318
Ectoparasites. See Parasitic disorders
Epidermopoiesis, 458
Edema, hypothyroidism and, 152, 153
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
 EFA (essential fatty acid) supplements, 10l, 102,
clinical [eatures of, 364-371, 364-371
196, 525, 571
diagnostics for, 372-373, 372-373
Eflux pumps, drug resistance and, 266, 267
dillerential diagnosis [or, 371-372
EGD. See Eosinophilic granuloma
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 363
Elavil. See Amitriptyline
keratinization disorders secondary to, 479, 481
Eldepryl. See Selegiline
overview of, 363, 374
Elimination diet trials, 128, 703-704
signalment/history ol, 363-364
ELISA technique, Ior sarcoptid mites, 429
treatment of, 374
Elspar See L-Asparaginase
Epithelium, bacterial infections ol, 257
EM. See Erythema multiforme
Epival. See Valproic acid
Endocrine disorders
Eqvalan. See Ivermectin
canine hyperadrenocorticism
Ergamisol. See Levamisole hydrochloride
dient education handouts for, 718-724
Ergocalciferol, 618t
dinical [eatures of, 133-136, 134-135
Erosions, 14, 14, 65-75, 70
INDEX
735
Erythema multiforme (EM), 188-192, 319, 339-340.
Flame hgures, dehned, 42t
345-350, 346, 492
Flank sucking, 443-444, 449-450, 451, 453-457
Erythroderma, exloliative, 189
Flea bites, 398-400, 400-403, 409-411
Erythromycin, 263t, 264, 316, 573, 619t
Florlenicol, 622t
Essential [atty acid supplements, 10l, 102, 196, 525,
Florinel. See Fludrocortisone acetate
571
Fluconazole, 281, 291, 304, 512, 623t
Estradiol, 167,619t
Flucort. See Flumethasone
Estrogen, 160, 162-163, 164-165
Flucytosine, 291, 292, 623t
Ethambutol, 310
Fludrocortisone acetate, 624t
Ethyl lactate, 274, 483
Flumethasone, 624t
Etiologic diagnosis, dehned, 41t
Flunixin meglumine, 625t
Etodolac, 620t
Fluocinolone, 122, 230, 456
EtoGesic. See Etodolac
Fluoroquinolones, 264t, 270, 310-311, 512
Etretinate, 361
5-Fluorouracil, 625t
Excenel. See Celtiolur
Fluothane. See Halothane
Excoriation, dehned, 13
Fluoxetine, 456, 573t, 625t
Exloliative cutaneous lupus erythematosus (ECLE),
Fly bites, 399, 405, 405,410-412
180
Fly strike (myiasis),399
Exloliative erythroderma, 189
Folex. See Methotrexate
Exloliative toxin, 266
Follicular casts, 5, 194
Exocytosis, dehned, 42t
Follicular ovarian cysts, 545-547, 546-547
Exophytic horns, 318
Folliculitis, bacterial
Exotoxin, 266
client education handout for, 693-694
Exudates, otitis and, 504, 504, 507-509
clinical [eatures of, 258-260, 259-261
diagnostics for, 261-262
Facial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats,
diflerential diagnosis for, 261
475-476, 476
disinlectants and, 272-273t
Facial nerve dehcits, 488
emerging resistant infections and, 265-266
Famotidine, 620t
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 256-257
Fascitis, nodular, 338, 339, 341, 347-350
keratinization disorders secondary to, 477, 477
Fatty acids, in pruritus, 568
methicillin resistance and, 266-267, 268-269.
Feldene. See Piroxicam
270271, 273
Feline giant cell dermatosis, 317
overview ol, 256
Feline inlectious peritonitis (FIP), 318
pododermatitis and claw disorders Irom, 518, 523
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 317
signalment/history ol, 258
Feline orolacial pain (FOP) syndrome, 319
staphylococcal virulence [actors and, 266
Feline plasma cell pododermatitis, 318
superhcial necrolytic dermatitis and, 526, 530
Feline plasma cell stomatitis, 317
transfer of between species, 267-270
Feline symmetrical alopecia, 443, 444, 446-449,
treatment of, 262-265, 263t-264t
448-450, 453-457
Food adverse reactions, 125-129, 126-127, 703-704
Fentanyl, 620t-621t
Food elimination diets, 127-128
Ferrets
Food hypersensitivity-induced trauma, 490-491
adrenal gland disease in, 540, 540-542, 542
Footpad hyperkeratosis, 464-465, 467
 canine distemper virus in, 543-544
Foreign body reactions, 232, 235, 239
mast cell tumors in, 537-539, 538-539
Fortaz. See Celtazidime
 sarcoptic mange in, 536-537
Fragile skin syndrome. See Hyperadrenocorticism,
Ferritin marker, 385
[eline
Fibroplasia, dehned, 42t
FSH. See Urolollitropin
Fibrosis, dehned, 42t
[T3 (Iree T3), 147
Filgrastim, 607t
{T4 (free T4), 147, 155-156
Fine-needle aspiration, overview ol, 23, 24
Fulvicin. See Griseofulvin
Fipronil, for sarcoptid mites, 431
Fungal infections
Fire ants (Solenopsis spp.), 405-406, 407-408 
blastomycosis, 286, 288-289,288-293
Firocoxib, 621t
of claw, 514, 516
Fissures, dehned, 14, 15
0occidiomycosis, 286, 288, 289-293
Fistula, 15, 16, 437-442
cryptococcosis, 286-288,287, 289-292
Flagyl. See Metronidazole
dermatophytosis (ringworm)
INDEX
dient education handout for, 70l-702
Growth hormone (synthetic), 168
keratinization disorders secondary to, 478,
Guinea pigs, 545-550, 546-548, 550
478
Gyropus ovalis, 548
overview of, 275-282, 277-278
in rabbits, 558-559
HA. See Hemangioma
diflerential diagnosis lor, 86-87
HA (hospital-acquired)-MRSA, 266-267
otitis and, 495, 504
HAC. See Hyperadrenocorticism
sporotrichosis, 283-286, 284
Hailey-Hailey disease, 203, 205
zoonotic, 90
Hair follicle tumors, 351, 353, 355, 358-362
Fungi, 29, 30, 32-33,273t
Halogens, as disinlectants, 272t, 273t
Fungizone. See Amphotericin B
Halothane, 629t
Furadantin.See Nitrofurantoin
Hamsters, 551, 551-552
Furalan. See Nitrofurantoin
Hand hygiene, 271t
Furantoin. See Nitrofurantoin
HDDST (high-dose dexamethasone suppression test),
Furosemide, 626t
138, 145
Furunculosis
Heartgard. See Ivermectin
actinic, 324, 326-327, 326-328, 335-336
Hedgehogs, 553-555, 553-555
bacterial Iolliculitis and, 257, 258, 259
Hemangioma (HA), 324, 329, 330-331, 335-336
demodicosis and, 417, 418
Hemangiosarcoma (HSA), 324, 328, 330-331,
pododermatitis and claw disorders Irom, 518,
335-336
523-524
Hemograms, 137
Fusidic acid, 274
Hemolysin, 266
Hepatocutaneous syndrome (superhcial necrolytic
Gabapentin, 574, 626t
dermatitis), 81, 339-350, 344-345, 520,
Genetics, breed-predisposition dermatoses and,
526-534, 528-533
575t-5851
Hepatomegaly, 133, 137
Gentamicin, 264, 316, 512, 627t
Herpesviruses, 319
Gentocin. See Gentamicin
Hetastarch, 629t
Gentran 70. See Dextran
 High-dose dexamethasone suppression test. See
German short-haired pointer lupoid dermatosis,
HDDST
180
Himalayan cats, [acial dermatitis of, 475-476, 476
GH-responsive alopecia. See Alopecia X
Histiocytic sarcoma, 381
Gliricola porcelli, 548
Histiocytoma, 381
Glucagon, superhcial necrolytic dermatitis and,
Histiocytosis, 232, 236, 239-240, 381-387, 382-384
532
Histopathology
Glucocorticoids
[or histiocytosis, 386
canine hyperadrenocorticism and, 132-133, 136
[or mast cell tumors, 393-394
[ood adverse reactions and, 128
[or mycobacterial infections, 309
noninlammatory alopecia and, 159
for otitis, 502, 504
for pruritus, 569-570, 570t
for panniculitis, 201, 201
for sarcoptid mites, 432
[or pre- and paraneoplastic syndromes, 347-348
for self-injury disorders, 455
for skin and hair follicle tumors, 360
Jor sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses,
[or superhicial necrolytic dermatitis, 533
239-240
[or viral infections, 321
Glucosamine/chondroitin sullate, 627t
Horner's syndrome, 499, 501
Gold sodium thiomalate, 628t
Hornets, 399, 408-409
Granulomas
Hospital visitation programs, 268
eosinophilic granuloma complex and, ll0, 11l,
Hospital-acquired MRSA, 266-267
113-119, 121
HPA (hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal) axis, 159
idiopathic sterile, 232, 233, 239
HSA. See Hemangiosarcoma
Granulomatous dermatoses. See Sterile nodular
Human intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), 192
granulomatous dermatoses
Hyaluronidase, 266
Granulomatous sebaceous adenitis. See Sebaceous
Hycodan. See Hydrocodone bitartrate
adenitis
Hydrea. See Hydroxyurea
Gravol. See Dimenhydrinate
Hydrocodone bitartrate, 629t
Grenz zones, dehned, 42t
Hydrocortisone, 230, 630t
Griseofulvin, 191, 250, 279-280, 559, 628t
Hydromorphone, 630t
INDEX
737
Hydropic degeneration, dehned, 42t
IgGd antibodies, 94
Hydrostat. See Hydromorphone
IL-2 receptors, demodicosis and, 417
Hydroxyurea, 631t
Imaverol. See Enilconazole
Hydroxyzine, 572t, 631t
Imipenem, 512, 631t
Hymenoptera, 405-412, 407-409
Imiquimod, 374
Hyperadrenocorticism (HAG)
Immunologic and autoimmune disorders
canine
bullous pemphigoid
clinical [eatures of, 133-136, 134-135
clinical [eatures of, 222-224,222-225
diagnostics Ior, 137-139
diagnostics for, 226-228, 227
dilferential diagnosis for, 136
dillerential diagnosis for, 226
overview of, 132-133, 141
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 204
treatment of, 139-141
overview of, 203, 228-230
client education handouts Ior, 718-724
signalment/history ol, 205
dillerential diagnosis [or, 50, 51, 57-58
treatment of, 228-230
[eline, 142-146, 143-144
canine lamilial dermatomyositis, 172-178.
in hamsters, 551, 551-552
174-176
keratinization disorders secondary to, 479, 479
discoid (cutaneous) lupus erythematosus
Hyperandrogenism, noninllammatory alopecia and,
clinical [eatures of, 180-18l, 180-181
160, 162, 163, 166
diagnostics for, 185
Hyperestrogenism, 160, 162-163, 164-165, 166, 167
differential diagnosis for, 185
Hypergranulosis, dehned, 42t
overview of, 179-180, 186-187
Hyperkeratoses, 42t, 463-465, 466-467
treatment of, 186
Hyperpigmentation, 11, 136, 151, 151-152, 166, 261
drug eruption, erythema multilorme, toxic
Hyperplastic dermatosis. See Epidermal dysplasia
epidermal necrolysis and, 188-192, 189-191
Hyperprogesteronemia, 160
dust mites and, 706
Hypersensitivity reactions. See Allergic and
granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 193-196, 194.
hypersensitivity disorders; Insects, biting and
705
stinging
keratinization disorders secondary to, 479, 480
Hypersensitivity vasculitis, 190
otitis and, 493, 496
Hyperthyroidism, 56, 479
panniculitis, 197-202, 198-199, 201
Hypertrichosis, 150
pemphigus complex
Hypoadrenocorticism, 724
client education handout for, 712-713
Hypoaminoacidemia, 526
clinical [eatures of, 205-221, 205-221
Hypogranulosis, dehned, 42t
diagnostics Ior, 226-228, 227
Hypomelanosis, dehined, 42t
dilferential diagnosis for, 83, 225-226
Hypophysectomy, 139
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 203-204
Hypopigmentation, dehned, 12
overview of, 203, 230-231
Hypopituitary dwarhsm, 160
signalment/history ol, 204-205
 Hyposensitization, allergy vaccines and, 687-688
treatment of, 228-229
Hyposomatotropism, 160
 sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses
Hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, 159
diagnostics for, 239
Hypothyroidism
diflerential diagnosis for, 238
clinical [eatures of, 149-154, 149-154
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 232, 232-238
diagnostics for, 155-156
overview of, 232, 240-241
differential diagnosis for, 53, 154-155
signalment/history ol, 232, 235
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 147-148, 148
treatment of, 239-240
keratinization disorders secondary to, 478, 478
systemic lupus erythematosus
otitis and, 499
clinical [eatures of, 182, 182-184
overview of, 147
diagnostics for, 185
signalment/history ol, 148
dilflerential diagnosis or, 185
treatment of, 157-158
overview of, 179-180, 186-187
treatment of, 186
ICD. See Irritant contact dermatitis
Immunomodulators, 101-102, 322, 374
Ichthyosis, 459-460, 459-460
 Impaction, of anal sac, 440-442
Idiopathic seborrhea. See Keratinization disorders
Impetigo, 258, 265
IDST. See also Intradermal skin testing
Impression smears, 20, 21-23, 121, 121
IgE (Immunoglobulin E), 94
Imuran. See Azathioprine
INDEX
Indolent ulcers, 110, 116, 118-119, 121, 122-123
[or actinic dermatoses, 336, 337, 349, 350
Infection, colonization vs., 256
for epitheliotropic lymphoma, 374
Infection Control and Best Practices for Small Animal
overview of, 632t
Veterinary Clinics, 271t
Itraconazole
Infectious dermatoses
Jor cryptococosis, coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis,
bacterial folliculitis
291
dinical [eatures of, 258-260, 259-261
[or dermatophytosis, 280, 281, 559
diagnostics [or, 26l-262
for otitis, 512
dilferential diagnosis for, 261
overview of, 633t
disinfectants and, 272-273t
[or pododermatitis and claw disorders, 525
 emerging resistant infections and, 265-266
for sporotrichosis, 285
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 256-257
Ivermectin
methicillin resistance and, 266-267, 268-269,
[or cheyletiellosis, 561
270-271, 273
[or denmodicosis, 422-423, 424
overview of, 256
[errets and, 537
signalment/history ol, 258
guinea pigs and, 549
staphylococcal virulence [actors and, 266
hedgehogs and, 554
transfer of between species, 267-270
mice/rats and, 556
treatment of, 262-265, 263t-264t
for otitis, 512, 513
blastomycosis, 286, 288-289, 288-293
overview of, 634t
coccidiomycosis, 286, 288, 289-293
rabbits and, 561
cryptococcosis, 286-288, 287,289-292
[or sarcoptid mites, 43l, 432, 537, 549, 554,
dermatophytosis, 275-282, 277-278
556
leishmaniasis, 294-297, 295-296
 IVIG. See Human intravenous immunoglobulin
Malassezia dermatitis, 298-304, 299-303
Ivomec. See Ivermectin
mycobacterial infections
cinical [eatures of, 307-309, 308
Kanamycin, 264, 634t
diagnostics for, 309-310
Kantrim.See Kanamycin
diflerential diagnosis for, 309
Kaolin/pectin, 6351
overview of, 305, 311-312
Kellex. See Cephalexin
signalment/history of, 306-307
Ke[zol. See Celazolin sodium
treatment of, 310-311
Keratin, dermatophytes and, 275
nocardiosis, 313-316, 314-315
Keratinization disorders
sporotrichosis, 283-286, 284
clinical [eatures of, 481
viral, 317-322, 318-320
diagnostics for, 482
Insects, biting and stinging
dilferential diagnosis for, 481-482
leas, 398-400, 400-403,409-411
etiology/pathophysiology of, 458-459
lies, 399, 405, 405, 410-412
otitis and, 493, 495
hymenoptera, 405-412, 407-409
overview of, 458, 483-484
mosquito bite hypersensitivity and, 399, 405, 406,
 primary
410-412
acanthosis nigricans, 463, 466
overview of, 398
acrodermatitis of bull terrier, 473-475
spiders, 398-399, 402, 404, 409-412
color dilution alopecia, 470-471
Interceptor. See Milbemycin oxime
ear margin dermatosis, 463, 465
Intereron-α,122,322,632t
epidermal dysplasia, 463, 463-464
Interleukin-2 (IL-2) receptors, 417
[acial dermatitis of Persian and Himalayan cats,
Interstitial cell tumors, nonin lammatory alopecia
475-476, 476
and,160
[ootpad hyperkeratosis, 464-465, 467
Intertrigo, bacterial folliculitis and, 258
ichthyosis, 459-460, 459-460
 Intradermal skin testing, 101, 309
nasodigital hyperkeratosis, 463-464, 466-467
 Intropin. See Dopamine hydrochloride
primary seborrhea, 460, 461-462, 476
Irritant contact dermatitis (ICD), overview of,
psoriasilorm-lichenoid dermatitis, 471, 475
107-109
Schnauzer comedo syndrome, 47l, 475
Isolurane, 632t
sebaceous adenitis, 193-196, 194,468-470,
Isoniazid, for tuberculosis, 310
471-474, 495, 705
Isotretinoin
vitamin-A responsive dermatosis, 463
for acne, 435
zinc-responsive dermatosis, 466, 468-469
INDEX
secondary to
Lichenihcation, 13, 13, 471, 475
age,479
Lidocaine, 638t
autoimmune dermatoses, 479, 480
Lime sulfur solution, 280, 28l, 423, 431
bacterial folliculitis, 477, 477
Lincocin. See Lincomycin
cutaneous supersensitivity, 476, 476
Lincomycin, 264, 638t
dermatophytosis, 478, 478
Linezolid, 271, 639t
ectoparasites, 477, 477
Linoleic acid, 374
endocrinopathy, 478-479, 478-480
Liothyronine, 639t
neoplasia, 479, 481
Lipoxygenase inhibitors, 571
nutritional disorders, 479
Lodine. See Etodolac
treatment of, 482-483
Lomotil. See Diphenoxylate
viral infections and, 317-322, 318-320
Lomustine, 374, 395, 639t
Keratinocytes, 204, 227, 228
Lopurin. See Allopurinol
Keratoses. See Actinic keratoses
Loratidine, 572t
Ketalar. See Ketamine
Low-dose dexamethasone suppression test. See LDDST
Ketamine, 635t
Loxosceles spp. See Spider bites
Ketavet. See Ketamine
Lufenuron, 28l, 640t
Ketoconazole
Luminal. See Phenobarbital
[or cryptooccosis, coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis,
Lupoid onchodystrophy, symmetric, 525
291
Lupus erythematosus
for dermatophytosis, 280
(soauno) proos
[or hyperadrenocorticism, 141, 146
clinical [eatures of, 180-18l, 180-181
[or keratinization disorders, 483
diagnostics for, 185
for Malassezia dermatitis, 304
differential diagnosis Ior, 75, 76, 185
for otitis, 512
overview of, 179-180, 186-187
overview of, 636t
treatment of, 186
[or perineal hstulas, 439
exloliative cutaneous, 180
for pododermatitis and claw disorders, 525
systemic
for pruritus, 573
clinical [eatures of, 182, 182-184
for sporotrichosis, 285
diagnostics for, 185
Ketofen. See Ketoprofen
differential diagnosis for, 185 
Ketoprofen, 636t
overview of, 179-180, 186-187
Ketorolac tromethamine, 637t
treatment of, 186
Konopin. See Clonazepam
Lymphocytic thyroiditis (primary hypothyroidism),
147
Lactophenol cotton blue stain, 29, 31
Lymphocytosis, cutaneous, 338, 339, 341, 341,
Lamisil. See Terbinafine hydrochloride
347-350
 Lamprene. See Clolazimine
 Lymphoma, epitheliotropic
Langerhan's cells, 104
clinical [eatures of, 364-371
Lasix. See Furosemide
diagnostics for, 372-373, 372-373
Latrodectus spp. See Spider bites
differential diagnosis for, 39, 53-55, 63-64,
 LDDST (low-dose dexamethasone suppression test),
364-371, 371-372
137, 138, 145
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 363
Lellunomide, 386
overview of, 63-64, 78, 82, 363, 374, 521
Leishmaniasis, 294-297, 295-296
signalment/history ol, 363-364
Leporacarus gibbus, 560
treatment of, 374
Leproid granuloma syndrome, 305, 306-307,
L-Lysine, 322, 640t
310311
Lysodren. See Mitotane
Leprosy, 305, 306-307, 310-311
Leukeran. See Chlorambucil
MAB IBF9 antigen, 351
Leukine, 607t
Macrodantin. See Nitrofurantoin
Leukoderma, defned, 12
Macules, dehined, 5, 7
Leukotrichia, dehned, 12
Maggots, 399
Levamisole hydrochloride, 637t
 Magnetic resonance imagery (MRI), 145, 502
Levasole. See Levamisole hydrochloride
Malassezia dermatitis
Levothyroxine, 157, 158, 637t
client education handout for, 708
Lice, 548
cytology Ior, 20, 21, 24, 507
740
INDEX
hypersensitivity reactions and, 97, 98, 127, 128,
Melphalan, 643t
298
Meperidine, 644t
overview of, 298-304, 299-303
Mepivacaine, 644t
superhcial necrolytic dermatitis and, 526
6-Mercaptopurine, 644t
Malassezia Overgrowth Syndrome (MOG), 298,
 Meropenem, 645t 
301
Merrem IV. See Meropenem
Malignant histiocytosis, 381-382, 384-387
Metabolic epidermal necrosis. See Superhcial
Malogen. See Testosterone
necrolytic dermatitis
Mange
Metacam. See Meloxicam
acetate tape preparation for, 23-24, 25
Methicillin resistance, 257, 265-267, 268-269
demodex
Methimazo]e, 491, 645t
cinical [eatures of, 417-419, 418-420
Methocarbamol, 645t
diagnostics for, 421
Methotrexate, 646t
dilflerential diagnosis for, 420-421
Methoxyllurane, 647t
etiology/pathophysiology of, 413, 414-416
Methylene blue, 647t
overview of, 413, 424-425
Methylprednisolone, 102, 122, 230, 570t,
 signalment/history ol, 416-417
647t-648t
treatment of, 421-424
Methyltestosterone, 168, 649t
notoedric, 426-432
Meticorten. See Prednisone
sarcoptic, 426-432, 427, 430, 536-537, 714-715
Metoclopramide, 649t
skin scrapings [or, 17-18, 19, 414-416
Metofane. See Methoxyllurane
Marbofloxacin, 264t, 310, 512, 641t
Metrodin. See Urofollitropin
Marcaine. See Bupivacaine hydrochloride
Metronidazole, 435, 499, 650t
Marin. See Silymarin
Mexate. See Methotrexate
Maropitant, 641t
Mibolerone, 650t
Mast cell tumors (MCT)
Mice, 556-557
dinical [eatures of, 389-391, 390-393
Miconazole, 28l, 559
diagnostics [or, 393-394
Microabscesses, defined, 42t
dillerential diagnosis for, 393
Microsporum camis, 29, 30, 32, 90, 275, 277
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 388
Microsporum gypseum, 28, 29, 30, 32, 275
in [errets, 537-539, 538-539
Microsporum spp., in rabbits, 558
signalment/history ol, 388-389
Milbemycin, 423, 424, 431, 651t
treatment ol, 394-396
Milk thistle. See Silymarin
Mastocytosis, papular, 338, 339, 341, 342,347-350
Miltefosine, 297
Maxolon. See Metoclopramide
Minocin. See Minocycline
MCT. See Mast cell tumors 
Minocycline, 316, 651t
MecA gene, 265-266
Misoprostol, Ior pruritus, 573
Mechlorethamine, 374
Mitaban. See Amitraz
Meclizine, 641t
Mite infestation. See also Demodicosis
Meclofenamate sodium, 641t
cheyletiellosis
Medetomidine, 642t
cytology lor, 24, 25
Medrol. See Methylprednisolone
human papules Irom, 89
Medroxyprogesterone acetate, 570, 642t
overview of, 426-432, 428, 430, 477, 477
Mefoxin. See Cefoxitin sodium
in rabbits, 559-561, 560, 562
Megestrol acetate, 123, 123, 570, 643t
ear mites, 426-432, 431, 488
Meglumine antimonite, 297
in [errets, 536-537
Melanoma
in guinea pigs, 536-537
cinical [eatures of, 356-357, 357
in hedgehogs, 553-555, 553-555
diagnostics for, 359-360
in mice/rats, 556-557
diflerential diagnosis or, 359
in rabbits, 559-562
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 351
sarcoptid
overview of, 361-362
client education handout for, 714-715
signalment/history ol, 352, 353
in [errets, 536-537
Melanosis, dehned, 42t
in guinea pigs, 548-550
Melatonin, alopecia X and, 168
in hedgehogs, 553-555, 554-555
Melittin, 409
human papules Irom, 89
Meloxicam, 643t
otitis and, 488, 489
INDEX
741
overview of, 426-432,427-428, 430-431
 Nasal dermatoses, differential diagnosis for, 82-85,
skin scrapings Ior, 17-18, 18
83-85
Mithracin. See Plicamycin
Nasodigital hyperkeratosis, 463-464, 466-467
Mitotane
Naxcel. See Celtiofur
alopecia X and, 168
Naxen. See Naproxen
client education handout Ior, 720-724
Nebcin. See Tobramycin sullate
∫or [errets, 542
Necrolysis, 42t, 68, 188-192. See also Superhcial
for hyperadrenocorticism, 139-140, 146, 542
necrolytic dermatitis
overview of, 652t
Necrolytic dermatitis, superhcial (hepatocutaneous
Mitoxantrone, 361, 652t
syndrome), 81, 339-350, 344-345, 520, 526-
Mobic. See Meloxicam
534, 528-533
Mold allergies, 709
Necrolytic migratory erythema. See Superhicial
Morbilliviruses, 318, 543
necrolytic dermatitis
Morphine sullate, 653t
Necrosis, 198,198,248, 248
Morphologic diagnosis, dehned, 41t
Nembutal. See Pentobarbital
Mosquito bite hypersensitivity, 71, 399, 405, 406,
Neomycin, 656t
410-412
 Neoplasias and cutaneous/paraneoplastic dermatoses
Mouse, 556-557
actinic dermatoses
Moxidectin, 423, 431, 512, 653t
clinical [eatures of, 325-335, 325-335
Moxilloxacin, 310, 654t
diagnostics for, 335-336
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imagery
differential diagnosis for, 335
MRSA. See Methicillin resistance
overview of, 324, 337
MTX. See Methotrexate
signalment/history ol, 324-325
Mucinosis, cutaneous, 338, 339, 341-342, 342,
treatment of, 336
347350
of anal sac, 440-442
Mucinosis, dehned, 42t
epitheliotropic lymphoma
Mucocutaneous pyoderma (MCP), 258
clinical [eatures of, 364-371, 364-371
Munro's microabscesses, 42t
diagnostics [or, 372-373, 372-373
Mupirocin, 271, 274, 435, 456
dillerential diagnosis [or, 371-372
Mycobacterial infections
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 363
clinical [eatures of, 307-309, 308
overview of, 363, 374
diagnostics Ior, 309-310
signalment/history ol, 363-364
differential diagnosis for, 309
treatment of, 374
overview of, 305, 311-312
in guinea pigs, 545-547, 546
signalment/history of, 306-307
histiocytosis, 232, 236, 239-240, 381-387,
treatment of, 310-311
382-384
Mycobacterial panniculitis, 305, 306-307,
keratinization disorders secondary to, 479, 481
310-311
mast cell tumors
Mycophenolate, 654t
clinical [eatures of, 389-391, 390-393
Mycoplasmas, disinlectants [or, 273t
diagnostics for, 393-394
Mycosis fungoides, 363, 367-370, 372. See also
differential diagnosis for, 393
Epitheliotropic lymphoma
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 388
Myiasis, 399
 signalment/history ol, 388-389
Myobia musculi, 556
treatment of, 394-396
Myochrysine. See Gold sodium thiomalate
in nodules and draining sinuses, 87
Myocptes musculinus, 556
otitis and, 493, 494, 498-499, 499
Myositis, canine [amilial dermato-, 172-178,
paraneoplastic syndromes (canine)
174-176
clinical [eatures of, 341-346, 342-346
Myringotomy, 504, 505-506
diagnostics for, 347-350
Myxedema coma, 158
dilflerential diagnosis or, 347
overview of, 338-339
Naloxone, 654t
signalment/history ol, 339-340
Naltrexone, 655t
treatment of, 347-350
Nandrolone decanoate, 655t
paraneoplastic syndromes (feline), 375-380,
Naprosyn. See Naproxen
376-379
Naproxen, 656t
pododermatitis and claw disorders [rom, 524
Narcan. See Naloxone
 preneoplastic syndromes (canine)
INDEX
clinical [eatures of, 340-341, 340-342
overview of, 159
diagnostics for, 347-350
signalment/history ol, 160-166, 161-166
dillerential diagnosis [or, 346-347
treatment of, 168-169
overview ol, 338
Norloxacin, 658t
signalment/history ol, 339
Noroxin. See Norlloxacin
treatment of, 347-350
Notoedres infestation, 62, 488, 490
skin and hair follicle tumors
Novantrone. See Mitoxantrone hydrochloride
dinical [eatures of, 355-358, 356-359
Novox. See Carprolen
diagnostics Ior, 359-360
NSAIDs, 570-571, 631t
dillerential diagnosis for, 358-359
Nullor. See Florfenicol
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 351-352
Numorphan. See Oxymorphone hydrochloride
overview ol, 351, 361-362
Nutrition, keratinization disorders secondary to,
signalment/history ol, 352-355, 354-355
479
treatment of, 360-361
squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
Obsessive/compulsive disorders, 572, 573t. See also
dinical [eatures of, 355, 357
Self-injury disorders
cutaneous (Bowen's disease), 318, 318,
Obstructions, otitis and, 493, 493-494,496.
322
506-507
diagnostics for, 359-360
Occult heartworm tests, 252
differential diagnosis for, 358
Octreotide, 349, 533
etiology/pathophysiology of, 351
Omeprazole, 658t
overview of, 324, 329-331, 332-335,
Omnicel. See Celdinir
335-336, 361
Omnipen. See Amoxicillin; Ampicillin
signalment/history of, 352, 353, 354
Oncovin. See Vincristine
treatment of, 360-361
Onychoclasis, 514
Neoral. See Cyclosporine
 Onychocryptosis, 514
Neosar. See Cyclophosphamide
Onychodystrophy, 514, 516, 525
Neupogen, 607t
Onychomadesis, 514, 516, 524, 525
Neurontin. See Gabapentin
Onychomalacia, 514
 Niacinamide
Onychomycosis, 514,516,524, 525
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 196
Onychorrhexis, 514, 516, 524
[or histiocytosis, 386
Ophthalmic symptoms of uveodermatalogic
lupus erythematosus and, 186
syndrome, 242, 245
for panniculitis, 202
Optimmune. See Cyclosporine
for pemphigus complex and bullous 
Orbax. See Orbifloxacin
pemphigoid, 229
Orbilloxacin, 264t, 310, 512,658t
Ior pododermatitis and claw disorders,
Ortoenin. See Cloxacillin sodium
525
Orudis KT. See Ketoprofen
for vasculitis, 252
Otic swabs/smears, overview of, 19-20, 20t
Nikolsky sign, 215
Otitis externa
Nilenpyram, 657t
client education handouts for, 710-711, 724-725
Nitrofurantoin, 657t
clinical [eatures of, 487
Nizatidine, 657t
diagnostics for, 19-20, 20t, 35, 35, 502-509,
Nizoral. See Ketoconazole
502-511
Nocardiosis, 313-316, 314-315
dillerential diagnosis for, 488-498, 488-500
Nodular dermatohbrosis, 339-340, 342, 343,
overview of, 485-486
347-350
signalment/history ol, 487
Nodular [ascitis, 338, 339, 341, 347-350
treatment of, 509-513
Nodular granulomatous dermatoses. See Sterile
Otitis interna
nodular granulomatous dermatoses
 client education handout for, 710-711
Nodules, 5, 9, 86-87
 clinical [eatures of, 488
Nolvadex. See Tamoxifen citrate
diagnostics [or, 19-20, 20t, 35, 35, 502-509,
 Noninllammatory alopecia
502-511
dinical [eatures of, 166, 167
dilferential diagnosis or, 498-500, 501
diagnostics Ior, 167-168
overview of, 485-486
dillerential diagnosis for, 166-167
signalment/history ol, 487
etiology/pathophysiology of, 159-160
treatment ol, 509-513
INDEX
743
Otitis media
nodular dermatofbrosis, 339-340, 342, 343,
client education handouts for, 710-71l, 724-725
347350
clinical [eatures of, 487-488
overview of, 338-339
diagnostics Ior, 19-20, 20t, 35,35, 502-509,
pemphigus, 338, 340, 344, 344, 347-350
502-511
signalment/history ol, 339-340
dillerential diagnosis for, 488-498, 488-500
superhicial necrolytic dermatitis, 81, 339-350,
overview o1, 485-486
344-345, 520, 526-534, 528-533
signalment/history ol, 487
treatment of, 347-350
treatment of, 509-513
[eline, 375-380, 376-379
Otobius megnini, 488
Parapoxviruses, 319
Otodectes cynotis (ear mites), 426-432, 431, 488
Parasitic disorders
Otoscopy, 502, 502-503, 724-725
 biting and stinging insects and
Ototoxicity, 485, 513
fleas, 398-400, 400-403, 409-411
Ovaban. See Megestrol acetate
lies, 399, 405, 405, 410-412
Ovarian follicular cysts, 545-547, 546-547
hymenoptera, 405-412, 407-409
Ovarian tumors, 160
mosquito bite hypersensitivity and, 399, 405.
Ovariohysterectomy, 164, 480
406, 410-412
Overview ol, 398
overview ol, 398
Oxacillin, 264, 659t
spiders, 398-399, 402, 404, 409-412
demodicosis
disinlectant characteristics ol, 273t
client education handout for, 698-700
as disinfectants, 272t
clinical [eatures of, 417-419, 418-420, 477, 477
Oxymetholone, 659t
diagnostics for, 421
Oxymorphone hydrochloride, 659t
diflerential diagnosis for, 420-421
Oxytetracycline, 659t
etiology/pathophysiology of, 413, 414-416
overview of, 413, 424-425
p53 (tumor suppressor gene), 351
signalment/history ol, 416-417
Pagetoid reticulosis, 363, 370
treatment ol, 421-424
2-PAM. See Pralidoxime chloride
diflerential diagnosis for, 86-87
 Pancreatic/hepatic paraneoplastic syndrome,
in guinea pigs, 548, 548-550, 550
375-376, 376-377, 380
in hedgehogs, 553-555, 553-555
Panectyl. See Trimeprazine tartrate
in mice/rats, 556-557
Panepidermal pustular pemphigus/vegetans (PEP),
otitis media, externa and, 488, 488-490, 512
203-205, 216, 219, 219-220, 226-231
in rabbits, 558-562, 560, 562
Panmycin. See Tetracycline
sarcoptid mites
Panniculitis
client education handout for, 714-715
mycobacterial, 305, 306-307, 310-311
in ferrets, 536-537
overview of, 197-202, 198-199, 201
in guinea pigs, 548-550
sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses and,
555-t5s 's5s-25s 'ssoua28ay u!
232, 235, 237-238, 240
human papules Irom, 89
Panton-Valentine Leukocidin toxin, 267
otitis and, 488, 489
Papillomatosis, dehned, 43t
overview ol, 426-432, 427-428, 430-431
Papillomaviruses, 318, 319, 351
skin scrapings for, 17-18, 18
Papular mastocytosis, 338,339,341, 342,347-350
zoonotic, 88-89
Papules, defned, 5, 8
Paronychia, 514, 515, 522, 524, 525
Paraneoplastic pemphigus (PP), 203-205, 219-221,
Paroxetine, 456, 660t
221, 226-229, 338-350, 344
Pars Ilaccida, 487, 503
Paraneoplastic syndromes
Pasturella multocida, 257
canine
Patches, dehned, 5, 10
cutaneous (primary nodular) amyloidosis, 338,
 Patchy alopecia, diflerential diagnosis for, 44, 45-48
339, 341, 347-350
Pathology, for epitheliotropic lymphoma, 373
cutaneous mucinosis, 338, 339, 341-342, 342,
Pautrier's microabscesses, dehned, 42t
347-350
Paxil. See Paroxetine
diagnostics Ior, 347-350
PBP See Penicillin-binding proteins
dillerential diagnosis for, 347
PBZ. See Tripelennamine citrate
erythema multiforme, 339, 340, 345, 346,
PCR (polymerase chain reaction), 310, 321
347-350
PDH. See Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
744
INDEX
Pelamine. See Tripelennamine citrate
Phlebectasia, 133
Pemphigus, paraneoplastic, 203-205, 219-221, 221,
Phospholipase A, 409
226-229, 338-350, 344
Photodynamic therapy, 361
Pemphigus complex
Pigmentary incontinence, dehned, 43t
cinical [eatures ol, 205-221, 205-221
Pigmentation changes, 11-12, 75-78, 75-79
diagnostics Jor, 226-228,227
Pilomatrixomas. See Hair follicle tumors
dilferential diagnosis for, 83, 225-226
Pinnal-pedal rellex, 429
etiology/pathophysiology ol1, 203-204
Piperacillin, 663t
keratinization disorders secondary to,479, 480
Piroxicam, 664t
otitis and, 496
Pituitary dwarfsm, 148, 161
overview of, 203, 230-231
Pituitary gland tumors, 132, 137, 139, 145
signalment/history of, 204-205
Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH),
treatment of, 228-229
132-133, 136-141
Pemphigus erythematosus (PE), 83, 203-204, 207,
Pakoglobin, 204
212, 217-218, 225-231
Planum nasale, lupus erythematosus and, 179, 180.
Pemphigus [oliaceus (PF)
180-181, 183-184
client education handout for, 712-713
Plaques, defined, 5, 10
cytology for, 22, 227
Plasma cell chondritis, 318
diflerential diagnosis [or, 72-73
 Plasma cell pododermatitis, 521-522
otitis and, 496
Plastic [ood bow] hypersensitivity, 84
overview of, 203-206, 205-216, 225-229
Platinol. See Cisplatin
pododermatitis and claw disorders Irom, 519,
 Plesiotherapy, 361
522
Plicamycin, 664t
 Pemphigus vulgaris (PV)
Pododermatitis, 514-518, 518-524, 524-525,
biopsy showing. 39
693-694
diflerential diagnosis or, 68, 81, 85
Polyarteritis nodosa, 248
overview of, 203-204, 213-216, 218-219,
Polyps, otitis and, 493, 495
225-231
Polysullated glycosaminoglycan (PSGAG), 665t
pododermatitis Irom, 520
 Postgrooming lurunculosis, 258
Penicillin-binding proteins (PBP), 265-266
Potassium iodide, 285
Penicillins, 660t-661t
Potbelly appearance, 133, 143, 144
Pentobarbital, 661t
Poxviruses, 318
Pentoxifylline
 PP. See Paraneoplastic pemphigus
[or canine amilial dermatomyositis, 177
PPA. See Phenylpropanolamine
[or contact dermatitis, 108
Pralidoxime chloride (2-PAM), 665t
for drug eruption, erythema multiforme, toxic
Praziquantel, 665t
epidermal necrolysis, 192
Prednisolone
lupus erythematosus and, 186
for actinic dermatoses, 336
overview of, 661t
for actinic keratoses, 349
for pododermatitis and claw disorders, 525
[or biting and stinging insects, 411-412
[or pruritus, 573
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 122
[or vasculitis, 252, 253
[or keratinization disorders, 483
PEP See Panepidermal pustular pemphigus/vegetans
[or otitis,512
Pepcid. See Famotidine
overview of, 666t
Percorten-V. See Desoxycorticosterone pivalate
[or paraneoplastic pemphigus, 349
Periactin. See Cyproheptadine
for pemphigus complex and bullous pemphigoid.
Perianal glands, 136
229
Perineal fstulas, 437-440
[or superhcial necrolytic dermatitis, 350, 533
Persian cats, [acial dermatitis ol, 475-476, 476
Prednisone
PE See Pemphigus loliaceus 
for atopic dermatitis, 102
Phenergan. See Promethazine
[or canine [amilial dermatomyositis, 177
Phenetron. See Chlorpheniramine maleate
for contact dermatitis, 108
Phenobarbital, 662t
for eosinophilic granuloma complex, 123
Phenols, disinfectant characteristics of, 272t, 273t
lupus erythematosus and, 186
Phenylbutazone, 662t
[or mast cell tumors, 394, 395
 Phenylpropanolamine (PPA), 663t
overview of, 666t
Phenytoin, 663t
for pruritus, 570t
INDEX
745
for sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses,
Pyoderma
239-240
bacterial folliculitis and, 257, 258, 259-260, 262,
[or uveodermatalogic syndrome, 245-246
265
for vasculitis, 252
client education handout for, 693-694
Preneoplastic syndromes (canine)
emerging resistant, 265-266
actinic keratoses, 324,327-329, 328-329, 338-
hyperadrenocorticism and, 133, 135
341, 340, 346
hypothyroidism and, 154
cutaneous lymphocytosis, 338, 339, 341, 341,
mucocutaneous, 258
347-350
superficial,72
diagnostics Ior, 347-350
Pyogranuloma, idiopathic sterile, 232, 233, 239
diflerential diagnosis lor, 346-347
Pyonchia, 514, 522
nodular [ascitis, 338, 339, 341, 347-350
Pyrazinamide, 311
overview of, 338
papular mastocytosis, 338, 339, 341, 342, 347-350
Quaternary ammonium compounds (QACs),
signalment/history of, 339
272t-273t
treatment of, 347-350
Quest. See Moxidectin
Previcox. See Firocoxib
Quill loss, 553-555, 553-555
Prilosec. See Omeprazole
Quorum sensing, 259-260
Primary keratinization disorder, 460, 461-462, 476
Primary lesions, overview of, 5, 10-12
Rabbits
Primary seborrhea, 460, 461-462, 476
barbering in, 564-566, 565-566
Primaxin. See Imipenem
dermatophytosis in, 558-559
Primor, 667t
Iur mites in, 559-562
Principen. See Amoxicillin; Ampicillin
urine scald in, 562-564, 563
Progesterone, 160, 570
Radiography
Program. See Lulenuron
[or canine hyperadrenocorticism, 137
ProHeart. See Moxidectin
[or cryptococcosis, coccidiomycosis, blastomycosis,
Proin PPA. See Phenylpropanolamine
290
PromAce. See Acepromazine
for histiocytosis, 385
Promethazine, 667t
[or mycobacterial infections, 309
 Propionibacterium acnes, 322
for nocardiosis, 315
Propylene glycol, 196
for otitis, 502
Propylthiouracy] (PTU), 667t
[or pododermatitis and claw disorders, 518
Prostaphlin. See Oxacillin
for skin and hair follicle tumors, 359
Protein A, 266
for sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses, 239
 Protopam. See Pralidoxime chloride
Radiotherapy, 145, 361, 394
Protozoan dermatitis, 294-297, 295-296
Ranitidine hydrochloride, 668t
Provocation diet trials, 128, 703-704
Rapid Sporulating Medium (RSM), 27
Prozac. See Fluoxetine
Rats, 556-557
Pruritus
Rattail, hypothyroidism and, 151
antihistamines Ior, 571-572, 572t
Reconcile. See Fluoxetine
client education handout for therapy for, 698-699
Reglan. See Metoclopramide
compounds alfecting arachidonic acid metabolism
Resident organisms, normal, 256-257
and, 570-571
Respiram. See Doxapram hydrochloride
glucocorticoids for, 569-570, 570t
 Retapamulin, for methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus,
miscellaneous drugs for, 573-574
274
pathophysiology ol, 568-569
Reticuwlar degeneration, dehned, 43t
progesterone compounds for, 570
Retinal exams, 245
 psychotropic drugs for, 572-573, 573t
Retinoids, 196, 374, 483-484. See also Isotretinoin;
Pseudomonads,258,273t
Vitamin A
Pseudorabies, 319
Retinol. See Vitamin A
PSGAG. See Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan
Retrovir. See Zidovudine
Psoriasiform-lichenoid dermatitis, 47l, 475
Retroviruses, 317-318
 Psychodermatoses. See Sel-injury disorders
Reverse zoonoses, 267, 270
PTU. See Propylthiouracyl
Revolution. See Selamectin
Purinethol. See 6-Mercaptopurine
Rhadfordia affnis, 556
Pustules, 5, 9, 34, 73
Rheumatrex. See Methotrexate
746
INDEX
Rhinotracheitis, 319
Selamectin, 431, 512, 561, 669t
Ridaura. See Auranofn
Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs),
Rifampin, 310, 311, 668t
456-457
Rimadyl. See Carprofen
Selegiline (L-Deprenyl), 140, 669t, 723-724
Ringworm. See Dermatophytosis
Sell-injury disorders
Robaxin-V. See Methocarbamol
clinical [eatures of, 444-452, 444-452
Roferon. See Interferon
diagnostics for, 454-455
Rompun. See Xylazine hydrochloride
differential diagnosis [or, 448, 453
Rough collie, ulcerative dermatosis of, 181
etiology/pathophysiology ol,443
rT3 (reverse T3), 147
overview ol, 443, 456-457
RT-PCR (reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
signalment/history ol, 444
reaction), 321
treatment of, 455-456
Seminoma,160
Sacculitis, 440-442
Sentinel. See Lufenuron
SaleHeart. See Milbemycin oxime
 Septra. See Trimethoprim-sullamethoxazole
Salazopyrin. See Sullasalazine
Serologic allergy tests, 101
Sandies, leishmaniasis and, 294
Sertoli cell tumors, 52, 160, 165
Sarbaud's dextrose agar, overview ol, 27
Sertraline, 456
Sarcoptid mites
Serum Ierritin, 385
client education handout for, 714-715
Sevollurane, 670t
in [errets, 536-537
Sezary syndrome, 363, 369, 371, 372
in guinea pigs 548-550
Shampoos
in hedgehogs, 553-555, 554-555
for atopic dermatitis, 10l, 102
human papules Irom, 89
[or bacterial folliculitis, 262, 264
otitis and, 488, 489
client education handout for, 716
overview of, 426-432, 427-428, 430-431
for contact dermatitis, 108
skin scrapings Ior, 17-18, 18
Ior granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 196
Sargramostim, 607t
[or keratinization disorders, 482-483
Satellitosis, defined, 43t
for pruritus, 574
Scabies
Shetland sheepdogs, ulcerative dermatosis ol, 181
 client education handout for, 714-715
Silymarin, 670t
in [errets, 536-537
Simplicel. See Celpodoxime proxetil
in guinea pigs, 548-550
Simulium spp. See Fly bites
in hedgehogs, 553-555, 554-555
Sinuses, draining, 86-87
human papules Irom, 89
Skin Iragility syndrome. See Hyperadrenocorticism,
otitis and, 488, 489
[eline
overview of, 426-432, 427-428, 430-431
 Skin scrapings, overview ol, 17-18, 18, 19
skin scrapings Ior, 17-18, 18
SLE. See Systemic lupus erythematosus
Scabies incognito, 428
SND. See Superhcial necrolytic dermatitis
Scaling, 5,6, 60, 60-64
SNP See Sterile nodular panniculitis
Scars, dehned, 16
Sodium stibogluconate, 297
SCC. See Squamous cell carcinoma
Solar dermatitis, 324, 325-326, 325-327, 335-336
SCCmec. See Staphylococcal chromosome cassette
Solar elastosis, 335
mec element
Solenopsin D, 407
Schnauzer comedo syndrome, 47l, 475
Solemopsis spp. (hre ants), 405-406, 407-408
Sclerosis, dehned, 43t
Solganol. See Aurothioglucose
Sebaceous adenitis, 193-196, 194, 468-470,
Solodyn. See Minocycline hydrochloride
471-474, 495, 705
Soloxine. See Levothyroxine
Sebaceous gland tumors
Solu-Cortel. See Hydrocortisone
dinical [eatures ol, 357-358, 359
Solu-Medrol. See Methylprednisolone
diagnostics for, 359-360
Spherulocytosis, 239
diflerential diagnosis or, 359
Spider bites, 398-399, 402, 404, 409-412
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 351
Spongilorm microabscesses, dehned, 42t
overview ol, 362
Spongiosis, defined, 43t
signalment/history of, 352, 353, 355
Sporanox. See Itraconazole
Seborrhea. See Keratinization disorders
Spores, disinfectants for, 273t
Seborrheic dermatitis. See Primary seborrhea
Sporothrix schenckii, 284
INDEX
Sporotrichosis, 283-286, 284
signalment/history of, 324-325
Squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
treatment of, 336
clinical [eatures of, 355, 357
Super antigens, 266
cutaneous (Bowen's disease), 318, 318, 322
Superhcial necrolytic dermatitis (hepatocutaneous
diagnostics for, 359-360
syndrome), 81, 339-350, 344-345, 520,
diflerential diagnosis for, 47, 358
526-534, 528-533
etiology/pathophysiology ol, 351
Supersaturated solution of potassium iodide (SSKI),
otitis and, 500
285
overview of, 324, 329-331, 332-335, 335-336,
Suprax. See Cehxime
361
Surgery, client education handouts for, 717.
signalment/history of, 352, 353, 354
724-725
treatment of, 360-361
Synthroid. See Levothyroxine
SSKI. See Supersaturated solution of potassium
Systemic histiocytosis, 381-387, 382
jodide
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
SSRIs. See Selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors
clinical [eatures of, 182, 182-184
Stanozolol, 670t
diagnostics Ior, 185
Staphage lysate, 264
differential diagnosis for, 185
Staphylococcal chromosome cassette mec element
overview of, 179-180, 186-187
(SCCmec), 266, 267
treatment ol, 186
Staphylococcus aureus, methicillin-resistant, 257,
265-267, 268-269
T3 (triodothyronine), 147
Staphylococcus pseudointermedius, 257, 265, 267, 268.
T4 (tetraiodothyronine), 147
299
Tabanus spp. See Fly bites
Staphylococcus schleiferi, 265, 267, 268
Tachyphylaxis, 122
Staphylococcus spp.
Tacrolimus, 186, 229, 440
 bacterial overgrowth syndrome and, 259-260
Tagamet. See Cimetidine
methicillin-resistant, 257, 265-267, 268-269
Tail biting/chasing, 443, 444, 450-451, 451-452,
transler of between species, 267-270
453-457
virulence [actors of, 266
Tamoxifen citrate, 672t
Stem cell [actor receptor (c-kit), 388, 394
Tapazole. See Methimazole
 Sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses
Tapazole reaction, 491
diagnostics for, 239
Tavist. See Clemastine
diflerential diagnosis or, 238
Tazicel. See Celtazidime
etiology/pathophysiology o1, 232, 232-238
Tazolac, 435
overview of, 232, 240-241
T-cell lymphoma. See Epitheliotropic lymphoma
signalment/history ol, 232, 235
T-cell-mediated keratinocyte apoptosis, 204, 228
treatment of, 239-240
Tegopen. See Cloxacillin sodium
 Sterile nodular panniculitis (SNP), 197, 198-199,
Temaril. See Trimeprazine tartrate
200,202
TEN. See Toxic epidermal necrolysis
Steroids, 239, 252, 264,559
Tepoxalin, 672t
Stings. See Insects, biting and stinging
Terbinahne hydrochloride, 281, 304, 559, 672t
Stomoxys calcitrans. See Fly bites
Terminology, 4-16, 41-43t
Streptokinase, 266
Terramycin. See Oxytetracycline
Streptolysin, 266
Testex. See Testosterone
Sublimaze. See Fentanyl
Testicles, 136, 163, 165-166
Sucrallate, 395, 671t
Testosterone, 160, 673t
Sulfadiazine, 671t
Tetracycline
Sulladimethoxine/ormetoprim, 265t
for granulomatous sebaceous adenitis, 196
Sullamethoxazole/trimethoprim, overview ol, 264t
for histiocytosis, 386
Sullasalazine, 252, 253, 671t
lupus erythematosus and, 186
Sulfonamides, overview of, 264t
for nocardiosis, 316
Sullur/salicylic acid shampoo, 483
overview ol, 673t
Sunlight, actinic dermatoses and
for panniculitis, 202
clinical [eatures of, 325-335, 325-335
Jor pemphigus complex and bullous pemphigoid,
diagnostics Ior, 335-336
229
dillerential diagnosis for, 335
for pododermatitis and claw disorders, 525
overview of, 324, 337
∫or vasculitis, 252
INDEX
Tetraiodothyronine. See T4
TSST-l. See Toxic shock syndrome toxins
Thermoregulation, 136
Tiuberculosis, 305, 306-307, 310-312
Thorazine. See Chlorpromazine
Tucoprim. See Trimethoprim-sulladiazine
Thymoma, 376-380, 378-379, 479
Tumor suppressor gene (p53), 351, 388
Thyroid gland, 147. See also Hyperthyroidism;
Tumors, defned, ll, 12
Hypothyroidism
Tylenol. See Acetaminophen
Thyroid hormone concentration test. See Total T4
Tylocine. See Tylosin
test
Tylosin, 678t
Thyroid-releasing hormone (TRH), 674t
Tympanic membrane rupture, 487, 488, 510
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH). See
Tympanum, 485, 503
Tyrogen. See Thyrotropin
Thyro-Tabs. See Levothyroxine
Tzanck preparation, 20, 21-23
Thyrotropin (TSH), 147, 156, 674t
L-thyroxine. See Levothyroxine
UCC. See Urine cortisol creatinine ratio
Thytropar. See Thyrotropin
Ulcerative dermatitis (urine scald), 562-564, 563
Ticarcillin, 512, 674t-675t
Ulcerative dermatosis of Shetland sheepdogs and
Ticillin. See Ticarcillin
rough collie (UDsSC), 181
Timentin. See Ticarcillin
Ulcers, 14, 14, 71
Tobramycin sullate, 675t
Ultram. See Tramadol hydrochloride
Toceranib phosphate, 395
Ultrasonography
Tongue, 182, 183-184
[or hyperadrenocorticism, 137, 139, 145
Toradol. See Ketorolac tromethamine
[or hypothyroidism, 156
Totacillin. See Amoxicillin
[or skin and hair follicle tumors, 359
Total T3/T3/rT3 test, 155
for sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses, 239
Total T4 test, 155
[or superhcial necrolytic dermatitis, 532, 532
Touch imprints, 20, 21-23
Ultraviolet light, actinic dermatoses and
Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN), 188-192
clinical [eatures of, 325-335, 325-335
Toxic shock syndrome toxins (TSST-1), 266
diagnostics Ior, 335-336
Toxins, staphylococcal, 266, 267
dillerential diagnosis for, 335
"Tragic" [acial expression, 15l, 153
overview of, 324, 337
Tramadol hydrochloride, 675t
signalment/history of, 324-325
Tramisol. See Levamisole hydrochloride
treatment ol, 336
Trental. See Pentoxilylline
Utraviolet light, squamous cell carcinoma and, 351
Tretinoin, 336, 349, 435
 Unasyn. See Ampicilin/sulbactam 
Trexan. See Naltrexone
Ungual fold, 514
TRH. See Thyroid-releasing hormone
Urine cortiso] creatinine ratio (UCC), 137
TRH-stimulation test, 156
Urine scalding. 562-564, 563
Triamcinode, 230
Urofollitropin (FSH),679t
Triamcinolone, 122, 230, 512, 570t, 676t
Ursodiol, 679t
Triamtabs. See Triamcinolone
Urticaria, 189, 190, 491-492
Tribrissen. See Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine
 Urticaria pigmentosa, 391
Trichoblastoma, trichoepithelioma, trichofolliculoma.
Uveodermatologic syndrome, 77, 83, 242-246,
See Hair follicle tumors
243-244
Trichograms, 18, 454
Tricholemmomas. See Hair follicle tumors
Vaccines, 281, 322, 687-688
Trichophyton mentagrophytes, 29, 31, 33, 275, 278.
Vacuolar degeneration, dehned, 43t
279,558
Valium. See Diazepam
Tricyclic antidepressants, 102, 456-457
Valproic acid, 679t
Triodothyronine. See T3
Vancocin. See Vancomycin
Trilostane, 140, 146, 168, 677t, 720-724
Vancoled. See Vancomycin
Trimeprazine, 570t, 677t
Vancomycin, 270,680t
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine, 122, 677t
Vasculitis, 179, 190, 247-253, 248-251
Trimethoprim-sullamethoxazole, 190, 264, 31l, 678t
Velban. See Vinblastine
Tripelennamine citrate, 678t
Vesicles, dehined, 5, 8
Trixacarus caviae, 548, 548-550, 550
Vestibular nerve dehcits, 488, 510
TSH. See Thyrotropin
Vetalar. See Ketamine
TSH-stimulation test, 156
Vetalog. See Triamcinolone
INDEX
Vetergesic. See Buprenorphine hydrochloride
Xanthoma, cutaneous, 232, 238, 239, 240, 521
Vetoryl. See Trilostane
Xerosis, 458
Vibramycin. See Doxycycline
Xylazine hydrochloride, 682t
Vidarabine, 322
Xylocaine. See Lidocaine
Vinblastine, 395, 680t
Vincasar. See Vincristine
Yeast, acetate tape preparation and, 23-24, 25
Vincristine, 395, 681t
Yeast infections
Viral infections, 86-87, 91, 273t, 317-322, 318-320
Malassezia dermatitis
Viral pustular dermatitis, 319
client education handout for, 708
Virulence [actors, staphylococcal, 266, 267
cytology for, 20, 21, 24
Vitamin A, 681t
hypersensitivity reactions and, 97, 98, 127, 128,
Vitamin A responsive dermatosis, 463
298
Vitamin C, for actinic dermatoses, 336
overview ol, 298-304, 299-303
Vitamin D2. See Ergocalciferol
otitis and, 504, 504, 507, 509
Vitamin E
 pododermatitis and claw disorders Irom, 525
for actinic dermatoses, 336
Yellow jackets, 399, 408-409
∫or actinic keratoses, 349
Yohimbine, 682t
[or canine [amilial dermatomyositis, 177
lupus erythematosus and, 186
Zantac. See Ranitidine hydrochloride
overview of, 681t
Zenecarp. See Carprolen
for panniculitis, 202
Zeniquin. See Marbolloxacin
[or skin and hair follicle tumors, 361
Zidovudine (AZT), 322, 682t
for sterile nodular granulomatous dermatoses,
Zinc-responsive dermatosis, 466, 468-469
240
Zithromax. See Azithromycin
Vitiligo, 77,78
Zoonoses. See also Sarcoptid mites
Vogt Kayanagi Harada syndrome, 242, 243-244
coccidiomycosis as, 293
Vogt Kayanagi Harada-like syndrome. See
leishmaniasis, 294-297, 295-296
Uveodermatologic syndrome
overview of, 88-91, 89-90
sporotrichosis, 283-286, 284
Walking dandruff, 426-432, 428, 430
Staphylococcus spp. as, 267-270
Wasps., 399, 408-409
tuberculosis, 305, 306-307, 310-312
Wheals, dehined, 10, 11
Zubrin. See Tepoxalin
Winer, Dilated Pore of, 351, 353, 355, 358-362
Zyloprim. See Allopurinol
Winstrol-V. See Stanozolol
Zyrtec. See Cetirizine
Wood's lamp test, 27, 28, 278
Zyvox. See Linezolid
This page intentionally left blank