Veterinary Dentistry for the
GeneralPractitioner
Cecilia Gorrel
SAUNDERS
SAUNDERS
Animprint of ElsevierLimited
@ 2004, Elsevier Limited. All rights reserved
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval
mechanical,photocopying,recording or otherwise,without either the
 prior permlssion of the publishers or a licence pernitting restricted
copying in the United Kingdom issued by the Copyright Licensing
Agency, 90 Tottenham Court Road, London W1T 4LP. Permissions
may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights
(+) x  6 91 (1+) ud : d  s
215 239 3805,e-mail:healthpermissions @elsevier.com.You may
also complete your request on-line via the Elsevier homepage
(http://www.elsevier.com), by selecting 'Support and contact' and then
'Copyright and Permission'.
First published 2004
Reprinted 2005, 2006, 2008
ISBN 978 0 7020 2747 5
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of
Congress
Notice
Medical knowledge is constantly changing. Standard safety
precautions must be followed, but as new research and clinical
experience broaden our knowledge, changes in treatment and drug
check the most current product information provided by the
manufacturer of each drug to be administered to verify the
recommended dose,the method and duration of administration,and
contraindications. It is the responsibility of the practitioner, relying on
thebest treatment for each individual patient.Neither the Publisher
nor the editors assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to
persons or property arising frorm this publication.
The Publisher
your source forbooks,
ELSEVIER
joumais and multimedia
in the health sciences
www.elsevierhealth.com
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
www.elsevier.com | www.bookaid.org I www.sabre.org
BOOKAIN)
pubishers
ELSEVIER
Sabre Fotundetion
policy is to use
paper manufactured
from sustainable foreata
Printed in China
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Preface
This book is written for the general practitioner
Oral diseases are common in small animal
 in small animal practice. The aim is to supply all
practice. Many conditions cause discomfort, and
the information required to be able to practice
some diseases cause intense pain. Detection of
good dentistry. There is a real opportunity, if not 
Sad s     si ao
an absclute need, to improve the practice of
since our pets cannot express and describe the
 dentistry and oral surgery in general practice.
sensations of discomfort and/or pain associated
While the discipline is taught in most veterinary
with these conditions. Moreover, there is increas-
schools, the time restrictions of the basic
ing evidence that a focus of infection in the oral
veterinary curriculum generally do not allow
cavity may lead to systemic problems. Thus,
adequate coverage.
This
book presents
prevention and treatment of oral discases is
 comprehensive and detailed knowledge of how
important for the general health and welfare of
to prevent, diagnose and treat common dental
our pets.
diseases in the dog and cat. It also provides
Although this book is written for the general
information as to diagnosis and initial manage-
practitioner, and therefore covers common
ment of less common diseases, where the ultimate
conditions in detail, it should also be of value for
treatment will generally be performed by a
veterinary students, both during their initial
specialist, but the general practitioner needs to
studies and as they seek specialist qualifications.
be able to identify a problem, and have a basic
understanding of the pathophysiology of the
Pilley 2004
Cecilia Gorrel
tissues involved. Dental conditions of lagomorphs
and rodents are also covered.
Acknowledgements
This book would not have been written without
Leen Verhaert and I wish to thank Professors
the assistance of Graeme Blackwood and Sue
Lauwers and Moens of the Morphology Depart-
Derbyshire. Thank you for your emotional
ment, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Ghent
support and practical help.
University, for allowing us to take photographs
of the skulls in the Department Museum.
Equipment and instrumentation
Introduction
 masks and appropriate eye wear (spectacles or
face shield) to protect themselves from the
A poor workman blames his tools! While there is
bacterial aerosol and other debris. There is a risk
some truth to this statement, it is not possible to
of infection of skin wounds if the operator works
perform good dentistry and oral surgery, how-
in a dirty environment without gloves. The oral
ever skilled the operator, without appropriate
cavity is never a sterile site, so the use of surgical
equipment and instrumentation.
gloves is recommended.
This chapter will deal with important general
Important patient considerations are as follows:
considerations, some of which are
often
disregarded. It will also outline equipment and
General anesthesia with endotracheal
instrumentation requirements for the general
 intubation is essential. This prevents
practice. The additional requirements  for
inhalation of aerosolized bacteria (and other
lagomorphs and rodent dentistry are detailed in
debris) and asphyxiation on irrigation and
cooling fluid. Chapter 2 covers anesthesia
ment and techniques are covered in Chapter
7.
and analgesia for the patient undergoing oral
Practicing dentistry without taking radiographs
and dental surgery.
would be considered negligent in human
· A pharyngeal pack is also recommended
dentistry. The same applies in veterinary dentistry.
during oral and dental treatment. Remember
to remove the pack prior to extubation!
· The animal should be positioned on a surface
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS
Many dental procedures result in the creation of
wet and hypothermic. This can be achieved by
a bacterial aerosol, so ideally a separate room
the use of a'tub-tank' or placing the animal's
should be designated for oral and dental procedures.
head on a towel or disposable 'nappy'. Most
The room must have adequate light and venti-
animals benefit from a heating pad.
lation. A bright light source is required. Investing
in a dental light is mandatory. A good dental light
Some important equipment and instrumentation
is expensive, but definitely worth the money.
considerations are as follows:
Ergonomic considerations are of paramount
importance in the layout of the dental operatory.
Clean, sterilized instruments should be
All equipment and instruments should be within
available for each patient. Ideally, several pre-
easy reach of the operator. Posture is important!
packed kits with the required instruments for
Ideally, the operator should be seated.
different procedures, e.g. examination,
It is essential to protect operator and staff. The
 periodontal therapy, extraction, should be
veterinarian and the assistant should wear face-
available.
 2 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
● Power equipment requires regular
its blunt end, it can be inserted into the gingival
maintenance (daily, weekly) in the practice and
sulcus without causing trauma (Fig. 1.l). The
 regular servicing by the supplier. Draw up
 periodontal probe is used to:
checklists for these chores. Check maintenance
and servicing requirements with the supplier
· Measure periodontal probing depth
· Determine degree of gingival inflammation
EQUIPMENT AND
·Evaluate furcation lesions
INSTRUMENTATION FOR ORAL
● Evaluate extent of tooth mobility.
AND DENTAL EXAMINATION
A rounded narrow, rather than flat, probe (e.g.
There is a wide selection of dental equipment
No. 14 Williams B) is my preferred choice, as it is
and instrumentation available on the market. My
easier to enter the gingival sulcus without
recommendation is to identify your needs and
causing damage with the rounded probe,
then invest in a bit more than you think you will
especially in cats, where the flat probe is impossible
require. The better you get at performing dentistry
and oral surgery, the more demanding of your
to use.
equipment you will become. There is also an
element of personal preference, so test different
Dental explorer
options before making a decision. Finally, be
The dental explorer or probe, a sharp-ended
prepared to upgrade!
instrument, is used to:
The details of how to perform oral examin-
 ation and recording are covered in Chapter 6. The
·Determine the presence of caries
following will outline equipment and instrumen-
 Explore other enamel and dentin defects, e.g.
tation requirements. Personal preferences have
been inserted as a guide, where appropriate.
fracture, odontoclastic resorptive lesions.
Periodontal probe
The explorer is also useful for tactile examination
of the subgingival tooth surfaces. Subgingival
The periodontal probe is a rounded narrow or 
 calculus and odontoclastic resorptive lesions
flat, blunt-ended, graduated instrument. Due to  1
 may be identified in this way.
Fig. 1.1 The periodontal probe. The
periodontal probe is a blunt-ended,
graduated instrument, which can be
inserted into the gingival sulcus without
causing trauma.
EQUIPMENT & INSTRUMENTATION 3
for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes, as well
as for medicolegal reasons.
EQUIPMENT AND
INSTRUMENTATION FOR
PERIODONTAL THERAPY
Periodontal therapy is detailed in Chapter 9.
Scaling
Scaling describes the procedure whereby dental
deposits (plaque, but mainly calculus) are removed
from the supra- and subgingival surfaces of the
Fig. 1.2 The dental explorer. The dental explorer is either
teeth. Scaling may be performed using either
straight or curved (shepherd's hook). The author does not
hand instruments or mechanical instruments, or
of inadvertent damage to the animal with the end not being
a combination of both.
used in the cral cavity.
Hand scaling instruments
 Dental explorers are either straight or curved
Scalers and curettes (Fig. 1.3) are used to remove
(Fig. l.2). They are also either single-ended or
double-ended, usually combined with a peri-
dental deposits from the tooth surfaces. Figure
1.4 details the design differences between a scaler
odontal probe, i.e. one end is an explorer and the
other end is a periodontal probe. My preference
and a curette.
is the Explorer probe No. 6, which is a single-
ended straight explorer.
Dental mirror
A dental mirror is a vital, but traditionally rarely
used tool. It allows the operator to visualize
palatal/lingual surfaces  while  maintaining
posture, reflect light onto areas of interest, and
retract and protect soft tissue. Orientation may
cause confusion and the use of a dental mirror
requires practice; however, the time taken to learn
how to use a dental mirror is a worthy invest-
ment. To prevent condensation occurring on the
mirror it can be wiped across the buccal mucous
membranes before use. Dental mirrors can be
purchased in several sizes. A small (pediatric size)
mirror for cats and small dogs and a larger one for
medium to large dogs should be available.
Fig. 1.3 Scaler and curette. The scaler (top) can only be
Dental record sheets
used to remove supragingival dental deposits. The curette
(bottom) is used to remove subgingival deposits and
Recording and dental record sheets are covered
restore the root surface to smoothness. It can also be used
in Chapter 6. A complete dental record is required
4
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Shank
Handle
Working tip
SupragingivalSCALER
SubgingivalCURETTE
Fig. 1.4  Scaler and curette design. Each has a handle, a shank and a working tip. The working tip of a scaler is more
EQUIPMENT & INSTRUMENTATION 5
Scalers are used for the supragingival removal
for operation. The tip vibration is generated
of calculus. A scaler has a sharp working tip and
either by a magnetostrictive mechanism, or a
should thus only be used supragingivally. If a
piezoelectric mechanism in the hand piece. The
scaler is used subgingivally, the result is lacer-
ultrasonic oscillation of the tip causes cavitation
ation of the gingival margin. The scaler should
of the coolant, which aids in the disruption of the
always be pulled away from the gingiva towards
calculus on the tooth surface. Ultrasonic scalers
the tip of the crown. Scalers require frequent
are generally designed for supragingival use, but
sharpening to maintain their cutting edges. Instru-
tips designed for subgingival scaling are avail-
ment sharpening is covered on pages 8 and 9.
 able. A thin, pointed insert is recommended for 
 Curettes are used for the subgingival removal
 supragingival use. Inserts specifically designed
of dental deposits and for root planing. They can
for subgingival use are recommended for sub-
also be used supragingivally. The working tip of
gingival scaling.
a curette is more slender than that of a scaler.
 I have no real preference between sonic or ultra-
Also, the back and tip are rounded to minimize
sonic scalers and use both.
gingival trauma. Curettes also require frequent
Rotary scalers are best avoided, but are
sharpening.
included here for completeness. In this system,
 Aselection of curettes is required. My preferred
 roto pro burs are inserted in the high-speed hand
curettes are the Gracey 7/8 and the Columbia
piece of a compressed air driven unit. They are
13/14. 1 don't recommend a separate scaler as
curettes can be used both above and below the
to calculus cause it to disintegrate while the
gingiva, while scalers are limited to supra-
 coolant flushes the debris away. In humans, the
gingival use.
use of these burs to scale teeth is associated with
sigrificant postoperative pain. They are thus no
longer used for scaling. In addition to post-
Mechanical scaling instruments
operative pain, roto pro burs can cause extensive
Mechanical or powered scalers enable fast and
        
easy removal of calculus. However, they have
veterinary dentistry is not recommended.
great potential for iatrogenic damage if used
incorrectly. There are three types of mechanical
scalers, namely sonic, ultrasoric and rotary
Calculus forceps
Gross supragingival calculus deposits are best
Calculus forceps have been designed to aid
removed with hand instruments (scaler, curette)
removal of heavy calculus from the surface of
prior to using mechanical scaling equipment.
 Sonic scalers are driven by compressed air, s0
teeth. It is essential to use these forceps with
extreme care and in the described manner, as
they require a compressed air driven dental unit
(see pp. 7 and 8) for operation. The tip oscillates
inappropriate use will result in fractured teeth.
 at a sonic frequency and is efficient at removing
These forceps must not be used to extract teeth.
dental calculus. Sonic scalers are generally less
effective than ultrasonic scalers, but generate less
Polishing
heat and are thus safer to use. Depending upon the
design of the tip of the scaler, these instruments
Polishing removes plaque and restores the scaled
may be used for supra- and subgingival scaling. A
tooth surfaces to smoothness, which is less
thin, pointed tip, sometimes called a perio, sickle 
plaque retentive. Scaled teeth must be polished.
 or universal insert is the recommended insert.
 It is often suggested that teeth may be 'polished'
Ultrasonic scalers are commonly used in
by hand using a toothbrush and prophy paste.
veterinary practice. The tip oscillates at ultra-
This method is inefficient and, therefore, not rec-
      s 
 ommended. Efficient polishing can be performed
so do not require a compressed air driven unit
using either prophy paste in a prophy cup or in a
6 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
brush in a slow-speed contra-angle hand piece,
 contamination and the iatrogenic transmission of
 or by means of air polishing (particle blasting).
pathogens.
Prophy paste in a cup/brush in a slow-speed
EQUIPMENT AND
contra-angle hand piece
INSTRUMENTATIONFORTOOTH
The speed of rotation of the cup/brush can be
EXTRACTION
regulated. To minimize the amount of heat
The techniques for tooth extraction are detailed
generated, the prophy cup or brush should not
in Chapter 13.
rotate faster than 1000 rpm.
Hand instruments
Air polishing (particle blasting)
Luxators and elevators
This technique, based on the sandblasting prin-
A selection of dental luxators and elevators of
ciple, is used to polish the supragingival parts of
 varying sizes is required. My preferred selection
the teeth. The particles used (e.g. bicarbonate of
is shown in Figure 1.5.
soda) will polish the tooth surface without
Luxators and elevators are used to cut/break
causing damage to the enamel. It is essential to
down the periodontal ligament, which holds the
protect the soft tissues (gingivae and oral
tooth in the alveolus. The different sizes are
mucosa) during air polishing. A simple way of
 required so that an appropriate range for each
protecting the soft tissues is to cover them with a
size of root can be selected. Always start with a
piece of gauze.
small instrument and move up to a larger one as
more space is created between the tooth and the
alveolar bone. Luxators have a very thin working
Prophy paste
end and are used to cut the ligament, but should
Prophy paste is available in bulk containers
not be used for leverage or they may break. Ele-
and in individual patient tubs. The latter are
vators have a relatively thick shank. They are
inexpensive and should be used to prevent
used to break down the periodontal ligament
Fig. 1.5 Luxators and elevators. The
author's favorite luxators and elevators
are depicted. On the left are four
Svensk luxators (colored handles) and
on the right four different sizes of
Coupland elevators.
EQUIPMENT & INSTRUMENTATION
7
with a combination of apical pressure and
forceps are not essential, but if they are to be
leverage. An extraction can be started with a
used then a selection of sizes, to fit the root
luxator and completed with an elevator. A very
anatomy of the tooth being extracted, is required.
small (2mm) luxator or a root tip elevator will
assist removal of fractured root tips and should
Power equipment
be available for all extractions - just in case!
Power equipment is required to perform dentistry
and oral surgery. Regular maintenance is essen-
Periosteal elevator
tial to avoid problems with equipment failure.
A periosteal elevator (Fig. 1.6) is required for
 open (surgical) extractions to expose the alveolar
Micromotor unit
bone by raising a mucoperiosteal flap. However,
even if a closed (nonsurgical) exraction technique
A micromotor unit can be used for polishing
has been used, the gingiva may be sutured over 
 teeth as well as sectioning them. For sectioning
the extraction socket. In this sifuation, a periosteal  t
 teeth, the micromotor should be set at maximum
elevator is invaluable to free the gingiva, allow-
speed (30 000 rpm). Micromotor units do not
ing suturing over of the extraction socket
generally include water cooling of the bur and an
without tension.
external source (e.g. assistant applying coolant
continuously to the tissues) is required to
 prevent thermal damage.
Extraction forceps
Although forceps can be used to aid ligament
Compressed air driven unit
breakdown by rotational force on the tooth, it is
very easy to snap the crown off by using excess-
The basic compressed air driven unit consists of
ive force. There is some truth in the saying that
a high-speed hand piece with water cooling. a
the only extraction forceps required are your
 slow-speed hand piece (with or without water
fingers. If the tooth cannot be lifted out with your
cooling) and a combination air/water syringe
fingers, then the periodontal ligament has not
(Fig. 1.7). A high-speed hand piece, although not
been adequately broken down. In short, dental
essential for sectioning multirooted teeth prior to
Fig. 1.6 Equipment for tooth
extraction. The author's preferred
periosteal elevators and suturing kit are
shown (small instruments are required)
The two periosteal elevators on the left
are the Fine P24GSP (for cats) and the
Howard P9H (for dogs). Also useful for
dogs are the Molt P9 and the Periosteal
No. 9. The size 15 blade shown in the
handle is the author's preferred choice.
8
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 1.7 A compressed air driven
unit. This compressed air driven unit
(Shor-Line Ltd) combines a high-speed
hand piece (with fibre-optic light), with
a slow-speed hand piece and a three-
way syringe. It also has an ultrasonic
scaler, driven by a built in micromotor.
extraction, facilitates the process and allows
accurate application of coolant water. Investing
in a high-speed hand piece with fibre-optic light
is strongly recommended. The slow-speed hand
piece accommodates the contra-angle hand piece
used for polishing the teeth. The three-way syringe
can deliver either a stream of water or a spray of
water and air, or air only. It is used to irrigate/
lavage the mouth (water or water/air spray) and
to dry the teeth (air only). Some units come with
two high-speed outlets and one of these can be
used with a sonic scaler. Suction is also available
with some units.
Fig. 1.8 A selection of tungsten-carbide burs. From the
 Investing in a compressed air driven unit from
left are round, pear-shaped and tapered fissure high-speed
the outset is recommended. The high-speed hand
hand piece burs. Round and cross-cutting straight fissure
piece greatly facilitates tooth sectioning and the
burs for the slow-speed hand piece are shown on the right.
pe m (rp pue aa ) aus Aem-n
in the removal of debris and improve visibility
will be required for sectioning of teeth and
 during examination and any procedure. Suction is
removal of alveolar bone. 'Diamond' burs abrade
a real bonus. Investigate the maintenance and
rather than cut and may be safer for the
 service options offered before making your choice.
inexperienced user.
Burs
MISCELLANEOUS
Dental burs are made of a variety of materials
Sharpening
including stainless steel, tungsten-carbide steel
and 'diamond'. There is a wide selection of burs
 Scalers, curettes, luxators and elevators all require
available to fit both the slow- and the high-speed
hand piece (Fig. 1.8). A selection of round, pear-
 ing kits (stones and oil), with instructions, are
shaped, tapered fissure and straight fissure burs 
 available through veterinary wholesalers.
EQUIPMENT & INSTRUMENTATION
6
Scalers and curettes should be sharpened before
suture material should always be used in the oral
each use, i.e. after cleaning and sterilization.
cavity. Monocryl (polyglecaprone, Ethicon) is
Sterilization will blunt the instruments and
currently my suture material of choice.
sharpening of dirty instruments will contaminate
the sharpening stone. Sharpening is performed
Suction
to retain the 70-80° angle between the face and
 the lateral surface of the working tip.
Suction is invaluable. Excess water and debris
Luxators and elevators need to be sharpened
can easily be removed, improving visibility for
 regularly, usually after each use, with a cylindrical
 the operator and increasing safety for the patient
Arkansas stone. If either have damage to the work-
(reducing the risk of aspiration). In addition,
 ing end they should be professionally reground.
blood loss can be estimated more accurately.
Invest in either a compressed air driven unit that
incorporates suction or a separate suction unit.
Scalpel blade
The use of a scalpel blade to free the gingival
attachment to the tooth is recommended for both
Summary
closed and open extraction technique. A size 15
0r 11 blade, used in the handle, is ideal (Fig. 1.6).
Bae lo woou paieubisap e auinbal sanpaooid euaa
designed to facilitate safe and effective clinical
working practices.
Suture kit and suture material
ideal
 Careful consideration should be given to the
A suture kit with small (ophthalmic) instruments
selection, maintenance and proper use of dental
should be available (Fig. 1.6). An absorbable
instruments and equipment.
FURTHER READING
Gorel, C. & Penman, S. (1995) Dental equipment. In:
Wiggs, R.B. & Lobprise, H.B. (1997) Dental equipment. In:
Crossley, D. & Penman, S. (eds) Manual of Smalf Anima!
Wiggs, R.B. & Lobprise, H.B. (eds) Veterinary Dentistry:
Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA, ch. 2, p. 12-26
Principles and Practice. Philadelphia, USA: Lippincott-
Verstraete, F.J.M. (ed) (1999) Self-assessment Colour
Raven, ch. 1, p. 1-28.
Review of Veterinary Dentistry. London, UK: Manson.
2
Anesthesia and analgesia
Introduction
what has been explained to them. While the
anesthetic mortality rate in fit and healthy cats
This chapter will deal with anesthetic and
and dogs is 1 in 679 (0.15%), it increases to
analgesic considerations specifically  for  the
around 1 in 31 (3.2%) in animals that have a
patient undergoing dental treatment and/or oral
disease (Clarke & Hall, 1990). In a more recent
surgery. Detailed protocols will not be given as
study (Dyson et al, 1998) investigating the
 there is wide variation in regimes worldwide and
morbidity and mortality associated with anes-
there are good textbooks on the subject available
thesia (8087 dogs and 8702 cats), the incidences
on the market.
 of complications were 2.1% in dogs and 0.13% in
 cats and the mortality rate was 0.11% in dogs and
ANESTHESIA
0.1% in cats. Among other factors, continuous
monitoring of anesthesia was associated with
A full clinical examination of the oral cavity and
reduced mortality.
all oral procedures require general anesthesia
A thorough clinical examination must be
(GA). In rare circumstances, e.g. a brief oral
 performed prior to anesthesia. A ful hematology
examination or taking a few radiographs,
and biochemistry panel is recommended for all
sedation may be sufficient. However, as soon as
geriatric (75-80% of the animal's anticipated life
any therapy needs to be performed the animal
span is completed) patients. In the elderly, there
should be placed under GA. Oral/dental
is increasing likelihood of systemic disease that
procedures range from simple procedures in
may have gone unnoficed by the client. Irrespective
young healthy patients to lengthy complicated
of age, the brachycephalic breeds pose an anes-
procedures in older systemically compromised
thetic challenge. Anesthesia for the trauma
individuals.
patient also requires careful management.
GA can be maintained using an inhalational or
injectable technique. However, if an injectable
technique is used, the airways should always be
General principles of anesthesia for
secured with an endotracheal tube to prevent
the dental patient
 aspiration of saliva, debris and irrigation fluids.
Airway security
Anesthesia is an unnatural state, and the
induction process always carries a risk. The
During (
dental surgery, the airway must be
degree of risk varies and this should always be
secured by endotracheal intubation to prevent
explained to the owner. It is essential that the
 aspiration pneumonia, which may occur if debris
 owner or, in their absence, adult agents, sign a
(irrigation fluid, blood) from the oral cavity
consent form for anesthesia, indicating that they
 enters unprotected airways. This condition may
are giving their consent and have understood
be fatal and is easier to prevent than cure.
11
12 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Endotracheal tubes
the jaws. The condition is self-limiting but may
Endotracheal tubes must be checked for defective
take several weeks to resolve. Mouth gags
cuffs and obstructed lumens before use. Any
should be released and the jaws closed every
defective tubes should be discarded. Lightweight
circuits are recommended.
10-15 minutes.
To reduce apparatus dead space and the risk
of endobronchial intubation, the tubing should
Suction
be cut to fit the patient from midneck to the level
of the incisor teeth. Excessively long tubes that
It is recommended to have suction available to
protect the airways from saliva, irrigation fluids
protrude from the oral cavity are prone to
and other debris if required. In addition, blood
kinking, which may lead to pulmonary oedema
loss can also be estimated by measuring the
   i s r e 
volume of blood in the suction jar.
way. The use of guarded endotracheal tubes
should be considered for patients at high risk of
tube kinking. Moreover, excessively long tubes are
Long anesthetic periods
difficult to secure to the jaw with gauze bandage,
which increases the risk of accidental extubation.
Dental procedures are often lengthy and close
attention to life support is needed:
Knots should be tied around the adaptor and not
around the endotracheal tube itself.
The cuff should be carefully inflated to a point
● Oxygen should be delivered at an inspired
concentration of at least 33% to compensate for
where there is no air leaking around it. Be careful
the deterioration in pulmonary function that
not to inflate the cuff excessively as this can cause
 accompanies anesthesia even in healthy young
tracheal injury.
patients.
Pharyngeal packing
● Reduced cardiac output and arterial blood
pressure produced by anesthesia should be
Pharyngeal packing should be used for greater
offset by intravenous fluid therapy. A catheter
airway security. Commonly used pharyngeal
should be aseptically placed in an appropriate
packs include surgical swabs, sponges and gauze
superficial vein before inducing anesthesia.
bandage. A simple way to pack the pharynx is to
Hartmann's (lactated Ringer's) solution should
insert a length of damp gauze bandage around
be given at a rate of 10 mL/kg/h. Catheters
the endotracheal tube with the free end left
allow immediate venous access in an emergency
visible for easy removal. It is important not to
and they ensure that irritant injectable agents
pack too tightly as this impedes venous return
are not given perivascularly They should not be
and results in swelling of the tongue. Packs will
removed until the patient is fully recovered
 become saturated with liquid during procedures
from anesthesia.
and will then no longer offer adequate protection
· Hypothermia is a complication of lengthy
and should be replaced as required. It is imperative
anesthesia and the use of cool irrigation fluids.
to remove any packing prior to extubation.
Hypothermia results in anticholinergic resistant
bradycardia, reduced cardiac output and
Eye protection
hemoconcentration. Cardiac fibrillation can
The eyes should be protected from desiccation by
occur at a body temperature of around 28°℃.
applying a lubricant eye ointment as required
Moreover, requirements for anesthetic agents
during the procedure.
are reduced during hypothermia and care
Mouth gags
should be taken to prevent relative overdose.
 Body temperature should be monitored during
Mouth gags should be used with caution. Keep-
dental procedures and the development of
ing the jaws wide open for prolonged periods
 hypothermia should be prevented by supplying
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
13
external heat by blankets and warmed
Hemostasis
intravenous and irrigation fluids. Patients
Hemostasis is best achieved by identifying and
should be insulated with towels or bubble pack
ligating blood vessels or by using firm pressure
to prevent thermal injuries due to 'hot spots'
that may occur with electrical heating mats.
for a few minutes. Vasoconstrictors such as
topically applied adrenaline or phenylephrine,
Circulating warm water mats may be safer.
· Hyperthermia can occasionally occur in large
due to their arrythmogenic properties if sys-
temically absorbed, are best avoided.
heavy coated dogs connected to rebreathing
circuits for long periods. Active cooling must
then be initiated before damage occurs to vital
Patient monitoring
organs.
All patients should be monitored continuously.
Careful monitoring should enable the detection
Hemorrhage
of problems before they become severe, so that
 sas pre araedodde paean aq reo Aa
The conditions covered in this book rarely result
be avoided. Continuous anesthetic monitoring is
in extensive hemorrhage unless the patient has
associated with reduced mortality (Dyson et al,
an underlying disorder, e.g. coagulopathy, septi-
1998).
cemia. A full hematological examination and
Routine anesthetic monitoring includes inspec-
clotting profile should be performed prior to any
tion of respiratory function and the color of the
potentially hemorrhagic procedure. The patient
should also be cross matched with a healthy donor
mucous membranes, capillary refill time, listen-
ing to the sound of breathing and palpation of
prior to any such procedure. An alternative to
cross matching is autologous transfusion, where
a week before surgery 10% of the patient's blood
volume is removed and replaced with intra-
Anesthesia and monitoring checklist
venous fluids. The blood is stored at 4°C in acid-
· Endotracheal tube is correctly positioned and the cuff
citrate-dextrose or citrate-phosphate-dextrose
is not overinflated.
 Endotracheal tube is securely fastened and not
transfusion packs until required.
kinke d.
During the procedure blood loss should be
 Accidental extubation or circuit disconnection has not 
estimated either by weighing blood soaked
occurred (apnea alarms and capnograms are useful
for detecting accidental disconnection).
swabs or by measuring the amount of blood
Monitor the central nervous system (ocular signs and 
collected in a suction jar. As a rough guide a
muscle tone will indicate the depth of anesthesia)
saturated 3x3 inch swab contains 7 mL of blood
Monitor the cardiovascular system (pulse quality.
auscultation of heart sounds, mucous membrane
and a saturated 4x4 inch swab contains 10 mL of
color and capillary refill). Monitoring devices that aid 
blood.
clinical assessment of cardiovascular function include
 The normal patient can compensate for a
esophageal stethoscopes, blood pressure monitors
and ECG)
blood loss of up to 20% of circulating volume. A
 Monitor the respiratory system (tidal volume
dog's blood volume is 80-90 mL/kg and a cat's
pue beg buyeaigal aul buiaasgo Ag juawssasse
blood volume is 60-70 mL/kg. To compensate
chest wall excursions, respiratory rate, and mucous
 membrane color). Monitoring devices include apnea
for hypotension, intravenous isotonic crystal-
alarms and pulse oximeters.
loid fluid infusion should be increased
to
Monitor and record body temperature (rectal or
30-40 mL/kg/h. Colloids can be used (up to
esophageal)
Monitor renal function (a urinary catheter connected to
20 mL/kg) to maintain tissue perfusion but they
an empty intravenous fluid bag via an administration
 are not a replacement for red blood cells. As the
set can measure urine cutput and thus give an
 blood loss approaches 20% of circulating volume,
indication of organ perfusion)
Estimate blood loss and take appropriate measures.
fluid replacement therapy with blood should
 Replace saturated pharyngeal packs.
begin. Donor blood should be given at the same
Release mouth gags at regular intervals.
rate as patient blood is lost.
· Reapply eye cintment as required.
14  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
the peripheral pulse. This basic monitoring
cor pulmonale, and evidence for this should be
can be augmented with mecharical aids which
checked.
give addifional information and allow a more
Brachycephalic patients pose a challenge at
precise picture of the patient's status. This allows
both induction and recovery.  Induction of
closer control over the course of the anesthetic.
anesthesia causes relaxation of pharyngeal
 The disadvantage of mechanical monitoring
musculature, and the degree of upper airway
devices is that they in turn must be monitored
obstruction is increased until endotracheal
to ensure that the information they are giving
intubation is performed. The ideal is rapid
is accurate. Unexpected readings should be
induction and expert endotracheal intubation
verified by examination of the patient before
as these exacerbate upper airway obstruction.
they are acted on, i.e. monitor the patient, not the
Mild sedation with low doses of acepromazine
equipment!
and an opioid, e.g. buprenorphine, is adequate in
dogs. Boxers are prone to vasovagal syncope
with acepromazine and should receive an
Geriatric patients
anticholinergic if acepromazine is used. Alter-
Many of the patients that require dental procedures
 natively, it should be avoided. Preoxygenation
are geriatric. It must be remembered that even
by mask for 5 minutes, if the animal will allow it,
helps prevent hypoxia during induction, but
ologic changes in the cardiopulmonary system
mask induction using an inhalational agent
that can influence the course of anesthesia.
should be avoided.
Important age-related changes include:
Airway obstruction during recovery can be
dealt with in two ways. First, using an induction
· Decreased cardiac output
agent with a short plasma half-life, e.g. propofol,
● Reduced ability to compensate for blood
will ensure a rapid recovery and return of the
 pressure and circulating volume changes
patient's ability to maintain its own airway.
· Decreased lung compliance
Isoflurane or sevoflurane provides more rapid
+]
High small airway closing volume
recoveries than halothane. Secondly, the use of an
· Decreased partial pressure of oxygen in
opioid with potent anti-tussive action, e.g.
arterial blood (PaO2).
butorphanol, morphine or oxymorphone, can be
used to allow tolerance of the endotracheal tube
A noticeable decrease in circulation time is seen
for a prolonged period. The endotracheal tube
during induction, and further increments of
should be left in place for as long as possible.
injectable anesthetic agents should not be given
Ideally, the animal should be able to sit up or
too soon.
even stand before the endotracheal tube is
In addition to the age-related physiologic
removed.
changes, elderly patients also have psychologic
Once the endotracheal tube is removed, there
requirements in that they are easily distressed
is still a risk of obstruction until the patient is
and confused by changes in routine and require
fully awake. It is wise to have a small dose of an
 gentle handling and constant reassurance.
induction agent available so that reintubation
can be performed rapidly if required. Continued
oxygenation via a nasal catheter to prevent
Brachycephalic patients
hypoxia following removal of the endotracheal
In brachycephalic patients
upper
airway
tube is prudent. The patient's tongue should be
obstruction should be anticipated. The degree of
pulled forwards to alleviate obstruction and the
obstruction, assessed from clinical history and
 mouth kept open to encourage mouth breathing.
physical examination, needs to be determined
 Recovery in sternal recumbency is ideal as
it
prior to anesthesia and surgery. Chronic severe 
 allows more uniform expansion of the lungs and
upper airway obstruction eventually results in
 may promote a more rapid return to consciousness.
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA 15
Maxillofacial trauma
table to the removal of chroric discomfort and
pain.
Patients with traumatic injuries must be stabilized
In human dentistry, there is a good under-
and other potential injuries dealt with prior to
standing of which disease processes cause
anesthesia. Most procedures can be managed
discomfort and pain. We also know which
with conventional endotracheal intubation, but
procedures are associated with postoperative
occasionally passing the endotracheal tube
pain. It seems reasonable to assume that dogs
through a pharyngotomy or tracheotomy site
and cats experience discomfort and pain when
may be necessary.
 afflicted by the same diseases and after receiving
Cats are prone to upper airway obstruction
similar treatment. In following this line of
during anesthetic recovery if the nasal passages
reasoning, overtreatment with analgesics may
 are occluded with blood and debris. They seem
occur, but the adverse consequences of this are
reluctant to mouth breathe during the critical
minimal compared with the distress of with-
time from extubation until they are completely
 holding pain relief.
recovered from the effect of the anesthetic. Anes-
Common conditions that we know are likely
thetic agents providing rapid recovery 
are
to cause discomfort and/or pain in people, and
therefore recommended.
are thus likely to cause similar sensations to an
affected animal include:
ANALGESIA
 Complications to periodontitis, e.g. lateral
Humans can express and describe the sensations
periodontal abscess, toxic mucous
of discomfort and/or pain that they experience,
membrane ulcers, gingivostomatitis
and these descriptions are well accepted. Assess-
Pulp and periapical disease, e.g. acute
ment of pain in animals is much more difficult.
pulpitis, periapical abscess, osteomyelitis
One must rely on overt signs and the correct
3
 Traumatic injuries, including soft tissue
interpretation of these signs. Animals probably
lacerations and jaw fracture.
have no psychologic expectation of pain, so the
confounding influence of anticipation is removed.
These conditions may be seen as emergencies in
Changed responsiveness to human contact is
that treatment should not be delayed. They are
often a first indicator that the animal is in dis-
  '     p
comfort. Aggression or avoidance of human
considerations will be covered in this chapter
contact may occur, but some animals seek excess-
Dental procedures that we know are likely to
ive human reassurance. Disturbance in the sleep
cause postoperative pain in humans, and are
pattern, with an animal sleeping less, is also an
therefore likely to cause similar sensations in
indicator of discomfort. Reduced grooming and
animals, include:
changes in eating behaviour are often mani-
festations of chronic pain.
 Periodontal therapy, e.g. deep subgingival
In the presence of oral/dental disease it is rare
curettage
for the animal to stop eating, instead they change
 Extraction, especially when extraction
their food preferences (e.g. an animal will
sockets are left to heal by granulation.
selectively only eat soft food) or change the way
they chew (e.g. chew selectively on one side). A
Mechanisms of pain processing
common feedback from clients after their pet has
undergone a remedial dental procedure is that
dud a os qu md d, 
the animal is brighter in general, often showing
components:
more interest in exercise and games than prior to
treatment. One can speculate that this commonly
1. Peripheral tissue nociceptors detect the
reported change in general behaviour is attribu-
stimulus and transmit the nociceptive signal
16 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
via primary afferent nerve fibres to the
been shown clinically in dogs (Lascelles et al,
spinal cord or cranial nerve nuclei.
1997) that pre-injury treatment with opioids
Processing occurs in the spinal cord or
 prevents or markedly decreases the development
brainstem before transmission to
of central hypersensitivity, but these treatments
supraspinal structures.
are far less effective if administered after the
3.
 After further procesing at supraspinal sites,
injury is initiated. Local analgesics (Bach et al,
the signal induces the conscious perception
1988) have shown similar protective effects. So,
of pain.
by preventing the surgical afferent stimuli from
entering the spinal cord, central sensitization can
In addition, there are various intrinsic segmental,
be avoided. Thus, the severity of postoperative
spinal and supraspinal endogenous mechanisms
pain can be markedly decreased.
for inhibiting the transmission of the nociceptive
The concept of pre-emptive analgesia is the
signals. These are mediated by endogenous 
 administration of analgesics preoperatively to
neurotransmitter systems (opioid, cholinergic,
reduce the severity of postoperative pain. It is
adrenergic, serotonergic).
important to distinguish between pre-emptive
The appreciation of pain is not just a moment-
 analgesia and alleviation of postoperative pain.
by-moment analysis of afferent noxious input
In other words, pre-emptive analgesia may block
relayed by a hard-wired transmission system.
sensitization, but it does not eliminate post-
Instead, it is a dynamic process that is influenced
operative pain; additional measures are still
by past experience. Clirical pain can be classified
 required to ensure a comfortable recovery.
as inflammatory (relates to peripheral tissue
The optimum form of pain therapy is con-
damage) or neuropathic (relates to a damaged
tinuous pre-emptive analgesia, continuously
CNS). Clinical pain is characterized by changes in
 preventing the establishment of sensitization.
       
The administration of opioids or local anesthetic
 perceived as painful become painful (allodynia)
 drugs block central sensitization and nonsteroidal
and an exaggerated response to a given noxious
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduce the
 stimulus (hyperalgesia) develops and spreads to
severity of the peripheral inflammatory response.
uninjured tissue (secondary hyperalgesia). This
The combined use of an opioid and an NSAID is
sensitization occurs at either or both peripheral
more effective than using either drug alone.
and central levels. Peripheral sensitization occurs 
Local anesthetics  (analgesics) can produce
because of an increase in sensitivity of the
complete pain relief by blocking all sensory input
nociceptors due to their exposure to high levels of
from the affected area.
inflammatory mediators and results in an increase
A basic analgesic routine, which can be modi-
in firing rate of afferent nerve fibres. Central
fied as required, is as shown in the box:
hypersensitivity develops due to changes in the
spinal cord. An activity-dependent increase in
excitability of dorsal horn neurons develops,
Basic dental analgesic plan
which outlasts the nociceptive afferent inputs.
Include an opioid in the premedication
The clinical implications of peripheral and
Use local anesthetics prior to surgery and/or
central hypersensitivity are that:
Give opioids and/or NSAlDs postoperatively. Local
anesthesia (administered at the end of a procedure)
will also provide postoperative analgesia.
· Once pain is established, analgesic drugs, for a
Administer NSAIDs during recovery.
given dose, are much less effective, i.e. pain is
more difficult to control.
· The pain perceived by the animal will be greater.
Local anesthesia
Thus, the evidence is overwhelming that pain
Local anesthesia (LA) can be used to provide
should be prevented rather than just treated. It has
intra- and postoperative analgesia. In contrast to
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA17
human patients, dogs and cats are not amenable
acidic and the result is that only small amounts
to LA if conscious. So, the techniques are used
of free base dissociate from the anesthetic salt,
when the animal is under GA. When given prior
 resulting in poor local anesthesia.
to the start of a procedure, the use of LA may
In human dentistry and oral surgery, vaso-
reduce the requirement for GA drugs during
constrictors (adrenaline, L-noradrenaline) are
 surgery. When given at the end of a procedure,
routinely used in combination with the local
-s ad  A   0 d
anesthetic. The main reason is to delay systemic
operative analgesia.
absorption of the local anesthetic, thus reducing
 Useful techniques in the oral cavity include
the toxicity and increasing the margin of safety.
 infiltration anesthesia and regional nerve blocks.
Local anesthetics produce analgesia when given
In our experience tongue biting or cheek chew-
in small doses intravenously, but are potent
ing in the postoperative period has not been a
proconvulsants and can induce marked myo-
problem.
cardial depression and  cardiac dysrythmias
Allclinically used local anesthetics are
when administered systemically. The addition
membrane-stabilizing agents. They prevent
of vasoconstrictors, by reducing systemic
depolarization and thus stop or retard conduc-
absorption of the local anesthetic, will also
tion of impulses. Sensation disappears in the
 increase intensity and prolong anesthetic activity.
following order: pain, cold, warmth, touch, joint
However, they may increase the risk of cardiac
and deep pressure. Procaine hydrochloride is
arrhythmias and ventricular fibrillation. In
the prototype of all local anesthetics. It is
veterinary dentistry and oral surgery, local
the standard drug for comparison of anesthetic
anesthetics are generally used without the
effects. For LA in the oral cavity lidocaine,
addition of vasoconstrictors. Safe maximum
mepivacaine, bupivacaine and ropivacaine
doses are: 4 mg/kg lidocaine and 1-2 mg/kg
are all suitable. The local anesthetic drug chosen
bupivacaine.
for postoperative pain relief should ideally
A 22-30 gauge, 1 inch needle is used for the
have a long duration of action, and therefore
regional blocks in dogs; a shorter needle is easier
bupivacaine (onset 15 minutes, duration
for infiltration anesthesia and for regional blocks
4-6 hours) is the drug of choice. Lidocaine
in cats. The safe maximum dose is calculated for
 can be used during surgery for more immediate
each animal. In general, 0.25-1.00 mL of local
effect.
anesthetic agent is deposited per site. Always
The mechanism of action of all local anesthetic
 aspirate for blood before injecting.
drugs is similar. The salt of the anesthetic base
(RNH+Cl ) is an ionizable quaternary amine with
little or no anesthetic properties of its own
Infiltration
because it is not lipid soluble and therefore not
Infiltration anesthesia involves depositing a
absorbed in the nerve membrane. After depo-
small amount of local anesthetic (bleb technique)
sition in tissue that is slightly alkaline and has
considerable buffering capacity, the anesthetic
into the gingiva and alveolar periosteum of the
maxillary teeth. It is useful when only a small
base is liberated as follows:
number of teeth need to be desensitized.
RNH+CI → CI + RNH+  RN + H+
The free anesthetic base (RN) is absorbed in
Regional blocks
the outer lipid nerve membrane, where anesthetic
action takes place. If sufficient local buffering
 Nerve blocks useful for dental procedures are:
capacity exists to remove the dissociated H, this
reaction proceeds to the right, and active base is
1.Infraorbital
lberated which exerts an anesthetic effect. In
2.Mandibular
inflamed or infected tissue, however, the pH is
3.Mental.
18 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
All four quadrants of the jaws can be blocked at
short distance into the canal. Remember that the
the same session if required, e.g. extraction of
infraorbital canal is much shorter than normal in
most or all teeth.
brachycephalic dogs and cats and it is not
Infraorbital nerve block. The infraorbital nerve is
recommended to insert the needle into the
the continuation of the maxillary nerve in the
pterygopalatine fossa. A good guideline is to
pterygopalatine fossa. Before entering the infra-
insert the needle into the canal no further than a
orbital canal (at the maxillary foramen), the
distance that is less than the width of the upper
nerve gives off caudal superior alveolar branches,
4th premolar. Following aspiration to ensure that
which supply the posterior cheek teeth. Within
the needle is not into the blood vessels, the
the canal, the infraorbital nerve gives off middle
calculated amount of local anesthetic is deposited.
superior alveolar branches to the cheek teeth.Just
 Place a finger over the infraorbital foramen for
before it emerges from the infraorbital foramen
20-30 seconds after withdrawing the needle to
(at the infraorbital foramen), it gives off the
 encourage the local anesthetic to track back in the
rostral superior alveolar branches, which supply the
canal and block the middle superior alveolar
upper canine and incisor teeth. The infraorbital
branches that supply the cheek teeth, and also to
nerve divides into a number of large fascicules
 prevent hematoma formation at the injection site.
upon emerging from the infraorbital foramen.
 Mandibular block. Blocking the inferior alveolar
These are distributed to the skin and sinus or
branch of the mandibular nerve will desensitize
tactile hair of the upper lip and muzzle. There are
the mandibular teeth and lower lip. The inferior
external and internal nasal branches and superior
alveolar nerve leaves the ventral lateral trunk of
labialbranches.
the mandibular division of the trigeminal nerve
Blocking the infraorbital nerve will desensitize
 and enters the mandibular canal at the mandibular
the upper lip and nose, roof of the nasal cavity.
foramen. The inferior alveolar nerve accompanies
skin ventral to the infraorbital foramen and the
the inferior alveolar artery and gives off sensory
 maxillary teeth. An extraoral approach is poss-
branches to the mandibular teeth. Several branches
ible, but the intraoral approach is much easier.
(mental nerves) leave the nerve rostrally and
The procedure (Fig. 2.l) is as follows.
pass out through the mental foramina. The
The lip is lifted and the infraorbital foramen is 
mental nerves are distributed to the incisor teeth
located by palpation. The needle is inserted a
and skin ventral to the incisor teeth.
Fig. 2.1  The infraorbital block.
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA
19
Fig. 2.2 The mandibular block
(extraoral approach).
In the mandibular block the inferior alveolar
nerve is blocked prior to its entering the man-
 dibular canal. This block can be performed using
 either an extraoral or an intraoral approach.
For the extraoral approach (Fig. 2.2), the
needle is inserted into the skin at the lower angle
of the jaw, approximately 1.5 cm rostral to the
angular process. The needle is passed dorsally
along the medial surface of the mandibular
ramus, staying close to the bone to avoid
inadvertently blocking the lingual nerve. The
mandibular foramen can be palpated intraorally
A)
and the needle point guided accurately to the
nerve. The calculated dose of local anesthetic is
deposited in and around the nerve as it enters the
mandibular foramen.
The intraoral approach (Figs 2.3A, B) involves
palpating the mandibular foramen intraorally
 and directing the needle to that area using an oral
approach. The easiest way is to slide the needle
along the medial aspect of the ventral mandible,
with the syringe held parallel to the hemi-
mandible to be blocked (Fig. 2.3A). When
the point of the needle is close to the foramen,
move the syringe barrel over to the premolar
region of the contralateral side (Fig. 2.3B) to
B
give better access to the area around the foramen.
Fig. 2.3A, B The mandibular block (intraoral apprcach).
The needle should be close to the bone of
the ventral mandible to avoid inadvertently
20 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 2.4 The mental block.
blocking the lingual nerve. The calculated dose is
Giving the animal some attention at regular
deposited.
intervals helps reduce the distress associated with
Mental block. Blocking the mental nerve
pain and the unfamiliar environment, otherwise a
branches will desensitize the lower lip and the
 cycle of pain/distress/sleeplessness can develop.
teeth rostral to the mental foramina. The needle
 The provision of a comfortable bed in a warm,
is inserted into the middle mental foramen at the
but not too hot, environment is beneficial. Food
level of the 2nd premolar tooth (Fig. 2.4) and the
 and water should be offered as early as possible
calculated dose of local anesthetic is deposited. It
in the postoperative period. Pain and inflam-
is not practically possible to perform a mental
mation increase the basic metabolic rate and a
block in cats and small dogs as the middle
high level of nutrition is required to promote
 dd  u  g r
healing. Offering food as early as possible not
may be too small a diameter to successfully insert
only speeds recovery, but can also have a
even a fine needle. Instead, a mandibular block is 
soothing effect.
performed.
SPECIAL TECHNIQUES
Non-pharmacologic methods of
There are certain situations where special tech-
pain relief
riques for intubation and feeding are required
Sound nursing measures also have a profound
and the clinician needs to be familiar with these.
impact on reducing the level of postoperative
discomfort and pain. A quiet environment allow-
Intubation
ing the animal to sleep is most important. The
intensity of acute postoperative pain generally
 In some circumstances, pharyngotomy or trache-
diminishes quickly. Sleeping it off is beneficial!
otomy intubation is required.
Cats, in particular, appreciate a quiet environment
postoperatively; a barking dog in the same room
is not conducive to a stress-free recovery! Giving
Pharyngotomy
a low dose of a sedative if the patient is par-
Occasionally, it may be required to pass the
ticularly agitated should be considered.
endotracheal tube from the trachea through a
ANESTHESIA & ANALGESIA21
temporary pharyngotomy to connect to the
ligament and mucosa between two tracheal
breathing circuit. This allows access to the oral
 rings. The incision should extend to up to 65% of
cavity without the hindrance of an endotracheal
the circumference of the trachea. This method is
tube. Pharyngotomy intubation is essential in
useful for short-term intubation.
situations where occlusion needs to be maintained,
 Alternatively, a U-shaped ventral tracheal flap
e.g. fracture repair.
is created based on the 2nd tracheal ring and
Orotracheal intubation, using a wire reinforced
extending two rings distally. The flap is raised as
endotracheal tube, is performed. The skin at the
a hinge to allow placement of the endotracheal
cervical area and over the angle of the mandible
tube. This method is suitable for long term
 is clipped and surgically prepared. An index
intubation as it prevents excessive pressure of the
finger is inserted into the oral cavity to locate the
tube on surrounding tissues.
pyriform sinus rostral to the epihyoid bone. The
 Ideally, the incision should be left to heal by
skin is incised and tissue dissected through to
 granulation. This does require intensive care to
the oral cavity. The adaptor is removed from the
allow cleaning of the tracheotomy site and con-
endotracheal tube and forceps are thrust through
stant observation of the patient. Some clinicians
the pharyngotomy incision and used to grasp
therefore prefer to close the site, but there is risk
and pull the proximal end of the endotracheal
 of subcutaneous emphysema, localized swelling
tube laterally. Be careful not to push the endo-
and subsequent airway obstruction.
tracheal tube in too far and accidentally perform
an endobronchial intubation! The adaptor is
Feeding tubes
reconnected and anesthesia using an inhalational
technique is continued. Injectable anesthetic
In patients that cannot eat or drink normally,
 drugs may be required to maintain anesthesia
placement of a feeding tube offers an alternative
during movement of the endotracheal tube. Pro-
method of providing nutrition and fluids.
pofol is ideal for this purpose, as it does not
accumulate with repeated boluses.
Indwelling nasogastric intubation
This technique is limited to short periods of feed-
Eective tracheotomy
 ing with liquidized foods. It is useful following
This may be required for an animal that cannot
full mouth extraction in cats with chronic
open its mouth sufficiently to allow orotracheal
gingivostomatitis and is rarely required for more
intubation (e.g. chronic masseteric muscle myo-
than 1-2 days.
sitis), or as an emergency procedure in animals
 A nasogastric tube can be placed in either the
with acute upper airway obstruction. Anesthesia
 conscious or the anesthetized animal. The easiest
can be induced and maintained with incremental
 and safest way of doing it is to place the feeding
boluses of a non-cumulative anesthetic agent such
tube while the animal is under general anes-
 as propofol until the tracheotomy is performed.
thesia with an endotracheal tube in place.
The skin over the ventral surface of the neck is
 A lubricated 5 or 6 French gauge polyvinyl
clipped and surgically prepared. The ventral
infant feeding tube is passed into the ventral
surface of the trachea at the level of the 2nd, 3rd
nasal meatus. In the conscious patient, the nasal
     s   
 mucosa should be desensitized with a local anes-
incision and retraction of the sternohyoideus
thetic agent and the head should be held with the
muscles. Tracheal incision can be performed in 
nose pointing down while the tube is being
two ways. In either method, two stabilizing
advanced, as this position helps prevent accidental
sutures are placed around the tracheal rings at
insertion into the trachea. The tube should be
the site of tracheal incision to facilitate later
advanced until the distal end is positioned in the
apposition. Access to the trachea is gained by
distal esophagus. Placement should be verified by
means of a transverse incision through the annular
radiography or by auscultation of bubbles when
22 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
air or sterile saline is instilled through the tube.
feeding tube (marked from stomach or distal
The tube should then be capped and sutured in
 4q ps st (s uis 0 snqdo5
place with butterflies made from sticky tape. An
forceps and pulled through the esophagus out
Elizabethan collar will be necessary
insome
of the mouth. With the aid of forceps, the
animals to prevent them from removing the tube.
distal end is then turned back on itself and fed
back into the esophagus until the loop dis-
appears. The distal tip is correctly positioned
Esophagostomy tube
using the mark on the tube. Placement should be
This site is currently the preferred position for
verified by radiography.
placement of a feeding tube. It prevents potential
complications such as aspiration and damage to
mucosa, which can be associated with pharyn-
Summary
gotomy intubation, and avoids the complication
 Most dental treatment requires general anesthesia.
of peritonitis from gastrostomy tubes.
and standard good clinical practice should be
With the animal under GA, the left lateral
followed
cervical region is clipped and prepared for
 Specific considerations in the dental patient include
airway protection, surgical access, the advanced age
surgery. Curved forceps are inserted into the
of many dental patients and prolonged anesthetic
proximal cervical esophagus, caudal to the hyoid
times. Attention should be given to maintaining body
bone, via the pharynx. The tips of the forceps are
temperature and fluid balance
 Pre-emptive and postoperative analgesia using
sd au os pandde anssard pre Aeraien pan
sonp Aoewueui-ue epiaaisuou lo/pue sploido
can be palpated. A skin incision large enough to
should be considered for all patients.
accommodate the feeding tube is made over the
Local anesthesia, administered intraoperatively, can
also be a useful part of the analgesic regime.
tips of the forceps. The forceps are then pushed
Short-term feeding tubes should be used in patients
through the esophagus or, in large dogs, an inci-
unwilling cr unable to eat despite receiving
sion is made. The distal end of the premeasured
appropriate analgesia.
REFERENCES
Bach, S., Norveng, M.F. & Tijellden, N.U. (1988) Phantom 
small animal veterinary practice in Ontario. Journal of the
limbpain in amputees during the first twelve months
American Animal Hospital Association 34(4): 325-335.
following amputation after preoperative lumbar epidural
Lascelles, B.D.x., Cripps, P.J., Jones, A. & Waterman, A.
blockade. Pain 33: 297-330.
(1997) Postoperative central hypersensitivity and pain:
Clark, K.W. & Hall, L.W. (1990) A survey of anaesthesia in
the pre-emptive value of pethidine for ovariohysterectomy.
small animal practice: AVA/BSAVA report. Journal of the
Pain 73: 461-471.
Association for Veterinary Anaesthesia 17: 4-10.
Dyson, D.H., Maxie, M.G & Schnurr, D. (1998) Morbidity and
mortality associated with anesthetic management in
FURTHER READING
Crowe, D.T. (1986) Enteral nutrition for critically ill or injured
Hartsfield, S.M. (1990) Anaesthetic problems of the geriatric
patients. Parts I, Il and Ill. Compendium of Continuing
dental patient. Problems in Veterinary Medicine 2: 24-45.
Education(Smaff Animal) 8: 603-826.
Moon,PF.(1999) Fluid therapy and blood transfusion. In:
Crowe, D.T. & Devey, J.J. (1997) Esophagostomy tubes for
Seymour, C. & Gleed, R. (eds) Manual of Smaff Anima!
feeding and decompression: clinical experience in 29
Anaesthesia and Anaigesia. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA,
small animal patients. Journal of the American Anima!
p.119-137.
Hospital Association 33: 393-403.
Muir, W.W. Ill & Hubbell, J.A.E (1995) Handbook of
Duke, T. (1999) Anaesthetic management: dental and
Veterinary Anesthesia, 2nd edn. St Louis: Mosby.
maxillofacial surgery. In: Seymour, C. & Gleed, R. (eds)
Waterman-Pearson, A.E. (1999) Analgesia. In: Seymour, C.
ManualofSmallAnimalAnaesthesia andAnaigesia.
&Gleed,R.(eds) Manual of Small Animal Anaesthesia
Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA, p. 147-153.
and Anaigesia. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA, p. 59-70.
3
Antibiotics and antiseptics
Introduction
ANTIBIOTICS
In the late 1930s and early 1940s the appearance
Antibiotics can be used for prevention and for
of potent chemotherapeutic agents selectively
therapy.
active against bacteria revolutionized the treat-
ment of bacterial infections. The discovery of
such drugs led many to believe that bacterial
Preventive use of antibiotics
infections were about to vanish! Antimicrobial
The main objective of preventive (prophylactic)
agents have been extensively used (in both
antibiotics is to prevent treatment-induced bacteremia.
human and veterinary medicine) for more than
Periodontal therapy, tooth extraction and surgical
half a century and the potential and limitations
of this therapy are now better understood.
treatment of oral trauma cause a considerable
bacteremia, which typically clears in around 20
Problems, resulting from the widespread use of
minutes. The preventive or prophylactic use of
 antibiotics, have modified the general perception
antibiotics should only be necessary in patients
of the capabilities of antimicrobial agents. Over
that cannot cope with the treatment-induced
the years, bacteria have developed a marked
ability to withstand or repel many antibiotic
bacteremia.
Animals that should receive preventive antibiotic
agents. Bacteria are increasingly resistant to
many formerly potent agents. The use of
administration are:
antibiotics may disturb the delicate ecologic equi-
librium of the body, allowing the proliferation of
Geriatric or debilitated animals
 resistant bacteria and/or nonbacterial organ-
 Patients with pre-existing heart and /or
isms. Sometimes this may initiate new infections
systemic diseases
● Immunocompromised patients.
that are worse than the ones originally treated. In
addition, no antibacterial drug is completely
nontoxic and the use of any antimicrobial agent
In addition to preventing treatment-induced
will have accompanying risks. It must also be
bacteremia, preventive antibiotic administration
remembered that resistant bacteria can cross the
helps control wound infection. Consequently,
species barrier. Antibiotics and antiseptics have a
animals that may benefit from receiving pre-
role to play in the management of oral diseases,
ventive antibiotic administration are those
but their use should be limited and selective.
affected by:
Dosing regimens and strategies that lead to
optimal efficacy of antimicrobial agents must be
· Gross infection
implemented.
· Chroric stomatitis.
23
24 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
The choice of prophylactic antibiotic and
infection, i.e. marked swelling, pus formation,
protocol remains controversial. A wide variety of
 fever, lymphadenopathy and an elevated white
microorganisms is found in the flora of the
blood cell count. Clinical judgement is important
mouth and saliva. Antibiotic prophylaxis requires
in making the diagnosis of infection and deciding
a drug with antimicrobial activity against Gram-
on antibiotic therapy. Antibiotic administration
positive and  Gram-negative  aerobes  and
just to be on the safe side' is not prudent use of
anaerobes. The timing of administration of
antimicrobials!
antibiotics is critical. It is generally accepted that
antibiotics should be administered
lwithin
Principles for prudent use of therapeutic
 2 hours of the surgery and not continued for
antibiotics
more than 4 hours after the procedure (Peterson,
1994; Callender, 1999). In addition, antibiotics
The causative agent should be identified and
must be given at a high enough dose to reach a
the antibiotic sensitivity determined. In the oral
tissue level four times higher than the MIC of the
 cavity, the organisms involved have been well
causative organisms. A number of studies have
defined and are known to include a mixed flora
shown that ampicillin, amoxicillin-clavulanic
of aerobic and anaerobic, Gram-positive and
acid, certain cephalosporins and clindamycin meet
Gram-negative bacteria (Peterson, 1994). Empirical
the above requirements in dogs, cats and humans
antibiotic treatment based on previous suscepti-
(Callender, 1999; Johnson et al, 1997; Harvey et
bility studies is, therefore, acceptable. Amoxicillin-
al, 1995a; Harvey et al, 1995b; Mueller et al, 1999).
clavulanic acid and clindamycin, and to a lesser
The standard protocol used by the Dentistry
extent cephalosporins, provide broad antibacterial
and Oral Surgery Service, Veterinary Medical
 p so  s eo is o
Teaching Hospital, University of California Davis
(Harvey et al, 1995a, b). Culture is indicated for
is 20 mg/kg i.v. of ampicillin prior to surgery (at
infection not responding to the initial treatment,
the time of catheter placement for anesthesia). This
recurrent infection,postoperative wound infection
dose is repeated after 6 hours if the catheter is still
andosteomyelitis.
in place. Metronidazole is given intravenously in
The antibiotic with the narrowest antibacterial
addition to ampicillin in the presence of severe
spectrum should be used. This will minimize the
infection to ensure a wider anaerobic spectrum
risk of development of resistant bacteria (Peterson,
The protocol used in my referral practice in
1994).
the UK is to give twice the therapeutic dose of
Combinations of antibiotics are discouraged.
amoxicillin or amoxicillin-clavulanic acid
by
The exception to this rule is the combination of
intramuscular injection at the time of pre-
amoxicillin or cephalosporins with metronidazole
medication for anesthesia. This gives 20-30
in severe mixed infections in which anaerobes
minutes for the drug to disperse before the
are believed to play a major role.
animal is anesthetized and the surgical procedure
A bactericidal antibiotic is preferable to a
is started. In fractious animals, who are unlikely
bacteriostatic agent. A bactericidal antibiotic
to tolerate an intramuscular injection while
(amoxicillin, cephalosporins and metroridazole)
conscious, we may choose to administer the
is preferred over a bacteriostatic antibiotic
antibiotici
immediately
 after induction
of
(clindamycin), mainly because there is less reliance
anesthesia. Examination and patient preparation
on host inflammatory and immune reactions.
will ensure that at least 20 minutes has elapsed
Other considerations include the toxicity of the
before the surgical procedure is started.
antibiotic and the patient's history of previous
allergic reactions to a particular antibiotic.
Therapeutic use of antibiotics
The antibiotic of choice must be administered at
the proper dose and correct time interval.
The therapeutic use of antibiotics is indicated in
 Refer to a current compendium of data sheets for
 veterinary products for correct dosing and time
ANTIBIOTICS & ANTISEPTICS
25
interval. A seven-day course of antibiotics is
removal will maintain gingival health. Antibiotics
 generally recommended. Osteomyelitis generally
are thus not indicated for the treatment of gingivitis.
requires a longer period of treatment (Rosin et al,
Adjunctive use of antiseptics (covered later in
1993). Suboptimal dosing and/or pulse therapy
this chapter) may be indicated in some patients.
is not recommended.
The patient must be monitored for response to
Periodontitis
treatment and the potential development 
of
adverse reactions. Re-evaluation of the diagnosis
The role of antibiotics for treatment of periodontitis
is required if there is no response to treatment.
is not clear and requires further investigation.
Culture and antibiogram may well be indicated.
The two main questions that need to be answered
before any general recommendation can be made
Minor adverse reactions, e.g. mild gastrointestinal
are whether antimicrobial agents can enhance
side effects and inappetance, due to changes in the
the effect of mechanical plaque removal, and
gut flora as a result of systemic treatment with
whether these agents can be a substitute for such
amoxicillin and clindamycin, occasionally occur.
treatment.
Can antimicrobial agents enhance the effect of
mechanical plaque removal? There are many
Antibiotics and periodontal disease
similarities between human and canine peri-
In veterinary practice, antibiotics are often used
odontal disease. Consequently, data from human
indiscriminately (incomplete diagnostic work-
studies do have relevance to canine periodontal
up, incorrect dose and time intervals, inadequate
disease.
moritoring of response to treatment) for patients
In human dentistry, it is recognized that anti-
with periodontal disease.
The indication for preventive (prophylactic)
in the treatment of periodontitis, compared to
use of antibiotics in animals with gingivitis
conservative periodontal therapy. Conservative
and/or periodontitis is well defined (indicated
periodontal therapy involves professional cleaning
for individuals that cannot cope with treatment-
(supragingival scaling and polishing, subgingival
induced bacteremia). In contrast, the indication
scaling and root planing) in combination with
for therapeutic use of antibiotics in the manage-
meticulous daily plaque removal by the patient.
ment of periodontal disease is not well defined.
Where follow-up mechanical plaque control is
A thorough understanding of the etiology and
successfully instituted (after professional cleaning),
 pathogenesis of periodontal disease is required
no benefit can be shown by including antimicrobial
(see Ch. 9) for discriminate (limited and selective)
therapy with professional mechanical debridement
therapeutic use of antibiotics. Periodontal
as compared to mechanical debridement alone
disease is a clinical descriptive term for inflam-
(Loesche, 1979). No similar study has been
mation of the periodontium caused by the
performed in dogs or cats.
accumulation of dental plaque (a bacterial biofilm)
Various antibiotic regimens have been tested
on the tooth surfaces. Itis essential to differentiate
for the treatment of human patients not responding
between gingivitis (inflammation limited to the
to conservative periodontal therapy. Although,
gingiva) and periodontitis (inflammation involves
favourable short term effects have been reported;
 periodontal ligament and alveolar bone) prior to
a great variability in treatment response among
instituting any treatment.
patients has been noted. Re-emergence of puta-
tive pathogens has been observed and has been
Gingivitis
considered the reason for recurrence of disease.
In dogs where no post-scaling homecare is
In gingivitis, daily mechanical removal of dental
 provided, a demonstrable long term retardation
plaque (toothbrushing) will restore inflamed  @
 effect following short term antimicrobial therapy
gingivae to health and continued regular plaque  has been reported in one study (Sarkiala et al,
26 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
1993). The ultimate evidence for the efficacy of
an
agent will work in the treatment of
systemic antibiotics must be obtained
periodontal disease.
longer term treatment studies in animals with
At our present level of understanding, systemic
periodontitis. At present, no such data are
antimicrobial therapy cannot be recommended
available.
as prevention and /or first line treatment of peri-
To summarize, reducing the bacterial load
odontal disease for any species, and definitely
postoperatively can be achieved by mechanical
not in the absence of mechanical periodontal
plaque control. The use of systemic antibiotics in
  d s 
combination with
 conservative
periodontal
lowed by meticulous mechanical plaque control
therapy will at best achieve a retardation of the
by the patient (owner) remains the way to treat
disease process.
periodontitis. In some very specific situations, e.g.
Can periodontitis be treated with antimicrobial
severe local infection, or a systemically ill or
agents alone? There are some specific features of
immunocompromised individual, antibiotics may
periodontal disease which suggest that treatment
be a useful adjunctive modality. However, the
by antimicrobial agents alone, i.e. in the absence
adjunctive use ofantiseptics rather than antibiotics is
of professional periodontal therapy and homecare,
likelytoachieve the same resultand isassociated with
will not be sufficient. First, there is generally a lack
fewer hazards, e.g. resistance development. In
 of bacterial invasion of the tissues in periodontal
short, antibiotics have not been shown to prevent
disease. Bacteria in the subgingival plaque
periodontitis; neither have they been shown to
interact with host tissues even without direct
have any significant role in the treatment of
tissue penetration. Thus, for any microbial agent
periodontitis.
to have an effect there is the requirement that the
agent is available at a sufficiently high
Antibioticdelivery
concentration not only within, but also in the
subgingival environment outside the periodontal
In the few specific situations where antibiotics
tissues. Secondly, periodontal pockets contain a
may be a useful adjunctive modality, the method
large number of different bacteria. This may cause
of delivery needs to be determined. Antibiotic
problems for antimicrobial agents to work
agents may be delivered by direct placement into
properly because they may be inhibited,
the periodontal pocket (local route) or via the
inactivated or degraded by nontarget micro-
systemic route. Each method of delivery has
organisms. Thirdly, subgingival plaque is a
specific advantages and disadvantages.
biofilm and it is known that biofilms effectively
Local therapy may allow application of an
protect the bacteria from antimicrobial agents.
agent at a concentration that cannot be achieved
Finally, the majority of microorganisms associated
byf
the systemic route. Local application may
with periodontal disease can frequently
7be
thus be particularly successful if the treatment of
detected at low numbers in the absence of disease.
target microorganisms is confined to the clinically
In the therapy of opportunistic infections,
visible lesions.
elimination is not a realistic goal. Successfully
 On the other hand, systemically administered
 suppressed putative pathogens are likely to grow
agents may reach widely distributed micro-
back if favorable ecologic conditions (e.g. deep
 organisms. Studies in humans have shown that
 periodontal pockets) persist. Therefore, continuous
periodontal bacteria may be distributed through-
control of ecologic factors will be necessary after
out the whole mouth in some patients, including
initial treatment.
 nondental sites such as the dorsum of the tongue
 It is important to understand that in vitro tests
and/or the tonsillary crypts (Mombelli et al,
cannot be directly correlated to clinical efficacy,
1991, 1994; Muller et al, 1995; van Winkelhoff et
as they do not reflect the true conditions found in
al, 1988). Disadvantages of systemic antibiotic
periodontal pockets. In particular, they do not
therapy relate to the fact that the drug is
account for the biofilm effect. Demonstration of
dispersed over the whole body and only a small
in vitro susceptibility is therefore no proof that
portion of the dose actually reaches the sub-
ANTIBIOTICS & ANTISEPTICS
27
gingival flora. In addition, adverse drug reactions,
oral hygiene to control the formation of supra-
e.g. resistance, are more likely to occur if drugs
gingival plaque and the development of early
are distributed via the systemic route.
 periodontal disease. It must be emphasized that
none of these agents will prevent gingivitis on
their own, i.e. in the absence of mechanical plaque
ANTISEPTICS
removal. Moreover, all these agents are associ-
Antiseptics have two major roles in veterinary
ated with adverse side effects. These effects vary
dentistry and oral surgery:
according to the chemical agent, and include
poor taste, a burning and/or numbing of oral
To reduce the number of bacteria in the oral
mucous membranes, staining of teeth and soft
cavity prior to and during a procedure
tissues, and allergic reactions. The use of chemical
2
To supplement mechanical plaque control.
antiplaque agents should be seen as adjunctive to
the mechanical removal of plaque.
It is good practice to rinse the oral cavity with a
Some examples of situations where adjunctive
suitable antiseptic prior to and during dentistry
use of topical chlorhexidine is useful are:
and oral surgery (Summers et al, 200o). This
reduces the number of potential pathogens,
· Immediately postoperatively when
providing a cleaner environment to work in and
discomfort from treatment (deep subgingival
thus reducing the bacteremia induced by dental
debridement, multiple extractions) may
 procedures. It also reduces the number of bacteria
 prevent mechanical plaque removal with a
in the aerosol generated by dental equipment,
toothbrush
e.g. ultrasonic scalers. This is beneficial to the
· Intermittent use when an inflammatory
operator and assistant.
process flares up, e.g. cats with chronic
Chlorhexidine gluconate, an aqueous, non-
gingivostomatitis
 alcohol containing solution, is generally regarded
· Adjunct to toothbrushing when
to be the oral antiseptic of choice in animals. The
toothbrushing is performed suboptimally, e.g.
correct concentration should be used. A 0.2%
animal won't allow proper brushing, owner
solution is generally recommended as being safe,
is not technically capable of efficient
but a 0.05% solution may be indicated if the oral
brushing.
mucosa is exposed to the solution throughout the
procedure. Care should be taken to avoid the
Chlorhexidine gluconate is available as an
eyes (Morgan et al, 1996).
aqueous solution and as a semi-fluid gel. It can be
 Numerous chemical agents have been evaluated
applied with a syringe, a piece of gauze or a
for the supplementation of mechanical plaque
toothbrush.
control. Clinically effective antiplaque agents are
characterized by a combination of intrinsic
antibacterial activity and good oral retention
properties. Agents that have been evaluated
Summary
include chlorhexidine, essential oils, triclosan,
● Antibiotics should be employed rationally based on 
sanguinarine, fluorides, oxygenating agents,
quaternary ammonium compounds, substituted
Indiscriminate and inappropriate use should be
amino-alcohols and enzymes. Of these, the
avoided.
Empirical drug choice based on published studies of
greatest effect on the reduction of plaque and
the nature of oral infections is usual, with culture and
gingivitis can be expected from chlorhexidine.
sensitivity being reserved for problem cases.
Chlorhexidine is the gold standard and the agent
Antibiotics are not indicated in the treatment of
gingivitis. Their role in pericdontitis is doubtful and is
against which all antiplaque agents are tested.
definitely secondary to conservative periodontal
Antiplaque agents delivered from toothpastes,
therapy.
 gels or mouth rinses can augment mechanical
The oral antiseptic of choice is chlorhexidine
28 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
REFERENCES
Callender, D.L. (1999) Antibiotic prophylaxis in head and
region. Journal of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery 54:
neck oncologic surgery: the role of Gram-negative
89-94.
coverage. International Journal of Antimicrobial Agents
Mueller, S.C., Henkel, K.O., Neumann, J. et al (1999)
12 (Suppl. 1): S21-S25.
Perioperative antibiotic prophylaxis in maxillofacial
Harvey C.E., Thornsberry, C., Miller, B.R., Shafer, F.S.
surgery: penetration of clindamycin into various tissues.
(1995a)Antimicrobial susceptibility of subgingival
Journal of Craniomaxillofacial Surgery 27: 172-176.
bacterial flora in dogs with gingivitis. Journal of
Muller, H.P., Eickholz, P., Heinecke, A. et al (1995)
Veterinary Dentistry 12(4): 151-155.
Simultaneous isolation of Actinobacillus
Harvey C.E., Thornsberry, C., Miller, B.R., Shafer, F.S.
actinomycetemcomitans from subgingival and
(1995b) Antimicrobial susceptibility of subgingival
extracrevicular locations of the mouth.Journal of Clinical
bacterial flora in cats with gingivitis. Journal of Veterinary
Periodontology 22: 413-419.
Dentistry 12(4): 157-160.
Peterson,L.J.(1994) Principles of antibiotic therapy. In:
Johnson, J.T., Kachman, K., Wagner, R.L. et al (1997)
Topazian, R.G. & Goldberg, M.H. (eds) Oral and
Comparison of ampicillin/sulbactam versus clindamycin
Maxillofacial Infections, 3rd edn. Philadelphia: W.B.
in the prevention of infection in patients undergoing head 
Saunders, p. 160-197.
and neck surgery. Head Neck 19: 367-371.
Rosin, E., Dow, S.w., Daly, W.R. et al (1993) Surgical wound
Loesche, W.J. (1979) Clinical and microbiological aspects of
 infection and use of antibiotics. In: Slatter, D.H. (ed)
chemotherapeutic agents used according to the specific
Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 2nd edn.
plaque hypothesis. Journal of Dental Research 58:
Philadelphia: W.B. Saunders, p. 84-95.
2404-2414.
Sarkiala,E.,Asikainen, S.E.A.,Kanervo,A.,et al (1993) The
Mombelli, A., McNabb, H. & Land, N.P. (1991) Black
efficacy of tinidazole in naturally occurring periodontitis in
pigmenting Gram-negative bacteria in periodontal
dogs: Bacteriological and chemical results. Veterinary
disease. 1, Topographic distribution in the human 
Microbiology 36: 273-288.
dentition. Journal of Periodontal Research 26: 301-307.
Summers, A.N., Larson, D.L., Edmiston, C.E. et al (2000)
Mombelli, A., Gmur, R., Gobbi, C. et al (1994) Actinobacillus
Efficacy ofpreoperative decontamination of the oral
actinomycetemcomitans in adult periodontitis. 1,
cavity. Plastic Reconstructive Surgery 106: 895-900.
Topographic distribution before and after treatment.
van Winkelhoff, A.J., Van der Velden, U., Clement, M. et al
Journal of Periodontology 65: 820-826.
(1988) Intra-oral distribution of black-pigmented
Morgan, J.P, Haug, R.H. & Kosman, J.W. (1996)
Bacteroides species in periodontitis patients. Ora!
Antimicrobial skin preparations for the maxillofacial
Microbiology and Immunology 3:83-85.
4
Anatomy of the teeth and periodontium
Introduction
contains the pulp or endodontic system. Figure
4.1 depicts the basic structure of a tooth.
The dentition of dogs and cats resembles that of
The crowns of dog and cat teeth have a more
man. There are differences in tooth number and
tapered shape with sharp cutting edges and
shape, but the basic anatomy is similar. The
fewer chewing surfaces as compared to human
dentition of rodents and lagomorphs is covered
teeth. Also the teeth are spaced further apart and
in Chapter 14.
where there is contact between teeth, the contact
Each tooth has a crown (above the gum) and
area is smaller and not as tight. Humans, dogs
one or more roots (below the gum). The bulk of
and cats are diphyodont, i.e. primary (deciduous)
the mature tooth is composed of dentine, which is
teeth are followed by a permanent dentition.
covered by enamel on the crown and by
Dental formulae describe the type and number of
cementum on the roots. The centre of the tooth
teeth in each quadrant of the oral cavity. ‘1′
represents incisor teeth, 'C' represents canine
teeth, 'P' represents premolars and 'M' represents
Enamel
Gingiva
molars. The respective dental formulae of the
primary and permanent dentitions of dog and
Dentinc
cat are shown in the box.
Pulp
Dog and cat dental formulae
Dog: Primary teeth: 2 x1l 3/3 : C 1/1 : P 3/3) = 28 
Permanent teeth: 2 x ↓I 3/3 : C 1/1 : P 4/4 : M 2/3}
= 42
180
Primary teeth: 2 x ↓l 3/3 : C 1/1 : P 3/2) = 26
Permanent teeth: 2 × {I 3/3 : C 1/1 : P 3/2 : M 1/1}
= 30
The formation of the crown of both primary
and permanent teeth occurs within the alveolar
bone. Enamel formation is completed before the
tooth erupts into the oral cavity. Once the enamel
has formed, the ameloblasts (the cells which
Cementum
Alveolar bone
 produce the enamel matrix) are lost and further
development of enamel does not occur. The only
Periodontal
natural form of repair that can occur to enamel
ligament
Fig. 4.1 Basic anatomy of the tooth and periodontium.
after eruption is surface mineralization, through
29
30 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
4 months
7 months
I% years
2 years
3 years
Fig. 4.2 Maturation of a permanent canine tooth after eruption. Enamel formation is complete at the time of eruption,
while dentine production and root development (root elongation and formation of an apex) are just beginning. The apical
foramen of an immature tooth is a single wide opening. As the individual ages, closure of the apex (apexogenesis) occurs by
continuous deposition of dentine and cementum until., in mature teeth, the root apex consists of numerous small openings or
foramina allowing the passage of blood vessels, lymphatics and nerves.
deposition of minerals, mainly from saliva, into
by the permanent dentition occurs between
the superficial enamel layer.
3 and 7 months of age in the dog and between
Although enamel formation is completed by
3 and 5 months of age in the cat. Once the crowns
the time the tooth erupts, dentine production is
of the permanent teeth have erupted, root
just beginning. Moreover, root development, i.e.
development continues for several months. The
 growth in length and formation of a root apex, is
by no means complete at the time of eruption.
cats are shown in Table 4.1.
Figure 4.2 depicts maturation of a permanent
tooth following eruption.
ANATOMY OF THE TEETH
The primary teeth start forming in utero and
erupt between 3-12 weeks of age. The permanent
As already mentioned, the teeth consist of enamel,
crowns start forming at or shortly after birth
dentine, cementum and pulp. The detailed struc-
and mineralization of the crowns is complete
ture of these tissues will be discussed below.
by around ll weeks of age. Resorption and
exfoliation of the primary teeth and replacement
Enamel
Table 4.1 Approximate ages (in weeks) when teeth
Enamelis the hardest and most mineralized tissue
erupt in dogs and cats.
in the body. It does not have a nerve or a blood
Teeth
Primary
Permanent
supply. The inorganic content of mature enamel
amounts to 96-97% of the weight, the remainder
Puppy
Kitten
Dog
Cat
being organic material and water (Fejerskov &
Incisors
4-6
3-4
12-16
11-16
Thylstrup, 1979). The inorganic material consists
Canines
9-8
3-4
12-16
12-20
of calcium hydroxyapatite crystals arranged in an
Premolars
5-6
5-6
16-20
16-20
orderly fashion at right angles to the tooth surface
The organic content is made up of soluble and
Molars
16-24
20124
insoluble proteins and peptides.
ANATOMY OF THE TEETH & PERIODONTIUM31
The enamel of dog and cat teeth is thinner
Pulp
than that of human teeth, generally being 0.2 mm
thick in the cat and 0.5 mm in dogs, rarely
The pulp is composed of connective tissue
liberally interspersed with tiny blood vessels,
exceeding lmm even at the tips of the teeth
(Crossley, 1995). This compares with a thickness
lymphatics, myelinated and unmyelinated nerves
and undifferentiated mesenchymal cells. As
of up to 2.5 mm in humans (Schroeder, 1991).
already mentioned, the pulp system is lined by
Dentine
odontoblasts, which produce dentine.
In the crown, the section containing the pulp
 The bulk of the mature tooth is made up of dentine,
is called the pulp chamber and in the root(s) it is
which is continuously deposited throughout life
called the root canal(s). The root canal opens into
by odontoblasts lining the pulp system. The
the periapical tissues at the root apex. The apical
primary dentine is the first layer that forms. It is
foramen of immature teeth is a single wide open-
the dentine that is present at the time of tooth
ing. As the individual ages, closure of the apex
eruption. Throughout life there is a slow con-
(apexogenesis) occurs by continuous deposition
tinuous physiologic deposition of dentine, which
of dentine and cementum (Fig. 4.2) until, in
is called secondary dentine. In response to trauma,
mature teeth, the root apex consists of numerous
dentine is laid down rapidly and in a less
organized fashion. This type of dentine is called
of blood vessels, lymphatics and nerves.
reparative or tertiary dentine.
The composition of dentine on a wet weight
basis is 70% inorganic material, 18% organic
ANATOMY OFTHE PERIODONTIUM
 material and 12% water (Mjor, 1979). The inorganic
The periodontium is an anatomic unit which
portion of dentine consists mainly of calcium
functions to attach the tooth to the jaw and provide
hydroxyapatite crystals that are similar to those
-ug  on pusau snrdde Aosudsns e
seen in cementum and bone, but smaller than the
tional forces. It is made up of gingiva, periodontal
hydroxyapatite crystals seen in enamel. The
ligament, cementum and alveolar bone (Fig. 4.1).
organic portion consists mainly of collagen.
Dentine has a tubular structure. Dentinal
tubules make up 20-30% of the volume of dentine.
The gingiva
The tubules traverse the entire width of the dentine,
The gingiva surrounds the teeth and the marginal
from the pulpal tissue to the dentino-enamel
parts of the alveolar bone, forming a cuff around
junction (DEJ) in the crown or the dentino-
 each tooth. It can be divided into the free gingiva,
cementum junction (DCJ) in the root. They contain
which is closely adapted to the tooth surface, and
the cytoplasmic processes of the odontoblasts and
the attached gingiva, which is firmly attached to
dentinal fluid. The dentine tubules are more
the underlying periosteum of the alveolar bone
numerous and have a wider diameter closer to the
(Figs 4.3 & 4.4). The attached gingiva is delineated
pulp than towards the enamel or cementum
from the oral mucosa by the mucogingival line,
surface. The number of  dentine  tubules
except in the palate where no such delineation
(20 000-40 000/mm²) and diameter (tapering from
exists. An interdental papilla is formed by the
3-4 μm near the pulp to under 1 pm in the outer
gingival tissues in the spaces between the teeth
layer of dentine) is similar in cats, dogs, monkeys
(the interproximal spaces).
and humans (Forssell-Ahlberg et al, 1975).
The margin of the free gingiva is rounded in
Cementum
such a way that a small invagination or sulcus is
formed between the tooth and the gingiva.
Cementum, although part of the tooth, is classified
Therefore, the gingival sulcus is a shallow groove
as part of the periodontium and is discussed later
surrounding each tooth. The depth of the sulcus
in this chapter.
can be assessed by gently inserting a graduated
32 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
AM
MGJ
AG
Gingival
sulcus
IP
FG
Fig. 4.3  The visible landmarks of clinically normal
gingiva. MGJ = mucogingival junction or line; AM =
IP = interdental papilla.
Oral sulcular
Junctional
epithelium
epithelium
Fig. 4.5
The gingival sulcus. The gingival sulcus is
measured from the free gingival margin to the base of the
sulcus.
Oral gingival
epithelium
lined by the oral sulcular epithelium. In addition
to the sulcular epithelium, which is closely
apposed to the tooth surface but not attached,
there is a thin layer of highly permeable epi-
thelium which is adherent to the tooth surface
called the epithelial attachment or junctional
epithelium. Both the oral sulcular epithelium and
Fig. 4.4 The gingival cuff. The cral surface is lined by a
the junctional epithelium are nonkeratinized
parakeratinized squamous cell epithelium: the oral gingival
squamous cell epithelia and have a very rapid
epithelium. The gingival sulcus is lined by the cral sulcular
cell turnover (5-8 days).
epithelium which is closely apposed but not adherent to the
tooth. The junctional epithelium or epithelial attachment is
The gingival connective tissue is densely
adherent to the tooth surface. Both the sulcular epithelium
fibrous and firmly attached to the periosteum of
and the junctional epithelium are nonkeratinized squamous
the alveolar bone.
cell epithelia.
Periodontal ligament
periodontal probe until resistance is encountered.
The periodontal ligament is the connective tissue
This resistance is taken to be the base of the
that attaches the root cementum to the alveolar
sulcus. The depth from the free gingival margin
bone. It acts as a suspensory ligament for the
to the base of the sulcus can thus be measured
tooth, and is in a continual stage of physiologic
(Fig. 4.5). In the periodontally healthy indi-
activity.
vidual, the sulcus is 1-3 mm deep in humans and
The collagen fibers within the ligament are
dogs and 0.5-1.0 mm in cats.
arranged in functional groups. Individual fibers
The oral surface of the gingiva is lined by a
do not span the entire distance between bone and
 parakeratinized squamous cell epithelium: the
cementum; they branch and reunite in an inter
oral gingival epithelium. The gingival sulcus is
 woven pattern. All fibers follow a wavy course
ANATOMY OF THE TEETH & PERIODONTIUM
33
that allows for slight movement of the tooth and
Alveolar bone consists of four layers. In
will absorb mild impact to the tooth.
addition to the three layers found in all bones,
namely periosteum, dense compact bone and
cancellous bone, there is a fourth layer called the
Cementum
cribriform plate, which lines the alveolar sockets.
The cementum is an avascular bone-like tissue
Radiographically, this appears as a fine radio-
that covers the root surface. It does not contain
dense line called the lamina dura. The crest of the
Haversian canals and is therefore denser than
alveolar bone is normally located around 1 mm
bone. It is less calcified than enamel or dentine,
below the cemento-enamel junction. Blood
but like dentine, cementum deposition is con-
vessels and nerves run through the alveolar bone
tinuous throughout life. Cementum is a very
 and perforate the cribriform plate. The majority
 important component involved in tooth support,
of these blood vessels and nerves supply the
as it is capable of both resorptive and reparative
periodontal ligament.
processes. Resorption and apposiftion are,
however, slower than in bone.
Summary
Cats and dogs (like humans) are diphyodont, i.e.
Alveolar bone
primary (deciduous) teeth are shed to make way for
the permanent dentition.
The alveolar bone is composed of the ridges of
The bulk of the mature tooth is composed of dentine.
covered by enamel on the crown and cementum on 
the jaw that support the teeth. The roots of the
the roots
teeth are contained in deep depressions, the
 Enamel is the hardest tissue in the body, consisting
alveolar sockets in the bone. The alveolar bone
mainly of calcium hydroxyapatite. Its formation is 
complete by the time of tooth eruption. Regeneration
develops during tooth eruption and undergoes
is not possible, only repair by surface mineralization.
atrophy with tooth loss. It responds readily to
The endodontic system (pulp) makes up the center of
external and systemic influences. The usual
the tooth and contains odontoblasts, which produce
dentine throughout the life of the animal.
response to stimuli results in resorption, but this
The periodontium serves to support the tooth and
may be accompanied by deposition in some
absorb functional forces. It consists of the gingiva,
situations.
periodontal ligament, cementum and alveolar bone.
REFERENCES
Crossley D.A. (1995) Results of a preliminary study of
and monkey. A comparative scanning electron
enamel thickness in the mature dentition of domestic
microscope study. Acta Odontologica Scandinavica 33:
dogs and cats. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 12(3):
234-50.
111-113.
Mjor, I.A. (1979) Dentin and pulp. In: Mjor, 1.A. &
Fejerskov, O. & Thylstrup, A. (1979) Dental enamel. In: Mjor,
Fejerskov, O. (eds) Histology of the Human Tooth, 2nd
I.A. & Fejerskov, O. (eds) Histology of the Human Tooth,
edn. Copenhagen, Denmark: Munksgaard, p. 43-74.
2nd edn. Copenhagen, Denmark: Munksgaard,
Schroeder H.E. (1991) Oral Structural Biology. New York:
p. 75-103.
Thieme.
Forssell-Ahlberg, K., Brannstrom, M. & Edwall, L. (1975) The
diameter and number of dentinal tubules in rat, cat, dog
5
Occlusion and malocclusion
Introduction
much research has been done and there are no
large epidemiological studies available. Specific
By definition, malocclusion is an abnormality in
 genetic mechanisms regulating malocclusion are
the position of the teeth. Malocclusion is com-
unknown. A polygenic mecharism, however, is
mon in dogs, but it also occurs in cats. The
likely and explains why not all siblings in suc-
clinical significance of malocclusion is that it may
cessive generations are affected by malocclusion
cause discomfort and sometimes pain to the
to the same degree, if affected at all. With a poly-
affected animal. In some cases, it may be the
genic mechanism, the severity of clinical signs is
direct cause of severe oral pathology It is con-
linked to the number of defective genes.
sequently important to diagnose malocclusion
The most reasonable approach suggested
early in the life of the animal so that preventative
(Hennet & Harvey, 1992b; Hennet 1995) to
measures can be taken.
 evaluate whether malocclusion is hereditary or
Malocclusion can result from jaw length
acquired is as follows:
and /or width discrepancy (skeletal malocclusion),
 from tooth malpositioning (dental malocclusion)
· Skeletal malocclusion is considered inherited
or a combination of both. The development of
the occlusion is determined by both genetic
unless a developmental cause can be reliably
identified.
and environmental factors. It is known that
· Pure dental malocclusion, unless known to
jaw length, tooth bud position and tooth size
have breed or family predisposition, should
are inherited (Stockard, 1941). It is also known
 be given the benefit of a doubt and not be
that the development of the upper jaw, mandible
considered inherited.
and teeth are independently regulated geneti-
cally (Stockard, 194l). Disharmony in the
regulation of these structures results in
NORMAL OCCLUSION
malocclusion. Alteration of jaw growth by
hormonal disorder, trauma or functional
When evaluating occlusion it is important to look
modification may result in skeletal malocclusion
at all parameters and not to base judgment solely
(Hernet & Harvey, 1992a). Although tooth bud
on the positioning of the incisor teeth. In fact, the
position is inherited, various events during
 canine and premolar relationships often give a
development and growth may alter the definitive
better guide to the occlusion.
tooth position.
The shape of the head affects the positioning
It is claimed that at least 50% of malocclusions
of the teeth. Malocclusion occurs in any of the
are acquired and have no genetic cause (Beard,
three head shapes (dolichocephalic, mesocephalic
1989; Shipp & Fahrenkrug, 1992). There are no
and brachycephalic), but is more common in
data to support such a claim in dogs or cats. Not
brachycephalic breeds.
35
36 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Dog
In the mesocephalic dog, the mandible is shorter
 and less wide than the upper jaw. Consequently.
the mandibular incisors and molars occlude with
the palatal surfaces of their upper jaw counter-
 parts. The normal bite of the adult mesocephalic
dog is characterized by the following:
Scissor bite of the incisor teeth (Fig. 5.1)
● The upper incisors are rostral to the lower
incisors.
· The incisal tips of the mandibular incisors
contact the cingulae of the upper incisors.
Interdigitation of the canine teeth (Fig. 5.2)
Fig. 5.2 Interdigitation of the canine teeth. There should
· The mandibular canine fits into the diastema
be equal space on either side of the mandibular canine
(space) between the upper 3rd incisor and the
crown.
upper canine, touching neither. In other
words, there should be equal space on either
side of the mandibular canine crown.
Interdigitation of the premolars (Fig. 5.3)
● The cusps (tips) of the premolars oppose the
The incisor scissor bite and canine inter-
 interdental spaces of the opposite arcade,
digitation form the dental interlock, which
with the mandibular lst premolar being the
coordinates rostral growth of the upper jaw and
most rostral. This interdigitation is called the
mandible.
'pinking shear' effect.
Premolar and molar relationships (Fig. 5.4)
· The mesiobuccal surface of the lst
mandibular molar occludes with the palatal
surface of the maxillary 4th premolar.
· The distal occlusal surface of the mandibular
lst molar occludes with the palatal occlusal
surface of the maxillary lst molar.
Cat
The incisor and canine occlusion of the adult
mesocephalic cat is the same as in the dog. The
premolar and molar occlusion differs (Fig. 5.5)
from the dog as follows:
 The most rostral premolar is the maxillary
Fig. 5.1 Scissor bite of the incisor teeth. The upper
incisors are rostral to the lower with the incisal tips of the
2nd premolar (the cat lacks the lst maxillary
 premolar and the first two mandibular
incisors.
premolars).
OCCLUSION & MALOCCLUSION
Fig. 5.3 Interdigitation of the
premolars. The mandibular 1st
premolar should be the most rostral of
thepremolars.
Fig. 5.4 Premolar and molar relationships in the dog.
The mesiobuccal surface of the 1st mandibular molar
occludes with the palatal surface of the maxillary 4th
premolar and the distal ccclusal surface of the mandibular
1st molar cccludes with the palatal occlusal surface of the
Fig. 5.5 Premolar and molar relationships in the cat.
maxillary 1st molar.
The most rostral premolar is the maxillary 2nd premolar. The
buccal surface of the 1st mandibular molar occludes with
the palatal surface of the maxillary 4th premolar. The
maxillary 1st molar is located distopalatal to the maxillary
· The buccal surface of the lst mandibular
 4th premolar and does not occlude with any other tooth.
molar occludes with the palatal surface of the
maxillary 4th premolar.
· The maxillary lst molar is located
distopalatal to the maxillary 4th premolar
SKELETAL MALOCCLUSION
and does not occlude with any other tooth.
Brachycephalic dogs have a shorter than normal
The cat does not have any teeth with occlusal
upperjaw (Fig. 5.6) and dolichocephalic dogs have
(chewing) surfaces.
a longer than normal upper jaw (Fig. 5.7); in both
38 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 5.6 Brachycephalic.
Brachycephalic dogs have a shorter
than normal upper jaw. A short jaw
results inreduced interdental spaces
with rotation and/or overlap of teeth.
cases the mandible is not responsible for any
rostrocaudal discrepancy.
Mandibular prognathic bite
In the mandibular prognathic bite, often called
undershot' (Fig. 5.8), the mandible is longer than
the upper jaw and some or all of the mandibular
teeth are rostral to their normal position. The
degree of malocclusion varies as follows:
· Normal incisor occlusion, but the mandibular
canines touch the upper 3rd incisors and the
mandibular premolars are rostrally displaced,
which disrupts the 'pinking shear' effect.
· Level bite: the upper and lower incisors meet
at their incisal edges; the lower canines touch
 the upper 3rd incisors and the mandibular
premolars are rostrally displaced.
· Reverse scissor bite: the lower incisors are
rostral to the upper incisors by 0.5 mm to
5 cm or more; the lower canines may be
caudal to but touching the upper 3rd incisors,
or may be rostral to the upper 3rd incisors;
the mandibular premolars are rostrally
displaced to a similar degree.
Fig. 5.7 Dolichocephalic. Dolichocephalic dogs have a
If the dental interlock prevents the mandible
longer than normal upper jaw. The increased jaw length 
from growing rostrally to its genetic potential,
results in interdental spaces that are wider than normal.
OCCLUSION & MALOCCLUSION39
Fig. 5.8 Mandibular prognathic bite. The mandible is longer than the upper jaw.
lateral or ventral bowing of the mandible may
● The upper incisors are rostral to the lower
occur to accommodate the length. This results in
incisors by 0.5 mm to 5 cm or more.
an open bite and is characterized by increased
· The upper canines are caudal to but touching
space between the premolar cusp. In addition, the
the mandibular canines, level with the lower
caudal angle of the mandible is caudal to the
canines or rostral to the mandibular canines.
temporomandibular joint to accommodate the
· The mandibular premolars are caudally
extra length of the mandible.
displaced relative to the maxillary premolars,
disrupting the 'pinking shear' effect. The
degree of displacement is similar to that of
Mandibular brachygnathic bite
the incisors and canines.
A mandibular brachygnathic bite, often called
Wry bite
overshot', occurs when the mandible is shorter
than normal (Fig. 5.9). The degree of malocclusion
A wry bite (Fig. 5.10) occurs if one side of the
varies as follows:
head grows more than the other side. In its mildest
40 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 5.9  Mandibular brachygnathic bite. The mandible is too short in relation to the upper jaw.
form a one-sided prognathic or brachygnathic
gingivae or palatal mucosa commonly occurs
bite develops. In more severe cases, a crooked
(Fig. 5.llA, B). In untreated severe cases, an
head and bite develops with a deviated midline.
oronasal communication may develop over time.
An open bite may also develop in the incisor
 This condition is seen in both the primary
region so that the affected teeth are displaced
(deciduous) and permanent dentition. Persistent
vertically and do not occlude. The space between
primary canines will further exacerbate the
the upper and lower incisors can vary from
condition as the permanent canines erupt medially
0.5 mm to 2 cm.
to their primary counterparts in the mandible.
The incorrect dental interlock will interfere with
the normal growth in width and length of the
Narrow mandible
developing mandible. The condition can also be
In some animals, the mandible is too narrow
caused by persistent primary mandibular canines
with respect to the upper jaw. The result is that
in a mandible of normal width.
the lower canines impinge on the maxillary
gingivae or the hard palate instead of fitting into
DENTAL MALOCCLUSION
the diastema between the upper 3rd incisor and
upper canine on either side. The animal may not
 Dental malocclusion is malpositioning of teeth
be able to close its mouth and injury to the
where there is no obvious skeletal abnormality,
OCCLUSION & MALOCCLUSION:
41
Fig. 5.10 Wry bite.
A: Right lateral view of the skull showing normal occlusion.
B: Left lateral view of the skull showing a mandibular prognathic bite
42 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Right
cft
Fig. 5.10 Wry bite. (Cont'd)
C: Rostral view of the skull showing a midline deviation and 
an open bite. Note that the left side of the skull is more
developed than the right.
i.e. there is no jaw length or width discrepancy.
Dental malocclusion may also occur in association
with skeletal malocclusion.
Anterior crossbite
Fig. 5.11 Narrow mandible.
This is a clinical term used to describe a reverse
A: The mandibular canines do not fit into the diastema
scissor occlusion of one, several or all of the
side. Instead, they impinge on the maxillary gingivae and
incisors (Fig. 5.12). The condition is thought to be
hard palate. The dog is unable to close its mouth.
secondary to persistent primary  incisors.
 B: Note the injury to the maxillary gingivae and palatal mucosa.
However, there is probably a skeletal origin as
well since affected animals often develop a man-
dibular prognathic bite. In other words, an
anterior crossbite in an immature animal may
be the first sign of a developing mandibular
prognathism.
Anterior crossbite is common in medium and
large breed dogs where persistent primary teeth
are less common. The cause can be either a dental
 malocclusion (i.e. linguoversion of the upper inci-
sors), or a skeletal malocclusion (i.e. mandibular
prognathism or maxillary  brachygnathism).
Anterior crossbite in humans usually has a skeletal
Fig. 5.12 Left anterior crossbite. The left incisors have a
origin.
reverse scissor occlusion.
OCCLUSION & MALOCCLUSION 43
Malocclusion of the canine teeth
MALOCCLUSION ASSOCIATED
WITH PERSISTENT PRIMARYTEETH
The two most common abnormalities in canine
tooth position are as follows.
Persistent primary teeth, i.e. primary teeth that
are still in place when the permanent counterpart
starts erupting, may interfere with the normal
Rostral displacement of the maxillary canines
eruption pathway of the permanent counter-
 parts. The smaller breeds are more often affected
 Persistent primary canines may be responsible
by this condition. The mode of inheritance is not
for this condition. A breed predisposition has
known but it seems to be familial. The three most
been reported in the Shetland sheepdog.
commonly affected areas are the lower canines,
the upper canines and the incisors.
Medial displacement of the lower canines
Mandibular canines
Persistent primary mandibular canines are
The mandibular
 permanent canine begins
thought to be the cause of this condition. Yet, the
eruption medial to its primary counterpart. Once
condition is not frequent in toy breeds, where
the primary tooth is lost, the permanent canine
persistent primary teeth are common. This mal-
flares out laterally to occupy the diastema
occlusion is frequent in dolichocephalic breeds,
where it is of skeletal origin in that the mandible
If the primary canine is not lost, the permanent
is too small for the long maxilla.
canine may be forced to continue erupting
 medial to the persistent primary counterpart and
will impinge on the hard palate causing pain,
Malocclusion of the premolars and
inflammation and possibly, with time, an oronasal
molars
communication.
Posterior crossbite (Fig. 5.13) is used to describe
Maxillary canines
an abnormal relationship of the carnassial teeth.
 The maxillary permanent canine erupts rostral to
seen commonly in the dolichocephalic breeds,
where the normal buccolingual relationship is
its primary counterpart (Fig. 5.14). If the primary
tooth is retained, this may force the permanent
reversed.
tooth to erupt into the diastema intended for the
permanent mandibular canine. The following
malocclusion situations could then develop:
· The maxillary or mandibular canine may
become impacted, i.e. does not erupt fully.
● The mandibular canine may push the upper
 3rd incisor or the upper canine in a
labial/buccal direction.
· The mandibular canine may be forced to erupt
 medial to the maxillary canine, thus impinging
on the hard palate with possible formation of
an oronasal communication, if left untreated.
Incisors
Fig. 5.13 Posterior crossbite. The normal buccolingual
The permanent incisors erupt caudal to their
relationship of the carnassial teeth is reversed.
primary counterparts. Retention of one or more
44 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
discomfort and pain to the animal and prevent
the development of severe pathology. Malocclusion
affecting the primary dentition may require
 interceptive orthodontics. Malocclusion affecting
the permanent dentition may need no treatment
at all, if it is not causing the animal discomfort or
any oral pathology. Malocclusion causing dis-
comfort and pathology always needs treating.
Malocclusion affecting the primary
dentition
Primary teeth involved in malocclusion should
be extracted as early as possible, i.e. at 6-8 weeks
of age. This will allow the maxilla and mandible
Fig. 5.14 Persistent primary maxillary canine. Due to
to develop to their full genetic potential indepen-
the persistent primary maxillary canine, the permanent
dently before the permanent dental interlock
maxillary canine is being forced to erupt in the diastema
forms. Extracting maloccluding primary teeth
that the permanent mandibular incisor normally occupies.
Malocclusion will develop
before eruption of their permanent counterparts
is called interceptive orthodontics. It will prevent
dental  interlock-induced malocclusion from
of the primary teeth may interfere with scissor
developing. If the developing malocclusion is of
Occlusion of the permanent teeth, with upper
skeletal origin, the value of interceptive ortho-
incisors occluding behind the mandibular incisors,
dontics is negligible since the permanent teeth
i.e. an anterior crossbite, which may result in
will form the same incorrect interlock. Persistent
localized soft tissue trauma.
primary teeth should be extracted as soon as
possible to prevent malocclusion.
Dental interlock-induced abnormalities
The roots of primary teeth are longer and
narrower than the roots of the permanent teeth.
A maloccluding dental interlock may form when
 a growth spurt of either the maxilla or mandible
Extraction requires care and patience to avoid
tooth fracture (see Ch. 13 for details of extraction
coincides with the eruption of primary or
technique). It is essential not to fracture the root
permanent canines and incisors that interact to
 as a remnant may continue to deviate the erup-
form the dental interlock. Once this interlock has
tion pathway of the permanent tooth. Preoperative
been established the maxilla and mandible are
radiographs to determine the anatomy of the
forced to grow rostrally at the same rate,
primary tooth, but also the position and stage of
irrespective of the genetic information. For
development of the permanent counterpart,
example, mandibular canines that are locked
should always be taken.
rostral to the upper 3rd incisors will cause a
non-hereditary mandibular prognathic bite;
mandibular canines that are locked medial and
Malocclusion affecting the permanent
more caudal than normal will cause a narrow
dentition
mandible and a mandibular brachygnathic bite.
If there is no evidence of discomfort/pain or any
associated oral pathology, malocclusion affecting
PREVENTION ANDTREATMENT OF
the permanent dentition may need no treatment.
MALOCCLUSION
 Malocclusion causing discomfort and pathology.
Prevention is always better than treatment. Early
however, always needs treating. The treat-
recognition of a problem is essential to avoid
ment options available are orthodontics, tooth
OCCLUSION & MALOCCLUSION45
shortening or extraction. In many instances tooth
earlier in this chapter It is essential to determine
shortening or extraction are preferable to ortho-
if the malocclusion is of skeletal, dental or combi-
dontics on ethical grounds. Tooth shortening
nation origin. Preventive measures (such as
often requires pulpal exposure. In this situation,
controlled playing with an appropriate rubber
endodontic therapy of the shortened tooth is
toy, interceptive orthodontics or extraction of
mandatory.
persistent primary teeth) should be carried out
 Lingually displaced mandibular canines in
early in the animal's life. In most instances,
young dogs can often be corrected by stimulating
treatment other than prevention is best left to a
the dogs to play, as often as possible, with specific
rubber toys of an appropriate size and shape
expertise in endodontics and orthodontics.
(Verhaert, 1999). The details of this technique are
found in Chapter 10.
Principles of orthodontic movement
Orthodontic movement of teeth can be described
Ethical considerations
as prolonged application of pressure to the tooth,
In humans, medical (predisposition to periodontal 
resulting in movement of the tooth as the bone
diseases), functional (alteration of mastication or
around it remodels. Bone on the compression
speech) and psychological (alteration of esthetics)
side undergoes lysis allowing the tooth to move
problems relating to malocclusion are the primary
and bone formation on the tension side ensures
reason for orthodontic treatment. In human
that the tooth stays in the new position. In the
orthodontics, whether malocclusion is hereditary
ideal situation bone lysis and bone formation
 or acquired is not a consideration when planning
should be in equilibrium. In most practical situ-
treatment. This is in contrast to veterinary
ations, there is an imbalance and lysis occurs
orthodontics where esthetics and ethical con-
more rapidly. A retention phase maintaining the
cerns are linked, and treatment for the sole
tooth in the new position while allowing time for
purpose of showing dogs or cats cannot be
bone formation is, therefore, necessary in many
encouraged. The aim of any treatment is primarily
cases.
to make the animal comfortable; esthetics are a
The optimal orthodontic force is one that
secondary consideration.
moves teeth rapidly without resulting in struc-
 It is essential to determine if the presenting
tural damage, while causing the least amount of
malocclusion is hereditary or not. Orthodontic
discomfort or pain. Factors that need to be con-
correction of a malocclusion is contraindicated
sidered for any orthodontic appliance are the
where the malocclusion is hereditary unless the
magnitude of the force, the distribution of the
animal is also neutered. The rationale for this is
force and the duration of the force. The ideal
to avoid spread of inherited malocclusion within
force is a light continuous force. Heavy continuous
a breed.
forces are most damaging and should be
avoided. Apart from the orthodontic forces
applied, normal growth processes and forces from
Managing malocclusion cases in
the lips, cheeks and tongue resting on the teeth
general practice
will determine the outcome of the treatment.
Occlusal evaluation is part of the basic oral
 Possible complications to orthodontic movement
examination of a conscious animal. To make an 
of teeth include pulpal disease, external root
evaluation, the practitioner needs to be able to
resorption, tooth mobility and pain. In short, the
identify normal occlusion for the species and
 outcome of an orthodontic procedure is rarely
breed and have an understanding of the etiology
 predictable and needs frequent monitoring based
and pathogenesis of malocclusion as detailed
 on clinical signs and radiography.
46 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Summary
®
It is essential to diagnose malocclusion early in the life of the animal.
Prevention is the best strategy.
Skeletal malocclusions and persistent primary teeth are hereditary.
 Orthodontic treatment of an inheritable malocclusion should only be considered in the neutered animal
 The aim of any treatment is to make the animal comfortable with a functional bite; esthetic considerations are of
secondary importance.
REFERENCES
Beard, G. (1989) Anterior crossbite: interceptive orthodontics
Shipp,A.D.&Fahrenkrug,P.(1992)Practitioner's Guide to
for prevention, Maryland bridges for correction. Journa!
Veterinary Dentistry. Beverley Hills, USA: Dr Shipp's
of Veterinary Dentistry 6(2): 14.
Laboratories. Ch. 9, p. 117-147.
Hennet, P.R. (1995) Orthodontics in small carnivores. In:
Stockard, C.R. (1941) The Genetic and Endocrinic Basis for
Crossley, D.A. & Penman, S. (eds) Manual of Smaff
Differences in Form and Behaviour. The American
Animal Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA, p. 182-192.
Anatomical Memoirs No. 19. Philadelphia, USA: The
Hennet, PR. & Harvey C.E. (1992a) Craniofacial
Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology.
 development and growth in the dog. Journal of
Verhaert, L. (1999) A removable orthodontic device for the
Veterinary Dentistry 9(2): 11-18
treatment of lingually displaced mandibular canine teeth
Hennet, P.R.& Harvey C.E. (1992b) Diagnostic approach to
malocclusions in dogs. Journal ofVeterinary Dentistry
69-75.
9(2): 23-26.
6
Oral examination and recording
Introduction
Having looked at the entire face, the mouth is
first examined by gently holding the jaws closed
Optimal treatment relies on a good diagnostic
and retracting the lips (do not pull on the fur
work-up. Oral diagnosis is based on the results
to retract lips) to look at the soft tissues
of clinical examination and radiography, with
and buccal aspects of the teeth. This is the opti-
 guidance from the case history. Additional diag-
mal time to evaluate occlusion. Chapter 5 details
nostic tests are used when indicated. A permanent
the normal occlusal relationships in the dog
record should be made ofrelevantmedicaland dental
and cat.
history, diagnostic data and details of all treatment
A checklist for evaluation of dental occlusion
performed.
is shown in the box.
ORAL EXAMINATION
6-point checklist for dental occlusion
Examination of the oral cavity is part of every
1. Head symmetry
physical examination; however, oral examination
2.
Incisor relationship
3.
Canine ccclusion 
in a conscious animal will only give limited
4.
Premolar alignment 
information. Definitive oral examination can
5.
 Distal premolar/molar ccclusion
 ss p  pd q 
 6. Individual teeth positioning 
detected abnormalities should be recorded. It saves
Finally, the animal is encouraged to open its
time if one person performs the examination and
mouth. One method of achieving this in the dog
another individual takes the notes and enters the
is to place a thumb and finger on the margin of
findings on the dental record.
the alveolar bone caudal to the canine teeth of the
Conscious examination
upper and lower jaws on one side and with
gentle pressure encouraging the animal to open
Oral examination of a conscious animal is limited
its jaws. Another method, useful for both dogs
to visual inspection and some digital palpation.
 and cats, is to approach the animal from lateral,
Gentle technique is essential.
 one hand is placed over the muzzle and the lips
Examination involves assessing not only the
are gently pressed into the oral cavity, while
oral cavity proper, but also palpation of:
tilting the head slightly upwards. A finger from
the other hand is placed on the lower incisors
● The face (facial bones and zygomatic arch)
and gentle pressure is exerted. Do not use the fur
· Temporomandibular joint
under the mandible to try to pull the jaw down.
· Salivary glands (mandibular/sublingual; the
Most animals allow at least a cursory inspec-
parotids are usually only palpable if enlarged)
tion of the oral cavity once the jaws have been
·Lymph nodes (mandibular, cervical chain).
opened. The mucous membranes of the oral cavity
47
48 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
should be examined as well as the teeth. Apart
Periodontium
from color and texture of the mucous membranes,
The periodontium of each tooth needs to be
look for evidence of a potential bleeding problem
assessed. Examination of the periodontium is not
(petechiation, purpura, ecchymoses). In addition,
 routinely performed in veterinary practice. It is
look for vesicle formation and ulceration, which
could indicate a vesiculo-bullous disorder, e.g.
essential to perform a thorough periodontal exam-
pemphigus, pemphigoid. Obvious pathology
ination in order to correctly diagnose disease and
plan treatment. The procedure for examination
(tooth fracture, gingival recession, advanced fur-
of the periodontium is detailed below.
cation exposure) relating to the teeth can be
identified. Assess the oropharynx (soft palate,
 Instruments required include:
palatoglossal arch, tonsillary crypts, tonsils and
1.
 Periodontal probe
fauces) if possible. It is useful to identify any
2.
 Dental explorer
potential problems with endotracheal intubation
3.
Dental mirror.
prior to inducing anesthesia.
The following indices and criteria should be
evaluated for each tooth:
Examination under general
anesthesia
1.
 Gingivitis and gingival index
2.
 Periodontal probing depth
The oropharynx should be examined prior to
3
Gingival recession
endotracheal:
intubation. Normal
anatomic
4.
Furcation involvement
features of the oral cavity need to be identified
5.
Mobility
 and inspected. Refreshing your memory on these
6.
 Periodontal (clirical) attachment level.
features from an anatomy textbook is highly
recommended. It is only with knowledge of the
In animals with large accumulations of dental
normal that abnormalifies can be identified. A
deposits (plaque and calculus) on the teeth, it may
checklist for the oral examination under anes-
be necessary to remove these to assess periodontal
thetic is summarized in the box.
status accurately (Fig. 6.1A, B)
Checklist for oral examination under general anesthesia
Oropharynx
Hard palate
 Soft palate
 Incisive papilla
 Palatoglossal arch 
 Incisive duct openings
Tonsillary crypts 
 Palatine raphe and rugae
Tonsils
Hamular process of the pterygoid
Floor of mouth and tongue
Fauces
1
 Orobasal crgan
 Sublingual caruncle
Lips and cheeks
 Lingual frenulum 
Mucocutaneous junction 
Lingual salivary gland (cat)
Vestibules
1
Lyssa
Philtrum
 Tongue papillae (types and distribution)
Frenula (maxillary and mandibular)
Salivary papilla (parotid and zygomatic)
Teeth
 Primary. permanent or mixed dentition
Oral mucous membranes
 Missing and/or supernumerary teeth
Alveolar mucosa
 Abnormalities in size and/or shape
Mucogingival line
 Abnormalities in angulation and/or position 
Attached gingiva
Wear patterns (abrasion, attrition)
 Free gingiva
 Pathology. e.g. caries, enamel hypoplasia, tooth
fracture
ORAL EXAMINATION & RECORDING49
Fig. 6.1 Dental deposits and
periodontal examination.
A: Large amounts of plaque and 
calculus make it impossible to assess
the severity of periodontitis.
B: The pericdontal destruction is
evident once the dental deposits have
been removed.
A
B
The full clinical significance of measuring and
periodontal tissues resulting in loss of
recording the periodontal parameters detailed in
attachment and eventually tooth loss)
the following will be made clear in Chapter 9.
· Identify precise location of disease processes
In outline, the purpose of the meticulous
· Assess the extent of tissue destruction where
 periodontal examination is to:
there is periodontitis.
· Identify the presence of periodontal disease
Periodontal probing depth, gingival recession,
(gingivitis and periodontitis)
furcation involvement and mobility quantify the
· Differentiate between gingivitis
tissue destruction in periodontitis. Radiography
(inflammation of the gingiva) and
to visualize the extent and type of alveolar bone
periodontitis (inflammation of the
destruction is mandatory. Radiography of the
50 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
jaws and teeth is detailed in Chapter 7. In many
 sulcus. The depth from the free gingival margin
cases, measuring or calculating the periodontal
to the base of the sulcus is measured in mm at
or clinical attachment level (PAL/CAL) is also 
several locations around the whole circumference
useful.
of the tooth (Fig. 6.2A, B). The probe is moved
gently horizontally, walking along the floor of
the sulcus. The gingival sulcus is l-3 mm deep in
Gingivitis and gingival index
The presence and degree of gingivitis (inflam-
mation of the gingiva) is assessed based on a
combination of redness and swelling, as well as
presence or absence of bleeding on gentle
probing of the gingival sulcus. Various indices
can be used to give a numerical value to the degree
of gingival inflammation present. In the clinical
situation, a simple bleeding index is the most
useful. Using this method, a periodontal probe is
gently inserted into the gingival sulcus at several
locations around the whole circumference of each
tooth. A score of O is given if there is no bleeding
 and a score of 1 if the probing elicits bleeding.
An index which relies on both visual inspec-
tion and bleeding. namely the modified Loe and
Silness gingival index (Loe, 1967), can also be
A
used (Table 6.1). In research, this is the most com-
 monly used method of assessing and quantifying
gingivitis.
Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
The depth of the sulcus can be assessed by gently
inserting a graduated periodontal probe until
resistance is encountered at the base of the
Table 6.1 The modified Loe and Silness gingival
index.
Gingival index 0
Clinically healthy gingiva
Gingival index 1
Mild gingivitis: slight reddening
and swelling of the gingival
margin; no bleeding on gentle
B
probing of the gingival sulcus
Gingival index 2
Moderate gingivitis: the gingival
Fig. 6.2 Periodontal probing depth (PPD).
margin is red and swollen; gentle
A: PPD is measured by inserting a periodontal probe into
probing of the gingival sulcus
results in bleeding
the gingival sulcus until firm resistance is felt. The distance
from the free gingival margin to the depth of the sulcus or
Gingival index 3
Severe gingivitis: the gingival
pocket is the periodontal probing depth. It should be
margin is very swollen with a red
measured and recorded at several sites around the
or bluish-red color; there is
circumference of each tooth.
spontaneous hemorrhage and/or
B: The probe has been placed on the surface of the
ulceration of the gingival margin 
gingiva to depict the depth to which it had been inserted.
ORAL EXAMINATION & RECORDINGS
51
the dog and 0.5-1 mm in the cat. Measurements
Furcation involvement
in excess of these values usually indicate the
Furcation involvement refers to the situation
presence of periodontitis when the periodontal
where the bone between the roots of multirooted
ligament has been destroyed and alveolar bone
teeth is destroyed due to periodontitis (Fig. 6.4).
resorbed, thus allowing the probe to be inserted
The furcation sites of multirooted teeth should be
to a greater depth. The term used to describe this
examined with either a periodontal probe or a
situation is periodontal pocketing.
dental explorer. The grading of furcation
 All sites with periodontal pocketing should be
accurately recorded. Gingival inflammation
involvement is listed in Table 6.2.
resulting in swelling or hyperplasia of the free
sulcus depths in excess of normal values. In these
Table 6.2 Grading of furcation involvement.
situations, the term pseudopocketing is used, as
the periodontal ligament and bone are intact (i.e.
Grade 0
 No furcation involvement
there is no evidence of periodontitis) and the
Grade 1
Initial furcation involvement: the furcation can
increase in PPD is due to swelling or hyperplasia
be felt with the probe/explorer, but horizontal
tissue destruction is less than 1/a of the
of the gingiva.
horizontal width of the furcation
Grade 2
Partial furcation involvement: it is possible to
Gingival recession
explore the furcation but the probe/explorer
cannot be passed through it from buccal to
Gingival recession (Fig. 6.3) is also measured
palatal/lingual; horizontal tissue destruction is
using a periodontal probe. It is the distance (in
more than 1/a of the horizontal width of the
mm) from the cemento-enamel junction to the
furcation
Grade 3
Total furcation invclvement: the probe/explorer
free gingival margin. At sites with gingival
can be passed through the furcation from
recession, PPD may be within normal values
buccal to palatal/lingual
despite loss of alveolar bone due to periodontitis.
Fig. 6.4  Furcation involvement. The furcation sites of
Fig. 6.3 Gingival recession. Gingival recession is
multirooted teeth should be examined with either a
measured from the cemento-enamel junction to the free
periodontal probe or a dental explorer so that the degree of
gingival margin using a graded periodontal probe. The right
furcation involvement can be graded. The right maxillary
2nd premolar has a grade 3 furcation, i.e. the explorer or
extensive gingival recession affecting their buccal aspects;
probe can be passed through from buccal to palatal
most of the root surfaces are exposed
52 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Tooth mobility
there is no attachment loss), while gingival
 recession may result in the absence of a pocket
The extent of tooth mobility should be assessed
but also minimal remaining attachment. PAL
using a suitable instrument, e.g. the blunt end of
the handle of a dental mirror or probe. It should
records the distance from the cemento-enamel
junction (or from a fixed point on the tooth) to the
not be assessed using fingers directly, since the
base or apical extension of the pathological pocket.
yield of the soft tissues of the fingers will mask
It is thus a more accurate assessment of tissue
the extent of tooth mobility. The grading of
loss in periodontitis. PAL is either directly
mobility is listed in Table 6.3.
measured with a periodontal probe, or it is
Table 6.3 Grading of tooth mobility.
calculated (e.g. PPD + gingival recession).
Grade 0
 No mobility
RECORDING
Grade 1
Horizontal movement of 1 mm or less
The information resulting from the examination
Grade 2
Horizontal movement of more than 1 mm
Note that multirooted teeth are scored more
and any treatment performed needs to be recorded.
severely and a horizontal mobility in excess of
A basic dental record consists of written notes
1 mm is usually considered a Grade 3 even in
 and a completed dental chart. Additional diag-
the absence of vertical movement.
nostic tests and radiographs are included as
Grade 3
Vertical as well as horizontal movement is
possible
indicated.
A completed dental record is a legal document
that can be referred to:
Periodontal/clinical attachment level (PAL/CAL)
· During treatment - to ensure that all
Periodontal probing depth is not necessarily
 treatment is performed
correlated with severity of attachment loss. As
● At post-treatment discharge - to inform the
already mentioned, gingival hyperplasia may
owner of the condition of the teeth and of
contribute to a deep pocket (or pseudopocket if
treatment performed
Fig. 6.5 Dentalabels. A Dentalabe@
(available for dog and cat) is a simple
way of recording most of your findings
and treatments. However, it is only a
chart and needs to be supplemented
by clinical notes, radiographs, etc. to
CANINE
make a complete dental record.
10109108107106
105104103102101201202203204205206207208209210
G
G
0000-0
etion:
ate
14DenteLabe
ORAL EXAMINATION & RECORDING
ADULTCANINEDENTALRECORD
Addressireference
Date
Animal name
Type/breed
Weght (Kg)
0&α&
Primary clinician
Assistant's
101
201
102
202
103
203
104
204
105
205
106
206
107
207
801
208
601
209
110
210
RHS
LHS
411
311
410
310
409
309
408
308
407
307
406
306
405
305
404
304
403
303
402
302
401
301
Fig. 6.6 The basic adult canine dental record sheet. The basic dental record sheet recommended by the European
Veterinary Dental College (EVDC) can also be used in a general practice situation. It allows space for clinical notes. Findings
of theEuropeanVeterinaryDental College.)
54
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
 Diagnostic codes & abbreviations
Treatment codes &abbreviations
nnn
= tooth number (eg.104)
A
= absces5
ORL
=resorptive lesion
A
= assessment
= periodontal pocket
T/Tx
= therapy/trcarment
n
 measuremenc in mm
+2
PT
= periodontal therapy/treacment
= calculus index (+ to +++)
Pi1
= probng depth (mm)
十
= extraction/extracted
missing tooth
F+
= furcation (+ to +++)
+d
= plaque index {+ to +++)
S/Sx
= surgery
(eg. SXIGSx)
。
+
= gingivitis (+ to +++)
Rn
= recession depth (mm)
Asdoq =
(eg, SB/FNAB)
并
 fracture (tooth or bone)
H
Snnn
= supernumeraly tooth 
suopopua =
(cg. Epc/Er/SxE)
Jine drgw o/1 c1at
= gingival hyperplasia
GR
5
= staining (scale 1-3)
Epc = Tx vical pulp (capping)
severicy + co +++
= gingival recession
Erf = conventional rootfilling
M+
= mobility(scale 1-3)
L
= ulcer
location of lesion
(eg OA/OTx)
ONF
drawn or chart
rjns1y leseu-ouo =
R
=restorative
[(eg. R-composite)
Comments and further information
Case log entry number:
A
Oral medicine
B
Routine perio. Tx
C
Involved perio. Tx
D.
Pocket reduction
E.
Involved perio. Tx
F.
Conventional endo. Tx
G.
Vital pulp Tx
H.
Surgical endodontics
Adult
Involved restoration
 Crown and/or bridge
K
Simple extractions
Involved extractions
M.
Jaw fracture fixation
N.
Involved oral surgery
O
Other oral surgery
Orthodontic assessment
Q
Interceptive ortho. Tx
R.
Simple orthodontic Tx
Skull type
Dalicocephalic
Normal
Brachycephalic
S.
Involved orthodontic Tx
T.
Other operative Tx
U
Non-cat/dog
Jaw relationships
V.
In-vitro procedure
W.
 Primary responsibility
Mandibular brachy/recr
X
Imaging
 Mandibular caninc angulation
[EWN
Y
Other documentation
Z
Supervised by
Fig. 6.6
The basic adult canine dental record sheet. (Cont'o)
ORAL EXAMINATION & RECORDING!
55
· At any time or by any person in the practice
The dental record recommended by the EVDC
- for information related to the mouth at a
is continuously updated. It also contains
specific date.
information that is not relevant to the general
practitioner, e.g. case log entry numbers, plaque
A dental chartis a diagrammatic representation
and calculus index for all teeth, staining scale for
of the dentition, where information (findings and
all teeth. I suggest using the EVDC recommended
treatment) can be entered in a pictorial and/or
record sheet as an example and drawing up a
notational form. A Dentalabel? (Fig. 6.5) is an
dental record sheet suitable for the individual
example of a dental chart. It provides a simple
practice.
way of recording most of your findings and
treatments. However, it is only a chart and needs
to be supplemented by clinical notes, radio-
 graphs, etc. to make a complete dental record.
Summary
The basic dental record sheet recommended
 Full cral examination is only possible under general
by the European Veterinary Dental College (EVDC)
anesthesia
Oral examination should proceed in an crderly and 
can also be used in a general practice sifuation.
structured fashion, using appropriate instrumentation
These sheets are currently available for the dog
Adequate recording should take place at all stages.
(puppy and adult) and the adult cat. The adult
preferably on published cr adapted dental charting 
canine dental record is depicted in Figure 6.6.
systems.
 Several indices and measurements should be taken to
The EVDC dental records can be downloaded
complement visual assessments, e.g. gingival index,
from the EVDC website (www.EVDC.info) free
periodontal probing depth, periodontal/clinical
of charge.
attachment level.
REFERENCE
Loe, H. (1967) The gingival index, the plaque index and the
retentionindexsystem.Journai ofPeriodontology
38:610-616.
FURTHER READING
Gorrel, C. (1998) Radiographic evaluation. In: Holmstrom, S.
Robinson, J.& Gorrel, C. (1995) Oral examination and
(ed) Canine Dentistry. Veterinary Clinics of North
radiography. In: Crossley, D.A. & Penman, S. (eds)
America:Small AnimalPractice.Philadelphia,USA:WB
Marual of Smaff Animal Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK:
Saunders, p. 1089-1110.
BSAVA,Ch.5,p.35-49.
Dental radiography
Introduction
a more complete diagnosis, thus allowing optimal
planning of treatment. It is also necessary to know
Radiography is a vital diagnostic tool in veterinary
the normal radiographic anatomy to be able to
dentistry. The bulk of the tooth, i.e. root and most
identify the abnormal. Many dental procedures
of the periodontium, can only be visualized by
can only be carried out under radiographic
means of radiographs. Consequently, a lot of
control. Checking adequacy of procedures and
pathology will remain undiscovered if clinical
success of treatment also relies heavily on radi-
examination does not involve radiography. While
ography In short, radiographs are required to
lesions such as caries can be recognized without
reach a diagnosis and thus plan treatment
radiography it is not possible to assess the full
optimally, to be able to perform certain pro-
extent of the lesions or if there is pulpal and
cedures, and to be able to assess the outcome of
periapical involvement. In other words, a clinical
treatment performed. Practicing dentistry without
examination is incomplete without radiography.
radiography as a tool would be considered negli-
Periodontal disease, endodontic disease, caries,
gent in human dentistry. The same applies to
resorptive lesions, fractures, bone pathology and
veterinary dentistry.
neoplastic conditions all require radiography for
Fig. 7.1 A nondiagnostic view. This
lateral view (extraoral film positioning)
is nondiagnostic for evaluation of teeth
and associated tissues. There is
superimposition of the right and left
sides. In fact, it is not possible to say
much more than that it is a radiograph
of an immature dog and there are teeth
present.
57
58 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Pathologic radiographic changes are usually
EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS
discrete and therefore clarity and detail are essen-
tial. For a dental radiograph to be diagnostic, it
Equipment and materials for intraoral
should be an accurate representation of the size
radiography
and shape of the tooth without superimposition
· X-ray machine
of adjacent structures (Figs 7.1 & 7.2). Intraoral
X-ray film
radiographic techniques are therefore required -
 Processing facilities
a parallel technique for the mandibular premolars
 Mounts or envelopes for film storage
and molars, and a bisecting angle technique for
all other teeth. Contralateral (same teeth,
The X-ray unit
opposite side) views should be taken as routine.
 Intraoral radiographic techniques do require
A dental X-ray machine is preferable to a veterin-
some time and patience to master, but once this
ary X-ray machine. The dental unit has a freely
has been achieved they provide valuable infor-
 maneuverable head that allows accurate position-
mation, with minimal loss of time, which allows 
ing of the film with minimal adjustment in patient
optimal planning and performing of dental treat-
position. The cone of the dental unit will collimate
 ments. Attending a practical course is particularly
the beam and provide the optimal film-focus
valuable in learning these techniques.
distance.
Fig. 7.2 A diagnostic view. For a dental radiograph to be diagnostic, it should be an accurate representation of the size
technique gives an accurate representation of the mandibular 3rd and 4th premolars and the 1st molar, as well as detail of
the mandibular bone in a cat. The mesial surface of the 3rd premolar is not on the film and a second view with the film
placed further rostrally in the mouth is required to assess this tooth fully
In this view, the component structures of the tooth and its supporting tissues are well defined. The enamel is seen as an
The dentine is less radiodense than enamel and accounts for the bulk of the hard tissues of the tooth. The cementum is not
visible. The pulp cavity is the continuous radiolucent space in the center of the tooth which extends from the coronal portion
o lalleed sun youm aull asuapoipe aul s! (enp euiuel aul) payoos yiool eoaale aul jo llem aul siooi aul jo xade aul ol
the root of the tooth. The periodontal ligament space is the fine radiolucent line between the lamina dura and the root of the
tooth. The cortical bone on the crest of the alveolar ridge is continucus with the lamina dura. The mandibular canal is
clearly visible
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY59
Most veterinary X-ray machines can be used
X-ray film
for dental raciography, but the film-focus distance
Single emulsion, nonscreen or screen film can be
will need to be adjusted to between 30 and 50 cm.
used to take dental radiographs. To allow intra-
The more maneuverable the head (in angulation
and positioning) the better it is for intraoral
oral film placement and achieve high definition,
dental film should be used. Dental film is single
techniques. With the less maneuverable units it is
emulsion, nonscreen, and is available in three
necessary to posiftion the animal differently for
sizes (Fig. 7.4): occlusal, periapical and pediatric.
each area requiring investigation.
Ideally a dental X-ray machine should be
It is available in two speeds: D (ultra) and E
(Ekta). Ekta film has larger crystals in the film
installed in the designated dental theatre (Fig. 7.3).
They are available as wall mounted or free
emulsion and is therefore faster; however, the
resolution is poorer. The advantage of using the
standing units. These machines are cost-effective
latter is that the film requires a lower exposure,
and their outlay is rapidly recouped. They
but E speed film cannot be developed in a chair-
usually have a fixed kV of 50-70 and a fixed mA
side developer.
of 8-10. Electronic timers are used to set the
desired exposure time.
The dental film is packed in either a paper or
a plastic envelope and the film is flanked by
black paper and backed by a thin lead sheet (foil)
that reduces scattered radiation.
Orientation
Ensure the correct side of the film envelope is
facing the incident beam; the envelope is marked
or labeled. If exposed through the back of the
envelope, the lead sheet will absorb much of the
Fig. 7.4  Sizes of dental film. Dental film is available in
Fig. 7.3 A dental X-ray unit. A dental X-ray unit installed
three sizes: ccclusal (5x7 cm). periapical (3x4 cm) and
in the designated dental theater is the ideal situation. They
pediatric (2x3 cm). The smallest film that depicts the area
are available as free standing or wall mounted units. Wall
of interest should be used to facilitate film positioning in the
mounting is usually preferable to save space
mouth.
60 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
X-ray beam, resulting in an underexposed radio-
 graph with the pattern of the lead sheet imposed
on it.
Each film has a raised dot in one corner. The
dot helps with orientation when viewing and
mounting dental radiographs if the following
procedure is adhered to. First, the dot should
face the incident beam. Secondly, the film should
be placed in the mouth so that the dot is always
facing a specific direction. I position the dot so
that it is always facing forward in the mouth.
Another way of doing it is to ensure that the film
is placed so that the dot is always in the same
 position, i.e. facing forward in the mouth on one
side and backward in the mouth on the contra-
lateral side.
Exposure settings
Dental film requires higher exposure setings than
Fig. 7.5 The Rinn box. A chair-side 'darkroom' (Rinn
screen film, but gives better definition. The actual
box) is a simple and inexpensive way of processing dental
settings required vary with different X-ray
film. Thorough rinsing under running water (rubbing the
machines and with different film-focal distances.
film gently with your fingers until it no longer feels 'soapy)
 Dental X-ray units provide guideline exposures
after developing and fixing is essential to avoid fixation
for different size patients and different teeth. The
stains.
X-ray unit is brought as close to the tooth that is
being radiographed as possible, so setting film-
obtained with the use of a chair-side processor
focus distance is not required. If you are using a
(Fig. 7.5). These chair-side 'darkrooms' have four
veterinary X-ray unit and D speed dental film, set
containers, one each for developing and fixing
the film-focal distance to between 30 and 50 cm
fluids and two for rinsing purposes. Care must
and try the exposures suggested in the box.
be exercised during processing to prevent scratch-
ing of the film surface. Films must be adequately
Suggested exposure settings
fixed so as not to lose quality during archiving.
Cat/small dog 
20-25 mA
 Thorough rinsing under running water (while
60-70 kV
Medium/large dog
70-80 kV
20-25 mA
 gently rubbing the film surface with your fingers)
Rabbit/guinea pig
50-60 kV
10-20 mA
after processing is essential to avoid fixation
Chinchilla
50-60 kV
5-15 mA
stains. Rinsing is complete when the film surface
no longer feels 'soapy'. Remember that E speed
 Irrespective of the type of X-ray unit available,
film should not be processed using a chair-side
it is advisable to take a series of trial exposures
processor.
on animals of different size to make up exposure
charts prior to undertaking dental radiography
Handling and mounting of dental
on patients.
radiographs
It is important to handle and mount processed
Dental film processing
dental films with care. Fingerprints can damage
Automated processors are available for dental
the emulsion on the film surface and the film
film processing, but excellent results can be 
is easily scratched. After rinsing thoroughly
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY 61
adequate time should be allowed for the film to
dry before being mounted or else it will adhere to
the mount. It is also important to archive the film
in such a way that it can be easily retrieved and
identified. Remember that these films make up
part of the patient's clinical records.
Dental radiographs are viewed and mounted
as if you were facing the animal and looking into
its mouth. The raised dot should face you when
viewing the film. Based on the anatomy of the
 jaws and teeth, it is then possible to identify upper
and lower jaw views. If the films were always
exposed with the dot facing forward in the
mouth, then all views on the right side will have
the dot in a different position from the left side
views. If the films were always exposed with the
Fig. 7.6 Intraoral film placement. The simplest way to
dot in the same position then all the views on one
hold a film in position in the oral cavity is to insert packing
side will have the dot on the distal aspect of the
(in this case a pack of swabs) behind it to sandwich the
teeth and the other side will have it on the mesial
film against the tooth. The pack should be replaced for
aspect of the teeth.
each animal
facts and hence the meticulous positioning for
 Preparation of the patient
each tooth is worth the time taken. The three-
General anesthesia is required for dental radio-
rooted teeth (4th premolars and molars in the
 graphy Ideally, clinical examination and recording
 upper jaw) have an added consideration, namely
should precede the radiographic evaluation. It is
the palatal root. In these teeth it is necessary to
also useful to clean the teeth before any radio-
position the incident beam in such a way as to
graphs are taken. Dental calculus, because it is
prevent superimposition of one root over another.
radiodense, can obscure pathological lesions on a
Magnification is inevitable but keeping the film
radiograph.
as close to the tooth as possible will minimize
this. Changing the film-focal distance will also
affect magnification.
INTRAORAL RADIOGRAPHIC
The parallel technique is used to radiograph
TECHNIQUES
the mandibular premolars and molars. In this
The film is placed intraorally and the incident
technique, the film is placed parallel to the teeth
beam directed through the tooth onto the film.
 and the incident beam strikes the film perpen-
The simplest way to hold the film in position is to
 dicularly. All other teeth are radiographed using
 place packing (foam wedge, swabs) behind it to
the bisecting angle technique. In this technique,
sandwich the film against the tooth (Fig. 7.6).
the acute angle created by the tooth axis and the
Various film holders are available but they can be
film is bisected and the incident beam is directed
difficult to use effectively
 perpendicular to this line.
The film should not be bent as this will lead to
distortion of the image, resulting in either
The parallel technique
shortening or elongation of all or part of the tooth.
If it does bend, a tongue spatula inserted below it
The parallel techrique is used for the mandibular
is usually sufficient to stabilize the film. It should
premolars and the molars. The patient is placed
be borne in mind that superimposition of dental
 in lateral recumbency (with the side to be radio-
structures will also lead to the creation of arte-
graphed uppermost). The film is placed between
62 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
the tongue and the teeth and pushed as far down
 The premolar and molar views of the upper jaw
into the sublingual fossa as possible. The X-ray
of the cat are difficult. Often the zygomatic arch
beam is then directed from lateral to medial at
is superimposed over the roots and apices of the
right angles to the long axis of the tooth, which is
teeth. Placing a foam wedge or small sand bag
 parallel to the film (Fig. 7.7). The resulting image
under the nose thus tilting the head up so that
of the tooth has very little magnification or
the dental arch is parallel with the table will help
distortion. Due to the anatomy of the oral cavity.
avoid this.
this technique is only possible in the mandibular
 Another common problem is superimposition
 premolar and molar regions.
of the mesiobuccal and mesiopalatal roots of the
5 hI 'sien pue shop yoq u reoad y raddn
The bisecting angle technique
often necessary to take more than one view,
changing the angle of the incident beam slightly
The bisecting angle technique is required to
(either rostrally or caudally), to be able to visual-
minimize distortion when taking radiographs of
ize both roots separately.
the teeth in the upper jaw and the mandibular
incisors and canines. The film is positioned at an
Extraoral film placement
angle behind the tooth in question. If the X-ray
beam is directed at 90° to the film, the image
When intraoral dental radiography is not avail-
would then be foreshortened (Fig. 7.8). If the
able, extraoral views of the teeth may have to be
beam is directed at 90° to the long axis of the
used. Extraoral views are not ideal for dental
tooth, the image would then be elongated (Fig.
examination, mainly due to superimposition of
7.9). To avoid these problems an imaginary plane
the contralateral side, which obscures, and
is drawn half way between the plane of the film
 causes distortion of, the image. However, it may
and a plane through the long axis of the tooth, i.e.
be possible to obtain diagnostic radiographs of the
at the bisecting angle, and the X-ray beam is
 maxillary and mandibular premolars and molars
directed perpendicular to this plane (Fig. 7.10). In
using extraoral film placement, especially in
this way, both sides of the triangles formed are
 dogs with wide skulls. Some examiners routinely
the same length and the resulting image of the
use extraoral film placement to radiograph the
tooth is similar to the real tooth.
maxillary premolars and molars in the cat.
To achieve correct positioning requires a
The technique is depicted in Figure 7.ll. The
mental image of the normal orientation, length
film is placed on the table and the animal is
and morphology of the tooth roots. Two tongue
placed in dorsolateral recumbency with the side
spatulas, fingers or instrument handles can be
to be radiographed closest to the film, i.e. the
used to visualize these planes outside the mouth
lower side of the animal's head. The mouth is
and so aid the positioning of the beam. A
 held wide open using a radiolucent device, e.g.
common problem is to 'miss the apex' of a tooth
 plastic needle cap. Tilting the head rotates the
(especially
on canine teeth) due to poor esti-
 do  p m s n
mation of root length or position.
should mean the beam passes only through the
It may be helpful to position the patient as
soft tissue of the contralateral side. The titing
follows:
will place maxillary teeth almost parallel to the
film but in reality the beam still requires adjust-
· Sternal recumbency for the incisors in the
ment according to the bisecting angle techrique
upperjaw
to reduce image distortion.
· Lateral or sternal recumbency for the canines,
premolars and molars in the upper jaw
The parallax effect
· Dorsal recumbency for the mandibular incisors
· Dorsal or lateral recumbency for the
As a radiograph is two dimensional, it is not
mandibular canines.
possible to tell which of two objects in the image
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY
63
X-ray beam
X-ray beam
Long axis
of tooth
Film
flm is placed between the tongue and the teeth and pushed as far down into the sublingual fossa as possible. The X-ray
beam is then directed from lateral to medial at right angles to the long axis of the tooth, which is parallel to the film.
64 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
90°
Fig. 7.8 Foreshortening of the image. If the X-ray beam is directed at 90° to the film the image is foreshortened
is nearer to the viewer. It is, however, often
from the film). This technique is also useful to
 necessary to know at what depth an object is, e.g.
separate and identify two overlying roots, e.g.
 in locating an ectopic unerupted tooth. When a
the mesiobuccal and palatal roots of an upper
second image is taken, after rotating the beam
carnassial tooth in carnivores.
 position around the object's axis, the image of the
The SLOB rule (same direction lingual, oppos-
object will move relative to other structures. When
ite direction buccal) may help you remember the
the object appears to move in the same direction
parallax effect. To use the SLOB rule you need to
as the shift in the X-ray head, it is placed lingually
know the original and second beam position. An
(nearer to the film); if it moves in the opposite
object that has moved in the same direction as
direction it is more buccally positioned (further
you have moved the incident beam is lingually
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY
65
Long axis
oftooth
90
Fig. 7.9  Elongation of the image. If the beam is directed at 90° to the long axis of the tooth the image is elongated
located. Conversely, an object that has moved in
mation, but is not always practically or financially
the opposite direction of that which the incident
viable. However, it is strongly recommended
beam has been moved is buccally located.
that all adult cats have full mouth radiographs
 taken as part of the oral and dental examination.
Full mouth radiographs
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions are common in
cats and clinical examination without radiography
Full mouth radiographs describes a series of
will only detect end stage lesions.
films where each tooth of the dentition is accur-
In cats, it is necessary to take a minimum of
ately depicted in at least one view. A full mouth
8 views, but 10 views are recommended, to ensure
 radiographic series of all animals undergoing
that all teeth are properly visualized. These are as
dental examination provides valuable infor-
follows:
66 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
o06
Long axis
of tooth
Bisecting
angle
Fig. 7.10. Bisecting angle technique. To avcid foreshortening or elongating the image, an imaginary plane is drawn half
way between the plane of the film and a plane thrcugh the long axis of the tooth, i.e. at the bisecting angle, and the X-ray
au pue ybual awes aui ae pawo aibue aul jo sapis yoa em sl ul aueid sui oi einoipuadad painap si weag
resulting image of the tooth is similar to the real tooth.
Essential views in cats
Recommended views in cats
●Incisor view in the upper jaw
· Lateral view for each of the canines of the
· Lateral view for each of the canines of the
mandible (in addition to the 8 essential
upperjaw
views)
· Left and right maxillary premolar and molar
views
The choice of film size for each view is subjective.
· Mandibular incisor and canine view
The smallest film that will depict the area of interest
● Left and right mandibular premolar and
should be used to facilitate film positioning. We
molar views
use periapical size film for all cat views.
DENTAL RADIOGRAPHY
67
X-ray bcam
are outlined below. Pathological radiographic
features are covered in Chapters 8, 9, 1l, and 12.
Normal radiographic anatomy
All normal anatomical landmarks are by no
means demonstrable in any given radiograph. In
fact, there are those that are visualized in a small
 percentage of cases only. It is, however, import-
Palate
ant to be familiar with them so they can be
identified and correctly interpreted when they
are visualized. There are also wide structural
variations which are within normal limits. This is
well exemplified by the trabecular structure of
bone which presents a variable picture depending
on the size of the bone, size of its medullary
Film
space and thickness of its cortex. The pattern will
Fg.7.11
Extraoral film placement. The film is placed on
also vary with use, disuse and age of the patient.
 the table and the animal is placed in dorsolateral
With disuse and advancing age the trabeculations
recumbency with the side to be radiographed closest to
tend to become fewer and finer in structure.
the film, i.e. the lower side of the animal's head. The mouth
is held wide open using a radiolucent device, e.g. plastic
needle cap. Tilting the head rotates the contralateral side
The tooth and its supporting tissues
away and an open mouth should mean the beam passes
only through the soft tissue of the contralateral side. The
The component structures of the tooth and its
tilting will place maxillary teeth almost parallel to the film,
supporting tissues are usually well defined
but the beam still requires adjustment according to the
radiographically (Fig. 7.2). The enamel of the
bisecting angle technique to reduce image distortion.
tooth is seen as a very radiodense band that
covers the crown and tapers to a fine edge at the
In the case of dogs, full mouth radiographs are
cervical margin of the tooth. The enamel of dogs
encouraged, especially at first examination. If
and cats is very much thinner than in humans
this is not possible (time or financial restrictions)
and is often incompletely visualized on radio-
then radiographs are taken where indicated,
graphs. The dentine is less radiodense than
based on the findings during the clinical examin-
enamel and accounts for the bulk of the hard
ation. In the event of full mouth radiographs, the
tissues of the mature tooth. The cementum, which
size of film and the number of films used will
covers the surface of the root of the tooth, is even
depend upon the breed of dog and the shape
less radiodense than dentine and is usually only
of its face.
visible when it has undergone hyperplasia. The
pulp cavity, ie. pulp chamber and the root
canal(s), are visualized as a continuous radiolucent
RADIOGRAPHIC INTERPRETATION
space in the center of the tooth which extends
 The radiographs should be viewed on a viewing
from the coronal portion to the apex of the root(s).
box with minimal peripheral light and preferably
The size and width of the pulp chamber and
using magnification. It is recommended to radio-
root canal(s) will vary with the age of the animal.
graph the contralateral structures for comparative
An immature tooth can be present in a mature
 purposes. A good knowledge of the radiographic
animal where early trauma has caused pulp
appearance of normal structures of the upper jaw 
 necrosis and thus stopped further development
and mandible is imperative to avoid misdiagnosis.
of the tooth. The lamina dura represents the wall
The radiographic features of normal structures
of the alveolar tooth socket. It is seen as a
68 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
radiodense line, which runs parallel to the root of
of it that extends from the mandibular foramen
the tooth. The lamina dura is not always visible
to the mental foramina (Fig. 7.2). Nutrient canals
on radiographs but a break in the path of a
that arise from the mandibular canal are those
visible lamina dura usually implies periodontal
that extend upward into the interdental space,
pathology. Contralateral radiographs however
and those that extend directly to the periapical
should always be taken for comparison. The
foramina at the root of the tooth. Other nutrient
periodontal ligament space is depicted by a fine
 canals, which may be seen, are the canal or groove
radiolucent line that is situated between the lamina
that occupies the posterior superior alveolar
dura and the root of the tooth. The cortical bone
artery and the anterior palatine (incisive) canal.
on the crest of the alveolar ridge is continuous
with the lamina dura.
The largest number and variety of anatomic
Foramina
structures appear in radiographs of the upper
Foramina may sometimes be mistaken for peri-
jaw. Superimposition of nasal structures over the
apical lesions. Important foramina to remember
apices of the premolar and molar roots will make
are: the anterior palatine (incisive) foramen, the
it impossible to assess periapical status of these
infraorbital foramina and the mental foramina.
teeth. Consequently an intraoral bisecting angle
technique to avoid superimposition and give an
accurate reproduction of the teeth is required.
Summary
Nutrient canals
 Radiography is mandatory for good dental practice
Intraoral technique, employing parallel and bisecting
The nutrient canals referred to here are those that
angle views, is essential for meaningful results to be
obtained.
contain blood vessels and nerves that supply the
Dental X-ray machines, with 'chair-side' processors.
 teeth, interdental spaces and gingiva. In radio-
are ideal and such equipment proves convenient and
graphs, these are seen as radiolucent lines of
cost-effective in most situations.
 Full mouth radiographs (8-10 views) are strongly
uniform width, which sometimes have radiodense
advocated in cats in crder to detect cdontoclastic
borders. The most easily identified nutrient canal
resorptive lesions. The technique is recommended in
is the mandibular canal, particularly the portion
dogs also
FURTHER READING
Aller, M.S. (ed) (1998) Atfas of Canine and Feline Dental
Gracis, M. & Harvey, C.E. (1998) Radiographic study of the
Radiography. Trenton, NJ, USA: Veterinary Learning
maxillary canine tooth in metacephalic dogs. Journal of
Systems.
Veterinary Dentistry 15(2): 73-78.
Gorrel, C. (1998) Radiographic evaluation. In: Holmstrom, S.
Robinson, J. & Gorrel, C. (1995) Oral examination and
(ed) Canine Dentistry. Veterinary Clinics of North
radiography. In: Crossley, D.A. & Penman, S. (eds)
America: Smafl Animal Practice. Philadelphia, USA: WB
Manual of Smaff Animal Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK:
Saunders, p. 1089-1110.
BSAVA, Ch. 5, p. 35-49.
8
Common oral conditions
Introduction
Anomalies in number, size and shape
This chapter deals with common oral conditions.
Congenitally missing teeth
Some of these conditions may require no pro-
 Congenital absence of teeth is common in the dog.
fessional intervention; others can be managed
successfully in the general practice (often by
Radiographs are required to determine if teeth
missing on clinical examination are actually
extraction) and some need referral to a specialist
absent or unerupted (Fig. 8.1). This is often of
for treatment. The general practitioner needs to
interest for the owner of a dog meant for the
recognize the conditions, be able to perform the
show ring.
diagnostic work-up, realize the clinical signifi-
Absence of teeth can be an inherited abnor-
cance and institute treatment (in-house
or
mality or can result from disturbances during the
referral) as required.
initial stages of tooth formation. The primary
Periodontal disease is covered in Chapter 9.
teeth give rise to the permanent tooth buds, so if
All dog and cat teeth require a combination of
there is no primary tooth the permanent counter-
homecare (daily toothbrushing and dental
part will also be missing. It is possible, however,
diet/dental hygiene chew) and professional
for the primary tooth to be present and the
cleaning. Preventive dentistry is indicated for
every dog and cat and is detailed in Chapter 10.
permanent counterpart absent.
In humans, anodontia (total absence of teeth)
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions are covered in
Chapter 1l. Conditions that require prompt
and oligodontia (congenital absence of many but
not all teeth) are associated with ectodermal
management, e.g. traumatic tooth injuries, jaw
dysplasia (Shafer et al, 1974a). In dogs, anodontia
fracture, and can thus be viewed as 'emergencies"
and oligodontia are rare and can be associated
are covered in Chapter 12. Extraction is detailed
with ectodermal dysplasia or ocur in dogs with
in Chapter 13.
 no apparent systemic problem or congenital
syndrome (Andrews, 1972; Skrentary, 1964;
DEVELOPMENTAL DENTAL
DISORDERS
Harvey & Emily, 1993). Hypodontia (absence of
only a few teeth) is, however, a relatively com-
Developmental dental disorders may be due to
 mon finding in dogs. It is especially common in
abnormalities in the differentiation of the dental
purebred and linebred dogs, as the genetic fault
lamina and the tooth germs (anomalies in number,
will have been perpetuated. It is also more com-
size and shape) or to abnormalities in the for-
  d    s n 
mation of the dental hard tissues (anomalies in
the most commonly missing (Harvey & Emily,
structure).
1993).
69
70 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 8.1 Congenitally missing teeth.
Radiographs are required to determine
if teeth missing on clinical examination
are actually absent or unerupted. This
puppy has a missing permanent 4th
premolar.
In general, missing teeth are of no clinical
Radiographic evaluation allows differentiation
significance other than that plaque accumulation
between primary and permanent teeth. Primary
may be more extensive as the cleaning of teeth
teeth are smaller than their permanent counter-
associated with chewing is likely to be reduced.
parts, with long, slender roots. As compared to
Supernumerary teeth
Supernumerary teeth (Fig. 8.2) are common in
certain dog breeds (Harvey & Emily, 1993). They
are the result of either a genetic defect or a
disturbance during tooth development. The
duplication of teeth may affect the primary as
well as the permanent dentition. Many super-
numerary teeth resemble normal teeth, others
have a conical shape, and some bear no resem-
blance to any normal tooth form. The most com-
 mon complications caused by supernumerary
teeth are malpositioning and noneruption of
other teeth (Harvey & Emily, 1993; Aitchison,
1963). As with other teeth that remain embedded,
there is the possibility of cyst formation (Harvey
& Emily, 1993; Shafer et al,1974b; Stafne
&
Fig.8.2 Supernumerary teeth. Supernumerary teeth
Gibilisco, 1975a). Eruption and shedding disorders
commonly cause crowding and malocclusion. In this dog.
are covered later in this chapter. In addition,
the supernumerary permanent teeth were involved in an
tooth crowding may contribute to severe plaque
incisor malocclusion, resulting in excessive wear of the
accumulation and predispose to periodontal
laddn aui ui eunen eaibuib pue yiaal osioui enaiueu
disease.
incisor arch (radiographs were taken to elucidate whether
Supernumerary teeth that contribute to mal-
the supernumerary teeth were primary or permanent)
occlusion or crowding should be extracted
that were grossly cut of alignment and had abnormal
(Harvey & Emily, 1993; Gorrel & Robinson, 1995a).
occlusion with the mandibular incisor teeth
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS  71
permanent teeth, the roots of primary teeth are
relatively long in relation to the crown. The radio-
graphs will also allow you to plan and perform
the extractions in a tissue-friendly fashion.
Fusion and gemination
Fusion is the developmental union of two or
more teeth in which the dentine and one other
dental tissue are united. There may be a complete
union resulting in one abnormally large tooth, or 
union of the crowns, or union of the roots only. A
supernumerary tooth is frequently one of the
teeth involved. Gemination is an attempt to make
two teeth from one enamel organ, without com-
plete division. Fusion and gemination affect
primary teeth as well as permanent ones.
Fig. 8.3  Abnormalities in root shape. The upper 3rd
f these teeth do not cause any functional
incisor depicted has a marked curvature at its apex.
problem, they may not need to be extracted.
Preoperative radicgraphs should be taken of all teeth where
extraction is planned. Identification of an abnormality in root
When they do require extraction, radiography
morphology allows selection of the optimal extraction
will give information as to the extent of fusion or
technique. In this case an open (surgical) extraction
gemination and allow planning of the best
technique was chosen.
extraction technique.
Root abnormalities
Common root abnormalities include aberrations
in shape (Fig. 8.3) and in the number of roots
present (Fig. 8.4 and Fig. 8.5). They are not
detected without radiographs. The identification
of an abnormally shaped root or an extra root is
not an indication for treatment per se. However, if
the tooth is affected by pathology that requires
extraction, it is essential to have prior knowledge
of an existing anatomic abnormality, so that
the extraction can be planned accordingly.
Radiographs should always be taken prior to
extraction of a tooth.
Fig. 8.4 Abnormalities in the number of roots. The
Anomalies in structure
sem ll loo exa liews e seu paioidap elow ss, laddn
Enamel hypoplasia (dysplasia)
identified on preoperative radiographs. The tooth was 
extracted due to severe periodontitis and could thus be
Enamel hypoplasia (dysplasia) may be defined
removed without sectioning.
as an incomplete or defective formation of the
organic enamel matrix of teeth. The result is defec-
five (soft, porous) enamel. It can be caused by
local, systemic or hereditary factors. Depending on
72 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig.8.5 Abnormalities in the
number of roots. The maxillary 3rd
premolar depicted on the radiograph
has a palatal root as well as the
expected mesial and distal roots. This
was an incidental finding on full mouth
radiographs. It was bilateral, i.e. both
left and right maxillary 3rd premolars
had an extra palatal root. If this tooth
were to require extraction, it would
need to be sectioned into three single-
rooted segments rather than the usual
two single-rooted segments
the cause, the condition can affect one or only a
tooth may cause enamel dysplasia in adjacent
few teeth (localized form), or all teeth in the
 developing permanent teeth. Usually only one or
dentition (generalized form). It is essential to
 a few teeth are affected. Systemic factors include
remember that enamel hypoplasia results only if
nutritional deficiencies, 
febrile  disorders,
the injury occurs during the formative stage of
hypocalcemia and excessive intake of fluoride
enamel development, i.e. during amelogenesis.
during the period of enamel formation. Usually
Thus, the defect occurs before the tooth erupts
most teeth are affected. Historically, enamel
into the oral cavity. Crown formation lasts from
dysplasia in dogs occurred due to distemper
the 42nd day of gestation through to the 15th day
 infection. This is rare today as most dogs are
postpartum for the primary teeth and from the
vaccinated against distemper. Hereditary types
second week through to the third month post-
of enamel dysplasia have been described in
partum for the permanent teeth of dogs and cats
humans. The incidence in cats and dogs is
(Arnall, 1960). Depending on the time of the insult,
unknown.
enamel dysplasia will affect primary and/or
 If the enamel dysplasia is the result of a local
permanent teeth.
trauma (Fig. 8.6A) or systemic pyrexia (Fig. 8.7A)
Teeth with enamel dysplasia may appear
that resolves within a period time, only those
normal at the time of eruption, but they soon
areas undergoing active formation during the
become discolored as the defective (porous)
period of the insult will be affected. This is seen
enamel soaks up pigments (from food, soil, etc.). In
clinically as bands of dysplastic enamel encircling
 more severely affected teeth, the defective enamel
the crown, with areas of normal enamel else-
may flake off with use. In very severe cases, the
where on the tooth. Banding is evident in both
enamel is visibly deficient, discolored in patches or
Figures 8.6A and 8.7A.
partly missing already at the time of eruption.
 Poorly protected or exposed dentine is pain-
As already mentioned, enamel dysplasia may
ful. These teeth do become less sensitive with
be caused by local, systemic or hereditary factors
 increasing age of the animal since secondary
(Shafer et al, 1974a). Local factors include trauma 
 dentine is laid down continuously by the pulp.
to the developing crown, e.g. a blow to the face
 Another consideration is that dysplastic enamel
or an infection. Infection is often a consequence
 harbours dental plaque. In severe cases of gener-
of a bite injury. Periapical disease of a primary
alized enamel hypoplasia, where the dentine is
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS  73
A
B
C
Fig. 8.6 Localized enamel dysplasia.
A: Localized region of defective enamel of the right mandibular canine tooth. This was the only affected tooth in the dentition.
This type of enamel dysplasia is likely to be the result of local trauma, e.g. blow to the face. Only the region of enamel
The rest of the crown is covered by normal enamel
B: The defect has been debrided (discolored dysplastic enamel was removed with a round bur in a slow-speed hand piece
C: Completed restoration using a white filling material (compomer).
effectively exposed to the oral environment,
In the management of patients affected by
 enamel dysplasia, oral hygiene is of paramount
 disease may occur due to pulpal irritation via the
importance. Daily plaque removal will promote
 poorly protected or exposed dentine tubules (Fig.
 periodontal health and possibly reduce pulpal
irritation. Affected animals require radiographic
pages 79-81. Teeth affected by such pathology
 assessment and monitoring to detect compli-
require treatment, i.e. either extraction or referral
cations such as pulp and periapical disease.
 to a specialist for endodontic therapy (outlined in
In fact, a series of full mouth radiographs at
Appendix l) if they are to be maintained.
regular intervals is indicated. In young animals,
74 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig.8.7(
Generalized enamel
dysplasia.
A: Enamel dysplasia affecting all teeth
of the dentition. This type of enamel
dysplasia is likely to be caused by
systemic factors, e.g. pyrexia, at the
time of active enamel development.
Only the areas actively forming at the
time of the insult will be affected as is
seen by the obvious banding with areas
of normal enamel elsewhere on the
tooth.
B: A radiograph of the caudal left
mandible of the same dog reveals pulp
and periapical disease affecting the
mandibular 4th premolar and the 1st
and 2nd molars. The full mouth
radiographic series showed that almost
all teeth of the dentition had evidence
of pulp and periapical pathology. The
dog was referred to me because her
teeth were discolored and the enamel
had seemed to 'crumble' on ultrasonic
scaling. She was 5 years old at the time
of referral. Treatment consisted of
extraction of all teeth except the
incisors and canines as these were
unaffected by pulp and periapical
disease. Home care was recommended
and annual radiographic examination
was instituted. The dog was not
amenable to toothbrushing. and further
extractions due to pulp and periapical
pathology have been performed.
exhibiting signs of discomfort, topical fluoride
in the dog and cat as they will swallow these
application may be beneficial. Topical fluoride 
 products.
application will enhance enamel remineralization
The use of professionally applied varrishes
and ‘harden' the enamel. The main effect of 
 and gels associated with a moderate rise in plasma
fluoride incorporation into the enamel is that it 
fluoride concentrations may well be safer than
makes the enamel more resistant to acid dis-
daily use of fluoride-containing toothpastes. In
solution that occurs with caries. It must be
 other words, it is useful to apply fluoride varnishes
remembered that fluoride is potentially toxic and
 or gel at regular intervals. The best way to do this
the risk of systemic administration of fluoride
 is following a dental cleaning. The product is
products meant for topical application is greater
applied while the animal is under general anes-
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS
75
thesia and excess is removed before the arimal is
The causes for noneruptionof teeth are
allowed to recover. In severely affected cases, the
numerous (Andrews, 1972; Stafne & Gibilisco,
enamel is so soft that it is removed on scaling. In
1975b). In humans, the most common cause is lack
these patients, gross calculus accumulation is
of space. Another common cause is obstruction,
carefully removed with hand instruments (a
either by persistent (retained beyond their
 d   (  
normal time for exfoliation) primary teeth or by
(sonic or ultrasonic). The crowns are polished
supernumerary teeth. In dogs, persistent primary
with a fine grain (to reduce abrasion) prophy
teeth more commonly result in abnormal
 paste. Restoration of lost enamel, i.e. debriding 
positioning of the permanent tooth rather than
the defect and replacing lost tissue with a
 1 (1  y ) 
suitable filling material, is useful for smaller
tumors may also obstruct eruption of the teeth.
lesions (Figs 8.6B & 8.6C) as it protects against
Other possible causes for noneruption of teeth
dentine sensitivity. It is not practical for
include infection, trauma, anomalous conditions
extensive, generalized lesions. Restoraftion 
affecting the jaws and teeth (e.g. abnormal
 requires referral to a specialist.
primary displacement of the tooth bud) and sys-
temic conditions which cause underdevelopment
of the jaws, structural defects of the teeth or poor
DISORDERS OF ERUPTION AND
quality of bone.
SHEDDING
Unerupted teeth may cause no pathology, in
Unerupted teeth can be detected and evaluated
which case they do not require any treatment. If
by radiographic examination only (Fig. 8.8).
an obstruction to eruption can be clearly identified,
Embedded teeth are those that have failed to
 e.g. supernumerary tooth, it should be removed.
erupt and remain completely or partially covered
An increased risk of cyst formation has been
by bone or soft tissue or both. Those that have
reported with unerupted teeth (Stafne & Gibilisco,
been obstructed by contact against another
1975a). The follicle of the unerupted tooth under-
erupted or nonerupted tooth in the course of 
 goes cystic transformation. The resultant follicular
their eruption are referred to as impacted teeth
(dentigerous) cyst may cause extensive alveolar
(Shafer et al, 1974a; Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975b).
bone resorption as it increases in size. These cysts
 Fig. 8.8 Unerupted teeth. Unerupted
teeth can only be detected and
evaluated by radiographic examination.
In this patient, the right permanent
maxillary canine tooth has not erupted.
The right primary maxillary canine tooth
is persistent. The cwner was not
amenable to the regular radiographic
evaluation indicated if the unerupted 
permanent tooth were to be maintained.
The chosen treatment in this case
therefore consisted of extracting
(open/surgical technique) both the
persistent primary canine and the
unerupted permanent canine
76 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
expand as an osmotic gradient develops between
The deposition of secondary dentine keeps pace
the cyst lumen and the surrounding tissues. The 
with the loss of tooth substance and there is
pressure of the expanding cyst stimulates resorp-
 rarely pulpal exposure. In fact, the crown pulp
tion of the bone. Follicular cysts can become large
may come close to obliteration. In other words,
and cause extensive resorption of the surrounding
attrition is a physiologic event that occurs, to
alveolar bone. Consequently, unerupted teeth that
varying degrees, in all animals. Factors such as
are maintained require regular radiographic
loss of teeth, malocclusion and habits such as
monitoring to identify development of a follicular
stone chewing may produce excessive attrition,
cyst at an early stage. Treatment then consists of
i.e. attrition that is so rapid that the formation of
removing the unerupted tooth and its associated
 secondary dentine cannot keep pace with it, and
cyst. Some clinicians choose to extract unerupted
pulp exposure results (Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975c).
teeth as a prophylactic measure.
Abrasion is the wearing away of tooth struc-
ture which is not caused by incisal or occlusal
wear. In other words, wear of tooth surfaces that
WEAR OF DENTAL HARD TISSUE
are not in contact. In humans, the most common
Attrition is the loss of tooth substance that results
cause of abrasion is incorrect use of a toothbrush,
from wear that is produced by opposing teeth
resulting in abrasion of the buccal tooth surfaces,
coming into contact with one another, ie. teeth
usually just above the gingival margin. In dogs,
that have occlusal contact. Attrition is therefore
the most common cause of abrasion is cage
also called occlusal wear. Incisal wear is the term
biting. The hard tissues on the distal aspect of the
used when describing attrition of the incisor
maxillary canine teeth are progressively lost,
region. There is progressive attrition with
weakening the tooth, until the crown fractures
increasing age, resulting in the wearing away of
(generally with pulpal exposure).
the cusps and exposure of the dentine (Fig. 8.9).
The consequences of pulpal exposure, whether
caused by excessive attrition or abrasion, are
detailed on pages 79-81. An exposed pulp
always requires treatment, either by extraction of
the affected tooth or endodontic therapy, which
allows the tooth to be maintained. Measures to
prevent excessive attrition and abrasion should
be instituted - these are detailed in Chapter 10.
CARIES
Caries (dental decay) occurs in dogs. In our
 experience, medium and large breed dogs are more
commonly affected and the lesions usually affect
the teeth that have true occlusal tables, namely the
molar teeth. Caries has not been described in cats.
While both periodontal disease and caries are
caused by the accumulation of dental plaque on
the tooth surfaces, the pathogenesis of the two
Fig. 8.9 Attrition. Attrition is the normal wear on tooth
diseases is completely different. Periodontal
surfaces that are in ccclusion. As the enamel is worn away.
disease is a plaque-induced inflammation of the
the dentine is exposed to the cral environment. The
periodontium and caries is a plaque-induced
deposition of secondary dentine keeps pace with the loss
of tooth substance and there is rarely pulpal exposure. The
destruction of the hard tissues of the tooth.
exposed dentine is yellow to brown and has a hard surface
Caries starts as an inorganic demineralization of
on exploration with a dental probe/explorer.
the enamel. The demineralization occurs when
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS
77
plaque bacteria use fermentable carbohydrate
slowly, the deposition of secondary dentine may
 (notably sugar) from the diet as a source of energy.
keep pace with its advance and prevent exposure
The fermentation products are acidic
and
of the dental pulp.
demineralize the enamel. Once the enamel has
The initial inorganic demineralization can be
been destroyed, the process extends into the
halted as long as the process has not reached the
dentine. In the dentine, the process accelerates as
enamel-dentine junction. Meticulous dental
an organic decay and will eventually involve the
hygiene in combination with topical fluoride
sisu dmd Arissod pue sdnd susnes dind
treatment and dietary restrictions (reducing
and/or periapical pathology. Dental caries
the frequency of intake of easily fermentable
stimulates the formation of secondary dentine on
carbohydrate) can lead to remineralization of the
the surface of the pulpal wall, which is directly
initial defect. An enamel 'scar' will, however,
beneath it (Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975c, d; Shafer et
always be present (Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975c;
al, 1974c, d). If the carious lesion is progressing
Shafer et al, 1974c). If the process has entered the
dentine it becomes irreversible and progressive.
Treatment (restoration or extraction) becomes
mandatory.
In dogs caries is very rarely diagnosed at the
early enamel demineralization stage. It is usually
diagnosed only when the process already
involves the dentine (Fig. 8.10) or the pulp is
exposed (Figs 8.11 & 8.12). The reason why caries
is rarely diagnosed at the enamel demineralization
Fig. 8.11  Caries. The carious lesion of the maxillary 1st
molar depicted here has resulted in extensive loss of
enamel and dentine and has exposed the pulp chamber to
the cral cavity. The pink tissue seen in the centre of the
Fig. 8.10 Caries. The clinical appearance of dental caries
occlusal table is inflamed and hyperplastic pulp tissue
affecting the left 1st and 2nd molars is depicted. The black
(pulp granuloma). Radiographs reveal that the dentine
areas were soft on exploration, with the explorer readily
destruction has been so extensive that the furcation of the
'catching' in the tooth surface. Radiographs are indicated
roots has been broached, i.e. the three roots are
to assess the full extent of the lesions and select
unconnected to the crown. Extraction is the only treatment
appropriate treatment, i.e. extraction or referral.
possible for this tooth!
78 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 8.12 Caries. The radiograph of the left mandibular 1st molar shows an extensive caricus lesion on the distal occlusal
or referral. From the specialist's point of view, there are two options available if the tooth is to be maintained. One option is to
perform endodontic therapy and restoration. The restoration of the distal occlusal surface will be large and likely to have
and restorations of the crown (endodontic access point and at point of sectioning). For either option, home care is
stage in dogs is two-fold. First, the occlusal
 Radiographs will also give an indication of how
surfaces are not generally explored with a sharp
close to the pulp chamber a caries lesion extends
explorer during clinical examination. Moreover,
(the extent of secondary dentine formation and
dog enamel is comparatively thinner than human
the amount and thickness of dentine that separates
enamel and the process is thus likely to extend
the pulp from the carious lesion), which allows
into the dentine more rapidly than in human
selection of most appropriate treatment. Dis-
patients.
colored areas that are hard and in which the
Caries can occur on any tooth surface. How-
explorer does not'catch' are not caries - they could
ever, the occlusal (grinding) surfaces of the molar
be exposed dentine due to attrition or stain.
teeth seem predisposed in dogs. Clinically, caries
Diagnosed caries requires treatment. The
manifests as softened, often discolored (dark
options are extraction or referral to a specialist
brown or black) areas in the enamel (Fig. 8.10). A
for restoration (if the process involves the pulp
dental explorer will 'catch' in the softened carious
tissue, as in Fig. 8.12, endodontic therapy prior to
tooth surface. A small enamel defect covers a
restoration is required). If the process has
large cavern of decayed dentine. Note that not all
resulted in gross loss of tooth substance at the
lesions are grossly discolored and all occlusal
 time of diagnosis, then extraction is the only option
surfaces, whether discolored or not, should be
(Fig. 8.11). Measures to prevent new lesions must
 meticulously examined with a dental explorer. If
 be instituted in animals with diagnosed caries. In
the explorer sticks in the tooth surface, then
addifion to home care and dietary modifications
 caries should be suspected and radiographs are
as detailed in Chapter 10, these dogs may benefit
indicated. Radiographically, radiolucent defects
from regular professional fluoride applications.
are seen in the affected area of the crown.
Fluoride enhances remineralization and makes
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS 79
the enamel more resistant to the acid dissolution
older, there are also conditions that accelerate the
that occurs with caries.
rate of deposition of secondary dentine, thus
prematurely reducing the size of the pulp cavity.
Attrition and abrasion are two common conditions
PULP AND PERIAPICAL DISEASES
resulting in a narrow pulp cavity. Alterations and
The pathophysiology of pulp and periapical
decrease of the pulp chamber and canals can
diseases caused by traumatic tooth injuries is also
occur with injury or disease. In some instances,
covered in Chapter 12. A tooth affected by pulp
injury to a tooth will result in complete obliteration
 and periapical diseases should always be treated,
of the pulp chamber and root canals. More
i.e. it cannot just be ignored. In general terms, treat-
unusually, the obliteration is partial with the
 ment is either extraction or endodontic therapy.
 pulp chamber retaining the size and shape it had
The principles of endodontic therapy, which
at the time of the injury, and the root canals
allows a tooth to be maintained, are outlined in
becoming completely obliterated. Orthodontic
Appendix 1.
force can result in partial or complete obliteration
of the pulp cavity (Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975b;
Shafer et al, 1974b). Injuries that cause inflam-
Pulpal reactions
mation and degeneration/necrosis of the pulp
The immafure tooth has a wide pulp cavity. As
account for many abnormally large pulp cavities
the tooth matures, secondary dentine is laid
(Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975c) as dentine production
down and the pulp cavity becomes narrower.
ceases when the pulp is chronically inflamed or
Note that the contours of the pulp chamber mimic
necrotic.
the shape of the crown so the pulpal horns are
Calcifications in the pulp tissue are sometimes
always relatively close to the surface. Con-
seen (Fig. 8.13). In humans, their presence has
sequently, crown fracture very often involves
been attributed to local irritants of long standing.
exposure of the pulp in the older animal as well
such as abrasion, erosion and gingival recession
as in the young.
but they also occur in normal teeth where such
Apart from the reduction in size of the pulp
factors are absent. The present consensus is that
cavity which is associated with continued depos-
calcification of the pulp is of no great significance
ition of secondary dentine as the animal gets
if one excludes the few instances where pathologic
Fig. 8.13 Calcifications in the pulp.
Calcifications in the pulp tissue have
been attributed to local irritants of long
standing. e.g. abrasion. They also
occur in normal teeth as incidental
findings on radiography. These require
no treatment. Calcifications associated
with pulpal inflammation require
extraction of the tooth or referral for
endodontic therapy.
80 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
calcification occurs as a result of inflammation or
dentistry, histopathology of periapical lesions is
necrosis of the pulp (Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975c).
rarely performed.
Calcifications associated with pulpal inflammation
Treatment for all three entities is the same, i.e.
require extraction of the tooth or referral for
 endodontic therapy or if there are complicating
endodontic therapy.
factors, e.g. advanced periodontitis, then extrac-
tion. Remember that not all apical rarefaction is
Periapical lesions
pathologic in the dog and cat. The periapical
bone of normal canines often appears radiolucent
 Pathology in the area surrounding the apex of a
 in the dog. Comparison should always be made
root, i.e. periapical pathology, is most commonly
 with other teeth of the same type in the same
a sequel to chronic pulpitis or pulp necrosis. The a
 animal. A distinctly round radiolucent area, how-
source of the infection may be blood-borne, but
ever, is usually pathologic. Periapical sclerosis,
such cases are rare (Shafer et al, 1974d; Gorrel &
 instead of radiolucency, as a result of a chronically
Robins0n, 1995b; Stafne & Gibilisc0, 1975e). The
 inflamed/necrotic pulp can sometimes be seen
earliest radiographic evidence of periapical
(Shafer et al, 1974d).
pathology is widening of the periodontal ligament 
 The periapical cyst usually occurs as a sequel
space in the apical region. This widening is due to
 to the periapical granuloma (Shafer et al, 1974d;
inflammation of the apical periodontal ligament. If 
Gorrel & Robinson, 1995b). It is a true cyst, since
untreated, the apical periodontitis progresses to
the lesion consists of a pathologic, often fluid-
involve the surrounding bone resulting in
filled, cavity that is lined by epithelium. Periapical
destruction of the bone, which is replaced by soft
 cysts enlarge due to the osmotic gradient set up
tissue. This is evident as an apical rarefaction on
between the lumen of the cyst and tissue fluids in
a radiograph (Figs 8.7B, 8.12 & 8.14). The soft
 the surrounding connective tissue. These lesions
tissue may be granulation tissue (periapical
can become very large at the expense of the
granuloma), cyst (periapical or radicular cyst) or
adjacent bone tissue, which is resorbed (due to
abscess (periapical abscess) (Shafer et al, 1974d;
pressure from the cyst).
Gorrel & Robinson, 1995b). Definiftive differen-
An untreated periapical abscess can lead to
tiation between these three possibilities requires
 complications such as osteomyelitis and cellulitis
histopathology of the tissue. In veterinary
 through spread of the infection. A fistulous tract
Fig. 8.14 Periapical lesions.
Destruction of the bone surrounding the
apex of the tooth is evident as
rarefaction on a radiograph. In the
radiograph depicted, there is an
obvicus periapical lesion of the distal
root of the left maxillary 4th premolar.
This tooth requires referral for
endodontic therapy if it is to be
maintained. Extraction is the other
option.
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS
81
opening on the skin or oral mucosa may develop
· A Class Ill lesion, or true combined lesion, is
(Shafer et al, 1974d; Gorrel & Robinson, 1995b;
a fusion of independent periodontic and
Stafne & Gibilisco, 1975e).
endodontic lesions.
 Periapical lesions may be entirely asymptomatic
-n qid a  x 
Diagnosis depends on clinical examination
loma and periapical cyst rarely cause severe
and radiography The prognosis for long term
discomfort but they may undergo exacerbation
retention of the tooth is based on the above
and develop into a periodontal abscess, which
classification. Class I lesions have a better
usually is an extremely painful condition. The
prognosis as endodontic treatment may lead to
clinical signs indicative of periapical pathology
resolution of the periodontal extension of the
 are often insidious and not noticed by the owner.
inflammation. In contrast, Class II and Class III
It is often only after completion of treatment that
lesions require endodontic treatment as well
the owner reports a dramatic improvement in the
as extensive periodontal therapy and the
animal's general demeanour. Consequently,
 periodontal destruction is often too extensive to
periapical lesions confirmed by radiography
be amenable to treatment.
should be treated even if the animal is not
Teeth with severe destruction of the peri-
showing obvious signs of pain or discomfort.
odontium should be extracted whatever the
Similarly, discolored teeth with a necrotic pulp
original cause (Gorrel & Robinson, 1995a, b).
need to be treated before periapical pathology
 Other treatment options are endodontic therapy
develops. Once diagnosed, patients with necrotic
and/or  periodontal  therapy  depending on
pulps and periapical pathology should receive
the classification. Referral to a specialist is
endodontic treatment (referral) or extraction of
recommended.
the affected tooth as soon as possible (Gorrel &
Robins0n, 1995b).
OSTEOMYELITIS
Combined periodontic and
Osteomyelitis of the jawbones is not a particularly
common disease in dogs and cats. Infection of
endodontic lesions
dental origin is not the only cause of osteo-
There are possible pathways of communication
myelitis in the upper jaw or mandible, but it is
between the pulp and the periodontium. These
probably the most frequent one. Osteomyelitis
are denuded dentine tubules, lateral and/or
then occurs as an extension of pulp and
accessory pulp canals and at the apical foramen.
periapical pathology. The disease may be acute,
Consequently, a periapical lesion may have a
subacute or chronic and presents a different
 periodontal origin and a periodontal type lesion
clinical course depending on its nature (Stafne &
may originate from the pulp. Another possibility
Gibilisc0, 1975e).
is that a lesion is the result of a combination of
Osteomyelitis
can be verydifficult
to
endodontic and periodontal pathology (Shafer et
differentiate from neoplastic bone lesions on
al, 1974d; Bergenholtz, 1992). The lesions
are
radiography.E
 Biopsy   and  histopathological
dlassified according to etiology as follows:
 examination of the bone is really the only way to
reach a definitive diagnosis. Once diagnosed,
· A Class I lesion, or endodontic-periodontic
osteomyelitis is treated by removing the cause
lesion, is endodontic in origin, i.e. pathology
(extraction or possibly endodontic therapy of
begins in the pulp and progresses to involve
teeth with pulp and periapical disease) in combi-
the periodontium.
nation with antibiotic therapy. The choice of
 Class II lesion, or periodontic-endodontic
antibiotic should be based on the results of
lesion is periodontic in origin, i.e. pathology
culture and antibiogram. The duration of anti-
begins in the periodontium and progresses to
biotic treatment required is usually longer than
involve the pulp.
for other oral infections.
82 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
ORAL TUMORS
inductive or noninductive (i.e. whether an inter-
action similar to that seen during odontogenesis
A variety of neoplastic lesions (benign and
takes place between epithelial and mesenchymal
malignant) occurs in the oral cavity. These can be
tissues or not). The odontoma (Fig. 8.15A, B, & C)
odontogenic or non-odontogenic in origin. In
is an example of an inductive tumor and the
addition, non-neoplastic lesions and swellings,
peripheral ameloblastoma and the peripheral
e.g. gingival hyperplasia and infective conditions,
 odontogenic fibroma are examples of noninductive
can be confused with neoplasia. Conversely, oral
tumors.
neoplasms may present as nonhealing ulcerative
Radiography, while not diagnostic of the
lesions rather than as masses. Also, the so-called
tumor type, will provide information about the
epulides constitute a variety of pathologic
extent of bony involvement of oral neoplasms
entities.
(Fig. 8.16). Such information, in conjunction with
Malignant neoplasms of the mouth and
the histopathologic diagnosis, is important in
pharynx constitute 5-7% of all canine tumors
planning tumor management.
(Verstraete, 1995). The most common malignant
neoplasms are malignant melanoma (30-35%),
squamous cell carcinoma (20-30%) and fibro-
ROOT RESORPTION
sarcoma (1-20%) (Verstraete, 1995). Oste0sarcoma
Hard tissues are protected from resorption by
is also relatively common.
their surface layer of cells (Gunnraj, 1999;
The term epulid (epulis) is a clinically descrip-
 Lindskog & Hammarstrom, 1980). Internal root
tive term referring to a localized swelling on the
resorption (when the root is resorbing from the
gingiva. A number of distinct histopathologic
pulp side towards the external tooth surface) is
entities can thus present as an epulis, including
triggered by pulpal inflammation. External root
malignant tumors. However, most epulides are
resorption (when the root is resorbing from the
non-neoplastic lesions or odontogenic tumors. In
cementum towards the pulp) may follow any
a recent study (Verstraete et al, 1992), it was
 damage to the protective periodontal ligament
found that 44% of epulides were focal fibrous
and cementoblast layer. Inflammatory external
hyperplasia. Peripheral odontogenic fibromas
root resorption is seen as a complication to
were also common (17%) and peripheral
orthodontic treatment, in periodontitis and in
ameloblastoma accounted for 18% of epulides
 conjunction with periapical pathology.
examined histologically.
 External root resorption (odontoclastic resorp-
Odontogenic tumors are benign neoplasms
tive lesions) of unknown etiology is common in
that arise from odontogenic tissue. They are
 cats and is detailed in Chapter ll. Similar lesions
classified based on the type of neoplastic tissue
(Arnbjerg, 1996) have been reported in dogs
(epithelial or mesodermal) and whether they are 
(Fig. 8.17)
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS
E8
R
Fig.8.15 Odontoma.
A: A swelling on the left side of the nose in this young dog
is obvious. The mass is slightly fluctuant on palpation.
B: The intraoral examination reveals that there is also an
intraoral swelling extending from the left canine in a caudal
direction.
C: The radiograph reveals that the swelling is comprised of
a cyst-like lesion that contains tooth-like material. This
radiograph is pathognomonic for cdontoma, i.e.
histopathology is not required for diagnosis. Treatment
consists of shelling cut the cyst-like lesion and its contents.
84 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 8.16 Bony extension of neoplasia. Radicgraphy will
provide information about the extent of bony involvement of 
oral neoplasms. This information, in combination with the
histopathological diagnosis, is important in planning
management.
Fig.8.17
 External root resorption.
The right mandibular 3rd and 4th
 premolars and the 1st and 2nd molars
depicted in this radiograph are affected
by external root resorption. The
periodontal ligament space of the
 affected roots cannot be identified. In
fact, it is impossible to differentiate
 between root and bone in some
locations. At these locations, the crown
appears to be separated from its roots
by a layer of bone. The distal roots of 
the 4th premolar and the 2nd molar
 cannot be identified. The root resorption 
has extended into the crown dentine
resulting in loss of hard tissue and
communication with the oral
environment. Histologically, this was 
diagnosed as external root resorption
 with bony replacement of destroyed
dental hard tissues. The resorption was
mediated by odontoclasts.
COMMON ORAL CONDITIONS 
85
Summary
 Common oral conditions should be readily appreciated so that appropriate treatment (conservative, in-house or
referral) can be instituted.
aberrant root shapes and numbers and enamel hypoplasia.
Caries (dental decay) is a recognized entity in dogs but not in cats.
 Osteomyelitis requires differentiation from neoplasia.
The commonest malignant cral tumors are malignant melanoma and squamous cell carcinoma.
Most epulides are non-neoplastic.
 Odontogenic tumors are benign neoplasms arising from odontogenic tissues
FURTHER READING
Aitchison, J. (1963) Changing incisor dentition of bull dogs.
Shafer, W.G., Hine, M.K. & Levy, B.M. (1974b) Cysts and
Veterinary Record 75: 153.
tumors of odontogenic origin. In: A Textbook of Ora!
Andrews, A.H. (1972) A case of partial anodontia in a dog.
Pathology, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, USA: WB Saunders,
Veterinary Record 90: 144-145.
Ch.4,p.236-284.
Arnall, L. (1960) Some aspects of dental development in the
Shafer, W.G., Hine, M.K. & Levy, B.M. (1974c) Dental caries.
dog. Il. Eruption and extrusion. Journaf of Smaff Anima!
In: A Textbook of Oral Pathofogy, 3rd edn. Philadelphia,
Practice 1:259
USA: WB Saunders, Ch. 7, p. 366-432.
Arnbjerg, J. (1996) Idiopathic dental root replacement
Shafer, W.G., Hine, M.K. & Levy, B.M. (1974d): Diseases of
resorption in old dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry
the pulp and periapical tissues. In: A Textbook of Oral
13(3): 97-99.
Pathology, 3rd edn. Philadelphia, USA: WB Saunders,
Bergenholtz, G. (1992) Periodontics and endodontics. In:
Ch. 8, p. 433-462.
Lindhe, J. (ed) Textbook of Clinical Periodontology, 2nd
Skrentary, T.T. (1964) Preliminary study of the inheritance of
edn. Copenhagen, Denmark: Munksgaard, Ch. 9,
missing teeth in the dog. Wien Tierarzt Monaschr
p.258-281.
51: 231.
Gorrel, C. & Robinson, J. (1995a) Periodontal therapy and
Stafne, E.C. & Gibilisco, J.A. (1975a) Cysts of the jaws. In:
extraction technique. In: Crossley, D.A. & Penman, S.
Oral Roentgenographic Diagnosis, 4th edn. Philadelphia,
(eds) Manual of Smalfl Animal Dentistry. Cheltenham,
USA: WB Saunders, p. 147-168.
UK: BSAVA, ch. 14, p. 139-149.
Stafne, E.C. & Gibilisco, J.A. (1975b) Malposition of teeth. In:
Gorrel, C. & Robinson, J. (1995b) Endodontics in small
Oral Roentgenographic Diagnosis, 4th edn. Philadelphia,
carnivores. In: Crossley, D.A. & Penman, S. (eds) Marua!
USA: WB Saunders, Ch. 13, p. 44-56.
of Smalff Animal Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA,
Stafne, E.C. & Gibilisco, J.A.(1975c) The pulp cavity. In:
ch. 16, p. 168-181.
Oral Roentgenographic Diagnosis, 4th edn. Philadelphia,
Gunnraj, M.N. (1999) Dental root resorption. Oral Surgery
USA: WB Saunders, Ch. 5, p. 61-70.
88:47-53.
Stafne, E.C. & Gibilisco, J.A. (1975d) Dental caries. In: Oral
Harvey C.E. & Emily, P. (1993) Occlusion, occlusive
Roentgenographic Diagnosis, 4th edn. Philadelphia,
abnormalities and orthodontic treatment. In: Smaf!
USA: WB Saunders, Ch. 6, p. 71-73.
Animal Dentistry. Missouri, USA: Mosby, Ch. 8,
Stafne, E.C. & Gibilisco, J.A. (1975e) Infections of the jaws.
p.266-296.
In: Oral Roentgenographic Diagnosis, 4th edn.
Lindskog, S. & Hammarstrom, L. (1980) Evidence in favour
Philadelphia, USA: WB Saunders, Ch. 7, p. 74-85.
 of an anti-invasion factor in cementum or periodontal
Verstraete, F.J.M. (1995) Advanced oral surgery in small
membrane. Scandinavian Journal of Dental Research
carnivores. In: Crossley D.A. & Penman, S. (eds) Manua!
88:161-163
of Smaff Animal Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA,
Shafer, W.G., Hine, M.K. & Levy, B.M. (1974a)
Ch. 18, p. 193-207.
Developmental disturbances of oral and paraoral
Verstraete, F.J.M., Ligthelm, A.J. & Weber, A. (1992) The
structures. In: A Textbook of Oral Pathology, 3rd edn.
histological nature of epulides in dogs. Journal of
Philadelphia, USA: WB Saunders, Ch. 1, p. 2-80.
Comparative Pathology 106: 169-182.
+
Periodontal disease
Introduction
 Table 9.1 Nonperiodontal oral inflammatory diseases.
Periodontal disease is the result of the inflam-
Conditions associated
●Necrotizing ulcerative
matory response to dental plaque, i.e. oral bacteria,
with immune system
gingivostomatitis
and is limited to the periodontium. It is the most
depression or dysfunction
Mycotic infections.
common oral disease seen in dogs (Hamp et al,
commonly candidiasis
●Neutrophil dysfunction,
1984). It is also common in cats (Reichart et al,
 gray collie syndrome.
1984). In fact, periodontal disease is probably the
drug therapy, viral
 most common disease seen in small animal prac-
infection, e.g. feline 
immunodeficiency virus
 s p s   p n  
(FeLV)
the age of three years having a degree of disease
Autoimmune disorders
·Vesiculobullous skin
that warrants intervention.
diseases, e.g pemphigus 
In addition to periodontal disease, a spectrum
and pemphigoid
● Systemic or discoid lupus
of inflammatory responses to agents other than
erythematosus
plaque (e.g. toxic, viral and unknown) also occurs
● Sjogren-like syndrome
in the oral cavity. These generally affect the oral
Hypersensitivity
● Drug eruptions
mucous membrane, but may also involve the
●Insect stings
periodontium. Inflammation of the oral mucosa
Viral infections
· FeLV
is called stomatitis. Table 9.1 lists the most import-
● Feline leukemia virus
(FLV)
ant oral inflammatory conditions, other than
+ Calicivirus
 periodontal disease. This chapter will deal with
Miscelfaneous conditions
●Eosinophilic granuloma
periodontal disease and feline gingivostomatitis.
complex
Periodontal disease is a collective term for a
● Feline chronic
umber of plaque-induced inflammatory lesions
gingivostomatitis 
that affect the periodontium. The term infection
refers to the presence and multiplication of a micro-
is ultimately exfoliation of the affected tooth. Thus,
 Organism in body tissues. Periodontal disease is a
gingivitis is inflammation that is not associated
unique infection in that it is not associated with a
with destruction (loss) of supporting tissue. It is
 massive bacterial invasion of the tissues. Gingivitis
reversible.
In
contrast,
periodontitis
iS
is inflammation of the gingiva and is the earliest
inflammation where the tooth has lost a variable
sign of disease. Individuals with
untreated
degree of its support (attachment). It is irreversible.
gingivitis may develop
periodontitis.
The
The salient features of gingivitis and periodontitis
inflammatory reactions in periodontitis result in
are depicted in diagrammatic form in Figure 9.1.
destruction of the periodontal ligament and
Periodontal disease can cause discomfort to
alveolar bone. The result of untreated periodontitis
affected individuals. Moreover, there is strong
87
88 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
circumstantial evidence that a focus of infection in
A
B
the oral cavity may cause disease of distant organs
(DeBowes et al, i996). Consequently, prevention
and treatment of periodontal disease is important
for the general health of companion animals. It is
not a cosmetic issue! Prevention of periodontal
disease is detailed in Chapter 10. This chapter
details etiology, pathogenesis, diagnosis and
 treatment. Successful management of periodontal
disease relies on a comprehensive understanding
D
of the etiology and pathogenesis of the disease.
ETIOLOGY
The primary cause of gingivitis and periodontitis
is accumulation of dental plaque on the tooth
surfaces. Contrary to common belief, calculus
(tartar) is only a secondary etiologic factor.
Fig. 9.1  Periodontal disease. Periodontal disease is a
collective term for plaque-induced inflammation of the
gingiva.
Dental plaque
A: Gingivitis. The inflarmmation is limited to the gingiva with
 Dental plaque is a biofilm composed of aggregates
no associated destruction of the periodontium. Gingivitis is
reversible.
of bacteria and their by-products, salivary
B: Gingival hyperplasia. Gingival hyperplasia may be the
components, oral debris and occasional epithelial
result of plaque-induced inflammation (hyperplastic
and inflammatory cells (Fig. 9.2). Plaque accumu-
gingivitis). but may also be of idiopathic or familial origin. It
lation starts within minutes on a clean tooth
results in increased periodontal probing depths, initially with
surface. The initial accumulation of plaque occurs
no loss of periodontal support, i.e. there is no attachment
supragingivally but will extend into the sulcus
loss.
and populate the subgingival region if left
C: Periodontitis with vertical bone foss. The plaque-induced
undisturbed. As demonstrated in a study where
inflammation results in irreversible destruction of the
periodontal ligament and alveolar bone. The junctional
dogs were fed by intubation, the formation of
epithelium (epithelial attachment) migrates apically and
dental plaque occurs whether food passes through
attaches on the root surfaces. If the gingival margin does
the oral cavity or not, i.e. food debris does not
not recede, the apical migration of the epithelial attachment
attach to the teeth to form plaque (Egelberg, 1965)
results in increased periodontal probing depth, i.e. a
Supragingival plaque bacteria derive their main
pathological pocket is formed. Destruction of the alveolar
bone can be horizontal or vertical. Shown here is vertical
nutrients from dietary particles dissolved in saliva.
bone loss, resulting in the formation of a periodontal pocket
Within the sulcus or pathologic periodontal
where the apical extension of the pocket is below the
pocket, the major nutritional source for bacterial
margin of the alveolar bone, i.e. infrabony pocket.
metabolism comes from the periodontal tissues
D: Periodontitis with horizonta/ bone loss. The periodontal
and blood.
destruction is evidenced by loss of periodontal ligament 
 Classic experiments have demonstrated that
and horizontal bone loss. The junctional epithelium has
migrated apically and attached to the root surfaces
accumulation of plaque on the tooth surfaces
However, the gingival margin has receded, so periodontal 
reproducibly induces an inflammatory response
probing depths do not increase.
in associated gingival tissues, and that removal
of the plaque leads to disappearance of the clinical
signs of this inflammation (Loe et al, 1965;
Theilade et al, 1966). At first, a direct relationship
was assumed to exist between the total number
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
68
Fig. 9.2  Dental plaque. Dental
plaque is a biofilm composed of 
aggregates of bacteria and their by-
products, salivary components, oral 
debris and occasional epithelial and
inflammatory cells. It starts accumulating
within minutes on a clean tooth surface.
Plaque may be difficult to see with the 
naked eye and the use of plaque-
disclosing solutions (dyes that stain
plaque) is recommended for
visualization.
of bacteria that accumulated on a tooth surface
covered by the pellicle (an amorphous coating of
and the amplitude of the pathogenic effect. Such
salivary proteins and glycoproteins). The pellicle
a view of dental plaque as a biomass is referred
alters the charge and free energy of the tooth
to as the nonspecific plaque hypothesis (Theilade,
surfaces, which increases the efficiency of bacterial
1986). As it became evident that not all gingivitis
adhesion. Specific bacteria such as Streptococcus
lesions invariably developed to periodontitis
sanguis and Actinomyces viscosus can adhere to the
lesions, the specific plaque hypothesis was
pellicle. These bacteria produce extracellular
developed. In this hypothesis, the view is that
    
periodontitis is caused by specific pathogens
that are not otherwise able to adhere.
(Loesche, 1979). Differences in the composition of
The plaque associated with healthy gingiva is
the subgingival plaque have been attributed in
mainly comprised of aerobic and facultative
part to the local availability of blood products,
anaerobic bacteria. As gingivitis develops, plaque
pocket depth, redox potential and pO. Therefore,
extends subgingivally. Aerobes consume oxygen
the question of whether the presence of specific
and a low redox potential is created, which makes
microorganisms in patients or distinct sites may
the environment more suitable for growth of
be the cause or consequence of disease is still a
anaerobic species. The aerobic population does
matter of dispute (Socransky et al, 1987). Many
not decrease, but with increasing number of
 periodontopathogens are strict anaerobes and, as
anaerobes, the aerobic / anaerobic ratio decreases.
such, may contribute little to the initiation of
The subgingival flora associated with periodontitis
periodontitis in shallow periodontal pockets.
ist
predominantly anaerobic and consists of
 Instead, these organisms are linked to progression 
Porphyromonas spp, Prevotella spp, Peptostreptococcus
 of disease in sites with pre-existing periodontitis.
spp, Fusobacterium spp and spirochetes (Hennet
The formation of plaque involves two pro-
& Harvey, 1991). High levels of Porphyromonas
cesses, namely the initial adherence of bacteria
 spp and spirochetes are consistently associated
and then the continued accumulation of bacteria
with progressive periodontitis in the dog. The
due to a combination of multiplication and
bacterial flora of the normal feline gingival margin,
further aggregation of bacteria to those cells that 
as well as the bacteria found in subgingival
are already attached. As soon as a tooth becomes
 plaque of cats with gingivitis and periodontitis,
exposed to the oral cavity, its surfaces are
 are similar to those found in humans and dogs
90 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
under similar conditions (Love et al, 1990;
● Indirect injury by plaque microorganisms via
Mallonee et al, 1988).
inflammation.
Summary
The microbiota in periodontal pockets is in a
 The first bacteria to adhere to the pellicle are aerobic
continual state of flux; periodontitis is a dynamic
Gram-positive organisms.
infection caused by a combination of bacterial
 In dogs and cats, the main bacteria in supragingival
vectors that change over time. As a result, the
plaque are Actinomyces and Streptococci
As the plaque thickens, matures and extends further
molecular events that trigger and sustain the
down the gingival sulcus, the environment becomes
inflammatory reactions constantly change. Many
suitable for growth of anaerobic organisms, motile
microbial products have little or no direct toxic
rods and spirochetes.
effect on the host. However, they possess the
potential to activate nonimmune and immune
Dental calculus
inflammatory reactions that cause the tissue
damage. It is now well accepted that it is the host's
Dental calculus is mineralized plaque. However,
response to the plaque bacteria,rather than microbial
a layer of plaque always covers calculus. Both
virulence per se that directly causes the tissue
 supragingival and subgingival plaque becomes
damage (Kinane & Lindhe, 1997).
mineralized. Supragingival calculus per se does
In gingivitis, the plaque-induced inflammation
 not exert an irritant effect on the gingival tissues.
is limited to the soft tissue of the gingiva (Fig.
In fact, it has been shown in monkeys that a
9.1A). Sulcus depths are normal (i.e. periodontal
normal attachment may be seen between the
probing depths are l-3mm in the dog and
junctional epithelium and calculus if the calculus
0.5-1.0 mm in the cat). As periodontitis occurs
surface had been disinfected using chlorhexidine
(Fig. 9.1C), the inflammatory destruction of the
(Listgarten & Ellegaard, 1973). It has also been
coronal part of the periodontal ligament allows
shown that sterilized calculus may be encapsulated
apical migration of the epithelial attachment and
in connective tissue without causing marked
the formation of a pathologic periodontal pocket
inflammation or abscess formation (Allen & Kerr,
(i.e. periodontal probing depths increase). If the
1965). It has been speculated that calculus may
inflammatory disease is permitted to progress,
 exert a detrimental effect on the soft tissue owing
the crestal portion of the alveolar process begins
to its rough surface. However, it has clearly been
to resorb. Alveolar bone destruction type and
established that surface roughness alone does
extent are diagnosed radiographically. The
not initiate gingivitis (Waerhaug, 1956). The main
resorption may proceed apically on a horizontal
importance of calculus in periodontal disease
level.1
Horizontal bone destruction is often
thus seems to be its role as a plaque-retentive
accompanied by gingival recession, so periodontal
surface. This is supported by well-controlled
pockets may not form (Fig. 9.1D). If there is no
animal (Nyman et al, 1986) and clinical (Mombelli
gingival recession, the periodontal pocket is
et al, 1995; Nyman et al, 1988) studies that have
 supra-alveolar, i.e. above the level of the alveolar
shown that the removal of subgingival plaque on
 margin. The pattern of bone destruction may also
 top of subgingival calculus will result in healing
 proceed in a vertical direction along the root to
of periodontal lesions and the maintenance of
form angular bony defects. The periodontal
healthy periodontal tissues.
pocket is now intra- or subalveolar, i.e. below the
level of the crestal bone.
 Disease progression is generally an episodic
PATHOGENESIS
occurrence rather than a continuous process.
The pathogeric mechanisms involved in peri-
Tissue destruction occurs as acute bursts of disease
odontal disease include:
activity followed by relatively quiescent periods.
The acute burst is clinically characterized by
· Direct injury by plaque microorganisms and
rapid deepening of the periodontal pocket as
PERIODONTAL DISEASE  91
periodontal ligament fibers and alveolar bone are
thetized animal. In addition, radiography is
destroyed by the inflammatory reactions. The
mandatory if there is evidence of periodontitis
quiescent phase is not associated with clinical or
on clinical examination. It is essential to differ-
radiographic evidence of disease progression.
 entiate between gingivitis and periodontitis in
However, complete healing does not occur during
 order to institute appropriate treatment. In
this quiescent phase, because subgingival plaque
individuals with gingivitis, the aim is to restore
 remains on the root surfaces and inflammation per-
the tissues to clinical health; in individuals with
sists in the connective tissue. The inactive phase
established periodontitis, the aim of therapy is to
can last for extended periods.
 prevent progression of disease.
Other conditions, such as physical or psycho-
Oral examination and recording of findings
logic stress and malnutrition, may impair
 are detailed in Chapter 6.
protective responses such as the production of
 The following parameters need to be assessed
antioxidants and acute phase proteins, and can
and recorded for each tooth in all patients:
aggravate periodontitis but do not actually cause
destructive tissue inflammation. A genetic pre-
1.  Gingivitis and gingival index
disposition to destructive inflammation of the
2.1
 Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
periodontium may be important in some indi-
3.
Gingival recession (GR)
viduals. In humans, a strong association has been
4.1
 Furcation involvement
observed between the severity of periodontitis
5.Mobility.
and a specific genotype of the interleukin-1 (IL-1)
gene cluster (Kornman et al, 1997). Patients
Periodontal probing depth, gingival recession,
carrying this periodontitis-associated genotype
furcation involvement and mobility measure the
(PAG) may demonstrate phenotypic differences,
extent of destruction of the periodontium, i.e.
as indicated by elevated levels of IL-lβ in
assess the presence and severity of periodontitis.
 gingival sulcular (crevicular) fluid (Engebretson
 I do not assess and record the extent of plaque
et al, 1999). No similar data are available for the
and calculus accumulation in patients that are
dog or cat.
seen for the first time. These deposits will be
removed during periodontal therapy. Instead, 1
assess and record plaque at follow-up visits to
Significance
assess the efficacy of the homecare regimen that
Undisturbed plaque accumulation results in
has been instituted. Plaque accumulation is
 gingivitis. While some individuals with untreated
visualized using a plaque disclosing solution and
gingivitis will develop periodontitis, not all
the teeth that have plaque at the gingival margin
untreated animals will do so. It cannot be predicted
 are noted and recorded. The amount of plaque is
which individuals with gingivitis will develop
 graded subjectively as mild, moderate or severe
periodontitis. However, animals in which clin-
depending on the depth of staining achieved by
ically healthy gingivae are maintained will not
the plaque disclosing solution.
develop periodontitis. Consequently, the aim in
periodontal disease prevention and treatment is to
Gingivitis
establish andmaintain clinicallyhealthy gingivae to
preventperiodontitis.
Gingivitis is defined as a reversible plaque-
induced inflammation limited to the gingiva (i.e.
no loss of periodontal attachment).
DIAGNOSIS
General considerations
Clinical signs and diagnostic methods
Diagnosis of periodontal disease relies on clinical
Gingiviftis  manifests  clinically  as  swelling.
examination of the periodontium in the anes-
reddening and often bleeding of the gingival
92 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 9.3 Gingivitis. Gingivitis
manifests clinically as swelling and
reddening of the gingival margin.
margin (Fig. 9.3). It may be accompanied by
halitosis. It is diagnosed clinically by means of a
combination of visual inspection and tactile
examination. The presence and degree of gingival
inflammation is assessed based on a combination
of redness and swelling, as well as presence or
absence of bleeding on gentle probing of the
gingival sulcus. Various indices can be used to
 give a numerical value to the degree of gingival
inflammation present. In the clinical situation, a
simple bleeding index may be the most useful.
Using this method the gingival sulcus of each
tooth is gently probed at several points and given
a score of 0 if there is no bleeding and a score of
1 if the probing elicits bleeding. The patient with
 uncomplicated gingivitis will have normal peri-
odontal probing depths (1-3 mm in the dog and
0.5-1.0 mm in the cat) and show no evidence of
gingival recession, furcation involvement or tooth
 mobility. Radiography is not mandatory if the
Fig. 9.4 Gingival hyperplasia. The hyperplastic gingival
tissue almost covers the crowns, resulting in the formation
clinical examination reveals no evidence of peri-
of pseudopockets.
odontal destruction, i.e. periodontitis.
Gingival hyperplasia (Figs 9.1B & 9.4) may be
periodontal probing depths due to the gingival
the result of plaque-induced inflammation, i.e.
overgrowth.
hyperplastic gingivitis. It may also be of idiopathic
or familial origin, and it can be induced by certain
Consequences to affected animal
drugs, e.g. hydantoin, cyclosporins. Gingival
hyperplasia is common in some breeds, e.g.
 Uncomplicated gingivitis is generally not associ-
   s  d  
ated with discomfort or pain in humans. In fact,
PERIODONTAL DISEASE 93
it is an insidious process and the patient may be
unaware of its existence. The significance of
gingivitis is that, if untreated, periodontitis may
develop as described earlier.
Gingival hyperplasia does pose an additional
concern. The hyperplastic gingiva alters the pos-
ifion of the gingival margin and results in a false
or 'pseudo' pocket. It is called a pseudopocket
because the increased periodontal probing depth
is not due to destruction of periodontal ligament
and alveolar bone with apical migration of the
junctional epithelium, as in periodontitis. Instead,
the increased periodontal probing depth is due
 to the overgrowth of the gingiva. The presence of
hyperplastic gingiva compromises tooth cleaning
graphy is mandatory for patients with gingival
hyperplasia.
Periodontitis
Individuals with untreated gingivitis may develop
periodontitis. The inflammatory reactions in
periodontitis result in destruction of the peri-
odontal ligament and alveolar bone. The result of
untreated periodontitis is eventually exfoliation
of the affected tooth. It is important to remember
that periodontitis is a site-specific disease, i.e. it may
Fig. 9.5 Gingival recession and mucous membrane
affect one or more sites of one or several teeth.
ulceration. The periodontal ligament and alveolar bone on
Periodontitis can generally be considered irrevers-
the labial aspect of the left upper canine has been
ible. The aim of treatment is thus to prevent develop-
destroyed. The gingival margin has receded. Periodontal
ment ofnew lesionsatothersites and topreventfurther
probing depth is 1 mm, i.e. there is no pathological pocket.
tissuedestructionat siteswhich arealreadyaffected.
A mucous membrane ulcer has developed on the lip
surface that is in contact with the plaque-covered tooth
surface. While uncomplicated periodontitis is not
Clinical signs
associated with severe discomfort, these mucous
membrane ulcers are known to be painful!
Halitosis is common and is often the first sign
noted by the pet owner. Large amounts of dental
deposits are usually present. These deposits need
recession, furcation involvement and degree of
to be removed to allow a detailed examination of
tooth mobility. In many cases, measuring or
the periodontium. Ulcers affecting mucous
calculating the periodontal attachment level
membranes of lips and cheeks may be present in
(PAL) is also useful. Periodontal probing depth
areas where these tissues are exposed to plaque-
(PPD) is not necessarily correlated with severity
covered tooth surfaces (Fig. 9.5).
of
attachment loss (
(Fig.9.6).Gingival
hyperplasia may contribute to a deep pocket (or
Diagnostic methods
pseudopocket if there is no attachment loss),
Tissue destruction in periodontitis is assessed by
while gingival recession may result in the
measuring periodontal probing depth, gingival
 absence of a pocket but also minimal remaining
94 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
A
Mesial
Distal
Mesial
Distal
PAL
PAL
PPD
PPD
PPD
CEJ
PPD
PAL=0
PAL:
Fig. 9.6 Attachment loss.
A: The epithelial attachment on both sides of the tooth is at the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ), so there is no loss of
periodontal attachment (PAL = O). The surface labeled mesial depicts normal gingival attachment: periodontal probing depth
(PPD) is 1-2 mm. The surface labeled distal has an increased PPD, e.g. 8 mm. However this is not periodontitis as there has
been no loss of periodontal support.
B: PPD on the surface labeled mesial is increased, e.g. 6 mm. PPD on the side labeled distal is normal, i.e. 1-2 mm, due to
the gingival recession. PAL, i.e. the extent of periodontal ligament and alveolar bone destruction, is the same.
attachment. PAL records the distance from the
resorption of the alveolar margin, widening of
cemento-enamel junction (CEJ) (or from a fixed
the periodontal space, a break in the path or loss
 point on the tooth) to the base or apical extension
of the radiopacity of the lamina dura and destruc-
of the pathologic pocket. It is thus a more
tion of alveolar bone resulting in supra- or
accurate
assessment
loss
in
infrabony pockets.
periodontitis. PAL can either be measured with a
Radiographs using a parallel technique will
periodontal probe or it can be calculated (e.g.
demonstrate more accurately the features of
PPD + gingival recession).
periodontitis because this technique provides a
 Radiography to assess the type and extent of
better view of the alveolar margin and reveals
alveolar bone destruction is mandatory for
more accurately the actual extent or depth of the
periodontitis patients. Consequently, full mouth.
periodontal lesion in relation to the root of the
radiographs should be performed prior to the
tooth. Radiographs produced with a bisecting
institution of any therapy In addition, radio-
angle technique may show greater destruction of
 graphs need to be taken at regular intervals to
the alveolar bone than is actually present,
moritor outcome of any treatment. A detailed
because the central ray is directed obliquely to
examination of the periodontal ligament space
the long axis of the teeth and jaw, which
and interproximal alveolar margin requires the
produces dimensional distortion. Moreover, with
use of an intraoral radiographic technique
the bisecting angle technique, subgingival calculus
(detailed in Ch. 7). The radiographic changes
may be superimposed on alveolar bone and
associated with periodontal disease include
would thus not be detected. The film taken using
PERIODONTAL DISEASE 95
a parallel technique will demonstrate deposits of
Infra-bony defects are diagnosed by a combi-
subgingival calculus and defects of the cementum
nation of exploration with a periodontal probe
but may not cover a sufficient area to demonstrate
(the probe meets the firm resistance of bone when
extensive periodontitis lesions adequately. In the
angled away from the tooth) and radiography.
maxilla and anterior mandible, bisecting angle
They are described by depth and by the extent of
and parallel views of the same region may be
the bony circumference involved. The surrounding
required to visualize the extent of the tissue
alveolar bone is thought of as forming four walls
destruction more accurately.
(mesial, buccal, distal, palatal/lingual). When
As periodontitis develops, the crestal portion
bone is present around the entire circumference
of the alveolar process begins to resorb. Radio-
of the pocket, a four-wall defect is present. When
 graphically, the destruction is evident as a cup-
bone is missing on one face, a three-wall defect is
shaped notch or as scalloping of the alveolar
present. Two- and one-wall defects have two and
 margin. The resorption may proceed apically on
three surfaces of the tooth root without bony
a horizontal level (Fig. 9.7). Beyond this, the lamina
support, respectively.
dura appears to be normal and there is no widen-
 A periodontal abscess is an acute exacerbation
ing of the periodontal space. Horizontal bone
of the process occurring in a chronic periodontal
destruction (Fig. 9.1D) is often accompanied by
pocket (Fig. 9.9). It usually occurs from partial or
gingival recession (Fig. 9.5), so periodontal
complete obstruction of the orifice of the pocket.
pockets may not form. If there is no gingival
 Multiple acute periodontal abscesses may occur
recession, the periodontal pocket is supra-
 in some cases of advanced generalized peri-
alveolar, i.e. above the level of the alveolar
odontitis. An abscess may also develop in the
margin. The pattern of bone destruction may also
healthy periodontium if a foreign body is forced
proceed in a vertical direction along the root to
beyond the epithelial attachment. Grass seeds
form angular bony defects. Radiographically these
embedded in the gingival sulcus have been identi-
are usually evidenced by a vertical or V-shaped
fied as causing acute periodontal abscessation in
flaw, with the root of the tooth forming one side
the dog. The acute periodontal abscess may
        
produce rapid and extensive bone loss. In some
now infra- or sub-alveolar, i.e. below the level of 
instances, the bone loss will extend beyond the
the crestal bone (Fig. 9.1C).
apices of the roots of the teeth.
Fig. 9.7 Horizontal bone loss. In this
dog. resorption of the alveolar bone has
proceeded apically in a horizontal
fashion. The right mandibular 3rd
premolar is unaffected, i.e. the height of
the alveolar margin is normal. The right
mandibular 4th premolar and 1st molar
have lost arcund 2 mm of alveolar
bone.
96 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 9.8 Vertical bone loss. The
pattern of bone destruction has
proceeded in a vertical direction along
the root to form angular bony defects at
the mesial and distal aspects of the
mesial root of the right mandibular 1st
molar tooth and at the mesial aspect of
the distal root of the same tooth.
Pus
Debris
occluding
thc orificc
Fig. 9.9 The formation of a lateral periodontal abscess. A: Occlusion of the orifice of an existing periodontal pocket.
B: An abscess has formed.
Consequences to affected animal
It has been shown that a severe infection in
Based on feedback from human patients,
the oral cavity, as with extensive periodontitis, will
uncomplicated periodontitis is not associated
lead to a transient bacteremia on chewing (Thoden
with severe pain or discomfort. In contrast,
van Velzen et al, 1984). In fact, an association has
complications such as the development of a
been demonstrated between periodontal disease
lateral periodontal abscess or ulcers in the
and histopathologic changes in kidney, myo
mucous membranes are very painful.
cardium, and liver in the dog (DeBowes et al, 1996).
PERIODONTAL DISEASE  97
TREATMENT
The term 'dental prophylaxis' or 'prophy' has been
used to encompass clinical examination and pro-
General considerations
fessional periodontal therapy. This is misleading
The treatment of periodontal disease is aimed at
since the real prophylaxis, i.e. steps taken to prevent
controlling the cause of the inflammation, i.e.
disease development and progression, is not the
dental plaque. Conservative or cause-related
 professional periodontal therapy carried out under
periodontal therapy consists of removal of plaque 
 general anesthesia but the daily home care regime
and calculus, and any other remedial procedures
 to remove plaque. If no home care is instituted, then
 required, under general anesthesia, in combination
 plaque will rapidly reform after a professional
with daily maintenance of oral hygiene. In other 
periodontal therapy procedure and the disease will
words, the treatment of periodontal disease has
progress. Before any treatment is instituted, the
two components:
owner must be made aware that home care is the
most essential component in both preventing and
 treating periodontal disease. Whenever possible it 
1.   Maintenance of oral hygiene
 Professional periodontal therapy.
is useful to institute a home care programme before
2
any professional periodontal therapy is performed.
The aim of treatment differs whether the patient
Maintenance of oral hygiene is performed by the
 d n r    s
owner and is often called home care. Its effective-
has periodontitis.
ness depends on the motivation and technical
ability of the owner and the cooperation of the
Gingivitis
animal. Home care is detailed in Chapter 10.
Gingivitis is by definition reversible. Removal or
Professional periodontal therapy is performed
adequate reduction of plaque will restore inflamed
under general anesthesia and includes:
gingivae to health. Once clinically healthy
 gingivae have been achieved, these can be main-
· Supra- and subgingival scaling
tained by daily removal or reduction in the
· Root planing
accumulation of plaque. In short, the treatment
● Tooth crown polishing
of gingivitis is to restore the inflamed tissues to
· Subgingival lavage
clinical health and then to maintain clinically
· And sometimes periodontal surgery.
healthy gingivae (Fig. 9.10), thus preventing peri-
Fig. 9.10 Clinically healthy gingivae.
With good home care, clinically healthy
gingivae can be maintained for the life
span of the animal. An animal with
clinically healthy gingivae will not
develop periodontitis.
98 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
odontitis. The purpose of the professional
of teeth that could potentially have been retained
periodontal therapy in the gingivitis patient is
with good home care.
removal of dental deposits, mainly calculus
 Periodontal surgery is never first line treat-
(which is not removed by toothbrushing). Once
ment for periodontal disease. Conservative
the teeth have been cleaned it remains up to the
management of periodontal disease, ie. a
owner to remove the plaque that re-accumulates
thorough supra- and subgingival scale, root
on a daily basis.
 planing, polishing and irrigation in combination
with daily meticulous home care is the first step.
Summary for treatment of gingivitis
Periodontal surgery should only be performed
 Educate the cwner to understand the disease process
where the owner has shown the ability to keep
 Train and motivate the cwner to perform daily home
the mouth clean. If a client cannot maintain good
care
oral hygiene measures in their pet then in the
Institute daily home care regimen by the cwner -
ideally, toothbrushing with a pet toothpaste in
interest of the well being of the arimal there is no
conjunction with a dental hygiene product
indication for surgery.
Professional periodontal therapy (supra- and
eauab yapun (buus!lod pue bu!jeos jeaibuibqns
anesthesia to remove dental deposits (plaque and
PROFESSIONAL PERIODONTAL
calculus)
THERAPY
 Regular check-ups to ensure that the cwner is
following recommendations and to boost the owner's
General considerations
motivation
Professional periodontal therapy must be per-
formed under general anesthesia. Anesthesia and
Periodontitis
special care of the patient undergoing dentistry
Untreated
gingivitis
may
progress
to
and /or oral surgery is covered in Chapter 2. The
periodontitis. In most instances in a practice
basic instrument requirements for periodontal
situation, periodontitis is irreversible. It is
therapy are covered in Chapter 1. Antibiotics
important to remember that periodontitis is a
should not be used to treat periodontal disease in
site-specific disease, i.e. it may affect one or more
the absence of mechanical debridement. The
sites of one or several teeth. The aim of treatment
prudent use of antibiotics and antiseptics is
is thus to prevent development of new lesions at
detailed in Chapter 3.
other sites and to prevent further tissue
The degree of discomfort or pain caused by
destruction at sites which are already affected.
dental and/or oral surgery procedures is usually
Professional periodontal therapy removes den-
not considered. Domestic pets have a dental
tal deposits above and below the gingival margin.
anatomy and nerve paths similar to our own.
It then rests with the owner to ensure that plaque
Their perception of pain may well be different
does not re-accumulate. Meticulous supragingival
but an analogous view is to assume that
plaque control, by means of daily toothbrushing
procedures that cause discomfort in humans are
and adjunctive antiseptics when indicated, will
 prevent migration of the plaque below the gingival
Summary for treatment of periodontitis
margin. If the subgingival tooth surfaces are kept
clean, the sulcular epithelium will reattach.
 Educate the owner to understand the disease process
In patients with suspected periodontitis,
1
care
recommend instituting daily toothbrushing three
Institute daily toothbrushing regimen by the owner
 Professional pericdontal therapy: this includes supra-
to four weeks prior to the planned professional
buuejd joou 'bulusjod pue bujjeos jeAibuibqns pue
periodontal therapy if the animal will allow it.
and extraction of unsalvageable teeth under general
This will result in less inflamed tissue at the time
anesthesia
ssss moe  pr Ar pssd p
Regular check-ups to ensure that the cwner is
following recommendations and to boost the cwner's
of the ability of the owner to perform home care.
motivation
If home care is not possible, the professional treat-
 Periodontal surgery may be indicated 
ment will need to be more radical, e.g. extraction
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
66
likely to do the same in dogs and cats. The
recommended use of analgesics is covered in
Chapter 2.
To master the technical skills required for
dentistry and oral surgery, attending practical
courses is recommended. In general, dental
instruments are held in a modified pen grip (Fig.
9.11A) and the 4th and 5th fingers are placed on
adjacent structures (neighboring teeth, opposite
jaw) for stability and support. A periosteal elevator
may be worked using a modified pen grip, or it
can be held as depicted in Figure 9.11B.
The procedures
 Supragingival scaling
Supragingival scaling is the removal of plaque
and calculus above the gingival margin. It can be
performed using hand instruments alone or a
combination of hand instruments and powered
scalers.
The recommended procedure is as follows:
1.
 Remove gross dental deposits (plaque
 covered calculus) using rongeurs, extraction
forceps or calculus-removing forceps
(Fig. 9.12).
2.
 Remove residual supragingival dental
deposits with sharp hand instruments
B
Fig. 9.11 How to hold dental instruments.
paow e buisn pieu Aleauan ae suawnsul leuaa 
pen grip, as depicted here. Resting the 4th and 5th fingers
 on adjacent structures gives stability and support,reducing
the risk of slippage and iatrogenic injuries
B: Periosteal elevators can be held using either the
modified pen grip or as depicted. The advantage of
grasping the instrument handle inside the palm of the hand
and placing your index finger close to the working end, is
that should you slip your index finger will stop the slippage
and minimize iatrogenic damage.
Fig. 9.12 Removing gross supragingival dental
deposits with extraction forceps. Do not traumatize the
gingival margin with the forceps.
100 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
(either a sickle-shaped scaler or a curette).
as demonstrated in Figure 9.13.
3.
 A powered scaler (either an ultrasonic or a
sonic scaler) is then used to remove residual
dental deposits (Fig. 9.14).
Powered scalers generate heat and have the
potential to cause iatrogenic damage if not used
properly. Overheating a tooth will cause desic-
cation of the dentine and consequent damage to
 the underlying pulp tissue. Pulp damage may be
a reversible pulpitis but it can become severe
enough to cause pulp necrosis, which would
necessitate endodontic treatment of the affected
tooth. The etiology and pathogenesis of pulp and
periapical disease is covered in Chapter 8.
Fig. 9.14 Removing supragingival dental deposits with
an ultrasonic scaler. The use of a fine perio (sickle.
universal) insert is recommended for both ultrasonic and
sonic scalers.
An ultrasoric or sonic scaler should be used
by gently stroking the tooth with the side of the
tip and with continuous movement over the tooth
surface. A plentiful supply of water is essential to
 cool the oscillating tip and flush away debris. Using
the tip of the instrument or applying excessive
pressure will cause gouging of the tooth surface
as well as generating excessive heat. As an
arbitrary rule, it is suggested that no more than
15 seconds of continuous scaling should be
performed on any one tooth. If the tooth is not
clean in that period of time, then return to it after
scaling a few other teeth. This will allow the
original tooth time to cool down.
Both sonic and ultrasonic scalers should be
used with a thin pointed tip, sometimes called a
 perio, sickle or universal insert. The large (wide)
tip is not recommended. A fine tip will remove
dental deposits more accurately, with less likeli-
hood of damage to the tooth enamel.
Subgingival scaling and root planing
Subgingival scaling is the removal of plaque,
Fig. 9.13  Removing supragingival dental deposits with
hand instruments. In this slide, a universal scaler is being
calculus and other debris from the tooth surface
used to remove calculus.
below the gingival margin, i.e. within the gingival
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
101
sulcus or periodontal pocket. There is no need to
1.  The curette is inserted to the bottom of the
perform extensive subgingival scaling if there is
gingival sulcus or periodontal pocket without
no calculus below the gingival margin. However,
 engaging the cutting edges of the instrument
the presence of subgingival deposits should always
(Fig. 9.16A).
be investigated with a dental explorer and
2
 The cutting edges of the instrument are then
 removed if any are identified. Root planing is the
engaged against the tooth root and sulcular
removal of the superficial layer of toxin-laden
 epithelium and the curette is pulled out of the
cementum from the root surfaces. Root planing
sulcus or periodontal pocket in this position
produces a smooth root surface which is less
(Fig. 9.16B).
likely to accumulate plaque and more likely to
3.
The instrument is moved circumferentially
 permit epithelial reattachment. The healing pro-
around the tooth using overlapping vertical
cess after subgingival scaling and root planing is
strokes. Oblique or horizontal strokes are also
depicted diagrammatically in Figure 9.15A, B & C.
used, particularly in the furcation area of
Scaling and planing are achieved simultaneously
multirooted teeth.
using a curette. The procedure can be performed
4.
 The process is repeated around all the teeth.
using either a closed (without raising an access
5.
A dental explorer is run over the root
flap) or open (raising an access flap) technique.
surface (Fig. 9.17) to ensure that all deposits
An open technique is recommended for pockets
have been removed. The instrument will catch
deeper than 4mm as it is difficult even for a
against or skip over any areas of remaining
skilied operator to ensure that all subgingival
calculus, which must be removed.
 deposits have been removed without raising a
 gingival flap for direct access and visualization.
A curette with two cutting edges will also
However, an open technique is only indicated in
remove the sulcular lining. Removing the inflamed
patients with proven sufficient home care, i.e. it
sulcular epithelium is called subgingival curettage.
is not first line treatment.
 It has been shown that subgingival curettage is
Ultrasonic and sonic scalers are designed for
not essential in controlling periodontal disease.
supragingival work. Once inserted into the
The vital step is the removal of all subgingival
gingival sulcus or periodontal pocket the water
deposits, i.e. subgingival scaling, and restoring
will no longer reach to cool the tip. This then
the root surface to smoothness, i.e. root planing.
results in thermal damage of both hard and soft
Subgingival debridement (scaling and root
fissues. Quick subgingival excursions are per-
planing) takes time. A thorough procedure in an
 missible only if the gingiva is edematous, or held
animal with extensive pocketing and subgingival
mecharically out of the way to allow the water to
deposits may well take an hour and often more.
reach the tip. Scalers with specially designed
It must be emphasized that removing sub-
working tips where the water exits at the very
gingival plaque, calculus and debris as well as
end are safer to use under the gingival margin,
the superficial layer of toxin-laden cementum
but the removal of established subgingival
and restoring the root surfaces to smoothness is a
deposits can only be adequately performed with
most important step. Removing only the supra-
meticulous use of sharp curettes. The curette has
 gingival debris at a periodontitis site does not have
a sharp working or cutting edge on the curved
Aue
therapeutic
cbenefit. It will not pre-
blade and has a rounded tip. Most curettes are
vent disease progression as the cause of the
a on d e se pasn are Aaui 'papa aanon
disease, namely subgingival plaque, is still present.
 instrumentation of the whole root circumference.
Open subgingival debridement. The procedure
Many different sizes and shapes are available.
for open subgingival debridement (Fig. 9.18) is as
My preferred curettes are the Gracey 7/8 and the
follows:
Columbia 13/14.
Closed subgingival debridement. The procedure
1. The epithelial attachment is cut by inserting
for closed subgingival debridement is as follows:
a scalpel blade (No. 11 or 15) into the gingival
102
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Blood clot
Fig. 9.15 Healing after subgingival debridement.
A: Before subgingival debridement.
and pocket epithelium will have been removed during the procedure and a blood clot will have formed between the tooth
and the connective tissue of the gingiva. As healing starts both the epithelium and connective tissue are activated. The oral
starts to form a new attachment with the clean root surface (black arrow).
C: Once the oral epithelium has reached the tooth surface it will start to grow apically (blue arrow) and the situation becomes 
a race between the epithelium growing apically and the connective tissue attaching to the root surface (black arrow). The
result of the race will determine at which level the epithelium's apical attachment will be.
PERIODONTAL DISEASE 103
A
B
Fig. 9.16 Procedure for closed subgingival
debridement.
Fig. 9.17  Checking adequacy of subgingival
A: The curette is inserted to the bottom of the periodontal
debridement. A dental explorer is inserted below the
 pocket without engaging the cutting edges of the
gingival margin and run over the root surface to identify the 
 instrument.
presence of residual subgingival calculus, which needs to 
 B: The cutting edges of the curette are then engaged (by
be removed.
turning the handle of the instrument) against the root
surface and pocket epithelium and the curette is pulled cut
of the pocket in this position. The instrument is worked in
sulcus, pointing apically, and cutting down to
this way around the whole circumference of the tooth using
the level of the crestal bone. Using the scalpel
blade in a handle gives better control.
horizontal strokes are also used, particularly in the furcation
2.
 Releasing incisions are made at either end
area of multirooted teeth).
of the primary incision.
3.
 The attached gingiva is freed from the
underlying periosteum using a periosteal
elevator. The flap should generally not be raised
beyond the mucogingival line.
Fig.9.18
Procedure for open
subgingival debridement.
A: Cutting the epithelial attachment.
B: Releasing incisions are made on
either side of the primary incision.
C: A periosteal elevator is used to free
the attached gingiva from the
B
underlying periosteum.
D: The flap is gently retracted to
expose the root surfaces and alveolar
bone. The exposed root surfaces can
now be scaled and polished. Minor
osteoplasty can also be performed.
E: The flap is replaced and sutured in
 its original position.
104 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
4.  The flap is gently retracted to expose the
root surfaces and the alveolar bone. The
 gingival flap should be handled gently
throughout the procedure.
5.
 The exposed root surfaces can now be scaled,
using either hand instruments or a combination of
hand instruments and powered scalers, and then
polished. Minor osteoplasty, e.g. removing sharp
bony spicules, can be carried out using either
bone-cutting forceps or a bur in a slow- or high-
 speed hand piece with copious water cooling.
 The area is fushed clean using either saline
 or dilute chlorhexidine solution and the flap
replaced and sutured in its original position. The
buccal flap is joined to the palatal or lingual
 gingiva by means of simple interrupted sutures
placed in the interproximal spaces. The releasing
Fig. 9.19 Supragingival polishing. Polishing smoothes
incisions are sutured. The suture material should
the tooth surface and helps remove any remaining plaque
be resorbable. The use of a swaged on needle is
and stained pellicle. It is good practice to check the
 recommended to avoid tearing the gingiva.
e buAidde Aq bupugap euopouad aul jo Aoenbape
plaque-disclosing solution after polishing. Any residual
dental deposits can then be identified and removed.
Polishing
Scaling, even when done correctly, will cause
 nique for subgingival debridement is used), so
minor scratches of the tooth. A rough surface will
their smoothness must be assured by thorough
facilitate plaque retention. Polishing smoothes
 (but not overzealous) root planing.
Suu Aue aaou sdil pre ssaunu s
plaque and stained pellicle.
Sulcular lavage
 Polishing is performed by applying a mildly
abrasive prophylaxis paste to the tooth surface
Sulcular lavage involves gently flushing the
with a prophylaxis cup mounted in a slowly rotat-
 gingival sulcus and pathologic pockets with saline
ing low-speed hand piece. The hand piece should
 or dilute chlorhexidine to remove any free-floating
be running at less then 1oo0 rpm to avoid generat-
ing excessive heat by friction. The amount of heat,
periodontal pocket as free-floating debris may
which can easily result from incorrect polishing.
occlude the orifice of the pocket and lead to the
can certainly cause severe pulpal pathology.
A
formation of a lateral periodontal abscess. The
surplus of paste is applied to the tooth surface in
 stream of fluid is directed subgingivally using a
 a soft rubber cup using a light force, i.e. just enough
blunt-ended needle, ‘lachrymal’ catheter or a
force to cause the cup to flare out on the tooth
Water Pik device.
 surface. The prophylaxis cup is kept moving
over the entire tooth surface for a few seconds
Periodontal surgery
per tooth. The flared edge of the prophylaxis cup
can be used to polish slightly subgingivally.
 Periodontal  surgery includes gingivectomy
 taking care to avoid causing any further gingival
(gingivoplasty), various flap techniques and
damage. This is illustrated in Figure 9.19. It is
osseous surgery. The main objective
2of
useful to check that all tooth surfaces are clean by
periodontal surgery is to contribute to the
using a plaque-disclosing solution.
preservation of the periodontium by facilitating
 It is not possible to polish the root surfaces
plaque removal and plaque control. Periodontal
within subgingival pockets (unless an open tech-
surgery can help achieve this by:
PERIODONTAL DISEASE 105
Creating accessibility for professional
 scaling and root planing
2
 Establishing a gingival morphology that
A
facilitates plaque control by home care
regimes.
Periodontal surgery is never first line treatment for
periodontitis. Cause-related treatment, as described
 in this chapter, is always the first step in manag-
ing periodontitis. The effect of the cause-related
B
therapy must be evaluated. If a client cannot
maintain good dental hygiene for their pet then,
in the interest of the well being of the animal,
 there is no indication for periodontal surgery.
In lieu of the fact that periodontal surgery is
rarely indicated in veterinary dentistry (clients
cannot maintain adequate oral hygiene), peri-
odontal surgery will not be covered in this book,
with the exception of gingivoplasty.
Gingivoplasty. Gingivoplasty is the removal of
gingival pockets by excision of the gingiva, or
recontouring the gingiva to its proper anatomical
form. Itis indicated for the management of gingival
hyperplasia. In this situation the excessive
 gingival tissue should be excised, leaving a normal
depth of healthy gingiva.
The procedure for gingivoplasty is as follows
(Fig. 9.20):
Fig. 9.20 Gingivoplasty procedure for management of
gingival hyperplasia.
A: Using the periodontal probe to measure and mark
1.  Pocket depths are measured with a
pocket depth.
 graduated periodontal probe or by means of
B: Making the bevelled incision with a scalpel blade (S) or
 pocket-marking forceps. The probe is
electrosurgery (E)
withdrawn from the pocket and held against the
C: The end result - the scalloped border of the normal
 outer surface of the gingiva to show the depth
gingiva has been recreated
of the pocket. The tip of the probe is then
turned horizontally and used to produce a
joining the bleeding points and recreating the
bleeding point at the level of the bottom of the
scalloped edge of the normal gingival anatomy.
pocket. When pocket-marking forceps are used,
The beveled incision is directed towards the base
the probing beak of the instrument is placed
of the pocket or to a level slightly coronal to the
parallel to the long axis of the tooth. When the
apical extension of the junctional epithelium.
bottom of the pocket has been reached, the
When using electrosurgery the operator should
forceps are closed to pierce the gingiva thus
allow for a 1 mm slough postoperatively. The
 producing a bleeding point on the outer surface
electrode should be activated at the minimal
of the soft tissue. The process is repeated along
effective setting in cut mode and stroked across
the whole circumference of the pocket
the gingiva at the required angle. The cut surface
producing bleeding points at several location
should be pink and not bleeding if the setting is
points around each tooth.
correct. Blanched tissue indicates that the setting
A beveled incision, using either a scalpel
is too high and should be reduced. To avoid
blade (No. 1l or 15) or electrosurgery is made,
overheating the tooth the electrode should not be
106  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
applied to the gingiva around the same tooth for
mation of the gingiva and oral mucosa (Gaskell
more than 5 seconds.
& Gruffydd-Jones, 1977; Johnessee & Hurvitz,
 3.  The incised tissues are carefully removed by
1983; Williams & Aller, 1992). Commonly
 means of a curette or a scaler. Remaining tissue
described clinical findings in cats with FCGS
tags are easily removed with a curette or a pair
include elevated serum globulins, predominantly
of scissors.
hypergammaglobulinemia (White et al, 1992;
4. Hemorrhage is controlled with gauze swabs
Zetner et al, 1989) and a submucosal inflam-
and digital pressure. The crown and exposed
matory infiltrate consisting of plasma cells,
root surfaces are carefully scaled and polished
lymphocytes, macrophages and neutrophils
(Johnessee & Hurvitz, 1983; Hennet, 1997;
The postoperative phase is uncomfortable and
Reindel et al, 1987). The elevated serum globulins
analgesics are indicated for the first few days. It
in affected cats and the nature of the submucosal
is vital that plaque is not allowed to form on the 
 inflammatory infiltrate have lead a number of
 tooth surfaces, as this will interfere with healing.
 authors to suggest that there may be an immuno-
These animals are unlikely to accept tooth-
logical basis for the condition (Johnessee &
 brushing immediately postoperatively, so chemical
Hurvitz, 1983; Williams & Aller, 1992; Sato et al,
plaque control is indicated. A useful protocol is
1996). To date, no underlying intrinsic immuno-
twice-daily application of chlorhexidine gluconate
 logical abnormality in cats affected by FCGS has
gel on a piece of gauze for the first week, then
been identified; however, the condition may still
once-daily in combination with toothbrushing for
be immune-mediated. Clinical studies have
the second week. Meticulous plaque control by
implicated the potential involvement of various
A  p s   s
viral agents, calicivirus in particular (Gruffydd-
dsoao ro unueda ga 'sasnen susodspaid
Jones, 1991; Knowles et al, 1989, 1991; Tenorio et
administration, are necessary to prevent recurrence.
al, 1991; Thompson et al, 1984; Waters et al, 1993;
The healing of a gingivoplasty wound is simi-
Yamamoto et al, 1989) as well as Gram-negative
lar to that of a simple soft tissue wound except
anaerobic bacterial species (Love et al, 1989; Sims
that there is a tooth in the centre of the wound.
et al, 1990). However, aftempts to reproduce the
During the inflammatory phase of healing the
disease using these putative infective etiological
underlying alveolar bone is slightly resorbed.
agents have been unsuccessful.
Superficially, healing is complete when the
epithelium reaches the tooth. This epithelium,
however, is thin and nonkeratinized and there is
Clinical signs
no normal epithelial attachment to the tooth. The
FCGS can present clinically as focal or diffuse
maturation phase in the healing of a gingivo-
inflammation. Patterns of clinical presentation
plasty wound takes much longer than in a simple
have been identified as follows (Harvey, 1990).
 soft tissue wound. The normal gingival anatomy
(epithelial attachment, gingival sulcus, keratinized
oral gingival epithelium) slowly reforms and the
Gingivitis with stomatitis (Fig. 9.21)
connective tissue matures. Optimal plaque con-
The gingival inflammation extends past the
trol is required for healing. Regeneration of the
mucogingival junction onto the buccal and less
lost bone does not usually occur during the
often palatal/lingual mucosa. Lesions are usually
maturation phase.
symmetrical and the premolar and molar regions
are likely to be more inflamed than the incisor
FELINE CHRONIC
and canine regions.
GINGIVOSTOMATITIS
Stomatitis with gingivitis (Fig. 9.22)
Feline chronic gingivostomatitis (FCGS) is a
 poorly defined syndrome of unknown etiology.
 The inflammatory reaction is more intense in the
characterized by focal or diffuse chronic inflam- 1
 rest of the oral mucous membranes than in the
PERIODONTAL DISEASE 107
Fig. 9.21 Gingivitis with stomatitis. The gingival
inflammation extends past the mucogingival junction onto
Fig. 9.22 Stomatitis with gingivitis. The inflammatory
the buccal and less often palatal/lingual mucosa.
reaction is more intense in the rest of the oral mucous
actual gingivae. In particular, the palatoglossal
more likely to exhibit signs of oral discomfort than cats with
folds are inflamed, but there may be extensive
predominantly gingivitis.
ulceration or granulation of the gingival and/or
buccal mucosa. The mucosa of the hard palate or
the tongue is rarely affected. Affected cats are
more likely to exhibit signs of oral discomfort
than cats with predominantly gingivitis.
Faucitis
The term ‘faucitis' is a misnomer. By definition
the “fauces'is the region medial to the palatoglossal
folds. The inflammation which is commonly called
'faucitis' is largely confined to the palatoglossal
folds and regions lateral to the folds (Fig. 9.23).
On close inspection, there is nearly always also
 evidence of gingivitis in the premolar and molar
regions.
Note that these are patterns of distribution rather
Fig. 9.23
*Faucitis'. The term 'faucitis' is a misnomer. By
than distinct diagnoses. There is often overlap,
definition the 'fauces' is the region media/to the
with a patient presenting with one or all of these
palatoglossal folds. The inflammation which is commonly
called 'faucitis' is largely confined to the palatoglossal folds
patterns.
and regions fatera/ to the folds. On close inspection, there
is nearly always also evidence of gingivitis in the premolar
and molar regions.
Diagnosis
Cats with chronic stomatitis require a thorough
108 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
the work-up is not to reach a diagnosis per se, but
include a combination of periodontal therapy
rather constitutes an attempt to identify possible
and a home care regimen whereby plaque accu-
underlying causes. Such a work-up includes
 mulation is kept to a minimum. In some cats, this
testing for feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
may result in a reduction in inflammation.
and
1 feline leukemia virus (FeLV), routine
Unfortunately, many cats will not cooperate ade-
hematology and blood biochemistry and some-
quately with home care measures and plaque
times biopsy and microscopic examination of the
reforms beyond a critical level. These cats need
affected tissues. Radiographic evaluation to
extraction of premolar and molar teeth. In some
identify the presence of odontoclastic resorptive
cats, all teeth may require removal (Fig. 9.24)
lesions, retained root remnants or other lesions is
mandatory. Systemic diseases, e.g. chronic renal
failure and diabetes mellitus, which may pre-
dispose to the development of severe gingival
inflammation in the presence of plaque, must also
be excluded before any treatment is initiated.
Treatment options
Historically, the intractable nature of the disease,
in combination with a poor understanding of the
etiopathogenesis of FCGS, has resulted in the
widespread use of empirical symptomatic treat-
ment regimens; however, their efficiency has
 rarely been documented. In a recent study various
treatment regimens, including chlorhexidine
rinses, antibiotics, corticosteroids and gold salts
were investigated over a six-month period
(Harley et al, 1999). In the short term, methyl-
prednisolone was shown to be the most effective
regimen. Over the long period, the individual
clirical responses were found to be diverse and
none of the treatment regimes demonstrated
superiority.
Thirty cats with FCGS were treated by extrac-
tion of most or all of the premolar and molar
teeth (Hennet, 1997). Twenty-four of the 30 cats
Fig. 9.24 Outcome of a radical extraction procedure.
(80%) were significantly improved or clinically
One month after radical extraction (all teeth except two
cured at the time of follow-up, ll-24 months
upper incisors). the mucous membranes of the oral cavity
following treatment.
are no longer inflamed. The two incisors were retained at
the request of the cwner who felt uncomfortable about her
Based on the above studies, the current treat-
cat loosing all its teeth. This cat still eats a hard diet, but 
ment recommendations for cats with FCGS
does require assistance with grooming
Summary for treatment of feline gingivostomatitis
Cats with chronic gingivostomatitis are usually extremely uncomfortable.
uoewweu! leo asuaui aul lof asneo buiaapun Aue pea lo aeuwe pue Auapi di apew aa pinous idwae Aaai
 Full mouth radiographs are a mandatory component of the diagnostic work-up.
Initial treatment consists of a combination of periodontal therapy and home care. Corticosteroid and/or antibiotic
therapy may also be required.
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
109
REFERENCES
Allen, D.L. & Ker, D.A. (1965) Tissue response in the guinea
Loe, H. et al (1965) Experimental gingivitis in man. Journal
pig to sterile and non-sterile calculus. Journal of
of Periodontology 36: 177-187.
Periodontology36:121-126.
Loesche, W.J. (1979) Clinical and microbiological aspects of
DeBowes, L.J., Mosier, D., Logan, E. et al (1996)
chemotherapeutic agents used according to the specific 
Association of periodontal disease and histologic lesions
plaque hypothesis.JournalofDentalResearch 58:
in multiple organs from 45 dogs. Journal of Veterinary
2404-2414.
Dentistry 13(2) 57-60.
Love, D.N., Johnson, J.L. & Moore, L.V. (1989) Bacteroides
Egelberg, J. (1965) Local effects of diet on plaque formation
species from the oral cavity and oral associated diseases
and gingivitis development in dogs, 2. Effect of frequency
of cats. Veterinary Microbiology 19(3): 275-281.
of meals and tube feeding. Odontolisk Revy 16: 50-60.
Love, D.N., Vekselstein, R. & Collings, S. (1990) The
Engebretson, S.P., Lamster, I.B., Herrera-Abrev, M. et al
obligative and facultatively anaerobic bacterial flora of the
(1999) The influence of interleukin gene polymorphism
normal feline gingival margin. Veterinary Microbiology
on expression of interleukin-1β and tumor necrosis
22(2-3):267-275.
factor-α in periodontal tissue and gingival crevicular
Mallonee, D.H., Harvey, C.E., Venner, M. et al (1988)
fluid. Journal of Periodontology 70: 567-573.
Bacteriology of periodontal disease in the cat. Archives
Gaskell, R.M. & Gruffydd-Jones, T.J. (1977) Intractable feline
of Oral Biology 33(9): 677-683.
stomatitis. Veterinary Annual 17: 195-199.
Mombelli, A., Nyman, S., Bragger, U. et al (1995) Clinical
Gruffydd-Jones, T.J. (1991) Gingivitis and stomatitis. In:
August,J.R.(ed) Consultations in Feline Internal
subgingival environment induced by periodontal pocket 
Medicine.Philadelphia, USA: WB Saunders,
reduction. Journal of Clinical Periodontology 22(10):
p.387-402.
780-787.
Hamp, S.E. et al (1984) A macroscopic and radiologic
Nyman, S., Sarhed, G., Ericsson, I. et al (1986) Role of
investigation of dental diseases in dogs. Veterinary
'diseased' root cementum in healing following treatment
Radiology 25: 86-92.
of periodontal disease. An experimental study in the dog.
Harley, R. Gruffydd-Jones, T.J. & Day M.J. (1999) Clinical
Journal ofPeriodontal Research 21(5):496-503.
and immunological findings in feline chronic
Nyman, S., Westfelt, E., Sarhed, G. et al (1988) Role of
gingivostomatitis. In: Proceedings of the 11th British
'diseased' root cementum in healing following treatment
Veterinary Dental Association's Annual Scientific
of periodontal disease. A clinical study. Journal of
Meeting, Birmingham, UK.
Clinical Periodontology 15(7): 464-468.
Harvey, C.E. (1990) Feline oral pathology, diagnosis and
Reichart, P.A., Durr, U.M., Triadan, H. et al (1984)
management. In: Crossley D.A. & Penman, S. (eds)
Periodontal disease in the domestic cat: a
Manual of Veterinary Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA,
histopathologic study. Journal of Periodontal Research
Ch. 13, p. 129-138.
19(1): 67-75.
Hennet, P.R. (1997) Chronic gingivo-stomatitis in cats: long
Reindel, J.F., Trapp, A.L., Armstrong, P.J. et al (1987)
term follow-up of 30 cases treated by dental extractions.
Recurrent plasmacytic stomatitis-pharyngitis in a cat with
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 14(1): 15-21.
esophagitis, fibrosing gastritis and gastric nematodiasis.
Hennet, P.R. & Harvey, C.E. (1991) Anaerobes in periodontal
JournaioftheAmericanVeterinaryMedicalAssociation
disease in the dog: a review. Journal of Veterinary
190(1): 65-67.
Dentistry 8(2): 18-21.
Sato, R., Inanami, O., Tanaka, Y. et al (1996) Oral
Johnessee, J.S. & Hurvitz, A.1. (1983) Feline plasma cell
administration of bovine lactoferrin for treatment of
gingivitis-pharyngitis. Journal of the American Anima!
intractable stomatitis in feline immunodeficiency virus
Hospital Association 19: 179-181.
(FIV)-positive and FIV-negative cats. American Journal
Kinane, D.F. & Lindhe, J. (1997) Pathogenesis of
of Veterinary Research 57(10): 1443-1446.
periodontitis. In: Lindhe, J., Karring. T. & Lang, N.P. (eds)
Sims,T.J.,Moncla, B.J.& Page,R.C. (1990) Serum antibody
ClinicalPeriodontoiogy and implantDentistry.
response to antigens of oral Gram-negative bacteria in 
Copenhagen, Denmark: Munksgaard, Ch. 5, p. 189-225.
cats with plasma cell gingivitis-stomatitis. Journal of
Knowles, J.O., Gaskell, R.M., Gaskell, C.J. et al (1989)
Dental Research 69(3): 877-882.
Prevalence of feline calicivirus, feline leukaemia virus
Socransky S.S., Haffajee, A.D., Smith, D.L. et al (1987)
and antibodies to FIV in cats with chronic stomatitis.
Difficulties encountered in the search for the etiologic
Veterinary Record 124: 336-338.
agents of destructive periodontal disease. Journaf of
Knowles, J.O., McArdle, F., Dawson, S. et al (1991) Studies
Clinical Periodontology 14(10): 588-593.
on the role of feline calicivirus in chronic stomatitis in
Tenorio, A.T, Franti, C.E., Madewell, B.R. et al (1991)
cats.Veterinary Microbiology 27: 205-219.
 Chronic oral infection of cats and their relationship to
Kornman, K.S., Crane, A., Wang, H.Y. et al (1997) The
persistent oral carriage of feline calici, immunodeficiency.
interleukin 1 genotype as a severity factor in adult 
or leukaemia viruses. Veterinary immunology and
periodontal disease.Journal of ClinicalPeriodontology
Immunopathology 29(1-2):1-14.
24(1): 72-77.
Theilade, E. (1986) The non-specific theory in microbial
Listgarten, M.A. & Ellegaard, B. (1973) Electron microscopic
etiology of inflammatory periodontal diseases. Journal of
evidence of a cellular attachment between junctional
Clinical Periodontology 13(10): 905-911.
epitheliumanddentalcalculus.JournafofPeriodontaf
Theilade, E., Wright, W.H., Jensen, S.B. et al (1966)
Research 8: 143-150.
Experimental gingivitis in man. Il A longitudinal clinical
110
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
and bacteriological investigation. Journal of Periodontal
(1973-1991).Journal of theAmericanVeterinary
Research 1: 1-13.
Medical Association 200(9): 1377-1380.
Thoden van Velzen, S.K., Abraham-Inpijn, L. & Moorer, W.R.
Williams, C.A. & Aller, M.S. (1992) Gingivitis/stomatitis in
(1984) Plaque and systemic disease: a reappraisal of the
cats. In: Harvey, C.E. (ed) Feline Dentistry. Veterinary
focal infection concept. Journal of Clinical Periodontofogy
Clinics of NorthAmerica:SmallAnimalPractice.
11(4): 209-220.
Philadelphia, USA: WB Saunders, p. 1361-1383.
Thompson, R.R. et al (1984) Association of calicivirus
Yamamoto, J.K., Hansen, H., Ho, E.W. et al (1989)
infection with chronic gingivitis and pharyngitis in cats.
Epidemiologic and clinical aspects of feline
Journal of Smalfl Animal Practice 25: 207-210.
immunodeficiency virus infection in cats from the
Waerhaug, J. (1956) Effect of rough surfaces upon gingival
continental United States and Canada and possible
tissues. Journal of Dental Research 35: 323-325.
mode of transmission. Journal of the American
Waters, L., Hopper, C.D., Gruffydd-Jones, TJ. et al (1993)
Veterinary Medical Association 194(2): 213-220.
Chronic gingivitis in a colony of cats infected with feline
Zetner, K. et al (1989) Comparative immunological and
immunodeficiency virus and feline calicivirus. Veterinary
virological studies of chronic oral diseases in cats.
Record 132(14): 340-342.
Weiner Tierarztliche Monatsschrift 76: 303-308.
White, S.D., Rosychuk, R.A., Reinke, S.l. et al (1992)
 Plasma cell stomatitis-pharyngitis in cats: 40 cases
10
Preventive dentistry
Introduction
called home care. The goal of home care is to
Oral and dental conditions generally cause
remove or, at least, reduce the accumulation of
dental plaque on the tooth surfaces, i.e. plaque
distress and many cause debilitating pain to the
control. The prevention and long term control of
affected animal. Most owners do not routinely
periodontal disease requires adequate plaque
examine their pet's mouth and diseases are
control by means of home care strategies.
 generally not diagnosed until late in the disease
Professional periodontal therapy is performed
process, when the animal is showing obvious
under general anesthesia and includes:
signs of oral discomfort or pain.
Prevention is always preferable to treatment
● Supra- and subgingival scaling
and many oral and dental conditions are readily
·Root planing
amenable to preventive measures. Common con-
· Tooth polishing
ditions that can be prevented (totally or partially)
· Subgingival lavage
include:
· Extraction of unsalvageable teeth
· Periodontal surgery in specific situations.
· Periodontal disease
·Caries
The benefit of any professional periodontal
·Excessive wear
therapy is short lived unless maintained by effec-
· Tooth fracture
tive home care. In fact, if no home care is
· Certain types of malocclusion.
 instituted after professional periodontal therapy.
then plaque will rapidly reform and disease will
 progres. It has been shown that if no home care
PERIODONTAL DISEASE
is instituted by three months after periodontal
The epidemiology, etiology, pathogenesis and
therapy, gingivitis scores are equivalent to those
treatment of periodontal disease are detailed in
recorded prior to therapy (Gorrel & Bierer,
Chapter 9. This chapter will deal with preventive
1999).
measures that should be encouraged for every
dog and cat.
Maintenance of oral hygiene
Prevention (and treatment) of periodontal
disease has two components:
Client education
1.
 Maintenance of oral hygiene
The cause (dental plaque) and effects (discomfort,
2
 Professional periodontal therapy.
pain, chronic focus of infection, loss of teeth,
possibility of systemic complications) of peri-
Maintenance of oral hygiene is performed by
 odontal disease must be thoroughly explained to
the pet owner in the home of the animal. It is also
the pet owner. The owner must be made aware
111
112 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
that home care is the most essential component
be introduced gradually and as early in the
in both preventing and treating periodontal
 animal's life as possible. Adult cats are generally
disease. The responsibility of maintaining oral
less amenable to the introduction of tooth-
hygiene, i.e. keeping plaque accumulation to a
brushing than adult dogs, but with patience and
level compatible with periodontal health, rests
persistence many will accept some degree of
with the owner of the pet. Once instituted, home
home care. In contrast, kittens often accept
care regimens need continuous monitoring and
toothbrushing more readily than puppies.
reinforcement. The veterinary nurse can play
a
Toothbrushes. There are innumerable brush
vital role in educating clients, checking compliance
head and handle designs and sizes of human and
and reinforcing the need for home care.
veterinary toothbrushes available, but there is
However, the owner must realize that even
insufficient evidence to clearly recommend any
with home care, most animals will still need to
particular one. The choice of brush should be
have their teeth cleaned professionally at inter-
based on the effectiveness of plaque control in
vals. The intervals between professional cleaning
 the hands of each individual. In general, a soft to
need to be determined for each animal. With
medium texture nylon filament brush of a suit-
good home care, the intervals between professional
able size for the intended pet seems to be the
cleaning can be greatly extended. It is useful to 
most comfortable.
 draw an analogy to the situation in humans, i.e.
A flannel cloth folded over a finger or a rubber
most of us do brush our teeth daily but still
      ,
require dental examinations and professional
 animals and owners, but is less effective (removes
periodontal therapy (at a minimum scaling and
less plaque) than a nylon filament brush. The use
 polishing) at regular intervals.
of a finger brush or cloth during the training
phase is useful, but every attempt should be made
to get the animal to accept a proper toothbrush.
Toothbrushing
Toothpaste. The use of nonfoaming tasty pet
Toothbrushing is known to be the single most effective
toothpaste is recommended, but not critical. It is
means of removing plaque. Studies have shown that
the mechanical action of brushing which removes
in dogs with both experimentally induced
the plaque. Therefore, brushing with a tooth-
gingivitis (Tromp et al, 1986), and naturally
brush moistened with water will still do the job.
occurring gingivitis (Gorrel & Rawlings, 1996a),
However,
the use of pet toothpaste is
daily toothbrushing is effective in returning the
recommended as it tastes rice and the pet will
gingivae to health. In a four-year study using the
therefore usually allow the owner to brush for
Beagle dog (Lindhe et al, 1975) it was shown that
longer, thus removing more plaque. The paste
with no oral hygiene plaque accumulated
should be pressed down into the bristles to
rapidly along the gingival margin,
with
maintain it on the brush or the animal will just
gingivitis developing within a few weeks. Dogs
lick it off.
that were fed an identical diet under identical
The use of a human toothpaste is not rec-
conditions but were subjected to daily tooth-
ommended, mainly due to the high fluoride
brushing developed
dno clinical
signs
of
content, which may lead to acute, but more likely
 gingivitis. In the group which were not receiving
chroric toxicity problems as our pets do not rinse
daily toothbrushing, gingivitis progressed
1to
and spit but will swallow the toothpaste (Gorrel,
periodontitis in most individuals.
1994).
Toothbrushing is the'gold standard'for plaque
Frequency of toothbrushing. In a study of
control. Every effort should be made to get every
experimental gingivitis in laboratory dogs,
 pet owner to commit to brushing their pet's teeth
brushing once-daily was effective in returning
 on a daily basis. The success of toothbrushing
 the gingivae to health, while brushing three times
depends on pet cooperation and owner motiv-
or once a week was not effective (Tromp et al,
ation and technical ability. Toothbrushing should
 1986). A recent study has shown that brushing
PREVENTIVE DENTISTRY  113
every other day was not sufficient to maintain
instances, a combination of roll and miniscrub
clinically healthy gingivae in dogs (Gorrel &
technique will achieve the objective. The teeth
Rawlings, 1996a). Brushing twice-daily with a
 and gingival margin are brushed in a circular or
human's hard nylon filament brush resulted in
side-to-side motion. The brush is angled at a 459
traumatic gingival lesions in the dog (Sangnes,
angle to the tooth surfaces, so that the bristles
1976).
enter the gingival sulcus (Fig. 10.1). The circling
In the only published toothbrushing study
motion should ensure that all cracks and crevices
involving cats, teeth brushed either daily or
in and around the teeth are cleaned.
twice- daily on one side of the mouth had 95%
less calculus, and teeth brushed once-weekly had
Dental diets and dental hygiene chews
76% less calculus than unbrushed teeth at the
end of an 18-week trial period (Richardson,
The use of products (dental diets, hygiene chews
1965). Unfortunately, gingivitis was not scored in
and biscuits) aimed at encouraging chewing
this study.
activity and which are designed with textural
Based on the above studies, the current clinical
properties that maximize the self-cleansing effect
recommendation should be daily toothbrushing to
of function are beneficial in reducing the accumu-
 establish and maintain clinically healthy gingivae
lation of dental deposits and consequenty the
for the whole life of the animal. With the increasing
degree of gingivitis that develops. None of the
life expectancy of dogs and cats, preventive
products in this category is as effective as daily tooth-
 medicine becomes increasingly important.
brushing.Consequently, their use cannot achieve or
Brushing technique. There is no one correct
maintain clinically healthy gingivae in the absence of
 method of brushing but rather one appropriate
toothbrushing.
method that in each case removes plaque
Periodontal disease has been linked with
effectively without damaging either teeth or
aspects of diet. Several studies have investigated
gingivae. A particular method must be dictated
the local effect of diet on plaque formation and
by individual preference and dexterity and the
 development of gingivitis in the dog (Egelberg.
variable dentogingival morphology occurring
1965a, b). A coarse diet may reduce plaque
with different stages of disease. In most
accumulation on some teeth and on some tooth
Some practical suggestions to give to owners
Start toothbrushing as early in life as possible as
made to open the mouth and carefully brush the palatal
prevention of disease development is the goal. The
and lingual surfaces of the teeth. If this is not accepted.
primary teeth will be exfoliated and replaced by the
there is every reason to continue with daily brushing of the
permanent dentition. Consequently. the benefit of 
buccal surfaces. However, gingivitis will occur on the
introducing toothbrushing at a young age will not benefit 
palatal and lingual surfaces if these are not brushed
the primary teeth, but the procedure will be accepted at
(Ingham & Gorrel, 2001) and periodontitis may cccur at 
the time the permanent teeth erupt. Moreover, it is far
these sites
easier to train puppies and kittens to accept dental
●Offer a reward at the end of the procedure, e.g. a
toothbrushing than middle-aged or clder animals.
game or a walk.
 Make the animal comfortable and approach from the
· Include toothbrushing as part of the daily grooming 
side rather than in front.
routine. Home care is more likely to be acceptable to an
Start with just a few teeth (premolars and molars rather
older pet if it is introduced as an extension of a pre-
than incisors since retracting the lips is usually readily
existing routine, e.g. evening meal, walk, grooming. The
accepted, while many animals don't like having their nose
owner is also more likely to remember a consistent routine
lifted) and gradually increase the number of teeth cleaned
 Owners can sit small dogs and cats on their lap whilst
each time until the whole mouth can be cleaned in a
brushing. at the same time cuddling them to reduce their
single session.
pue salppno uosiad auo aaleuae uoisuauadde
Initially. the mouth does not need to be opened.
restrains whilst a second performs the toothbrushing.
Concentrate on brushing the buccal surfaces of the teeth.
Some animals may better accept the use of a 'grooming
especially at the gingival margin.
table' type situation.
 When the animal is comfortable with having the buccal
surfaces of all its teeth brushed, an attempt should be
114 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 10.1  Toothbrushing technique.
 Subgingival plaque is a consequence
of supragingival plaque migrating in an
apical direction. To remove plaque
from the gingival sulcus, the toothbrush 
is angled at a 45° angle to the tooth
surface, which allows the bristles to
enter the sulcus. Even with optimal
technique, toothbrushing will not clean
more than 1-2 mm below the gingival
margin. Consequently, the best way to
prevent plaque accumulating in the
sulcus is meticulous supragingival
plaque control.
surfaces. Although consumption of soft foods
adjunctive measure and is highly recommended
may promote plaque accumulation, the general
to pet owners. In selecting an appropriate dental
belief that dry foods provide significant oral
 diet or dental hygiene chews I would recommend
cleansing should be regarded with skepticism. In
 using either a product that has been shown to be
fact, one study reported that feeding a canned
effective in peer-reviewed publications, or a
food performed similarly to feeding a dry food in
product that has been awarded a Veterinary Oral
the degree of plaque and calculus accumulation
Health Council (VOHC) Seal of Acceptance. The
(Boyce & Logan, 1994). In a large epidemiologic
VOHC? Seal of Acceptance system identifies
survey, dogs consuming dry food did not con-
products that meet pre-set standards for
sistenfly demonstrate improved periodontal health
 prevention of accumulation of dental plaque and
when compared with dogs eating moist foods
calculus (tartar). It is a product effectiveness
(Harvey et al, 1996)
recognition system, with no regulatory function,
Specifically designed dental diets (Jensen et al,
 and is limited to considering products designed to
1995; Logan et al, 2002) and dental hygiene chews
control plaque and calculus.
(Gorrel & Rawlings, 1996b; Gorrel et al, 1998;
Gorrel et al, 1999; Gorrel & Bierer, 1999; Ingham et
Chemical plaque control
al, 2002) with enhanced textural characteristics
have been shown to significantly
reduce
 In addition to mechanical plaque control, chemical
accumulation of dental deposits and the degree
 plaque control does have a role in treating
of gingivitis, in both long and short term studies.
 periodontitis. These means are not indicated to
 It is not known whether this reduced degree of
prevent or treat gingivitis. The prudent use of
 gingivitis is sufficient to prevent the development
antibiotics and antiseptics in periodontal disease
of periodontitis. Further studies of longer duration
is detailed in Chapter 3.
 are required.
While every attempt should be made to ensure
CARIES
that daily toothbrushing is performed by the
owner, the reduction of accumulation of dental
 Caries occurs in dogs. It has not been described
deposits (plaque and calculus), thus reducing the
 in cats. The etiology pathogenesis and clinical
severity of gingivitis by dietary means, is a useful
 feature of caries are detailed in Chapter 8.
PREVENTIVE DENTISTRY 115
In simple terms, caries occurs when plaque
TOOTH FRACTURE
bacteria use fermentable carbohydrate (notably
Tooth fracture is dealt with in detail in Chapters
sugar) from the diet as a source of energy.
8 and 12.
The fermentation by-products are acidic and
The incidence of tooth fracture, especially in
demineralize the enamel. Caries can thus be
dogs, can be reduced by preventing certain types of
prevented by removing the bacteria (tooth-
behavior (owner and pet). The owner should be
brushing) in combination with removing their
discouraged from behavior such as throwing
substrate (sugar and other easily fermentable
stones for the dog to collect, or reprimanding
carbohydrate). Dogs should not be fed human
biscuits and confectionary, as they are high in
during training by hitting the animal across the
face. As already mentioned in the previous section,
sugar.
circumstances and/or behavior that predisposes to
excessive tooth wear and weakening of the teeth
should be avoided. Chewing on hard bones or toys
EXCESSIVE WEAR
should not be encouraged. Endodontic treatment
of fractured teeth is a large proportion of the
Attrition (wear of tooth surfaces that are in con-
clinical case load at my referral practice and a
tact with one another) and abrasion (wear of
tooth surfaces that are not in contact with one
large number of the dogs referred for treatment
another) are detailed in Chapter 8.
fractured one or several teeth by biting on hard
bones or toys. Softer bones should also be
Excessive attrition can occur under certain
avoided. These will be chewed and swallowed,
circumstances - stone chewing is a common cause.
often causing digestive problems, or become
Another common cause is playing with a ball on
a sandy surface. The ball becomes wet and
impacted on or between teeth.
covered with sand or grit and as the animal bites
MALOCCLUSION
on the ball, the teeth are worn excessively. Pre-
vention in such circumstances is restricting access
Malocclusion is common and may cause pain/
to stones and playing with a ball in an environ-
discomfort and severe oral pathology. Occlusal
ment where the ball does not become covered in
evaluation is part of the basic oral examination of
abrasive material.
a conscious animal. To make an evaluation, the
Loss of teeth (due to disease or trauma) and
practitioner needs to be able to identify normal
malocclusion may also predispose to excessive
occlusion for the species and breed and have an
attrition. If extensive extractions are required, the
understanding of the etiology and pathogenesis
resultant occlusion must be evaluated and pre-
of malocclusion. Occlusion and malocclusion are
ventive measures instifuted as appropriate.
detailed in Chapter 5. In general, the treatment of
In humans, the most common cause of
malocclusion is best left to a veterinarian with
abrasion is incorrect use of a toothbrush. Other
special skills in dentistry, namely expertise in
causes include the ingestion of solids or liquids
endodontics and orthodontics. It is possible to
that are highly acidic, or the regurgitation or
prevent development of some types of mal-
vomiting of acids from the stomach that enhance
occlusion. General practitioners are encouraged
the tissue destruction caused by incorrect
to implement these measures.
brushing technique. In the dog. the most
common cause of abrasion is cage biting. The
Prevention of malocclusion
result of the progressive loss of tooth substance is
Preventive measures, which can be performed in
fracture (generally with pulpal exposure)
of
the weakened tooth. Every effort should be
 a general practice, include:
made to rid the animal of this habit. If this cannot
· Extraction of persistent primary teeth
be achieved, then the animal should not be
· Interceptive orthodontics
caged.
·A removable orthodontic device.
116  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Extraction of persistent primary teeth
 strong bond between owner and animal during
the course of the treatment.
Persistent primary teeth should be extracted as
As with any technique, correct diagnosis is
soon as possible to prevent malocclusion. The
critical for success of treatment. No major jaw
golden rule is that the primary and permanent
discrepancies should be present. The diastema
tooth of the same type should not be present at
between the 3rd incisor and canine tooth in the
the same time. Extraction of persistent primary
upper jaw should be wice enough to accommodate
teeth should not be delayed past 12-14 weeks of
the mandibular canine tooth in its corrected
age. The procedure for extracting primary teeth
position. In other words, the only orthodontic
is found in Chapter 13.
movement required is lateral movement of the
mandibular canines, and there needs to be
Interceptive orthodontics
 enough space available between the 3rd incisor
and canine in the upper jaw for them to fit into
Interceptive orthodontics is used to describe the
their correct position.
practice of extracting maloccluding primary
The most appropriate objects to use are toys
teeth before eruption of their permanent counter-
with a round or oval shape. The size is important.
 parts. It will prevent dental interlock-induced
The correct size of toy sits in between and just
 malocclusion from developing. If the developing
behind the canine teeth, and is larger than the
malocclusion is of skeletal origin, the value of
distance between the mandibular canine teeth
interceptive orthodontics is negligible since the
(Fig. 10.2). The toy thus applies primarily lateral
permanent teeth will form the same incorrect
 pressure to the teeth while the dog plays. A toy
interlock. However, it may still be indicated to
that is too small will be held more caudally in the
prevent discomfort. Further treatment, once the
mouth and thus exert no lateral force on the
permanent occlusion has formed, will be required.
canine teeth. Too large a toy might cause intru-
Primary teeth involved in malocclusion should
 sion rather than lateral tipping. In dogs that
be extracted as early as possible, i.e. at 6-8 weeks
prefer to hold a toy between the carnassial teeth
 of age. This will allow the maxilla and mandible
rather than the canine teeth, a very large toy may
to develop to their full genetic potential independ-
be needed. It needs to be so large that it cannot be
ently before the permanent dental interlock
fitted between the carnassial teeth. Rostral as
forms.
well as lateral tipping of the mandibular canines
occurs with a toy this large.
The composition and consistency of the toy
A removable orthodontic device
are important. It should be of hard rubber that
 Lingually displaced mandibular canine teeth are
slightly deforms on chewing. If the toy is too soft,
a relatively common orthodontic problem in
it is unlikely to create enough pressure for lateral
dogs. This malocclusion may be due to a dental
tipping of the mandibular canines. If it is t00
abnormality, a skeletal abnormality, or a
hard, the result is tooth damage due to abrasion.
combination of both. The palatal contact of the
The toy should have a smooth surface to avoid
mandibular canine crown tips frequently causes
excessive abrasion.
discomfort and pain, and may lead to palatal
 Active play for 15 minutes, three times per
mucosal ulceration, infection, and formation of a
day is the recommended minimum. Longer and
permanent oronasal communication. In properly
 more frequent episodes are preferable and the
selected cases (young dogs, no major jaw dis-
 owner should be recommended to play with the
crepancies), the use of a removable orthodontic
 dog as often as possible and to take away all other
appliance ('rubber toy' technique) has been  toys. Assuming a one-week learning phase, two
 proven successful in correcting the malocclusion
 additional weeks are needed before any benefit is
within 4 weeks in most cases (Verhaert, 1999).
 likely to be seen. Occlusion is checked after three
The techrique also encourages development of a
 weeks of treatment and then monthly as necessary.
PREVENTIVE DENTISTRY
117
outcome. However, many owners are unwilling
 to have their dogs anesthetized just for this. As a
compromise, hard wax bite wafers can be used to
record crown tip positions in most conscious
dogs. Photographs (rostral, left and right view)
should always be taken to record the extent of
the malocclusion prior to treatment.
Once the mandibular canines are in their
correct position, the established canine dental
interlock should prevent relapse. However, con-
tinued playing with the toy for several months is
recommended. It appears that there is little risk
of overcorrection (labioversion) of the canine teeth.
The technique works in teeth that are still
erupting as well as in fully erupted teeth. How-
ever, the time required for correction is longer
when the teeth are fully erupted.
Summary
There is no magic bullet that we can feed cur pets to
prevent pericdontal disease: daily toothbrushing remains
the single most effective method of restoring inflamed
gingivae to health and of then maintaining clinically
healthy gingivae.
· Compliance may be an issue for some people.
Compliance failure has not been critically investigated in
veterinary dentistry: however, it is not difficult to imagine
that many factors may prevent cwners from brushing their 
pets' teeth. Such factors include lack of skill.
questionable perceived benefit, unpleasantness of the 
procedure and lifestyle (lack of time).
Fig. 10.2 A removable orthodontic device. To achieve
● One study evaluated compliance in a period of
primarily lateral pressure to the canine teeth while the dog
6-21 months following periodontal therapy and home
plays, the correct size of toy is critical. As depicted in this
care instruction (Miller & Harvey. 1994). This study
photograph, the toy needs to be larger than the distance
reported that 53% of clients surveyed were satisfactorily
between the mandibular canine teeth and when the dog
compliant. However, the report was based on a
holds it in its mouth the toy should sit in between and just
telephone survey and clinical effectiveness of compliance 
behind the canine teeth. A toy that is too small will be held
was not assessed.
● Our experience is that a combination of client
more caudally in the mouth and thus exert no lateral force
education, continuous reinforcement and individually
on the canine teeth. Too large a toy might cause intrusion
determined recalls to check efficacy yields surprisingly
rather than lateral tipping.
good compliance.
 Caries in dogs is prevented by toothbrushing and 
avoiding treats containing sugars.
If no movement is seen after three weeks, other
 Attrition, abrasion and tooth fracture are prevented by
modifying play behaviors or the animal's environment.
treatment methods should be considered.
 Malocclusion can be prevented by extraction of
It is advisable to obtain full pre- and post-
persistent primary teeth, interceptive crthodontics and by
treatment impressions and radiographs to assess
the use of appropriate removable crthodontic devices.
118
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
REFERENCES
Boyce, E.N. & Logan, E.l. (1994) Oral health assessment in
Ingham, K.E., Gorrel, C. & Bierer, T.L. (2002) Effect of a
dogs: study design and results. Journal of Veterinary
dental chew on dental substrates and gingivitis in cats.
Dentistry 11(2): 64-74.
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 19(4): 201-204.
Egelberg, J. (1965a) Local effects of diet on plaque
Jensen, L., Logan, E.1., Finney, O. et al (1995) Reduction in
formation and gingivitis development in dogs. Ill Effect of
accumulation of plaque, stain and calculus in dogs by
frequency of meals and tube feeding. Odontologisk Revy
dietary means. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 12(4):
16:50-60.
161-163.
Egelberg, J. (1965b) Local effects of diet on plaque
Lindhe, J., Hamp, S.-E. & Loe, H. (1975) Plaque induced
formation and gingivitis development in dogs.| Effect of
periodontal disease in beagle dogs. A 4-year clinical,
hard and soft diets. Odontologisk Revy 16: 31-41.
roentgenographical and histometrical study. Journal of
Gorrel, C. (1994) The effects of fluoride and its possible
Periodontal Research 10: 243-255.
uses in veterinary dentistry. Proceedings of the Worid
Logan, E.1., Finney, O. & Hefferren, J. (2002) Effects of a
Veterinary Dental Congress. Philadelphia, USA.
dental food on plaque accumulation and gingival health
Gorrel, C. & Bierer, T. (1999) Long term effects of a dental
in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 19(1): 15-18.
hygiene chew on the periodontal health of dogs. Journa!
Miller, B.R. & Harvey, C.E. (1994) Compliance with oral
of Veterinary Dentistry 16(3): 109-113.
hygiene recommendations following periodontal
Gorel, C., Inskeep, G. & Inskeep, T. (1998) Benefits of a
treatment in client-owned dogs. Journal of Veterinary
'dental hygiene chew' on the periodontal health of cats.
Dentistry 11(1): 18-19.
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 15(3): 135-138.
Richardson, R.L. (1965) Effect of administering antibiotics,
Gorrel, C. & Rawlings, J.M. (1996a) The role of tooth-
removing the major salivary glands and toothbrushing on
brushing and diet in the maintenance of periodontal
dental calculi formation in the cat. Archives of Ora!
health in dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 13(3):
Biology 10: 245-253.
139-143.
Sangnes,G.(1976)A pilot study on the effect of
Gorrel, C. & Rawlings, J.M. (1996b) The role of a 'dental
toothbrushing on the gingiva of a beagle dog.
hygiene chew' in maintaining periodontal health in dogs.
Scandinavian Journaf of Dental Research 84: 106-108.
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 13(1): 31-34.
Tromp, J.A., van Rijn, L.J. & Jansen, J. (1986) Experimental
Gorrel, C.,Warrick, J.,& Bierer,T. (1999) Effect of a new
gingivitis and frequency of tooth-brushing in the beagle
dental hygiene chew on periodontal health in dogs.
dog model. Clinical findings. Journal of Clinica!
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 16(2): 77-81.
Periodontology 13: 190-194.
Harvey C.E., Shofer, F.S. & Laster, L. (1996) Correlation of
Verhaert, L.(1999) A removable orthodontic device for the
diet, other chewing activities and periodontal disease in
treatment of lingually displaced mandibular canine teeth
North American client-owned dogs. Journal of Veterinary
in young dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 16(2):
Dentistry 13(3): 101-105.
69-75.
Ingham, K.E. & Gorrel, C. (2001) Effect of long-term
intermittent periodontal care on canine periodontal
disease. Journal of Smafl Animal Practice 42(2): 67-70.
11
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions
Introduction
Resorption of teeth is common in domestic cats.
Tooth resorption has also been shown to occur in
feral (Clarke & Cameron, 1997; Verstraete et al,
1996) and wild cats (Levin, 1996; Berger et al,
1996). It has also been reported in dogs
(Arnbjerg, 1996) and in the chinchilla (Crossley et
al, 1997). This chapter, however, will deal
exclusively with tooth resorption in cats.
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORL) are a
type of ‘idiopathic’ external root resorption,
where the hard tissues of the root surfaces are
destroyed by the activity of multinucleated cells
called odontoclasts. The destroyed root surface is
replaced by cementum-like or bone-like tissue.
 The process starts in cementum and progresses
 to involve the dentine where it spreads along the
dentine tubules and eventually comes to involve
Fig. 11.1 Clinical appearance of feline ORL (FORL).
the dentine of the crown as well as the root. The
The lesions are first noticed clinically when they become
peripulpal dentine is relatively resistant to resorp-
evident in the crown, often as a cavity at the cemento-
enamel junction (CEJ). The process has extended into the
tion and the pulp thus only becomes involved
crown dentine and come to involve the enamel, which has
late in the disease. The process extends through
either resorbed or fractured off to reveal a small cavity.
the crown dentine, eventually reaching the
filled with granulation-like tissue, at the buccal aspect of
enamel. The enamel is either resorbed or it frac-
the gingival margin of the upper canine. Contrary to
tures off and a cavity becomes clinically evident
common belief, this is a late-stage lesion.
(Figs 11.1 & 11.2A).
In the absence of routine radiography, the
destruction with ORL weakens and undermines
lesions are first noted clinically when they
the crown to such an extent that minor trauma,
become evident in the crown, often as cavities at
e.g. during chewing, causes the crown to fracture
the cemento-enamel junction (CEJ). Figure 11.2B
off, leaving the root in the alveolar bone. The
depicts the radiographic appearance of the
resorbing root remnants are usually covered by
clinical lesion seen in Figure 1l.2A. The first
intact gingiva (Fig. 1l.3A, B). However, in some
clinical manifestation of ORL is thus a late-stage
cases the overlying gingiva may be inflamed
lesion. In many cases, the progressive dentine
(Fig. 11.4).
119
120 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
A
B
 Fig. 11.2  Clinical and radiographic appearance of
ORL.
A: Clinical appearance. The lower left 3rd premolar tooth
has an extensive cavity at the CEJ. The destroyed dentine
and enamel have been replaced by connective tissue.
Again, this is a late-stage lesion.
of the left 3rd mandibular premolar tooth depicted in A. Both 
roots show evidence of extensive resorption, i.e. loss of
distinct periodontal ligament space, replacement of tooth
B
substance by bone-like material, and most of the crown 
dentine is destroyed. This tooth requires treatrment.
Fig. 11.3 Missing tooth with gingival overgrowth.
A: Clinical appearance. The right mandibular 3rd premolar
is absent on clinical examination. The cverlying gingiva is
Because the first clirically detectable lesion is
not inflamed
often seen at the CEJ, the disease has also been
B: Radiographic appearance. The roots are retained in
the alveolar bone. The roots are showing evidence of
described as feline neck lesions, cervical line
ongoing resorption. The only treatment required is clinical
lesions, or feline caries. However, ORL should
and radiographic monitoring. i.e. there is no indication to
not be confused with dental caries. Early caries is
extract theretained roots.
a passive inorganic demineralization of the
enamel, while odontoclastic resorption occurs as
EPIDEMIOLOGY
an active progressive destruction of the dental
tissues by clastic cells. Moreover, dental caries
Prevalence rates ranging from 28.5-67.0% have
has never been described in the cat.
been reported and the incidence increases with
ODONTOCLASTIC RESORPTIVE LESIONS 121
of cats, 52% of cats were affected with a mean of
3.2 lesions per affected cat (Coles, 1990).
All types of teeth in the feline dentition may be
affected by ORL, but lesions seem more common
in certain teeth (Ingham et al, 2001). The manifest
lesions can often be diagnosed clinically by visual
and tactile examination. As already mentioned,
they commonly present as a cavity at the CEJ of the
tooth.  Studies  which included radiography
(Ingham et al, 200l; Lindskog & Hammarstrom,
1980; Verstraete et al, 1998) have demonstrated that
the resorption can occur anywhere on the root
surfaces, i.e. not only at the CEJ. Clirical methods
will only detect lesions that involve the crown,
while radiography will also detect lesions confined
to the root. Thus, the prevalence of ORL in studies
that include radiography is higher.
In a recent study (Ingham et al, 200l) which
investigated the incidence of ORL in a clirically
healthy population of 228 cats (mean age was
4.92 years), using a combination of clinical exam-
Fig. 11.4 Missing tooth with gingival inflammation.
ination and radiography, it was found that the
In this patient, the progressive dentine destruction has
overall prevalence rate was 29%. The mandibular
weakened and undermined the crown of the right maxillary
canine tooth to such an extent that minor trauma, e.g
3rd premolars (307, 407) were the most com-
during chewing. has caused it to fracture, leaving the root
monly affected teeth and the pattern of ORL
in the alveolar bone. The gingiva cverlying the retained root
development was symmetrical in most cats. The
remnant is inflamed. The retained root remnant needs to be
risk of having ORL was found to increase with
extracted.
increasing age and cats with clinically missing
teeth were more likely to have ORL. Neutering.
 sex, age at neutering or mean whole mouth gingi-
increasing age (Verstraete et al, 1996; Coles, 1990;
vitis index did not affect the prevalence of ORL.
van Wessum et al, 1992; Lund et al, 1998;
Lommer & Verstraete, 2000; Ingham et al, 200l),
Resorption of hard tissue
Differences in breed susceptibility have also been
Suggested in some studies, but differences in the
Hard tissues (bone, cementum, dentine) are nor-
 sdn pa sn u a w
mally protected from resorption by their surface
comparisons of significance suspect.
layer of cells (Lindskog & Hammarstrom, 1980;
The large variation in prevalence rates can be
Verstraete et al, 1998). Root resorption is
explained by the different populations of cats
classified as:
studied (random versus dental versus mixed)
and by the different methods used to diagnose
·Internal, or
ORL (clinical versus radiographic). The incidence
· External.
was generally higher in the studies where the
cats examined were presented for dental examin-
 Internal root resorption occurs when the integrity
 ation or treatment as compared to studies looking
of the odontoblasts layer is broached. It thus starts
at a random or mixed (i.e. presented for dental or
on the pulpal surface and extends towards the
other problem) populations of cats. However, in
external aspect of the tooth. Internal root resorption
an Australian study looking at a mixed population
is usually a consequence of pulpal inflammation.
122
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
External root resorption may follow any damage
root resorption (EIRR). In PIRR, the osteoclast-
to the protective periodontal ligament and
activating factors, which keep the resorptive
cementoblast layer. It thus starts on the external
A ue Aq ppad ae  sand
root surface and progresses within the tooth.
lesion in the adjacent periodontal tissues
External root resorption (Andreasen, 1988) is
(Andreasen, 1985; Gold & Hasselgren, 1992; Ne
classified as:
       
the marginal tissues and is thus often sifuated
· Surface
cervically. It has therefore also been termed
· Replacement
cervical root resorption.
·Inflammatory.
EIRR, on the other hand, receives its stimulus
for continued resorption from an infected necrotic
Surface resorption is self-limiting and reversible.
pulp (Andreasen, 1985). This type of root resorp-
It is thought that minor traumata caused by un-
tion is a complication that can follow dental
intentional biting on hard objects, bruxism, etc. can
trauma. It begins as a surface resorption due to
cause localized damage to the periodontal ligament
damage
to
0 the periodontal ligament and
and cementoblast layer and trigger this type of
cementoblast layer in conjunction with the
resorption. The denuded root surface attracts
traumatic injury. However, the pulp is also
clastic cells, which will resorb the cementum for as
damaged by the trauma and becomes necrotic.
long as osteoclast-activating factors are released at
As the surface resorption approaches the dentine,
the site of injury - usually a few days. When the
necrotic and possible infected pulp matter is
resorption stops, cells from the periodontal
 released into the periodontal ligament from the
ligament will proliferate and populate the resorbed
 thus exposed dentine tubules. The pulp products
area resulting in deposition of reparative dental
will then maintain an inflammatory process in
tissue (Lindskog et al, 1983, 1987). The majority
the adjacent periodontal tissues that in turn will
of human teeth show signs of active or healed
 trigger the continuance of the resorption.
surface resorptions.
The resorptive lesions seen so commonly in
Replacement resorption results in replacement
cats are external and fit into the replacement-
of the dental hard tissue by bone. The etiology of
resorption category. It is possible that some lesions
replacement resorption appears to be related to
are inflammatory in origin and fit into the PIRR
the absence of a vital periodontal ligament cover
category.
on the root surface (Andreasen, 1985). Itis assumed
that damaged periodontal ligament is repopulated
ETIOLOGY AND PATHOGENESIS
with progenitor cells from adjacent bone marrow.
These cells establish themselves on the resorbed
While the ongoing or established resorptive
root surface and bone will thus be formed directly
process has been detailed (Hopewell-Smith,
upon the dental hard tissues (Andreasen &
1930; Okuda & Harvey, 1992; Shigeyana et al,
Kristerson, 198l). This results in fusion between
1996), the etiology of ORL is not known.
bone and tooth, i.e. ankylosis. Replacement
 It had been assumed that ORL represented a
resorption can be seen as a form of healing: the
PIRR type of lesion and were associated with
bone has accepted the dental hard tissue as part
periodontal disease (Gold & Hasselgren, 1992;
of itself and the tooth becomes involved in the
Hopewell-Smith, 1930; Okuda & Harvey, 1992;
normal skeletal turnover, i.e. during subsequent
Reichart et al, 1984). Recent studies have shown
remodeling of bone both dental hard tissue and
that the histologic lesion is a noninflammatory
bone will be resorbed (Hammarstrom et al, 1989).
replacement resorption, resulting in ankylosis
Inflammatory root resorption is a consequence
(Gorrel & Larsson, 2002) and that gingivitis index
of inflammation in the adjacent tissues. There are
did not affect the prevalence of ORL (Ingham et
two main forms, namely peripheral inflammatory
al, 2o0l). These findings indicate that while a
root resorption (PIRR) and external inflammatory
PIRR type of lesion may exist, the most com-
ODONTOCLASTIC RESORPTIVE LESIONS123
mon lesion is a noninflammatory replacement
resorption.
In the recent study (Gorrel & Larsson, 2002)
investigating the histologic features of the early
lesion, it was found that surface resorptive
lesions in the root cementum were common. The
level along the root at which the lesions were
identified varied, but they were always below
the level of the alveolar crest, and were not
associated with inflammation in the adjacent
periodontal ligament (PDL). Therefore, in con-
flict with some data in the literature (Coles, 1990;
van Wessum et al, 1992), this study found no
evidence to support the hypothesis that
 resorption starts at the cemento-enamel junction
(CEJ) or in the cervical part of the root.
Surface resorptive lesions of the root cementum
in some teeth showed evidence of healing (Figs
11.5 & 1l.6). Whenever dentine was involved in
the resorptive process, there was also evidence of
Fig. 11.6 Healed surface resorption. The slide depicts a
healed root resorption. The process had penetrated
through the cementum (C) and into the dentine (D) and the 
defect is now filled with reparative cementum. (H&E × 100.)
Fig. 11.5 Healing surface resorption. There is a shallow
localized resorption cavity (arrow) in the cementum. The
lesion is showing evidence of healing. i.e. it is filled with
reparative cementum-like tissue. There is also resorption in
Fig. 11.7 Root resorption and ankylosis. Cementum
adjacent alveolar bone (arrcwhead). The periodontal
and dentine (D) resorption has been repaired by bone-like 
ligament is not inflamed, but it is atypical with a lack of
tissue (B) forming a bridge with adjacent alveolar bone.
horizontal fibers. See Fig. 11.8A for comparison with
The tooth and bone are thus fused at this point. Whenever
normal periodontal ligament. (Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
dentine is involved in the resorptive process, ankylosis is
×100.)
likely to follow. (H&E × 50.)
124  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
ankylosis (Fig. 1l.7). There was no inflammation
unaffected by resorption is depicted in Figure
of the periodontal ligament (PDL) associated
11.8A. In teeth affected by resorption without
with the resorption cavities. However, the PDL in
ankylosis, the PDL was narrower than normal
teeth affected by resorption (with or without
and lacked distinctive fiber bundles (Figs 1l.5 &
ankylosis) was atypical. The PDL of teeth
11.8B). The PDL in teeth with resorption and
Fig. 11.8 Appearance of the periodontal ligament
(PDL).
A: Normal PDL in teeth that were unaffected by ORL.
The PDL fills the space between the alveolar bone (b) and
the cementum (c). The fibers are aligned horizontally and 
obliquely. This appearance is characteristic of functioning
pericdontal ligament. (H&E × 25.)
B: Atypical PDL in teeth affected by resorption without
ankylosis. The ligament space is narrower than normal
and the fibers are aligned in a vertical direction, rather than
the normal horizontal and cblique orientation. (H&E × 100.)
C: Atypical PDL in teeth affected by resorption and
ankylosis. The section depicts a region distant from the
ankylosis. The PDL does not have the normal fibrous
of the PDL is presumably a 'functional adaptation' to the
loss of tooth mobility due to the ankylosis. Note the
localized resorption channels (arrows) in the cementum.
(H&E × 100.)
ODONTOCLASTIC RESORPTIVE LESIONS 125
ankylosis was a loose vascular cornective tissue
Visual inspection and tactile examination with
(Fig. 1l.8C). The authors concluded that further
a dental explorer will only identify end-stage
studies are necessary to determine exactly what
lesions, i.e. when the process is involving the
causes the high incidence of this type of
crown and has resulted in an obvious cavity (Figs
idiopathic' feline external root resorption.
11.1 and 11.2A). Radiography will identify lesions
However, they suggest several etiopathogenic
that are localized to the root surfaces within the
explanatory models as follows.
alveolar bone (Fig. 1l.9), which would not be
First, that all cats suffer from surface
detected by clirical methods. Moreover, it is only
 root cementum resorption but cats that develop
with the aid of radiography that the extent of a
ORL fail to heal such lesions. The failure to
resorptive process can be identified (Figs ll.2B &
heal could be a result of an inherent cementum
11.9). Selection of the best treatment option thus
defect. It could also be age related, i.e. that as a cat
depends on radiography. In fact, a series of full
ages the healing process becomes slower
mouth radiographs (the technique is covered in
than the resorptive process and the balance
between the two processes changes and the surface
resorption reaches the dentine. Once this occurs,
ORL formation and ankylosis become inevitable.
Alternatively, cats that develop ORL may
suffer from defects in the protective properties of
the PDL and cementoblast layer. This hypothesis
is indirectly supported by the observed anatomic
cifferences of the PDL in teeth with root resorp-
tion as compared to unaffected teeth. These
anatomic differences may also give rise to a sus-
 picion that the affected teeth in cats which develop
ORL are subject to suboptimal mecharical forces
or are nonfunctional, resulting in lack of the
stimulus required to maintain the functional
 integrity of the PDL. It is known that hypofunc-
tion (King & Hughes, 1999) or reduced masticatory
stimulation (Andersson et al, 1985) may result in
tooth ankylosis.
Since mineralized tissues are subject to nutri-
tional and hormonal factors, another line of
research is investigating calcium homeostasis in
Fig. 11.9 Value of radiography for diagnosis and
cats with or without ORL (Reiter & Mendoza,
treatment selection. Radicgraphy will identify lesions that
2002).
are localized to the root surfaces within the alveolar bone.
which would not be detected by clinical methods.
Consequently, radiography is required for diagnosis of
DIAGNOSIS
ORL. Moreover, it is only with the aid of radiography that
Radiography is required for diagnosis of ORL.
the extent of the resorption can be evaluated. In the
radiograph shown, the left lower canine has a resorbing
The lesions can be detected by means of a
combination of:
crown dentine. In fact, there was no clinical evidence of
ORL. The left lower canine could thus be treated
· Visual inspection
conservatively. In contrast, in the right lower canine tooth,
● Tactile examination with a dental explorer,
the process has progressed to involve the crown and most
of the root has been resorbed and replaced by bone-like
and
tissue. Extraction is not possible and coronal amputation
·Radiography.
becomes the treatment of choice
126 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Ch. 7) is recommended for all cats presented for
the use of restoration of feline odontoclastic
dental therapy. If taking a series of full mouth
 lesions as a major treatment technique cannot be
radiographs is not possible, e.g. due to financial
recommended.
restrictions, then take one view of each mandibular
premolar/molar region. The mandibular 3rd pre-
Conservative management
molars are the most commonly affected teeth. If
Conservative management consists of monitoring
radiographs show resorption of these teeth, then
a full mouth series must be taken.
the lesions clinically and radiographically. This
approach is recommended for lesions that are not
evident on clinical examination, i.e. only seen
TREATMENT
radiographically and there is no evidence of
The aim of any treatment is to relieve pain, prevent
discomfort or pain. As most lesions are only
progression of pathology and restore function. It
diagnosed when pathology is extensive, conser-
remains a matter of debate as to whether ORL
 vative management is rarely indicated in the
 general practice situation.
cause discomfort or pain to the affected indivi-
dual. Based on the fact that pulpal inflammation
In most cases, extraction or coronal ampu-
occurs late in the disease process, it seems likely
tation of an affected tooth is indicated. With
that lesions that are limited to the root surfaces
extraction, the whole tooth is removed. This is
the gold standard. However, when the root has
and do not communicate with the oral environ-
ment are asymptomatic. However, once dentine
been extensively resorbed it is often not possible
 destruction has progressed to such an extent that
to extract all tooth substance (Fig. 1l.9) and
the process invades the pulp and /or a communi-
coronal amputation is indicated. Preoperative
cation with the oral cavity has been established
radiographs are mandatory to allow selection of
(when the enamel has been resorbed or it has
the appropriate treatment option.
fractured off to reveal the dentine to the oral
cavity), then discomfort and /or pain are likely.
Extraction
Some cats may show clinical signs indicating oral
Teeth with ORL are notoriously difficult to exract
discomfort or pain, e.g. changes in food prefer-
as the root is resorbing and being replaced by
ences (soft rather than hard diet), reduced food
bone-like tissue. Moreover, there are areas of
intake, but most cats do not.
ankylosis, i.e. fusion of bone and tooth substance,
To date, there is no known treatment which
along the root surface. In addition to preoperative
prevents development and/or progression of
radiographs to detect the lesions and determine
ORL. It seems unlikely that such treatment can
appropriate treatment, postoperative radiographs
be developed without knowledge of the cause of
to ensure that the whole tooth has been removed
the pathology. Currently, the suggested methods
are required. The details of the technique for
of managing odontoclastic resorptive lesions are:
extracting feline teeth are covered in Chapter 13.
· Conservative management
Coronal amputation
·
 Tooth extraction
· Coronal amputation.
As already mentioned, when the root has been
extensively resorbed it is often not possible to
Restoration of the tooth surface has been
extract all tooth substance. Coronal amputation is
recommended for the treatment of accessible
 then indicated. The indications for and outcome of
lesions, which extend into the dentine and do not  coronal amputation have been well documented
- t ad 1 pe (oh s)  n q ss as ss dd a
that tooth resorption continues and the restor-  mended, but needs radiographic monitoring at
ations are lost (Hopewell-Smith, 1930; Okuda &  regular intervals postoperatively to ensure that the
Harvey, 1992; Shigeyana et al, 1996). Consequently,  root is resorbing and that healing is uneventful.
ODONTOCLASTIC RESORPTIVE LESIONS 127
The technique for coronal amputation (Fig.
bur.A small amount of root tissue is also
11.10A, B, C, D) involves raising a gingival flap
removed with the bur, just enough to ensure that
asodxa oi Aenu/Aeieed pre Aeonq yoq
the intentionally retained root(s) are apical to the
 the margin of the alveolar bone. The crown of the
alveolar crest. The gingival flap is replaced and
affected tooth is amputated using a small round
sutured in place.
Fig. 11.10 Coronal amputation.
A: Raising a gingival flap. Two short releasing incisions (one placed mesial to, and the other distal to, the tooth) extending
B: Raising a gingival flap and amputating the crown. A periosteal elevator is used to raise a full-thickness gingival flap. The
flap is reflected to expose the buccal alveolar bone plate. The crown of the affected tooth is amputated using a small round bur.
128
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig.11.10
Coronal amputation. (Cont'd)
intentionally retained root(s) are apical to the alveolar crest.
Summary
 ORL are common in the cat.
The etiology is not known, so prevention is not possible.
The lesions are progressive.
 Diagnosis requires radiography.
amputation, remain the preferable treatment cptions.
 Successful extraction and uncomplicated healing needs clinical and radiographic monitoring.
ODONTOCLASTIC RESORPTIVE LESIONS
129
REFERENCES
Andersson, L., Lindskog, S., Blomlof, L. et al (1985) Effect of
morphogenetic protein-2-stimulated periodontal
masticatory stimulation on dentoalveolar ankylosis after
regeneration in vivo. Journal of Periodontology
experimental tooth replantation. Endodontics and Denta!
70: 1125-1135.
Traumatology, 1:13-16.
Levin, J. (1996) Tooth resorption in a Siberian tiger. In:
Andreasen, J.O. (1985) External root resorption: its
Proceedings of the 1oth Annual Veterinary Denta!
 implications in dental traumatology, paedodontics,
Forum. Houston, Texas, USA, p. 212-214.
periodontics, orthodontics and endodontics. Internationa!
Lindskog, S. & Hammarstrom, L. (1980) Evidence in favour 
Endodontic Journa/ 18: 109-118.
 of an anti-invasion factor in cementum or periodontal
Andreasen, J.O. (1988) Review of root resorption systems
membrane. Scandinavian Journal of Dental Research
and models. Etiology of root resorption and the
88:161-163.
homeostatic mechanisms of the periodontal ligament. In:
Lindskog, S., Blomlof, L. & Hammarstrom, L. (1983) Repair
Davidovitch, Z. (ed) Proceedings of the Internationa!
of periodontal tissues in vitro and in vivo. Journal of
Conference on the Biological Mechanisms of Tooth
Clinical Periodontology 10: 188-205.
Eruption and Root Resorption. Birmingham, UK: Ebesco
Lindskog, S., Blomlof, L. & Hammarstrom, L. (1987) Cellular
Media, p. 9-21.
colonization of denuded root surfaces in vivo: cell
Andreasen, J.O. & Kristerson, L. (1981) The effect of limited
morphology in dentin resorption and cementum repair.
drying or removal of the periodontal ligament.Periodontal
Journal of Clinical Periodontology 14: 390-395.
healing after replantation of mature incisors in monkeys.
Lommer, M.J. & Verstraete, F.J.M. (2000) Prevalence of
Acta Odontologica Scandinavica 39: 1-13.
 odontoclastic resorption lesions and periapical
Arnbjerg, J. (1996) Idiopathic dental root replacement
radiographic lucencies in cats: 265 cases (1995-1998).
resorption in old dogs. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry
Journal of the American Veterinary Medical Association
13(3): 97-99.
217: 1866-1869.
Berger, M., Schawalder, P., Stich, H. et al (1996) Feline
Lund, E.M., Bohacek, L.K., Dahlke, J.L. et al (1998)
dental resorptive lesions in captive and wild leopards and
Prevalence and risk factors for odontoclastic resorptive
lions.Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 13(1): 13-21.
lesions in cats. Journal of the AmericanVeterinary
Clarke, D.E. & Cameron, A. (1997) Feline dental resorptive
Medical Association 212: 392-395.
lesions in domestic and feral cats and the possible link
Ne, R.F, Witherspoon, D.E. & Gutmann, J.L. (1999) Tooth
with diet. In: Proceedings of the 5th Worid Veterinary
resorption.Quintessence Internationa/ 30:9-25.
Dental Congress. Birmingham, UK, p. 33-34.
Okuda, A. & Harvey, C.E. (1992) Etiopathogenesis of feline
Coles, S. (1990) The prevalence of buccal cervical root
dental resorptive lesions. Feline Dentistry. Veterinary
resorptions in Australian cats. Journal of Veterinary
Clinics of North America: Smaff Animal Practice.
Dentistry 7(4): 14-16.
Philadelphia: WB Saunders, p. 1385-1404.
Crossley D., Dubielzig, R. & Benson, K. (1997) Caries and
Reichart, PA., Durr, U-M., Triadan, H. et al (1984)
 odontoclastic resorptive lesions in a chinchilla (Chinchilla
Periodontal disease in the domestic cat. Journal of
lanigera). Veterinary Record 141: 337-339.
Periodontal Research 19: 67-75.
DuPont, G. (1995) Crown amputation with intentional root
Reiter, A. & Mendoza, K.A. (2002) Feline odontoclastic
retention for advanced feline resorptive lesions - a
resorptive lesions: an unsolved enigma in veterinary
clinical study. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 12(1): 9-13.
dentistry. Veterinary Clinics of North America: Smal!
Gold, S.1. & Hasselgren, G.(1992) Peripheral inflammatory
Animal Practice 32: 791-837.
root resorption. A review of the literature with case
Shigeyana, Y, Grove, T.K., Strayhorn, C. et al (1996)
reports. Journal of Clinical Periodontology 19: 523-534.
Expression of adhesion molecules during tooth
Gorrel, C. & Larsson, A. (2002) Feline odontoclastic
resorption in feline teeth: a model system for aggressive
resorptive lesions: unveiling the early lesion. Journal of
osteoclastic activity. Journal of Dental Research
Small Animal Practice 43:482-488.
75: 1650-1657.
Hammarstrom, L., Blomlof, L. & Lindskog, S. (1989)
van Wessum, R., Harvey C.E. & Hennet, P. (1992) Feline
Dynamics of dentoalveolar ankylosis and associated root
dental resorptive lesions. Prevalence patterns. Feline
resorption.Endodontics and DentalTraumatology
Dentistry.Veterinary Clinics ofNorth America:Small
5: 163-175.
Animal Practice. Philadelphia: WB Saunders,
Hopewell-Smith, A. (1930) The process of osteolysis and
p.1405-1416.
odontolysis, or so-called 'absorption' of calcified tissues:
Verstraete, F.J.M., Aarde Van, R.J., Nieuwoudt, B.A. et al
a new and original investigation. The evidences in the
(1996) The dental pathology of feral cats on Marion
cat. Dental Cosmos 72: 1036-1048.
Island. Part Il: periodontitis, external odontoclastic
Ingham, K.E., Gorrel, C., Blackburn, J.M. et al (2001)
resorptive lesions and mandibular thickening. Journal of
Prevalence of odontoclastic resorptive lesions in a
Comparative Pathology 115: 283-297.
clinically healthy cat population. Journal of Smaff Animal
Verstraete, F.J.M., Kass, P.H. & Terpak, C.H. (1998)
Practice 42: 439-443.
Diagnostic value of full mouth radiography in cats.
King, G.N. & Hughes, F.J. (1999) Effects of occlusal loading
American Journal of Veterinary Research 59: 692-695.
on ankylosis, bone and cementum formation during
12
Emergencies
Introduction
The basic principles of managing a severely
traumatized animal are covered in other texts. It
The conditions which may be considered emerg-
must be emphasized that there is a body attached
encies generally result from trauma to the face
to the head. In the severely traumatized animal,
and oral cavity (Fig. 12.1). While they are not life-
dental and oral problems are not generally the
threatening, most cause discomfort and some
main initial consideration.
cause severe pain and even systemic complications
to the affected animal, so treatment should not be
delayed. All practicing veterinarians will come
SOFT TISSUE TRAUMA
across these conditions and need to be able to
diagnose and provide first line management and
The principles of wound management are the
then refer to a specialist for treatment if indicated.
same as elsewhere in the body. Consequently,
Trauma
Soft tissue
injuries
Lip
Oronasal
Jaw
injuries
fistulac
fractures
Tooth
injurics
Fracture
Luxation/
Crown
Root
avulsion
Fig. 12.1 Oral emergencies.
131
132
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
 o   s  
Injury to the anterior maxilla with loss of part
fistulae will be dealt with in detail in this chapter.
of the rhinarium can also be repaired using
 The immediate priority is to control hemorrhage
advancement, rotation or transposition flap. Ensure
without compromising the blood supply to the
patency of the nares. There is a lot of spare tissue
damaged area. Most traumatic wounds will be
available to cover defects. Think ‘large' when
contaminated. Early efforts should be made to
creating flaps and ensure that flaps are never
reduce contamination. Particulate debris is best
sutured under tension.
removed by gentle lavage with a balanced electro-
lyte solution. Antiseptic solutions should only be
used in very dilute solutions. Larger fragments
Oronasal fistulae
embedded in a wound can be removed manually
An oronasal fistula is a pathologic communi-
during surgical exploration of the wound. Surgical
cation between the oral cavity and the nasal
chambers. The fistula is lined by epithelium and
taminated wounds. Surgical excision of necrotic
can therefore not heal over. The two most com-
tissue (debridement) is essential to promote early
mon locations are full thickness palate defects
granulation. Following debridement, several
and communication between a maxillary tooth
options are available for closure of wounds.
alveolus and the nasal chamber.
These are:
Hard palate
· Primary closure
· Delayed primary closure
Acquired hard palate defects in dogs and cats
Healing by secondary intention
may occur following:
· Grafting techniques.
· Road traffic accident
The choice of closure technique will depend on:
· Electrical shock
● Foreign body penetration
· Location of the wound
· Gunshot wounds
· Size of the wound
· Pressure necrosis.
· Age of the wound
· Degree of contamination.
Several methods of managing hard palate clefts
(congenital and acquired) have been described.
The procedures include the:
Lip injuries
The anatomy of the lip is particularly suited to
● Langenbeck technique
grafting techniques. Advancement, rotation and
· Overlapping double flap technique
transposition flaps (Fig. 12.2) all have their uses.
 Split palatal U-flap technique
Degloving injury to the lower lip frequently
Other pedicle grafting techniques
occurs in cats involved in road traffic accidents. If
 Silicone or acrylic prosthesis.
the skin is viable, it can be pulled forward and
sutured using the canine teeth as anchors. If the
The choice of technique will depend on:
skin is not viable, then, after debridement, the
exposed bone can be covered by creating an
· Location of the defect, i.e. rostral or caudal
advancement flap, which is pulled forward and
· Size of the defect
anchored to the canine teeth. It may be necess-
· Amount of tissue available for pedicle
ary to incise the commisures of the lips to
grafting procedures.
mobilize a sufficiently large advancement flap.
To close the commisures the mucosa is sutured to
Small rostral defects not involving the nasal cavity
the skin.
but communicating into the incisal bone will not
EMERGENCIES
133
Fig. 12.2 Some useful grafting techniques.
A: Advancement flap.
B: Rotation flap.
C: Transposition flap.
134  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
cause nasal regurgitation and do not need to be
4.  Suture lines should not lie over a defect if
repaired.
possible. The use of asymmetrical flaps may
help avoid this.
Principles of palate surgery
6.
 Gastrostomy or pharyngostomy tubes are
 The flaps must be tension free. Large flaps
not necessary. Nasogastric tubes are preferable
should be raised to avoid tension and ensure
if the animal will not eat. Careful, gentle
overlap between the flap and adjacent healthy
technique and planning the procedure so that
tissue.
there is no tension on the sutured edges is much
2.  The blood supply to the flap must be
more important in preventing dehiscence.
retained. When raising palatal flaps it is
The Langenbeck technique. This technique is
important to identify and preserve the palatine
familiar to most veterinary surgeons. It is out-
artery. This artery exits from the palatine bone
0.5-1.0 cm medial to the upper carnassial tooth.
lined in Figure 12.3.
Palatal flaps should be full thickness
1. Debride the epithelial margins of the defect
mucoperiosteum with the incisions located
with a scalpel blade.
away from the palatine artery. For vestibular
 Incisions are made into the mucoperiosteum
flaps, find a tissue plane that will leave most of
at the dental margin on either side of the defect.
the connective tissue attached to the mucosal
Be careful not to transect the palatine arteries.
flap.
3.
 The mucoperiosteum is released from the
3.
 Ensure that connective tissue surfaces or cut
palate with a periosteal elevator, thus raising
edges are sutured together, as intact epithelium
two longitudinal strips of mucoperiosteum from
will not heal to any other surface.
the hard palate on either side of the defect.
Fig. 12.3A, B The Langenbeck technique.
EMERGENCIES 135
4. The two strips of released mucoperiosteum
are slid together and sutured at the midline,
thus closing the cleft.
Course of
palatine artery
5.
 The exposed bone at the dental margin
bilaterally is left to granulate and epithelialize.
6. The main disadvantage of the technique is
that there is a tendency for breakdown and
persistence of the cleft rostrally.
The double overlapping flap technique. There is
less risk of rostral breakdown using this
technique. It is summarized in Figure 12.4.
1.
 Debride the epithelial margins of the defect
with a scalpel blade.
2.
 Incisions are made in the mucoperiosteum
at the defect on one side, and along the dental
 margin on the other side.
3.
 Flaps a and b are raised using a periosteal
elevator. Make sure that the palatine arteries are
not transected.
4. Flap a is folded back on itself and sutured
under flap b so that the connective tissue
surfaces are in contact. The sutures are
preplaced in a mattress pattern. The epithelium
of flap a will thus form the nasal epithelium and
flap b will contribute the oral epithelium.
Nasal chambe
 5.  The exposed palatine bone is again left to
 granulate and epithelialize.
The split palatal U-flap technique. This
defect
technique is particularly useful for large caudal
defects. The procedure is outlined in Figure 12.5.
Oral cavity
Palatine artery
1. Debride the epithelial margins of the defect
with a scalpel blade.
2
 Create a large U-shaped mucoperiosteal flap
rostral to the defect using a periosteal elevator.
 Incise along the midline of the raised flap to
 create two equally sized flaps.
4.
Rotate flap a 90° and transpose to cover the
defect.
 The medial aspect of flap a is sutured to the
caudal aspect of the palatal defect and the tip of
Palatineartery
this flap is sutured to the lateral aspect of the
Fig. 12.4A,B,C The double overlapping flap
palatal defect.
technique.
6.
 Flap b is rotated 90° and transposed
anterior to flap a.
136  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
A
B
Fig. 12.5A, B  The split palatal U-flap technique.
 7. The medial aspect and tip of flap b are
 sutured to form a complete oral epithelium. The
sutured to the edge of flap a.
palate is closed to just caudal to the tonsils.
8. The rostral aspect of the palate from which
the flap was harvested is left to granulate.
Maxillary alveolus
Other techniques. For large, rostral defects a
The maxillary canine teeth are the most frequent
vestibular flap can be used. Holes are made in
 sites of oronasal fistula formation and the pre-
the flap to allow for teeth in the area, or teeth are
molars the least frequent. The three most common
extracted as required. Alternatively, a prosthesis
causes of oronasal fistula formation between a
of silicone or acrylic can be custom-made. This
maxillary alveolus and the nasal chamber are:
technique requires a minimum of two anesthetic
episodes.
1.
Periodontitis
2.
 Periapical lesions
Soft palate
3.
Iatrogenic.
Soft palate clefts are usually congenital rather
An oronasal fistula in the region of the canine
than traumatic or acquired. Closure of soft palate
tooth is commonly the result of periodontitis,
defects should be a double layer repair. Incisions
where the process perforates the medial bony
are made along the medial margins of the palate
wall of the dental alveolus. Periapical pathology
on each side. Blunt-ended scissors are used to
 of the maxillary canine teeth and premolars can
separate the palate tissue on each side into dorsal
 also cause perforation of the medial wall of the
and ventral flaps. The two dorsal flaps are sutured
 alveolus, as can extraction of the maxillary canine
in a simple interrupted pattern to form a complete
tooth. Large fresh defects or long-standing defects
nasal epithelium, and the two ventral flaps are 
 causing clinical signs, i.e. nasal discharge, food
EMERGENCIES 137
impaction and chronic infection, should be sur-
gically repaired. In the case of a long-standing.
chronically infected lesion preoperative, as well
as postoperative, antibiotics are recommended.
The choice of antibiotic should ideally be based
 on culture and sensitivity.
Single layer repair. The single layer repair is the
surgery of choice. It works very well in most
 instances. The important step is to mobilize enough
tissue to allow an absolutely tension-free repair.
This usually requires extending flap elevation
beyond the buccal vestibule, i.e. the site at which
the mucosa leaves the bone and reflects onto the
interior of the cheek to become the buccal mucosa.
Scarifying the edges of the defect to remove the
epithelium is also essential for healing.
The procedure is outlined in Figure 12.6.
1. The epithelial attachment is cut on the labial
B
side from the caudal aspect of the 1st premolar,
 along the buccal edge of the defect extending to
the mesial aspect of upper lateral incisor using a
scalpel blade.
 2.   Vertical releasing incisions are made at the
 mesial aspect of the lateral incisor and the distal
aspect of the lst premolar.
3. A full thickness flap is raised using a
periosteal elevator.
4.
 It is essential that the flap extends beyond
the mucogingival line, i.e. the alveolar mucosa
is released from the underlying alveolar bone.
 5. Dissection of the alveolar mucosa continues
until sufficient tissue has been mobilized to
cover the defect. This may require extending the
flap elevation to or beyond the height of the
buccal vestibule.
6.
 Split the periosteum at the base of the flap
Fig. 12.6A, B Single layer oronasal fistula repair.
to afford complete mobility of the flap.
 The margins of the oronasal fistula are
scarified.
8.
 The flap is advanced across the defect and
double layer technique may be used (Fig. 12.7).
sutured to the palatine mucosa using an
This technique can be modified for gingival
absorbable suture material.
recession or alveolar bone loss (Fig. 12.8).
9.
 Soft food is recommended for two weeks
postoperatively.
TRAUMATICTOOTHINJURIES
Double layer repair. If single layer repair fails
Traumatic tooth injuries are common and may
or if the defect is large and long-standing. a
involve fracture of the tooth or damage to the
138
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 12.7 Double layer oronasal fistula repair.
A: Oronasal fistula at the upper left canine site. The box
indicates the area drawn in detail.
of the fistula.
C: Laying the tension-free palatal flap and raising the
mucosal finger flap.
D: The palatal flap is sutured in place.
E: The mucosal finger flap is rotated and sutured to the
palatal mucosa.
EMERGENCIES
139
D
-Mucogingival
line
Exposed
alveolar bone
Scarified
attached gingiva
Fig. 12.8 Repair of oronasal fistula complicated by
A: Oronasal fistula at the upper left canine site. The box
indicates the area drawn in detail.
B: Raising the palatal flap and scarifying the attached
gingiva.
C: Laying the palatal flap and raising the mucosal finger
flap.
 D: The lifted palatal flap is sutured in place and the finger
flap lifted.
E: The mucosal finger flap is rotated and sutured to the
palatal mucosa.
140  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
periodontium. They are generally the result of a
obvious visually. However, at times it can be
road traffic accident, blunt blow to the face or
difficult to determine if the pulp is exposed by
chewing on hard objects.
the fracture line and general anesthesia for
examination with a dental explorer and
Tooth fracture
radiography are necessary.
Complicated crown fractures always need
Tooth fracture may affect the crown (Fig. 12.9),
treatment. An exposed pulp will become
the crown and root (Fig. 12.10) or just the root
inflamed and may eventually undergo necrosis.
(Fig. 12.11).
The inflammation can spread from the pulp to
involve the periapical area (Fig. 12.12). A primary
tooth with complicated crown fracture should be
Crown
extracted to avoid damage to the adjacent
Crown fractures are classified as complicated if
developing permanent tooth. A permanent tooth,
the fracture line exposes the pulp to the oral
if unaffected by periodontal disease, can be
environment and as uncomplicated if they do not
 treated by means of endodontic therapy. If the
involve pulpal exposure. Crown fractures are
tooth  has periodontitis or  the  fracture is too
A
Fig. 12.9 Types of tooth crown injuries.
They require no treatment, but the tooth should be monitored for signs of pulp and periapical disease.
B: Uncomplicated crown fracture affecting only the enamel. Treatment consists of smcothing off jagged edges.
EMERGENCIES141
D
Fig. 12.9  Types of tooth crown injuries. (Cont'd)
 D: Complicated crown fracture, i.e. pulp chamber is exposed. This is an indication for endodontic therapy.
extensive, then extraction is the treatment
teeth might well be present in the adult animal
of choice. In fact, with complicated crown
if trauma to the developing teeth caused pulp
 fractures extraction is preferable to no treatment
necrosis (Fig. 12.13).
at all.
Uncomplicated
  crown  fractures  may  also
Immature permanent teeth are a special
require treatment as the exposed dentine tubules
consideration in that viable pulp is necessary for
allow communication between pulp and oral
apexogenesis (continued root growth and closure
environment and can thus result in inflammation
 of the root apex). Thus, a specific endodontic pro-
or death of the pulp. An uncomplicated crown
p pre adnd ed Au 'am
fracture usually requires minimal treatment, e.g.
pulp capping, is indicated if the pulp is still vital.
removal of sharp edges with a bur and sealing of
Necrotic immature permanent teeth also need
the exposed dentine with a suitable liner or
endodontic treatment if they are to be maintained.
restorative material. However, such fractures do
The aim of treatment is to achieve apexification
require monitoring (clinical examination and
(closure of the root apex in the absence of further
raciography) at regular intervals to ensure that the
root development). In most instances, necrotic
pulp remains vital. If pulp and periapical disease
immature permanent teeth should be extracted.
develop, the tooth requires either exraction or
 It must be remembered that immature permanent
endodontic therapy.
142VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 12.10 Types of crown and root fractures.
A: Uncomplicated crown and root fracture.
B:Complicated crown and root fracture.
C: Complicated crown and root fracture, which usually involves damage to the alveolar bone.
 D: Long axis crown and root fracture. This is an absolute indication for extraction.
EMERGENCIES
143
Fig. 12.12 Pulp and periapical disease. An exposed
Fig. 12.11 Horizontal root fractures. 1: Fracture of
pulp will become inflamed and eventually undergo
apical segment. 2: Midroot fracture. Both 1 and 2 will heal
necrosis. The inflammation can spread from the pulp to
with immobilization. 3: Fracture of the coronal root close to
involve the periapical area.
the gingival margin. This fracture is unlikely to heal. If the 
root is to be retained, it needs endodontic treatment.
Fig. 12.13 Immature permanent
maxillary 1st molar in an 11-year-old
dog. The trauma that caused the
complicated tooth fracture with 
consequent pulp and periapical
disease occurred when the animal was
less than 1 year old.
144VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Crown and root
Damage to the periodontium
Fractures that involve both the crown and root of
pod a on An n A 
a tooth are also classified as complicated
or
 allowing the tooth to subluxate, luxate or avulse
uncomplicated, depending on whether the pulp
from its alveolus (Fig. 12.15).
is involved in the fracture line or not.
Treatment of crown and root fractures depends
Subluxation
 on how far below the gingival margin the fracture
line extends. If the fracture line does not involve the
In a subluxation, the periodontium has been
pulp and does not extend more than 4-5 mm below
damaged so that the tooth is loosened in its
the gingiva, restorative dentistry can be performed.
alveolus. Tooth mobility is limited to increased
If the pulp is exposed, endodontic therapy needs to
horizontal movement. The tooth has not been
be performed prior to restoration. If the fracture
 displaced in a vertical direction. No treatment is
line extends more than 5 mm below the gingiva
indicated except soft food and no toys for a week.
then the tooth should usually be extracted.
Pulp vitality of the traumatized tooth does need
to be monitored, as pulp necrosis is the most
Root
common complication.
Root fractures may be horizontal or oblique. In
Luxation
 general, horizontal root fractures have the best
prognosis. A tooth with a long axis fracture is an
Luxation of a tooth can be either in a vertical
absolute indication for extraction.
direction, i.e. an intrusion or an extrusion, or in a
Abnormal mobility, horizontal or vertical,
lateral direction
of a periodontally sound tooth may lead you to
An intrusion occurs when the tooth is pushed
suspect a root fracture. Definitive diagnosis of
apically. This pushes the tooth into the alveolar
root fractures depends on radiography. The
bone. The tooth is not usually abnormally mobile
choice of correct treatment, i.e. fixation or
as it is firmly embedded in the alveolar bone.
extraction, is only possible based on a definitive
Clinically, the tooth is shorter than its neighbors
diagnosis. Fixation is by means of ligature wire 
 as it is pushed into the alveolus. Radiographically.
and  acrylics.  Radiographic monitoring
of
the periodontal membrane is narrower.
treatment is required.
An extrusion occurs when the tooth is dis-
The fracture level determines the choice of
located vertically from the alveolus. The tooth is
treatment for horizontal root fractures. A fracture in
mobile in both horizontal and vertical directions
the apical region carries a better prognosis than a
and appears longer than its neighbors. Radio-
fracture close to the gingival margin. A horizontal
 graphically, the periodontal space is increased.
fracture of the coronal part of the root is, in most
A lateral tooth luxation (Fig. 12.16) occurs
cases, an indication for tooth extraction. Horizontal
when the trauma pushes the crown in a palatal/
midroot and apical fractures will heal if the tooth is
lingual direction and the root in a labial/buccal
immobilized. Horizontal root fractures can heal by
direction or vice versa. This type of luxation is
means of a dentino-cemental callus, connective 
always associated with a fracture of the palatal/
tissue union, fibrous union, or an osteofibrous
 lingual or labial/buccal alveolar bone plate, which
union (Fig. 12.14). If the pulp of the coronal frag-
 allows the tooth to luxate rather than fracture.
ment becomes necrotic, the fracture will not heal.
A luxated tooth needs repositioning and
Endodontic treatment of the coronal segment is
 (s p m i n 
then indicated. The apical segment may be left in
soon as possible. Endodontic therapy of the
place if there is no radiographic evidence of peri-
affected tooth, either immediately or after heal-
pical pathology. If there is radiographic evidence of
ing, is generally required. Consequently, prompt
referral to a clinician specializing in veterinary
removed.
dentistry is indicated.
EMERGENCIES145
Fig. 12.14 Types of root fracture healing.
A: Formation of a dentino-cemental callus.
B: Connective tissue union.
C: Union by connective tissue and bone.
and retrograde root filling.
146  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
：
Bruising
Fig. 12.15 Subluxation, luxation and avulsion of teeth.
A: Subluxation. The damage to the periodontium leads to loosening of the tooth. There is increased horizontal movement.
but the tooth has not been displaced in a vertical direction.
B: Intrusion. The tooth has been pushed apically. Clinicaly. the tooth is shorter than its neighbors as it has been pushed
into the alveolus. It is not mobile, being firmly embedded in bone.
Avulsion
avulsed tooth has been out of its bony socket and
An avulsed tooth has been completely extruded
the medium in which the tooth has been stored
from its alveolus. It needs to be replaced in its
during this period. The sooner an avulsed tooth
socket and fixed in its normal position.
is replaced the better the prognosis. Optimal
Contraindications for replacing and fixating
 prognosis is achieved if the tooth is back in its
an avulsed tooth are:
alveolus within 30 minutes or less of avulsion.
The avulsed tooth should not be allowed to dry.
· Primary tooth
The best medium in which to store an avulsed
· Periodontitis
tooth is saline, or, if not available, in milk. An
● Extensive caries or resorptive lesion.
avulsed tooth will require endodontic therapy
after it has healed back in its alveolus. Prompt
The two most important factors determining the
referral to a person specializing in veterinary
result of treatment are the length of time the
dentistry is required.
EMERGENCIES
147
Fig. 12.15 Subluxation, luxation and avulsion of teeth.
(0,1u0)
C: Extrusion. The tooth is dislocated vertically from the
 alveolus. It is mobile in both horizontal and vertical
directions, and appears longer than its neighbors.
D: Lateral luxation. This cccurs when the trauma pushes
the crown in one direction and the root in the opposite 
direction. Fracture of the labial/buccal or palatal/lingual
alveolar bone plate allows the tooth to luxate rather than
fracture.
E: Avulsion. The tooth has been totally removed from its
alveolus by the trauma.
148 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 12.16 Lateral tooth luxation.
The trauma (dog fight) has pushed the
crown of the maxillary canine in a
buccal direction and the root in a
palatal direction.
Jaw fracture
extraction technique can result in iatrogenic
fracture of an already weakened mandible. Pre-
Jaw fracture is common in small animal practice.
operative radiographs prior to tooth extraction
Most are the result of road traffic accidents and
 are mandatory.
 are frequently compound. However, disease pro-
 The upper jaw consists of the premaxilla,
qns asnen Aeu shnupoad se qons sasson
 maxilla and nasal bones. All of these are thin
severe bone loss that spontaneous jaw fracture
 plates of bone surrounding an air-filled cavity
occurs (Fig. 12.17). The most common site for such
 and, therefore, fracture easily at the site of impact.
spontaneous fracture is the mandibular premolar
 The location of common mandibular fractures in
region and it is frequently bilateral. Rough
 the dog and cat is summarized in Figure 12.18.
Fig. 12.17 Spontaneous jaw fracture
due to advanced periodontitis.
EMERGENCIES149
Bi
Bii
Fig. 12.18 Common locations for mandibular
fractures.
A: Dog.
B: Cat.
150 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Pressures of
occlusion
Tension side
Compression side
Fig.12.19 The compression and tension sides of the mandible.
Biomechanics of jaw fracture repair
complication is that the nasal cavity may be
exposed because of the fracture. There is often
The pressures of occlusion tend to push the
damage to intranasal structures that may reduce
rostral end of the maxilla dorsally and the rostral
or prevent air movement through the nose for
end of the mandible ventrally. The caudal areas
 some time after the injury.
of these bones, embedded in muscle, are more
 In general, maxillary fractures will need repair
stable. Hence, the occlusal surface of both the
if they cause:
maxilla and the mandible is the tension side. The
compression side of the maxilla is the nasal
Malocclusion
chamber and of the mandible is its ventral border
·Instability
(Fig. 12.19). If a fracture causes malocclusion
●Facial deformity
it is essential to restore and maintain normal or
 near normal occlusion during the healing
 Oronasal communication
· Obstruction of the nasal cavity.
process.
Mandibular fractures will need repair if they
Indications for repair
cause:
Many fractures do not need surgical fixation,
·Malocclusion
particularly those where the fracture lines are
·Instability.
contained within the areas of attachment of the
masticatory muscles, as the muscles will effectively
Stable fractures if causing malocclusion need
splint the fracture during healing.
Although many fracfures of the upper jaw
repair to recreate a normal occlusion.
require only conservative treatment, others are
more complex to manage. The upper jaw consists
of relatively thin bone supporting the teeth and
Principles of jaw fracture repair
framing the nasal cavity. Rigid fixation of these
The main guidelines for successful jaw fracture
thin plates of bone is rarely possible. An additional
repair are:
EMERGENCIES 151
● Simple technique
 3. Measure the distance from the left upper
· Preserve soft tissue attachments
canine, behind the ears and back to the right
● Minimum implants
upper canine.
· Avoid tooth roots and periapical areas
 4. Cut a piece of wide tape twice this length
· Extract diseased teeth
(tape B).
· Restore and maintain occlusion.
 5. Lay tape B with sticky side out by placing
the middle of the tape behind the ears and
Ensuring correct occlusion is of paramount
bringing the ends forward to attach to tape
importance. The presence of an endotracheal tube
A on either side of the muzzle.
in the mouth makes this impossible. Intubation
6. Wrap another tape around the muzzle over
through a pharyngotomy incision (Ch. 2) allows
tape A, this time with the sticky side in.
an accurate assessment of the occlusion. The
This will secure tape B.
tongue is folded down into the pharynx, leaving
 7. Fold tape B backwards, sticking it to itself.
the mouth clear of obstructions.
8. Measure the distance from tape A to tape B
 over the forehead.
9. Cut a piece of wide tape twice this length
Methods of jaw fracture repair
(tape C).
Standard orthopedic techniques, e.g. pinning
10. Thread tape C, sticky side out, under tape A
and plating, are likely to damage the teeth and
over the forehead and under tape B and
are not recommended for jaw fracture repair.
then back over itself so it sticks to itself.
 The endodontic treatment required to repair the
damage caused to the teeth takes much longer
Orthopedic wiring. Interdental or inter-
than the initial fracture repair. Moreover, the
fragmentary cerclage/hemicerclage techriques
 d p s ns  n
 or combinations of these are useful in repairing
the damaged teeth. These techniques have,
 some jaw fractures. Primary fixation of large
therefore, largely been superseded by less inva-
fragments of the premaxilla and maxilla can be
sive techniques which minimize the damage to
achieved with wire sutures, tension wires, or
the teeth. Tape muzzle, orthopedic wiring.
intraosseous screws and wire. Pre- and intra-
 external fixation and intraoral acrylic splints are
operative radiographs are required to avoid
the most useful techniques in a general practice
damage to tooth roots and periapical areas.
situation.
Most veterinarians will be familiar with the
Tape muzzle. In many situations, a tape muzzle
technique of a cerclage wire behind the canine
for 3-4 weeks may provide sufficient stability for
teeth to stabilize fractures of the mandibular
the fracture to heal. It can also be used as tem-
symphysis (Fig. 12.20). An adaptation, which
porary support or as an adjunct to other methods
avoids placing a knot in the oral cavity, thus
of fixation. A tape muzzle is particularly useful in
reducing patient discomfort, is depicted in
dolicocephalic breeds. The interdigitation of the
Figure 12.21. In the cat, nylon suture material can
canine teeth prevents lateral movement 
of
be used instead of wire. The fracture usually
the jaw so the muzzle must be tight enough
heals in 4-6 weeks. Healing is confirmed radio-
to ensure that these teeth do interdigitate.
.A
 graphically and the wire is then removed.
0.5-1.ocm gap is left to allow eating and
Cerclage/hemicerclage techniques can also be
drinking.
used for fixation of fractures of the horizontal
 The procedure for making a tape muzzle is as
ramus of the mandible. Depending on the forces
follows:
involved 18-22 gauge wire should be used.
These techniques should only be performed
1. Clip the hair.
under strict radiographic control to avoid
2. Wrap wide tape around the muzzle with the
-3d seare xade poo1 pue 1o01 qool 0l a3euep
sticky side out (tape A).
and intraoperative radiographs must be taken.
152
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Skin
B
Skin
Fig. 12.20 Repair of a mandibular symphyseal fracture
Fig. 12.21A, B Repair of a mandibular symphyseal
with cerclage wiring.
fracture with surgical nylon (cat) or wire (dog or cat).
The suture knot is tied A beneath the skin (wire) or
The principles of using these wiring techniques
Fractures of the horizontal ramus between the
are:
canine and 1st premolar (Fig. 12.22) can be repaired
 by placing a wire suture close to the buccal margin 
· The wires must be perpendicular to the
of the fracture. Holes for the wire should be
fracture line
drilled between the teeth roots. There is no need
● Drilled holes must be at least 5 mm away
to raise a buccal flap to drill holes. The wire is
from the fracture line
tied over the mucosa. This will cause ulceration
· Drilled holes need to be angled slightly
butit soon heals once the wire has been removed.
 towards the fracture to improve tightening
To improve stability it may be useful to place a
on the medial aspect of the bone.
wire tension band on the ventral aspect of the
EMERGENCIES 153
Wire
suture
Wire
tension band
Fracture
Fig. 12.22Repair of fracture of the horizontal ramus of the mandible between the canine and the 1st premolar.
Radiography will reveal the state of the tooth roots and their exact location so that they can be avoided.
fracture. Access to the ventral border of the
mandible. Transverse pins are placed through
 mandible is through a skin incision
the mandible. Attach flexible plastic tubing to the
Fractures of the horizontal ramus caudal
pins to act as a mould for the acrylic bar. Ensure
to the first molar (Fig. 12.23) can be repaired
that normal occlusion is obtained. While main-
by using interdental cerclage wire in combi-
taining normal occlusion, acrylic is poured into
nation with a wire suture joining the bone
the plastic tubing to form the bar that will hold
fragments.
the pins in the correct position. Tooth roots and
The use of intraosseous screws and wire in the
 periapical areas should not be damaged by the
mandible is not advised, as it is virtually
placement of the pins.
 impossible to place the screws without damaging
Intraoral acrylic splints. These appliances are
the teeth.
particularly useful for mandibular fractures. Any
External fixation. In the upper jaw, fixation can
soft tissue injuries should be sutured or covered
be provided by transverse pinning and an acrylic
prior to making the splint to prevent wound con-
 bumper' bar, which holds the pins in the correct
tamination with acrylic. The technique (Fig.
alignment with respect to both the fracture lines
12.24) utilizes the teeth to splint the fracture. The
and the occlusion of the teeth. The fragments are
advantages of this technique are:
transfixed with pins and the ends of the pins are
· It is not invasive
around the nose. It is useful to use flexible plastic
· Perfect occlusion is maintained
tubing or gutter tubing as a mould for the acrylic.
· It is technically easy to do
 Ensure that occlusion is normal before fixing the
· It is a quick procedure, therefore requiring
pins in that position with the acrylic bar. Once
only a short anesthetic time.
again, it is essential that the placing of the pins
does not damage the teeth.
The results are excellent and the technique is
The bumper' bar technique described above
highly recommended.
for upper jaw fractures is also applicable to the
The procedure is as follows:
154 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Interdental
cerclage wire
Wiresuture
Fraccure line
Fig. 12.23 Repair of fracture of the horizontal ramus of the mandible caudal to the 1st molar. Pre- and intraoperative
radiographs to avoid tooth root damage are mandatory
1. The teeth are scaled and polished.
2. Orthopedic wire is bent to follow the dental
arcade.
3. Acid etchant is applied to the teeth for 30-60
seconds.
4. The etchant is removed using the air/water
syringe for 30 seconds.
5. The teeth are dried using the air syringe.
6. Boxing wax is placed on the buccal and
lingual aspects against the necks of the
mandibular teeth to prevent acrylic from
running onto the gingiva.
7. The wire is then placed against the buccal
tooth surfaces coronal to the gingiva.
8. Acrylic powder is poured over the teeth and
wire enclosed by the boxing wax. Liquid is
added to the powder and the mouth is
closed to ensure correct occlusion.
9. Once the acrylic has set, the wax is
removed.
 10. Any excess acrylic should be removed and
Fig. 12.24Intraoral acrylic splint in place to repair a
rough surfaces should be smoothed. This
mandibular fracture.
can be done before the acrylic has set.
The appliance can usually be removed after 4-6
weeks. The easiest way to remove the splint is to
EMERGENCIES  155
drill through the wire and acrylic at several
Complications
 points and then gently rotate the pieces.
Many of the possible complications of jaw
fractures are similar to those seen with fractures
Postoperative care following jaw fracture repair
elsewhere in the body and are dealt with in the
same way. These are:
· Daily flushing the oral cavity clean using a
chlorhexidine solution is advantageous if the
· Soft tissue trauma
animal allows it.
·Nonunion
· Liquid or soft food should be given for the
· Malunion
first three weeks. Most arimals will not need
· Infection.
nasogastric or pharyngostomy feeding.
· Systemic antibiotics are indicated in all cases
The two complications unique to the jaw are:
where the fracture is compound. See Chapter
 3 for more detail on use of antibiotics.
· Malocclusion
· Opiates and NSAIDs should be administered
· Endodontic problems.
during the early recovery phase. Refer to
Chapter 2 for more details on use of
Malocclusion is dealt with in Chapter 5 of this
analgesics.
book. Teeth that have become affected by pulp and
 periapical disease will need endodontic therapy
and should be referred to a person specializing in
veterinary dentistry.
Summary
Most dental emergencies follow facial or general trauma
Treatment should be prioritized and initial attention given to life-threatening problems or complications
ag pinous (areudodde j) ainsolo aa-uoisual pue anbuuoal auab 'juaapugap iabeael jlo saidiouud jeoibins poog
followed for all oral soft tissue injuries.
 Complicated crown fractures (pulp exposure) always need treatment by referral for endodontic therapy or else
extraction.
Root fractures can be treated by fixation (usually via referral) or extraction
Luxated and avulsed teeth usually require prompt referral to a specialist if the tooth is to be saved.
buziwujw pue uoisnjaoo buuleulew uo aa pinous siseydwa aul sanioe mel oi Aldde suoeapisuoo eioads
jatrogenic trauma during repair
13
Tooth extraction
Introduction
owners cannot perform home care, extraction is
required.
Tooth extraction is commonly indicated in small
animal practice. The procedure is often time
consuming and fraught with difficulties. The
Extensive destruction of dental hard tissue
problems experienced are usually attributable to
Extensive destruction of dental hard tissue occurs
 poor equipment and instrumentation, as well as
with dental caries and odontoclastic resorptive
unfamiliarity with extraction techniques. The
lesions. Teeth with caries can be treated either
purpose of this chapter is to aid the general prac-
with restoration alone, or in combination with
fitioner in selecting the correct techniques to extract
endodontic therapy if the pulp is also affected. In
teeth with minimal trauma.
advanced caries, however, most of the crown has
been destroyed and only the root(s) with inflamed
INDICATIONS
or necrotic pulp tissue remain in the alveolar
bone. These root(s) must be extracted to avoid
While there are some absolute indications (i.e. no
periapical pathology.
other treatment option exists) for extraction,
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORL) are
there are often alternative treatments available
detailed in Chapter ll. The current treatment
(e.g. endodontic therapy and restoration of a
recommendation for most teeth affected by ORL
complicated crown fracture), which would allow
is extraction. However, if there is no radiographic
a tooth to be maintained. Alternative treatment is
evidence of endodontic involvement and the
recommended for strategic teeth, i.e. the per-
roots are seen to be undergoing replacement
 manent canine and large posterior teeth, but only
resorption, crown amputation and flap closure is
if they are periodontally sound. However, treat-
justified, but this procedure requires long term
 postoperative radiographic monitoring.
pathology untreated.
Common conditions that generally require
extraction include the following.
Persistent primary teeth
Persistent primary teeth, i.e. primary teeth that
Advanced periodontitis
are still in place when their permanent counter-
parts start erupting, may interfere with the
 Periodontal therapy, in combination with rigorous,
normal eruption pathway of the permanent
lifelong home care, may allow some teeth with
counterparts, resulting in the development of
advanced loss of periodontal attachment to be I
 malocclusion. The primary incisors and canines
maintained. In many instances, when the peri- 2
 are the most common teeth that persist. Apart
odontal destruction is excessive and/or thef
from the risk of a malocclusion developing.
157
158 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
periodontal complications are likely. Hair and
Pulpal and periapical disease of a primary
other debris become trapped between the primary
tooth (due to a traumatic injury) may cause
 n p d sr nd p
 damage to the underlying developing permanent
plaque-induced periodontal breakdown. Persist-
 tooth. Consequently, a primary tooth affected by
 traumatic injury is also an absolute indication for
early in the animal's life (ideally at around the
extraction.
time that the homologous permanent tooth is
erupting) to reduce the likelihood of a malocclusion
developing and prevent periodontal complications.
Overcrowding/supernumerary teeth
Overcrowding of teeth, often the result of a skeletal
Malocclusion
malocclusion, e.g. an upper jaw or mandible that
is too short for the full complement of teeth to
Orthodontic techniques are available to correct/
have sufficient space for normal occlusion, will
modify malocclusion of the permanent dentition,
predispose to periodontitis. In such sifuations,
such that pain-free function is achieved. How-
early extractions of a selected few teeth can help
ever, there will be owners who will not be able to
afford these, usually multi-stage, procedures.
maintain the periodontal health of the other
teeth. Supernumerary teeth should be extracted
Alternatively, the patient may not be suitable for
if their presence results in overcrowding and
more than a single elective anesthesia. Ethical
periodontal complications.
considerations also play a role in deciding how
best to treat a malocclusion. In many circum-
stances extraction of maloccluding teeth, and /or
Teeth involved in a fracture line
their antagonist tooth will enable adequate
function.
Teeth are often involved in a fracture line. Such
 Primary teeth involved in malocclusion should
teeth may need removal depending on the jaw
be extracted before the eruption of their permanent
fracture repair method employed.
counterparts (i.e. at 6-8 weeks of age). This is
called ‘interceptive orthodontics'. It will allow
the upper jaw and mandible to develop to their
Contraindications
full genetic potential independently before the
There are probably no absolute contraindications
 permanent dental interlock forms. Interceptive
for extraction, but bleeding disorders or clotting
orthodontics will prevent dental interlock-induced
defects should be identified since a life-
malocclusion from developing. However, if the
developing malocclusion is of skeletal origin, the
threatening hemorrhage can follow extraction in
these patients.
value of interceptive orthodontics is negligible
since the permanent teeth will form the same
incorrect interlock.
TYPES OF EXTRACTION
Traumatic tooth injuries
There are two basic extraction techniques, namely:
Traumatic tooth injuries are common and may
1. Closed (nonsurgical)
involve fracture of the tooth or damage to the
periodontium. The management of these injuries 
 This can be defined as extraction using simple
to the permanent dentiftion is detailed in Chapter  luxation and/or elevation, without the need to
12. While many tooth crown fractures can be  remove alveolar bone. The extraction socket is
 either left open to heal by granulation or it may
oblique crown root fractures are an absolute
be closed by suturing the gingiva over the defect
indication for extraction.
 to achieve primary healing.
TOOTH EXTRACTION159
2. Open (surgical)
periodontal ligament space (instrument placement
can thus be more precise and the extraction is less
This techrique is where a mucoperiosteal flap is
traumatic to adjacent tissues) and healing is more
raised in order to access the alveolar bone. The
predictable.
. Human patients report less
alveolar bone overlying the buccal surface of the
postoperative discomfort following an open
tooth root is usually removed in order to facili-
technique than a closed technique. The same is
tate tooth removal. The mucoperiosteal flap is
probably true for our patients.
replaced to close the extraction socket, thus
allowing primary healing.
Choice of extraction technique
EXTRACTION TECHNIQUES
General considerations
The choice of either a closed or an open
technique will depend on several factors. The
Extraction of teeth is a surgical procedure. While
 most important are:
it is not possible to achieve a sterile environment
in the oral cavity, the mouth should be clean
1.
Tooth morphology
before extraction is performed. All teeth should
2.
 Existing pathology
be scaled and polished and the mouth rinsed
 3. Operator preference.
with a chlorhexidine solution.
It is essential to know the normal anatomy of
Preoperative radiographs are mandatory to
 the oral cavity to prevent iatrogenic damage, e.g.
evaluate the tooth morphology and extent of
 severing neurovascular structures, which would
 pathology necessitating the extraction.
result in sensory deficits and hemorrhage. Good
 Situations where an open extraction technique
visibility simplifies the procedure greatly. A good
is absolutely indicated (i.e. the tooth cannot tech-
light source is essential. In addition, use the
rically be removed using a closed technique, since
three-way syringe to clean the mouth out
alveolar bone must be removed to free the root)
frequently during the procedure. Use water only
include:
or water and air to clean away debris, followed
by air only to dry the tissues. The air spray
· Bizarre root morphology, with bends or
should be used sparingly (brief bursts) to avoid
spirals
soft tissue emphysema. Suction is extremely
· Extensive root resorption +/- ankylosis
useful and strongly recommended. Extraction is
· Periodontally sound upper and lower canines
easy if the periodontal ligament space can be
(the roots are curved and are wider below the
visualized and consequently
instruments
cemento-enamel junction than above it).
applied at the correct location. Contrary to
common belief, tooth extraction requires no
Situations where an open
technique may
force. It is best achieved by planned placement
facilitate extraction include:
of instruments and carefully working around
the whole circumference of the tooth cutting
●Retained root remnants
the periodontal ligament, thus releasing the
· Any multirooted tooth which is periodontally
tooth.
sound, i.e. there is no loss of alveolar bone
As already mentioned, preoperative radio-
(an open technique will make access to the
 graphs are mandatory to assess the extent of the
furcation and individual roots possible)
pathology and identify morphologic abnormalities.
· Feline teeth.
The clinical findings in combination with
pre
operative radiographs allow selection of the best
With the exception of teeth affected by advanced
extraction technique for each tooth. Intraoperative
periodontitis, I generally use an open extraction  1
 radiographs are recommended if the procedure
 h d s d o s   o s s  
160  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
of the extraction should be verified with
postoperative radiographs.
 Equipment and instrumentation requirements
for extraction are detailed in Chapter 1. Some
guidelines for the use of dental luxators and
elevators include:
· Select the appropriate size of instrument for
the size of the root
· Start with a small instrument and move up to
a larger one as more space is created between
the tooth and the alveolar bone
· Luxators should not be used for leverage as
this will damage the fine working end
· Elevators are used with a combination of
apical pressure and leverage.
Closed extraction
Single rooted teeth
Teeth suitable for this technique are incisors and
lst premolars in the dog and cat, and mandibular
3rd molars in the dog. It can also be used for
canine teeth with extensive bone loss due to severe
periodontitis.
Fig. 13.1 Cutting the gingival attachment to the tooth.
A scalpel blade or a sharp luxator is inserted into the
gingival sulcus until the instrument contacts the margin of
Procedure
1. Cut the gingival attachment around the
surface is released in this way around the whole
whole circumference of the tooth using either a
circumference of the tooth. This is the first step of any
 No. 1l or 15 scalpel blade in a handle or a sharp
extraction, irrespective of whether a closed cr cpen
technique is planned. There is no attempt to enter the
luxator (Figs 13.1 & 13.9A).
pericdontal ligament space at this stage. The purpose of
2.
 Select a luxator of the appropriate size. Its
this cut is just to free the gingival attachment.
concave surface should equal the curvature of
the root being extracted. This is often a larger
size than initially estimated. The instrument is
3.  The luxator is advanced into the gingival
held with the handle along the palm of the hand
sulcus at a slight angle to the tooth, i.e.
and the index finger resting on the shaft, with
following the surface of the tooth, and pressed
the tip of the finger close to the cutting end
into the periodontal ligament space (Fig. 13.3). If
(Fig. 13.2). The fingertip functions as an
the luxator is not inserted into the gingival
emergency stop should you slip, thereby
sulcus in the described fashion, it is likely to
 avoiding iatrogenic damage to surrounding
slide over the margin of the alveolar bone and
structures. With an average-sized hand, this will
raise the gingiva off the bone. This will lacerate
leave the end of the handle resting against the
the gingiva rather than break periodontal
wrist, where it can be gripped with the other
ligament fibers!
fingers. This grip prevents the excessive force,
 4.  The luxator is worked, applying gentle
which can be applied if the handle end rests in
 apical pressure, into the periodontal ligament
the center of the palm, forming a straight line of
 space around the whole circumference of the
force from the elbow!
tooth. The sharp luxator will cut the periodontal
TOOTH EXTRACTION 161
Fig. 13.2 The correct grip for a dental luxator or
elevator. The instrument is held with the handle along the
's aul uo busan abui xapui aul pue pueu aul jo wjed
with the tip of the finger close to the cutting end. The
dils nos pinous dois Aouabawe ue se suooun, dlabu
buipunouns ol abeuep duaboei buipiore Agaaul
structures
Fig. 13.3 Inserting a luxator into the periodontal
ligament. The luxator is advanced into the gingival sulcus
ligament fibers. Once sufficient space has been
at a slight angle to the tooth, i.e. following the surface of the
created between the tooth and the alveolar
tooth, and pressed into the periodontal ligament space. It is
bone, an elevator can be used. Some clinicians
worked around the whole circumference of the tooth, using
prefer to perform the whole extraction using
gentle apical pressure, cutting the periodontal ligament fibers.
luxators of increasing size, i.e. do not switch to
 elevators. This is acceptable procedure as long
tooth root (around the alveolus of the tooth).
as the luxators are used in the correct fashion,
This will allow tactile feedback as well as
i.e. in an apical direction, without rotation, to
minimize iatrogenic damage should slippage
cut the periodontal ligament fibers. Luxators
occur with the elevator. As the periodontal
should not be rotated, as this will damage the
ligament fibers break and the tooth begins to
fine end of the instrument.
loosen, the elevator can be pushed further
5.  The elevator (gripped in the hand in the
 apically, and rotated more. It is essential to work
same way as a luxator) is also worked
around the whole circumference of the tooth. It
circumferentially around the tooth, with a
is tempting to concentrate elevation at the
steady gentle rotational pressure held at each
 points where the tooth is most mobile. The
point for 10-15 seconds to fatigue the deeper
opposite should be performed, i.e. the elevator
periodontal fibers (Fig. 13.4). Hemorrhage will
should be worked more in positions where the
be created at the same time, which adds
tooth is least mobile. When the tooth is loose in
hydraulic pressure to the process of breaking
its socket, it is tempting to use extra force to
down the fibers. The other hand should be used
 speed up the extraction. Try to avoid this as it
to support the jaw and prevent any undue stress 
usually results in fracture of the root, which
on the jawbone. In addition, the thumb and
then needs to be retrieved.
index finger of the other hand should be placed
6. When the tooth is loose, it can be drawn out
on the buccal and palatal/lingual aspect of the
 of the socket with fingers or forceps. In my
162
2VETERINARY DENTISTRY
roots of multirooted teeth diverge away from
each other, which gives the tooth greater stability
in the mouth, but also makes it impossible to
extract the tooth as a single urit. For a visual
analogy, imagine the periodontally sound maxil-
lary 4th premolar as a tripod embedded in
concrete! Each root, therefore, needs to be drawn
 out at a different angle to its neighbour during
the extraction process. The obvious exception is
the tooth with such advanced periodontitis that
mobile and will, after careful breaking down of the
remaining periodontal fibers, come out as a unit. 1
would still recommend sectioning to avoid
iatrogenic root fracture.
The three-rooted teeth are the maxillary 4th
premolars in cats and the maxillary 4th premolars
and the maxillary lst and 2nd molars in dogs. All
other multirooted teeth have two roots. Note,
however, that supernumerary roots are quite
common. Preoperative radiographs will allow
detection of extra roots and allow optimal section-
ing into single rooted units. Different methods of
sectioning the multirooted teeth have been
 described. My preferred methods for sectioning
of the maxillary 4th premolar and 1st molar in
dogs and the mandibular lst molar in dogs and
cats are shown in diagrammatic form in Figures
Fig. 13.4 Using a dental elevator. The elevator (gripped
13.5-13.7.
in the hand in the same way as a luxator) is also worked
circumferentially around the tooth, with a steady gentle
rotational pressure held at each point for 10-15 seconds to
Procedure
fatigue the deeper periodontal fibers.
 1.  Cut the gingival attachment as described
earlier.
2.  Unless the furcation of the roots is exposed
experience, the use of dental forceps usually
by gingival recession, the gingiva will need to
results in fracture of the apical portion of the
be elevated to visualize these sites. This is best
root. I do not use them or recommend their use.
 achieved with a round-ended periosteal elevator
However, if they are used, make sure that the
 of the 'wax spatula' type. A periosteal elevator
forceps are applied as far apically as possible on
 can be held in the classic modified pen grip
 the root and use gentle rotational force applied
 traditionally used for dental instruments. It can
in a back and forth manner along the long axis
also be gripped in the same fashion as described
of the tooth.
for a dental luxator or elevator. My preference is
the latter, as it minimizes the potential trauma
induced by accidental slippage. The periosteal
Multirooted teeth
elevator is inserted into the space between the
The tooth is sectioned into single rooted units,
gingiva and the tooth pointing apically until
such that each unit can be removed as a single
 contact is made with the margin of the alveolar
rooted tooth. The reason for sectioning is that the
bone. The periosteal elevator is advanced and
TOOTH EXTRACTION 163
Fig. 13.5 Tooth sectioning - maxillary 4th premolar.
A: Shorten the crown (horizontal cut through tooth) using either a fissure bur or a round bur to improve access to the
furcation.
 B: Identify the furcation between the mesiobuccal and distal roots. Insert a round bur into the furcation and drill through the
y aui saeedas sul umn aui oui dn bun anag ueng aul lapun auog leoaae aui ui uuni e buein unung
into two units.
 C: In the periodontally sound tooth, it can be difficult to clearly identify the furcation between the mesiobuccal and
It is relatively easy to miss the furcation. Another option is to extract the distal crown/root unit before sectioning the mesial
tooth structure into its two crown/root units. Visualization is greatly improved when the distal portion has been removed.
umoo aui ybnoui dn papuaxa uaul ino au pue sioou eisaw oml au jo uoeouny aul lapun palup ag ueo auuni y
164
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
A
Fig. 13.7 Tooth sectioning - mandibular 1st molar.
Fig. 13.6 Tooth sectioning - maxillary 1st molar.
A: Shorten the crown.
A: Shorten the crown.Identify the furcation between the
B: Identify the furcaticon between the mesial and distal roots
and drill from the furcation up through the crown to
buccal tooth unit (contains mesial and distal root) and the
palatal unit (contains palatal root). Drill from the furcation in 
separate the mesial and distal tooth/root units.
a coronal direction to separate tooth into these two units.
B: Identify the furcation between the mesial and distal roots
D umoo aui yhnou dn uoeouny aul wo lp pue
separate the mesial and distal tooth/root units.
There is no absolute rule that the above needs to be the 
sequence of events. In many situations, it may be easier to
separate the mesial and distal tooth/root units first. Use the
technique that is most reproducible and creates least tissue
trauma in your hands.
TOOTH EXTRACTION 165
gently rotated, peeling the attached gingiva off
following multiple mandibular premolar and
the underlying bone, to raise a full thickness
molar extractions since the gingiva tends to fall
gingival flap. Keep the elevator close to the
away from the extraction site, leaving exposed
bone to ensure that the flap is full thickness.
bone. Always elevate sufficient gingiva to allow
 Holding around the alveolus with the thumb
suturing without tension, or wound breakdown
and index finger of the other hand is useful; it
will inevitably occur.
facilitates keeping the elevator close to the bone
 and minimizes potential trauma if slippage
Open extraction
occurs.
3.
 The tooth is sectioned into single rooted
An open extraction technique can be used for all
units using a bur in either a slow- or high-speed
teeth. In open extractions, a mucoperiosteal flap
hand piece. Traditionally a 70l taper fissure cut
is raised (usually on the buccal aspect of the tooth)
bur has been recommended for sectioning teeth.
to expose the alveolar bone. Releasing incisions
It is inserted into the furcation and the cut is
(from the gingival margin to beyond the muco-
then extended coronally (i.e. towards the
gingival line) are usually placed at one or both
occlusal surface). I find fissure burs difficult to
ends of the initial incision to allow the flap to be
use for this purpose, unless the furcation is
raised past the mucogingival junction, thus
open, as they do not cut efficiently when the
 exposing most of the buccal bone plate. The inci-
end is used (the cutting surfaces of a fissure bur
sions should be placed over bone. The number,
are its sides). In my hands, a better method is to
length and position of the releasing incisions
use a round bur (size 4-6 for cats and 6-8 for
depend on the exposure required to perform the
dogs), since this can be used to cut a tunnel in
extraction. The flap needs to be large enough for
the alveolar bone under the furcation before
 good visualization. It also needs to allow enough
cutting up into the crown. Using a round bur
space to remove alveolar bone without damaging
will usually create a larger slot in the crown
the flap. A large flap will heal at the same speed
than if a fissure bur is used. This aids insertion
as a small flap. My recommendation is to start
of the luxator or elevator between the two
large; with increasing experience and skill, smaller
crown/root units created. At all times, water-
flaps will be required. It is essential to protect the
cooling is essential to prevent thermal damage
flap during the procedure, as this is the tissue
 to surrounding tissues. An alternative to the
that will be used to suture over the extraction
round bur is a pear-shaped bur, e.g. 33lL type,
socket. Plastic spatulas or gingival retractors can
which cuts both on the end and on the shank.
be used to keep the flap intact. Asking an assist-
4.
 Luxate and elevate the single root urits as
ant to work the spatula or retractors will make
already described for a single rooted tooth. In
the exraction easier and quicker, as well as prevent
addition to using the elevator in an apical
iatrogenic damage to the flap.
direction, it can be inserted in a horizontal
Once the tooth has been removed, the flap is
fashion between the tooth root and bone, and
replaced and sutured to the palatal/lingual
rotated to lift the tooth roots out of their alveoli
mucosa to close the extraction socket. There must
(Fig. 13.8).
be no tension on the suture line. If there is tension,
 5.  Any sharp bony edges should be removed
wound healing is compromised and the flap is
with a round bur or bone cutters. The loose
likely to dehisce. If necessary, bluntly dissect the
 gingiva should be protected, e.g. with a plastic
flap submucosally towards the lip margin in order
spatula.
to gain more tissue. In addition, ensure that the
6.
 Unless the gingiva lies flat against the
edge of the palatal/lingual mucosa is free by
alveolar bone after extraction, suturing the
gently inserting the periosteal elevator between
extraction socket closed should be considered to
the bone and soft tissue. Lowering the margin of
speed healing, prevent infection, and reduce
remaining alveolar bone will also help reduce
postoperative pain. Suturing is mandatory
tension. If it is not possible to fully close the flap
166 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
B
Fig. 13.8 Using a dental elevator in a horizontal fashion.
(shown in cross section in the illustration) and rotated on its long axis to help tear periodontal fibers, so loosening the root. It
uee aun ou 'wnnn aui se pasn si uibhew oae aui leui ansua as yom ui eisp pue Aeisau pasn ag ose uen
tooth.
B: The elevator is inserted between the tooth sections and gently rotated.
C: The elevator is inserted distally. Note that the alveolar bone is used as the fulcrum, i.e. not the mesial surface of the 1st
molar, to prevent iatrogenic loosening of the molar!
Maxillary canine
without tension, then leave an opening. Leaving
an opening is preferable to tension! The opening will
Procedure
heal by granulation.
1.
 The gingival attachment around the whole
In the following, the maxillary canine tooth
circumference of the canine is cut (Fig. 13.9A).
will be used to exemplify the details of the open
This incision is then extended rostrally to the
extraction technique. Differences for other teeth
distal aspect of the 3rd incisor and distally to
will be highlighted as required.
the mesial or distal aspect of the 2nd premolar
TOOTHEXTRACTION167
using a No. 11 or No. 15 blade in a handle. This
to stretch the fibers, and held for 10-30 seconds
 involves cutting the buccal gingival attachment
at a time, repeating each side until the tooth
of the lst and 2nd premolars.
becomes loose, and can be easily removed. It is
2.
 Short releasing incisions (extending from
useful to also use a luxator to cut the buccal
the gingival margin to just beyond the
apical periodontal fibers.
 mucogingival line) are placed at the rostral and
7.
 The bur is used to smooth the edges of the
distal ends of the initial incision. Some clinicians
alveolus. If the socket is filled with debris.
 prefer a long distal releasing incision (Fig
this should gently be flushed out prior to
13.10A). Make the releasing incisions parallel or
closure. Ensure a clean clot forms in the socket
slightly divergent to ensure that the base of the
(Fig. 13.9E).
flap is broader than the edge and blood supply
 8.  The flap is replaced and sutured to the
 to the flap is thus not compromised.
palatal mucosa to close the extraction socket.
 3.  Periosteal elevators are used to lift the gingiva
There must be no tension on any of the sutures.
and mucosa from the bone overlying the buccal
If necessary, bluntly dissect the flap
aspect of the canine root (Figs 13.9B & 13.10B).
submucosally towards the lip margin in order to
Extend the releasing incisions if necessary. I
gain more tissue. Ensure that the edge of the
usually work the periosteal elevators from the
 palatal mucosa is free by gently inserting the
gingival incision in an apical direction. Use a
 periosteal elevator between the bone and soft
gentle technique, especially at the mucogingival
tissue. Use simple interrupted sutures and an
junction, to prevent tearing of the flap with the
absorbable sufure material with a swaged on
periosteal elevators. Remember this fissue will be
needle (Fig. 13.9F). Proper placement of
required to close the exraction socket.
releasing incisions should ensure all edges at
4.  The buccal bone plate overlying the root is
the time of repair are supported by bone. If it is
drilled away. It is usually not necessary to
not possible to fully close the flap without
remove bone to the apex, only to two thirds of
tension, then leave an opening. Leaving an
the root length (Figs 13.9 C & 13.10 C). A size
opening is preferable to tension! The opening
2 or 4 bur is best for cats, a size 6 for dogs, and
will heal by granulation.
size 8 for giant breeds. Water cooling of the bur
is mandatory to avoid thermal damage to the
Mandibular canine
bone. A feather-light, stroking motion with the
bur enables removal of the bone without
Extraction of a periodontally sound mandibular
digging into the tooth substance. Bone can
canine is difficult. Patience and gentle technique
readily be differentiated from tooth: bone has a
 are encouraged! This tooth can be extracted using
 grayish color and bleeds, cementum/dentine is
either a buccal or a lingual approach. If using a
white and avascular.
buccal approach, be careful to avoid damage to
5.
 Use the round bur to create a trough or
the neurovascular bundle exiting the mental
 gutter between the tooth root and the alveolar
foramina while raising the flap. A lingual approach
bone on the rostral and distal root surfaces. Try
is possible, but gives poor visualization.
to remove bone and not drill into the root
My preferred method is a combined buccal
 surface, or the tooth may fracture during
and lingual approach as follows:
elevation (Figs 13.9 C & 13.10 C).
6. Place an elevator in one of the troughs and
1. The buccal flap is raised in a similar fashion
rotate the elevator along its long axis. This
to that described for the maxillary canine. The
action will rotate the tooth along its long axis
 large neurovascular bundle exiting at one of the
(Figs 13.9D & 13.10D). The aim is to break down
 mental foramina (usually the middle foramen)
the palatal periodontal fibers and those of the
must not be transected. It is visualized and
root tip, but avoid levering the root tip into the
carefully dissected free so it can be reflected
nasal cavity (Fig. 13.10E). The elevator is rotated
together with the flap.
168
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
D
Fig. 13.9 Open extraction - maxillary canine (clinical slides).
A: Cutting the epithelial attachment.
 B: A full-thickness flap extending from the gingival margin past the mucogingival junction has been elevated to expose most
C: Approximately two thirds of the buccal bone plate overlying the root has been drilled away (a size 6 round bur in a high-
speed hand piece was used). The bone overlying the apical third of the root has not been removed. In addition, a gutter
D: An appropriately sized elevator has been placed in the mesial gutter. The instrument is rotated along its long axis. It is
held in tension for 10-30 seconds at a time, alternating between mesial and distal until the tooth becomes loose. It is useful
aui ui Alea paaow ag ueo l! leui asool os si yiooi aui aouo siaa leuopoad jeoide jeoong aui ino di lotexnl e asn 0l
socket, it can be gripped with fingers and lifted out.
E: Ensure that a clean coagulum forms in the socket.
 F: The flap has been replaced and sutured to the palatal mucosa to close the extraction socket. There must be no tension on
the suture line!
TOOTH EXTRACTION 169
Fig. 13.10 Open extraction - maxillary canine
(diagrammatic representation).
A: The primary incision and two releasing incisions have
been placed.
 B: The flap has been raised and reflected rostrally
C:Buccal bone plate has been removed and the mesial
and distal gutters between bone and tooth have been 
created.
D: Elevators are applied to rotate the tooth along its long
axis to break the periodontal ligament fibers and loosen the
tooth.
E: Sectional view of placement of the elevator in the gutter
(G). Note the thin layer of bone on the nasal aspect of the
maxillary canine alveolus.
170 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
2. A gingival flap is also raised on the lingual
attachment around the whole circumference of
aspect of the tooth. It needs to be just large
the upper 4th premolar, the incision is extended
 enough to provide access to the lingual margin
 rostrally to the midbuccal aspect of the maxillary
 of the alveolar bone. A short lingual releasing
3rd premolar and caudally to the distal edge of
incision placed distal to the canine tooth is used
the lst molar. One divergent releasing incision
if necessary.
extending just past the mucogingival line is made
3.
Approximately 30% of the buccal alveolar
at the distal aspect of the 1st molar. Placing only
bone plate is drilled away. The bone is removed to
the one releasing incision distally avoids damage
a level just apical to where the root is at its widest.
 to the neurovascular bundle exiting at the infra-
4.
 The crown is amputated just above the
orbital foramen, dorsal to the 3rd premolar.
cemento-enamel junction (round or fissure bur)
The flap for the maxillary lst molar needs to
to allow easier access to the lingual surface.
extend from the midbuccal aspect of the 4th pre-
5.
 Approximately 20% of the lingual alveolar
molar to the distal aspect of the 2nd molar. A
bone plate is drilled away. Ensure that the flap
short releasing incision can be placed at the mid-
is protected from the bur.
buccal aspect of the 4th premolar.
6. Mesial and distal gutters between tooth root
The flap for the maxillary 2nd molar extends
and bone are created bucally as described for
from the midbuccal aspect of the lst molar to the
the maxillary canine.
distal aspect of the 2nd molar. No releasing inci-
 7. To loosen the tooth, elevators are used in
sions are usually required.
the buccal mesial and distal gutters as described
The flap for the lower molars usually only
for extraction of the maxillary canine. In
needs to extend to the adjacent teeth, with the
addition, luxators should be used to cut the
releasing incisions at each end diverging as they
buccal apical periodontal fibers. On the lingual
 pass through the mucogingival line.
aspect, luxators are used to cut periodontal
 In all teeth, buccal bone is removed to expose
ligament fibers and create enough space for
the furcation and the tooth is sectioned into its
 elevators of increasing size to be used. Working
constituent root/crown urits. Further removal of
in this fashion, the periodontal ligament is
alveolar bone (start with approximately 30% of
progressively destroyed around the whole
the alveolar bone plate) will facilitate extraction.
circumference of the root until the tooth is loose
If necessary, e.g. ankylosis, the whole buccal bone
 and can be lifted out with your fingers.
plate can be removed. However, use caution when
8.1
 It may be necessary to remove additional
removing large amounts of buccal bone. It is
alveolar bone, especially lingually Try to
essential to know the anatomy of your patient,
 maintain as much of the alveolar bone as possible
e.g. the mesiobuccal root of the maxillary 4th
to preserve the strength of the mandible.
 premolar is close to the infraorbital canal, and the
 Close the defect by suturing the buccal flap
 mandibular lst molar root tips are adjacent to the
to the lingual flap. There must be no tension on
mandibular canal.
the suture line.
 To reduce tension on the suture line, remember
to free the palatal/lingual mucosa from the
underlying bone.
Maxillary 4th premolars and maxillary and
mandibular molars in the dog
Primary teeth
These teeth, if periodontally compromised, can
be removed by sectioning, and closed extraction.
Primary teeth can be extracted using either a
If the teeth are periodontally sound, open extrac-
closed or an open technique. Preoperative radio-
tion is recommended.
graphs are mandatory to give information
The flap for the maxillary 4th premolar extends
as to the position and extent of primary tooth
from the middle of the 3rd premolar to the distal
root resorption and the location and stage of
edge of the 1st molar. After cutting the gingival
development of the adjacent permanent tooth.
TOOTH EXTRACTION 171
Closed extraction is indicated when the root is
root remnants may resorb, others may result in
virtually resorbed. In most other situations,
inflammatory disease. In the latter case, a second
visualization will aid the procedure and open
attempt to retrieve them should be performed.
extraction is my technique of choice. The details
Multirooted teeth in the cat can be removed
of the extraction procedure are the same as for
using either a closed or an open technique. The
 permanent teeth but use care to avoid damage to
closed technique is identical to that described for
adjacent developing permanent dentition.
the dog. Gentle technique is essential. In addition,
ensure selection of appropriately sized instru-
ments to avoid iatrogenic root fracture. Open
Special considerations with feline
 extraction is similar to that described for the dog.
teeth
Suggested modifications in the cat will be covered
The most common diseases necessitating tooth
in the next paragraph. Irrespective of extraction
extraction in cats are odontoclastic resorptive
 technique, multirooted teeth always need to be
 lesions (ORL), periodontitis and traumatic dental
sectioned into single rooted segments. My
injuries resulting in pulpal exposure.
preference in the cat is open extraction unless
there is severe periodontitis and the tooth is very
Small single rooted teeth
mobile.
A modified technique for extracting multi-
In the cat, the incisors, the maxillary 2nd pre-
rooted teeth in the cat is proposed. The aim of the
molar and the maxillary molar are small single
modification is to simplify removal and preserve
 rooted teeth. They can generally be removed using
alveolar bone. In the following, it is described for
a closed technique. The technique is the same as
the mandibular teeth. The method can be adapted
already described for the dog, but use a gentle
for removal of the maxillary multirooted teeth.
approach and make sure that the luxators and
elevators used are of an appropriate size for the
 Raise a gingival flap both buccally and
tooth.
lingually.
2.
Remove enough alveolar bone to expose the
Canine teeth
furcation (Fig. 13.11A).
The canine teeth, unless affected by severe
A small round bur, size 2 usually, is used to
make two cuts from the furcation at 45°, one
periodontitis, require an open extraction technique
as described for the dog.
distally and one rostrally (Fig. 13.11B).
These cuts will remove the bulk of the
crown, leaving only a small point of crown
Multirooted teeth
on each individual root.
hn the cat, these are the maxillary and mandibular
4.
Use either a size 2 or a size 4 round bur to
3rd and 4th premolars and the mancibular molar.
remove the cancellous bone between the
These teeth are every veterinary surgeon's night-
two roots. The depth should be the same as
mare due to the ease with which they fracture
the root length, but not long enough to
during extraction. This leaves roots, with or
enter the mandibular canal (Fig. 13.1lC). If
without pieces of crown attached, which must be
in doubt, measure the distance on your
removed. Although it might be tempting to leave
radiographs.
these roots and hope they will resorb, or the 
5.
 Each root is then only supported by bone on
gingiva will grow over them, this is negligent.
three sides. A small luxator or elevator can
Every attempt should be made to retrieve such
be eased into the space created by the bur
root remnants. If this is not technically possible,
and the roots can be loosened and removed.
the owner must be informed that extraction was
6.
 If necessary, remove additional buccal bone.
incomplete. Postoperative clinical and radio-
 7. Remove any sharp bony edges.
graphic monitoring is mandatory. While some
 8. Suture the buccal flap to the lingual flap.
172
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Bur away cancellous
bone between roots
Root
Root
Bur awaybone
to reveal
furcation
Cut outward
Cut outward
withbur
with bur
Fig. 13.11 Extraction of feline lower molar.
A: After raising the gingival flaps, bur away the shaded
area of bone. Remove enough of the buccal alveolar bone
plate to clearly expose the furcation.
B: Make two cuts from the furcation at 45°, one rostrally and
one distally. and drill from the furcation towards the occlusal
surface of the crown. These cuts section the tooth into two
single rooted units and remove the bulk of the crown
C: (View looking down on mandible). Bur away the
cancellous bone between the two roots. The depth should
be the same as the root length. Be careful not to enter the
mandibular canal.
COMPLICATIONS OF EXTRACTION
and can be visualized, it is removed using small
luxators and elevators to cut the remaining
Thermal bone injury
periodontal ligament fibers. This is where a small
Adequate water cooling of the bur (whether used
(2 mm) luxator or root tip pick come in handy.
in a high- or slow-speed hand piece) is manda-
Visibility is essential to be able to place instru-
tory. Overheating will result in damage to both
ments in the periodontal ligament space. Use the
the soft tissue and bone. Thermal necrosis of
water spray to remove blood.
bone usually results in the development of a bone
 If the root fractures, a radiograph is required
sequestrum that needs to be surgically retrieved
to assess how much root is still in place and its
as a second procedure.
position. Based on the radiographic findings, the
extraction can be planned. An open extraction
may be required to access the root remnant. As a
Tooth fracture
last resort, small retained root tips may be
Extraction may result in fracture of the tooth,
atomized, i.e. using a bur to drill away remaining
either the crown or the root. Fracture of the crown
tooth substance. A radiograph to ensure that all
is usually due to excessive force with elevators or
 tooth substance has been removed is mandatory.
using dental forceps. If the root is in one piece
Also, use extreme caution to avoid excessive
TOOTH EXTRACTION173
damage to bone and adjacent structures. If the
obvious crepitus on palpation of the swelling.
root tip cannot be removed, the client must be
Alternatively, the floor of the mouth is swollen.
informed and the affected jaw monitored clinically
The condition usually resolves over a few hours/
and radiographically for evidence of pathology
days. The owners are often concerned and itis best
avoided.
Oronasal communication
Sublingual oedema
A communication between a maxillary tooth
alveolus and the nasal chamber may occur.
Traumatizing the lingual mucosa may result in
Established fistulae are lined by epithelium and
sublingual oedema. If severe, it may require med-
will, therefore, not heal spontaneously. The three
 ical management with anti-inflammatory drugs
most common causes of oronasal fistula formation
and sometimes diuretics. It is easily avoided by
involving the maxillary alveolus area are:
using a gentle technique.
· Advanced periodontal disease
Jaw fracture
· Periapical lesions
· latrogenic.
Advanced periodontal disease around man-
dibular teeth will weaken the mancible itself,
An oronasal fistula in the region of the canine
and jaw fractures can and do happen. Extreme
tooth is usually the result of advanced periodontal
caution should be used in elderly toy and small
disease where the process caused destruction of
breeds who seem most prone to this.
the medial bony wall of the alveolus. Periapical
pathology of the maxillary canine teeth and
Hemorrhage
premolars can also cause perforation of the
medial bony wall of the alveolus. Extraction of a
Clotting defects may not be apparent until after
maxillary canine tooth may also cause per-
you have extracted a tooth, when the associated
foration of the medial bony wall when an incorrect
hemorrhage does not stop after a few minutes,
technique is used. A small iatrogenic perforation
but continues copiously and can become life-
will probably heal if the gingival flap is replaced
threatening. Suturing the gingiva with a hemostatic
and sutured. Large fresh defects or long-standing
gauze or plug in the alveolus can help.
defects causing clinical signs, such as nasal dis-
charge, food impaction and chronic infection
should be surgically repaired. The repair of per-
Summary
sistent symptomatic oronasal communication is
 Tooth extraction demands suitable equipment.
covered in Chapter 12.
instrumentation and surgical technical skills if patient
morbidity is to be minimized.
Sufficient time should be allocated for the procedure.
Emphysema
Extraction is performed under radiographic control
including. in problem cases, intraoperative X-rays.
 Closed (nonsurgical) and open (surgical) techniques
Emphysema can occur if the high-speed hand
are possible, but the latter generally causes fewer
piece is angled in such a way that air is blown
problems and results in greater patient comfort when
into the bone and soft tissues. Continuous air-
executed well
drying, especially if the air is directed into the
Each tooth should be apprcached using one of the
prescribed techniques for that location.
alveolus, can also lead to emphysema. Cats seem
When mucoperiosteal flaps are used, care should be
particularly prone and on recovery have swelling
taken to ensure that their replacement is tension free.
across the base of the nose and forehead. There is
 anbiuyoal pue sjelajew anins ajeudodde buisn
174 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
FURTHER READING
Emily, P. & Penman, S. (1994) Extraction and oronasal fistula
Holmstrom, S., Frost, P. & Eisner, E. (1998) Exodontics.
closure. Handbook of Smaff Animal Dentistry, 2nd edn.
Veterinary Dental Techniques. Philadelphia: WB
London, UK: Pergamon Press, Ch. 8, p. 95-106.
Saunders, Ch. 6, p. 215-254.
Gorrel, C. & Robinson, J. (1995) Periodontal therapy and 
Mulligan, T., Aller, M. & williams, C. (1998) Atlas of Canine
extraction technique. In: Crossley, D. & Penman, S. (eds)
and Feline Dental Radiography. Trenton, NJ, USA:
BSAVAManualofSmallAnimai Dentistry.Cheltenham,
Veterinary Learning Systems.
UK: BSAVA, Ch. 14, p. 139-149.
14
Dental diseases in lagomorphs and rodents
With Leen Verhaert
Introduction
 The hypsodont tooth is a tooth with a long
anatomic crown, and a comparatively short root.
Lagomorphs and rodents are increasingly popular
The subgingival part of the crown is called the
 pets. These 'pocket pets have a high incidence of
reserve crown. Hypsodont teeth are either radi-
oral/dental problems that the general prac-
cular or aradicular. The radicular hypsodont tooth
 titioner needs to be able to identify and manage.
eventually forms a true root. The tooth grows for
Most of the problems are related to the anatomic
most of the life of the arimal, but late in life the
peculiarities of their dentition in combination
root apex closes and tooth growth ceases. Horses
with poor husbandry, i.e. feeding a nonabrasive
and cows have radicular hypsodont teeth. The
 diet resulting in abnormal wear and malocclusion.
aradicular hypsodont tooth never forms a true
While there are many similarities between
root with an apex and the tooth grows continu-
lagomorphs and rodents with regards to type of
ously throughout the animal's life. Rabbits, guinea
dentition, oral/dental conditions and treatment
pigs and chinchillas have aradicular hypsodont
options, there are also significant differences. In
teeth. The incisors of all rodents are aradicular
addition, there are differences within the rodent
hypsodont, while the cheek teeth are either
group.
 aradicular hypsodont or brachyodont depending
This chapter will describe the normal anatomy
on the species.
of the dentition and the common oral/dental
If eruption of continuously growing teeth is
conditions of lagomorphs and rodents. As with
hindered, e.g. mechanical obstruction due to a
other species, itis essential to know whatis normal
malocclusion resulting in abnormal occlusal forces,
in order to identify disease. Dental procedures,
the continued growth of the tooth will result in
i.e. tooth trimming and extraction techniques, are
destruction of the alveolar bone and apparent
detailed separately at the end of the chapter.
'apical growth' of the tooth. This may result in
 perforation of the cortical bone of the jawbones.
Types of teeth
 There are two basic types of teeth:
DENTAL ANATOMY
Lagomorphs
· Brachyodont
· Hypsodont.
The Order of Lagomorphs includes rabbits, hares,
 cottontails and pikas. All teeth in lagomorphs are
The brachyodont tooth has a short crown:root
aradicular hypsodont. They have four incisor
ratio, with a true root. Once the tooth has matured,
teeth in the upper jaw. This clearly differentiates
the root apex closes and the potential for further
them from rodents who only have two incisors in
tooth growth ceases. Humans, dogs, cats and
 the upper jaw. The lagomorphs do not have canine
ferrets have a brachyodont dentition.
teeth.
175
176
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
 Lagomorph dental formula
shaped tooth as the softer dentine wears down
2 × 1 1 2/1 : C 0/0 : P 3/2 : M 3/3 1
faster than the thick enamel.
A large diastema separates the incisor teeth
The four incisor teeth in the upper jaw are placed.
from the premolar and molar teeth (cheek teeth).
in two rows with the two large incisors located
The upper jaw is wider than the mandible
labially and the two smaller rudimentary incisors
(anisognathic) and when there are no cheek tooth
(peg teeth) located palatally. In occlusion, the
 problems, and no other interference such as over-
crown tips of the mandibular incisor teeth rest
 grown incisors, the rabbit chews its foods using a
between the first and second row of upper jaw
wide lateral (side to side) motion.
incisors. At rest, the incisors are held in occlusion
and the cheek teeth are held out of occlusion
Rodents
(Crossley, 1995a). A relatively normal rabbit skull
is depicted in Figure 14.1.
Rodentia is the largest Mammal Order, with
Rabbits do not gnaw like rodents, unless there
weights ranging from 4g to over 50 kg. All
is some cheek tooth problem interfering with
rodents are 'gnawers', with a wide rostrocaudal
normal mastication (Crossley, 1995a). The incisors
 movement range in the temporomandibular joint
are mainly used in a lateral slicing motion, so
and chisel-shaped continuously growing incisor
s    i ss   
teeth designed for this dorsoventral motion.
apprehensible pieces. The large upper incisors
They are anisognathic, but, in contrast to the
grow at an average rate of 2.0 mm per week and
lagomorphs, the mandible is wider than the
the lower incisors at a rate of 2.4 mm per week
maxilla.
(Wiggs & Lobprise, 1995). A rabbit with normal
While the incisors are aradicular hypsodont,
incisor occlusion, eating a normally abrasive diet
the cheek teeth are either aradicular hypsodont
such as hay, grass and fresh greens, will wear
or brachyodont depending on species. The strict
down the teeth at a similar rate. The incisor teeth
herbivores eating a highly abrasive diet have
have thick white enamel on the labial surface and
aradicular hypsodont cheek teeth, e.g. guinea
almost no enamel on the palatal/lingual surface.
 pigs and chinchillas. Species eating less abrasive
Normal tooth wear thus results in a chisel-
diets, e.g. mice, rats and hamsters, have
brachyodont cheek teeth.
The dental formula varies among the species,
ranging from 16-22 teeth. However, all rodents
have four incisors (one in each quadrant) and no
canine teeth. A diastema separates the incisors
from the cheek teeth.
Rodent dental formulae 
Guinea pig and chinchilla: 2 x II 1/1 : C 0/0 : P 1/1 :
M3/3 1
Rat, mouse, gerbi: 2 x I I 1/1 : C 0/0 : P 0/0 : M 3/3 1
Hamster: 2 x f 1 1/1 : C 0/0 : P 0/0 : M 2-3/2-3 1
At rest (Fig. 14.2A), the mandible is in a caudal
position and the incisors are out of occlusion
(Crossley, 1995b). During gnawing, the incisors
are held in occlusion (Fig. 14.2B).
As in lagomorphs, the enamel layer of the
incisors is thickest on the labial surface, with
Fig. 14.1 Normal - rabbit skull. At rest, the incisors are
 almost none present at the palatal/lingual aspect,
held in occlusion and the cheek teeth are out of occlusion.
resulting in a chisel-shaped pattern of tooth wear.
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS177
A
B
Fig. 14.2 Normal - rat skull.
A: At rest, the mandible is held in a caudal position. The incisors are then cut of occlusion and the cheek teeth are in ccclusion.
The enamel is usually orange-yellow in color.
healthier for the gastrointestinal system. All
However, the guinea pig has white enamel.
rodents need material to gnaw on.
Guinea pigs need vitamin C supplementation
(Flecknell, 1991; Schaeffer & Donnelly, 1997). A
HUSBANDRY
daily dose of 10 mg/kg is recommended for
By far the most common dental problem in rabbits
normal activity; this should be increased (up to
is tooth overgrowth. While incisor overgrowth
30 mg/kg) in situations of stress (e.g. change of
due to an inherited skeletal malocclusion does
environment, pregnancy, illness, new pet). There
occur, the most common cause of tooth over-
are commercially available vitamin C drops that
growth is insufficient wear of the continuously
can be added to the food or the water. Alternatively.
growing teeth caused by feeding a nonabrasive
human vitamin C tablets can be crushed and
diet, e.g. dry pellets only. The affected animal is
mixed with the diet or the water. Vitamin C is
often presented late in the process. In many cases
unstable (easily oxidized by light and air), there-
the patient is presented when disease is too
fore water solutions need to be changed daily
advanced to be amenable to intervention and
euthanasia is required for a condition which
Consequences of tooth overgrowth
 could have been prevented. Weekly weighing of
every pocket pet is strongly recommended.
Tooth overgrowth commonly results in mal-
 Weight loss requires investigation. Disease may
occlusion. Complications to malocclusion include:
thus be identified and treatment instituted
earlier.
Traumatization of oral soft tissues (cheeks,
The ideal diet for the strictly herbivorous pocket
 tongue) by the overgrown teeth
pets consists of grass and coarse hay as the main
Apical overgrowth with resultant penetration
components. This may be supplemented with
of upper teeth into the ocular sockets and /or
fresh vegetables and dry pellets. If dry pellets are
sinuses
fed, they should only form a maximum of 10% of
· Apical overgrowth of the mandibular teeth
the total diet. A diet such as this will not only
 with resultant penetration of the ventral
help in preventing dental overgrowth, but is also
border of the alveolar bone in the mandible
178
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
· Retrobulbar and/or facial abscessation
Scope of this chapter to cover these issues. Several
· Inability to close the mouth
excellent texts on rabbit medicine, with extensive
● Inability to chew (lateral slicing motion in
drug information, are available and the reader is
lagomorphs; gnawing in rodents).
encouraged to refer to these.
It may be necessary to stabilize the patient
With advanced disease, the animal is unable to
before anesthesia. While some authors recommend
eat and weight loss occurs. The oral discomfort
hospitalization to achieve this, in our experience
is often associated with excessive salivation
it is not wise to hospitalize these stress-sensitive
('slobbers), which predisposes to moist dermatitis
 animals for long periods. A common response to
(wet dewlap).
stress is anorexia. If hospitalization is required,
all should be done to decrease stress, i.e. the area
should be quiet, as odor-free as possible, and a
EXAMINATION
hiding area should be offered.
General considerations
Examination of the face and oral
A full history should be taken. Husbandry details
cavity
(housing, diet) need to be known. A full physical
examination is required to assess general
Inspection and palpation of the face and oral
condition and anesthetic risk. Signs that may be
cavity is the next step (see box).
due to dental disease include:
Checkist for inspection
· Selective food intake
Salivation (wet chin, dirty forelimbs)
Ocular discharge
· Dropping food from mouth
Nasal discharge
·Anorexia
Ocular protrusion
·Ocular discharge
Occlusion at rest (incisors should be in occlusion in
·Nasal discharge
rabbits, out of occlusion in rodents)
Overgrown incisors, loss of chisel-shaped wear
· Continuous tooth grinding
pattern, ccclusal plane deviated from the perfectly
· Salivation
horizontal plane
· Changes in grooming behavior
 Structure of the incisors: horizontal grooves, ribbing.
discoloration
· Accumulation of cecotrophs around anus
(predisposing to 'fly strike').
Checklist for palpation
 Sweling. deformity of upper jaw and/or mandible
 Pain or discomfort on palpation 
It must be emphasized that the above signs can
Apply pressure on the eyes to identify potential
Occur with other disease processes. Anorexia is a
retrobulbar abscessation
very common sign of advanced oral disease, but it
is also a sign of almost any disease in these animals.
Valuable information can be gained from oral
Rabbits and rodents in pain usually stop eating.
examination of the conscious animal. Although
Tooth grinding is more commonly associated with
the mouth cannot be opened, a reasonable view
abdominal discomfort than with dental disease.
can be achieved using an otoscope. Overgrowth
Since animals with oral/dental disease are
of cheek teeth, tongue lacerations and wounds of
presented late in the disease process, they are
the buccal mucosa may be identified in this way.
often emaciated, dehydrated and obstipated. In
Less severe problems will not be identified.
addition, they are usually severely stressed from
As in other species, thorough intraoral exam-
chronic discomfort/pain. Extreme care must be
ination requires general anesthesia. Sedation and
used in selection of medications (antibiotics,
 anesthesia in pocket pets is covered in other texts
antinflammatory drugs, analgesics and fluid treat-
and will not be dealt with here. Aids such as
ment) as lagomorphs and rodents have sensitivifties
 mouth gags and cheek dilators are necessary to
and toxicities to many drugs. It is outside the
 open the mouth. We do not use mouth gags in
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS179
rabbits. Instead, we use cheek dilators as shown
Three basic skull views need to be taken, namely
in Figure 14.3. We do use a mouth gag for most
lateral, dorsoventral and rostrocaudal. Of these,
other species. Risks associated with using a mouth
the lateral view is usually the most informative.
gag are damage to the teeth and damage to the
Additional oblique lateral views may be necess-
temporomandibular joint (if the mouth is opened
ary for some patients. When possible, additional
excessively).
intraoral views to avoid superimposition of
Additional tools include spatulas to depress the
adjacent structures are recommended. The tech-
tongue or push it aside. Good lighting
is
niques for intraoral radiography are outlined in
ud e - ae o Asea jou uo pue Xrp
Chapter 7. Detail is essential, so nonscreen films
 torch is useful. Crown elongation, spikes, lacer-
are required.
ations of tongue and oral mucosa, and missing
 Suggested exposure time for the rabbit, guinea
teeth should be noted and recorded. The sulcus of
 pig and chinchilla is as follows:
each tooth should be examined with a periodontal
uo os 'AY sz pue svu s ipm Auderoopeu prepues
probe to identify pathologic periodontal pockets.
film-focus distance as a starting point.
Even under general anesthesia, it is estimated that
only 50% of pathology will be detected (Crossley.
For rostrocaudal views, higher exposures will be
2000). In other words, disease is underestimated
needed.
and oral examination under anesthesia needs to be
Using a dental radiography unit, an exposure
complemented by radiography.
time comparable to that for radiography of the
canine teeth in a medium to large breed dog
(depending on the size of the animal) should be
Radiographic examination
appropriate.
Radiographs are mandatory to identify type and
extent of pathology Without such information,
 accurate diagnosis allowing appropriate treatment
Further examination
is not possible.
Even with radiographic examination, a lot of the
 pathology will be missed. Radiographic interpret-
around 85% of the pathology present (Crossley,
2000). CT-scan will give more information,
especially for the detection of early cheek tooth
 pathology (Crossley et al, 1998).
RABBITS
The healthy mouth
Incisor teeth
· The maxillary incisors have vertical grooves
on the labial surfaces
● Held in occlusion at rest (with the crown tips
 of the mandibular incisors resting between
Fig. 14.3 Access to the oral cavity. Cheek dilators can
the first and second row of maxillary
be used to open a rabbit's mouth. We rarely use mouth
incisors)
gags in rabbits. This method gives both good visibility and
· Occlusal plane is horizontal
been extracted.
· Have chisel-shaped wear pattern
180
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Cheek teeth
· The apices of the maxillary incisor teeth
should not penetrate the palatine shelf
· The maxillary cheek teeth should be worn
almost level with the gingiva
· The mandibular cheek teeth show only a few
Dorsoventral view
mm of crown (depending on the size of the
 Smooth bony contours, with only the
rabbit)
lachrymal processes sticking out
· The occlusal plane is almost horizontal (10°)
· Orbits clear with smooth borders
· No spikes on any of the teeth
Rostrocaudal view
Normal radiographic features
· Occlusal plane: almost horizontal
· No spikes visible
Lateral view (Fig. 14.4)
· No tipping of teeth
· The palatine shelf and the dorsal border of
the mandible converge rostrally
The dorsoventral view does not usually contri-
· Ideally, with the incisors in occlusion, the
bute much extra information in the rabbit and we
cheek teeth should be out of occlusion. This
often omit it.
is rarely seen in pet rabbits. As soon as both
 are in occlusion, there is some degree of
cheek tooth overgrowth. However, as long as
Incisor overgrowth
the maxilla and mandible converge rostrally,
this is not a clinical problem
Incisor overgrowth is common in rabbits. The
Smooth ventral mandibular border
condition can be classified as primary or
 Normal radiolucencies of the periapical
secondary depending on its cause. Primary
germinal tissues
incisor overgrowth occurs early in life (within
Fig. 14.4 Lateral radiograph of a
normal rabbit. Note that the palatine
shelf and the dorsal border of the
mandible converge rostrally.
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS181
the first year) and is the consequence of an
inherited skeletal malocclusion (maxillary
brachygnathism resulting in a relative mandibular
prognathism). In contrast, secondary incisor
overgrowth occurs later in life (adult, usually
more than 1 year old) and is the consequence of
cheek tooth overgrowth. Primary incisor over-
 growth is over-diagnosed. Most rabbits presented
for treatment of incisor overgrowth have devel-
tooth overgrowth.
Primary incisor overgrowth is seen in young
animals. It occurs regularly in dwarf rabbits. Due
to the jaw length discrepancy (i.e. the mandible is
A
too long with respect to the maxilla), normal
incisor occlusion is not established. The man-
dibular incisors occlude either level with or
rostral to the large labial row of maxillary inci-
sors. The result is that normal incisor wear does
not occur. The upper incisors may curl inward
(Fig. 14.5A) or flare out laterally (Fig. 14.5B), and
the mandibular incisors protrude from the
mouth. If eruption of the maxillary incisors is
hindered, e.g. mechanical obstruction by abnor-
mal occlusal forces, then tooth growth will
occur in an apical direction and may result in
perforation of the palatine shelf. When signifi-
cant incisor malocclusion has developed, the
animal cannot close its mouth normally and
secondary cheek tooth overgrowth will develop
over time. Radiographic features of primary
incisor overgrowth are shown in Figure 14.6. If
B
the condition is identified early, i.e. before
excessive secondary cheek tooth overgrowth has
Fig. 14.5 Rabbit - incisor overgrowth (clinical
presentation).
occurred, the prognosis is relatively good with
A: The upper incisors curl into the oral cavity.
appropriate treatment.
B: The upper incisors flare out laterally.
The first step in treating incisor overgrowth,
whether primary or secondary in origin, consists
of correcting any cheek tooth overgrowth. Over-
Cheek tooth overgrowth
 grown cheek teeth should be shortened to a normal
level. Once that is done, two options exist for the
Cheek tooth abnormalities are very common in
incisor teeth. The teeth can be extracted, or they
pet rabbits. As already mentioned, most rabbits
can be trimmed down every 3-5 weeks, as
presented for treatment of incisor tooth over-
 necessary It is essential that feeding regimens
growth have the incisor overgrowth secondarily
that ensure adequate tooth wear be instituted. If
to the cheek tooth overgrowth, i.e. the cheek
the incisors are extracted, food needs to be cut
 tooth overgrowth is the primary cause. Although
into small pieces since the rabbit can no longer
calcium and vitamin D deficiency may be involved
cut it itself.
in the etiology (Harcourt-Brown & Baker, 2001),
182
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 14.6 Rabbit - primary incisor
overgrowth (lateral radiograph). There
is slight overgrowth of the cheek teeth.
which causes the palatine shelf and
dorsal border of the mandible to be
parallel rather than converge rostrally.
the primary cause of cheek tooth overgrowth is
but if it is still eating then it will only be able to
thought to be feeding diets that provide insufficient
consume soft fresh food or dry food, which does
abrasion (Crossley, 1995a; Redrobe, 1997).
not need much chewing.
Early cheek tooth overgrowth is not obvious
without examination under general anesthesia
Cheek tooth overgrowth: points to look at on lateral
and radiography. The incisors may still be
radiographs
 Incisor tooth position and length
normally occluding and wearing. Consequently,
 Periapical region of the incisor teeth
animals with cheek tooth overgrowth are usually
The palatine shelf and dorsal border of the mandible
may still converge rostrally. but are often either
presented late in the disease process. In fact, it is
parallel or diverging rostrally
often when the animal is unable to close its
Cheek tooth ccclusion: straight line or extremely
mouth and secondary incisor overgrowth and
zigzag ('step-mouth', wave mouth)
Cheek teeth may show resorption, curving. extensive
malocclusion has occurred that treatment is
periapical lucencies
sought. The owners assume that the problem is
Thinning of the ventral border of the mandible 
isolated to the incisor teeth. Client communi-
 Perforation of the ventral border of the mandible
cation and education is essential.
Late-stage disease is easy to diagnose. On
Figure 14.8 demonstrates many of the radio-
conscious intraoral examination with an otoscope,
 graphic features of severe cheek tooth overgrowth.
the massive overgrowth of the cheek teeth is
The more abnormalities are found, the worse the
usually clearly visible. The upper cheek teeth
 prognosis. Overgrowth of the cheek teeth may be
flare out buccally (Fig. 14.7A), causing buccal
 complicated by abscess formation on one or more
ulceration and wounds. The lower cheek teeth
 teeth, aggravating the disease and worsening
show spikes on the lingual side (Fig. 14.7B), often 
 prognosis considerably (Figure 14.9).
associated with wounds on the tongue. The
Once the alveolar bone is perforated, the
rabbit at this stage is unable to use the normal
condition cannot be cured, but it may be
lateral chewing movements. It may be anorectic
controlled in some cases. Pain relief is of utmost
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS183
 importance when alveolar perforation is present.
The treatment of cheek teeth overgrowth is to
In many cases, the situation is really beyond
recreate as normal an occlusion as possible. The
treatment, and euthanasia is the only humane
cheek teeth should be radically trimmed down.
treatment (Figs 14.8 & 14.9).
After treatment, the palatine shelf and the dorsal
A
Fig. 14.7 Rabbit - cheek tooth overgrowth (clinical
presentation).
A: The maxillary cheek teeth are flaring out buccally.
B
traumatizing the soft tissues of the cheek.
B: The mandibular cheek teeth are developing lingual
spikes, which may traumatize the tongue.
Fig.14.8 Rabbit- severe cheek
tooth overgrowth (lateral radiograph).
This rabbit has severe cheek tooth
overgrowth. The palatine shelf and
dorsal border of the mandible are 
parallel. The roots of the cheek teeth
are grossly deformed. The ventral
border of the mandible has been
perforated. There is secondary incisor
overgrowth and malocclusion (level
bite). The palatine shelf has been
perforated. Once the alveolar bone is
perforated, the condition cannot be 
cured. With appropriate management, it
can be controlled in some cases.
Euthanasia should be considered, and
may be the most humane option, for an
animal with this severity of disease.
184
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 14.9 Rabbit - severe tooth
overgrowth and abscessation (lateral
radiograph). This rabbit has extensive
tooth overgrowth (cheek tooth and
secondary incisor tooth). The palatine
shelf and dorsal border of the mandible
are parallel. The maxillary cheek teeth 
show gross root elongation with
associated abscess formation. The
upper incisors are almost penetrating
the palatine shelf. Most of the roots of
the mandibular cheek areresorbing
The lower incisors are also showing
gross root elongation. Euthanasia may
be the most humane option for this
animal
border of the mandible should again converge
time of diagnosis and the prognosis for complete
rostrally. The incisors should also be trimmed
cure is usually poor. In fact, euthanasia is often
down, and a chisel-shaped occlusal plane should
indicated.
be created. Change of feeding regimen is extremely
 The abscesses present clinically as enlarge-
important to prevent or at least slow down further
ment of the jawbones. The cheek teeth are usually
disease.
the teeth affected, but abscessation associated
with incisors also occurs. In the latter case, the
Facial abscess
common practice of clipping overgrown incisors
with nail cutters is often implicated. The use of
The development of facial abscesses is common
nail cutters exposes the pulp and often results in
in rabbits. They are usually associated with
 longitudinal fractures that extend subgingivally.
diseased teeth (Fig. 14.9), but may also occur due
The resultant pulpal pathology may lead to the
   q   
formation of a periapical abscess. Due to the
spikes) or due to external wounds. While abscesses
 position of the incisor root apices, an abscess associ-
caused by mucosal trauma from overgrown teeth
ated with a diseased incisor tooth can be difficult to
or external wounds are easy to treat, the abscesses
distinguish from one associated with a diseased
arising due to dental pathology are more difficult
cheek tooth. Radiographs are mandatory to
to manage.
identify the tooth involved and assess the precise
'Dental' abscesses can be of endodontic origin
location and extent of the destructive process.
(pulpal disease) or periodontic origin. In the
Successful treatment relies on identifying and
latter, foreign material (food) that is impacted
removing the cause, i.e. the diseased tooth, in
 into the periodontal ligament causes destruction
combination with surgical removal of the actual
of the periodontium, which may be so extensive
abscess. Tooth removal is difficult. Often teeth
that the endodontic system becomes involved
 that are not actually themselves diseased but have
secondarily. The lesions are often large at the
 been secondarily involved in the destructive pro-
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS185
cess also need to be removed. Moreover, complete
sheet is cut to a shape and size that fills the
surgical removal of the abscess may not be tech-
space left after surgical debridement.
nically possible. The adjunctive use of systemic
3.Another option is to pack with doxyrobe gel.
antibiotics may be useful and the choice of anti-
biotic agent should be based on culture and
Of these options, the two last methods are easier
sensitivity results. The culture should be from the
but more expensive.
abscess wall, i.e. not from the pus; anaerobes often
play a major role. The prudent use of antibiotics in
Other dental conditions
lagomorphs is covered in other texts.
Many options for cure/control have been
Periodontal disease, i.e. plaque-induced inflam-
described. The options include local application
mation of the periodontium, is reportedly not as
of antibiotics into the abscess wall (Brown &
common in the rabbit as in the dog and cat
Rosenthal, 1997b) or inserting a dextrose-soaked
(Wiggs & Lobprise, 1995). However, periodontal
drain into the abscess cavity. Due to the poor
disease does occur; it is probably under-diagnosed.
success rate, these options are mainly of his-
The sulci of all teeth should be investigated with
torical interest and we do not recommend them.
 a periodontal probe. Treatment is similar to that
One option, with reported good success, consists
for other species, i.e. professional cleaning and
of packing the abscess cavity with calcium
extraction of severely affected teeth. In the rabbit,
hydroxide (Remeeus & Verbeek, 1995). Due to the
loss of periodontal attachment is more often
extreme alkalinity of the calcium hydroxide (pH
caused by food impaction triggering destruction
11), extensive necrosis of the adjacent tissues is a
of the periodontium rather than irritation from
common complication. We rarely use this method.
plaque accumulation (Redrobe, 1997). Often the
Three techniques, which are currently under
periodontal destruction is severe and spreads to
evaluation, are outlined below.
involve the endodontic system, usually resulting
in the formation of a periapical abscess. Once this
1.After tooth extraction and surgical
complication has occurred, prognosis is poor and
debridement of as much of the abscess as possible,
often warrants euthanasia of the affected animal.
the area is packed with antibiotic impregnated
If treatment is attempted, it consists of tooth
beads (Klaus & Bennett, 1999) and sutured closed
 extraction and abscess management as detailed
The beads are made of polymethylmethacrylate
in the previous section.
(Surgical Simplex P Radiopaque Bone Cement;
Both caries and root resorption have been
Howmedica Inc, Rutherford, NI). The antibiotic is
described in rabbits. When the lesions are small,
mixed thoroughly with the copolymer powder
they may wear away. Extensive lesions require
prior to adding the liquid monomer, and while the
extraction of the affected tooth or possibly restor-
 mixture is still quite thin, it is placed within a
ation. The latter option requires referral to a
syringe. The mixture is pressed out on a sterile
specialist.
drape and cut into small pieces using a scalpel.
 The details of how to prepare the beads can be
GUINEA PIGS
found in Klaus & Bennett, 1999. There is no
agreement as to whether the beads need to be
Guinea pigs are strictly herbivorous rodents, and
removed or not, although in our experience they
have aradicular hypsodont cheek teeth.
usually do need removal. Monitoring outcome of
the treatment may help in deciding whether to
The healthy mouth
 leave or remove them.
An alternative to packing with antibiotic
· Incisor enamel is white in color (in contrast to
impregnated beads is to pack the area with
most other rodents)
commercially available gentamycin
· Incisors are worn down in a chisel-shaped
impregnated sheets of bovine collagen. The
pattern
186
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
· The occlusal plane of the incisors is horizontal
· At rest, the mandible is held in a caudal
position and the incisor teeth are out of
occlusion
· The mandible is wider than the maxilla
· The cheek teeth tip (the maxillary teeth
buccally and the mandibular teeth lingually)
The occlusal plane of the cheek teeth has a
30° angle (Fig. 14.10)
· The palatine shelf and dorsal border of the
mandible converge rostrally
· The crowns of the cheek teeth are almost
level with the gingiva
Incisor overgrowth
Primary incisor overgrowth is considered rare.
When incisor overgrowth occurs, it is usually
secondary to cheek tooth overgrowth. It may also
Fig.14.11(
 Guinea pig - severe cheek tooth overgrowth
be secondary to facial trauma.
(clinical presentation). The tongue is trapped by the
mandibular cheek teeth
Cheek tooth overgrowth
 Most pet guinea pigs have some degree of cheek
tooth overgrowth, and in many it will cause severe
· Lacerations of the buccal mucosa by dental
problems at some stage in life. The problems
spikes on the overgrown maxillary teeth
include:
· Overgrowth, abnormal wear patterns and
malocclusion of the incisor teeth (Fig. 14.12)
· Tongue entrapment by the mandibular cheek
（·Apical overgrowth of the cheek teeth with
teeth (Fig. 14.11)
 resultant perforation of the alveolar bone.
The radiographic features of cheek tooth over-
growth in guinea pigs are shown in Figure
14.13A, B. In guinea pigs, the rostrocaudal view
provides valuable information.
There is an association between cheek tooth
overgrowth and hypovitaminosis C (Klaus &
Bernett, 1999; Brown & Rosenthal, 1997a). The
condition is often exacerbated by a vitamin C
deficiency, which leads to collagen defects and
resultant tipping of the teeth and/or eruption
 problems since collagen is necessary for anchoring
the tooth in the socket (Schaeffer & Donnelly,
1997; Brown & Rosenthal, 1997a). Dental over-
growth in guinea pigs also has been linked with
excessive selenium intake (Williams, 1976).
The animals are usually presented when
Fig. 14.10 Normal - guinea pig skull. The occlusal plane
pathology is advanced and prognosis is usually
of the cheek teeth has a 30° angle
poor. Restoring normal occlusion should be
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS187
showing cheek tooth elongation on examination
(Crossley, 2001a).
The healthy mouth
● Incisor enamel is orange-yellow in color
· Incisors are worn down in a chisel-shaped
pattern
+
 The occlusal plane of the incisors is
horizontal
· At rest, the mandible is held in a caudal
position, and the incisor teeth are out of
occlusion
● The mandible is wider than the maxilla
· The cheek teeth are upright in position, i.e.
do not tilt as in guinea pigs
· The cheek teeth have a horizontal occlusal
plane
· The palatine shelf and dorsal border of the
mandible converge rostrally
· The crowns of the cheek teeth are almost
Fig. 14.12 Guinea pig - uneven wear of the incisor
level with the gingiva
incisor teeth was caused by overgrowth of the cheek teeth.
The radiographic features of a chinchilla with
normal dentition and occlusion are depicted in
Figure 14.14.
attempted. The maxillary cheek teeth should be
trimmed almost level with the gingiva. They
should be trimmed at a 30° angle, so that the
Incisor overgrowth
crowns are shortest on the buccal side. The man-
Primary incisor overgrowth is extremely rare. In
dibular cheek teeth should also be trimmed at a
a large survey (more than 700 animals were
30° angle, this time shortest on the lingual side.
examined) investigating the incidence of dental
The mandibular teeth should be trimmed so short
disease in this species, only one animal with
that they do not entrap the tongue, i.e. almost level
incisor overgrowth due to a maxillary brachy-
with the gingiva. The lingual tip of each tooth
gnathism was identified (Crossley, 200la). In
should barely touch the tongue. All dental spikes
contrast,
, secondary incisor overgrowth
need to be identified and removed.
is
It is essential to check husbandry and ensure
that the animal receives a sufficiently abrasive
 diet. Supplementation with vitamin C is generally
Cheek tooth overgrowth
beneficial.
Most pet chinchillas have some degree of cheek
tooth elongation. They seem to cope well with
CHINCHILLAS
simple elongation as long as no sharp spikes are
formed on the occlusal surfaces, and as long as
Chinchillas are herbivorous rodents, with 
 the process is not complicated by periodontal
aradicular hypsodont teeth. Dental disease is (
disease (Crossley, 200la).
extremely common in this species; one report  I
 Due to the upright position of the cheek teeth
mentions 35% of apparently healthy chinchillas  even slight overgrowth of the visible crown will
188
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig. 14.13 Guinea pig - cheek tooth
overgrowth (radiographic features).
A: Lateral view. The massive
 overgrowth of the cheek teeth is forcing
the mouth open and the mandible is
pushed rostrally.
B: rostrocaudal view. This view is
extremely helpful in guinea pigs. It
allows visualization of dental spikes and
shows the tipping of the teeth. Note
also the nice image of the TMJ
obtained with this view.
A
of the ventral mandibular border indicate early
 cheek tooth overgrowth in chinchillas. In guinea
pigs, this clinical finding is evidence of advanced
disease.
As cheek tooth overgrowth progresses, dramatic
changes in the structure of the upper jaw and
 mandible occur (Figs 14.15 & 14.16). In the upper
jaw, the root elongation may present clinically as
lachrymal overflow and/or eye protrusion. In
the mandible, the cortical bone may be destroyed
during the root elongation, resulting in
perforation. Since apical growth of the teeth
occurs as an early response to overgrowth,
pathology is usually advanced before there is
obvious elongation of the visible crowns on
B
intraoral clinical inspection.
Radiographic features of cheek tooth over-
growth include:
result in occlusal forces that exceed eruptive
forces. The visible crown will stop erupting.
· Occlusal irregularities
Instead, continued tooth growth will proceed in
· Apparent root elongation
an apical direction (retrograde eruption) and
· Overgrowth of the clinical crowns
result in apparent 'root' elongation. In the man-
· Secondary incisor crown elongation.
dible, swellings associated with the apical growth
of the cheek teeth are readily palpated along the
Treatment consists of radical shortening of the
ventrolateral border even with minor over-
cheek teeth, i.e. level with the gingival margin.
growth. This is a major difference between
 Due to the insidious nature of cheek teeth over
chinchillas and guinea pigs. Palpable swellings
 growth, many chinchillas are only presented for
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS189
Fig. 14.14 Chinchilla - clinically
healthy (radiographic features).
Cheek teeth with short crowns and
roots, smooth occlusal plane.
Fig. 14.15 Chinchilla skull - severe
tooth overgrowth. This is a very
advanced case.
treatment when the pathology is extensive and
of the periodontium rather than irritation from
irreversible. In these animals, euthanasia is the
 plaque accumulation.
only option (Crossley, 2001a).
Both caries and root resorption have been
described in chinchillas (Crossley, 200la; Crossley
et al, 1997). Starch and sugar are a significant
Other dental conditions
proportion of the pet chinchilla's diet, and the
diet is less abrasive than the diet in the wild.
Loss of periodontal attachment is more often
Therefore, incipient occlusal caries will not be
caused by food impaction triggering destruction
worn down, as it would be in the wild animal.
190
 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Fig.14.16 Chinchilla - advanced
cheek tooth pathology (lateral
radiograph). Advanced cheek tooth
problems. Root and crown elongation,
wavy' occlusal plane. Radical coronal
reduction of the cheek teeth and
change of feeding regimen resulted in
clinical cure and weight gain. The same
animal was represented two years later
for recent weight loss because of
dental disease that didn't respond to
treatment and he was euthanased.
RATS, MICE, HAMSTERS AND
gingival scaling, polishing and extraction of
GERBILS
severely affected teeth.
Rats, mice, hamsters and gerbils have brachyodont
TRAUMATICTOOTHINJURIES
cheek teeth, sparing them from the severe
malocclusion problems seen in guinea pigs and
The most common cause of ‘traumatic tooth
chinchillas.
injuries’ is probably the use of nail cutters
Incisor overgrowth (Fig. 14.17) in these species
(clippers) to shorten overgrown incisors. Apart
is usually caused by lack of gnawing. They are
'ad a rg apad pueseadun re aq u
 usually fed a diet that requires minimal gnawing.
the nail cutters shatter the tooth. The fracture
Successful treatment is a combination of changing
may extend below the gingival margin and the
the diet and professional trimming of the teeth.
pulp is often exposed. The resultant pulpal
These animals need to be presented with material
inflammation may be so severe that periapical
to gnaw on, e.g. twigs of nontoxic trees such as
abscessation develops and extensive treatment is
fruit trees for the smaller species and whole nuts
required. Nail cutters should not be used (either by
 in the shell for the larger species.
the owner or the veterinarian)to shorten overgrown
incisors.
of these species to plaque-induced periodontal
While the most common cause of tooth injuries
disease is conflicting. While some authors report
may be iatrogeric, all the pocket pets are prone to
it to be relatively uncommon (Wiggs & Lobprise,
1995), others report it to be common in labora-
children who don't handle them as carefully as
tory maintained animals (Miles & Crigson, 1990).
 one might like. In fact, accidentally dropping to
In our experience, periodontal disease is common
the floor is common. This type of trauma often
in pet rodents. This will ultimately result in
 results in tooth fracture (usually incisors), some-
exfoliation of the affected tooth. Treatment is the
times accomparied by jaw fracture.
same as in the dog and cat, namely professional
Uncomplicated crown fracture (i.e. the pulp is
periodontal therapy consisting of supra- and sub-
not exposed to the external environment)
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS191
cases, extraction of the damaged tooth and
its opponent is indicated. Another option is
trimming at regular intervals (usually every
3-5 weeks). The latter is more stressful for owner
and pet. It is also more expensive for the owner
in the long term.
TOOTH TRIMMING
Tooth trimming is the most commonly indicated
procedure in lagomorph and rodent dentistry.
The aim is to recreate normal, or near normal,
occlusion. It is thus essential to know the normal
occlusal pattern for each of the species. Improved
husbandry, i.e. feeding an appropriately abrasive
diet, will then help maintain normal occlusion as
normal wear occurs.
Tooth trimming is a difficult and time-
consuming procedure. It should be performed
under general anesthesia. While trimming incisors
without general anesthesia is possible, it is
impossible to check and trim cheek teeth. The
whole occlusion needs evaluation. It is rare that
just the incisors need shaping. In fact, it is more
common that the cause of the problem rests with
the cheek tooth occlusion.
Practice is required to master the art of tooth
 trimming. It can be hazardous even in experienced
Fig. 14.17 Rat -incisor overgrowth (clinical
 hands. The space available to work in is limited
presentation). Incisor overgrowth caused by lack of wear.
One of the upper incisors is fractured due to excessive
and one 'slip' can have fatal consequences, e.g.
overgrowth
accidentally severing major blood vessels. Good
lighting is crucial and precision instruments
must be used. The soft tissues must be protected
at all times.
rquires no other treatment than smoothing of
 Equipment and instrumentation requirements
any sharp edges. Complicated crown fracture
(i.e. the pulp is exposed) requires covering
(Figs 14.18 & 14.19) include:
the exposed pulp with hard-setting calcium
hydroxide cement (e.g. Dycal) and a layer of
· Good lighting
intermediate temporary restorative material.
·Mouth gag
·Cheek dilator(s)
The opposing tooth or teeth need to be trimmed
·
 Spatulas for protection of soft tissues
regularly to compensate for the lack of wear until
+
 Slow-speed straight hand piece
the fractured tooth is back in occlusion. In some
+
 High-speed hand piece
cases, the trauma causes injury to the periapical
· Selection of slow-speed burs (HP fissure and
 germinal tissue. The injured tooth may cease to
acrylic burs of different sizes)
grow or may grow in the wrong direction. The
· Selection of high-speed burs (fissure and
tooth may also become malformed. In such
possibly pear-shaped, of different sizes).
192
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
take a bit longer. The lips and tongue should be
protected to avoid soft tissue damage.
A high-speed unit generates large amounts of
heat on the tooth. This can lead to thermal
injuries of the tooth and associated structures.
The golden rule is thus that a high-speed unit
should never be used without water cooling of
the bur. Moreover, if a bur is run dry at high-
speed, it will become blunt within seconds.
Therefore, if a high-speed unit is used to trim the
incisors, the water cooling should not be turned
off. It has been suggested that if a 'waltz-rhythm'
(one second of bur contact with the tooth,
followed by two seconds off the tooth allowing it
to cool down) is used, then the water can be
turned off. The evidence to show that this is safe
is lacking. If this option were used, we would
recommend keeping the teeth moist by dropping
water over them intermittently.
For incisors that are in occlusion, the chisel-
Fig. 14.18 Equipment 1 - gags and dilators.
shaped wear pattern should be restored. In
patients with primary incisor overgrowth (i.e.
relative mandibular prognathism), the recreation
 of the normal wear pattern is not required
since the teeth do not occlude anyway. Patients
with primary incisor overgrowth will need
regular trimming (usually every 3-5 weeks) for
the duration of their life. Extracting the incisor
teeth is probably the best treatment for these
patients.
 Pulp exposure is a common complication when
trimming elongated incisor teeth. One study has
shown that, while the tip of the pulp cavity in
normal incisor teeth does not extend above the
level of the interdental gingival papilla, it fre-
quently extends supragingivally in elongated
Fig. 14.19 Equipment 2 - burs and hand pieces. From
top to bottom: high-speed hand piece with FG fissure bur:
incisor teeth (Crossley, 2001b). If the pulp
is
low-speed hand piece with acrylic bur: protector for HP
exposed, it needs to be covered with
a
fissure bur; HP fissure bur.
hardsetting calcium hydroxide cement and an
intermediate restorative material.
Incisor teeth
Cheek teeth
Incisors are best trimmed using a fissure bur in a
high-speed hand piece. In our experience, diamond
To access the cheek teeth, the mouth has to be
discs are
 potentially hazardous (soft tissue
 opened wide and the cheeks held out of the way.
injuries) to both the operator and the patient, and
 The cheek dilators are often too short to keep the
should not be used. Using a fissure bur in a slow- l
 buccal mucosa safe from injury with the bur. We
speed hand piece will also do the job, but it does 
 use a round-ended spatula between the cheek
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS193
and the cheek dilator to keep the mucosa away
Aradicular hypsodont incisor teeth
even at the level of the last molar. A second
spatula is used to protect the tongue. Bur pro-
The most common indications for extraction of
tectors are available. They lead to a false sense of
incisors are:
security and have a sharp edge, which may
·  Primary incisor overgrowth
injure the soft tissues if used without caution,
 especially when the mucosa is already ulcerated.
· Periapical abscessation.
We usually do not use them.
Overgrown cheek teeth need to be shortened
It is essential to evaluate the whole mouth and
 radically - usually almost level with the gingiva.
treat any cheek tooth disease. Preoperative lateral
Moreover, the normal inclination of the occlusal
radiographs should be taken, to assess root struc-
ture and extent of pathology present.
surface should be recreated (almost horizontal in
rabbits and chinchillas, 30° angle in guinea pigs).
Tooth extraction is a surgical procedure and
should be performed in a clean mouth using
Recreating the normal occlusal inclination for the
species is called 'occlusal calibration'. A straight
sterile instruments. Specialized instrumentation
is needed (Fig. 14.20), and with the increasing
slow-speed hand piece is used. The choice of bur
 popularity of rabbits and rodents as pets, these
depends on the size of the animal and operator
instruments are now available (e.g. Crossley
preference. Our preference is either an acrylic bur
luxator). For very small animals, instruments
(stainless steel) or the HP cheek tooth bur
(tungsten-carbide, 6 mm diameter). Moistening
may need to be custom-made by bending hypo-
dermic needles of suitable size.
the teeth, e.g. wiping them with a wet cotton
bud, facilitates smooth working of the bur. In
Extraction can be performed using a closed
addition, by wiping away enamel and dentine
technique (i.e. without raising a gingival access
flap) or using an open technique (i.e. raising a
shavings, visualization is improved.
Laceration of soft tissues and consequent
gingival flap for access to the alveolar bone). We
use a closed technique in most instances. The
hemorrhage should be avoided. The tongue and
procedure is as follows:
the buccal mucosa distal to the last molar will
bleed heavily if traumatized. It is easy to entrap
the sublingual mucosa of a rabbit in the
dental bur, and it is most difficult to stop the
serious bleeding that results. Hemostasis can
usually be achieved with continuous pressure.
Suturing lacerated tissue is extremely difficult
due to the lack of space in the long and narrow
oral cavity.
After trimming, the mouth should be cleaned
(to avoid inhalation of debris) and re-inspected.
EXTRACTION
 Teeth affected by severe disease need extraction.
In the pocket pets, there are rarely alternative
treatments. Moreover, extraction may be prefer-
able to trimming every few weeks.
The basic principles of extraction are similar to
Fig. 14.20 Equipment 3 - extraction. From top to
those used in other species. Extraction of teeth in
bottom: molar extraction forceps, Crossley molar luxator:
dogs and cats is covered in Chapter 13.
Crossley incisor luxator
194
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
1. The gingival attachment is severed down to
the root remnant must be removed to achieve
the level of the margin of the alveolar bone
healing. An open extraction technique is indicated
using a No. 1l scalpel blade in a handle, or with
as follows:
a sharp luxator.
2.
 The luxator is gently inserted into the
1、
 Raise a gingival flap to access the alveolar
periodontal space, alternatively on mesial and
bone.
distal aspects of the tooth, holding tension for
2.
 Remove alveolar bone (with a small round
10-20 seconds each time, stretching and tearing
bur in either a high- or slow-speed hand
the periodontal ligament. The luxator is not used
piece).
 on the buccal and palatal/lingual tooth aspects as
3.
 Proceed with luxators as described in the
the strongest attachment is on the mesial and
previous section for closed extraction.
distal surfaces.
4.
 Debride the apical portion of the alveolus
3.
 Alternate the luxator application between
once the tooth has been removed.
mesial and distal, working further apically each
5.
Replace the gingival flap and suture the
time, until the tooth feels loose in the alveolus.
extraction socket closed.
It is important to support the mandible while
working; too much force can easily lead to
If the reason for the extraction was not infection,
mandibular fracture.
 e.g. elective extraction rather than frequent trim-
4.  Once there is considerable mobility.
ming, then the best option for management is to
longitudinal traction with extraction forceps can
leave the root remnant in place and wait for a few
be applied until the tooth comes out.
weeks for the tooth to regrow. Once it has regrown,
 5. The alveolus (especially the most apical
a second extraction procedure is performed.
 portion) is thoroughly debrided with a spoon
curette to destroy any germinal tissue at the
apex, thus reducing the likelihood of the
Cheek teeth
extracted tooth reforming. Even with complete
Brachyodont
removal of the tooth and curettage of the apical
germinal tissue, an extracted tooth will
The pocket pets with brachyodont cheek teeth are
occasionally regrow. The owner should be
spared the pathology associated with overgrowth
informed of this risk prior to the procedure.
of teeth. In our experience, the most common.
6. The extraction socket may be left open to
indication for tooth extraction is plaque-induced
heal by granulation or the gingiva may be used
periodontal disease.
to close the site and achieve primary healing. If
Extraction techniques for the brachyodont
the socket is sutured closed, ensure that there is
teeth of dogs and cats are covered in Chapter 13.
no tension. We generally suture the gingiva
The same techniques are used for rats, mice,
across the alveolus. It helps control hemorrhage
gerbils and hamsters. The instruments need to be
and keeps the coagulum in the socket.
small. Hypodermic needles can be used as ele-
vators. Due to the limited space, only mobile
We do not recommend inserting hemostatic
teeth are easy to remove.
packing materials into the extraction socket as
they may delay healing. While postoperative sys-
temic antibiotics are generally not indicated,
Aradicular hypsodont
unless there was evidence of preoperative infec-
The most common indication for extraction of
tion, good postoperative analgesia is mandatory.
cheek teeth is that they are affected by endodontic
If the tooth fractures during extraction, two
or periodontic disease resulting in periapical
basic options for management exist. The choice
 abscessation. These teeth are difficult to extract.
of method depends on the reason for the extrac-
 They have long submerged crowns and root
tion. If the reason for extraction was infection,
elongation or deformity often further complicates
LAGOMORPHS & RODENTS195
extraction. Cheek teeth can be extracted using
If the tooth is not mobile, either an extraoral
either an intraoral or extraoral approach, or a
approach or a combination of extra- and intraoral
combination of both.
access is usually required. Referral to a specialist
An intraoral approach is indicated when a
is recommended. Although buccotomy incision
tooth has lost a significant portion of its peri-
facilitates extraction, it is associated with major
odontal support and is mobile. The instruments
disadvantages, e.g. significant risk of severe
used need to be thin, angled and sharp. A
hemorrhage, complicated healing. We do not rec-
selection is available on the market.
Bent
ommend the approach via buccotomy incision,
hypodermic needles can also be used
as
unless there is a lesion (usually an abscess) that
elevators. The technique is a closed extraction.
 requires surgery at this site. Mandibular teeth
The elevator is inserted into the periodontal
can be extracted using a surgical extraoral
ligament space and worked around the whole
approach from the ventrolateral aspect of the
circumference of the tooth until it loosens.
mandible, and repulsed into the mouth or
Sometimes there is insufficient space to remove
extracted via the surgical incision.
the long tooth in one piece. The crown can then
Once a cheek tooth has been extracted, the
be cut transversely into pieces as it is removed
patient will require long term monitoring and
out of the alveolus.
regular trimming of the opposing teeth, as these
will not wear down appropriately.
Summary
 Dental problems in lagomorphs and rodents are very common.
Most conditions are associated with incorrect husbandry and diet, and these issues must be addressed as part of the
treatment.
These species are often presented late in the disease process, with consequent poorer prognosis
pathology may be missed.
Rabbits, guinea pigs and chinchillas with incisor overgrowth usually have a primary problem afecting the cheek teeth.
Primary incisor overgrowth is considered rare except in young rabbits (less than 1 year of age).
In guinea pigs, the problem is exacerbated by vitamin C deficiency. In chinchillas, it may be detected early by
palpation of swellings on the ventral border of the mandible.
general anesthesia is indicated.
Suitable equipment and instruments are nee ded for safe and effective tooth trimming in pocket pets.
Closed extraction of incisors is the usual procedure, but extraction of the cheek teeth can be problematical and referral
should be considered
196
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
REFERENCES
Brown, S.A.& Rosenthal, K.L. (1997a) Seff Assessment
Harcourt-Brown, F.M. & Baker S.J. (2001) Parathyroid
Colour Review of Smaff Marmmals. London, UK: Manson
 hormone, haematological and biochemical parameters in
Publishing, p. 77-78.
relation to dental disease and husbandry in rabbits.
Brown, S.A. & Rosenthal, K.L. (1997b) Seff Assessment
Journal of Smaff Animal Practice 42(3): 130-136.
Colour Review of Smaff Marmmals. London, UK: Manson
Klaus, P. & Bennet, R.A. (1999) Management of abscesses
Publishing, p. 63-74.
of the head in rabbits.Proceedings of the North
Crossley, D.A. (1995a) Clinical aspects of lagomorph dental
American Veterinary Conference, Orlando, USA.
anatomy: the rabbit (Oryctolagus cuniculus). Journal of
Miles,A.E.W.& Crigson,C.(1990) Colyer's Variations and
Veterinary Dentistry 12(4): 137-142.
Diseases of theTeeth of Animals,revised edn.
Crossley, D.A. (1995b) Clinical aspects of rodent dental
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,
anatomy. Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 12(4): 131-135.
p. 567-569.
Crossley, D.A. (2000) Rodent and rabbit radiology. In:
Redrobe, S. (1997) Surgical procedures and dental
DeForge, D.H. & Colmery, B.H. Ill (eds) An Atlas of
disorders. In: Flecknell, P. (ed) Manual of Rabbit
Veterinary Dental Radiology. Ames, USA: lowa State
Medicine and Surgery. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA,
University Press, p. 247-259.
p.129-133.
Crossley, D.A. (2001a) Dental disease in chinchillas in the
Remeeus, P.G.K. & Verbeek, M. (1995) The use of calcium-
UK. Journal of Smaffl Animal Practice 42(1): 12-19.
hydroxide in the treatment of abscesses in the cheek of
Crossley, D.A. (2001b) The risk of pulp exposure when
the rabbit resulting from a dental periapical disorder.
trimming rabbit incisor teeth. Proceedings of the 10th
Journal of Veterinary Dentistry 12(1): 19-22.
EuropeanVeterinaryDentalSociety AnnualCongress,
Schaeffer, D.O. & Donnelly, T.M. (1997) Disease problems in
Berlin, Germany.
guinea pigs and chinchillas. In: Hillyer, E.V. &
Crossley D.A., Dubielzig, R.R. & Benson, K.G. (1997)
Quesenberry K.E. (eds) Ferrets, Rabbits and Rodents:
Caries and odontoclastic resorptive lesions in a chinchilla
Clinical Medicine and Surgery.Philadelphia, USA: WB
(Chinchilla laniger). Veterinary Record 141 (27): 337-339.
Saunders, p. 260-281.
Crossley, D.A., Jackson, A., Yates, J. et al. (1998) Use of
Wiggs, B. & Lobprise, H. (1995) Dental anatomy and 
computed tomography to investigate cheek tooth
physiology of pet rodents and lagomorphs. In: Crossley.
abnormalities in chinchillas (Chinchilla laniger). Journa!
D.A. & Penman, S. (eds) Manual of Smafl Animal
of Smafl Animal Practice 39(8): 385-389.
Dentistry. Cheltenham, UK: BSAVA, Ch. 7, p. 68-73.
Flecknell, PA. (1991) Guinea Pigs. In: Beynon, P.H. &
Williams, C.s.F. (1976) Practical Guide to Laboratory
Cooper, J.E. (eds) Manual of Exotic Pets. Cheltenham,
Animais. St Louis, USA: Mosby.
UK: BSAVA, p. 52.
Appendix:
Endodontics
Endodontics is the treatment of the pulp of the
pulp, replacing it with an inert material and restor-
tooth (Endo: inside; -dontic: tooth)
ing the tooth. The inflamed or dead pulp is
There are three pulpal treatments, each of which
removed using special files. Once the pulp has
has specific indications. They are:
been removed, the root canal is cleaned, both
mechanically with files but also chemically with
1.
 Pulp capping
a disinfectant. The clean and disinfected root
 Partial pulpectomy with direct pulp
canal is then filled with inert material and the
capping
crown is restored with a suitable restorative
3.Root canal therapy.
material. The tooth is not restored to its original
shape and size as the biting forrces in dogs are much
Conventional root canal therapy is the most
greater than those in humans and the restoration
commonly indicated type of endodontic treat-
would be likely to fail if this was attempted.
ment. It involves total removal of pulp tissue, i.e.
 The whole procedure is performed under
total pulpectomy, cleaning and filling of the root
canal, followed by tooth restoration.
control. It is time-consuming, as each step needs
Root canal therapy is indicated when there is,
to be performed with meticulous detail to ensure
or may be, irreversible pulp pathology (e.g.
successful outcome.
generalized pulpitis or pulp necrosis, often in
 The outcome of conventional root canal therapy
combination with periapical involvement) in the
should be monitored radiographically for 6-12
mature permanent tooth. Immature permanent
months postoperatively. This will also require
teeth are a special consideration and are dealt with
general anesthesia. Evidence of disease around
separately.
the tip of the root at this time indicates the need
The objectives of conventional root canal
for further endodontic therapy or extraction of
therapy are:
the tooth. Further endodontic therapy usually
consists of re-doing the root canal therapy, often
· To clean and disinfect the pulp chamber and
in conjunction with surgical endodontics (usually
root canal(s)
removing the tip of the root and sealing the root
· To fill the root canal(s) with a nonirritant,
canal from this direction as well)
 antibacterial material, thus sealing the apex
· To close the access and exposure sites with a
Special considerations with
suitable restorative material.
immature teeth
Many different methods are employed in the
A partial pulpectomy and direct pulp capping
preparation and filling of root canals. In simple
 procedure is indicated for recent tooth crown
terms, root canal therapy involves removing the
fractures with pulp exposure in an immature
197
198  VETERINARY DENTISTRY
tooth. An immature tooth has a thin dentine wall
effective  in  stimulating apexogenesis and
 and an open apex, allowing a good blood supply
apexification. When no further root development
 to the pulp. Treatment is aimed at maintaining a
 can be seen radiographically and if the apex is
viable pulp, as this is needed for continued root
closed, a conventional root canal treatment should
development.
be performed. A conventional root canal treat-
A necrotic immature tooth requires endodontic
ment can only be carried out if the apex is closed.
treatment if they are to be retained. The pro-
If the apex is still open and closure cannot be
cedure is an adaptation of conventional root canal
stimulated by repeated calcium hydroxide dress-
therapy as already described for the mature per-
ings, it may be possible to obtain an apical seal
manent tooth. The necrotic pulp tissue is gently
using a surgical approach and placing a root
removed and the pulp chamber and root canal
filling in a retrograde manner.
thoroughly cleaned. It is important to remove all
 It must be noted that multiple general anesthesia
the necrotic tissue, which usually extends slightly
episodes are required and thus in most cases
beyond the radiographically verifiable open
 extraction of an immature tooth with a necrotic
 pulp is the best course of action. Salvage procedure
is packed into the root canal, extending just beyond
 as described above is really only indicated for the
the apex. A degree of apexogenesis (normal root
 strategic permanent teeth that have undergone
length and apex development) or apexification
 some degree of maturation.
(treatment-stimulated root closure) can be
It should also be noted that immature teeth
achieved if this procedure is performed. The
might well be present in the mature arimal if
exposure site is sealed with a restorative material.
 trauma caused pulp necrosis during the develop-
The tooth is monitored closely and the calcium
 mental period. Treatment of such teeth is the same
hydroxide dressing is changed approximately
as for any immafure permanent teeth, regardless
every six months, as a fresh dressing is more
of the actual age of the animal.
Glossary
GLOSSARY 201
Abrasion Wear of tooth surfaces that are not in contact with
Attachment epithelium Cells that attach the gingiva to the
one another.
tooth.
Acrylic General name for methyl methacrylate and poly
Attrition Abnormal or excessive wear of occluding tooth
methyl methacrylate. Polymer material used in dental
surfaces
restoration, splinting and orthcdontics.
Avulsion Separation by traction. The dislocation of a tooth
Alveolar bone Bone forming the sockets for the teeth.
from its alveolus.
Alveolar mucosa Oral mucosa that covers the alveolar
Bifurcation Division into two parts or branches, as any two
processes
roots of a tooth.
Alveolar septum The dense bone separating alveoli of
adjacent teeth.
minimize linear distortion by aiming the beam perpendicular
Alveolus Socket within bone and soft tissue in which a tooth
to the line that bisects the angle formed by the long axis of
is normally located
the tooth and the film.
Ameloblast Enamel-forming cell that arises from oral ectoderm.
Biting force The pressure exerted by teeth when engaged
Ameloblastoma Benign, but locally invasive, neoplasm
by the muscles of mastication
criginating from cdontogenic epithelium
Body of the mandible Horizontal portion of the mandible.
Anelodont Teeth that develop a true anatomic root structure
excluding the alveolar process.
and do not continuously grow throughout life.
Brachycephalic Having a short skull, e.g. Bulldogs.
 Anisognathism Having upper and lower jaws of differing
Pekinese
widths. Normal in many species
Brachygnasthism Having a short jaw
Ankylosis (Greek for 'immobile'). Fusion of bone and tooth
Brachyodont Teeth that have a short crown:root ratio, with a
substance along the root surface.
true root
Anodontia The congenital absence of teeth
Bruxism Abnormal grinding of the teeth.
Anterior Situated in front of. This term is commonly used to
Buccal Of, or towards, the cheek.
denote the incisor and canine teeth or the area toward the
front of the mouth.
Buccal surface Surface of a posterior tooth positioned
Anterior crossbite Reverse scissor ccclusion of one, several
immediately adjacent to the cheek.
or all of the incisors.
Bur A rotary instrument used for cutting and shaping teeth
Apatite Calcium hydroxyapatite [Cao(PO) (OH)2]. the
bone, metal, etc.
main mineral component of dental hard tissues
Calcification Process by which organic tissue becomes
Apex Point or extremity of a conical cbject such as a tooth
hardened by a deposit of calcium salts within its substance.
root.
Literally, the term denotes the deposition of any mineral
Apexification Treatment-stimulated closure of the root apex.
tissue.
Apexogenesis Normal root length and apex development.
Calcium hydroxide Alkaline powder used as such or
Apical Direction toward the root tip or away from the incisal
incorporated into pastes and cements for use as a direct or
cr occlusal surfaces.
indirect pulp dressing
Apical delta Fine branching channels at the root apex of
Calcium hydroxide cement Alkaline dental cement popular
a sau  ynn  aui  a 
for lining cavities.
vessels and lymphatics pass.
Calculus Hard deposit which accumulates on the teeth
Apical foramen A single opening at the root apex thrcugh
Mineralized plaque. Tartar
which nerves, blood vessels and lymphatics pass
Aradicular Without roots.
Canines See cuspids.
Aradicular hypsodont Dentition with long crowned teeth.
Caries Progressive dissolution of tooth structure by
without a true root structure, which are continually growing
bacterial acid and enzyme action. Common in humans, less
(e.g. lagomorphs, guinea pigs, chinchillas). Elodont.
common in dogs and not described in cats.
the free gingiva to the alveolar mucosa.
and lower jaws (upper 4th premolar and lower 1st molar in
202
VETERINARY DENTISTRY
dogs and cats).
Contact point A point where two adjacent teeth touch.
Coronal Towards or pertaining to the crown of a tooth
Cavity An abnormal hole or depression in the surface of a
Coronally positioned flap Gingival flap that is placed at a
tooth, e.g. caries cavities and feline resorptive lesion cavities.
point coronal to its original position.
Cementoblasts Cells that form cementum.
portion of the vertical ramus. It is the attachment location
Cemento-dentinal junction (CDJ) Junction where the
for the temporal muscle.
cementum and dentine contact.
Cortical plate Dense bone on the cuter buccal and lingual
Cemento-enamel junction (CEJ) The line between anatomic
surfaces of the alveolar bone.
Covering the root. Term usually only used when referring to
Crown 1 That part of a tooth that is normally situated within
brachyodont teeth.
by enamel.
Crown 2 A prosthetic reconstruction of the coronal part of a
Cementum Bone-like connective tissue usually covering the
damaged tooth
surface of tooth roots and sometimes the crown. Consists of
65% mineral (calcium hydroxyapatite), 23% organic (mainly
Curette Dental instrument used for removing plaque and
collagen). 12% water
calculus from the subgingival surface of tooth roots. Alsc
used for root planing.
Cervical Of or towards the neck. Of that part of a tooth
where root and crown meet.
Cusp A raised or pcinted portion of a tooth crown.
Cervical line The cemento-enamel junction where root and 
Cuspids (canine teeth, fang teeth) Four pointed teeth
crown of brachyodont teeth meet.
situated one on each side of both jaws, immediately distal
to the corner or lateral incisors
Cervix (neck) Narrow or constricted portion of a tooth in the
region of the junction of crown and root.
Cyst Sac of fluid lined by epithelial cells. Cysts may grow to
varying sizes.
Cheek teeth Term used to signify the premolar and/or molar
teeth of herbivores as a functional unit.
Deciduous teeth Those teeth which are normally shed and
replaced in diphyodont dentitions. Temporary. puppy. kitten,
Cheilitis Inflammation of the lips.
milk, baby or primary teeth.
Chlorhexidine Chemical disinfectant often used for plaque
Deglutition Action of swallowing.
control. Used as either the gluconate or acetate.
Dental abrasion Wear from the friction of an externally
applied force, such as brushing.
the palatal or lingual surface of the crown of incisor teeth in
humans and dogs.
Dental attrition Wear or loss of tooth substance due to
normal masticatory forces, i.e. teeth that are in contact
Cleftlip Defect or gap in the upper lip. cccurring during
fetal development.
Dental luxator Instrument with a wider, but more delicate
blade than an elevator that is used in the periodontal space
Cleft palate Lack of joining together of hard or soft palate.
to sever the pericdontal ligament attachment
Dentigerous Containing or associated with teeth, e.g.
gingiva.
paidnaun ue punoe soy peun so e - so snoabuan
Clinical root That portion of the tooth below the gingiva
tooth.
Closed apex Natural constrictive closing of the tooth apex
Dentine (dentin) Hard connective tissue forming main bulk
of most teeth. Consists of 70% mineral (calcium
Closed curettage Root scaling and root planing of a
periodontal pocket shallow enough to allow the apical
extent to be reached with hand instruments.
Dentino-enamel junction (DEJ) Juncture within the crown of
the tooth where the dentinal and enamel walls meet.
Cold-cure acrylic Acrylic which cures when an amine
activates the initiator without the application of heat. Self-
Dentition Name used to signify the characteristics
curing.
arrangement and function of teeth, e.g. carnivorcus.
a p s  a    s 
herbivorous and omnivorous dentition.
mandible that forms part of the temporomandibular joint.
Developer Solution to make the latent image on an exposed
Congenital Present at birth.
X-ray film visible.
GLOSSARY 203
Developmental Of, or relating to, formation, e.g.
External resorption Destruction of dental hard tissue that
commences at the external root surface.
aidas o uoisnt au wo bueuibio Ainsn yooi e o
Extirpation Complete surgical removal of a part, such as a
parts during the formation of the tooth.
dind
Diastema A natural gap or space between teeth in the
Extract To pull out or remove.
incisors and cheek teeth in lagomorphs and rodents, and
Extrusion Over-eruption or extension of a tooth from its
the space between maxillary incisors and canine teeth in
socket.
carnivores
Facet A flattened surface worn on a tooth, usually caused
Dilaceration Deformity of a tooth root or crown. Usually
by contact with an opposing tooth
used to refer to sharp angulation of a tooth root.
Facial The cutward facing. i.e. labial and buccal, surfaces
Diphyodont Dentition where one set of teeth (the deciduous
of the teeth.
dentition) is shed, being replaced by a second set (the
Fauces Space between the left and right palatine tonsils.
permanent dentition).
i.e. medial to the palatoglossal folds.
Disclosing agents Organic dyes capable of indicating the
Filling See restoration 1.
presence of plaque
Disinfectants Agents that remove or kill microorganisms.
Filling materials Restorative materials used to cbturate
cavities, e.g. those left after the removal of caries.
  s a o  o  sn s
Fissure A developmental fault seen as a deep fold or cleft
in the occlusal or buccal surface of a tooth
arch.
Fixer solutions Used to preserve and enhance the latent
Distal surface Surface of a tooth facing away from the
image on the radiographic film.
Dolichocephalic Having a long skull, as seen in Rough
Fluorapatite The acid-resistant form of hydroxyapatite
Collies and Dobermans
Fluoride agents Sources of fluoride ions that are suitable for
use in the mouth.
Dysplasia Abnormal development, e.g. enamel dysplasia.
Elodont Teeth that grow throughout life. Aradicular
Follicle A small sac or cyst.
hypsodont teeth.
Follicular cyst Dentigerous cyst or dilation of the follicular
Enamel Very hard cuter layer of tooth crown in humans and
space around the crown of a tooth that is unerupted or
carnivores. Consists of 96% mineral (calcium
impacted.
Fossa A shallow depression, e.g. the depression between
Enamel hypoplasia Condition in which the enamel layer is
the cingulum and incisal edge of certain incisor teeth.
thin or reduced.
Frenectomy Excision of the frenulum
Endodontic Of, or pertaining to, the tissue within a tooth, i.e.
Frenoplasty Excision of part of the frenulum to alter its
the pulp/dentine unit.
contours.
Endodontic filling materials Means of obturating pulp
Frenulum Fold of alveolar mucosa forming a noticeable
chamber after extirpation and disinfection
ridge of attachment between the lips and gums
Endodontic sealers Materials used to create a seal between
Frenum Fold of skin or lining tissue that limits the movement
endodontic filling materials and the wall of the pulp
(anbuol aul lapun anssl 6'a) uebio ue j0
chamber.
Fulcrum Centre of rotation of the tooth, usually occurring
Endodontics Study and treatment of the dental pulp
approximately at the junction of the middle and apical thirds
Epiglottis Mucosal-covered cartilage that helps cover the
of the root.
laryngeal opening
Functional occlusion Active tooth contacts during
Epulis Clinical descriptive term to denote mass on the
mastication and swallowing: also called dynamic ccclusion
gingiva.
Furcation Forking or branching point. Bifurcation or
trifurcation: the area where the roots of multirooted teeth
Eruption Movement of a tooth as it emerges thrcugh
meet.
surrounding tissue so that the clinical crown gradually
appears longer
Fusion The joining of two or more teeth each retaining its
Exfoliation Shedding or loss of a primary tooth.
own structure
204 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Gemination The partial splitting of a tooth giving the
Homodont The feature of having all teeth of the same
appearance of a double crown whilst having a single root
 ui se  e azis yanoue 'ad o adus eaua
structure.
reptiles and sharks.
Gingiva Oral mucosa that surrounds the teeth.
Gingival Of, or pertaining to, the gingiva.
running from the cementum to the alveolar crest to resist
horizontal tooth movements
Horizontal ramus That portion of the jaw composed of the
Gingival fibers Periodontal fibers in the gingival connective
body and symphyseal area of the mandible
tissue.
Hydroxyapatite Form of calcium phosphate, the basic
Gingival fluid Tissue fluid that exudes thrcugh the sulcular
mineral of enamel, dentine and cementum. See apatite for
epithelium.
formula.
Gingival hyperplasia Proliferation of the gingiva.
Hypersialism Excessive salivation or drooling.
 a p b po s  
Gingival papilla Gingival tissue in the interproximal space
insufficient number of enamel crystals or insufficient growth
of the crystals.
between two adjacent teeth.
Hypodontia Condition in which some teeth are missing.
Gingival pocket Abnormal, pathologic space extending
down a tooth root from the gingival sulcus
Hypoplastic enamel Thin enamel, commonly seen in
 conjunction with enamel hypccalcification
Gingival sulcus Gap or potential space situated between
the free gingiva and the tooth surface
Hypsodont Dentition comprising long crowned teeth,
Gingivectomy Excision of excessive gingival tissues to
radicular or aradicular.
create a new gingival margin
Impacted tooth A tooth that cannot erupt, or complete its
Gingivitis Inflammation of the gingiva.
eruption, due to contact with an obstruction such as
another tooth
Gingivoplasty Periodontal surgery used to correct gingival
deformities of contour not associated with pocketing.
Incipient caries First indication of enamel demineralization
seen as a chalky white spot.
Gnathic Of the jaw. In general use refers to the mandible.
Incisal Coronal portion or direction in incisors.
Groove Shallow linear depression on the surface of a tooth
There are two common types
Incisal bone The premaxilla, rostral-most area of upper jaw.
that accommodates the maxillary incisors and is formed
1.
 Developmental groove: Marks the boundaries
between adjacent cusps and other major divisional
parts of a tooth.
primary plate.
 2. Supp/emental groove: An indistinct linear depression,
Incisor Center teeth in either arch that are essential for
irregular in extent and direction, that does not
cutting.
demarcate major divisional portions of a tooth.
Infrabony pocket Periodontal pocket that has its base
Gum In common usage. Gingiva.
pocket.
Halitosis Unpleasant breath cdor.
Interceptive orthodontics Generally considered to be the
Hard palate Bony vault of the oral cavity proper covered
extraction or recontouring (crown reduction) of primary or
with soff tissue
permanent teeth that are contributing to alignment
Hemisection A tooth being cut in half generally through the
problems of the permanent dentition.
furcational area.
Interdental Situated between adjacent teeth, e.g. interdental
Hereditary Term describing traits received from ancestors
wiring.
that produce specific characteristics
Interdental papillae Projection of gingiva between the teeth
Heterodont Dentition comprising teeth of different shapes
Interdental septum Bone between the roots of adjacent
and functions
teeth.
High-speed Used to describe air driven turbine
Internal resorption Loss of the dentinal structure internally.
mechanisms capable of rotation at over 100 000 rpm.
Typical high-speed hand pieces rotate burs at around
Interproximal Between adjoining surfaces of adjacent teeth.
300 000 rpm.
GLOSSARY 205
Interradicular fibers Aveolodental periodontal ligament
Mesial Towards the point of the dental arch situated in the
fibers in multirooted teeth that go from the interradicular
median plane
crestal bone to cementum.
Mesial surface Surface of a tooth facing toward the median
Intraradicular septum Bone between the roots of multirooted
line, following the curve of the dental arch.
teeth.
Mesocephaly Condition marked by a balanced facial
 an  a  an o  s
profile, somewhere between dolichocephalic and
brachycephalic, as in German Shepherds
Ilrreversible pulpitis Inflammation of the pulp that cannot be
resolved, leading to the death of the vital pulp.
Microdontia Having smaller teeth than normal
Isognathism Condition of having equal jaw widths, in which
Milk teeth Those teeth that are normally shed and replaced
the premolars and molars of opposing jaws align with the
puppy. kitten or baby teeth.
plane.
Mixed dentition The feature of having primary and
Junctional epithelium Epithelium that acts to hold mucosa in
permanent teeth in the dental arches at the same time
the base of the gingival sulcus to the tooth
Molars Teeth with ccclusal surface that can be used to
grind food or break it down into smaller pieces
Labial Of, towards, or pertaining to, the lips.
Monophydont Having one set of teeth, i.e. permanent only.
Labial surface Surface of an anterior tooth positioned
immediately adjacent to the lip.
Mucogingival junction The line between attached gingiva
and oral mucosa
Lamina dura Radiographic term denoting the cribriform
plate, bundle bone and the dense alveolar bone
Occluding Contacting opposing teeth
surrounding a root
Occlusal Of, or pertaining to, the surface of a tooth which
meets a tooth in the opposite jaw, e.g. the occlusal
the premolars or molars ccclude cusp to cusp.
surfaces of molar teeth.
Occlusal equilibration The recontcuring of abnormal
Lingual Of, towards, or pertaining to, the tongue
occlusal surfaces of teeth to improve function, most often
Lingual surface Surface of a tooth immediately adjacent to
the tongue
Occlusal surface Surface of a premolar or molar within the
Low-speed Dental engines or hand piece capable of
marginal ridges that contacts the corresponding surfaces of
providing rotation up to 30 000 rpm.
antagonists during closure of the posterior teeth.
Luxation Dislocation of a joint. Partial or complete
Occlusal trauma Injury caused by malocclusion.
separation of a tooth from its alveolus.
Macrodontia Having larger teeth than normal.
lower teeth
Malar abscess Facial abscess of dental origin.
Odontoblast Dentine-forming cell that originates from the
Malocclusion Abnormal tooth positioning
dental papilla
Odontoclasts Multinucleated cells responsible for
Mandible Lower jaw.
destroying cementum, dentine and enamel
Mandibular Pertaining to the lower jaw.
Mandibular condyle Rounded top of the mandible that
components of the developing tooth structure.
articulates with the mandibular fossa.
Odontoma Mixed odontogenic tissue tumor containing both
Mandibular symphysis Point at which the mandibular
epithelial and mesenchymal cells. It may be either
processes merge, forming the mandible
Mastication Act of chewing or grinding
Maxillae Paired main bones of the upper jaw.
failure to develop
Open bite Failure of teeth to come into ccclusion, an
Maxillary Pertaining to the upper arch.
abnormal gap remaining between opposing teeth when the
Medial/median Toward/at the midline of the body.
aw Is closed
Mental foramen Foramen cn the lateral side of the
mandible, below the premolars
206 VETERINARY DENTISTRY
Operculectomy Excision of an operculum to allow further
leukocytes, bacteria and their products including
eruption and crown exposure.
mucopolysaccharides.
Operculum Persistence of a thick, fibrous gingiva over a
Posterior Situated toward the back, such as premolars and
partially or even fully erupted tooth.
molars.
  a  aa b  n
Posterior crossbite Condition in which the cusps of a
consisting of stratified squamous epithelium.
posterior tooth (premolar, molar) in one arch exceed the
Oral mucosa Stratified squamous epithelium running from
normal cusp relation of those in the opposing arch, bucally
buull pue sllsuoi aul jo eae aul oi sdll aul jo suibhew aul
or lingually
the oral cavity: also known as oral mucous membrane
Pre-eruptive stage Period of time when the crown of the
tooth is developing.
Oropharynx Section between the tonsils and the base of the
tongue.
alveolar ridge for the incisors and the area immediately
Orthodontics Study and treatment relating to restoration of
behind it in primates.
normal tooth position and jaw relationships.
Premolars Permanent teeth that replace the primary molars.
Osteoblasts Cells that form bone.
designed to help hold and carry. like cuspids, and break
Osteoclasts Multinucleated cells responsible for destroying
food down into smaller pieces, like molars; also known as
bone.
bicuspids.
Palatal Pertaining to the palate or roof of the mouth.
Primary teeth see deciduous teeth.
Palatal surface Lingual (medial) surface of maxillary teeth.
Prognathism Having a longer or protruding jaw, e.g. relative
Palate Roof of the mouth.
mandibular prognathism.
Proxima Close to or toward the center or midline.
Peg teeth The small 2nd maxillary incisors, located behind
the large 1st maxillary incisors, in lagomorphs.
Proximal surface Surface of a tooth facing toward an
 Pellicle Amorphous coating of salivary proteins and
adjcining tooth in the same arch (e.g. both mesial and
distal surfaces are proximal surfaces)
mouth.
Periapical Around the tip of a tooth root.
height is increased due to hyperplasia, resulting in
increased periodontal probing values althcugh there is no
Periodontal Around or surrounding teeth and their roots. Of,
real attachment loss.
or pertaining to, the periodontium.
Ptyalism Excessive salivation, usually with excess drooling
Periodontal disease Plaque-induced inflammation of the
from mouth (slobbers)
periodontium.
Pulp Soft tissue within a tooth; contains odontoblasts,
Periodontal membrane or ligament Collagen fibers attached
nerves, blood vessels, lymphatics and connective tissue
attachment of the tooth to the bone.
Pulp canal Root canal. The space within a tooth root
running from the apex to the pulp chamber.
Periodontitis Plaque-induced inflammation of the 
Pulp cavity The pulp canal and chamber
periodontal tissues, resulting in irreversible loss of
periodontal ligament and alveolar bone
Pulp chamber The space within a tooth crown occupied by
pulp tissue
Periodontium Pericdontal tissues. Tissues adjacent to,
surrounding and supporting the tooth and its roots. Alveolar
Pulp-dentine unit The sensitive tissue of the tooth
bone, periodontal ligament, cementum and gingiva
Permanent teeth Final or lasting set of teeth that are
cements are used as pulp dressings and protectants. They
typically of a very durable and lasting nature (opposite of
are used as indirect pulp capping agents when there is
deciduous).
Physiologic mobility Degree of tooth movement that can be
liners beneath surface restorations.
considered normal
 Pit A small developmental depression usually in the
Pulpal exposure Unnatural opening of the pulp chamber by
occlusal surface of a tooth.
pathologic or mechanical means.
Plaque Biofilm that accumulates on teeth, composed of
Pulpal necrosis Partial or total pulpal death.
mucin, food residues, desquamated epithelial cells
Pulpectomy Extirpation of the entire pulp.
GLOSSARY207
Pulpitis Inflammation of pulp tissue - may be caused by
Scissor bite Normal relationship of the maxillary incisors
thermal, chemical, infective or traumatic insults.
Radicular Of, or pertaining to, the (tooth) root.
rest on or near the cingulum on the lingual surfaces on the
maxillary incisors
Radicular ankylosis Loss of part or all of the periodontal
Secondary dentine Dentine deposited after the eruption of a
ligament, resulting in fusion of root cementum and socket
tooth.
bone.
Self-cure acrylic Acrylic caused to set by the action of
Radicular hypsodont Dentition with long crowned teeth
having short, distinct, closed root structure: continucusly
chemicals without external heat.
(saunba 6'a) buimob Ajienuuos jou ing budne
Anelodont
the action of chemicals rather than light.
Ramus of the mandible Vertical portion of the mandible
Slobbers Ptyalism causing fur to be wet and matted around
Ranula Salivary retention cyst (sialocele) located under the
the mouth, jaw and ventral neck, particularly in chinchillas.
tongue, caused by blockage of the sublingual duct or
Soft palate Unsupported soft tissue that extends back from
gland.
the hard palate free of the support of the palatine bone.
Stomatitis Inflammation of the soft tissues of the oral cavity
direction, away from the crown of the tooth.
or mouth.
Reparative dentine Dentine deposited because of injury or
Subgingival curettage Removal of diseased soft tissue
irritation to the pulp. Tertiary dentine.
within a pericdontal pocket
Resorption Physiologic removal of tissues or body
Subluxation Incomplete dislocation of a joint, such as the
products, as of the roots of deciduous teeth or of some
temporomandibular jcint or a tooth.
alveolar process after the loss of the permanent teeth.
Submandibular Referring to the region below the mandible:
Restoration 1 The placed restorative materials, i.e. a filling.
a group of lymph nodes around the mandibular gland
Restoration 2 Act of placing restorative materials, e.g. filling
Supernumerary teeth Extra teeth, above the normal number.
a tooth cavity
and the premolar region of dolicocephalic dogs.
Restorative agent A material used to fill a cavity or rebuild
tooth structure (amalgam, composite, glass-ionomer etc.)
Tartar See calculus
Restorative dentistry The study of, or treatment invclving.
Temporary teeth Deciducus teeth.
the replacement of lost or missing tooth structure.
Temporomandibular joint Joint composed of the condylar
Root That part of tooth normally contained in the alveolus.
process of the vertical ramus of the mandible and the
Root bifurcation That point at which a root trunk divides into
mandibular fossa of the temporal bone of the skull
two separate branches
Tertiary dentine Dentine deposited as a result of injury or
irritation to the pulp. Reparative dentine.
Root exposure Uncovering or exposing of root surfaces due
to periodontal tissue loss
Toothbrushing Mechanical means of removing dental
Root planing Procedure for smoothing the cementum of the
plaque.
root of a tooth.
Version Angulation: bucco-, linguo-, labio-, palato-version;
Angulation of a tooth or teeth with the crown deviated
toward the cheek, tongue, lip. palate.
three separate branches
Vestibule That part of the mouth between the teeth and the
Rostral Toward the nose. Away from the tail
lips/cheek.
Rugae Small ridges of tissue extending laterally across the
Wet dewlap Moist dermatitis on the ventral neck of rabbits
anterior of the hard palate
from ptyalism due to malocclusion, stomatitis or cther cral
Scaler Dental instrument used for the removal of plaque
inflammation. Slobbers.
and calculus from the crowns of teeth. Hand scaler,
ultrasonic scaler, sonic scaler.
Xerostomia Dry mouth, due to lack of salivary secretion
Index
INDEX  211
Page numbers in italic refer to
Avulsion of tooth, 143, 145-6, 147,
preventive dentistry, 114-15
iffustrations.
148
radiography, 57
see also Odontoclastic resorptive
lesions
A
B
Catheters, 12
Cats
Abrasion, 76, 79
Bacterial aerosol, 1, 27
 age of tooth eruption, 30
Abscesses, 15, 80, 96, 96, 184, 184-5
Bicarbonate of soda, 6
airway obstruction, 15
Absence of teeth, 69, 70
Biscuits, 113-14
dental formulae, 29
Acepromazine, 14
Bisecting angle technique, 62, 66, 94
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV),
Acrylic prosthesis, 132
Bleeding, 48, 50, 92
107
Acute pulpitis, 15
Blood loss, 13
feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 107
Advancement flaps, 132, 133
Blood pressure, 12
feline odontoclastic resorptive
Aerosol, bacterial, 1, 27
Bone cutters, 165
lesions see Odontoclastic
Age of tooth eruption, 30
Bone loss/destruction, 94-5
resorptive lesions
Air polishing, 6
 see aiso Alveolar bone
full mouth radiographs, 65-7
Airway obstruction,14
Bone pathology, 57
gingivostomatitis, 27, 87, 106-8
Airway security, 11
Boxer dogs, 14, 92
occlusion, normal, 36-7
Alveolarbone
Brachycephalic dogs, 37-8, 38
odontoclastic resorptive lesions,
 anatomy of periodontium, 33
Brachycephalic patients
119-28
destruction of, 87, 90, 93
anesthesia,14
postoperative pain,20
odontoclastic resorptive lesions, 119
malocclusion, 35
radiography, 65-6
tooth anatomy, 29-30
Brachygnathic bite, 39, 40
tooth extraction, 171, 172
tooth extraction, 170
Brachyodont teeth, 175, 194-5
Cavities see Caries
Alveolar mucosa, 31
Bradycardia, anticholinergic resistant,
Cell turnover, 32
Alveolar tooth socket, 67-8
12
Cellulitis,80
Amelogenesis, 72
Buccal bone plate, 165, 169
Cemento-enamel junction (CEJ), 119,
Amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, 24
Bupivacaine, 17
123
Ampicillin, 24
 Buprenorphine, 14
Cementum
Amputation, coronal, 126-8, 127, 128
Butorphanol, 14
anatomy of periodontium, 33
Analgesia
normal radiographic anatomy, 67-8
 general description, 15
C
odontoclastic resorptive lesions, 119
local anesthesia, 16-20
tooth anatomy, 29, 31
 mechanisms of pain processing.
Cephalosporins, 24
15-16
Cage biting, 76
Cerclage techniques, 152, 152
Anesthesia
Calcifications in pulp tissue, 79
Cheek chewing, 17
oral examination under, 48
Calculus
Cheek dilators, 179
periodontal therapy, 98
accumulation of, 48
Cheekteeth
risks, 11
calculus forceps, 5
extraction, 194-5
special techniques, 20-2
periodontal disease, 90-1
infraorbital nerve, 18
see also Analgesia; General
removal of, 75, 96-8
overgrowth, 181-4
anesthesia;Local anesthesia
subgingival,2,5,100-3
see also specific species
Ankylosis, 122-3, 123
supragingival,98-100
rabbits,180
Anodontia, 69, 70
Canine teeth
trimming,193
Anorexia, 178
 attrition, 76
see also Molars: Premolars
Anterior crossbite, 42
degloving injuries, 132
Chemical plaque control, 114
Anterior maxilla, 132
extraction, 160, 166-70, 167, 168,
Chews, 113-14
Antibiotics
171
Chinchillas
and periodontal disease, 25-7
infraorbital nerve, 18
cheek tooth overgrowth, 189,
delivery of, 26-7
interdigitation, 36
189-90,190
feline gingivostomatitis, 108
malocclusion,42
healthy mouth, 188, 188
periodontal therapy, 98
mandibular, 36, 116, 117
incisor overgrowth, 189
preventive use of, 23-4
maturation of,30
other dental conditions, 190
therapeutic use of, 24-5
maxillary, 136-7
Chlorhexidine gluconate, 27, 106, 108,
see also specific antibiotic
medial displacement of, 42
159
 Anticholinergic agents, 14
occlusion, normal, 35
Chronic gingivostomatitis, 27, 87,
Anticholinergic resistant bradycardia,
persistent primary teeth, 43
106-8
12
radiography, 62
Chronic masseteric muscle myositis, 21
Antiplaque agents, 27
tooth anatomy, 29-31
Chronic stomatitis, 23
Antiseptics, 27
Cardiac dysrythmias, 17
Classification of lesions, 81
Arterial blood pressure, 12
Cardiac output, 12
Cleft palates, 132-6
Attached gingiva, 31, 32
Caries
Client education, 111-13
Attrition, 76, 79, 115
chinchillas, 190
Clindamycin, 24
Autologous transfusion, 13
definition, 76-9
Clinical attachment level (CAL), 50, 52
212INDEX
Closed extraction, 158, 160-5
Diagnosis, 57-8
Exposure settings for radiography, 60,
Closed subgingival debridement, 102,
see also specific condition
179
102-3
Diet, 113-14, 176, 177
External fixation, 154
Colloids,13
Dilators, 192, 192
External inflammatory root resorption
Complications of extraction, 172-3
Diphyodont, definition of, 29
(EIRR), 122
Compressed air driven unit, 7-8
Distal root surfaces, 169
Extraction
Conservative management, 126
Distemper, 72
cheek teeth, 194-5
Coronal amputation, 126-8, 127, 128
Dogs
closed extraction, 158, 160-5
Corticosteroids, 108
age of tooth eruption, 30
complications of, 172-3
Cows, 175
antimicrobial agents, 25
equipment for, 6-8,7
Crowding, 70, 158
brachycephalic, 37-8,38
extraction forceps, 7, 99
Crown
caries in, 77-8
feline gingivostomatitis,108
amputation,170
dental formulae, 29
feline teeth, 171
destruction of, 157
dolicocephalic, 37-8, 38
indications, 157-8
elongation, 179
mesocephalic, 36
odontoclastic resorptive lesions, 126
hypsodont teeth, 175
occlusion, normal, 35-6
open extraction,159,165-71
injuries/fractures,79,140-3,191
 pre-injury treatment, 16
post-operative pain, 15
normal radiographic anatomy, 67-8
radiography, 67
primary teeth,44,115-16
odontoclastic resorptive lesions, 119
Double flap oronasal fistula repair.
radical,108
polishing, 75, 97
137, 138
rodents & lagomorphs, 185, 193-5
tooth anatomy, 29-31
supernumerary teeth,70
Curettes
techniques, 158-9, 159-71
description of, 3
use of antibiotics, 23-4
design, 3, 3-5, 4
Eye protection, 1, 12
removing deposits, 99
Eating, reluctance to, 15
sharpening. 8-9
Ecchymoses, 48
Cyclosporins, 92
Ectodermal dysplasia, 69
Cysts,70,75-6,80
Elective tracheotomy, 21
F
Electrical shock, 132
Elevators
D
Face masks, 1
description of, 6, 6-7
Facial abscess, 184, 184-5
extraction, 161, 162, 162, 166.
Facial deformity, 149
Debridement, 102, 101-4
169
Fauces, 48
Decay see Caries
sharpening, 8-9
Faucitis, 107, 107
Deep subgingival curettage, 15
surgery, 134
Febrile disorders, 72
Deformity, facial, 149
Embedded teeth, 75-6
Feeding tubes, 21-2
Degloving injury, 132
Emergencies,131-56
Feline chronic gingivostomatitis
Dental burs, 8, 165, 169, 192, 192 see
Emphysema,159,173
(FCGS), 87, 106-8
Burs
Enamel
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV).
Dental calculus see Calculus
 demineralization, 77
107
Dental chews, 113-14
enamel hypoplasia (dysplasia),
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV), 107
Dental decay see Caries
71-5
Feline odontoclastic resorptive lesions
Dental deposits see Calculus; Plaque
 normal radiographic anatomy, 67-8
 see Odontoclastic resorptive
Dental examination see Oral
tooth anatomy, 29, 30
lesions
examination
Endodontic disease, 57, 81
Fever, 24
Dental explorer, 2-3, 3
Endodontic therapy, 73, 157, 197-8
Fibrosarcoma, 83
Dental film, 59-60
Endotracheal intubation
Film, 59-60, 62
Dental formulae, 29
anesthesia, 1, 11-12
Flaps, 132, 133
Dental interlock-induced 
oral examination, 48
Fluorides
abnormalities, 44
pharyngotomy, 20-1
excessive intake, 72
Dental light, 1
removal of, 14
preventing plaque, 27
Dental malocclusion, 40-3
Epihyoid bone, 21
topical,74,77
see also Malocclusion
Epithelial attachment, 103
Foramina, 68
Dental mirror, 3
Equipment, 1-9, 99, 192, 192
Forceps, extraction, 7, 99, 162
Dental plaque see Plaque
see also specific item
Foreign body penetration, 132
Dental records, 3, 52-5
Eruption disorders, 75-6
Fractures, jaw, 15, 57, 146-55, 149,
Dentalabels@, 52, 55
Eruption of teeth, 30, 75-6
173
Dentine
Esophagostomy tube, 22
Fractures, tooth, 57, 115, 137, 140-3,
exposure,76
Essential oils, 27
172-3, 191
normal radiographic anatomy, 67-8
European Veterinary Dental College
Free gingiva, 31, 32
odontoclastic resorptive lesions, 119
(EVDC) website, 55
 Full mouth radiographs, 65-7
tooth anatomy, 29, 31
Euthanasia, 177
Furcation involvement, 2, 48, 51, 51,
Developmental dental disorders,
Examination see Oral examination
91
69-75
Excessive wear, tooth, 76, 115
Fusion,71
INDEX  213
G
H
y
Gags, 12, 179, 192, 192
Halitosis, 92, 93
Jaw fracture, 15, 146-55, 149, 173
Gastrostomy tubes, 22, 134
Halothane, 14 
Jaw length, 35
Gemination, 71
Hamsters, 190
General anesthesia (GA)
Hard palate clefts, 132-6
 brachycephalic patients, 14
Hartmann's solution, 12
L
essential equipment, 1
Healing/healed resorption, 123
 general principles, 11-13
Hemicerclage techniques, 152
Lactated Ringer's solution, 12
geriatric patients, 14
Hemorrhage, 13, 105, 132, 159, 173
Lagomorphs
maxillofacial trauma, 15
Hemostasis, 13
dental anatomy, 175-6
patient monitoring, 13-14
Home care, 69, 97, 157
dental formula, 176
reasons for, 11
Horses, 175
examination, 178-9
Gerbils, 190
Hydantoin, 92
extraction,193-5
Geriatric patients, 14, 23
Hygiene, 0ral, 96-8, 111-15
husbandry, 177
Gingivae
Hypergammaglobulinaemia, 106
tooth trimming, 191-3
anatomy of the periodontium,31-2
Hyperthermia, 13
traumatic tooth injuries,190-1
attachment,31,32,160,160,162
Hypocalcemia, 72
see also specific animal
chronic inflammation, 106
Hypodontia, 69
Lamina dura, 33, 67-8
free gingiva, 31, 32
Hypothermia, 1, 12-13
Langenbeck technique, 132, 134
healthy, 97
Hypoxia, 14
Lavage, 97, 104
 inflammation, 2
Hypsodont teeth, 175, 193-4
Lidocaine,17
landmarks of, 31
Light, 1
protection whilst polishing, 6
Lips
swelling, 83
lip injuries, 132
Gingival cuff, 32
nerve blocks,18,20
Gingival hyperplasia, 82, 92, 92, 105,
Immunocompromised patients,23-4
Local anesthesia, 16-20
105
Impacted teeth,75-6
Loss of attachment, 94
Gingival index, 48, 50
Incisal wear, 76
Luxation of teeth, 143, 145, 147, 148,
Gingival recession (GR), 48, 51, 51,
Incisor teeth
149
91,93,139
attrition, 76
Luxators
Gingival sulcus, 32, 33, 103
cats, 36
correct grip, 161
Gingivectomy, 104-6, 105
extraction,160,193-4
description of, 6, 6-7
Gingivitis
lagomorphs, 176
sharpening, 8-9
definition, 91, 92
occlusion, normal, 35-6
use for extraction, 160-1, 162
description, 87
overgrowth, 180-1
Lymph nodes, 47
diagnosis, 91-3
persistent primary teeth, 43-4
Lymphadenopathy, 24
gingivitis index, 123
rabbits, 179
 oral examination, 50
radiography, 62
similarity to periodontitis, 49
scissor bite, 36
M
treatment,97
tooth anatomy, 29
use of antibiotics, 25-7
trimming, 192-3
Malignant melanoma, 83
with stomatitis, 106, 106-7
Induction agents, 14
Malnutrition, 91
Gingivoplasty, 104-6, 105
see also specific induction agent
Malocclusion
Gingivostomatitis, 27, 87
Indwelling nasogastric intubation,
definition, 35
Glossary of terms, 199-207
21-2
dental, 40-3
Gloves, 1
Infection, 23-4,75
extraction, 158
Gnawing, 190
Infiltration anesthesia, 17
jaw fracture, 149
Gold salts, 108
Inflammatory root resorption, 122
lagomorphs, 177-8
Grafting techniques, 132, 133
Infraorbital nerve block, 18,18
persistent primary teeth,43-4
Gram-positive/Gram-negative aerobes,
Instrumentation, 1-9, 99, 192, 192
prevention and treatment, 44-6,
24
see also specific item
115-17
Grass seeds, 96
Interceptive orthodontics,115,116
skeletal, 37-40
Guinea pigs
Interdental papilla, 31, 32
supernumerary teeth,70
cheek teeth overgrowth, 186,
Interpretation of radiographs, 67-8
Malpositioning, 70
186-8,187
Intraoral acrylic splints, 154-5, 155
Mandible
healthy mouth, 185-6
Intraoral radiographic techniques,
fracture, 150, 151, 151
incisor overgrowth, 186, 186
61-7
narrow,40,42
normal skull, 186
Intravenous fluid therapy, 12
repair of, 151-3, 153, 154,154-5
vitamin C, 177
Intubation, 20-2
see aiso Jaw fracture
Gums see Gingivae
 see also specific type of intubation
Mandibular brachygnathic bite, 39, 40
Gunshot wounds, 132
Isoflurane, 14
Mandibular canine teeth, 116, 117
214 INDEX
Mandibular nerve block, 18-20, 19
Neoplastic conditions, 57
Oronasal fistulae, 132-7, 137, 139,
Mandibular prognathic bite, 38-9, 39
Nerve blocks, 17-20
149, 173
Mandibular teeth 
Neuropraxia, 12
Oropharynx, 48
mandibular nerve block, 18-20
Noneruption, 70, 75-6
 Orotracheal intubation, 21
persistent primary teeth, 434
Nonperiodontal oral inflammatory
Orthodontic device, removable, 115,
radiography, 61-2
diseases, 87
116.117
see aiso specific teeth
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
Orthodontic movement, 45
Masseteric muscle myositis, chronic,
(NSAIDs), 16
Orthodontics, 115, 116
21
Nonsurgical extraction, 158, 160-5
Orthopedic wiring, 152-4
Maxilla, 132, 149
Nose, infraorbital nerve block, 18
Osseus surgery, 104
see also Jaw fracture
Nutrient canals, 68
Osteomyelitis, 15, 24-5, 80, 81
Maxillary alveolus, 136-7
Nutrition, 113-14
Osteoplasty, 103
Maxillary foramen, 18
Nutritional deficiency, 72
Osteosarcoma, 83
Maxillary teeth
Overcrowding,70,158
infraorbital nerve block,18
Overgrowth, footh, 177-8, 181, 182
persistent primary teeth,43
0
186-8, 189-90
see also specific teeth
see also specific species
Maxillofacial trauma, 15
Occlusal wear, 76
Overlapping double flap technique,
Mechanical scalers, 5
Occlusion, normal
132,135, 135
Medial displacement of lower canines,
 after jaw fracture, 151
Overshot jaw, 39
42
cats,36-7
Owner education, 111-13
Mental nerve block, 20, 20
dogs, 36
Oxygen, 12
Mepivacaine, 17
evaluating, 35-6
Oxygenating agents, 27
Mesocephalic dogs, 36
Ocular discharge, 178
Oxymorphone,14
Methylprednisolone, 108
Odontoclastic resorptive lesions (ORL)
Metronidazole, 24
clinical and radiographic
Mice, 190
P
appearance,120
Micromotor unit, 7
dental explorer, 2-3
Missing teeth, 69, 70
diagnosis, 125-6
Pain
Mobility, tooth, 48, 91
epicdemiology, 120-2
malocclusion, 35
Molars
etiology and pathogenesis, 122-5
mechanisms of pain processing.
extraction, 160, 162, 170, 172
extraction, 157
15-16
malocclusion, 43
healing/healed resorption, 123
periapical lesions, 81
radiography, 61-2
introduction, 119-20
periodontal therapy, 98
relationship with premolars, 36
tooth extraction, 171
relief, 20
tooth anatomy, 29-31
treatment, 126-8
 Palate surgery, 134
tooth sectioning, 164
Odontogenic tumours, 83
Palatoglossal arch, 48
Morphine, 14
Odontoma, 82-3
Palpation, 47, 178
Mortality rate, anesthetic, 11
Oedema, sublingual, 173
Parakeratinized squamous cell
Mounting radiographs, 60-1
Oligodontia, 69
epithelium, 32
Mouth gags, 12, 179,192, 192
Open extraction, 159, 165-71
Parallax effect, 62-5
Mouth opening methods, 47
Open subgingival debridement, 103.
Parallel technique, 61-2, 63, 94
Mouth rinses, 27
103
Partial pulpectomy, 197
Mucogingival junction, 31, 32
Opioids, 14, 16
Patient monitoring under anesthesia,
Mucoperiosteal flap, 165
see also specific opioid
13-14
Mucoperiosteum, 134, 165
Oral antiseptics, 27
 Patient preparation for radiographs, 61
Mucous membrane ulceration, 93
Oral emergencies, 131-56
Pemphigus, 48
Mucous membranes, 47-8
Oral examination
Periapical abscess, 15, 80
Multiple rooted tooth extraction,
conscious patient, 47-8
Periapical diseases, 15, 72, 73, 77,
162-5, 171
equipment for, 2-3
78-81, 144
Myocardial depression, 17
periodontium, 48-52
see aiso specific disorder
Myositis, chronic masseteric muscle,
rodents & lagomorphs, 178-9
 Periapical lesions, 80-1
21
under general anesthesia, 48
Periodontal abscess, 96, 96
Oral hygiene, 96-8, 111-15
Periodontal attachment level (PAL),
Oral infiammatory diseases,
48, 50, 52,93, 94
N
nonperiodontal, 87
Periodontal disease
Oral mucosa
diagnosis,49,91-6
Nail clippers, 190-1
inflammation, 87, 106
etiology. 88-91
Narrow mandible, 40, 42
lacerations of, 179
introduction, 87-8
Nasal chamber, 136-7, 149, 173
periapical lesions, 81
periodontal therapy 98-106
Nasal discharge, 178
 protection whilst polishing, 6
preventive dentistry, 111-14
Nasogastric tubes, 21-2,134
 relationship to gingivae, 32
progression,88
Needles, 17
Oral sulcular epithelium, 32
radiography, 57
Neoplasms, 82-3
Oral tumours, 82-3
treatment,97-8
INDEX  215
Periodontal disease (cont'd)
Pharyngotomy, 20-1
pulp cavity, 67-8, 79
use of antibiotics, 25-7
Plaque
pulpal exposure, 76
see also Gingivitis; Periodontitis
accumulation of, 25, 48
pulpal reactions, 79-80
Periodontal ligament
antiplaque agents, 27
pulpectomy, 197
anatomy of periodontium, 32
caries, 76
pulpitis,15,77,80
appearance,124
chemical plaque control, 114
tooth anatomy,29,31
destruction of, 87, 93
definition, 88-90, 89, 90
see aiso Endodontic disease;
extraction, 159
dysplastic enamel, 72
Endodontic therapy:
 inflammation, 124
oral examination,49
Endodontics
periapical lesions, 80
periodontal disease, 87
Purpura,48
Periodontal pockets
prevention of, 112-14
Pus formation, 24
antibiotic delivery,26
removal,25,73,96-8
Pyriform sinus rostral, 21
microbiota in,90
subgingival removal, 100-3
Periodontal probe
supragingival removal, 98-100
depth of sulcus, 32
tooth crowding, 70
Q
description of, 2, 2
see also Calculus
Periodontal probing depth (PPD)
Plasma fluoride-concentrations, 74
Quaternary ammonium compounds,
attachment loss, 93, 94
Polishing
27
diagnosis of periodontal disease, 91
air, 6
instrumentation, 2
antimicrobial agents, 25
crown,97,104
R
normal, 90
oral examination, 48, 50-1
equipment, 5-6
Periodontal surgery, 97, 98, 104-6
supragingival, 104
Rabbits
Periodontal therapy
Posture, 1
cheek teeth overgrowth, 181-4, 183
advanced periodontitis, 157
Power equipment, 2, 7-8
facial abscess, 184-5
 antimicrobial agents, 25
see aiso specific item
healthy mouth, 179-80
equipment for, 3-6
Premolars
incisor overgrowth,180-1,181
general considerations, 98
cats, 36-7
normal skull, 176, 176
post-operative pain, 15
extraction, 160, 162, 170
other dental conditions, 185
preventive dentistry, 111-15
interdigitation, 36
tooth overgrowth, 184
procedure, 98-106
malocclusion, 43
Radiography
use of antibiotics, 23-4
occlusion, normal, 35
caries,78
see also specific procedure
radiography, 61-2
choice of extraction technique, 159 
Periodontic lesions, 81
tooth anatomy, 29-31
diagnosis of ORL, 125-6
Periodontitis
tooth sectioning.
.163
diagnosis of periodontal disease,
advanced, 80, 157
see also Molars
91, 92, 94
diagnosis, 93-6
Pressure necrosis, 132
equipment and materials, 58-61
pain, 15
Preventitive use of antibiotics, 23-4
extraoral film placement, 62
similarity to gingivitis, 49
Preventive dentistry
intraoral radiographic techniques,
treatment,98
caries, 114-15
61-7
use of antibiotics, 25-7
excessive wear, 76, 115
introduction, 57-8
Periodontium
malocclusion, 115-17
lamina dura, 33
anatomy of, 29-30, 31-3
periodontal disease, 111-14
oral examination,49-50
damage to, 143-6
tooth fracture, 115
 placement of nasogastric tubes,
oral examination of, 48-52
Primary teeth
21-2
periodontal disease, 87
extraction, 170-1
radiographic interpretation, 67-8
see aiso specific parts of
malocclusion affecting, 44
rodents & lagomorphs, 179
periodontium
tooth anatomy, 30
Rats
Periosteal elevator, 7
see also Persistent primary teeth;
incisor overgrowth, 190, 191
Peripheral ameloblastoma, 83
specific teeth
normal skull, 176, 177
Peripheral inflammatory root
Procaine hydrochloride,17
Regional nerve blocks, 17-20
resorption (PIRR), 122
Processing dental film, 60
Removable orthodontic device, 115,
Peritonitis, 22
Prognathic bite, 38-9, 39
116. 117
Permanent teeth
Prophy paste, 6, 75, 104
Repair of jaw fracture, 147-55
 malocclusion affecting, 44-5
Propofol, 14, 21
Resorption of teeth see Odontoclastic
tooth anatomy, 30-1
Prosthesis, 132, 136
resorptive lesions
see aiso specific teeth
Pterygopalatine fossa, 18
Resorptive lesions see Odontoclastic
Persistent primary teeth
Pulmonary oedema, 12
resorptive lesions
extraction of, 157-8
Pulp
Reverse scissor occlusion, 42
malocclusion, 43-4
calcifications, 79
Rinn box, 60
noneruption, 75
diseases of, 15, 73, 78-81, 144
Risk of anesthesia, 11
Petechiation, 48
see aiso specific disorder
Road traffic accidents, 132, 146
 Pharyngeal packing. 1, 12 
necrosis, 77, 80, 99, 157
Rodents
 Pharyngostomy intubation, 22, 134
pulp capping, 197-8
 dental anatomy, 176-7
216 INDEX
Rodents (contd)
Single rooted tooth extraction, 160-2,
Temporomandibular joint, 47, 179
dental formula,176
171
Thermal bone injury, 172
examination, 178-9
Skeletal malocclusion, 37-40
Three-way syringe, 8
extraction, 193-5
Sleep patterns, 15
Tongue
husbandry, 177-8
SLOB rule, 64
biting, 17
tooth trimming, 191-3
Soft palate, 48
lacerations, 179
traumatic tooth injuries, 190-1
Soft palate clefts, 136
swelling of the, 12
see also specific animal
Soft tissue trauma, 131-7
Tonsillary crypts, 48
Rongeurs, 99
Sonic scalers, 5, 99, 100
Tonsils, 48
Root abnormalities, 71
Splints, intraoral acrylic, 154-5, 155
Toothbrushing
Root canals
Split palatal U-flap technique, 132,
equipment,112-13
normal radiographic anatomy, 67-8
135-6
gingivoplasty, 106
root canal therapy, 197
Springer spaniels, 92
periodontitis,98
Root fractures, 142-3, 142-3, 144.
Squamous cell carcinoma, 83
preventive dentistry,25,69
145,146
Sterilization, 1, 9
technique,112-3,114
Root planing, 5, 25, 97, 100-3, 104
Stomatitis, 23-4, 87, 107
toothbrushes, 112
Root resorption, 83-4, 121-2, 123,
Stone chewing, 76
toothpaste, 27, 112
190
Subgingival calculus, 2, 5
see also Home care
see also Odontoclastic resorptive
Subgingival debridement, 102, 101-4,
Topical fluoride application, 74, 77
lesions
103
Toys, 116
Roots
 Subgingival lavage, 97
Tracheotomy, 21
distal root surfaces, 169
Subgingival scaling, 25, 97, 99-101,
Transfusion, autologous, 13 
extraction of, 157
100
Transposition flaps, 132,
133
multiple rooted tooth extraction,
Sublingual oedema, 173
Traumatic tooth injuries
162-5
Subluxation of tooth, 143, 147, 148
extraction, 158
odontoclastic resorptive lesions, 119
Suction, 9, 12, 159
noneruption, 75,
137-56
rostral root surfaces, 169
Sulcular epithelium, 32
rodents, 190-1
single rooted tooth extraction, 160-2
Sulcular lavage, 104
Triclosan, 27
tooth anatomy, 29
Supernumerary teeth, 70, 70-1, 75,
Tumours, 82-3
Ropivacaine, 17
158
Rostral displacement of maxillary
Supragingival scaling, 25, 97, 98-100
U
canines, 43
Surgical extraction, 159, 165-71
Rostral root surfaces, 169
Suture kit, 9
Rotary scalers, 5
Sutures, 165
Ulcers, 48, 93, 93
Rotation flaps, 132, 133
Swelling, 12,24, 82-3
Ultrasonic scalers, 5, 27, 99, 100, 100
Systemic pyrexia, 72
Undershot jaw, 38-9, 39
s
T
V
Salivary glands, 47
Salivation,178
Tape muzzle, 151-2
Vasoconstrictors, 17
Sanguinarine, 27
Tartar see Calculus
Vasovagal syncope, 14
Scalers
Teeth
Ventilation, 1
description of, 3,3-5
anatomy, 29-31
design, 4
avulsion of, 143, 145-6, 147, 148
removing deposits, 99, 100
eruption of, 30,75-6
W
sharpening, 8-9
excessive wear, 76, 79, 115
sonic, 5, 99,100
extraction see Extraction
Water-cooling, 165
Scaling
fracture of, 48, 115, 137, 140-3,
Wear of dental hard tissue, 76
equipment for,3-5
172-3, 191
Weight loss, 177
see also Scalers
grinding of, 178
White blood cell count, 24
periodontal surgery, 104
loss of, 76, 79, 115
Wound closure, 132
subgingival,25,97,100-3,101
luxation of,143,145,147,148, 149
Wound management, 131-2
supragingival,25,97,98-100
mobility, 2, 52, 91
Wry bite, 39-40, 41-2
Scalpel blade, 9
Overgrowth,177-8,181,181-4,
Scissor bite, incisor, 36
182
Sectioning of teeth, 163-4, 165
see also specific species
X
Serum globulins, 106
sectioning of,163, 164,165
Sevoflurane, 14
shortening of, 44-5
X-ray film, 59-60
Sharpening of instruments, 8-9 
subluxation of, 143, 147, 148
see also Radiography
Shedding disorders, 75-6
tooth resorption see Odontoclastic
X-ray unit, 58-9
Silicone prosthesis, 132
 resorptive lesions
see also Radiography
Single layer oronasal fistula repair,
tooth socket, 67-8
Xylazine, 14
137,137
trimming. 191-3