Brinker,Piermattei,aFlo's
Handbook
of
SmallAnimal
Orthopedics
Fracture
and
Repair
FOURTH EDITION
Donald Piermattei
Gretchen Flo
CharlesDeCamp
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
SAUNDERS
LLSLVILR
11830 Westline Industrial Drive
St. Louis, Missouri 63146
BRINKER, PIERMATTEI, AND FLO'S HANDBOOK
ISBN-13: 978-0-7216-9214-2
OF SMALL ANIMAL ORTHOPEDICS AND FRACTURE
ISBN-10: 0-7216-9214-1
REPAIR, Fourth Edition
Copyright @ 2006, 1997, 1990, 1983 by Elsevier Inc.
 All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by
any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, recording, or any inforrmation storage and
retrieval system, without permission in writing from the publisher.
Permissions may be sought directly from Elsevier's Health Sciences Rights Department in Philadelphia,
PA, USA: phone: (+1) 215 239 3804, fax: (+1) 215 239 3805, e-mail: healthpermissions@elsevier.com.
You may also complete your request on-ine via the Elsevier homepage (http://www.esevier.com),by
selecting *Custormer Support' and then *Obtaining Permissions'.
Notice
Knowledge and best practice in this field are constantly changing. As new research and experience
appropriate. Readers are advised to check the rmost current information provided (i) on procedures
featured or (i) by the manufacturer of each product to be administered, to verify the recommended
dose or formula, the method and duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the
responsibility of the practitioner, relying on their own experience and knowledge of the patient, to
the Authors assume any liability for any injury and/or damage to persons or property arising out
or related to any use of the material contained in this book.
The Publisher
ISBN-13: 978-0-7216-9214-2
ISBN-10: 0-7216-9214-1
Publishing Director: Linda Duncan
Senior Editor: Liz Fathman
Devetoprmentat Editor: Shelly Stringer
Pubtishing Services Manager: Patricia Tannian
Senior Project Manager: Anne Altepeter
Senior Book Designer: Julia Dummitt
Working togcther to grow
libraries in developing countries
Printed in the United States of America
www.clscvier.com |www.hookaidl.org | www.sabre.org
FLSEVIFR
DOOKAMSabre Foundation
Last digit isthe print number:987654321
PREFACE
The publication of the fourth edition of Brinker, Piermattei, and Flo's Handbook of
Small Animal Orthopedics and Fracture Repair comes soon after the ninety-third
birthday of Wade O. Brinker. Wade will receive the "Founder's Award" from the
American College of Veterinary Surgeons this year in celebration of a lifetime of
contributions to our profession. This book is but one small contribution of the
- s    a a pa a   s a a
vation in founding this book was to establish a solid reference for veterinary students
and practicing veterinary surgeons. Through the years we have tried to maintain a
balance of information in a straightforward, well-illustrated, and understandable
manner that will not only challenge the avid veterinary student, but also provide a
reasonable, though not exhaustive, reference for the practicing clinical surgeon.
Twenty-three years have passed since publication of the first edition. With each
edition, we note the introduction of many new concepts and fixation strategies (e.g..
biologic osteosynthesis). These new developments validate the very same principles
that Wade has stressed from the first pioneering days of veterinary surgery. Surgical
values of respect for tissue, surgical efficiency, aseptic technique, and appropriate
planning will always be relevant to the optimal healing of our patients. Although
Wade's active participation ended with the second edition, his influence continues to
 permeate every page of this text.
With the fourth edition, sections have been expanded to reflect common and
accepted improvements with external fixators, interlocking nails, and plate fixations.
An introductory chapter on canine arthroscopy has been added to introduce the
student to the value of minimally invasive joint surgery. Sections on hip dysplasia,
cruciate ligament rupture, and patella luxation reflect continuous progress in treatments
of these common conditions.
We continue to be blessed with the artwork of F. Dennis Giddings. Our publisher
has changed from W.B. Saunders to Elsevier. This conversion has been seamless, and
we thank the new publishing staff for their patient efforts.
Readers will also note the addition of a new author, Charlie DeCamp, who has
worked diligently to balance the wealth of information from the first 20 years to
that which will be most relevant to students and surgeons in the next 10 years. Two
of us (GF and DP) are making our final contribution to this work, which we started
with Wade in 1981. We sincerely strive to move this textbook forward in time, and
Wade will be with us, every step of the way.
DONALD L. PIERMATTEI
GRETCHEN L. FLO
CHARLES E. DECAMP
To Wade O. Brinker and all the surgeons before us,
and to the families bebind us.
Orthopedic Examination
and Diagnostic Tools
GENERAL EXAMINATION
An orthopedic examination must begin with an adequate history and general
physical examination. A systemic approach to the examination ensures that multi-
ple problems are discovered. The animal's general health should be ascertained
before focusing on the orthopedic complaint. The entire examination varies with
case complexity, a history of recent trauma, the intended use of the animal (e.g.,
breeding, showing, racing, hunting), and economics dictated by owners. Severely
traumatized animals with hemorrhaging wounds and unstable fractures that
could become open fractures obviously need different immediate steps; these
animals are not discussed in this chapter. This chapter focuses on the examination
for orthopedic problems (Table 1-1) and presents some of the diagnostic tools
available.
History
Specific historical information is useful for categorizing orthopedic problems to
rule out. This information includes breed, age, gender, occurrence of trauma, owner
identification of limb(s) involved, chronological progression of the problem, efficacy
of treatments tried, and variability with weather, exercise, and arising from recum-
bency. Other features, such as fever, inappetance, lethargy, and weight loss, may
 indicate some systemic problem, such as inflammatory joint conditions, or a rup-
tured bladder after trauma.
 Certain historical facts and deviation from the “normal" presentation of certain
orthopedic conditions alert the clinician to investigate further by asking appropriate
questions or performing additional tests or procedures. For example, a 10-year-old
dog that falls down two stairs and sustains a fractured radius and ulna should be
carefully scrutinized for pathological fracture. Normally, chronic luxating patellas
usually do not suddenly cause a carrying-leg lameness, and cruciate ligament
rupture may have become the more recent problem. Chronic osteoarthritic condi-
tions usually do not cause severe pain. In older animals with severe progressive
 pain, neoplasia must always be considered. With pelvic fractures, trauma to the
chest, abdomen, or spine often occurs. Answers to specific questions help assess con-
current problems. For example, knowing whether the recumbent animal has been
eating, voiding large pools of urine, or moving the legs spontaneously is helpful.
3
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
TABLE 1-1. CAUSES OF LAMENESS IN THE DOG (EXCLUDING FRACTURES
AND MINOR SOFT TISSUE INJURIES)
Pelvic Limb
Forelimb
GROWING DOG
1. Hip dysplasia
1. OCD—shoulder
2. Avascular necrosis (Legg-Calve-Perthes)
 2. Luxation/subluxation shoulder—congenital
 3. Avulsion of long digital extensor
 3. Avulsion supraglenoid tubercle
4. OCD—stifle
4. OCD—elbow
5. OCD—hock
5. UAP
6. Luxating patella complex
6.FCP
7. Genu valgum
7. UME
8. Panosteitis
8. Elbow incongruity
Mediurm to large breeds = 1, 3-8
a. Congenital
Toy to small breeds = 2, 6
b. Physeal injury
Chondrodystrophied breeds = 1, 2, 6, 8
9. Radius curvus
10. Retained cartilaginous cores {ulna)
11. Panosteitis
12. HOD
13. Congenital shoulder luxation
Medium to large breeds = 1, 4-7, 8b, 9-12
Toy to small breeds = 2, 8, 9, 13
Chondrodystrophied breeds = 2?, 5, 8a, 8b, 9, 11, 13
ADULT DOG
A. Arthritis (or continuum): 1-7
A.Arthritis (or continuum): 1-6, 8, 9
B. Luxating patella complex
B.UME
C. Panosteitis
C. Panosteitis
D. Cruciate/meniscal syndrome
 D. Bicipital tenosynovitis/biceps rupture 
 E. Inflammatory joint disease
 E. Calcification of supraspinatus tendon
F. Neoplasia
 F. Contracture of infraspinatus or
Mediurm to large breeds = A1, A 3-7, B, F
supraspinatus
Toy to small breeds = A2, B, D-F
G. Bone/soft tissue neoplasia
Chondrodystrophied breeds = A1, A2, B, D-F
H. Luxation/subluxation—shoulder
 I. Inflammatory joint disease
J. HO
K. SCM
Medium to giant breeds = A, 7, 11, I, J, K
Toy to small breeds = 2, G, H, I, J, K
Chondrodystrophied breeds =2(?), A-5, A-8,
A-9, C, H, I, J, K
OCD, Osteochondritis dissecans; UAP, ununited anconeal process; FCP, fragmented coronoid process; UME, ununited
medial epicondyle; HOD, hypertrophic osteodystrophy; HO, hyperrophic osteopathy; SCM, synovial chondrometaplasia.
A good appetite probably does not occur with significant internal injuries.
“Urinating" or dribbling small amounts of urine does not mean the bladder is
intact, and voluntary leg movement usually means serious thoracolumbar spinal
injury has not occurred.
Distant Observation
 The animal should be observed for general thriftiness and relative weight status.
 Patient disposition and potential lack of animal or owner cooperation should be
noted. Sedation should not be used if possible, or at least until the area of involve-
ment is known, because tranquilizers may mask detection of painful regions.
 The animal should be observed for body conformation, decreased weight bearing,
trembling, asymmetrical joint or soft tissue swellings, muscle atrophy, and digit
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
FIGURE 1-1. Typical forelimb curva-
ture in a German shepherd affected with
ununited anconeal process. Note varus
angulation of the elbows and valgus of
the carpi.
be very straight legged in the pelvic limb, whereas dogs with elbow problems tend
to have curvature of the forelimbs (Figure 1-1).
Gait
Observing the lameness is helpful before examining the limb. It helps confirm or
contradict owner complaints. Often in an examination room environment, however,
 chronic lameness disappears. The gait is observed at a walk and if necessary a trot.
Covert lameness may become apparent with tight circles or stair climbing.
Abnormalities include a shortened stride, dragging of the toenails, “toeing-in" or
"toeing-out," limb circumduction, hypermetria, stumbling, generalized weakness,
ataxia, crisscrossing of the legs, abnormal sounds (e.g., clicks, snaps), and a head
"bob," which is a bobbing motion of the head that occurs with foreleg lameness.
The head ele vates as the painful leg strikes the ground.
Standing Palpation
With the animal standing as symmetrically as possible, both hands examine the con-
tralateral aspects of the limbs simultaneously, observing for asymmetry produced by
trauma, inflammation, neoplasia, degenerative joint changes, and congenital
 defects. Signs to palpate are swelling, heat, malaligned bony landmarks, crepitus,
and muscle atrophy. Muscle atrophy may be palpated directly if the examiner can
grasp around a muscle (e.g., gastrocnemius) or indirectly by discerning a more
 prominent adjacent bone (e.g., acromion, trochanter major). With bilateral condi-
tions, experience or radiography is used to distinguish abnormality.
Forefeg
Specific landmarks to observe in the foreleg are the acromion, spine and vertebral
border of the scapula, greater tubercle of the humerus, humeral epicondyles, olecra-
non, and accessory carpal bone, which is located at the level of the radiocarpal joint.
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Scapulohumeral Region
Trauma and neoplasia affect the scapula. The scapulohumeral region is affected
with congenital OCD, developmental calcification of the supraspinatus muscle,
bicipital tendinitis (or rupture), and joint luxation. The lateral aspect is palpated.
The relative position and size of the greater tubercle of the humerus are noted,
which are altered with shoulder luxation or tumors of the proximal humerus.
Muscle atrophy from any chronic (over 3-4 weeks) foreleg lameness is often
detected as a more prominent acromion. Bicipital muscle pain may be elicited by
internally rolling or pressing the belly of the biceps.
Elbow and Forearm
 Traumatic and congenital elbow incongruities, congenitally unstable fragments,
fracture, and luxation occur in the elbow. Elbow joint effusion is especially noted
laterally between the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the olecranon.
 Normally, only a thin anconeus muscle lies under the skin. With increased joint
fluid, a bulge occurs between these two bony landmarks in the weight-bearing limb
 that often disappears with non-weight bearing. Osteophytes are noted as an extra
ridge lying between the epicondyle and the olecranon. The width of the condyles
is compared to the opposite side and is increased with condylar fracture, elbow
dislocation, or osteoarthrosis. The radius and ulnar regions are palpated for
swelling and malalignment.
Carpus and Paw
 The carpal and paw regions are affected with fracture, malalignment, joint swelling,
and proliferative bony changes. Valgus and external rotation of the carpus are
 frequently seen with congenital elbow conditions (see Figure 1-1) and with growth
plate injuries. The dorsal carpal and metacarpal regions are palpated for swelling.
Further examination takes place in the recumbent animal.
Neurological Examination
Conscious proprioception of the foreleg is carried out at this point. With the animal
standing with the forelegs parallel, the chest is supported while the paw is knuckled
over on its dorsal aspect. This is repeated several times. The paw should quickly
right itself. A normal animal will usually not even allow the dorsum of the forepaw
Pe paxa si yoau a 'i-i a q ean a an oo ae uo paoid aq o
FIGURE 1-2. Conscious pro-
 prioceptive response is elicited
while the dog is standing with
the limbs in a normal position.
The dog is supported while
the toes are turned over and
released. A delay or absence of
the dog's quickly returning the
toes to a normal position may
mean  neurological  rather than
orthopedic problems.
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
extended to elicit a painful response or stimulation of cervical muscle spasms. The
dorsal spines of the thoracolumbar regions are pressed downward to elicit pain. In
 dogs with lumbosacral disease, the pressure in this area may cause a sudden sitting
 position.
 The thoracic and abdominal areas are palpated before proceeding to the pelvic
limb.
Pelvic Limb
Pelvis
Landmarks to note on the pelvic limb are the iliac crests of the ilium, trochanters
major, tubers ischi, extensor mechanism (quadriceps, patella, patellar ligament,
and tibial tubercle), femoral condyles, distal tibia, fibular tarsal bone, and Achilles
tendon.
 Asymmetry of the bones of the pelvis could mean pelvic fracture, hip dislocation,
femoral head fracture, or chronic coxofemoral arthritis. If imaginary lines are
drawn from the wings of the ilium, trochanters major, and tubers ischii, a triangle
is formed (Figure 1-3). With craniodorsal coxofemoral dislocation, the triangle
becomes more acute (Figure 1-4), the trochanter major more prominent, and when
the rear quarters are elevated, the toes on the dislocated side appear "shorter." With
 unilateral ilial fracture and overriding segments, the trochanter major may be closer
to the wing of the ilium than the opposite side. In addition, the lateral musculature
is swollen. The muscles of the cranial and caudal thigh and the gastrocnemius
muscle are palpated.
Stifle
The stifle joint is frequently affected with degenerative, congenital, and traumatic
conditions that include cruciate ligament rupture, patellar luxation, OCD, and
physeal fracture. Stifle palpation begins with locating the tibial tubercle and follow-
n   a n  p d n rd a 
midline plane should be noted and occurs with patellar luxation. Normal patellar
ligaments should be taut and approximately pencil thick. The cranial two thirds of
the pencil-like ligament can be grasped. With stifle injury, swelling from the joint
pushes forward around the caudal and lateral aspects of the patellar ligament,
making the ligament less distinct and more bandlike than pencil-like. The patella
is found 1 to 4 cm proximal to the tubercle, but it may be examined better in
the recumbent animal when joint manipulation is possible. With chronic stifle
FIGURE 1-3. If imaginary lines are drawn between
the wing of the ilium, tuber ischii, and trochanter
major, a triangle is formed.
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 1-4. With hip dislocation, the triangular
shape becomes altered when compared with the other
normal hip of the dog (compare with Figure 1-3).
swelling and osteophyte formation, the diameter of the femoral condylar ridges is
enlarged; this is assessed 1 to 2 cm behind the patella. In addition, there may be joint
swelling medially between the femur and tibia.
Hock
The tarsocrural joint is affected with traumatic and congenital conditions. Swelling
of the hock joint is detected on the standing animal by palpating between the distal
tibia and the fibular tarsal bone. Normally, only skin, subcutaneous tissue, and bone
are present. Joint swelling from increased fluid accumulation or fibrosis is detected
as a firm, soft tissue mass between those two landmarks. Additionally, swelling
may be detected cranially or medially. The Achilles tendon is examined above the
calcaneus for swelling and continuity.
Recumbent Examination
The animal is placed in lateral recumbency to examine previously noted abnormal-
ities thoroughly. This allows patient restraint and limb manipulations but precludes
simultaneous palpation of the opposite side. Most maneuvers discussed do not
produce pain in normal animals. Pain production gives the diagnostician clues as
to the location of the problem. It may be best to examine the normal side first to
relax the animal and to learn individual responses to certain maneuvers. The veteri-
narian looks for instability, crepitus, painful regions, and altered ranges of motion.
 Animals usually do not resist gentle manipulation of abnormal areas. Unfortunately,
 many animals do not indicate when a painful area is manipulated, which creates
a diagnostic challenge at times. In general, it is recommended to examine from
the toes proximally. Known abnormal areas or maneuvers that may produce pain
should be examined last to ensure patient cooperation. Maneuvers producing
painful responses should be carefully and gently repeated while immobilizing sur-
rounding tissues to reduce the possibility of misinterpreting the origin of the pain.
Crepitus (a sound or palpable friction sensation) occurs when bone rubs bone,
cartilage rubs bone, or subcutaneous tissues move over air pockets or foreign
materials such as wires, pins, or suture material. The sensations palpated are
characterized as clicks, snaps, clunks, crackling, grinding, or grating. Normal laxity
of the carpal, tarsal, or shoulder regions produces innocent clicks that are mistaken
as crepitus. In some thin dogs, elbow flexion produces clicks when the ulnar nerve
 moves over a prominent humeral epicondyle.
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
Forelimb
Paw and Elbow
The digits are flexed, extended, and examined for swelling, crepitus, and pain. The
interdigital webbing and foot pads are examined for discoloration, abrasions, and
other conditions. The proximal sesamoid bones are palpated for swelling on the
xa si sndr au uu edode au ie med a jo iadse rd
and extended, and a valgus/varus stress is applied. Swelling detected on the standing
examination is better identified when the exact location of the joint space can be
identified. This helps to rule out joint problems from distal radial swelling seen with
neoplasia or hypertrophic osteodystrophy. The radiocarpal joint space lies at the
same level as the base of the accessory carpal bone.
 The elbow is similarly placed through a range of motion. Hyperextension of the
elbow may produce pain in dogs with ununited anconeal process, whereas internal
and external rotation with digital pressure applied at the medial joint line may
 produce pain that accompanies conditions such as OCD or fragmented coronoid
process.
shoulder
 Swelling of the shoulder joint unfortunately cannot be appreciated because of its
depth under musculature. The shoulder is examined for pain by flexing and extend-
ing the joint while grasping the forearm with one hand while the other hand
stabilizes the front of the shoulder. OCD usually produces pain with this maneuver.
Bicipital tendinitis or rupture is painful when the tendon is stretched. To produce
diagnostic discomfort, the elbow is extended, and the entire limb is pulled caudally
along the thoracic wall while digital pressure is applied to the proximal medial
humeral region over the tendon (Figure 1-5). With the advent of arthroscopy,
tearing of the medial ligaments of the scapulohumeral joint has been documented
and may be quite common. Under sedation, increased abduction of shoulder can
be compared to the normal side. With the dog in contralateral recumbency, the
acromial process is pushed downward while the extended limb is abducted
maximally. The limb is maintained approximately perpendicular to the spine during
 sa sdu q ro a o a  an  sn a
significance.
Fractures of the acromion can cause discomfort and possibly crepitus when the
acromion is manipulated. Shoulder instability may be appreciated, usually in the
FIGURE 1-5. To detect bicipi-
tal tendon pain, the tendon is
stretched by extending the elbow
and bringing the entire limb par-
allel to the thorax. Digital pres-
sure is applied to the tendon in
the  proximal  medial  humeral
region.
10
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
sedated or anesthetized patient, by applying a mediolateral or craniocaudal sliding
motion at the joint level.
Long-Bone Palpation
 o paaran si uodd auoq-uo pazas Au are q l jo seare i
last part of the examination because pain from bone tumor or panosteitis is exqui-
site at times. To avoid production of pain from pressing normal muscle, the exam-
iner should find muscle planes where the fingers can reach bone. These locations
include the distal radius, the proximal ulna, and the distal and proximal humerus.
 Once the fingers touch the bone, a gentle pressure is applied.
Neurofibromas or neurofibrosarcomas must be considered in older dogs with
severe progressive foreleg lameness. In these special cases, deep digital pressure in
 the axilla may detect a mass and produce exquisite pain. In addition, ocular signs of
Horner's syndrome (unilateral miosis, ptosis, and enophthalmos) may be present.
The “mass" may be compared to the other side in the standing animal.
Rear Limb
Paw and Hock
 The digits and paw are examined similar to the foreleg. The tarsal region is maxi-
mally flexed, extended, and stressed in varus and valgus angles. Instability, pain, and
crepitus may be produced with fracture, tendon and ligament breakdown (seen
especially in collies and shelties), and OCD of the talus. Achilles tendon continuity
is palpated during flexion and extension of the tarsocrural joint.
Stifle
 The stifle joint is often affected with luxating patellas and cruciate ligament disease,
as well as physeal fractures of the distal femur. With fracture, the stifle is quite
swollen with a history of young animals sustaining trauma. Swelling also occurs
with inflammatory joint conditions and OCD. Localized swelling occurs with
avulsion of the origin of the long digital extensor tendon.
Patellar Luxation.  With some animals, there is normal mediolateral movement
within the trochlea of the femur. Luxation out of the trochlea is abnormal and
can cause lameness. Subluxation (patella rides on the trochlear ridge, and "catches"
during flexion) occasionally causes lameness. Luxation may be medial, or less often
lateral, and occasionally in both directions. Luxation of a patella is normally not
a painful maneuver The examiner should stand caudal to the animal. To begin the
examination, the tibial tubercle is located and its position noted. Noting the medial
location of the tibial tubercle helps avoid misinterpreting a medial luxation (ectopic)
that is replaced into the trochlea (i.e., reduced) from a reduced patella that can be
luxated laterally. Cat tubercles are not as prominent as dog tubercles. The patella
may be found 1 to 4 cm proximally. In small dogs or cats with ectopic patellas, the
patella is palpated as a small, pealike bump on the medial (or lateral) femoral
condyle. It may or may not move with flexion, extension, and digital pressure.
It may or may not be reducible. To luxate a reduced patella medially, the stifle
is extended, the toes are internally rotated, and digital pressure is applied to the
patella in a medial direction (Figure 1-6). Conversely, to luxate a patella laterally,
the stifle is flexed slightly, toes are externally rotated, and pressure is applied in a
lateral direction (Figure 1-7). Sometimes an unstable patella may be luxated simply
   s n ed  md n  a  a 
examination should be reduced. The stifle should always be examined for cruciate
ligament instability and with the patella reduced.
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
11
FIGURE 1-6.  To luxate the patella medially, the stifle is extended and the toes rotated medi-
ally while the patella is pushed medially.
FIGURE 1-7. To luxate the patella laterally, the stifle is partially flexed and the toes are
rotated laterally while the patella is pulled laterally.
Cruciate Ligament Instability. Palpation for cruciate ligament instability can
produce pain and should be performed gently in the relaxed patient. Sedation may
be needed if no abnormality can be detected in the tense animal. Drawer movement
is the sliding of the bony tibia in relation to the femur. Normally, there is no cranial
 or caudal drawer movement in the adult animal. Some large puppies have “puppy"
drawer, which lasts up to 10 to 12 months of age because of normal joint laxity.
12
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 Some rotary motion of the tibia is normal and is occasionally mistaken as drawer
movement. In a fresh, fully torn cruciate ligament in a relaxed medium-sized animal,
the tibia may slide 5 to 10 mm (grade 4). In relative terms, larger dogs have less
drawer movement than small dogs. Other factors that diminish full drawer
movement are chronicity, animal tenseness, partial ligament tear, and presence
of a meniscal injury. Increased drawer movement occurs with multiple ligament
tears in the traumatized animal or in cushingoid dogs. If there is patellar
luxation, the patella should be reduced if possible before examining for cruciate
instability.
 The tibial compression test, or cranial tibial thrust! (indirect drawer movement),
 compresses the femur and tibia together, and when there is cranial cruciate ligament
incompetence, the tibia slides forward in relation to the femur. This occurs
during weight bearing as well, and its surgical elimination is the basis of the
tibial plateau-leveling procedure for cruciate repair.1 It can be elicited by holding
the stifle in a slightly flexed position while the paw is alternately dorsiflexed as
far as possible and then relaxed. The index finger of the opposite hand lies cranial
to the femur, patellar ligament, and tibial tubercle and detects the tubercle sliding
forward (Figure 1-8). It is repeated several times quickly but gently.2 Interpretation
 of this maneuver is more subjective than direct drawer movement but has the
advantage of producing minimal pain in animals with ruptured cranial cruciate
ligaments.
Direct drawer movement is examined by placing the fingers as close as possible
to bone and not soft tissue (Figure 1-9). The index finger of one hand is placed on
the cranial proximal patellar region while the thumb is placed caudally on the
lateral fabella. The index finger of the opposite hand is placed on the cranial aspect
 of the tibial crest while the thumb is positioned caudally on the fibular head. With
the wrists held straight and not bent, the femur is held stable while the tibia is
 pushed forward (and not rotated), then pulled backward. This is repeated quickly
and gently several times. At first the stifle is held firmly in slight extension, and then
the movement repeated with the stifle held in extension, then in flexion. In large
dogs it is helpful to have an assistant or the examiner's foot (if performed on the
floor) support the dog's foot.
FIGURE 1-8. The tibial compression
test produces indirect drawer movement.
With the stifle angle held in slight flexion,
the metatarsal region is dorsiflexed as far
as possible. The index finger of the oppo-
site hand detects the forward movement of
the tibial tuberosity if drawer movement is
 present. It is repeated several times.
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
13
FIGURE 1-9. To palpate
direct drawer movement, the
index finger of one hand is
placed on the proximal patel-
lar region while the thumb is
placed caudal to the lateral
fabella. The index finger of the
 opposite hand is placed on the 
cranial aspect of the tibial
crest, and the thumb is placed
on the caudal aspect of the
fibular head. With the femur
stabilized, the tibia is pushed
forward and then pulled back-
ward. This is repeated several
times and is performed gently
but quickly to detect 1 to 10 mm
of movement of the tibia in
relation to the femur.
Interpretation of Instability. With cranial cruciate ligament rupture, the cranial
 Aas a ana s ups ou m s, si sd pa
of the stifle become taut. When the tibia is pulled caudally, a sudden "thud" is
palpated as the normal caudal cruciate ligament becomes taut. Conversely, with rare
caudal cruciate rupture (usually grade 2 or less of motion), when cranial force is
applied, there is a sudden "thud" that is not present when caudal force is applied.
"Puppy" drawer (grade 2 or less of motion) has a sudden end point cranially
and caudally. It usually disappears by 6 to 9 months of age unless chronic painful
conditions of the hip, stifle, or hock exist.
 Inexperienced palpaters of the stifle can make the following five common
mistakes:
1. If the wrists are bent, proper force cannot be applied.
de aq r ar adod oq i ae sd ai si  7
3.1
 If the fingers are placed laterally/medially instead of cranially/caudally,
the skin moves and is misinterpreted as drawer movement.
4. If drawer movement is performed slowly, detection of 1 to 2 mm of motion
is impossible.
5. Tibial rotary movements, which may be normal or excessive,
are misinterpreted as drawer movement.
Collateral Ligament Instability. When the collateral ligaments and joint cap-
sule are torn, the stifle will have medial, lateral, or combined instability. Cutting
either of these ligaments alone without cutting the joint capsule does not produce
much instability in research animals. The cruciate ligament(s) is (are) invariably torn
in clinical cases of collateral instability. To detect this instability, the stifle should be
held in "neutral" drawer while a valgus (stifle inward) or varus (stifle outward)
force is applied. The thumb is placed on the fibular head while the index finger
is placed along the medial joint line to perceive the joint opening abnormally with
its respective instability.
Meniscal Injury.
. Meniscal injury is suspected when the owner hears a click
when the animal walks or when the animal has a severe three-legged lameness
several weeks after acute onset of stifle lameness. In addition, a worsening of
14
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
an improving lameness several weeks to months after cruciate rupture with or with-
out surgical repair sometimes indicates meniscal involvement. Meniscal injury is
suspected when flexion, extension (with and without rotation about the stifle), and
 direct and indirect drawer manipulations produce a click, snap, clunk, or grating.
Definitive diagnosis is made on visualizing the unstable caudal horn or a part of it
malpositioned after arthrotomy (see Chapter 18).
Hip Joint and Pelvis
 The hip joint and pelvis are often affected by trauma, congenital conditions such
crepitus, and instability. The femur is grasped at the stifle, and the hip is flexed and
extended several times. If pain or crepitus is not produced, external hip rotation is
a aunan raau s srau uisuxa pue uixa a on pappe
 pain in the animal with Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. Fine crepitus may be heard
when the examiner's ear or stethoscope is placed on the trochanter major during
these manipulations. Pressing the femur into the acetabulum accentuates the
crepitus (Figure 1-10). This crepitus must be distinguished from hair coat noises.
Suspected fracture and dislocation are further evaluated by radiography.
 The sacroiliac joint is examined for instability by gentle manipulation of the wing
 of the ilium. The tuber ischi is pressed to detect instability and crepitus. A rectal
 examination may detect pubic and ischial fractures.
 s a a  q A iss d m s x d
si dy aqeisun ue uaum panpod cnu, aedied io asiu e si us uoo
replaced into the acetabulum.? To produce this sound while the dog is in lateral
recumbency, the hip is subluxated proximally by grasping the adducted stifle and
pushing proximally while the other hand stabilizes the pelvis. Second, when the
stifle is abducted, downward pressure is applied across the trochanteric region.
A noise is produced as the femoral head glides over the rim into the acetabulum
(Figure 1-1l). This can also be done bilaterally with the dog in dorsal recumbency.
The stifles are adducted, pushed proximally, and then abducted to produce the
"thud" (see Figure 16-10, C, D, and E). A third way to detect this instability is to
FHIGURE 1-10. To hear finer
crepitus from coxofemoral arthri-
tis, the examiner's ear is placed on
the trochanter major during flex-
ion, extension, abduction, and
adduction of the hip joint.
Proximal pressure during these
movements accentuates the sounds.
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
15
A
B
FIGURE 1-11.  Ortolani's sign is the sound produced when the subluxated hip is suddenly
reduced into the acetabulum. A, To subluxate the hip joint, the stifle joint is adducted while
proximal pressure is applied. B, Reduction of the subluxation occurs when the stifle is
abducted, which reduces the hip, creating a "thud. "
place the dog in lateral recumbency. One palm stabilizes the pelvis with two fingers
on the trochanteric region while the other hand grasps the distal femur and
positions it parallel to the table or floor. The femoral head is alternately levered
laterally and relaxed while the fingers on the trochanter major are alternately
relaxed and then pressed downward. The amount of subluxation in millimeters may
    d  si r    
because of the force applied on the thigh muscles. Muscle tension often masks hip
laxity occurring with hip dysplasia.
DIAGNOSTIC TOOLS
Beyond the physical examination, several tools are available for diagnosing
and evaluating orthopedic diseases and treatments. These include radiography,
fluoroscopy, arthrography, myelography, diagnostic ultrasonography (DUS),
computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), nuclear imaging,
arthroscopy, force plate analysis, kinematic gait analysis, exploratory surgery, biopsy,
clinical pathological tests, arthrocentesis with joint fluid analysis, serology, and
hormonal assay. A brief description of each of these modalities follows, along with
their uses.
Radiography
The most common diagnostic tool used to investigate orthopedic disease is radio-
graphy. The history and physical examination should suggest the area of the
body involved. Radiography is also used to rule out other concurrent common
diseases, such as a large dog with cruciate ligament rupture with concurrent hip
dysplasia. It is extremely useful in detecting and evaluating fractures, joint dis-
locations, osteoarthrosis, neoplasia, joint incongruities, and congenital joint
conditions (e.g., OCD, hip dysplasia). It is also useful in evaluating fracture fixation
and healing as well as in following progress of joint treatments. In general, two
16
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 pi)     p s a a  s  
are discussed in other chapters for each disease.) Many times, animals even with
fractures may be positioned for radiography without sedation if enough personnel
are available. If personnel are unavailable or state laws prohibit their exposure to
radiation, sedation or anesthesia may be required using appropriate positioning and
restraining devices.
Fluoroscopy
Another modality using radiation is fluoroscopy, with or without image intensifica-
tion. It is occasionally used to detect instability (e.g., shoulder luxation), retrieve
metallic foreign materials (pins, wires, bullets), observe contrast material used in
arthrography, confirm needle placement for myelography and angiography, and
aid placement of surgical implants. Fluoroscopy is a “movie" of radiographic
 images, and image intensification enhances the signal to reduce the amount of
selected images.
Arthrography
An arthrogram is a radiograph of a joint after a contrast substance such as an iodine
solution, air, or both have been injected. Injection techniques are discussed later
in the arthrocentesis section. The most frequent joint undergoing arthrography
is the shoulder joint. Interruption of contrast material flow occurs with bicipital
tendonitis or rupture. Arthrography is useful in identifying obscure cartilaginous
flaps in OCD. The contrast solution we prefer is a half-and-half mixture of sterile
water and 60% Hypaque (diatrizoate meglumine and diatrizoate sodium, used for
 intravenous pyelograms). The shoulder of a 30-kg dog should have 2 to 3 ml of this
mixture injected, and radiographs are taken within 5 to 10 minutes, after which the
ionic solution is resorbed or diluted with synovial effusion and loses its contrast
quality. In a recent study, nonionic contrast agents were found to have superior
radiographic imaging qualities because of their decreased absorption rate and joint
fluid influx. However, they are also more costly.4
Myelography
Myelography is the process of injecting the spinal intrathecal space with a water-
soluble nonionic sterile iodine solution to detect abnormal obstruction or deviation
of contrast material flow caused by spinal neoplasia, degenerative disk disease, or
vertebral trauma and instability. Contrast agents, such as iohexol and iopamidol,
are used for myelography.
Computed Tomography
CT is specialized radiography in which cross-sectional images of a body structure
are reconstructed by a computer. A CT unit is an apparatus in which the x-ray
source moves in one direction while the x-ray detector moves in synchrony in the
opposite direction (Figure 1-12). This allows detailed vision without obscuration
from superimposed structures. With computer configuration, serial "slices" as small
as 1.5 mm in width may be made through a body part. These machines cost
between $350,000 and $1.1 million, and some veterinary teaching hospitals
have these machines or have access to them at human hospitals. CT's primary use
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
17
FIGURE 1-12. Anesthetized dog is placed into the gantry of a CT machine. The black
circular region contains the ionizing radiation source.
in small animals is examination of the spine, skull, and brain. CT can also be used
in conjunction with contrast agents. It is very helpful in diagnosing fragmented
 coronoid process disease in dogs (see Chapter 12). It is useful in guiding a surgeon
trying to locate a radiodense foreign body or discovering subtle joint fractures.
 Two disadvantages of this diagnostic modality are that anesthesia must be used and
that CT is not particularly useful for soft tissue conditions.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging
MRI uses imaging equipment that is even more expensive than for CT ($750,000 to
$2 million) and requires a special dedicated room for its use. MRI produces
computer images of internal body tissues from magnetic resonance of atoms within
the body induced by the application of radio waves. Again, animals must be
anesthetized, and the study is usually performed at human hospitals or modular
units. The main advantage of MRI in human orthopedics is that soft tissue and
s r ana aiu saq  si i s aq  a r
meniscal and cruciate injuries in humans.
NuclearImaging
Nuclear imaging uses radioactive pharmaceuticals injected intravenously that
accumulate in certain organs based on their chemical structure and the carrier
to which they are bound. These radioactive materials accumulate in vascularized
tissues, which can be compared with contralateral limbs to detect increased
vascularity seen with inflammation, trauma, or neoplasia. Radioactive decay emits
gamma radiation that is detected by a scintillation crystal (gamma camera;
Figure 1-13) and transmitted to a dedicated computer for image production.
In animals, technetium-99m methylene diphosphonate (99mTc MDP) is used for
bone scans and is distributed in soft tissues for imaging within 4 to 8 minutes. Bone
uptake may be imaged 2 to 8 hours after intravenous injection. Both phases are
18
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FGURE 1-13. Sedated dog is positioned
over the radiation detector or gamma camera
(white object) for nuclear imaging.
scanned with the animal under sedation. The animal must be housed in special
holding facilities while radiation decay occurs. Gamma cameras cost more than
$2000, but the computer that creates the image and hard copy can cost more than
$300,000. In humans, nuclear imaging can be used to detect stress fractures.
In the horse, it is helpful in identifying the anatomical origin of occult lameness.
 In small animals, use of nuclear imaging is becoming more popular to detect
early neoplastic, inflammatory, and traumatic lesions. Unfortunately, in the
United States, most state radiation laws require special dedicated rooms to house
animals that have been given radioactive materials. Nuclear imaging is helpful at
times to locate the region of occult lameness. Dogs younger than 3 years of age,
however, have normally reactive physeal plates, which may obscure the detection of
real joint problems.
Diagnostic Ultrasonography
 DUS is infrequently used for musculoskeletal problems in small animal medicine
It has been used somewhat successfully in diagnosing bicipital tendonitis in dogs,
although it was less reliable than arthrography. It may be useful for other problems,
such as the evaluation of soft tissue masses and OCD. The application of DUS
in skeletal evaluation is poor because of absorption of sound waves by bone.
Arthroscopy
Arthroscopy involves puncturing a joint with a specialized endoscope after disten-
tion with a liquid or gas for the purpose of exploration and surgical repair if
indicated (see Chapter 8). This modality is extremely useful in human medicine
because there is less surgical trauma, resulting in less pain, shorter hospitali-
zation, less time off work or physical activity, quicker healing time, and less
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
19
adhesion formation. When appropriate arthroscopic equipment became available
to perform therapeutic manipulations, it became more than a diagnostic tool. Many
surgeons became trained in its use, and it is cost-effective. Arthroscopy is also
extremely useful in horses with loose bone or cartilage bodies in joints, especially
when open surgery and the long rehabilitation would cause an economic loss in the
performance individual.
 Pet owners frequently ask if small animal veterinarians have the capability to
 perform arthroscopy, and the answer at this point is that it is impractical, although
a few referral centers have used it.67 Other surgical manipulations, such as ligament
a dan ps    n   
more sophisticated equipment and surgical training. Dogs usually do not develop
 au jo aq ed a ado  op adoad u sss s a
pain tolerance. Dogs that could benefit from the commonly available equipment are
those with loose OCD or coronoid fragments. However, these dogs use their legs
immediately after conventional open surgery, thereby minimizing the apparent
advantages of arthroscopy. Additionally, there are no savings in anesthesia or
patient preparation time.
Force Plate Analysis and Kinematic Gait Analysis
-ad  a  a   Ps so s m a o
formance are force plate analysis* and kinematic or motion analysis.? They are
included in this chapter because they are a more objective means than clinical
 impression to evaluate function after certain orthopedic treatments. Some recent
reports compare different treatments for specific conditions (e.g., different cruciate
  (s i  n  p s 
 uo ne aq o a  i pre op son as s
observation.
 Briefly, force plate analysis is a system in which the magnitude of weight-bearing
(ground-reactive) force can be measured as the animal steps onto a sensor plate
during gait (Figure 1-14). Multiple passes are completed across the force plate to
acquire representative data. Assessment of lameness grade may now be quantitated.
 However, it only measures the force on that single step as the animal strikes the
plate. This tool does not measure problems that owners see, such as stiffness on
arising or lameness after running 3 to 4 miles.
o sns a moe jo  a su sis o
successive motions during locomotion. Multiple markers are placed on the skin at
 different joint levels. During locomotion, these markers move and are detected by
video cameras, and the signals are sent to a computer (Figure 1-15). Limb move-
ments may be calculated at 60 to 100 measurements per second, which allows
precise definition of normal versus lame gait. Different joint angles and the duration
of stance and swing phases of the gait cycle vary with the joint affected. Thus the
gait of a dog with hip dysplasia may be characterized.10 During most of the stance
phase, hip extension is quicker but has increased extension compared with normal
hip movement. Coxofemoral flexion is more rapid in the early swing phase but
slower in the middle of swing phase. There are also distal alterations in the stifle and
tarsus. Medical or surgical treatments may then be compared to the individual's
baseline data. In the future, kinetic gait analysis may be helpful in distinguishing
which area is the cause of lameness when multiple abnormalities are found in the
same limb (e.g., elbow arthrosis, calcification of supraspinatus muscle, possible
bicipital tendonitis).
20
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 1-14.This dog is stepping with one
foot on the rectangular force plate.
 FGURE 1-15. Kinematic gait (motion) analysis. Multiple markers are attached to the ani
mal and then gaited between video cameras that send marker location signals to a computer.
As many as 100 measurements per second can be made. Joint angles and duration of gait
phase may be analyzed. (Courtesy Dr. Charles DeCamp.)
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
21
Exploratory Surgery
Exploratory surgery is often used to assess a condition totally or to discover the
origin of joint, muscle, or bone problems. For example, a mature dog with a swollen
stifle without drawer movement or patellar instability may have a partial cruciate
tear, a previous OCD lesion, inflammatory joint disease, synovial tumor, or synovial
o a Pus po snss ss Asdo o o ao  ss
sufficient volume to be representative and to allow for histopathology, micro-
biology, or both.
Arthrocentesis
Arthrocentesis involves puncture and aspiration of joint fluid. Fluid may be grossly
inspected, cultured, or analyzed for cell types and numbers (see Table 6-3), protein,
viscosity, and glucose content. In addition, arthrocentesis allows instillation of
medications, dye, or air for arthrography. As with all joint injections, the hair is
clipped and surgical scrub applied. Spinal needles (18-22 gauge) are used. Care must
be taken to avoid scratching the articular surfaces and make a “"clean" puncture
to avoid blood contamination. The appearance of joint fluid confirms proper
needle placement. If no fluid appears, the needle is reintroduced in the same region,
moved slightly, or approached from the other side of the joint if possible. Often,
with swollen inflamed joints (rheumatoid arthritis), minimal extracellular fluid
is present.
The injection techniques for various arthrocentesis sites are as follows:
Coxofemoral joint. The needle is introduced just cranioproximal to
the trochanter major, aimed slightly ventrally and caudally
(Figure 1-16).
Stifle. With the stifle flexed, the needle is introduced medial or lateral to the
patellar ligament midway between the femur and tibia. Lack of fluid could
mean the needle is in the fat pad or cruciate ligaments (Figure 1-17).
Alternatively, the needle may be aimed carefully toward the femoral condyle
 just below the patella. There is less fat pad interference, but the needle may
scratch the femoral surface.
FIGURE 1-16. Arthrocentesis of the cox-
ofemoral joint. The needle is introduced prox-
imal and cranial to the trochanter major and is
directed somewhat ventrally.
22
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 1-17. Arthrocentesis of the stifle joint. With the knee
flexed, the needle is introduced just medial or lateral to the mid-
portion of the straight patellar ligament.
Tarsocrural joint. With the tarsocrural joint hyperextended (that distends
the joint caudally), the needle is inserted lateral or medial to the fibular
tarsal bone and aimed cranially toward the middle of the joint
(Figure 1-18). If swelling appears to be more cranially, a cranial approach
can be used.
 Shoulder joint. The needle is inserted about 1 cm distal to the acromion process
and just slightly caudal to it (Figure 1-19). If fluid is not found, the needle
should be "walked" in different directions from the same skin puncture site.
 If the forearm is pulled distally (separating the humerus from the scapula),
FIGURE 1-18. Arthrocentesis of the
tarsocrural joint. With the hock held in
extension, the needle is introduced lateral
to the fibular tarsal bone and aimed
toward the middle of the joint.
1—Orthopedic Examination and Diagnostic Tools
23
FIGURE 1-19.Arthrocentesis of the
scapulohumeral joint. The needle is intro-
duced about 1 cm distal to the acromion
process of the scapula. If no fluid is
obtained, an assistant may gently pull the
"ads suol au <uado, oi Aleisp wog
sometimes the needle is introduced in the center of the joint rather than
 under the capsule lateral to the humeral head.
 Elbow joint. The elbow is hyperextended to allow the joint to distend caudally.
The needle is introduced lateral to and alongside the olecranon and inserted
cranially toward the middle of the joint until contact is made with the
humeral condyle (Figure 1-20).
 Carpal joint. The carpal joint is located with thumbnail pressure during joint
 motion. This joint is located on the same level as the base of the accessory
carpal bone. The needle is introduced from the dorsal cranial aspect of the
joint (Figure 1-21).
Other tests that may help diagnose systemic musculoskeletal disorders include
testing for infections affecting muscle and joints (e.g., toxoplasmosis, Lyme disease ),
FIGURE 1-20. Arthrocentesis of the elbow joint. With the elbow in
extension, the needle is introduced just lateral to the olecranon.
24
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 1-21. Arthrocentesis of the carpal joint. The
joint lies on the same level as the base of the accessory carpal
bone. With the joint flexed, the needle is introduced at the 
midline of the joint.
endocrine myopathies (hyperadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism), immune-mediated
myopathies, and immune-mediated joint disease (rheumatoid arthritis, systemic
lupus erythematosus). These tests include hematology, serology, histochemical
staining of muscle, serum enzymes, electromyography, and cytology of swollen
tissues.
References
 1. Slocum B, Devine T: Cranial tibial wedge osteotomy: a technique for eliminating cranial tibial thrust
in cranial cruciate ligament repair, J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:564-569, 1984.
 2. Henderson RA, Milton JL: The tibial compression mechanisrm: a diagnostic aid in stifle injuries,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 14:474-479, 1978.
 3. Chalman JA, Butler HC: Coxofermoral joint laxity and the Ortolani sign, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
21:671-676, 1985.
4. Van Bree H, Van Ryssen B: Positive contrast shoulder arthrography with ioprormide and diatrizoate
in dogs with osteochondrosis, Vet Radiot Ultrasound 14:203-206, 1995.
 5. Rivers B, Wallace L, Johnston GR: Biceps tenosynovitis in the dog: radiographic and sonographic
findings, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 5:5i-57, 1992.
6. Lewis DD, Goring RL, Parker RB, et al: A comparison of diagnostic methods used in the evaluation
of early degenerative joint disease in the dog, J Am Anir Hosp Assoc 23:305-315, 1987.
 7. Van Bree H, Van Ryssen B, Desmidt M: Osteochondrosis lesions of the canine shoulder: correlation
of positive contrast arthrography and arthroscopy, Vet Radiot Ultrasound 33:342-347, 1992.
8.Anderson MA, Mann FA: Force plate analysis: a noninvasive tool for gait evaluation,Compend Cont
Educ Pract Vet 16:857-867, 1994.
dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 7:148-153, 1994.
10. Bennet RL, DeCamp CE, Flo GL, et al: Kinermatic gait analysis of canine hip dysplasia, J Am Vet
Res 7:966-971, 1996.
Fractures: Classification,
Diagnosis, and Treatment
A fracture is a complete or incomplete break in the continuity of bone or cartilage.
A fracture is accompanied by various degrees of injury to the surrounding soft
tissues, including blood supply, and by compromised function of the locomotor
system. The examiner handling the fracture must take into consideration the
patient's local and overall conditions.
CLASSIFICATION OF FRACTURES
Fractures may be classified on many bases, and all are useful in describing the
fracture.1-3 These bases include causal factors; presence of a communicating exter-
nal wound; location, morphology, and severity of the fracture; and stability of
the fracture after axial reduction of the fragments.
Causal Factors
Direct Violence Applied to Bone. Statistics indicate that at least 75% to
80% of all fractures are caused by car accidents or motorized vehicles.
Indirect Violence.   The force is transmitted through bone or muscle to a distant
point where the fracture occurs (e.g., fracture of femoral neck, avulsion of tibial
tubercle, fracture of condyles of the humerus or femur).
Diseases of Bone. Some bone diseases cause bone destruction or weakening to
such a degree that trivial trauma may produce a fracture (e.g., bone neoplasms,
nutritional disturbances affecting bone).
Repeated Stress.   Fatigue fractures in small animals are most frequently encoun-
tered in bones of the front or rear foot (e.g., metacarpal or metatarsal bones in
the racing greyhound).
Presence of Communicating External Wound
Closed Fracture.  The fracture does not communicate to the outside.
25
26
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Open Fracture.
The fracture site communicates to the outside. These fractures
are contaminated or infected, and healing at best may be complicated and delayed
(see Figure 2-3, A).
Location, Fracture Morphology, and Severity
The system used for location, morphology, and severity of long-bone fractures is
based on the classification system adopted by AO Vet, which was developed to
allow fractures to be alphanumerically coded for easy data retrieval by computer.3
It is based on the system used by the Arbeitsgemeinschaft fur Osteosynthese
and Association for the Study of Internal Fixation (AO/ASIF) group for documen-
tation of human fractures.4 It permits grading of the complexity of fracture config-
 uration and relative stability after reduction, thus providing information regarding
appropriate treatment and prognosis (Table 2-1).
Localization of the fracture is provided by num bering each long bone (1, humerus;
 2, radius/ulna; 3, femur; 4, tibia/fibula) and dividing each bone into 1, proximal;
2, shaft; and 3, distal zones. As a measure of severity, each fracture is typed as
A, simple; B, wedge; or C, complex (Figure 2-1). Each grade is further grouped into
three degrees of complexity (e.g., A1, A2, A3) depending on the type and extent
a pom s a jo an s isas n s u au jo
characterized as "1 2 A1." Proximal and distal zones may require individual
 descriptions to accommodate the specific bone morphology (Figure 2-2).
Additional specific nomenclature can be applied to each of these descriptions to
convey more information. The orientation of the fracture line relative to the bone's
TABLE 2-1. THE AO VET ALPHANUMERIC MORPHOLOGICAL FRACTURE
CLASSIFICATION SYSTEM
Localization
Fracture Morphology
Bone 1 2 3 4
Segment 1 2 3
Type A B C
Subdivision 1 2 3
Group A1, A2,
***C3
Redrawn from Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UFA: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.
A
B
C
FIGURE2-1. Diaphyseal
1 fracture types.
A, Simple fracture. B, Wedge fracture. C, Complex
fracture. (Redrawn from Unger M, Monta von PM,
Heim UFA: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50,
1990.)
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
27
B
C
-i
FIGURE 2-2. Proximal and distal long-bone fracture types. A, Extraarticular fracture.
B, Partial articular fracture. C, Complete articular fracture. There are some special cases in
long axis allows the following descriptions:
Transverse Fracture.  The fracture crosses the bone at an angle of not more than
30 degrees to the long axis of the bone (Figure 2-3, D).
Oblique Fracture.  The fracture describes an angle of greater than 30 degrees to
the long axis of the bone (Figure 2-3, E).
Spiral Fracture.  This is a special case of oblique fracture in which the fracture
line curves around the diaphysis (Figure 2-3, F).
The extent of damage can be described as follows:
Incomplete Fracture.  Most often used to describe a fracture that only disrupts
one cortex, an incomplete fracture is called a greenstick fracture in young animals
because of the bending of the nonfractured cortex (Figure 2-3, B). Fissure fractures
exhibit fine cracks that penetrate the cortex in a linear or spiral direction. In skele-
tally immature animals the periosteum is usually left intact (Figure 2-3, C).
Complete Fracture.  A complete fracture describes a single circumferential
disruption of the bone. Any fragmentation that results in a defect at the fracture
site must be smaller than one third of the bone diameter after fracture reduction
(see Figure 2-3, D).
Multifragmental Fractures. Also known as comminuted fractures, multifrag-
mental fractures have one or more completely separated fragments of intermediate
size. These fractures can be further described as follows:
Wedge fracture. A multifragmental fracture with some contact between the
main fragments after reduction (see Figures 2-1, B, and 2-3, G).
 Reducible wedges. Fragments with a length and width larger than one third the
 bone diameter (Figure 2-3, G). After reduction and fixation of the wedge(s)
to a main fragment, the result is a simple fracture.
28
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
c
D
E
F
G
H
FIGURE 2-3. Descriptive nomenclature of diaphyseal fractures. A, Open. B, Greenstick.
C, Fissure. D, Transverse. E, Oblique. F, Spiral. G, Reducible wedge. H, Nonreducible
wedges. I, Multiple or segmental.
 Nonreducible wedges. Fragments with a length and width less than one third
 the bone diameter and that result in a defect between the main fragments
after reduction of more than one third the diameter (Figure 2-3, H).
segments; the fracture lines do not meet at a common point (Figure 2-3, I).
This is a special case of a reducible wedge fracture.
 Proximal and distal metaphyseal zones require specific nomenclature to describe
the wide variety of extraarticular and intraarticular fractures seen in these locations,
as follows:
Extraarticular Fractures.  The articular surface is not fractured but is separated
from the diaphysis (see Figure 2-2, A). These are typically called metapbyseal
fractures. In a pbyseal fracture the fracture-separation occurs at the physeal
line or growth plate. This type occurs only in the young, growing animal
(Figure 2-4, C).
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
29
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 2-4. Descriptive nomenclature for proximal and distal zone fractures.
A, Metaphyseal, impacted. B, Metaphyseal avulsion. C, Physeal. D, Partial articular or
unicondylar. E, Complete articular or bicondylar.
Partial Articular Fractures. Only part of the joint surface is involved, with the
 a  a as si a oi pe s ud a
fractures are the most common example (Figure 2-4, D).
Complete Articular Fractures.  The joint surface is fractured and completely
        a s) s a  s
representative of this type (Figure 2-4, E).
The following additional descriptive terms are applied to certain fractures:
Impacted Fracture. The bone fragments are driven firmly together (Figure 2-4, A).
Awulsion Fracture.  A fragment of bone, which is the site of insertion of a muscle,
tendon, or ligament, is detached as a result of a forceful pull (Figure 2-4, B).
Stability after Replacement in Normal Anatomical Position
Stable Fracture. Fragments interlock and resist shortening forces (e.g., trans-
verse, greenstick, impacted). The primary objective of fixation is to prevent angular
and rotational deformity.
 Unstable Fracture.   The fragments do not interlock and thus slide by each other
and out of position (e.g., oblique, nonreducible wedges). Fixation is indicated to
maintain length and alignment and to prevent rotation.
BLOOD SUPPLY AND HEALING OF BONE
Until about 1940, almost all fractures were reduced, closed, and stabilized by
external means, such as coaptation splints, plaster of Paris casts, and Thomas
splints. The various methods of internal fixation were introduced and developed
30
 during the same period as aseptic technique in veterinary surgery, open approaches
to the various bones and joints, and open reduction of fractures. To handle tissues
properly and implement reduction and fixation to best advantage, an understanding
of blood supply and bone healing is essential.
Normal Vascularization of Bone
An adequate blood supply is necessary for bone to carry out its normal physio-
logical function. Clinically, most vascular problems arise in the long bones. Blood
supply to these bones is derived from three basic sources: (1) the afferent vascular
system, (2) the intermediate vascular system of compact bone, and (3) the efferent
vascular system.s6 The afferent system carries arterial blood and consists of the
principal nutrient artery, the metaphyseal arteries, and the periosteal arterioles at
muscle attachments (Figure 2-5). The periosteal arterioles are minor components of
the afferent system and supply the outer layers of the cortex in the vicinity of firm
fascial or muscle attachments.
The vessels in compact bones are intermediate between the afferent and efferent
systems and function as the vascular lattice where critical exchange between the
blood and surrounding living tissue occurs. This system consists of the cortical
canals of Havers and Volkmann and the minute canaliculi, which convey nutrients
to the osteocytes.
Venous drainage (the efferent system) of cortical bone takes place at the
periosteal surface. Blood flow through the cortex is essentially centrifugal, from
medulla to the periosteum. Although other venous drainage from the marrow
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
 FIGURE 2-5. Normal blood supply to bone. A, Schema of afferent blood supply to imma
ture bone. After the growth plate closes (adult bone), the metaphyseal and epiphyseal vessels
anastomose. B, Section of diaphysis showing schema of normal afferent blood supply to com-
pact bone. (From Rhinelander F, Phillips RS, Steel WM, et al: J Bone Joint Surg 50A:643, 1968.)
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
31
cavity is present, this is connected with the hematopoietic activity of the marrow
cavity.
Response of Vascularization after Fracture
Disruption of the normal blood supply to bone varies with the complexity of
the fracture. The afferent vascular components are stimulated and respond by
hypertrophy, increasing in both diameter and number. In addition, a new blood
supply is developed, termed the extraosseous blood supply of healing bone,$6 from
the immediately surrounding soft tissues. This is separate from the normal periosteal
arterioles. It furnishes blood to detached bone fragments, devitalized cortex, and the
developing periosteal callus. When stability at the fracture site and continuity of
 the medullary circulation are established, the extraosseous blood supply regresses.
Fortunately, the regenerative powers of the medullary arterial supply are rapid
and enormous under favorable circumstances, since this must be reestablished for
healing of cortical bone.
Some of the factors that may deter vascular response and thus bone healing
are (1) trauma in connection with the original accident, (2) careless or improper
surgical handling of the soft tissues, (3) inadequate reduction, and (4) inadequate
stabilization of bone fragments. Intramedullary nails may temporarily damage the
medullary afferent system, whereas plates may block the venous outflow. Either
srd aq isn yoq nq pasndo Aed aq a auoq aui on Aidns poo
to an adequate degree for bone healing.
Bone Healing
 The pattern of bone healing varies according to the mechanical conditions present
within the fracture line after reduction and stabilization of the fracture. The follow-
ing four basic mechanical situations can be observed, and all may be present in one
fracture?:
1. Bone immediately adjacent to a compression plate or lag screw may experience
very high static (stabilizing) load, with very litte dynamic (destabilizing)
component.
 2. A site farther from a compression plate, or a fracture stabilized with a very
stiff external fixator, will experience moderately high compressive static
loading with a small dynamic component. This situation could also be
present in certain intramedullary pin/cerclage wire fixations.
3. A site slightly farther from a compression plate or screw, fixation with a
buttress or bridging plate, or a fracture stabilized with a moderately stable
external fixator will experience more even distribution between static and
dynamic components. This would also be typical of many intramedullary pin
fixations.
 4. At the cortex opposite a plate or a unilateral external fixator, in some
buttress or bridging plate situations and in some intramedullary pin fixations,
a gap is continuously present because of varying dynamic loads (tension,
bending, shear) that continuously exceed the stabilizing compressive loads.
In areas of intermittent bone contact, there will be resorption of the fracture surfaces
to enlarge the gap, followed by indirect bone union (Figure 2-6). The sequence of events
in this case may be briefly stated as (1) hemorrhage in the area, (2) clot formation, and
(3) inflammation and edema, followed by (4) proliferation of pluripotential mesenchy-
mal cells, (5) cartilage and bone formation, and (6) remodeling of callus back to
32
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 2-6. Callus formation in bone
healing: a, periosteal bridging callus; b, inter-
cortical bridging callus; c, medullary bridging
callus.
normal bone. The sequence of events results in a progressive replacement of the
tissue in the fracture gap with stiffer and stronger tissue, going from granulation tis-
 a paza oi ai ii anssl s oi anss a oi ans
lamellar bone to cortical bone. This entire process is under the direction and con-
trol of a host of cellularly produced active mediators, such as chemoattractants, as
well as angiogenetic and growth factors.8
 Callus formation may be subdivided on the basis of location into (1) medullary
bridging callus, (2) periosteal bridging callus, or (3) intercortical bridging callus
(see Figure 2-6). The pattern of callus formation will vary greatly in response to
circumstances and stimuli present. In general, however, stabilization of fractures
by external splintage, the external fixator, buttress (bridging) plates, and intra-
medullary pins is characterized by the formation of callus in all three areas. Stability
of the fracture fragments is not absolute, and micromotion is present. The develop-
ing callus is responsible for early stabilization of the fracture and results in relatively
early clinical union, that is, the point at which the bone is able to assume normal
weight-bearing forces without dependence on the fixation device. In contrast, exces-
sive dynamic loading is responsible for delayed union, where the transformation of
callus from cartilage to bone is delayed because of the poor blood supply within the
areas of excessive motion. Other than in the young growing animal, the amount of
callus is in inverse relation to the degree of stability at the fracture site.
Healing in areas of contact and high compression forces, as well as in very
small, stable gaps (<0.1 mm), is described as direct bone union (Figure 2-7). This
type of union bypasses most of the steps previously described and goes directly to
cortical remodeling. Union of the cortices is achieved by internal remodeling of
the haversian system without resorption of the fracture surfaces. This intense
remodeling at the fracture surface may be radiographically confused with resorption
because it results in slight loss of density in the fracture zone. Thus, stabilization of
fractures by use of compression plates and screws is characterized by no visible
intercortical callus and small amounts of medullary bridging callus. Healing in
areas of mixed compressive and dynamic loads can exhibit all three types of healing
patterns.
 Successful healing in areas of direct contact of the bone fragments or in areas of
very small fracture gaps depends on absolute stability, because strain on individual
cells filling the fracture gap is magnified by any motion at the site and can easily
cause rupture of these cels.? As can be seen from Table 2-2, there is a dramatic dif-
ference in the tolerance to strain by the three major cell types found in the healing
fracture gap. Figure 2-8 illustrates the effect of micromotion in a small fracture
 gap.10 Thus it becomes obvious that if closed reduction and interfragmentary
compression are chosen, it becomes imperative to provide absolutely stable fixation.
If this cannot be guaranteed, it is beter not to reduce the fragments too closely
in order to ensure survival of the tissues in the fracture gap in the presence of
the micromotion inevitable in such a mechanical situation. This is the basis of the
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
33
FIGURE 2-7. Direct (primary) bone union. A, Contact healing at 4 weeks of osteotomy
stabilized by compression plate. A thin zone of necrotic bone can be seen in the center of the
 section. There is extensive haversian remodeling of the bone ends, with osteons growing
across both living and dead cortex and bridging the osteotomy. B, On the side opposite the
plate there is a small fracture gap. This space is invaded by capillaries and accompanied by
osteoblasts that deposit osteoid. Bone lamellae form initially parallel to the fracture line and
then are replaced by axially oriented osteons to complete the remodeling. This type of
direct bone healing without the intermediate steps of fibrous tissue and cartilage formation is
possible under conditions of good stability and a gap up to 0.3 mm wide. (Courtesy
Dr. Robert Schenk.)
TABLE 2-2.
TOLERANCE TO INTERFRAGMENTARY STRAIN
Cell Type
Toler ance to Elongation
Tolerance to B ending
Granulation tissue
100%
40 degrees
Cartilage
15%
5 degrees
Bone
2%
0.5 degree
Data from Perren SM, Cordey J: The concept of interfragmentary strain. In Uthoff HIK, editor: Current concepts of
internalfixation,erl9ring
In summary, bone healing depends on and is influenced by blood supply at
the fracture line, reduction of the fracture fragments, and the degree of stabilization
of the fracture fragments.
DIAGNOSIS OF FRACTURES AND PRINCIPLES
OF TREATMENT
The history and clinical signs usually indicate the presence of a fracture; however,
radiographs are essential for precise determination of its nature.
The first consideration is preserving the patient's life; repair of tissues and
restoration of function are secondary. Treatment for shock, hemorrhage, and
34
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
 FIGURE 2-8. Concept of interfragmentary strain in a small fracture gap. A, One granu-
lation tissue cellis seen within the 10-μm fracture gap and three cells within the 30-μm gap.
aindni pue ueus %ol e sasnes (aka aui ot alqndasuad sou wun ol Aq des aui suiseausul 'g
of the cell in the small gap, but only a 33% strain on the cells in the larger gap. Thus the
resorption of fragment ends seen in areas less than totally stable is an attempt to protect
physiologic concepts. In Sumner-Smith G, editor: Bone in clinical orthopaedics, Philadelphia,
1982, Saunders, pp 335-386.)
wounds of the soft tissues, if present, should be instituted immediately, and the
 patient should be made as comfortable as possible.
 Examination of an animal with a fracture or suspected fracture should include
the following:
 1. Assessment of the animal's general health.
 2. Determination of whether tissues or organs adjacent to the fracture
or other parts of the body have been damaged and, if so, to what
extent.
 3. Examination to ascertain whether fractures, ligamentous instability, or
dislocations are present in other parts of the body.
 4. Precise evaluation of the fracture or fractures. (See Chapter 1 for a more
complete discussion on physical examination of the locomotor system.)
Clinical Signs
Even though they are not always readily detectable, visible signs at the fracture area
 include one or more of the following:
 1. Pain or localized tenderness
2. Deformity or change in angulation
3. Abnormal mobility
 4. Local swelling (This may appear almost immediately or not until several
hours or a day after the accident. It usually persists for 7 to 10 days because
of the disturbed flow of blood and lymph.)
 5. Loss of function
6. Crepitus
 Radiographic Examination
Radiographs of at least two views at right angles to each other are essential
 for accurate diagnosis and selection of the best procedures for reduction and
immobilization.
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
35
Reduction and Immobilization
Because movement of fracture fragments results in pain to the animal, these
  isaue aa u-aus ro uoas aan Aensn sydero
presents a problem because of respiratory compromise from traumatized lungs, it
may be necessary to delay performing radiography. In this situation it is often
helpful to obtain only the one view that can be taken without anesthesia to confirm
 o  n   s 'a ae n   i a
basic treatment plan. Bear in mind that the second view should be taken before
attempting reduction and stabilization.
In the immature or deformed animal, interpretation of the radiograph may
 present special problems because of the presence and stages of development of
various osseous growth centers. Radiographs of the opposite limb are usually
helpful.
Treatment
 The goal of fracture treatment is early ambulation and complete return of function.
Return to Function
The principles of fracture treatment have been articulated best by the AO/ASIF
 group,11-13 as follows:
1. Anatomical reduction of fracture fragments, especially in articular fractures.
2. Stable fixation, suitable to the biomechanical and clinical situation.
3. Preservation of the blood supply to the bone fragments and surrounding
soft tissues through atraumatic reduction and surgical technique.
4. Early active pain-free mobilization of muscles and joints adjacent to the
fracture to prevent development of fracture disease.
The interpretation and emphasis of these principles have undergone a gradual
change in recent years as AO/ASIF has promoted the concept of biological fixation.
 snss os  oud a si ndao s u upius red a
the blood supply of the fracture fragments. This means that anatomical reduction,
 in the sense of total reconstruction of all fracture lines, is deemed necessary only for
 articular fractures or shaft fractures treated by interfragmentary compression using
lag screws or cerclage wires, which are then protected by a neutralization plate.
Direct bone union without callus is to be expected under this protocol. Other shaft
fractures are treated by leaving the fragments undisturbed to protect their blood
supply. The fracture zone either is spanned by a bridging plate attached to each end
of the bone or is stabilized by an external skeletal fixator or interlocking medullary
nail. Healing in this case is by the indirect route, with early callus formation respon-
n  pasd au r pe as s a jo yu rg a
"bridging osteosynthesis," which is useful and descriptive and thus is used through-
 sn s a s  n p i s n
alignment in both the frontal and the sagittal plane, eliminating torsional deformity,
and maintaining bone length to the extent possible, although the latter is not as
consequential in quadripeds as in bipeds
The concept of stable internal fixation must also be reevaluated in consideration
of the aims of bridging osteosynthesis. All fixation must maintain axial alignment
and length and provide rotational stability. Stabilization by interfragmentary com-
pression demands absolute stability of the small remaining fracture gap in order for
direct haversian bridging to occur (see previous section on bone healing). When the
objective is bridging osteosynthesis, the fixation must be only as strong as needed to
36
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
allow callus formation. Small amounts of interfragmentary motion are not only
probable but also even desirable for callus formation, which actively enters into
the role of stabilizer of the fracture, thus protecting the internal fixation from
 mechanical overload and failure. How much fixation is needed in a given situation
is difficult to define succinctly but is addressed in detail later in this chapter (see also
specific fractures in later chapters).
The concept of atraumatic technique has received increased emphasis in the
employment of bridging osteosynthesis strategies, especially as applied to preserva-
-x  s Aos ond sa aoq on Adns po yo u
tion to allow early pain-free mobilization of the limb has always been and continues
to be of primary importance to the veterinary orthopedic surgeon. Not only is
 bone healing aided, but the soft tissue integrity of the limb is better maintained, and
nursing care of the animal is greatly simplified.
Reduction and Fixation
Reduction and fixation of the fracture should be undertaken as soon as the patient's
condition permits.15.16 Delay makes reduction more difficult because of spastic con-
traction of the muscles and inflammatory thickening of the soft tissue. In some
cases, fixation can be accomplished when the patient is presented; in others, it may
 be advisable to delay for a day or longer until the patient becomes an acceptable
anesthetic risk. It is inadvisable to wait until the swelling has subsided before going
ahead with reduction and fixation. By this time, organization of the hematoma and
callus formation are well underway. Callus formation also obscures fracture lines,
nerves, and blood vessels. In addition, surgical hemorrhage is greatly increased as a
result of increased circulatory response in the area. This circulatory response is usually
evident about the fourth day after trauma. Surgery before this time is accompanied
by less hemorrhage.
RATE OF BONE UNION AND CLINICAL UNION
The moment a fracture occurs, changes in the tissue in the immediate area set the
stage for its repair, and many factors may influence the rapidity of the repair
process. The surgeon can do little to alter such factors as age, character of the
fracture, state of the soft tissues in the surrounding area, and certain systemic or
local bone diseases. Unfavorable factors, however, such as poor reduction, inade-
quate immobilization, excessive operative trauma, and lack of aseptic surgical
procedures, are within the surgeon's control. These factors, along with owner com
pliance or animal disposition, may slow or even interrupt the healing process. When
all other factors are equal and the fracture is optimally treated, age of the patient is
the most influential factor affecting the rate of healing.
Clinical union refers to the period in the recovery process of a fracture when
 healing has progressed to the point in strength that the fixation can be removed.
Table 2-3 lists average periods of anticipated healing for the typical, uncomplicated
fracture treated optimally. These healing times vary somewhat, depending on the
type of fixation used. Fractures immobilized with external fixation, skeletal fixa-
tion, and intramedullary pins heal with the development of an external and internal
bridging callus. The bridging callus does give added early strength to the fracture
site. Fractures immobilized with rigid fixation (bone plate) heal primarily by direct
union and some internal callus, and animals with fractures treated by this method
should have the fixation in place for a longer period.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
37
TABLE 2-3. RATE OF UNION IN TERMS OF CLINICAL UNION
Extermal Skeletal and
Age of Animal
Intr amedullary Pin Fixations
Fixation with Bone Plates
Under 3 months
2-3 weeks
4 weeks
3-6 months
4-6 weeks
2-3 months
6-12 months
5-8 weeks
3-5 months
Over 1 year
7-12 weeks
5 months-1 year
Table 2-3 is not to be interpreted as an indication that one method of fixation is
superior to another. Each method has its place, indications, and contraindications,
as described later.
Radiographic evaluation of fracture healing (Figure 2-9) should be routinely
 performed at the time of expected union, as indicated in Table 2-3. The mnemonic
"AAAA" has proved useful for evaluation of such radiographs (Egger E, Schwarz P:
Personal communication, 1994), as follows:
1. Alignment. This is basically an assessment of the restoration of the bone as a
whole. Alignment is evaluated in relation to angular and torsional
displacement relative to normal. Return to normal alignment is necessary for
normal long-term function.
2. Apposition. Looking more directly at the fracture site, the examiner here is
evaluating the degree of realignment of the fracture fragments. A certain degree
of apposition is required for routine bone healing, but this degree is highly
dependent on the type of fixation employed; thus, no single definition can be
used in all situations.
3. Apparatus. Is the fixation device functioning as intended to maintain stability
of the fracture until healed? Were applicable protocols for the device followed?
 Is there evidence of loosening of implants? Is there evidence of impending
failure of the implant, such as bending or screw loosening?
4. Activity. This is the biological activity of the bone in response to the fixation
used. To evaluate activity, it is necessary to know the age of the animal, the
length of time since the fracture was stabilized, and the degree of functional
use of the limb. It is also useful to consider such factors as preexisting infection
and open wounds or other devascularizing injuries. This is the area where the
type and amount of callus formation are evaluated. The examiner must search
for signs of infection (e.g., bone lysis) and periosteal, new bone formation.
Bone resorption is evaluated to decide if this represents normal
re vascularization of bone fragment edges or indicates infection or loosening of
 an implant. Table 2-4 details typical radiographic signs of healing.
REDUCTION OF FRACTURES
 Reduction of a fracture refers to the process of replacing the fractured segments in
their original anatomical position. Fractures can be reduced by either closed reduc-
tion with traction and manipulation of the fragments or open reduction and direct
visual reconstruction of the bone. Bones with their muscles attached may be likened
to a system of levers with springs attached. Muscles are constantly contracting
(normal tonus). Flexors oppose extensors, counterbalancing the part at the joint.
When a bone is fractured, all opposing muscles contract maximally, and overriding
38
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
C
D
FIGURE 2-9.  Fracture healing in various forms. Table 2-4 summarizes this process. Indirect
bealing is illustrated in parts A through J. A and B, Type A2, simple diaphyseal fracture of
jo uedod uaaid oi sam aas om und uuas e ym pazis nwag a
fissure fractures, and an interfragmentary skewer-pin and wire. The fracture lines are clearly
visible postoperatively. C, At 4 weeks the fracture line is less visible, and there is patchy
mineralization of unstructured bridging callus. D, The fracture line is faintly visible at
7 weeks, and callus is smoothing and becoming uniform in density. The Steinmann pin was
removed.
and shortening of the bone occur. Spastic contraction of the muscle is intensified by
injury to soft tissues of the region. The pull caused by the muscle spasm is constant
and continuous, even under general anesthesia. Initially, the contraction and
overriding are primarily muscular and are responsive to general anesthesia,
countertraction, and some of the muscle-relaxing drugs. After several days, inflam-
matory reaction in the area with its accompanying proliferating changes leads to
contraction of a more permanent nature; thus, more difficulty is encountered when
attempting reduction.2
Gas anesthesia (halothane, methoxyflurane, or isoflurane) is superior to the
 barbiturates in bringing about relaxation of muscle spasm. The addition of muscle
relaxants is helpful in overcoming spastic contraction when used in addition to gen-
eral anesthesia and within the first 3 days after a fracture occurs. Succinylcholine
(0.44 mg/kg) or pancuronium (0.05 to 0.1 mg/kg) has been used in small animals;
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
39
E
F
9665
G
H
FIGURE 2-9. Cortirued E, By 14 weeks, only a faint hint of the fracture line remains, and
the dense callus is being remodeled on the periosteal and endosteal surfaces. F, Florid
periosteal callus in a skeletally immature dog 4 weeks postoperatively. This extreme callus is
not caused by insta bility but rather by intraoperative trauma to the active periosteum. Note
the absence of callus cranially at the fracture site, which was the area most devitalized by
intraoperative handling. This area later bridged with callus. G and H, To illustrate the widen
ing of the fracture gap caused by vascularization of the fracture edges, compare the postop-
erative gap seen in G with the situation 3 weeks later in H. This is a more dramatic than
normal response because the fracture was 3 weeks old at surgery and the fracture fragment
edges were more devascularized than in a fresh fracture.
Continued
succinylcholine is preferred. At the doses listed, these drugs also produce respiratory
 paralysis, and assisted respiration is necessary. The duration of action is about 20 to
30minutes.
To a large extent, healing is influenced by the handling of the soft tissues, blood
supply to the fracture segments, accuracy of reduction, and efficiency of immobiliza-
tion. All these factors may be influenced or altered by the surgeon.
      n   s
because this gives the possibility of maximum stability when fixation is applied.
40
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
K
FIGURE 2-9. Contirued I, This type A3, complex distal extraarticular tibial fracture was
stabilized by external fixator and closed reduction (biological osteosynthesis) 20 weeks pre-
viously. Fracture lines are faintly visible, with remodeling of callus and cortical bone evident.
The fixator was destabilized at this time by removing some of the proximal fixation pins.
J, At 32 weeks, cortical remodeling is almost complete, and the fixator was removed. Direct
healing is illustrated in parts K through M, a type A1, simple extraarticular tibial fracture sta-
bilized with lag screws and external coaptation. K, Postoperatively the double-spiral fracture
line is obvious despite the perfect reduction. L, Fracture lines are becoming hazy and fading
proximally at 6'/2 weeks. No callus is present except at the fibular fracture.
fractures of the diaphysis. Rotational alignment must be restored between the joints
proximal and distal to the fracture to ensure good function. Axial bending in the
cranial-caudal direction (sagittal plane) is well tolerated unless the limb becomes
excessively shortened. Moderate medial angulation in the frontal plane (varus) of
 the distal segment is quite well tolerated, but lateral angulation (valgus) usually pro-
duces significant functional problems.
When a joint surface is involved in a fracture, the articular fragments must
always be reduced anatomically to restore joint congruency and thus to eliminate
or at least minimize abnormal wear and secondary osteoarthrosis. The secret of
reduction is the application of continual, steady pressure over time. This fatigues the
 muscles, bringing about relaxation and lengthening.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
41
FIGURE
2-9. Continued M,
At
10 weeks the fracture lines have disap-
peared in most areas and are obviously
well bridged in those areas where they
can be identified. (Radiographs courtesy
Dr. Richard Park.)
M
TABLE 2-4.
RADIOGRAPHIC SIGNS OF FRACTURE HEALING*
Radiographic Sign
Postoperative Time
Sharp fracture margins (Figure 2-9, A and B)
1 week
Indistinct fracture margins and widening of fracture gap
2 weeks
(Figure 2-9, G and H)
Unstructured and patchy rmineralization of bridging callus; fracture
4-6 weeks
line still visible (Figure 2-9, C and F)
 Bridging callus of even density and smooth borders; fracture line
6-9 weeks
faintly visible (can remove some of fixation; e.g, pins from
external fixators) (Figure 2-9, D)
 Dense callus of reduced size; fracture line barely visible, early
8-12 weeks
corticomedullary remodeling (stage of early clinical union)
{Figure 2-9, E)
Further condensation of callus; distinct corticomedullary separation 
10 weeks>>>
caused by remodeling; fracture line not visible {Figure 2-9, I and J)
*Assuming normal adult fracture situation with stable fixation and good vascularity to the fracture fragments.
Closed Reduction
Closed reduction is usually accomplished by manipulation along with the
application of traction and countertraction. This is ideal, provided that it can be
accomplished and maintained with minimal tissue trauma, and many fractures are
so treated in human patients. This should not influence veterinary surgeons unduly,
since the problems they face in regard to patient cooperation and aftercare cannot
be compared with those in humans. Closed reduction is the norm when external
fixation devices such as casts and splints are employed. This method is most useful
below the elbow and stifle, where soft tissues are not a hindrance in palpating the
bone to aid in determining reduction. This is also the region where casts and splints
are most applicable in animals.
 Closed reduction has greater success in small and relatively long-legged breeds
than in large, chondrodystrophied, or heavily muscled breeds. This approach
should be attempted as soon as the patient's condition permits general anesthesia,
because any delay increases muscle spasm and contracture as well as the difficulty
42
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 in obtaining reduction. Do not wait for the swelling to go down; it will not regress
until reduction restores normal circulation. Initially, the contracture and overriding
are primarily muscular in nature and respond to traction, general anesthesia, and
muscle relaxants. After 2 to 3 days, inflammatory reaction and its proliferative
changes cause a much more permanent and difficult-to-overcome contracture.
Methods of Closed Reduction
The guiding principle in any method of closed reduction is to apply slow,
continuous traction to the fragment that can be controlled, aligning it with the less
 q am s e d n  sin  a
to the possibility of laceration, perforation, or compression of a major vessel or
nerves. Apply traction slowly to relax muscles and not cause irritation.
 Traction can be obtained by manual force (Figures 2-10 and 2-11) or by gravity
(Figure 2-12). Manual traction is facilitated if a gauze or soft rope loop is placed
around the axillary or groin region and anchored to the edge of the table near
  ae  ad si do ado   o   a
tarsal area, and traction is applied against the first rope. The Gordon extender
is a mechanical device that allows comparable traction to be exerted without
the surgeon exerting as much force (Figure 2-13). Relaxation of muscle is
 o ro n  j a isd m e Aq P i
30 minutes.
To use gravity to obtain traction, position the animal on its back, and place
 gauze, tape, or soft rope around the paw of the affected limb, then attach this to
an infusion stand or to a ceiling-mounted eyebolt (see Figure 2-12). The length of
the attaching material is adjusted to raise the animal slightly off the table so that a
portion of the body weight is being supported and thus producing traction on the
limb. Traction for 10 to 30 minutes adequately fatigues the muscles and aid in
reduction.
 In skeletal traction, sterile pins or ice tong-like devices are attached to the
distal fragment and traction is exerted on the device. This method is not widely used
 in veterinary surgery but has merit, since it allows for a straight pull on the bone
A
FIGURE 2-10. Application of traction, countertraction, and manipulation.
B
C
FIGURE 2-11. Application of traction, countertraction, and toggeling or bending.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
43
fragments, whereas the other methods all cause some distraction of bone ends 
because of muscle pull. The Gordon extender is a useful method of producing
traction.
After adequate traction, directly reducing the fragments may be possible by direct
manipulation of the more movable fragment (see Figure 2-10). More likely is the
necessity of resorting to toggeling, or angulation of the bone ends (see Figure 2-11).
 FIGURE 2-12. Use of animal's weight to apply traction and countertraction in fatiguing
 spastically contracted muscles.
FIGURE 2-13. Use of the Gordon extender. Gradual turning
 down of the wing nut increases traction on the affected limb.
The wing nut is tightened at a bout S-minute intervals to increase
traction.
44
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
In toggeling the bone fragments are angulated to form a V so that the ends can
a am an  p  an sa a  on q 
angle formed by the bones is forcefully reduced by pressure at each end of the
bone. Maintenance of this pressure fatigues the muscle to allow restoration of
length.
Open Reduction
Open reduction is the method of choice in many fracture cases. The fragments are
reduced under direct vision, and usually some type of internal fixation is applied to
ensure that the position is maintained. (Internal fixation is discussed in the section
 on immobilization and in the chapters covering treatment of specific fractures.)
Open reduction technique is used particularly in a high percentage of (1) fracture
cases that are unstable and more complicated, (2) those of more than several days*
duration, (3) those involving an articular surface, and (4) those for which internal
fixation is indicated. Many of the more common open approaches are described in
association with the treatment of fractures involving the various bones; An Atlas of
Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints in the Dog and Cat is the standard
reference for these approaches.17 The surgeon should strive continually to improve
 techniques for handling soft tissue. Key guidelines in this area include the following:
1. Be gentle and efficient. All soft tissues are handled carefully and retracted
with respect. Avoid excessive handling of any tissue to preserve viability and
healing potential of soft tissue and bone.
2. Attain strict hemostasis. Active bleeding must be controlled if the operative
field is to be clearly visualized. Control of hemorhage may also be critical
in preserving the life of the animal, and it reduces some of the possible
complications in postoperative healing. Electrocoagulation is invaluable because
it is efficient in sealing small bleeding points and shortens operating time.
3. Follow normal separations between muscles and fascial planes.
4. If a muscle needs to be severed for exposure, do this near its origin or
insertion to minimize trauma and hemorrhage, facilitate closure, and
minimize loss of muscular function.
5. Know the location of major blood vessels and nerves. Locate these structures
and work around them.
6. Avoid putting excess traction on nerves because this may lead to temporary or
 permanent injury.
 7. Preserve soft tissue attachments (and therefore blood supply) to bone
fragments in the process of exposure, reduction, and application of fixation.
 8. Use suction, rather than blotting, to minimize soft tissue trauma.
 9. When necessary, blot with moist gauze sponges (Ringer's solution) to help
clear the area. Avoid wiping.
10. Irrigate copiously to remove blood clots and debris.
Each fracture is unique and may require a different maneuver or combination of
bring about sufficient relaxation to allow the reduction of bone fragments.
Disposition of Bone Fragments at Fracture Site
 a  a  s q a sa  s 
 a general rule, all fragments are kept whether or not they have soft tissue attachment.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
45
The exact disposition of these fragments depends on what scheme of internal fixa-
tion will be employed. As discussed in the section on immobilization, the surgeon
tither can try to achieve anatomical reconstruction of the fragments or can leave the
fragments untouched to preserve their blood supply. If anatomical reconstruction is
chosen, all fragments with soft tissue attachments are carefully handled to maintain
this attachment. The pieces that are too small for internal fixation with bone screws,
wires, or Kirschner wires are maneuvered back into position as best as possible with
minimal disruption of soft tissue attachments. In most cases the surrounding soft
ing begins. Large fragments, with or without soft tissue attachment, are usually
fixed in place with lag screws, wires, or Kirschner wires.
 As a general rule, these fragments aid in restoring the original bone substance and
-o uum nsanas rg uo aau  aoq sunone ue se uun
tion or infection is present, and even under these circumstances, they may enter into
callus formation.
 Removal of fragments often results in delayed union, nonunion, or a decrease in
diameter of the bone in that area. Generally, if removed, fragments should be
replaced by a bone graft. That is particularly true if rigid fixation (plate) is applied
 or if any conditions are present (e.g., older animal, devitalized surrounding tissue,
 architectural deficits after reduction) that result in slow healing (see Chapter 3).
MethodsofOpenReduction
The following methods are suggested approaches to open reduction:
1. Application of levering by use of some instrument, such as an osteotome, bone
skid, periosteal elevator, or scalpel handle (Figure 2-14).
2.
Application of direct force (using bone-holding forceps) on one or more of the
bone fragments (Figure 2-15).
3. Direct application of force on both the bone fragments (Figure 2-16, A and B).
After the fragments are reduced by the application of traction, countertraction,
and corrective rotation, self-holding bone forceps may be used to maintain
reduction temporarily while fixation is applied (Figure 2-16, E).
 4. Application of distraction force through the bone-holding forceps (Figure 2-16, C
and D). If the overriding muscle forces are strong enough, it may be difficult to
achieve the last small amount of distraction to allow complete reduction by
simple traction, as illustrated in Figure 2-16, A and B. If the bone-holding 
forceps is applied with finger pressure across the bone at an angle, it can then
be rotated to force each bone fragment into the reduced position. This
 maneuver depends on the friction between the bone and forceps being greater
than that between the bone fragments. Apply this method cautiously in young
A
B
FIGURE 2-14. Application of levering by use of an osteotome.
46
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 2-15.
bone fragments.
D
FIGURE 2-16. Open reduction of fractures. A and B, Direct application of force to the
bone fragments. C, Oblique fracture overriding can be reduced by grasping the fragments
with a bone-holding forceps that is angulated so that each jaw is toward the end of the bone
fragment. The forceps is not locked but held by finger pressure only. D, By rotating the for-
ceps in the direction shown in C while applying enough pressure to cause the forceps to grasp
the cortex, the fragments will slide into reduction. E, After reduction, a locking bone-holding
animals, because the bone may be crushed before adequate friction is created
between the bone and forceps.
 5. Direct application of force on both the bone fragments combined with the use
of levering (Figure 2-17).
6. Use of the fracture distractor (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa; Jorgensen Laboratories,
Loveland, Colo) (Figure 2-18). In multifragmentary fractures, it is often
difficult to restore length through direct distraction forces, and the distractor
is invaluable in these cases. Fixation pins are applied through both cortices,
then attached to the distractor with finger nuts. Wing nuts on a threaded rod
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
47
FIGURE 2-17.  Direct application of force on both bone fragments combined with the use
of levering.
A
C
FIGURE 2-18. Use of the fracture distractor to aid in reduction is particularly helpful in
femoral fractures in large-breed dogs. A, Fixation pins are placed through both cortices of the
proximal and distal fragments in locations that will cause minimal interference when fixation 
approach. Clockwise rotation of the wing nut will cause distraction of the fracture. B, As
length is regained, individual fragments can be reduced and held with bone-holding forceps.
C, When length is totally restored, it is possible to reduce the fracture completely and stabi-
If bone plate fixation is used, the plate can be molded and clamped to the bone before the
distractor is removed.
allow the fracture to be slowly distracted until the fragments can be secured
with bone-holding forceps, Kirschner wires, or cerclage wires. Definitive
fixation, usually a bone plate or external fixator, can be applied at this time.
Some angular deformity develops as distraction progresses, and this will need
to be reduced during application of the definitive fixation.
 7. Use of the Steinmann pin as a fracture distractor (Figure 2-19). This is a
  s i ee r a a  ae asis
humerus and femur. A Steinmann pin with a diameter of 50% of the
48
s, and Joint Disease
A
B
D
          
p 'ais aey aun ssooe Aisp uap pue ruu apeou au u paoed si ud
the pin is maneuvered into the medullary canal of the distal fragment. If the IM pin will not
be used for final fixation, the pin diameter can be smaller than usual. B, The distal fragment
is brought into axial alignment by bone-holding forceps and traction through the proximal
tibia while the stifle is flexed 90 degrees. The pin is driven distally by pressure without rota-
a si suaug sp a 'sdaoy suioq-uoq e susn suamey rexond au uo an
reduced. C, Bone-holding forceps are used to hold reduced fragments. D, If bone plate fixa-
tion is used, the plate is molded and clamped to the bone before the IM pin is removed.
medullary canal is introduced into the bone in either a normograde or
distal fragment. This is facilitated if the distal fragment is angulated to restore
axial alignment by means of a bone-holding forceps. While the proximal
fragment is secured with a bone-holding forceps to allow force to be
applied in a proximal direction, the pin is driven against the distal
metaphyseal area without any rotational drilling action, thus producing
distraction. Once adequate length is attained, the fragments are secured with
bone-holding forceps, Kirschner wires, cerclage wires, or a bone plate, and
the pin is withdrawn.
Note: Bone fragments must be handled with care because too much force may
result in additional fragmentation. In skeletally immature animals the bone is easily
crushed by bone-holding forceps.
IMMOBILIZATION (FIXATION)
 Immobilization involves fixing the bone fragments so that they are motionless with
respect to each other during the healing process. The objectives are to stabilize the
fragments and to prevent displacement, angulation, and rotation. Ideally, the
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
49
fixation method used should (1) accomplish uninterrupted stabilization at the time
of the original surgery, (2) permit early ambulation, and (3) permit the use of as
 many joints as possible during the healing period.
The peculiarities of each fracture will dictate or suggest the method of immobi-
lization to be employed. Some fractures lend themselves to a variety of methods.
whereas in other fractures the methods may be very limited for a successful
outcome.
Methods of Fixation
The methods of fixation may be classified as follows:
1. Limb splintage (coaptation splints, casts, modified Thomas splint)
 2. Bone splintage (intramedullary pin, external skeletal fixator, bone plate)
 3. Compression (lag screw, cerclage/interfragmentary wire, tension band wire,
tension band/compression plate)
Fixation by splinting stabilizes the bone either indirectly as with casts and splints
or directly as with pins, fixators, or bone plates that are attached to the bone. There
is a certain amount of motion at the fracture site because of the inherent flexibility
of these types of devices. The surgeon must ensure that the amount of motion at the
fracture site is still within the limits consistent with callus formation. Fixation by
compression utilizes interfragmentary friction produced by relatively small implants
to produce stability of the bone surfaces. The compression may be static in nature,
P  si  a   i   r a  e  s
to change with time. Dynamic compression, on the other hand, does change cycli-
cally with loading of the limb as limb function periodically loads and unloads the
bone surfaces. Functionally induced tension of the bone fragments is transformed
into compression forces by the tension band wire or plate.
Temporary Splintage
If for some reason there is a delay in reduction and fixation, temporary splintage
(e.g., Robert-Jones dressing, coaptation splint, Thomas splint) of the limb may be
indicated to reduce additional trauma. This is true particularly for fractures distal
to the elbow and stifle. In most other fractures, the animal is more comfortable sim-
ply with cage rest and mild sedation/analgesia. The objective in most fracture cases
is early reduction and fixation.
Coaptation Splints and Casts
Knowledge of internal fixation of fractures is highly advanced, with diverse fracture
fixation systems available to all veterinary surgeons; however, a definitive therapeutic
role remains for coaptation devices. We must not neglect the “art" of constructing a
 proper splint. Rigid materials such as fiberglass, plaster, and splint rod provide the
mechanical strength and stiffness required in external coaptation, but these may also
Sai sn au aamiq o u adod pan qul ps  ea
of bandages, splints, and casts, it is important to consider the somewhat conflicting
basic principles of orthopedic bandaging versus external coaptation. The challenge
is to balance a patient's needs for soft bandaging with the strict requirements for
bone splinting.
External casts, splints, and bandages are often called “coaptation fixation
Aq paysduoe si su 'eixodde on Suueau aideoo, prom au 4'sap
50
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
simply immobilizing muscles, as with a bandage, or by transmitting compression
forces to the bony structures by means of the interposed soft tissues, as with casts
 and splints. Such pressure must be uniformly distributed throughout the cast or
splint to avoid circulatory stasis and swelling.
Casts are generally considered to be molded tubular structures that, if removed,
would form a mold from which a casting of the limb could be made. A splint is
something less than a full cast and typically is molded only to one aspect of the limb.
 A wire frame structure such as the Schroeder-Thomas splint is a special case, using
soft bandage materials to suspend the limb within the wire frame.
As a general rule, molded casts and splints are more efficient stabilizers of the
bones and joints than premade ones or the Schroeder-Thomas splint, although
good use can be made of both latter methods. The advantage of molded devices
is that they custom-fit the animal perfectly and therefore cause fewer soft tissue
 problems and are better tolerated by the patient. For many years, plaster of Paris
was the only moldable material available, but many such materials have become
available. Of these, two types have proved especially useful, the thermomoldable
and the fiberglass/resin materials. X-Lite (AOA Kirschner Medical Corporation,
Marlow, Okla) and Vet-Lite (Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, Colo) are thermo-
moldable plastic materials, impregnated onto an open-mesh fabric. When heated to
160° to 170° F, the material becomes very soft and self-adherent and then hardens
within a few minutes as it cools to room temperature. It is available as precut splints
or rolls in 3-, 4-, and 6-inch widths. These materials are most useful in small animal
patients for making splints. Veterinary Thermoplastic (VTP) (IMEX Veterinary Inc.,
Longview, Texas) is similar in application but is a solid, homogenous material rather
than an open mesh; it is also available in rolls of varying widths. Because these mate-
rials are self-adherent, they can be made as stiff as necessary by adding layers to
effect.
Fiberglass materials have a resin-binding material impregnated into the roll of
knitted fiberglass tape. They are popular because of ease of application and rela-
tively few complications. The resin is activated by a 10- to 15-second immersion in
water of room temperature, after which the material cures and hardens within a few
- e ras aa pond su ssa aan onn  s
casts, although it can also be used for splints. Cast-cutting saws are essential for
removing cylinder casts. All these products are lightweight, strong, and waterproof.
 Because wider width material generally makes stronger casts, use the widest roll
consistent with the animal's size.18 To obtain maximal usefulness, use them with
 polypropylene or other synthetic stockinet and cast padding, both of which shed
water. Because these materials all "breathe" and do not retain water, there are few
soft tissue problems such as maceration of skin. Pressure sores are still possible
when casts are incorrectly applied, but even this problem occurs less frequently than
when cotton padding materials are used. Synthetic orthopedic felt used over bony
prominences will do much to reduce pressure sores. In general, the middle and
distal phalanges of the middle toes should be left exposed to monitor swelling.
 (aa sd oi u  o si  a s a 
create two half-shells and to facilitate future cast changes. The two halves are
secured to each other with non-elastic adhesive tape.
Owners should be instructed to observe the protruding toes twice daily, looking
for signs that the toenails are spreading apart. Such a sign indicates swelling and
requires that the cast be removed immediately to prevent pressure necrosis.
Reapplication of the cast with less pressure can follow immediately, or the limb can be
placed in a Robert-Jones bandage for a few days to allow swelling to be resorbed. The
animal should be kept indoors to minimize damage to the external fixation device.
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
51
 d           s
 or similar impervious material should be temporarily placed over the foot to keep
the cast/splint or bandage material clean and dry. An electric hair dryer can be
applied to hasten drying in case the cast becomes wet. The owner should be
instructed to have the device checked regularly at 7- to 10-day intervals or at
any sign of foul odor, drainage, loosening, chafing, instability, or obsessive licking
 or chewing on the appliance. Such signs are indications for removal of the device
and evaluation of the soft tissues, with appropriate treatment. Reapplication of
the cast/splint may require some revision to prevent recurrence of the problem.
 The thermomoldable materials are reheated and reapplied as originally. Do not
remove a cast or splint simply because a certain amount of time has elapsed and
you are curious to see the soft tissues; if the animal is tolerating the device well and
it is still functional, it should be left undisturbed until the appropriate time for
removal.
Because of the pain created by manipulating broken bones and the muscular
relaxation needed for most reductions, general anesthesia is almost always indicated
when applying these devices.
Indications for Coaptation
Consider the forces acting on the bone and how well the proposed immobilization
will neutralize them: angulation or bending, rotation (shear), shortening or overrid-
ing (shear), and distraction. The following indications generally fall within the range
of casts and splints:
1. Closed fracture below elbow or stifle. In Figure 2-20, a', b', c', and d' indicate
the length of cast/splint needed for fractures in zones a, b, c, and d.
 2. Fractures amenable to closed reduction, as previously discussed.
 3. Fractures in which the bone will be stable after reduction relative to shortening
 or distraction; classified above as type A or B fractures (see Table 2-1).
 ieu ya ai p oi axa aq  auoq au ym u s t
disease).
 5. Specific indications follow:
· Greenstick fractures.
● Long-bone fractures in young animals in whom the periosteal sleeve is
mostly intact.
· Impaction fractures.
Long-Leg Cylinder Cast 
(-7 ai) uoe ro exe ai oi sat a o spuxa ieui auo si se sal-uo 
Plaster of Paris or fiberglass/resin tape are the most commonly used materials.
A variety of casting tapes made of knitted fiberglass substrate and impregnated with
various resins are now available and utilized in much the same manner as plaster of
Paris. These products are strong, lightweight, waterproof, and porous but cannot be
 e   q  s as d s d s p
oscillating saw whether they are made of plaster of Paris or fiberglass.
The cast can be bivalved after it has hardened for ease of inspection and redress-
ing. To prevent the padding from sticking to the resin, it is covered with a sheet of
thin polyethylene film (as used for food storage) while the cast material is applied.
After hardening of the resin, the cast-cutter saw is used to split the cast into halves
along either the sagittal or the frontal plane. The plastic film is removed after sepa-
rating the two halves, which are then reapplied and held together with nonelastic
white tape. Future cast changes are accomplished by cutting the tape, removing the
52
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
D
FIGURE 2-20. Optimal splint or cast length for fractures in the dark-shaded areas are
shown by the length of the light-shaded areas.
half shells, repadding the limb, and reapplying the half shells. Care must be taken
suaad oi Aunio pasn sem se buped jo adi pue zunoe aues aun Aidde o1
tither undue pressure or looseness when the cast is reapplied.
Indications.
 Immobilization of the elbow and stifle, the radius and ulna, and
the tibia and fibula.
Short-Leg Cylinder Cast
A shor-leg cast extends only to the proximal tibia or radius (Figure 2-22). The
elbow and stifle joints are free to move normally. The casts must be distal enough
(1-2 inches below the humeral epicondyle or tibial tubercle) so that there is no
binding during flexion/extension. Limb swelling under a cast may lead to disastrous
sequelae.
 Indications. Immobilization of the carpus and metacarpus and the tarsus and
 metatarsus. As a general rule, short-leg casts are used primarily in large, active ani-
 mals to provide more stabilization than short-leg splints.
Spica Splint—Foreleg
Although this splint can be constructed with wood, rigid plastics, or aluminum,
the molded splint is better tolerated and gives better immobilization (Figure 2-23).
The spica splint is named for the method of attaching it to the body by a “spica"
-a e y Ao aq on ao si aeq a op a u eq (a-r-a)
of-8. It can be applied to the hip, but bandaging in this region is very difficult,
especially in the male dog, and ambulation is awkward.
Indications. Immobilization of the shoulder, humerus, and elbow.
A
B
D
E
F
    n         
Application here is to the forelimb with fiberglass material. A, Adhesive tape stirrups are
 applied to the lower limb and extend several inches beyond the toes. B, Polypropylene stock-
inet is applied to the limb. The material should be long enough to extend distally beyond the
toes and well into the axilla proximally. C, Two or three layers of polypropylene cast padding
are applied to the limb starting at the toes and proceeding proximally. D, After the fiberglass
tape is immersed in water at room temperature for 12 to 15 seconds and gently squeezed of
excess water, the roll of fiberglass is spiraled onto the limb; rubber or vinyl (as recommended
by the manufacturer) gloves are used to protect the hands. This material should be rolled on
smoothly using even pressure, which is facilitated by rolling continuously around the limb in
a spiral fashion and not raising the roll away from the skin. Two layers of cast material are
produced by overlapping the spirals by half the width of the roll. The distal end of the cast
should be at the level of the base of the distal phalanx of the middle toes. E, A longitudinal
splint is applied to both the medial and lateral sides. This material is cut from the roll and
applied over the spiraled material. Mechanical testing has revealed that these splints ad more 
applied over the splints, resulting in four spiraled layers plus the medial and lateral splints.
Very large breeds may require six layers.
Continued
54
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
G
 FIGURE 2-21. Continued G, Hand lotion or lubricating jelly is used to treat the gloves to
lotion. H, After use of the lotion or jelly on the gloves, it is possible to smooth the fiberglass 
and conform it to the limb. The material begins to harden in 4 to 5 minutes under average
temperature conditions. I, After hardening of the fiberglass, the ends of the cast are
 dressed by folding the stockinet over the end of the fiberglass. At the distal end, the tape
 initially applied to the skin is folded over the end of the cast. This tape and the stockinet are
secured with circular wraps of tape. The proximal end of the cast is similarly taped.
 J, The completed cast. Note that both the elbow and the carpus have been maintained in
moderate flexion.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
55
FIGURE 2-22. Short-leg cylinder cast is made
in the same manner as the long-leg cast but does
 not cover the elbow or the stifle. In this case the
cast has been applied to the forelimb and ends
just distal to the elbow joint, leaving the two
 middle toenails exposed for daily monitoring.
To ease redressing, after hardening, the cast
may be cut mediolaterally or craniocaudally
(bivalving) and retaped.
A
B
FIGURE 2-23.S
 Spica splint for the foreleg. A, Precut X-Lite splints are laid over the limb,
and the area of overlap is noted. Veterinary Thermoplastic can be applied in one piece, since
it comes in long rolls. Three to six thicknesses are used, depending on the size of the animal
and the degree of rigidity required. B, The limb has been padded with two or three layers of
polypropylene cast padding to the axilla, and sheet cotton is placed over the proximal
humerus, shoulder joint, and scapula. This padding should extend dorsally to the midline.
Continued
5G
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
D
F
    a   aa ss  a   ' 
170° F and are being placed over the lower limb, then molded by hand. D, Conforming gauze
is used to hold the softened splint material against the limb while it hardens. The proximal
end of the splint is left exposed for attachment to the upper splints. E, The upper splints have 
been heated and are placed over the shoulder and onto the more distal splints. The material
will adhere to itself and form a continuous splint. These splints are then molded by hand to
conform to the limb. F, Conforming gauze has been rolled proximally to the axilla to com-
 plete molding of the proximal splints. The upper end of these proximal splints can be molded
over the shoulder by hand pressure until sufficiently cooled to harden.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
57
G
H
FGURE 2-23. Continued G, Conforming gauze is used to attach the splint to the chest
wall. This gauze creates a half figure-of-8 around the splinted limb but is carried behind the
opposite axilla. H, Bandaging has been completed. I, The bandage is covered with wide
elastic tape, applied in a pattern similar to that of the gauze. If short-term immobilization is
contemplated, white tape can be substituted. J, Bandaging has been completed.
58
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Long Lateral Splint
This splint is shorter than a spica splint, but otherwise the long lateral splint is
constructed and attached similarly from the axilla or groin distally (Figure 2-24).
Indications.  Immobilization of the elbow and stifle joints.
Schroeder-Thomas Splint
This versatile splint has been widely used for immobilization of fractures
(Figure 2-25). Considerable artistry is required to construct a functional, well-
tolerated, and effective Schroeder-Thomas splint. Widely used in the past,19 it has
been largely superseded by molded splints and casts. Nevertheless, it remains useful
for those versed in its application.
Indications. Immobilization of the elbow, stifle, carpus, and tarsus; the radius
and ulna; and the tibia and fibula. The Schroeder-Thomas splint may be the most
effective device for immobilization of the stifle joint at a functional angle. Care must
be taken to keep the splint as short as possible to allow active weight bearing; this
is accomplished by placing all joints at functional (standing) angles.
Short Lateral Splint—Hindleg
Although this type of molded splint (Figure 2-26) can be applied to any surface of
the lower hindlimb, the lateral surface has resulted in fewer soft tissue injuries.
Indications.  Immobilization of the tarsus and metatarsus.
Short Caudal Splint—Foreleg
This splint (Figure 2-27) replaces the preformed rigid plastic and metal “spoon"
splints in wide use. Such splints are not suitable for long-term use because of the
incidence of soft tissue problems and poor immobilization. The only way a curved
limb can be put in a straight premolded splint is with copious padding, and this
destroys rigid immobilization. A properly made molded splint can often be left on
for 6 weeks with no soft tissue problems.
Indications. Immobilization of the carpus and metacarpus.
 Phalangeal Splint 
 This bivalved splint (Figure 2-28) is designed to protect the toes while leaving the
 antebrachiocarpal or tarsocrural joints free to move normally.
Velpeau Sling
This bandage is generally well tolerated by most animals (Figure 2-29). In addition
to its main use for shoulder and scapular injuries, the Velpeau sling can serve as
a substitute for hard casts or splints when the objective is simply to prevent
weight bearing of the foreleg, although the carpal flexion bandage is much easier
to apply.
Carpal Flexion Bandage
The flexion bandage is intended solely to discourage weight bearing while maintaining
passive motion of the shoulder and elbow joints. It is useful after lateral shoulder lux-
ation, supraspinatus, and biceps brachii surgery. The carpus is less than fully flexed
while two or three layers of wide white tape are applied from the distal third of the
radius/ulna to the metacarpal region. Narrower tape is used in the middle to keep
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
59
B
FIGURE 2-24. Long lateral splint applied to the hindlimb. A, The lower limb is padded
with two or three layers of polypropylene cast padding to the level of the stifle, and sheet cot-
ton is applied from the stifle to the level of the hip joint. The cast padding overlaps the lower
end of the sheet cotton to help fix it in place. B, Overlapping precut X-Lite splints or full-
length Veterinary Thermoplastic splints are applied proximally and distally, with three to six
thicknesses, depending on the size of the animal and the rigidity required. The splints will
stick together where they overlap, and the splints are initially molded by hand to conform to
the limb. C, The softened splints are covered with conforming gauze bandage to hold the
splints conformed to the limb while they harden. D, After hardening, the splint material is 
 covered with wide elastic tape to complete the splint.
60
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
FIGURE 2-25. Fabrication of modified Thomas splint. A, After the diameter of the thigh is
approximated, B, the aluminum alloy rod is bent, forming 1'/2 circles. C, The lower half of
the ring is bent at a 45-degree angle to accommodate the thickness of the thigh and to avoid
femoral vessel pressure; foam, cotton, or cast padding is added, followed by gauze and tape.
0 uaq is si ieq ineo aun uoan luun aun u dn Ay paqsnd uds aui y 'a
approximate the length of the leg with the limb in normal standing angulation and the toes
flexed to simulate standing. Next, the cranial rod is bent to approximate normal angulation of
the limb, with the toes flexed to simulate standing. The distal ends of the bars are then taped
securely together. E, Splint is again pushed firmly up in the inguinal region; foot is anchored
with adhesive tape. F, If a dog weighs more than 25 pounds, a walking bar (f) is applied.
A layer of cotton is placed around the upper leg, then both are anchored as one to the cranial
bar with a layer of gauze and tape. Anchoring the tape to the bar in the inguinal area holds
the padding for the thigh in place; otherwise, it slips distally and serves no useful purpose.
G, The forelimb splint is reversed from the hindlimb to accommodate the normal joint angles.
the bandage from slipping off the leg. Although usually well tolerated when applied
as illustrated in Figure 2-30, some animals will develop skin irritation on the cranial
surface of the antebrachium and must have cast padding applied between the skin
and tape.
EhmerSling
 Primarily used to partially immobilize and stabilize the hip joint (Figure 2-31), this
bandage can also be used to prevent weight bearing of any joint of the hindlimb.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
61
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 2-26. Short lateral splint for the hindleg. A, The limb is padded with two or three
layers of polypropylene cast padding to the level of the tibial tubercle. A small piece of
orthopedic felt is placed on the tuber calcis and is secured by the cast padding. Additional
thicknesses of cast padding can be substituted. B, Four to six thicknesses of precut X-Lite
splints or full-length Veterinary Thermoplastic splints are placed on the lateral side of
the limb. The distal end of the splint extends to the level of the base of the distal phalanx
of the middle toes. C, The splint is molded to the standing angle of the hock while the mate-
rial is placed laterally to slightly dorsolaterally on the hock region. If the splint material
extends more than 1 80 degrees around the limb, it should be trimmed. D, The splint is held
in position by a conforming gauze bandage while the material hardens. E, The splint is
completed by covering it with elastic tape.
62
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 2-27. Short caudal splint for the foreleg. A, The dog is positioned in dorsal
recumbency to expose the caudal surface of the lower limb, which is padded with two or
thre layers of polypropylene cast padding. B, Three to six precut X-Lite splints or full-length
Veterinary Thermoplastic splints are heated and applied to the caudal surface of the limb.
If the splint material extends more than 180 degrees around the limb, it should be trimmed.
C, The splints are conformed to the limb with the desired degree of carpal flexion. The
distal end of the splint should extend to the level of the base of the distal phalanx of the
middle toes. D, The softened splints are held in position by a conforming gauze bandage.
This bandage material must not be rolled too tightly, for it will create soft-tissue pressure
sores along the edge of the splint. E, After the splint hardens, it is completed by covering with
conforming tape.
The ASPCA sling is probably better tolerated than the Ehmer sling when prevention
of weight bearing is the primary objective.
ASPCASling
This sling is very effective in preventing weight bearing on the hindlimb while still
s    ai s as e d ai o  asd e
 is better tolerated and has fewer complications than the Ehmer sling.20
Robert-JonesBandage
This highly padded bandage is very versatile, being useful not only in immobi-
lization distal to the elbow or stifle but also in decreasing or preventing edema
(Figure 2-33). It is well tolerated, but because of the large volume of cotton, it can
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
G3
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 2-28. Phalangeal splint applied to the front foot. On the hindfoot, the splint
extends proximally to the level of the distal tarsal bones. A, Adhesive tape is attached to the
medial and lateral surfaces of the paw. B, The paw and lower limb are covered with three or
four layers of polypropylene cast padding to a point just proximal to the carpus. C, Two or
three thicknesses of precut X-Lite splints or full-length Veterinary Thermoplastic splints are
heated to soften them. The middle portion is then crimped on each edge to make the splints
slightly narrower at this point and to create extra thickness at the end of the splint. D, The
soft splint material is applied on the dorsal and palmar sides of the foot with the splint
material folded over the toes. There should be room to insert a finger between the toes
and the end of the splint. The splint is conformed by hand pressure while the material cools
and hardens. E, The splint is covered with elastic tape. A portion of the proximal end of the
palmar portion of the splint is trimmed when necessary to avoid pressure caused by flexion
of the carpus. Wire-cutting scissors can be used for this trimming. F, Elastic tape is applied
Over the splint and proximally to the end of the padding.
G4
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 2-29. Velpeau sling bandage used to immobilize the shoulder region.
A, Conforming gauze bandage material is wrapped loosely around the paw in a lateral-
to-medial direction. B, With the carpus, elbow, and shoulder all fexed, the gauze is
brought from the paw over the lateral aspect of the limb and shoulder, over the chest,
and behind the opposite axilla. It then continues under the chest, back to the starting point.
C, Several more layers of gauze are applied in a similar manner, and a few layers are
Pnoo uoisuaixa yons moqle aul jo uoisuaixa uaaaid oi sndieo paxa aui punoue uanoig
force the lower limb out of the bandage. D, Gauze bandaging is completed. E, Wide
au uo  'uodde azg aui oi ruis uanid e u azne aui raao on pasn si aden susa
 opposite side of the animal, both gauze and adhesive tape are brought behind the opposite
axilla.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
65
A
B
D
FIGURE 2-30. Carpal flexion bandage. A, A strip of 1-inch white tape is preplaced along
the palmar surface of the carpus to facilitate wrapping around the encircling tape later. B, The
carpus is flexed while 2-inch white tape encircles the distal radius and ulna and the
metacarpal region. C, The preplaced narrow tape is wrapped around the middle area of both
sides of the encircling tape to prevent the tape from slipping over the carpus. D, Another
method involves covering the lower limb with padding and tape, then flexing the carpus with
several thicknesses of tape from the dorsal surface of the toes to the proximal antebrachium.
E, The entire bandage is covered with tape.
absorb considerable quantities of water and cause maceration of skin or contami-
nation of surgical incisions. The Robert-Jones bandage is generally used only for
am e e aq p q u ar l u n-r
 frame or molded splints to the bandage. Coat hangers (for very small animals) or
aluminum rods can be bent to conform to joint angles and can be applied cranially,
caudally, or laterally depending on the support desired.
PaddedBandage
roj padde si aepueq papped e iedan anoen pue Araans suiol raue uao
additional support. It is applied similar to a Robert-Jones dressing, except that less 
 padding and less compression can be applied to the outer wraps.
66
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
C
    o       
placing some padding on the plantar surface of the metatarsus. B, Conforming roller
gauze bandage is wrapped around the metatarsus (1) from lateral to medial, being sure to
include most of the metatarsal pad. After several wraps to secure it, the gauze is carried
medial to the flexed stifle (2) and over the cranial surface of the thigh. This internally
rotates the limb at the hip joint. Finally (3) the gauze is brought medial to the tibia and
tarsus and over the plantar surface of the tarsus. Several more circuits are made in the
same manner. C, The gauze is continued in a figure-of-8 fashion around the flexed hock
and paw to secure it. The entire bandage is then covered with elastic adhesive tape that over-
hangs the gauze to anchor the sling to the hair. Although some construct the bandage with-
out any gauze by starting with adhesive tape applied to the skin, this invariably leads to
considerable skin irritation on the cranial thigh region as well as the difficulty of removing
the large amount of tape. D, It is difficult to keep the sling from slipping down over the
stifle on short-legged breeds. One solution is to attach wide adhesive tape to the paw area of
aul punoie pue (7) yoeq ui iaao piemdn adei aui kueo uaui "(i) sus paiadwoo au
belly (3). This is simple in the bitch or cat, but care must be taken to avoid the sheath in the
male dog.
General Considerations
When a coaptation splint or cast is used, the following factors should be
considered:
Padding.
. If closed reduction is used, the hair is usually not clipped. A light
padding (cast padding, stockinet, cotton, sheet wadding, felt) should be applied
d q n  si d  s  n nd 
(e.g., accessory carpal pad, tuber calcis, olecranon process, dewclaw). This is best
as ae aue ao seare passardap aue u uped pasraru Aq pausdoie
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
67
A
B
FIGURE 2-32. ASPCA (Robinson) off-weight-bearing sling.20 A, Six to 8 feet of 2-inch
white tape is folded at the center and the adhesive sides pressed together. This double-
thickness tape is secured to the tarsus by wrapping with 1-inch tape. A belly wrap of
S yo y a 'ai aise p ym d aq au on ps si p as as
section is adjusted to shorten the limb just enough to prevent weight bearing. C, The outer
section of double-thickness tape is passed lateral to the stifle and secured to the belly band.
The double-thickness tape is stabilized by a wrap of tape approximately halfway between the
hock and stifle joints.
and less padding over the prominences. Avoid overpadding because it may allow
 ro sds uidoo a aisi sha aq go so
Fixation.  Anchor the cast/splint in place to avoid shifting on the limb. This is
particularly applicable if the leg is swollen when the cast is applied. This may be
accomplished with use of adhesive tape and by molding the cast to the contour of
the limb.
Radiographs.(
 Check reduction radiographically before and after application
 and again in several days.
Extent.
 Distally, the toes may be covered, or preferably the center two digital
 pads may be exposed.
PatientTolerance.
Usually, coaptation splints are reasonably well tolerated
by the animal, if they are accomplishing their purpose, if the cast is kept dry,
68
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 2-33. Robert-Jones bandage. Application of the cotton for this heavily padded
bandage is simplified by splitting a 1-pound roll of cotton into two narrower I/2-pound rolls.
A, Adhesive tape stirrups have been applied to the lower limb and are used for traction while 
rua ro exe au oui aissod se yau e pno si adi a xond aeds si uono
B, Half to 2 pounds of cotton are necessary to complete the padding, depending on the size
of the animal. C, Vetrap (3M Animal Care Products, St. Paul, Minn) is used to compress the
cotton. The tape applied to the limb is folded back and incorporated into the 4-inch-wide
Vetrap. The first layer of Vetrap is used to conform and compress the cotton, and the second
layer is used to further compress and firm the cotton padding. D, Adhesive tape is used to
 secure the end of the Vetrap. E, Additional stability can be obtained by bending an aluminum
splint rod to conform to the Robert-Jones bandage. F, The splint rod is attached to the
Robert-Jones bandage with nonelastic tape. X-Lite or Veterinary Thermoplastic splints can
also be used to stiffen the bandage by molding one or more layers over the lateral side in place
of the aluminum rod.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
69
and if activity is limited. Indications of a complication include pain, elevation of
temperature, swelling, edema, numbness, foul odor, cyanosis of digits, loss of
appetite, systemic depression, irritated areas, and chewing on the cast.
EXTERNAL SKELETAL FIXATION*
Use of the external fixator for immobilization of long-bone fractures requires
transcutaneous insertion of two to four pins in each of the proximal and distal
bone fragments, which are then connected by one or more external bars or rods
 ai si se a a iz'(t pe    sm a)
as a splint or a frame, whereas the bone and attached frame are called a construct
or montage. Fixators can be used on all the long bones, on the mandible, and for
 bridging joints but are not adaptable to most intraarticular fractures.
Indications or Uses221-36
The external fixator is adaptable to the following:
1. Stable and unstable fractures
2. Open fractures 
3. Gunshot fractures
4.Osteotomies
5. Delayed unions and nonunions
 6. Arthrodesis of certain joints
7. Stabilization of certain joints after ligament or tendon reconstruction
 The advantages of the external fixator include (1) ease of application; (2) its use-
fulness in treating fractures reduced by either open or closed methods; (3) if applied
in connection with an open approach, minimization of the approach; (4) fixation
pins that can usually be inserted some distance from an open wound; (5) an open
wound is readily accessible for dressing; (6) its compatibility for use in conjunction
with other internal fixation devices; (7) tolerance by both dogs and cats; (8) in
most cases, removal without placing the animal under general anesthesia; and
(9) reasonable cost.
Components of External Fixator
An amazing variety of fixators are available throughout the world, most developed
for human use. Because of their size and cost, most are not practical for veterinary
 use, although some are adaptable, especially those designed for hand or forearm use
in humans. In North America the traditional devices commercially available (IMEX
Veterinary, Longview, Texas; Osteo-Technology International Inc., Hunt Valley, Md;
Gauthier Medical, Rochester, Minn; Securos, Charlton, Mass) are based on the
Kirschner-Ehmer adaption of the Roger Anderson splint.22 The earlier Stader
 aae ane sa re od s aae ou p se
various manufacturers in Europe. The clamps used in these fixators are rather sim-
ple in design, and although they have some inherent deficiencies relative to stability.
they still function adequately if properly applied, and they provide a relatively
*The authors gratefully acknowledge the comtributions of a colleague, Dr. Erick Egger, to this section.
70
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
economical method of stabilizing a wide variety of fractures. Unless otherwise
noted, all frames depicted in this text are of the Kirschner-Ehmer variety.
Fixation Pins
Most fixator frames are fastened to the bone by stainless steel fixation pins
that must penetrate both first and second cortices. If the fixation pin penetrates
only one skin surface and two bone cortices, it is called a balf pin, and it is the only
pin used in type I frames (Figure 2-34, A and B). Those pins that penetrate two skin
surfaces and two bone cortices are called full pins and are the basis of type II frames.
A minimum of two pins is required in each major bone fragment to ensure stability,
n o  s  a sd a  r o a 
considerations). These pins may be smooth, partially threaded, or fully threaded in
 design; the latter are not widely used because of their lack of stiffness. Smooth pins
are typically Steinmann pins of the appropriate diameter cut to length after inser-
tion into the bone. Partially threaded pins are either end-threaded or center-threaded
pins. Threads can be cut from the stock of the pin (negative-thread-profile pins) or
can be built up (raised-thread, enhanced-thread, or positive-thread-profile pins) to
a larger diameter than the pin shaft (Figure 2-34, C). Negative-thread-profile pins
usually have a fine thread, that is, a relatively high number of threads per unit of
length, and are designed for cortical bone insertion. Positive-thread-profile pins are
o a pea d ra s e pe pe i a oq u a
insertion into cancellous bone, such as found in the metaphyses of long bones.
Typically, a mixture of threaded and smooth pins is used in most frames. Kirschner-
s un ( o'h) y s on dn s ud jo as an moe s r
clamps, to 1s inch (3.2 mm) in medium clamps, and to 3%6 inch (4.8 mm) in large
-sd n s yo un a u io o u s
profile-threaded pins is that the threads of these pins will not slide through
Kirschner-Ehmer clamps, so they must always be inserted into the clamps from the
unthreaded end unless oversized clamps are used. Two relatively new systems
(Secur-U, Securos, Charlton, Mass; IMEX-SK, IMEX Veterinary, Longview, Texas)
use clamps that accept positive-profile-threaded pins and allow attachment to the
connecting bar between previously installed pins.
 Miniature positive-profile end-threaded pins are available with a roughed
central area of the pin shank to allow greater purchase of acrylic connecting bars
(Figure 2-34, D). These pins have a cortical thread (IMEX Veterinary, Longview,
Texas) and have shank sizes ranging from 0.35 inch (0.9 mm) to 3/32 inch (2.4 mm).
Miniature positive-profile-threaded pins are very useful for tiny mandible and long-
bone fractures.
Connecting Bars
 The connecting bar, or rod, functions to connect the fixation pin clusters attached
-s oa saond  aaoq a a s aoq a 
ity to allow the bone to heal while maintaining functional use of the limb. The bars
used for Kirschner-Ehmer clamps are typically solid stainless steel rods with a diam-
eter between 1% and 1/4 inch (3.2 and 6.5 mm) (Figure 2-34, E). Traditionally, the
connecting rod has been used only as a straight rod, but as illustrated later, in many
cases it is useful to contour the rod. Although hollow rods are more rigid, they
cannot be contoured, and their cost makes them impractical for veterinary use.
Mechanical stiffness of the connecting bar affects axial loads at the fracture site and
shear loads on the fixation pins (see Biomechanical Considerations). One fixation sys-
tem (IMEX-SK) uses larger connecting rods of increased stiffness (Figure 2-34, G)
The SK system is available in three sizes.37 The small SK connecting rod is 1/4 inch
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
71
C
FIGURE 2-34.1
External fixator components (IMEX Veterinary, Longview, Texas).
A, Fixation half pins with positive thread profile in large (2h6 inch; 4.8 mm), medium
(/s inch; 3.2 mm), and small (<%4 inch; 2.0 mm) diameters. The upper three pins have cortical
threads and the lower three pins have cancellous threads. B, Ellis pins are partially threaded
pins with negative cortical thread profile. The threads penetrate the second cortex, and the
smooth part of the pin rests in the first cortex. C, Fixation full pins with positive thread
profile in large (%6 inch; 4.8 mm), medium (/& inch; 3.2 mm), and small (§%4 inch; 2.0 mm)
diameters. The upper three pins have cortical threads, and the lower three pins have cancel-
lous threads.
Continued
72
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
口
E
F
FIGURE 2-34. Contimued D, Miniature positive-profile end-threaded pins with a roughed
central area of the pin shank to allow greater purchase of acrylic connecting bars. These pins
have a cortical thread and have shank sizes ranging from 0.35 inch (0.9 mm) to 3h2 inch
(2.4 mm). E, Kirschner-Ehmer double and single clamps. F, The Secur-U external fixation
clamp (Securos, Charlton, Mass) may be applied to connecting bars between two previously
installed clamps and allows installation of enhanced-thread pins at any location.
(6.3 mm) in diameter and available in carbon fiber or titanium. The larger SK
connecting rod is 3/s inch (9.5 mm) in diameter and available in carbon fiber or alu-
 minum. The mini-SK system is designed for use with the small stainless steel
connecting rods (3.2 mm) of the Kirschner-Ehmer system. The use of carbon fiber,
titanium, and aluminum allows for increased diameter and stiffness without
e o  n  q a  n s
    e  o  q  o s 
fixation pin clusters. This method is particularly applicable to bones such as
the mandible and maxilla, as well as in transarticular applications, where it can be
difficult to drive all the fixation pins in the same plane.24
Clamps
 Traditional external fixator clamps are designed as part of the Kirschner-Ehmer
u aqeiu ane pue req soauuoo pue ud uoxy au da sup auis aisss
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
73
G
FIGURE 2-34. Continued G, The SK clamp (IMEX Veterinary) is a split clamp, which
allows the addition of clamps between two previously installed clamps. The SK clamp accom-
modates a wide range of fixation pin diameters and allows the passage of enhanced-thread
pins directly through the clamp bolt. The SK system uses larger connecting rods of increased
stiffness made of titanium, aluminum, or carbon fiber. Carbon fiber is illustrated here. H, The
original Kirschner-Ehmer splint utilizing both double and single clamps.
two axes: that of the fixation pin and that of the bolt. Single clamps are the only
clamps required for one-plane frames (see following discussion). Where two con-
necting bars need to be connected to each other, double clamps are used, in which
two clamps rotate around the bolt axis (Figure 2-34, H). The design of the double
clamp allows construction of multiplane frames, and these clamps are integral to the
type IA double-clamp frame, the basic design used by Ehmer.22 Because they are not
inherently as “stiff" (resistant to deformation when subjected to loading) as single
clamps, double clamps have been relegated to an ancillary role in fracture fixation.
However, they are still useful in fixation of corrective osteotomies in young dogs, in
which bone healing is vigorous and the need for long-lasting stability is only mod-
erate. The use of two connecting bars between the pin clusters significantly stiffens 
type IA double-clamp frames.
74
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 Two clamp designs have become available that offer distinct improvements
(   a    r  
         sa  p 
to connecting bars between two previously installed clamps and allows instal-
lation of enhanced-thread pins at any location. Secur-U clamps are available in
small and medium sizes and are attached to traditional stainless steel connecting
rods, 1/s inch (3.2 mm) and 316 inch (4.8 mm), respectively. The small Secur-U clamp
can accommodate fixation pins with a shaft diameter of 1/6 inch (1.6 mm) or
3/32 inch (2.3 mm). The large Secur-U clamp can accommodate fixation pins with
a shaft diameter of 3s2 inch (2.3 mm) or 1s inch (3.2 mm). Secur-U clamps have
been shown to be more resistant to pin-clamp slippage compared with the tradi-
tional Kirschner-Ehmer clamp, and type II frames constructed with Secur-U clamps
are 1.64 times more rigid in axial compression than the standard Kirschner-Ehmer
system.38,39
The IMEX-SK system (IMEX Veterinary, Longview, Texas) is also a relatively
new system of both connecting bars and pin-gripping clamps. The SK clamp (see
Figure 2-34, G) is a split clamp, which allows the addition of clamps between two
-e  d s a  nx ixa   s  
 modate a wider range of fixation pin diameters and allows the passage of enhanced-
thread pins (except cancellous center threaded) directly through the clamp bolt.
Therefore, placement of enhanced-thread pins at multiple sites is much easier than
the traditional Kirschner-Ehmer system. The SK system is available in three sizes:
small, large, and mini. The small SK system is designed to be used in cases in which
a small or medium Kirschner-Ehmer fixator would have been used. The large SK sys-
tem should be used in cases in which a medium or large Kirschner-Ehmer fixator
would have been appropriate. The mini SK system is designed for the smallest
-s an ym o  pas aq n s  a y s a s
dard stainless steel connecting bars because of size variation, except for the mini SK
system. The small SK clamp can accommodate fixation pins ranging from 3/32 inch
(2.3 mm) to */32 inch (4.0 mm) in diameter. The large SK clamp can accommodate
a aap u (u 8't) yu 9 oi (u z'e) you s/, o suui sud uoex
mini SK clamp accommodates fixation pins from 0.035 inch (0.9 mm) to 3/32 inch
(2.5 mm) in diameter.
Classification of Frame Configurations
 For many years the various types of frames were described and named in a variety
 Of ways. Gradually, however, some uniformity of nomenclature has been emerging,
which is necessary for easy communication. It is probably naive to believe that
everyone will agree on a single system, so here we use the two most common
n, san ae sissnsp s u pasn s ot ao  aqsap se sa
 ao a  d  ro   n rn l,  
two skin surfaces, and the term "plane" refers to the projected plane formed by the
fixation pin clusters.
Type WUnilateraf (Figure 2-35, A and B)
Although type I splints can be used in either one or two planes, perhaps the most
widely used frame is the type I/unilateral half-pin splint, which is applicable to all
long bones. Such a splint can be further described using either the alphanumeric
descriptor "IA" or the adjectival form “one plane." Further description requires the
 ro s go ad au ads on ,as, o anop, sae ae yo a
of connecting bars.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
75
FIGURE 2-35. Classification of external fixator frame configurations. A, Type IA/one plane
             
bilateral two planes. E, Ring fixator, showing complete and partial rings.
IA/One Plane
 Three subtypes of frames are included within this group, as follows:
Double Clamp (see Figure 2-47). This was the original veterinary device,
commonly referred to simply as the "Kirschner-Ehmer pin splint."
 ae s as o e sse si  a t a as a 
for attaching the fixation pins to the connecting bar in the single-bar frame. This
form is widely applicable and is responsible for the renewed interest in the external
fixator stimulated by Brinker and others in the 1970s.23
Double Bar (see Figure 2-43, E). As with the single-bar frame, the use of only
 single clamps is assumed in the double-bar frame design.
IB/Two Plane (see Figures 2-35, B, and 2-45, B)
This frame is simply two type IA single-clamp frames applied at an angle of 60 to
90 degrees to each other. Interconnecting the connecting bars increases torsional
76
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
rigidity and decreases pin loosening. The number and geometry of interconnecting
bars affect gap strain (rigidity) at the fracture site, as discussed in the section on
biomechanical considerations.
Type I/Bilateral One Plane (Figure 2-35, C)
Because they utilize full pins, these frames are applicable only to the lower limbs.
distal to the elbow or stifle. They are particularly suitable for closed reduction and
stabilization of radial and tibial fractures. Various combinations of full and half pins
are used in these frames.
IIA/Full Pins (see Figure 2-44, F)
Widely applied to tibial fractures in human patients, there are some technical prob-
lems in driving all the pins in the same plane to allow attachment to the connecting
rods, as described in the later section on fundamentals of application. These frames
are very versatile and useful not only in fractures of the lower limbs but also in
transarticular fixation of lower limb joints.
IB/Full and Half Pins (see Figure 2-44, B)
The problem of driving more than two full pins in the same plane is eliminated
in this design, at the price of a slight loss in stiffness compared with the full-pin
frame.
Iype Mll/Bilateral Two Plane (see Figures 2-35, D, and 2-46)
 a s i s pe p is a se m se iss a 
used only in situations of extreme instability of the fracture and when slow healing
aq oe o i iq 'ne d a a s l 'e s
adapted to the radius.
Ring (Figure 2-35, E)
Unlike other frames that depend on stiff fixation pins for stability at the
bone-pin interface,the ring fixator pioneered by Ilizarov841 utilizes small-diameter,
flexible Kirschner wires as fixation pins. Stiffness of these pins is created by
 placing them under tension as they are attached to the rings. By use of threaded
connecting rods, the rings can be adjusted to align the bone fragments and to
 provide either compression or tension on the fragments. Their primary veterinary
application is in corrective osteotomy for angular deformity or limb lengthening
 (see Chapter 23), although ring fixators have also been described for fracture repair
and arthrodesis.42.43
Biomechanical Considerations (see Figures 2-42, 2-43,
and 2-44)
An approximation of the strength, or stiffness, of fixator frames is suggested by the
numbers of the classification system, with "I" being the weakest and "II" being the
strongest. Matching the required fixator strength to the clinical situation is partly
art and partly science. The art portion is only acquired by experience, but the
science can be explained and studied. In general, fractures that are expected to heal
readily, with abundant callus formation, will heal consistently with type I frames. In
 II frames. A specific plan for choosing the appropriate form of fracture fixation for
a given situation is discussed later in the section on selection of fixation method
(see p. 145).
 2——Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
77
Mechanical studies have elucidated much knowledge regarding the mechanical
characteristics of external fixators and the fixator-bone construct, from which
we can gain insight to the clinical situation.303544 Based on these studies, certain
 generalizations can be made, as discussed next.
Overall Frame Stiffness
As stated earlier, stiffness in compression and torsion increases from type IA to
[ s s  s ao o oi ae s ea  ad otl adi i a
splints. All frames are stiffest in the plane of their application; therefore, bilateral
type II frames are stiff in medial-lateral bending, whereas unilateral type IA splints
lose stiffness when the bending is toward the side of the splint. However, type IB
 splints are stiffer in bending than type I splints. Medium Kirschner-Ehmer frames
 are a mean 85% stiffer than small frames.4s
Fixation Pin Number, Spacing. and Angle of Insertion
The pin-bone interface is subjected to very high-stress loads, which can lead to bone
resorption around the pins and subsequent pin loosening. Increasing the number of
fixation pins from the minimum of two pins per major fragment increases the area
of the pin-bone interface, thus decreasing the incidence of bone resorption and
subsequent pin loosening, which is the major postoperative complication seen. This
x   e    i     s
Increasing the number of fixation pins also stiffens the frame, which further decreases
the incidence of pin loosening, but the effect is probably not important once a total of
four pins per major fragment is reached.
Widening the spacing between pins to place them as close as practical (half the
bone diameter) to the ends of the bone and to the fracture line (see Figure 2-42, C
 and F) stiffens the construct in the bending plane perpendicular to the pins. Angling
smooth pins 70 degrees relative to the long axis of the bone stiffens the frame and
helps prevent accidental dislodgement of the pins by the patient. Angling of fixation
pins is not important when positive-profile-threaded pins are used, which simplifies
application.
Fixation Pin Design, Size, and Type
 Threaded pins have better holding power than smooth pins (about tenfold acutely
and even more chronically), and most frames should be constructed either with all
d    o   m   sd 
Negative-thread-profile pins are weakest at the junction of the threaded and
unthreaded portions; this area acts as a stress concentrator and is susceptible to
fatigue failure from repetitive bending. The Ellis pin depicted in Figure 2-34, B, has
a short negative-profile-threaded tip to allow the threaded end to penetrate the sec-
ond cortex while the junction of threaded and unthreaded portion is protected
within the medullary cavity. Positive-thread-profile pins offer the most holding
power, and end-threaded half pins do not undergo loss of stiffness at the junction of
threaded and unthreaded areas. In type I unilateral frames, it is optimal to place
these pins at each end of a pin cluster. Centrally threaded, positive-thread-profile
pins are advisable for at least the most proximal and most distal full pins in type II
and II frames.
  sd a-ad j us  aou d e 
tightness (end-insertional torque) and pull-out strength of the pin acutely by 25%
and 14%, respectively, compared with no predril1.46.47 Less mechanical damage to
the cortex develops at the pin-bone interface when a pilot hole is used, and less bone
resorption may occur over time.
78
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Larger pins are stiffer than smaller pins by a direct relationship to the fourth
 power of the radius; thus a small increase in diameter produces a large increase in
stiffness. However, pin diameters larger than 20% to 25% of the bone diameter
weaken the bone and should be avoided.
Type II bilateral frames offer some technical difficulties in full-pin placement.
 Insertion of the most proximal and distal pins and attaching them to the connecting
bars is not difficult, but placing additional full pins is hindered by the need to place
these pins in the same plane as the first pins. Half pins can be substituted for full
pins in this situation (see Figure 2-44, A, B, and D), but at the cost of some loss of
stiffness. One method for placing the intermediate pins follows:
1. With the end pins placed, the medial and lateral connecting bars, with the
appropriate number of empty clamps placed on each, are positioned in the end
clamps.
 2. The fracture is reduced and held by any means in the reduced position while
the four end clamps are tightened.
 3. A third connecting bar with the same number of empty clamps is attached to
the end pins on the most convenient side
 4. The intermediate fixation pins are placed through the clamps attached to the
double connecting bars and drilled through the bone to emerge on the opposite
side. The fracture must be reduced satisfactorily before these pins are drilled.
5. Because all three connecting bars are in the same plane, the fixation pins will
line up with the clamps on the opposite side, where the pins are secured by
tightening the clamps.
6. When all the fixation pins are placed and secured in their clamps, the
temporary connecting bar and clamps are removed.
Connecting Bars and Clamp Configuration
Stiffness of the connecting bar is of greatest concern in type I unilateral splints,
where it is the limiting factor in frame stiffness. Increasing the stiffness of the con-
necting bar decreases axial loads at the fracture site and reduces shear loads on some
a second bar to unilateral splints (see Figure 2-43, D, E, and F) almost doubles
frame stiffness. Conforming the connecting bar to keep it as close to the bone as
possible (see Figure 2-48, C) is helpful in increasing frame stiffness because it
decreases the working length of the fixation pin. Stiffness of the pin is inversely
 proportional to the third power of the length, so keeping the length as short as
possible is desirable. For similar reasons, clamps should be positioned on the
connecting bar with the bolt inside the connecting bar (see Figure 2-41, B) because
this also shortens the working distance of the fixation pin. Clamp design may also
d x aias a e su is n a ssas a i
bar junction than the Kirschner-Ehmer clamps.38,39 Connecting bars of larger diam-
eter and stiffness are available in carbon fiber, titanium, or aluminum materials in
the IMEX-SK fixator system. The large SK system has been shown to be more than
x i  is e m Po s p  s s s o
using the medium Kirschner-Ehmer system. Frame stiffness may be affected by num-
ber and geometry of interconnecting bars between the axial planes in more complex
fixator designs. Four horizontal or single or double diagonal interconnecting bars
(see Figure 2-4.5, C).49
 Acrylic connecting bars offer good mechanical characteristics, such as easy
conformation of the bar to the skin surface, thereby maximizing fixation pin
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
79
stiffness. In mechanical testing a 34-inch (19-mm) column of molded methyl
methacrylate displayed more strength and stiffness than the 3/6-inch (4.6-mm)
stainless steel rod typically used in the medium Kirschner-Ehmer frame.S0
Curving the acrylic connecting bars up to 25 degrees between pins does not affect
frame stiffness, compared with a medium Kirschner-Ehmer frame.S1 Additionally.
acrylic connecting bars offer more freedom of fixation pin placement to accommo-
date the fracture and the anatomy and allow the use of positive-thread-profile
fixation pins anywhere in the frame.
Fundamentals of Application
The first consideration in applying an external fixator is the decision about
which basic approach will be taken toward reduction of the fracture. Because of its
versatility, the external fixator lends itself to either (1) an open approach, with
anatomical bone reconstruction and rigid fixation, or (2) a closed approach or min-
imal open approach, with reduction aimed at aligning the diaphysis relative to angu-
lar and rotational deformity, and little or no reduction of bone fragments by direct
manipulation. The first method represents the traditional rigid fixation approach to
internal fixation, whereas the latter represents the biological fixation or bridging
osteosynthesis approach discussed earlier. Consideration should always be given to
between the bone and fixator, even if it requires some shortening of the bone. This
will allow the use of a simpler frame and will reduce the possibility of premature pin
loosening and loss of fixation caused by high stress loads at the pin-bone interface.
1. Use aseptic technique. This includes preparation of the patient, the operating
room, the equipment, the surgeon, and postoperative care.
 2. Use proper bone surface location for insertion of pins. Complications can be
minimized if the splint is located on the bone surface that allows insertion of
the fixation pins through the skin and directly into the bone. This minimizes
the length of pin between the fixation clamp and bone, thus maintaining
maximum pin stiffness. It also minimizes soft tissue irritation; pins
 penetrating through muscle and skin are more irritating than those
penetrating skin alone. The proper surface for the unilateral splint on the
tibia is medial; for the radius, craniomedial or medial; for the humerus,
craniolateral; and for the femur, lateral (Figure 2-36). To insert the pins in
the humerus and femur, it is necessary to penetrate both skin and underlying
muscle; however, the surfaces just mentioned keep muscle thickness to
a minimum.
3. Use the most suitable configuration of the splint.2,23,28-30,343s Guidelines
relative to this decision in specific clinical situations are discussed later (see
Selection of Fixation Method). General guidelines are that type I unilateral
configurations can be used on all the long bones and the mandible, and that
biplanar and bilateral configurations are limited to fractures of the tibia, radius
and ulna, and mandible to avoid interfering with the body wall. Although
static strength and stiffness evaluation of the various frame configurations
i a (i y r a ui oe n nd (si an  )
unilateral one plane, (2) type IB unilateral two plane, (3) type II bilateral one 
 plane, and (4) type II bilateral two plane, it must be remembered that clinical
performance depends on many variables, as mentioned earlier, such as the
diameter and contouring of the connecting bars, diameter and number of
80
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
C
FIGURE 2-36. Preferred location of the unilateral external fixator in relation to the bone
surface and associated soft tissue. A, Lateral surface of femur. B, Medial surface of tibia.
C, Craniolateral surface of humerus. D, Craniomedial or medial surface of radius.
fixation pins, angle and location of pins in the cortical bone, length of the pins
from the fixation clamps to the bone, and inherent stability at the fracture site.
The importance of the latter is difficult to overemphasize; if load sharing can
be achieved between the bone and frame, as in type A simple or type B wedge
fractures, the frame can be less stiff than in the situation where there is no
load sharing, as in type C complex fractures, and the fixator must function
as a buttress. Clinical experience supports that the stiffness produced by the
type IA unilateral configuration—one connecting bar with two to four pins per
se apam g adi iso pue ads y adi u aenape siuae auog
where load sharing can be achieved and when supplemented with appropriate
auxiliary fixation as indicated. Because fractures vary widely in type, stability,
condition of soft tissue, animal activity, and size of the patient, no single
configuration is best suited for all fractures; however, the simple configurations
serve very well on most fractures.
4. Auxiliary fixation should be used when indicated. If the goal of fracture
 treatment is rigid, uninterrupted stabilization of the main fracture fragments,
auxiliary fixation (which may include use of lag screws, intramedullary pins,
Kirschner wires, and cerclage or interfragmentary wire configurations) may be
helpful in maintaining reduction during insertion of the fixation pins and in
aiding rigid stabilization (Figure 2-37). However, rigid devices such as lag
screws and cerclage wire should be used cautiously in combination with the
less stiff, type IA unilateral frames, since they can act as stress concentrators
and cause secondary fractures or loosening of the implant because of bone
 resorption. An additional consideration is the disruption of fracture biology
caused by their placement. These frames are safest in situations in which good
stability can be achieved and rapid bone healing is anticipated.
An intramedullary (IM) pin used as auxiliary fixation to an external fixator
can be especially helpful in achieving the concept of biological fixation in more
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
81
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 2-37. Auxiliary fixation commonly used with the external fixator.
A, Intramedullary pin. B, Cerclage wire. C, Lag screws. D, Diagonally inserted Kirschner wire.
ai asoxa on pasn si ynodde uado ie y sa auoq-uo xado
fracture site, with no disruption of fracture hematoma or manipulation of
cortical fragments. An IM pin is placed to approximate axial alignment and
minimize fracture manipulation during placement of fixator pins. Modified
type IB frames are useful for complex femoral or humeral fractures with IM
roy sud NI ym pasn aq Aeu sae l pue '1l ai adAi paypoN s'sud
difficult tibial fractures. The IM pin can be connected to the fixator connecting
bar with an additional “tie-in" connector. IM pin tie-in improves fixator
construct strength and stiffness.56
5. The fracture should be reduced and maintained in reduction during application
of the splint. With the fracture reduced, the soft tissues are restored to their
normal anatomical position, and the pins can be inserted without distorting the
soft tissues. This helps to minimize tissue irritation and discomfort to the
animal. If reduction is lost during pin insertion, it should be regained before
 proceeding. Fractures of the radius/ulna and the tibia can often be reduced
a ron rao ais e sapnui anan sep aems (i- an
 suspending tape or rope that extends far enough upward to preclude
 accidental contamination of the surgeons.
6. Insert pins through soft tissue in a manner that does not distort the tissue.
A short (14-inch or 2- to 3-mm) stab incision is made in the skin. If the pin is
inserted through muscle, tunnel bluntly through the muscle with a hemostat
and then spread the hemostat jaws to allow the pin to be placed through the
tendons to the extent possible helps to reduce postoperative problems (see later
discussion). With open reduction the pins should not be placed through the
incision, and it is important to remove all retractors from the incision before
pins are placed to prevent soft tissue distortion. At the conclusion of the
82
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
D
B
pedic or battery-powered drill. B, Nonsterile battery-powered electric drill being dropped
into a sterile shroud held open by the surgeon. The shroud is secured by hook and eyelet
material to keep it closed over the drill. A sterile Jacobs chuck and extension tube is then
screwed into the drill through a small opening in the shroud. Care must be taken to prevent
the shroud from becoming wetted and allowing bacterial "strike-through." Alternatively, the
drill can be sterilized in ethylene oxide gas. C, The correct method of holding the pin chuck
to minimize wobbling is with the wrist straight and the elbow flexed so that the forearm, pin
chuck, and pin are rotated as a unit around a constant axis. The chuck handle is pushed by
the palm. D, This handgrip on the chuck is a common error and cannot apply proper force
and control while driving pins.
procedure, extend the original pin incisions as necessary to relieve any skin
wrinkling. If there is no alternative to inserting pins through the incision, it
must be done in a manner that allows penetration of the muscles without
distortion of the muscle, and relief incisions must be made in the skin to allow
it to return to its normal position.
 7. Pin-driling technique is critical 23,30,31.s2 Use a slow-speed power drill 
(150 rpm or less) for pin insertion; a higher-speed power drill creates an undue
 Rechargeable battery-powered drills operate at these low speeds and have
sufficient torque to make them an economical substitute for true surgical drills
(Figure 2-38, A). The technical problem in the use of these drills is the issue of
sterilizing them, since they cannot be steam-sterilized. Ethylene oxide
sterilization is a simple and satisfactory solution, if available, and the drill can
be handled as any other sterile instrument during surgery. If ethylene oxide
sterilization is not an option, sterile fabric shrouds (Figure 2-38, B) to cover
the drill and an extended shaft and detachable and sterilizable chuck are
needed (Extend-a-Chuck drill extension and shroud, Animal Clinic Products,
Montgomery, Ala). Use of the hand chuck is acceptable if extreme care is taken
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
FIGURE
2-39. Trocar-pointed
Steinmann pins. The relatively long
point is preferred over the short point; 
it penetrates faster and easier.
to prevent wobble of the pin during insertion, and this works quite well in
immature bone (Figure 2-38, C, D). Hand-held rotary bone drills are not
satisfactory because they generate excessive heat at the pin, and it is
impossible to control wobble of the pin during insertion. Pins should be
first and second cortex and better stabilize the pin within the bone. After
insertion, each pin should be checked to make sure it is solidly anchored in
the bone. Trocar-pointed pins are favored, and those with a relatively long
 point are preferred because they penetrate the bone faster and are easier to
insert (Figure 2-39). Positive-thread-profile pins should not be inserted
directly into bone because they produce microfractures of the cortex at the
entry and exit points, particularly with cancellous threaded pins. This damage
can be reduced by predrilling a pilot hole in the bone that is 10% smaller
rd oi aaas l e o as au saa u n ap ud aun 
the soft tissues if a twist drill is used; alternatively, the pilot hole can be
drilled using a smooth pin or Kirschner wire. After drilling pilot holes, it is
safest then to insert positive-thread-profile pins using a hand chuck, since this
will minimize bone damage, such as accidental stripping of the threads.
8. Insert pins through both cortices of the bone. Invariably, any pin that is not
fully inserted through both cortices loosens and thus does not accomplish its
 purpose. With few exceptions, the pinpoint can be palpated on penetration of
the far cortex. When using a power drill, a definite change in the pitch of the
drill's motor sound will be detected as the pin penetrates through the second
cortex. When inserting pins by hand, an increased amount of torque is needed
as the point of the pin penetrates the second cortex, followed by a sudden
 decrease in resistance as the tip of the pin clears the cortex. The pin should
 penetrate about the length of the trocar point. If pins should penetrate too far
on insertion, they should be left in position if possible; withdrawing the pin
weakens the pin-bone interface and diminishes pull-out strength.s2 Even
d  e  a sd   
9.Insert smooth and negative-thread-profile pins at an angle of 70 degrees
to the long axis of the bone23244s (Figure 2-40). Pins inserted at this angle
give maximum stiffness to the fixator along with maximum pull-out
sd  s  si n s aq an  ai
 thread-profile pins, thereby simplifying insertion of an adequate number
of pins per fragment.
10. Insert all related fixation pin clusters in the same plane. This has two
advantages: (1) all pins can be attached to a common connecting bar, thus
eliminating the need for the less stiff double clamps, and (2) if postoperative
swelling occurs, the fixation clamps can be loosened and readily adjusted
without affecting reduction at the fracture site. The procedure for application
using one connecting bar is shown in Figure 2-41.
84
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 2-40. For maximum stiffness, the end fixation pins in
sixe suol aui oi alaue aaiap-0z e ie pahasui aa pinoys dnoa yoea
Of the bone.
fracture is first reduced, and reduction is maintained during the application procedure.
The proximal and distal pins are inserted. B, The fixation clamps are assembled on the
connecting bar C, The fixation clamps are attached to the proximal and distal pins. The
remaining three pins are inserted through the clamps and bone. D, All clamps are tightened,
and the incision is closed.
11. Insert pins in the proper location of the bone fragment. Experimental
studies34,44 and clinical studies indicate that maximum stability is
accomplished by inserting the pins near the proximal and distal ends of the
bone fragment rather than by inserting both pins near the ends or near the
fracture site (Figure 2-42). The pins should be kept half the bone diameter
distant from the fracture line, and fissures in the cortex must be avoided.
 Because the cortex is normally quite thin in the proximal metaphyseal region
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
85
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 2-42. A, B, and C, Unilateral {type IA) configurations. D, E, and F, bilateral
(type IIA) configurations. Maximum stability is accomplished by inserting the pins near the
proximal and distal ends of the bone fragment (C and F) in preference to both pins near
the proximal end (A and D) or the fracture site (B and E).
of the humerus and tibia and the distal metaphysis of the femur, it is 
advantageous to avoid placing smooth or negative-thread-profile pins in these
 areas, because cancellous bone has very little holding power on the pins.
Cancellous positive-thread-profile pins should be used in these areas, after
drilling a pilot hole.s4
12. Insert two to four pins in each major bone fragment. Until the early 1970s,
two pins per bone fragment were used in most cases. Studies since that time
definitely indicate that three or four pins per fragment increase the stiffness of
the construct* (Figures 2-43 and 2-44). The degree of stiffness needed to heal
later section on selection of fixation method. Biomechanically, it appears that
*References 24, 30, 34, 35, 44, 45.
86
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
D
FIGURE 2-43. Unilateral (type IA) configurations. One connecting bar: A, 2/2 pins/
fragment; B, 3/3 pins/fragment; C, 4/4 pins/fragment. Two connecting bars: D, 2/2 pins/
fragment; E, 3/3 pins/fragment; F, 4/4 pins/fragment. Using two connecting bars approxi-
mately doubles the stiffness of the splint; however, this is usually indicated only in the very
large dog. Note: The "fracture gap" is for artistic clarity.
one of the major advantages of using more than two pins per fragment is a
decrease in pin-bone stress forces to which the pins are subjected during
healing. This appears to hold true in clinical use because bent pins and
 loosening are much less frequently encountered when three or four pins per
fragment are used. All fractures require a minimum of two pins on each
 major bone segment. If healing is anticipated to be slow as a result of
fragmentation, contamination, or old age, more pins per segment are useful.
13. Choose optimal size fixation pins and connecting bars. The appropriate size
of both varies with the size of the bone involved. In the United States the
Kirschner-Ehmer splint is the apparatus used almost exclusively in small
87
D
FIGURE 2-44. Various bilateral (type I) configurations. On the basis of stiffness response,
 ssu ' non  si un a pmn ss p isea an  uss
improved by through-and-through pins instead of half pins, using angled pins, or increasing
the number of pins. Note: The “fracture gap" is for artistic clarity.
 animals (Figures 2-45, 2-46, and 2-47). The medium-size fixation clamps
 accommodate a 3/16-inch (4.6-mm) connecting bar. The use of two connecting
bars (see Figure 2-43) approximately doubles the stiffness of the splint and
may be indicated for use in some large-breed or giant-breed dogs. The
medium-size fixation clamps accommodate 3/32-inch and 1/s-inch
(2.4- to 3.2-mm) fixation pins. The 1/s-inch pins are used most frequently;
however, the 3/32-inch pins may be used on animals in the 18- to 25-pound
(8- to 11-kg) range. The small Kirschner-Ehmer clamps accommodate an
(-o) yu-e/ on dn au u sud uxy pue req uauo yu-s/
diameter. In clinical settings the largest practical pin size is used because this
 gives stiffness to the apparatus, bends less at the pin-bone interface on cyclical
loading, and is less apt to loosen during the healing period. However, in
 general, the fixation pin should not exceed one fourth of the diameter of the
88
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
C
FIGURE 2-45. A, Biplanar type I configuration. One unilateral external fixator is placed on
the medial surface of the tibia or radius, and another is placed on the cranial surface. Their
connecting bars or the end pins (see B) may be bridged by two or more connecting bars.
B, Modifications of this configuration work well on very proximal or distal fractures. Note:
The "fracture gap" is for artistic clarity. C, Frame stiffness may be affected by number and
connecting bars reduce fracture gap strain in type IB fixators.
bone because weakening and fracture can occur. Pins should be cut as close
to the clamp as possible, with a pin (bolt) cutter or saw, to minimize the
overall dimensions of the splint.
14. Place the connecting rods an optimal distance between the fixation clamps
and the skin. This distance at the time of application varies depending on the
size of the animal and the anticipated postsurgical swelling. The distance is
usually 3/s to 1/2 inch (10-13 mm) (Figure 2-48). The thickness of the small
finger is a good approximation in most people. Contour the rod to fit the
skin/muscle surface where necessary to minimize the clamp-bone distance
(Figure 2-48, C). Postsurgical swelling, which usually occurs within the first
10 days, may necessitate readjustment and moving the fixation clamps
outward on the pins because contact pressure will result in necrosis of
the soft tissue. Regions of tissue movement (e.g., near joints) swell more
 than do regions of little motion.
15. Use a bone graft for significant cortical deficits. Because rigidity of fixation
using the external fixator is usually less than when using plates, the body is
stimulated to produce more bridging callus. If definite architectural deficits
are present, however, they should be filled with a bone graft. This is
particularly true in mature and older animals, in those with osteotomies of
diaphyseal bone, and in nonunions.
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
89
FIGURE 2-46. Type Ill bilateral two-plane splint. A, This splint is most applicable to the
tibia, although it can also be adapted to the radius. B, The tentlike configuration can be seen
in this proximodistal view.
70
FIGURE 2-47. Original Kirschner
type IA configurations using one (A)
or two (B) connecting bars. With clin-
ical patients, two connecting bars are
used in most cases because this greatly
 increases splint stiffness and stability.
Note: The "fracture gap" is for artis-
tic clarity.
B
Aftercare
Following surgery, a compressive (Robert-Jones) bandage is applied to protect
the incision and minimize swelling in fractures of the radius/ulna and tibia
(Figure 2-49). Any open wounds and all incisions are covered with a sterile nonad-
herent dressing, and roll cotton or cast padding is packed around the pins and under 
the connecting bars. Additional cotton or padding is rolled on the leg from the toes
90
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
FIGURE 2-48. The distance between the fixation clamps and the skin is usually 3/s to
1/2 inch. A and B, This distance varies with the size of the animal and anticipated postsurgi-
cal swelling. If swelling causes the skin to press against the fixation clamps, readjustment
and movement of the clamps outward on the pins are indicated because contact pressure
will result in necrosis of the soft tissue. C, In some situations it is useful to gently contour the
connecting rod to follow the skin/muscle surface.
to the frame. The padding is then compressed with an elastic conforming bandage
(Vetrap, 3M Animal Care Products, St. Paul, Minn; Flexus, Kimberly-Clark
Corporation). It is important that the padding and wrapping start at the toes and
then proceed proximally to cover the frame. Covering only the frame with this type
dressing will cause severe swelling of the limb distal to the frame. In most cases this
bandage is removed after 2 to 5 days. This step is not possible with humeral and
femoral fractures. With open fractures or with severe soft tissue injury, the wound
is often debrided, lavaged, and rebandaged every 2 to 3 days until it is covered
with granulation tissue. Because of the stability the fixator provides, such frequent
bandage changes can be performed without traumatizing early vascular granulation
 tissue and callus formation.
The compressive bandage is replaced with a gauze and Vetrap cover,
which encloses only the connecting clamps and bars and the protruding ends of the
fixation pins of the fixator (Figure 2-50). This cover protects the animal and the
owner from the sharp ends of the fixation pins and decreases the chance of catch-
ing the apparatus on fixed objects. Flexible plastic caps can also be fitted on the ends
of the fixation pins, which are usually quite sharp as a result of being cut with a pin
(bolt) cutter. The cover should be applied so that it does not contact the skin but
 does allow air circulation around the skin-pin interface. Do not use adhesive tape
for this cover because it is very difficult to remove from the metal frame compo-
nents. Gauze can be used as a first layer, which is then covered by adhesive tape, but
the tape is not brought into contact with the frame components. This type of cover
p  jo asn a u aaadsd  ap s a a ro
femoral fractures.
 The use of a broad-spectrum antibiotic is indicated for contaminated open or
 infected fractures until a culture and sensitivity can direct more specific therapy.
Because of the soft tissue trauma attending even most closed fractures, we tend to
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
91
FIGURE 2-49. (See p. 92 for legend.)
92
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 2-49. Postoperative dressing of an external fixator. A, Nonadherent dressings are
partially cut to allow them to be positioned over the pin-skin sites. B, Roll cotton, cotton
fluffs, or other bulky dressing material is positioned on the skin along the fixator and distally
to the toes. C, Starting at the toes, elastic bandage material ( Vetrap here) is applied with mod-
erate compression to cover all the cotton padding. D, The dressing and the patient 24 hours 
postoperatively. This dressing is usually left in place 3 to 4 days.
FIGURE 2-50. Protective cover for
the fixator is applied after the postop-
erative dressing is removed. The objective
of the cover is to help prevent the fixator
from becoming "snagged" on fences,
bushes, etc. The cover shown here is
fashioned from gauze and elastic tape
but can also be covered with Vetrap.
Do not allow the gauze padding to
contact the skin at the pin sites, and do
not adhere adhesive tape directly to the
splint.
 use a broad-spectrum antibiotic such as cephalexin for 4 to 7 days after surgery,
until the body defenses are mobilized.
The animal is released with instructions to limit exercise to leash walking for
elimination only and to take particular care to avoid fencing or similar structures
a ious raao e ym sede au yo u de a y u i
 maintained until the device is removed. The owners are instructed to inspect the
apparatus daily and advised to expect a small amount of dry crust to develop at the
skin-pin interface. In the absence of complications (see next section), we advise no
 or minimal cleaning or treatment of the pin sites. Others advise a rigorous regimen
of postoperative care that includes daily cleaning of crusts and exudate around the
pins, treatment of the pin sites with a topical antibacterial medicine, and a dressing
to cover the splint and to compress and immobilize soft tissues under the splint with
 gauze padding placed between the skin and splint. This dressing is changed every
few days, depending on the amount of exudate present around the pin tracks.53,54
Complications
 The most common cause of morbidity after external skeletal fixation is drainage
from the fixation pin tracks (Figure 2-51, A). This problem is associated with exces-
sive skin and deeper soft tissue movement, causing pressure against the pins, or with
loose pins. This tends to be a somewhat closed-loop series of events, since one of the
causes of loosening of fixation is muscle motion against the pin. Constant motion
of soft tissues around the pin, or motion of the pin relative to soft tissues, prolongs
the debridement phase of wound healing and results in continual exudation of the
pin track.$3 There is inevitably a degree of bacterial contamination from the skin
and environment, and these bacteria propagate within the pin track, adding to the
exudation. Careful placement of the pins through nondisplaced soft tissue and
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
93
B
FIGURE 2-51. Complications from fixator pins. A, Drainage from pin track caused by
motion of the soft tissues relative to the fixation pin. Swelling of soft tissue has caused the
clamp to become very close to the skin, adding further to the skin exudation. B, This fixator
pin has been placed too close to the fracture site and may have contributed to delayed union.
Note the osteoporosis of the fragment.
avoiding large muscle masses will minimize this problem in most cases. The use of
the bulky splint dressing with pressure on the soft tissues advocated by Aron and
Dewey$3 is aimed at both immobilizing soft tissue and minimizing bacterial contam-
ination. In some locations, such as the distal femur, soft tissue movement against the
pins is unavoidable, and some drainage is to be expected. In this situation, activity
 d    as d a  d p 
organic iodine solution is recommended first. If this is not effective in controlling
 drainage, the padded bandage of Aron and Dewey is used.
Moderate drainage from pin sites is not associated with significant loss of func-
tion as long as the skin around the track is healthy and the pin remains stable. If
function of the limb is impaired in the absence of a loose pin, and if the drainage
does not respond to the simple measures just outlined, true infection of the pin
track, although rare, should be suspected. The surrounding skin will appear tense
and erythematous and may be tender to touch. Steps should be taken to ensure
drainage around the pin by incising skin for 1 cm on each side of the pin. Topical
antibacterials and mechanical cleansing by lavage should be done at least daily.
 Administration of systemic antibiotics for several days is useful in controlling the
infection. Bacterial culture and antibiotic sensitivity testing are not usually helpful
because many skin organisms are present in the sample. It is safe to assume
Stapbylococcus species as the cause of the drainage and to choose the antibiotic on
this basis. Only rarely does such infection affect the bone, although radiographic
 signs of bone reaction are often seen.7
 Loosening of fixation pins is most often caused by soft tissue interference, as 
detailed earlier, or by instability of the fracture and resultant motion because of an
overly flexible fixator frame or insufficient fixation pins. Such motion of the bone
results in high stress loads at the pin-bone interface, leading to bone resorption and
pin loosening. Correct choice of frame type and number of fixation pins for the
clinical situation is the only help for preventing this problem. Loosening of the
fixation pin at the pin-bone interface typically results in drainage and may lead to
infection of the pin tract. Once a pin becomes loose, the only effective treatment is
removal. The drainage usually resolves rapidly. Besides the nuisance of drainage,
94
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 loosening of pins may cause a decrease in limb function. If too many pins loosen to0
quickly, stability may be lost, and delayed union or nonunion can follow, although
ud asool e jo sso a pue paeay ian iou s a au  es'aqod ai e si s
appears to significantly weaken the fixator, additional fixation pins must be inserted
to maintain adequate stability. Although this requires general anesthesia and
aseptic technique, it can be done by closed insertion of a new pin at a new site.
 Selection of an appropriate frame type, use of three or four pins per fragment, and
use of positive-thread-profile pins will prevent most pin loosening and subsequent
drainage or infection.
Pin tract drainage can be of particular concern if the affected pin has been placed
marginally close to a fracture site. Ongoing contamination of the fracture with bacte-
ria associated with pin tract drainage may contribute to delayed fracture healing
(Figure 2-51, B). Pins that are suspected of contributing to fracture site contamination
should be removed, whether or not radiographic signs of pin loosening are evident.
Another uncommon source of drainage and loosening of pins is the ring
sequestrum that forms around a pin after insertion with a high-speed drill or with
undue pressure that caused excessive heat generation (Figure 2-s2). Bone death
occurs in a circular pattern around the pin, with secondary infection, drainage, and
 pin loosening. The radius is the most common site of this problem, since placing
pins in the frontal plane of the bone requires drilling through primarily cortical bone
because of the elliptical cross section and small medullary cavity of this bone.
Treatment is removal of the pin and sequestrum, curettage of the tract, and replace-
ment of the pin, if needed for continuing stability.
 A relatively rarely encountered problem is iatrogenic fracture of the bone through
the fixation pinholes. This usually occurs when oversized fixation pins (>33% of
fixation pins are placed in fissure fractures. The latter problem is usually avoided if
 a   ri aq  y un ras pad iu are su
Unrestricted postoperative activity can also result in fractures through pinholes,
 particularly if the holes are enlarged by loose pins. Such problems are managed by
replacement of pins in intact bone.
Removal of Frames
When radiographic and clinical signs of bone union are confirmed, the fixator can
be removed. In many cases this can be done with little or no sedation; if the animal
  a oo  e a  e 
usually adequate. Often the pins are somewhat loose by the time of clinical union
because of the increasing activity of the animal; this is especially true with smooth
fixation pins.
Clamps are loosened and connecting bars removed. Loose half pins often can be
removed with the fingers without any signs of pain. If resistance is encountered, or
if threaded pins are present, a Jacobs chuck with handle is attached to the pin and
 sad asraq ud s asno e s aoq an o pimansn si 1i
 be stimulated. Full pins are cut close to the bone on one side, and the short protrud-
ing end is disinfected, after which the pin is removed by pulling the short end
through the bone.
 Some bleeding accompanies pin removal; this is cleaned, and the pin sites are
covered with sterile gauze dressings and a light bandage, which is maintained for
48 to 72 hours. Even pin sites that have enlarged to 2 cm in diameter because
of skin motion heal very quickly without visible scarring. Do not suture pinholes,
since this can result in entrapment of exudate and lead to abscessation.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
95
A
B
FIGURE 2-52.
 Ring sequestrum caused by thermal necrosis during insertion of fixation pin.
A, In this mediolateral view of the proximal radius, the sequestrum appears doughnut shaped
because of the lucency of the pinhole and the area of detachment from surrounding bone.
B, Three lucent zones are seen in the cranioca udal view.
Acrylic Frames24,36,50,58,59
Replacement of the conventional clamp and connecting bar system with a plastic
material may offer significant advantages in the clinical application of external
skeletal fixation. The ability to conform the connecting bar to any shape allows
placement of pins in multiple planes to make best use of whatever bone is available
for their placement and to allow orientation of the pins to avoid soft tissue entrap-
ment. Although applicable to any external skeletal fixation application, this method
is especially advantageous in the areas of the mandible, in the long bones of toy and
miniature breeds, and in transarticular applications in the carpus and tarsus.
Eliminating the need for fixation clamps also reduces the cost of the apparatus,
always a consideration in veterinary applications.
The material most often used for the plastic connecting rod is methyl methacry-
late, an acrylic resin used for many years in the production of tray molds for the
fabrication of dental prostheses and in veterinary applications for hoof wall repair
(Orthodontic resin, L.B. Caulk Co., Division of Dentsply International Inc.,
Milford, Del; Technovit hoof acrylic, Jorgensen Laboratories, Loveland, Colo). In a
sterile and much more costly form, methyl methacrylate is also used for anchoring
various types of metal and plastic prostheses to bone in both humans and animals.
There is no difference in strength between the sterile and nonsterile forms, and
therefore, for economic reasons, the nonsterile form is most frequently used,
although careful planning is needed to allow most fixator applications to be
 performed without the need for sterile cement.
96
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Solid methyl methacrylate is created by mixing a volatile liquid monomer solvent
with methyl methacrylate powder, which initially creates a liquid stage not unlike a
flour/water batter. This liquid stage lasts 2 to 3 minutes and is followed by a doughy,
moldable phase (4-5 minutes) that hardens into a very strong mass 7to 10 minutes
after initial mixing. There are slight variations in these times because of ambient
temperatures, with higher temperatures lowering and cool temperatures lengthening
the cure time. Considerable exothermic heat is liberated by the polymerization reac-
tion of the last 2 to 3 minutes of the cure cycle. Peak temperatures of fixator pins
may reach greater than 55° C at 5 mm from a standard acrylic column, which could
affect tissue viability.60 Provided the acrylic columns are maintained 10 mm from
tissue, higher temperatures are not achieved in the fixator pin, and there seems to
be no real danger.60.61 A 3/4-inch (19-mm) column of solid methyl methacrylate has
ie n o s  a ar o uus 
(4.6-mm) rod typically used with the medium Kirschner-Ehmer splint.41 Material
testing has been performed on available acrylics. Although differences in flexural
and torsional stiffness exist between acrylic products, the effect of these differences
on overall frame stiffness and bone healing is, as yet, undefined.2
Fundamentals of Application
The exact sequence followed for applying acrylic frames depends on the choice of
 p  p no s a  r  u s
methacrylate can be injected with a catheter-tipped, 60-ml-dose syringe into flexible
plastic tubing that has been impaled over the fixation pins, whereas the doughy
stage requires hand molding of a column that is pressed onto the pin clusters. A use-
ful method applicable to nonsterile acrylic fixator frames is the biphase technique.
 If nonsterile acrylic is to be used during an open reduction, the fracture must be
reduced and the soft tissues closed before the connecting acrylic column can be
attached to the fixation pins. This may make it difficult to maintain fracture reduc-
tion during attachment of the connecting columns. Even during a closed reduction,
 su n jo ue p unn u on i aq un u
biphase technique utilizes a temporary frame using normal clamps and connecting
bars to maintain reduction while the acrylic column is attached.
 Phase 1 involves reduction of the fracture by either open or closed methods and
insertion of fixation pins as previously described. The fixation pins are not cut
short; they are left long enough to attach clamps and a connecting bar 11/2 to
e e  ssu ias si in as s an  ( s-i's) so 7
fixation pins to this temporary connecting bar. This phase can be done aseptically;
thus the bone can be reduced and stabilized under open reduction. After closure
of the open reduction, radiographic confirmation of the reduction can be obtained
if desired.
 Phase 2 is the joining of all pin clusters by an acrylic column, as described
further next. If nonsterile methyl methacrylate is used, the incision must be closed
at this point. Ater the acrylic has hardened, the fixation pins are cut close to the
column, and the temporary clamps and bar are discarded. It may be useful to dress
the protruding cut pins with a file or rotary burr to reduce the sharpness of the end
 produced by the pin cutter and to reduce the chances of the protruding pin hanging
 up on clothing and other objects.
Liquid-Stage Application
Methyl methacrylate powder and liquid monomer are mixed with a tongue
three parts powder for dental acrylic, or two parts powder for hoof acrylic, to one
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
97
q e sin pre on cm, im s x in d
in the mixture, and as soon as the powder is well mixed with the liquid, pour
the mixture into the barrel of a catheter-tipped dose syringe, then replace the
plunger.
 Thin-walld flexible tubing of appropriate inner diameter (3/4 inch for medium
fixation pins, 1/2 inch for small fixation pins) is used as a mold for the liquid.
Disposable plastic adult anesthesia breathing-circuit tubing works well for the larger
columns, and polyvinyl or rubber medical tubing or pediatric breathing-circuit
tubing is useful for the smaller sizes. The tubing is impaled over the fixation pins,
taking care to avoid tearing large holes in the tubing. Short incisions are necessary
in polyvinyl and some rubber tubing. If the biphase technique will be used, the
clamps and connecting bar are attached at this time to the fixation pins “outboard"*
of the tubing. Note that the tubing would need to be sterilized if this part of
the procedure were being done in conjunction with an open approach. An open
 i  a d sn  aa o o s
closed. The lower end of the tube is plugged with cotton wadding or a sponge to
prevent leaking, and the liquid acrylic is injected in the opposite end to fill the tub-
ing. After hardening of the acrylic, the pins are cut close to the column and dressed
as previously described.
 A commercially available kit contains all the components needed to apply type II
biphase fixators of the small or medium size (APEF System, Innovative Animal
Products, Rochester, Minn) (Figure 2-53). An advantage of this kit is that the
materials are all sterile, thus allowing the entire fixation under direct vision during
 an open approach.
Moldable-Stage Application
This method eliminates the need for tubing molds and simplifies the use of the
biphase technique with nonsterile methyl methacrylate powder. Mixing of the liquid
and powder proceeds as described earlier, but mixing is continued until the mixture
becomes doughy and no longer sticks to the surgical glove. The dough is removed
from the cup to a flat surface, where it can be rolled to a rod of appropriate diam-
eter with the palm of the hand. This soft rod is then impaled on the fixation pins
and molded firmly around the pins by digital pressure. After hardening of the
acrylic, the pins are cut and dressed as already discussed. It is also possible to inject
liquid-stage acrylic into soft tubing (e.g., Penrose drain), allow it to reach the
doughy stage, and then impale it on the pins.
 Further refinements of either the liquid-stage or the moldable-stage method are
useful to allow a more firm adhesion of the acrylic to the fixation pins. Notches can
be produced in the ends of the pins with a pin cutter to provide a roughened
surface. Stainless steel wire can be attached between fixation pins to provide a
i  n no sxa     a  oos
bending the ends of fixation pins to bridge the gap between pins (see Figure 21-11).
Both these latter two techniques can complicate removal or adjustment of the frame,
as discussed next.
Removal or Revision
Removal of an acrylic frame can be done either by cutting fixation pins to free
the acrylic column or by cutting the column between each pin to allow removal of
the pin and attached column as a unit. Cutting the pins between the skin and the
acrylic is the simplest method in theory but may be difficult to execute because of
insufficient clearance between the skin and the column to allow use of a pin cutter.
A hand-held hacksaw can be used for cutting the pins in this situation. Cutting of
98
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
D
FIGURE 2-53. APEF biphase method. A, Pin placement and size can be optimized for frac-
ture stability and minimal soft tissue interference. Any combination of positive-thread-profile
pins or smooth pins can be used. Predrilling pinholes for threaded pins is simplified because
no drilling or pin placement is done through fixation clamps. B, The fracture is reduced, and
temporary stabilization is achieved by use of two connecting bars and APEF alignment frame
clamps, which are placed at skin level. If an open reduction was done, the soft tissues are
closed, or a closed reduction can be radiographically verified. Fixation pins are cut 1'/2 to
2 inches (4-5 cm) from the skin. C, The corrugated plastic tubing that will mold the connect-
sud uoexih 'sdue aul premon pausnd pue sud uouexy ai iaao pausnd si sieq su
too long to allow the tubing to rest against the clamps without penetrating the outer wall of
the tubing must be recut to shorten them. The dependent ends of the tubing are plugged.
D, Prepackaged acrylic is mixed within its plastic bag, the corner of the bag cut, and the
liquid phase acrylic poured into the open ends of the tubes. Leakage of acrylic at pin sites is
controlled with cotton balls or sponges. Biplanar configurations are interconnected by pins
placed through the connecting bar tubing while the acrylic is still in liquid phase. E, After
hardening of the acrylic, 10 to 12 minutes from the start of mixing, the frame alignment clamps
are loosened and removed with the temporary connecting bars. Excess length of the connect-
ing bars can be removed by saw. (Courtesy Innovative Animal Products, Rochester, Minn.)
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
99
the acrylic column is most easily done with an oscillating cast saw if there is no wire
or fixation pin to be cut. In the latter case, or in the absence of an oscillating saw,
the hacksaw works well to cut the acrylic.
 At times it may be necessary to alter the reduction after the column has hardened
or to replace a loose pin. Revision of the frame begins either by removing a segment
of the acrylic column bridging the area to be realigned or by cutting on each side of
the pin to be removed. After cutting away several centimeters of the column, several
small holes approximately 1 cm deep are drilled into the opposing cut ends and
around the circumference of the end of the column. The purpose of these holes is to
key the patch to the existing column to increase the adhesion of the patch. Methyl
methacrylate is mixed to the doughy stage and hand-packed and molded into the
existing gap in the column while the desired reduction is maintained or after the
pin has been replaced. Using similar methods, acrylic frames can be revised to
 different-type frames, adding or removing portions of the frame as circumstances
dictate.
Ring Fixators
 Although ring fixators were originally employed for fracture fixation, they are more
tion in fracture repair. The technique for their use is discussed in Chapter 23.
Bone Healing with External Skeletal Fixation
In biological fracture fixation or bridging osteosynthesis, as discussed earlier, some
degree of interfragmentary motion or loading is accepted if the fracture can be
stabilized in a manner that minimally disrupts soft tissues and bone vascular supply.
Reliance is placed on early bridging callus to stabilize the fracture and allow contin-
ued healing. Placement of external skeletal fixation with closed reduction or with
minimal open exposure is ideally suited to such a strategy.
 Fracture healing can be manipulated in the presence of an external skeletal
- saaoau daus s se.uonezup, pal aaens anun e u roex
cation of an initially rigid frame to allow axial compressive loading of the fracture
with physiological weight bearing after early healing has occurred. This should
enhance callus hypertrophy and remodeling of the fracture while providing
protection from excessive stress, which might cause refracture. This concept would
be most useful in unstable fractures that initially require a relatively rigid frame to
maintain reduction. An undesirable situation can arise when very stiff fixators
are left in place too long, in which bone healing proceeds by direct haversian
remodeling, as often seen with bone plate fixation. Although there is no question
that the bone will heal, clinical union is much slower than when healing is by the
indirect route and external callus is present. This means that the fixator must be
maintained for a longer period, with its attendant cost and morbidity. Thus, it is
optimal to have callus form when using external skeletal fixation. Experimental
studies have indicated that about 6 weeks after surgery is the optimal time for
 dynamization of fractures in dogs. This can be achieved by removing the connect-
ing bars and pins from one side of a type I or two sides of a type II splint to
create a type I splint, which allows increased compressive loading while still protect-
n ds i a e no sd  a  ' hq o s
plishes the same effect, although these splints are rarely stiff enough to require such
manipulation.
100
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
INTRAMEDULLARY PINS*
 Intramedullary (IM) pin (or nail) fixation for fracture treatment in small animals
  y r anod p o il iytstal a u ps
of safe general anesthesia, aseptic technique, antibiotics, and awareness by
veterinarians and clients alike that successful repair could be accomplished in the
majority of cases. Despite its limitations, IM pinning remains as the most common
      m    
years, largely because of a better understanding of the biomechanical considerations
necessary for successful bone healing, and in combination with cerclage and tension
 band wire techniques and external fixators, IM pinning has entered a new phase.
The key element for successful application of both pinning and wiring techniques
is an acute awareness of their shortcomings in stabilizing fractures. Once these defi-
ciencies are recognized and counteracted, pins and wires can be successfully used in
General Considerations
Advantages of Intramedullary Fixation
There are many potential advantages of pin and wire fixation over bone plates for
the veterinary surgeon. Pin and wire fixation is much less expensive than bone plate
fixation when the cost of implants, the large inventory of equipment needed, main-
tenance, and repair costs for bone plating equipment are compared to pinning costs.
The issue of cost is less important when comparing IM fixation to external skeletal
fixation, but it is true that less inventory is needed for pin fixation. However, as
discussed later, pin fixation cannot be applied to its maximum advantage without
the availability of external skeletal fixation. Most equipment needed for pins and
wires is readily available from many manufacturers and is basically the same as that
used for external skeletal fixators. For a small investment, newer wire tighteners and
pin cutters will update existing equipment. Most pin and wire equipment will last
a lifetime of heavy use, whereas plating requires periodic replacement of taps and
 drill bits. Most pin and wire fixations require less surgical exposure than for bone
plates, resulting in less tissue trauma and vascular damage and enhanced healing.
 In general, pins and wires can be applied in less time than needed for plates; this
factor saves money and decreases anesthesia time.
 Pins are usually much easier to remove than plates, often being removed under
simple sedation and local analgesia. Plate removal, on the other hand, necessitates
a second major invasive procedure with its attendant costs. Pins and wires have min-
 imal effect on medullary blood supply and thus on bone healing. Except in cases in
which active reaming for seating of large IM nails (not widely practiced in animals)
has taken place, total destruction of the medullary supply does not occur. Use of a
Steinmann pin will decrease this medullary blood supply initially but will not
destroy it. Hypertrophy of medullary vessels will take place around the pin unless
the pin completely fills the cavity or when the inner cortex has been reamed (as with
Kintscher-type nails in human patients). Serious interference with medullary blood
supply is most likely when a large pin fills the medullary cavity of a straight femur,
as found in toy/miniature breeds and cats. When plates (or any implant) are applied,
there is some interference with cortical blood supply under the plate, which can lead
* The authors gratefully acknowledge the contribution of a colleague, Dr. S.J. Withrow, to this section.
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
101
to weakening of the bone. The problems created are postplate removal fracture
or eventual cycling fatigue and fracture of the plate if the fracture is delayed in
 healing. Pins and wires only rarely result in this vascular interference.
Disadvantages of Intramedullary Fixation
Pins and wires definitely have disadvantages compared with plates, with most relat-
ing to the biomechanical factors discussed next. If bone fragments are too small to
be reduced and stabilized, pin and wire fixation may not be as stable as a plate.
Pin and wire fixation is not designed to maintain bone length (act as a buttress),
 since there is no load sharing between the round pin and the bone. Plates, on the
other hand, can and do have the capability to prevent compressive forces from
causing collapse (shortening) of a multifragment fracture that cannot be anatomi-
cally reconstructed. This is referred to as the buttress effect. Without plates, the best
method of achieving a buttress effect is with external skeletal fixators.
It has been stated that IM pinning of open fractures may disseminate infection up
or down the medullary cavity. This is surely theoretically possible, but it is a rare
occurrence. If any internal fixation is used in treatment of open fractures, it must
produce very stable fixation, because bone will heal in the presence of infection if it
is stabilized.
Biomechanical Factors
An understanding of how pins resist the various stresses or forces of bending,
compression, and rotation acting on a long-bone fracture is necessary. The stainless
steel material used for IM pins is manufactured to be very stiff when subjected to
bending forces, unlike the steel material used for bone plates or wire.68 Therefore,
nbape jo ud pun e uaom paauo si uoap Aue o ssas hupu
diameter is anchored both proximally and distally in the bone. Bone can still bend
around an undersized pin, however, and the diameter of the medullary canal may be
too small (e.g., the radius) to allow a suitable pin to be introduced. Rotational and
    p   o a s ss
and the pin, which is too small to be effective in the clinical situation. Although
transverse fractures have minimal tendency to override or shorten, spiral and
multifragment fractures need ancillary support (as listed later) to stop axial collapse.
Likewise, a pin has virtually no ability to resist rotational forces. Occasionally, if
the fracture interdigitates and the muscles pull the bone ends together, rotation may
be stopped. In general, however, some means of antirotation must be utilized with
the pin. The interlocking nail, widely used in human orthopedics,"? can resist both
compression and rotational forces and is being used more often in veterinary ortho-
eusdaqsusd u  s uosd
of musculotendinous attachment, such as the tuber olecranon and calcaneus. In such
require the use of a pin and tension band wire or a lag screw.
The most common forms of ancillary fixation employed with IM pins to
 counteract rotational and compressive forces are the following:
● Cerclage or interfragmentary wire (see Figure 2-56, A, B, G, and H).
· External skeletal fixation (see Figure 2-56, C and D).
 nou e sd us ad ( is- as aas) sd yis e
effective.
· Lag screw fixation (see Figure 2-56, E). Although lag screw fixation is very
effective, the bone size required to place both a screw and a pin within the
medullary canal limits the application of this technique.
102
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
These fixation methods are discussed in detail in the following sections. Proximal
pin migration postoperatively is a definite indication of motion caused by insuffi-
cient stability at the fracture site, since motion of the pin relative to the bone causes
bone resorption and subsequent loosening of the pin. With very few exceptions,
distal pin migration into the joint means that the pin penetrated distal articular
cartilage at the time of insertion. This can usually be corrected at surgery by retract-
ing the point of the pin back into the medullary cavity, then angling the distal
fragment in a slightly different direction before advancing the pin. Do not simply
retract the pin and leave it in its original pin track.
External coaptation is sometimes combined with intramedullary fixation but
should be necessary only in intramedullary fixation of metacarpal and metatarsal
bones. External coaptation is never used in long-bone fractures because it defeats
the main goal of internal fixation (i.e., early return to functional use of the limb).
Immobilizing the elbow or stifle joint in the presence of a long-bone fracture has
an unacceptably high risk of loss of joint motion because of periarticular and
intraarticular fibrosis. Fixation of the joints distal to the fracture has the effect of
increasing the disruptive lever arm forces acting at the fracture site.
 In discussing the “pros and cons" of pinning, it is assumed that the surgeon
adheres to the fundamental principles of the technique. Any technique will fail if not
properly performed. In retrospect, very few nonunions or delayed unions are free of
error at the surgery table.
PinTypes
Steinmann Pins and Kirschner Wires
Both Steinmann pins and Kirschner wires (K-wires; pins that look like Steinmann
 pins but are smaller in diameter: 0.035, 0.045, and 0.062 inch, or 0.9 to 1.5 mm)
are circular in cross section and either smooth or with partial or fully negative-
 , o  s d   t a s o-
(1.5 mm) to 1/4 inch (6.5 mm). The threads probably offer little stability and are
S    s      
 pronounced in the partially threaded pin where the thread meets the shank. This is
an area of stress concentration, and if this junction falls at or near the fracture site
 and is subjected to repetitive bending forces, these pins will often break. If a par-
tially threaded pin binds against the bone during placement, the threads may cause
the shank to be twisted completely off, just as a screw that is overtorqued will shear
off at a thread.
 The major reason that the threads do not achieve any extra stability initially is
that the point of the pin is as wide as the outside thread diameter and in placing the
pin, no threads are cut in bone; that is, the point produces a glide hole rather than
a tap or thread hole. The threaded or partially threaded pin cannot be equated to a
bone screw (see section on bone screw fixation). Mechanical testing of the force
required to pull out smooth pins and partially threaded pins from bone showed
 d  e  u iom a mq san i
fracture healing, it is sometimes necessary to “unscrew" the pin because bone has
 grown into the threads, not because the pin has been threaded into the bone.
The tip of a Steinmann pin is designed to cut bone as it is inserted with a drilling
motion. The most common tip is the three-sided trocar (or trochar) point, with a
auoq aqi oi aue aos ie auoq onun pais aq oi ud aui smone ieui pua deus Ara
(Figure 2-54, B). The four-sided diamond or chisel point is more effective in cutting
through very dense bone but is not as easy to start without slipping on the bone
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
103
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 2-54. Intramedullary pin types. A, Steinmann pin, partial negative-profile-thread,
trocar point. B, Steinmann pin, trocar point. C, Steinmann pin, chisel point. D, Rush pin.
E, Interlocking nail and drill jig for placing bone screws through the pin.
surface (Figure 2-54, C). In the smaller sizes of K-wires the chisel point tends to bind
and twist on itself in areas of dense cortical bone, so the trocar point is preferred in
these pins. The most useful type of Steinmann pin is smooth shanked and furnished
with a trocar point on one end and chisel point on the other end. This allows
the choice of the most efficient point for drilling; it makes no difference which point
is used once the pin is seated in the bone.
Rush Pins
Whereas Steinmann pins are passive intramedullary splints, exerting no mechanical
force on the bone, Rush pins are dynamic intramedullary splints, exerting continu-
ous compression forces at two or three points on the bone because they become
flexed during introduction (Figure 2-54, D). This flexion is induced by introducing
the pin at an angle of about 20 degrees to the axial axis of the bone, rather than on
the axial axis as with the Steinmann pin (see Figure 2-55, A). As long as this
flexion does not exceed the elastic limits of the metal, the pin will react to the
 d y a ra s u as  si on  n  aq 
itself to the bone at the point of entry, where it deflects off the opposite cortex and,
in some cases, where the tip comes to rest on the original cortex.
 To be used in the manner just described, the Rush pin has a noncutting beveled
point that glides rather than cuts when it encounters bone. The opposite end is hook
shaped to allow (1) close approximation of this end with the bone and (2) positive
 control of the direction of the flexion during introduction.
Kuntscher Nail
Although it was one of the early forms of intramedullary fixation6s in the dog
because of its wide use in human patients at the time, the Kintscher nail has never
104
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
achieved wide application in small animals. The V cross-sectional shape requires
close contact of the pin through a considerable length of the bone to ensure stabil-
ity. Because dog bones rarely are true cylinders, and because the cortex is too thin
for reaming to a uniform diameter as is done in human bone, this device is not very
useful in dogs or cats.
Interlocking Nail
The intramedullary reaming required to insert Kintscher nais in human patients
was recognized as extremely nonphysiological because of the damage done to the
medullary blood supply, and the unreamed interlocking nail was developed to
replace the Kintscher nail.69 An interlocking nail is basically an IM pin secured in
position by proximal and distal transfixing screws that secure the bone to the
nail to provide torsional and axial stability. The use of the interlocking nail has
considerable advantages over the use of IM pins alone. The interlocking nail helps
to prevent collapse of comminuted fractures during weight bearing, rotational insta-
bility, and pin migration.72 As with the IM pin, the interlocking nail can be inserted
through a limited surgical approach, with minimal disruption of fragment blood
supply. Because this technique in humans generally involves insertion by closed tech-
nique on a distraction table under fluoroscopic control, it seemed to be beyond any
practical application in veterinary orthopedics. The introduction of the IN System
(Innovative Animal Products, Rochester, Minn) has provided a method for insertion
of the interlocking nail without the need for specialized radiographic equipment
(see Figure 2-54, E).70 Considerable experience has been gained to adapt this
system for large dogs and now for smaller dogs and cats.72-79 Application of the
interlocking nail was originally limited to use in femoral, tibial, and humeral
fractures in large breeds, with a minimal medullary canal diameter of 6 mm. An
early report indicated that 83% of fractures healed without complication.72
Interlocking nails broke in 7% of fractures, mostly when 6-mm nails accommo-
dating 3.5-mm screws were used.72,74 Fatigue cycling was the likely cause of failure
and developed when the interlocking nail was malpositioned so that screw holes
were too close to the fracture site or nails of insufficient diameter were selected.
Considerable modifications have been made in the size and number of screw holes
for interlocking nails.
The interlocking nail currently is available in 4.0-, 4.7-, 6.0-, and 8.0-mm
diameters, with a standard two holes proximally and distally for the interlocking
screw (Innovative Animal Products, Rochester, Minn). The 4.0-mm and 4.7-mm nails
accept 2.0-mm screws; the 6.0-mm nail accepts a 2.7-mm screw; and the 8.0-mm
nail accepts a 3.5-mm screw. Nails are also designed with three holes instead of
four, with a single screw hole in the proximal or distal positions, to avoid placement
of a screw hole at the fracture site. The current sizes should accommodate use in dia-
physeal fractures of the femur, humerus, and tibia in large cats and dogs of most
sizes. Reduction of the fracture and insertion of the interlocking nail are
typically completed through a limited surgical approach. The medullary canal
may be opened with Steinmann pins of increasing diameter. The interlocking nail
is adequately seated into the distal metaphysis, and the drill guide is attached
for placement of the locking screws. Interlocking nails are most often used in
"statie" mode, in which locking screws are used in both proximal and distal positions
A “dynamic" mode can also be selected, in which locking screws are used in only
 the proximal or distal positions. The dynamic mode allows more axial compression
at the fracture site but also affects rotational stability and must therefore be used
judiciously.
One study compared the mechanical properties of the 8.0-mm interlocking
nail to the broad 3.5-mm dynamic compression plate (DCP) in an unstable
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
105
fracture model.77 Stiffness and failure limits were higher for the interlocking nail in
compression testing, but not in bending. Yield load (deformation) was higher for the
interlocking nail than the DCP in compression and bending tests. Rotational tests
were not performed but would be highly relevant in a comparison of these systems.
The superior bending and compressive mechanical properties of the interlocking
to the neutral axis of bone.
Indications for Intramedullary Fixation
Because of the variety of intramedullary devices, it is not possible to list indications
without qualifying the fixation device to be used. Fracture types are listed in
Table 2-1, and for discussion of the “fracture patient score" mentioned here,
 see Selection of Fixation Method later in this chapter.
Steinmann Pin
When used without any ancilary fixation, the indications for Steinmann pin
fixation are limited to the following:
1. Stable fractures that do not have a tendency for axial shortening or rotation,
 primarily type A fractures with a high fracture patient score.
 2. In skeletally immature animals, especially puppies and kittens less than 
4 months of age, type B and some type C fractures can be successfully treated
 because of the rapid callus formation seen in these animals.
When used in combination with ancillary fixation, virtually all fracture types
can be handled with Steinmann pins, although perhaps not as efficiently as other
fixation methods in type C fractures with a low fracture patient score.
Steinmann pin fixation can be accomplished by either an open or a closed
method. The closed technique is restricted to simple fractures, those of recent
origin, and those that can be easily and accurately reduced. Fixation of the latter
 fractures is influenced by the size of the animal, time since injury, and experience 
 of the operator.
Rush Pin
The use of Rush pins for diaphyseal fractures in dogs and cats has not been well
evaluated, although one of us (DLP) has long used them in place of Steinmann pins
with good results in tibial fractures. The primary application for these pins is in
 proximal or distal fractures, where the double-pin configuration provides good
stability. When there is an intraarticular component, the Rush pin is easily combined
with lag screw fixation.
Interlocking Nai!
All diaphyseal fracture types in the humerus, femur, and tibia are amenable to
fixation using interlocking nails as long as the medullary canal diameter is at
least 4 mm.
Methods of Application
Steinmann Pins
Specific landmarks for pin insertion in the various bones are provided in later
l are sei hmo a sao i u sa anon sad
and apply to all bones.
106
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Pin Chucks and Power Drills
Steinmann pins are most often inserted with a hand chuck, that is, a Jacobs keyed
chuck to grip the pin, which is attached to a handle. Lowering the surgery table
assists in the penetration of hard bone; this allows more mechanical force to be
uaq uard o ae ud a jo ue radod u spre ue yno aui oi pae
noe ous e Ao is ie dauoq poo y Ara aead oi ue sd ns jo
 of pin should protrude from the chuck until the outer hard cortical bone is pene-
trated. The pin is inserted into the bone with a back-and-forth rotational motion
      i    e   a 
120 degrees to take advantage of the cutting trocar tip. Care should be taken to
avoid "wobbling" an arc with the handle, since this will cause the bone hole to be
enlarged (see Figure 2-38, C, D).
Power drills allow easy pin insertion but do have significant drawbacks. With too
much speed and forceful insertion, thermal necrosis of surrounding bone can
easily occur, resulting in loosening of the implant with time. These drills can be
safely used if low-speed drilling (150 rpm) is performed (see Figure 2-52). Another
technique to avoid thermal necrosis is to stop the drill every 2 or 3 seconds;
however, this makes it more difficult to detect when the pin has entered the
medullary canal or opposite cortex. When properly used, power drills offer
the advantage of less wobble during pin insertion, thus preventing enlargement of
the entrance hole through cortical bone. They also significantly increase the ease of
insertion of Kirschner wires, which tend to bend easily when inserted with a hand
chuck. (For further discussion of power drills, see previous section on pin insertion
methods for external fixators.)
Pin Diameter
It has been said that a goal of pinning is to fill the fracture site with pin or
pins because this gives the most stiffness to the pin-bone construct. However, the
surgeon must weigh this goal against its possible drawbacks. With a straight
bone (cat), filling the cavity will still allow anatomical reduction, although an overly
large pin in a straight bone does increase the risk of significant interference with
reestablishment of the medullary blood supply, with resultant delayed union.
 In curved bones, however (most dogs), filling the fracture site with the pin will
 often mean inability to achieve anatomical reduction. For midshaft fractures, try to
fll about 60% to 75% of the medullary cavity at its narrowest point. If in
 doubt, use a smaller pin, since you can always replace it with a larger pin. If you go
from a large pin to a smaller pin, you will have a large hole at the entry site
au yo uo au u si am au j ud raeus a cpu, iou saop ieu
narrowest diameter, you can estimate pin size directly, but if the fracture is
 proximal or distal to the narrowest diameter, it must be estimated from the
radiograph.
StackPinning
 This method of pinning involves the use of several pins rather than one pin to fill
the cavity. It is rarely needed, except in the very big dog where the biggest pin
(/4 inch) is not large enough. As a general rule, stack pinning is necessary only for
 the humerus or femur. The theoretical advantages include better rotational stability
and more points of bone contact; however, clinical results do not bear these out,
with a 50% complication rate and generally unsatisfactory results reported in one
study.&0 Another study did not find statistically significant differences in mechanical
torsional strength when comparing single-, double-, and multiple-pin fixation of
femoral fractures.81 Disadvantages of stack pinning include (1) greater tendency for
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
107
 pins to migrate because of the difficulty of firmly seating all pins distally; (2) poten-
tial problems with many pins exiting in one place (e.g., greater chance of hitting
sciatic nerve in femoral fractures); and (3) difficulty of cutting multiple pins at the
entrance site short enough to prevent soft tissue irritation.
Seating of Pin
Landmarks are given later for each bone on how far to seat a pin, but these are only
"rough estimates" and variance is common. Always watch the fracture as the pin is
driven; if distraction of the fracture is seen, the pin is probably engaging the distal
 cortex and pushing the bones apart. The pin should then be retracted, the fracture
reduced again, and additional counterforce applied to resist the tendency to distract.
 This can be done either with manual pressure from some point distal to the fracture
or with bone clamps if the fracture allows. In this situation the pin should be rotated
without too much pressure, to allow it to cut into the bone without distracting the frac-
ture. Driving the pin too far results in penetration of the distal cortex, often with result-
ing intraarticular pin placement. When this happens, the pin must be redirected from
the fracture site into the distal fragment; simply retracting the pin often results in late
 migration of the pin back into the joint. As you approach final pin placement, be sure
that no crepitus (pin on bone) is present in the joint (elbow, stifle, hock). Use another
pin of similar length, matched to the protruding end of the working pin, to confirm the
 position of the point of the pin within the bone.
Cutting of Pin
The most practical method of cutting is usually with a bolt cutter or specialized pin
cutter. Metal saws can be used but are awkward and deposit considerable amounts
of metallic particles into the skin wound. Watch the fracture during and after the
pin is cut with bolt cutters. With large pins, considerable movement of the pin
occurs with resultant movement at the fracture. Except for small pins, it is often
difficult to cut the pins short enough with bolt cutters. The usual goal is to cut the
pin as short as possible (~5 mm) above the bone. This prevents large seromas and
impingement on nearby structures (sciatic nerve, femoral condyles), lessens post-
operative pain, and keeps the pins more stable by avoiding muscle and tissue action
on the exposed pin end. One method of keeping pin ends short when they cannot
ap radod a oud a eas ( iel a u pap s n aea 
(2) withdraw it about 2 cm; (3) cut off as close as possible (usually about 2-3 cm
from bone); and (4) impact the pin with a punch and mallet, being careful to
stabilize the fracture carefully before impacting.
PinPlacementinLongBones
Pins are placed in long bones by either retrograding (i.e., driving pins from
fracture site, out one end of the bone and then back into opposite fragment) or
normograding, where the pin is placed from one end of the bone, into and through
the medullary canal, and into the other fragment (see Figures 17-1 and 17-2).
Depending on the bone, one or both methods may be acceptable, as discussed in the
appropriate chapters.
Rush Pin
Instrumentation
 , o (u sl) yu s,  siaa ui ae Aau ae sud ys
(6.6 mm). The latter size is too large for any small animal application; 3/32 inch
108
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
(2.4 mm) and 1/s inch (3.2 mm) are the most useful sizes in dogs. Pins are available
in a variety of lengths proportional to their diameter (Osteo-Technology
     q    (    
 surgery table. Because these pins are often used in pairs and because they are precut
in length, it is probably worthwhile, although not absolutely necessary, to have
a double set of pins. The only other special equipment necessary for use of Rush pins
is an impactor, which is used to seat the pin. Adequate substitutes for Rush pins can
be fabricated from Steinmann pins with a metal saw and file, but this must be done
preoperatively.
Technique
 Unlike the Steinmann pin, which is static in the medullary canal, the Rush pin is put
( 's-z an) paasu si u se puaq oi paro si ud au ieui os auoq aui oiu
au jo sixe su aui oi saarp oz Aiaexodde jo aue ue ie paasui si ud au
bone. If the forces produced on the bone are properly manipulated, they can be used
to increase the stability of the fixation. The technique is somewhat more demand-
ing than Steinmann pinning and will require some practice to perfect, but it is well
worth doing so.
1. Because Rush pins do not have cutting points, a pilot hole must be drilled with a
twist drill or Steinmann pin of the same size as the Rush pin (Figure 2-55, B1).
With the fracture reduced, the pin is started into the bone while held at the
hooked end in a pair of pliers. The hook provides a means of keeping the
gliding point properly oriented to strike the second cortex. When double pins
are used for proximal or distal fractures, the pin length is chosen to
approximate two thirds to three fourths of the bone length (Figure 2-55, A).
Ans u d a jo ae a pe ai aoq uo pasq si raa 
immature animals, a pin that is too stiff (because of its diameter) will tend to
break through the second cortex rather than bend and glide. For cats and small-
breed dogs, /16 inch (1.5 mm) is appropriate; 3/32 inch (2.4 mm) is used for
animals to 30 pounds (15 kg); and 1/s inch (3.2 mm) is used for larger animals.
 2. When resistance is felt as the pin contacts the opposite cortex, the pin is driven
with a mallet and a special Rush pin driver or impactor, which is similar to a
nail set, although the pliers will provide sufficient force to insert the smaller
pins (Figure 2-55, B2). The double pins are alternately driven a short distance,
a yoo aun as in pas si siad ro roin ai s An are oa 
of the pin tightly against the entry cortex, where it provides some compression
and stability against rotation of the pin. If the pin resists moderate driving
force, it can be prebent slightly to relieve some bending strain and allow easier
insertion without the chance of damaging the bone (Figure 2-55, B3). This
bend must not be so severe as to preclude the pin being further bent as it is
inserted; to do so would make the pin behave in a passive rather than a
 dynamic mode, and stability would be compromised.
 3. When a Rush pin crosses an oblique fracture, its dynamic characteristics will
cause either distraction or compression of the fracture line, depending on the
orientation of the pin relative to the obliquity of the fracture (Figure 2-55, C)
When driving double pins, it is important to lead with the pin that will tend to
reduce the fracture, then follow with the pin that displaces the fracture.
4. Because of the hook end lying close to the bone, Rush pins are usually not
removed after bone union because they create very little soft tissue irritation.
When used across physeal lines, Rush pins may cause growth arrest in animals
 sd a   d q u s ae jo s  i san
4 weeks postoperatively or by cutting off the hook after the pin is seated.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
109
FIGURE 2-55. Rush pin principles. A, Proper length of pins, usually two thirds to three
fourths the length of the bone, allow the pins to glide off the opposite cortex and bend back
toward the cortex of insertion, as in 1. The elasticity of the pins causes them to exert dynamic
forces on the bone, as indicated by the arrows. If the pins are too short (2), their elasticity
will cause distraction of the fracture. If the pins are too long (3), the tips of the pins may
impinge the cortex sufficiently (arrows) to prevent complete reduction of the fracture. B, The
pilot hole is drilled with a Steinmann pin or bone awl at an angle of approximately 20 degrees
to the long axis of the bone (1), and both pins are seated before being alternately driven
across the fracture line (2). If inserted at the correct angle, the pins will deform and glide on
the opposite cortex with moderate force. If the condyle is too wide to allow insertion at the
proper angle, the pins are relieved of stress by gentle bending (3), to allow easier bending at
the opposite cortex. If bent too far, the pin will lose its dynamic force on the bone.
Continued
110
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
C
11
FIGURE 2-55. Contirued C, When double pinning an oblique fracture (1), it is important
to drive and partially seat first the pin that forms a V angle with the fracture line (2) because
this pin will create some compression force at the second cortex and will cause minimal dis-
placement of the short distal fragment. If the pin that forms an X angle with the fracture line
Alternating the advancement of the pins until they are seated close against the bone (4) main-
tains good reduction.
Interlocking Nail
The interlocking nail system is now available with 4.0-, 4.7-, 6.0-, and
 8.0-mm-diameter nails, using the standard two holes proximal and distal for
the locking screws (Innovative Animal Products). Each diameter size comes in
different lengths. The interlocking nail has a trocar point, although IM pins of
smaller diameter are often used first to open the medullary canal. Fracture reduc-
tion is accomplished through a limited surgical approach, and the interlocking
nail is then driven into the intramedullary space with technique similar to the IM
pin. Each nail has a machined joint proximally that allows attachment of an exten-
sion to the drill guide jig (see Figure 2-54, E). Nail length is therefore an important
 issue for preoperative planning, since cutting off the jointed end is not desirable.
 The location and number of the interlocking screw holes in relation to the fracture
are also important preoperative considerations. Templates are available for onlay to
 the radiographs and to facilitate proper choices in preoperative planning. Once the
drill guide jig is attached to the pin extension, drill guide inserts and sleeves are used
through the jig to position the locking screws properly in the nail holes. The jig
 is fairly effective at blind location of the nail holes, with one report indicating only
a 4% prevalence of misdirected screws.72
CERCLAGE WIRE
refers to a flexible wire that completely (see Figure 2-59, H) or partially (see
Figure 2-59, I) passes around the circumference of a bone and is then tightened to
is also known as hemicerclage. Cerclage or hemicerclage wire is never used as the
 sole method of fixation on any type of diaphyseal fracture. To do so routinely causes
 a pathological fracture at the most distal wire, which acts as a stress concentrator
for bending forces.
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
111
Current clinical use of cerclage wiring is based on the work of Rhinelander,&2 who
showed that the small diameter of the tightly placed wire did nothing to disturb the
centripetal flow of blood from medullary canal to periosteum. Recent emphasis on
the concept of biological fixation suggests that fracture fragments should be left
undisturbed when possible, so that remaining viable cells can contribute to
callus formation. A decision to use cerclage wire to stabilize a fragment must be bal-
anced against potential damage to fragment blood supply inherent to fragment
manipulation. The surgeon must be gentle and efficient in reduction of fragments
and application of cerclage wire to avoid this concern. Preserving cortical blood
d q sn a oi se anss os u s ans
and the wires being tight; a moving wire will disrupt the periosteal capillary net-
work, devascularizing the underlying bone and disrupting periosteal callus forma-
tion. Inappropriate application of cerclage wire resulting in loose wire is a common
cause of delayed union or nonunion in healing of fractures. Careful adherence
to application fundamentals is important to avoid complications in the use of
cerclage wire.
Indications
 Cerclage wires are used primarily on long oblique, spiral, and certain comminuted
A and B), external skeletal fixators (Figure 2-56, C and D), and bone plates
(Figure 2-57). Additionally, cerclage wires are used intraoperatively to aid in
holding fracture segments in the reduced position while primary fixation is applied
(see Figure 2-57).
Technique
 Several fundamentals must be observed if cerclage wires are to be used with optimal
success.
1. Cerclage wire fixation should be restricted to those fractures in which the
length of the fracture line is at least twice the diameter of the bone or longer
(see Figure 2-59, D). This ensures that the fracture line describes an angle of
45 degrees or less with the axial axis of the bone, and thus tensioning of the
wire produces stable interfragmentary compression rather than shear forces
(see Figure 2-59, E).
 2. Restrict use of wires to areas where the cylinder of bone can be reconstructed
 anatomically, this means that, with rare exceptions, there should be no more
than two fragments and two fracture lines in the transverse plane described by
fragments are large and interdigitate well, so that the compression afforded by
the wire will maintain reduction (see Figure 2-59, F). Cerclage wires shouid not
be used to surround multiple unreduced fragments (see Figure 2-59, G). These
wires will become loose and disrupt vascular supply, and they are one of the
main causes of nonunion.
 3. Use monofilament stainless steel wire of sufficient strength for immobilization.
Wire of 22 gauge (0.025 inch, 0.64 mm) is suitable for toy breeds and cats,
20 gauge (0.032 inch, 0.81 mm) for average dogs, and 18 gauge (0.040 inch,
1.0 mm) for large breeds. For giant breeds, 16 gauge (0.049 inch, 1.25 mm) is
i ae oot are ieq sam jo apis au uo a ot isaes semie si i paiei!
than too small.
112
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
D
G
H
FIGURE 2-56. Auxiliary fixation used with intramedullary {IM) pin. A, Two cerclage
wires. B, Two hemicerclage wires. C, External fixator 1/1 pin (half-Kirschner splint) and
cerclage wires. D, External fixator, 2/2 pins, and cerclage wires used in a multiple fracture.
E, Lag screws. Their use is usually limited to larger dogs. F, Two IM pins used in a serrated,
short oblique fracture. G and H, Interfragmentary wire crossed around IM pin as auxiliary
fixation in a serrated transverse fracture.
4. Apply all wires tightly to bring about rigid fixation of the fracture segments.
 Anything short of this allows movement of the implant and bone fragment,
with subsequent devascularization, as well as demineralization of bone.
 Placement of a tight wire involves both tensioning the wire around the bone
and then securing it in place. Two methods are in common use: twisting a
straight wire and bending an eyelet wire (see Figure 2-59, A and B); both
 produce equally good clinical results when properly performed. The eyelet wire
technique results in less soft tissue irritation from the bent end, is less
technically demanding than the twist method, but is slightly more expensive.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
113
FIGURE 2-57. Cerclage wire and bone
plate. A, Comminuted fracture of the femur.
B, Comminuted area reconstructed and com-
pressed using cerclage wires and a lag screw.
C, Neutralization plate applied.
A
B
C
Although more tension is produced in the wire by the eyelet method, the yield
point, where the wire begins to deform due to tension forces, is lower for the
eyelet than the twisted wire 8384 This difference can be negated by using the
 next larger size of wire with the eyelet method. With either method, it is
important to try moving each wire on the bone after placement. There should
be no movement with the application of any reasonable force. Twisted wires
can be given additional twists to further tighten them, but this is not possible
with bent eyelet wires, which must be replaced if not tight enough on the
An s
Twist Method
 pe y s- am) as ab ae sm imi d n pa snu
Almost any type of pliers will suffice, but needle holders are only useful with the
smallest wire. The threaded collar device in Figure 2-58, A is the most consistent
and easiest to use. Wires should be twisted under tension preload so as to produce
a uniform twist of both wires (Figure 2-59, B); this requires that the position of the
twisting device be continuously adjusted to produce the correct twist. Excessive
movement of the twisting instrument or twisting one wire only (Figure 2-59, C)
results in fracture of the wire before it is tight. The twisted end either can be cut
seven or eight twists from the bone and bent flat while continuing to twist slightly
 or can be left upright and cut three or four twists from the bone. The latter results
 Aq pao si am aui anaym Ao auop aq ueo inq cuoisan jo ss iseal an u
adequate thickness of soft tissue.
Bent Eyelet Wire Method
Although there are several types of tighteners available for eyelet wire, including
those with built-in tension gauges (Figure 2-62, D), the simple type illustrated in
(Figure 2-58, C) produces equally good results clinically and experimentally.84 The
tensioning and bending method is illustrated in Figure 2-60.
 5. In applying the wire, avoid destruction of periosteal blood supply resulting 
from detachment of soft tissue in areas where muscle or ligaments attach to
114
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
C
FGURE 2-58.V
Wire-tightening
instruments. A, This twisting
instrument secures the wire
between a fixed, double-perforated
tip and a large nut that is tight-
ened (arrow) on a threa ded shaft.
B, Parallel jaw pliers work well
for twisting and are available at
hardware stores. C, Eyelet wires
 are tightened by wrapping the long
end of the wire around a rotating
key inserted into a hollow bullet-
nosed tube.
 periosteum. Avoid entrapping muscle or nerves by passing the wire very close
to the bone. The wire passer serves very well for placing the wire around the
bone with a minimum of trauma (Figure 2-61). The end of the wire can also be
q a e a ssd e ais ade jo a e o 
with a needle holder. This method works best with the larger wire sizes. The
wire must be placed so that it will be perpendicular to the axial axis of the
 bone when tightened; an angled wire will loosen just as a ring that is too large
on the finger will be loose. Avoid placing wire in an area where it will increase
the fracture gap when tightened.
6. If a relatively long fracture area is to be covered, the cerclage wires should be
 s a jo spu a  uu s) yu , adde padm
spaced approximately 1 to 1.5 cm apart. Placement closer than this may result
in unnecessary devitalization of the bone (caused by detachment of soft tissue
in placing the wires) and delay of union and does not increase the fixation
stability. The number of cerclage wires used is in direct relation to the length of
the fracture, but is never less than two. A single wire acts as a fulcrum to
concentrate all bending loads but cannot supply enough interfragmentary
compression to prevent bending. Single wires are used only for fissure
fractures.
 7. When placing a full cerclage on a bone that is conical, or tapering,
(e.g, proximal femur), precautions need to be taken to prevent the wire from
slipping toward the smaller diameter and thus becoming loose. Often the
natural surface irregularities of the bone accomplish this, but it may be
necessary to notch the bone or drive a small K-wire perpendicular to the bone 
to trap the wire. One end of the K-wire is bent 90 degrees to discourage late 
migration of the implant.
8. Above all, stabilize the main bone fragments with stable, uninterrupted
with an IM pin, an external fixator, or a bone plate.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
115
G
B
C
D
2d
E
FIGURE 2-59. Cerclage wire principles. A, Tightening and securing an eyelet wire.
See also Figure 2-60. B, Tightening and securing a twisted wire. Note that each wire is
equally twisted at a uniform angle and that there are at least three twists below the cut
ends. C, An improperly tightened twisted wire. This wire will loosen when loaded and will
produced by a cerclage wire, the length of the oblique fracture line must equal at least twice
the bone diameter. Wires are placed approximately 5 mm from the end of the fracture and
spaced about 1 cm apart. There is no mechanical advantage to closer spacing (d, diameter).
E, If the length of the fracture line is less than twice the bone diameter, tightening the wire
produces shearing rather than compression forces. F and G, Stability of cerclage fixation
requires that the tubular shape of the diaphysis be reconstructable and that a maximum of
 op o p a ou a s ae   a s 
interlock when compressed, the wire will become loose as the fragments move. H, An ideal
cerclage wire fixation: a long oblique two-piece fracture, used in support of a Steinmann
pin. I, Placing part of the wire through a bone tunnel does not change the mechanical
function of the wires, and this is a good method of preventing displacement of wires in
a ta pering bone.
 Modifications of the eyelet and twist methods are described to use double-loop,
loads before loosening than single twist or eyelet methods.&5
Double-Loop Cerclage
Double-loop cerclage is formed from a single length of wire, folded near its center
(Figure 2-62, A and D).ss Both free ends of the wire are passed through the center
116
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
secured in the rotating key of the tightener. B, Tension is produced in the wire as the key is
turned. The angular bend of the wire, indicated by the arrow, must not be too acute or the
wire will fatigue and easily break. C, After attaining sufficient tension, the tightener is rotated
 90 degrees to secure the wire. D, Loosening the tightener and rotating it back to the upright
 position allows the bent wire to be pressed closely to the bone and then cut.
FIGURE 2-61. AO/ASIF wire passer.
This  instrument  makes it  possible  to
insert the cerclage wire around the bone
with minimal soft tissue detachment.
(Courtesy Synthes, Ltd, Paoli, Pa.)
fold and tightened with a single-eyelet tightener with two cranks or a double-loop
tightener (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa).
Double-Wrap Cerclage
Double-wrap cerclage is formed from a single-eyelet cerclage (Figure 2-62, B). The
wire is of sufficient length to encircle the bone twice before placing the free end
through the eyelet.&s The wire is tensioned and bent over with a wire-tightening
instrument.
Loop/Twist Cerclage
 Loop/twist cerclage is formed by folding a single wire in half, thereby constructing
a small loop in the fold (Figure 2-62, C).8s Both free ends of the wire encircle the
bone. One end is passed through the loop but enters the tightener and is attached to
the second crank. The first end is tightened and bent over, but not cut. The second
crank is tightened to take up the slack, and the instrument is rotated on its axis to
complete the twist.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
117
A
11
FIGURE 2-62. Double cerclage wire patterns. A, Double-loop cerclage has both free ends
of the wire passed through the center fold and tightened. B, Double-wrap cerclage is formed
from a single-eyelet cerclage with sufficient length to encircle the bone twice before placing
the free end through the eyelet. C, Loop/twist cerclage is formed by folding a single wire in
half, thereby constructing a small loop in the fold. Both free ends of the wire encircle the
bone. One end is passed through the loop but enters the tightener and is attached to the
second crank. The first end is tightened and bent over, but not cut. The second crank is
tightened to take up the slack, and the instrument is rotated on its axis to complete the twist.
D, Left, Single-eyelet tightener with two cranks. Right, Double-loop tightener. (Courtesy
Synthes, Ltd, Paoli, Pa).
INTERFRAGMENTARY WIRE
These techniques are typically utilized to prevent rotation of short oblique or
transverse fractures, to secure bone fragments, and to stabilize fissure fractures.
As the name "interfragmentary" wire implies, the wire does not encircle the bone,
but rather passes through and partially around the bone. This is the least secure and
consistent form of internal fixation and should not be depended on for long-lasting
stability when subjected to high dynamic loading forces. It should be reserved for
smaller dogs and cats, or for immature animals that can be expected to form callus
early and abundantly. Interfragmentary wires are difficult to tighten because of
 the acute bends introduced during placement of wire in the bone. If the fracture line
is suitable for cerclage wiring, this is always a better choice relative to stability
 produced.
The most common patterns using interfragmentary wire are shown in Figure 2-63.
The holes in the bone are made with K-wires or twist drills, and the wire is passed
through the holes. If the wire enters the medullary canal, it is best to drill the
bone first, place the wire into both bone segments, reduce the fracture, then seat
the pin and tighten the wire. It makes little difference if the pin is encircled, as in
Figure 2-63, B and C, unless the pin is small enough to deform and be brought into
contact with the cortex. The cruciate and horizontal mattress patterns shown in
 Figure 2-63, D, E, and F, are more effective in preventing rotation than are simple
patterns (Figure 2-63, A).86 Even so, they are not very efficient, merely changing the
rotational point from the central axis of the bone to the cortex secured by the wire.
The opposite side of the bone remains unstable unless the fracture lines interdigitate
sufficiently. Maximum rotational stability is provided by the transfixation pin and
118
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
G
FIGURE 2-63. Various interfragmentary wire patterns. A, Simple interfragmentary
"suture” placed through holes drilled from the cortex to the medullary cavity. The wire must
be positioned before the fracture is reduced. B and C, Wire placed around the pin. In some
situations this may pull the pin tightly against the cortex, which increases stability of the
fixation. D and E, Interfragmentary wires placed through bone tunnels tangential to the
medullary cortex. These patterns offer increased rotational stability and can be placed after
the fracture is reduced. F and G, Combining interfragmentary wires with K-wires may be
simpler than drilling bone tunnels. Crossing the fracture line with the K-wire, as in G, adds
considerable rotational sta bility.
wire technique shown in Figure 2-63, G. Application of additional pins and wire to
the transfixation device has been described to increase the strength of the configu-
ration; however, additional manipulation of the fragments may cause soft tissue and
vascular damage that could compromise healing.
TENSION BAND WIRE
According to the tension band principle, active distracting forces are counteracted
and converted into compressive forces.*7 The tensile forces exerted by contraction
of muscles on fractures such as those involving the olecranon proces, trochanter
major, tuber calcis, or detached tibial tuberosity can be overcome and converted to
 compressive forces by inserting two K-wires and a tension band wire (Figure 2-64).
The K-wires are needed to neutralize shear forces at the fracture line, and the ten-
sion band wire not only neutralizes bending loads, but actually converts them to
compressive forces. The cortex that forms the bending point must be intact for this
method to work. The wire is usually placed in a figure-of-8 fashion to ensure that
the longest possible lever arm, between the bending point and the wire, is main-
tained. This fixation device is more stable when the animal is weight bearing than
when at rest, which is a useful situation for the veterinary surgeon.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
119
B
+
FIGURE 2-64.
Tension band wire and Kirschner wire (K-wire) fixation. A, Olecranon frac
ture. The K-wires are placed at caudomedial and lateral corners of triceps tendon insertion.
Ideally, the pins contact the cranial ulnar cortex distal to the coronoid process. A transverse
hole (a) is drilled through the caudal cortex. B, The tension band wire is positioned and
don close to the olecranon proximally. The K-wires are bent caudally, cut, and, C, rotated
180 degrees so that the ends are buried in soft tissue. If the fragments of this fracture do not
interlock or if comminution is present, plate fixation is indicated.
Technique
The tension band technique described and illustrated here is on the olecranon, one
of the most common applications. The usual procedure in repairing a fracture or
osteotomy of the olecranon process requires first reducing the fracture, then insert-
ing two pins that are started on the caudomedial and caudolateral areas of the tuber.
Such placement interferes less with the triceps tendon, and bending of the pins can
be accomplished more effectively. If the pins can be inserted diagonally to engage
the cranial cortex distally, they do a better job of securing the fragments and coun-
tering rotational and shearing forces than if they just go down the medullary canal.
The pins should be as parallel to each other as possible to allow for compression
of the fracture line as the wires are tightened. Note that the olecranon is concave on
the medial side, and that pins tend to exit the cortices prematurely unless aimed
carefully in a direction parallel with the lateral cortex.
A transverse hole is then drilled through the diaphysis distal to the fracture
site (Figure 2-64, A). This hole is positioned to place the crossing point to the
figure-of-8 wire near the fracture line and thus maintain the lever arm. The wire
is inserted in a figure-of-8 manner and tightened by twisting each side of the
figure-of-8. Avoid overtightening, because this will create a gap at the articular
notch if the fracture is in this area (Figure 2-64, B). Note that the wire is passed
through the triceps tendon close to the bone to avoid cutting the tendon when
tightening the wire. Alternatively, the wire can be placed through a second hole in
the bone to prevent interference with soft tissues, as is done in the tuber calcis
(Figure 2-65, D). Use monofilament stainless steel wire of sufficient strength for
immobilization. As listed earlier for cerclage wire, wire diameter of 22 gauge
(0.025 inch, 0.64 mm) is suitable for toy breeds and cats, 20 gauge (0.032 inch,
0.81 mm) for average dogs, and 18 gauge (0.040 inch, 1.0 mm) for large breeds.
Giant breeds place considerable stress on an olecranon repair and are the most likely
120
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
breeds to have loosened fixation. For giant breeds, 16 gauge (0.049 inch, 1.25 mm)
and the largest possible pins are indicated. Again, it is always safest to err on the side
of wires that are too large rather than too small. Eyelet wires can be used in place of
twisted wire, but because of the stiffness of the wire, some difficulty will be noted in
the 1.0- and 1.25-mm sizes in making both halves of the figure-of-8 equally tight.
 The K-wires are then bent down the caudal surface of the ulna, cut, and rotated
so that the ends are buried in soft tissue (Figure 2-64, C). If properly inserted, these
implants do not interfere with movement of soft tissue and usually do not need to
be removed after healing. If removal is desired because of lameness or seroma
formation, the knot is untwisted a few turns to allow a pin cutter to cut each side
 of the knot. The wire is then twisted around a needle holder as it pulls through the
tissues. It may have to be cut several times during this maneuver depending on wire
length.
 Other situations in which the tension band wire principle can be used to
 advantage include the following:
1. Avulsion fracture or osteotomy of the trochanter major of the femur
(Figure 2-65, A)
2.
Avulsion fracture of the tibial tubercle (Figure 2-65, B)
3. Fracture or osteotomy of the medial malleolus of the tibia
(Figure 2-65, C)
4. Fracture of the tuber calcanei (Figure 2-65, D)
5. Fracture or osteotomy of the acromial process of the scapula, usually in
large dogs (Figure 2-65, E)
E
F
G
FIGURE 2-65.
 Conditions in which the tension band wire principle can be used to advan
tage. A, Avulsion fracture or osteotomy of trochanter major of femur. B, Avulsion fracture of
tibial tubercle. C, Fracture or osteotomy of medial malleolus of tibia. D, Fracture of tuber cal-
canei. E, Fracture or osteotomy of acromion process of scapula. F, Fracture or osteotomy of
greater tuberosity of humerus. G, Arthrodesis of intertarsal joint.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
121
 6. Fracture or osteotomy of the greater tuberosity of the humerus 
(Figure 2-65, F)
7. Arthrodesis of the proximal intertarsal joint (Figure 2-65, G)
BONE SCREWS
There are two basic types of bone screws: cancellous (Figure 2-66) and cortical
- smaos auo jo saosse jeidi aqn sap siz anb sszs(ii7 ansi)
able to the veterinary surgeon. Bone screws are usually employed to provide static
interfragmentary or plate/bone compression by means of the lag screw principle.
 Interfragmentary compression is produced when the head of the screw bears on the
'xa puos au u auo paeua ae maios aul jo spar au pue xaoo isig
 Tightening of the screw converts that torque force to interfragmentary compression.
Partially threaded screws automatically function as lag screws if their threads do not
cross the fracture line (Figure 2-66, B and C). Fully threaded screws require special
insertion technique to function as interfragmentary lag screws (Figure 2-67, B
and C). Fully threaded screws provide plate/bone compression because the screw
threads do not engage the plate and are anchored in the bone only, usually in two
cortices. A secondary function of bone screws is to hold fragments in a fixed
position without interfragmentary compression, where it is called a position screw.
Such use is rare, usually being applied to prevent a small bone fragment or graft
from displacing into the medullary canal.
B
C
FIGURE 2-66. Partially threaded lag screws. A, Partially threaded screws most often have
a thread designed for cancellous bone. The junction of the smooth shank and the threads is
a potential "stress raiser,” where bending loads concentrate. Both fragments are drilled the
diameter of the screw shank. This will allow tapping of the screw threads in the second
fragment. B, Lateral part of the humeral condyle sta bilized by lag screw fixation. In order for
compression to be produced, it is critical that all the threads be across the fracture line
from the screw head. This may position the shank/thread junction close to the fracture line
and predispose to breakage of the screw. C, In this femoral neck fracture, it can be seen that
the shank/thread junction is some distance from the fracture, with little chance of screw
breakage.
122
A
B
C
D
E
G
H
FIGURE 2-67. Fully threaded lag screws. Although these illustrations show diaphyseal
bone, the same principles apply in metaphyseal fractures, as shown in Figure 2-66. A, Fully
threaded screws typically are designed for use in cortical bone, although this does not
diminish their usefulness in canine and feline metaphyseal regions. B, For fully threaded
first cortex ( fragment) must be equal to the diameter of the screw threads, allowing the screw
to glide within the hole. The hole in the second cortex is the diameter of the core of the
threads, allowing the threads to engage or tap into the bone. C, Because of the glide hole
in the first cortex, the bone is pulled into compression between the screw head in the first
cortex and the distal threads engaged in the second cortex. D, If both cortices are threaded
(or tapped), the bone cannot glide on the screw, and no compression is generated. Continued
tightening of the screw will strip the threads in the bone. E and F, Although a lag screw
perpendicular to the fracture line, as in C, produces maximal interfragmentary compression,
h 'say hes u uiot leixe isisau oi ae ianaq si xahoo aui on renuadiad maos e
is ideal to combine both positions if the fracture line is long enough to accommodate two
screws. G and H, This complex fracture was completely stabilized by interfragmentary lag
bending, rotational, and axial forces. I, When the plane of the fracture line allows, interfrag-
mentary compression can be applied by a lag screw placed through a plate hole. As in G and
H, the plate functions as a neutralization plate.
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
123
-Type
Cortex
 Sm.Canc.
Cortex
Cortex
 Canceflous
Screw:
-Diameter (mm)
1.5
2.0
2.7
3.5
4.0
4.5
5.5
6.5
in hard
Drill Bit dia.
1.5
2.0
2.7
3.5
none
4.5
5.5
bone
4.5
tor Gliding Hole
.2.
for Threaded Hole
Drill Bit dia.
1.1
1.5
2.0
2.5
2.5
3.2
4.0
3.2
o, de1
1.5
2.0
2.7
3.5
(4.0)
4.5
5.5
(6.5)
FIGURE 2-68.
Screw, drill bit, and tap sizes. (Courtesy Synthes, Ltd, Paoli, Pa.)
Cancellous screws are used to compress fragments of epiphyseal and metaphyseal
bone. The screw may be partially or completely threaded with relatively few threads
 per unit length; threads are quite deep, and the pitch of the threads is relatively high.
Although very useful in human osteoporotic bone, there is much less need for this
type thread in canine and feline bone, since even the metaphyseal zones are covered
in dense cortical bone, where cortically threaded screws hold well. Partially
threaded screws are inherently weak at the junction of the threaded and unthreaded
zones, where there is a dramatic change in stiffness of the screw shaft. This produces
a stress-concentrating effect and makes this area subject to stress fracture when sub-
 ansua d A pinus uoms an aaru speoi uaq aaadan on paa
this junction is as far from the fracture line as possible.
Cortical screws are designed to be used primarily in the dense diaphyseal bone
  ad s  m apan Ae si mas au -  s)
than cancellous screws; threads are shallower and more flatly pitched than cancel-
 se uo oi ap aq uo saros asae uede adod  'smas sns
screws (see Figure 2-67, B through I). Because fully threaded screws are of uniform
 diameter throughout their length, they are not subject to the stress-accumulating
effect just described for partially threaded screws. Also, fully threaded screws are
less prone to breakage when used in heavily stressed fractures such as the lateral
 aspect of the humeral condyle.
 Indications and Principles of Insertion
Primary Fixation in Certain Fractures
The fractures fixed with bone screws are usually in the metaphyseal or articular
areas of the bone rather than in the diaphysis. Either partially threaded cancellous
screws or fully threaded cortical screws can be used. To accomplish interfragmental
compression, cancellous screws are inserted so that the thread of the screw does not
124
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
cross the fracture line (see Figure 2-66, B and C). The fracture segments are first
 ms    o d re  e n
diameter in the threaded area; Figure 2-68) is drilled, the thread is cut using the
appropriate tap. Some cancellous screws are self-tapping and thus do not require
pretapping. Tightening the screw produces compression of the fracture segments as
the near fragment glides on the smooth shank of the screw.
A cortical screw will bring about interfragmentary compression when it is
inserted to accomplish a lag effect, and it can also be used to repair these fractures
when inserted in the manner described later (see Figure 2-67). This requires that
(1) an oversized hole equal to the outer diameter of the screw threads (glide hole)
 be drilled in the near cortex and (2) a tap hole be drilled in the far cortex and tapped
so that the screw thread becomes engaged on insertion. The latter step can be
 omitted if the screw is self-tapping. Precise centering of the tap hole with the glide
hole is best accomplished by placing an insert drill sleeve in the glide hole.
Alternatively, the tap hole is first drilled through both cortices, and then the first
cortex hole is enlarged to glide hole diameter. Tightening the screw allows compres-
 o    i ae  so  an a a  i s
screw because the glide hole is not engaging screw threads (see Figure 2-67, C).
When threads are engaged in both cortices, no gliding can occur, and thus no
compression is produced (see Figure 2-67, D). Maximum interfragmentary
r a ii redd s mas a jo sxe a m pas s ss
line; therefore an attempt is always made to orient the screw as close to this axis
as bone contour and exposure will allow.
Screws are never used as the primary fixation in shaft fractures. They are always
supplemented with a plate, pin, or external skeletal fixator. Primary fixation of shaft
fractures with screws always results in fracture at a screw hole or failure of the
a huu se sds peaxa ue  paoi si q i ssaun masn
advantages of internal fixation.
Aid in Reduction and Auxiliary Fixation
With long oblique, spiral, or multiple fractures of the diaphysis, cortical bone
screws inserted with a lag effect to accomplish interfragmentary compression
may be used as an aid in accomplishing reduction and serve as auxiliary fixation
(see Figure 2-67, F). The recent emphasis on the concept of biological fixation
would encourage that fracture fragments be left undisturbed when possible, so that
remaining viable cells can contribute to callus formation. A decision to use lag
screws to stabilize a fragment must be balanced against the potential for damage to
fragment blood supply inherent to fragment manipulation. The surgeon must be
gentle and efficient in the reduction of fragments and application of lag screws to
avoid this concern.
Two adjoining fragments are reduced and usually held in the reduced-compressed
position during drilling, tapping, and insertion of the bone screw. The bone screw
should be inserted at a distance from the fracture line at least equal to the screw
 ain a  s s'i aq i au a  r a os a
When the fracture is multiple in nature and the bone segments are of sufficient size,
the entire bone or portions of it may be reconstructed anatomically by reducing and
fixing two fragments at a time until reconstruction is complete (see Figure 2-67, G).
 s      si (s x  d  
2-67, H). Plate screws can also be inserted for lag effect when the fracture line is
properly oriented to the plate (see Figure 2-67, I). Whenever possible, lag screws
should be used in preference to cerclage wire to accomplish interfragmental com-
pression and to aid in reduction and auxiliary fixation. Lag screws are more reliable
than cerclage wires in producing interfragmentary compression because fewer
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
125
potential technique errors are possible during insertion. Additionally, insertion
of a lag screw causes less disruption of soft tissue and periosteal blood supply than
does placement of a cerclage wire, and if a screw should loosen, it does not cause
the vascular disruption attributed to a loose cerclage wire.
BONE PLATES
One of the primary objectives in the treatment of fractures is early return to full
function of the injured limb. Bone plates are ideal for accomplishing this goal
because they have the potential to restore rigid stability to the reconstructed
fractured bone when properly applied.87-89 Bone plates are adaptable to many
situations, as follows:
1. Most long-bone fractures
 2. Multiple and complex fractures
 3. Fractures in larger dogs (especially the femur) because postoperative
complications are less frequent and postoperative care is reduced when the
fixation apparatus is covered with soft tissue
Although many designs and sizes of plates are available, the ASIF (Association
for the Study of Internal Fixation, Synthes Ltd., Paoli, Pa) system is used here to
 ae sro a ym m ss a i ii asaq sadrud  a
familiar (Figure 2-69). Several manufacturers now produce plates and screws
very similar in design and function to the ASIF implants. For optimum results in
the use of bone plates, a scientific understanding of the following areas is a
prerequisite:
1. Anatomy (e.g., structure of bone; location of blood and nerve supply;
muscle separations; attachments of muscles, tendons, and ligaments)
2. Principles of active forces (knowledge of compresson, tension, and torsional
and bending forces as they affect the bone)
 3. Understanding of the mechanics of fixation in detail, and viewing and
 planning its application in three dimensions
4. Proper selection of a surgical approach and method of internal fixation best
suited for the individual fracture
(de s u uisssp snad ose as) sand -o 's
It is important to be able to interpret the biological response with rigid fixation,
where primary or direct bone union is anticipated. Development of a "cloudy"
irritation callus is a warning sign and indicates some movement occurring at
the fracture site and the potential for delayed union or nonunion. When two
vascular, anatomically reduced bone fragments are rigidly fixed under compression
so that no shearing or torsional forces can act on them, no resorption of bone at
the fracture line takes place, and a direct bony union occurs without any radio-
logically visible periosteal callus.1 On the other hand, if a bridging osteosyn-
thesis approach was adopted to stabilize the fracture, considerable periosteal
and endosteal bridging callus is anticipated, and its absence would be cause for
concern.
Terminology
'ad uoezu e ‘aeid uissadoo e se uoung oi paasui aq Aeu saieid
bridging plate, or a buttress plate. Such names do not imply anything about the 
physical characteristics of the plate, but only its function.
126
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 2-69. Basic bone-plating equipment and plates. (Courtesy Synthes, Ltd, Paoli, Pa.)
Compression (Tension Band) Plate
When the plate is applied so that it is under tension and the fracture fragments are
under compression, it is referred to as a compression plate or a tension band plate.
 Long bones (e.g., the femur) are subject to eccentric loading and may be compared
to a bent column. The lateral side is subject to distracting or tension forces; the
 medial side, to impacting or compressive forces (Figure 2-70, A and B). It is vital
that the plate be applied on the side of the bone that is most frequently under a dis-
tracting or tension force (Figure 2-70, C). Clinically, these surfaces are the lateral
surface of the femur, medial or cranial surface of the tibia, cranial or lateral surface
of the humerus, and the craniomedial or cranial surface of the radius.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
127
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 2-70. Principle of a compression plate. Insert the plate only on the tension side of
the bone so that the bone will receive compressive forces. Because long bones are subject to
eccentric loading, the side of the bone to be under tension must be known to determine where
to apply the plate. The femur (A), for example, can be compared with a bent column (B). The
plate that is applied to the outer or convex side can then counteract all tension forces (C) and
provide rigid internal fixation. If applied on the inner or concave surface, the plate would not
provide fixation (D); such a plate would come under excessive bending stresses and would
soon show a fatigue fracture.
When a plate is applied to the lateral surface of the femur, it counteracts all ten-
sion forces and creates compressive forces along the fracture line, thus providing
rigid internal fixation (Figure 2-70, C). If the plate were applied on the medial sur-
face, it would not give long-lasting fixation because the plate would be under exces-
sive bending stress and subject to fatigue fracture (Figure 2-70, D). It is also critical
to long-term stability and prevention of plate failure that the cortex opposite the
 plate be intact to prevent compression forces on that cortex from becoming bend-
ing forces being applied to the plate (Figure 2-70, B). The cortex opposite the plate
in this situation acts as a buttress against the compression forces.
 Production of tension in the plate was originally accomplished by use of a ten-
sioning device (see Figure 2-71, D) that was temporarily applied to the plate and
 attached to the bone, but the self-compressing plate has totally replaced the tension
plates, and the dynamic compression plate (introduced by Synthes and discussed
later) has been the pattern for these plates (Figures 2-71 and 2-72).92 Compression 
 plates are used on type A stable fractures, osteotomies, and arthrodeses.
Neutralization Plate
The neutralization plate is applied on the tension side of the bone to neutralize or
overcome torsional, bending, compressive, and distraction forces on fracture lines 
128
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 2-71. Self-compressing plate (dynamic compression plate, DCP). A and B, Sagittal
sections of a screw and screw hole in a DCP show the mechanical principle. C, The first
screws on either side of the fracture line are inserted eccentrically (load position) and alter
nately tightened to produce compression. D, If there is a wide fracture gap, additional com-
pression can be accomplished by the use of a tension device. (From Miller M et al: Manual
of internal fixation, ed 2, New York, 1979, Springer-Verlag [Translated by J Schatzker].}
that have been stabilized by interfragmentary compression supplied by lag screws
and cerclage, hemicerclage, or interfragmentary wire (see Figure 2-67, C). If possi-
ble, the plate is applied to exert some axial compression. Neutralization plates are
aq ueo ieqn saioey aqeisun  ad1 aos pue g ad 1o saoioaiso uo pasn
 anatomically reconstructed using lag screws or cerclage wire.
Buttress or Bridging Plate
This nomenclature can be somewhat confusing because the term “bridging plate"
seal fractures. The buttress plate functions to shore up a fragment of bone, thereby
maintaining length and the proper functional angle in fractures such as those involv-
ing the proximal tibial plateau (Figure 2-73, A and B). The bridging plate may be
considered a buttress plate used to splint or bridge the fracture area to maintain
length of the bone when the fragments are left unreduced or are missing and
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
129
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 2-72. Drill guides for insertion of the self-compressing plate (DCP). A, Load
guide. The guide is inserted in the screw hole of the plate with the arrow pointing to the frac-
ture line. The screw is located eccentrically so that in tightening, it moves 1 mm (it also moves
the bone fragment 1 mm). B, Neutral guide. The screw is located slightly eccentrically so that
in tightening, it moves 0.1 mm. C, For oblique fractures, a lag screw may be inserted at an
angle through the plate.
Continued
replaced with cancellous bone graft (Figure 2-73, C). The advantage for use of a
buttress plate is that the plate is applied with minimal manipulation of the bone
fragments and disruption of remaining blood supply. The disadvantage of this
plate function is that the plate must completely absorb all bending, torsional, and
compressive forces of weight bearing and is more likely to fatigue and fail compared
with compression or neutralization plate constructs. Hulse and colleagues have
130
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Rightswerenotgranted toinclude thisfigureinelectronicmedia
Pleaserefertotheprintedpublication.
FIGURE 2-72. Continued D, E, and F, When multiple fracture lines are present, the
first fracture line is compressed as the second screw in the load position is tightened. The
second fracture line is compressed as the third screw in the load position is tightened. (From
Allgower M et al: The dynamic compression plate, New York, 1973, Springer-Verlag, pp 15,
24, 34.)
suggested and described the use of an intramedullary pin, in conjunction with
a buttress plate, to reduce stress on the plate used with buttress function.93 The details
of intramedullary pin/buttress plate combination fixations are discussed later in this
chapter.
Application of Bone Plates
Number of Screws
Clinical data indicate that an absolute minimum of two screws (four cortices)
should be used in the bone segments on each side of the fracture in small animals.
However, a minimum of three or four screws (six or eight cortices) is ideal for
compression and neutralization plates and is mandatory for bridging plates in small
animals (Figure 2-74). These numbers do not vary much with the size of the animal,
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
131
A
B
C
FIGURE 2-73. Buttress plate. A, Fracture of the proximal tibial plateau. B, Buttress plate
fixation shores up the fragment, maintaining length and proper functional angle. C, Bridging
 plate bridges a defect, filled with bone graft in this case.
FIGURE 2-74. Plate fixation: number of screws and screw
placement. Although two screws (four cortices) are an absolute
minimum on each side of the fracture line, three or four screws
(six or eight cortices) are more ideal and are mandatory for larger
breeds. Minimal distance between fracture lines and screws is
At least
4 to5mm.
 4-5 mm
since the plate sizes vary to allow approximately the same number of screws per unit
 of bone length. The number of screws is a function of plate length.
Placement of Screws
hole and fracture line should be 4 to 5 mm, or at least equal to the diameter of the
screw used87,ss (see Figure 2-74).
132
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Length and Size of Bone Plate
Bone plates are made in a variety of sizes to mate with the various diameters of bone
screws (see Figure 2-69). Both length and thickness are proportional to the
size screw intended for use with the plate. A long plate is much more effective than
a short plate in neutralizing forces to which the fractured bone may be subjected,
because it increases the working length of the implant and distributes destabilizing
forces over a larger surface. The ideal approach in most cases is to use a plate that
is just short of the entire length of the bone (see Figure 2-74). See Figure 2-75 for
plate size guidelines relative to the bone involved and the size of the animal. Because
the number of screw holes is directly proportional to the length of the plate, more
screws can be used with the longer plate.
Contouring the Plate
 If anatomical reduction of the bone fragments is to be maintained during applica-
tion of the bone plate, it is mandatory that the plate be contoured to closely fit the
bone surface to which it is to be applied. In some cases, this is accomplished
by bending; in others, by a combination of bending between the screw holes
(Figure 2-76, A) and twisting (Figure 2-76, D). Prestressing (underbending) the plate
is advisable in most cases because it aids in minimizing the gap on the far
cortex and assists in compression when the screws are finally tightened. This
as aoe au ie aeld pue auoq au uamaq dea u-i e on suoe Ansn
(Figure 2-76, B and C).
Insertion of a Lag Screw through the Plate
 In some cases the fracture line lends itself to interfragmentary compression by insert-
 ing the lag screw through the bone plate (see Figure 2-67, A).
Dynamic Compression Plate
The design of the screw holes in the dynamic compression plate (DCP) is based
on the spherical gliding principle developed by the ASIF and patented by Synthes.
As the screw is tightened, the spherical screw head glides toward the center of the
plate until the deepest portion of the hole is reached (see Figure 2-71, A and B). The
result is that the bone fragment into which the screw is being driven is displaced at
the same time and in the same direction, that is, toward the center of the plate and
the fracture line. By alternate tightening of the screws on each side of the fracture
line, the fragments are compressed (see Figure 2-71, C). The tension device may be
used for additional compression, although it is rarely needed (see Figure 2-71, D).
Two drill guides (neutral and load) are used in drilling the holes in the proper posi-
tion. The load guide has the potential for moving the fragment 1.0 mm and the neu-
tral guide 0.1 mm in the 4.5-mm plate (see Figure 2-72, A and B). In general, all the
the DCP has the following additional advantages87,88:
1. Cancellous bone screws may be inserted in any plate hole.
 2. Plate screws may be applied at varying angles when used as lag screws (see
Figure 2-72, C). The interaction between the screw head and screw hole of the
plate permits angulation of the screw to a maximum range of 25 degrees in
either direction longitudinally and 7 degrees sideways.94 Exceeding the
recommended angulation of the screw in any plate may cause interference of
the screw head on the edge of the plate hole and may prevent proper seating of
the screw into the plate hole and to the far cortex of the bone.
2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
133
Veterinary plate and screw chart
A guide for the selection of plates with respect to animal weight and fracture location
DCP
 Dynamic compression plate 
LC. DCP
 Limited contact dynamic com pression plate
Br.DCP
Broad dynamic compression plate
RCP
Reco nstruction plate
AP
 Veterinary acetabular plate
MP
Mini plate
Na.DCP
Narrow dynamic compression plate
VCP
Veterinary cut-to-length plate
 Animal weight in kilograms
10
20
30
40
50
60
MP
3.5 m DCP
3.5 mm B.DCP
or LC-DCP
Humerus
2.0 mmDCP
or LCDCP
2.7mm RCP
or LC-CP
4.5 mm Na.DCP
or LC-DGP
3.5 mm/4.0 mm
6.5mm
Humeral
2.7 mm
screws
4.5 mm
screws
condyle
screws
screws
3.5mm DCP
LC-DCP
Radius
VCP
4.5 mm Br. DCP
MP
UIna
nmDCP
3.5 mm Br.DP
orL-DCP
orLC-DCP
or LC-DCP
4.5 mm Na.DCP
LC-DCP
5 mm/6.5 mm
Sacroiliac
3.5 mm/4.0mm
screws
joint
screws
4.5 mm
screws
VCP
2.7 mn DCP
or Ld-DCP
3.5 mm DCP
llium
2.7mmRCP
or LC-DF
2.0mm
DCP
orLC-CP
mmRCP
2.0 mm DCF
3.5 mmRCP
VCP
or LC-DCP
Acetabulum
MP
2.0mmAP
2.7 mm DCP, LCP-DCP
0r 2.7 mm AP
2.7 mm RCP
 Femoral
3.5 mm/4.0 mm
5.5 mm/6.5 mr
screws
2.7 mm
4.5 mm
screws
neck
screws
screws
4.5mmB.DCP
VCP
or LC-DCP
2.0 mmCP
35mm Br.DCP
or LC-DCP
3.5mmDCP
or LC-DCP
Femur
OLC-DCP
4.5 mm Na.DCP
mmRCP
or[C-DCP
2.0mmDCR
3.
mm DCP
4.5 mm Br.DpP
MP
LC-DCP
or LC-DCF
Tibia
VCP
2.7mmDCP
or LC-DCP
orLC-DCH
D
22
44
66
88
110
132
 Animal weight in pounds
FIGURE 2-75. A guide for selection of plates with respect to animal weight and fracture
location. (Courtesy Synthes, Ltd, Paoli, Pa.)
134
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
D
FIGURE 2-76. Plate fixation: contouring the plate. A, The plate must be contoured so that
it approximately fits the bone surface to which it is applied. Using the bone plate-bending
press, gently bend the plate between the screw holes. B, Prestressing {underbending) the plate
supplies added compression to the far cortex. In a curved bone the plate is contoured to leave
a 1-mm gap between plate and bone at the fracture site. In a straight bone the plate is bowed
slightly to produce the 1-mm gap. C, Tightening the prestressed plate causes added compres.
ad e io ot pasn aq A suni susm ' aneld al aisddo xahoo an uo uos
around its central axis.
3. With a fracture of three or more segments, the plate has the potential for
compression at each of the fracture lines (see Figure 2-72, D, E, and F).
Selection of Proper Bone Plate and Screw Sizes
One of the problems confronting the surgeon is the choice of the size of implant to
use on the various fractures in patients of different sizes. Various factors may be
considered in choosing the size of implant, such as type and location of the fracture,
age, activity, size of bone, weight of animal, and condition of soft tissue.895,96
However, when the basic fundamentals of implantation are observed, the most
consistent factor in choosing the size of the implant is the weight of the patient.
 To provide guidelines in selecting proper bone plate and screw size, data were com-
 i ss ex ms o pe ss ad  oo xe  pd
plates and screws were used as the primary method of fixation.9s The summation of
data collected is presented in Figure 2-75. Corrections have been made and included
for implants that were too weak (resulting in breaking or bending) or too large.
As expected, there is some overlapping of appliance sizes for given weights. In addi-
tion to the size of the implant, some of the more common causes of failure include
bone plates that are too short in length, an insufficient number of bone screws,
vascular impairment, infection, and failure to use bone graft.
Special Plates and Plate Applications
 Because most plates are manufactured for use in humans, there are many anatomi-
cal areas in small animals where no suitable plate exists. Thus a variety of bone
 plates have been designed for application in small animals in special circumstances
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
135
(Synthes Ltd., Paoli, Pa). These include C-shaped plates for use on the dorsal acetab-
ular rim; T-shaped mini DCPs for 1.5- to 2.0-mm screws for use on distal radial
fractures; straight mini DCPs for 1.5- to 2.0-mm screws; hook plates for
 intertrochanteric osteotomy (see Chapter 16), and cuttable plates. Other manufac-
turers have similar devices available. A useful plate in severely comminuted fractures
is the lengthening plate, which has no screw holes in the middle; this minimizes plate
failure over unstable regions.
Veterinary Cuttable Plate
Although a fairly recent development, veterinary cuttable plates (VCPs) have
rapidly become popular in small animal use because they fill a very real gap in
 previously available implants for long-bone fractures in small breeds and for small-
 -'i r s a sd a s r u s a
2.0-mm screws are often too weak or too short, whereas the 2.7-mm plate either is
too thick or does not have enough screw holes per unit of length. Additionally, the
2.7-mm-diameter screw may exceed 25 % of the bone diameter and thus weaken the
bone. The VCP is 300 mm in length, 7 mm wide, and either 1.0 mm thick (1.5- or
2.0-mm screws) or 1.5 mm thick (2.0- or 2.7-mm screws) (Figure 2-77). The screw
holes are all round, and the spacing of the holes is identical in both size plates,
allowing the stacking or sandwiching of two plates to increase stiffness as required
for the situation. The plates are easily cut at a screw hole with a small pin or wire
cutter, allowing one plate to be used for several cases, and are very economical
compared with other plates. A small amount of bone compression can be obtained
by drilling the screw holes slightly eccentric (away from the fracture line) to the
plate hole.
 7 o '1 t 5       sd g 
3.0 mm. Two identical length plates are stacked if the increased stiffness is
desirable over the full length of the plate. In some cases it may be desirable to allow
slightly more flexibility at each end of the bone, and the top plate can be shortened
to between half and three fourths the length of the base plate.?7 Stacked plates
 should be contoured simultaneously by placing a screw through both plates at
each end of the plates to prevent sliding of the plates relative to each other during
 contouring. Mechanical studies have demonstrated that the VCP is more resistant
to bending force than 1.5- to 2.0-mm miniplates and is less resistant than
2.7-mm plates.9 Stacking plates yielded a stiffness slightly less than the sum of
A
B
FIGURE 2-77. Miniplates and screws.
A, 2.0-mm screw. B, 2.0-mm DCP.
C
C, 1.5-mm/2.0-mm cut-to-length plate,
1.0 mm thick. D, 2.0-mm/2.7-mm
cut-to-length plate, 1.5 mm thick.
D
(Note increased number of screw holes
available compared  with standard
2.7-mm DCP in E.) F, 2.7-mm screw.
E
(Courtesy Synthes, Ltd, Paoli, Pa.)
F
136
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
stiffness for each plate, and two thick plates had a stiffness of approximately
two thirds that of the 2.7-mm plate. Screw size did not have a pronounced effect on
stiffness.
 Reports of clinical application of the VCP have been uniformly encouraging.*7,9,100
 Primary use has been in multifragmental type C long-bone fractures in small breeds,
pelvic fractures, and metacarpal-metatarsal fractures in large breeds. The ability to place
 s   s a s   e ua ss 
often makes the bone-plate construct stronger than a larger plate with fewer screws.
Limited-Contact Dynamic Compression Plate
The limited-contact DCP (LC-DCP) is used in the same manner as the 3.5-mm
narrow and 4.5-mm narrow DCP; however, additional design features have been
 incorporated to enhance its application and function in diverse fractures (Synthes). 4
The LC-DCP is designed with a structured undersurface, with oblique undercuts at
both ends of each screw hole (Figure 2-78, A and B). The purpose of the undercuts
is to reduce contact of the plate with the cortical surface and therefore to improve
periosteal blood supply and efferent blood flow from the cortex. Improved blood flow
should reduce plate-related osteoporosis. A second benefit of the undercuts at each
screw hole is to distribute stiffness more evenly throughout the plate and reduce stress
concentration and failure of the plate through unfilled screw holes. Each screw hole has
pression. Oblique undercuts at each end of the screw hole allow a screw to be angled
up to 40 degrees in either direction of the long axis of the plate. This is especially use-
ful in the application of lag screws through the plate. The screw may be angled
7 degrees sideways in the plate, similar to the DCP. The spherical gliding principle of
the screw hole has been redesigned to be present at both ends of the hole, which allows
fractures, in which it may be desirable to compress different components of the fracture.
Specific "universal" drill guides are designed for use in the LC-DCP (Figure 2-78, C).
Screw holes are now evenly spaced throughout the plate, with elimination of the
middle open segment. This feature allows greater versatility in shifting the plate in the
long axis of the bone in relation to the fracture.
 The original LC-DCP is made of commercially pure titanium and should be used
with titanium screws. Titanium achieves 90% of the strength of stainless steel, with
slightly less stiffness. Pure titanium is biologically inert and therefore has better
tissue tolerance and fewer low-grade immunological complications than stainless
steel. Titanium implants cost more than stainless steel, however, and thus few
-s u ap aq mu sI dT u dT a n ae sad ea
less steel, so veterinary application is expected to increase.
Reconstruction Plates
Compression plates and LC-DCPs may be contoured with a bending press or twist-
ing irons around their longitudinal axes, but they cannot be bent in the plane of
their flat surface without structural damage to the screw holes. Reconstruction
plates (Synthes) have been designed to develop three-dimensional contours for com-
plex bony anatomy. Notches are designed into the sides of the plate to allow the
surgeon greater freedom to contour the plate in the plane of its flat surface
(Figure 2-79). Special bending pliers and twisting irons are available to contour the
plate with minimal distortion of the screw holes. These plates are available in 4.5-
3.5-, and 2.7-mm configurations. They are useful in selected fractures of the
humerus, pelvis, and mandible; however, caution must be exercised in selection and
use of this plate type. Reconstruction plates are significantly less stiff than the DCP
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
137
B
?
FIGURE 2-78. Limited-contact dynamic compression plate {LC-DCP). A, LC-DCP has
been designed with a structured undersurface, with undercuts (arrow) at both ends of each
 screw hole. The purpose of the undercuts is to reduce contact of the plate with the cortical
surface and to distribute stiffness more evenly throughout the plate. B, Each screw hole has
of the screw hole allow a screw to be angled up to 40 degrees in either direction of the long
axis of the plate. The screw may be angled 7 degrees sideways in the plate, similar to the DCP
C, Universal drill guide may be used in either end of the redesigned screw hole to allow
compression of a fracture in either longitudinal direction of the plate. (Courtesy Synthes, Ltd,
Paoli, Pa.)
or LC-DCP. If significant bending forces are expected in weight bearing at a fracture
site, this plate may deform, resulting in loss of fracture alignment.
Plate and Intramedullary Pin Combination for Bridging
Osteosynthesis
The concept of biological osteosynthesis emphasizes that bone fragments be left
undisturbed to reduce manipulation of the soft tissue envelope surrounding fracture
fragments and, therefore, to prevent disturbing the healing potential of the bone.
138
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
FIGURE 2-79. Reconstruction plates. A, Notches are designed into the sides of the plate
to allow contouring the plate in the plane of its flat surface. B, Special bending pliers
allow contouring the plate with minimal distortion of the screw holes. (Courtesy Synthes,
Ltd, Paoli, Pa.)
A buttress plate applied correctly to a comminuted fracture achieves the goals
of a bridging osteosynthesis strategy. A disadvantage of a bone plate applied with
buttress function is that the plate must withstand all weight-bearing forces until
 fracture healing is achieved and is typically subjected to major bending stresses.
There is no early load sharing between the plate and the bone because fragments
remain aligned, but unreduced. The plate is subjected to considerable bending stress
and may fatigue and fail earlier than a comparable plate used with neutralization or
compression function. The combination of an intramedullary (IM) pin with a
buttress plate has been described to help overcome some of the disadvantages of use
When an IM pin is used in combination with a plate, the pin is placed first and
fulfills two functions. Placing the IM pin allows easy and efficient alignment of the
 major bone fragments of a fracture. The smaller fragments are not disturbed, and
 the healing potential of the bone is protected. The pin also functions during healing
to share loading and protect the plate from the bending forces of weight bearing.
d ssaq ae m  e si s ded e   ssa
alone, and fatigu life of a plate/pin system is increased tenfold over a plate alone.101
Mechanically, the pin and plate are acting as parallel beams, to shield each other
from diverse weight-bearing forces. A disadvantage of the combination of pin and
plate for fracture repair is that the IM pin may interfere with placement of plate
screws through the intramedullary space (see Figure 2-80). A larger IM pin will
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
139
FIGURE 2-80. Plate and intramedullary pin combination for bridging
(biological) osteosynthesis. The pin will function during healing to share
loading and protect the plate from the bending forces of weight bearing.
make this problem more likely. A pin size that occupies 35% to 40% of the diame-
ter of the medullary space has been proposed to provide adequate stiffness at the
fracture site when used with a plate.101 A pin of this size generally allows adequate
space for placement of bicortical screws through the plate. If significant interference
with the pin is encountered, unicortical screws may be placed. The pin size can be
adjusted for different comminution patterns. A pin size of 50% of the medullary
 diameter may be chosen for severely comminuted fractures that involve a large pro-
portion of the diaphysis, because this selection will provide greater stiffness. A lesser
comminuted fracture may require a pin size of 30% of the diameter of the medullary
space. A minimum of three monocortical and one bicortical screw above and below
intramedullary space often is present in many bones for several bicortical screws
above and below the fracture.
 A pin/plate combination allows efficient alignment and fixation of the major
fragments of a fracture. Comminuted fractures are seen with great variation in frag-
ment size, number, and spacing. The surgeon applying a pin/plate combination must
also carefully assess, radiographically and by gentle inspection, the minor fragments
at the fracture site. If significant fracture gaps remain after application of the
pin/plate combination, the use of autogenous cancellous bone graft is highly recom-
mended at the fracture site. If a large fragment remains severely displaced and
cerclage or other auxiliary fixation is not indicated, a loop of absorbable mono-
filament suture material around the fragment and bone can be used to gently draw
the fragment closer to the fracture site, without disrupting soft tissue attachments.
se see a ar i  de a al jo azis  sai s
of the stiffness of the fracture fixation system, may contribute to delayed fracture
healing.
 Pin removal may be completed at 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively, if some destabi-
lization of the fracture is desired. Removal of the pin at an appropriate time will
 increase strain at the fracture site and contribute to healing. The pin may be main-
tained for a longer period if protracted healing is expected. Pin removal can be
 expected to be difficult in some pin/plate combinations because the threads of screws
140
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
may be etched into the side of the pin. Forceful extraction of the pin may be required,
or the pin may be left in place, as long as it is sufficiently seated within the bone.
Removal of Bone Plates in Small Animals
Indications for Removal
In general, plates are not removed. Previous concerns in human medicine that
implants might stimulate bone tumors have been unfounded. However, bone plates
should be removed under the following conditions8.103.
1. When the plates become nonfunctional (e.g., loose, broken, or bent), they
are no longer serving a useful purpose, and some cause discomfort.
2. The plate may be acting as a thermal conductor. A small number of owners
have observed that their animals show some favoring of the leg after being
outside in cold weather for a time. However, normal function returns after
the animal comes back into the house. Lameness has been most frequently
noted with plate fixation of the radius and tibia. This is thought to be
caused by a difference in expansion and contraction of the plate and bone
when subjected to change in temperature, as well as by the thermal mass of
 clinical union, has corrected this temporary lameness.
3. The bone plate may cause bone beneath the plate to become osteoporotic as
a result of remodeling associated with vascular interference by the plate on
the bone surface. These changes are the result of a local periosteal
s ou a a  l aoq-d q as a 
these changes to be as severe as in human patients, probably because the
surface of the dog bone is quite irregular, and plate-bone contact is not close 
over large areas of the bone. Serious problems can arise from remodeling
osteoporosis in the situation in which a rather stiff plate ends in the
middiaphyseal region, as with plating of a proximal femoral fracture or
plate fixation of a stifle joint arthrodesis. Under these circumstances the end
of the plate acts as a stress concentrator, focusing all bending loads that the
bone normally distributes over a much larger area. Concentrating these
loads where there is a dramatic transition from normal bone to osteoporotic
 bone can cause pathological fracture.
4. Interference with bone growth may occur in the young animal. Many shaft
oexg pue uonpan paso Aq paiean aq uo sheue hunoa ui sa
or simple intramedullary pinning, since they heal rapidly and most axial
deformities correct themselves by the active remodeling present during bone
growth. Nevertheless, open reduction and internal fixation are indicated
when congruent articular surfaces or leg length cannot be obtained and
maintained by these means. In our experience, altered bone growth in young
animals has not been a problem when bone plates have been removed at the
time of clinical union and where the plate does not cross a growth plate.
 5. The plate may cause irritation. Occasionally, an implant just beneath the
skin gives rise to a lesion characteristic of a lick granuloma. Plate removal
after clinical union has cleared up the condition. Late lameness is
occasionally seen 1 or more years after plate fixation. Radiographic signs
of implant loosening (bone resorption around screws, evidenced by a black
halo) or infection are absent. Plate removal causes the lameness to
disappear, but the reason is unclear.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
141
6. Infection may occur. If infection is present, it is difficult to clear it up totally
until the plate is removed. As a rule, if the plate is not loose, it is left in
 place as long as immobilization is indicated. When clinical union is
achieved, the plate is removed, and the infection usually clears up with
 appropriate treatment (see Chapter 5). Plate removal in these circumstances
is also indicated because most fracture-associated sarcomas in animals have
 a history of a metallic implant, infection, and a disturbed fracture-healing
pattern.10s
7. The plate may also impede full functional performance in field and racing.
animals, for reasons that are not entirely clear. This situation may be similar
to the late lameness described in condition 5.
Suggested Policy in Regard to Plate Remova!
1. Leave all pelvic plates in place unless specific complications indicate removal.
Relatively small plates are used, and to date, no evidence of stress protection
has been noted.
 2. Leave plates in place in skeletally mature animals that have undergone
uncomplicated healing. Those that have experienced complications, such as
infection, delayed union, or nonunion, probably should have plates removed.
3. In skeletally immature animals, remove all plates on the long bones at the time
of clinical union.
4. Ideally, it is best to remove all plates on long bones, although the economic
realities of veterinary practice make this difficult to accomplish. Call the
owner's attention to the potential reasons for removal at discharge, and give
an approximate time for recheck and plate removal. Needless to say, it is
difficult to have an animal return for plate removal when all appears well.
If complications occur after clinical union, it is best to have talked to the
owner about recheck and plate removal. Stress protection problems and
implant-stimulated osteosarcoma occur only rarely in small animals.
Suggested Timing of Plate Removal
Data were collected covering patient age and plate removal time in more than
300 cases103 and are collated in Table 2-5, which suggests timing of bone plate
removal. The time until removal may need to be increased in more complex cases
or problem cases.
Surgical Removal of Implant
Radiographs should be taken before and after plate removal. This will add to the
clinician's knowledge of bone healing and radiographic interpretation and will help
to avoid repeating surgical errors. The procedure is performed as follows:
1. A standard approach is made to the bone involved.
 2. The cicatrix encasing the plate is opened over its entire length.
TABLE 2-5. REMOVAL OF BONE PLATES
Age
Postoperative Time for Plate Removal
Under 3 months
4 weeks
3-6 months
2-3 months
6-12 months
3-5 months
Over 1 year
5-14 months
142
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
3. In some animals a portion of the plate will be covered with a layer of bone.
 An osteotome is usually required for its removal over the surface of the plate
 Bone filling empty screw holes will usually fracture if the plate can be levered
away from the bone.
4. After bone plate removal, active hemorrhage (which is usually minimal) is
controlled, the wound is closed in layers, and a pressure dressing is applied.
Cerclage wires and lag screws are routinely left in place unless they are
 associated with infection or other abnormal healing.
Refracture
Refracture is a fracture of normal bone occurring in the region of a previous
fracture that appears to have undergone sound union both clinically and radi-
ographically.8,96,103,10s,106 An incidence of less than 1% has been encountered in our
fracture cases. Most refractures result from premature implant removal, poor
 anatomical reduction, or osteoporotic bone. Refractures can be kept very minimal
if the basic fundamentals of applying and removing implants are followed, with
particular emphasis on anatomical reduction, proper implant size, and bone
grafting of architectural defects.
worrisome because of the delicate nature of this bone and the tendency for these
breeds to jump off of furniture. The holes left after screw removal may be
large enough relative to the bone to weaken it. Autogenous cancellous bone
grafting of the screw holes is one way to hasten return of normal bone strength. The
limb can also be lightly splinted for 3 weeks, with provisions to leave the foot
exposed to allow active weight bearing while protecting the bone from excessive
bending loads.
Postoperative Care after Plate Remova!
 The appearance of the radiographs and the activity of the patient are usually
the determining factors in postoperative care. Treatment usually involves the
following:
 1. Application of a compression bandage over the operative area for 2 to 3 days
to help prevent possible hematoma or seroma formation.
 2. Supportive measures (e.g., coaptation splint, external fixator, IM pin) if bone
healing on the radiograph after plate removal appears to be less than adequate,
aui  aeid aui raun ooodoiso Aaaxa aq oi seade auoq au ji 
thickness or density of the bone in the fracture area is greatly altered, bone
grafting may be indicated.
 3. Restriction of activity for 1 to 4 weeks. This may range from confinement to
 the kennel or house, walking on a leash, or restricting play.
SELECTION OF FIXATION METHOD
Fracture Treatment Planning
 Decision making regarding an appropriate method of treatment for a specific frac-
ture in a specific patient can be either straightforward or very difficult, depending
on many factors. As in many other areas of veterinary practice, the decision is partly
science and partly art. One cannot simply look through the following chapters to
find a fracture that looks like the one under consideration and then blindly copy the
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
143
method of fixation depicted. To do so ignores the fact that the fracture is attached
to an animal that is part of a milieu composed not only of its fracture but also other
injuries, body weight, general health, physical environment, animal disposition,
economic constraints, owner's care, and the owner's expectations for the long-term
function of the animal.
Most often, it is with diaphyseal/metaphyseal fractures that we must make
choices between several possible methods of fracture fixation. As discussed earlier,
there is little choice of fixation method for treating intraarticular fractures, whereas
basic indications for many of these methods overlap considerably, leading to
varying degrees of uncertainty about the best choice. Regarding the overlap of indi-
cations, we must remember that many roads may lead to the same point and that
there probably is no single way to treat a given shaft fracture. There is nothing
wrong with choosing a particular approach to a specific situation as long as the
decision is rationally based and good results are obtained.
Factors to consider in choosing a fixation method cover a wide gamut. The
answers to many of these questions are self-evident, but some will require consider-
able probing before the repair is attempted. The type of bone involved determines
the healing pattern and relative stability needed for healing. Cortical bone is the
most demanding of stability and is represented by fractures of the shaft of long
bones, the mandible, the tuber calcis, and the olecranon. In corticocancellous bone,
as in flat bones and metaphyseal bone, stability is less critical.
 Location of fracture in the bone determines the forces acting on the fracture
and fixation device. In the shaft the primary forces are bending and shear
(rotation and shortening). The femur is the most highly loaded bone during
weight bearing. In the metaphysis the primary loads are bending and shear. This is
also the area of insertions of ligaments/tendons, and these create their own
shear and tension forces. Articular fractures are usually subjected primarily to shear
and tension. Location of the fractures also determines the potential suitability
of various classes of fixation. Coaptation is only suitable for long-bone fractures
distal to the elbow/stifle, fractures of the scapular body, and some fractures of
the metacarpal/metatarsal bones. Internal fixation is the best choice for all other
fractures.
The type of fracture is critical in determining fixation methods, because many
methods are very limited in their ability to neutralize forces acting on the fracture
fragments (see later discussion in this section)
Concurrent injuries of either the musculoskeletal system or soft tissues may dictate
more rigid forms of internal fixation to achieve early ambulation of the patient and
thereby ease the problem of postoperative care for the animal. Open and infected
fractures need early stabilization with rigid internal fixation.
Age of the patient determines stability and the length of time that fixation may
be needed to achieve healing. Skeletally immature animals produce abundant and
early periosteal/endosteal callus, which means early stability. Aged animals typically
produce minimal periosteal/endosteal callus, and clinical union is slower Therefore,
types of fixation that do not achieve long-lasting stability (IM pins, casts) may
become unstable before clinical union is achieved.
Size, breed, and temperament are secondary factors in fixation choice, in the
sense that exactly the same basic principles will govern the choice, but the surgeon
should always favor the most stable of the range of choices when dealing with a
large, active, or excitable animal. Likewise, when considering the fracture type, the
surgeon should score it conservatively in these animals.
144
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
The degree of function needed is also important in choosing a fixation
method. The activity levels of patients vary considerably. Consider the functional
 demands on the bone in the large, working or sporting breed versus the small
sedentary pet. Likewise, the owner's expectations of function are critical. We would
be more likely to use a very stable form of fixation when a high level of function is
mandatory.
 The animal's environment and its expected control by the owner may influence
the choice of fixation. An external fixator may not be a good choice for an animal
kept on a chain in the yard or for an owner who will not follow instructions for care
 and rechecks faithfully. Inquire carefully into the housing conditions of the animal
and the owner's attitudes before, not after, the repair.
Equipment available and experience level of the surgeon must be considered, and
surgeons must be scrupulous in their self-evaluation. When possible, a timely
referral may be in order to ensure the best outcome for the patient and owner.
Economic constraints are a fact of life that must be faced in veterinary medicine
a-aq-asro e uo pay aq is si 'sa nao apo on pun  pue
basis, but we must not be forced into doing a procedure that we know will fail
simply because it is what the client can afford. It is a commonly held opinion that
external casts and splints are less expensive to apply than internal fixation.
Although this may be true in some cases, it is not uniformly so. If we rigorously
evaluate costs of coaptation in terms of cost of materials, time involved in not only
application but also rechecks and replacement, and most importantly in results
achieved, we will often see that simple forms of internal fixation are very competitive
with coaptation.
Choice of Fixation
An elegant method of compiling many of the considerations just discussed has been
devised by Palmer and colleagues.107.1os (Table 2-6). The routine use of this or a
similar method of evaluation will force the surgeon to consider the “mechanical,
biological, and clinical variables affecting fracture healing and return to function in
TABLE 2-6.
FRACTURE PATIENT SCORING SYSTEM*
Score
2
3
4
5
6
7
MECHANICAL FACTORS
Non-load sharing
 Neutralization possible
Good load sharing
Large, obese patient 
Medium patient
Small patient
 Multiple limb injury/disease
Single-limb injury
BIOLOGICAL FACTORS
Locat Factors
High-energy frature: wedges
Two-piece fracture
Low-energy fracture: greenstick
Short open reduction; closed reduction
Open fracture—degree 3
2
1
Gunshot fracture—grade 3
2
1
Systeic Factors
Geriatric
Mature
Immature
Debilitated/ill
Healthy
*Data from Palmer RH: Decision making in fracture treatment: the Fracrure Patient Scoring System. In Proceedings
of (Small Animal) ACVS Veterinary Symposium, Washingron, DC, 1994, pp 388-390; and Palmer RH, Hulse DA,
Aron DN: A proposed fracture patient score system used to develop fracture treatment plans. In Proceedings of 20th
Annual Conference of Veterinary Orthopedic Society, 1993.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
145
 a given patient."107 Each line should be scored if applicable and the results totaled
and divided by the number of scorable factors to obtain an average. With practice
the clinician will be able to assess the score mentally without the arithmetic, but the
exercise will force consideration of all the factors listed. This type of evaluation is
of value primarily in diaphyseal fractures, where many fixation methods might be
considered. It is of less use in most other fractures, where the choices of fixation are
much more pragmatic because of anatomical and mechanical considerations; the
best examples involve articular fractures, where the fixation method for a specific
fracture will not vary much from patient to patient.
Scores from Table 2-6 can be correlated with fixation methods as follows:
· Score 9 or 10
Fracture—transverse or short oblique; type A:
1. Cast/splint
 2. IM pins in many, but not all cases; may be combined with interfragmentary
wires.
 3. Compression plate
 4. External fixator, type IA
5. Interlocking nail
· Score 8 (7) to 9
Fracture—long oblique or spiral; type A and B1 one reducible wedge:
1. IM pins/cerclage-hemicerclage wires
2. Neutralization plate
 3. External fixator, type I, II (may be combined with cerclage wires/lag screws)
 4. Interlocking nail (may be combined with cerclage wires/lag screws)
·Score 4 (3) to 7
Fracture--wedge; type B:
1. Neutralization plate
2. External fixator, type IA double bar or IB, I (may be combined with
cerclage wires/lag screws)
3. Interlocking nail (may be combined with cerclage wires/lag screws)
· Score 1 to 3
Fracture—complex; type C:
1. Buttress/bridging plate, or plate and IM pin combination
2. External fixator, type I or II
3. Interlocking nail
OPEN FRACTURES
Open fractures usually occur in about 5% to 10% of the total fracture cases seen.
The term "compound fracture" is obsolete in North America but is still widely
used in other areas. An open wound overlying a fracture almost always means
(1) contamination, (2) reduction in local host defense mechanism by the presence of
foreign material and debris, (3) devitalized necrotic tissue, and (4) dead space. All
these factors increase the potential for infection in the open wound, and prevention
 of such infection is the overriding concern in animals with these injuries. Aggressive
early internal fixation of the fracture is key to controlling infection.
Classification
Degree I. The skin is penetrated from the inside by a sharp bone fragment, which
then usually retracts under the skin and is no longer visible. The wound
146
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Apu Auo ane sanss suunos pue aarp u u I u sa siAeidi
contused.
 Degree I. Wounding of the skin occurs from the outside, leaving a variably
sized soft tissue deficit and more severe contusion of surrounding tissues
(Figure 2-81, A). Foreign material may be carried into the wound at the time
of injury or later.
Degree M. Extensive skin, subcutaneous tissue, and muscle injury from the outside
is present, and the bone is usually fragmented as a result of high-energy injury
(Figure 2-81, B and C). There is often soft tissue avulsion, degloving,
[ed snen pue spum nanq Aoiaa niu rensaau p
amputations are common examples.
closed fractures, but third-degree injuries carry a less favorable outlook. Treatment
of these injuries is both extensive and expensive, but if aggressively managed, these
the only alternative.
Treatment
Principles
The following principles apply to the treatment of open fractures8 109.110.
1. Prevention or minimization of contamination from time of occurrence of injury
until initiation of surgical treatment.
B
FGURE 2-81. Open fracture classifications.
A, Degree II: wounding from outside with moderate
soft tissue injury. B, Degree Ill: extensive skin and
muscular injury in the brachial region. C, Degree Ill:
degloving abrasion injury of paw.
C
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
147
 2. Thorough cleansing and aseptic surgical debridement to remove nonviable and
devitalized tissue.
3. Preservation of vascularity to both soft tissue and bone.
4. Stable fixation.
5. Early active mobilization of the limb.
Emergency Treatment
First aid by the owner should be directed toward stopping hemorrhage and
preventing contamination. Covering the area with a clean bandage applied
with minimal pressure usually accomplishes this objective. An open fracture is
always considered an emergency and is treated as such. At the hospital the
open fracture should be covered immediately with a large sterile dressing, which
should remain until debridement is possible. A soft splint is useful in the distal
limbs.
 After and during thorough physical and orthopedic examination to expose
and evaluate concurrent injuries, particular attention is given to the cardiovascular
system regarding perfusion and circulating red blood cell volume. The animal is
[ po y e aos o e sp y aessu se ps
rule is to take chest radiographs of all fracture patients as soon as their general
condition permits. A thorough physical and radiographic orthopedic examination
is essential for diagnosis, prognosis, and determination of the type of fracture
treatment.
 a- e jo asd a ade o  d  ssa q e 
Cultures should be taken from the wound at this time for sensitivity testing.
Systemic antibiotics (usually a cephalosporin) should be started immediately.
Staphylococci account for 60% of the infections at our hospitals, with most of the
remaining infections equally divided between Streptococcus and Escherichia coli.
Pseudomonas, Proteus, and Klebsiella are found rarely. For many first-degree
injuries, clipping of hair, cleansing the wound, and bandaging are all that is neces-
sary before fracture stabilization. For second- and third-degree injuries, adequate
surgical debridement and primary fracture fixation are urgent and are done as soon
as the animal will tolerate general or regional anesthesia.
Definitive Surgical Treatment
Cleansing and Debridement
Utmost care in aseptic technique is indicated because most strains of bacteria found
in wounds are indigenous to the hospital in which treatment was performed rather
 than to the scene of the accident. Cleansing and debridement are carried out under 
general anesthesia. Caps, masks, and gloves should be worn to clip and wash the
area. The open area is covered with sterile lubricating jelly, and the surrounding sur-
gical area is clipped and surgically scrubbed. Loose hair from the clippers will be
trapped in the jelly and rinsed away. Debridement should be done in the operating
room or a clean area using aseptic technique. Careful removal of obviously dead
tissue and foreign material is aided by copious lavage with saline or Ringer's
solution. Addition of chlorhexidine to make a 0.5% solution, or 100 ml of 10%
povidone-iodine solution (or whirlpool concentrate) per liter of irrigating fluid, is
advocated by some for added disinfection. If the wound must be enlarged to allow
for adequate debridement, some thought must be given to blood supply, since
additional compromise could predispose to infection.
Debridement must be meticulous to remove all devitalized tissue and not damage
vessels and nerves. Very large wounds present difficulties in this regard and need to
148
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
be Ieft open to allow progressive debridement over several days. It is best initially
to be conservative in evaluating skin viability because skin is easily removed in
 later sessions if it does not survive. Nonviable muscle is a good culture medium,
and its recognition is difficult; loss of contractility, lack of bleeding when cut,
and pale color are the most useful criteria. Cortical bone fragments stripped of
a so e jo id ar  ssa po ar s as os 
or essential for stabilization of the fracture. Resulting bony defects are filled
with autogenous cancellous bone graft. Large devascularized cortical fragments
left in situ may become sequestra and require removal if the wound becomes
infected.
The importance of removal of all dead or devitalized material in the prevention
of deep-seated wound infection cannot be overemphasized.
Fracture Fixation
Stabilization of the fracture must be addressed following debridement. It is critical
to success to do the fracture fixation at this point because stabilizing the fracture
also stabilizes soft tissues, preserving existing blood supply and allowing capillary
invasion to establish new blood supply. Thus, stabilizing the fracture is the
best defense against infection of both the bone and the soft tissues. Open reduction
can be performed through the wound, if it is correctly placed, or through a separate
incision. Consideration must be given to a second incision's effect on skin blood
supply.
 First-degree injuries are treated as closed fractures. Second-degree injuries require
different initial care, but stabilization and poststabilization care is similar to closed
fracture treatment. Stabilization of third-degree injuries is primarily done with
external skeletal fixation, although the interlocking nail may prove to be an impor-
 tant method. The following types of fixation may be used; each has its indications
and limitations.
1. Splints and casts are usually reserved for animals with minor puncture
wounds; those treated within the first 6 to 8 hours; and those with
stable fractures of the distal half of the radius and ulna, carpus, tarsus,
and foot.
 2. Internal fixation involves the following methods:
 a. Intramedullary pins are usually restricted to stable, first-degree fractures
treated within 6 to 8 hours. Secondary fixation (e.g., external fixator)
may be added for more stability.
b. Bone screws and plates have the advantage of stable uninterrupted
fixation; however, an extensive open approach is required for application.
They are particularly applicable when the fracture involves an articular
surface, as well as on the femur of dogs, where postoperative limb
function is not optimal with the external fixator.
c. Interlocking nails may be applied through a minimal open approach
and provide stable fixation, but they are less likely to be used for the
highly comminuted fractures.
d. External skeletal fixation has the advantage of minimal application
time, and the fixation pins can usually be applied proximal and distal
to the fracture and skin wound area, leaving the traumatized area freely
accessible for treatment as an open wound. This type of fixation is
particularly adaptable to infected fractures, gunshot fractures, and the
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
149
the tibia and radius/ulna, external fixation is the first choice for open
fractures of these bones.
  i pn ad u n ps pas si  jo an r
achieved, as long as it is secure and accomplishing stabilization of the fracture
segments. Healing is routinely delayed in third-degree fractures, and fixation should
be chosen with this in mind. Loose implants should be replaced if clinical union has
not been achieved.
Bone Grafting
Bone grafting is usually indicated in open fracture cases when bone is missing
and in some of the more severely fragmented fractures (see Chapter 3). Autogenous
cancellous grafts can be used at surgery, after debridement, reduction, and fixation.
If the graft cannot be covered with soft tissue, it is usually covered with petrolatum-
present, however, it is usually advisable to delay grafting until suppuration has
ceased and healthy granulation tissue is present. The granulation tissue is elevated
and the graft packed into the bony deficit.
Cortical grafts should not be used in an infected area because they are slow to
become vascularized and usually become sequestered. If a cortical graft is indicated,
 the procedure should be delayed until the infection has cleared.
Wound Closure
Closure of the wound should only be considered in first- and second-degree
injuries in which the minimal soft tissue injury can be adequately debrided and the
skin closed without tension. It is important to cover vessels, nerves, and tendons,
but bone can be left exposed if necessary, as can bone plates. Transposition of
muscle bellies often allows soft tissue coverage of vital structures when skin is not
available. Theoretically, contaminated wounds do not become infected for 6 to
8 hours—the "golden period"—and can be successfully closed after debridement
without the need for drainage. However, some wounds are so heavily contaminated
or devitalized that the golden period is considerably shortened. When in doubt,
leave the wound open, which is more successful than surgical placement of drains
in our experience. If no suppuration develops, delayed primary closure can be
op aq uo anso Arepuooas rodns si aau  'shep s o t n auop
 after healthy granulation is established, or the wound can be left to heal by second
intention.
Aftercare
Systemic antibiotics are continued several days postoperatively, or as long as there
ae spunom uado 'iodan Asus aun ins oi paeu aq Aeu pue dunddns si
kept under sterile dressings, with saline-soaked sterile natural gauze sponges packed
 into the wound. Dressings are changed daily until secretion and suppuration slows,
then as needed. Once granulation has become well established, the frequency of
bandage changes can be reduced. Keeping the wound covered during the epithelial-
ization period will keep the tissue moist and prevent overgrowth of granulation tis-
sue. (See Chapter 5 for further details regarding infected fractures.)
 Early active, but limited, use of the limb stimulates both soft tissue and bony
repair. Radiographic evaluation of bone healing is done at monthly intervals until
healing is obvious. External fixator removal can often be staged to allow a more
gradual return to normal stress patterns in the bone.
150
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Case Studies
Case 1
Figure 2-82, A, shows a grade 2, open, type B wedge fracture in a 1-year-old,
55-pound dog that was struck by a car bumper. The open area was covered with a
 clean bandage immediately and presented for treatment within 8 hours. Fixation
was performed using an IM pin and a two-pin, type I external fixator (Figure 2-82, B).
The wound was treated as an open lesion with nitrofurazone dressings. The skin
lesion closed within 2 weeks (Figure 2-82, C). The external fixator was removed in
 1 month, and the IM pin was removed at clinical union (2 months).
Case2
Figure 2-83, A, shows a grade 2, open, type C complex gunshot fracture, in a
2-year-old, 60-pound dog. Fixation was done using a bone plate (Figure 2-83, B).
The fracture healed; however, minor fistulous tracts opened up intermittently
during the healing period (Figure 2-83, C). These cleared up promptly after removal
 of the bone plate and a sequestrum 11 months after injury. The defect in the shaft
was the sequestrum site (Figure 2-83, D).
Case3
Figure 2-84, A, depicts a grade 3, open, infected, type B wedge fracture in an
 8-month-old, 15-pound dog 6 days after trauma. The end of the distal segment was
still protruding from the skin; the dog's temperature was 10s° F. A type I external
fixator was applied (Figure 2-84, B), and the local area was treated with numerous
nitrofurazone dressings. The animal was started on a systemic antibiotic regimen.
The local and systemic infection cleared, and healing was delayed, although with-
 out sequestrum formation (Figure 2-84, C and D). The fixator was removed at
4 months.
A
B
c
FIGURE 2-82. A, Grade 2 open comminuted fracture that resulted when a 5S-pound,
1-year-old dog was struck by a car bumper. Open area was covered with a clean bandage
immediately, and the dog was presented for treatment within 8 hours. B, Fixation using
an intramedullary (IM) pin and unilateral external fixator, 1/1 pin. C, IM pin shown at time
of clinical union (7 weeks). The external fixator was removed at 4 weeks and the IM pin at
7weeks.
2—-Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
151
A
B
C
FIGURE 2-83. A, Grade 2 open gunshot fracture in a 60-pound dog. B, Fixation using a
bone plate. C, Fracture had healed (11 months after injury); however, intermittent minor 
 draining tracts were still present. D, After removal of the plate and sequestra, the draining
tracts disappeared. The defect in the diaphysis was the site of sequestra. In retrospect,
 a better choice of stabilization would have been a unilateral external fixator.
A
B
D
FIGURE 2-84. A, Grade 3 open infected fracture, 6 days after trauma, in a 15-pound
healing was delayed, although without sequestrum formation. Splint was removed at
4months.
152
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
GUNSHOT FRACTURES
Gunshot fractures of the limbs cause multisystem wounding that can lead to
massive destruction of soft and hard tissues and result in complicated and delayed
healing of both. With judicious treatment, the success and complication rates are
very acceptable for the less complicated fractures, whereas more guarded prognoses
are indicated for the most diffcult fractures.11 Although the treatment of gunshot
fractures shares much with that of open fractures, it is important to have knowledge
of the type of wounding missile, specifically, the ballistics of the bullet or pellet.
 No knowledge of firearms is necessary, and the information needed is gained from
physical examination of the wound and examination of the radiographs.
Pathophysiology
When tissues are struck by a missile, whether a bullet or an automobile bumper, the
kinetic energy of the wounding object is converted into work on the tissues and
results in plastic and elastic strain (deformation) and dissipative energy in the form
of heat. This kinetic energy is described by the formula KE = MV2/2. Because the
energy developed is greatly influenced by the velocity raised to the second power,
most attention has been devoted to the muzzle velocity of the bullet. Although it is
true that when the bullet weight is constant, raising the velocity is a good way to
increase the wounding energy available, it is also true that sheer mass can have a sig-
nificant effect.112 Tabie 2-7 illustrates that the kinetic energy of the 30-06 Springfield
 bullet (common hunting rifle) is almost double that of the M16 (current military
weapon), although the square of its muzzle velocity is only 72% of the M16. The
kinetic energy of the small bullet of the M16 is highly dependent on its high muzzle
velocity, whereas the bullet of the 30-06 has sufficient mass to be a significant con-
tributor to the wounding energy. The effect of mass is most dramatically illustrated
by the shotgun: as seen in Table 2-7, the 12-gauge shotgun has a muzzle velocity of
only 1300 ft/sec, but because of the tremendous mass of the pellets (700 grains) the
kinetic energy available is 2700 foot-pounds. Although this amount of energy is
only available in short-range situations, where the pellets are still tightly enough
grouped to act as a single missile, the shotgun does have a tremendous wounding
potential. The terms high energy and low energy are used here in place of the
commonly used "high velocity" and "low velocity" descriptors.
The location of gunshot injuries of the dog varies with the environment in which
the pet lives. In metropolitan settings, the dog is typically an apartment dweller who
confronts an intruder. In these cases, head wounds with mandibular and maxillary
fractures are common, almost always caused by handguns at short range. In subur-
ban and rural settings, wounds are more often inflited by hunting rifles at longer
range, and the location of fractures is much more random. It is interesting to note
the relatively high incidence of humeral fractures, probably because the heart/chest
is a common aiming point. Fortunately, the incidence of short-range shotgun
TABLE2-7.
WeightBullet/Shell
Muzzle Velocity
Kinetic Energy
Type Carridge/Shell
(grains)
(feet/sec)
(foot-pounds)
12-gauge, 3-inch magnurm
701
1315
2726
M16 {AR-15)
55
3250
1290
30-06 Springfield
150
2750
2519
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
153
injuries is low. Long-range shotgun injuries are usually confined to shallow wound-
ing by a few pellets.
 s  j s a a a n   
helpful in developing a treatment protocol. Such a scheme is described in Table 2-8.
Low-energy type 1 fractures produce predictable penetrating wounds of the soft tis-
sues, and there is often no exit wound (Figure 2-85, A). Soft tissues are disrupted
along the path of the missile, and fracture patterns are simple. The severity of bone
damage varies with the location of the bone; much more of the initial energy of the
bullet is already expended by the time the bullet strikes the midshaft of the femur as
compared with the tibia, so tibial fractures typically are more complicated. Most of
the bullet fragments remain in situ and are usually quite large, although some
smaller, dustlike fragments are present.
High-energy type 3 fractures are much more complicated, with both an entry and
an exit wound present (Figure 2-85, C). The exit wound is often not on line with
the entry wound if the bullt ricochets off a bone. As the bullet's energy is trans-
ferred to the soft tissues, they expand around the missile, creating a temporary cav-
ity that then immediately collapses. Hydrostatic shock waves are created that injure
tissues within a radius as much as 30 times the diameter of the bullet.11 Bone is
shattered into small pieces, and the bullet is reduced to myriad dustlike fragments;
most of the bullet probably continues through the exit wound, where it can produce
a secondary injury in adjacent tissues. Extensive devascularization of bone is pro-
duced not only by fragmentation but also by soft tissue detachment and thrombo-
  s   n a a a  p n  j 
location of the impact and the type of bone (cortical vs. metaphyseal) involved.
Type 2 fractures exhibit characteristics of both types 1 and 3, depending on the
specific wounding missile (Figure 2-85, B). These wounds are generally produced by
low- to medium-velocity bullets that are relatively heavy; the lead fragments seen
radiographically are a combination of the large type 1 fragments and the dustlike
ada u uu pau aro ae sud a an s su e ad
1 fractures, but the fragmentation is neither as severe nor as extensive as with the
type 3 injuries.
Surgical Protocol111
Initial Evaluation and Wound Treatment
Treatment of gunshot fractures is basically the treatment of type 2 and 3 open
fractures. All are considered contaminated, and type 3 injuries have the greatest
potential for infection to become established. Antibiotic therapy should be started
immediately after culturing the wound for antibiotic sensitivity testing. After
stabilization of the patient, as indicated by clinical signs, and performing a complete
physical and neurological examination, definitive fracture treatment can be
considered. Radiographic examination, preferably under general anesthesia, is nec-
essary to establish the exact fracture type and plan further treatment.
TABLE 2-8. CLASSIFICATION OF GUNSHOT FRACTURES
Kinetic Energy
Fracture Type
Soft Tissue Injury
Type 1
Low
A, few B
Minimal
Type 2
Mediurm
A, B, few C
Moderate
Type 3
High
C
Extensive
Modified from Schwach RP, Park RD, et al: Vet Surg 8:57-62, 1979.
154
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
2/68
C
FIGURE 2-85. Gunshot fracture classification. A, Type 1, low energy. B, Type 2, interme-
diate energy. C, Type 3, high energy.
Wounds are cleansed and debrided as described earlier for open fractures.
 Extensive debridement is not needed in type 1 and 2 injuries, but type 3 injuries 
require more attention to removing dead tissue, especially muscle that is completely
devitalized (see previous debridement guidelines). Short-range shotgun wounds
result in massive soft tissue injuries and require extensive debridement. Hair, small
detached bone fragments, and lead fragments that are readily accessible are
all removed. It is not strictly necessary to remove lead fragments, so extensive
 probing and dissection is to be avoided; however, intraarticular lead should always
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
155
be removed. Leave all bone fragments with soft tissue attachments and all large
S  's do  s n ass os t ss 
about primary closure of the wounds; it is much safer to allow open drainage until
a determination can be made about the presence of infection. Delayed primary
closure or healing by granulation is always preferable to wound disruption caused
by exudation.
Fracture Fixation
As with open fractures, immediate stabilization of the gunshot fracture is helpful in
treating the soft tissues. Except for a few type 1 fractures of the radius/ulna and the
tibia, the remaining gunshot fractures require internal fixation.
Type 1 and 2 Fractures
Treatment is similar to closed fractures of type A, B, or C. Either an anatomical
reconstruction with stable internal fixation or a biological osteosynthesis approach
may be taken with these fractures.
Type 3 Fractures
Because of the extensive bone devascularization involved in these complex type C
fractures, very delayed healing is to be expected. The fixation must therefore be
capable of long-lasting stability, and because of the fragmentation, the fixation must
be capable of acting as a bridging or buttress device. The choices are thus limited to
bone plates, interlocking IM nails, or external fixators. Experience has shown that
the bridging osteosynthesis approach is preferable in these fractures; they are
reduced either closed or with a minimal open approach. No attempt is made to
reduce fragments; rather, the emphasis is on restoring axial and rotational alignment
and maintaining as much length as possible. To attempt extensive manipulation and
stabilization of small fragments not only further devascularizes them, but also rarely
results in adequate stabilization. The severe nature of the wounding process is actu-
ally helpful in establishing the cascade of humoral and local factors needed for early
callus formation, and to the extent that the area is invaded and further disturbed,
we can slow this healing reaction.
 q o   ia a a  e o   s
external fixator for fractures of the humerus, radius/ulna, and tibia (see the section
on external skeletal fixation for the splint types appropriate to these bones). Because
dogs often do not function well with external fixators on the femur, the interlock-
ing IM nail, bone plate, or bone plate/IM pin combination may be a better choice
for this bone. As previously stated, the goal is restoration of axial and rotational
alignment and maintaining length to the extent possible. In placing the bridging
plate, the emphasis is on simply attaching it proximally and distally, with minimal
disturbance of the fracture site and fragments. This is facilitated by contouring
the plate from a radiograph of the contralateral bone. Likewise, with placement of
the interlocking nail, the open approach is only sufficient to allow guiding the
roscopy would eliminate the need for any open approach, as is common in human
applications.
 If bone plates or interlocking nails are not available, there should be no hesita-
tion to use the external fixator on canine femoral fractures, but there is a tendency
to delayed bone healing and soft tissue tie-down problems in the stifle joint.
Aggressive physiotherapy during the healing period may minimize these problems
Cats do not exhibit the tendency toward poor limb function with the external
fixator applied to the femur, so it can be readily used on all bones in this species.
156
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Healing Time and Prognosis
Type 1 and 2 fractures generally heal similar to closed fractures of the same type,
that is, between 6 and 10 weeks. Type 3 fractures routinely exhibit delayed healing
times of 12 to 20 weeks. Progressive destabilization of external fixators starting
at 8 weeks is helpful in producing more vigorous callus formation. Schwach and
colleagues!l1 reported overall prognosis as good to excellent for type 1 fractures,
fair to good for type 2 fractures, and fair to poor for type 3 fractures. The progno-
sis for type 2 and 3 fractures has certainly improved since this report because of the
increased sophistication of external fixator applications, but we have no firm figures
available.
References
1. Adams JC: Outine of fractures, ed 7, Edinburgh, 1978, F&S Livingstone, pp 4-8.
2. Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery, Santa Barbara, Calif, American Veterinary Publications
(ed 2, 1952, pp 548-643; ed 3, 1957, pp 548-640; Archibald, editor, 1965, pp 777-849; Archibald,
editor, ed 2, 1975, pp 957-1048).
3. Unger M, Montavon PM, Hem UF: Classfication of fractures of the long bones in the dog and cat:
4. Miller M: The comprehensive classification of fractures of the long bones. In Allgower M, editor:
Manuat of internal fixation: techniques recommended by the AO-ASIF group, ed 3, Berlin, 1991,
Springer-Verlag, pp 118-150.
5. Rhinelander F: The normal microcirculation of diaphyseal cortex and its response to fracture, J Bone
Joint Surg 50A:784, 1968.
 6. Rhinelander F, Phillips RS, Steel WM, et al: Microangiography in bone healing, J Bone Joint Surg
50A:643, 1968.
7.Perren SM: Basic aspects of internal fixation.In Allgower M, editor: Manuat of internat fixation:
techniques recommended by the AO-ASIF group, ed 3, Berlin, 1991, Springer-Verlag, pp 18-19.
8. Hulth A: Current concepts of fracture healing, Clin Orthop Ret Res 249:265-284, 1989.
9. PerrenSM, Cordey J: The concept of intefragmentary strain In UthoffHK, editor: Cuent cones
of internat fixation, Berlin, 1980, Springer-Verlag, p 63.
10. Rahn BA: Bone healing: histologic and physiologic concepts. In Sumner-Smith G, editor: Bone in
clinicat orthopaedics, Philadelphia, 1982, Saunders, pp 335-386.
11.Perren SM:Basic aspects of internal fixationInAllgowerM,editor:Maruat of intrnatfixatin:
techniques recommended by the AO-ASIF group, ed 3, Berlin, 1991, Springer-Verlag, p 2.
12. Mast J, Jakob R, Ganz R: Planning and reduction techniques in fracture surgery, Berlin, 1989,
Springer-Verlag.
13. Gautier E, Perren SM, Ganz R: Principles of internal fixation, Curr Orthop 6:220-232, 1992.
14. Hulse DA, Aron DN: Advances in small animal orthopedics, Compendiurm 16:831-832, 1994.
15. Seibel R, LaDuca J, Border JR, et al: Blunt rmultiple trauma, femur traction, and the pulmonary state,
Ann Surg 202:283-395,1985.
16. Allgower M: The scientific basis of aggressive traumatology in lesions of the locomotor system,
Diatogue 1:2-3, 1985.
17. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An attas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
118-121, 1995.
19. Schroeder EF: The traction principle in treating fractures and dislocations in the dog and cat, North
A# Vet 14:32-36, 1933.
20. Robinson GW, McCoy L: A pelvic limb sling for dogs. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in
smatl animal surgery, Philadelphia, 1975, Lea & Febiger, pp 567-569.
21. Stader O: A preliminary announcement of a new method of treating fractures, North Am Vet 18:
37-38, 1937.
22. Ehmer FA: Bone pinning in fractures of small animals, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 110:14-19, 1947.
23. Brinker WO, Flo GL: Principles and application of external skeletal fixation, Vet Clin North
Am Small Anim Pract 5:197-208, 1975.
24. Egger EL: External skeletal fixation: general principles. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smalf
animat surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders, pp 1641-1656.
25.WaJhyHtalmrisnfsttmaingwithdiet stiffessharateisti
Joint Surg 66A:1258-1264, 1984.
26.Lewallen DG, Chao EY, et al: Comparison of the effects of compresson plates and external fixators
on early bone healing, J Bone Joint Sturg 66A:1084-1091, 1984.
27. Rittrman WW, Schibli M, et al: Open fractures: long-term results in 200 consecutive cases,
Clin Onthop 138:132-140, 1979.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
157
28. Etter C, Burri C, et al: Treatment by external fixation of open fractures associated with severe soft
tissue damage of leg, Clin Orthop 178:81-88, 1983.
29. Behrens F, Searls K: External fixation oftibia: basic concepts and prospective evaluation, J Bone Joint
Surg 68B:246-254, 1986.
30. Egger EL, Histand MB, et al: Effect of pin insertion on bone pin interface, Vet Surg 15:246-252, 1986.
31. Gumbs JM, Brinker WO, DeCamp CE, et al: Comparison of acute and chronic pull out resistance of
pins used with the external fixator (Kirschner splint), J Arm Anirm Hosp Assoc 24:231-234, 1988.
fixation, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:295-300, 1988.
33.Matthews LS,Green CA,Goldstein SA: The thermal effect of skeletal fixation-pin insertion in bone,
J Bone Joint Surg 66A:1077-1083,1984.
34.BrinkerWO,VerstraeteME,Soutas-LittleRW:Stiffness studies on various configurations and tyes
of external fixators, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 21:280-288, 1985.
35. Egger EL: Static strength evaluation of six external skeletal fixation configurations, Vet Surg
12:130-136, 1983.
 36. Stambaugh JE, Nunamaker DM: External skeletal fixation of comminuted maxillary fractures in
dogs, Vet Surg 2:72, 1982.
37. Toombs JP, Bronson DG, Welch RD: The SKTM external fixation system: description of components,
instrurnentation, and application techniques, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatof 16:76-81, 2003.
38. Kraus KH, Wotton HM, Rand WM: Mechanical comparison of two external fixator clamp designs,
Vet Surg 27:224-230, 1998.
39. Kraus KH, Wotton HM: Effect of clamp type on type II external fixator stiffness, Vet Commp Orthop
Traumatof 12:178-182, 1999.
40. Roe SC: Classification and nomenclature of external fixators, Vet Clin North A Smatl Anim Pract
22:11-18, 1992.
41. Cech O, Trc T: Prof. Ilizarov and his contribution to the challenge of limb lengthening, Injury
24(suppl 2):2-8, 1993.
42. Trostel CT, Radasch RM: Tarsocrural arthrodesis: a clinical report using a circular external fixator,
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 11:193-196, 1998.
43. Lewis DD, Radasch RM, Beale BS, et al: Initial clinical experience with IMEXTM circular external
skeletal fixation system, Vet Comp Orthop Traurmatol 12:108-117,1999.
44. Bouvy BM, Markel MD, et al: Ex vivo biomechanics of Kirschner-Ehmer external skeletal fixation
applied to canine tibiae, Vet Surg 22:194-207, 1993.
45. Palmer RH, Hulse DA, et al: Principles of bone healing and biomechanics of external skeletal
fixation, Vet Clin North Am Smalt Anim Pract 22:45-68, 1992.
positive-profile external skeletal fixation pins in canine tibiae, Vet Surg 25:453-462, 1996.
47. Clary EM, Roe SC: Enhancing external skeletal fixation pin perforrmance: consideration of the
pin-bone interface, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 8:1-8,1995.
48. Pollo FE, Hyman WA, Hulse DA: The role of the external bar in a six-pin type I external fixation
device, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 6:75-79, 1993.
49. Lauer SK, Aron DN, Evans MD: Finite elerment method evaluation: articulations and diagonals in
an 8-pin type 1B external skeletal fixator, Vet Surg 29:28-37, 2000.
50. Willer RL, Egger EL, Histand MB: A comparison of stainless steel versus acrylic for the connecting
bar of external skeletal fixators, J A Anirm Hosp Assoc 27:541, 1991.
51. Shahar R: Evaluation of stiffness and stress of external fixators with curved acrylic connecting bars,
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:65-72, 2000.
52. Dernell WS, Harari J, Blacketter DM: A comparison of acute pull-out strength between two-way
and one-way transfixation pin insertion for external skeletal fixation in canine bone, Vet Suig
22:110-114, 1993.
53. Aron DN, Dewey CW: Application and postoperative management of external skeletal fixators,
Vet Clin North Am Smalt Anim Pract 22:69-98, 1992.
54. Toombs JP: A review of the key principles of external skeletal fixation. In Praceedings of
(Small Animat) ACVS Veterinary Symposium, Washington, DC, 1994, pp 405-406.
55. Aron DN, Palmer RH, Johnson AL: Biologic strategies and a balanced concept for repair of highly
 cormminuted long bone fractures, Comp Cont Educ 17:35-49, 1995.
56. Aron DN, Foutz TL, Keller WG, et al: Experimental and clinical experience with an IM pin external
fixator tie-in configuration, Vet Camp Orthop Traumatol 4:86-94, 1991.
57. Johnson AL, Kneller SK, Weigal RM: Radial and tibial fracture repair with external skeletal fixation:
effects of fracture type, reduction, and complications of healing, Vet Surg 18:367-372, 1989.
58.Toombs JP: Transarticular application of external skeletal fixation, Vet Clin North A SmallAnim
Pract 22:181-194, 1992.
59. Ross JT, Matthiesen DT: The use of multiple pin and methylmethacrylate external skeletal
fixation of the treatment of orthopaedic injuries in the dog and cat, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma
6:115-121, 1993.
60. Martinez SA, Arnoczky SP, Flo GL, et al: Dissipation of heat during polymerization of acrylics used
for external skeletal fixator connecting bars, Vet Surg 26:290-294, 1997.
61. Williams N, Tomlinson JL, Hahn AW, et al: Heat conduction of fixator pins with polymethyl-
methacrylate external fixation, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatof 10:153-159, 1997.
158
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
62. Davis M, Schulz Ks, Fawcett A, et al: Flexural and torsional analysis of five acrylics for use in
external skeletal fixation, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatot 11:53-58, 1998.
63. Egger EL, Histand MB, et al: Canine osteotomy healing when stabilized with decreasingly rigid
fixation compared to constantly rigid fixation, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 6:182-187, 1993.
Ar Vet 29:292-297, 1948.
65. Jenny J: Kuentscher's rmedullary nailing in femur fractures of the dog, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
17:381-387, 1950.
66. Carney JP: Rush intramedullary fixation of long bones as applied to veterinary surgery, Vet Med
47:43, 1952.
67. Rudy RL: Principles of intramedullary pinning, Vet Clin North Am 5:209-228, 1975.
68. Pohler O: Implant fractures. In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML, Sumner-Smith G, Prieur WD, editors:
Manuat of intenat fixation in smal aniats,ed2,Berlin,1998,Springe-Verlagpp110114.
 69. Weller S, Hontsch D: Medullary nailing of the fermur and tibia. In Allgower M, editor: Manuat of
internat fixation: techniques recommended by the AO-ASIF group,ed 3,Berlin,1991, Springer-
Verlag, pp 291-366.
70. Dueland RT, Johnson KA, et al: Forty-two interlocking nail fracture cases in the dog, Proc Vet
Orthop Soc 2i:51-52, 1994.
71. Howard PE, Brusewitz GH: An in vitro comparison of the holding strength of partially threaded
vs nonthreaded intramedullary pins, Vet Surg 12:119-122, 1983.
fractures in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:59-66, 1999.
73. Dueland RT, Berglund L, Vanderby R, et al: Structural properties of interlocking nails, canine femora,
and femur-interlocking nail constructs, Vet Surg 25:386-396, 1996.
74. Dueland RT, Vanderby R, McCabe RP: Fatigue study of six and eight rmm diameter interlocking nails
with screw holes of various size and number, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 10:194-199, 1997.
75. Durall I, Diaz MC: Early experience with the use of an interlocking nail for the repair of canine
femoral shaft fractures, Vet Surg 25:397-406, 1996.
76.Larin A,Eich CS,Parker RB, et al: Repair of diaphyseal femoral fractures in cats using interlocking
intramedullary nails: 12 cases (1996-2000), J A Vet Med Assoc 219:1098-1104, 2001.
77.BerardeDioA,MareN:invitrbimehanica studyfbone lateandntlockinl
in a canine diaphyseal femoral fracture model, Vet Surg 30:397-408, 2001.
78. Suber JT,Basinger RR,Keller WG: Two unreported modes of interlocking nail failure: breakout and
screw bending, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatof 15:228-232, 2002.
79.DuhautoisB: Use of veterinaryinterlocking nails fordiaphyseal fractures in dogs andcats: 121cases,
Vet Surg 32:8-20, 2003.
80. Gibson KL, vanEe RT: Stack pinning of long bone fractures: a retrospective study, Vet Clin Orthop
Trauma 4:48-53, 1991.
 81. Dallman MJ, Martin RA, et al: Rotational strength of double pinning techniques in repair of
transverse fractures of fermurs in dogs, Arm J Vet Res 51:123-127, 1990.
J Bone Joint Surg 50A:784, 1968.
83. Rooks RL, Tarvin GB, et al: In vitro cerclage wiring analysis, Vet Surg 11:39-43, 1982.
84. Blass CE, Pierrmattei DL, et al: Static and dynamic cerclage wire analysis, Vet Surg 15:181, 1986.
85. Roe SC: Mechanical characteristics and comparisons of cerclage wires: introduction of the
double-wrap and loop/twist tying methods, Vet Suig 26:310-316, 1997.
86. Blass CE, Arnoczky SB, et al: Mechanical properties of three wire configurations, Arm J Vet Res
46:1725, 1985.
87. Schatzker J: Screws and plates and their application. In Allgower M, editor: Manuat of internat fixa-
tion: techniques recommended by the AO-ASIF group, ed 3, Berlin, 1991, Springer-Verlag, pp 179-199.
88. Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD: Manuat of internat fixation in small animats, Heidelberg, 1984,
Springer-Verlag, pp 29-79, 104-107.
89. Perren SM, Russenberger M, et al: A dynamic compression plate, Acta Orthop Scand Supp!
125:31, 1969.
90. Perren SM, Hutzschenreuter P, Steinermann S: Some effects of rigidity of internal fixation on the
healing pattern of osteotormies, Z Surg 1:77, 1969.
91.Matter,BrenwaldJ,et al: Theeffet of staticcompression and tensionon internal remodelingf
cortical bone, Hetv Chir Acta 12(suppl):5-43, 1975.
92. Perren SM, Allgower M, et al: Clinical experience with a new compression plate DCP, Acta Orthop
Scand Suppt 125:45, 1969.
93. Hulse DA, Hyman W, Nori M, et al. Reduction in plate strain by addition of an intramedullary pin,
Vet Surg 26:451-459, 1997.
94. Schatzger J, Meutstege F Prieur WD: Imlants and their application. In Brinker WO, Olmstead ML,
Sumner-Smith G, Prieur WD, editors: Manuat of internat fixation in smatl animats, ed 2, Berlin, 1998,
95. Brinker WO, Flo GL, et al: Guidelines for selecting proper implant size for treatment of fractures in
dog and cat, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:476-477, 1977.
96. Jiunn-Jerr W, Shyr HS, et al: Comparison of osteotomy healing under external fixation devices with
different stiffness characteristics, J Bone Joint Surg 66A:1258-1264, 1984.
 2—Fractures: Classification, Diagnosis, and Treatment
159
 s  d   e   r  i    a 
Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 1:40-46, 1989.
98. Fruchter AM, Holmberg DL: Mechanical analysis of the veterinary cuttable plate, Vet Comp
Orthop Trauma 4:116-119, 1991.
 99. McLaughlin RM, Cockshutt JR, Kuzma AB: Stacked veterinary cuttable plates for treatment of
comminuted diaphyseal fractures in cats, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 5:22-25, 1992.
100. Gentry SJ, Taylor RA, Dee JF: The use of veterinary cuttable plates: 21 cases, J Arm Anirm Hosp
Assoc 29:455-458, 1993.
101. Hulse D, Ferry K, Fawcett A, et al: Effect of intrarmedullary pin size on reducing bone plate strain,
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:185-190, 2000.
102. Reerms MR, Beale BS, Hulse DA: Use of a plate-rod construct and principles of biological
osteosynthesis for repair of diaphyseal fractures in dogs and cats: 47 cases (1994-2001), J Am Vet
Med Assoc 223:330-335, 2003.
103. Brinker WO, Flo GL, et al: Removal of bone plates in small animals, J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc
11:577-586, 1975.
104. Perren SM: Basic aspects of internal fixation. In Allgower M, editor: Manuat of internat fixation:
techniques recommended by the AO-ASIF group, ed 3, Berlin, 1991, Springer-Verlag, pp 18-19.
105. Stephenson S, Hohn RB, et al: Fracture-associated sarcomas in the dog, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
180:1189-1196, 1982.
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:559-561, 1977.
107. Palmer RH, Hulse DA, Aron DN: A proposed fracture patient score system used to develop
fracture treatment plans. In Proceedings of 2Oth Annuat Conference of Veterinary Orthopedic
Society, 1993 {abstract).
             
Proceedings of (Small Animat) ACVS Veterinary Symposium, Washington, DC, 1994, pp 388-390.
 a g s    o  a    ra 
treatment of chronic osteomyelitis in dogs and cats, J Am Vet Med Assoc 183:312, 1983.
110. Rittmann WW, Webb JK: Compound fractures. In Allgower M, editor: Manuat of internat fixation:
techniques recommended by the AO-ASIF group, ed 3, Berlin, 1991, Springer-Verlag, pp 683-688.
111. Schwach RP, Parks RD, et al: Gunshot fractures of extremities: clasification, management, and
complications, Vet Surg 8:57-62, 1979.
112. Lindsey D: The idolatry of velocities, or lies, damn lies, and balistics, J Traua 20:1068-1069,
1980 (editorial).
Bone Grafting
Bone grafting was introduced into general surgical practice early in the twentieth
century, and the principles of grafting have been well established for more than
75 years.1 Banked bone (frozen, freeze-dried, and irradiated) came into general
use in the late 1940s.2 Infection associated with bone grafing in animals has been
 minimal when aseptic procedures have been used and when the bone has not been
 introduced into a contaminated, infected, or unstable area. We have not encoun-
tered outright rejection by the body or bone sequestrum formation when autoge-
nous or frozen allografts are used, although bone does have an antigenic potential.?
Freezing decreases the antigenic stimulation of the graft. Introduced bone undergoes
varying degrees of osteoconduction (creeping substitution) and is completely or
 partially replaced by host bone.
INDICATIONS FOR GRAFTING
 Bone grafting is recommended in the following circumstances:
1. To enhance healing in delayed unions, nonunions, osteotomies, and arthrodeses
of joints by stimulating early formation of bridging callus
2. To bridge major defects in multifragmentary fractures by establishing
continuity of bone segments and filling cortical defects, thereby stimulating and
enhancing early formation of bridging callus
3. To replace entire cortical segments lost from fracture fragmentation or from
excision caused by neoplasia
 4. To fill cavities or partial-thickness defects resulting from excision of cysts or
neoplasms
CHARACTERISTICS OF BONE GRAFTS
Sources and Terminology
Grafts originate from the following three sources:
 1. Autograft or autogenous graft—from the same animal. Autografts
have maximal osteogenetic potential and earliest response, but their
collection increases operative time and risk, and the bone available may be
insufficient in quantity, shape, and size or may be mechanically
unsuitable.
160
3—Bone Grafting
161
 2. Allograft-from the same species. Formerly known as *homografts," these
 grafts are collected from donor animals and either used fresh or held in a bone
bank (freezer) for future use. Experimentally and clinically, an allograft has
about the same enhancing effect as autogenous bone; however, no direct
 Osteogenesis occurs, and there is an initial delay in response of about 2 weeks
compared with the response of an autograft. Availability in sufficient quantity,
shape, and size is the main advantage. Additionally, allografts are the only
feasible source for large cortical grafts.
3. Xenograft-from a different species. This graft has the least osteogenetic
   q ia e   l  i e pd
 u, n a   a se og e  
obsolete.
Structure
Grafts may be either cancellous, cortical, or a combination of both—corticocancel-
lous. Cancellous grafts are usually collected from the host's metaphyseal bone and
used as fresh autografts. Cortical grafts are most often used as frozen allografts.
Corticocancellous grafts can be either fresh autografts or fresh or frozen allografts
and are usually collected from the ribs or dorsal iliac crests.
FUNCTIONS OF BONE GRAFTS
Bone grafts serve as a source of osteogenesis and may also serve as a mechanical
support.23 Rapid formation of bridging callus is important when fracture fragmen-
 tation creates a situation in which the bone cannot assume any weight sharing with
the implant. Under these circumstances, callus can stabilize the fracture sufficiently
to relieve the implant of some of these forces and thus minimize chances of prema-
ture failure or loosening of the implant. When placed in large deficits resulting from
-iam e se ais o sr a i 'oq dou go u no en
bearing strut or buttress that resists weight-bearing forces, again sparing the implant
of some of these loads.
New bone that is formed on or about a graft can be of graft origin (i.e., directly
from osteoblasts or osteoprogenitor cells that survive the transfer). At best, survival
of cells from the graft is estimated at 10% when a fresh autogenous cancellous
graft is used and handled under optimum conditions. The second way in which
the bone graft may function as a source of osteogenesis is by recruitment of
mesenchymal or pluripotential osteoprogenitor cells in the area, which then
differentiate into cartilage-forming and bone-forming cells, a process called osteoin-
dimensional process of ingrowth of sprouting capillaries, perivascular tissue, and
osteoprogenitor cells from the recipient bed into the structure of a graft. The graft
acts as a scaffold or template for new-bone formation, then undergoes varying
degrees of osteoclastic resorption and replacement (creeping substitution) by
host bone.
 Cancellous grafts have many advantages, such as rapid stimulation of direct bone
formation, early osteoinduction, and early vascularization. Autogenous cancellous
bone is the only bone graft that can be safely applied in contaminated areas.
Vascular invasion and osteoconduction occur much more slowly in cortical grafts,
but these grafts have the advantage of affording some immediate stability to the
area. They are prone to sequestration in infected areas.
162
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
CLINICAL APPLICATION OF BONE GRAFTS
Collection of Bone for Grafting
Strict aseptic technique is mandatory in grafting procedures that do not involve
ethylene oxide (ETO) sterilization.
Autogenous Cancellous Bone
Figure 3-1, A through D, shows the most common areas for collection in small
animals: the lateral tubercle of the humerus, the subtrochanteric region or medial
 condyle of the femur, the proximomedial tibia, and the craniodorsal iliac spine.
The selected area is approached through a 2- to 3-cm skin incision. The cortical
(you v-si/) ud uueuuas pauod-reoon e no audan e ym pauado si auoq
4.8-6.5 mm), and cancellous bone is scooped out with an oval curette
(Figure 3-1, E). The graft is usually held in a small container (covered with a
 gauze sponge moistened with Ringer's or saline solution) until time for transfer to
the new area (Figure 3-1, F). Do not immerse the graft in the fluid, and do not apply
antibiotics. A blood-soaked surgical sponge can be substituted for the container.
The graft should be implanted immediately after it is collected.
 Because of their accessibility, the proximal humerus and tibia are the most
frequently used collection sites. One or more of these areas is prepared pre-
operatively, and draping should allow access to them if needed during fracture
 repair. The proximal humerus yields more bone than the tibia, and cancellous bone
is restored more completely than in the tibia, where fibrous tissue fills the graft site.4
D
E
A
B
c
 FIGURE 3-1. Collection of autogenous cancellous bone for grafting. A through D, Sections
of a humerus, femur, tibia, and ilium indicating location for collection of bone graft.
 E, Curette used to scoop out cancellous bone. F, Receptacle used for temporarily holding
collected gra ft.
3—Bone Grafting
163
Postoperative hematoma is not uncommon at the donor site, but can be minimized
by careful layered closure of the site.
Autogenous Corticocancellous Bone
The ribs and craniodorsal iliac spine are the usual donor sites. The rib collection
technique is similar to that illustrated in Figure 3-2 for allografts. An incision
through skin and muscle is made directly over the chosen rib. The periosteum is
incised and carefully elevated to avoid opening the pleural cavity, and the rib is freed
by cutting at both ends. The iliac spine is also approached directly by a dorsal inci-
sion of skin and muscle. It is not necessary to elevate periosteum, and a suitable
 block of bone is freed by osteotome or bone saw. The graft can be either just the
lateral cortex or a full-thickness piece of the iliac spine/crest containing both
cortices.
Allograft/Bone Banking
Collection technique varies with the method chosen for preservation. The graft can
- a raun o ro a q pasrd pe andase pa aq
tions, sterilized by ETO, and preserved by freezing.23.s
Bone is collected from a healthy donor animal of the same species, under strict
 aseptic procedure if ETO sterilization is not used. For corticocancellous bone, it is
s g oi t xde spq ar au jo au  ru e as  aqd
of age. Ribs are the most common source of bone because they have a relatively high
proportion of cancellous bone (Figure 3-2, A). If more cortical content is desirable,
o pe sad n edxa snard se pasn si ads s esoo 
soft tissue are removed from the bone by scraping with a scalpel blade or periosteal
elevator at collection. The harvested bone is placed in a sterile test tube or similar
container. A small amount of Ringer's solution may be added to keep the bones
moist and to prevent freezer burn (dehydration) in storage. Each bone is usually
A
B
FIGURE 3-2.
 Collection of rib grafts for bone bank. A, Ribs are aseptically collected from
a donor animal and cleaned of all soft tissue. B, Each rib is placed in a sterile test tube or
similar container.
164
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
placed in an individual sterile container or wrap for convenient use (Figure 3-2, B)
The sealed and labeled containers are placed in a home-type deep freezer and
held at 0° F (-18 C) or lower. Bone preserved in this manner may be held for
approximately 1 year.
Cortical diaphyseal grafts are collected from all the long bones, cutting the
diaphyseal portion free at each end with a bone saw. The medullary canal is
curetted and fushed to remove soft tissue elements. Packaging and freezing are
done as described earlier. Because these grafts will need to match the recipient
site quite closely in size, they should be labeled as to size of donor, and it is also
helpful to radiograph the specimen to allow easier matching to the recipient.
ETO sterilization simplifies the collection process in that aseptic technique does
not have to be used, although the conditions should be made as clean as possible.
After the bones have been cleaned of soft tissue, they are double-wrapped in poly-
ethylene instrument sterilization pouches or tubing. Sterilization is by 84% ETO
(Anprolene, H.W. Anderson Products) for 12 hours, followed by 72 hours of aera-
tion, all at room temperature. After this sterilization the bones are deep-frozen as
previously described. Such sterilization and storage up to 1 year appear to have no
effects on cortical bone resistance to compressive, bending, and torsional loads
when compared with fresh bone.6
Types of Grafts and Placement
The graft types most often used are pure cancellous fragments, corticocancellous
bone chips, cortical or corticocancellous onlay or inlay, and cortical tubular
intercalary grafts (Figure 3-3).
B
D
 FIGURE 3-3. Types of bone grafts. A, Pure cancellous fragments or bone chips created by
use of a rongeur are packed around the fracture site. B, Onlay graft {usually a split rib) spans
the fracture, and cancellous fragments or chips are packed around the fracture site. C, Inlay
 opposite the plate. The fragmented area under the plate is grafted with cancellous bone.
D and E, Tubular intercalary allograft used to replace a section of the diaphysis. Autogenous
cancellous bone is used at the graft-host junctions.
3—Bone Grafting
165
Pure Cancellous Fragments
The graft of pure cancellous fragments is used immediately after collection by pack-
ing the fragments into the desired area and then gently compressing the material.
Any graft left after packing into the defect can be spread around the surface of the
defect and adjacent bone (Figure 3-3, A). The graft site should be cleaned of tissue
fragments and blood clots before insertion of the graft. Avoid irrigation of the graft
before closing the soft tissues, which should be done immediately. In delayed unions
or nonunions, the sclerotic tissue and periosteum are peeled off the host bone
segments at the fracture site. This is usually accomplished by using a periosteal
elevator or osteotome and mallet (see Figure 4-3). The bone segments are stabilized
by a compression plate, and the graft is placed around the fracture site between the
elevated periosteum and cortex.
Corticocancellous Bone Chips2
The graft using corticocancellous bone chips is usually prepared from banked
allograft rib bone. Bone chips of 2 to 5 mm in diameter (see Figure 3-3, A) are used
in a manner identical to pure cancellous bone and are useful to increase the volume
of graft over that available from pure autogenous cancellous bone, or when an
e us Aq paiea are sdo au paedard uaaq iou seq ais rouop snouanone
rongeur to "nibble off" small bone pieces.
Onlay Bone Graft2
 Figure 3-3, B, shows an onlay graft used in treatment of a nonunion fracture. The
sclerotic tissue and periosteum are elevated and reflected off the host area. The bone
segments are stabilized by a compression plate. The graft is created by splitting a rib
bone to expose the cancellous interior, and this side is placed against the recipient
bone. One or more onlay grafts are placed on the bone, spanning the fracture site. The
graft may be secured in place by bone screws, by cerclage wires, or by suturing the
patient's tissue over the area. Rigid fixation of bone segments in the host is much more
important than fixation of the transplant. It is usually a good procedure to place auto-
genous cancellous bone or bone chips around the remaining uncovered portion of the
n sa u  r e un as aq  s a 'as a
Inlay Bone Graft
The inlay graft is most often cortical bone used as a buttress to replace a portion of
missing cortex on the compression side opposite the bone plate (Figure 3-3, C). Its
use has declined with the advent of the concept of "bridging osteosynthesis" (see
Chapter 2). In many cases its use is interchangeable with the tubular graft explained
below. The graft must be securely stabilized, preferably by bone screws placed
through the plate.
Tubular Intercalary Diaphyseal Graft.7-9
Tubular grafts (Figure 3-3, D and E) are indicated chiefly for the following:
1. Severe multiple or comminuted shaft fractures that do not lend themselves
to anatomical reconstruction
 2. Fractures with missing bone segments; bone length can be restored
 3. Replacement of surgically removed segments of neoplastic bone
 4. Reconstruction of certain atrophic nonunion fractures
5. Correction of malunion
followed a mean of 2.1 years yielded normal function in 96% of the dogs.?
166
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 Despite these results, the use of this type of bone graft in fracture repair has declined
with the advent of the concept of bridging osteosynthesis (see Chapter 2), and
intercalary grafts are presently used primarily in limb-sparing surgery for bony
neoplasia.
The procedure usually consists of squaring off the ends of the viable bone
segments, attaching the proper size and length of cylindrical diaphyseal allograft to
the center section of the plate, and immobilizing it under compression at both ends
by using a dynamic compression plate. Autogenous cancellous graft is used at each
end of the graft. There may be an advantage to perforating the graft with small drill
holes to encourage vascularization of the medullary canal. Screws should secure a
minimum of four cortices in the graft and six cortices in each end of recipient bone
to secure adequate stability. Functionally, most animals respond in the same way as
 the patient with an average, multiple or segmental fracture stabilized with a bone
plate. Replacement of the allograft by host bone is slow and incomplete, with areas
 uo pasodp auoq man oyuad auo u sea g ie susard s yna pap jo
surface of the graft creates clinical union, and plates can be removed in 18 to
25 months if indicated.
Autogenous Free Vascularized Bone Graft
The advent of microsurgery in veterinary orthopedics has resulted in the description
of successful autogenous free vascularized bone grafts, with donor sites of the distal
B
C
 FIGURE 3-4. Free autogenous vascularized bone graft. A, Medial tibial cortex harvested
from donor site with vascular pedicle (arrow). B, Graft is fixed to mandibular defect with
hemicerclage wire. An acrylic type I fixator is used to stabilize the mandible. The graft ves-
sels have been anastomosed with microsurgical technique. C, Radiograph shows healing of
the graft (arrow) to host bone. (Images courtesy Dr. Trevor Bebchuck.)
3—Bone Graffing
167
ulna, coccygeal vertebrae, fibula, and medial tibial cortex.11-15 Maintaining vascular
supply to the bone graft requires successful microsurgical anastomosis of the vascu-
lar pedicles of the graft to the recipient site vessels. A successful anastomosis yields 
excellent graft survival and incorporation of the graft into the host bone, with resist-
ance to infection and sequestration. Distal ulna has been used to reconstruct tibial
diaphyseal defects.112 Medial tibial cortical free grafts have been used to bridge
 contaminated mandible defects successfully (Figure 3-4).13 These techniques require
advanced training and experience in microsurgical techniques and are used currently
on a very limited basis. They may become more relevant to clinical practice as
veterinary orthopedic specialization progresses.
References
1. Albee FH: Fundamentals in bone transplantation: experiences in three thousand bone graft
operations, JAMA 81:1429-1432, 1923.
2. BrinkerWO: Fractures. In Canine surgery, SantaBarbara, Calf, American VeterinaryPublicatins
{ed 2, 1952, pp 548-643; ed 3, 1957, pp 546-640; Archibald, editor, 1965, pp 777-849; Archibald,
editor, 1975,pp 957-1048).
3. Stevenson S: Bone grafting. In Slatter DH, editor: Textbook of small animat surgery, vol II, ed 2,
Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders, pp 1694-1703.
4. Penwick RC, Mosier DK, Clark DM: Healing of autogenous cancellous bone graft donor sites,
Vet Surg 20:229-234, 1991.
 5. Johnson AL: Principles and practical application of cortical-bone grafting techniques, Compend
Cont Educ Small Anim Pract 10:906-913, 1988.
6. Tshamala M, vanBree H, Mattheeuws D: Biormechanical properties of ethylene oxide sterilized and
cryopreserved cortical bone allografts, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 7:25-30, 1994.
12:741-745, 1976.
8. Henry WB, Wadsworth PL: Retrospective analysis of failures in the repair of severely comminuted
9. Sinibaldi KR: Evaluation of full cortical allografts in 25 dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 194:
1570-1577, 1989.
10. Wilson JW, Hoefle WD: Diaphyseal allograft: eight year evaluation in a dog, Vet Cormp Orthop
Trauma 3:78-81, 1990.
11. Szentimrey D, Fowler D: The anatomic basis of a free vascularized bone graft based on the canine
distal ulna, Vet Surg 23:529-533, 1994.
12. Szentimrey D, Fowler D, Johnston G, et al: Transplantation of the canine distal ulna as a free
vascularized bone graft, Vet Surg 24:215-225, 1995.
13. Bebchuck TN, Degner DA, Waishaw R, et al: Evaluation of a free vascularized medial tibial bone
graft in dogs, Vet Surg 29:128-144, 2000.
14. Levitt L, Fowler D, Longley M, et al: A developmental rmodel for free vascularized bone transfers in
the dog, Vet Surg 17:194-202, 1988.
15. Yeh LS, Hou SM: Repair of a mandibular defect with a free vascularized coccygeal vertebra transfer
in a dog, Vet Surg 23:281-285,1994.
Delayed Union and Nonunion
The speed of reunion of bone is in direct ratio to the rigidity with which the two
pieces are placed together.
Richard VonVolkmann (1830-1889)
Delayed union refers to a fracture that has not healed in the usual time for that
s r pde s h e sp i ae a rd
animals.1 Nonunion refers to a fracture in which all evidence of osteogenic activity
at the fracture site has ceased, movement is present at the fracture site, and union
 is no longer possible without surgical intervention. The term pseudoarthrosis is
sometimes applied indiscriminately to all nonunions, but it should be reserved for
those nonunions in which sclerotic bone ends are united by a fibrous "joint capsule"
filled with serum (Figure 4-1, A). The most common causes of these conditions are
local factors, as follows:
1. Inadequate immobilization, or failure to maintain immobilization for a
sufficient length of time.
 2. Inadequate reduction with a large fracture gap and interpositioning of
soft tissue.
 3. Impairment of the blood supply resulting from the original trauma or
surgical trauma.
 4. Infection. A fracture may heal in the presence of infection; at best,
however, healing is delayed. Implant loosening is common in infected
bone.
5. Loss of bone or bone fragments from open trauma or surgery.
General factors such as age, high-dose corticosteroid therapy, and metabolic
alteration of osteoblastic activity (e.g., rickets) may affect the rate of bone healing.
However, observations of delayed union or nonunion fractures attributed to these
factors are uncommon in dogs or cats.
DELAYED UNION FRACTURES
The most common cause of delayed union is inadequate or interrupted fixation of
the fracture segments. On radiographic examination (Figure 4-1, B) the fracture line
remains evident and has a feathery or woolly appearance, and there is no sclerosis
of the bone ends. Evidence of osteogenic activity (callus) is visible, but this is
minimal and may not bridge the fracture line.
168
4-Delayed Union and Nonunion
169
TABLE 4-1.
AVERAGE TIMES TO CLINICAL UNION
ESF (type I, some II)
Plate Fixation ESF
Age of Animal
IM Pin
(type II, some II)
<3 months
 2-3 weeks
 4 weeks
3-6 months
4-6 weeks
6-12 weeks
6-12 months
5-8 weeks
12-16 weeks
1 year
7-12 weeks
16-30 weeks
Modified from Hohn RB, Rosen H: Delayed union. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD, editors: Manual of internal
fixation in small animals, Berlin, 194, Springer-Verlag, pp 241254.
ESF, External skeletal fixation; IM, intramedullary.
M
A
C
FIGURE 4-1. Delayed union and nonunion fractures. A, Chronic nonunion of the
pseudoarthrosis type. The sclerotic bone ends are united by a fibrous "joint capsule” contain-
ing serum. B, Delayed union tibial fracture caused by rotational instability. The fracture
laterally. C, Four weeks after closed application of an external fixator, the fracture has
reached clinical union.
 Treatment of delayed union fractures may be approached by various means,
as follows':
1. If reduction is satisfactory, rigid uninterrupted fixation should be ensured and
maintained for an extended time. If the original fixation is still deemed
adequate, this may involve simply reducing the animal's activity through better
owner cooperation or may require the use of non-weight-bearing slings
 (see Chapter 2). The use of external coaptation splints or casts should be
avoided in animals with long-bone fractures.
 If the original fixation is suspect, it should be augmented or replaced. A common
scenario is a long-bone fracture (often the femur) treated by intramedullary fixation,
170
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
with or without cerclage or interfragmentary wire, that is not totally stable in
rotation or perhaps is in shear resulting from collapse with weight bearing. Under
these circumstances, closed application of an external fixator is useful and usually
provides sufficient stability to allow healing to proceed (Figure 4-1, C). Type I
fixators are most often used in this situation. Delayed union femoral fractures
 in large-breed dogs are probably better treated by application of a bone plate
(Figure 4-2, A and B) because better limb function can be anticipated than with
external fixators.
Bone plate fixation is not immune to problems with delayed union, usually
because of instability at the fracture site. Loose screws in bone plates can be
salvaged by the following means:
a. Replace with larger screws if the plate holes will accept them, or replace
cortical threads with cancellous threads.
b. Add a nut to the protruding end of the screw.
c. Fill screw holes with methyl methacrylate. Use liquid cement in a syringe, fill
 the holes, and insert the screws. After the cement hardens, tighten the screws
to normal tightness. Do not allow any cement into the fracture area.
d. Substitute cerclage wires for screws. This is the least desirable method and is
used only as a last resort.
 2. If there is good end-to-end bone contact, but with malalignment or bending at
the fracture site, the bone should be straightened and rigid uninterrupted
fixation applied. This situation is most often a sequel to closed reduction and
coaptation fixation. Usually, straightening can be accomplished by careful but
forceful pressure with the hands or by applying pressure over a fulcrum point.
C
D
FIGURE 4-2.
 Delayed union fractures. A, Satisfactory reduction of delayed union femoral
 fracture previously treated with an intramedullary pin. B, Rigid internal fixation provided by
a compression plate. C, Delayed union fracture of a tibia with good contact of bone frag-
ments but with valgus deformity. D, Bone straightened manually, without surgical exposure.
A unilateral external fixator consisting of 2/2 pins was applied for fixation.
4Delayed Union and Nonunion
171
 This is preferable to doing an open surgical correction because it saves many
weeks of healing time (Figure 4-2, C and D). Again, external fixators are often
the technique of choice.
 3. If reduction is unsatisfactory, surgical intervention is indicated to correct the
deficiencies of reduction and fixation. In the absence of vigorous callus
 formation, autogenous cancellous bone grafting of the fracture site is always
indicated (Figure 4-3).
NONUNION FRACTURES
 Two basic types of nonunion fractures—viable and nonviable—as classified by their
biological characteristics, were proposed by Weber and Cech? and remain the most
useful system for the clinician. All these types may be complicated by the presence
 of infection.
1. Viable (reactive, vascular). This is a biologically active fracture, characterized
by a variable degree of proliferative bone reaction with interposed cartilage
and fibrous tissue that is evident radiographically and histologically
(Figure 4-4). There are three subtypes within this category, representing the
types most often seen in small animals:
a. Hypertrophic, or "elephant foot" (Figures 4-4, A, and 4-5, A). There is an
abundant bridging callus that has not ossified because of motion at the
A
B
FIGURE 4-3. A, Delayed union fracture with evidence of osteogenic activity, movement at
fracture site, overriding of fracture segments, shortening, and favoring the leg. B to D, Open
approach; modified periosteal callus layers were reflected away from the cortex as one layer.
Reduction and stabilization were achieved by inserting an intramedullary {IM) pin and
unilateral external fixator (1/1 pin). A cancellous bone graft was added around the fracture
site. In cases such as this, the medullary space is filled with internal callus; thus the IM pin
fits snugly and affords excellent stability. The external fixator was added to stabilize against
rotation. The other alternative is to use a plate for fixation.
172
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
fracture site. What appears to be sclerosis of the bone ends is actually
abundant appositional bone being deposited that is unable to bridge the
fracture gap due to motion.
b. Moderately bypertrophic, or "horse hoof" (Figures 4-4, B, and 4-5, B).
Callus is present, but it is not as florid as the hypertrophic nonunion 
fracture.
c. Oligotrophic (Figure 4-4, C). This type is sometimes difficult to
distinguish from the nonviable types. Callus is absent or minimal, and
the fracture gap may simply be bridged by fibrous tissue. The radiographic
key is the continued fuzzy or hazy appearance to the bone ends, even if
they have become smooth or rounded in outline. This haziness is caused
 by vascularity of the area, as opposed to the sclerotic appearance of
devascularized bone.
FIGURE 4-4. Classification of nonunion fractures, according to Weber and Cech.3 A to C,
Viable, or biologically active, nonunions. A, Hypertrophic; elephant foot callus.
B, Moderately hypertrophic; horse hoof callus. C, Oligotrophic; callus minimal or absent.
D to G, Nonviable, or biologically inactive nonunions. D, Dystrophic; one or both sides of
the fracture line are poorly vascularized. E, Necrotic; devascularized bone fragments
(sequestra) remain in the fracture gap. F, Defect; bone fragments missing from the fracture
 gap. G, Atrophic; resorption and rounding of bone ends and complete cessation of osteogenic
activity.
4Delayed Union and Nonunion
173
 2. Nonviable (nonreactive, avascular). These types of nonunion fortunately are
not common because they represent a much more difficult situation to achieve
clinical union.
a. Dystrophic (Figure 4-4, D). One or both sides of the fracture line are poorly
vascularized, sometimes because of a fragment that has healed to one end
but has too little blood supply to unite to the other end. Radiographic
characteristics include a visible fracture gap, rounded and distinct edges to
the bone, and sclerosis extending several millimeters from the bone edges.
 The dystrophic type is seen most often in distal radius/ulna fractures in toy
and miniature dogs.
b. Necrotic (Figure 4-4, E). If bone fragments are not "captured" by invading
callus, as a result of motion or more often infection, they may never become
vascularized and remain in the fracture gap as sequestra. These fragments 
will have the same sharp jagged edges as they had in the immediate
 postfracture radiographs and will appear more sclerotic with time. The main
fragment edges will smooth off as a result of remodeling and will exhibit
variable degrees of sclerosis.
c. Defect (Figure 4-4, F). Large fragments may be missing from open fractures,
especially high-energy gunshot fractures. If this gap is more than 1.5 times
the bone diameter, osteogenetic potential in the local area may be insufficient
to bridge the gap with callus, no matter how good the stabilization. This is
most common in areas in which vascular recruitment is limited because of
inadequate soft tissue (e.g., distal tibia, radius/ulna) or local soft tissue and
vascular damage.
d. Atrophic (Figures 4-4, G, and 4-5, C). This is the end point of most
nonviable nonunions, with resorption and rounding of the bone ends, with
 or without disuse osteoporosis, and complete cessation of osteogenic activity.
A
B
C
FIGURE 4-5. Radiographic appearance of nonunions. A, Hypertrophic. B, Moderately
hypertrophic. C, Atrophic.
174
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Treatment
Viable Nonunion
 If reduction is satisfactory, most patients will respond to stable fixation of any type.
Compression at the fracture site (e.g., with a compression plate) is especially effica-
 cious. Callus should be disturbed as little as possible when applying fixation, even
to the point of contouring the plate to accommodate the callus. Type II and Ill exter-
nal fixators can also be employed, especially in the radius/ulna and the tibia. These
fixators are the best choice if the nonunion is infected. Type I external fixators com-
"(9-t ai) suos aos u pade aq uo sud ( Ara ym pa
A
B
c
D
E
FIGURE 4-6. Moderately hypertrophic nonunion of a supracondylar fracture in a
 small Yorkshire terrier immobilized by use of an improperly placed intramedullary (IM) pin.
the area was very painful, and the animal refused to use the leg. B and C, A lateral open
approach was used, and an IM pin and unilateral external fixator (1/1 pin) were applied for
stabilization. The external fixator was removed in 6 weeks because there was sufficient
callus to stabilize against rotation. D and E, Clinical union was present at 3 months, and the 
IM pin was removed. The animal regained a full range of movement and function.
4Delayed Union and Nonunion
175
If reduction is unsatisfactory, the callus must be divided at the fracture site. Some
callus may need to be resected to achieve bone-to-bone contact and to open the
medullary canal with an IM pin, allowing speedy reestablishment of the medullary
blood supply. Appropriate fixation is then applied. Bone grafting is not needed,
although pieces of resected callus can be packed around the fracture site.
Nonviable Nonunion
An open approach is made to allow reflection of the covering of thickened perios-
teum with a periosteal elevator or osteotome and removal of the fibrous soft tissue
 spu aoq an  pao si ao pass 'spua aoq an ama
rongeurs until bleeding is observed from the periosteum and endosteum; however,
excessive bone length should not be sacrificed to achieve this. Additionally, a suit-
able diameter of Steinmann pin or a twist drill is used to open the medullary canal.
The space between the reflected periosteum and bone is packed with cancellous
bone chips, and stable fixation is applied (e.g., bone plate, external fixator, or IM
and external fixator) (Figure 4-7; see also Figure 4-3, B, C, and D). Healing is slow,
and the fixation will need to remain in place for a prolonged period (4-6 months).
Some of the more indolent conditions may necessitate grafting procedures a second
or third time.
Future Treatment Possibilities
 Bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) function to induce transformation of undif-
ferentiated mesenchymal cells into chondroblasts and osteoblasts and have been
shown to induce new bone formation in vivo and in vitro.4 BMPs have been isolated
from a variety of mammalian tissues and are on the verge of becoming commer-
cially available through recombinant DNA technology in quantities sufficient for
A
B
C
FIGURE 4-7. Nonunion of a fracture of the femur. The extremely comminuted fracture was
originally fixed by use of a plate; however, the fracture site deficits were not filled with bone
graft. At 15 months, when the animal returned for plate removal, it was favoring the leg.
A, Radiograph of femur after plate removal, lateral view. B, After reflection of the modified
periosteum in the fracture site area, an intramedullary (IM) pin and a unilateral external
ture area. C, Clinical union at 4'/2 months, lateral view. Demineralized bone such as this
responds faster if subjected to stresses; therefore the IM pin and external fixator were chosen
for sta bilization.
176
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
clinical application. Potential applications include use as alternatives to bone grafts,
 promoters of osteointegration of implants, and treatment of nonadaptive bone
disease such as stress fractures. Thus, BMPs would appear to have value in the treat-
ment of delayed union and nonunion fractures, but their role in this area remains to
be defined through clinical trials.
Microsurgical technique has allowed the use of autogenous free vascular bone
 grafts as treatment for nonunion fractures in dogs. The distal ulna and the medial
tibial cortex have been described as potential donor sites, with external fixators
used for graft stabilization. Successful experimental vascular bone transplantation
 also has been described.s-7 Microvascular anastomosis of a bone graft blood supply
has a demonstrated experimental advantage over avascular grafts in a bacteria-
contaminated graft site.7 Avascular bone becomes an infected sequestrum in the
 presence of bacteria, whereas vascularized autogenous bone (see Figure 3-4) quickly
 incorporates with local bone and hypertrophies to accept a load during weight
Bone transport osteogenesis, with the use of circular-frame external fixators, has
 been described as a possible treatment for large segmental defects, as seen with
 nonunion fractures.&-io A circular-frame external fixator is applied to the bone, and
 an osteotomy is performed distant to the nonunion site. Serial distraction is used to
transport autogenous bone slowly across the bone defect until the defect is closed
and the fracture has healed. New bone forms in the distracting osteotomy site and
rapidly remodels into lamellar bone. The transported bone provides vascularized
 autogenous bone at the site of the poor healing environment of the nonunion gap.
Use of this technique has been very limited for nonunion fractures in animals,
and further clinical and scientific studies are needed to define its use in veterinary
orthopedics.
References
1. Hohn RB, Rosen H: Delayed union. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD, editors: Manuat of inter-
2. Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery, ed 2 (Archibald, editor), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974,
American Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
3. Weber BG, Cech D: Pseudoarthrosis: pathalogy, biomechanics, therapy, results, Bern, 1976, Hans
Huber Medical Publisher.
4. Kirker-Head CA: Recombinant bone rmorphogenetic proteins: novel substances for enhancing bone
healing, Vet Surg 24:408-419, 1995.
distal ulna,Vet Surg23:529-533,1994.
6. Szentirnrey D, Fowler D, Johnston G, et al: Transplantation of the canine distal ulna as a free
vascularized bone graft,Vet Strg 24:215-225,1995.
7. Bebchuck TN, Degner DA, Walshaw R, et al: Evaluation of a free vascularized medial tibial bone
graft in dogs, Vet Surg 29:128-144, 2000.
8. Lesser AS: Segmental bone transport for the treatment of bone defects, J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc
30:322-330, 1994.
principles of the Ilizarov method, Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 11:59-67,1998.
Vet Comp Orthop Traumatol 13:18-22, 2000.
Treatment of Acute and
Chronic Bone Infections
Osteitis or osteomyelitis is defined as a bone inflammation involving the haversian
spaces, Volkmann canals, and generally the medullary cavity and periosteum. Bone
infection is usually associated with open fractures, bone surgery (especially involv-
ing metallic implants), and systemic illness. Bite wounds are common causes of
osteomyelitis in the lower limbs, mandible, and maxilla in dogs and the coccygeal
vertebrae in cats.
 Acute infection is characterized by a supportive history, localized pain, swelling,
a i   o 1 ) a o  a  
cases, radiological signs are not evident. Persistent fever is the most reliable early
sign of infection. Postsurgical osteomyelitis signs are usually evident 48 to 72 hours
after surgery, but during this period it is difficult to distinguish between incipient
osteomyelitis and deep wound infection. Wound disruption and drainage takes
several days to develop.
muscle atrophy, fibrosis, and contracture; variable lamenes; and positive radio-
graphic changes. These changes may include cortical resorption and thinning:
 a s q    q  sd iss
spiculated'; formation of sequestra and involucra; sclerosis; and soft tissue swelling
 normal bone during the process of necrosis and is surrounded by a pool of infected
exudate. Because it has not undergone any resorptive process and is not vascularized,
its radiographic density is high, giving the appearance of a very white piece of bone
that has very sharp and ragged edges. Most sequestra are found within the
medullary cavity or beneath a bone plate. An nvolucrum is a covering or sheath of
new bone formation and fibrous tissue covering a sequestrum.
 Most often, osteomyelitis implies bacterial infection; however, fungi or viruses
can also infect bone and marrow. Staphylococci cause 50% to 60% of bone infec-
tions in dogs, and historically the organism most frequently reported has been
Staphylococcus aureus; however one report indicates that Staphylococcus inter-
medius is more common.2 The significance here is that most of these were resistant
to penicillin because of β-lactamase production. Other common organisms include
Streptococcus, Escherichia coli, Proteus, Klebsiella, Pseudomonas, and Pasteurella
when bite wounds are present. The importance of anaerobes, especially in bite
wound osteomyelitis, has been emphasized by Muir and Johnson,? who reported a
64% incidence of anaerobic bacteria isolated from such cases. Such isolates include
Actinomyces, Clostridium, Peptostreptococcus, Bacteroides, and Fusobacterium.
177
178
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
4-11
706
2
A
B
C
FIGURE 5-1.   Radiographic signs of osteomyelitis. A, Postoperative film of revision by bone
plate fixation of an infected nonunion fracture. Hazy nonbridging callus is seen at the distal
edge of the fracture gap, and periosteal new bone is distal to the plate. B, Postoperative
day 19. Note resorption of bone under the center of the plate, increased periosteal new bone
distally, and sclerosis of the ulna. The ulnar fragment is a sequestrum. The plate is loose, as
indicated by bone resorption around the distal screws. C, Two months after intramedullary
(IM) pin fixation, this humerus shows classic signs of chronic infection and nonunion
characterized by extensive, mature periosteal bone formation.
About 50% of infections are caused by a single organism; others are caused by
multiple organisms.
ROUTES OF INFECTION
The routes of infection, in order of occurrence, are as follows:
 1. Direct contamination from open fractures, surgical intervention in
ad s au snm aund pe an e jo su
 of infected fractures follow either open fracture repair or open repair
 of closed fractures. The presence of a metallic implant is usually
involved.
2. Direct extension from infected adjacent soft tissue.
 3. The bloodstream, from such conditions as vertebral osteomyelitis,
discospondylitis (Brucella, Nocardia, Staphylococcus), and bacterial
endocarditis.4 Compared with other routes, this source of osteomyelitis is
rare and is not discussed here.
TISSUE CHANGES
 Bone is normally as resistant to infection as any other tissue. Clinical infection is
always a result of more than simple bacterial contamination and usually implies con-
(sas (n aq pasn sn p) m ans os am
5—Treatment of Acute and Chronic Bone Infections
179
Phagocytes
Sequestrum
Osteoblasts
(encased in biofilm)
(in reactive "new" bone)
 Antibodies -
Antibiotics
Osteoclasts
Bacteria
(encased in biofilm)
FIGURE 5-2. Bacteria produce a biofilm (glycocalyx) that promotes bacterial survival and
 implants, instability of fracture fragments, or alteration of local tissue defenses.1
Indeed, 72% of open fractures and 39% of closed fractures have bacterial contam-
 ination at surgery, but only a small percentage become clinically infected. The role
of metallic implants in bone infection has been elucidated in a variety
of studies that have explained how these implants create low-grade inflammation
by depressing host defenses, thus providing a nidus for infection. Infective bacteria
produce a biofilm (glycocalyx) that promotes bacterial growth by protecting
bacteria from phagocytosis and antibodies and causing adherence to implants
(Figure 5-2) or other foreign materia1.1.6
 Infection in bone produces vascular congestion, edema, and an inflammatory exu-
 date that spreads through the bone, killing osteocytes and marrow cells. Polymor-
phonuclear cells release proteolytic enzymes, causing tissue necrosis, a decrease in
local pH, and demineralization of bone matrix and breakdown of trabeculae.
Sometimes the involvement is confined to a localized area; in other cases, large areas
are involved. Spread of infective exudate occurs most easily along the medullary
canal; however, it also occurs beneath the periosteum and in the cortex through
vascular channels. As the quantity of exudate increases, intraosseus pressure
 increases and further compromises blood flow. Areas of bone served by the involved
vascular channels become anoxic and die.
With subsidence of the acute phase, pyogenic granulation tissue attacks and
absorbs dead spongiosa and separates as sequestra those parts of the cortex that are
necrotic. Pus accumulating in the subperiosteal space may separate periosteum from
the outer cortex. The periosteum responds by laying down new bone in an attempt
to bridge and surround the involved area, the so-called involucrum. This process is
not unlike the classic formation of an abscess. The involucrum is usually fenestrated,
leading to the eventual drainage of pus through multiple sinus tracts, which are
accompanied by extensive scar tissue formation in the surrounding soft tissue and
distortion and thinning of overlying skin. These events are worsened by fracture
instability, since interfragmentary motion discourages vascularization of the bone.
The opposing surfaces become more widely separated because of bone resorption,
leading to further instability.
180
Timely and aggressive surgical or medical intervention can arrest infection,
leading to its elimination, followed by gradual remodeling of the involucrum into
cortical bone that may look surprisingly like the original bone. This process of
healing can be discussed by considering (1) changes in necrotic bone; (2) formation
of new bone; and (3) changes in old, living bone.
Necrotic Bone
Dead bone is absorbed by the action of granulation tissue that develops about its
surface. If the dead bone is cancellous, it may be removed entirely, leaving a cavity
tration, the bone is less readily attacked and more slowly absorbed because of
the physical barrier imposed by the scar tissue walls of the cavity surrounding the
sequestrum. Cortical sequestra may take years or even the lifetime of the animal to
be completely absorbed. Some sequestra are never absorbed and will continue
to cause drainage until they are surgically removed.
NewBone
New bone forms from primitive mesenchymal cells in the surviving portions of
periosteum, endosteum, and cortex. Recurrence of infection may result in the
 formation of superimposed layers of involucrum.
Old, Living Bone
 In osteomyelitis, surviving bone usually becomes osteoporotic during the active
period of infection because of disuse atrophy and decalcification resulting from
inflammatory hyperemia. After subsidence of infection and resumption of function
of the part, bone density increases again.
CLINICAL APPROACH
 History, signs, and radiographic findings are essential in making a diagnosis and in
determining the extent of the lesion. Treatment is based on the principles of appro-
priate antimicrobial drugs, open wound drainage and lavage, fracture stabilization,
sequestrectomy, and grafting of bone deficits.1 The first step is to culture and deter-
mine the antibiotic sensitivity of the causative organisms. Culturing for anaerobes is
particularly important in chronic infection and those associated with bite wounds.
It is imperative that the culture be taken from the infected area and not from the
draining sinus tracts, which are typically contaminated with skin organisms.
In acute cases, it is best to perform fine-needle aspiration from the infected area. In
chronic cases, culture at the time of sequestrectomy is indicated. Fractures will heal
in the presence of infection, although healing will be delayed.
Acute Infection
Treatment for acute infection must be aggressive and appropriate to forestall
chronic disease, as follows:
1. Place the animal on a regimen of systemic antibiotics, initially based on either
hospital epidemiology (previous iatrogenic infections) or on the knowledge that
5—Treatment of Acute and Chronic Bone Infections
181
most infections are caused by β-lactamase-producing staphylococci; thus,
cefazolin, clindamycin, cloxacillin, or amoxicillin-clavulanate is indicated.
 Culture and sensitivity testing will indicate the best choice for long-term
treatment, which should be continued for 4 to 6 weeks.
 2. Perform complete and careful debridement of wound, if indicated.
A s sasd si aenxa jn eare aun oi aap ns yseis '
 necessitate leaving the wound open after debridement or using drains with
 or without suction or irrigation. Because of the difficulty in maintaining
drains in animals, it is much safer and easier to manage the patient if the
wounds are left entirely open, even if this means leaving the implants exposed.7
In this method the open wound can be covered with a wet to dry bandage
that is changed daily until the defect has stopped draining exudate or is filled
with healthy granulation tissue. In a healthy wound, granulation tissue will
quickly cover a metallic implant. At this time, filling the bone defect with
an autogenous cancellous bone graft may be indicated by simply elevating
 granulation tissue and packing the cancellous graft beneath it
(see Chapter 3).
 A common technique in human patients involves primary closure of the wound
over drains to allow irrigation and suction. The drains are placed into the wound
bed and exit the skin at a distant site. The tubes are used to flush the wound bed
with fluids containing the appropriate antibiotic, based on culture and sensitivity
results. The difficulties of managing such a system almost preclude its use in
animals. Open drainage is much more successful in completely evacuating exudate
and preventing chronic infection.
 4. Evaluate and modify, if necessary, the internal fixation to ensure stability of the
fracture.
Chronic Infection
 Treatment of chronic infection usually involves the following:
1. Administer antimicrobial therapy as outlined for acute infection and continue
 and metronidazole and clindamycin are the most useful drugs.
Aminoglycosides and quinolones are the most useful drugs against
 gram-negative infections.
2. Remove sequestra if present. In most cases it is advantageous to follow the
same surgical approach used in open reduction of the fracture rather than
following the sinus tract, if one is present. As a rule, it is not necessary to
aza oaod o peao as n ro pen ss al jo eare a ana
after removal of sequestra that are walled off with granulation tissue. It is
useful to remove sclerotic bone involved in the involucrum, since this may
be necrotic bone that will form a secondary sequestrum. Remove bone only
until point bleeding is seen from the cortex to avoid creating a large cavity.
 If a draining tract persists, all sequestra probably have not been removed, and
 a second or even a third attempt may be in order. A common site for sequestra
is beneath a bone plate, which may require removal of the plate to remove the
sequestrum.
3. Critically evaluate fracture stability. If the fracture is healed and implants are
present, they are removed. If implants are secure and stabilizing the fracture,
they should be left in place until the fracture is healed. If instability is present
182
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
and implants are loose, they should be removed and replaced by suitable
fixation. Use of the external fixator or plates and screws is preferred over
intramedullary pins. Once the fracture is healed, removal of implants is
 generally required to completely clear the infection because of the persistence
 of bacteria around the implant.
There is an exception to the rule that dead bone should be removed as soon as it
is separated. This occurs when the sequestrum involves the whole thickness of the
as puo ai ie paou ae su ae asa  aq i e jo s
shortly after injury or within a few weeks-the surrounding tube of periosteum may
collapse, and the subperiosteal hematoma may be obliterated. There is no longer a
continuous hematoma between the fragments, and the fracture cannot unite. In such
a case it is better to defer sequestrectomy for several months until the surrounding
involucrum of subperiosteal bone has been laid down, thereby ensuring continuity
A
B
c
D
E
open suppurating wound. The dog's temperature was 104.5° F. B and C, Lateral and cranio-
caudal views of the unilateral external fixator, consisting of 2/2 pins applied for fixation. The
draining area was treated as an open wound and closed in about 2 weeks. D and E, Lateral
and craniocaudal views at 9 weeks; clinical union was present, and the splint was removed.
 5—Treatment of Acute and Chronic Bone Infections
183
of the shaft. Bone grafting with autogenous cancellous bone is usually indicated
after removal of sequestrum of this magnitude.
4. Leave the wound open and treat as described for acute infection.7
Case Studies
Case 1
Figure 5-3 depicts acute bone infection. A cocker spaniel struck by a car 5 days pre-
surface and a temperature of 104.5° F (Figure 5-3, A). The immediate objectives in
treatment were to flush the area with Ringer's solution, apply rigid fixation, and
place the animal on a regimen of systemic antibiotics. The area was prepared for
surgery, which included flushing it. Fixation was accomplished by application of a
unilateral external fixator 2/2 pins (Figure 5-3, B and C). Because the distal bone
segment was too short for placement of two pins proximal to the supracondylar
foramen, the distal pin was placed in a transcondylar position. The proximal pin
was inserted next, followed by application of the connecting bar and clamps, then
the two center pins. This arrangement allowed full use of the leg during the healing
 period. The draining area was treated as an open wound, and it closed in about
2 weeks. Healing was uneventful. Clinical union was present at 9 weeks, and the
external fixator was removed (Figure 5-3, D and E).
Case 2
Figure 5-4 depicts the history of a fractured femur, which was originally treated
5 months previously. Infection had been a constant problem from the time of
surgery. Several draining tracts were present in the region of the popliteal lymph
 a a pue y 't-g aiii suasand sem sanas o-panem e pue 'sapou
sensitivity testing indicated Staphylococcus pyogenes, which was sensitive to
chloramphenicol, oxytetracycline, and chlortetracycline. In Figure 5-4, C, one large
A
B
C
FIGURE 5-4. Fractured femur treated 5 months previously; draining sinus tracts were pres-
ent near the popliteal lymph nodes. A and B, Lateral and craniocaudal views indicating a
walled-off sequestrum. C, One large and two small sequestra were removed surgically using 
184
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
and two small sequestra have been removed surgically by a lateral approach to the
femur. The bone was well healed, and the infection was walled off in the local area.
The animal was placed on systemic antibiotics, and the draining tract disappeared
in 1 week.
References
1. Johnson KA: Osteomyelitis in dogs and cats, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 205:1882-1887, 1994.
2. Love DN, Johnson KA: Antinicrobial sensitivity of staphylococci isolated from dogs, Aust Vet Pract
19:196-200,1992.
 3. Muir P, Johnson KA: Anaerobic bacteria isolated from osteomyelitis in dogs and cats, Vet Suig 21:463-
466,1992.
4. Smeak DP, Olmstead ML, Hohn RB: Brucela canis osteomyelitis in two dogs with total hip
replacements, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 191:986-989, 1987.
5. Stevenson S, Olmstead M, Kowalski J: Bacterial culturing for prediction of postoperative
 complications following open fracture repair in small animals, Vet Surg 15:99-102, 1986.
6. Smith MM, Vasseur PB, Saunders HM: Bacterial growth associated with metallic implants in dogs,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 195:765-767, 1989.
7. Bardet JF, Hohn RB, Basinger BS: Open drainage and delayed autogenous cancellous bone grafting for
treatment of chronic osteomyelitis in dogs and cats, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 183:312-317, 1983.
Arthrology
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF JOINTS
The purpose of joints is to afford the greatest stability to the body during weight
bearing and motion. Painless and full range of joint motion are needed for normal
ambulation and performance of daily living chores. Interruption of normal joint
mechanics leads to painful osteoarthritis and physical incapacity, thereby reducing an
individual's quality of life and increasing the burden on others. This is an increasing
problem in human and animal geriatric populations because of longer life spans.
Proper diagnosis and management of joint disease depend on understanding the basic
anatomy and physiology of the musculoskeletal system. Cures for stopping or revers-
ing osteoarthrosis are on the horizon. The material presented in this chapter should
 guide clinicians in understanding and arriving at rational treatments for joint diseases.
Connective Tissues
 The “workhorse" of the musculoskeletal system is connective tisue. Its components
are outlined in Table 6-1 and are mentioned throughout this chapter and Chapter 7.
It is extremely important that clinicians understand the relationships among these
components of joint tissue.
Classification of Joints
 Joint classification12 is summarized in the following way. Joint diseases of animals
usually involve diarthrodial joints.
· Fibrous joints (synarthroses). These joints have little motion.
 1. Syndesmoses. These have considerable intervening connective tissue 
(e.g., temporohyoid joint).
2.
Sutures (e.g., skull).
3. Gomphosis (e.g., tooth socket).
● Cartilaginous joints (amphiarthroses). These joints have limited motion, which
 permits compression and stretching.
1. Hyaline cartilage (synchondrosis) (e.g., costochondral junction, epiphyseal
plate of long bones of growing animals).
2. Fibrocartilage (amphiarthrosis) (e.g., mandibular symphysis).
· Synovial joints (diarthroses). These joints allow the greatest amount of
movement and are of primary concern to the orthopedic surgeon.
185
186
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
TABLE 6-1.
. COMPONENTS OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE IN JOINTS
Cell Types
Fibers (Proteins)
Matrix (Ground Substance)
Fibroblast
Elastin
Proteins
Chondrocyte
Reticulin
Mucopolysaccharides (proteoglycans),
Osteocyte
 Collagen (hydroxyproline)
hyaluronic acid, chondroitin sulfate,
Synoviocyte
keratosulfate
Myocyte
Water
Components of Synovial Joints
All synovial joints have a joint cavity, joint capsule, synovial fuid, articular carti-
lage, and subchondral bone (Figure 6-1). Some joints, in addition, have intraarticu-
lar ligaments, menisci, and fat pads.
The articular surface of bone is covered by hyaline cartilage. The bones are united
by a joint capsule and ligaments. The joint capsule is composed of an inner synovial
membrane that produces synovial fluid and an outer fibrous layer that aids joint
 'si 's q l i s n uo jo s  s
capsule, and bone shapes.
Any mechanical system wears out with time, and animal joints are no exception.
Wear and tear occur with aging but may be hastened or exaggerated by trauma,
disease, and structural and biochemical changes in the articular cartilage.
 Lubrication, which decreases friction, is vital in keeping the “machine" in proper
working condition. This lubrication can be affected by the nature and geometry
 of the articulating surfaces, the synovial membrane, the physical and chemical
properties of the synovial fluid, the load on the joint, and the type of joint
movement.
Synovial Membrane
The synovial membrane is highly vascular blends with the periosteum as it reflects
onto bone, and covers all structures within the joint except articular cartilage and
menisci. The synovial lining may extend beyond the fbrous layer and may act as
bursae under tendons and ligaments. Basically, the synoviocytes (cells of synovial
membrane) have two functions: phagocytosis and synovial fluid production.
Synovial Fluid
Synovial fluid is a dialysate of blood to which glycosaminoglycan (GAG) has been
added by the synoviocytes. Its chief function is lubrication, which decreases friction,
thereby decreasing wear and tear to articular cartilage. The synovial fluid also pro-
 vides nutrition to the articular cartilage and maintains electrolyte and metabolite
balance.
The chief GAG of synovial fluid is byaluronic acid, which is highly polymerized
and prevents serum proteins of high molecular weight from entering the fluid. Joint
fluid proteins increase with inflammatory conditions either because of a decrease in
this polymerized state of hyaluronic acid or as a result of an increase in the capil-
lary permeability of the subsynovium. Both situations cause joint effusion.
 Corticosteroids are thought to interfere with production of hyaluronic acid.
 Inflammatory joint conditions may be distinguished from noninflammatory con-
ditions by analysis of joint fluid (see Table 6-2). In inflammatory conditions, the
protein electrophoretic pattern of synovial fluid is altered, sugars are decreased, the
cell population increases, and cell type ratios change. The polymerized state of
6—-Arthrology
187
FIGURE 6-1. Schematic drawing of joint com-
ponents: A, joint cavity with joint fluid; B, articu-
lar cartilage; C, subchondral bone; D, synovial
D
lining; E, fibrous joint capsule.
E
hyaluronic acid can be estimated using the glacial acetic acid precipitate test.3 The
quality of GAG decreases rapidly in the presence of some infections and can slowly
decrease in chronic osteoarthritis.
The viscosity of the synovial fluid is related to this mucoprotein; it is higher in
small joints and at low rates of shear and use (walking, standing). A decrease in vis-
cosity during more rapid joint movement causes less drag and therefore less friction
of the joint surfaces. Cold temperatures may cause increased viscosity and therefore
drag to joint surfaces. This partly explains the necessity for "warming up" before
athletic pursuits.
Articular Cartilage
Joint cartilage allows gliding action of joints. It is the recipient of most blows and
jolts to the skeleton. Its resilience buffers these blows, preventing erosion of the sub-
chondral bone with subsequent shortening. The subchondral bone absorbs shock
and in turn protects cartilage from damage.4
 Grossly, normal adult articular cartilage is white, smooth, glistening, and trans-
lucent. It lacks blood vessels, lymphatic vessels, and nerve endings.$ Nutrients
must pass the synovial barrier and the cartilage matrix barrier before reaching the
chondrocytes. Thus a mechanical or chemical joint injury is not recognized by the
animal until a synovial reaction occurs. Some agents used to treat synovial disease
may be deleterious to the articular cartilage (e.g., corticosteroids in rheumatoid
 arthritis) but are not detected by cartilage cells because of this lack of nerve endings 
in the cartilage. Because cartilage lacks blood vessels, the inflammatory repair
 process after trauma is impossible until deep lesions invade subchondral bone6
(Figure 6-2).
 The thickness of the articular cartilage is generally greater when the following are
presents:
1. The joints are larger.
2.
 The joints are under considerable functional pressure.
 3. Friction is increased.
4. The joints are not very congruent.
5.
 The joints are greatly used.
 6. The animals are younger.
7. The joints are exercised.
Histologically, articular cartilage is composed of chondrocytes, fibers, and
ground substance. Eighty percent of cartilage is water, 10% is collagen, and 10% is
 proteoglycan.6
188
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
C
H
E
F
FIGURE 6-2.:
Schematic drawing of articular cartilage histology showing its layers and
fibril arrangement: A, surface membrane; B, tangential zones; C, intermediate zones;
D, radial zone; E, calcified zone; F, subchondral zone; G, tidemark; H, fibrils, or "wickets."
 There are four layers of articular cartilage, not including a surface membrane
(lamina splendens), based on fiber orientation and shape of chondrocytes, as
followss:
1. Tangential (surface layer)
2. Transitional (intermediate layer)
3. Radial (deep layer)
4. Calcified
  is an  so  a  n  
7% to 10% coming from the blood vessels of the subchondral bone.7
Cells
 a a a q ass ar a a u s
 despite their appearance on light microscopy. The intermediate-zone cells are
 active in synthesizing protein and other components of matrix, as well as collagen.
 In immature carilage, mitoses occur in the surface zone (resulting in growth of the
 cartilaginous mass during adolescence) and in the basilar layers (accounting for
 growth of the bony epiphysis). At skeletal maturity, however, mitoses are absent
under normal conditions and cartilage cells are incapable of division. There is
evidence that under certain situations, such as cartilage laceration and osteo-
arthritis, the chondrocyte can reinitiate cell synthesis and multiple division of a
single cell (clone).6
Fibers
Collagen fibers are imbedded in matrix. They are not normally visible by light
microscopy because the refractive index is the same as that of the ground sub-
The surface arrangement of the cartilage fibrils provides a slightly irregular surface
that prevents adhesions of opposing articular surfaces when lubricated by synovial
fluid.2 This superficial layer of tightly packed fibers resists shear forces during joint
 pxa s a  a e pe si ad  
while the thickness decreases. When the pressure is released, the fibrils rebound
6—-Arthrology
189
as a result of their elasticity.& This elasticity decreases with continuous compression
or with age. The resiliency of cartilage also depends on the fibrils being supported
by matrix proteoglycans.? The intermediate layer has the greatest shock-absorbing
capacity because of the high content of bound water.?
If the superficial layers of fibers are lost through erosion (trauma), the matrix
comes into closer contact with joint enzymes, leading to further degradation. This
layer can then be considered like the integument as a first line of defense for the rest
 of the cartilage.
Matrix
The matrix, or ground substance, of articular cartilage is composed of bound water
(GAGs), such as chondroitin 6-sulfate, chondroitin 4-sulfate, and keratosulfate.
These macromolecules are stiffly extended in space as a result of their strong
negative charges, repelling one another. They are hydrophilic and bind to the
collagen fibers, thereby creating a barrier to absorption of substances from synovial
fluid. Only substances having a low molecular weight permeate normal articular
 oi u i s o yo m pmo on raq a a
the factor for its resiliency and resistance to deformation of the articular
cartilage.6
The health of cartilage matrix may be measured by using metachromatic histo-
chemical stains such as toluidine blue O or safranin O. Loss of metachromasia (and
thus chondroitin sulfate) is characteristic of degenerating cartilage and is directly
 proportional to the severity of the disease. Staining is thus an excellent research tool.
 Significant softening of the articular cartilage has been seen in dogs undergoing
experimental stifle immobilization for 11 weeks.10 Rabbit knees immobilized for
6 days underwent extensive loss of metachromatic staining.11 Mobilization is
 therefore critical to the health of articular cartilage.
Diseases, injuries, or toxic agents affecting matrix or fibers result in changes
that can be permanent, painful, and crippling. Understanding these mechanisms
 may elucidate a cure or reversal of these changes.
Healing of the Articular Cartilage
In normal situations, mitotic figures are not seen in the articular cartilage of adult
animals. In lacerations to the articular cartilage or in osteoarthrosis, however, the
 an q ssd  o p sis  n o 
biological suppression of the replicatory apparatus.6
If lacerations in adult animals are confined to the upper layers of the avascular
articular cartilage, no inflammation or effective healing can occur. Mitotic activity
does occur but ceases 1 week after initial injury. In rabbits, these superficial lacera-
tions neither healed nor progressed to more serious disorders within 1 year of injury.
When lesions were deep and invaded the subchondral vascular bone, reparative
granulation tissue invaded the defect, which then changed to fibrocartilage by meta-
 plasia. The end result, years after injury, is a discolored, roughened pit surrounded
by smooth hyaline cartilage.6 Allowing this vascularity to reach the surface is the
theoretical reason for curetting or drilling a defect that results from osteochondritis
pd s e  sasd s s
apparatus with the affected limb attached to a machine that moves the leg at prese-
lected rates and ranges of motion for 2 to 4 weeks) has shed new light on articular
cartilage healing. However, it remains to be seen if there are practical applications
in veterinary medicine.
190
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
CARTILAGE AND JOINT ABNORMALITIES
Pain, deformity, and limb malfunction can result from improper joint physiology.
 Many acute joint conditions progress to chronic osteoarthrosis. The aim of the
orthopedist is to minimize or stop these changes. In chronic osteoarthrosis the
objective is to minimize patient discomfort and improve limb function.
Definitions
Arthritis. The simple definition of arthritis is inflammation of a joint. Many
 chronic orthopedic conditions in veterinary medicine do not have any long-
lasting appreciable inflammatory component of the synovial lining. Therefore
ndod paua a u pau os nq raous e si cse, i 
 that this term will unfortunately persist.
Arthrosis. The term arthrosis refers to a noninflammatory degenerative joint
condition characterized by a lack of inflammation in the synovial lining and the
presence of normal or near-normal synovial fluid.
Osteoarthritis (osteoarthrosis). The common arthritis seen in veterinary medicine
is a slowly progressive cartilage degeneration with osteophyte production,
usually caused by trauma or microtrauma (abnormal wear). There is very little
inflammation of the synovial lining (and therefore few changes in the synovial
fluid) compared with the more inflammatory joint diseases. The synovial
response is the basis for classifying joint disease. Because it is degenerative and
not inflammatory, a more proper term for osteoarthritis is osteoarthrosis, or
degenerative joint disease (DJD).
Classification of Joint Disease
 Joint diseases are classified in the following way14.
 I. Noninflammatory joint disease
 1. Degenerative joint disease (DJD), osteoarthritis, osteoarthrosis
a. Primary
b. Secondary
2. Traumatic
3. Neoplastic
 II. Inflammatory joint disease
1. Infectious
2. Noninfectious: immunological
a. Erosive
b. Nonerosive
NONINFLAMMATORY JOINT DISEASE
Osteoarthrosis
Primary Degenerative Joint Disease
Primary DJD is a degeneration of cartilage in elderly individuals occurring for
no known reason other than the wear and tear that comes with aging. Mankin,1s
however, points out that aged cartilage does not show the same changes as
 Osteoarthrotic cartilage.1s Consequently, contradictions in various histochemical
6—Arthrology
191
and biochemical data exist because of the types of abnormal cartilage that are
analyzed and not identified as to source.
Most people older than 40 years of age have some degree of degeneration in the
hip, knee, or interphalangeal joints of the fingers (Heberden's nodes). Much interest
in this phenomenon has been generated in human medicine. Animals are useful as
research models for osteoarthrosis. Bentley16 has stated that a suitable model is valu-
able in facilitating further study of the pathogenesis of the disease and the effects
of various treatments on it. The ideal model for DJD should start with the loss of
cartilage matrix and should progress to fissuring, fibrillation, erosion of cartilage,
 subchondral sclerosis, osteophyte production, and mild synovial inflammation.
Secondary Degenerative Joint Disease
Secondary DJD develops secondarily from known conditions that affect the joint
and supporting structures. This is perhaps the most common type observed in small
animals. Those conditions predisposing animals to secondary DJD are outlined by
Pedersen14 (Table 6-2).
Degeneration of the Articular Cartilage
 Bentley16 states that the cartilage breakdown starts when compression or shear
stresses cause cell damage, releasing cathepsin, which in turn induces loss of proteo-
glycans and water This decreases cartilage resiliency and leaves collagen exposed so
that fissuring (fibrillation) occurs. Additional chondrocyte damage then occurs,
additional cathepsin is released, and the cycle continues (Figure 6-3).
 Other investigators hypothesize that excessive wear occurs in this damaged car-
tilage with normal physical stresses, and that the degradation products released into
the joint space produce secondary synovitis and sometimes inflammation (thus pain
 and effusion in acute flare-ups of a chronic situation). There are attempts at repair
in the forms of granulation tissue, chondrocyte proliferation, clones, increased pro-
teoglycan production, and osteophytes. However, with degradative enzymes, lack of
Rights were not granted to include this table in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
Hospital Association, 1978, pp 359-366.
192
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Loss of resiliency
increased calcification 
 Subchondral sclerosis
Loss of
 proteoglycans
Loss of 
chondrocytes
Wear
{loss of "skin"
collagen)
(gross/microscopic)
Loss of
chemical barrier
Thinning of cartilage
 Secondary synovitis
Osteophytes
. Degradative enzymes /
in matrix (cathepsin)
FIGURE 6-3. The vicious cycle of progressive degenerative joint disease.
 orientation in regenerating tissue, and abnormal stress caused by these unstable
joints, physiological repair attempts are usually negligible. Two reported cases,
however, may show some reversibility of osteoarthrosis.17
 In a case of hip osteoarthrosis, devitalized tissue was removed and a metal device
interposed between the acetabulum and femoral head. Imperfect hyaline articular
cartilage formed under the prosthesis. The implication is that the prosthesis pro-
tected the reparative granulation tissue from mechanical abrasion.17
 In another case of osteoarthrosis of the hip, wedge osteotomies of the femur with
reangulation of the femoral head were performed. Subsequently, radiographs
in the joint space and more reformation of cartilage.
Changes in Bone
Two changes in bone occur in the presence of osteoarthrosis: the production of mar-
 ginal osteophytes and the appearance of subchondral sclerosis.
Osteophytes
Marginal osteophytes may protrude into the joint or may develop within capsular
structures or ligamentous attachments to joint margins. Their shape is determined
 by mechanical forces and the surface contour from which they protrude.1s MeDevitt
xa rae sp  sa s as  paors sanao p
rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament in dogs. At first, there was an accumulation
of fibroblast-like cells at the synovial membrane-articular cartilage junction, which
by 4 weeks had changed to woven bone with a few chondrocytes. By 8 weeks,
trabecular patterns were seen in the early osteophyte along with resorption of the
femoral cortex underneath, allowing some communication of bone marrow from
each area. By 16 weeks after the rupture, the osteophytes consisted of trabecular
bone covered by thick cartilage. By 48 weeks, the trabeculae and marrow of the
6—-Arthrology
193
osteophyte and distal femur were confluent. Some investigators have proposed that
hyperplasia of the cartilage margin is invaded by vascular granulation tissue with
subsequent bone formation.20 The reason for these osteophytes is unclear, and the
theories are contradictory &20-22
Sclerosis
Under areas of cartilage erosion, sclerosis (eburnation) occurs. The denuded bone
becomes polished and grossly resembles ivory or marble and represents advanced
cartilage destruction. Turek22 believes that an early stage of this condition results
from endochondral ossification of the lower layers of cartilage, which histologically
are detected by double “tidemarks" (wavy hematoxylin-staining lines demarcating
the interface between calcified and noncalcified hyaline cartilage).
Changes in Synovial Membrane
The synovial membrane in DJD generally appears normal. The surface may show
some hyperplasia, but minimal inflammatory response, except in certain forms of
hip osteoarthritis in humans and large animals. With some partial cruciate ligament
tears, however, we have noticed a red, proliferative synovial lining consistent with
Griffen and Vasseur's suggestion that immune mechanisms may play a role in the
 development of spontaneous cruciate ligament rupture.23
Changes in Cartilage
Early gross changes in articular cartilage consist of a localized, soft or velvety area
that changes to a yellow to dull-white color with pits, and with depressions and lin-
ear grooves becoming apparent. In advanced disease the cartilage may be soft and
spongy. In areas where subchondral bone is exposed and subjected to wear a highly
polished eburnated surface may be present. In joints with apposing articular
surfaces, “kissing" or mirror-image lesions develop. Osteophytes develop at joint
margins where the synovium reflects off the chondral-perichondral junction.
Osteophytes sometimes form in an area not covered by synovium. Bone spurs that
form outside joints where tendons insert are termed enthesiopbytes.
Histological Changes
 Collins?4 has defined the histological progression of osteoarthrosis as follows:
1. Loss of surface cartilage layers.
2. Diffuse increase in numbers of cells
 3. Moderate decrease in metachromatic staining, indicating loss of
 proteoglycans. In experimental sectioning of the cranial cruciate ligament
in dogs, McDevitt and associates19 found this loss 16 weeks after the
rupture.
 4. Ingrowth of subchondral vessels through the tidemark.
 5. Vertical clefts beginning at the surface (flaking).
6. “Fibrillation" when clefts extend to the calcified zone.
 7. Further loss of metachromatic staining.
8. Cloning or clumping of chondrocytes.
 9. Focal areas of erosion down to the subchondral bone, leaving exposed
sclerotic bone.
10. Subchondral cyst formation.
11. Patches of new cartilage seen over eroded areas and osteophytes.
The stages just enumerated are not always present and do not always occur in the
 order given. In some cases, extensive erosions and eburnation occur without mar-
ginal osteophytes, whereas in other cases, many osteophytes may be seen without
194
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
appreciable change in the aricular cartilage, such as in many spontaneous
cruciate ligament ruptures in dogs. Dogs infrequently have subchondral cyst
formation.
Biochemical Changes
 In osteoarthrotic cartilage, collagen is renewed with a different type of collagen that
 is larger in diameter than the type found in skin and bone. The synthesis of protein
and glycosaminoglycans is greatly increased—although the total quantity found is
decreased—and is proportional to the disease severity in mild or moderate cases. In
severe cases, there is a failure of this reparative process. This irreversibility suggests
that treatment should be instituted at a relatively early stage of the disorder
while there is still a capability of providing cells and matrix for repair of minimal to
 moderate defects.2s Lacerations and chemical lesions do not show this reparative
reaction. It may be feasible to treat lesions of cartilage with agents that decrease
enzymatic degradation or with materials that could enhance repair (salicylates,
uridine diphosphates).2s
 ap, p ssso, s  m a a
 disease" are somewhat confusing at times. Human orthopedists frequently stress the
decreased thickness of articular cartilage (with decreased joint space and sclerosis
seen on radiography), whereas small animal clinicians usually are referring to
 marginal osteophytes. Oten with cruciate rupture, severe osteophytosis may occur,
but the articular surfaces look fairly normal rather than yellow, pitted, or eburnated.
This joint performs better than when the cartilage is lost. Joint replacement in
humans is considered when the surface articular cartilage is gone. Judging the sever-
ity of the arthritis based solely on osteophytes may be incorrect.
Clinical Signs
Osteoarthrosis in Humans
Because subjective patient descriptions are lacking in veterinary medicine, the clini-
cal signs and symptoms of osteoarthrosis in people are reviewed.26
 Pain. The prominent sign is pain that occurs on use of the part and that is
relieved by rest. The pain is usually described as aching and poorly localized. With
more advanced cases, pain may occur with minimal activity or even at rest. At times,
pain may awaken a person after tossing and turning during sleep because of loss of
 e  hm    d s m s, 
be exacerbated by changes in the weather, such as temperature, humidity, and baro-
metric pressure.
This pain may originate from the following factors:
1. Elevation of normally sensitive periosteum because of marginal osteophytes
2. Pressure on exposed subchondral bone
3. Trabecular microfracture
4. Pinching or abrasion of synovial villi
 5. Mild synovitis
 6. Capsular inflammation
According to Gardner,27 pain in capsules and ligaments is stimulated by twisting
or stretching. There are pain fibers in the capsule and ligaments but few in the
synovium. However, there are pain fibers in the adventitia of blood vessels supply-
ing these areas. Gardner theorizes that increased sensitivity during weather changes
is caused by reflex blood flow to the area of joints. In addition, the pain may be
referred from one area of the limb to another as a result of reflex spasms of the
flexor muscles.
6—-Arthrology
195
Pain is often nonexistent in osteoarthrosis. In one study, only 30% of people with
 Generally, when symptoms were present, there was little correlation between degree
of pathology and severity of pain.
Stifness. Stiffness on arising from a resting position is common and usually
lasts less than 15 minutes. The stiffness is caused by a change in the elasticity of
periarticular structures. Loss of joint range of motion (ROM) may result from joint
surface incongruity, muscle spasm and contracture, capsular contraction, or
 Crepitation. On palpation, the human joint may show localized tenderness.
Pain elicited by passive motion may be prominent. Joint crepitation (grating,
crackling) from erosion or incongruity may be palpated; however, normal joint
cracking or snapping is believed to be a slipping of tendons or ligaments over a bony
prominence when the joint is flexed. The examiner may note loss of ROM. Bony
ankylosis (fusion) of joints is very uncommon with osteoarthrosis. The joint may
be swollen because of synovial reaction, increased joint fluid, or the presence of
osteophytes. Although not a true crepitus, the noise that is made when knuckles can
snaq e   t) anssad susar aaeu e Aq pasio si spar, aq
more negative (> -117 mm Hg) with distraction forces. This causes gas to go out of
solution, resulting in a “crack."28
Obesity.  It is still unresolved whether obesity is a contributing causative factor
abrade a damaged joint more quickly. In mice with a genetic predisposition for pri-
mary degenerative joint disease, obesity did not alter the course of the disease.
Epidemiological studies in humans, however, indicate that osteoarthrosis is more
common in obese, rather than nonobese, individuals. In one study of 105 obese
(>50 kg) patients with chronic musculoskeletal pain, significant weight reduction
was achieved by surgery on the stomach.29 Eighty-nine percent of patients had com-
plete relief of pain in one or more joints. Two patients regained their weight and
their pain as well.
Osteoarthrosis in Dogs
  a  i  s so  a  o s
osteoarthrosis except after obvious injury. Hip dysplasia has been diagnosed sporad-
ically in cats.30 In the dog or cat, osteoarthrosis is usually not idiopathic or primary.
It is usually secondary to trauma, unstable joints, malalignment or conformation
defects, or congenital conditions such as osteochondritis dissecans and hip dyspla-
sia. Exceptions may occur in very old or obese dogs. The clinician should try to
discover the cause of the arthrosis in order to intervene in situations in which treat-
ment may decrease the amount of discomfort and future osteoarthrosis an animal
will have.
Pain.  A discussion of pain is noteworthy, since our clients usually complain
that their pet is in pain, or they may ask whether the animal is in pain when known
osteoarthrosis exists. First, many dogs, as with some people, are stoic and do not let
their pain bother them. Because they cannot tell us they are in pain and even though
they may not cry or yelp, it is difficult to advise an owner whether an osteoarthrotic
animal is experiencing pain, especially since we know that human patients with
osteoarthrosis often are without pain.
An example of stoicism in a dog occurs in the event of fresh fractures. Many
times, a dog will allow gentle palpation, radiographic positioning, and body move-
ment without wincing, cringing, gasping, crying, yelping, or biting. Is this dog in
pain? The answer is believed to be "yes."
196
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Another finding is that excitement or nervousness may override the dog's sensi-
tivity to pain. For example, a client may say, "He limps all day except when he
goes out chasing rabbits," or lameness may disappear as the pet approaches the
veterinary environment.
 The most prominent sign of limb pain with osteoarthrosis is lameness. Limping
or unusual gait can occur with other conditions, such as shortened limb (without
pain), mechanical dysfunction (i.e., patellar ectopia, contracture of infraspinatus mus-
cle), a stiff leg (usually from previous fracture), neurological problems, and neuromus-
cular weakness. After examination of the limb, shortening or mechanical problems
 can be eliminated. Therefore, limping is usually caused by pain. This is contradictory
 xued ae un aq on s iusap, ap uu au ie sa s e o
fail to understand that dogs are more tolerant and less vocal than humans.
Other signs of pain—-besides crying out, yelping, sensitivity on palpation, and
favoring a limb-include loss of tolerance to exercise and reluctance to play, jump
on furniture, or go up and down stairs. When rear legs are involved, the dog may
"bunny hop," take short, mincing steps, sit with the painful leg cocked to the side
rather than underneath the body, or show pacing, irritability (especially with children),
and personality change. When the owner or veterinarian has judged that the dog has a
"shoulder" or "hip" lameness, the clinician must keep an open mind. In our experi-
ence, locating the source of pain based on gait observation is difficult. The astute
Pain elicited on palpation is variable. Many dogs with known osteoarthrosis of a
a q s d a  a  d   o  
can be challenging at times. It is difficult to isolate and move one joint without mov-
ing other tissues or without pressing on a sensitive area during the manipulation.
For example, in a young dog with panosteitis of the radius or ulna, the area may be
grasped tightly while the shoulder joint is examined. When the dog cringes, the
examiner is thinking about the shoulder joint and forgets that the elbow is extended
and the forearm tissues are compressed.
The osteoarthrotic dog is similar to humans in regard to the pain worsening with
cold, damp weather or a change in physical activity. This altered physical activity
may include taking longer walks or runs than usual; slipping on ice and stretching
contracted tendons, joint capsules, and other parts; or climbing stairs that have not
been part of the daily routine. Although pain may be increased, it usually does not
persist for more than 1 or 2 weeks. If it does, the clinician should be alerted to
further problems, such as a ruptured cranial cruciate ligament with hip dysplasia,
fracture of osteophytes, or further progression of pathology (e.g., meniscal damage
occurring with chronic cruciate ligament disease). However, some chronically
The fact that in humans the radiographic signs may not correlate with the
severity of the symptoms may help the veterinary clinician understand why a dog
with severe osteoarthrosis of the hips may act totally normal without clinical
signs, or why the dog may be more lame on the less arthritic hip, as shown by
radiography.
Certain questions arise about the theorized origin of pain from osteoarthrosis. If
 osteophytes stretch sensitive periosteum, does debridement of these proliferations
alone help the patient? Experimental data are lacking. If reflex muscle spasms
 from osteoarthrosis accentuate pain in people, can this be one of the benefits of
pectinotomy for hip dysplasia in dogs? In cranial cruciate ligament rupture or par-
tial rupture, the synovium is frequently reddened and corrugated. Can synovectomy
 in dogs relieve pain by eliminating hypertrophied synovial villi that can become
pinched or contain immune complexes?
6—-Arthrology
197
Stiffness. On arising from a resting state, an arthritic dog experiences stiffness.
As with people, in earlier stages, this stiffness disappears as dogs “warm out of it. "
As time passes, this stiffness may become continual as fibrosis and decreased joint
ROM occur. Decreased ROM is not as common or as great as in people, probably
because of increased use a dog would have compared with a person, whose pain
threshold is probably lower.
 ss aaaas  sip u pd i ar 
examiner must be careful at times in determining the source of crepitation because,
if great, it can resound throughout the limb. If the stifle is palpated and crepitation
originates from the hip, the examiner may wrongly assume the stifle is the origin
of the crepitation. Sutures beneath the skin from previous surgery may also give a
feeling of crepitation; however, this sensation will be of a quality different from the
type that comes from bone rubbing on bone.
Obesity.  The question of whether obesity contributes to the development of
osteoarthrosis is pertinent in veterinary medicine. Most arthritic dogs that we see
abrading and degenerating cartilage more quickly. For example, hypernourished
puppies with hip dysplasia potential have shown more DJD than those whose diets
were restricted31; however, this does not indicate that the diet was the cause of hip
dysplasia. In cases of ruptured cruciate ligaments, our clinical impression is that
larger dogs develop osteophytes more quickly than smaller dogs. This may also be
related to the fact that smaller dogs may “carry" or favor the leg, thus resulting in
 d   s ss   q    s
 Osteoarthrosis seem to improve with weight reduction alone.
 Age. Osteoarthrosis rarely is seen (radiographically or pathologically) in very
immature animals compared with adults, except for cartilage diseases such as Legg-
Calve-Perthes or osteochondrosis. For example, a mature, large dog with cruciate
disease would begin to develop osteophytes within 7 to 10 days after the rupture.
 Although the literature is sparse concerning natural rupture in young dogs, a few
cases have been seen in which young dogs with chronic lameness (i.e., ≥2 months)
 associated with cruciate disease do not have remarkable cartilage change.
Treatment
The best treatment for osteoarthrosis is prevention. When a known disease condi-
tion is present with a potential for osteoarthrosis, the clinician should advise correc-
tive measures or environmental changes to lessen the problem (e.g., surgery for
cruciate ligament rupture, diet for overweight dogs with hip dysplasia, slinging for
early Legg-Calve-Perthes disease of femoral head). Interestingly, Murray states
that excessive athletic activity in children is likely an important cause (especially in
males) of subsequent DJD of the hip.32 This contradicts those veterinarians and
owners who believe that young dogs with hip dysplasia or with a potential for hip
dysplasia should be heavily exercised to develop muscle mass and prevent or mini-
mize osteoarthrosis.
Objectives
 The objectives of treatment for osteoarthrosis in animals are (1) to relieve pain,
(2) to maintain function and range of motion (unless undertaking arthrodesis), and
(3) to maintain or regain normal activity.
Nonsurgical Methods
Rest.  During flare-ups of osteoarthrosis, mild inflammation exists as debris is
being absorbed and removed by the synovium. Weight-bearing activities tend to
198
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
aggravate and prolong this inflammation. Rest includes short walks on leash and
elimination of running and jumping. Total disuse, however, may lead to excessive
muscle atrophy and joint stiffness. In most animals, total limb inactivity is unusual.
If inactivity seems to be a problem, gentle passive ROM exercises may be war-
ranted. When the animal is overusing a joint affected by early osteoarthrosis, or
in cases of early traumatic arthroses, coaptation splints, casts, or slings for 2 to
3 weeks may be useful.
Heat.  Heat is very beneficial in relieving muscle spasm and pain. This may be
accomplished by soaking a facecloth or towel in fairly warm water and applying it
around the joint for 10 minutes, two or three times per day. Therapeutic ultrasound
is an effective method of applying heat in animals. The dose range depends on the
depth of penetration desired and ranges from 5 to 10 watts (total dose) twice daily
for 5 to 10 days. In acute joint injuries, however, cold rather than heat is indicated
to decrease pain, swelling, and hematoma formation.
 Exercise. Our usual recommendation concerning degree of exercise is rest
during acute flare-ups and moderate, self-regulated activity during remission.
Encouraging an animal to overexert behind a bike or car or on an exercise treadmill
is not advised. A dog will often not "feel" (until later) its limitations when excited
 to please an owner, chase a rabbit, or follow another dog in a race. Swimming is an
 r q     a 
exercise decreases joint capsule adhesions. If the animal has an athletic function
(hunting, performance), permanent reduction of strenuous activity may need to be
instituted to achieve a good quality of life for the pet.
 Medications. Most medications do nothing to reverse osteoarthritis. Animals
are medicated for the most part to decrease pain and discomfort. In recent years,
more medications are available to the pet owner, and a general discussion is war-
ranted. It must be remembered that drug interactions vary between species. Drugs
Sasoq ro saop u aes aiessau ou ae sueq u aaa pue aes aq ot uaaod
or cats. All animal owners should be warned to observe for the occurrence of
vomiting, diarrhea, melena, anemia, edema, inappetence, abdominal pain, sep-
signs occur.
 By eliminating the animals’ own defense mechanism (pain), overexertion and
aggravation of joint degeneration are possible. Therefore, any pain-reducing drugs
should be accompanied by rest. Medication should be used as determined by the
animal's discomfort or decreased function, not by radiographs. The minimum
amount of drug should be used to reach the desired effect, and the drug should be
stopped when no longer needed. Masking pain may also delay proper diagnosis
and management of some orthopedic conditions (e.g., osteochondritis dissecans of
various joints, cruciate instability).
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are antinflammatory, analgesic,
and antipyretic. Gastrointestinal (GI) side effects are still a major concern in animals
and humans, even with the modern COX-2 inhibitors.33 In the Vane model, the
 inflammatory cascade has been simplified, as follows34.
Tissue damage (→) Prostaglandin synthase (cyclooxygenase) (→) Prostaglandin
(→) Inflammation
Prostaglandins are important normal substances in the body. The NSAIDs block the
cascade from cyclooxygenase (COX) to prostaglandin, thereby decreasing inflam-
mation. COX-1 is in many tissues and performs a variety of important homeostatic
mechanisms, including manufacture of prostaglandins that protect the GI tract.35
COX-1 inhibitors can lead to GI erosions and ulceration. COX-2 is not normally
6—Arthrology
199
found in most tissues and helps transmit pain and accelerates inflammation.
Its absence is theoretically not harmful to the body. Therefore, although COX-1
and COX-2 inhibitors are helpful with decreasing pain, the COX-2 inhibitors are
theoretically a better choice of drug with fewer undesirable side effects.
Aspirin in humans is reported to inactivate COX permanently (until new cells are
formed), whereas other NSAIDs are competitive inhibitors and reversible.34 In our
hands, buffered aspirin along with food intake used judiciously and intermittently
has not proved to cause problems in dogs. Aspirin in cats can be quite toxic (platelet
dysfunction), but administration every third day in low doses is a widely used
used for pain.
The following agents have been accepted, by U.s. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) approval or by common usage, for use in the dog. A drug that may be
effective in some osteoarthritic individuals may not be effective in others. Positive
clinical response is usually found by “trial and error."
● Etodolac (Etogesic, Fort Dodge): more selective inhibition of COX-2 than
COX-1. Dose is 5 to 15 mg/kg orally once daily; supplied in 150- and 300-mg
tablets; dogs only.
● Deracoxib (Dermaxx, Novartis Animal Health): COX-2 inhibitor. Dose is 3 to
4 mg/kg once daily orally for up to 7 days to control postoperative orthopedic
 pain; doses of 1 to 2 mg/kg/day can be administered long term for
osteoarthrosis and inflammation; supplied in 25- and 100-mg scored
chewable tablets; dogs only.
● Carprofen (Rimadyl, Pfizer Animal Health): selective inhibition for COX-2 than
COX-1. Dose is 2 mg/b once daily or 1 mg/lb twice daily; supplied in 25-, 75-,
● Carprofen (Rimadyl, Pfizer Animal Health): injectable. May be used to control
postoperative pain at a dose of 2 mg/lb daily for a maximum of 4 days
postoperatively.
● Meloxicam (Metacam, Boehringer Ingelheim Vetmedica GmbH): 1.5 mg/ml oral
suspension; supplied at 1.5 mg/ml in 10-, 32-, and 100-ml dropper bottles with
measuring syringe. Dose is 0.2 mg/kg once daily orally for the first day, then
0.1 mg/kg daily orally thereafter; dogs only. For dogs weighing less than
5 pounds, it is recommended to use a dropper bottle at the rate of 1 drop for
each pound of body weight, dropped directly on the food, not into the mouth.
 Dogs more than 10 pounds may be given the suspension directly in the mouth
with a measuring syringe provided, or the agent may be mixed with food.
● Buffered acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin): COX-1 and COX-2 inhibitors. Dose is
10 to 25 mg/kg two or three times per day (preferably with food). Cats may be
given 10 to 20 mg/kg every 2 or 3 days.
"Chondroprotective agents," more appropriately termed disease-modifying
osteoarthritic agents, ideally enhance chondrocytic macromolecule synthesis,
enhance hyaluron synthesis by synoviocytes, inhibit inflammatory modifiers, and
remove or prevent formation of fibrin, thrombi, and plaque in synovium or sub-
chondral vessels. No known agent performs all these objectives at this time.
Cartilage is produced by chondrocytes, which synthesize matrix, giving cartilage its
resilience and tensile strength. This matrix consists of collagen (supplying tensile
strength) and proteoglycans (mainly hyaluronic acid and glycosaminoglycans),
which provide the compressive resilience to cartilage.37-39
DJD is characterized by a slow, progressive loss of cartilage matrix molecules,
called polysulfated glycosaminoglycans (PSGAGs). Intuitively, resupplying the body
with these macromolecules could lessen or reverse osteoarthrosis.
200
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Injectable PSGAGs (Adaquan, approved for use in dogs in the United States;
Arteparon, used in Europe) have had conflicting efficacy studies. Although some
experimental studies have shown efficacy, at this time there are no clinical data
proving symptomatic relief or disease modification from administration of these
drugs.38 It appears, however, that the best results occur if PSGAGs are given early,
before the development of significant DJD, at a dose of 5 mg/kg twice weekly for
4 weeks and then as needed. These products are fairly expensive to administer and
are not available orally.37.39
Hyaluronic acid (Hyaluron) is a nonsulfated glycosaminoglycan (GAG) and a
major component of synovial fluid. It is used intraarticularly or intravenously in
Sun Aq uoun P lous dny on psod si inpd s asno
viscosity, reducing inflammation, and scavenging free radicals.
 Oral products supply building blocks for producing GAG and hyaluronic acid.
"Neutraceuticals" do not require FDA approval, and some claim these products
have the same parenteral effect as PSGAGs. Neutraceuticals are readily available
 be absorbed (bioavailability). Fortunately, no significant side effects have been
Chondroitin sulfate is the predominant GAG in articular cartilage. Its oral
absorption rate in dogs has been shown to be 70%. Glucosamine is a building block
of GAG in cartilage and hyaluronic acid in synovial fluid. Its bioavailability is
good (87%). Gycoflex (Vetrascience Lab) is a mollusk exoskeleton and contains
glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate. Cosequin (Nutramax Laboratories) contains
glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate, as well as manganese and ascorbate. Its
bioavailability is uncertain.
In conclusion, these disease modifiers have shown conflicting results. Results in
humans are not necessarily comparable to those in dogs. Although these drugs
clearly do not, at this time, reverse osteoarthrosis, they may have some benefits,
especially the injectable products, when used early. Good long-term, blinded,
placebo-controlled studies are needed to document their efficacy.37 Oral products,
which are less expensive, lack good scientific evidence that they modify osteoarthri-
tis. Anecdotal reports at times claim "success," but this may only be the result of an
antinflammatory effect.
Diet. Although it has not been conclusively proved that obesity causes
osteoarthrosis, common sense and positive clinical results lead us to recommend
weight loss in overweight animals. Weight reduction alone has been very effective
for some animals in reducing pain from osteoarthrosis.
Acupuncture. Some animal owners are interested in alternative therapies for
osteoarthritis. Because anecdotal reports have shown promise,40 we performed a
double-blind prospective study of 19 dogs with clinical signs of hip dysplasia treated
by gold bead implantation or placebo performed by an experienced, certified veteri
questionnaire or veterinary physical examination. Objective measurements using
force plate and kinematic gait analysis showed no statistical differences between
treatment and placebo groups.
Surgical Methods
 si  r d  Ps  s ss  
helped by reasonable conservative measures. Procedures include debridement of
osteophytes and joint surfaces, soft tissue or muscle release, arthrodesis (bony
fusion of a joint), arthroplasty, osteotomy, pseudoarthrosis, neurectomy, and limb
amputation.
6—Arthrology
201
joint capsule and therefore prevent pain, although the real efficacy is unknown.
Regrowth of osteophytes may occur, especially if the inciting cause (e.g., instability)
is not corrected. Removal of fractured osteophytes has also provided some pain
relief in elbow, shoulder, and stifle joint osteoarthrosis. Debridement of "joint
mice," cartilage flaps, proliferative synovium, and degenerative ligaments is also
performed. Debridement is often used in conjunction with other procedures.
Smoothing joint surfaces may enhance joint congruency and improve stability and
joint fluid lubrication.
Muscle Release.
A prime example of decreasing pain and restoring function
 ssp d  op a u  n as sad a  sa
exact effect is uncertain, but improvement may result from destroying a painful
spastic muscle, decreasing the forces between the painful femoral head and acetab-
ulum, or reangulating an eroded area in the coxofemoral joint to allow weight bear-
ing on a less-damaged area of cartilage.
Arthrodesis.  Fusion of the carpal and tarsal regions is a fairly common proce-
dure in dogs and is effective in relieving instability and pain. The canine limb func-
tions satisfactorily with these fusions. Shoulder, elbow, and stifle fusions are
attempted less often; these fusions have a slightly greater chance of failure, and
 greater gait impairment results than with fusion in the more distal areas. When
arthrodesis is performed properly, however, a remarkable degree of function is
obtained. At times, amputation results in a better ambulation function for the
animal but is often unpalatable for the owners.
Artbroplasty. Arthroplasty means any plastic or surgical reconstruction of a
joint. A synovectomy may fall into this category.42 It is helpful in synovial chon-
drometaplasia and early cases of rheumatoid arthritis. Total hip replacement is
another example of an arthroplastic procedure. This is now a fairly common proce-
dure in small animal referral centers. Other prosthetic joints are not commercially
available at present.
treatment for coxofemoral arthritis. The reangulated femoral head is nailed or
plated in a more varus precalculated position, which brings immediate relief of pain
and can increase the joint space radiographically as some re-formation of surface
cartilage occurs. Wilson1α stated that simply breaking the bones is what brings relief,
possibly because of a decongestive effect by altered venous drainage; mere
trochanteric osteotomy without altering the femoral angle also gave immediate pain
relief. It was not clear whether re-formation of cartilage is possible. With unicom-
partmental osteoarthrosis of the knee in people, tibial osteotomy is successfully
used. In small animals, however, osteoarthrosis typically involves the entire joint,
 and osteotomy is an impractical option.
joints. He then studied the effects 3 and 6 months after osteotomy. Results showed
an increased blood supply to the femoral head and acetabulum, increased bone for-
mation in the femoral head, and increased marrow activity. These changes can result
in the clearance of bone cysts and subchondral sclerosis. The subchondral marrow
cells produce fibrocartilage, and coupled with a more favorable redistribution of
forces in the hip, a continuous surface layer is re-formed.
Wedge osteotomy of the proximal femur in dysplastic dogs has been performed
in North America after encouraging results with its use in Switzerland.43 Our expe-
rience is that, although dogs are helped clinically, osteoarthrosis is still progressive.44
 Pelvic osteotomy (see Chapter 16) is another example of an osteotomy usually used
to prevent rather than treat osteoarthrosis.
202
Pseudoartbrosis.   A good example of pseudoarthrosis is resection of the femoral
head and neck in dogs and cats. It is a simple, effective technique for relieving pain
in dogs and cats. With congenital luxation of the radial head in canine elbows,
resection has resulted in good limb function. Pseudoarthrosis can also be useful for
 treating problems with the digits, if necessary.
Neurectomy. Sectioning a sensory nerve to relieve pain has been used in large
animals but not in companion animals. The diffuse nerve supply to an area is one
reason why neurectomy may fail in dogs. In humans lacking nerve supply to a joint
(e.g., Charcot's joint, often caused by syphilis or diabetes), joint destruction is mas-
sive because of the absence of normal body responses in protecting a painful area.2
 Pursuing therapies along this line seems unwarranted.
Amputation.  A final treatment that should be avoided but still considered
 is amputation of a limb or toe. In a few cases, however, such as a chronically infected,
destroyed joint caused by a resistant organism, or when arthrodesis would result in
a severe mechanical gait impairment, amputation may be in the patient's best
interest.
Conclusion
Treatment of osteoarthrosis should include a proper balance of client instruction,
moderate medication, and surgery if applicable.
TraumaticJointDisease
Obvious traumatic joint conditions involve dislocation (luxation), instability from
ligamentous disruption, and fracture. These conditions are categorized under
"acquired degenerative joint disease." There are some general guidelines for select-
 ing a rational treatment.
Dislocation (Luxation)
Dislocations result in obvious mechanical dysfunction. Normal nourishment and
lubrication of the articular cartilage are lacking, and weight bearing on incongruent
's aos  'ss ao a on At  a oi seal ss
open reduction is less traumatic than prolonged, abortive attempts at closed reduc-
tion (e.g., elbow dislocated ≥5 days). Therefore, gentle closed reduction should be
attempted as soon as possible before muscle spasticity prevents easy relocation or
before the animal tries to bear weight too soon on an unstable joint. Most joints
should be immobilized from 1 to 4 weeks after reduction, depending on the
degree of instability remaining after reduction. A relocated elbow may not need any
is so unstable that immobilization will not maintain reduction, some form of inter-
 nal stabilization may be needed, such as capsular or ligament repair, pinning across
 joints, and other techniques that assist coaptational support.
Fracture
A fracture through a joint is serious when it affects a major movable joint. The hip.
 stifle, and elbow joints are most frequently involved. The aim of repair is to reduce
the fracture line perfectly in order to decrease incongruency and subsequent degree
of osteoarthrosis. Another objective in surgery is to stabilize fractures well enough
 to allow early weight bearing, which helps decrease joint stiffness and maintain
range of motion. In general, pins, wires, and screws should not be placed through
articular cartilage unless absolutely necessary. If necessary, non-weight-bearing
areas of cartilage should be selected, if a choice is possible.
6—Arthrology
203
Instability
 Instability from ligament rupture often involves the stifle joint. The ligament or its
function should be repaired as soon as possible so that instability does not cause
 Osteophytes, erosion, or possible discomfort from the resulting arthritis. Instability
seen with congenital laxity, such as in hip dysplasia or patellar luxation, causes
microtrauma of articular surfaces, deformity of bony contours, eventual erosion of
cartilage surfaces, and osteoarthrosis. Simple “reefing" or imbrication of the joint
Buex u sed no sdy asau u aqis uauead e u si ou so asde
patellas, or in cruciate rupture instability.
Thus, early repair of joint injuries is indicated to minimize the irreversible
changes that may occur. Usually some osteoarthritis will form, and the surgeon
attempts to minimize these changes so that the animal may lead a comfortable life.
With cruciate ligament rupture, however, the client should be advised that the joint
will never be as normal as it was before injury, despite the best efforts made. This
may change the performance of a working dog. When performance must be maxi-
mal (e.g., in police, tracking, or sled dogs), the dog's function in life may need to be
changed. In some cases, however, strenuous activities were resumed and the animal
 performed well.
Neoplastic Joint Disease
Neoplasms in joints are rare. From 1952 to 1978, there were only 29 cases in
dogs and three in cats reported in the literature.4s Primary tumors are termed
synoviomas, synovial sarcomas, or giant cell tumors. These tumors are character-
ized by slow-growing swellings about a joint that occasionally cause pain on joint
be calcium deposits within the soft tissue. Later, destruction of the adjacent cortical
bone ocurs, followed by cancellous bone destruction. The tumor may appear
encapsulated, but often there are extensions into fascial planes and surrounding
tissues, resulting in a high rate of recurrence after extirpation.45
Wide surgical resection is advisable. Postoperative radiation therapy results in the
dogs are unknown. In humans, there is a decreased frequency of local recurrence
after postoperative radiation. If recurrences appear, amputation may be the best
course to follow.
INFLAMMATORY JOINT DISEASE
Inflammatory joint diseases caused by infection or immunological factors are not
rare in pet practice, but they occur infrequently. These conditions are characterized
by inflammation of the synovial membrane with resultant changes in the synovial
fluid (Table 6-3).14 Lameness and gait impairment are the signs seen most frequently.
Systemic signs may include fever, lethargy, anorexia, and leukocytosis. In-depth dis-
cussion of systemic inflammatory joint disease is beyond the scope of this text, and
 readers are referred to internal medicine textbooks for more detailed information.46
Infectious Disease (Arthritis)
Joint infections are usually caused by bacteria that enter the joint either through
penetrating wounds or through the bloodstream. Fortunately, these infections are
rare, but when an infection occurs, it can be devastating to the joint. Our experience
with pets (other than neonates) differs from that of other investigators14 in that joint
204
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
TABLE 6-3.  SYNOVIAL FLUID CHANGES IN VARIOUS TYPES OF CANINE ARTHRITIS
Rightswere notgranted to include this table in electronicmedia
Please refer to the printed publication.
From Pedersen NC: Canine joint disease. In Scientific Proceedin
Hospital Association, 1978, p 365.
infections usually have been caused by external wounds (e.g., surgery, gunshot,
abrasion, laceration). The severity of joint destruction depends on the type of bac-
teria and the duration of infection. Corynebacterium pyogenes infection causes
severe pannus formation (granulation) over cartilaginous surfaces, whereas
Clostridium species can elaborate collagenase. Streptococcus and Staphylococcus
 produce kinases that activate plasminogen and result in plasmin, which removes
chondroprotein from cartilage matrix. All these infections result in severe and wide-
spread cartilage damage. Other bacteria may not produce destructive enzymes, and
widespread permanent damage may not occur.
Signs
Pain and lameness are consistent findings with joint infections. The joint is swollen,
warm, and tender on palpation. If the soft tissue trauma is extensive, the former
signs may be present without infection.
Diagnosis
 It is expedient to perform synovial fluid analysis and Wright's staining of the
centrifuged exudate. This staining technique is more helpful than a Gram stain in
 picking up the presence of bacteria. Culture and sensitivity of this fluid are manda-
tory, although synovial biopsy culture is better. Early radiographs may show capsu-
lar distention, and subchondral lysis may appear later Bacteria readily attach to the
synovium. Therefore, it may be helpful to massage and "pump" the joint before
joint tap so that the bacteria may be liberated into the fluid.
Treatment
 In acute joint infections, treatment should be undertaken immediately. The exudate
 should be evacuated (by aspiration or by arthrotomy), the synovium cultured, the
fluid smeared on a slide, and Wright's stain applied. High levels of appropriate
antibiotics, depending on the results of the smear, are given systemically. However,
antibiotics given before the culture is taken may prevent bacterial growth of the cul.
ture. Antibiotics should be given before receiving the culture and sensitivity results
because of the disaster that may result if protection is withheld while awaiting test
results. Choice of antibiotics may be changed when the sensitivity results are known.
 Penicillin G in high doses (30,000 IU/b twice a day) is good initial drug. Ampicillin
and the cephalosporins are also useful. These antibiotics should be continued for
2 to 4 weeks.
 Early infections (within first 24-48 hours) may respond to joint aspiration
and systemic antibiotics without arthrotomy. Arthrotomy, however, allows debride-
ment of necrotic material; removal of fibrin clots, which may serve as a nidus for
infection; and subtotal synovectomy, if joint motion is restricted by the thickened
6—-Arthrology
205
joint capsule encroaching on the articular cartilage. Local instillation of anti-
biotics is contraindicated for two reasons: systemic antibiotics achieve adequate
levels in the joint, and chemical synovitis may be created, enhancing the
inflammation.47
Initially, the joint should be supported by a soft splint or bandage to reduce pain
and inflammation. When clinical signs regress, gentle ROM exercise and minimal
weight bearing may be allowed. If the joint is destroyed, arthrodesis may be indi-
cated after the infection clears.
Noninfectious Diseases (lmmunological Joint Disease)
Joint conditions believed to be the result of the immune mechanism can be divided
into those that erode cartilage (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis) and those that do not
(e.g, systemic lupus erythematosus). These conditions are becoming better known
in veterinary medicine as the literature describing clinical cases and our diagnostic
tools expand. Most of our knowledge comes from human medicine, where these
 diseases are common and potentially crippling or life threatening.
Erosive Inflammatory Disease
Rheumatoid Arthritis
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is defined as a severe, often progressive, polyarthritis of
unknown etiology. It was first described in the dog in 1969,48 and other cases have
been described since then.46.49,50
Patbogenesis.
 The exact pathogenesis of RA is unknown but has been summa-
rized as follows.1 Endogenous immunoglobulin G (IgG) protein becomes altered
for some unknown reason and stimulates IgG and IgM antibodies (called rheuma-
toid factors), which then combine to form immune complexes in the joint. These
complexes activate the complement sequence, resulting in leukotaxis. Leukocytes
phagocytize the immune complexes, thereby releasing lysosomal enzymes that alter
the components of the joint. These enzymes contain collagenase; cathepsins, which
disrupt basement membranes; and proteases, which can cleave glycoproteins.52
The more prolonged the synovitis, the more prominent is the joint damage.$3 This
succession of events is the basis for using antiinflammatory drugs. Surgical syno-
vectomy removes the immune complexes and can be effective in humans if
 performed early.54
Signs and Symptoms.  The clinical signs and course of RA may vary in dogs, as
in humans. Depression, fever, and anorexia may occur with or without lameness.
Joint swelling may be subtle or obvious. Often, more than one joint may be affected.
With severe and chronic involvement, cartilage erosion may be detected by palpat-
ing crepitation. Erosions may be explained by the proliferative granulation tissue
arising from the synovium, which crosses the articular surface (pannus) or invades
the subchondral bone at the synovial attachments. Erosions in cartilage not covered
by pannus may be caused by granulation tissue arising from the epiphyseal marrow.
which erodes the subchondral bone.$s Joint instability of the carpus and tarsus
may be apparent while the dog is ambulatory. Drawer movement from stretching or
tearing the cruciate ligaments may be palpated. Toes may dislocate. Spontaneous
exacerbations and remissions occur.
Diagnosis.  The diagnosis of RA is not provable. In humans, there is no pathog-
nomonic characteristic or test. The American Rheumatism Association has estab-
lished seven criteria (Table 6-4),$6 and a definitive diagnosis is made if a patient
shows at least four of seven characteristics. Subcutaneous nodules (criterion 5) have
 not been reported in the dog.
206
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
TABLE 6-4. DIAGNOSTIC CRITERIA FOR RHEUMATOID ARTHRITIS*
Rights were not granted to include this table in electronic media.
 Please refer to the printed publication.
The rheumatoid factor test in humans yields false-positive and false-negative
results. The latex particle rheumatoid factor test using human IgG, as performed in
clinical laboratories, has given poor results in the dog.$7 In institutions using canine
antigen, if the titer is high and other clinical signs are compatible with RA, a
-ss  ssas ae araq  a   r siso a
A negative rheumatoid factor test, however, does not exclude the diagnosis. Synovial
histopathology reveals lymphoid and plasma infiltrates and is nonspecific.
Radiographic changes occurring in RA can include soft tissue swelling, increased
joint fluid, decreased joint space, and lytic areas in the subchondral bone and jux-
taarticular bone. Disuse osteoporosis appears at a later stage, and osteophytes form
when instability occurs. The joint space decreases as cartilage becomes thinner, and
it is seen especially in the carpal and tarsal joints.
 In one report, four of 10 cases of RA occurred in the Shetland sheepdog.49 In our
experience the Shetland sheepdog and collie have been prone to this condition.
 Often the presenting signs are breakdown of the ligaments and tendinous support
 of the carpus or tarsus. Minimal trauma (e.g., fighting, jumping from a truck) may
 have alerted the owner suddenly to the lameness or joint angulation. The cartilage
change seen on radiographs (i.e., lysis) or arthrotomy may be minimal. The inflam-
matory response may cause necrosis within bundles of collagen, leading to weaken-
 ing and rupture of tendons and ligaments.46,58
 Joint infections may be difficult to differentiate from RA. History and clinical
course help to distinguish the two conditions.
Other inflammatory diseases have joint fluid analyses as well as systemic signs
similar to those characteristic of RA. In bacterial endocarditis there may be a
heart murmur, electrocardiographic changes, and little erosion of the cartilage.
6—Arthrology
207
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) may be difficult to distinguish from RA in the
early stages. SLE does not tend to cause erosions of cartilage, and it can have a high
 antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer.
Other diseases that may mimic clinical signs of RA include traumatic arthritis
and DJD. History of sudden onset and involvement of only one joint help to distin-
guish these conditions from RA. Usually, synovial fluid analysis is valuable. Shifting
leg lameness is seen with hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy (HPO); however, care-
OH aeiona Ansn ueo Aydeaoen pue Suams ron uoedid ql i
Panosteitis causes a shifting leg lameness in young dogs, with some systemic signs
(fever, inappetence), but can be differentiated by age, presence of bone pain, and
lack of joint swelling.
Treatment.   Antinflammatory agents are used to block the production or action
 of the local mediators of the inflammatory response. Immunosuppressant drugs may
be tried.ss In general, it is wise to start treatment with the least toxic drug and to
change therapy only when the maximum tolerated dose is ineffective.59 In veterinary
medicine, economics may play a considerable role. Salicylates (e.g., aspirin) are con-
sidered very effective in their antinflammatory and analgesic effects and are still
 considered the first form of therapy for humans.
The most common cause of aspirin failing to achieve therapeutic results in
humans is administration of an inadequate dose.s8 The dose for dogs with RA is 25
pnq aq Pious us smu 8 Aaaa (iam Apoq qi o/sn g) sy/ se o
and given with food to decrease gastric irritation. It is debatable whether salicylates
impede the disappearance of cartilage,60 whereas corticosteroids hasten it.61
Corticosteroids, such as prednisolone, 1 to 2 mg/lb acutely for 2 to 3 weeks, tapered
over 3 to 4 months to 0.1 mg/lb every other day,46 can be used as necessary if aspirin
fails to decrease the active inflammation. Intraarticular injections of corticosteroids
are seldom indicated. If the patient is not responsive to high levels of aspirin and is
nonambulatory, the clinician may be forced to consider joint injections. However,
S    n    sn  
should be used as a last resort.62 Other drugs used with some success are the cyto-
toxic drugs (cyclophosphamide, azathioprine) and gold (sodium aurothiomalate).46
Other aspects of treatment consist of weight reduction, rest during flare-ups, mild
exercise (swimming is excellent), synovectomy, and arthrodesis. Synovectomy and
arthrodesis are practical only if one or two joints are involved.
Lyme Arthritis
Lyme arthritis is a relatively new disease caused by the spirochete Borrelia burgdor-
feri. It has been diagnosed mainly in northern California, the upper Midwest, and
the Northeast. It can cause recurrent joint lameness, fever, inappetence, and
lethargy. Conditions and signs less frequently associated with Lyme arthritis include
lymphadenopathy, central nervous system (CNS) disorders, and renal and cardiac
disease. The diagnosis is presumptive and should be based on a history of tick
exposure and clinical signs, which include the presence of inflammatory joint fluid.
Serological tests have a high proportion of false-positive and false-negative results
and generally are not helpful.63 Treatment is usually successful with the administra-
tion of antibiotics (tetracyclines, penicillins) for 3 to 4 weeks.46 The use of preven-
tive vaccines is controversial at this time and is not recommended except where
Lyme arthritis is endemic.
NonerosiveInflammatoryDisease
 Nonerosive inflammatory joint conditions involve three categories of disease: SLE,
those associated with chronic infectious processes, and idiopathic conditions.
208
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
The symptoms can mimic rheumatoid arthritis, but erosions are rare and systemic
involvement occurs. Lameness and weakness are common.
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus
The distinguishing feature of SLE is its serological abnormalities (LE cell or ANA
complexes in the kidney may cause death. Aspirin may control the joint aspects of
SLE, but not the kidney changes.$9 Therefore, prednisolone is recommended and
may be combined with cytotoxic drugs such as cyclophosphamide or azathioprine.64
Polymyositis has been reported in the dog.6s
Arthritides with Concomitant Chronic Infectious Disease
The presenting symptomatology of these arthritides is the same as for SLE, except
that a disease process (dirofilariasis, or chronic fungal or bacterial infections of the
heart, ears, or genitourinary system) is concurrent. Reversal of inflammation has
occurred on resolution of the primary problem.4 Rheumatic fever in humans
(preceded by Streptococcus pharyngitis) may result in polyarthritis that is sterile,
probably because of circulating immune complexes.
OSTEOCHONDROSIS
Osteochondrosis is a disturbance of cell differentiation in metaphyseal growth
 plates and joint cartilage. If this condition results in a dissecting flap of articular
cartilage with some inflammatory joint changes, it may then be termed osteochon-
dritis dissecans (OCD). This condition is very common in many species. In the dog.
medium, large, and giant breeds are affected. By understanding the origins of these
lesions, the veterinarian can devise a rational treatment for osteochondrosis at
various stages and degrees of severity.
After a general discussion of osteochondrosis, each major joint is covered as to
clinical signs, pertinent physical findings, radiographic diagnosis, treatment, and
prognosis.
Pathology
 Olsson66 has characterized osteochondrosis as a generalized skeletal disturbance of
 endochondral ossification in which either parts of the physis (epiphyseal plate) or
lower layers of the articular surface fail to mature into bone at a symmetrical rate.
This results in focal areas of thickened cartilage that are prone to injury.
 Bone growth (osteogenesis) in the metaphyseal area of the long bones occurs at
lowing a cartilage precursor). The end of the bone-the epiphysis—must also grow.
This occurs by endochondral ossification of the deeper layers of the surface articu-
lar cartilage. Osteochondrosis in the physeal area can result in an ununited anconeal
process (UAP), retained cartilaginous cores at the distal ulna, and genu valgum
(knock-knee). Osteochondrosis of the articular surface can lead to OCD in several
joints (shoulder, stifle, hock, elbow, vertebral articular facets67) and possibly to a
fragmented coronoid process and ununited medial epicondyle of the eibow.6.6s.69
The form of osteochondrosis seen most frequently in the United States is OCD of
the scapulohumeral joint. OCD and fragmented coronoid process (FCP) of the
          
retriever and Rottweiler breeds. In our practice, they outnumber the cases of OCI
6—Arthrology
209
of the shoulder. UAP, OCD of the talus (hock), and OCD of the stifle are seen in
lesser numbers. In Studdert's study of 1247 Labrador retriever puppies in an
Australian breeding colony for producing guide dogs, 15% had osteochondrosis of
the elbow.70 In Grondalen's study of Rottweiler dogs in Norway, 50% of 1423 dogs
screened radiographically for elbow arthrosis had positive results. 71 In our experience
and that of others, the cause of the arthrosis is some abnormality of the coronoid
(fragmented or fissured) process and less often OCD of the humeral condyle.72.73
Histopathology
 Cordy and Wind74 describe a histological sequence for the various stages of osteo-
op ti  su a a jo aos eu, a ps a sisp
of large breeds 3 to 18 months of age. The predilective site for OCD had thicker-
than-normal subchondral trabeculae that contained calcified cartilage until the dogs
were 8 months of age. Nonpredilective sites of the humeral head showed ossified
cartilage remnants in the trabeculae, which remained only until the animal reached
5 months of age. In three of these “normal" control animals, however, tongues
of unossified cartilage extended into the subchondral bone region (Figure 6-4, A).
B
c
D
FIGURE 6-4. A, Schematic diagram of thickened cartilage representative of osteochondrosis.
B, Osteochondrosis with a horizontal cleft that may heal or turn into osteochondritis
dissecans. (X represents a crack in the calcified cartilage zone.) C, Osteochondritis dissecans with
flap formation. (Y represents the flap.) D, Specimens from the radiograph shown in Figure 6-5, E.
Note the color difference between the fractured osteophyte and the four white "joint mice."
210
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
The cartilage in the oldest of these three dogs contained necrotic chondrocytes.
These three dogs probably had osteochondrosis, which might have progressed to the
clinical lesions of OCD had they been allowed to live.
cating junction of calcified and noncalcified layers of cartilage) was faint in younger
   no s  n  s aon  - s 1q s
 predilective site, however, the tidemark was not prominent until the animals were
 9 months old. The tidemark can be compared to a cementing substance. It may be
that the predilective site has a weaker attachment (until the animal is 9 months of
age) to the calcified cartilage zone than other areas of the humeral head.
 A greater degree of asymptomatic pathology was seen in two other dogs.72 On
gross visualization of the smooth humeral head, a yellowish discoloration was seen
bilaterally at the predilective sites. Histologically, there were debris-filled horizontal
clefts along the tidemark region with thickened cartilage above it (Figure 6-4, B).
This thickened carilage superficial to the horizontal cleft contained some unorgan-
ized and necrotic chondrocytes.
    p e  s sssd s 
surface, the disease can then be termed OCD. It is at this point that lameness may
occur. According to Pedersen and Pool,7s if the subchondral capillary bed is able to
surround, bridge over, and bypass this area of chondromalacia, then endochondral
ossification can occur without a clinical lesion developing. If the vertical cleft radi-
ates and becomes more extensive than in one linear spot, the cartilage can form a
movable flap (Figure 6-4, C). These flaps, at this stage, are twice the normal carti-
lage thickness. Histologically, the surface appears normal, whereas the deep layers
contain disorganized chondrocytes with some necrosis and calcification.74 Bone
was not found in these flaps except in two of 31 cases. In these cases, vascularized
q a jo mo auq uun a  d ai oi pauxa anss aaaun
This vascularized cartilage then underwent endochondral ossification, allowing
bone to form within the flap. In our experience, OCD of the hock usually contains
bone. The cartilage flap is usually attached to the synovial lining and therefore
receives nourishment. It can later undergo endochondral ossification after detach-
ment from the subchondral region.
 The bed of the defect formed a saucer-shaped depresson covered by a granular,
grayish white material that histologically represented the calcified cartilage zone.
Beneath this zone, there was a thin layer of new fibrous tissue or fibrocartilage.
Deeper to this, trabecular bone was normal, and no necrosis, comminution, or ebur-
nation was present, at least in the early stages of this condition.
 op y pa n  e go s / n g si s d an a
the bed of the lesion. It undergoes further dystrophic calcification and may either
stay in place with gradual degeneration or become dislodged. Often, there is a
"kiss" lesion on the articular surface touching the loosened piece. When free, these
nicate with the joint. These joint mice may be engulfed by synovium, or they may
remain free within the joint. They may grow in size because they are nourished by
synovial fluid. Often they become rounded (Figure 6-4, D, and Figure 6-5, E).
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of OCD can be considered as a thickened area of articular carti-
lage that is not cemented down well to the underlying subchondral bone. Some
chondrocytes may die. A tangential force, such as the scapula hitting the humerus
 during running and jumping, can crack this weakened area horizontally. If the
6—Arthrology
211
A
B
D
FIGURE 6-5. A, Flattening of subchondral bone, resulting from thickened, nonvisible
cartilage superior to it, in a 5-month-old German shorthair pointer. B, Saucer-shaped defect
in a 6-month-old Great Dane. C, Dystrophic calcification of the cartilage in a 7-month-old
Great Dane. D, Elevated calcified flap in a 17-month-old German shorthair pointer.
E, Calcified joint mice, roughened articular surface, and fracture of an osteophyte from the
caudal glenoid of the scapula in a 2'/2-year-old Great Dane.
trauma is continued, it may crack vertically through the articular surface, allowing
     o s  a  on  ps
causes a synovitis. If there is no further stress (e.g., the stress of walking or running),
the lesion may have a chance to heal. With further stress, the crack becomes circum-
ferential, forming a nonhealing flap. The flap will continue to stimulate synovitis
until removed. The cause of the thickened cartilage is unknown; however, a heredi-
tary predilection is suspected.
 Feeding the dog three times the recommended calcium intake has also produced
osteochondrosis.76
212
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
Radiographic Appearance
Normal cartilage is not visible on plain radiography unless significant dystrophic
calcification or bone formation has occurred. Because OCD lesions consist of thicker
cartilage than the surrounding cartilage, the lesion is observed as a flattening.
"divot," or saucer in the bone. Each characteristic lesion is described next.
Treatment
When recognized early (4 to 6 months), some syndromes (OCD of the shoulder,
hock, and stifle, retained cartilaginous cores) may be treated with rest and restricted
diets. Diet restrictions consist of decreased caloric intake of a well-balanced cereal
dog food and cessation of calcium supplementation. Decreased activity may
 decrease shear forces and prevent flap formation. Once flap formation or separation
has occurred, however, healing will not take place. Healing, or nonseparation of the
thickened cartilage, should occur by 6 months of age, and it has been our experi-
 ence that dogs remaining lame after 6/2 months of age have formed a nonhealing
lesion and are surgical candidates at this point. Removal of the irritating flap or
loose piece should be performed as soon as possible.
The first objective of surgery is to remove the flap or joint mouse that is irritat-
ing the synovium and gouging the opposite cartilaginous surfaces. A second objec-
tive is to remove any cartilage in the periphery ofthe bed that is not adherent to the
underlying tissue. A third concern is whether the bed should be curetted. Curettage
is sometimes recommended because granulation tissue from the bleeding subchon-
dral bone invades the defect and fills it more quickly with fibrocartilage. This is
especially true if the defect has dense sclerotic bone lining it. Often, however, a gray-
ish material is already lining the defect (calcified cartilage layer) and may contribute
to natural healing. Therefore, curettage may be unnecessary and even contraindi-
cated. Another alternative is to use a Kirschner drill wire to drill a few holes in the
FIGURE 6-6. Humeral head of aged, stray coonhound dog with bilateral involvement of its
shoulder joints. Note the degenerative-looking fibrocartilage, which may represent the "healing”
of a flap that never detached (see Figure 6-5, B), or healing of the bed once the flap had detached.
6—-Arthrology
213
FIGURE 6-7. Humeral head of a 7-year-old Irish setter presented for forelimb amputation
of an osteosarcoma of the radius. The dog had been lame all its life. A rounded joint mouse
1 inch in diameter was also found.
defect ("forage") to allow neovascularization without disturbing some of the carti-
lage elements already there.
Controlled experimentation using cases of natural disease is needed to provide
 guidance as to the proper therapy of the bed. Currently, we do not agree on recom-
mending routine curettage of the bed.
u re sea s iop a e jo ae an smus g-i a
flap detachment. Figure 6-7 provides an example of an incompletely "healed" lesion
(unoperated).
Panosteitis (Chapter 24) is a common condition of large young dogs and may
coexist with osteochondrosis. Care must be taken to rule out panosteitis (moderate
to severe lameness, pain on long-bone palpation, characteristic radiographic lesions) as
 the source of pain to avoid surgery on an osteochondrosis that has not formed a flap.
References
1. Evans HE, Christensen GC: Miter's anatommy of the dog, Philadelphia, 1979, Saunders, p 95.
2. Gardner E: Structure and function of joints. In Hollander JL, editor: Arthritis and altied conditions,
Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 32-50.
3.Hollander JL: The arthritis handbook, West Point, Pa, 1974, Merck, Sharp, & Dohme.
4.Radin EL,Rose RM:Role of subchondral bonein theinitiation and progression of cartilage damage,
Clin Orthop 213:34, 1986.
5. Jaffee HL: Structure of joints, bursal mucosae, tendon sheaths. In Metabotic degenerative and inflam-
matory diseases of bones and joints, Philadelphia, 1972,Lea&Febiger, pp 80104.
6. Mankin HJ: The reaction of articular cartilage to injury and osteoarthritis, N Engt J Med 291:
1285-1292, 1974.
7. Moroudas A: Transport through articular cartilage and some physiological implications. In Ali SG,
Elves MW, Leaback DH, editors: Proceedings of the Symposium on Normal and Osteoarthrotic
Articutar Cartiltage, Middlesex, England, 1974, Institute of Orthopaedics, pp 33-40.
mechanisms of disease, Philadelphia, 1967, Saunders, Chapter 32.
9. Johnson LC: Joint remodeling as a basis for osteoarthritis, J A Vet Med Assoc 141:1237-1241, 1962.
10. Jurvelin J, Kiviranta I, Tammi M, Helminen JH: Softening of articular cartilage after immobilization
of the knee joint, Clin Orthop Ret Res 207:246-252, 1986.
11. Troyer H: The effect of short-term immobilization on the rabbit knee joint cartilage, Clin Orthop Ret
Res 107:249-257, 1975.
12. Salter RB, Simmonds DF, Malcolm BW, et al: The biological effect of continuous passive motion on
the healing of fullthickness defects in articular cartilage, J Bone Joint Suig 62A:1232-1250, 1980.
214
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
13. Driscoll SW, Salter RB: The repair of major osteochondral defects in joint surfaces by neochondro
genesis with autogenous osteoperiosteal grafts stimulated by continuous passive motion, Clin Orthop
Ret Res 206:131-140, 1986.
14. Pedersen NC: Canine joint disease. In Scientific Proceedings of 4Sth Annuat Meeting of the American
Animat Hospitat Association, South Bend, Ind, 1978, pp 359-366.
15. Mankin HJ: Discussion of pathogenesis of osteoarthrosis. In Ali SG, Elves MW, Leaback DH,
editors: Proceedings of the Symposium on Normal and Osteoarthrotic Articutar Cartilage,
Middlesex, England, 1974, Institute of Orthopaedics, pp 301-317.
16. Bentley G: Experimental osteoarthrosis. In Ali SG, Elves MN, Leaback DH, editors: Proceedings of
the Symposium on Normal and Osteoarthrotic Articular Cartilage, Middlesex, England, 1974,
Institute of Orthopaedics, p 259-284.
alied conditins,Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 1009-1029.
18. Wilson JN: The place of surgery in the treatment of osteoarthritis. In Ali SG, Elves MN, Leaback DH,
Middlesex, England, 1974, Institute of Orthopaedics, pp 227-232.
and biochemical changes, J Bone Surg 59:24-35, 1977.
 20. Marshall JL: Periarticular osteophytes: initiation and formation in the knee of the dog, Clin Orthop
62:34-47, 1969.
 21. Brandt KD, Mankin HJ: Pathogenesis of osteoarthritis. In Sledge CB, Ruddy S, Harris ED, Kelley WN,
editors: Arthritis surgery, Philadelphia, 1994, Saunders, pp 450-468.
22.Turek SL: Orthopaedics: principtes and their application, Philadelphia, 1967, Lippincott.
23. Griffen DW, Vasseur PB: Synovial fluid analysis if dogs with cranial cruciate rupture, J Am Anirm
Hosp Assoc 28:277-281, 1992.
24. Collins DH: The pathology of articulat and spinat diseases, London, 1949, Edward Arnold.
25. Mankin HJ: The reaction of articular cartilage to injury and osteoarthritis, N Engt J Med 291:
1335-1340, 1974.
26. Moskowitz RW: Symptoms and laboratory findings in osteoarthritis. In Hollander JL, editor:
Arthritis and attied conditions, Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 1032-1053.
 27. Gardner E: Structure and function of joints. In Hollander JL, editor: Arthritis and altied conditions,
Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 32-50.
28. Simkin PA: Synovial physiology. In McCarthy DJ, Koopman WJ, editors: Arthritis and alied
conditions, ed 12, Philadelphia, 1993, Lea & Febiger, pp 199-211.
 29. McGoey BV, Deitel M, Saplys RJF, et al: The effect of weight loss on rmusculoskeletal pain in the
morbidly obese, J Bone Joint Surg 72B:322-323, 1990.
30. Hayes HM, Wilson GP, Burt JK: Feline hip dysplasia, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 15:447-449, 1979.
 31. Olsson S, Hedharmmer A, Kasstrom H: Hip dysplasia and osteochondrosis in the dog. In Proceedings
of Voojaarsdagen 1978 (The Netherlands Small Animal Veterinary Association), Amsterdam, 1978,
Royal Netherlands Veterinary Association, pp 70-72.
32.Murray RO: Aetiology of degenerative joint disease: a radiological re-assessment. In Ali SG, Elves MW,
Leaback DH, editors: Proceedings of the Symposium On normat and osteoarthrotic articutar cartilage,
Middlesex, England, 1974, Institute of Orthopaedics, pp 125-130.
 33. Chan FK, Hung LC, Suen BY, et al: Celecoxib versus diclofenac and omeprazole in reducing the risk
of recurrent bleeding in patients with arthritis, N Engt J Med 347:2104-2109, 2002.
Disord 1:12i-127, 2001.
35. ADVISOR for the Practicing Veterinarian, 2002, Novartis.
 36. Bennett D, May C: Joint diseases in dogs and cats In Ettinger SG, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of
veterinary internat medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders, p 2032.
37.McLaughlin R: Chondroprotective agents: fact or fiction. In Proceedingsof 1Oth Anruat Symposium
of the American Caltege of Veterinary Surgeons, Arlington, Va, 2000, pp 40-43.
38. Budsberg SC, Todhunter RJ, McNamara PS: Use of chondromodulating drugs and substances in the
prevention andtreatment of steoarthritisindogs.InBonagurasKirkscuentveterinary therapy
Philadelphia, 2000, Saunders, pp 1018-1022.
39. McLaughlin RM, Roush JK: Medical therapy for patients with osteoarthritis, Vet Med, February
2002, pp 135-144.
40. Durkes TE: Gold bead implants. In Schoen AM, editor: Probtems in veterinary medicine,
Philadel phia, 1992, Lippincott, pp 207-211.
41. Bolliger C, DeCamp CE, Stajich M, et al: Gait analysis of dogs with hip dysplasia treated with gold
bead implantation acupuncture,Vet CompOrthop Traumatol 15:116-122,2002.
42. Bradney IW: Treatment of osteoarthritis of the fernoro-tibial joint in the dog by synovectomy and
debridement and repair of the anterior cruciate ligament, J Smatt Anim Pract 20:197, 1979.
43. Walker T, Prieur WD: Intertrochanter femoral osteotomy, Semin Vet Suig Med 2:117-130, 1987.
44. Braden TD: Personal communication, Michigan State University, 1995 (Unpublished data).
45. Madewell MR, Pool R: Neoplasms of joints and related structures, Vet Clin North An 20:511-521, 1978.
46. Bennett D, May C: Joint diseases of dogs and cats. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of
veterinary internat medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
47. Van Pelt RW, Langham RF: Nonspecific polyarthritis secondary to primary systemic infection in
calves, J Am Vet Med Assoc 149:505-511, 1966.
6—Arthrology
215
48. Tiu SK, Suter PF, Fischer CA, Dorfrman HD: Rheurmatoid arthritis in a dog, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
154:495-502, 1969.
49. Newton CD, Lipowitz AJ, Halliwell RE, et al: Rheumatoid arthritis in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
168:113-121, 1976.
50. Newton CD, Lipowitz AJ: Canine rheumatoid arthritis: a brief review, J Amm Ani Hosp Assoc
11:595-599, 1975.
51. Ward PA, Zvaifler NJ: Complement-derived leukotactic factors in inflammatory synovial fluids of
humans, J Ctin Invest 50:606-616, 1971.
52. Robinson WD: The etiology of rheumatoid arthritis. In Hollander JL, editor: Arthritis and altied
conditions, Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 297-301.
53. Anderson RJ: The diagnosis and management of rheumatoid synovitis, Orthop Clin North Am
6:629-639, 1975.
54. Sbarbaro J: Synovectomy in rheumatoid arthritis. In Hollander JL, editor: Arthritis and altied condi-
tions, Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 623-629.
55. Pedersen NC, Pool RC, Castles JJ, Weisner K: Noninfectious canine arthritis: rheumatoid arthritis,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 169:295-303, 1976.
56. Prier on the rheumatic diseases, ed 10, Atlanta, 1993, Arthritis Foundation.
57. Lipowitz AJ, Newton CD: Laboratory pararmeters of rheurmatoid arthritis of the dog: a review, J Ar
Anim Hosp Assoc 11:600-606, 1975.
 58. Sokoloff L: The pathology of rheurmatoid arthritis and allied disorders. In Hollander JL, editor:
Arthritis and atlied conditions, Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 1054-1070.
59. Mills JA: Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, N Engt J Med 290:781-784, 1974.
Pract Vet 13:1439-1446, 1991.
 61. Roach JE, Tomblin W, Eysing EJ: Comparison of the effects of steroid, aspirin and sodium salicylate
on articular cartilage, Clin Orthop 106:350-356, 1975.
62. Moskowitz RW, Davis W, Sammarco J, et al: Experimentally induced corticosteroid arthropathy,
Arthritis Rheum 13:236-243, 1970.
63. Kazmierczak J, Sorhage FE: Current understanding of a Borretia burgdorferi infection, with the
emphasis on its prevention in dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 203:1524-1528, 1993.
64. Pederson WC, Weisner K, Castles JJ, et al: Noninfectious canine arthritis: the inflammatory nonero-
sive arthritides, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 169:304-310, 1976.
65. Krum SH, Cardinet GH, Anderson BC, Holliday TA: Polymyositis and polyarthritis associated with
systermic lupus erythermatosus in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 170:61-64, 1977.
 66. Olsson SE: Osteochondrosis--a growing problerm to dog breeders, Gaines Dog Research Progress,
Gaines Dog Research Center, White Plains, NY, Surmmer 1976, pp 1-11.
67. Hedhammar A, Wu FM, Krook L, et al: Overnutrition and skeletal disease: an experimental study in
  9      
68. Johnson KA, Howlett CR, Pettit GD: Osteochondrosis in the hock joints in dogs, J Arm Anim Hosp
Assoc 16:103-113, 1980.
69. Olsson SE: Lameness in the dog: a review of lesions causing osteoarthrosis of the shoulder, elbow,
hip, stifle and hock joints, Proc Am Anim Hosp Assoc 42:363-370, 1975.
70. Studdert VP, Lavelle RB, Beilharz RG, et al: Clinical features and heredity of osteochondrosis of
the elbow in Labrador retrievers, J Smatl Anim Pract 32:557, 1991.
 71. Grondalen J, Lingaas F: Arthrosis in the elbow joint of young rapidly growing dogs: a genetic
investigation, J Small Anim Pract 32:460, 1991.
72. Grondalen J: Arthrosis with special reference to the elbow joint in young rapidly growing dogs.
 Part 2. Occurrence, clinical and radiographic findings, Nord Vet Med 31:69, 1979.
A pathoanatomical investigation, Nord Vet Med 33:1, 1981.
 74. Cordy DR, Wind AP: Transverse fracture of the proximal humeral articular cartilage in dogs
(so-called osteochondritis dissecans), Pathol Vet (Basel) 6:424-436, 1969.
75. Pedersen NC, Pool R: Canine joint disease, Vet Clin North Arm 8:465-493, 1978.
76. Goedegebuure SA, Hazewinkle HA: Morphological findings in young dogs chronically fed a diet
containing excess calciurm, Vet Pathot 23:594-605, 1986.
Principles of Joint Surgery
The structure and function of joints, discussed in Chapter 6, should be well
understood as a basis for surgery. An ever-increasing percentage of small animal
orthopedics cases have involved disorders of the joints, since stringent leash laws
have limited the number of fractures seen in many urban practices. This chapter
presents a few basic concepts necessary for success in arthroplastic procedures and
 defines some terms used in later chapters.
In small animals, diseases of the joints should be repaired as soon as possible
to avoid permanent changes. Clinicians must adhere to strict asepsis to avoid
devastating infection. Hemostasis is of utmost importance.
 The objective of the orthopedic surgeon is to minimize the amount of uneven
wear and abnormal stress across joint surfaces. This is accomplished by realigning
joint fractures perfectly, removing loose bone (e.g., ununited anconeal process,
fragmented coronoid process), correcting angular deformities, stabilizing instability
(e.g., cruciates, patellar luxations), reducing dislocations, removing repetitive
microtraumata (e.g., meniscal tears), reconstructing joints with diseases of cartilage
(e.g., osteochondritis dissecans, Legg-Calve-Perthes disease), and performing
 arthrodesis on nonreconstructible joints, such as those with rheumatoid arthritis,
severe osteoarthrosis, and chronic instability.
Correct diagnosis and understanding of the disease process are paramount in
 good patient care. All too often, the "grand old panacea" (cortisone or any pain
medication) is given without diagnosing the problem correctly, sometimes at the
expense of permanently crippling the animal. In other cases, when a correct
diagnosis is made, eliminating the animal's signs may bring immediate relief to the
owner and veterinarian; however, this may shorten the life span as the animal
 approaches old age and develops crippling arthritis as a result of misuse of the limb.
o an as sses un ae r sn  are aa
 The veterinarian must bear in mind the client, the economic situation, the home
care, the use and function of the animal, and the veterinarian's facilities and
surgical abilities and ability to refer to specialists. The veterinarian needs to adapt
to these variables and may treat the same disease differently in different animals,
depending on the circumstances.
 Proper postoperative management is vital in achieving success. If the client is not
advised on how to restrict the animal's activity for a certain length of time, how to
take care of a splint (e.g., if a plaster of Paris cast gets wet), and how to look for
complications, hours of the veterinarian's work may be wasted. If the patient or
owner is uncooperative, longer hospitalization may be necessary. In all conditions
in which osteoarthrosis is present or a potential for osteoarthrosis exists, lean body
weight should be the goal. To check for optimal weight, the owner should be
216
 7—-Principles of Joint Surgery
217
advised to palpate and individualize each rib. When these ribs are palpable, and
the abdominal area shows a discernible "waist," the animal has lost sufficient
weight.
PRINCIPLES OF ARTHROTOMY
Surgical approaches to joints must be carefully planned to avoid damage to muscles,
tendons, and major ligaments. Ideally, none of these structures would be incised, but
an e   a si  ssd s u si s d 
structures be properly sutured to maintain joint stability. Degenerative joint disease
secondary to surgically induced instability of the joint is an unfortunate sequel to
many otherwise successful procedures. Large ligaments and tendons should be
detached, when necessary, by osteotomy of their bony origin or insertion rather
 than by incising and suturing. It is important to achieve adequate exposure for the
proposed procedure; excessive retraction causes soft tissue trauma, and poor
visualization of the joint usually results in an inadequate repair.
 Incision into a joint often involves severing one or more fascial or fibrous tissue
planes that function to stabilize the joint. These tissues are collectively known as
the retinacula. The lateral retinaculum of the stifle, for example, is composed of the
fascia lata, the aponeurosis of the vastus lateralis and biceps femoris muscles, and
the lateral patellar ligament. The fibrous joint capsule could also be considered
part of the retinaculum. In some cases these structures can be sutured collectively,
and in some instances they need to be closed in layers to ensure normal function.
The reader is referred to An Atlas of Surgical Approaches to the Bones and Joints
of the Dog and Cat! for a discussion and illustration of specific approaches.
 The actual incision into the joint capsule must be planned and executed to
avoid damage to articular cartilage and to provide adequate tissue margins to allow
suturing. Intraoperatively, damage to articular cartilage with retractors, knives,
electrocautery, and other devices should be avoided. Frequent irrigation with
saline or balanced electrolyte solution is valuable in maintaining superficial layers
of articular cartilage in good condition. It is important to postoperative healing to
maintain hemostasis to the extent possible and to remove large clots before closing
the joint. Although the capsule is usually sutured, complete closure of the synovial
layer is not necessary to prevent synovial fluid leakage. As with the peritoneum, the
synovial membrane quickly seals itself by fibrin deposition and fibroplasia. Before
a joint is closed, the joint space should be thoroughly irrigated to remove tissue
debris and clotted blood.
Selection of suture material for joint capsule closure is the subject of a wide
 variety of opinions. Our general rules are provided here.
1. When the closure can be made without tension and the capsule is not
important in stabilizing the joint (e.g., shoulder osteochondritis dissecans
[OCD] surgery, medial approach to elbow for OCD), use continuous sutures
of small-gauge (sizes 2-0 to 4-0) absorbable material or an interrupted pattern
with nonabsorbable materials. The synthetic absorbable materials such as
polyglycolic acid (Dexon, Davis and Geck, Wayne, NJ) and polyglactin (Vicryl,
Ethicon, Inc., Somervill, NJ) are more satisfactory than surgical gut, being
initially stronger and more uniformly absorbed. The more slowly absorbed
monofilament synthetic materials such as polydioxanone (PDs, Ethicon)
and polyglyconate (Maxon, Davis and Geck) are also excellent materials for
use in these applications.
218
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
2. If the capsule must be closed under tension or if it is being imbricated to add
stability, use interrupted sutures of nonabsorbable material in sizes 3-0 to 1.
The choice of material is not critical; however, monofilament materials such
as nylon or polypropylene are not as prone to becoming infected as are
the braided materials. Polydioxanone and polyglyconate sutures provide the
long-lasting strength needed for healing of the capsule under tension as well as
the advantage of ultimately being absorbed. This greatly reduces the potential
for long-lasting, suture-based infections. For these reasons, we are using these
materials increasingly in joint surgery.
 It is important with any nonabsorbable material that the suture not penetrate
the synovial membrane in an area that would allow the suture to rub on articular
cartilage. Such contact can cause erosion of the cartilage. Lembert and mattress
 patterns allow slight imbrication because of eversion, whereas the simple inter-
rupted pattern allows edge-to-edge apposition. The cruciate interrupted pattern is
excellent for holding the tension on the first throw of a knot and thus is very useful
with suture material that is “slippery" to tie under tension.
 The question is often raised regarding the usefulness of debridement of osteo-
phytes in the arthritic joint. Experimental work has indicated that this procedure
 p sso op pxa  aa s s a
60% of predebridement level within 24 to 28 weeks, and there was no measurable
clinical difference between treated and untreated dogs. However, because of experi-
mental conditions (i.e., minimal production of osteophytes after severance of
anterior cruciate ligament), the research cases had far fewer osteophytes than we
typically see in clinical cases. Consequently, the results in this research protocol may
not mimic clinical conditions. Therefore, we remove osteophytes when they mechan-
ically interfere with joint motion, as is often seen at the proximal trochlear sulcus of
the stifle joint; however, partial synovectomy of hyperplastic synovial membrane is
indicated to reduce inflammation within the joint. Osteophytes are also removed
when they are rough and protrude into the overlying, sensitive synovial lining.
Fracture of osteophytes occasionally accentuates clinical signs of lameness.
LIGAMENTOUS INJURIES
A great deal of joint surgery in the dog and cat consists of treating various forms of
ligamentous injury. We tend to think in terms of "luxations" or "ruptured liga-
       s  sn n  r 
pathophysiology of sprain injury should help the clinician deal more confidently
with these injuries.
Sprains
 , p s, sa a e sn an 
distinct definitions. A strain is an injury of the muscle-tendon unit, whereas a sprain
is a ligamentous injury.
 Ligaments are composed of longitudinally oriented bundles of collagen fibers
that are so oriented as to have a much greater tensile strength in tension than in
a        are s  n r
the ligament's elasticity, the collagen fiber bundles will become permanently
deranged at about 10% elongation. Damage to a ligament caused by external force
is called a sprain (Figure 7-1).
7—-Principles of Joint Surgery
219
FIGURE 7-1. Sprain classification
schemes generally focus on the qual-
itative aspects of the ligamentous
injury. A, First-degree sprain injury
involves minimal tearing of ligament
and associated fibers, as well as a
varying degree of internal hemor-
rhage. B, Second-degree sprain usu-
ally results in definite structural
breakdown, as a result of partial
tearing. Hemorrhage is both internal
and periligamentous, with inflam-
matory edema being moderately
extensive. C, Third-degree sprain is
most severe and often involves com-
plete rupture of the ligament body.
D, Avulsion at the points of origin or
insertion usually results in one or
more small bone fragments, which
may often be identified radiographi-
cally. (From Farrow CS: Vet Clin
North Am 8:169-182, 1978.)
Sprains are conveniently categorized into three classes: first degree (mild), second
degree (moderate), and third degree (severe)3 (Table 7-1).
1. First-degree sprains, or mild sprains, result from very-short-lived application of
moderate force. Relatively few collagen fibers are damaged, and minimal
functional change results. Hematoma formation and edema occur in the 
parenchyma with rapid fibrin deposition. Invasion of the fibrin by fibroblasts
results in rapid healing, with normal anatomy being restored and no functional
deficit. Minimal or no treatment is needed.
2. Second-degree sprains, or moderate sprains, are characterized by increased
numbers of damaged collagen fibers, more extensive hematoma, and marked
functional deficit (Figure 7-2). The ligament is grossly intact. Long-term
restoration of normal function is unlikely without treatment.
3. Third-degree sprains, or severe sprains, are characterized by actual interstitial
disruption (partial or complete) or avulsion of the ligament from bone (Figures
7-3, 7-4, and 7-5). Avulsion fractures of the ligamentous origin or insertion
may also be present. Function is completely lost, and vigorous treatment is
needed to restore function. Spontaneous healing by fbroplasia is virtually
certain to result in an unstable joint.
Treatment
First-Degree (Mild) Sprains
 Immediately after the first-degree injury, icing willreduce hemorrhage and minimize
pain. Veterinarians rarely see the patient this early. Initial application of ice should
be followed within a few hours by application of heat. External support is not
necessary, although an elastic bandage may provide some comfort. Treatment is pri-
marily directed at enforced rest for 7 to 10 days, followed by another 7 to 10 days
of light exercise, such as leash walking or the freedom of a small kennel-run.
220
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
TABLE 7-1. CHARACTERISTIC FINDINGS IN SPRA/N INJURY IN THE DOG
Disor der
Physical Findings
Radiographic Findings
Chronic sprain
Regional sof tissue alterations, lameness, and
Regional soft tissue alterations often
variable degrees of limb deforrmity unaccompanied
accompanied by signs of old bony
by signs of inflammation. There is almost always 
traurma, osteoarthritis, and
a history of prior trauma.
heterotopic bone formation.
Acute sprain
Mild (first degree)
1. Minimal lameness.
1. Minimal regional soft tissue
 2. Mild to moderate regional soft tissue swelling,
which may be confined to the intracapsular
2. No bony lesions.
location.
3. No apparent instability; stress
 3. Tenderness on palpation.
radiographs fail toidentify spatial
4. Pain variable on manipulation.
derangernent.
Moderate
1. Obvious lameness.
1. Prominent regional soft tissue 
(second degree)
2. Obvious swelling.
swelling, usually both intracapsular
 3. Frank pain on palpation.
and extracapsular in origin.
4. Pain readily elicited on minimal manipulation.
2. Bony lesions rarely present.
3. No apparent instability, stress
radiographs may dermonstrate spatial
derangerment (see Figure 7-2)
Severe
1. Severe lameness, often resulting in no weight
1. Gross regional softssue swelling.
(third degree)
bearing by the affected limb.
2. Bony lesions frequently present.
2. Grosswelling, which rmay extend well
Avulsion fractures are common and
into the proximal metacarpus and digits of
are often associated with subluxation.
the affected paw (see Figure 7-3).
3. Instability often apparent and
3. Extreme pain on palpation or
readily demonstrable with stress
radiographs (see Figures 7-4 and 7-5).
crepitus or abnormal rmobility.
From Farrow Cs: Vet Clin North Asm 8(2):169-182, 1978.
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may be useful for a few days but
may also encourage the animal to be overactive. By the end of the third week, most
 animals with mild sprains can be allowed unrestricted activity, although extremely
vigorous exercise should be approached gradually.
Second-Degree (Moderate) Sprains
More aggressive and definitive therapy is required in second-degree injuries to
ensure full return to function. It is extremely important to realize that 6 to 10 weeks
 may be required for initial healing and that full stability may not be achieved until
3 to 6 months after injury. If no instability can be demonstrated, the limb is splinted
for 2 to 3 weeks, followed by 2 weeks in a firm elastic bandage, if possible. Light
 activity is started at the removal of the splint and slowly increased toward normal
between 6 and 8 weeks after injury, although maximal-effort activities should be
delayed until at least 12 weeks.
 If instability can be demonstrated either by palpation or radiography, the best
 chance of success lies with early surgical repair of moderate sprains (see following
section on surgical repair). Because the ligament is basically intact, the technique of
functional position and to support it during the healing phase. The joint capsule and
retinaculum can also be imbricated for additional support. The limb must be immo-
bilized postoperatively, with the affected joint at a functional angle in some
manner that will protect the ligament from severe stress initially. However, it is
important not to stress-shield the ligament completely for too long; 4 to 6 weeks
7—-Principles of Joint Surgery
221
 FIGURE 7-2. Second-degree sprain. The stressed radiograph (closed arrouw) demonstrates
slight instability on the medial site (open arrouw) of the carpus, evidenced by excessive valgus
deformity of the metacarpus. This view should be compared with a similar view of the con-
tralateral limb to confirm the spatial derangement.
FIGURE
7-3.Third-degree
sprain, showing marked swelling
of the car pus and metacarpus and
non-weight-bearing lameness.
222
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE  7-4. Third-degree
sprain. Stressing the metacarpus
in the lateral direction indicates
severe valgus deformity caused
by complete rupture of ligaments 
at the midcarpal and carpo-
metacarpal joints (arrows).
FIGURE 7-5. Third-degree
sprain with avulsion of liga-
ments {arrows) on the medial
aspect of the humeral condyle.
 7—-Principles of Joint Surgery
223
in the splint/cast is adequate. (See the discussion of splints and casts in Chapter 2
for more details.) On removal of the cast, it is critical that the animal be closely
confined until 8 weeks postoperatively. Motion without undue stress will stimulate
reorganization of collagen and produce more normal structure than prolonged,
complete immobilization. An elastic padded bandage may be useful for the first
 2 weeks after splint/cast removal.
Between 8 and 12 weeks after the second-degree injury, a slowly progressive exer-
cise program should be started. This may consist of short periods of leash walking
or being turned loose in the yard for a few minutes. The activity level is gradually
 increased for another 4 to 6 weeks, at which point most patients will be able to
return to near-normal activity.
Delayed surgery in the presence of instability is not as successful as early repair
for second-degree sprains. The necessity of early surgical repair is directly related
to the size and activity level of the patient. Small, sedentary animals may have a
successful outcome when treated nonsurgically, whereas in the same type of
situation, a large athletic dog would end up with a permanent instability and
degenerative joint disease.
Third-Degree (Severe) Sprains
Suture repair of the torn ligament is the primary method of treatment for this class
of injuries (see following section on surgical repair of ligaments). The locking-loop
(Kesser)4 and pulley suture patterns have proved most reliable. Monofilament
nylon or polypropylene in size 0-4/0 is most often used. Shredding of the ligament
(a crabmeat-like appearance) may make it difficult to reappose the severed ends. In
these cases the ligament is augmented with strong suture material to support the
joint while fibroplasia envelops the suture and ligament. This fibrous tissue reorgan-
izes in response to tension stress because of loosening or stretching of the suture and
eventually can provide a functional substitute for the original ligament. Materials
that can be used include braided polyester sutures in size O-2, monofilament nylon,
and wire. These sutures are usually anchored by means of bone screws or bony
tunnels. It is important to make these anchor points of the ligament correspond to
the normal origin or insertion point to allow a full and unrestricted range of motion.
If a pedicle of nearby fascia or tendon can be harvested, it can be sutured to the
remaining ligament to act as a source of fibroblasts and as a lattice for fibroplasia
in the same manner that a bone graft functions.
If the ligament is avulsed close to a bony attachment, it can often be reattached
with a screw and plastic spiked washer or a bone staple with a special insert.
Likewise, it may be possible to anchor suture material in the ligament and then use
the suture to pull the ligament into contact with the bone, after which the suture is
tied around a screw or anchored through a bone tunnel.
Bony avulsions of ligaments can be reattached by small screws with or without
spiked washers, by multiple Kirschner wires driven through the fragment at diver-
 gent angles, by tension band wire with or without a Kirschner wire, or by stainless
reduction must be accurate to restore joint stability. If the joint is unstable after
reduction, the ligament may need imbrication, as described for second-degree injuries.
Postoperative management is also provided as described for second-degree injuries.
Surgical Repair of Ligaments
Conservative treatment of many second-degree and most third-degree injuries with
224
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
tissue shows little tendency to contract during healing, and very minor elongation,
perhaps as little as 10%, causes loss of effective function and joint laxity.
Additionally, scar tissue does not stand tension forces well and does not adequately
substitute for ligamentous tissue.
Several basic methods are used in ligamentous reconstruction.
 1. Stretched ligaments (second-degree injury) are imbricated by suturing
(see Figures 7-1 and 18-23, G and H).
 2. Torn ligaments are united by suturing, as shown in Figures 7-6, 7-7, and 7-8.
H '-ah at aas) sa asond, ae yo as aq pue ansde s!
and B) if necessary.
 3. Avulsed ligaments are reattached as closely as possible to their original point
of bony origin or insertion. If the ligament is pulled away from the bone
cleanly, it can be reattached by a lag screw and plastic spiked washer
(see Figure 18-23, D) or a suture placed in the ligament and then attached to
sipe ue qnon au e ro (d -tt aii aas mans aoq e aa
bony prominence (see Figure 20-12, B and C). Suture anchor devices
(see Figure 14-24, D) may be used as an alternative to bone screws and
washers to attach suture to bone for synthetic ligaments (IMEX Veterinary,
Longview, Texas).
 4. When bony avulsion of a ligament occurs, a lag screw with or without a
plastic spiked washer is ideal if the fragment is large enough
(see Figure 18-23, C and D). Smaller fragments can be attached with
stainless steel wire (see Figure 18-20, C) or with three diverging Kirschner
wires drilled through the fragment (see Figure 18-20, D).
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 7-6.
The locking-loop tendon-ligament suture.4 A, The second half of the suture
pattern is placed by entering the cut end with the suture needle and exiting the tendon at a
distance from the cut end about equal to the width of the tendon. B, A transverse bite is made
superficial to the first bite. C, The needle is passed deep to the transverse bite. The two cor
 ner loops surround and lock against a group of ligament-tendon fibers. D, The suture is tied.
7—Principles of Joint Surgery
225
2
2
FIGURE 7-7. The pulley tendon-ligament suture. A monofilament material such as nylon
Or polypropylene must be used to obtain proper tightening of this suture. In theory, bites 1,
3, and 5 are rotated 120 degrees from each other. In practice, as much rotation as possible is
obtained. A, The first bite is made in a near-far pattern. B, The second bite is midlength
between the near-far pattern; the third bite is made in the far-near pattern. C, The suture is
tied. (From Berg RJ, Egger EL: Vet Surg 15:107, 1986.)
FIGURE 7-8. Modified double Bunnel-Meyer suture. This suture weaves through large ten-
dons and obtains its main holding strength from the outer peritendinous tissue. 1, The suture
is placed on the outside end of the tendon, angled away from the cut edge, and exits. 2, An
'/g-inch bite of peritenon is pierced as the needle is again angled away from the cut edge. 3,
Another I/g-inch bite is taken as the needle is passed parallel to the cut tendon edge. 4 and 5,
Two more bites are taken while the needle is angled toward the cut edge and, 6, emerges just
proximal to the cut edge. The process is repeated on the other side of the cut tendon. The first
half of a surgeon's knot is tied on one side of the paired suture and temporarily grasped with
a smooth-jawed needle holder while the opposite side (1 and 12) is tied. The needle holder is 
released as the second throw of the knot is placed.
226
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 5. When the ligament is completely destroyed, as in shearing injuries of the
carpus and tarsus, or in chronic injuries, the ligament must be prosthetically
replaced. Such reconstruction is illustrated in Figure 20-4, C and D, and
14-24, B and C. Large sizes of braided polyester suture and tape (Polydek,
Tevdek-Deknatel, Queens Village, NY; Mersilene, Ethicon), sizes 0 to 2, and
 monofilament nylon size 0-3 or 10-30# leader have often been used for this
 purpose, but polyester arterial grafts may be stronger. Carbon and stainless
steel filaments show promise as extraarticular ligamentous replacements
because fibrous tissue infiltrates them well and can result in formation of a
functional pseudoligament. However, carbon fibers have little initial strength.
6. Any type of repair may be augmented by transposition of adjacent fascia to add
strength and more fibroblastic elements for repair (see Figure 18-23, I, J, and K).
 Protection of the ligament during healing is necessary to prevent the sutures from
tearing out and to prevent elongation of healing ligamentous fibers. None of the
repair techniques available is able to withstand full weight-bearing stresses for sev-
eral weeks. In some cases, internal support is supplied by prosthetic materials, as
just described (see Figure 18-23, A). External skeletal fixators are often useful to
support ligamentous repairs, particularly in the presence of open wounds (see
 Figures 14-24, E, and 20-5). Other cases are best supported by external casts and
splints, as detailed in Chapter 2. Casts and splints are generally maintained for 4 to
6 weeks, followed by 6 to 8 weeks of very gradual resumption of activity. Swimming
is an ideal form of physiotherapy.
MUSCLE-TENDON INJURIES
Injuries of the muscle-tendon unit are termed strains (Figure 7-9). Strains can be
chronic and multiple or acute and singular in nature, can occur anywhere in the
FIGURE 7-9. Strain injuries should always be consid-
ered in the context of all anatomical components
associated with a muscle-tendon unit (MTU): origin or
insertion (A), muscle belly (B), and muscle-tendon
aul jo jed Aue oi Ainjuj "(o) Apoq uopual 1o uououn!
MTU is typically reflected by dysfunction of the unit
as a whole. (From Farrow CS: Vet Clin North Am
B
8:169-182, 1978.)
 7—-Principles of Joint Surgery
227
muscle-tendon unit, and can vary in their severity from mild to complete rupture
(Table 7-2). Milder forms produce minimal changes in gait and are often overlooked
except in animals such as the racing greyhound, in which a slight falling off of speed
 go ud daa aq p aq u sas e au pou aq 
 bellies and tendons. Digital pressure in these areas evinces pain in the patient.
 The majority of strains resolve with conservative management consisting of rest
and confinement for several days. Complete rupture of a muscle-tendon unit can
occur in the muscle belly, in the musculotendinous junction, or in the tendon. Such
injuries are usually characterized by an inability to actively flex or extend the
 associated joints and to support weight. Because the affected muscles undergo spasm
and contract, such injuries in the large muscles require surgical repair and external
coaptation until primary healing can occur. Techniques for suturing tendons and
for aftercare closely follow those described for ligaments (see Figures 7-6, 7-7, and
 7-8). Deficits in muscle tissue heal by unorganized scar tissue and, if large enough,
can seriously interfere with function. In such cases it may be possible to resect the
scar tissue and reappose the muscle tissue. In other cases the muscle is so extensively
replaced by scar tissue and so severely restricts motion of the affected joint(s) that
the only recourse is to section the tendon, thus freeing the bone. Contracture of the
infraspinatus muscle is one of the more common clinical conditions of this nature
(see Chapter 10).
OPEN WOUNDS OF JOINTS
 An open wound into a major joint is a surgical emergency and requires vigorous
and early treatment to prevent the inevitable contamination from becoming an
 established infection. Septic arthritis is a devastating injury, often totally destroying
articular cartilage.
The animal should be sedated or lightly anesthetized to allow surgical debride-
ment under aseptic conditions. The wound is covered by sterile lubricating jelly
while surrounding hair is clipped, after which the jelly and embedded hairs can be
TABLE 7-2.
 CHARACTERISTIC FINDINGS IN STRAIN INJURY IN THE DOG
Disorder
Physical Findings
Radiographic Findings
Chronic strain
Comparatively nonspecific; lameness
 A generalized decrease in regional
often accompanied by localized
 muscle mass, which depends on
muscle spasm. Often there is little
both severity and longevity of the
patient response to palpation of
injury. Disuse osteoporosis may be
the affected muscle-tendon unit.
 present in advanced cases.
Acute strain
Comparatively specific lameness
Regional soft tissue swelling.
usually associated with signs of
localized inflammation. The area
of involvement is often painful to
touch and manipulation.
Mild
Minimal lameness, which may be
Usually no radiographic abnormalities.
(first degree)
imperceptible to all but the owner.
Moderate
 Easily perceived lameness, which
Mild, often deceptively generalized
{second degree)
appears to be the result of localized
regional soft tissue swelling.
discomfort as opposed to frank,
frequently associated with
persistent pain.
abnormality of associated fascial
planes.
Severe
 Obvious lameness, which is often
Mild to moderate regional soft tissue
(third degree)
rapidly progressive. Pain is easily
 swelling with distinct discrepancies
elicited.
of regional fascial planes.
From Farrow Cs: Vet Clin North A 8(2): 169-182, 1978.
228
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
washed away. The wound is enlarged to allow removal of intrasynovial foreign mate-
rial, and devitalized tissue is excised. A culture and sensitivity sample is obtained.
The joint is flushed copiously with sterile Ringer's or saline solution before
 closure. Tissues are closed in layers with fine-monofilament interrupted sutures, and
any ligament damage is repaired at this time. Stabilization of the joint is important
in preventing infection because better blood supply is maintained in stable tissues
Drain tubes in the joint are not necessary in most cases and probably do more
harm than good. Daily drainage and Ringer's or saline lavage by arthrocentesis are
preferable. Antibiotic therapy is initiated with ampicillin and gentamicin and
changed if indicated by culture results. The joint should be immobilized for 7 to
 10 days, or longer if ligamentous damage is present.
IMMOBILIZATION OF JOINTS
Immobilization of major joints, especially of the elbow and stifle, is a double-edged
sword. Although it can be very useful in protecting both bony and soft tissue
during healing, it is also capable of producing undesirable side effects.
The most common side effect of joint immobilization is fibrosis and contracture
of periarticular soft tissues, resulting in loss of range of motion (ROM). Articular
cartilage is poorly nourished during periods of immobilization and will degenerate
o s a se  dn  u   e o
the large and giant breeds, often results in laxity of ligaments in the immobilized
Jo ssn e se s in au u (x sni huas u pue q
increased stress.
Despite these problems, the greater good is often done by immobilization of the
joint after certain arthroplastic procedures. We specifically identify these situations
and recommend appropriate immobilization devices in the procedures described in
the applicable chapters. Most veterinarians probably tend to overuse, rather than
underuse, external immobilization after joint surgery. The theoretical ideal would be
never to immobilize a joint because all the periarticular structures, muscles, tendons,
and joint cartilage thrive better in the presence of motion. Therefore, we should
examine each situation to see if immobilization can be omitted or at least mini
mized, rather than slavishly adhering to any specific regimen. Remember, our
patients are four-footed and get along quite well on three legs. It is often possible to
delay immobilization until the animal shows signs of recovering from the initial
pain and swelling and begins to touch the foot tentatively to the ground. Such delay
can shorten the period of immobilization by 2 to 10 days in most cases. Ideally
 many conditions and postoperative management would be best handled by ROM
exercises without weight bearing. On the other hand, certain animals will overuse
the limb and abuse the surgical repair, especially if the owners are not able to
confine an active animal adequately. The intended athletic demands placed on the
dog along with owner compliance will determine the balance of immobilization
versus mobilization. Good judgment is necessary in evaluating these situations.
(See Chapter 2 for a discussion of casts, splints, and slings.)
Transarticular Skeletal Fixation
The external fixator can be used to immobilize joints. It is particularly useful for
open wounds, which make the use of casts and splints very difficult. In the case of
 d     sd s d an si q 
joint, yet allows the animal to bear weight directly on the foot.
 7—-Principles of Joint Surgery
229
No standard patterns have evolved for the use of the external fixator in this mat-
ter. Two such applications are illustrated in Figures 14-24 and 20-5.
Arthrodesis
Surgical fusion of a joint to form a bony ankylosis is termed an arthrodesis.
Spontaneous ankylosis rarely results in bony fusion of a joint in small animals; more
 often, it simply causes severe periarticular fibrosis and contracture. Arthrodesis and
total loss of motion relieve pain originating in articular and periarticular tissues,
whereas ankylosis often does not.
Arthrodesis is a salvage procedure and an alternative to amputation in the
following situations:
1. Irreparable fracture of the joint
2. Chronically unstable joint
 3. Chronic severe degenerative joint disease from any cause
 4. Neurological injury causing partial paralysis of the limb, especially of the
carpal and tarsal joints. For arthrodesis to succeed, there must be cutaneous
sensation in the palmar-plantar foot region, or self-mutilation may result.
Functioning of the limb after arthrodesis is never normal, but in most cases,
it is adequate to allow a reasonably active life for a pet. The more proximal the
fusion, the more pronounced is the disability. Stifle and elbow fusion produces
severe disability, and in most situations the animal would probably function better
a aaq au seq n on unxa u si raus au u ue 
scapula becomes more mobile on the trunk and thus allows considerable move-
ment to replace normal shoulder motion. Arthrodesis of the more distal tarsal and
     ou ss sd  ra   s p
hip joint is never fused, since excision of the femoral head and neck and total hip
replacement are more useful procedures. Ensuring that the joint is fused in the
proper angle is fundamental to success because the angle chosen is the primary
means of producing correct leg length. Although a quadriped can make considerable
compensation for lengthening or shortening of a single limb, function is still
compromised.
Surgical Principles of Arthrodesis
 To achieve rigid and functional arthrodeses, the following principles should be
observed:
1. Arthrodesis should be performed only on a noninfected or a noncontaminated
joint. Infection would lead to implant failure, loss of bone stock, and eventual
loss of limb function.
2. Articular cartilage must be removed and subchondral bone exposed on what
will be the future contact surfaces at the fusion site (see Figure 14-20, A).
Cartilage in noncontract areas can be left intact. Curettage, power-driven burs,
 and power saws are all useful tools.
 3. Contact surfaces may be cut flat to produce the proper joint angle and to
increase the contact area, or they may be prepared by following the normal
contours of the joint (see Figure 20-21, A and B). The former approach
provides more stability against shear stress but creates more shortening, with
potential rotation, and is difficult to accomplish without power bone saws.
Following the normal contour is the much easier method if working with hand
instruments such as curettes and rongeurs.
230
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
 4. Proper joint angle is ensured by preoperative measurement of the opposite
limb. Published ranges for each joint are only averages and may not fit any
specific animal (e.g., crouched, flexed stifle angle of German shepherd vs.
straight-legged Akita). Intraoperative use of a goniometer will allow the chosen
angle to be duplicated. In the absence of a goniometer, a short piece of splint
rod can be bent to the contour of the normal limb, sterilized, and used
intraoperatively as a template. In some fusions, such as that of the stifle
(see Figure 18-31), debridement of cartilage causes loss of limb length, which is
fortuitous. During running movements, the contralateral limb flexes and
"shortens" body height. The arthrodesed limb may become relatively too long,
requiring abduction of the limb or knuckling of the toes.
 5. Fixation of the bones must be rigid and long lasting, with compression of the
contact surfaces preferred. Bone plates, lag screws, and tension band wire
fixation techniques are most useful. When the fixation device is being.
attached to the bones, care must be taken to maintain the chosen angle and
rotational alignment of the limb. Temporary Kirschner wires may be driven
across the joint to help maintain normal relationships of the two bones
(see Figure 18-31, C) while the permanent fixation device is applied.
 6. Bone grafting is useful to speed callus formation. Most often, autogenous
cancellous bone is used to pack into and around the contact surfaces
(see Chapter 3).
 7. External cast/splint support is needed for 6 to 8 weeks in certain cases, when
the internal fixation device is not able to withstand weight-bearing loads
before partial fusion has occurred.
PRINCIPLES OF JOINT FRACTURE TREATMENT
 Intraarticular fractures are potentially devastating injuries that require prompt and
 aggressive surgical treatment. Open reduction and rigid internal fixation offer the
best hope for uninterrupted function.
Failure to stabilize joint fractures adequately leads to malarticulation.
s an   p   as  an i s
surfaces. Liberation of intracellular proteoglycans is followed by inflammatory and
degenerative changes within the joint, and varying degrees of degenerative joint dis-
ease (DJD, arthritis) follow. A certain amount of instability is also present as a result
of malarticulation, which further adds to the DJD.
Principles of Surgical Treatment
Treatment of specific fractures is covered in succeeding chapters. Several general
principles apply to all articular fractures, as discussed here.
Intraarticular Surgery
1. Wide surgical exposure is needed. Consider osteotomy of
ligamentous/tendinous attachments to allow generous exposure.
 2. In the presence of open wounds, it may be necessary to enter the joint through
the wound, after appropriate debridement. If possible, however, enter through
normal tissues.
 3. Make a general inspection of the joint to assess the damage and to
correlate it with the radiographs. Identify all fracture lines and bony
fragments.
7—-Principles of Joint Surgery
231
4. Remove cartilage chips without bone attachment and foreign bodies, and
debride nonviable tissue.
5.5
 Save cartilage fragments that have subchondral bone attached.
6. In reconstructing/reducing the fracture, handle cartilage gently. Use pointed
reduction forceps, Schroeder vulsellum forceps, or Kirschner wires to hold
7. Size of fragments may dictate the fixation method. Some fragments are too
small for anything but a small Kirschner wire. Where these are placed on
gliding surfaces, they should be countersunk beneath the cartilage surface.
Lag screw fixation is generally the most versatile and reliable method of
fixation. The interfragmentary compression produced generally is the most
effective method of preventing shearing forces from disrupting the reduction.
Very small screws, 1.5 to 2.0 mm, can be valuable for fixation of small
fragments. In some cases it is possible to countersink the heads of these small
screws sufficiently that they can be used on gliding surfaces. This is
recommended only as a last resort, however, because late damage to the
 opposing cartilage surface is possible.
Use of plastic spiked washers (Synthes, Ltd., Wayne, Pa) can be helpful in distrib-
uting the compression load of the screw head more evenly over small, thin frag-
ments (Figure 18-23, D). When tension loads are the primary consideration, the
pin/tension band wire technique may be useful, especially with small fragments.
Lag screws are useful in large, tension-stressed fragments if the screw can be
positioned so that it is loaded only in the axial direction and is not subjected to
bending loads (see Figure 8-5, B). Positioning of lag screws may be influenced by the
type of fixation required when extraarticular fractures are present (see following
discussion).
8. Know anatomy well. It is easy to misdirect a screw and not secure adequate
fixation. The use of an aiming device (Synthes) can be very helpful. In some
cases, it may be better to excise small fragments that cannot be adequately
reduced and stabilized. For example, fractures of the distal one third of the
 patella are best treated by excision of the fragments and reattachment of the
 patellar ligament to the remaining patella.
Extraarticular Surgery
Many intraarticular fractures have an extraarticular component, such as the T-Y
fractures of the distal humerus (see Figure 11-22) and femur (see Figure 17-29).
 Fixation of the extraarticular fracture should be completed at this time. Plates and
external skeletal fixators are most widely applicable in these situations, although
occasionally, certain forms of pinning, especially with Rush pins, are applicable.
Cancellous Bone Grafting
 Both intracapsular and extracapsular bone deficits may be present after reduction
and fixation. Such defects can lead to loss of stability as a result of delayed bony
bridging by callus formation. Autogenous cancellous bone grafts will greatly speed
callus formation (see Chapter 3). Do not place the graft where it is exposed to syn-
ovial fluid or where graft fragments could become free floating within the joint.
Repair of Soft Tissue Injuries
Ligamentous instability caused by fracture-producing trauma is the most common
soft tissue problem. Appropriate reconstructive surgery should be done at this time
because the instability is deleterious to the joint, and any additional insult to the
232
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
fractured joint is definitely not needed at this point. Examine carefully for musculo-
tendinous injuries, especially in gunshot fractures and those produced by sharp
trauma.
Aftercare
Aftercare varies with the joint involved, the security of fixation achieved, and the
size and activity level of the animal. The major question to be resolved is the neces-
sity for cast or sling immobilization. Often, the fixation is less than adequate to
allow weight bearing before some degree of fracture union is achieved.
As a general rule, immobilization of the elbow and stifle joints is best avoided.
 Both these joints are susceptible to periarticular fibrosis and intraarticular cartilagi-
O se snonat os si uoexy au f 'uono jo sso oi suea uonauaap snou
require external immobilization, try to delay applying the cast or splint for several
days postoperatively until the animal starts to use the limb. Even the slight passive
 portion involved in non-weight-bearing activity gives the joint a chance to clear
 some of the hemarthrosis and inflammatory debris. Flexion bandages of the carpus
and tarsus are often effective in allowing some motion while preventing weight
bearing (see Figures 2-30, 2-31, and 2-32). The shoulder and hip joints and the
joints of the carpus and tarsus tolerate immobilization better and can be safely
supported in the appropriate cast, splint, or sling. Generally, 3 to 4 weeks of
external support is sufficient to allow restricted activity throughout the rest of the
healing period. Most animals can be returned to moderate levels of activity by
12 weeks postoperatively.
The determination of implant removal must be approached on a case-by-case
basis. If bone plates have been used, they are often relatively short and end in the
middiaphysis. In rare instances, pathological fractures have occurred where the
plate ends in the middiaphyseal region, usually at the distal end of the plate, which
is an argument for plate removal at about 6 months postoperatively or whenever
 radiographs confirm healing. We do not remove plates routinely and have seen more
problems with fracture after plate removal than when plates are retained. Screws
- a    e si e ou i ad  i aq  
tion, unless carefully applied, may cause irritation of overlying soft tissues and will
 need to be removed as soon as practical, especially if lameness or seroma is present.
Twelve to 20 weeks is usually adequate to allow good healing in this situation.
References
and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
2.
Nesbitt T: The effects of osteophyte debriderment in osteoarthrosis. Presented at 17th Annual
Meeting, Armerican College of Veterinary Surgeons, San Diego, 1982.
3.
Farrow CS: Sprain, strain, and contusion, Vet Clin North Am 8:169, 1978.
4.
PenningtnDG:ThlockinglooptndonsuturePlastReconstSurg63:6481979.
5.
BergRJEggerELInirocomparisonof th threelooppullyandockingloopsuturepatternsor
repair of canine weightbearing tendons and collateral ligaments, Vet Surg 15:107, 1986.
Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
Arthroscopically assisted surgery is minimally invasive joint surgery that uses
specialized rigid endoscopic and surgical equipment through small incisions to
directly view and provide treatment for intraarticular pathology. The evolution of
small animal arthroscopy has been slow since the first report of its use by Siemering'
in 1978. Early arthroscopic equipment was less efficient than current equipment
because visualization was by direct sight through the scope rather than with video
joints of dogs and the protracted learning curve of arthroscopy, many veterinary
surgeons were initially discouraged.
 The development of more refined equipment and the perseverance and
dedication of surgeons reporting therapeutic successes throughout the 1980s and
1990s have resulted in arthroscopy evolving into a common and successful surgical
modality in dogs (Figure 8-1, A). The most important rationale for use of
pe ued aaadoisod jo unpau si siop u Arins uado snsiaa adooso
improved early function of the joint after surgery. Improved visualization of
the articular surface and its supporting ligaments and capsule is achieved with the
magnification and lighting capabilities of the arthroscope, and therefore the
surgeon's diagnostic capability is improved in many canine joints (Figure 8-1, B, C,
and D).
Although most canine articular diseases are amenable to successful treatment
by conventional open surgery, arthroscopy has added a new and useful dimension
to the diagnosis and surgical treatment of many lesions. For example, osteo-
chondritis dissecans (OCD) of the humeral head is treated in a practical and
highly successful manner with conventional open surgery. Arthroscopically
assisted surgery of OCD not only allows atraumatic removal of the cartilage
flap from the humeral head, but also allows more of the joint to be explored
through the arthroscope. Loose pieces of cartilage may be removed from the
cranial aspect of the joint near the sheath of the biceps tendon (see Figure 8-1, C
and D). Articular damage to the humeral head and glenoid surface and coincident
ligament and capsular injury can be documented better with arthroscopy than with
open surgery.
Canine arthroscopy is now recognized as state-of-the-art therapy for many
orthopedic conditions, and clients more frequently request this service of veterinary
surgeons. Despite documented therapeutic success and the more common use of
arthroscopy in surgical specialty referral centers, numerous factors inherent to
arthroscopy may limit its development for use in general practice. Arthroscopy
equipment, including the arthroscopes, light source, video camera technology,
specialized surgical instrumentation, fluid ingress system, image capture equipment,
233
234
 Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
F
C
D
FIGURE 8-1. Arthroscopically assisted surgery. A, Minimally invasive joint surgery is
tives. Arthroscope and motorized shaver used for elbow surgery in a dog are shown. B, The
surgeon's diagnostic capability is improved by use of arthroscopy. In this case, a fragmented
coronoid process is removed with minimally invasive technique (black arrow), but severe
cartilage loss to the medial portion of the humeral condyle has also been documented (uhite
arrouw). C and D, Arthroscope has been used in a dog with osteochondritis dissecans of the
humeral head to discover and remove a cartilage fragment (black arrows) located next to the
 biceps tendon using a grasper (white arrow). This fragment may have gone undetected with
conventional surgery.
power-driven shavers, and radiofrequency ablation equipment, is very expensive
and difficult to justify outside of a high-volume orthopedic surgical practice.
Maintenance and repair of delicate and frequently damaged equipment add addi-
tional expense. The disposable items alone, such as shaver blades and specialized
 ingress tubing, may cost hundreds of dollars per surgery.
Although excellent continuing education opportunities are available in canine
arthroscopy, the learning curve for arthroscopic techniques is very steep because
the surgeon must learn to work from a video image to manipulate instruments in
 three dimensions of a very small space. The purpose of this chapter, therefore, is not
to provide information at the level of the expert, but to introduce the avid ortho.
pedist to common, currently practical arthroscopic techniques and to encourage the
serious student toward greater educational opportunities.
8—-Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
235
ARTHROSCOPIC PRINCIPLES AND INSTRUMENTATION
Arthroscopic surgery is accomplished by viewing the intraarticular space through
 a precisely placed video camera-assisted arthroscope that has been inserted through
a small incision or portal into the joint (Figure 8-2, A). Specialized surgical instruments 
 are introduced through one or more separate, precisely placed incisions to complete
specific surgical objectives (Figure 8-2, B). A fluid management system is used to
distend the joint capsule for better visualization with the arthroscope and to flush
 synovial fluid, blood, and other debris from the joint that may interfere with the
of fluid is either through a separate needle or cannula, or it may be achieved through
the portal developed for surgical instrumentation. Surgical instrumentation includes
various manual instruments for the functions of grasping, curettage, elevation, and
cutting. Motorized shaving instruments with specialized cutting blades provide effi-
cient debridement of soft tissue, cartilage, and bone. Continuous suction through
B
 FIGURE 8-2. A, Surgeon views the intraarticular space on a video screen by using a video
camera-assisted arthroscope that has been inserted through a small incision into the joint.
B, Another small incision (portal) into the joint is maintained with a cannula and used for
introduction of specialized hand instruments, such as the small probe shown here used by the
surgeon to judge quality of tissue.
236
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
the shaver removes debris as it develops. Radiofrequency instruments can provide
e  s ass  e e a r
Arthroscope, Camera, and Light Source
A state-of-the-art arthroscope is a rigid endoscope, designed with fiberoptics and
lenses to provide illumination within a joint and to transmit intraarticular images to
a camera for display on a video monitor for real-time use by the surgeon.
Arthroscopes are designed with varied diameters and lengths. Surgeons generally
 select scopes with 2.7-, 2.4-, or 1.9-mm diameter for canine arthroscopic surgery,
with short or long lengths (Figure 8-3, A). Most surgeons select a 30-degree lens
angle at the tip of the arthroscope (Figure 8-3, B).
Older systems allowed the surgeon to look directly through the eyepiece of the
arthroscope; however, maintenance of sterility was a concern, and manual dexterity
B
C
FIGURE 8-3. A, Arthroscopes 2.4 and 2.7 mm in diameter with short and long lengths
are usually selected for arthroscopy in dogs. B, A 30-degree lens angle at the tip of the
 arthroscope is selected for improved visibility in the small spaces of a canine joint. C, Video
  a  o a on  a s    
visualization and image documentation by the surgeon.
8—Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
237
using instruments was compromised while viewing through the scope. Current
a-a ro i a s i e e o a i sdo
display on a video monitor and allows for image documentation and storage
(Figure 8-3, C). Cameras of variable sizes and quality may be selected, with the most
expensive cameras providing the greatest clarity and quality of image. A light source
quality light source uses an expensive xenon light bulb; however, tungsten-halogen 
lamps are also available.2
The arthroscope, camera, and light source system are fragile, and breakage is
surgery, during cleaning and sterilization, and during storage must be carefully
Cannulas
The functions of cannulas in arthroscopic surgery are protection of the arthroscope,
fluid ingress and egress, and maintenance of portals into the joint.2 An arthroscope
cannula is a metal sheathing that protects the scope from bending damage to the
fiberoptics. The tube that makes up the cannula is slightly larger and shorter
than the scope, which allows for fluid ingress into the joint (Figure 8-4, A and B).
The cannula may have one or more ports for attachment to fluid lines. A trocar
may be locked into the cannula for initial placement of the cannula into the joint
(Figure 8-4, C and D). Once inside the joint the trocar is removed, and the arthro-
scope is locked into the cannula to begin viewing the joint. If the arthroscope
slips out of the joint, the trocar is replaced into the cannula before reintroduction
D pasn aq A eo ardas y adoos aun  saaand on suoi au o
maintain an instrument portal into the joint, although the use of a cannula may
not always be required for this portal (see Figure 8-2). Specific cannulas may also
be attached to motorized-shaver blades for portal maintenance and fluid ingress
or egress.
Fluid Systems for Ingress and Egress
Endoscopic viewing requires a viewing medium, and arthroscopy generally uses
a flowing fluid medium. Pressure of the fluid is important to expand the joint
for viewing and to help to limit bleeding from small vessels. Fluid flow and egress
are important to extract synovial fluid, blood, and tissue debris that obstruct the
surgeon's view.
P s e r ss mo A e ra Aq pe si ss P
pump, connected with fluid lines directly to the cannula for the arthroscope
(Figure 8-5, A). Both systems use isotonic intravenous fluids, such as lactated
Ringer's solution, with fluid lines connected to the arthroscopic cannula. A gravity
flow system uses 1-, 3-, or 5-L bags of fluid that are raised as needed to a height
constrained by the ceiling of the surgical suite to improve flow. Pressure bags using
inflatable cuffs further improve pressure and flow. Gravity flow systems are appro-
which less egress suction is applied. Pressure and flow may be difficult to regulate
 do o  ais a  e s  e m
asn ae sados iaai uum adode arou are sdund pn pazuo uuosd
or when a greater rate of flow is expected, as when a motorized shaver is used.
Motorized pumps are expensive, and many require disposable fluid lines with a
pump cartridge, which adds additional expense (Figure 8-5, B). A fluid pump.
238
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
C
D
HIGURE 8-4. Cannulas for arthroscopic surgery. A, The cannula is a metal sheathing
designed to protect the arthroscope from damage. One or more ports (arrouw) are used for
attachment of fluid lines. B, The cannula is slightly larger and shorter than the scope, which
allows for ingress of fluids through the cannula and protection of the scope from bending
damage. Note that the arthroscope extends from the cannula, which makes it susceptible to
damage at its tip. C and D, A blunt or sharp trocar may be selected by the surgeon and locks
into the cannula for initial placement into the joint. Once inside the joint the trocar is
removed, and the arthroscope is locked into the cannula for viewing, or the cannula may be
used for other instrumentation.
however, facilitates control of intraarticular pressure and fluid flow through the
joint and allows the surgeons and technicians to concentrate on other matters.
Automated fluid pressures in canine arthroscopy are often set between 20 and
 60 mm Hg, depending on circumstances of a specific surgery.
  m jo   n  si    s 
joint and is achieved by several different methods. Large, fenestrated cannulas are
available but are not useful in the small canine joints, except perhaps for the stifle
joint (Figure 8-5, C and D). Small, nonfenestrated cannulas or standard intra-
 venous-type needles can be used for the shoulder and elbow joints. Some joints, such
as the elbow, are amenable to allow fluids to egress through the instrument portal
without cannula or needle placement. Care must always be taken to prevent fluid
extravasation into tissues surrounding the joint, which may collapse the joint and
 a o so r s zis  m ss a as
allow for good drainage without trapping fluids within the tissues and collapsing
the joint.
Manual Instrumentation
The magnification and visual acuity afforded the surgeon by the arthroscope are
coupled with tactile sensory information by touching tissues of the joint with
various instruments (see Figure 8-2, B). Probes are helpful in determining the
8—-Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
239
0000
?
D
FIGURE 8-5. A, Fluid ingress into the joint is usually through the cannula, which will serve
the dual purpose of also protecting the arthroscope. The cannula and fluid line are shown
with a blunt trocar for initial placement into the joint. B, Motorized fluid ingress pump
facilitates monitoring of fluid pressure and flow rates into the joint. C and D, Fenestrated
cannulas can be used for fluid egress from large joint spaces, such as the stifle joint.
Alternately, nonfenestrated cannulas, intravenous needles, or the instrument portal may be
used for fluid egress.
quality of tissue, such as articular cartilage. Probes may be needed to palpate and
probes of different sizes are available, and some have visible scaled markings to
aid the surgeon in establishing size of lesions (Figure 8-6, A). Smaller, sensitive
probes may be used to palpate consistency of articular cartilage or other tissues
(Figure 8-6, B). Larger probes may be used to manipulate cartilage flaps or bone
fragments for grasping with another instrument (Figure 8-6, C).
Grasping forceps are essential to manipulate and excise pathological tissues in
arthroscopy. There is limited space in the small joints of dogs, and forceps manipu-
lation in a small space can be very challenging. Various forceps are available for use
as grasping instruments. Simple fine-tipped mosquito or alligator forceps may be pre-
ferred by some surgeons, although these instruments are nonspecific to arthroscopy.
 Except for instruments designed for the smallest joints, most arthroscopic graspers
forceps with a diameter of 2 to 3 mm are adequate for canine arthroscopy, if
not somewhat large for the smaller joints (Figure 8-7, A and B). Forceps tips are
designed with varied shapes and styles of teeth (Figure 8-7, C). Aggressive teeth may
with subtler teeth may be more appropriate for picking up small, loose cartilage
fragments (Figure 8-7, D).
 Excising tissue may require forceps with a grasping and cutting function. Punch
forceps are available in configurations that provide these functions. A punch
(Figure 8-7, E). Different shapes, sizes, and angles are available according to the
240
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
C
FIGURE 8-6. Probes used for athroscopic surgery. A, Right-angle probes of different
 sizes are available; some have scaled markings to aid the surgeon with perspective and
sizing lesions. B, Probes are used to add tactile sense to arthroscopic surgery and may be
used to sense texture and firmness of tissue. This probe is being used to palpate the quality
of articular cartilage of the humeral head. C, Probes may be used to manipulate tissues
physically. This probe is used to elevate an osteochondritis dissecans flap in preparation for
graspingit.
8—Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
241
B
L
E
 FIGURE 8-7. Grasping forceps. A and B, Grasping forceps for arthroscopic surgery in the
small spaces of joints in dogs require a small diameter of 2 to -3 mm. The tip has teeth
designed for grasping and removing tissues from the joint. C, Forceps tips have various styles
of teeth for different grasping functions. D, Small, straight mosquito forceps may be used
as a grasping instrument for arthroscopic surgery, shown here grasping a small cartilage
fragment. E, Punch forceps have a hollow cutting scoop designed to grasp and remove
soft tissue.
surgeon's preference. A specialized suction punch forceps is designed with a port for
applying vacuum. As the tissue is excised by punch forceps, it is suctioned away
into the vacuum collecting system. Spoon forceps are less aggressive at cutting firm
tissue but are well suited to scoop or biopsy soft, friable tissue.
Arthroscopic knives are designed to be forward cutting as the instrument is
apis no uois au premoi pald s ll se huno asaan 'annns e ou pansnd
cutting (Figure 8-8, A). Meniscal blades are forward-cutting blades with either
rounded or V-shaped tips and are useful for meniscectomy and tendon-release
procedures (Figure 8-8, B). A hooked knife provides cuting as the instrument
242
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
A
B
FIGURE 8-8. Arthroscopic knives. A, Hooked knife cuts as the instrument is pulled back
against tissue. V-shaped knife is forward cutting as it is pushed into tissue. Side-cutting knife
(serrated here) cuts as it is pushed against tissue. B, Forward-cutting V-shaped knife is used
for a biceps tendon release in the shoulder of a dog. Note the frayed state of the tendon.
B
FIGURE 8-9. Osteotomes and curettes for arthroscopic surgery. A, Small osteotomes are
working in the tight spaces of a small canine joint. B, Small curettes, of either the closed or
the open ring style, are useful for mobilizing cartilage or bone fragments before using a
gra sper to remove them.
engages the tisue while pulling back toward the surgeon. Side-cutting knives and
knives with serrated edges are available and may also be used for tendon-release
procedures (see Figure 8-13, G).
 Arthroscopic curettes and osteotomes are useful for contouring a bony surface,
debriding a lesion, or mobilizing a tenacious cartilage or bone fragment. Osteotomes
 are straight or angled, and bone curettes are either closed or of the open ring style 
(Figure 8-9).
Motorized Shaver
 A motorized shaver consists of a small, partially covered, rotating cutting tip
 inserted into a joint, powered by a variable-speed electric motor and equipped with
suction to remove tissue debris as it develops (Figure 8-10, A; see also Figure 8-1, A).
Small joint shavers are most applicable to small animal arthroscopy. Cutting tips for
s  no s a m a p a a rs a
 8—Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
243
C
B
D
FIGURE 8-10. Motorized shaver. A, Electric motor drives a rotating cutting tip
 equipped with suction to remove tissue debris as it develops. B, Cutting tips for the shaver
are disposable and interchangeable. Burr tips are designed to remove bone efficiently. Radial
shaver blades have an open cup and blades with or without teeth for excision of softer
tissues. C, Full radial shaver tip being used to remove a cartilage and bone fragment that was
too "slippery" for a grasper. D, Radial shaver tip being used to trim loose edges of cartilage
 of an osteochondritis dissecans lesion in the shoulder of a dog.
(Figure 8-10, B). Burr-type shaver blades are designed to remove bone. Radial
shaver blades have an open cup designed to debride soft tissues. Radial shaver
blades with teeth provide the most rapid removal of soft tissues. Cutting speed is
variable from 100 to 3000 rpm, with slower speeds and oscillating mode used for
more efficient debridement of soft tissues (Figure 8-10, C and D).
Electrocautery and Radiofrequency
Electrocautery and radiofrequency units transfer electrical energy in the fluid
environment of arthroscopic surgery to tissue for cauterization of bleeding vessels,
tissue ablation, cutting, and shrinkage (Figure 8-11). Monopolar units dispense the
energy through local tissue, through the body, to a grounding plate. Bipolar units 
244
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
FIGURE 8-11. Electrocautery
and  radiofrequency instru-
ments. A, Electrocautery tip
used for arthroscopic applica-
tions. B, Radiofrequency tip
used for tissue ablation in
arthroscopic surgery.
B
limit energy dispersion only to the local tissues. Cauterization of bleeding vessels is
a common arthroscopic application. Tissue shrinkage is another application that
 develops when the electrical energy is carefully applied to tissue to cause partial
denaturation of collagen. Shrinkage techniques are typically used in the joint cap-
sule for shoulder instability in humans. The role of tissue shrinkage in small animal
orthopedics is currently evolving, and care must be exercised to avoid iatrogenic
tissue injury. Tissue ablation is the most extreme use of radiofrequency that essen-
tially vaporizes local tissue. Application of this function is applied for local partial
 synovectomy, partial meniscectomy, and various cutting applications.
IMAGE DOCUMENTATION
Video recording may be used to document an entire arthroscopic procedure. Digital
capture of still images or digital video provides high-quality documentation of
surgical diagnosis and treatment. Digital images are easily transferred for use in
 medical records, documentation for the client, and educational purposes. One dis-
advantage to digital recording is the sheer volume of information available and
the labor inherent to data management.
ARTHROSCOPIC SURGERY OF SPECIFIC JOINTS
Elbow Joint
Van Ryssen and van Bree34 first described arthroscopy of the canine elbow in 1993
(with Simsoens) and then again in 1997 with a series of 100 cases. The surgical
access to the canine elbow is relatively superficial compared with other canine
joints, which facilitates arthroscopy. Arthroscopic surgical objectives for diseases
 of the elbow are often simple, involving removal of small fragments or cartilage
flaps. Elbow disease is very common in canine orthopedics, providing ample
surgical opportunities. The combination of these factors has promoted the rapid
development of expertise in arthroscopy of the elbow joint.
 8—-Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
245
The two elbow diseases most frequently treated with arthroscopic surgery are
fragmented coronoid process and OCD of the medial portion of the humeral
condyle. Medial portals are used to access the elbow joint for these diseases.
Craniolateral and caudal portals are also described but are used less often.s6 The
arthroscope portal is located distal and slightly cranial to the medial epicondyle of
 the humerus at the approximate midpoint of the ulnar trochlear notch. The instru-
ment portal is developed distal and cranial to the scope portal at the location super-
ficial to the tip of the medial coronoid process.7 A 2.7-mm arthroscope can be used
    si adoss s o f moa a yo aose r
canine joint and may result in more iatrogenic carilage injury. A 2.4-mm or 1.9-mm
 Because bilateral elbow arthroscopy is often completed, the dog is positioned in
dorsal recumbency to allow each elbow to be dropped in turn to a small table with
the medial side up. The elbow is levered over a fulcrum of padding to open the
medial side of the joint. A needle and syringe are used to distend the joint with lac-
tated Ringer's solution. A small incision is made for the arthroscope portal, and
mosquito forceps may be used to dissect bluntly a small channel between muscle fas-
cial planes to the level of the joint capsule. A cannula with blunt trocar is introduced
into the joint, followed by the arthroscope.
 Egress can be quickly established with an 18-gauge needle to flush synovial fluid
from the joint to improve visibility and may be located caudally at the anconeus or
at the site of the instrument portal. Egress at the instrument portal avoids flushing
particulate matter to the caudal aspect of the joint. To establish the instrument por-
tal, the arthroscope is aimed cranially in the joint and used to direct the 18-gauge
needle into the joint directly over the coronoid process. A #11 scalpel blade is used
to incise tissue along the needle to open the instrument portal to an appropriate
width while the arthroscope is used to verify location. Fluid egress is maintained
Mo ot pamoe aq Aeu pig o as leiod suannsui au ie einuueo e busn aq
adjacent to manual instruments introduced at this site.
 The joint is now completely explored. The medial coronoid process, trochlear
notch of the ulna, anconeal process, humeral condyle, and medial portion of the
radial head can be easily viewed (Figure 8-12, A). The lateral coronoid process of
the ulna can be seen by placing the arthroscope across the trochlear notch, taking
care to avoid iatrogenic cartilage damage. Most coronoid fragments and OCD flaps
may be mobilized and removed with curettage and grasping forceps (Figure 8-12, B
and C). A motorized shaver is useful for cleaning up smallfragments attached to
soft tissue. Especially large fragments are difficult to remove arthroscopically and
may be broken up with an osteotome before removal.
 arthritis, biopsy of intraarticular tumors, and visualization of fragment reduction in
articular fractures.
Shoulder Joint
Goring and Price& described arthroscopic examination of the canine shoulder
joint in 1987, and Person? described arthroscopic treatment of OCD of the shoulder
in 1989. Arthroscopy of the canine shoulder contributes to diagnostic accuracy of
shoulder conditions (see Figure 8-1, C) and to surgical therapy of selected condi-
tions, such as OCD and biceps tenosynovitis.
Arthroscopic surgery of the shoulder joint is more difficult because of thicker
overlying muscle mass and corresponding difficulty in manipulation of instrumen-
tation through the instrument portal. The most common placement for the arthroscope
246
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
FIGURE 8-12. Arthroscopy of canine elbow joint. A, Fragmented coronoid process (black
arrow) is seen through a medial portal. Full-thickness cartilage loss is seen (uwhite arrow) at
the base of the coronoid fragment. B, Fragmented coronoid process (black arrow) is shown
in close association with full-thickness cartilage loss (white arrouw) to the humeral condyle.
C, Radial shaver is used to excise a fragmented coronoid process.
portal is a lateral site, just distal to the acromium. Instrument portals may
be positioned cranial or caudal to this site, depending on the specific needs of
the patient. A 2.7- or 2.4-mm arthroscope is most often used for the canine
shoulder.
Suol y dn apis paae au ym Aouaqunai jeraei ul pauosod si sop au
needle and syringe are used to distend the shoulder joint with lactated Ringer's
solution and identify the joint space at the intended arthroscope portal site. A small
incision is made at the arthroscope portal site, and mosquito forceps may be
used to dissect bluntly a tunnel between muscle fascial planes to the joint capsule.
A cannula with a blunt trocar is introduced into the joint, followed by the arthro-
scope. An egress needle is placed cranial to the arthroscope portal or medial to the
greater tubercle at the cranial aspect of the joint. Fluid flow is established to
improve clarity of sight, and the joint can then be thoroughly explored by rotating
the arthroscope at the light post and gently manipulating the arthroscope. Proximal
biceps tendon, glenohumeral ligaments, subscapularis tendon, joint capsule, and
most of the articular surface of the glenoid and humeral head can be visualized and
 8—Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
247
 inspected for pathology. If an OCD flap is present, an instrument portal is estab-
lished caudal to the arthroscope portal by 1.5 to 2.0 cm by introducing an 18-gauge
needle into the joint, followed by a #11 scalpel blade to open the instrument portal
along the needle. Grasping forceps are introduced into the joint. Combined with
careful manipulation of joint position by an assistant, the forceps are used to
mobilize the cartilage flap and twist it out through the soft tissues of the shoulder
(Figure 8-13, A to D). An instrument portal may be established for treatment of
biceps tenosynovitis cranial to the arthroscope portal. A forward-cutting or side-
cutting arthroscope knife is used to cut the biceps tendon to provide tendon release
(Figure 8-13, E, F and G).
 Other uses for shoulder arthroscopy include potential applications in diagnosis
of arthritis and shoulder instability (Figure 8-13, H to K) with injuries to the gleno-
humeral ligaments, subscapularis tendon, and joint capsule, as well as biopsy of
intraarticular tumors.
Stifle Joint
Siemering' described diagnostic arthroscopy for the canine stifle in 1978.
 Arthroscopic replacement of the cranial cruciate ligament was described by Person10
in 1987, and arthroscopic management of OCD was described by McLaughlin
 o st aado pe pd r e ssa ai u saoo p
cranial cruciate ligament and meniscal injury is wellestablished.12.13 Most veterinary
surgeons continue to prefer open surgery for stabilization of cranial cruciate rupture
rather than arthroscopically assisted procedures. However, an arthroscopic
techniques.13
 The patient is positioned in dorsal recumbency with the operative table slanted
at an angle that will present the stifle joint to the surgeon. Lateral and medial distal
parapatellar portals are developed at the level of the meniscus. The distal lateral
parapatellar portal is most often used for the arthroscope and the medial portal for
instruments, but the portals may be interchanged. Fluid egress is established through
a portal into the joint space proximal to the patella and medial or lateral to the
 quadriceps tendon. The large joint space at this area allows use of a fenestrated can-
nula for efficient fluid egress. A motorized shaver with a full radial blade is used
through the distal medial parapatellar portal to remove a portion of the fat pad for
visibility. Full exploratory surgery of the stifle joint may now be completed, with
visualization of the medial and lateral condyles, femoral trochlea, patella, tibial
plateau, cruciate ligaments, and menisci (Figure 8-14, A to E). Torn portions of the
cranial cruciate can be debrided with a motorized shaver. Partial arthroscopic
meniscectomy (Figure 8-14, F) is performed by grasping the bucket-handle tear with
locking graspers and using an arthroscopic knife or a small tissue ablation tip to
incise the axial and abaxial attachments.12 The same arthroscopic and instrument
 portals described can be used to remove an OCD cartilage flap.
Other uses for stifle arthroscopy include potential applications in diagnosis of
arthritis, treatment of avulsion injuries of the cranial cruciate ligament and long dig-
 ital extension tendon, biopsy of intraarticular tumors, and visualization of fracture
reduction in intraarticular fractures.
Coxofemoral, Carpal, and Tarsal Joints
Arthroscopic procedures have been described in other joints of the canine.
Arthroscopic viewing of the coxofemoral joint has been advocated for assessment
248
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease 
C
 FIGURE 8-13. Arthroscopy of canine shoulder joint. A, View of the humeral head as seen
through a lateral portal. B, Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) lesion of the caudal and medial
surface of the humeral head. C, Grasping instrument is used to mobilize and extract an OCD
flap from the joint. D, OCD lesion site after the flap has been removed and the bed lightly
curetted. Note the small, bleeding vessels from the subchondral bone (arrow). E, Normal
origin of the biceps tendon as seen through a lateral portal with the arthroscope directed
cranially.
249
G
H
K
FIGURE 8-13. Continued F and G, Partial rupture of the origin of the biceps tendon fuhite
arrow) is seen with severe fraying distal to the supraglenoid tubercle (black arrow).A serrated
 side-cutting arthroscopic knife is used to perform tendon release at the origin of the biceps
tendon. H, Normal medial glenohumeral ligament (black arrow) and subscapular tendon
(wbite arrow) as seen through a lateral portal in the canine shoulder. I, Severely frayed and
degenerative medial glenohumeral ligament (black arrow) is seen with canine shoulder
insta bility. J, Radiofrequency instrument is used to ablate frayed portions of the medial gleno-
humeral ligament and provide "shrinkage" to remaining tissue to aid in stabilizing the joint.
Care must be taken to avoid iatrogenic injury to the ligament. K, Improved appearance
 of degenerative medial glenohumeral ligament (arrow) after shrinkage procedure with
 radiofrequency instrument. (Images courtesy Dr. Loic Dejardin.)
250
Part I—Diagnosis and Treatment of Fractures, Lameness, and Joint Disease
B
C
FIGURE 8-14. Arthroscopy of canine stifle joint. A, Normal cranial (ubite arrou)
and caudal (black arrow) cruciate ligaments as seen through a lateral parapatellar portal. B,
Ruptured cranial (white arrouw) and intact caudal (black arrow) cruciate ligaments. C,
Normal medial meniscus as seen through a lateral parapatellar portal. D, Frayed and torn
Caudal horn of the medial meniscus has ruptured and displaced forward into view at the cra-
nial aspect of the joint. F, Grasping instrument is used to hold the ruptured meniscal flap in
preparation for partial medial meniscectomy. (Images courtesy Dr. Loic Dejardin.)
8—Arthroscopy in Joint Surgery
251
of hip dysplasia and the state of articular cartilage before completing triple pelvic
small chip fractures are described in the carpal joint. The canine carpus and tarsus
have little space for working, but a 1.9-mm arthroscope is small enough to accom-
plish some tasks. Arthroscopic removal of OCD carilage flaps has been described
for the medial trochlear ridge of the talus.15
References
1. Siemering GH: Arthroscopy of dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 172:575-577, 1978.
2. Beale BS, Hulse DA, et al: Arthroscopic instrumentation. In Small animat arthroscopy, Philadelphia,
2003, Saunders, pp 5-21.
 3. Van Ryssen B, van Bree H, Sirmsoens P: Elbow arthroscopy in clinically normal dogs, Arm J Vet Res
541:191, 1993.
 4. Van Ryssen B, van Bree H: Arthroscopic findings in 100 dogs with elbow lameness, Vet Rec 140:360,
1997.
 craniolateral portal, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 10:1-5, 1997.
6. Bardet JF: Arthroscopy of the elbow in dogs. Part II. The cranial portals in the diagnosis and
treatment of the lesions of the coronoid process, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 10:60-66, 1997.
7. Beale BS, Hulse DA, et al: Arthroscopically assisted surgery of the elbow joint. In Smatl amimat
drthroscopy, Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders, pp 51-79.
Assoc 23:551-555, 1987.
9. Person MW: Arthroscopic treatment of osteochondritis dissecans in the canine shoulder, Vet Surg
18:175-189, 1989.
10. Person MW: Prosthetic replacement of the cranial cruciate ligament under arthroscopic guidance,
a pilot project, Vet Surg 16:37-43, 1987.
11. McLaughlin RM, Hurtig RM, Fries CL: Operative arthroscopy in the treatment of bilateral stifle
osteochondritis dissecans in a dog, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 4:158-161, 1989.
12. Van Ryssen B, van Bree H, et al: Small anirmal arthroscopy. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatf
animal surgery, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders, pp 2285-2306.
13. Whitney WO: Arthroscopically assted surgery of the stifle joint. In Sallaniat arthroscopy.
Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders, pp 118-157.
14.Beal BS, Hulse DA, et al: Arthroscopically assted surgery of the hip joint. In Smatl amimat
arthroscopy, Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders, pp 96-115.
15. Beal BS, Hulse DA, et al: Arthroscopically asssted surgery of the tarsal joint. In Small animat
drthroscopy, Philadelphia, 2003, Saunders, pp 159-177.
Fractures of the Scapula
CLASSIFICATION
Fractures of the scapula are relatively uncommon and may be classified according
to the following anatomical locations12.
1. The body and spine
2.
 The acromion process
3. The neck
4. The glenoid and supraglenoid tuberosity
 The most frequently encountered immediate complications of scapular fracture
are pulmonary contusions, rib fractures, pneumothorax, pleural effusions, foreleg
paralysis, and injury to the suprascapular nerve.3 The most common cause of scapu-
lar fracture is automobile trauma (68%), and 56% of cases have concurrent injury
to other organ systems, including pulmonary trauma in 42% of vehicular trauma
Aq pasnn Aedomau redessrns apnu suonnd suus-suo tsas
 entrapment, as well as limitation in range of movement and osteoarthrosis in unre-
duced fractures of the neck or articular surface, particularly in large, athletic animals.
TREATMENT
Conservative Treatment
Most scapular body fractures are not grossly displaced because of the protection of
the surrounding muscle mass and rib cage and can be treated closed unless there is
loss of congruity of the articular surface or a distinct change in the angulation of the
shoulder joint articulation, as in most fractures of the neck. Healing is generally
rapid because of the high proportion of well-vascularized cancellous bone, and sta-
bility of fixation is not critical except for articular fractures. Many fractures respond
well to simple limitation of the animal's activity. In many cases a modified Velpeau
bandage adds greatly to the animal's comfort. The leg is flexed along the chest wall,
padded, and bound to the body (see Figure 2-29). The spica splint is also useful for
stabilizing these fractures and reducing pain (see Figure 2-23).
Internal Fixation
Open approach and internal fixation are indicated in fractures of the articular
surface, the neck of the scapula, and most fractures of the acromion process.
255
256
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Less frequently, some displaced body fractures are internally fixed, especially when
athletic performance or cosmetic appearance is a major concern for the owner. The
open approach varies considerably, depending on the area of involvement. Exposing
the body simply requires elevating the spinati muscles from the spine and body,
whereas exposure of the neck and glenoid cavity usually requires osteotomy of the
 acromion process and, in some cases, osteotomy of the greater tubercle (Figure 9-1).
Spine of scapula
Omotransversarius m. and 
 supraspinatus m. retracted 
Spinous head of
deltoideus m.
 Infraspinatus m.
Teres minor m.
Acromial head of
deltoideus m.
A
Supraspinatus m
Supraspinatus m.
Osteotomy of acromion
 Infraspinatus m.
 Incision in joint capsule 
Osteotomy of
Teres minor m.
greater tubercle
Acromial head of
 deltoideus m.
 and acromion
B
C
FIGURE 9-1. Open approaches to the scapula and shoulder joint. A, Fractures of the scapu-
lar body and spine; the infraspinatus and supraspinatus muscles are reflected caudally and
cranially, respectively, from the spine. B, Fractures of the scapular neck; the acromion process
is osteotomized so that the acromial head of the deltoid muscle can be reflected distally. The
infraspinatus and supraspinatus muscles are reflected caudally and cranially, respectively. Their
tendons of insertion may be severed for more exposure. The suprascapular nerve is located as
it crosses the lateral surface of the neck just distal to the acromion process. In fractures involv-
ing the articular surface, the joint capsule is incised between the scapula and humerus for expo-
sure. C, In avulsion fractures of the supraglenoid tuberosity or in multiple neck fractures, the
belly of the brachiocephalicus muscle is reflected cranially. The greater tuberosity of the
humerus is osteotomized, and insertion of the supraspinatus muscle is reflected proximally for
exposure and working room. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical
approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
9—-Fractures of the Scapula
257
Acromion Process
This scapular fracture includes the origin of the acromial part of the deltoid
muscle, which pulls the fragment away from the spine if the fracture is complete and
results in a fibrous nonunion. Chronic soreness and lameness result. If the bone is
large enough, pin and tension band wire is the most efficient fixation method
(Figure 9-2, A). When the process and spine are too small to accommodate
the Kirschner wires (one K-wire is sufficient), a variety of interfragmentary wire
patterns can be used (Figure 9-2, B and C). It is more important to ensure good
stability of the fracture than perfect reduction.
Body and Spine
aq u eare as pu aoq ndess a u s so s Asd s
rapid and certain with open reduction. The body usually folds outward in a tentlike
configuration. In young dogs the body may fracture and the spine may remain intact
along the crest of the spine. Interfragmentary wire usually provides sufficient
fixation once reduction is complete. Because the bone of the body is very thin, it is
best to place the wire in the thickened areas of the cranial and caudal border and in
the crest or base of the spine (Figure 9-3, A). The wire diameter must not be too large,
A
C
   sr     o  a 
wire and Kirschner wires. B, Simple interfragmentary wiring. C, Interfragmentary wiring,
applicable to animals too small for the technique in A.
FIGURE 9-3. Fracture of the
scapular body. A, Simple frac-
tures of the body and spine are
A
B
amenable to interfragmentary
wiring of the body and a ten-
sion band wire in the spine.
Wires are placed to take advan-
tage of the thicker bone of the
cranial and caudal borders of
the body and the crest of the
spine. B, Multiple fragment
fractures are best fixed by a
veterinary cutta ble plate (VCP)
{Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) with
screws anchored at the junction
of the spine and blade. The VCP
shown here, or a semitubular
plate, can be inverted to provide
better contact with the bone.
258
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 or the wire will be so stiff that it will cut through the bone when tightened; 20 to
22 gauge is sufficient.
 s m a n ra si i  a s q 
apply a plate along the base of the spine (Figure 9-3, B). This restores the basic
alignment of the body and reduces the fragments to near normal position, where
they do not require fixation. The use of the veterinary cuttable plate (VCP) dis-
cussed in Chapter 2 is extremely helpful here, and stacking these plates can make
them sufficiently strong for most dogs.
Neck
The scapular body typically displaces distolateral to the neck fragment and restricts
impingement between the fragments or can become trapped in callus in unreduced
fractures. Although partial function of the shoulder remains in this situation,
considerable cosmetic deformity results from atrophy of the spinati muscles.
 si sd   r   e  
for exposure (see Figure 9-1, C). Pin fixation is sufficient in simple transverse fractures
(Figure 9-4, A and B). The pin from the supraglenoid tubercle into the scapular neck
can also be inserted from the other direction, although with slightly less resultant
stability. Occasionally, the neck fracture is sufficiently oblique to allow fixation with
lag screws. More often, the obliquity is too short for screws only, and a plate is
required (Figure 9-4, C). Right-angle or oblique-angle finger plates work well in this
 location, taking care to elevate the suprascapular nerve during placement. Two VCP
 plates are another option (see Figure 9-7, C).
An off-weight-bearing foreleg sling or Velpeau sling (see Figures 2-30 and 2-29,
respectively) is indicated for 2 weeks postoperatively, with exercise severely
restricted the first month and a gradual return to normal activity at 8 to 10 weeks.
Use of the sling is especially indicated when pin fixation is used or when the dog is
very active and poorly controlled by the owner.
Articular Fractures
Treatment of articular fractures of the glenoid is difficult because of the small size
 of most bone fragments and the relative difficulty of surgical exposure. Fractures of
the cranial portion of the glenoid are most common, followed by the TY type.4
?
FIGURE 9-4.  A, Transverse fracture of the sca pular neck. B, Immobilization by insertion of
two transfixing Kirschner wires. One wire was inserted at the acromion process and one in
the scapular neck. C, Immobilization by a small bone plate; the suprascapular nerve is ele-
vated to insert the bone plate. The use of two VCPs for a similar fracture is illustrated in
Figure 9-7, C.
9—Fractures of the Scapula
259
Supraglenoid Tubercle
 Forming a separate center of ossification and the origin of the biceps brachi muscle,
 jo usun ay  us o ioalqns si (snn res) aaqn a
biceps muscle in skeletally immature, large-breed dogs (Figure 9-5, A). Although
the initial lameness is dramatic, this quickly disappears, and many of these animals
are not presented until the lameness is chronic, with secondary degenerative joint
disease (DJD) caused by malunion or nonunion of this intraarticular fracture.
Attempts to reduce the fracture are probably not worthwhile at this point, and
biceps tenodesis is indicated and quite successful if DJD is not advanced
(see Chapter 10).
 Recent fractures are best stabilized with either a lag screw or a pin and tension
band wire. As with all articular fractures, accurate reduction and stable fixation
ll pe paibau si ansodxa ssal asneoaq paaad s uoex mas Aressaau an
can be applied from a cranial approach, whereas the pin and tension band wire
  a r t  e o e a a
 as parallel as possible to the biceps tendon in order to minimize bending loads on
the screw (Figure 9-5, B). A cancellous thread screw provides the best security. Pin
and tension band wire fixation requires that the wire span the suprascapular nerve,
so care must be taken to protect the nerve during wire placement (Figure 9-5, C).
An off-weight-bearing foreleg sling or Velpeau sling (see Figures 2-30 and 2-29,
respectively) is indicated for 2 weeks postoperatively, with exercise severely
restricted the first month and a gradual return to normal activity at 6 to 8 weeks.
Glenoid Rim
The most common fracture in this area is of the caudoventral angle of the glenoid
(Figure 9-6, A); similar fractures of the craniodorsal angle are less common.
Fracture of the medial rim is also seen, as in Figure 9-6, B and C. These fractures
require lag screw fixation. Initial fixation with a K-wire is useful to remove the
 o q si a au e ms   a  sa 
the protruding end to prevent pin migration and is left in situ. The concavity of the
glenoid cavity must be kept in mind when placing the screws to prevent them from
entering the joint.
FIGURE 9-5. A, Avulsion fracture of the supraglenoid (scapular) tuberosity. B, Fixation
with a lag screw, inserted as parallel to the tendon of the biceps brachii as possible.
C, Fixation with Kirschner wires and a tension band wire. The suprascapular nerve must be
protected during placement of the tension wire.
260
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
C
FIGURE9-6.
 A, Fracture of the caudoventral angle of the glenoid fixed with Kirschner wire
and lag screw. The K-wire is placed first. B and C, Fracture of the medial rim of the glenoid
fixed with two lag screws placed from the lateral side.
P
FIGURE 9-7. A, Fracture of the scapular neck and glenoid; TY fracture. B, Immobilization
by a cancellous screw and two transfixing Kirschner wires. C, Fixation by a lag screw and
two VCPs (Synthes). Although there is only one screw on the glenoid fragment for each plate,
this is sufficient sta bilization for this fracture.
An off-weight-bearing foreleg sling or Velpeau sling (see Figures 2-30 and 2-29,
severely restricted the first 6 weeks and a gradual return to normal activity at 10 to
12 weeks.
Glenoid and Neck; T-Y Fracture
 au si ui au jo ua 'adi s jo a a u ii i s
 priority, followed by fixation of the neck. Methods of fixation are as previously
described for glenoid and neck fractures (Figure 9-7).
An off-weight-bearing foreleg sling or Velpeau sling (see Figures 2-30 and 2-29,
respectively) is indicated for 2 to 3 weeks postoperatively, with exercise severely
restricted the first 6 weeks and a gradual return to normal activity at 10 to 12 weeks.
 Use of the sling is especially indicated when pin fixation is used or when the dog is
very active and poorly controlled by the owner.
Prognosis for Intraarticular Fracture
Long-term follow-up of 20 animals with articular fractures indicated that only 15 %
were free of clinical signs related to the fracture, with the remainder showing
variable degrees of lameness. Thus, although prognosis for limb function is good,
some degree of continued lameness is probable.4
9—-Fractures of the Scapula
261
References
1. Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974, American 
Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
2. Pierrmattei DL: Fractures of the scapula. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD, editors: Manuat of
internat fixation in smatl animats, New York, 1984, Springer-Verlag, p 127-133.
 3. Tomes PM, Paddleford RR, Krahwinkel DJ: Thoracic trauma in dogs and cats presented for limb
fractures, J A Vet Med Assoc 21:161-166, 1985.
4. Johnston SA: Articular fractures of the scapula in the dog: a clinical retrospective study of 26 cases,
JAm Anim Hosp Assoc 29:157-164,1993.
The Shoulder Joint
FORELIMB LAMENESS
Following a history and lameness examination of the animal, as described in
Chapter 1, it is usually posible to localize the source of lameness with some degree
of accuracy. After this, the veterinarian constructs a list of possible diagnoses and
works through them until the correct cause is found. The following listing is not
exhaustive but includes the problems that are seen regularly.
Forelimb Lameness in Large-Breed, Skeletally
Immature Dogs
General/Muitiple
· Trauma—fracture, luxation
· Panosteitis
● Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HO)
· Cervical cord lesion—vertebral instability
Shoulder Region
· Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of humeral head
Elbow Region
· OCD of medial trochlear ridge
● Ununited anconeal process (UAP)
· Fragmentation of medial coronoid process (FCP)
· Avulsion and calcification of the flexor tendons of the medial epicondyle or
ununited medial epicondyle (UME)
● Subluxation caused by premature physeal closure
· Synovial chondrometaplasia (SCM)
Carpal Region
● Subluxation/valgus or varus deformity caused by premature physeal closure
· Valgus deformity caused by retained cartilage cores in the ulna, or elbow
conditions
Paw Region
· Fragmentation of the sesamoids
262
10—The Shoulder Joint
263
 Forelimb Lameness in Large-Breed, Skeletally
Mature Dogs
General/Multiple
· Trauma—fracture, luxation, muscle and nerve injuries
· Panosteitis
· Cervical cord lesion—disk, tumor, vertebral instability
· Brachial plexus tumor
· Bone cartilage or synovial tumor
OH·
· Synovial chondrometaplasia (SCM)
Shoulder Region
· OCD of humeral head
· Degenerative joint disease (DJD), primary or secondary
· Contracture of infraspinatus muscle
● Tenosynovitis of biceps brachi tendon
● Calcification of the supraspinatus muscle
● Luxation/Instability
Elbow Region
·DJD
· FCP
· Calcification of the flexor tendons or UME
● Subluxation caused by prior physeal injury or breed (chondrodystrophic)
 predisposition
· Subluxation caused by premature physeal closure
·Luxation
Carpal Region
● Ligamentous instability/hyperextension
● Subluxation caused by premature physeal closure
·DJD
· Inflammatory joint disease, with or without instability
Forelimb Lameness in Small-Breed, Skeletally Immature Dogs
General/Multiple
· Trauma—fracture, luxation
·Atlantoaxial luxation
Shoulder Region
· Congenital luxation
Eibow Region
· Congenital luxation
· Subluxation caused by premature physeal closure
Carpal Region
· Subluxation caused by premature physeal closure
264
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Forelimb Lameness in Small-Breed, Skeletally
Mature Dogs
General/Multiple
· Trauma—fracture, luxation, muscle and nerve injuries
· Cervical cord lesion—disk, tumor
· Brachial plexus tumor
OH·
· SCM
Shoulder Region
·DJD
● Recurrent medial luxation, nontraumatic
Eibow Region
·DJD
· Subluxation caused by physeal injury
Carpal Region
· DJD
· Inflammatory joint disease
· Subluxation caused by prior physeal injury
THE SHOULDER
 Dorsal Luxation of Scapula
Multiple ruptures of the serratus ventralis, trapezius, and rhomboideus muscle
insertions on the cranial angle and dorsal border of the scapula allow the scapula to
move dorsally on weight bearing. Onset of clinical lameness is usually acute and is
often directly associated with jumps, falls, or bite wounds.
 Considerable soft tissue swelling is evident several days after injury. Mobility of
the scapula is easily demonstrated and is diagnostic. This uncommon problem is
 seen in both dogs and cats.
Surgical Technique
The objective of surgical repair is to attach the scapula to a suitable rib with heavy
stainless steel wire and to reattach as many ruptured muscles as possible. An
 inverted L-shaped incision is made along the cranial and dorsal borders of the
scapula. If any portions of the trapezius, serratus, or rhomboideus muscle insertions
are intact, they are cut sufficiently to allow lateral retraction of the scapula so that
its caudal angle and caudal borders can be visualized. Two holes are drilled from
a medial-to-lateral direction through the caudal border of the scapula, close to the
caudal angle (Figure 10-1). Stainless steel wire of 20 to 22 gauge is carefully placed
around an adjacent rib with the ends placed through the scapular holes, then pushed
laterally through the muscles. The wire is twisted until dorsal movement of the
scapula is minimized but still possible. All muscular insertions are sutured to the
extent possible, and all tissues are closed in layers.
It is sometimes possible to eliminate the rib wire suture and simply attach
muscle to the scapula through holes drilled near the cranial angle.
10—The Shoulder Joint
265
FIGURE 10-1. Dorsal luxation of the scapula
Heavy stainless steel wire is used to secure the
caudal border of the scapula to an adjacent rib.
Alternatively, holes are drilled through the cranial
angle and vertebral border (arrous) to allow
suturing to the serratus ventralis muscle.
Aftercare
 The scapula is immobilized in either a Velpeau sling (see Figure 2-29), a spica splint
(see Figure 2-23), or a carpal flexion bandage (see Figure 2-30) for 2 weeks. Exercise
is gradually increased to normal in the 2 weeks after sling or splint removal.
Luxations of Shoulder
Luxations of the shoulder are relatively uncommon in the dog. Traumatic luxations
can occur in all breeds, but the toy poodle and sheltie show a particular propensity
to develop medial luxations without any history of significant trauma (Figure 10-2).
At presentation, many of these animals have a history of lameness of several
 months' duration. Most luxations—perhaps 75%—are medial, and a large propor-
tion of the remainder are lateral (see Figure 10-4). Cranial and caudal luxations are
rarely seen (see Figures 10-6 and 10-8). Although the tendons of the parascapular
muscles have long been thought of as the primary stabilizers of the shoulder joint,
it was found experimentally that cutting the tendons that cross the shoulder joint
resulted in minimal changes in joint motion, whereas cutting the joint capsule and
 glenohumeral ligaments caused marked alteration of joint motion.1 This suggests
that careful imbrication suturing of the capsule and associated ligaments should be
an important part of any surgical repair.
With medial luxation the leg is usually carried with the elbow flexed and
adducted and the lower limb abducted and supinated. With lateral luxation the
position is similar except that the lower limb is adducted. On palpation, the
relative positions of the acromial process and the greater tubercle are the keys to
determining the position of the humeral head relative to the glenoid. These
points should be palpated on the normal limb and then compared with the
affected limb. Clinical signs and physical examination are usually diagnostic; as
with any skeletal injury, however, diagnosis should always be confirmed radio-
graphically to eliminate the possibility of bone injuries such as fractures. Stress
radiography has been suggested as an objective method of measuring instability in
 this joint.2 The presence of a severely eroded glenoid resulting from chronic luxa-
tion or the presence of a dysplastic glenoid or humeral head greatly reduces the
probability of a successful reduction. Congenital luxations discovered later are
usually irreducible because of severe malformations of both the glenoid and the
humeral head.
 If an injury is seen within a few days after dislocation, and particularly if there
is a known traumatic event, it is probably worthwhile to attempt closed reduc-
tion and immobilization of the limb for approximately 2 weeks. If the joint is
relatively stable after reduction, there is a good chance that this type of treatment
266
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 10-2. Medial luxation of the left shoulder
(ventrodorsal view).
will be successful. If the joint remains unstable after reduction, or if the luxation
recurs while the leg is in the sling, surgical treatment is indicated.
Medial Luxation
 Prosthetic ligaments and imbrication techniques have not been as successful as
methods for transposing the biceps tendon as in other areas. Medial transposition
 and tenodesis? of the biceps tendon create a stabilizing lateral force on the humeral
head (see Figure 10-5). If the glenoid is deformed, surgical stabilization will usually
fail. Treatment in this situation is excision arthroplasty (see Figure 10-11) or
arthrodesis (see Figure 10-12).
Surgical Technique
 The shoulder joint is exposed by a craniomedial approach.4 Typically, the subscapu-
 laris tendon of insertion is torn at its insertion on the lesser tubercle and has
retracted a considerable distance, making identification difficult. The tendon should
 be tagged with a suture when identified to assist in later suturing. If the joint cap-
S as on sod si i 'uof aun ioadsui oi lnao pauado si il dun nou si ans
much capsule as possible for suturing. Careful assessment of the medial labrum of
the glenoid and the lateral side of the humeral head is necessary. If the labrum is
worn, successful stabilization is less likely. If there is significant chondromalacia or
erosion of the humeral head articular cartilage because of rubbing on the medial
 labrum, degenerative joint disease (DJD) changes could limit long-term success even
 if the joint is stabilized. Arthrodesis or excision arthroplasty is probably indicated
in these circumstances (see later discussion).
If the articular surfaces are in good condition and the luxation is recent, it may
 be possible to stabilize the joint by suture of the joint capsule and the subscapularis
tendon (Figure 10-3, B and D). If these tissues are friable, tenodesis of the biceps
 tendon is carried out.
- Brachiocephalicus m.
 Sutures in
Supraspinatus m.
joint capsule
Subscapularis m.
Coracobrachialis m.
Tendon of
Incision in
biceps brachii m.
 joint capsule
Transverse
humeral
:ligament
:Tendon of
biceps
Insertion
of deep
 pectoral m.
Insertion of
subscapularis m?
Deep pectoral m.
. Superficial
pectoral m.
Kirschner wires in
bone flap
Trough in cortex
of bone
Bone screw and
 spiked washer
Subscapularis m
C
Deep pectoral m
 Superficial
pectoral m.
D
FIGURE 10-3. Surgical repair of medial luxation of the shoulder. A, The left shoulder joint
has been exposed by a craniomedial approach, and the dislocation has been reduced.4 The
position for incision in the joint capsule is indicated. Elevation of the bone flap by means of
an osteotome is being started. B, Transposition of the tendon of the biceps muscle has been
completed. It is trapped under the osteoperiosteal flap, which is then secured to the humerus
with two Kirschner wires or a bone staple. The joint capsule is imbricated with mattress
sutures of heavy absorbable material. C, Another method of attachment is the use of a plas-
tic spiked washer and bone screw (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa). The bone beneath the tendon is
cut to form a shallow trough to encourage early attachment of the tendon. D, The deep pec-
toral muscle has been advanced and sutured to the origin of the superficial pectoral muscle.
The superficial pectoral muscle is advanced craniolaterad until it can be sutured to the fascia
of the acromial head of the deltoideus muscle. The subscapularis muscle is attached to the prox-
imal border of the deep pectoral muscle and to any humeral periosteum or fascia available.
268
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Tenodesis of the biceps tendon to a medial position begins by transecting the trans-
verse humeral ligament overlying the biceps tendon (Figure 10-3, A). The tendon is
 mobilized from the intertubercular groove after incising the joint capsule as needed.
A crescent-shaped flap of bone is elevated from the lesser tubercle with an
osteotome. This flap should hinge on the periosteum along its cranial edge. Bone
(and sometimes articular cartilage) is curetted from underneath the flap to accom-
modate the tendon. The tendon is transposed caudally under the flap and held in
place by Kirschner wires driven through the flap into the humerus (Figure 10-3, B).
An alternative method of tenodesis is illustrated in Figure 10-3, C. The tendon is
bluntly split and a bone screw and spiked washer (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) are used
to fix the tendon to the bone in a shallow trough in the cortex. Removal of some
cortical bone allows the tendon to heal to the bone more readily than if it were sim-
 ply attached to the periosteal surface.
 by mattress or cruciate sutures of synthetic absorbable material. If the joint seems
unstable when the humerus is externally rotated (thus turning the humeral
 head medially), a derotational suture to temporarily tether the humerus is helpful.
 Large-gauge nonabsorbable monofilament or braided polyester is anchored to the
medial labrum of the glenoid by a bone tunnel or bone screw. A bone tunnel is then
 drilled through the greater tubercle in the region of the transverse humeral ligament.
After passing the suture through the tunnel, it is tied moderately taut with the
humerus internally rotated. Joint capsule and medial glenohumeral ligament
 imbrication is accomplished by mattress or Lembert suture patterns of absorbable
material.
 The deep pectoral muscle is sutured to the superficial pectoral muscle, and
the subscapularis muscle is advanced as far cranially as possible and sutured to
the deep pectoral muscle (Figure 10-3, D). The superficial pectoral muscle is pulled
across the cranial border of the humerus and sutured to the acromial head of
the deltoideus muscle. The effect of these transpositions is to tighten the muscles
and to reinforce medial support of the joint. The remaining tissues are closed in
layers.
Aftercare
The limb is supported in a foreleg (Velpeau) sling for 14 days (see Figure 2-29).
Exercise is restricted for 4 weeks. Passive flexion-extension exercise may be needed
 after removal of the sling, supplemented with swimming when possible.
Prognosis
Hohn and colleagues? reported an overall 93% success rate (15 cases) for the ten-
odesis procedure applied to both medial and lateral luxations. Vasseur and col-
leagues? reported that 40% (two cases) of their medial luxation cases had normal
gaits, 20% (one case) had occasional limping, and 40% (two cases) had persistent
limping after the tenodesis procedure. If cases are carefully selected, and if those
with wearing of the glenoid or humeral head are eliminated, it is likely that these
results could be improved.
Lateral Luxation
Lateral luxations are more often seen in larger breeds of dogs and are usually trau-
matic in origin (Figure 10-4). They are more amenable to closed reduction when
seen within a few days of injury. Fixation after closed reduction is by means of a
spica splint (see Figure 2-23) rather than a Velpeau sling, which tends to turn the
humeral head laterally. For surgical treatment of irreducible or chronic luxations,
10—The Shoulder Joint
269
FIGURE 10-4. Lateral luxation of the left shoulder
(ventrodorsal view).
biceps tenodesis can again be used to stabilize the joint.? By moving the tendon
laterally, a "bowstring" effect creates a medial force on the humeral head.
Surgical Technique
 A cranial approach to the shoulder is used with osteotomy of greater tubercle.4
If the joint capsule is not torn, it is opened carefully to inspect the joint. All
capsular material is saved for suturing. Careful assessment of the lateral labrum of
the glenoid and the medial side of the humeral head is necessary. If the labrum is
worn, successful stabilization is less likely. These changes are seen less with lateral
luxations because of the more acute nature of most lateral luxations. If there is
sufficient chondromalacia or erosion of the articular cartilage of the humeral
head because of rubbing on the lateral labrum, DJD changes could limit long-term
success even if the joint is stabilized. Arthrodesis or excision arthroplasty is
 If the articular surfaces are in good condition and the luxation is recent, it may
(see Figure 10-9). If this does not appear to be a viable option, tenodesis of the
biceps tendon is carried out.
Tenodesis of the biceps tendon to a lateral position begins by transection of
the transverse humeral ligament over the biceps tendon. The joint capsule is incised
as needed to allow lateral transposition of the tendon (Figure 10-5, A). To transpose 
the tendon lateral to the remaining crest of the greater tubercle, it may be necessary
to rongeur or curette a trough at the proximal end of the tubercular osteotomy
site (Figure 10-5, B). The tendon is then held lateral to the tubercle by reattaching
it to the humerus with Kirschner wires, pins and a tension band wire, or bone
screws, depending on tubercle size (Figure 10-5, C). Several sutures are placed
between the biceps tendon and the deltoideus fascia. The joint capsule is imbri-
cated with mattress or Lembert sutures. The superficial pectoral muscle is moved
270
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Osteotomized greater
tubercle
Supraspinatus m.
Tendon of
 coracobrachialis m.
Osteotomy site
on humerus
Incision in
Deep pectoral m.
transverse
 partially
humeral
tenotomized
ligament
Tendon of
Superficial
biceps brachii m.
pectoral m.
 Origin of
superficial
pectoral m.
A
 Incision in
joint 
capsule
Kirschner
Osteotomy
.wires
site
Joint
capsule
Tendon of
sutures
biceps
brachii m.
Tendonof
biceps
Supefficial
Greater
brachi m.
pectoral m.
tubercle
B
C
FIGURE 10-5. Surgical repair of lateral luxation of the shoulder. A, The left shoulder has
been exposed by a cranial approach.4 The greater tubercle of the humerus has been
 Osteotomized, and the incision is marked in the transverse humeral ligament. B, The joint cap-
sule has been incised to aid in moving the biceps tendon lateral to the greater tubercle
osteotomy site. A small area of the proximal osteotomy site has been removed to ease posi-
tioning of the biceps tendon. C, The greater tubercle is pinned back to its original site by two
Kirschner wires or bone screws, thus trapping the biceps tendon laterally. The joint capsule
is imbricated with mattress sutures, and the superficial pectoral muscle is attached to the
fascia of the acromial head of the deltoideus and the biceps muscles.
10—The Shoulder Joint
271
craniolaterally and sutured to allow attachment to the fascia of the deltoideus and
biceps muscles.
Aftercare
A foreleg spica splint is maintained for 14 days (see Figure 2-23). Exercise is
 restricted for 4 weeks. Passive flexion-extension exercise may be needed after
removal of the splint, supplemented with swimming when possible.
Prognosis
In one series of six cases treated by lateral transposition of the biceps, five dogs had
normal function and one limped occasionally at follow-up.s
Cranial Luxation
In our experience, cranial luxation, a relatively rare injury, is always the result of
trauma. The biceps tendon can again be used for the stabilization of this infrequent
luxation (Figure 10-6). It is transposed cranially and thus is under increased tension 
and tends to hold the humeral head more tightly within the glenoid.
Surgical Technique
The shoulder is exposed by the cranial approach to the shoulder joint.4 An incision
is made in the transverse humeral ligament over the biceps tendon, and a trough
is cut on the osteotomy surface on the crest and in the tubercle to accommodate
the biceps tendon. If, as a result of tension, the tendon cannot be positioned within
the osteotomy site on the humerus, sufficient bone is removed from the proximal
osteotomy site to form a slight trough there (Figure 10-7, A). The tubercle is
replaced and attached with Kirschner wires or pins and a tension band wire
(Figure 10-7, B). Screw fixation should probably be avoided to prevent tendon
injury. The joint capsule is imbricated with mattress or Lembert sutures.
Aftercare
The limb is supported in either a foreleg spica splint or Velpeau sling for 10 to
14 days (see Figures 2-23 and 2-29). Exercise is restricted for 4 weeks. Passive
flexion-extension exercise may be necessary after removal of the external fixation,
and swimming is encouraged.
FIGURE 10-6. Cranial luxation of the left shoulder
(mediolateral view).
272
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Osteotomized
greater
tubercle
Trough cut in
 tubercle
Supraspinatus m.
-Sutures in
joint capsule
Osteotomy site
Tendon of
biceps brachii m.
Kirschner
in trough cut
wires
in osteotomy
site
Greater
Transverse
tubercle
humeral
ligament
Deep pectoral m.
 partially
tenotomized
Superficial
pectoral m.
 Original position
of biceps
brachii m.
A
B
FIGURE 10-7. Surgical repair of cranial luxation of the shoulder. A, The left shoulder has
a pue 'no uaq s a ieay asasun ai toodde pu e aq pasoxa uaaa
biceps tendon has been transposed cranially to lie in a trough created in the tubercular
Osteotomy site and in the tubercle itself. The joint capsule is imbricated with mattress sutures.
B, The tubercle is reattached to the osteotomy site with two Kirschner wires holding the
'pioual aui oui eay leiauny aul slnd ieui uoisod e us uopuan sd
Caudal Luxation and Subluxation
As with cranial luxation, caudal luxation/subluxation occurs infrequently and
may be either a self-induced or traumatic injury. Hyperextension of the joint is
the probable cause. The luxation may be total, as shown in Figure 10-8, A, or
subluxated. In the latter case, the joint space between the humeral head and the
caudoventral rim of the glenoid is increased on extension-stress radiographs
(Figure 10-8, B). Imbrication of the lateral and caudolateral joint capsule has 
 worked well in these cases.
Surgical Technique
Caudal Luxation.'
 The shoulder joint is exposed by a craniolateral approach
with osteotomy of the acromial process.4 The joint capsule will be at least partially
 torn but may need to be opened farther to allow access to the joint. After inspection
for intraarticular damage, the humeral head is reduced, and the craniolateral
and caudolateral joint capsule is imbricated with mattress or Lembert sutures of
 synthetic absorbable material (Figure 10-9).
Caudal Subluxation. The shoulder is exposed by a caudolateral approach.4
The caudolateral joint capsule is imbricated with mattress or Lembert sutures of
synthetic absorbable material (Figure 10-10).
10—The Shoulder Joint
273
B
FIGURE 10-8. Caudal luxation and subluxation of the shoulder. A, Caudal luxation of the
left shoulder (lateromedial view). B, Caudal subluxation of the left shoulder (lateromedial
view). The joint space is increased caudally as extension stress is applied to the joint.
FIGURE 10-9. Caudal luxa-
Spine of
tion of the shoulder. The left
scapula
shoulder has been exposed by
Suprascapular n.
a craniolateral approach with
Acromial head
Sutures in
of deltoideus m.
an osteotomy of the acromial
joint capsule
process.4 The infraspinatus and
teres muscles have been freed
Tendon of 
Infraspinatus m.
by tenotomy. Mattress sutures
 infraspinatus m.
of heavy-gauge absorbable suture
Tendon of
Teres minor m.
have been used to imbricate the 
 teres minor m.
joint caps ule as far cranially and
 Acromial
 caudally as possible, following
head of 
deltoideus m.
the line of the rim of the glenoid.
Osteotomized
acromial process
Aftercare. The limb is supported in a foreleg (Velpeau) sling for 14 days (see
 Figure 2-29). Exercise is restricted for 4 weeks. Passive flexion-extension exercise
may be needed after removal of the sling.
Excision Arthroplasty
In some cases the glenohumeral joint cannot be reconstructed adequately. This
situation is most often caused by excessive wear of the medial labrum of the
glenoid as a result of chronic medial luxation. Gunshot wounds occasionally
damage the articular surfaces in such a way that nothing resembling normal joint
function can result. The traditional method of treatment in these animals has been
 arthrodesis, which is technically demanding and requires bone-plating equipment in 
most cases.
274
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Infraspinatus m.
Acromial head
FGURE 10-10. Caudal subluxa-
of deltoideus m.
tion of the shoulder. The left shoulder
has been exposed by a caudolateral
approach.4 The caudolateral joint
Teres minor m.
capsule has been imbricated with
mattress sutures of heavy-gauge
Sutures in
absorbable suture. The suture line
joint capsule
 follows the rim of the glenoid as far
caudad as possible, taking care to
avoid the caudal circumflex humeral
artery.
An alternative salvage procedure is resection of the glenoid based on the method
 of Parkes.6 We have modified this procedure to include partial excision of the
humeral head in an attempt to provide a larger vascular surface. We postulate that
this will result in a more rapid and proliferative fibroplasia and thus earlier stabil-
ity of the pseudoarthrosis.
Surgical Technique
The joint is exposed by the approach to the craniolateral region of the shoulder
p im pdo si ans i au tssad pe a jo aso aq
the tendon of the biceps muscle is detached from the supraglenoid tubercle
(Figure 10-11, A). With care taken to protect the suprascapular nerve and caudal
circumflex humeral artery, ostectomies are made in the glenoid and humeral head
with an osteotome or high-speed pneumatic surgical bur (Figure 10-11, B). The
glenoid ostectomy is made obliquely to bevel the edge. The deep (medial) edge is
longer than the superficial edge.
A notch is cut in the base of the spine of the scapula to allow proximal displace-
ment of the suprascapular nerve. The teres minor muscle is pulled medially between
(Figure 10-11, C). Soft tissue interposition may hasten formation of a fibrous false
joint. Any available joint capsule is pulled into the "joint space" and sutured to the
teres minor and biceps tendon. The infraspinatus is reattached. It may be necessary
to wire the acromial process more proximally than normal to remove the resulting
laxity in the deltoideus muscle created by the ostectomies.
Aftercare
 The limb is not immobilized postoperatively. Early, gentle use of the limb is encour-
aged by leash walking. More vigorous activity is forced starting 10 days postopera-
tively, and swimming is encouraged. Early activity stimulates the fibrosis necessary
to create a false joint without any bony contact.
Prognosis
 It must be appreciated that this is a salvage procedure and that normal function
 si ed axa aa-d ao xa aq o rou si q ae o
 objective, and it usually is achieved. A slight limp and some atrophy of the shoulder
 girdle muscles are expected.
10—The Shoulder Joint
275
Supraspinatus
Spinous head of
Suprascapular n.
 deltoideus m.
Tendon of biceps
Infraspinatus m.
brachii cut~
Incision in
Humeral head
joint
Rim of glenoid
Ostectomy
capsule
Tendonot
Teres minor m.
lines
infraspinatus m.
 Tendon of 
teres minor m.
Acromial headof
 deltoideus m.
-Osteotomized'
acromialprocess
B
A
Infraspinatus m.
Tendon of
biceps brachii m.
Teres minor m.
ointcapsule
C
FIGURE 10-11. Resection of the glenoid and humeral head. A, The left shoulder has been
exposed by a craniolateral approach.4 Tenotomies have been performed on the biceps, infra-
spinatus, and teres minor muscles. The joint capsule is cut close to the glenoid rim. The joint
capsule that is left attached to the humeral head is preserved. B, Positions of both ostectomy
lines. C, Both ostectomies have been completed. The teres minor muscle has been pulled
medially, where it has been sutured to the biceps tendon, which has previously been sutured
to the fascia of the supraspinatus muscle. Accessible joint capsule from the humeral head is
sutured to the teres minor. A small notch may be cut in the base of the spine of the scapula
to allow the suprascapular nerve to be positioned more proximally if it is too near the ostec-
tomy. The infraspinatus is reattached to its insertion, and the acromial process is wired to the
spine more proximally than normal.
Thirteen cases have been reported in two series.7α Good to excellent pain-free
function was noted in each case. One case had bilateral surgery for chronic
medial luxations of the shoulders, and at 6 months postoperatively, the animal
was using both limbs at all times and bearing about 80% of normal weight on
the limbs.
276
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Arthrodesis of Shoulder Joint
Surgical fusion of the shoulder joint results in remarkably little functional disability
for loss of motion in the shoulder joint. This does not indicate that use of the limb
 is normal, but rather that enough function remains for active use of the limb. In one
study the only gait abnormalities noted were limited circumduction and inability to
 advance the limb quickly when running.2
Common indications for arthrodesis of the shoulder are comminuted fractures of
the glenoid, neck of the scapula, or head of the humerus. Additionally, chronic
shoulder luxations often result in severe erosion of the glenoid and humeral head,
making surgical repair impossible. Severe DjD is a legitimate but uncommon
 indication. As with all arthrodeses, this is a mutilating operation and should be
considered only as a last-resort salvage procedure. It is important that other joints 
of the limb be normal if this procedure is performed.
Surgical Technique
A combined craniolateral and cranial approach to the shoulder joint is performed with
osteotomy of both the acromial process and the greater tubercle4 (Figure 10-12, A).
This widely exposes the joint and allows the joint capsule to be opened for debride-
 ment of cartilage on both articular surfaces.
 The biceps tendon is detached at the supraglenoid tubercle, and the suprascapu-
lar nerve is protected during 20 osteotomies, which parallel the lines shown in
Figure 10-12, B. Flat osteotomy surfaces eliminate shear stress at the bone surfaces,
especially when compression is exerted. The greater tubercle of the humerus is
Spine of scapule
Supraspinatus m
Spinous head of
deltoideus m.
Osteotomized
greater tubercle
 Infraspinatus m.
Tendon of
 biceps brachi m.
 Suprascapular n.
Osteotomy
 Teres minor m.
site
Tendon of
Incised joint
capsule
infraspinatus m.
 Tendon of 
teres minor m.
Acromial
head of 
Humeral
deltoideus m.
head and rim
of glenoid
Acromial
process
A
 FIGURE 10-12. Arthrodesis of the shoulder joint. A, The left shoulder has been exposed by
 a combined cranial and craniolateral approach.4 The biceps tendon has been detached from
the supraglenoid tubercle, and the joint capsule is opened.
10—The Shoulder Joint
277
Ostectomy
lines
Temporary
105°
-desired
pin
angle
 Cancellous
Line of
screw
tubercular
ostectomy
B
C
nfraspinatus m.
Tendon of 
biceps brachii m.
Teres minor m.
Cancellous
bone graft
D
FIGURE 10-12. Continued B, With the joint positioned at a functional angle of 105 to
110 degrees, osteotomies of the glenoid and humeral head are performed to remove articular 
cartilage and produce flat opposing surfaces. The greater tubercle is further osteotomized to
provide a gentle curve from the humeral neck to the cranial cortex. C, A small pin is driven
across the joint to hold the bones at the correct angle while the plate is contoured and applied,
after which the pin is removed. At least one screw must be a lag screw between the scapula
punone paoeid si aaqn iaiana aun woy paurenqo yena auog q snaunq aul pue
the opposed bones. The biceps tendon is sutured to the supraspinatus muscle fascia. The
 screwed lateral to the plate, and the rest of the tissues are closed routinely.
278
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
osteotomized with double-action bone cutters, Gigli wire, or saw to provide
a gentle curve on a line from the spine of the scapula to the cranial aspect of the
s e e d h an n an  o 
intramedullary pin or Kirschner wire is driven from the cranial humeral cortex
into the glenoid with the shoulder at a functional angle of about 10s degrees
(Figure 10-12, C). An 8- to 10-hole plate is contoured to fit the cranial surface
 of the humerus and the dorsocranial junction of the spine with the body of the
scapula. Some torsion of the plate will be necessary to make it fit the junction of the
spine and the body of the scapula. The reconstruction plate (Synthes) is especially
suitable for this procedure because it is more easily contoured than conventional
plates. However, this fixation is not strong, and coaptation is needed for additional
protection. The plate must either pass over the suprascapular nerve with sufficient
room for the nerve or be placed underneath the nerve. In applying the plate, the
surgeon must consider placing at least one screw in lag fashion across the debrided
bone surfaces to create compression. As shown in Figure 10-12, C, the third screw
hole was chosen.
One or two cancellous screws can be used to advantage in the humeral head.
(Some types of plates do not accept cancellous screws except at the end holes.) The
  q  e si d a   aq  
the greater tubercle osteotomy site can be used as a bone graft (Figure 10-12, D).
The biceps tendon is reattached to the fascia of the supraspinatus muscle or to the
cortex of the humerus medial to the plate using a bone screw and spiked washer (see
Figure 10-15, B and C). After scarifying the proximal lateral aspect of the humerus,
 the osteotomized greater tubercle is attached to the humerus lateral to the plate with
 a screw or pins. The soft tissues are closed routinely in layers.
Aftercare
The shoulder is immobilized in a spica splint for 4 weeks (see Figure 2-23).
 Radiographic signs of fusion should be noted between 6 and 12 weeks postopera-
tively, at which time the splint is removed and the dog allowed to return to normal
activity over a 4-week period. Barring complications, the plate is not removed.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of Humeral Head
A general discussion of osteochondrosis dissecans (OCD) is provided in Chapter 6
In the shoulder joint, OCD is manifested as a fragment of cartilage that becomes
 partially or fully detached from the caudocentral aspect of the humeral head, usually
opposite the caudoventral rim of the glenoid. The cartilage flap usually remains
attached to normal cartilage along the cranial edge of the flap; however, it may
become free within the joint, in which case it usually becomes lodged in the caudoven-
tral pouch or cul-de-sac of the joint capsule or rarely in the bicipital tendon sheath
 Free cartilage fragments within the joint can be resorbed, but some may remain
viable and even grow in size because they are nourished by synovial fluid. Others
become attached to synovial membrane, where they can become vascularized and
undergo partial ossification; they are then called ossicles. Those cartilage fragments
that lodge in the caudal joint often do not create clinical signs unless they grow in
 size sufficient to irritate the synovial membrane (see Figures 6-4 and 6-5). Fragments
that migrate to the bicipital tendon sheath may produce clinical lameness.9
Clinical Signs and History
Large-breed dogs are most often affected by OCD, in a 2:1 to 3:1 male/female ratio.
Various studies have reported bilateral radiographic involvement in 27% to 68%
10—The Shoulder Joint
279
 of cases. Many dogs with bilateral radiographic signs will be clinically lame in only
one limb. However, it is worth noting that when an animal is extremely lame in one
leg, it is difficult to assess lameness in the contralateral leg. It is likely that animals
diagnosed radiographically as bilateral in reality are showing only the signs of
osteochondrosis in one shoulder and never develop a loose cartilage flap in the other
shoulder. Our experience, as well as that of others,10 is that only a few cases require
bilateral surgical intervention for shoulder OCD.
Although most animals first show clinical signs of OCD between 4 and 8 months
of age, some will present much later, at 2 to 3 years of age. In these cases the
i s ssn a a u nu p r i is aa s
often first noted after severe exercise, but it may be insidious in onset. Rarely does
the dog have three-legged lameness. A shortening of the swing phase of gait leads
to atrophy of the spinatus and deltoid muscles, resulting in a more prominent
acromial process. This is a consistent finding if lameness has been present more
than 2 to 3 weeks. The change of gait is most noticeable at a walk. Pain on
 palpation is variable and is more often noted on severe extension than on flexion or
rotation. Crepitus is also variable. Clinical signs are most notable after rest preceded
by heavy exercise.
Radiology
OCD of the shoulder is usually detected by lateral radiographs of the shoulder.
A flattening of the humeral head is usually seen if properly positioned (Figure 10-13).
The presence of osteophytes on the caudal glenoid is indicative of significant carti-
lage damage (i.e., flap formation). Sedation is often necessary. Rarely, arthrograms
may be needed if the flattening is inapparent (see Chapter 1). Usually, 4 to 5 ml of
diluted contrast is injected. The dye seeps under the flap (Figure 10-13, B), and it
 also travels to the bicipital tendon sheath, where it may outline joint mice.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of OCD causing the lameness must be based on clinical assessment of
the history, radiographs, and physical examination. The lameness is usually of a mild
to moderate severity. Often, pain may be elicited by palpation (flexion and extension).
A
B
FIGURE 10-13. Osteochondritis dissecans of the humeral head. A, Flattening of subchon-
dral bone of caudal aspect of the humeral head can be appreciated here, but there is no
visible indication of the presence or absence of a cartilage flap. However, the presence of the
osteophyte on the caudal glenoid signifies the probability of flap formation. B, This contrast
arthrogram shows dye filling of the joint space and a filling defect that represents the
cartilage flap.
280
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
The radiographic lesion should be at least 4 mm long. Other common “rule-outs,"
such as elbow conditions and panosteitis, must be eliminated.
Treatment
ence has been gained, a more aggressive surgical approach has become evident.
 Although some animals do recover spontaneously, this can ocur only if the flap
breaks loose and is absorbed in the joint cavity. Furthermore, this process may take
9 to 12 months, and bilaterally affected animals are unlikely to recover to the point
of clinical soundness. An additional, little-appreciated danger is that the loose
cartilage flap may survive within the joint, as previously described. Large ossicles
may cause severe inflammatory changes and DJD (see Figure 6-7). We have retrieved
such ossicles from 3- and 4-year-old dogs. If the flap never breaks free, a similar
deterioration of the joint occurs. We have removed partially attached flaps in
 3-year-old dogs.
Surgical treatment has yielded much more uniformly good results than nonsurgi-
cal treatment in our experience as well as that of others.l112 Not only is the final
outcome more predictable, but soundness is achieved within 1 to 2 months, and
late degenerative changes are less likely. We recommend surgery in the following
situations:
 1. Pain is elicited on shoulder extension or flexion.
2. No other radiographic lesions of the forelimb are found.
3. The shoulder lameness has persisted after 6 12 months of age.
4. A cartilage flap or "joint mouse" is confirmed radiographically.
Osteochondroplasty of Humeral Head
The aim of surgery is to remove cartilage flaps still attached and to remove all frag
ments of free cartilage from within the joint. Removal of the cartilage allows a fibro-
cartilage scar to fil the defect and seal the edges of the articular cartilage bordering
the defect.
The choice of surgical approach varies. The caudolateral approach4 or variations
of it have generally worked well for us if an assistant is present. A humeral head
retractor (Scanlan Surgical Instruments, Inc., Englewood, Colo) is useful for exposure
of the lesion. If we work alone, the more generous exposure of the craniolateral
approach with osteotomy of the acromial process4 is preferable, lessening the need
for retraction. However, this is a longer procedure and is associated with more post-
 operative morbidity (seroma, lameness).
 The caudolateral approach provides adequate visualization of the lesion if the
joint capsule is adequately retracted and if the leg is severely internally rotated
(Figure 10-14, A). A scalpel blade or small, curved osteotome is used to cut the car-
tilage flap free (Figure 10-14, B and C). Irregular and undermined loosened areas
of cartilage at the periphery of the lesion should be trimmed and smoothed with
d sn ie auo aq nou  no A  's pe a oi aa e
depending on the surgeon's preference. Curettage of the lesion floor should be cau-
tiously done to minimize removal of subchondral bone. There is often a layer of
 unorganized material covering the bed of the lesion that could have chrondrogenic
potential. This can be gently scraped to expose the bone. There may be merit in
forage, which is a technique of drilling multiple holes in the bed of the lesion with
a Kirschner wire. This creates vascular channels to the subchondral bone and
hastens ingrowth of "repair" tissue in the defect. The caudal cul-de-sac of the joint
cavity must always be explored for free fragments of cartilage. Exposure of this area
10—The Shoulder Joint
281
Spinous head of
deltoideus m.
Elevation of
Infraspinatus m.
cartilage flap
 Acromial head
of deltoideus m
Joint capsule
 retracted
Edge of
cartilage flap
on humeral head 
A
B
Cartilage
 Removal of
fragment
cartilage flap
C
D
FIGURE 10-14.
Osteochondroplasty of the humeral head for osteochondritis dissecans.
A, The left shoulder has been exposed by a caudolateral approach.4 The lateral edge of the
cartilage flap is visible after retraction of the joint capsule by stay sutures. B, The cartilage
flap is elevated from the humeral head by sharp dissection. C, When the flap has been
sufficiently elevated, it can be cut free along its cranial border. D, The caudal cul-de-sac of
the joint capsule is retracted with a small Hohmann retractor to allow removal of any free
 cartilage fragments.
 is enhanced by a small Hohmann retractor and by flexing the shoulder and elbow
(Figure 10-14, D). In chronic lesions, debridement of large caudal glenoid osteo-
phytes may assist in removal of the flap and inspection of the lesion bed. The final
step is forceful lavage of the joint to flush out small carilage fragments. If cartilage
fragments have been identified in the bicipital tendon sheath, they will need to be
 removed by a cranial approach because they cannot be exposed from a caudolateral
approach.4
 Another surgical technique, the lateral approach, involves partially incising the
caudal half of the acromial head of the deltoideus tendon to facilitate the cranial
incision into the joint capsule (Figure 10-15). The junction of the infraspinatus and
teres minor muscles is bluntly separated, followed by incision into the joint capsule.
A Gelpi retractor is helpful to keep the infraspinatus and teres minor muscles
retracted.
282
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Acromion process
Incision
Deltoideus m..
 Scapular part
Acromial part
Axillobrachial v.
Omobrachialy
B
C
Gildin,
FIGURE 10-15. Lateral approach of the scapulohumeral joint. A, Slightly curved skin
incision is made from above the acromial process to the proximal fourth of the humerus. The
 deep fascia has been incised from the caudal edge of the acromial process to the junction of
the omobrachial and axillobrachial veins distally. The junction between the acromial and
spinous heads of the deltoideus muscle is developed. B, The caudal half of the acromial
deltoideus is incised 5 mm from its origin to gain increased exposure to the cranial joint.
C, After retraction of the deltoideus cranially, the junction between the infraspinatus and
teres minor muscles is separated. The teres minor is undermined off the joint capsule. The
infraspinatus insertion and the deltoideus are retracted craniodorsally, whereas the teres
minor is retracted caudoventrally. The joint capsule is incised as in Figure 10-14. (A from
Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones and joints of the
dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
10—The Shoulder Joint
283
Aftercare
 a m   rs m  a si  
other canine surgery, perhaps because of the extreme amount of sliding motion of
the skin and subcutis in this region over the muscle fascia. The only prevention is
enforced rest for the first 10 to 14 postoperative days. A Velpeau sling may be indi-
cated for some hyperactive animals (see Figure 2-29). Small seromas clear sponta-
neously in 2 to 5 weeks; large ones are treated with hot packs. Needle aspiration is
usually unnecessary, since the seroma disappears in 4 to 6 weeks regardless. Often,
if drained, the fluid recurs.
From 3 through 6 weeks postoperatively, very minimal activity (house confine-
ment or leash) is suggested, followed by graduated exercise 2 to 3 months post-
operatively.
Arthroscopy
Person13 reported successful treatment of OCD with arthroscopic surgery in
23 shoulder joints in 21 dogs. Force plate evaluation showed objective signs of
treatment may well see much more application in the future (see Chapter 8).
Prognosis
With shoulder OCD, the prognosis with surgery is excellent if treated before 12 months
of age. The prognosis is still very good in older animals.
Calcification of Supraspinatus Tendon
Calcification of the supraspinatus tendon of insertion14 is a degenerative condition
causing mild to moderate forelimb lamenes in medium to large adult dogs. The
etiology is unknown but is probably an overuse syndrome. It is often bilateral radi-
ographically but rarely causes bilateral lameness.
History and Clinical Features
 Lameness is usually insidious in onset, producing chronic signs. Unlike osteoarthritic
conditions, lameness worsens throughout the day with minimal or moderate activity.
The presence of calcification radiographically is often asymptomatic, and the clinician
 must eliminate other conditions before making the definitive diagnosis.
Physical Examination
 Unfortunately, manipulations often do not produce pain. With few exceptions, the
calcium deposit is not large enough to palpate.
Radiographic Examination
Calcification is often seen on careful scrutiny of a lateral view of the shoulder
(Figure 10-16). The condition is often bilateral radiographically but rarely produces
bilateral lameness. Calcification of the supraspinatus tendon is often subtle because
of superimposition on the greater tubercle of the humerus. A tangential or "skyline"
view of the intertubercular region of the proximal humerus eliminates this superim-
position and allows distinction between biceps tendon calcification. The cranio-
proximal-craniodistal (CP-CD) view is taken with the dog in sternal recumbency,
with the radiographic cassette placed on top of the forearm with the elbow
bent. The radiographic tube is positioned directly over the scapulohumeral joint
(Figure 10-17). Calcification occurs cranial and just medial to the greater tubercle
y A  r o ys aq  1 e-it a as saq a jo
284
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 10-16.Calcification
{arrows) of the supraspinatus
tendon. This calcification was
asymptomatic in the 2-year-old
Rottweiler. Its symptomatic cal-
cified supraspinatus tendon on
the opposite side was not as
apparent radiographically. Note
the numerous pockets of min-
eralized material located on
and superficial to the greater
tubercle of the humerus.
A
B
FIGURE 10-17.  Positioning of dog for cranioproximal-craniodistal (CP-CD) view. A, With
 the dog in sternal recumbency, a radiographic cassette is placed on top of the flexed forearm.
The radiographic tube is positioned directly over the point of the shoulder. B, Dorsal view of
 how the greater tubercle is projected on the radiographic cassette. The dog's head is pulled to
the side.
into the groove closer to the humeral head.
Diagnosis
Because the presence of calcification can be asymptomatic and because there is no
particular physical exam finding, the diagnosis of the calcification causing lame-
ness is only presumptive. Other conditions, such as bicipital tendinitis and chronic
 congenital joint lesions, must be ruled out (Figures 10-18 and 10-19). When other 
10—The Shoulder Joint
285
FIGURE 10-18. CP-CD view of the Rottweiler in Figure 10-16. The mineralization lies
cranial and medial to the greater tubercle (arrouw). The biceps tendon lies in the intertubercular
groove situated under the arrow. The convex white area represents the greater tubercle, and
the conca ve area is the intertubercular groove.
 FIGURE 10-19. CP-CD view of a shoulder arthrogram of a dog with severe foreleg lame-
ness from suspected bicipital tendinitis along with calcification of the supraspinatus tendon.
Note the calcified material on top of the greater tubercle (white arrow), osteophyte in the
intertubercular groove (curved arrow), and dye outlining the normal biceps tendon in the
intertubercular groove (white arrowheads).
conditions are found, a diagnostic quandary exists. Because the treatment is fairly
simple, surgical treatment of both conditions at the same time may be undertaken.
The amount of calcification is not relative to the amount of pain a dog may have.
Treatment
By longitudinally incising into the supraspinatus tendon, the calcium is evacuated.
To accomplish this, the dog is placed in dorsal recumbency with both forearms
secured alongside the body wall. The radiographs are placed on a viewer to mimic
286
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
the position of the dog to assist placement of the tendinous incision. A 6- to 7-cm
cranial skin incision is followed by deeper dissection through the longitudinal fibers
 of the brachiocephalicus muscle (Figure 10-20, A). The tendon of the supraspinatus
 is identified along with the proximal end of the humerus. Longitudinal incisions are
made in relation to the humerus (Figure 10-20, B). Normal tendon is a yellowish
white, whereas the tendon surrounding the white calcium deposit is grayish white.
The calcified material is very white and similar to what one sees when fenestrating
a calcified disk. If multiple areas are seen radiographically, multiple small incisions
may be needed to evacuate the material. Closure is made in layers using absorbable
or nonabsorbable sutures.
Aftercare
A flexion carpal bandage (see Figure 2-30) is applied for 10 to 12 days to allow
tendon healing, followed by limited activity for another 2 to 3 weeks. Although
swimming is a good exercise for many orthopedic conditions, it may stress the
supraspinatus and is not advised for several months.
Prognosis
 Provided this calcification was the cause of the lameness, the prognosis is excellent.
n i suoran siop o ps adson ls e u 'saam g on 9
 had a return of mineralization without a return of clinical lameness at a mean of
 5 years postoperatively.1s
Tenosynovitis of Biceps Tendon
This disease process is a common cause of forelimb lameness in medium-breed to
large-breed adult dogs, especially the Labrador retriever, Rottweiler, and racing
FIGURE 10-20. A, A 6-to
7-cm skin incision is made
over the point of the shoul.
der. A similar incision is made
between muscle fibers of the
brachiocephalicus muscle.
B, After retraction of the
brachiocephalicus muscle, a
blind longitudinal incision is
made in the supraspinatus
tendon, depending on the
location of the mineral seen
on the radiograph. Pockets
of mineral have a whiter
appearance than the sur-
rounding tissue. Multiple
incisions may be needed
to find all the pockets.
Closure consists of nonab-
sorbable sutures placed in
the supraspinatus tendon,
A
B
brachiocephalicus  separa-
tion, and subcuticular and
skin layers.
10—The Shoulder Joint
287
 greyhound. Animals that are not physically well conditioned have some predilection
for tenosynovitis of the biceps tendon.
Anatomy and Pathophysiology
After originating on the supraglenoid tubercle, the tendon of the biceps brachii
muscle passes distally through the intertubercular groove of the humerus, where it
is stabilized by the transverse humeral ligament. The muscle inserts distally on the
radius and ulna, and its main function is flexion of the elbow. It has little involve-
ment in stabilizing the normal shoulder joint.1 The tendon is surrounded by a syn-
 Ovial sheath that is an extension of the glenohumeral joint capsule. This sheath
extends distally just beyond the transverse humeral ligament. There is no bursa
associated with this tendon.
This injury is a strain injury to the tendon of the biceps brachi (see Chapter 7).
The mechanism of injury to the biceps tendon can be either direct or indirect trauma
the tendon (grade 3 strain) to chronic inflammatory changes, including dystrophic
calcification. Pathological changes also can be secondary to other diseases, such as
OCD, in which joint mice migrate to the synovial sheath and create an acute syn-
ovitis.? Thus it can be seen that the initial irritating source usually first affects either
the tendon or the synovial membrane individually, but that soon the inflammatory
 process involves the opposite member. Proliferation of fibrous connective tissue and
adhesions between the tendon and sheath limits motion and causes pain.16 In addi-
tion, osteophytes in the intertubercular groove may encroach on the tendon.
Preoperative distinction between tenosynovitis and partial biceps tendon rupture or
avulsion is difficult.
History and Clinical Signs
The owner may recall an inciting traumatic incident, but usually the onset of biceps
tenosynovitis is insidious, and many cases will be of several months' duration when
presented. The lameness is subtle and intermittent and worsens during exercise.
Because the pain is present only during gliding motion of the tendon, there is no hes-
itation to bear weight on the limb; therefore, little change occurs in the stance phase
of gait.16 The swing phase of locomotion is limited because the shoulder joint is
guarded by limiting the amount of extension and flexion.17-19
 Atrophy of the spinati muscle group is soon evident, but more distal muscles
appear normal in size. Shoulder pain on manipulation is not a consistent finding,
especially in chronic cases. Pain is elicited by applying deep digital pressure over the
tendon in the intertubercular groove region while simultaneously flexing the shoul-
der and extending the elbow (see Figure 1-5). Pain may also be produced in the
standing dog by internally pressing the belly of the biceps, which stresses the prox-
imal tendon. A few owners have reported a change in the dog's recumbent position
in which the carpus is flexed. This relaxes the sore biceps and may represent the
 dog's own attempt to relieve pain.
Radiographic Findings
Tenosynovitis of the biceps tendon may stimulate a bony reaction on the supragle-
noid tubercle (Figure 10-21), calcification of the bicipital tendon, and osteophytes
in the intertubercular groove (Figure 10-22). The lateral and CP-CD or tangential
radiographic views (Figure 10-23) are helpful in defining these changes.
Arthrography is often very helpful in diagnosing the condition.
A normal arthrogram fills the tendon sheath, which is continuous with the
scapulohumeral joint. The dye column should be continuous and has a lobulated
288
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FGURE 10-21.  Reaction on the supraglenoid tuberosity in a 5-year-old mixed-breed dog
with a small rupture of the biceps tendon (arrows).
FIGURE10-22.Osteophytes
located in the  intertubercular
groove of a dog with chronic par-
tial  bicipital tendon  rupture
(black arrows). Note also a minor
reaction on the suprascapular
tuberosity (white arrowhead).
appearance distally (Figure 10-24). Abnormal findings include absence or decrease
of dye filling the sheath (Figure 10-25), leakage of dye from the sheath, and narrow-
 ing of the bicipital tendon.i7-19 Recent experience sugests that ultrasonography has
a place as a diagnostic tool.
Diagnosis
 The diagnosis of bicipital tenosynovitis is based on history, pain with flexing the
shoulder and characteristic plain radiographs or arthrograms1719 and ultrasonography.
Not all cases will have all the characteristic signs, and at times the diagnosis is pre-
 sumptive, with definitive diagnosis made only after gross inspection or histopathology
10—The Shoulder Joint
289
 h   i  ( s-  e 
location of bony changes surrounding the proximal humerus. Note the greater tubercle (white
arrouw) and osteophyte (black arrouw) in the medial aspect of the intertubercular groove.
Compare with the calcification of the supraspinatus seen in Figures 10-18 and 10-19.
FIGURE 10-24.A normal shoul-
der arthrogram. Note the normal
lobulations(arrow)surrounding
the distalhalf  of the bicipital
tendon sheath, and compare with
Figure 10-25.
Differential diagnoses include calcification of the supraspinatus, osteosarcomas and
chondrosarcomas of the proximal humerus, neurofibromas of the brachial plexus
and spinal cord, and chronic elbow conditions related to osteochondrosis and
synovial chondrometaplasia. Occasionally, response to an intrarticular injection of
a long-acting (days to weeks) corticosteroid (methylprednisolone acetate, 20-40 mg
[Depo-Medrol, Upjohn Co., Kalamazoo, Mich]) in large dogs helps to locate the
 problem to the shoulder.
Treatment
 In acute cases the treatment is aimed at reducing inflammation in the affected struc-
tures before the pathological changes become irreversible. Rest and nonsteroidal
antiinflammatory drug (NSAID) therapy (see Chapter 6) are often sufficient. Strict
confinement for 4 to 6 weeks is needed for resolution, and premature return to
290
 Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 10-25. Shoulder arthrogram of a 6-year-old mixed-breed dog with poor filling of
the proximal (black arrows) and distal bicipital tendon sheath accompanying a bony reaction
on the suprascapular tuberosity (white arrow) that was seen on plain radiographs. The biceps
tendon was partially torn.
activity will almost ensure a chronic disease state. Systemic treatment with either
nonsteroidal or corticosteroidal drugs has been unsuccessful in chronic cases in our
hands. Intraarticular corticosteroid treatment can be successful in biceps tenosyn-
 ovitis if there are no mechanical causes, such as joint mice, and when the patholog-
ical changes are not well established. There is no way of knowing if this is the case
initially, so treatment is always given on a trial basis unless the injury is relatively
acute and uncomplicated.
Arthrocentesis must be done aseptically (see Figure 1-19), and we prefer 1.5-inch,
22-gauge spinal needles, which cause less accidental damage to the articular carti-
lage. The joint is entered 1 cm from the acromial process, with the needle directed
toward the glenoid and angled slightly cranially. Synovial fluid is aspirated
and immediately observed for turbidity. If the fluid is off color or cloudy, or if the
viscosity is greatly changed, a complete examination of the fluid is completed
before injecting the joint with corticosteroid to prevent injection into a septic
joint. If there are no contraindications, 20 to 40 mg of prednisolone acetate
(Depo-Medrol) is injected, which will fill the joint and go down the tendon sheath.
 Direct injection of corticosteroid into the tendon itself is contraindicated because it
is known to cause further tendon disruption. This is followed by strict confinement
for 2 weeks and light activity the third week. A carpal flexion bandage may be used
if strict confinement is not possible (see Figure 2-30). If lameness is greatly improved
but not eliminated, a second injection is given 3 weeks later If this is not curative,
the dog should have surgical treatment. Return of the lameness several months
or years later is possible, and many animals will respond again to corticosteroid
injection.
10—The Shoulder Joint
291
Surgical treatment is recommended for dogs that do not respond to medical
treatment or those in which a mechanical problem is found initially. The goal of
surgical treatment is elimination of movement of the biceps tendon in the inflamed
tendon sheath, and this is accomplished by tenodesis of the bicipital tendon.
A newer technique advocated is releasing the biceps tendon without reattachment.
This may be performed with open or arthroscopic techniques. Early anecdotal
reports claim good success, but long-term clinical results and research concerning
this procedure are currently una vailable.
Surgical Technique
The biceps tendon is exposed by a cranial approach to the shoulder joint.4
The transverse humeral ligament and joint capsule are opened to expose the
tendon and the intertubercular groove, which often has osteophytes along each edge
(Figure 10-26, A). Partial rupture of the tendon near its origin is possible. Joint mice
are sought and removed, and the tendon is transected near the supraglenoid tuber-
cle. The tendon is reattached to the humerus distal to the groove by a bone screw
and spiked washer (Synthes), as shown in Figure 10-26, B. More often, however, the
tendon can be pulled through a bone tunnel in the greater tubercle of the humerus
and then sutured laterally to the supraspinatus muscle or the infraspinatus tendon
(Figure 10-26, C). No loss of stability or mobility to the shoulder joint is apparent
from this procedure.1 A section of the tendon should be saved for histopathological
examination.
 A simple procedure to reattach the biceps muscle after excision of the trauma-
 tized proximal tendon involves placement of a double Bunnell-Meyer suture pattern
in the proximal biceps muscle. With the limb moderately extended, two parallel
 holes are made in the greater tubercle adjacent to the proximal end of the biceps.
The ends of the suture material (No. 1 nonabsorbable suture material) are passed
through these holes and tied laterally with the biceps relaxed (shoulder extended)
(Figure 10-26, D).
Aftercare
The limb is supported in a Velpeau sling (see Figure 2-29) or carpal flexion bandage
(see Figure 2-30) and the animal closely confined 3 weeks. Exercise is allowed to
 increase slowly to normal at 6 weeks postoperatively.
Prognosis
About two thirds of the cases we have seen are treated medically, and approximately
two thirds of these are cured by the treatment. The remainder of this group is
ou op ieun asoun pue Aeoipa uiee paiean are ieqn asoqn uaamiaq papii
respond and require surgical treatment. Those treated early with surgery respond
better than those surgically treated later. Normal gait and use of the leg return in
50% to 60% of the dogs, and the remainder stay variably lame, undoubtedly
because of chronic DJD. Surgery is therefore recommended after one course (or less)
of corticosteroids. Medical management of this problem is discussed in Chapter 6.
 Surgical treatment of tenosynovitis of the biceps tendon in humans is variably
reported to be 50% to 94% successful.20.21
Rupture of Tendon of Biceps Brachii Muscle
The same forces that cause avulsion of the supraglenoid tubercle in young dogs
cause rupture of the tendon of the biceps near its origin on the tubercle in the mature
dog. Initially, there is pain and effusion in the cranial shoulder joint region.
292
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
+
FIGURE 10-26. Tenodesis of the biceps brachi tendon. A, The tendon is exposed by a
craniolateral approach to the shoulder.4 The tendon is cut near the supraglenoid tubercle and
again distal to the intertubercular groove. B, With the elbow flexed, the tendon is fixed to
the humerus in a position that creates some tension on the muscle. After curettage of the
periosteum, the tendon is bluntly split and attached to the humerus with a bone screw and
an AO/ASIF plastic spiked washer (Synthes). C, A second method of attaching the tendon.
The tendon is cut free from the tubercle but is not cut again distally as above. A hole is drilled
laterally through the greater tubercle, and the tendon is brought through the bone tunnel and
sutured to the insertion of the supraspinatus muscle. D, Alternatively, a double Bunnell-
Meyer suture pattern utilizing No. 1 nonabsorbable suture material has been placed in
 the proximal biceps muscle. Two parall holes are made with an 0.045 Kirschner wire in the
greater tubercle of the humerus adjacent to the proximal biceps muscle. The ends of
the suture material are passed through the holes and tied laterally with the limb in extension.
10—The Shoulder Joint
293
Although the animal will exhibit an obvious lameness on the affected limb, flexion
of the elbow joint is not obviously impaired. It usually is not possible to palpate the
area of rupture in the tendon digitally because of swelling of tissues. Partial rupture
may be a cause of bicipital tenosynovitis.
Arthrography in acute cases is essential for diagnosis.18.,19 The contrast media
may not allow actual visualization of the ruptured tendon, but a filling defect tends
to support the clinical diagnosis. Plain films may demonstrate a slight laxity in the
joint, but this is not consistent. Chronic cases frequently show bony reaction on the
supraglenoid tubercle.
 Because repair of the biceps tendon is difficult, and because there are no adverse
effects from detaching the biceps tendon,1 the treatment of choice is tenodesis
(see Figure 10-26), as described in the previous section, or by detachment of the
tendon without tenodesis.
Avulsion of Greater Scapular Tuberosity
 m ui a p  si as nis r  jo u
epiphysis along with the biceps brachi tendon separates from the distal scapula.
It may become separated with mild or insignificant trauma. In the dog the separate
ossification center of the greater scapular tuberosity unites with the scapula at
 3 to 5 months of age.22 Care must be taken in interpreting radiographs in younger
puppies, because there is a normal “step" between the epiphysis and the rest of
the glenoid that should not be interpreted as a fracture separation. A radiograph
of the noninvolved shoulder may be helpful. We have seen a few cases in 6- to
8-month-old dogs in which minimal trauma (rough play with another dog)
created the separation, and radiographs of the opposite limb showed a partially
opened physis. We believe that this delay in closure may represent a form of
osteochondrosis.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of avulsion of the glenoid tuberosity is made from lateral radiographs
of both shoulders. The triangular bone fragment is pulled distally.
Treatment
If the dog is diagnosed less than a week from the onset of lameness, fixation with
screws or pins is indicated using a cranial approach, with osteotomy of the humeral
rapidly forming callus and the resulting poor visualization for accurate reduction
  d  o   a   d 
 In chronic cases the tubercle is friable, and reduction is even more difficult to appre-
ciate. Tenodesis of the biceps tendon may be the only salvage repair possible. If
instability is present, it may lead to a poor result. An arthrodesis can be attempted
after bone growth has ceased. An alternative is scapulohumeral excision arthro-
plasty (see Figure 10-11).
Aftercare
(0-7 an aas) aaepueq uoxau iedres e u sAep tl ot 8 ioy paoddns s qu au
 after fracture fixation or tenodesis.
Prognosis
If the fracture is reduced and stabilized appropriately, the prognosis is very good.
Implant failure, poor reduction, and late surgery are reasons for a guarded prognosis.
294
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Fibrotic Contracture of Infraspinatus Muscle
Fibrotic contracture of the infraspinatus muscle is an uncommon cause of shoulder
lameness in hunting or working dogs. Electrophysiological and histological studies
have indicated infraspinatus contracture to be a primary muscle disorder rather
than a neuropathy. Affected muscle shows degeneration and atrophy with fibrous
tissue replacement. The cause of this syndrome is hypothesized as an acute trau-
matic event that results in incomplete rupture of the infraspinatus muscle, leading
to fibrotic contracture.23 Although the trauma is usually self-induced and probably
caused by indirect trauma, outside sources may also cause the injury. We have seen
two cases of contracted infraspinatus in nonhunting breeds sustaining known direct
 trauma and another in a Doberman pinscher with known von Willebrand's disease.
Usually, there is a history of a sudden onset of lameness during a period of field
exercise. Lameness and tenderness in the shoulder region gradually disappear within
10 to 14 days. Gait abnormality develops 3 to 4 weeks later. At this time, the ani-
mal elicits no pain but is completely unable to rotate (pronate) the shoulder joint
 internally. This results in a stance with the elbow adducted and the foot abducted
(Figure 10-27, A). The lower limb swings in a lateral arc (circumduction) as the foot
 advances during the stride. There is atrophy of the infraspinatus muscle on palpa-
tion; when the forelimb is forcibly pronated or adducted, the proximal border of the
scapula becomes more prominent as it abducts from the thorax. Radiographs are
usually normal. Although rare, the condition can be bilateral.
Treatment consists of tenotomy and excision of 1 cm of the infraspinatus tendon
 insertion on the greater tubercle of the humerus. The tendon is exposed by the
approach to the craniolateral region of the shoulder joint.4 The belly of the infra-
spinatus is inspected to confirm its fibrosis and contracture, and then the scarred
Tenotomy and
resection of
infraspinatus
tendon,
Acromial head
of deltoideus m.
Joint capsule
Tendon of
teres minor m.
A
B
 FIGURE 10-27. Fibrotic contracture of the infraspinatus muscle. A, Typical sitting posture
of a dog with infraspinatus contracture. The lower limb is permanently externally rotated and
therefore shortened. B, The left shoulder has been exposed by the craniolateral approach by
the shoulder moves freely; then about 1 cm of the tendon is excised.
10—The Shoulder Joint
295
tendon is undermined from the joint capsule and severed. If complete range of
motion is not achieved, the joint capsule is also contracted and needs to be released
(Figure 10-27, B). A distinct "pop" is often felt when the last of the adhesions is
released. Full range of motion is immediately restored.
Aftercare and Prognosis
 Dogs are leash-walked immediately, with no constraint of the limb. Normal activity
is resumed in 10 to 14 days. These animals uniformly return to normal limb
function.24
Fibrotic Contracture of Supraspinatus Muscle
Although only a single case of fibrotic contracture of the supraspinatus muscle
 u u u s aas aa am sdpan uaaq au o seade
external trauma and in Doberman pinschers suspected of a spontaneous hemor-
rhage from von Willebrand's disease (platelet dysfunction). Clinical signs were iden-
tical to those described for infraspinatus contracture. Dogs respond well to
sectioning of the tendon of insertion of the supraspinatus muscle. It would thus
seem prudent to inspect both spinatus muscles for evidence of fibrosis and contrac-
ture before either tendon is sectioned.
References
1. Vasseur PB, Pool RR, Klein BS: Effects of tendon transfer on the canine scapulohumeral joint,
Am J Vet Res 44:811, 1983.
2. Fowler DJ, Presnell KR, Holmberg DL: Scapulohumeral arthrodesis: results in seven dogs, J Ar
Anirm Hosp Assoc 24:667, 1987.
 3. Hohn RB, Rosen H, Bohning RH, Brown SG: Surgical stabilization of recurrent shoulder luxation,
Vet Clin North Am 1:537, 1971.
4. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An attas of approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and cat,
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
5. VasseurP:Clinical results of surgical correctionof shoulder luxation in dogsJA Vet Med AssO
182:503, 1983.
6. Parkes L: Excision of the glenoid. Presented at 3rd Annual Meeting of Veterinary Orthopedic Society.
Aspen, Colo, 1976.
 7. Breucker KA, Pierrmattei DL: Excision arthroplasty of the canine scapulohumeral joint: report of
three cases, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:134, 1988.
8.Franczuski D, Parkes LJ: Glenoid excision as a treatrment in chronic shoulder disabilities: surgical
technique and clinical results, J Arm Anir Hosp Assoc 14:637, 1988.
 9. LaHue TR, Brown SG, Roush JC, et al: Entraprment of joint mice in the bicipital tendon sheath
as a sequela to osteochondritis dissecans of the proximal humerus in dogs: a report of six cases,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:99, 1988.
10. Smith CWStowater J: Osteochondritis dissecans ofthe canineshoulder joint: a reviewof 3 cases,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11:658, 1975.
 11. Schrader SC: Joint diseases of the dog and cat. In Olmstead ML, editor: Small animat orthopedics,
St Louis, 1995, Mosby, pp 437-469.
12. Birkeland R: Osteochondritis dissecans in the humeral head of the dog, Nord Vet Med 19:294, 1967.
13. Person M: Arthroscopic treatrment of osteochondritis dissecans in the canine shoulder, Vet Surg
18:175, 1989.
14. Flo GL, Middleton D: Mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
197:95, 1990.
15. Laitenen OM, Flo GL: Mineralization of the supraspinatus tendon in dogs: a long-term follow-up,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:262, 2000.
16. Lincoln JD, Potter K: Tenosynovitis of the biceps brachi tendon in dogs, J Am Ani Hosp Assoc
20:385, 1984.
17. Rivers B, Wallace L, Johnston GR: Biceps tenosynovitis in the dog: radiographic and sonographic
findings, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 5:51, 1992.
18. Barthez PY, Morgan JP: Bicipital tenosynovitis in the dog: evaluation with positive contrast arthrog-
raphy, Vet Radiol Ultrasound 34:325, 1993.
19. Stobie D, Wallace LJ, Lipowitz AJ, et al: Chronic bicipital tenosynovitis in dogs: 29 cases 1985-1992,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 207:201, 1995.
296
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
20. Becker DA, Cofield RH: Tenodesis of the long head of the biceps brachi for chronic bicipital ten-
dinitis, J Bone Joint Surg 71A:376, 1989.
21. Post M, Benca P: Primary tendinitis of the long head of the biceps, Clin Orthop Ret Res 246:117,
1989.
 22. Sumner-Smith G: Observations on epiphyseal fusion in the canine appendicular skeleton, J Smatt
Anim Pract 7:303, 1966.
 23. Pettit GD, Chatburn CC, Hegreberg GA, Meyers KM: Studies on the pathophysiology of infraspina-
tus muscle contracture in the dog, Vet Surg 7:8, 1978.
24. Bennett RA: Contracture of the infraspinatus musdle in dogs: a review of 12 cases, J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 22:481, 1986.
 25. Bennet D, Campbell JR: Unusual soft tssue orthopaedic problems in the dog, J Ssmall Animm Pract
20:27, 1979.
11
Fractures of the Humerus
Most fractures involving the humerus are in the middle and distal thirds.12 In a
study of 130 humeral fractures, 4% involved the proximal physis, 47% the shaft,
13% the supracondylar region, and 37% the distal articular surfaces.3 Rarely, frac-
tures of this bone may be accompanied by foreleg paresis or paralysis resulting from
radial nerve injury. Nerve injury may occur at the fracture site or in the brachial
plexus (axillary nerve), or it may be caused by avulsion of spinal nerves from the
n i l  fad  Aoi aq A ndi an o
rary in most cases. Establishing the presence of withdrawal response by toe pinch
 and sensorium by skin pricks may be helpful in differentiation. Nerve conduction
studies can be used to establish whether nerves are intact, but results are not reliable
until about 7 days after injury. Most patients with a humeral fracture carry the
affected leg with the elbow dropped and with the paw resting on its dorsal surface
because of pain and weakening of the extensor musculature. This mimics the
appearance of loss of proprioception resulting from nerve injury, and response to
the toe-pinch reflex may be obtunded because of pain, making early differentiation
of nerve injury difficult.
FIXATION TECHNIQUES
Coaptation
Few fractures of the humerus lend themselves to external fixation because of the
difficulty of immobilizing the shoulder joint. The spica splint is the only device that
will stabilize the proximal fragment of a humeral fracture (see Figure 2-23). Most
diaphyseal fractures have considerable angular displacement of the distal segment
because of muscular forces, and these forces cannot be adequately neutralized by the
spica splint. Greenstick or nondisplaced fractures in skeletally immature dogs are
the major indications for this type of fixation.
Intramedullary Pins and Wires
Steinmann pins have wide application in the humerus in the more stable fractures.
These pins can be inserted either retrograde or normograde. The pins are most often
driven distally into the medial condyle, which gives firm anchorage in the distal
fragment (Figure 11-1, D). The pin must be small enough in diameter to pass
through the epicondylar crest into the epicondyle. This method is applicable to
fractures at any level of the bone. A larger-diameter pin, or multiple pins, can be 
297
298
Part II—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
B
FIGURE 11-1. Internal fixation with an intramedullary (IM) pin. A, The Steinmann
pin is inserted from the proximal end by entering the skin and bone obliquely just lateral to
the ridge of the greater tuberosity of the humerus. B, After the bony anchorage is secured
in the outer cortex, the IM pin is directed distally in the marrow cavity. C and D, Method 1:
The IM pin is directed to pass along the medial cortex of the shaft and anchors well down in
the medial condyle. Care must be taken that the pin is not too large to pass through the
medial epicondylar area. If too large, The IM pin will break through into the elbow joint.
E, Method 2: A large-diameter IM pin is directed centrodistal in the medullary canal and
is seated just proximal to the supratrochlear foramen.
anchored distally just proximal to the supratrochlear foramen (Figure 11-1, E). The
use of this type of pin should be restricted to fractures proximal to the midshaft,
because anchorage of the pin is not firm in the distal fragment.
 For normograde insertion, the Steinmann pin is driven from the proximal end by
entering the bone on the lateral slope of the ridge of the greater tubercle near its base
(Figure 11-1, A and B). Note that the pin enters near the base of the curve connect-
ing the tubercle to the shaft. Initial drilling is done with the pin held perpendicular
to the bone surface. After bony anchorage is secured in the outer cortex, the pin is
redirected distally into the marrow cavity canal to pass along the caudomedial cor-
tex of the shaft and anchors well down in the medial condyle, at least to the level of
the epicondyle. The medial condyle forms a square corner with the caudomedial shaft
that can be easily palpated to judge the depth of the pin (Figure 11-1, C and D).
 During insertion of the pin into the distal segment, the two segments are held firmly
 in the reduced position with one or two self-locking bone forceps. Allowing one
segment to rotate on the other during insertion results in a loose-fitting pin. To
ensure passage of the pin down into the medial condyle, the bone fragments are
bowed slightly medially at the fracture site. For anchorage of the pin proximal to
the supratrochlear foramen, it is allowed to follow the center of the medullary canal
 until resistance is felt, then driven slightly farther to secure bone anchorage without
entering the foramen. These pins are all usually cut as close to the bone as possible,
 leaving just enough pin protruding to allow removal after fracture healing.
Retrograde insertion from the fracture site can be done by initially driving the pin
either proximally or distally through the medial condyle. The pin is directed proxi-
mally toward the craniolateral cortex until it exits through the greater tubercle, after
which it is withdrawn proximally until the distal pin tip is flush with the fracture.
11—-Fractures of the Humerus
299
The fracture is reduced and the pin seated distally with either method just described.
If medial condylar seating of the pin is chosen, the pin also can be first driven
distally until it exits from the condyle, after which the pin is retracted and the
fracture reduced. The pin can now be seated by the following two methods:
1. Drive the pin proximally through the greater tubercle, then pull it proximally
until the distal pin is within the medial condyle. The pin is cut proximally as
described. If the pin is small enough, it should be bent at the greater tubercle
of the humerus to prevent migration distally. Figure 11-26 shows this method
 used in a supracondylar fracture.
 2. Drive the pin proximally until it has just penetrated the greater tubercle, then
cut the pin distally close to the bone of the condyle.
The chief indication for using a Steinmann intramedullary (IM) pin as the sole
method of fixation is for transverse or short oblique type A fractures in small dogs
and cats. The IM pin may be used in combination with other methods of fixation in
unstable fractures. After an open approach, the fracture is first reduced, and the IM
 pin is inserted in the proximal segment. The auxiliary fixation is applied next. The
methods of auxiliary fixation are as follows:
1. Cerclage wires, type A2 fracture (Figure 11-2, A).
2.1
 Hemicerclage wires, type A2 fracture (Figure 11-2, B).
 3. Interfragmentary wire inserted to secure the cortical fragments to each other
and the IM pin at the fracture site, type A3 fracture (Figure 11-2, C). This
method does not establish complete rotational stability because the cortex
 opposite the wire is still free to move unless the fragments interlock.
4.
 Skewer pin and wire, type A fractures (see Figure 2-63, G).
5. Lag screw fixation, type A2 fracture (Figure 11-2, D). This is only possible
in very large breeds.
6.
Two or more IM pins, type A3 fracture (Figure 11-2, E).
7. External fixator, type I, 1/1 pins for stable type A fractures (Figure 11-2, F).
The 2/2 pin configuration is used on unstable type B fractures.
B
c
A
F
FIGURE 11-2. Intramedullary (IM) pin and auxiliary fixation. A, Cerclage wires.
B, Hemicerclage wires. C, Orthopedic wire secures cortical fragments to each other and the
IM pin at the fracture site. D, Lag screw fixation. E, Use of two pins. F, Unilateral external
fixator, 1/1 pins.
300
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Rush pin intramedullary fixation is useful in both proximal extraarticular type A
and distal segment extrarticular type A1 fractures of the humerus because the
 ability to use double pins is effective in eliminating rotary motion. Pin entry sites are
shown in Figure 11-3. Typically, a distal pin through the lateral epicondylar crest
will need to be smaller in diameter than that in the medial side because of the small
diameter of the bone of the lateral crest.
Interlocking Nails
 Interlocking nails are indicated for closed diaphyseal fractures, type A, B, and C, in
medium to large dogs with sufficient medullary size to accept the 6- or 8-mm nails.
 Smaller nails of 4 and 4.7 mm are now available for treatment of smaller dogs and
cats. Suficient bone should be intact in the proximal distal humeral fragment to
allow seating of the nail and placement of at least one interlocking screw in each
main fragment (Figure 11-4). Because most diaphyseal humeral fractures are in the
B
C
FIGURE 11-3. Rush pin sites in the humerus. A, Proximal and distal sites on the lateral aspect.
B, Proximal and distal sites on the medial aspect. C, Distal sites as seen from the caudal aspect.
FIGURE 11-4. Interlocking nail in the humerus. Two screws in each the
proximal and distal fragments are preferred, with a minimum distance of
1 cm from the fracture to the nearest screw.
11—Fractures of the Humerus
301
 distal one third of the shaft, careful evaluation of the distal fragment is indicated.
The relatively larger size of the interlocking nails inhibits placement of the nail
through the medial epicondyle. The nail is usually directed centrodistal and is seated
proximal to the supratrochlear foramen (Figure 11-1, E). Type B and C fractures
heal with abundant callus because reduction of all fragments is not attempted with
this fixation system. The major goal is to achieve rapid healing with the concept of
*bridging osteosynthesis" with minimal disruption of fragment blood supply.
External Fixators
 External skeletal fixation is applicable to all diaphyseal fractures as well as distal
extraarticular type A fractures. Unilateral type I single-bar or double-bar fixators
[iy aa si l- ad pqy e pue (ill a aas) sa yeus u pasn are
for very proximal type B (see Figure 11-15) or distal extraarticular type A2 and
3 fractures (see Figure 11-29, B).
Although the fixator may be used on most types of fractures, it is most often used
on diaphyseal types B and C and open fractures. The splint is placed on the cranio-
lateral surface of the bone to minimize muscle impingement. If the distal segment is
short, the distal pin may be inserted in a transcondylar position (see Figure 11-21).
The distal (positive-thread-profile) pin is usually inserted first in the transcondylar
position, in the same position as a transcondylar screw (see Figure 11-30). The
proximal pin is inserted next, followed by application of the connecting bar and
clamps, then by insertion of the center pins through the clamps. For the strongest
 pas e m  s sod s ro shop   a ss
C3 fracture, a double connecting rod is advisable when using the Kirschner-Ehmer
system. Another option, when increased stress on the fixator is expected because of
dog size, temperament, fracture configuration, or polytrauma, is to use an external
fixator system with larger-diameter carbon fiber, aluminum or titanium connecting
rods for increased fixator stiffness (IMEX SK, IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview,
Texas).
 If the distal segment is fragmented and strong buttressing is needed (type C3
d s s a n ih  n os ss a n a
 of pins allows full range of movement of the elbow joint during the healing
period.
 Fixators are also useful in combination with IM pins to control rotational and
             ss
removed as soon as callus formation is observed, usually 4 to 6 weeks, and the IM
 pin is left in place until clinical union is ascertained by radiography.
Bone Plates
The choice between plates and external fixators is often arbitrary, following the
surgeon's preference. Plates are indicated for all unstable type B and C diaphyseal
fractures, as well as the more stable type A fractures in large-breed dogs. Bone plates
can be applied to every side of the humerus, depending on the fracture location
(Figure 11-5). In most cases where the fracture is proximal to the midshaft, the plate
may be applied on the cranial surface to advantage (see Figures 11-19, C, and
11-20). The lateral surface has two disadvantages: marked curvature of the bone
and proximity of the radial nerve and brachialis muscle. The plate must be placed
under these structures (see Figure 11-19, D). Fractures of the distal third and frac-
tures requiring a long plate (type C) are best handled with a medial plate.4
Supracondylar fractures can be treated with a caudomedial plate (see Figure 11-29, A)
302
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FGURE 11-5. Various fracture zones on the
humerus are indicated by the overlapping boxes.
 Suggested bone plate position is labeled within the
boxes. There is considerable overlap of potential
plate position for a specific fracture, so the choice
may be related to other factors, such as patient
size, bone shape, soft tissue injuries, or simply
 personal preference.
or a caudal plate on the medial epicondylar crest (see Figure 11-34, G), sometimes
supplemented with a plate on the lateral crest (see Figure 11-34, H). (See Figure 2-75
S r u  as aq  sed  (is ed ps 
sion functions, with lag screws or cerclage wire providing interfragmentary com-
a aa oe  us a aq  jo un d ro us
concept of bridging osteosynthesis and use a buttress function plate with minimal
fragment manipulation. When increased stress on the plate construct is expected
because of dog size or temperament, fracture configuration, or polytrauma, addi-
tional stiffness and strength may be achieved by use of a plate and pin combination
fixation (Figure 11-6).
Lag Screws
 pa si ux ms  q Pe ss  
most type B and C intraarticular fractures (see Figures 11-30, 11-31, 11-33, and
11-34) in adult animals. Because of the shear loads imposed on these screws with
weight bearing, the use of a fully threaded cortical screw as a lag screw (see Chapter 2)
is preferred over partially threaded cancellous screws. The junction of the threaded
and smooth shank in partially threaded screws is a stress-raiser area and is prone to
fatigue failure if this junction is near the fracture line. The dog's bone is dense
enough in the condylar region that the cancellous thread is not important.
(See Figure 2-75 for suggested screw sizes.)
PROXIMAL FRACTURES
Fracture Type 1-1-A; Proximal, Extraarticular Simple
(Figure 11-7, A)
Physeal fractures are uncommon injuries, comprising about 5% of humeral frac-
tures, that occur in young animals before physeal closure.3 They may be a result
of direct or indirect force (avulsion). The proximal humerus has two epiphyses:
the greater tubercle and the humeral head. These epiphyses may be confluent,
with a bridge of cartilage between, or entirely independent from one another.
11—Fractures of the Humerus
303
FIGURE 11-6. Multiple fractures of the distal third of the humerus
plate construct is expected because fragments are not reduced, additional
stiffness and strength may be achieved with a plate and IM pin combination.
Therefore, some fractures will involve both portions, as in Figures 11-8 and 11-9,
whereas others involve either just the tubercle (Figure 11-7, A) or just the head
Closed Reduction and Fixation
Closed reduction can usually be accomplished when the fracture leaves both epiphy-
ses intact, particularly in cases of recent origin (see Figures 11-8 and 11-9). If the
displacement of the fracture is 5 mm or less, immobilization may be accomplished
by use of a modified Velpeau bandage encircling the chest and the affected leg with
the joints flexed? (see Figure 2-29). This area heals readily with minimal fixation,
and vigorous remodeling quickly restores normal alignment.
Open Reduction and Fixation
 An open craniolateral approach to the shoulder joint and proximal humerus? and
reduction can be performed if closed reduction cannot be accomplished. The frac-
ture is reduced by levering. Internal fixation, which is necessary in most cases, is
accomplished by inserting one or more Steinmann pins or Kirschner wires (K-wires)
in young animals with open growth plates. There is minimal chance of creating
iatrogenic growth arrest with small, smooth pins. Figures 11-8, B; 11-9, B; 11-10;
11-11, A; and 11-12, A, show this technique. Because of the vigorous healing
response of the physeal area, only minimal stability is needed. In animals at or near
skeletal maturity, a wider variety of fixation, including lag screws and tension
band wires, provide additional stability when needed (Figures 11-11, B and C, and
11-12, B).
Fracture Type 1-1-B; Proximal, Extraarticular
Multifragmentary (Figure 11-7, B)
Open reduction and internal fixation is always indicated in these fractures because
the bone segment or callus may encroach on the joint or brachial plexus or change
the functional angle of the shoulder joint and thus limit range of movement or alter
function. As is typical of metaphyseal fractures, they are quick to heal, but if they
cannot be anatomically reconstructed (type B2) by interfragmentary compression,
they present a challenge for fixation because of the shortness of the proximal
fragment.
304
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
 Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 11-7. Proximal fractures of the humerus. A: A1, Involving tuberosity; A2,
impacted metaphyseal; A3, nonimpacted metaphyseal. B: B1, Metaphyseal wedge; B2, meta-
physeal complex. C: C1, Simple; C2, simple and metaphyseal; C3, multifragmentary. (From
Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UFA: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
A
B
C
FIGURE 11-8.  A, Type A3 (Salter-Harris I) fracture of the proximal humeral physis and the
apophysis of the greater tuberosity. B, Fixation using transfixing Kirschner wires. C, Fixation
with a cancellous bone screw is reserved for animals that are close to maturity.
A
B
C
FIGURE 11-9.
 sid qa p ai no an ( snh  a ' 
meta physis. B, Fixation using transfixing Kirschner wires. C, Fixation with a cancellous bone
screw is reserved for animals that are close to maturity.
11—Fractures of the Humerus
305
FIGURE 11-10.  A, Type A2
impacted fracture of the proximal
humeral metaphysis. B, The IM
pin is inserted closed, starting on
the ridge of the greater tuberosity
and proceeding distally into the
medial aspect of the condyle.
B
 FIGURE 11-11. Type A1 fracture involving the apophyseal growth plate of the greater 
tuberosity of the humerus. A, Fixation using transfixing Kirschner wires (K-wires).
B, Fixation with a cancellous bone screw is reserved for animals that are close to maturity.
C, Fixation with K-wires and tension band wire is also reserved for animals that are close
to maturity.
B
FIGURE 11-12.  A, Type C1 (Salter I) fracture
of the proximal humeral physis fixed by double
transfixing K-wires. B, Fixation by lag screw.
The K-wire is inserted first and maintains
reduction while the screw is placed. Screw fixa-
tion is used only for animals that are close to
maturity.
Open Approach
These fractures are exposed through the approach to the proximal shaft of the
humerus (Figure 11-13).$
306
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Supraspinatus m.
Infraspinatus m.
Deltoideus m.
Periosteal incisions
 acromial part
Superficial pectoral 
m.
Teres minor m.
 Triceps brachii
m., lateral head
Brachiocephalicus m.
Cephalic v.
FIGURE 11-13. Approach to the proximal shaft of the humerus. Because it is relatively
superficial, this region is easily exposed. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of sur-
gical approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004,
Sa unders.)
Internal Fixation
Type B1 wedge fractures can usually be reduced and the fragment stabilized by lag
screw or cerclage wire, which should be placed through a drill hole or notch in the
bone to prevent migration. Fixation of the resulting two-piece fracture is then done
with a cranial plate or by pins and tension band wire, as in Figure 11-11, C, except
that long IM pins are used instead of the pictured K-wires.
Type B2 complex fractures require buttress or bridging fixation. This can be
accomplished by a cranial straight plate or T-plate (Figure 11-14) or by a hybrid
external fixator (Figure 11-15). Autogenous cancellous bone graft is packed into
 the unreduced fragment area if this can be done without disturbing the fragments.
A carpal flexion bandage is useful for the first 2 to 3 weeks postoperatively to
protect the fixation (see Figure 2-30).
DIAPHYSEAL FRACTURES
Fracture Type 1-2-A; Diaphyseal Simple or Incomplete
(Figure 11-16, A)
Considerable overriding resulting from spastic contraction of the brachial muscles
 can be seen with these fractures.16 The distal segment is usually tilted cranially.
11——Fractures of the Humerus
307
FIGURE 11-14.T
Type B2 fracture of the proximal humeral
metaphysis stabilized by a buttress plate. The fragments are left as
undisturbed as possible during the open reduction.
FIGURE 11-15.
.Type B2 fracture of the proximal humeral
external fixators, one of which is tied into a Steinmann IM pin.
The proximal fixation pin of the smaller fixator is driven deeply
into the humeral head, in a manner similar to the proximal
screws in Figure 11-14.
Rights were not granted to include thisfigure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 11-16. Diaphyseal fractures of the humerus. A: A1, Incomplete; A2, oblique;
A3, transverse. B: B1, One reducible wedge; B2, reducible wedges; B3, nonreducible wedges.
C: C1, Reducible wedges; C2, segmental; C3, nonreducible wedges. (From Unger M,
Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
308
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Shat fractures constitute approximately half of all humeral fractures.3 Treatment rec-
 Ommendations are keyed to the fracture patient scoring system detailed in Table 2-6.78
Open Approachess
 Figure 11-17 shows the craniolateral open approach to the distal shaft of the
 humerus. This approach may be used to expose the proximal three fourths of the
humerus when combined with the approach to the proximal shaft of the humerus.
Figure 11-18 shows a medial open approach to the shaft of the humerus, which is
useful for application of a long bone plate.
Brachiocephalicus
m.
Superficial
pectoral m.
Brachialis m.
Radial n.
FIGURE 11-17. Approach to the shaft of the humerus through a craniolateral incision. The
triceps and brachialis muscles are retracted caudally, and the biceps, superficial pectoral, and
brachiocephalicus muscles are retracted cranially. The radial nerve is protected by the
brachialis muscle, which can also be retracted cranially to better expose the distal shaft.
(From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones and joints of
the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
11——Fractures of the Humerus
309
Biceps brachii m.
Brachiocephalicusm.
Humeral shaft
FIGURE 11-18.  Approach to the shaft of the humerus through a medial incision. The entire
shaft of the bone can be exposed, and the relatively flat surface is advantageous for plate
application. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones
and joints of the dog and cat, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
Closed Reduction and Fixation
Closed reduction is occasionally possible, particularly in cats and small dogs, when
the fracture is of the transverse or short oblique type and can be readily palpated.
Immobilization is most often done by intramedullary pinning, with a type I half-pin
external fixator added for supplemental fixation when needed for rotational stabil-
ity (see Figures 11-1 and 11-2). An external fixator can also be employed as primary
fixation.
Internal Fixation
Potential methods of internal fixation are as follows:
1. Intramedullary pin alone when the fracture patient score is 9 to 10 or more
(see Table 2-6 for interpretation), usually with supplemental fixation 
(see Figure 11-2) when the fracture patient score is 8 to 9.
score of 7 to 8 or less. Four to six fixation pins and one connecting bar are
used. There is the possibility of closed reduction and splint application or of
 a limited open approach.
3. Bone plate, especially in large-breed dogs, for any fracture score. The plate is
applied as a neutralization plate in oblique fractures and as a tension band
compression plate in transverse fractures.
310
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 4. Interlocking nail, in medium to large dogs, for any fracture score. There must
be sufficient intact bone to allow placement of at least one interlocking screw
 in each main proximal and distal fragment.
Fracture Type 1-2-B; Diaphyseal Wedge (Figure 11-16, B)
These fractures all require open approach and internal fixation because they are all
unstable in rotation and may be minimally stable relative to compression (weight-
bearing) loads.
Type B1, One Reducible Wedge
 si a aui mas e ro aepoiao Aq paxy pue paai aq ue apam aui 
treatable as a simple type A fracture with any of the fixation methods previously
detailed, as long as the fracture patient score is 8 or above. Figure 11-19 shows
neutralization plate fixation of such a fracture.
Type B2, Several Reducible Wedges
-a jo ai e si a P 's / ot t a u id si as sd a
to a proximal shaft fracture using a neutralization plate. An external fixator and
supplemental fixation of the fragments could also be used. Bridging osteosynthesis
 can be accomplished with either a bridging plate or a plate and IM pin combination.
Another good choice would be an external fixator, since a much more limited open
approach can be used. The fixator would be applied as shown in Figure 11-21, B,
 or could be used in combination with an IM pin. An interlocking nail could also be
used (see Figure 11-4).
A
B
D
E
FIGURE 11-19. A, Midshaft, type B1, one reducible wedge humeral fracture. B, The wedge
was next reduced and attached with a second lag screw. C, Neutralization plate applied to
cranial surface. D, A neutralization plate may be applied to the lateral surface, although sur-
gical exposure and contouring the plate may be more difficult. E, The medial side of the
humerus provides an excellent surface for plate fixation for most midshaft humeral fractures.
11—Fractures of the Humerus
311
Type B3, Nonreducible Wedges
pq Aq paea ae sa asa a g ote a u as uad a e y
 Osteosynthesis, as detailed for B2 fractures. The interlocking nail is also applicable.?
Fracture Type 1-2-C; Diaphyseal Complex (Figure 11-16, C)
These fractures all require open approach and internal fixation because they are all
unstable both in rotation and compression (weight-bearing) loads. Fracture patient
scores range from 1 to 3 (see Table 2-6).
Type C1 Reducible Wedge and C2 Segmenta!
would be in a small-breed patient when the fracture lines are long enough to allow
cerclage wire fixation. The more common options are as follows:
1. Reconstructive; interfragmentary compression by lag screws or cerclage wires
and application of a neutralization plate or a type I external fixator.
B
FIGURE 11-20. A, Type C1 reducible wedges of
the proximal humeral shaft. B, Fixation by applica-
tion of bone plate to cranial surface. Screws crossing
the fracture line are inserted with a lag effect through
the plate.
FIGURE 11-21. A, Multiple fractures
of the distal third of the humeral shaft.
The reduction is done closed or by mini-
mal open approach, and the fragments
are not reduced. B, Type IA external
fixator with single or double (shaded)
connecting bar. The distal pin is usually
inserted first in the transcondylar position.
The proximal pin is inserted next, fol-
lowed by application of connecting bar
and clamps, then the center pins. The
double connecting bar is indicated in
animals more than about 40 pounds
(18 kg) when there is no load sharing by
the bone.
A
B
312
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 2. Bridging osteosynthesis; most often by a type I external fixator (Figure 11-21),
but a long bridging plate could be used. A combination of plate and pin
fixation may also be considered to reduce the stress on the bridging plate
(see Figure 11-6).
 3. Bridging osteosynthesis by interlocking nail (see Figure 11-4).
Type C3 Nonreducible Wedges
Bridging osteosynthesis is the only option available. This is usually accomplished
by a type I external fixator (see Figure 11-21), but a long bridging plate, plate and
 pin combination, or interlocking nail could be used.
DISTAL FRACTURES
Fracture Type 1-3-A; Distal, Extraarticular (Figure 11-22, A)
 Distal humeral shaft and supracondylar fractures appear to be more common in cats
than in dogs, in which condylar fractures, type 1-3-B, are more common.10 In supra-
condylar humeral fractures the fracture line may vary somewhat, but it usually passes
through the supratrochlear foramen.13 In young animals the injury may be a combi-
nation fracture and physeal separation (Salter-Harris type II injury). Even though the
fracture may be reduced closed, an open approach is usually indicated for the appli-
cation of internal fixation. Best results are obtained by using stable internal fixation,
which allows movement of the joint during the convalescent period.
Open Approaches5
The skin incision may be medial (Figure 11-23), lateral (Figure 11-24), or both.
 In most cases, both medial and lateral incisions are used. In some multiple, type C2
or C3 fractures in this area, the transolecranon (caudal) approach may give the best
visualization and working area (Figure 11-25).
Internal Fixation
Type A1, Simple
The exact method of fixation may be dictated by the individual fracture. Possibilities
 include the following:
the humerus along the medial cortex, reduce the fracture, and run the pin
Rights were not granted toinclude thisfigure in electronicmedia.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 11-22. Distal fractures of the humerus. A: A1, Simple; A2, wedge; A3, complex.
B: B1, Lateral; B2, medial. C: C1, Simple, metaphyseal simple; C2, simple, metaphyseal
wedge; C3, simple, metaphyseal complex. (From Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UFA: Vet
Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
11—Fractures of the Humerus
313
Brachiocephalicus
m.elevated
Anconeus m.
 p e  sau a jo uoau s a oi o 'i 
sion. Cranial retraction of the median nerve and accompanying vessels and caudal retraction
of the ulnar nerve and triceps muscle provides exposure of the medial aspect of the condyle
and supracondylar region. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches
to the bones and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
will allow rotation at the fracture site unless the fracture is serrated and
 interlocking on reduction, and it is best reserved for skeletally immature dogs 
 in which early callus formation is expected.
2. Insert a double-pointed Steinmann pin as just described. In addition, insert
another pin (usually of a smaller diameter) or K-wire from the lateral
epicondyle across the fracture to anchor in the medial cortex of the humeral
shaft proximal to the fracture line (Figure 11-27, A).
3. When the lateral fragment is slightly longer, insert a double-pointed
Steinmann pin as described in 1. In addition, insert a lag screw through the
lateral epicondylar crest, and anchor it in the medial cortex of the humeral
shaft (Figure 11-27, B). This will bring about compression at the fracture site
and ensure rotational stability. When applicable, this is the preferred method.
 4. Insert a double-pointed Steinmann pin down into the medial condyle as
described. In addition, insert one or more cerclage wires if the fracture is of the
oblique type (Figure 11-27, C).
314
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Triceps brachim.,
Brachialis m.
lateral head 
Superficial
pectoral m.
Radial n.
FIGURE 11-24.  Approach to the supracondylar region of the humerus through a cranio-
lateral incision. Caudal retraction of the triceps muscle combined with cranial retraction of
the brachialis muscle and radial nerve are used to expose this region. (From Piermattei DL,
Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and cat,
ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
Anconeus m.
retracted
FIGURE 11-25. Approach to the humeroulnar
 part of the el bow joint by osteotomy of the tuber ole-
crani. This approach allows reduction of both parts 
of the humeral condyle, and further elevation of the
triceps muscle exposes the supracondylar region of
Anconeal
the humerus.
process
Lateral humeral
condyle
Elbow flexed
5. A Steinmann pin is inserted as described, and a two-pin type I external
skeletal fixator is added for rotational stability (Figure 11-27, D). The distal
fixation pin is inserted across the condyles in the same manner as a
 transcondylar screw. (See the description of screw placement in the following
section on distal partial articular fractures.)
11—Fractures of the Humerus
315
A
B
c
D
         e   i 
A, Fracture of the supracondylar type. B, The fracture site is exposed from the medial side,
and a double-pointed pin, started near the medial cortex, is inserted retrograde. C, A pin
chuck is attached at the proximal end at a distance (c') that corresponds to the length of the
condyle (c"). The fracture is reduced, and the elbow joint is extended before insertion.
D, Final position; if fracture segments do not interlock, rotation is possible at fracture site,
and supplemental fixation is indicated.
C
D
 FIGURE 11-27. Intramedullary pin and auxiliary fixation for a supracondylar fraction.
A, An additional pin is inserted up the lateral epicondyle and penetrates the medial cortex.
B, A lag screw is inserted in addition to the pin. C, Two cerclage wires are added for supple-
fracture.
316
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 11-28.  Two Rush pins give good stabilization.
6. Insert Rush pins at the medial and lateral epicondyles and drive them
simultaneously into the shaft of the humerus (Figure 11-28).
Type A2, Wedge
The wedge is usually lateral, and if the fragment is large enough, these fractures can
be fixed with the methods shown in Figure 11-27, using an IM pin into the medial
condyle and K-wires and/or lag screws to secure the wedge. A caudomedial bone
plate is more stable because it will better prevent rotation (Figure 11-29, A). The
 distal screws must be angled cranially into the condyle to prevent penetration into
the supratrochlear foramen. If the wedge fragment cannot be captured by lag screw,
double caudal plating can be applied (see Figure 11-34, H).
 IM pins are not an option when the medial condyle is fragmented, and either
a neutralization or a buttress plate caudomedially (see Figure 11-29, A) or a hybrid
external fixator (Figure 11-29, B) can be used.
Type A3, Complex
A strong buttress effect is needed for these fractures. This can be supplied best
with double caudal plating (see Figure 11-34, H) or the external fixator shown in
Figure 11-29, B.
Note that all methods of fixation allow movement of the joint during the conva-
 lescent period. IM pins are usually removed after the fracture reaches the stage
of clinical union.
Fracture Type 1-3-B; Distal, Partial Articular (Figure 11-22, B)
Fractures of the lateral portion of the humeral condyle occur much more frequently
than fractures of the medial portion.3.10 The lateral portion is the major weight-
bearing part, and its smaller lateral epicondylar crest makes it biomechanically
weaker. Also, a problem of incomplete ossification of the humeral condyle in cocker
condylar fractures from minor trauma or normal activity.1l Others have noted
ao au q oren rou aq pasn s ruo ro auun a
spaniel in Europe does not appear to be predisposed to these fractures.12
11——Fractures of the Humerus
317
FIGURE 11-29. Distal extraartic-
ular fractures of the humerus.
A, Type A2 wedge fracture stabi-
lized by a caudomedially applied
plate. Minimal contouring of the
B
plate is required. The wedge is lag-
 screwed to the supracondylar region
of the humerus, and the condyle frac-
ture line is compressed by using the
load drill guide in the two distal
plate holes. B, Type A3 complex
fracture stabilized by a hybrid
type I-Il external fixator. A minimal
 exposure, open approach is used to
partially reduce the fragments, and
the transcondylar center-threaded 
fixation pin is placed first, followed
by the most proximal half pin. The
remaining fixation pins are then
inserted, and a curved connecting
bar is attached to one of the proxi-
mal half pins and to the medial end
of the transcondylar pin for rota-
tional sta bility.
 Two distinct age groups are noted in this fracture type: those less than 4 months old
(often toy or miniature breeds) and those older than 2 years.10,12
 The procedure for reduction and fixation will vary depending on the length of
time since injury, the amount of swelling and edema, and the ease with which the
fragments can be palpated. As a result of muscular pull, the prereduction radiograph
will usually show the fractured lateral portion to be dislocated proximally and
rotated laterally and cranially. The fractured medial epicondyle is usually rotated
 medially and caudally. Subluxation is present in the elbow joint. Recent fractures of
the lateral and medial aspects of the humeral condyle are shown in Figures 11-30, A,
and 11-31, A. Within the first 36 to 48 hours after injury, there is usually minimal
swelling, and the fragment can be palpated.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
 Accurate reduction of articular elbow fractures is imperative because degenerative
 joint disease and elbow stiffness are common sequelae of poorly reduced fractures,
leading to severe functional impairment.
The fractured leg may be placed in the Gordon extender for 10 to 15 minutes to
  a i  asi   aao  s a a
be prepared and draped for surgery while still in the Gordon extender. Using a
lateral or medial approach (Figure 11-32, A and B), the fracture area is exposed.s
The fracture is reduced, and a pointed reduction forceps or vulsellum forceps is applied
across the epicondyles (Figures 11-30, D, and 11-33, A). On the side opposite the 
open approach, this clamp will penetrate the skin, so a sharp, pointed forceps
is needed. If additional rotational stability is desired, a transcondylar K-wire can be
placed from epicondyle to epicondyle, as in Figure 11-33. Care must be taken to
prevent this pin from entering the supratrochlear foramen.
The points of entry and exit of the transcondylar hole to be drilled are referenced
 to the epicondyles and are halfway between the epicondyle and the articular surface
318
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
A
B
C
E
F
FIGURE 11-30. A, Distal partial articular fracture of the lateral aspect of the humeral
condyle. B, Lateral view to show screw placement centered on the condyle. Note the proxi-
mocaudal position of the epicondyle relative to the screw. C, Medial view to show the tip of
the screw protruding distocranial to the epicondyle. D, Reduction may be maintained during
 drilling of the screw hole by use of a vulsellum or pointed reduction forceps placed on the
epicondyles. This leaves the area to accommodate transcondylar bone screw free for drilling.
(See also Figure 11-33.) E, Bone screw insertion with lag effect. F, Insertion of additional bone
screw proximal to the supratrochlear foramen adds to stability and is important when the
proximal fracture line does not provide any buttress effect to support the transcondylar screw.
A
B
C
FIGURE 11-31. A, Recent type B2
fracture of the medial aspect of the
humeral condyle. B, Bone screw insertion
with lag effect. C, Insertion of additional
bone screw proximal to the supra-
trochlear foramen adds to stability.
of the condyle (Figure 11-30, B and C). It is necessary to separate bluntly the exten-
sor or flexor tendons to anchor the drill sleeve in these areas. The screw hole can
 also be started by a trocar-pointed pin, then enlarged with a drill of the appropriate
 sd  e  s oq a  o a
drilling of the fractured condyle can be accomplished by drilling from the fracture
surface, then reducing the condyle and completing the drill hole, as illustrated in
Figure 11-33, B. This technique is preferred by less experienced surgeons but needs
 more soft tissue dissection, and screw insertion parallel to the elbow joint surface is
more difficult to achieve.
q sano e  q po aq  as a a jo us
screw or a cortical bone screw inserted with a lag effect (see Figure 2-67, E and F);
the latter is preferred because there is less chance of screw failure. In the very imma-
ture dog, minimal or no compression is advisable because of crushing of soft bone.
In very small breeds, drilling a glide hole for a full-threaded screw can remove a sig-
 nificant portion of the condyle, and in these cases a tap hole-diameter drill is used
 through both cortices, and the only compression is that supplied by the bone clamp.
Two or more small pins or K-wires placed in a diverging pattern may be substituted
for the transcondylar screw in toy breeds that are less than 4 kg in weight.13 Small
vulsellum or pointed reduction forceps are used to obtain compression during the
insertion procedure. This method is definitely not recommended in larger breeds,
and the availability of 1.5- and 2-mm screws lessens the need to use it even in small
breeds. In some cases it is useful to use a K-wire through the lateral or medial epi-
condylar crest to supply additional rotational stability to the condyle, as shown in
Figure 11-34, A and B.
11——Fractures of the Humerus
319
Lateral aspect of
humeral condyle
Trochlea
Medial aspect of
humeral condyle
Ulnar n. and 
Brachialis m.
collateral ulnar
a. and v.
Median n. and
brachial a. and v.
Medial humeral
epicondyle
Tendonofbiceps
brachii m.
Deep digital
Pronatorteresm.
flexor m.,
humeral head
Fexor carpi
radialis m.
Superficial
dligital flexor m.
B
FIGURE 11-32.L
 A, Approach to the lateral aspect of the humeral condyle and epicondyle.
The extensor carpi radialis muscle has been elevated and the joint capsule opened.
B, Approach to the medial humeral epicondyle. The medial and ulnar nerves must be
protected during this approach. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical
approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
320
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Additional fixation, preferably a second screw, is necessary in some cases, espe-
cially with lateral condylar fractures. Note that when the metaphyseal fracture line
is relatively transverse (see Figures 11-30, A, D, and E, and 11-31, A and B), the
bone can load-share weight-bearing forces with the fixation screw, and the screw
is unlikely to fail. However, if the metaphyseal fracture line is less than 45 degrees
to the long axis of the bone, no load sharing can occur, and the screw is at jeopardy
to fail in a few weeks (Figures 11-30, F, and 11-31, C). Because there is no callus
formation in the intercondylar fracture area, it is slow to regain normal strength
through the haversian remodeling process. Under these circumstances, fixation of
the metaphyseal fracture is important to prevent screw failure. A pin large enough
in diameter to resist bending can be substituted for the screw if necessary.
 For longer-standing fractures of the lateral or medial region of the condyle, if the
fragments cannot be accurately reduced or if the fracture is more than 3 to 4 days
old, this procedure can be modified by performing a caudal approach with
osteotomy of the tuber olecrani (see Figure 11-25) to expose the fracture site. When
the patient is very young, a triceps tenotomy is preferred to an osteotomy of the
olecranon process. The additional exposure gained by these approaches simplifies
reduction. Prognosis for good to excellent function after repair is reported to be
 89% for lateral condylar fractures and 87% for medial condylar fractures.14
 An additional method of fluoroscopically guided closed reduction and fixation has
of the fragment is achieved and confirmed with a fluoroscope. The reduction is
maintained with a condylar clamp or reduction forceps, and a temporary trans-
condylar K-wire is applied. A positional or lag screw is then placed across the
condyle, using previously described landmarks, through a small stab incision.
 Position is confirmed with the fluoroscope. Malreduction of less than 1 mm was
achieved in 91% of the cases reported.1s
Aftercare
It is important to maintain motion in the elbow joint postoperatively, so no exter-
nal splintage is employed. Passive range of motion (ROM) exercise is started as soon
as tolerated. If the animal seems likely to damage the fixation, a carpal flexion band-
age will protect the fixation while still allowing motion of the elbow joint (see
 Figure 2-30). The bone screw may be removed in the young, growing animal, up to
approximately 4 months of age, but it is usually left in place in those over this age
 unless otherwise indicated.
Fracture Type 1-3-C; Distal, Complete Articular
(Figure 11-22, C)
Bicondylar, or T-Y, fractures occur most frequently in mature animals and usually
d a s ps au eissns pn axa   isn
prone to this fracture. Spastic contractions of the muscles of the foreleg pull the ulna
and radius proximally between the fractured medial and lateral portions of the
condyle.
Open Approachess
The caudal approach to the humeroulnar part of the elbow joint by osteotomy of the
tuber olecrani usually gives the best visualization of the fracture area (see Figure 11-25).
This approach provides good exposure of the caudal surface of the distal end of the
humerus, including the condyle, trochlea, and anconeal process. The surgeon also may
use two other approaches: (1) to the elbow joint by osteotomy of the proximal ulnar
11—-Fractures of the Humerus
321
diaphysis and (2) to the supracondylar region of the humerus and caudal humeroul-
nar part of the elbow joint. In cats, two anatomical differences should be noted
when making surgical approaches in this area, as follows:
1. The median nerve passes through the supratrochlear foramen.
 2. The ulnar nerve lies under the short portion of the medial head of the
triceps muscle.
Reduction and Fixation
Perfect anatomical reduction of the fractured articular surfaces with uninterrupted
rigid fixation (preferably with screws, with or without plates) and early postopera-
tive movement of the elbow are mandatory for the best functional results. This type
of fracture is one of the most challenging to repair in veterinary medicine; any errors
in reduction and fixation lead to decreased range of movement, abnormal wear, and
 degenerative joint changes.
 After exposure of the fracture and removal of the organizing clot and fibrin, the
condyles are reduced and temporarily held by one or two vulsellum or pointed reduc-
tion forceps (Figure 11-33). After being rigidly immobilized with the two forceps, the
elbow can be further flexed to evaluate fracture reduction. The addition of one or two
transverse K-wires proximally or cranially to the screw site increases rotational stabil-
ity for drilling the condyle. The hole is drilled for insertion of the transcondylar bone
screw. This hole may be drilled directly from the lateral or medial surface, as described
earlier for type B fractures, or retrograde from the fracture surface (Figure 11-33, B).
Before the transcondylar hole is drilled, there should be perfect anatomical reduction
of the articular cartilages of the humeral condyle along the fracture lines. The humeral
condyles should be checked for good approximation at the intercondylar and supra-
condylar fracture sites. Less than anatomical reduction may impinge the anconeal
 process, limit range of movement, and result in abnormal wear.
B
A
FIGURE 11-33. Methods of fixation for type C distal, complete articular fractures of
the humerus. Reduction is usually maintained during the fixation procedure by use of
a vulsellum forceps and transcondylar Kirschner wire. A, The hole may be drilled and
The K-wire is usually removed after lag screw insertion.
322
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
The transcondylar bone screw is then inserted with a lag effect. It now remains
to fix the supracondylar fracture, which is done in the same manner as described for
type 1-3-A distal extraarticular fractures. The method is dictated by the fracture
 pattern, size of the animal, and the equipment available. The objective is rigid unin-
terrupted fixation that is capable of withstanding considerable abuse during the
 healing period. Documentation studies on T-Y fractures of the humerus indicate that
a ta jo asn unba iso a s eae su u unex aenbape-uui-s
plate fixation has the highest percentage of successful results, especially in type C2
and C3 fractures. In most cases it is advantageous to carry out the reduction and
fixation of the condyle first. In some cases, however, it may be advantageous first to
reduce and fix one of the condyles to the humeral shaft and then reduce the remain-
ing condyle and insert the transcondylar bone screw. Figure 11-34 presents some
suggested methods of fixation of the supracondylar fracture.
Type C1 Fracture
An IM pin is inserted in retrograde fashion at the fracture site (Figure 11-34, A
and B) and then driven back into the medial epicondyle (see Figure 11-26).
An additional pin is inserted just distal to the lateral epicondylar ridge and directed
diagonally through the epicondylar crest, across the fracture, and through the
medial cortex of the shaft. This provides good two-point fixation if the fracture is
pins (Figure 11-34, C and D) or by a caudomedial bone plate (Figure 11-34, G).
An IM pin can also be used in combination with one or more lag screws when the
wedge fragment is long enough to accept a lag screw proximally (Figure 11-34, E).
This provides interfragmentary compression and is preferable to the use of a diago-
nal pin, when applicable. If the arms of the Y fracture are relatively long, they may
 be attached using several lag screws (Figure 11-34, F).
Type C2 Fracture
A bone plate inserted caudally along the medial epicondylar crest and shaft
(Figure 11-34, G) is applicable for most type C2 wedge fractures. This plate must
be carefully positioned on the crest to avoid interference with the olecranon process
within the supratrochlear foramen. Because the bone is almost perfectly straight in
this region, minimal contouring of the plate is necessary. The distal screws are quite
long and well anchored in the medial condyle, but care should be taken not to pen-
etrate the articular surface cranially. It is necessary to add lag screw or pin fixation
to the wedge fragment. In some cases, these fractures may be fixed by combining
the methods shown in Figure 11-34, A and E, with both a lag screw proximally and
 a pin distally in the wedge fragment, combined with an IM pin.
Type C3 Fracture
Double-plate fixation is the safest method of fixation in this situation16
(Figure 11-34, H). The medial plate can be applied either to the caudal surface of
the epicondylar crest, as shown here, or to the medial surface of the distal shaft and
epicondylar crest. The difficulty with this position for the plate is that unless the
most distal screws can be angled cranially into the condyle, they can only penetrate
one cortex, or they will enter the supratrochlear foramen.
Aftercare
It is important to maintain motion in the elbow joint postoperatively, so no exter-
e     i a o sse  i s p
 If the animal seems likely to damage the fixation, a carpal flexion bandage will
11—Fractures of the Humerus
323
G
H
o
O
O
FIGURE 11-34. Fixation techniques for type C distal, complete articular fractures of
the humerus. In all cases the transcondylar screw is placed first, followed by reduction of the
inserted retrograde at the fracture site and seated in the medial aspect of the condyle. An
additional pin, inserted just distal to the lateral epicondylar ridge and directed obliquely
across the fracture through medial cortex of the shaft, gives good two-point fixation in these
 stable fractures. C and D, Fixation of type C1 fracture using two Rush pins. E, An IM pin in
 combination with lag screws gives interfragmentary compression to all fragments when the
fracture lines permit. F, If the fracture lines are relatively long, they can all be stabilized using
lag screws in a type C1 fracture. G, Type C2 and C3 fractures are best fixed using two small 
bone plates placed caudally on both epicondylar crests. H, Fixation of a type C1 fracture
using one bone plate inserted caudally along the medial epicondylar crest, with a K-wire in 
the lateral epicondylar crest for additional rotational stability.
324
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 protect the fixation while still allowing motion of the elbow joint (see Figure 2-30).
Exercise is limited during the healing period, and IM pins are removed after
 healing. Other implants are left in place unless migration or soft tissue irritation is
 encountered. Prognosis is less than optimistic for type C fractures, with only 52%
 attaining good to excellent results in one study.14
References
1. Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974, American
Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
cat: introduction and clinical application, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.
3.BardetJHomsteadMLFracturesf thumrsinogs andcatretrsective
of 130 cases, Vet Surg 12:73-77, 1983.
 4. Harari J, Roe SC, et al: Medial plating for the repair of middle and distal diaphyseal fractures of the
humerus in dogs, Vet Sturg 15:45-48, 1986.
5. Pierrmattei DL, Johnson KA: An atas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
6. Kasa F, Kasa G: Fractures of the humerus. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD, editors: Manua!
of internat fixation in small animats, New York, 1984, Springer-Verlag, pp 134-143.
7. Palmer RH, Hulse DA, Aron DN: A proposed fracture patient score system used to develop fracture
treatment plansnProceedins f20thAnrualConferencefVeterinaryOrthopediSociety1993
(abstract).
8. Palmer RH: Decision making in fracture treatrment: the fracture patient scoring system.
In Praceedings of (Smatt Animal) ACVs Veterinary Symposium, 1994, pp 388-390.
in seven clinical cases, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 7:3-8, 1994.
 10. Vannini R, Olmstead ML, Smeak DD: An epidemiological study of 151 distal humeral fractures in
dogs and cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:531-536, 1988.
11. Marcelin-Little DJ, DeYoung DJ, Ferris KK, Berry CM: Incomplete ossification of the humeral
condyle in spaniels, Vet Surg 23:475-487, 1994.
12. Drape J: Etiology of distal humeral fractures in dogs: a retrospective study of 120 cases. In
Proceedings of 18th Annual Conference of Veterinary Orthopedic Society, 1991.
dogs, Vet Surg 13:1-s, 1984.
14. Vannini R, Smeak DD, Olmstead ML: Evaluation of surgical repair of 135 distal humeral fractures
in dogs and cats, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:537-545, 1988.
15. Cook JL, Tormlinson JL, Reed AL: Fluoroscopically guided closed reduction and internal fixation of
fractures of the lateral portion of the humeral condyle: prospective clinical study of the technique and
results in ten dogs, Vet Surg 28:315-321, 1999.
12
The Elbow Joint
TRAUMATIC LUXATION OF THE ELBOW
Because of the bony anatomy of the region, virtually all elbow luxations are lateral
(Figure 12-1). The large, square caudodistal corner of the medial epicondyle of the
humerus prevents the ulna from moving medially, whereas the rounded shape of the
lateral epicondyle permits the anconeal process to clear the lateral epicondylar crest
when the elbow is flexed more than 90 degrees. When medial luxations are seen,
ClinicalSigns
The general appearance of an animal with a lateral luxation is distinct, but similar
to infraspinatus contracture (see Figure 10-28). Palpation easily differentiates the
condition, with the laterally displaced radius and ulna being quite prominent. The
antebrachium and foot are abducted, and the elbow is flexed. There is usually
marked pain and increased elbow width, with resistance to flexion and extension.
Because of elbow flexion, the foot does not touch the ground when the animal is
standing or sitting.
Diagnosis
Although the basic diagnosis can be made by physical examination, radiographs
in two planes are necessary to look for associated fractures and avulsion of
ligaments.
Treatment
Closed Reduction
 Many lateral luxations can be reduced closed during the first few days after injury.
Muscle contracture makes later reduction more difficult. The rarity of this condition
and the lack of experience opportunities by clinicians contribute to reduction
difficulties.
With the animal under general anesthesia, firm palpation is used to establish the
position of the humeral condyles relative to the radius and ulna. In some cases the
anconeal process will still be inside (medial to) the lateral epicondylar crest. In such
a patient, medial pressure is maintained on the olecranon while the elbow is flexed
325
326
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 12-1. Lateral luxation
of the elbow. A, Craniocaudal
view. B, Lateromedial view. Note
that in this case the anconeus is
completely luxated.
B
to 100 to 110 degrees. Medial pressure is then placed on the radial head to force it
under the humeral capitulum to the reduced position. The elbow is also abducted.
If medial pressure on the radial head does not bring about reduction, additional
pressure can be exerted by slightly extending the joint to lock the anconeal process
inside the lateral epicondylar crest. The antebrachium should then be twisted
inward (pronated) and adducted while abducting the elbow, causing the radial head
to slip medially relative to the fixed fulcrum of the anconeus.
 If the anconeal process lies lateral to the lateral epicondyle, an additional step
is required. With the elbow flexed to 100 to 110 degrees, the antebrachium is
twisted inward (pronated) to force the anconeal process inside the lateral condyle
(Figure 12-2, A). The joint is extended slightly, then flexed while medial pressure on
the radial head is continued. With pronation the radial head can be forced under the
capitulum (Figure 12-2, B), especially with abduction of the elbow.
Anconealprocess
locked medial to
epicondyle
Pressure
Rotation
Pressure
Rotation
Adduction
A
B
FIGURE 12-2. Closed reduction of lateral luxation of the elbow. A, With the elbow flexed
to 100 to 110 degrees, the antebrachium is twisted internally, and the joint is slightly
extended to lock the anconeal process inside the lateral epicondyle. B, Continuous inward
pressure is maintained on the radial head while the antebrachium is internally twisted.
Gradual flexion and adduction of the antebrachium and abduction of the elbow force the
radial head medially, using the anconeal process as a fulcrum.
12—The Elbow Joint
327
After reduction, evaluation of ligamentous damage is necessary. Although most
luxations can be reduced closed, a few will require open reduction. A straight cranio-
 caudal radiograph of both elbows is necessary to ascertain full reduction.
Examination of Collateral Ligaments
The collateral ligaments of the elbow (Figure 12-3) are intimately associated with the
tendons of origin of the extensor (lateral) and flexor (medial) muscles and may be
difficult to differentiate from these tendons at surgery.
The collateral ligaments are evaluated by the method of Campbell1 After
a po uooy saaap 0e oi paxa yoq are sndeo pue moqia an uonpa
paw laterally and medially causes similar rotation of the radius and ulna, which
· Humerus
 Medial collateral
Brachialis
ligament 
--Biceps
Caudal and cranial 
Oblique ligament
crura
Biceps and
brachialis tendon
Ulna
Radius
Annular ligament .
Lateral collateral ligament 
 caudal and cranial crura 
nterosseous ligament
B
FIGURE 12-3. Collateral ligaments of the elbow. A, Medial ligaments of the left elbow.
B, Lateral ligaments of the left elbow. (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of the dog, ed 3,
Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders.)
328
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
are constrained at the elbow by the collateral ligaments. If these ligaments are
intact, lateral rotation of the paw is possible to about 45 degrees and medial
rotation to about 70 degrees. If the lateral collateral is severed or avulsed, the
paw can be rotated medially to about 140 degrees. If the medial ligament is
damaged, the paw can be rotated laterally to about 90 degrees. In both cases,
a ym paoo aq uno p u au aqnop ioqe si uoon med a
opposite limb.
Excessive movement indicates damage to the collateral ligaments, and the
clinician must decide whether surgical treatment is indicated. If the joint is easily
reluxated, the decision for surgical repair is simple to make. If the joint is reason-
ably stable despite the signs of ligament damage mentioned, the decision is more
difficult. Immobilization will allow healing by fibrosis of periarticular soft tissues
and may provide sufficient stability for smaller breeds, especially if they are not
athletic or working animals. Conversely, surgical treatment is more often indicated
in larger and more active animals.
Open Reduction
 The elbow is exposed by a limited approach to the head of the radius and lateral
compartments of the elbow joint.2 This approach may be used up to 6 to 7 days
after injury. Organized hematoma and shreds of ligament muscle and joint capsule
are cleared from the joint. Occasionally an avulsed collateral ligament is folded
into the joint, precluding total reduction, and can be retracted to its normal position
and sutured. The procedure then continues as for a closed reduction. It may be
necessary to use a smooth-surfaced instrument such as closed scissor blades or a
bone lever to pry the radial head into the reduced position. Because of the inevitable
 damage to articular cartilage, this maneuver should be avoided if possible, but dam-
age may be minimized by protection of the instrument with a piece of sterile
catheter.
 If reduction is still not possible, it may be necessary to extend the exposure
by performing the caudal approach with osteotomy of the olecranon process.2
This allows debridement of granulation and scar tissue in chronic cases. It
also relieves the tension exerted by the triceps muscle and simplifies reduction.
 After reduction, necessary repairs are performed as explained in the following
discussion.
Repair of Ligaments
 The surgical principles governing repair of ligamentous injuries are discussed in
Chapter 7. Stretched ligaments are plicated (shortened), torn ligaments are sutured,
and avulsed ligaments are reattached. Occasionally, ligaments are totally replaced or
supplemented with various synthetic materials, although this is rarely necessary in
the elbow.
Figure 12-4 illustrates repair of the lateral collateral ligaments. The elbow is
approached laterally, with transection of the tendinous origin of the ulnaris
lateralis? (Figure 12-4, A). The ligament is sutured or reattached to the bone
(Figure 12-4, B). The adjacent extensor muscles are plicated with mattress sutures
 in the tendinous areas (Figure 12-4, C). If ligaments are shredded, a "prosthetic
ligament" can be constructed by passing nonabsorbable suture material from holes
placed across the lateral epicondyle and head of the radius. Similar repairs are done
medially if both ligaments are damaged. If the ligaments are torn near their distal
 insertions, they can be attached by suturing to the annular ligament. Damage in the
midportion of the ligament is handled by suturing, using the locking loop suture
described in Chapter 7.
12—The Elbow Joint
329
Suture in tendon
passed through
drill hole in
epicondyle
Extensor mm.
Elevation and
retracted
retraction
of anconeus m.
 Ruptured lateral
collateral ligament
Tenotomy of
ulnaris lateralis
tendon
A
B
Suture imbrication
of common and lateral
digital extensor mm.
Suture of ulnaris
lateralis tendon
C
FIGURE 12-4.
Surgical repair of lateral collateral ligaments of the elbow. A, The left elbow
has been exposed by a lateral approach with tenotomy of the ulnaris lateralis. Retraction of
the other extensor muscles exposes the torn ligament. B, The ligament has been torn close to
the humerus. A locking loop suture has been placed in the ligament. One end of the suture is
passed through a bone tunnel in the epicondyle to allow the ligament to be pulled to the bone.
C, The common and lateral digital extensors are imbricated with mattress sutures, and the
ulnaris latera lis is sutured.
Aftercare
Closed or Open Reduction with No Ligament Damage
 The elbow is most stable when moderately extended to about the normal standing
angle of 140 degrees. Because the elbow joint is prone to lose range of motion as
a result of periarticular fibrosis when completely immobilized, a soft splint 
(e.g., modified Robert-Jones dressing; see Figure 2-33) is useful. Immobilization for
5 to 7 days is usually sufficient if exercise is restricted to the house or leash for 2 more
weeks. Passive flexion-extension exercises are started immediately after removal of
the dressing. This is facilitated by flexing the carpus while flexing the elbow.
330
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Closed Reduction with Ligament Damage
More rigid postoperative immobilization is needed with ligament damage despite
the risk of joint stiffness. A spica splint (see Figure 2-23) or Thomas splint
(see Figure 2-25) is maintained for 2 weeks. Passive flexion-extension exercise is
important after splint removal. Exercise is restricted to the house or leash for 3 to
4 more weeks.
Ligament Damage Surgically Repaired
Aftercare is similar to that for ligament damage, except that the splint is maintained
for 3 weeks.
DEVELOPMENTAL ABNORMALITIES AFFECTING THE
ELBOW JOINT
 Disturbed growth resulting from traumatic physeal closure of either the radius or
ulna can produce subluxation of the elbow and is covered in Chapter 23.
Congenital elbow problems include luxation, asynchronous growth of the
radius and ulna resulting in elbow incongruity, luxation of the radial head, and
the presence of unstable and irritating cartilaginous bodies with or without bone.
Congenital Luxation and Subluxation
Congenital luxation of the elbow is occasionally seen in small breeds of dogs
(e.g., terrier, Lhasa apso, pug). It can occur at birth or anytime up to 3 to 4 months
a  p  a j e si  sdd   o
to hypoplasia of the coronoid and anconeal processes and a shallow trochlear notch.3
The proximal ulna is typically twisted laterally 45 to 90 degrees (Figure 12-5). When
diagnosed early (7-10 weeks of age) and if closed reduction can be achieved, one or
two temporary Kirschner wires driven from the olecranon to the humerus, followed
by a spica cast for 10 to 14 days, has been successful in our hands. In older pups
(12-16 weeks old), reduction usually requires an ulnar osteotomy distal to the semi-
lunar notch. After the ulna is placed in the humeral trochlea, small Kirschner wires
are driven across the joint (Figure 12-6, A), followed by spica coaptation until pin
removal 2 to 3 weeks later These dogs, if reduction is maintained, do surprisingly
well (Figure 12-6, B). If reduction cannot be maintained, amputation or later
arthrodesis is the only alternative.
 Elbow incongruity can be caused by physeal trauma or congenital factors. At times
the inciting cause is difficult to determine. Chondrodystrophied breeds are prone to
asynchronous growth between the radius and ulna, resulting in the ulna being too short
relative to the radius (usual case) (Figure 12-7, A) or the radius being too short relative
to the ulna (Figure 12-8, A). Traumatic physeal injuries resulting in elbow incongruity
are covered elsewhere (see Chapter 23). In cases under consideration here, there is usu-
ally no known evidence of injury to the growth plate, and the cause is unknown.
 Hereditary factors must be considered in the breeding animal.4 Radiographs of the
semilunar notch should be carefully inspected for a loose coronoid fragment, which we
have occasionally observed when the radius is too short relative to the ulna.
Radiographic Findings
 Mediolateral projections with the joint in approximately 90 degrees of flexion are
most useful (Figures 12-7, A, and 12-8, A), although the craniocaudal view should
12—The Elbow Joint
331
FIGURE 12-5. A, Bilateral congenital luxation of the proximal ulna in a 9-week-old mixed-
breed dog. Note the 90-degree or more internal rotation of the paw. Pressure sores of the
cranial surface of the limb were present from abnormal weight bearing. B, Intraoperative
view demonstrating the 90 degrees or more of rotation of the anconeal process (a) and
olecranon. The humeral trochlea is located at b.
 also be examined. Varying degrees of degenerative changes will be seen, depending
on the age of the animal. Ununited anconeal process may be seen concurrently in
qond stun oi auond are iu pnoq iassq aui se yns spaaq
1. Normally the bottom of the semilunar notch lies on the same level as the radial
head (Figure 12-9, A and B). With ulnar shortening, the coronoid process region lies
below the radial head (see Figure 12-7, A). In addition, the joint space surrounding
the rounded humeral condyles may be pinched at the proximal anconeal process
 region and widened distally at the coronoid region (see Figure 12-7, A). With unusual
332
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 12-6. A, Lateral radiograph 2'/2 weeks after surgery on the elbow of the dog in
Figure 12-5, A. B, Lateral radiograph of the dog in Figure 12-5, A, taken 2'2 months after
bilateral elbow surgery. Note the elbow congruity. The puppy's forelimb function at this time 
was described by the owner as " normal."
12—The ElbowJoint
333
Anconeal process to
 radial head
distance decreased
Radial
head
Congruent
Ulna moves 
with medial
proximally
coronoid
Osteotomy
process
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 12-7. Incongruity of the elbow in the growing dog; the ulna is too short relative
to the radius. A, This mediolateral radiograph of elbow region illustrates that the trochlear
notch (arrouw) is not congruent with the radial head, resulting in subluxation of the humer-
oulnar joint. B, Drawing illustrates the changes seen radiographically in A. Note the position
and angle of the osteotomy. C, After osteotomy of the ulna, the proximal ulna is free to move
proximally beca use of muscular forces. D, Postoperative radiograph of the case shown in A.
Note the congruity of the trochlear notch of the ulna and the humeral condyles. A transverse
osteotomy was performed here. E, Three weeks postoperatively the ulnar gap is being bridged
by callus, and the humeroulnar joint is congruent. Normal exercise can be resumed. (B and
C from Gilson SD, Piermattei DL, Schwarz PD: Vet Surg 18:114, 1989.)
cases the radial head lies distal to the coronoid region because of radial shortening
(Figure 12-8, A).
 2. The usual surgical options for elbow incongruity involve lengthening the ulna
(Figure 12-7, D), when the ulna is too short relative to the radius; shortening the
ulna (Figure 12-8, D), when the radius is too short relative to the ulna; or lengthen-
ing the radius (see Figure 23-15), when the radius is too short. Lengthening the
radius requires bone plate or external fixation, which is a more expensive procedure
than altering the ulna, which is usually repaired with pins, or no internal fixation.
(See Chapter 23 for further details.) As mentioned, with total ulnar luxation
(see Figures 12-5 and 12-6), an ulnar derotational osteotomy is used.
Surgical Aiternatives
The clinician must decide how much surgical limb shortening is acceptable in an
already-shortened limb. A crude method for ascertaining limb length relative to the
 normal side during the physical examination is to align both olecranon regions 
334
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
A
Anconeal process to
radial head distance
increased
Radial head
congruent with
humeralcondyle
Ostectomy
Radius and
ulna move
proximally
B
+
D
E
FIGURE 12-8.  Incongruity of the elbow in the growing dog; the radius is too short relative
humeral condyle and the radial head, resulting in subluxation of the humeroradial joint.
B, Drawing illustrates the changes seen in A and the site for the ulnar ostectomy. C, After
ostectomy the radius and distal ulna are pulled into reduction by muscular forces. D, In the
 postoperative radiograph the gap between the humeral condyle and the radial head has been
partially reduced. An overly generous section was removed from the ulna. E, At 9 weeks
 postoperatively the ulna has healed and the humeroradial joint is congruent. (B and C from 
Gilson SD, Piermattei DL, Schwarz PD: Vet Surg 18:114, 1989.)
12—The Elbow Joint
335
FIGURE 12-9. A, Lateral radiograph of a normal elbow. Note the contour of the
semilunar notch and its even joint space (black arrows). The rounded coronoid process
(white arrouwbead) lies on the same level as the radial head. B, Craniocaudal radiograph
of a normal elbow.
n an  s  n j d aa n a e o a on nds
lie within 12 inch of each other, perhaps another 12-inch shortening of the radius
would be acceptable. If the toe discrepancy is worse, however, and the radius is
more than 1/4 inch short at the elbow, radial lengthening should be considered
When the ulna is too short, an ulna-lengthening osteotomy is performed, and
the osteotomy site is wedged apart. The insertion of a small, nonthreaded
intramedullary pin and Kirschner wires provides some fixation (Figure 12-7, B and C)
but still allows muscular forces to reduce the proximal ulna on weight bearing. This
situation has a better chance of being truly anatomical than the surgeon's estimation
of reduction. The intramedullary pin prevents the osteotomy site from "jackknif-
ing," which could result in persistent lameness. Limb length is unaffected, and the
surgical procedure is simple and effective.$
Alternatively, some surgeons prefer to perform the osteotomy in the distal third
of the ulna, obviating pin insertion and removal. However, elbow joint exposure
with visualization of the reduction is usually not performed. With either technique,
active controlled limb use is encouraged postoperatively to allow muscular forces to
provide final fine-tuning of the reduction.
Ulna Too Short
The ulna is exposed by a caudal approach to the proximal shaft of the ulna.2 The
joint capsule is incised on both sides of the ulna in the distal trochlear notch area
336
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
to allow joint visualization. An oblique osteotomy of the ulna is performed distal to
the trochlear notch (Figure 12-7, B). This cut should be made with a Gigli wire saw
or power saw, because an osteotome may split this hard bone. Typically the
osteotomy will spontaneously gap apart as the osteotomy is completed, illustrating
the dynamic muscular forces working on the proximal ulna. If this is not the case,
a periosteal elevator is used to break down the interosseous membrane until
the proximal ulna can be moved by forcing the osteotomy gap apart. A small,
nonthreaded intramedullary pin or Kirschner wire, 1/s to 3/32 inch in diameter
(1.6-2.4 mm), is driven from the tuber olecrani across the osteotomy and seated into
the midshaft region of the bone (Figure 12-7, C and D). The oblique osteotomy and
the pin protect against angular displacement of the tuber olecrani from triceps
muscle forces.
Radius Too Short
 If the radius is too short in relation to the ulna, a similar approach is made to the
 proximal ulna. An ostectomy of the ulna distal to the trochlear notch is performed
instead of a simple osteotomy (Figure 12-8, B and C). The width of the removed
bone must be sufficient to allow the radius and distal ulna to move proximally until
the radial head articulates normally with the lateral aspect of the humeral condyle.
Some narrowing of the gap will be seen postoperatively (Figure 12-8, D). A pin
is driven as in the previous case of ulnar shortening. If a radial lengthening is per-
formed, stability must be rigid and is accomplished by plate fixation or an external
fixator (see Chapter 23)
Aftercare and Prognosis
With either type of surgery previously described, it is important that early, active
 e si aq d  e aq q a po sq i
nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs; see Chapter 6) are administered to
help reduce pain and inflammation. Leash walking and limited free exercise are
encouraged. Full activity is resumed after healing is confirmed by radiography
(Figure 12-8, E). If a lengthening procedure of the radius is performed (see
Figure 23-15), excessive activity could cause premature implant loosening in
overly soft bone. Therefore, coaptation and very limited activity are recommended
for several weeks.
The prognosis in these incongruent elbows depends on the severity of the incon-
 gruency, growth potential remaining after repair, and age at time of repair If sur-
gery is performed successfully at 6 to 7 months of age, the prognosis is very good.
If surgery must be performed at a younger age due to severity, multiple surgeries
may have to be done to achieve lasting congruency. If the incongruency is severe and
surgery occurs later than 8 to 9 months of age, remodeling of the joint surfaces may
 be impossible, and significant degenerative joint disease may ensue.
 If surgery is done before degenerative joint disease is established, good results can
be expected.s
Congenital Luxation of Radial Head
This uncommon condition is seen in young chondrodystrophic breeds and sporadi-
cally in other breeds, including the Akita.6 The radial head migrates lateral relative
to the humeral epicondyle, along with ulnar shortening. Luxation may be partial or
total, in which case the medial side of the radial head lies lateral to the non-weight-
bearing aspect of the humeral epicondyle and is nonfunctional. Subluxation is com-
mon in chondrodystrophied breeds and at times may be relatively asymptomatic,
12—The Elbow Joint
337
s sauu moqia araas u ssar pue pnud Araa aq uen uexn saram
condition is often bilateral.
Clinical Signs
Beginning at 2 to 4 months of age, there is forelimb lameness, elbow swelling,
valgus deformity of the carpus, and varus deformity at the elbow (Figure 12-10).
Physical Examination
The limb deformities are noted, and crepitus may be palpated. The radial head lies
more lateral than the humeral epicondyle (Figure 12-11, A and B).
Radiographic Findings
 On the craniocaudal radiographic view, a subluxated radial head lies more lateral
than normal, but it still articulates somewhat with the weight-bearing surface of the
humerus. A luxated radial head lies lateral, proximal, and caudal to the humeral
weight-bearing surface (see Figure 12-11). The ulna may be bowed.
Pathogenesis
A proposed mechanism is ulnar physeal injury or improper intraarticular annular liga-
 a more important weight-bearing structure as the radius becomes nonfunctional.
Treatment
The radial articular surface becomes extremely deformed when luxated in very
young puppies. Therefore, reduction should be achieved early. A corrective
osteotomy with radial shortening, if done before 41/2 months of age, will result in
reluxation as asynchronous growth continues, thereby necessitating another surgi-
cal correction. Unfortunately, if performed after 512 months of age, remodeling of
the thinner articular cartilage is less likely. After osteotomy the radial head is
reduced and stabilized with pins (Figure 12-12) or a plate. Postoperative care
FIGURE 12-10. This 8-month-old
Akita has severe radial head luxation
and varus of the left elbow. The right
 radial head is also luxated.
338
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 12-11. A, Lateral radiograph demonstrates caudal and proximal displacement of
the radial head (arrou) of a 4'/2-month-old German shepherd. B, Craniocaudal radiograph of
the dog in A demonstrates lateral displacement of the radial head. C, Intraoperative photo of
a deformed radial head (a) of a 3-month-old basset hound lying lateral and proximal to the
articular weight-bearing surface of the humerus (b).
12—The Elbow Joint
339
FIGURE 12-12.Healed corrective
osteotomy of the proximal radius with
pin fixation that was performed in this
basset hound at 4 months of age.
 includes bandaging for 7 to 24 days and severe activity restriction until radiographic
evidence of bone healing (4-8 weeks).
 si hop Po-quo-/ on -o aun u paoad aq uo ieun apanond nao
lengthening procedure of the ulna (see Figure 12-7, B). This allows reduction of the
intact radius, which is then stabilized to the ulna utilizing screw fixation.4
 A third option that we have used successfully in a few cases involves amputating
the radial head and neck (Figure 12-13). This is a simple, less costly procedure.
However, stability of the elbow is less than if the humeral radial joint can be saved.
Activity is restricted for 3 to 4 weeks.
OSTEOCHONDROSIS OF THE ELBOW
Four conditions of the elbow are presumed to be a result of osteochondrosis:
(1) ununited anconeal process (UAP), (2) osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of the
medial humeral condyle, (3) ununited or fragmented coronoid process (FCP), and
(4) ununited medial epicondyle (UME), also known as calcification of the flexor
tendons. Each is discussed in the following sections.
Ununited Anconeal Process
 UAP is found primarily in large-breed dogs, especially German shepherds, basset
hounds, and the Saint Bernard. It is characterized by failure of the ossification cen-
ter of the anconeus to fuse with the olecranon by 5 months of age. Instability or
detachment of the process leads to eventual osteoarthrosis of the elbow joint. This
condition can be bilateral.
340
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Hayes and associates? observed a positive association between risk and adult
body weight; they suggested that in addition to familial genetics and hormonal fac-
tors, growth plate trauma associated with rapid or long periods of growth might be
involved in the etiology. Olsson&9 has suggested that UAP is a manifestation
of osteochondrosis, that is, a failure of endochondral ossification of the physeal
cartilage.
 a jo as  ran nss aess e sq ssd pe a
breeds. It is not ossified and therefore not visible radiographically until 12 to
13 weeks of age. It does not unite to the proximal ulna until 16 to 20 weeks of age
in the German shepherd and somewhat later in the Saint Bernard and basset hound.
Therefore the diagnosis of UAP should not be made until 5 months of age in the
German shepherd, which is the breed most affected in the United States. We have
 seen spontaneous reattachment between 7 and 8 months of age in the Saint Bernard
 and basset hound.
Wind10 believes a growth disturbance of the proximal ulna results in an “elliptical*
  s  a  od s  s 
pressure against the anconeal process, thereby separating the thickened osteochon-
drotic physis. We have seen this obviously elliptical semilunar notch especially in the
chondrodystrophied breeds.
Clinical Signs
Clinical signs of UAP are usually not apparent before 5 to 8 months of age.
 Occasionally, lameness is not evident until the dog is several years old. The signs
consist initially of only a slight limp, with the lower limb and elbow slightly
abducted. The swing phase of gait is limited by reduced motion at the elbow joint,
which is virtually locked. The elbow circumducts laterally during the swing phase
of gait. The dog stands and sits with the carpus in valgus and the paw externally
rotated, and the toes often seem widespread (Figure 12-14). Crepitus on flexion-
extension is more likely in older animals; joint effusion is also noticeable between
95
FIGURE 12-13. A, Lateral elbow radi-
ograph of a 3-month-old basset hound
after amputation of the radial head
because of congenital luxation. Note the
ra dial head and metaphysis cranial to the
foreleg that were removed and placed on
the radiographic cassette.
A
12—The Elbow Joint
341
B
C
FIGURE 12-13. Contirued B, Lateral elbow radiograph of the dog in A, 4 months post-
operatively. This dog had good function, but the opposite radial head was now luxated. Note
regrowth of a "new” radial head. C, Lateral elbow radiograph of a 9-year-old coonhound
that underwent radial head amputation for radial head luxation 81/2 years previously. The dog
was still able to hunt and only became slightly lame after a strenuous hunt.
the lateral epicondyle and the olecranon. This is best appreciated with the dog
standing.
Diagnosis
 Clinical signs, age, and breed form the basis for a provisional diagnosis of UAP;
however, this must be radiographically confirmed. Both elbows should be examined.
Acute flexion of the elbow moves the anconeal process distal to the medial
Sp r i (ai-i e sii saie) uesa s pe aia
there is a thin, linear black space between the anconeal process and the rest of the
olecranon (Figure 12-15, A). In older dogs the anconeal process is often completely
342
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 12-14.Typical stance of a dog
affected  with bilateral elbow  osteochon-
droses. Note varus of the elbows and valgus
of the carpi.
A
B
FIGURE 12-15. A, Extreme fexion of the elbow permits good visualization of this
ununited anconeal process (UAP) in a 6-month-old dog. Note the wide lucent zone dividing
the olecranon from the anconeal process (mediolateral view). B, In this 24-month-old dog
the anconeal process has become completely detached and is seen at the proximal extent of
(mediolateral view).
Anconeal
process
Line of
FIGURE 12-16.
.Ununited anconeal
separation
process (lateromedial view).
12—The Elbow Joint
343
detached and lies in the supratrochlear foramen (Figure 12-15, B). Considerable
arthritic changes in the form of osteophytes may be visible throughout the joint and
are best visualized from the craniocaudal view.
Treatment
Surgical Excision
Removal of the anconeal process is the most widely practiced method of treatment
for UAP. Although it is unquestionably true that the joint is mildly unstable with
the process removed, it is much better to remove the source of inflammation and
degenerative changes. In a series of 19 procedures on 16 dogs, with an average
follow-up of 191/2 months, good function was noted in most cases despite some loss
 of range of motion, crepitus, and arthritic changes.11 Early removal—-before marked
arthrosis--produces the best results.
 The elbow is exposed by a lateral approach to the caudal compartment of the
elbow2 (Figure 12-17, A). Considerable synovial hyperplasia may need to be
resected to visualize the process adequately. Usually, the anconeal process is still
attached to the ulna by a fibrous tissue and must be sharply dissected to free it. This is
usually accomplished with a narrow osteotome, periosteal elevator (Figure 12-17, B),
or scalpel blade. Grasping the process with a small, pointed bone clamp or towel
clamp aids in removing it from the joint. The anconeal process may be completely
Anconeus m.
elevated and
 retracted
Anconeal
process
A
Pointed
reduction
forceps
Osteotome in
line of
separation
B
FIGURE 12-17. Surgical removal of ununited anconeal process. A, The left elbow has been
exposed by an approach to the caudal compartment of the elbow joint.2 With the anconeus
muscle retracted, the anconeus is visualized. B, A narrow osteotome is being used to free the
anconeal process from the ulna. Grasping the process with a small, pointed bone forceps aids
in removing the process.
344
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
free within the joint, particularly in older dogs. In such cases, it may migrate to the
proximal portion of the joint (Figure 12-15, B). The process usually is not well
attached and can be removed quite easily.
 Occasionally the separation area is not readily observable. Approximately one
third the way down the semilunar notch, a small cartilage defect may be noted
is usually 25% to 30% larger than appreciated from the radiograph because of its
cartilaginous surfaces.
Screw Fixation
Repair of the UAP by screw fixation has been advocated.12,13 It is true that when a
lag screw is properly placed, the anconeal process will heal. The difficulty in this
approach lies in properly placing the screw. The primary consideration is that the
process must be perfectly positioned, or it will interfere with one of the humeral
condyles on extension of the elbow. The wobble induced by such interference results
in fatigue fracture of the screw. Screw fixation has the best chance of success in the
animal that is presented early, between 51/2 and 6 months of age. In this circum-
stance the process is still firmly attached to the ulna and has not moved. This
ensures that fixation of the process will be in an anatomically perfect position. The
a o aoy di e hu is aq eun aun yo apis e au o pad s ma
anconeal process caudally through the ulna, then drilling a glide hole from the cau-
 dal ulnar side. This eliminates having the screw head in the joint, as the original
technique described.12,13
Lengthening osteotomy of the proximal ulna also has been used, which reduces
 pressure of the anconeal process on the humeral trochlea and allows the UAP to
unite. Preliminary results by others appear encouraging in selected cases.14 We have
seen this work in a few cases of UAP in conjunction with severe ulnar shortening in
which release osteotomy was used to lengthen the ulna and improve congruity of
the elbow.
Aftercare
Animals with significant joint effusion tend to have slow healing of soft tissue.
 Immobilizing the joint in a modified Robert-Jones dressing (see Figure 2-23) for
 7 to 10 days aids significantly in preventing seromas and dehiscence.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of Medial Humeral Condyle
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) affects the medial condyle of the humerus, sometimes
bilaterally, in the same dog populations that are affected by OCD of the shoulder.
Although retrievers, Bernese mountain dogs, and Rottweilers between the ages of 5
to 8 months are the breeds most frequently affected, many other large breeds are
affected as well. (See Chapter 6 for a general discussion of osteochondrosis.)
Clinical Signs
Affected dogs show a foreleg lameness or stiffness and stilted gait starting
between ages 5 and 8 months. Occasionally, lameness is not obvious to an owner
until later in life. Lameness is intensified by exercise and is often most prominent
immediately after resting. Frequently, joint swelling can be palpated laterally
between the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the olecranon with the dog
standing. There may be valgus of the carpus. Pain may be elicited by deep palpation
over the medial collateral ligament or by stressing the ligament by flexing the
carpus 90 degrees and rotating the foot laterally. Pain may also be evident on
12—The Elbow Joint
345
hyperflexion or extension of the joint. Crepitus is occasionally elicited in dogs over
1 year of age, when osteoarthrosis wili be sufficiently advanced to produce
palpable thickening.
RadiographicSigns
The radiographic diagnosis of OCD of the elbow joint has been well described by
Olsson.1s A triangular subchondral defect can be seen on the medial aspect of the
humeral trochlea in the craniocaudal projection (Figure 12-18, A and B). Sclerosis
of the medial condyle is often present near the lesion. Roughening of the medial epi
  ae    i  a is a  si s r
6 months. Later in the disease, osteophyte production is apparent in many areas of
the joint. The lateral view also allows visualization of discontinuity of the medial
trochlea (Figure 12-18, C). In dogs older than 9 to 10 months, osteophytes will be
Osteophytes
Cartilage
flapin
medial trochlear
ridge
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 12-18. Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) of the medial humeral condyle. A, A sub-
 chondral defect (arrouw) is seen on this craniocaudal view of the right limb. B, Similar changes
are seen here in the trochlear ridge of the left limb, and, in addition, osteophytes are present
on the medial epicondyle. C, Although the cartilage flap is seen in this drawing, it is rarely
seen radiographically because of superimposition of the condyles and its cartilaginous com-
 on medial humeral condyle caused by fragmented coronoid process in young dogs.
346
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
seen on the anconeus and radial head. Both elbows should be examined.
Fragmented coronoid process (FCP) may be seen concurrently with OCD.
 In our experience with OCD of the elbow, the cartilage flap is traumatized and
eroded away quicker than OCD of other joints. By 8 to 9 months of age, often only
an oval area of "erosion" on the humerus is seen, with or without "joint mice"
s a u a as, e a si a   a di ai aas
area of the humeral condyle, but it is often narrower and longer than the OCD bed
(Figure 12-18, E). Therefore, in dogs older than 10 months, it is very difficult to
determine whether the damage to the humerus is attributable to an eroded OCD
flap or trauma from an FCP. Statistics as to OCD occurrence with or without FCP
thus may be misleading. In a study using computerized data on elbows in 62 cases,
only 2 of 64 elbows were believed to be OCD, whereas 34 of 64 were diagnosed as
fissured or fragmented coronoid processes.16 In our surgical experience, we see
many more cases of FCP than OCD, and occasionally we see the two together.
Often, however, we cannot tell if OCD had accompanied the FCP, as previously
discussed. In the cited study, 27 elbows underwent surgery, with two cases of OCD
found, 22 fragmented or fissured coronoid processes, two ununited medial
epicondyles, and one undiagnosed arthritic joint.16
Diagnosis
The specific diagnosis of OCD must be made radiographically and while the dog is
5 to 9 months of age. On exploration, observation of a flap confirms the diagnosis.
After 9 months of age the triangular defect may fill in radiographically, and the flap
may be gone on exploration. The diagnosis is only presumptive at this point.
Treatment
Treatment consists of surgical excision of cartilage flaps and removal of loose carti-
lage from the joint. Good clinical results are obtained if surgery is done before
degenerative joint disease is well established. This means that animals treated
further arthrosis will develop. Grondalen17 found that dogs with OCD had a better
 prognosis than those with FCP, which conflicts with Olsson's results.15
 Surgical Technique
The elbow is approached from the medial aspect.218 This simple muscle-separating
approach gives adequate exposure (Figure 12-19, A), especially if a valgus stress
using a sandbag is applied on the lateral aspect of the elbow. Occasionally, some
prefer an osteotomy of the medial epicondyle (Figure 12-19, B). The epicondyle is
fixed with a lag screw. Drilling for placement of the lag screw before osteotomy of
the epicondyle ensures accurate replacement of the epicondyle and simplifies the
 drilling process. We have not found this technique necessary since adopting the
muscle-separating approach.
Removal of the cartilage flap is easily accomplished with either approach because
the usual location of the lesion is in the center of the surgical field (see Figure 12-19).
Sharp excision frees partially attached flaps. Curettage should be just sufficient to
clean the edges of the lesion. The joint should be thoroughly searched for free frag-
ments of cartilage before the closure.
Aftercare
A light bandage is applied for 2 weeks, with restricted activity advised for 4 weeks
Often, dogs after a muscle separation technique are walking normally within a few
 days after surgery, even when done bilaterally.
12—The Elbow Joint
347
B
Osteotomy
 of medial
Elevation of
cartilageflap
epicondyle
FIGURE 12-19. Surgical treatment of osteochondritis dissecans of the medial humeral
condyle. A, The left elbow is exposed by a medial muscle-splitting procedure. After separating
cranial and caudal to the pronator to facilitate retraction and avoidance while retracting with
 a Gelpi retractor. An L-shaped incision is made through the joint capsule and medial collateral
Jo pie aue ym moana aui oi ssas snaiea e suaidde aq paisisse aeara si ansodxg tuae
a sandbag positioned laterally on the elbow. B, The left elbow has been exposed by a medial
approach with osteotomy of the epicondyle.2 The pronator teres, flexor carpi radialis muscles,
elevated with a scalpel.
Fragmented Medial Coronoid Process
 The breeds of animals affected, clinical manifestations, and etiopathology of the
FCP are similar to those found for OCD of the humeral condyle. According to
some,1s OCD and FCP coexist 37% of the time. As explained previously for OCD
of the elbow, the humeral lesion is often undefinable. It may represent the bed after
the OCD flap has been eroded, or it may represent a "kiss" lesion from the FCP
underneath it (Figure 12-18, D and E). As with OCD, this lesion is often considered
to be part of the osteochondrosis complex,19 but trauma20 and growth discrepancies
between the radius and ulna have been proposed as causes.
Wind10 found a developmental incongruity of the trochlear notch of the ulna that
was associated with the development of UAP, FCP, and OCD of the medial humeral
condyle. In affected breeds a slightly elliptical trochlear notch with a decreased arc
of curvature develops, which is too small for the humeral trochlea. This results in
major points of contact in areas of the anconeal process and medial coronoid
 process and little or no contact in other areas of the trochlea. The incidence of FCP
and OCD (which were not separated in this study) was 16%, and the incidence of
FCP with UAP was 3%.21
 In our experience, FCP is seen much more often at surgery than elbow OCD. The
majority of FCP cases are bilateral radiographically, although clinically the dog may
show either unilateral or bilateral lameness. In some instances, one elbow may have
an OCD lesion while the other may have an FCP or an FCP and OCD. Grondalen2
has shown that, especially in the Rottweiler, there can be a "fissured" coronoid
process, meaning that the process is not grossly loose, but usually has an observable
line in the articular surface. This has paralleled our experience. Computed tomog-
raphy (CT) examination is especially helpful in assessing these cases for surgical
decisions.
348
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Surgical excision of loose cartilage or bony fragments or excision of a fissured
coronoid before significant arthrosis develops affords a good prognosis, but later
Aqa si s ss e  si s  ad a u 
ss, e ss  ssnrd pn p a 'aadxa o 
lesion on the medial aspect of the humeral condyle. This lesion is a cartilage abra-
sion and is difficult to distinguish from an old OCD lesion. The abrasion is usually
2 mm wide and extends almost the whole length of the articular surface of the
medial condyle (Figure 12-18, E).
Clinical Signs
Little clinical evidence exists to differentiate FCP from OCD of the elbow. Pain on
flexion-extension of the elbow and lateral rotation of the paw is slightly more
consistent in FCP In younger dogs, effusion is often present and is detected as a
bulge between the lateral epicondyle of the humerus and the olecranon process of
 the ulna. In dogs older than 10 to 11 months, joint effusion, crepitus, and general
thickening resulting from osteophyte production are also more evident. In older
dogs a ridge of osteophytes may be palpable between the prominence of the humeral
lateral epicondyle and the olecranon.
Radiographic Signs
Radiographic examination of the elbow is important despite radiographic signs of
the FCP often being nonspecific. Excessive osteoarthrosis and superimposition of
the radial head and coronoid proces make identification of the FCP difficult.
 Usually the first radiographic sign seen is the appearance of an osteophyte on the
anconeal process (Figure 12-20, A and B). This may be subtle at first and consists
of a convex bony opacity on top of the normally dish-shaped concave anconeal process
(see Figure 12-9, A). This view and finding are used for screening purposes for breed-
ing dogs. On the craniocaudal view, osteophytes appear medially on the coronoid
process (Figure 12-20, C and D) and on the medial humeral condyle (Figure 12-21, A).
Occasionally, the osteophytes are present on the coronoid process but not obvious
on the anconeal process (Figure 12-20, C). Therefore, three views are normally
recommended for symptomatic dogs: lateral, flexed lateral, and craniocaudal.
a pii ns  o s ss si  a ans  as
The normal coronoid process has a beaklike projection cranially (Figure 12-9, A). With
FCP, however, there may be a squared or blunted cranial margin without the "beak"
(Figure 12-20, B). With chronicity, sclerosis of the proximal ulna surrounding the
semilunar notch may be seen (8-10 months of age).
 A normal sesamoid bone is seen in some large dogs, located just lateral to the
radial head, and should not be mistaken as a joint mouse (Figure 12-21, A).
Although radiographic signs may be suggestive, definitive diagnosis often
depends on arthrotomy. This should be undertaken immediately on any young.
large-breed animal that shows persistent lameness and radiographic signs of
osteoarthritis or joint effusion, preferably between 6 and 8 months of age. We have
seen some dogs, however, whose lameness did not begin until 2 to 3 years of age,
with minimal degenerative joint disease present. Perhaps this represents a fissured
coronoid process with a recent break. These dogs have functioned well after surgery.
Often these cases are bilateral and may be operated bilaterally. In affected Labrador
retrievers, Studdert and colleagues23 reported a 90% occurrence of bilateral lesions.
Diagnosis
As mentioned earlier, FCP is usually not proved with conventional radiography. The
 diagnosis is presumptive based on the breed, age, joint swelling palpated laterally,
12—The Elbow Joint
349
A
C
FIGURE 12-20. Fragmentation of the medial coronoid process. A, Mediolateral view.
Typical osteophytes on the dish-shaped anconeal process (twhite arrow). B, Mediolateral view.
Subtle osteophytes causing the anconeal process to lose its dish-shaped profile (black arrow).
Note the vertical blunting of the coronoid process (black arrouwhead). Compare with Figure
epicondyle (open uwhite arrow), and the nondisplaced coronoid process is uncharacteristically
well visualized (solid arrow). D, The craniocaudal view of the dog seen in B. Note the osteo-
phytes on the medial epicondyle of the humerus and coronoid process (black arrouwheads).
and radiographs demonstrating osteophytes without an OCD defect. A CT scan
may actually demonstrate the separate piece (Figures 12-22 and 12-23), but CT is
costly, often unnecessary (i.e., not needed for the surgical exploration), and unavail-
able to many practitioners (see Chapter 1). However, loose pieces seen on the
 CT scan and at surgery may actually represent fractured osteophytes or joint mice
from OCD, especially if not located in the typical area of the FCP (between radius
and coronoid process). Therefore, making an absolute diagnosis based on surgical
and CT findings may not be entirely accurate, especially in dogs over 1 year old.
This must be kept in mind in breeding and genetic studies.
Surgical Technique
Exposure of the elbow joint is identical to that for OCD, as discussed previously
(see Figure 12-19). Forceful abduction and rotation of the antebrachium are helpful
350
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
B
FIGURE 12-21. Fragmented coronoid process (FCP). A, Osteophyte production is evident
on the medial epicondyle, and a displaced FCP is noted on this craniocaudal view. There is
the FCP. The process may not be displaced in all cases. B, In this mediolateral view, osteo-
phytes are present on the radial head, but anconeal osteophytes are obscured by the humerus.
The FCP can be seen here, but radiographically it is superimposed on the radial head. Note
the normal sesamoid lateral to the radial head seen in some individual large-breed dogs.
1
B
 FIGURE 12-22. A, Computed tomography (CT) scan through the ulna and radius. Note
the obvious black separation between the coronoid and its tip (white arrouw). B, Reformatted
 CT view in the plane of the dotted white lines in the lower left part of the picture. In the upper 
right, the black separation is seen (uhite arrouw).
12—The Elbow Joint
351
国
SF
B
FIGURE 12-23. A, CT scan through the radius and ulna in a 9-month-old Rottweiler with
a "fissured" or cracked coronoid (uhite arrou), which may not be apparent on visual inspec-
tion. An osteotome is used to start the removal parallel to the cleavage plane denoted from
the CT image. B, Reformatted CT view of the white dotted lines in the lower part of the
picture. Note also a separate piece (fracture of an osteophyte) to the left of the dotted line. In
the upper right, a dark, abnormal coronoid process (uwhite arrou) is seen, but no obvious
"fracture" line.
 in increasing exposure of the coronoid process. In most cases the process is loose 
enough to be readily apparent, but in some patients it is necessary to exert force on the
process to find the cleavage plane. Loose coronoid processes are usually attached cra-
nially with soft tissue, requiring sharp dissection. In fissured processes, a small-width
osteotome is used to break the top surface, which usually breaks cleanly.
A CT scan is especially helpful in these cases.
 Older dogs with secondary osteophytes present different problems. In these cases
the medial aspect of the coronoid process may be overgrown with enough osteo-
phytes to cover the cleavage plane and may give the process sufficient stability so
before the FCP can be appreciated. In addition, erosions in the osteophytic prolifer-
ation of the humerus may represent "kiss" lesions from the osteophytes on the
 coronoid region.
 Because of the possibility of slight malarticulation resulting from discrepancies
between the ulna and humeral condyle,10,21 Olsson24 advised removal of the base of
the medial coronoid process so that there is no possibility of contact with the
condyle. The joint is carefully inspected for OCD lesions and fractured osteophytes.
 After their removal, irrigation is used to remove any small cartilage fragments
before closure.
Aftercare and Prognosis
A soft bandage is applied for 2 weeks, with restricted activity for 4 weeks, followed
by gradual return to full activity. The outlook for function is good if the FCP
352
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 is removed before secondary degenerative joint disease is well established. These
animals will have recognizable signs of degenerative joint disease later in life but
usually function well because the changes are not as severe as in untreated
cases. This means that animals treated at 7 to 9 months have the best outlook;
the prognosis declines rapidly when surgery is delayed past 12 months and degen-
erative joint disease is extensive. Cases that suddenly worsen in later years have also
improved with surgery. A CT examination is especially helpful in identifying all
loose fragments and fractured osteophytes that should be removed,2s in hopes of
achieving limb function before the condition worsens.
Ununited Medial Epicondyle
UME is a poorly defined, uncommon elbow condition seen in several large breeds,
especially the Labrador retriever. UME is characterized by detached ossified bodies
located either at the medial joint line or caudally just distal to the squared-off
medial epicondylar ridge. In many cases these bodies are located in both locations
(Figures 12-24 and 12-25, C and D). Often they are seen in conjunction with other
 osteochondroses of the elbow. These pieces may actually grow to be 3 or 4 cm in
length.
With no other conditions, the ossified bodies may cause lameness or may be
 asymptomatic. There may be no history of trauma, or the lameness may result from
nonviolent trauma, such as hunting or playing with other dogs. Signs may begin
at age 4 to 5 months or at 5 years, or again, signs may be an incidental finding.
Others prefer to call this condition "calcification of the flexor tendons of the
medial epicondyle.*26 We believe, as do Olsson? and Bennett and May,27 that UME
is a form of osteochondrosis in which fragments of the cartilage avulse with
tendons. Over time, the cartilage changes to bone and enlarges, reaching a point
where the bony pieces may rub against the humerus or ulna, causing lameness
(Figure 12-25, E and F).
The rationale in believing there is an underlying problem (i.e., osteochondrosis)
other than trauma is that UME (1) is often bilateral, (2) is often seen without trauma
in the history, (3) has been seen in three littermates of English setters, and (4) is seen
especially in the Labrador retriever, German shepherd, and English setter. We have
seen a case in a 14-month-old Labrador retriever with FCP that was surgically
treated and did well for 4 years. On reexamination for a 2-month-old lameness,
the 2-mm UME that was seen 4 years earlier had grown six to eight times in size
(see Figure 12-25, E and F). After excision the lameness resolved within 3 weeks.
Histological analysis of these pieces in the older dog is not helpful in elucidating the
pathogenesis of UME.
A
B
FIGURE 12-24. Schematic drawing of the
two locations where loose pieces of bone
(ununited medial epicondyle) are located. A,
Lateral distal humerus. B, Craniocaudal view
of the distal humerus. The asterisk at site α is
the position of the fragment that detaches
from the caudal distal medial epicondyle. The
asterisk at site b is the position of the frag-
ment that detaches from the medial aspect of
the medial epicondyle.
12—The Elbow Joint
353
B
C
D
FIGURE 12-25. Ununited medial epicondyle (UME), or calcification of the flexor tendons,
arising from the caudal medial epicondyle. A, Lateral view of UME located at the open
arrowhead. B, Lateral view of UME in another dog. C, Lateral view of a large UME seen cau-
dal, as in site a (see Figure 12-24) (black arrows). The mineralized densities at site b are not
evident (wbite arrouwheads). (D) Craniocaudal view of dog in C. Note the densities in site b
are obvious, but those in site a are obscured by the humerus.
Continued
Clinical Examination
On physical examination, thickness around the medial condyle may be detected
along with pain, sometimes elicited by direct pressure.
Radiographic Findings
 Two radiographic views (flexed lateral, craniocaudal) of the elbow must be studied
carefully to determine the number and location of the fragments. These may be
found only on the craniocaudal view spanning or just distal to the joint line. On the
s au jo usoans j aoq ponn aq e an ma pe
354
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
F
FIGURE 12-2s. Continued E, A 2-mm mineralized density (arrow) in a 14-month-old
Labrador treated successfully for a fragmented coronoid process. F, Four years later, the dog
presented with 2-month-old lameness that resolved quickly after extirpation. Note the
growth of the fragment seen in E (arrows).
and radius. The fragments located on the distal caudal epicondyle may be seen
on the flexed lateral view but not on the craniocaudal view, again because of
superimposition (Figure 12-25).
Diagnosis
The diagnosis as to whether lameness is caused by UME is problematic, since
it may be asymptomatic and may coexist with OCD or FCP. In the mature
dog, however, these fragments are just outside the articular surface and cause
minimal degenerative joint disease. If degenerative joint disease is present, other
 Pogs ue ssa no as pan an aq  (h 'ao "o'a) soo
explored.
Treatment
 Surgical extirpation usually is rewarding if there is no coexisting elbow condition.
 In Figure 12-25, C and D, lesion at site b is located in the fibrotic tissue surround-
ing the flexor carpi radialis, whereas lesion at site a is more caudal in the scarred
origin of the deep and superficial flexors. Often these fragments are not palpable,
bony fragments are sharply dissected, carefully avoiding horizontal transection of
tendons. All fragments should be removed. If fragments are left, they may grow and
result in return of lameness. If degenerative joint disease is present, the elbow should
be explored further. (See OCD and FCP sections.)
Aftercare and Prognosis
The limb is bandaged for 10 to 14 days, followed by another 2 weeks of restricted
activity. If all fragments have been removed, and if no other condition is present to
cause the lameness, the prognosis is excellent.
12—The Elbow Joint
355
ARTHRODESIS OF THE ELBOW
Arthrodesis of the elbow is an alternative to amputation for severely comminuted
intraarticular fractures, chronic luxation or subluxation from a variety of
causes, and severe osteoarthritis. High radial nerve palsy has also been suggested
as an indication. Elbow arthrodesis, however, is a very disabling fusion and
should be considered only when the owner refuses amputation. Amputation will 
provide better overall function than arthrodesis if other joints are relatively
 pain free.
 Strict attention to detail to establish proper joint angles and rigid internal fixa-
tion are necessary for success. Although a variety of fixation methods have been
described, multiple-screw or bone plate fixation has yielded the best results in our
 sard e n s po iss r   asi s
arthrodesis.)
Surgical Technique
Bone Plate Fixation
The joint is exposed by a combined caudal approach with osteotomy of the
olecranon process and lateral approach to the elbow (Figure 12-26, A). A second
ostectomy of the proximal ulna is performed to provide a smooth curve from the
caudal humeral shaft to the caudal ulnar shaft, with the joint at the functioning
angle, usually 110 degrees (Figure 12-26, B). The lateral joint capsule is opened
widely to allow the radius and ulna to be rotated medially and thus expose the
interior of the joint. Articular cartilage is removed from all contact surfaces of the
radial head, humeral condyles, and trochlear notch of the ulna. The humeral
capitulum is flattened to fit against the radial head.
A temporary pin is driven across the joint to hold it at the selected angle, and an
8- to 10-hole bone plate is contoured to the caudal surfaces of the ulna and humerus
(Figure 12-26, C). The proximal ulna may have to be further flattened slightly to
d a y mas  e se pad si mas u d a jo as oo mo
P si maos sl puoas e ei peau li aui ou apoida laei pue
through the plate and ulna into the medial epicondyle. The rest of the screws are
 inserted, and the temporary pin is removed.
Autogenous cancellous bone graft from the proximal humerus and the ulnar
ostectomy is packed into and around the joint. The olecranon process is attached
medial to the plate by a lag screw (Figure 12-26, D). The anconeus muscle is detached
from the humerus, and the ulnaris lateralis tendon is sutured. The remaining tissues
are closed in layers.
Lag Screw Fixation
 asxa rns ssa s moqia a se on anan s
operating time while eliminating the cost of a large bone plate. The joint is exposed
by the lateral approach to the elbow.2 Additional extensor muscles and the lateral
collateral ligament are cut to expose the joint widely (Figure 12-27, A). Articular
cartilage is debrided as detailed previously.
 a ae sp  u i  a se aed s ud  i
u l a on aa p a  s  e s pd si ma
(Figure 12-27, B and C). The second screw is lagged from the olecranon process into
the humerus just proximal to the supratrochlear foramen. The third screw is lagged
356
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Anconeus m.elevated from
olecranon
Lateral
collateral
ligament、
Ulnar n.
Ulnaris
lateralis m.
Joint
Osteotomyof
capsule
olecranon
Ostectomy of
process
olecranon
Lag screw
Temporary
into radial
pin
head
110°
Lag screw
Completed
into medial
ostectomy
epicondyle
of olecranon
B
Suture of
ulnaris lateralis m.
,Olecranon process 
lag screwed to
D
medial epicondyle
FIGURE 12-26.
Arthrodesis of the elbow by bone plate fixation. A, The left elbow has been
exposed by a combined caudal approach with osteotomy of the olecranon process and lateral
approach.2 The ulnaris lateralis and lateral collateral ligament have been sectioned, and the
joint capsule has been opened widely to allow for removal of joint cartilage. Ostectomy of
the ulna is outlined here. B, Ostectomy of the ulna is completed to form a smooth curve from
the humerus to the ulna. C, Temporary pin holds the joint at the selected angle, and the plate 
is contoured. A minimum of four plate holes for each bone is required. One screw is lagged
through the plate and lateral epicondyle into the radial head, and a second screw is lagged
through the plate and ulna into the medial epicondyle. D, The olecranon process is lag-
screwed to the humerus medial to the plate, and the ulnaris lateralis tendon is sutured. The
anconeus muscle has been excised.
12—The Elbow Joint
357
Temporary
pin
Joint
capsule
Lateral
110°
collateral
Ulnaris
ligament 
lateralis m.
- Lateral
digital
extensor m.
A
B
c
FIGURE 12-27.
 Elbow arthrodesis with lag screw fixation. A, The left elbow has been
exposed by a lateral approach. The ulnaris lateralis, lateral digital extensor, and lateral col-
lateral ligament have been sectioned, allowing the joint capsule to be opened widely. Removal
of articular cartilage follows. B, Temporary pin fixes the joint at the desired angle, and the
screws are placed in order. Screws 1, 2, and 3 are lag screws, and screw is 4 positional,
threaded in both bones. C, Caudal view of the screw placement.
  si s  a aa  a   an 
threaded into the ulna and the center of the epicondyles. The temporary pin is
removed. Autogenous cancellous bone graft from the proximal humerus is packed
into and around the joint. Extensor and anconeus muscles are sutured, and the
remaining tissues are closed in layers.
Aftercare
A spica splint is applied and maintained for 4 weeks (see Figure 2-23). Exercise is
restricted for 4 more weeks, at which time radiographic signs of fusion should be 
noted before exercise is gradually returned to normal.
References
1. Campbell JR: Luxation and ligamentous injuries of the elbow of the dog, Vet Clin North Ar
1:429, 1971.
2. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atias of approaches to the bones of the dog and cat, ed 4,
Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
3. Bingel SA, Riser WH: Congenital elbow luxation in the dog, J Smatl Anim Pract 18:445, 1977.
4. Guerevitch R, Hohn RB: Surgical managerment of lateral luxation and subluxation of the canine
radial head, Vet Surg 9:49, 1980.
5. Gilson SD, Piermattei DL, Schwarz PD: Treatment of humeroulnar subluxation with a dynanic
proximal ulnar osteotomy: a review of 13 cases, Vet Surg 18:114, 1989.
6. Flo GL, DeCamp CE: Surgical correction of congenital radial head luxations. In Proceedings of the
1990 Veterinary Orthapedic Society Annuat Meeting, Jackson Hole, Wyo, 1990.
 7. Hayes HM, Seiby LA, Wilson GP, Hohn RB: Epidemiologic observations of canine elbow disease
(ermphasis on dysplasia), J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 15:449, 1979.
8.
Olsson SE: Osteochondrosis in the dog.
.In Kirk RW,editor: Current veterinary therapy VI,
Philadelphia, 1977, Saunders, pp 880-886.
9.
 Olsson SE: Osteochondrosis-a growing problem to dog breeders, Gaines Dog Research Progress,
White Plains, NY, Gaines Dog Research Center, Surnmer 1976, pp 1-11.
10. Wind AP: Elbow incongruity and developmental elbow diseases in the dog. Part I, J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 22:711, 1986.
358
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
11. Sinibaldi KR, Arnoczky SP: Surgical removal of the ununited anconeal process in the dog, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 11:192, 1975.
12.F
1970.
13.F
 Fox SM, Burbidge HM, Bray JC, Guerin SR: Ununited anconeal process: lag screw fixation, J Ar
Anim Hosp Assoc 32:52, 1996.
14.9
Sjostrom L, Kasstrom H, Kallberg M: Ununited anconeal process in the dog: pathogenesis and
treatment by osteotomy of the ulna, Vet Comp Orthop Traurma 8:170, 1995.
15.（
 Olsson SE: The early diagnosis of fragmented coronoid process and osteochondritis dissecans of the
canine elbow joint, J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 19:616, 1983.
16.
 Rosenstein Ds, Stickle RS, Flo GL, et al: Computerized tomography of the canine elbow, Vet Rad
Ultrasound 35(4):244, 1994 (abstract).
17.（
Grondalen J: Arthrosis in the elbow joint of rapidly growing dogs. Part 3. Ununited medial coro-
noid process of the ulna and osteochondritis dissecans of the hurmeral condyle: surgical procedure
for correction and postoperative investigation, Nord Vet Med 34:520, 1979.
18. Probst CW, Flo GL, McLoughlin MA, et al: A simple medial approach to the canine elbow for
treatment of fragmented coronoid process and osteochondritis dissecans, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
25:331, 1989.
19.(
Olsson SE: Osteochondrosis of the elbow joint inthe dog: its manifestations, indications for surgery,
and surgical approach, Arch Am Coltl Vet Surg 6:46, 1977.
20. Berzon JL, Quick CB: Fragmented coronoid process: anatomical, clinical, and radiographic
considerations with case analyses, J Am Anir Hosp Assoc 16:241, 1980.
21.
Wind AP, Packard ME: Elbow incongruity and developmental elbow diseases in the dog. Part II,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:725, 1986.
22.(
Grondalen J: Arthrosis in the elbow joint of young rapidly growing dogs. Part 5. A pathoanatormical
investigation, Nord Vet Med 33:1, 1981.
23.9
 Studdert VP, Lavelle RB, Beilharz RG, et al: Clinical features and heritability of osteochondrosis of
the elbow in Labrador retrievers, J Smalt Anirm Pract 32:557, 1991.
24.（
Olsson SE: Personal communication, 1988.
25.F
 Flo GL: Surgical removal of fragmented coronoid processes and fractured anconeal process in the
older dog with evidence of severe degenerative joint disease, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 213:1780, 1998.
26.
 Zontine WJ, Weitkamp RA, Lippincott CL: Redefined type of elbow dysplasia involving calcified
flexor tendons attached to the rmedial humeral epicondyle in three dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
194:1082, 1989.
27. Bennett D, May C: Joint diseases of dogs and cats. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of
veterinary internat medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders.
13
Fractures of the Radius
and Ulna
All the various types of radial and ulnar fractures can be seen involving either bone
asan 'snpen aul jo pii jexond aui ot les s- eu au pue snpen aun yoq no
bones usually fracture as a unit, but proximal to this region, independent fractures
 ne uon e uue jo suop a s aid ae sa  jo
fracture site, delayed union, nonunion, and subsequent growth deformity may occur
in fractures of the distal third, and the surgeon should always keep in mind meas-
ures to prevent these common sequelae.
FIXATION TECHNIQUES
Coaptation
Stable type A1 and A2 fractures of the diaphysis and distal radius/ulna respond to
External coaptation in a narrow range of cases (see Table 2-1 and Figure 13-13, A).
Fractures of only the radius or the ulna with its paired bone intact, however, are
75% serious complication rate in toy and miniature breeds, whereas medium-sized
dogs (10-65 pounds) less than 1 year of age responded well, with no serious com-
plications. Figure 13-1 illustrates the principle of location of fracture versus length
of cast for applying coaptation fixation for these fractures. Reduction may be
accomplished closed by a combination of traction, countertraction, and digital
manipulation. In some cases, open reduction is preferable to closed manipulation,
which may cause an undue amount of trauma to tissue in the fracture site. There
is a tendency for the carpus to hyperextend, develop valgus deviation, and rotate
position of the foot on standing and walking while favoring the leg is also a factor.
To prevent this undesirable development when an external splint is used, the foot
should be placed in a position of slight varus, flexion, and inward rotation.
Ordinarily, this can be accomplished best with a molded cast.
Splinting
As the sole method of fixation, the use of a Mason metasplint or similar coaptation
splint (see Figure 2-27) is limited to the more stable and more distal fractures
(e.g, greenstick and certain intraperiosteal fractures) because it is impossible to
359
360
Part II—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 13-1. Stable fractures of the ulna and
radius (b) may be immobilized with a cast extending
to the midhumeral region (b).
  sn on  s  e  moa a 
constant rechecking to make sure they are accomplishing the intended objective. For
complete fractures, the position of slight varus, flexion, and inward rotation is
difficult or impossible to obtain and maintain when these splints are used. Thomas
splints can be satisfactorily used for diaphyseal fractures for those familiar with
their application (see Figure 2-25); however, the molded fiberglass cast is generally
more satisfactory.
Casts
 In stable fractures, a plaster of Paris or fiberglass molded long-leg cast may be used
as the sole method of fixation (see Figure 2-21). If a cast is used on an unstable frac-
ture, overriding frequently develops at the fracture site. Overpadding inside the cast
allows for torsional movement at the fracture site and may result in delayed union,
nonunion, or malunion. If the cast is applied when the leg is swollen, looseness and
instability may result if the cast is not readjusted. Two sites that are predisposed to
pressure ulceration under a forelimb cast are the accessory carpal pad and the point
of the olecranon. The use of “doughnut" pads under the cast at these pressure
 points reduces the overall requirement for padding thickness and reduces pressure
ulceration at these sites. An alternative to doughnut pads, if fiberglass is used, is to
use a cast saw to cut a rectangular window in the fiberglass over the pressure point
to reduce local pressure.
Intramedullary Pins and Wires
The radius is not as amenable to intramedullary (IM) pin fixation as are other long
 bones because the radius is relatively straight and covered at both ends by articular
cartilage, and the medullary canal narrows in craniocaudal diameter.
If an IM pin is used, it must be inserted medial to the distal articular surface and
must be of small diameter to bend and travel up the medullary canal in the manner
of a Rush pin. If inserted cranially, the IM pin must be started above the joint to
13—Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
361
avoid cartilage trauma and flexion contracture of the carpus. Likewise,it must bend
to follow the medullary canal. Supplemental coaptation must be used after IM pinning.
In small dogs the IM pin may be used to assist in holding end-to-end alignment
 in stable fractures. In general, the pin that is inserted is too small to approximate
   se    an s s n i  
- e are 'spanq on p s u Aadsa rx  ie sid 'uo
mon cause of delayed union and nonunion.4.s IM pinning is only practical in large
breeds, and even in these cases it has the disadvantage of requiring supplemental
coaptation. Better methods of fixation are available.
 Figure 13-2 shows the method of insertion of an IM pin in the radius in large-breed
dogs, as follows:
1. The pin is started at the styloid process, then continues up through the
marrow cavity, Rush pin style (Figure 13-2, A).
 2. The pin is inserted obliquely through the cranial cortex and medullary
cavity of the distal segment into the proximal segment, Rush pin style.
 Intramedullary pinning of the ulna is easily accomplished from the tuber olecrani
distally. The narrow diameter of the distal third of the bone limits the use of suitable-
size pins to the proximal two thirds of the ulna. Steinmann pinning of the ulna is
generally indicated for additional support for a radial fracture fixation. Type A1
proximal extraarticular fracture (see Figure 13-7) is the only diaphyseal fracture
suitable to IM pinning as the primary fixation.
External Fixators
The fixator is adaptable to most shaft fractures of the radius and ulna. It is partic-
ularly indicated in open fractures, delayed unions, nonunions, and corrective 
osteotomies. The splint works particularly well with small dogs. In most cases the
pins are inserted on the medial or craniomedial border of the radius because the
bone is more superficial in this location, and the splint is in the position of least
interference from cages, fences, and other objects.
 FIGURE 13-2. Insertion of intramedullary (IM) pins
in radius. A, IM pin is started at the styloid process,
continuing up through the marrow cavity in a Rush pin
style. B, Alternatively, IM pin is inserted obliquely
through the cranial cortex and marrow cavity of the
distal segment into the marrow cavity of the proximal
segment in a Rush pin style.
A
B
362
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
All the various configurations (unilateral and biplanar type I, bilateral type II,
trilateral type Il) may be used. In the authors' experience, however, the unilateral
type I single bar is adequate in almost all cases, is the simplest to apply, and has the
fewest complications. This method requires the placement of all pins in the same
plane (Figure 13-3). Figure 13-17, A and B, shows a complex fracture of radius and
 ad e smous  i-i a pue sud ee rex ad req-aus ym su
fixator. Depending on the size of the animal and stability of the fracture, 2/2, 3/3,
or 4/4 pins may be used. On some extremely fragmented fractures, a biplanar
 configuration type IB (one unilateral splint on medial surface and one on cranial
surface) may be indicated. This configuration is also useful for distal A2 fractures
because it allows placement of three fixation pins in the very short segment (see
 Figure 13-22). A hybrid type I-II splint also has application in extremely short dis-
tal segments (see Figure 13-23). If increased stress is expected at the fracture site
because of large dog size, temperament, or fracture configuration, another option is
to select a fixator system with larger-diameter connecting rods for increased fracture
stiffness, such as the SK system (IMEX SK, IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview,
Texas). The use of this system may allow the surgeon to select simpler frames for
more complex and unstable fractures (see Figure 2-34, G).
An important advantage of the external fixator in radial fractures is the ability to
employ the biological osteosynthesis concept by applying the splint with the fracture
musculature of the antebrachium, closed reduction is more feasible than in the
O
A
B
C
FIGURE 13-3.  Applying a type IA unilateral external fixator with one connecting bar and
all pins inserted in the same plane. A, The fracture is openly reduced and held with locking
d ps pue iexond aui 'a aredad si sd auis inoy ym seq suou e ida
are inserted in the same plane; the connecting bar and outer clamps are attached. C, Middle
clamps are positioned; the two inside pins are inserted through holes in the middle clamps.
The nuts on the clamps are securely tightened. In some cases an additional, obliquely directed
Kirschner wire is inserted to give more stability at the fracture site. If the fracture pattern is
a longer oblique, insertion of a lag screw is indicated.
13—Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
363
humerus or femur. The animal is prepared and draped for surgery with the limb sus-
pended, as shown in Figure 2-12. Sterile towels or bandage materials are wrapped
around the suspending material a sufficient distance to prevent the chance of acci-
 dental contamination of the surgeon during reduction.
Although any type of fixator can be used, type II has special application during
closed reduction. If the most proximal and distal fixation pins are inserted first, at
90 degrees to the bone, they become a visual indicator of the adequacy of reduction
in the frontal plane, since they will be parallel to each other when angular deformity
in this plane is reduced. Additionally, they can be employed to anchor a fracture
distractor to aid in the reduction (Figure 13-4, A), if desired. If difficulty is encoun-
tered in reducing the fracture closed, it is often possible to make a small approach
over the shaft of the ulna, then to reduce the ulnar fracture under direct vision. If
the ulnar fracture is simple, reducing it ensures that the radius is also adequately
reduced. The other method is to employ a limited open approach to the radius to
allow reduction under direct vision, but with minimal disruption of the fracture site,
thus maintaining maximal vascularity of the fracture segments (Figure 13-4, B). The
open approach also allows the use of auxiliary fixation, such as Kirschner wires
(Figure 13-3, C) or lag screws (see Figure 13-14), both of which can be inserted with
minimal disruption of soft tissues.
B
FIGURE 13-4.  Application of a type IIA external fixator with a limited open approach to
the radial diaphysis. A, Fixation pins have been placed proximally and distally in the radius,
and the fracture has been reduced by means of the fracture distractor applied laterally to the
fixation pins. The medial connecting bar is loosely positioned at this point. Note the varus
angulation induced by the distractor; this can be adjusted when the lateral connecting bar is
attached. B, The adequacy of the reduction is verified by a small cutdown over the fracture
site. If necessary, the ends can be levered into better contact, but the fracture hematoma is
disturbed as little as possible.
364
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Bone Plates
Plates are adaptable to most radial and ulnar shaft fractures.13 For diaphyseal frac-
tures, the usual procedure is to plate only the radius. If the radius is well stabilized,
fixation of the ulna is usually unnecessary. In large dogs it is useful to use small
plates on both the radius and the ulna (see Figure 13-16) rather than one large plate
on the radius. A large, cranially placed plate may make it difficult to attain adequate
soft tissue closure at implantation, or it may interfere with movement of the
extensor tendons. Round hole plates, dynamic compression plates (DCPs), limited
 contact dynamic compression plates (LC-DCPs), or semitubular plates may be used.
The plate most frequently used is the DCP because it has the built-in potential
of compression at the fracture site. A semitubular plate must be of sufficient size,
and bending must be minimal in contouring it to fit the bone surface. For distal
fractures, the T-plate allows placing two or three screws in a short segment
(see Figure 13-21, A), and the veterinary cuttable plate (VCP) is also helpful in small
breeds. (See Figure 2-75 for suggested plate sizes.)
   psn am s a uq su ad a jo d 
diaphyseal fractures, because it is easily accessible and provides a broad and only
slightly curved surface (see Figure 13-14, B).3 This surface serves well for fractures
of the proximal and middle regions of the radius, but in the distal zone the plate is
the source of some morbidity. Dissection and elevation of the extensor tendons from
their synovial sheaths in the middle groove of the distal radius and the subsequent
gliding of these tendons over the plate surface produce varying degrees of functional
problems. Additionally, problems are sometimes encountered in closing the scant
soft tissues over a distal plate. Most of these problems can be eliminated by medial
plate placement for distal fractures (see Figure 13-21, B), and mechanical testing has
shown this position to be equivalent in axial stiffness to cranially placed plates
following distal osteotomy.6 The medial aspect of the radius is narrower than the
cranial surface, and a smaller plate must be used (2.7 vs. 3.5 mm). The smaller plate
allows more screws to be placed per unit of plate length, and the medial position
 increases the possibility of incorporating a lag screw through the plate into an oblique
fracture. The smaller plate for a medial position may also be slightly contoured with
a slight bow to fit the natural cranial bow of the radius.7
Combination fixation on the radius and ulna is more often considered in com-
plex fractures in larger or giant-breed dogs. Bone plates may be applied to both
radius and ulna, providing a very rigid fixation for a two-bone system, or a plate
may be applied to the radius fracture and an IM pin applied to the ulna component.
The ulna pin provides excellent protection against bending forces that affect the
radial plate.
 Postoperative swelling and pain are eased by use of a Robert-Jones dressing for
3 to 5 days (see Figure 2-33).
Lag Screws
s rne p u psn A ae sma e n ad s
r ae yo sa as ds ro no o -ii e tiii si a
and ulna may be stabilized with lag screws for holding alignment and exerting inter.
   t       s 
must be supplemented with either external coaptation or internal fixation. Internal
fixation may consist of a bone plate (see Figure 13-14, B); an IM pin in the ulna
(see Figure 13-14, C), which may still need external splint support; or an external
fixator (see Figure 13-14, D).
13—Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
365
PROXIMAL FRACTURES
A major consideration in type B and C articular fractures is the pull of the triceps
muscle on the tuber olecrani, with the tuber pivoting at the trochlear notch. Some
form of tension band fixation is essential in these fractures to neutralize these
muscle forces.
Open Approaches
Two open approaches can be used individually or combined to expose this region:
the approach to the proximal shaft and trochlear notch of the ulna and the
approach to the head and proximal metaphysis of the radius (Figure 13-5).8
Fracture Type 2-1-A; Proximal, Extraarticular (Figure 13-6, A)
Type A1, Uinar Fracture
This fracture is relatively rare because this region of the ulna is non-weight
bearing and is not subjected to any indirect forces; therefore, fractures can only be
the result of direct trauma. Treatment is by external coaptation by long-leg cast
(  ) s   "(1 a )  s   )
in reduced fractures. An IM pin may also be used for unstable proximal ulnar
fractures.
Monteggia Fracture9
The Monteggia lesion is a fracture of the ulna and dislocation of the radial
head and is a special class of injury that does not conform completely to the
 peau pei pex a uil ad e un ss uss a iaa o
cranial in relation to the joint, and the bones are angulated cranially. This injury in
dogs is usually a result of being struck by a car, whereas in cats it usually results
from a fall. The proximal radioulnar joint can be intact (Figure 13-7, A), or the
bones can become separated by rupture of the annular ligament of the radius and
the caudal crus of the lateral collateral ligament (Figure 13-8, A). Type I is by far
Ieu aui sanu l ada u pue uonenue ppneo yim peay lpei au jo uon
head is luxated in a lateral or craniolateral direction. Rarely seen are type IV lesions,
with cranial luxation of the radial head and fracture of the proximal radial and
ulnar diaphyses.
Reduction and Fixation.  If the Monteggia fracture is relatively recent in origin,
a closed reduction often can be accomplished by a combination of traction and
countertraction, along with caudal pressure on the radius to manipulate the radial
head back into the reduced position.
Types I, Il, and Ill proximal radioulnar joint intact. Internal fixation may be 
accomplished by inserting a pin from the proximal end of the olecranon process
into the shaft of the ulna (Figure 13-7, B). In some cases it may be necessary to
 perform an open approach to the proximal ulna and trochlear notch to accomplish
accurate reduction. The pin in the ulna may be inserted either from the proximal
end or by use of the retrograde technique. If indicated, an interfragmentary
wire may be inserted in the ulna for additional stabilization and compression
(Figure 13-7, C). If temporary additional external support is indicated, it may be in
366
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Flexor carpi
Ulnaris lateralis
ulnaris m.,
m.
ulnar head
Radial head
Lateral aspectof
humeral condyle
Medial coronoid
Joint capsule
process of ulna
incisions
Anconeus m.
Medial aspect of
humeral condyle
Supinator m.
Annular ligament
Radial head
Radial n.
Lateral collateral
ligament
B
FIGURE 13-5.
 Approaches to the proximal radius and ulna. A, The approach to the prox-
imal shaft and trochlear notch of the ulna gives good visualization of the articular surface of
the trochlear notch. B, The radial nerve must be preserved during this lateral approach to the
head and proximal metaphysis of the radius. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of
surgical approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004,
Saunders, pp 237, 246.)
13—-Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
367
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Pleaserefer to theprinted publication.
FIGURE 13-6. Proximal fractures of the radius and ulna. A: A1, Ulnar; A2, radial; A3,
radial and ulnar. B: B1, Ulnar; B2, radial; B3, of one bone, the other extraarticular. C: C1,
One bone remains intact; C2, of one bone, the other extraarticular; C3, radius and ulna.
(From Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
FIGURE 13-7. A, Type A1
fracture of ulna with dislocation
of the radial head (Monteggia
 fracture). The annular ligament
is intact. B, Immobilization by
use of an intramedullary pin in
the ulna and a coaptation splint.
C, The addition of an interfrag-
mentary wire improves stability
at the fracture site; this need not
be a tension band wire.
B
C
A
B
C
FIGURE 13-8. A, Monteggia fracture with the annular ligament disrupted. B, Repair by
immobilizing the ulna with a bone plate and suturing the annular ligament. C, Fixation by
use of bone screws. The ulna is fixed to the radius. The proximal screw should be removed
in 3 to 4 weeks to allow the return of some pronation-supination motion.
368
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
the form of a modified Robert-Jones dressing. Exercise is restricted during the
 healing period.
Types I, Il, and Ill; proximal radioulnar joint luxated. Frequently, there is soft tissue
(usually one or more of the extensor muscles) interposed between the two bones.
An open approach may be necessary to accomplish reduction. The usual procedure
is to repair the ulnar fracture (with a bone plate or IM pin) and then suture the
annular and collateral ligaments to restore and maintain apposition of the radius
and ulna (Figure 13-8, B). If suturing the annular ligament is not possible, apposi-
tion between the radius and ulna can be accomplished by the use of several bone
screws (Figure 13-8, C). Ordinarily, this procedure is not used in the young, grow-
ing animal because it interferes with normal shifting of the ulna on the radius in the
 growing process and may result in incongruency of the elbow joint and radius
curvus. Also, it should be used with caution in cats because marked supination
and pronation are a part of the normal function of the foreleg. If it is used out of
necessity in either the dog or the cat, the screws should be removed 3 to 4 weeks
 postoperatively to allow return of normal motion between the radius and ulna.
Iype Iv.  The radioulnar joint is typically intact in this Monteggia injury. Reduction
of the radial head luxation is followed by fixation of the radial fracture, as described
next. Additional fixation of the ulna can be supplied by an IM pin if desired.
Type A2, Radial Fracture
The radial head is rarely fractured. It may or may not be accompanied by disloca-
tion of the elbow joint. There is usually a history of trauma. Separation at the
physeal plate always threatens to disturb growth. Premature closure of the physis
and shortening of the radius are possible sequelae (see Chapter 23). Anatomical
reduction and fixation are indicated. Figure 13-9 shows an epiphyseal fracture and
separation of the radial head. Open reduction and simple Kirschner wire (K-wire)
fixation is used. Healing is rapid, and the wire may be removed in 2 to 3 weeks or
 left in place. A Robert-Jones dressing may be indicated for temporary additional
support.
Type A3, Radial and Uinar Fracture
Stabilization of the ulna by IM pin, IM pin and interfragmentary wire, or bone plat-
ing caudally (Figure 13-10, F) or laterally (Figure 13-10, G) may provide sufficient
suppor for the radius. Additional radial fixation can be gained either by K-wire fix-
ation or a small T-plate or VCP applied either cranially or laterally. A Robert-Jones
dressing may be indicated for temporary additional support.
Fracture Type 2-1-B; Proximal, Simple Articular (Figure 13-6, B)
Following fracture, the triceps brachii muscles pull the tuber olecrani segment prox-
imally, bending it toward the shaft of the humerus (Figure 13-10, A). For best
results, this pull should be neutralized by use of the tension band principle. In gen-
eral, the pin and tension band wire method is used on stable fractures, and a plate
is used for unstable fractures (Figure 13-10, B, C, E, F, and G). Repair of intraartic-
ular proximal ulnar fractures with pin and tension band wire has been associated
with a greater prevalence of implant loosening, breakage, and delayed union than
s  sq  e   a sa si s isd aq m 
Although it seems reasonable to do, simple IM pin fixation of the ulna in these frac-
tures never works well in animals of any size. The medullary canal of the ulna is
simply not large enough to accept a sufficiently large pin to resist the bending forces
of the triceps muscle (Figure 13-10, D).
13—-Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
369
FIGURE 13-9. A, Type A2 physeal
fracture of the radial head. B, Simple
 transfixation pinning with Kirschner
wire. The wires enter the bone near
the joint surface and proceed distally
and diagonally into the opposite
cortex.
A
B
B
c
E
F
G
FIGURE 13-10. Fixation of olecranon fractures. A, Type B1 transverse fracture of the
olecranon process. B and C, Fixation using two Kirschner wires and a figure-of-8 tension
band wire works very well on simple fractures involving the articular surface. D, Fixation
with a smooth intramedullary pin alone is inadequate to resist the bending forces; as the
proximal segment slides proximally due to pull of the triceps brachii muscle, a gap develops
at the fracture site, and delayed union or nonunion results. With a fracture in this location,
pins or screws used alone as intramedullary fixation are subject to bending or fatigue
fracture. E, Type C1 fractures involving the articular surface must be anatomically reduced
and may be stabilized using the tension band wire if the articular surface can be completely
reconstructed on reduction. F, In multifragmentary type C1 fractures (unsta ble fractures), the 
semitubular or dynamic compression plate (DCP) may be used as a tension band if the
articular surface is intact after reduction. G, In some multifragmentary fractures, it may be
advantageous to place the plate on the lateral surface of the ulna, especially if the articular
surface is not well reconstructed. The plate must be bent perfectly to avoid malarticulation 
between the anconeal process and the humerus.
370
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Type B1, Ulnar Fracture
Reduction and Fixation
The fracture site and the shaft of the ulna about 2 to 3 cm distal to it are exposed,
and the fracture is reduced. When the articular surface is involved, anatomical
reduction is mandatory for restoration of good joint function. Two Kirschner drill
wires are started in the proximal end near the caudal edge of the olecranon process
and are driven distally into the shaft of the ulna. In small-breed dogs it is advanta
 geous to place the pins in the sagittal rather than the frontal plane. The pins are
directed to engage the cranial cortex of the ulna distal to the trochlear notch rather
than going directly down the marrow cavity, because this may not adequately pre-
vent rotation (Figure 13-10, B and C; see also Figure 2-64). A transverse hole is
drilled through the ulna distal to the fracture line. A figure-of-8 wire connects the
 protruding pins on the proximal end with the hole that was drilled transversely in
the distal segment. If the K-wires were inserted in the sagittal plane, the wire engages
 only the more caudal K-wire. It is important to place the wire under the triceps ten-
don, directly on the bone rather than over the surface of the tendon. The wire is
twisted in both arms of the figure-8 to ensure that the entire wire is tight enough to
resist the bending muscle forces, but not so tight that the articular side of the frac-
ture is opened. The protruding portions of the pins are bent over caudally in hook
fashion, cut off, and rotated 180 degrees cranially into the triceps tendon and driven
against the bone with a nail set. This will minimize soft tissue irritation over the pins.
With long oblique fractures, the tension band wire needs to be long. To shorten
this figure-of-8 wire, a second drill hole can be made in the tuber olecrani, and wires
are passed through two holes rather than one end being passed around the K-wires.
With this type of fixation, the K-wires guard against rotation and shear forces at the
fracture line, and the figure-of-8 wire transforms tension force into compression.
Aftercare
 In most cases, no external support is required. Activity should be limited during the
healing period. The pins and wire should be removed if there is any indication of
irritation or loosening after the fracture is healed.
Type B2, Radial Fracture
Because these are articular fractures, simple K-wire fixation as described earlier for
A2 fractures is not optimal. Lag screw or T-plate fixation is indicated. The plate is
applied cranially or laterally, depending on the plane of the fracture line.
Type B3, One Bone Articular and One Bone Nonarticular
 In the illustrated example for type B3 (Figure 13-6, B), the ulnar fracture is the artic-
ular fracture. The ulnar fracture is stabilized by the methods described for type B1
fractures. The radial fracture is best treated by a short cranial plate, with at least
four cortices engaged by plate screws in the proximal fragment. If the fractures were
reversed, the radial fracture would be treated as in B2 above, and the ulnar fracture
as in A1.
Fracture Type 2-1-C; Multifragmentary Articular (Figure 13-6, C)
These fractures are fortunately rare, since they can present a real challenge to stabi-
lize. Fixation is a combination of methods previously described. If the fragments can
function as tension bands in larger breeds (see Figure 13-10, F and G). If the ulnar
13—-Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
371
articular portion cannot be reconstructed, the plate will not function as a tension
band and will be subject to bending forces. In this situation a laterally applied plate
is stronger than a caudal plate.
 If plate application is not feasible, a hybrid external fixator can be employed
(Figure 13-11). Using an IM pin for one fixation pin provides some additional axial
stability. This can be combined with plate fixation of the radius in type C2 and
C3 fractures.
If fixation is less than totally stable, a carpal flexion bandage (see Figure 2-30) is
applied postoperatively for 2 to 3 weeks to prevent weight bearing while allowing
 passive motion of the elbow joint.
DIAPHYSEAL FRACTURES
A high percentage of the fractures involving the shaft of the radius and ulna occur
in the middle and distal thirds with both bones involved.1-4 However, these fractures
occur at all levels and include all types; in a few cases, they may involve only the
radius or ulna. The development of angulation, rotation, delayed union, and
nonunion at the fracture site are common sequelae when the bones are handled
improperly. Two of the more typical mistakes are using fixation methods that allow
 an aq a ox a n p as a an i u
becomes sufficiently mature for weight bearing.
A
B
FIGURE 13-11. An extremely fragmented type A3 gunshot fracture. A, Intramedullary pin in
the ulna was used to restore angular alignment, and the proximal end of this pin was tied into
a type IIA external fixator by means of contoured connecting bars. B, Note that the most prox-
imal full-fixation pin is placed in the ulna. No attempt was made to reduce the radial head; it
was allowed to "float" against the humeral condyle and healed in a functional position.
372
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
When applicable, treatment recommendations are keyed to the fracture patient
scoring system detailed in Table 2-6.11,12
Open Approachess
1. When reduction by closed methods is difficult or impossible.
2.
When there is difficulty in maintaining reduction in the process of applying
fixation. (Viewing the fracture site during this process is most helpful.)
3. When internal fixation is applied.
 The choice of approach may vary, depending on the location of the fracture and
the objective to be accomplished. The approach to the proximal radius is shown in
Figure 13-5, B. The diaphysis can be approached either laterally or medially; in
most cases the medial approach is preferred because the radius is subcutaneous in
this area and can be exposed with minimal hemorrhage. Figure 13-12, A, illustrates
this technique. The lateral approach might be chosen when there are medial skin
wounds or where positioning the animal for access to other limbs makes it more
convenient (Figure 13-12, B). The ulna is exposed by simple incision over the
 caudal border proximally (see Figure 13-5, A) or in the diaphysis laterally.
Fracture Type 2-2-A; Diaphyseal, Radial Simple or
Incomplete (Figure 13-13, A)
Type A1, Incomplete or of One Bone Only
Fracture patient scores of 9 to 10 are typical for these fractures. If only the shaft of
the ulna is fractured, it can be treated by compression bandaging to reduce pain and
with rest. Rarely, a short caudal splint might be applied (see Figure 2-27).
Pronator
teres m.
Extensor carpi
Extensor carpi
 radialis m.
 radialis m.
Cephalic vein
Common digital-
Flexor carpi
extensor m.
Lateral digital
radialis m.
extensor m.
Superficial --
digital flexor m.
Abductor pollicis
Deep digital -
longus m.
flexor m.
Radial artery
-
A
B
FIGURE 13-12. Approaches to the diaphysis of the radius and ulna. A, The craniomedial
 approach provides good exposure without much muscle elevation. B, The lateral approach is
used when there is soft tissue injury to the medial side of the limb.
13—Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
373
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 13-13. Diaphyseal fractures of the radius and ulna. A: A1, Incomplete or of
one bone only; A2, simple, distal zone; A3, simple, proximal zone. B: B1, Simple, with ulnar
fracture; B2, distal zone, multifragmentary ulnar; B3, proximal zone, multifragmentary ulnar.
C: C1, With ulnar simple or wedge fracture; C2, segmental radial, complex ulnar; C3,
complex ulnar. (From Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:
41-50, 1990.)
If the radius is fractured, more aggressive treatment is indicated. Incomplete
(greenstick) fractures respond to caudal splinting. Complete fractures can be han-
dled with a long-leg cylinder cast (see Figure 2-21), bivalved cylinder cast, or
Thomas splint (see Figure 2-25). In a young animal, less than 6 months old, caudal
splinting will usually suffice.
Type A2, Simple, Distal Zone; and Type A3, Simple.
Proximal Zone
Slightly more complex than type A1, fracture patient scores for types A2 and A3
may range as low as 7, with 8 to 9 more common.
Closed Reduction and Fixation
Fixation by long-leg cylinder cast or bilvalved cylinder cast is appropriate for
relatively transverse fractures of the distal zone (stable relative to shortening, frac-
ture patient score 9 to 10) in medium to large breeds, especially if under 1 year of
age.4 (See previous discussion on cast fixation under Fixation Techniques.)
Open Reduction and Fixation
Fractures that are not stable relative to shortening (fracture patient score 7 to 8),
those in dogs older than 1 year, those in small and toy breeds, and proximal-zone
fractures are best treated by internal fixation. A variety of methods are applicable,
with the choice being personal preference or availability of equipment.
 eii a as a e aa ae s ias pxa a 1
by closed or minimal open reduction (see Fixation Techniques). Auxiliary
fixation in the form of interfragmentary K-wires or lag screws can be used in
oblique fractures (Figures 13-3, C, and 13-14, D). Proximal fractures with a
very short proximal segment may require a type IB biplanar splint (see Figure
13-22) with three pins in the proximal fragment.
2. Cranially placed compression or neutralization plates (Figure 13-14, B and E).
374
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
A
B
C
D
F
FIGURE 13-14.  Fixation of type A simple fractures of the radius and ulna. A, Long oblique
or spiral fractures of the radius and ulna may be stabilized by lag screws to restore alignment
 and to exert interfragmentary compression at the fracture site. Additional stabilization may
consist of a coaptation splint; B, a neutralization plate; C, an intramedullary pin in the ulna;
or D, a type I external fixator. E, Distal transverse fracture stabilized with a compression plate
on the radius and a buttress plate on the ulna. F, Distal fracture stabilized with a compres-
sion plate on the radius and an intramedullary pin in the ulna.
 3. Intramedullary Rush-type pins in large breeds for distal-zone fractures 
(see Figure 13-2).
Fracture Type 2-2-B; Diaphyseal, Radial Wedge (Figure 13-13, B)
 Because of their instability, none of these fractures is amenable to coaptation fixa-
tion. Fracture patient scores will usually be in the 4 to 7 range and occasionally as
low as 3. The choice of fixation is limited to either bone plating or external skeletal
fixation. The degree of fragmentation has little effect on the choice of fixation, since
the radius is the weight-bearing bone.
Internal Fixation by Bone Plate
 If the radial wedge is reducible, a reconstructive approach can be taken, with lag
screw and neutralization plate fixation (Figure 13-15). Cerclage wire fixation can be
substituted for the lag screw(s) in some cases. Cranial application of the radial plate
is indicated. If the radial wedges are not reducible, the plate is applied with buttress
function, with autogenous cancellous bone graft added to the fragments. A long
bridging plate on the ulna is useful for proximal-zone radial fractures where only
two screws (four cortices) are possible in the proximal fragment. Another suitable
fixation combination is to apply a plate to the radius fracture with buttress function
and to apply an IM pin to the ulna fracture, to reduce bending stress on the radial
plate (Figure 13-14, F).
Internal Fixation by External Skeletal Fixator
Type I fixators are sufficient for those with higher fracture patient scores, whereas
type II fixators are more certain for lower scores. Closed reduction or limited open
13—-Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
375
FIGURE 13-15. A, Single radial wedge-type B1 midshaft
fracture. B, Fixation with two lag screws and a neutraliza-
tion plate on the cranial surface of the radius.
1
B
reduction (biological osteosynthesis) is the best choice for application, because this
will result in the least disruption of the vascular supply to the fragments. Proximal
fractures with a very short proximal segment may require a type IB biplanar splint
(see Figure 13-22) with three pins in the proximal fragment.
Fracture Type 2-2-C; Diaphyseal, Radial Complex
(Figure 13-13, C)
As stated earlier for wedge fractures, none of these injuries is amenable to
 coaptation. Fracture patient scores will be 1 to 3 or 4.
Type C1, C3
 Plate fixation in the bridging or buttress mode is applicable to these fractures
(Figure 13-16). This is supplemented with autogenous cancellous bone graft in the
fragmented area, and in some cases involving large breeds, the ulna is also plated,
or an ulnar IM pin is used.
 a   s   i  d aq n
and heal faster when a more biological approach is taken, using closed or limited open
reduction and external skeletal fixation. Type IA external fixators (Figure 13-17, B)
are sufficient for those patients with the highest fracture patient scores for this type
of fracture. A lower score is an indication for the type II fixator (Figure 13-17, C)
 or perhaps a type IB biplanar splint (see Figure 13-22).
Type C2
   d       s
With DCPs, both fracture lines can be compressed, as shown in Figure 2-72.
The disadvantage with plate fixation is the need for a very long plate if the
middle bone fragment is long. External fixators of type IB or II are both applicable
to this type of fracture. A minimum of two fixation pins is required in each
fragment.
376
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 FIGURE 13-16. A, Type B2 distal-zone fracture
of the radius and midshaft fracture of the ulna
in a large Saint Bernard dog. B, Fixation using
two bridging plates.
A
B
A
B
C
FIGURE 13-17. A, Type C3 midshaft fracture of radius and ulna. B, Fixation with a type
IA external fixator, after closed reduction. C, Somewhat more stability can be provided in
large, active breeds by this type IIB external fixator. Because of the cranial bow of the radius,
it is much easier to place half pins rather than full pins in the midportion of the splint.
DISTAL FRACTURES
 Radial fractures of this region can be exposed by a cranial midline incision between
 the extensor tendons.* Ulnar fractures are virtually subcutaneous and are exposed
by simple skin incision.
13—-Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
377
Fracture Type 2-3-A; Distal, Extraarticular (Figure 13-18, A)
Type A1, Uinar Fracture
These fractures may occur in association with luxation or subluxation of the
antebrachiocarpal joint (Figure 13-19) or in isolation (Figure 13-20). Because
the ulnar collateral ligaments originate on the styloid process, it is essential to fix
these fractures to help stabilize the joint, especially in large, active animals.
 Supplemental external fixation in the form of a short caudal splint is necessary
(see Figure 2-27).
Type A2, Simple Radial Fracture, and Type A3,
Multifragmentary Radial Fracture
These injuries are common in small and toy breeds, usually the result of a jump
or fall. Coaptation and IM pinning are common causes of nonunion in these
breeds.4s,13
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 13-18. Distal fractures of the radius and ulna. A: A1, Ulna; A2, simple radial;
A3, multifragmentary radial. B: B1, Sagittal radial; B2, frontal radial. C: C1, Simple,
metaphyseal simple; C2, simple, metaphyseal multifragmentary; C3, multifragmentary.
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 13-19. A and B, Type A1 fracture of the ulnar styloid with palmar luxation of
the antebrachiocarpal joint. C and D, Intramedullary fixation of the styloid. If any ligament
or the joint capsule is ruptured, it is repaired and a coaptation splint is added.
378
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FGURE 13-20.  A, Type A1 fracture of
the ulnar styloid. B and C, Fixation with a
Kirschner wire and tension band wire to
secure the short distal fragment and collat-
eral ligament. Add a coaptation splint for
sta bility, if indicated.
A
B
c
Closed Reduction and Fixation
 Fixation by long-leg cylinder cast is appropriate for relatively transverse fractures
(stable relative to shortening, fracture patient score 9 to 10) in medium to large
 breeds, especially if under 1 year of age.4 (See previous discussion on cast fixation
under Fixation Techniques.)
Open Reduction and Fixation
Bone Plates. The length of the distal fragment is the challenge for these fractures.
A minimum of two screws (four cortices) are required in the bone, and three
screws are ideal. For toy and miniature breeds, 1.5- to 2.0-mm screws and the mini
T-plate or the VCP are the best implants. The T-plate must be applied cranially
(Figure 13-21, A), but the VCP can be used medially (Figure 13-21, B)(see Fixation
Techniques).
 In medium-sized breeds, a 2.7-mm T-plate is suitable, as is a standard 2.7-mm plate
applied medially. In large breeds a medial plate of 2.7- or 3.5-mm size is indicated.
External Fixators. As for plate fixation, the length of the distal fragment
becomes the major consideration, and as with plates, two fixation pins are minimal
and three are ideal. If the fragment is long enough, a type IA unilateral fixator
may be sufficient (see Figure 13-3). Three pins in the distal fragment are achievable
s 1-l a  e n ( a s    a 
(Figure 13-23). Acrylic fixation rods work very well in toy breeds and reduce costs
of the splint as well.
Fracture Type 2-3-B; Distal, Partial Articular (Figure 13-18, B)
 Fractures involving the styloid process of the radius give rise to instability of
the antebrachiocarpal joint. Open reduction and internal fixation are indicated.
Figure 13-24 presents examples of some of the various methods of fixation of a
type B1 fracture. In this oblique fracture of the radial styloid process, fixation
may be done with two K-wires, a tension band wire, or a lag screw. The latter
two methods provide better security than the simple K-wire fixation. Figure 13-25
depicts a type B2 fracture combined with an A1 ulnar fracture. Because this
fracture line is more directly in the weight-bearing surface of the radius, lag screw
fixation is mandatory. In most cases, additional external support in the form
13—-Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
379
FIGURE 13-21. Type A2 simple distal radial fracture
fixation. A, T-plate on the dorsal surface allows
two screws to be placed in the short distal segment.
o
B, Medial placement of T-plate increases the area's
moment of inertia of the plate and the stiffness of
fixation.
B
FIGURE 13-22. Placing three fixation pins
 in a type A2 simple distal radial fracture
with a short distal fragment is possible by
means of the type IB two-plane external
fixator.
of a short caudal splint (see Figure 2-27) is indicated during the healing period
(4-6 weeks).
Fracture Type 2-3-C; Distal, Complete Articular (Figure 13-18, C)
 These injuries are rarely encountered,2 which is fortunate, since they offer consider-
 able challenge for adequate fixation, especially in toy or miniature breeds. Type C1
and type C2 fractures could be fixed by use of a medially placed plate
380
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 13-23.  Fixation of this type A2 simple distal radial
 fracture with a very short distal fragment can be accomplished
with a hybrid type I-ll external fixator. In toy and miniature 
breeds the connecting bars and clamps are easily replaced by
molded acrylic bars.
FIGURE 13-24.  A, Type B1 distal partial articular fracture of
the styloid process of the radius. Progressively more stable fixa-
tion can be achieved by B, two Kirschner wires; C, addition of a
tension band wire; or D, a lag screw.
A
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 13-25. A and B, Combined type B1 and B2 partial articular fracture of the distal
radius and distal ulna, C and D, Lag screw fixation of the distal radius with 4.0-mm cancel-
lous screws and Kirschner wire, intramedullary fixation of the ulna. A coaptation splint is
usually indicated for additional stability for the first 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively.
13—Fractures of the Radius and Ulna
381
(Figure 13-21, B), with one or more of the distal screws placed in lag fashion to
stabilize the articular fracture. It is highly unlikely that type C3 fractures could be
 adequately reduced and fixed to provide a functional articular surface. Pancarpal
 arthrodesis is the most rational treatment of these injuries (see Chapter 14).
References
1. Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974, American
Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
2. Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UF: Classification of fractures of the long bones in the dog and cat:
introduction and clinical application, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.
 3. Harrison JW: Fractures of the radius and ulna. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD, editors:
Manuat ofinternal fixatin in satl amimais,New York, 1984,Springer-Verlagpp 144151.
4. Lappin MR, Aron DN, et al: Fractures of the radius and ulna in the dog, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc
19:643-650, 1983.
5. DeAngelis M, Olds RB, et al: Repair of fractures of the radius and ulna in small dogs, J Am Ani
Hosp Assoc 9:436-441, 1973.
6. Wallace MK, Boudrieau RJ, Hyodo K, et al: Mechanical evaluation of three methods of plating
distal radial osteotormies, Vet Surg 21:99-106, 1992.
7. Sardinas JC, Montavon PM: Use of a rmedial bone plate for repair of radius and ulna fractures in
dogs and cats: a report of 22cases,Vet Surg 26:1081131997.
8. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
Cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
 9. Schwarz PD, Schrader SC: Unar fracture and dislocation ofthe proximal radial epiphysis (Monteggia
lesion) in the dog and cat: a review of 28 cases, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 185:190-194,1984.
10. Muir P, Johnson KA: Fractures of the proximal ulna in dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 9:
88-94, 1996.
11. Palmer RH, Hulse DA, Aron DN: A proposed fracture patient score system used to develop fracture
treatrment plans. In Proceedings of 20th Annuat Conference of Veterinary Orthopedic Society, 1993
(abstract).
12.
Palmer RH: Decision making in fracture treatment: the fracture patient scoring system.
In Proceedings of (Smalt Animat) ACVs Veterinary Symposium, 1994, pp 388-390.
for fracture healing in small breed dogs, Vet Surg 26:57-61, 1997.
14
Fractures and Other Orthopedic
Conditions of the Carpus,
Metacarpus, and Phalanges
OVERVIEW OF THE FOREPAW
Injuries of the forepaw may consist of fractures, ligamentous injuries, and various
larger and more athletic the animal, the more devastating are injuries in this area.
The horseman's cliche of "no feet, no horse" can also be applied to the dog. There
 is a tendency to treat ligamentous injuries in this area very conservatively, with cast
immobilization, and to hope for sufficient fibroplasia to stabilize the joint. Although
this may be moderately successful in small and inactive breeds, it rarely restores full
function in large breeds. Randomly oriented collagen in scar tissue cannot withstand
tensile stress and soon breaks down, leaving the joint permanently unstable. Such
instability soon leads to degenerative joint disease, as described in Chapter 7.
Anatomy of the Forepaw
The bony anatomy of the forepaw is depicted in Figure 14-1, and the ligamentous
structures are shown in Figure 14-2. Distal to the radius, the terms cranial and cau
dal are replaced by dorsal and palmar. The six bones of the carpus are arranged in
a proximal and distal row, with three joint levels: the antebrachiocarpal, the middle
carpal, and the carpometacarpal. The middle carpal is often referred to as the
"intercarpal joint," but this term properly describes the joints between carpal bones
of a given level. Ligaments of the carpus are generally short, with none spanning all
three joints and most crossing only one joint level, connecting individual carpal
bones. On the palmar side of the carpus, the joint capsule is well developed and
blends with the palmar carpal fibrocartilage and ligaments. Note the dorsal
sesamoids of the metacarpophalangeal and proximal interphalangeal joints in
Figure 14-1; these bones are often mistaken for fractures of the metacarpal bones.
Surgical Approaches and Technique
The carpal joints are most frequently opened on the dorsal aspect of the midline,
elevating and retracting the carpal extensor tendons medially and the digital
382
14—Fractures and Other Orthop
.Metacarpll!
383
Radial
styloid
styloid
JIna
styloic
carpea
rocess
Ulna
Jista
caral
Radia
Distal
carpal
l carpal
bones
 UInar
carpal
Metacarpal
Palmar
oones
esamoids
 Palmar
sesamoid
alanges
Proximal
Middle
phalanges
Middle
phalanges
Distal
phalanges
Dorsal view
Palmar view
Lateralview
Medial view
 FIGURE 14-1. Bones of the carpus, metacarpus, and phalanges.
extensor tendons laterally (Figure 14-3, A).1 The synovial capsule must be incised at
each individual joint space because the synovium is adherent to each carpal bone.
The palmar ligaments and carpal fibrocartilage can be exposed by an incision
slightly medial to the midline. The flexor retinaculum is incised medial to the deep
digital flexor tendon, which is then retracted laterally. From the dorsal aspect,
metacarpal bones lie subcutaneously, covered only by digital extensor tendons and
blood vessels (Figure 14-3, B).1 Individual bones are exposed by incision of skin
directly over the bone, with retraction of underlying vessels and tendons. Multiple
bones are approached by parallel incisions or a variety of S-, U-, or H-shaped skin
incisions.
Surgery of the lower limbs can be done with a tourniquet, which is invaluable
 for decreasing oozing hemorrhage and thus increasing visibility and decreasing
operating time. Although pneumatic cuffs are the best way of creating the tourni-
quet more proximally in the limbs, distal tourniquets can be made more simply.
Vetrap (3M Animal Care Products, St. Paul, Minn) elastic bandage material has
 proved very satisfactory for this purpose, as illustrated in Figure 14-4. Although the
bandage is best sterilized in ethylene oxide, it can be steam sterilized at minimal time
and temperature, similar to the method of sterilizing rubber gloves (250° F for
12 minutes). Use of the tourniquet is limited to about 60 minutes and has the
splints should be delayed 48 to 72 hours, with the lower limb supported in a
Robert-Jones bandage during this time (see Figure 2-33).
Clinical Signs and Diagnosis of Injury
 Most carpal luxations and fractures occur as a result of a fall or jump, but automo-
bile trauma is also common. Affected limbs are non-weight bearing, have variable
384
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Radioulnarlig
Dorsal radiocarpal lig.
Short radial collateral lig.
- Short ulnar collateral lig.
C2
CU
C1
Superficial digital flexor
Deep digital flexor
Fexor retinaculum
 -Palmar carpal fibrocartilage
 Short radial collateral lig.
Palmar radiocarpal lig
Palmar ulnocarpal lig.
Radioulnar lig.
Dorsal radiocarpal lig
Short ulnar collateral lig.
D
FIGURE 14-2. Ligaments of the carpus. A, Ligaments of the left carpus, dorsal aspect. CR,
Radial carpal; CU, ulnar carpal; C1 to C4, first, second, third, and fourth carpals; I to V,
the left carpus, palmar aspect. CA, Accessory carpals; I to V, metacarpals. D, Ligaments of
the left carpus, lateral aspect.
Tendon of abductor
pollicis longus m.
Tendon of common digital
extensor m.
 Tendons of extensor
carpi radialis m.
Tendon of lateral digital 
extensor m.
Cranial superficial
antebrachial a. and v.
Dorsal common digital a.
Metacarpal Il
and v.
B
FIGURE 14-3.L
A, Approach to the distal radius and carpus through a dorsal incision.
B, The most important vessels and tendons overlying the metacarpal bones are illustrated.
Incisions to individual bones are made directly over the bones, and these structures are
retracted as needed. Multiple bones are approached by parallel, C-shaped, or H-shaped
incisions. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones
and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
386
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 14-4. Application of a Vetrap tourniquet {3M Animal Care Products, St. Paul,
Minn). A, After the foot has been draped in sterile stockinet bandage, a roll of 2-inch sterile
Vetrap is secured around the toes. B, The Vetrap is wrapped very tightly as it is being
wound proximally. C, When well proximal to the surgical field, the elastic bandage is
wrapped several times in one area while the bandage is twisted 180 degrees. This forms the
a sl u iy lens aui asodxa oi ino ae deaa pe iauiois aui 't pue  lanot
thephalanges.
swelling and joint effusion in the carpal region, and may show gross instability of
the carpus when ligaments are injured. The limb is typically carried in abduction
 and flexed at the elbow and carpus.
Although clinical signs and palpation are usually sufficient to localize the area of
probable injury, radiographs are necessary to verify the diagnosis and to localize the
damage. Stress radiographs will show the area of instability. Standard cranial and
lateral or medial views, plus oblique views, will identify ligamentous avulsions and
fractures. Valgus- and varus-stressed cranial and standing lateral views are helpful
to confirm subluxation and its location. Nonscreen film or fine-detail screens are
essential.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
387
THE CARPUS
Luxation of Antebrachiocarpal Joint
Total luxation of the antebrachiocarpal joint is fortunately a rare injury (Figure 14-5).
Such total disruption of the ligamentous structure is disastrous. Panarthrodesis is
usually the only means of restoring function (see Figures 14-22 and 14-23). Fusion
of only the antebrachiocarpal joint has not been successful in our hands.
Subluxation of Antebrachiocarpal Joint
The most frequently injured ligaments at the antebrachiocarpal joint level are the
radial collaterals, resulting in medial instability and valgus (lateral) deformity of the
foot (Figure 14-6). Because the dog normally stands with the foot in valgus by a few
[ a on san sn ran sme an s  a s
FIGURE 14-5. Luxation of the ante-
brachiocarpal joint. All the ligaments
of the carpus are disrupted.
B
Braided
Torn radial
polyester
collateral
suture
ligaments
Valgus
deformity
of foot
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 14-6.
 Subluxation of the antebrachiocarpal joint resulting from tearing of the
B and C, Synthetic braided suture is threaded through bone tunnels placed in the radial carpal
bone and radius to simulate both the long and the short ligaments. An attempt is made to
suture the ligaments, which have been omitted in these views for greater clarity. D, The
abductor pollicis longus muscle has been elevated and moved into a position overlying the
torn ligaments. It is secured proximally to the radius with a bone screw and spiked washer
(Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) through the split tendon, and sutured distally at the radial carpal
bone to remna nts of the ligament.
388
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
ligaments are both less common and less serious because they are not subject to
as much tension stress.
Surgical Technique
The long radial collateral ligament is important primarily when the joint is in
carpus slides in a dorsopalmar direction during flexion and extension, the function
of these ligaments is complex. An attempt is always made to suture the ligaments,
 aq psodxa si eae au a ious a un i ad si s ig
medial incision directly over the area. The ligaments are found immediately deep to
the antebrachial fascia and the tendon of the abductor pollicis longus muscle.
Bolstering a suture repair of the ligaments with synthetic material is usually
advisable. Bone tunnels are drilled in the medial prominence of the radial carpal
bone and in the radius (Figure 14-6, B and C). Braided polyester suture, size 0-2,
is passed through these holes in a manner that simulates both the long and
short ligaments. Although stainless steel wire is usually advised for such application,
its use is not recommended for situations in which it is subject to alternate
stretching and relaxation. Monofilament wire will quickly fatigue and break under
such conditions and should be used only when it is under a continuous tension
stress. The suture is tightened until the joint is stable but still mobile, then tied. The
knot can be oversewn with fine wire or lightly seared with electrocoagulation to
prevent untying.
Earley? was the first to report the use of autogenous tissue, such as the
abductor pollicis longus or flexor carpi radialis muscle tendons, in replacing the
radial collateral ligaments. The tendons were placed through bone tunnels in a
manner similar to that used for the synthetic material. Additionally, the tendon of
the abductor pollicis longus muscle can be directly attached to the sutured
ligament, or the ligament can be replaced by securing the tendon to the bone and
s e q sn a on paas aaq sey on a 'a 'r-th ai n sa
bone screw and plastic spiked washer (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa). Distally the
tendon is sutured to remnants of the collateral ligament at its insertion on the
radial carpal bone. The attachment procedure could be reversed, as the situation
demands.
Aftercare
The carpus is immobilized in 10 to 15 degrees of flexion in a caudal splint for
4 to 6 weeks (see Figure 2-27). Strict confinement is continued through the
eighth week, with a firm padded bandage in place after splint removal. A slowly
progressive increase in exercise is then allowed, starting with leash walking.
 u Ps os si d s xa a jo sd is 
for another 4 to 6 weeks, at which point most patients are able to return to
near-normal activity.
Luxation of Radial Carpal Bone
A relatively rare condition, luxation of the major bone of the carpus is possible fol-
lowing a jump or fall. The radial carpal bone pivots 90 degrees medially and in a
dorsopalmar direction, coming to rest against the distopalmar rim of the radius
(Figure 14-7, A and B). Severe lameness is always present with abduction of the limb
and elbow flexion. Swelling is not remarkable, and the joint is not easily movable
Pain and crepitus are usually elicited by palpation, which easily reveals the displaced
bone and a depression in its normal area.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
389
FIGURE 14-7. Luxation
Luxated
of the radial carpal bone.
radial carpal
A and B, Dorsal and medial
bone
views illustrating the pal-
maromedial luxation of the
radial carpal bone. The
Braided
bone is rotated 90 degrees
polyester
suture
medially and dorsopalmar.
Kirschner
C, The bone is reduced, and
wire
a Kirschner wire is driven
through the bone into the
ulnar carpal. Synthetic radial
collateral ligaments stabi-
lize the medial  side of the
joint.
A
B
C
Treatment
Closed Reduction
e uos uas  pas pau aq uo u aoq pd p a n
injury. Functional stability is unlikely to result in large-breed dogs, however, because
of damage to the radial collateral ligaments. Although splint fixation for a few
weeks may well be justified in a toy-breed or small-breed dog, many patients will
require surgical stabilization.
Open Reduction and Fixation
The joint is exposed by a dorsal midline approach as previously described.
The following technique is a modification of the repair described by Punzet.? The
lateromedial rotation is corrected first, and the bone is rotated in a palmodorsal
direction to reduce it. A small pin or Kirschner wire is placed from the medial
nonarticulating surface of the bone into the ulnar carpal bone. The pin is cut short
 pn p r    a   
is constructed as detailed previously (see Figure 14-6). The remaining ligament
is sutured if possible.
Aftercare
 The carpus is immobilized in 10 to 15 degrees of flexion in a caudal splint for 4 to
6 weeks (see Figure 2-27). Strict confinement is continued through the eighth week,
with a firm padded bandage in place after splint removal. A slowly progressive
 increase in exercise is then allowed, starting with leash walking, then short periods
 of free exercise. This program is slowly increased in intensity for another 4 to
6 weeks, at which point most patients are able to return to near-normal activity.
Fracture of Radial Carpal Bone
Fractures of the radial carpal bone, which, with the radius, forms the antebrachio-
carpal joint—the major joint of the carpus—are usually manifested as chips or slabs
off the articular surfaces (Figures 14-8, 14-9, and 14-10). These fractures are most
 often seen after injuries resulting from jumps or falls and in dogs undergoing heavy
exertion, such as sled dogs, field trial dogs, and other working breeds. Fragments
are apparently created by a compressive force combined with shear. There is little
390
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
FIGURE 14-8.
 Comminuted dorsal slab fracture of the radial carpal bone.
The fragments are excised in this type of injury.
tendency for these fragments to heal spontaneously, and the bony or cartilaginous
 fragments usually become “joint mice,”" creating an acute inflammatory reaction in
the joint and leading to synovitis and degenerative joint disease. Lameness is severe
but subsides somewhat in a few weeks. The dog may be sound when rested but
becomes lame when exercised. Soft tissue thickening around the joint may become
obvious after a few more weeks as a result of synovitis and arthritis.
 Diagnosis requires a high index of suspicion because radiographs (nonscreen film
 or high-detail screens) must be made in oblique planes and in flexion and extension
to verify the fracture. Sometimes, only a unilateral arthrosis is seen, but if the history
 supports a traumatic cause, this is sufficient justification for exploration of the joint.
Treatment
Closed Reduction
-d a sam t r pus si su au j ya Ar su panedsu
 nosis is uncertain, however, and many patients require surgery later.
Open Reduction and Fixation
Surgery may be performed with a tourniquet, and most fractures can be exposed
from a dorsal approach. Considerable synovial proliferation and inflammation may
complicate the exposure. When the fragment is located, the surgeon decides whether
 aq is su aui pauon aq oi uae aui aaoi no yoeei o
enough to handle; moreover, the fracture surfaces should not be severely eburnated,
 as may happen in a chronic fracture. If small screws are used, their heads must not
interfere with any other structures (Figure 14-9, C and D, and 14-10, B and C).
Miniscrews 1.5 and 2.0 mm in diameter are the most useful sizes. Kirschner wires
countersunk below the level of the carilage or bone are also used (Figure 14-9, E
 and F). Fragments are often excised because they cannot be reattached because of
chronicity and resulting eburnation (Figure 14-11). In this situation the desired
 result is an adequate fibrocartilage scar to fill in the defect.
Prognosis
 The outlook for satisfactory function is usually good unless the bone is comminuted;
this situation usually calls for arthrodesis (see Figure 14-22).
14—-Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
391
C
D
F
FIGURE 14-9. A and B, Dorsal slab fracture of the radial carpal bone. C and D, Two lag
screws of 1.5-mm or 2.0-mm diameter are countersunk beneath the articular surface when the
fragment is large enough. E and F, Smaller fragments may be secured by two or more 
Kirschner wires countersunk beneath the surface of the articular cartilage or bone.
Aftercare
A short, molded palmar splint or short cast (see Figures 2-27 and 2-22, respectively)
is applied for 3 to 4 weeks after fixation of the fragments. Exercise is limited for 6
to 8 weeks, until there is radiographic evidence of healing. If the fragments are
excised, the joint is rested in a similar splint for 10 days, after which light exercise
is advisable through the fourth postoperative week.
392
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-10. A, Oblique fracture through the body of the radial carpal bone. B and
C, Lag screw fixation with a 2.7-, 3.5-, or 4.0-mm lag screw inserted from the medial surface
of the bone. The screw is placed through the insertions of the radial collateral ligaments 
(see Figure 14-2). In this position, the screw head will not interfere with joint motion.
FIGURE 14-11. Fracture of the palmaromedial portion of the radial
carpal bone (mediolateral view). Such fragments are simply excised
beca use they are not on the main weight-bearing area of the bone.
Fracture of Accessory Carpal Bone
Fractures of the accessory carpal bone are seen most often in the racing greyhound
but may be seen occasionally in most of the large breeds. Most fractures are self-
induced avulsions (grade III sprains or strains; see Chapter 7), rather than caused
by outside trauma. Johnson and colleagues4s have described these fractures and
 proposed the following classification system.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
393
Classification
Intraarticular Fractures
Type I, Distal Basilar.
 Avulsion fracture of the distal margin of the articular
surface at the origin of the accessoroulnar carpal ligaments (Figure 14-12, A).
Type I, Proximal Basilar. Avulsion fracture of the proximal margin at the inser-
tion of the ligaments to the radius, ulna, and radial carpal bone (Figure 14-12, C).
Extraarticular Fractures
Type mf, Distal Apical.
Avulsion fracture of the distal margin of the palmar
end of the bone at the origin of the two palmar accessorometacarpal ligaments
(Figure 14-12, E).
Type IV, Proximal Apical.  Avulsion fracture of the tendon of insertion of the
flexor carpi ulnaris muscle at the proximal surface of the palmar end of the bone
(see Figure 14-14, A).
Combined Intraarticular and Extraarticular Fractures
Type V, Comminuted Fracture of the Body. May extend into the articular sur-
face (see Figure 14-15).
 Type I fractures constitute 67% of the injuries in the racing greyhound and occur
almost exclusively in the right limb, whereas type IIl injuries are the least common and
s  ae  iae  an s l a s q a an u  
concurrently with type I fractures. In other breeds, type IV and V fractures predominate.
Clinical Signs
In track injuries, the dog usually comes off the track mildly lame, but clinical signs
may not be noted until the day after the injury, when slight lameness and swelling
swelling of the carpus, pain on digital pressure lateral to the accessory carpal bone,
and pain on carpal flexion. Rest will lead to diminution of these signs, but a chronic
A
B
C
D
E
F
FIGURE 14-12. Fractures of the accessory carpal bone. A and B, Type I distal-basilar frac-
ture and fixation of the fracture with a 2-mm screw. C and D, Type II proximal-basilar frac-
ture and fixation with a 2-mm screw. E and F, Type Ill distal-apical fracture and fixation with
a 2-mm screw.
394
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
low-grade lameness persists when exercise is resumed. There is minimal tendency
for complete healing to occur with conservative treatment, such as external
splinting or casting of the limb.
Treatment
S  aq s s i ad u   yo sa as 
than 50% of our animals so treated have ever returned to the track. With this tech-
nique, successful healing seems to depend on scar tissue reattachment of the distal lig-
aments to the bone. Failure to achieve this results in instability of the accessory carpal
bone, leading to inflammation and degenerative joint disease. Because scar tissue does
not have nearly the tensile strength of ligamentous tissue, it does not adequately
replace the ligament in areas of high tensile stress. Screw fixation of type I, II, and III
injuries has resulted in 91% of these dogs returning to training or racing, and 45% of
those won one or more races.6 Although these case numbers are small, nevertheless
these results are encouraging and dramatically different from excisional treatment,
and this approach is our preferred treatment (see Figures 14-12 and 14-13).
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation, Type I. A palmarolateral approach is
 made.1 The fragment is reduced and clamped with small, pointed reduction forceps
or Lewin forceps (Figure 14-13, A). Fixation is accomplished by a 2-mm screw
(Figure 14-13, B). This is not placed as a lag screw because of the difficulty
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-13. A, Screw fixation of accessory carpal bone fracture. The acces-
small, pointed reduction forceps or Lewin forceps. A 1.S-mm drill is used to place a drill hole
in the center of the fragment. If the drill is held parallel to the metacarpus, the angle will be
correct to prevent entering the joint space. B, The hole is measured and tapped, and a 2-mm
screw is driven with the clamp in place. This is not a lag screw; the clamp supplies
compression. C, The tendinous slip from the ulnaris lateralis tendon is sutured, followed by
the antebrachial fascia, and then the skin.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
395
in determining the depth of the glide hole required for lag effect and because drilling
with a 2-mm bit to produce a glide hole probably poses an unnecessary risk of split-
 yo a uos ns o as si d au au  an s
approach includes suturing of the abductor digiti quinti muscle and the tendinous
slip from the ulnaris lateralis tendon to the accessory carpal bone (Figure 14-13, C).
Treatment of Other Fracture Types
Fractures seen most often in nonracing animals include the type IV proximal apical avul-
sion fracture of the free end of the bone (Figure 14-14, A) and type V body fracture with
varying degrees of comminution of the bone (Figure 14-15). The type IV avulsion 
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 14-14. A, Avulsion of part of the insertion of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle on
the free end of the right accessory carpal bone (type IV fracture). B, Skin and antebrachial
fascia incisions for removal of the fragment are slightly lateral to the bone. C, The tendinous
slip from the ulnaris lateralis muscle is incised over the free end of the bone, and a midsagit-
tal incision is made in the tendon of the flexor carpi ulnaris. D, Careful dissection through
the tendon will reveal the fracture fragment, which is then dissected free; care must be taken
to avoid unnecessary trauma to the tendon. The tendon incision is closed with interrupted
sutures, followed by the tendinous slip over the free end of the bone, the antebrachial fascia,
and the skin.
FIGURE 14-15. Comminuted nonarticular type V fracture of the acces-
sory carpal bone. This fracture was splinted in 20 degrees of flexion and
healed well.
396
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 is in the insertion of the flexor carpi ulnaris muscle and causes mild but persistent
irritation until the fragment is removed (Figure 14-14, B, C, and D).
  m a s  a a jo  
feasible, but most limbs treated for this injury are cast in 20 degrees of flexion with
surprisingly good healing and function if the fracture is entirely extraarticular.
 If there is an intraarticular component, an attempt should be made to do an internal
fixation of that part of the fracture.
Aftercare
After screw fixation a molded palmar splint or short cast (see Figures 2-27 and
2-22) is applied with the carpus flexed 20 degrees. The splint is maintained for
 4 weeks. Complete confinement is enforced through the eighth postoperative week,
followed by 4 weeks of gradually increasing activity. Regular training or activity
is started by the 12th week.
After excision of fragments the splint is maintained for 2 weeks, followed by an
elastic bandage for 2 weeks. Exercise is restricted for 4 more weeks. Splinting of a
comminuted fracture is maintained until radiographic signs of healing are obvious,
usually in about 6 weeks. Full exercise should not be started until 3 or 4 weeks after
splint removal.
Subluxation of Accessory Carpal Bone
This injury is discussed later under Hyperextension of the Carpus.
Fracture of Ulnar and Numbered Carpal Bones
We have not observed fractures of the ulnar carpal bone. Fracture of the distal row
of numbered bones is rare and usually manifests as a small chip or slab on the dor-
sal surface (Figure 14-16). Clinical signs of intermittent mild lameness and joint
effusion are noted. Because these bones are smaller, radiographic diagnosis and reat-
tachment of fragments are more difficult. Multiple oblique views are often necessary
for visualization. Because these bones are all directly in contact with the synovium,
adhesions form early between the fragments, or between the damaged articular
surface, and the synovial membrane. Most of these fractures are treated by excision
FIGURE 14-16. A small fracture (arrow) on the dorsal surface of the third
carpal bone. This fragment was excised.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
397
of fragments and curettage of the damaged articular surface to ensure fibrocartilagi
nous scar formation. Small, nondisplaced fragments may reattach and heal after
3 to 4 weeks of splinting the carpus.
Middle Carpal Luxation
Complete disruption of the middle carpal joint is unusual but does occur, as
illustrated in Figure 14-17. This was a combined antebrachiocarpal and middle
  a n pe e   a q x 
(supination) about 60 degrees. A closed reduction was performed, and the lower
limb was splinted for 6 weeks. Spontaneous ankylosis of the middle carpal joint
adequately stabilized the carpus in this small animal. It is highly unlikely that
adequate stability would occur in a larger animal that was treated conservatively in
this manner. Hyperextension of the middle carpal joint would almost always
develop, necessitating partial arthrodesis of the carpus (see Figures 14-20 and
14-21). Because of the complexity of the injury, primary repair and stabilization of
a complete luxation, although technically possible, are not very feasible.
Middle Carpal Subluxation
Subluxation of the middle carpal joint, with medial instability, is a much more com-
mon problem than complete luxation. Dorsomedial ligamentous disruption between
the radial carpal and carpal 2 and occasionally between carpal 2 and metacarpal II
results in valgus deformity of the foot (Figure 14-18). Less easily appreciated is the
  d  s pd a o  
medial half of the carpus and therefore is not as dramatic as the examples shown
later. The mediolateral projection stress radiographs (see Figure 14-19) will need to
be taken with slight internal rotation (pronation) of the paw to demonstrate hyper-
as described here. If hyperextension is present, the medial wire augmentation repair
FIGURE 14-17. Middle carpal joint luxation,
right limb. A, This is actually a combined middle
and  antebrachiocarpal  luxation  because  the
ulnar carpal bone has remained with the distal
carpals. The foot has supinated 60 degrees.
Dorsal view. B, Medial view showing supination
of the foot.
A
B
398
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Torn
lig ament
Valgus
deformity
of foot
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-18. Middle carpal joint subluxation with medial instability. Left limb, dorsal
view. A, Ligaments are torn between the radial carpal and carpal 2. B and C, Bone tunnels
are drilled in the palmaromedial process of the radial carpal bone and in the base of
au yanoun papeaun s1 (ww 90-8'0) ans 77 01 07 jo aim lis ssauis '1 led1oau
holes in figure-of-8 fashion and the wire tightened enough to eliminate the valgus insta bility.
described here is performed, plus a partial arthrodesis of the medial half of the
middle carpal and carpometacarpal joints (see Figure 14-20). The Kirschner wires
 seen in Figure 14-20 are placed in metacarpals II and Il in this case.
Treatment
Closed Reduction and External Fixation
Conservative treatment can be considered for cats, toy, and small breeds when the
observed laxity is minimal. A molded palmar splint or short cast (see Figures 2-27
 p si sus au sap o paxa snd au m pe si ( p
 4 weeks. Complete confinement is enforced through the eighth postoperative week,
followed by 4 weeks of gradually increasing activity. Regular training or activity is
I ad ron parasai si spaarq rre u uaea yons aam yami a Aq paris
and II sprain injury without laxity.
Open Reduction and Stabilization
The dorsomedial instability is reduced by a synthetic ligament reconstruction with
a po a as Ad e op  issd o si li asaq am s
ligament. The incision for the dorsal approach to the carpus is positioned dorsome-
dially on the carpus. If a partial arthrodesis is to be performed concurrently, it is
done first. (See following discussion under Hyperextension of the Carpus for
details.) The wire placement proceeds by exposure of the medial aspect of the joint.
A bone tunnel is drilled through the palmaromedial process of the radial carpal
bone and through the base of metacarpal II (Figure 14-18, B and C). Stainless steel
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
399
wire, 18 gauge (1 mm) to 22 gauge (0.6 mm), is threaded through the holes in
figure-of-8 fashion. The valgus deformity is reduced and the wire tightened until the
instability is abolished. Care must be taken to turn the twisted end of the wire
closely against the bone to minimize skin irritation. Closure of the skin completes
the procedure.
Aftercare
The carpus is immobilized in 10 to 15 degrees of flexion in a caudal splint
(see Figure 2-27) for 4 to 6 weeks. Strict confinement is continued through the
eighth week, with a firm padded bandage in place after splint removal. A slowly
progressive increase in exercise is then allowed, starting with leash walking, then
 a  s os si d s s a j spd 
another 4 to 6 weeks, at which point most patients are able to return to near-
normal activity. If a partial arthrodesis was done, use the aftercare routine for that
 procedure, as described later.
Hyperextension of the Carpus
Among the most serious injuries to the canine carpus, hyperextension is also one of
the more common, occurring in midsize and large breeds of dogs after falls and
jumps. The structures responsible for maintaining the normal 10 to 12 degrees
of carpal extension (Figure 14-19, A) are the palmar ligaments and palmar carpal
fibrocartilage (see Figure 14-2, B, C, and D). It is commonly held that hyperextension
A
B
C
D
   s    s s e 
lateral views. A, Lateral view of a normal carpus with the foot stressed (open arrotw) to
maximal extension of 10 to 12 degrees. Note the angular relationships of the proximal carpal
bones to the radius and to the distal carpal bones. Note also the angular relationship between
the carpal and metacarpal bones. B, Lateral view of hyperextension at the antebrachiocarpal
joint (shaded arrouw). The only difference from normal is the increased angle of extension.
C, Lateral view of hyperextension at the middle carpal joint (shaded arrouw). Note the gap
between the palmar process of the ulnar carpal bone (star) and the base of metacarpal V.
D, Lateral view of hyperextension at the carpometacarpal level (shaded arrouw). The bases of
the metacarpal bones appear to overlap the carpal bones.
400
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
of the carpus is a result of tendon injury, but in fact the only tendon that bears
on carpal stability in extension is the flexor carpi ulnaris, which inserts on the
accessory carpal bone. Sectioning of this tendon results in very slight hyperextension
at the antebrachiocarpal joint. Diagnosis of this problem is relatively easy because
 there will be either a laceration of the skin or, in the case of spontaneous rupture
or avulsion (rare), palpable evidence of soft tissue inflammation.
History and Clinical Signs
Invariably there is a history of injury caused by a fall or jump. If there is no history
of injury and hyperextension has developed slowly, immune-mediated joint disease
or degenerative conditions of the ligaments may be the cause (see Chapter 6).
Surprisingly, minimal signs of pain and inflammation are associated with hyperexten-
sion injuries after a few days. Animals typically will attempt weight bearing within
 5 to 7 days. A seal-like or plantigrade stance is characteristic but variable in appear-
ance. Some animals may be walking on their carpal pads, but others may show only
20 to 30 degrees of extension. Pressure and abrasion sores are common sequelae.
Diagnosis
 To select the proper treatment, it is important to know at which joint level the injury
has occurred. In our experience the distribution of injuries has been as follows:
1. Antebrachiocarpal, 10%
2. Middle carpal, 28%
 3. Carpometacarpal, 46%
4. Combined middle and carpometacarpal, 16%
A very rare injury, involving isolated subluxation of the base of the accessory
carpal bone caused by rupture of the accessoroulnar ligaments, with associated mild
carpal hyperextension, has been reported.7
Definition of the joint level involved is possible only by radiographic examina-
tion. A medial or lateral exposure is made with the limb stressed to maximal carpal
extension (Figure 14-19). A palmar intraarticular fracture of the radius is often seen
when hyperextension is present at the antebrachiocarpal level (Figure 14-19, B).
When the injury is at the middle carpal level, the palmar process of the ulnar carpal
bone becomes separated from the base of metacarpal V, and the process is easily
identified (Figure 14-19, C). The accessory carpal bone may show evidence of
subluxation and proximal angulation. With carpometacarpal injury the proximal
carpal bones override the distal row (Figure 14-19, D). Chronic antebrachiocarpal
level injuries show wearing of the palmar edge of the distal radius caused by the
 proximal carpal bones as they subluxate in a palmar direction. In chronic middle
carpal instability the radial and ulnar carpal bones can pivot in a distopalmar direc-
tion, their dorsodistal edges coming to rest on the base of the metacarpals, creating
a wide gap between the craniodorsal surface of the radius and the radial carpal
 bone. In chronic injuries at all levels, varying degrees of bony proliferation will be
present where the more proximal bones override the distal bones.
 In the case of subluxation of the accessory carpal bone mentioned earlier, there
was increased space in the accessoroulnar joint space in lateral radiographs taken in
ulnar carpal bone shifted laterally, as visualized in dorsopalmar views.7
Treatment
 Two basic types of arthrodesis are performed in the carpal region. Panarthrodesis
involves surgical fusion of all three joint levels: the antebrachiocarpal, the
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
401
middle carpal, and the carpometacarpal. Partial arthrodesis involves fusion of only
the middle and distal joints. Panarthrodesis has been a widely practiced method of
treating carpal hyperextension, regardless of the joint level involved.α This has been
a satisfactory method of treatment, with 97% of owners reporting improvement
in gait and 74% reporting normal use of the limb.8 Nevertheless, panarthrodesis
destroys a normal joint (antebrachiocarpal) and requires the use of bone-plating
equipment (see Figures 14-22 and 14-23, A and B) or external skeletal fixators
(see Figure 14-23, C).
 Partial arthrodesis (fusion of the middle carpal and carpometacarpal joints only)
is probably a better approach for those injuries that involve only the middle and
distal joints? (see Figures 14-20 and 14-21). With this technique, flexion of the
major joint of the carpus—the antebrachiocarpal joint—is maintained, and gait is
affected little. In performance dogs, partial arthrodesis has the potential for return-
ing the dog to athletic pursuits, whereas panarthrodesis does not. Conversely, in
chronic cases with marked degenerative joint disease, panarthrodesis will yield
better results. Conservative treatment by splinting in flexion or hyperextension
seems to have little application, since virtually all animals will break down again
after return to weight bearing. Patients with mild hyperextension at the antebrachio-
carpal level and smaller animals are the best candidates for treatment by splintage.
 Arthrodesis can be performed later if necessary.
Partial Arthrodesis
Partial, or subtotal, arthrodesis involves surgical fusion of only the middle level and
carpometacarpal joints. Subluxation of the accessory carpal bone need not be
an sn  u assa s s a ro  a assa
 because there is little motion normally present in these joint levels. The antebrachio-
carpal joint, which is responsible for virtually all flexion of the carpus, remains
functional. The major indication for partial arthrodesis is hyperextension of the
middle carpal and carpometacarpal joint levels, which together account for 90%
of all hyperextension injuries of the carpus. Both joints are fused when either is
injured because of the technical difficulty of fusing either individually. On occasion,
instability will develop medially at either of these joints and will not respond to
d re Paisuo aq ose Pnoo sseo asa (si-tl an aas) zu
arthrodesis. Attainment of a partial arthrodesis is more difficult to achieve than
Pin Fixation Metbod.  A dorsal midline approach to the carpus is made, with
the incision extending distally to the level of the metacarpophalangeal joints
(Figure 14-20, A). A tourniquet can be used. Preoperative preparations and draping
are made to allow collection of a cancellous bone graft from the proximal humerus
of the same limb (see Chapter 3). Articular cartilage of the middle carpal,
intercarpal, and carpometacarpal joints is debrided with a curette or high-speed bur.
Care is taken to preserve the insertions of the extensor carpi radialis tendon on the
proximal ends of metacarpals II and III. If the high-speed bur is used, slots are
burred through the distal cortex of metacarpals II and IV at the level of the distal
third of the shaft (Figure 14-20, B). Kirschner wires (0.045 or 0.062 inch; 1.2 or
1.6 mm) are introduced through the slots into the medullary canal in the manner of
a Rush pin and driven proximally into the base of the metacarpal bone. The corti-
cal slots must be long enough to allow the pin to bend as it is introduced into the
medullary canal. Failure of the pins to drive easily up the medullary canal means
that the pins are too large in diameter or that the slot is too short. Autogenous can-
 cellous graft is collcted from the proximal humerus and packed into the debrided
402
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Tendons of
extensor
carpi radialis m.
Debridementof
Cancellous
articular
bone
cartilage
graft
Tendon of
common
dligital
extensor m.
Cancellous
bone
graft
Pressure
D
二
FIGURE 14-20. Partial arthrodesis of the carpus with pin fixation. A, The carpus is
exposed by a dorsal midline incision. The middle carpal, carpometacarpal, and intercarpal
joints are debrided of articular cartilage. B, Slots are burred in the dorsal cortex of
metacarpals II and IV in the distal third of the bones. Kirschner wire (0.045 or 0.062 inch)
is introduced into the medullary canal in the manner of a Rush pin. C, Both pins are seated
(see also D), and the protruding end is bent into a hook shape and cut off. D, Autogenous
cancellous bone graft is placed in all the prepared joint spaces. The carpus is flexed
90 degrees, and palmar and proximal pressure on the metacarpal bones is applied to position 
the carpal bones correctly relative to the metacarpals. The Kirschner wires are now driven
into the proximal row of carpal bones as deeply as possible without penetrating the articular
surface. E, An alternative method of placing the Kirschner wires is to drive them from the
metacarpophalangeal joints proximally. Two pins are placed and driven to the base of
metacarpals Ill and IV. F, Pins placed at the metacarpophalangeal joint are also bent to a hook
shape and cut off.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
403
joint spaces. With the carpus held in extreme flexion to reduce the subluxation of
the middle carpal or carpometacarpal level, pins are driven proximally into the
xd a ad ou i sd a a ti i q  p
articular cartilage of the radial carpal bone. The pins are backed out a few millime-
ters, then bent to form a hook at the distal end and cut off. The pins are then pushed
 or driven proximally to their original depth, after which the hook is rotated flat
against the bone (Figure 14-20, C).
If no power bur is available, it is difficult to cut slots in the metacarpal bones;
two methods can be substituted in this situation, as follows:
1.
 The pins can be driven from the metacarpophalangeal joint proximally into
the shaft of the bone, similar to pinning a metacarpal fracture (see Figure 14-30).
The pins should enter the bone slightly dorsal to the articular carilage of the distal
end of the metacarpal bone (Figure 14-20, E). After the pins are seated in the radial
carpal bone, they are retracted a few millimeters, the distal ends are bent to form a
hook, cut off, and driven back into their original depth. Finally, the hook ends are
rotated flat against the bone (Figure 14-20, F).
2.
q pede xd a o ae u ie up aq u sd ux
from metacarpals II and V (Figure 14-21, A) after reducing the joints as shown in
Figure 14-20, D. The medial pin must be driven from metacarpal II proximally into
B
Extensor carpi
radialis tendon
from metacarpal lll
FIGURE 14-21. A, Alternative transfixation method of pinning the middle carpal and car-
pometacarpal joints for partial carpal arthrodesis. The medial pin is driven from metacarpal
II proximally into the ulnar carpal bone. The lateral pin is driven from the articular surface
of the radial carpal bone (with the joint flexed) distally into metacarpal V, where it is then
pulled distally until buried beneath the articular surface of the radial carpal bone. B, Partial
arthrodesis of the carpus using T-plate fixation. The plate is attached to the distal end of the
radial carpal bone, the screws angling proximally. The first screw in the long end of the plate
is placed in carpal 3 and the other two screws in the third metacarpal. The tendon of the
is sutured there.
404
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
the ulnar carpal bone and the position of the tip of the pin verified to ensure it does
not penetrate the articular surface, which will probably not be visible. The lateral
pin is more easily driven from the articular surface of the radial carpal bone distally.
The carpus is maximally flexed to allow the pin to be positioned under direct vision
proximally in the radial carpal bone. After the pin exits metacarpal V distally, the
pin chuck is reversed and the pin pulled distally until it is below the articular sur-
face of the radial carpal bone. An advantage of this method is that the exposure does
not need to extend as far distally. The disadvantage is that the pins are more diffi-
 p ramod  'saoq iao a ad aan eu asa on oap oi i
recommended because it is easier to direct than a hand chuck.
Bone Plate.  A small T-plate can also be used for partial arthrodesis. However,
the bones must be large enough to accommodate the plate without impinging on
the radius. The joint is exposed, prepared, and bone-grafted as detailed previously
e  a  a p a o pe si d a  d 
s aoq ledreo ien aun uo isp rey se paoeid si pue (a i-ti ai) auoq
possible to avoid interference with the dorsal rim of the radius. The two screws in
the radial carpal bone are angled proximally to allow the plate to be properly
positioned. The distal portion of the plate must lie over the third metacarpal bone,
which necessitates cutting the tendon of insertion of the extensor carpi radialis
 The tendon is sutured to the insertion of its paired tendon on metacarpal I1. The
two distal screws in the plate are placed in metacarpal IIl. The most proximal
screw is either placed in carpal 3, as shown in Figure 14-21, B, or in the base of
metacarpal Il.
Aftercare. If a tourniquet was used, a padded support bandage is applied for
several days, and after swelling has subsided, a molded splint or short cast
(see Figures 2-27 and 2-22, respectively) is applied to the caudal surface of the
limb. If no tourniquet was used, the splint can be applied immediately if desired.
This support is maintained until radiographic signs of fusion are noted, typically
6 to 8 weeks later. A gradual return to normal exercise is allowed over the next
4 weeks. If the pins were driven from the metacarpophalangeal joint, they should be
removed before allowing exercise. Other implants are removed only if they migrate
(pins) or loosen (plates).
Prognosis. Good results have been reported for partial arthrodesis.? At an
average of 32 months postoperatively, 25 of 25 owners reported to be pleased or
 y a  s    an  asd a
persisted in 11% of cases, and degenerative joint disease was present in 15.5%.
No cases required revision by panarthrodesis.
Panarthrodesis
 Indications for panarthrodesis primarily involve the antebrachiocarpal joint: poly-
trauma (e.g., fractures, multiple ligamentous injuries), degenerative joint disease,
and hyperextension injuries at the antebrachiocarpal level. Arthrodesis for total
 brachial plexus paralysis is not recommended because of the poor elbow function
and self-mutilation of the foot that usually occur. It does not appear to be practical
to fuse only the antebrachiocarpal level; therefore, when this level must be fused,
the other two levels are also fused. Fusion of only the antebrachiocarpal joint
is technically possible, but the stress placed on the metacarpal and carpometacarpal
joints disposes them to increased laxity and degenerative changes. It should be
remembered that because minimal motion occurs in the middle and distal joints of
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
405
the carpus, fusion of the antebrachiocarpal level effectively destroys all motion in
the carpus. Although function remains good, there is pronounced circumduction of
the lower limb during the swing phase of gait.
 Either bone plate or external skeletal fixation can be applied for stabilization
of this fusion. Plate fixation was originally applied dorsally, but this position
is mechanically unsound, since the plate is not on the tension side of the carpus and
is therefore subject to bending forces. The plate will loosen or break unless the
carpus is supported in a cast or splint until fusion is radiographically verified.
Dorsal plating has been used successfully in the cat, and in a case of hypoplasia
of the carpal bone, where the radius was fused directly to the metacarpus.10.11
A palmar position for the plate is mechanically superior, which Chambers and
 Bjorling12 found to be useful. This advantage may be negated by more difficult
exposure (see next section). External skeletal fixators can also be applied in
 a variety of configurations and are especially valuable in the presence of open
injuries.
Dorsal Plate Tecbnique.  A dorsal midline approach from the level of the distal
radius to the midmetacarpal level is used after a tourniquet (±) has been placed.
Preparations are made to collect a cancellous bone graft from the proximal humerus
of the same limb (see Chapter 3). Articular cartilage of the antebrachiocarpal, the
middle carpal, the carpometacarpal, and the intercarpal joints is debrided with a
curette or high-speed bur. The tendons of the extensor carpi radialis on metacarpals
II and IIl can be sacrificed. After debridement of articular cartilage of all three joint
levels (Figure 14-22, A), a seven-hole (minimum) compression plate is applied to the
dorsal surface of the distal radius, bridging the carpus and attaching distally to
the third metacarpal (Figure 14-22, B). Plate and screw sizes vary with the size
of the patient, with the width of the third metacarpal bone being the limiting factor.
The screw diameter should not exceed 25% to 30% of the bone width, or the bone
could be seriously weakened. Suggestions for sizes are as follows:
1. For large breeds over 60 pounds (27 kg), 3.5-mm screws/plates are used.
2. For breeds 20 to 25 pounds to 60 pounds (9-11 kg to 27 kg), 2.7-mm
screws/plates are used.
3. For breeds 10 to 20 pounds (4.5-9.0 kg), 2.0-mm screws/plates are used.
Cuttable plates (Synthes; see discussion in Chapter 2) work well here. Two
1.5-mm-thick plates are stacked together to span the distance from the radius
to the most proximal metacarpal screw. A single-thickness plate extends
distally for two or three more screw holes. This simplifies skin closure and
lessens the problem of late loosening of the most distal screw, as discussed
later. Another option with this method is the use of 2.7-mm screws in the
radius and radial carpal bone and 2.0-mm screws in the metacarpal.
4. For cats and toy breeds, 1.5-mm screws/plates are used.10 Two thicknesses
of 1.0-mm-thick cuttable plates are used here. The 2.0-mm screws can be
used in the radius and radial carpal bones and 1.5-mm screws in the
metacarpal.
 5. For medium-sized to large dogs, a tapered "hybrid" pancarpal arthrodesis
plate is available in various lengths and has either all 3.5-mm holes or
3.5-mm holes for placement of screws in the radius and radiocarpal bone
 and 2.7-mm holes for placement of screws in the metacarpus (Jorgensen
Laboratories, Inc., Loveland, Colo; Veterinary Instrumentation, Sheffield,
United Kingdom).
406
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 Drill holes
Tendons of
extensor
Cartilage
carpi
radialis m.
 debrided
Cancellous
bone graft
ancellous
D
FIGURE 14-22. Panarthrodesis of the carpus with a dorsal plate. A, The left carpus has
been exposed by a dorsal midline incision, and the tendons of the extensor carpi radialis have 
been severed at metacarpals Il and IIl. Removal of articular cartilage is eased by maximum
 flexion of the joint. Multiple drill holes penetrate the distal radius to aid in vascularization.
B, A seven- or eight-hole bone plate is contoured to provide 10 to 12 degrees of carpal
extension (see D) and is attached distally to the third metacarpal and proximally to the
s aun uo ad aun is ot io q is ao si sio o ai 's
 proximally. The screws in this dynamic compression plate (Synthes) are placed in the load
 position to produce compression. It is important that the distal screw be placed first, in order
joint spaces. C and D, The bone plate is completely attached, with three screws in the radius,
three in the third metacarpal, and one in the radial carpal bone. Autogenous cancellous bone
 graft is used to pack the joint spaces and under the plate. Note that about 10 degrees of carpal
extension has been maintained.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
407
Three screws are placed in the distal radius, one in the radial carpal bone,
and a minimum of three in the third metacarpal bone. The distal screw must be
placed first to center the plate over metacarpal II and thus ensure that the screws
will be centered in this rather narrow bone. The self-compressing load position
is used for the first two screws in the radius and metacarpal IIl to compress all the
joint levels. Compression is not possible with cuttable plates. Plates are contoured
to produce about 10 degrees of extension in the carpus (Figure 14-22, C and D).
It is usually helpful to flatten the flare of the distal radius slightly by removing
a small portion of bone with a rongeur or high-speed drill to avoid the need to
double-curve the plate. Autogenous cancellous bone from the proximal humerus is
used to pack all the joint spaces and space beneath the plate. Multiple drill
holes directed from the articular surface of the distal radius into the radial
metaphysis may assist vascular invasion and incorporation of the graft to hasten
healing. The extensor carpi radialis tendons are sutured to the joint capsule in
the area.
Aftercare. A short, molded palmar splint or cylinder cast (see Figures 2-27 and
 2-22) or a bivalved cylinder cast is maintained until radiographic signs of fusion are
noted, usually at least 8 weeks. Exercise is gradually returned to normal over the
next 4 weeks. If function of the limb is good, most plates will need to be removed
-xa ae soq jedeau a u no huasoo jo asaq so zl oi g 
ible enough to bend slightly during weight bearing, which may cause loosening of
the distal screws because of the stiffness of the plate. Occasionally, fatigue fractures
of metacarpal Ill occur at the end of the plate. The plate should be removed and
the foot splinted until bone healing is well advanced, usually about 4 weeks.
carpus is used to expose the area.1 Preparations are also made to collect a cancel-
lous bone graft from the proximal humerus of the same limb (see Chapter 3).
Ligaments, palmar carpal fibrocartilage, and joint capsule are sharply dissected
from the distal radius and carpal bones. Articular cartilage of all joint levels is
removed by powered burs or curettes. This debridement is somewhat blind, since
 good visualization of the articular surfaces is diffcult. Any bony prominences
that prevent close contact of the plate and bone are removed in preparation for
attaching an appropriate-size plate. The distal radius must be flattened quite
aggressively to minimize contouring of the plate. Plate sizes are used as previously
 discussed and should be long enough to place at least three screws in the radius and
in metacarpal II1. The carpus is positioned in normal extension (10-12 degrees), and
a Kirschner wire is drilled from the distal radius into the carpus to maintain the
the distal radius and metacarpal II (Figure 14-23, A and B). The plate is attached
first at the distal hole to ensure that the screw holes in metacarpal II will be cen-
tered in this narrow bone. The plate is then attached using the self-compressing load
position for the first two screws in the radius and metacarpal Ill to compress all
the joint levels. Cancellous bone graft is added to the joint surface areas and
the Kirschner wire removed before closing the tissues in layers.
Aftercare. A padded support bandage is applied for several days, and after
swelling has subsided, a molded splint may be applied to the caudal surface of the
limb (see Figure 2-27). This splint is maintained until radiographic signs of fusion
allowed over the next 4 weeks. If the animal can be closely confined, and if the use
of a splint presents difficulties in treatment of soft tissue wounds, it is possible to
dispense with use of the splint.
408
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Autogenous cancellous
bonegraft
Screw in
radial carpal
bone
A
B
FIGURE 14-23. A and B, Carpal panarthrodesis with a palmar plate.12 A palmaromedial
approach to the distal radius and carpus! is made to allow plate placement on the distal
 radius and metacarpal bone Ill. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is used in the prepared
articular surfaces. Plate size for large-breed dogs is typically 2.7 to 3.5 mm. C, A modified
type IIB external fixator is applicable for panarthrodesis. Placement of the fixation pins is
eased if the medial and lateral connecting bars are curved to match the normal extension
angle of the carpus. The shaded fixation pins are used for maximum stiffness of the fixator,
 as is the shaded angular connecting bar, which is curved to arch dorsal to the paw.
External Skeletal Fixator Tecbnique. In rare cases, it is desirable to perform
panarthrodesis of the carpus in the presence of actual or potential infection. Open
comminuted fractures and severe shearing injuries are the most common indica-
tions. Early stabilization will help in management of the soft tissue injury by improv-
ing blood supply and optimizing the local defense reaction. Considerable time and
expense are also saved. It is wise, however, to treat the open wounds vigorously with
copious lavage, debridement of necrotic tissue, and systemic antibiotics for many
days before undertaking arthrodesis. Otherwise, contaminated and infected tissue
may become deep seated and cause failure and further destruction of bone stock.
If bone-plating equipment is not available, the external fixator represents an
 excellent method that is available to most practices.
The type IIB splint configuration shown in Figure 1423, C, can be used to
stabilize the joint after preparation of the joint surfaces, as described earlier.
Curving the connecting rods is helpful in establishing the proper angle of the
carpus. Acrylic resin connecting bars are useful in this application, especially in
e oi o anb si in inq asn aq osie u sus ai adn spaara hs a
 the intermediate pins to the second bar (see discussion in Chapter 2). Autogenous
cancellous bone graft (see Chapter 3) can be safely used in the presence of infection,
but this should be withheld if there is frank suppuration because the graft will be
washed out of the site by the exudate and therefore wasted. It is better to wait until
healthy granulation has covered the area and then elevate the granulation tissue
and insert the graft.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
409
 Aftercare. Bone healing in open injuries will probably be delayed, and the splint
will need to be maintained for 10 to 12 weeks. Radiographic fusion in closed
injuries will usually be attained by 8 weeks. If bone pins loosen before fusion is radio-
 graphically visible, the pins can be either replaced or removed and followed with a
few more weeks of immobilization in a short cast (see Figure 2-22).
Shearing Injuryof theCarpus
This abrasion injury occurs when the dog's lower limb is run over by the tire of
an automobile with its brakes locked attempting to avoid the animal. Soft tissues
in contact with the pavement are simply ground away, often eroding skin, muscle,
ligaments, and even bone. The medial carpal and metacarpal regions are most
frequently affected, with the radial styloid process and radial collateral ligaments
often completely destroyed (Figure 14-24, A). One or more carpal or metacarpal
joints may be open, and varying amounts of debris are ground into all the tissues.
The lateral side is less often involved and represents a less serious injury than a com-
parable injury on the medial side. Because the dog normally stands with a few
degrees of valgus (lateral) deviation of the forepaw, ligamentous stability of the
medial side of the carpus and metacarpus is much more critical than on the lateral
aspect. Best results are obtained by treating these wounds in an open manner, with
tarly aggressive stabilization of the joints and any accompanying fractures. Rarely
is skin grafting indicated, and only if second intention healing does not adequately
close the wound.
Braided
polyester
suture
Valgus
deformity
of foot
A
B
c
D
E
FIGURE 14-24. Shearing injury of the medial carpus. A, The radial styloid process and
medial aspect of the radial carpal bone and the associated collateral ligaments have been
ground away. B and C, Bone screws provide anchor points for the synthetic ligament of
braided polyester suture. Placement of the screws and bone tunnel closely mimic the normal
ligament. D, Suture anchor devices may be used as an alternative to bone screws and wash-
ers to attach suture to bone for synthetic ligaments (IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview, Texas).
The anchor device has a hole to accept suture, which helps to prevent slippage. E, To simplify
open treatment of soft tissues, the joint is stabilized in 10 degrees of flexion with external
skeletal fixation (Kirschner-Ehmer splint). The connecting rods are bent to allow the desired
amount of extension.
410
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 Early or delayed arthrodesis is indicated when it is not possible to restore reason-
able joint function by ligamentous stabilization. Variables to be considered in choos-
ing a plan of action include the following:
1. Assuming that the joint(s) can be stabilized, is there enough articular surface to
allow good function? Loss of bone in the antebrachiocarpal articulation is
critical. If the answer is *no," arthrodesis is indicated.
 2. What will the owner accept as reasonable function? A large, active breed
presents problems different from those of a small, sedentary animal. In the
former, aggressive ligamentous repair, augmentation, or replacement is
necessary, whereas in the latter it may be possible to obtain good results by
very conservative methods. Stabilization of joints by scar tissue may well
provide adequate support in the smaller and less active animals, but it rarely
s e   ais  a  s s  s 
of which approach is taken to the ligamentous instability, the involved joints
must be stabilized during the healing period. Because of the necessity for daily
 bandage changes for 2 to 3 weeks when treating these large open wounds, the
use of conventional casts or splints is difficult. External skeletal fixation
devices have greatly aided in solving this problem.
Treatment
Reconstruction
Initial debridement must be meticulous but not too aggressive, with emphasis on
removal of dead tissue and foreign matter from both soft tissue and joint spaces.
 s  n a sn s   s   o
Some recommend the addition of 10% povidone-iodine or 0.2% chlorhexidine.
After adequate debridement, it may be possible to close the wound partially by
suturing skin. This can be helpful, but care must be taken to do the following:
1. Leave adequate open area for unimpeded wound drainage. Placement of
Penrose or tube drains under the sutured skin is usually advisable for 2 to
5days.
2. Avoid closing skin under tension. Serious circulatory stasis develops because
of the tourniquet-like effect of excessive skin tension in the lower limbs.
3. When in doubt about tissue viability, do not suture skin. Delayed primary
closure can be done in a few days with no loss of healing time.
Several debridements over a number of days may be necessary to remove all devi-
talized tissue adequately because of the difficulty in determining viability of badly
traumatized tissue. If there are portions of ligaments, joint capsule, or other tissues
that can be sutured to support the joint and to close the synovial membrane, this
should be done. Monofilament or synthetic absorbable suture is the most trouble-
free material relative to later sinus tracts.
Reestablishment of the radial collateral ligament complex is usually hampered by
loss of bone, and small bone screws may be used to anchor a synthetic ligament.
There is a tendency to use monofilament wire in this contaminated area, but heavy,
braided suture is a much more functional ligament and has resulted in very few
problems related to suture sinus drainage tracts. Monofilament nylon fishing line of
40- to 60-pound test has also been successful. Two bone screws are positioned to
    te  sd s s s s s a s
placement of these bone screws for attachment of heavy, braided polyester suture
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
411
and adequate soft tissue debridement are necessary for successful treatment.
The sutures are tied tightly enough to stabilize the joint, but motion without
binding should still be possible. Washers can be used on the screws to prevent the
suture from slipping over the head of the screw. Suture anchors may be used
 as an alternative to bone screws for attaching suture to bone when creating
synthetic ligaments (Figure 14-24, D). Anchors have a hole to accept suture, which
helps to prevent the suture from slipping. Treatment of the open wound is
simplified by use of transarticular type IB external fixator to stabilize the joint
(Figure 14-24, E).
Fixation is maintained until granulation tisue has covered the defect, usually in
3 to 4 weeks. Sterile laparotomy sponges soaked in povidone-iodine or chlorhexi-
 dine solution are loosely bandaged to the limb for several days, and debridement is
repeated daily or every other day until all dead tissue is removed. The wound must
azne isio st'aiepnxa jo aeuiep aienbape 1oj apeu uoisord pue isio idaY aq
with copious absorbent padding covered by a moisture barrier (e.g., polyvinyl sheet)
and dressing changes are used daily until healthy granulation covers the wound.
Hydrocolloid, hydrogel, and polyethylene semiocclusive dressings have received
considerable attention for treatment of full-thickness skin wounds. Hydrogel and
  sn sd e  a  arm sssa aa
 or with antibacterial ointments, and minimal absorbent padding are used in place
of the moist dressings. Intervals between dressing changes can gradually be spread
out as wound exudation lessens. The wound must be kept protected until it is well
epithelialized, which may take up to 10 to 12 weeks.
Aftercare. When granulation tissue completely covers the wound, but not
before 3 weeks postoperatively, the external fixator is removed. A firm elastic sup-
ity. Normal exercise is not allowed until weeks 8 to 12, depending on the stability
achieved. Loosening of the bone screws and skin irritation from the screw heads are
indications for removing the screws. The screw in the radial carpal bone is particu-
larly prone to loosening because of its motion. This should not be done before 3 to
4 months postoperatively if possible. Failure to stabilize the joint adequately will
result in degenerative joint disease and poor function. In such cases, arthrodesis
offers the best chance of restoring function (see previous discussion).
Prognosis. A retrospective study of 98 shearing injuries by Beardsley and
 Schrader1 revealed some previously unknown facts regarding the outcome of these
cases. All were treated essentially as just described, except that none received joint
stabilization by means of external fixators; all were supported in some form of
external coaptation. Healing time ranged from 2 to 9 weeks, depending on the size
and depth of the wound and the amount of the wound that was able to be closed
by suture. A mean of 1.7 surgical procedures were performed on each patient, and
a mean of 5.5 rechecks were required after hospital discharge. Good to excellent
outcome was attained in 91 % of the dogs, defined as clinically normal or with only
minimal functional abnormalities after healing of the injury. Only one case required
skin grafting.
As can be seen, these are expensive injuries because of the amount of care
required, and those owners not prepared for this type of care would be well advised
to consider amputation as a primary treatment. It is our subjective opinion that
support with external fixators simplifies treatment because owners can do more
412
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
treatment at home because of the absence of the coaptation splint, but we do not
have data to suggest that it shortens the healing period or affects the final outcome.
Arthrodesis
Some shearing injuries to the carpus are too extensive to be successfully recon-
structed. These are invariably those with extensive bone loss of the medial radial
 p a r ae o  sxa ss aoq a  ssard r
radius, there may not be sufficient articular support for the radial carpal bone.
Additionally, the ability to provide sufficient medial ligamentous support is ques-
tionable. In this situation, panarthrodesis of the carpus is the best method of main-
taining limb function. Although it is possible to attempt reconstruction and then
follow with arthrodesis if reconstruction fails, much time and expense can be
wasted. Ideally, arthrodesis using a bone plate should be undertaken only after bac-
terial contamination is well under control. If infection is present, the debridement of
 articular surfaces and the presence of implants may well drive infection deeper into
the bone
 By the use of external skeletal fixation (Figure 14-23, C), the arthrodesis can be
performed very early, before the wound is healed, with a high probability of success-
ful fusion and a low chance of bone infection. The procedure can be delayed for
several days, until the debridement phase is complete and, it is hoped, some granu-
lation tissue has begun to appear. The carpus is supported during this phase entirely
by the bandage, sometimes augmented by thermomoldable plastic splints or wire
frames. If it seems necessary to use the external fixator immediately to support the
joint, the fusion is done at the same time. The technique is performed basically as
described earlier under Hyperextension of the Carpus. The major difference is in the
manner of applying the autogenous cancellous bone graft, since there must be
sufficient soft tissue available to cover the graft and allow its early vascularization.
 Exudation is another contraindication to early grafing because the exudate may
physically carry the graft fragments away. In this situation the joint debridement
and fixation are completed as usual, but grafting is delayed until there is a healthy
granulation tissue bed, without exudation. At that point the granulation tissue is
carefully elevated from the joint surfaces sufficiently to allow the graft to be packed
into the joint spaces. The area is kept covered by petrolatum-impregnated gauze
sponges for several days, until granulation tissue again covers the area. Aftercare
from this point onward is as previously described.
METACARPUS AND PHALANGES
 Fractures of the Metacarpus
Fractures of the metacarpal bones occur in all three anatomical regions of the bone:
the base (proximal end), the shaft, and the head (distal end).
Fracture of the Base
P a iso ae sauoq () lna ue (ps) i a
(Figures 14-25, A, and 14-26, A). Because these areas are points of ligamentous
insertion, varying degrees of valgus (lateral) displacement of the foot are seen with
fractures of the second metacarpal and varus (medial) displacement with fifth
metacarpal fractures. Some injury of the carpometacarpal ligaments may be noted,
discussion).
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
413
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-25. A, Fracture of the base of the second metacarpal bone is usually associated
with valgus (lateral) deviation of the foot. B, Fixation with Kirschner wire and tension band
wire. C, Fixation with lag screw.
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-26. A, Fracture of the base of the fifth metacarpal bone. The tendon of inser-
tion of the ulnaris lateralis muscle causes the fragment to be displaced proximally. Some varus
(medial) deviation of the foot may be present. B and C, Fixation is by the tension band wire
technique. The Kirschner wire is 0.045 inch in diameter, and the stainless steel wire is
22 gauge. This fracture could also be repaired with a lag screw.
Closed Reduction
Undisplaced fractures may be treated by external fixation, but there is usually some dis-
 placement of the fragment during healing and subsequent varus or valgus malunion. A
a aq s (aiads  e  s aas s s ro sds p a
414
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation
Fixation of displaced fractures is usually done by the tension band wire technique
(Figures 14-25, B, and 14-26, B and C). Lag screws are also useful in some cases
(Figure 14-25, C). Comminuted fractures in larger breeds may be handled with
small plates, combined with lag screws and/or cerclage wires (Figure 14-27).
 pons a jo san sas n ilns ae s n
(and third metatarsal) of the right foot. These fractures are undisplaced and
often show some callus formation (Figure 14-28, A and B). Fixation of acute
injuries is by a palmar splint (see Figure 2-27), maintained for 4 weeks. Lag screw
fixation with 2.0-mm miniscrews is indicated when there is no response to immobi-
lization (Figure 14-28, C). Chronic injuries can be stimulated to start anew with a
healing response by osteostixis.16 Several 1.5- to 2.0-mm holes are drilled in the
fracture area to stimulate a healing response, after which the foot is splinted for
4weeks.
Aftercare
Primary fixation by casting or splinting will require the device to be worn for about
 6 weeks, except with the stress fracture, which requires only 4 weeks. If internal fix-
ation is used, a molded palmar splint or short cast (see Figures 2-27 and 2-22) is
maintained for 3 to 4 weeks. Exercise is restricted for 3 to 4 weeks after splint
removal.
FractureoftheShaft
ai j aiadsa Xni snoas e nou si sdiea omi uaa no ao jo a
two middle bones are not involved. They heal quite readily in a simple palmar splint
as a result of the splinting effect of the remaining bones. When three or all four
bones are broken (Figure 14-29, A), the situation is quite different, however,
especially in the large and giant breeds. In these cases, simple splints often create a
delayed union or malunion at best, with nonunion often resulting. This is a problem
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 14-27. A and B, Comminuted fracture of the proximal shaft and base of the fifth
metacarpal bone. C and D, One-third tubular plate, 2.7-mm screws, and 22-gauge cerclage
wire fixation. The two proximal screws were applied in lag fashion.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
415
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-28. A and B, Stress fracture of the second metacarpal bone, right forefoot.
 a an si a au  r  u s i ai s
undisplaced and may extend into the articular surface of the base; unless it is seen very early,
it will have some periosteal callus formation, which is usually palpable. C, Fixation with
1.5-mm or 2.0-mm lag screws placed in a dorsal-palmaromedial direction.
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-29. A, Multiple metacarpal shaft fractures. B and C, Closed reduction
and inadequate external fixation resulted in valgus deformity and palmar bowing of the
metacarpus.
416
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
 particularly when preformed spoon splints are used. Additionally, a valgus defor-
mity and palmar bowing of the bones may occur because they are not adequately
supported in the spoon splint (Figure 14-29, B and C).
Closed Reduction
When closed reduction and external fixation are used, a molded splint or fiberglass
short cast is advisable (see Figures 2-27 and 2-22). Because these devices are molded
to the foot, the bony support is greatly improved. The splint or cast should be main-
tained until radiographic signs of healing are well advanced, which typically occurs
within 4 to 8 weeks, varying with the age of the animal.
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation
Internal fixation is indicated when two or more bones are involved, especially if
they are the middle bones. Other indications for internal fixation include severely
fragmented or displaced fractures, nonunion, and malunion. Even simple single-
 bone fractures may warrant internal fixation for optimal functional results in large,
athletic breeds.
Intramedullary Pins.  Kirschner wires (K-wires), Steinmann pins, and Rush pins
are all applicable to the metacarpal and metatarsal bones. These are indicated in
transverse and oblique fractures that are not highly fragmented, often combined
with cerclage wires in long oblique fractures. The pin should not fill the medullary
canal too tightly because it will interfere with medullary blood supply and delay
healing. K-wires of 0.045 to 0.062 inch (1.2-1.5 mm) generally suffice. In most cases
it is best to think of the pin as merely an internal splint to maintain reduction of the
bone and to rely on an external cast or splint to furnish much of the immobilization
 needed for fracture healing.
The metacarpal (and metatarsal) bones have thick cortices and small
intramedullary (IM) canals, which creates difficulty in passing IM pins or K-wires.
A method of introducing the pins that does not damage or interfere with motion
of the metacarpophalangeal joint will produce the best functional results and allow
the pin. One acceptable method is to introduce the pin from the distal end of the
bone at the dorsal edge of the articular cartilage. Although this causes the pin to
enter the bone at a slight angle, if the pin is not too large and stiff to bend slightly,
it still should glide proximally in the medullary canal. The fracture is reduced and
the pin driven into the proximal fragment until it is well seated in the base of the
bone. The pin is then retracted 5 mm, a hook is bent and the end cut, and then the
 pin is driven back into the bone until the hook is close to the bone surface. In this
manner, minimal pin is protruding from the bone to irritate the joint, yet the pin is
easily removed (Figure 14-30). This method is difficult in small-breed dogs. Some
advocate retrograde insertion (from the fracture site), but it is difficult to avoid pen-
etrating the distal articular surface with this method. Another method to start the
IM pin obliquely in a metacarpal bone is to drill a small slot in the dorsal cortex
with a high-speed bur, either distally or proximally to the fracture, depending on
the location of the fracture, to allow introduction of the pin to the medullary space
without affecting the joint surface (Figure 14-30, C; see also Figure 14-20, B and C)
In a final method, if the bone is large enough to accept a 1/16-inch (1.5-mm) Rush
pin (Osteo-Technology International, Inc., Hunt Valley, Md), the surgeon will not
need to bend the hook and can insert the pin at some distance from the articular
surface (Figure 14-31, C). Generally, a Rush pin will provide more rigid fixation
 than a straight IM pin.
14—-Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
417
Jin
Lat.
AVP
A
B
C
 go ox  e d on o    e 
metacarpal fractures. Kirschner wires are inserted in the distal segment of metacarpals II
and V, staying as close as possible to the dorsoproximal edge of the metacarpophalangeal
joint capsule. The fracture is reduced, and the pins are driven proximally into the base of the
bone. The pins are then bent to a hook shape and driven as close to the bone as possible to
allow more extension of the toes and easier removal of the pins. Plate fixation is ideal for
fixation of metacarpals Ill and IV, which are the major weight-carrying bones. Veterinary
cuttable plates (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) are the most adaptable plate for this application.
C, A trough has been created with a high-speed bur in the distal segment to allow oblique
cortical pinning. Pinning of all four metacarpals is acceptable if plating is not possible.
In either case, the foot must be supported in coaptation for several weeks.
FIGURE14-31.A,Oblique
shaft fracture of the fifth meta-
 carpal in a racing greyhound.
B, Fixation by 2.7-mm lag screws.
This method was chosen over pin-
ning  or  cerclage  wiring beca use
there is less joint and soft tissue
irritation. Primary bone union was
achieved. C, Cerclage wires and
1/16-inch diameter Rush pin. The
 articular surface is not invaded.
A
B
418
Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Aftercare. The metacarpophalangeal joint is kept in flexion in a splint or cast
(see Figures 2-27 and 2-22), and the pins are removed after healing. If the pins do
penetrate articular cartilage, the splint should be maintained until healing is com-
plete and the pins are removed, before allowing active weight bearing. Rush pins do
 not generally require removal.
Cerclage Wires. The general rules given in Chapter 1 apply to application of
wires in the metacarpus or metatarsus. Useful wire sizes vary from 20 gauge
(0.8 mm) to 24 gauge (0.4 mm). Of primary importance is that the cerclage wire
must be tight or it will devascularize the underlying bone because of movement of
the wire. An important difference in the metacarpus/metatarsus from their applica-
tion in long bones is that cerclage wires occasionally are used as primary fixation.
This is possible because external casts or splints are always used to support the
internal fixation. More often, however, cerclage wires are combined with IM pins
(Figure 14-31, C).
Lag Screus. Interfragmentary fixation with lag screws, as with cerclage wire, is
occasionally used as primary fixation in the metacarpus/metatarsus when supported
with an external cast or splint. The advent of 1.5- and 2.0-mm screws has increased
the usefulness of this method in long oblique or spiral fractures. It is rarely possible
to combine IM pinning with lag screws because of the small size of the bones; thus,
screws are generally used alone (Figure 14-31, B) or in conjunction with bone plates
(see Figure 14-37, C and D). The same general guidelines as discussed in Chapter 1
apply to the application of lag scre ws here.
 o  r s    a sd n  
unstable fractures (see Figure 14-30) and for nonunion fractures (Figure 14-32).
Because of their stability, external support does not need to be maintained as long
as with other methods. Four weeks in a cast or splint is typically sufficient to allow
 o s'i    s mas pe a ql u jo a a l
mm; both flat and semitubular plates are useful. Cuttable plates (Synthes) have
screws in a given unit of length than conventional plates, and their low profile min-
imizes problems with soft tissue coverage (see Chapter 2).
Aftercare. In all cases of internal fixation, the foot should be supported in a
molded splint or cast (see Figures 2-22 and 2-27) until radiographic signs of bone
healing are obvious, typically 3 to 6 weeks. Bone plates are usually removed in 3 to
4 months, especially in athletic animals. Bone screws and cerclage wires can usually
be left with no harmful effects. IM pins inserted from the distal joint area should be
removed as soon as callus formation is well established. Rush pins can usually be
left in place if desired.
Fracture of the Head
One of the most common injuries in the metacarpal head is a fracture of
the condyle. Such a fracture results in instability and luxation or subluxation of the
metacarpophalangeal joint (Figure 14-33) because the collateral ligaments of
the joint originate on the condyle. The condylar fragment may be quite small
(Figure 14-33, A), or it may involve half the head.
Treatment
Closed reduction and external casting usually result in an unstable joint, or the
  h od a  s a jo  
419
A
B
FIGURE 14-32. A and B, Nonunion fracture of all metacarpals, 9 months' duration
C, Multiple bone plate fixation. Size of plate will vary from a 1.5- to 2.7-mm screw size.
Good healing was achieved using 2.7-mm plates and screws in this 80-pound (36-kg) dog.
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 14-33.
A, Fracture of the medial condyle of the head of the fourth metacarpal
bone. Valgus deformity of the toe results. B and C, Wire fixation of fragments. To avoid
drilling a hole through the small fragment, two holes are drilled in the metacarpal bone, and
the wire (22 gauge in a 60-pound animal) is passed through the holes and around the
fragment. If the wire can be passed through the ligamentous tissue, it will have less tendency
to slip off the fragment. D, Lag screw fixation with 1.5-mm or 2.0-mm screws is ideal if
the fragment is large enough.
joint disease. Internal fixation offers the best chance for return to normal function,
especially in the athletic animal. The approach is by incision of skin directly over the
injury. Internal fixation may be done with wire (Figure 14-33, C and D) or lag
screws (Figure 14-33, D). Failure to repair these injuries may necessitate amputation
at the metacarpophalangeal joint to restore function in the athletic animal, espe-
cially if the third or fourth bone is involved (see later discussion on amputation).
420
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Aftercare
A molded palmar splint or cast is applied for 4 weeks, and exercise is limited for
6 to 8 weeks.
 Fractures of the Phalanges
Treatment
Fractures of the phalangeal head and base are handled in much the same way as
described for metacarpal fractures, except that the fragments are often smaller and
more difficult to secure (Figure 14-34). As a result, amputation may need to be con-
sidered more often. Fractures of the shaft are most frequently treated by closed
reduction and external fixation (Figure 14-35), although internal fixation should be
considered for a performance animal (Figures 14-36 and 14-37). Surgical exposure
  s    i  e    
metacarpal fractures, both cerclage wires and lag screws are suitable as primary
fixation when supplemented with external support.
Aftercare
 A molded plastic bivalve splint is applied either as primary fixation or as support
for internal fixation (see Figure 2-28). Splinting for 3 to 6 weeks is usually needed
for primary fixation, and 3 to 4 weeks is sufficient for support of internal fixation.
FIGURE 14-34.A, Fracture of the base of
the first phalanx. B, Lag screw fixation using
a 2.0-mm or 1.5-mm screw.
A
B
FGURE 14-35. A, Comminuted
fracture of the first phalanx. B, Four
weeks after coaptation splintage.
 Although there is considerable callus
at this stage, good alignment of the 
bone has been maintained.
A
B
421
FIGURE 14-36. Because of the need
for perfect reduction and rapid return to
function, internal fixation with 1.5-mm
or 2.0-mm lag screws was chosen. Such
fixation must be protected by casting or
splinting for several weeks.
A
B
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 14-37. A and B, Short oblique fracture of the second phalanx in a racing grey-
hound. C and D, Because the fracture line was too short for a lag screw, a miniplate was used
with 2.0-mm screws. Excellent functional result was obtained. The plate was left in place
beca use it had not affected the dog's performance.
Fracture of Proximal Palmar Sesamoids
Large-breed dogs are the primary victims of fractures of the proximal palmar
sesamoid bones of the metacarpophalangeal joint, although they are seen sporadi-
cally in dogs of all sizes. This is a common injury of the racing greyhound, and the
tendons can cause the sesamoid bone, which is quite long and banana shaped, to
 fracture near its midportion, although vascular compromise and bone necrosis have
been proposed as a cause.17 For convenience the sesamoids can be numbered from
 medial to lateral; because there are two sesamoids at each metacarpophalangeal joint,
they are numbered from 1 to 8 (Figure 14-38, A). The sesamoids that are most often
injured are the second and seventh (Figure 14-38, B and C). Either the forelimbs
 or hindlimbs can be involved. Sudden lameness occurs, accompanied by swelling,
pain on palpation, and crepitus. This lameness rapidly subsides, and the animal
shows lameness only on exercise. Tenderness on deep palpation over the bones
remains. Bilateral injuries may occur. High-detail screens or nonscreen radiographic
techniques are helpful in diagnosing these fractures.
422
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
A
B
c
FIGURE 14-38.
.A, Ligaments of the palmar sesamoids of the metacarpophalangeal
joints. The sesamoids are numbered from medial to lateral, 1 to 8, with 2 and 7 injured most
often. B, Fractures of the distal third of sesamoid 7 and midportion of sesamoid 2. Only the
small fragment of 7 is removed, whereas all of 2 is removed. C, Fracture of sesamoid 2 with
fracture of the base of the second metacarpal bone. The sesamoid is excised and the
metacarpal fracture wired or lag-screwed as in Figure 14-33.
Treatment
 In the acute stage, treatment may consist of splinting (see Figure 2-28). Some
phalangeal fractures will heal sufficiently with splint fixation, but many will require
 surgery later for excision of the bone fragments. All animals with chronic conditions
 Aq pasodxa si auoq au Xrans oraun pnous suis lenu suansisiad pue
incision just medial or lateral to the large central pad, directly over the joint.1 The
fragments are sharply dissected free of their ligamentous attachments. On occasion,
only a small portion of the bone is fractured. If this piece is less than one third of
the total bone, the usual approach is to leave the larger fragment and remove the
smaller one. When the fracture is in the midportion, both fragments are removed.
Aftercare
 A snug bandage is maintained for 7 to 10 days postoperatively. Activity is restricted
 until 6 weeks postoperatively. A good prognosis can be given for surgically treated
patients.
FractureofDorsalSesamoids
The dorsal sesamoid bones of the metacarpophalangeal bones are attached
 proximally to the common digital extensor and interosseous muscles and distally
 by a ligament to the proximal phalanx (see Figure 141). These small bones are
 rarely involved with any injury or pathological proces, although they are often mis-
taken for chip fractures of the joint when sen radiographically. However, a dog was
seen in our practice that had chronic lameness and exhibited pain and crepitus on
flexion of the digits. Radiographic signs of enthesiophytes on the dorsal sesamoid
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
423
 bone and degenerative joint disease of the metacarpophalangeal joint were present.
 The lameness and clinical signs were relieved by surgical excision of the affected
dorsal sesamoid.
Luxation of Metacarpophalangeal and
Interphalangeal Joints
Luxation or subluxation of the phalanges can occur at any joint level (Figure 14-39),
but the distal interphalangeal (IP) joint is most often involved. These injuries are
confined almost exclusively to racing greyhounds and working dogs. In greyhounds
the toe is usually luxated to the left side, that is, the inside of the track. In other
breeds the distribution is more random.
ClinicatSigns
Lameness is usually absent to minimal at a walk when the animal is presented. Only
when the dog is worked at faster gaits does it become evident that the dog is favor-
ing a foot. Swelling, pain, and crepitus are not prominent, but the instability can be
appreciated by careful palpation. The IP joints must be extended when palpating for
stability to avoid rotational movement being mistaken for instability.
Diagnosis
fractures and to allow identification of avulsions, which are treated as shown in
Figure 14-33. Both total luxations and subluxations are seen.
A
B
C
FIGURE 14-39. Luxation and subluxation of the phalanges. A, Lateral subluxation of the
metacarpophalangeal joint with rupture of the medial collateral ligaments. B, Lateral sublux-
ation of the proximal interpahalangeal joint with rupture of the medial collateral ligaments.
C, Lateral subluxation of the distal interphalangeal joint with rupture of the medial collateral
ligaments.
424
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
Treatment
These luxations are serious injuries for a running or working dog and should not be
dismissed lightly. Aggressive surgical repair has yielded much better results than
more conservative approaches, such as closed reduction and splintage. Many of
 these animals end up with instability of the joint and chronic degenerative changes
in the joints that slow them greatly or leave them reluctant to traverse hard ground.
SutureReconstruction
ad it p s  ro d as   
(Figure 14-40) works best when performed within the first 10 days after injury
(the earlier, the better). Fibroplasia of these structures makes accurate suturing more
difficult after 10 days. Failure to stabilize the joint leaves only the alternative
of amputation (see Figures 14-41 and 14-42) or arthrodesis (see Figure 14-43). The
IP joint is exposed through a dorsal incision (Figure 14-40, A). The torn joint
capsule and collateral ligaments are visible beneath the skin. Three mattress
Tomjointcapsule
and collateral
ligaments
FIGURE 14-40. Suture repair of proximal interphalangeal subluxation. A, The affected
joint is exposed by a dorsal incision, with reflection of tissues on the side of the instability.3
Tearing of joint capsule and collateral ligaments can be seen below the arrow. B, Three main
mattress sutures of 4-0 monofilament or synthetic absorbable material are placed across
the torn capsule and collateral ligaments. C, A purse-string-like suture encompasses the 
Other sutures.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
425
sutures of 4-0 nonabsorbable monofilament or synthetic monofilament absorbable
suture material are placed vertically to the tear in the capsule and collateral liga-
 as e um passeoa nn are s as (a otti a s
purse-string mattress suture (Figure 14-40, C). Occasionally the extensor tendon
apparatus will be slightly luxated as a result of tearing of its retinaculum. A few
sutures are placed in the edge of the tendon and joint capsule to stabilize it. After
reduction of total luxations, usually only one side of the joint is unstable, and
 that side is sutured. If both sides of the joint are loose after reduction, suture repair 
is performed bilaterally.
Aftercare.  A molded plastic bivalve splint is applied to the foot for 3 weeks
(see Figure 2-28). After splint removal, exercise is severely limited for 1 week, after
which activity is slowly resumed to normal 6 weeks postoperatively.
Amputation of Toe
Amputation of the second or fifth toe at any joint level is not too serious in most
dogs. In the middle toes, however the results are not as good because these toes are
the main weight-bearing digits; the more distal the amputation, the better the prog-
nosis. Although amputations usually give good results in working animals, the
outcome in racing animals is more difficult to predict; some animals will run well,
and some will not.
The surgical principles of toe amputation vary little with the joint level involved.
The skin incision is made to preserve the pad when amputation is at the IP level
(Figure 14-41, A), but the toe pad is removed for a metacarpophalangeal (MCP)
amputation (Figure 14-42, A). The joint is disarticulated by sharp dissection, which
also involves section of both the flexor and the extensor tendons. It is desirable to
remove the palmar sesamoids when amputation occurs at the MCP joint. The distal
condyle of the proximal remaining bone is always removed. In the case of a distal
IP amputation, the distal third of the middle phalanx is removed to provide more
soft tissue between the skin and bone end (Figure 14-41, B). When amputating at
the MCP level, the condyle is removed when metacarpal II or IV is involved, but
bones II and V are beveled for a more cosmetic closure (Figure 14-42, B). Skin sutur-
ing may involve removal of skin "dog ears" to result in smooth skin closure (Figure
14-41, D and E).
Aftercare. A snug padded bandage is maintained for 10 days, and normal activ-
 ity is not resumed until 3 weeks postoperatively.
Arthrodesis
Arthrodesis is a rational approach to MCP and proximal IP chronic instability in
the racing animal. The most precise and predictable method of arthrodesis involves
the use of miniplates or cuttable plates (Synthes) and 2.0-mm or 1.5-mm bone
screws (Figure 14-43, A). K-wires and a tension band wire are also applicable
(Figure 14-43, B). Minimal functional disability results from such a fusion, and joint
pain is eliminated.
The joint is exposed by a middorsal approach as for amputation. The extensor
tendon is reflected to one side by incising its retinaculum at the joint capsule. The
joint is opened and articular carilage removed by rongeurs or high-speed bur, con-
forming the surfaces to achieve good contact at the functional angle, which is judged
by an adjacent toe. A four-hole or five-hole, straight miniplate or cuttable plate
(Synthes) is contoured to the dorsal surface of the bone and attached with 2.0-mm
or 1.5-mm screws (see Figure 14-43, A). An attempt is made to lag-screw across the
Cut extensor
tendon
Second phalanx
Trimming
'dog ear
C
D
E
FIGURE 14-41.
 Amputation at the middle or distal interphalangeal joint. The procedure is 
drawn for the distal interphalangeal joint but does not differ in principle from a middle joint
amputation. A, The skin incision encircles the nail, sparing the digital pad, and continues proxi-
 mally over the bones for a short distance. The incision shown would have to be extended prox-
imally a short distance to expose the middle joint. B, Soft tissue is sharply dissected away from
the bone to be removed, and disarticulation is performed at the desired level. Rongeurs are used
to remove the condylar portion of the remaining phalanx. C, Skin sutures are placed to create a
Y-shaped incision and to pull the pad over the cut end of the bone. D, Excess skin is trimmed to
allow smooth skin closure. E, Skin suturing has been completed.
Line of
amputation
Incision for digits
3 or 4
Skin incision
for digits
2 or 5
A
B
FIGURE 14-42. Amputation at the metacarpophalangeal (or metatarsophalangeal) joint.
A, Skin incisions are designed to remove the digital pad, and when sutured, they both create
a straight line. B, After disarticulation to remove the phalanges, the metacarpal bone is ampu-
tated at the indicated level. Beveling the medial and lateral bones improves the cosmetic
appeara nce, especially on the lateral side.
14—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Conditions of the Carpus, Metacarpus, and Phalanges
427
Elevation of
common digital
extensor tendon
Tension band 
Lag screw
wire
Kirschnerwire
A
B
 FIGURE 14-43. Arthrodesis of the proximal interphalangeal joint. Similar technique can be
employed at the metacarpophalangeal (or metatarsophalangeal) joint. A, AO/ASIF straight
miniplate (Synthes) has been contoured over the dorsal surface of the proximal and middle
phalangeal bones after removing articular cartilage at the joint. Mini L-plates (AO/ASIF) can
also be applied medially or laterally. Screws of 1.5- to 2.0-mm diameter are used to attach the
plate. One screw has been lagged across the joint through the plate. B, Kirschner wires and
a tension band wire can also be used to stabilize this arthrodesis.
joint with at least one screw. Bone grafting is not necessary. Alternatively, K-wires
can be driven across the joint and the joint compressed with a tension band wire
(Figure 14-43, B).
Aftercare.
 A molded bivalve splint (see Figure 2-28) is maintained for 6 weeks,
 at which time radiographic signs of healing should be seen. Exercise is slowly
increased for 3 to 4 weeks before full activity is allowed.
References
1. Pierrmattei DL, Johnson KA: An attas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
 cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
2.
Earley T: Canine carpal ligament injuries, Vet Clin North Amm 8:183, 1978.
3. Punzet G: Luxationofthes carpiradialeinthe dog pathogenesis, symtomsandtreatmet,Jmall
Anim Pract 15:751, 1974.
4. Johnson KA: Accessory carpal bone fractures in the racing greyhound: classification and pathology.
Vet Surg 16:60, 1987.
 5. Johnson KA, Piermattei DL, et al: Characteristics of accessory carpal bone fractures in 50 racing
greyhounds, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 2:104, 1988.
6. Johnson KA, Dee JF, Piermattei DL: Screw fixation of accessory carpal bone fractures in racing
greyhounds: 12cases(1981-1986),JAmVet Med Assoc 194:1618-1625,1989.
7.
Lenehan TM, Tarvin GB: Carpal accessorioulnar joint fusion in a dog, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
194:1598-1600, 1989.
8. Parker RB, Brown SG, Wind AP: Pancarpal arthrodesis in the dog: a review of forty-five cases,
Vet S#rg 10:35, 1981.
9. Willer RL, Johnson KA, Turner TM, et al: Partial carpal arthrodesis for third degree carpal sprains:
a review of 45 carpi, Vet Surg 19:334-340, 1990.
10. Simpson D, Goldsmid S: Pancarpal arthrodesis in a cat: a case report and anatomical study,
VetComp Orthop Traua 7:45-50,1994.
11. Kellar W, Chambers J: Antebrachial metacarpal arthrodesis for fusion of deranged carpal joints in
two dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 195:1382-1384, 1989.
428
Part II—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Forelimb
12. Chambers JN, Bjorling DE: Palmar surface plating for arthrodesis of the canine carpus, J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 18:875, 1982.
13.9
Swaim SF: Management and bandaging of softissue injuries of dog and cat feet, J Arm Anir Hosp
Assoc 21:329, 1985.
14. Morgan PW, Binnington AG, Miller CW, et al: The effect of occlusive and semi-oclusive
dressings on the healing of acute full-thickness skin wounds on the forelimbs of dogs, Vet Surg
23:494-502, 1994.
15.
Beardsley SL, Schrader SC: Treatrment of dogs with wounds of the limbs caused by shearing forces:
98 cases (1975-1993), J Ar Vet Med Assoc 207:1071-1075, 1995.
16.9
results in 11 horses, Vet Surg 19:34-40, 1990.
17.(
Cake MA, Read RA: Canine and human sesamoid disease, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 8:
70-75, 1995.
15
Fractures of the Pelvis
 Fractures of the pelvis are relatively common, and in many veterinary practices they
constitute 20% to 30% of all fractures. Most fractures are multiple, in that three or
more bones are involved. Pelvic fractures rarely are open or compound.
ANATOMY
Structurally, the pelvis roughly forms a rectangular box and is made up of the ossa
coxae (ilium, ischium, and pubis), sacrum, and first coccygeal vertebra (Figures 15-1
and 15-2). The structure is well covered with muscles and soft tissues. In fractures
with minimal displacement, the muscles serve very effectively in supporting the
bones. If there is gross displacement of the fracture segments, spastic contraction of
the muscles increases the difficulty of surgical reduction and fixation.
FRACTURE CATEGORIES
 Pelvic fractures can be grouped into six anatomical areas, as follows!:
● Sacroiliac fracture/luxation: Luxation of the sacroiliac joint, fracture of the
sacral wing, or partial sacroiliac luxation with partial fracture of the sacral
wing.
· Mial wing fracture: Fracture of the non-weight-bearing and nonarticular portion
of the ilial wing.
· Mial body fracture: Ilial fracture between the sacroiliac joint and the
acetabulum.
· Acetabular fracture: Any fracture involving the articular surface; may extend
into the ilium or ischium.
· Ischial fracture: Fracture of the ischial body or ramus or fracture/avulsion of the
tuber ischium.
· Pelvic floor fracture: Fractures of the pelvic symphysis, pubic body or ramus,
and ischial ramus.
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION
 The patient's history usually includes traumatic injury and a sudden onset of symp-
toms. Because of the degree of trauma necessary to fracture the pelvis or cause a
433
434
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 1s-1. Pelvis, caudodorsal aspect.
FIGURE 15-2. Left os coxae of
young dog, lateral aspect, showing the
acetabulum made up of the ilium,
ischium, pubis and acetabular bones,
and physes of ilium and ischium.
 fracture-luxation, adjacent tissue and surrounding organ systems must be carefully
evaluated. Fractures of the pelvis are always multiple in nature (excluding bite and
 gunshot wounds), and if displacement is present, at least three or more bones are
msa aa q am a s  q pe
lateral injuries, but they also may be weight bearing on all limbs with bilateral
injuries. Inability to stand may be associated with neurological injury or extreme
 pain, which is seen most often with sacral injuries.
 Examination should include the following:
1. Physical examination and evaluation of the entire body.
 2. Special emphasis on some of the more common complicating injuries:
traumatic lung syndrome, traumatic myocarditis, pneumothorax (chest
radiographs are taken routinely), rupture of the bladder or urethra, fractures of
the spine, fractures of the femoral head and neck, and neurological deficits.
3. Neurological examination of the rear limbs should be evaluated with the
reservation that pain may obtund some reflexes, such as proprioception and
withdrawal. Include observation for voluntary leg movement while supporting
the trunk, deep pain reflexes on all four toes of each foot, femoral nerve reflex
(knee jerk), sciatic nerve reflex (withdrawal), as well as observations of the
rectum and perineal reflex.
 4. Palpation of the pelvic bones, with emphasis on normal relationships between the
bony prominences, such as the tuber coxae and ischi, and the greater trochanter.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
435
Palpation is rarely adequate to form a good picture of the bone damage, and
provide some information about pelvic canal compromise caused by displaced
bone fragments. Blood on the glove should lead to suspicion of rectal
perforation or laceration, and inability to palpate the prostate in males would
suggest urethral avulsion.
 5. Radiographs including ventrodorsal and lateral views. A lateral radiograph is
taken with the affected side down, the lower hip flexed, and the upper hip
extended. Tilting the pelvis to produce a slightly oblique view helps to separate
the two sides. Extension of the hindlegs for the ventrodorsal view can often be
painful; the frog-leg position is adequate for initial evaluation. Complete
radiographic examination may require anesthesia because of pain and therefore
may have to be postponed until the patient is stable. If surgical treatment is
expected based on the initial films, more definitive views can be obtained when
the patient is anesthetized for surgery.
PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
In regard to treatment, pelvic fracture patients may be divided into nonsurgical and
surgical groups.23
Nonsurgical Group
Included in the nonsurgical group are patients with little or no displacement of the
fracture segments, an intact acetabulum, and continuity of the pelvic ring remaining
essentially intact. The pelvic musculature serves very effectively in immobilizing the
fracture segments. Perfect anatomical alignment of fractures involving the bones of
the pelvis (other than articular surfaces) is not necessary for healing or function.
Posttreatment function may be adequate for most pets, but the prognosis is much
less certain for performance animals.
Management of the patient usually consists of cage rest, limitation of activity, and
measures to ensure regular urination and defecation. To help prevent the development
of decubital ulcers, a well-padded kennel is needed, particularly for animals that are
temporarily nonambulatory; many patients are able to stand up and move around
in 1 or 2 days or, in the case of multiple fractures, 1 or 2 weeks. For large breeds,
an enclosed space that can be covered with a thick layer of clean straw makes excellent
bedding that will carry urine away from the skin. Healing time for bones of the
pelvis is approximately the same as for other bones in the body.
Surgical Group
Surgical intervention should be considered in animals with pelvic fractures charac-
terized by one or more of the following23:
1. Marked decrease in the size of the pelvic canal.
2. Fracture of the acetabulum (displacement of articular surfaces).
 3. Instability of the hip caused by fracture of ilium, ischium, and pubis.
4. Unilateral or bilateral instability, particularly if accompanied by
 coxofemoral dislocation or other limb fractures.
Careful study of the radiographs can show the type and location of the fractures
436
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Se paa a asodxa oi sde jo uo e as  ressu aq e i
and to accomplish reduction and fixation. Most pelvic fractures are accompanied by
extensive muscle trauma, hemorrhage, and soft tissue injury. Such conditions usually
result in increased surgical risk. The condition of the patient may prohibit carrying
out all of the surgery that may be indicated. Traumatic lung or myocardial syn-
dromes may complicate anesthesia and delay surgery for 3 to 6 days. Reduction and
fixation are accomplished much more easily and accurately if undertaken within the
first 4 days of injury. Each day of delay adds to the injuries to major nerves and
blood vessels and to the time required to obtain reduction of the bones. In some
cases a prolonged delay may limit or prevent surgical repair. The chief advantages
of early reduction and fixation are minimal hospitalization time, early ambulation,
and minimization of fracture disease.
 The various means of fixation for pelvic fractures typically include intramedullary
pins, Kirschner wires, bone plates, bone screws, and interfragmentary wiring, or a
combination of these techniques. Clinical experience indicates that the highest per-
gical treatment of pelvic fractures, major emphasis is placed on the sacroiliac joint,
ilium, and acetabulum. If these three areas are properly reduced and fixed, the other
areas (ischium, pubis) as a rule will be adequately reduced and stabilized and, with very
few exceptions, need no specific surgical treatment. In most cases, it is to the surgeon's
advantage to proceed in the order of sacroiliac joint, ilium, and acetabulum if all
three are involved. If the ilium and acetabulum are involved, reduction and fixation
of the ilium first gives stability to the cranial portion of the acetabulum; thus, there
 is a stable segment to build on for reduction and fixation of the remaining portion
SACROILIAC FRACTURE-LUXATION
 In sacroiliac (SI) fracture-luxation the ilium is usually displaced craniodorsally, with
a portion of the sacral wing often remaining attached to it. Displacement is always
accompanied by fractures of the pubis and ischium or by separation along the pelvic
symphysis, making half the os coxae unstable. In some bilateral SI luxations the rest
of the pelvis may remain intact. Injuries of the lumbosacral trunk in the form of sen.
sory, voluntary motor, and reflex neurological abnormalities are common accompa-
nying injuries. In two studies of pelvic fractures, 11% had peripheral nerve injury,
and 41% of these were SI fracture-luxations.14 Perineal, sciatic, and femoral nerve
function should be assessed before undertaking surgery. Minor luxations of the SI
joint with little or no displacement may be treated conservatively with restricted
activity. Indications for internal fixation chiefly include pain and instability. Inability
to control adduction of the limb due to pain may present a problem in some cases.
 In many animals, this condition is accompanied by considerable discomfort and a
prolonged period of favoring the involved rear limb, particularly when the lumbosacral
nerve trunk is traumatized. Reduction and stabilization facilitate healing of the
nerve trunk. Contralateral injuries may dictate stabilization of the SI joint to allow
weight bearing to be shared between the hindlimbs and to ease the load on the contralat-
eral internal fixation. As a generalization, SI joint instability creates fewer problems
in smaller breeds than large breeds, and there is less need for internal fixation.
Open Approach and Reduction
The sacroiliac area may be exposed dorsally by the dorsolateral approach to the
wing of the ilium and dorsal aspect of the sacrum (Figure 15-3) or ventrally by the
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
437
Middle
gluteal m.
Sacrum
Wing
Sacroiliac
of llium
 joint
Cranial 
 gluteal
artery, vein,
nerve
FIGURE 15-3.  Dorsolateral approach for sacroiliac fracture-separations.′ A skin incision is
made over the crest of the ilium and extended caudally along the dorsal iliac spine. The middle
gluteal muscle is incised at its origin just inside the cranial and dorsal borders of the wing and
subperiosteally elevated from the ilium. As the caudal end of the straight portion of the dorsal
iliac spine is approached during this elevation, a curved hemostat is used to run along the
 dorsal iliac spine to locate the caudal border of the sacrum. The cranial gluteal vessels and
nerve pass from medial to lateral over the caudal iliac spine and enter the middle and deep
gluteal muscles. The inserted hemostat helps to locate this area and also helps to avoid
severing the cranial gluteal vessels and nerve. The hemostat is retained in place, and the
subperiosteal reflection stops just short of this area, thus avoiding injury to the gluteal vessels
and nerve. In most cases the tissue between the iliac crest and adjoining sacrum is separated,
 and little additional cutting or blunt dissection is necessary to expose the opposing surfaces
of the sacrum and wing of the ilium. Additional soft tissue is reflected off the dorsal surface
of the sacrum to expose the sacroiliac joint. The hemostat remains in place during the entire
procedure, including dissection, reduction, and fixation, because it helps to protect the cranial 
gluteal vessels and nerve and serves as an aid in keeping anatomical landmarks in mind.
lateral approach to the ilium (Figure 15-4).$ Either approach may be used. The dorsal
 approach lends itself to fracture separations alone or in conjunction with ipsilateral
acetabular fractures and to contralateral fractures of the os coxae. The ventrolateral
 approach lends itself to fracture separations alone or in conjunction with fractures
of the ilium on the same side.
From the dorsal approach, the articular surface on the medial side of the ilium
lies just ventral to the dorsal iliac spine in the caudal half of the wing (Figures 15-5
and 15-6, C). After location or visualization of the fracture-separation surface on
 both the ilium and the sacrum, reduction is accomplished by grasping the edge of
the iliac wing with a bone-holding forceps and moving it caudally into position.
A countering cranial force on the sacrum by use of a hemostat is helpful in accomplish-
ing reduction (see Figure 15-5). It is highly recommended that the surgeon visualize
these areas on a cadaver specimen and be able to compare the anatomical positions
438
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 15-4. Ventrolateral
approach for a sacroiliac fracture-
separation is the same as the
lateral approach for the ilium
(see Figure 15-9). In addition, the
iliacus muscle is incised and sub-
periostally elevated along the
ventromedial border of the iliac
body as needed to allow insertion 
of one finger in the pelvic inlet.?
The inserted finger is used to pal-
pate the area of synchondrosis of
the ilium and sacrum for reduction
and screw placement. The Kern
bone-holding forceps is used to
move the ilium into reduction on
the sacrum. The arrow and dot
indicate the approximate location
for inserting the lag screw through
the ilium and into the body of the
first sacral vertebra. This is the
 same location for placement of
 the lag screw as in a dorsolateral
approach.
FIGURE 15-5. In a fracture-separation of
the sacroiliac joint, the wing of the ilium
lies in a craniodorsal position in relation to
the sacrum. From a dorsolateral approach,
reduction is usually accomplished by grasping
the wing of the ilium with a bone-holding
forceps and exerting a caudal and down-
ward force. This is countered by a directly
 opposite force exerted on the sacrum by a
curved hemostat or scissors.
FIGURE 15-6. Reduction and fixation. A, Craniocaudal view of the pelvis showing proper
position of the lag screw into the sacral body. Penetration is usually about 60% the width of the
sacral body. A second screw may be inserted for two-point fixation. B, Schema of lateral view
of pelvis with screw inserted into the body of the sacrum. C, Lateral view of the ilium; + marks
the spot for drilling and inserting the lag screw. Craniocaudally, the + is located in the center
of the caudal half, and proximodistally, it is located in the proximal one third of the ilial width.
D, The area of the lateral surface of the sacral body available for proper screw placement is only
slightly larger than 1 cm in the average-size dog, as denoted by the clear area. The cross-hatched
area represents a thinner portion of the sacral wing, which can only accommodate short screws.
This means that for many cases, there is only room for placement of one screw within the area of
padus-uasar an pue wns aul jo iapio ieun aun suoe (u sauou ai Xpoq ioes a
auricular cartilage (b) are used as landmarks in locating the area for screw insertion into the sacral
body. E, The frst lag screw is inserted through the ilium and then, directed by sight, into the hole
previously drilled into the sacral body. The first screw is completely tightened. When a second
screw is inserted, it is usually located slightly cranial and proximal. The depth for drilling this hole
drill hole and screw should stop just short of the neural canal. Two-point fixation is preferred in
most cases. F, If additional fixation is indicated for stabilization, a transilial bolt passing through
the wings and over the dorsal surface of the seventh lumbar vertebra (L7) may be inserted.
440
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 of the ilium and sacrum with a bone specimen during surgery. Anatomical reduction
is essential to allow for stable screw fixation.
Internal Fixation
Stabilization of the SI joint is accomplished by inserting a lag screw(s) (see Figure 2-66)
Bs ae ss o  a go a a o  a  oq a o
than a single screw of the same size, and two small screws are stronger than a single
Looking at the lateral surface of the ilium, the area for insertion of the screw
through the ilial body and into the sacral body is indicated by the “+" mark on
Figure 15-6, C. This point is located by first dividing the length of the straight
 portion of the dorsal iliac crest into two equal parts. The craniocaudal location of
+ lies in the center of the caudal half. The dorsoventral location of + lies near the
proximal third of the ilial width in this area. The first screw goes into the sacral
body (Figure 15-6, B). If a second screw is inserted, it is usually located just cranial
 and slightly dorsal to the first, and the length is just short of the neural canal (Figure
15-6, A). The ilial body hole should be glide-hole diameter if full-threaded screws
are to be used. Screw length is measured on the dorsoventral view of the radiograph.
A second screw is desirable, particularly where a portion of the sacrum is fractured
 or the first screw is not ideally placed in the body of the sacrum.
 san de esop au  ms  o apoq is au jo u
visualizing the notch on the lateral surface of the sacrum (Figure 15-6, D). Pulling
the wing ventrally and laterally aids in locating this area.78 The tap hole into the
sacral body should be drilled just caudal to this notch and cranial to the crescent-
shaped auricular cartilage. The clear area on Figure 15-6, D, shows the area in
which the screw can be inserted for maximum holding and the area that is free of
important structures.& Although a perfectly placed central sacral body screw can
penetrate the entire body, if there is any doubt about the location of the hole,
drilling should proceed cautiously to a premeasured depth that will not take the drill
into the neural canal. This hole is then tapped to receive the selected screw. The screw
is advanced through the ilial hole, and when the tip appears on the medial side, the
fracture is reduced and the screw directed and inserted into the predrilled sacral hole.
From the ventrolateral approach, a finger is used to palpate the area of synchon-
drosis on the ilium and the ventral portion of the sacrum? (see Figure 15-4). A bone-
holding forceps placed on the cranial ventral iliac spine is used to accomplish reduction
A Kirschner wire is inserted through the ilial wing and into the sacrum for temporary
stabilization until one or two lag screws are inserted through the wing into the sacrum
The sacrum must be drilled *blind" because it cannot be exposed for predrilling, as pre
viously explained. It is recommended that the surgeon visualize and palpate these areas
as well as review the anatomical position of the ilium and sacrum on a bone specimen
 Note: Accurate reduction and placement of screws are at times challnging, espe-
cially if a week or more has elapsed since the injury. A common error involves screw
lumbar vertebra or missing the sacrum entirely.
 In some cases (e.g, extremely overweight dogs, impacted fractures involving
a portion of the sacrum, some bilateral fractures), an additional stabilizing bolt
improves stability. This device passes transversely through the iliac wings and dorsal
Steinmann pin, bent at the smooth end and with a nut placed on the threaded end,
or a Hagie pin, which has a positive-thread-profile tip and a negative-profile thread
at the other end to accept a nut.
15—-Fractures of the Pelvis
441
Case Studies
Case 1
Figure 15-7, A, shows a mature Saint Bernard with a unilateral fracture-separation
of the SI joint and fractures of the ischium and pubis. On the fourth day after the
trauma occurred, the animal still exhibited considerable pain on attempting to move
and was unable to rise. Two cancellous bone screws were used for fixation of the SI
joint (Figure 15-7, B). Reduction and fixation of the SI joint also aided in stabi-
lization of the other fractures. The animal was able to stand and walk on the first
postoperative day.
Case 2
Figure 15-8, A, depicts a large mixed-breed dog with bilateral SI luxations, a
coxofemoral luxation, and fractures of the pubis and ischium. The animal was
unable to rise and lay with its hindlimbs in the “spread-eagled" abducted position.
Reduction and fixation were done using two cancellous bone screws on each side
(Figure 15-8, B). It was necessary to stabilize the acetabulum before reduction of the
hip joint could be maintained. An open approach was performed to reduce the hip
joint and suture the joint capsule. The legs were hobbled together for 6 days
(see Figure 15-27) to protect against abnormal abduction.
ILIAL WING FRACTURE
ordinarily not treated surgically. Cosmetic considerations might be an indication for
internal fixation under some circumstances. Pins, interfragmentary wire, lag screws,
A
B
FIGURE 15-7. A, Mature Saint Bernard with a unilateral fracture-separation of the sacroiliac
joint and fractures of the ischium and pubis. B, Postoperative view showing two cancellous
bone screws used for fixation.
442
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
FIGURE 15-8. A, Large dog with bilateral sacroiliac separations, a coxofemoral dislocation,
and fractures of the pubis and ischium. B, Postoperative view showing two cancellous bone
screws on each side used for fixation. The acetabulum must be stabilized before reduction of
the hip joint can be maintained. A dorsolateral approach was used to expose the hip joint;
after reduction, the ruptured joint capsule was sutured in place.
or small plates could be employed. The dorsolateral approach (see Figure 15-3) is
used for exposure.
ILIAL BODY FRACTURE
Most fractures of the ilial body are oblique, and the caudal segment is depressed
medially, resulting in decreased size of the pelvic canal23 (see Figure 15-10). Some
fractures are multiple, and most are accompanied by fractures of the ischium and
pubis. Neurological injury to the lumbosacral trunk may accompany ilial fracture
 and should be assessed before undertaking surgery. Often these injuries are transient.
 Reduction and stable fixation of ilial body fractures aid in lining up and stabilizing
fractures of the ischium and pubic bones (see Figure 15-10, C and D). If the body
of the ischium is also fractured, the hip joint will be quite unstable (see Figure 15-11).
Internal fixation of ilial body fractures is the most common surgical repair of the
pelvis.
Open Approach and Reduction
Figure 15-9 shows an approach to the lateral surface of the ilium that is sufficient
a combination of levering, traction, and rotation. The caudal segment generally
needs to be levered out from underneath (medial, or deep, to) the cranial segment.
A bone-holding forceps on the greater trochanter (Figure 15-10, D) may be helpful
in maneuvering and realigning the caudal segment. If the ischium is not fractured, a
 rae rn uors  s i a  sar -a
reduction (see Figure 15-15, A), can also be used. Final reduction and fixation will
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
443
Middle gluteal m.
Shaft of
ilium
Cranial gluteal artery,
vein, and nerve
Deep gluteal
m.
 Sartorius m
 and tensor
fasciae latae
m.
lliolumbar
Lateral
artery and 
circumflex
vein
femoral vessels
FIGURE 15-9. Approach to the lateral surface of the ilium. Subperiosteal reflection
upward of the middle and deep gluteal muscles exposes the ventral border and lateral surface
of the body and wing of the ilium. The primary structures of importance encountered in this
approach are the lateral circumfex femoral vessels (just cranial to the acetabulum), the
cranial gluteal nerve (midway), and the iliolumbar vessels (located at the caudal iliac spine).
The iliolumbar vessels are cut and ligated in carrying out the approach. The cranial gluteal
vary according to the type fixation used. Application of a bone plate does not
require total reduction initially, as explained later.
Caudal ilial body fractures are located immediately cranial and/or dorsal to the
acetabulum, without invading the joint. If fixation is anticipated to extend over
the dorsal aspect of the acetabulum, a more extensive approach to the os coxae may
be indicated (see Figure 15-21).
Internal Fixation
Many methods of fixation for fractures of the ilium have been presented and used.
The highest percentage of successful cases, as well as ease of application, can be
attributed to the use of bone plates. Plating of the ilium is very straightforward,
requires a fairly small inventory of implants, and is an excellent place to gain expe-
rience in bone plating before doing long-bone fractures. In certain cases (e.g., long
oblique fractures and in relatively lean animals), the insertion of lag screws or pins
and compression wire is very effective.
Bone Plates
There are two methods of plate application for ilial body fractures, as follows:
1. If the fracture can be adequately reduced, self-retaining bone forceps
and maintaining reduction while fixation is applied (Figure 15-10, D).
(  a teit a as a ar e ss  a s 
 si a i a an a ne  s nd dnr 
maintaining stability with the forceps.
 2. When the fracture can only be semireduced, the prebent plate is first applied to
the caudal segment (see Figure 15-10, B). Lateral traction is exerted on the
trochanter major along with medial pressure on the cranial end of the plate
444
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 15-10. A, Reduction and plate fixation of an iliac shaft fracture with accompanying
fractures of the ischium and pubis. B, A contoured plate is first attached to the caudal iliac
segment. C, Lateral traction by way of the trochanter major and medial pressure on the
cranial end of the bone plate bring about reduction of all the fractures. Cranial screws are
then placed. D, Bone-holding forceps maintain reduction while cranial screws are placed.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
445
before and during insertion of the bone screws into the cranial segment, which
should proceed from caudal to cranial (see Figure 15-10, C). Driving the screws
through the contoured plate acts to reduce the fracture (see later discussion).
The length and type of bone plate depend on the location of the fracture line, the
limiting factor being the distance between the fracture line and the acetabulum.
If there is sufficient room, a six-hole straight plate is applied, as in Figure 15-10, D.
Anchoring one or more screws in the body of the sacrum greatly increases the
holding power of the cranial screws. The cranial part of the wing of the ilium is thin,
s iq aesap si a a a yo iso sa ds r ssas pue
possible because of the obliquity of the fracture line. Two screws are sufficient in the
caudal segment if the distance is short. If the distance is too short for two screws in
a straight plate, T-plates, L-plates, or reconstruction plates (see Figure 15-17, B) may
be necessary. However these plates are thin and bend easily.
The ilial plate must be bent slightly more concave than the normal curvature of
the ilium, which is judged from the contralateral side on the dorsoventral radio-
 graph. This is essential to help restore the normal size of the pelvic canal, which will
always collapse slightly postoperatively because of the animal's tendency to lie on
the operated side.
 Figure 15-11 shows an oblique fracture of the ilium along with fractures of the
ischium and pubis and sacroiliac luxation on the opposite side. If attention is
 directed toward reduction and fixation of the sacroiliac separation and the fractured
ilium, the rest of the fractures will usually align in a satisfactory manner. The SI joint
easier on the opposite side. The lateral approach was used to expose the ilium,
which was fixed by the use of a bone plate. Note how the plate is contoured in a
A
FIGURE 15-11. A, Oblique fracture of the ilium, along with fractures of the ischium and
pubis; sacroiliac separation on opposite side. B, The sacroiliac joint is stabilized by two can-
cellous screws; a lateral approach exposes the ilium, which was fixed by use of a bone plate.
446
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
concave manner to restore the pelvic canal to normal size and to realign the fractured
ischium.
When the location of the ilial fracture is immediately cranial or extending dorsal
to the acetabulum, the plate application may need to extend over the dorsal rim of
the acetabulum. Contouring a plate for this location can be a daunting task but is
simplified by applying a simple torque to a straight plate (Figure 15-12) or by using
 a reconstruction plate, which facilitates contouring in three dimensions.
Lag Screws
Mechanical and case studies have shown that two or more lag screws (Figure 15-13, A)
can be an effective method of stabilizing oblique fractures of the ilial body when
the length of the fracture line is equal to two times the dorsoventral measurement
 of the ilium.10.11 Shorter obliquities do not allow the screws to be placed at an effective
angle to provide angular stability. The fracture is exposed by the lateral approach to
 a ai o aa si a  a s'ei at as oq  
 of the ilium and is retracted medially with a Hohmann retractor to allow drilling
 into the ilial body. If the animal is heavily muscled or obese, it may be difficult to
obtain the proper angle for the drilling. In this case, a smooth intramedullary pin
can be used for drilling the screw hole, since the pin can be introduced into the
exposed bone after passing it through soft tissues at the required angle. A cancellous
screw can be used if the threads do not cross the fracture line; otherwise, a fullthreaded
screw and glide hole are necessary. Self-tapping screws are advantageous because it
aq ose Aeu auoq pil aui aue paar aui ie dei e anpo on sno aq u
soft enough to allow the use of a nontapped cortical thread screw without cutting
 threads in the bone with a tap.
Pins and Compression Wire
The pin and compression wire technique can be substituted for the screw technique,
especially in smaller breeds, where screw size can be a problem (Figure 15-13, B
and C). It is essential that a minimum of two pins be used to ensure angular stability
C
FIGURE 15-12. A, Straight plate may be contoured with a simple torque to facilitate
extending the plate over the acetabulum if the ilial fracture is immediately adjacent to the
acetabulum. This is the dorsal view. B, Cranial view demonstrating placement of the ilial
plate dorsal to the acetabulum. C, End-on view of the simple torque contour required for
placement of a straight ilial plate dorsal to the acetabulum.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
447
C
FIGURE 15-13. Ilial body fracture fixation methods. A, Lag screw fixation is as stable as
plate fixation but is technically difficult in small breeds, in heavily muscled breeds, and in
obese patients. B, Two Kirschner wires and an interfragmentary wire to provide compression
offer good stability and can be applied to small breeds. There is no specific advantage to
crossing the wire in this application. C, Another method of providing interfragmentary
compression with Kirschner wire fixation is to place the compression wire between screws set
on each side of the fracture line. Less dorsal muscle elevation is required compared with B.
 and that the wire be tight enough to provide interfragmentary compression. The wire 
can be placed around the protruding ends of the pins or between two short screws
in the ilium.
FRACTURES OF THE ACETABULUM
Conservative Treatment
Fractures of the acetabulum in skeletally immature animals that show no displacement
on ventrodorsal and lateral radiographs may be treated conservatively, with marked
restriction of activity indicated for 3 to 4 weeks. In most cases, it is advantageous
to place the leg in a non-weight-bearing or Ehmer sling for 10 to 14 days
(see Figures 2-31 and 2-32). Conservative treatment of apparently nondisplaced or
non-weight-bearing area fractures in adult animals often yields disappointing
results in the long run, with degenerative joint disease being the all-too-common
sequela. Femoral head and neck excision arthroplasty or total hip replacement is
indicated in this situation if medical treatment is not successful (see Chapter 16).
Surgical Treatment
 Open approach and internal fixation are indicated for those cases in which dislocation
 or instability of the fractured segments is present and for any performance animal.23.12
Crepitation is usually felt on movement of the hip joint. If these cases are untreated,
pain and permanent lameness follow as a result of abnormal wear and ensuing
degenerative joint disease. Another reason for surgical treatment is that the animal
 frequently lies on the affected side, which further displaces the fracture fragments.
448
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Early surgical intervention is needed to prevent chondromalacia of the femoral head
 resulting from abrasion from the acetabular fracture fragments.
 If there is fragmentation of the fracture, the chances of successful internal fixation
are reduced, especially if the fragments are too small to be stabilized or when they
involve the articular surface. This is often difficult to ascertain from preoperative
radiographs. Therefore the owner must often be given an uncertain prognosis pre-
operatively. Femoral head and neck excision arthroplasty is a reasonable primary
treatment for irreducible acetabular fractures, and this should be discussed preoper-
  pri si sa dr pn p  ao a m 
treatment, some reduction and stabilization are desirable to provide a reasonably
intact acetabulum for later anchorage of the acetabular prosthesis. Fractures of the
caudal fifth of the acetabulum are difficult to repair because of the small size of the
distal fragment, its contour, and interference with the sciatic nerve.
Open Approach and Reduction
Figure 15-14 shows the approach to the craniodorsal and caudodorsal aspects to the
hip joint with osteotomy of the greater trochanter.$ The tendons of the obturator
and gemellus muscles are only cut when access is needed to the most caudal part of
the acetabulum.
 The method of reduction varies with the type and location of the fracture.
Acetabular fractures are often combined with ilial body fractures; in such cases it is
best to reduce and stabilize the ilial fracture first because it then provides one stable
A un (-t pe n-i sa as) uon reqae a rog su
 patients, reduction consists of a combination of traction, countertraction, levering.
and rotation. The caudal segment is always angled ventrally and rotated because of
the combined pull of the hamstring and external rotator muscles. Reduction is
assisted by attaching a Kern or Lane bone forceps to the tuber ischii by means of a
small cutdown over the tuber (Figure 15-15, A). In many cases a bone hook moved
 down along the medial surface of the caudal segment is helpful in the reduction
procedure.
Superficial gluteal m.
Deep
gluteal m
Middle gluteal m.
Sciaticn
Joint
capsule
Incision of
 internal obturator m.
Internal
 and gemelli m.
obturator m.
and
gemellim.
retracted
FGURE 15-14. Dorsolateral approach to the hip joint with osteotomy of the greater
 trochanter.^ Transection of the external rotator muscles close to the trochanter exposes the 
 caudal acetabular and ischial area, and the retracted muscles protect the sciatic nerve.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
449
A
B
C
FIGURE 15-15. Procedures to aid reduction of acetabular fractures. A, Because the caudal
fragment is always rotated and displaced ventrally, a small hook placed in the obturator
foramen is helpful to elevate the ischium. Distraction and rotational control are achieved by
placing a bone-holding forceps on the ischial tuberosity after a short cutdown approach
directly over the bone. B, Compression of a transverse fracture can be achieved by application
of a pointed reduction forceps across the aceta bulum. The pointed jaws of the forceps can be
introduced through soft tissues, taking care to avoid the sciatic nerve. C, In a similar manner,
the pointed reduction forceps is seen here compressing an oblique fracture. Avoidance of the
sciatic nerve is again a consideration.
  i   ai a  e s i a  as
reduced position while fixation is being applied. Use of a reduction forceps that
straddles the trochanter major and anchors on the cranial and caudal rims of the
acetabulum is helpful in maintaining reduction and compression in a stable fracture
(Figure 15-15, B). If the fracture is oblique, the compression forceps is placed at
right angles to the fracture line (Figure 15-15, C). At times, when locking forceps
 cannot be used effectively because of fracture configuration, reduction pressure on
the tuber ischii with a Kerns bone-holding forceps or intramedullary pin may be
to protect the sciatic nerve during reduction.
Anatomical reduction is a necessity in acetabular fractures. Final reduction is
checked by observing the fracture line, the acetabular rim, and the articular cartilage
inside the acetabulum through a small capsular incision. Particular attention must
450
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
be paid to rotational reduction to ensure that the central portion of the acetabular
fossa is realigned.
Internal Fixation
Bone Piates
 The method of fixation varies with the type of fracture, but bone plates and screws
have yielded the best percentage of success.23.12 The various types of bone plates that
may be contoured and used on acetabular fractures include standard straight, acetabu-
lar (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) (Figure 15-16), reconstruction (Synthes) (Figure 15-17),
cuttable (Synthes), and various small fragment plates. (See Figure 2-75 for correct
P
C
FIGURE 15-16. A and B, Serrated transverse fracture of the acetabulum and fracture of the
ischium and pubis. C and D, With bone plate fixation, at least two screws should be inserted
on each side of the fracture line. The plate should be contoured so that it fits the surface to
which it is applied. In cases such as this, any one of the various types of plates could have
been used: reconstruction, aceta bular, standard straight, or small fragment.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
451
plate size relative to body weight.) Reconstruction and acetabular plates lend
themselves to easy contouring, which is helpful because it is essential that the plate
conform perfectly to the reduced bone surface. Failure to do so results in displace-
ment of the fracture surfaces as the screws are placed and tightened. In multi-
fragment fractures the individual fragments are reduced and stabilized by Kirschner
wires and/or 1.5-mm or 2.0-mm lag screws in preparation for plate application
(see Figure 1.5-17).
Lag Screws
ai se smaos ei asn o Audo an suasard uao sa anaid-omi aio
primary fixation. When properly placed and inserted, lag screws provide very stable
fixation. To attain the correct angle for screw insertion, it may be necessary to work
a tap sleeve through muscle to protect the drill bit and tap. The two most common 
'6l-sl pue sl-st sainslg u uaas are auueu sn u paean sadi aimoe
B
D
c
FIGURE 15-17. A, Multiple fractures of the acetabulum; as pieces were reduced, they were
skewered into place with Kirschner wires, one at a time. B, Bone plate contoured and applied;
the center two fragments are too small for screw fixation. A reconstruction plate contours
very easily and is very adaptable to fractures of this type. C and D, Screws are partially
inserted in each segment, leaving two screw threads exposed. Figure-of-8 wire connects each
fragment, and D, the dough stage of polymethyl methacrylate is placed around the implants
 and dorsal acetabulum. (The wires are omitted for clarity.)
452
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
FIGURE 15-18.
A, Oblique fracture through the cranial part of the body of the ilium and
aceta bulum. B, Two lag screws are preferable if there is room for insertion.
A
FIGURE 15-19.
A, Oblique fracture through the caudal part of the body of the ischium and
aceta bulum. B, Two lag screws are inserted for fixation.
B
FIGURE 15-20. Additional fixation methods applicable to nonfragmented transverse
fractures. A, Tension band wire is placed between bone screws inserted on each side of the
fracture. It is iperative that a small pin or Kirschner wire be placed across the fracture
At least one pin must cross the fracture line.
Tension Band Wire
Tension band wire fixation can be used only on interlocking, stable two-piece fractures
(Figure 15-20). The dorsal side of the acetabulum is used for tension band fixation,
 and it is essential that a small intramedullary pin and Kirschner wire cross the fracture
line to prevent shearing motion at the fracture surfaces. Simply compressing the
se aqs e u si ux jo adn si ' yo ad stn sd ou m as
 a plate or lag screw and is best reserved for small breeds, in which plates and screws
can be more difficult to insert.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
453
Screws, Wires, and Polymethyl Methacrylate
Acetabular or comminuted fractures that cannot be repaired by conventional plates
 may have screws partially inserted (leaving the screw head and two threads visible)
 a sso r pne m r n si aoq o
in reduction, the fracture repair is stabilized by wrapping the dough stage of
 methyl metracrylate around the protruding implants and dorsal acetabulum13,14
(see Figure 1.5-17, C and D).
Muitiple Fractures
Fractures of the ilial body are the most common significant fractures to accompany
acetabular fractures (Figures 15-21, B, and 15-22, A and B). Both fractures can be
simultaneously reduced through the approach to the os coxae (Figure 15-21, A).
The ilial fracture is reduced and fixed first because this will provide one stable frag-
ment for reduction of the acetabular fracture. Fixation for each fracture is done as
detailed earlier (Figures 15-21, C, and 15-22, C). If the ilial body fracture is close to
the acetabulum, a long reconstruction plate (see Figure 15-17) can be used for both
fractures. Because of the intricate contouring involved in fitting such a plate, con-
siderable intraoperative time can be saved by contouring the plate to a similarly
sized pelvic specimen preoperatively. Only minor corrections then need to be made
 intraoperatively. Reconstruction plates bend easily, so care must be taken to anchor 
Osteotomized greatertrochanter
Middle gluteal m.
Superficial
Deep gluteal m.
 gluteal m.
Sciatic n.
Internal obturator n.
and gemelli m.
A
C
FIGURE 15-21. Exposure and fixation of a common multiple fracture combination.
A, Oblique fracture of the ilial shaft and acetabular fracture. B, This combination of fractures
may be exposed by a combined lateral exposure to the ilium and dorsal approach to the hip
joint (approach to the os coxae). C, The ilial fracture is reduced first and fixed with a bone
plate, with at least one of the screws placed through the sacrum for maximum anchorage in
the soft ilium. The acetabulum is then reduced and stabilized with an aceta bular plate.
454
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 15-22.  A and B, Oblique fractures of the ilium, ischium, and aceta bulum. B and C,
Reduction and fixation of the ilium rigidly stabilized one segment of the acetabulum, thereby
facilitating reduction of the aceta bular fracture. A pin through the tuber ischi and compression
forceps assisted and maintained reduction while lag screws were inserted.
the plate to stable bone cranially and caudally to prevent bending of the plate and
loss of reduction and alignment in the postoperative period.
Closure of Soft Tissues
 Secure soft tissue closure is important in restoring good stability to the hip joint.
This consists of suturing the joint capsule, the deep gluteal muscle, and when cut, the
combined tendons of the internal obturator and gemellus muscles. The osteotomized
tip of the trochanter major is fixed with the tension band wire technique. The remain-
 ing muscles—the superficial gluteal, the biceps femoris, and tensor fasciae latae-
are sutured in place, followed by the gluteal fascia, subcutaneous tissue, and skin.
Aftercare
 Ideally the animal would be allowed early active use of the hip joint. This requires
totally stable internal fixation, good owner compliance with confinement and exercise
restrictions, and a patient that will not overstress the repair because of hyperactivity.
 If any of these elements is less than optimal, an Ehmer sling (Figure 2-31) or an
off-weight-bearing sling (see Figure 2-32) is advisable for 2 to 3 weeks. Exercise
should be severely restricted for 6 weeks, with a gradual return to unrestricted activity
at 10 to 12 weeks.
FRACTURES OF THE ISCHIUM
Most fractures of the ischium accompany other fractures (e.g., ilial body, acetabulum,
or sacroiliac fracture-luxation).23 If these fractures are properly reduced and immo-
bilized, the ischium often needs no further treatment. When an ischial fracture is of
 primary concern (e.g., fracture of ischial body and pubis with marked dislocation),
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
455
reduction and fixation may be indicated when speed of recovery is important, when
cosmetic concerns are present, when the animal is in great pain, and if optimal ath-
letic function is desirable. Ischial fractures are displaced ventrally by the powerful
hamstring muscles and eventually heal in an extremely abnormal position.
Open Approach and Reduction
 The cranial part of the ischial body can be exposed from the dorsolateral side by the
 approach to the caudal aspect of the hip joint and body of the ischium (Figure 15-23).s
Another approach involving osteotomy of the ischial tuberosity provides more
exposure to the body.1s The caudal body, ramus, and tuberosity are exposed from
the caudomedial side by the approach to the ischium.$
Internal Fixation
Ischial Body
Fixation is usually accomplished by the use of an intramedullary pin or Kirschner wire
with a tension band wire or by a small bone plate. After open reduction, the pin is
usually inserted in the region of the tuber ischium, and insertion is continued cranially
beyond the fracture site until good anchorage is obtained (Figure 15-24, A). The addi-
tion of a tension band wire is important for stability because of the muscular bending
forces; thus the pin is less apt to loosen and work itself out before clinical union.
 Superficial gluteal m.
 Conjoined tendon of 
 int. obturator and 
llium
 gemelli mm.
 Incision in joint
capsule
Sciatic notch of
ischium
Deep gluteal m.
 Sciatic n.
Greater trochanter
FIGURE 1s-23. Caudal aspect of the acetabulum and body of the ischium can often be
muscles. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones and
joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
456
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
FIGURE 15-24. Fixation of ischial shaft fractures. A, Pin from the ischial tuberosity and
tension band wire are biomechanically very effective. This is much easier to insert in the cat
than in the dog. B, The reconstruction plate (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) lends itself to the
intricate contouring required in the ischiatic notch area.
The wire is usually inserted first, the pin next, and the wire then tightened. Space in
this area is usually very limited because of the location of the sciatic nerve. The
twists of the wire are always of concern because of potential sciatic nerve irritation.
 In larger dogs a small bone plate can be placed laterally in the ischiatic notch. The
ischial tuberosity approach mentioned above would be advantageous here. Contouring
of the plate is difficult; the reconstruction plate shown in Figure 15-24, B, is useful.
Ischiatic Ramus and Tuberosity
Most fractures of the ischiatic ramus and tuberosity respond satisfactorily to con-
 servative treatment. In some patients a sizable bone segment is fractured and pulled
 distally, causing considerable discomfort. The ventral surface of the ischiatic tuberosity
gives rise to the powerful hamstring muscles: the biceps femoris, the semitendinosus,
and the semimembranosus. Contraction of these muscles pulls the fracture segment
distally (Figure 15-25, A). In these cases, surgical treatment may be indicated. The
tuberosity fragment is fixed in place with pins, and a dorsal tension band wire is
looped over a screw, or the fragment is fixed with screws alone in large breeds
(Figure 15-25, B). Small Kirschner wires are used to hold the fragment in the
reduced position while the fixation is inserted.
FRACTURES OF THE PELVIC FLOOR
As a result of traumatic injury, the os coxae may become separated at the pelvic
symphysis. This may be accompanied by fracture-luxation of the sacroiliac articula-
tion (Figure 15-26, A). With this injury, the animal loses the ability to adduct the
legs; the rear legs abduct, and the patient is unable to stand. The condition is seen
most frequently in an immature animal before the symphysis has ossified. If other
fractures are present (e.g., in ilium or acetabulum, fracture-separation of sacroiliac
articulation), proper treatment of these fractures usually gives sufficient stability so
that surgery in the pelvic symphysis area is not necessary. Primary treatment of these
injuries is usually confined to adhesive tape hobbling of the hindlimbs to prevent
abduction (Figure 15-27). Usually about 1 week of hobbling will allow the animal
to walk on a surface that is not slippery.
Infrequently, reduction and stabilization are accomplished by a ventral midline
approach and insertion of interfragmentary wires (Figure 15-26, B). Pubic fractures
may also need stabilization during ventral abdominal hernia repair.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
457
A
B
FIGURE 15-25.  A, Ventral surface of the ischial tuberosity gives rise to powerful hamstring
muscles: biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and semimembranosus. B, This dorsal view shows 
the tuberosity fragment fixed in place with pins and a tension band wire looped over a screw
 n  a s  n     ss  o d a 
the fragment in reduced position while the screws were inserted.
A
B
FIGURE 15-26. A, Fracture-separation of pelvic symphysis and sacroiliac articulation;
 gross dislocation of the os coxae. B, Reduction and fixation by use of two stainless steel wires.
Two lag screws inserted to stabilize the sacroiliac articulation would achieve the same effect.
MALUNION FRACTURES CAUSING COLLAPSE
OF PELVIC CANAL
 Healed fractures of the pelvis resulting in a marked decrease in size of the pelvic cavity
are shown in Figure 15-28. This condition may be accompanied by constant or
458
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FGURE 15-27. Rear legs hobbled together to restrict abduction
until healing is underway and power of adduction is recovered.
A
B
FIGURE 15-28. Healed, unreduced fractures collapsing the pelvic canal. A, Healed
fractures of the pelvis resulting in marked decrease in size of pelvic cavity, accompanied by
constant or intermittent constipation or obstipation. B, Midline ventral approach exposes
pelvic symphysis area. The symphysis is split longitudinally with an osteotome. The two
halves are spread, and an allograft (wing of ilium) is inserted and fixed in place using two
wires. This increases the diameter of the pelvic canal and facilitates defecation.
intermittent obstipation. Surgical treatment is indicated when medical treatment is
ineffective in controlling bowel function.
 One method of treatment involves a midline ventral approach to expose the
pelvic symphysis area. The symphysis is split longitudinally with an osteotome, the
two halves are carefully spread, and an allograft (body of ilium or rib) is inserted
and fixed in place using two stainless steel wires. This greatly increases the diameter
of the pelvic canal and returns defecation to normal, provided neurological control
of defecation is normal.2,3 Occasionally, it may be necessary to osteotomize the ilial
shaft unilaterally to allow adequate spreading of the pelvis. Caution must be taken
because the lumbosacral trunk may be incorporated in the bony callus on the medial
side of the ilium. Plate fixation is used on the ilium.
15—Fractures of the Pelvis
459
Triple pelvic osteotomy can also be used (see Chapter 16), although the ilial body
malunion complicates fitting of the osteotomy plate. Cats are more likely than dogs
with femoral head and neck excision and subtotal colectomy have been described as
successful treatment strategies for this difficult problem in cats.16.17
POSTOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT OF PELVIC FRACTURES
Hemostasis before closure creates a smoother recovery period and minimizes
complications in the surgical area. A good anatomical closure by layers, particularly
in the hip area, aids in rapid restoration of function and stability of the hip joint.
A good skin closure is mandatory. Avascular necrosis of skin is a rare problem.
If it occurs, however, it may be caused by the original trauma in the area, by unnec-
essary subcutaneous dissection during surgery, or by a combination of both.
Conservative treatment is usually sufficient for a small area of necrosis, but debride-
ment followed by secondary closure may be indicated if a large area is involved.
Good nursing is an essential part of the aftercare. Particular atention must be paid
to the patient's appetite, urination, defecation, and cleanliness. If the patient is
temporarily nonambulatory, decubital ulcers may become a secondary complication.
A dry, well-padded bed and frequent turning from side to side are good preventive
measures.
Movement and restriction of activity will vary greatly with the individual case,
the degree of trauma, and the stability of fixation. If good, rigid stability can be
achieved, limited restricted movement should be encouraged. Local restriction of
activity in the form of an Ehmer or non-weight-bearing sling (see Figures 2-31 and
2-32) for 5 to 10 days is usually indicated in fractures involving the acetabulum and
femoral head and neck or in a reduced coxofemoral dislocation. If adduction is a
problem, resulting from multiple fractures in the pelvic symphysis area or from
muscle trauma, a restriction bandage or hobble is indicated for 5 to 7 days to limit
abduction (see Figure 15-27). Marked restriction of activity is always indicated
when many fractures are present.
 Fractures of the pelvis require the usual span of time for healing, which is normally
6 to 10 weeks. Some alteration in gait can be expected during this period. In general,
bone plates and bone screws are not removed unless specifically indicated.
Long-term follow-ups usually show no radiographic indications of loosening or
 alteration in bone density.
References
1. Bookbinder PF, Flanders JA: Characteristics of pelvic fractures in the cat: a 10-year retrospective
review,Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 5:122-127,1992.
2.
Brinker WO: Fratures. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974, American
Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
3.
 Brinker WO, Braden TD: Fractures of the pelvis. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD, editors:
Maruat ofintenat fiatin in smal animatsNewYork,1984,pringerVerlagp152164.
4.
Jacobson A, Schrader SC: Peripheral nerve injury associated with fracture or fracture-dislocation of
the pelvis in dogs and cats: 34 cases (1978-1982), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 190:569-572, 1987.
5.
Pierrmattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
6.
Radasch RM, Merkley DF, Hoefle WD, et al: Static strength evaluation of sacroiliac fracture-separation
repairs, Vet Surg 19:155-161, 1990.
7.
 DeCamp C, Braden TD: The surgical anatomy of the canine sacrurm for lag screw fixation of the
sacroiliac joint,Vet Surg 14:131-134,1985.
8.
DeCamp C, Braden TD: Sacroiliac fracture-separation in the dog: a study of 92 cases, Vet Surg
14:127-130, 1985.
460
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
9.
 Montavon PM, Boudrieu RG, Hohn RB: Ventrolateral approach for repair of sacroiliac fracture-
10.
VanGundy TE, Hulse D, Nelson J: Mechanical evaluation of two canine iliac fracture fixation systems,
Vet Surg 17:321-327, 1988.
11.1
Hulse D, VanGundy T, et al: Compression screw stabilization of oblique ilial fractures in the dog.
Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 4:162-167, 1989.
12.1
 Hulse DA, Root CR: Management of acetabular fractures: a long-term evaluation, J Comp Cont
Educ 2:189, 1980.
13.
WR Renegar WR, Griffiths RC: The use of methyl methacrylate bone cement in the repair of
acetabular fractures, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 13:5 82,1977.
14.
StubbsWLwisDDMillerJalAbimehanical auation ndassessment fthaccry
of reduction of two methods of acetabular osteotomy fixation in dogs, Vet Surg 27:429,1998.
15.
ischium and caudal acetabulum in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:505-514, 1990.
16.
 Schrader SC: Pelvic osteotomy as a treatrment for obstipation in cats with acquired stenosis of the
pelvic canal: six cases (1978-1989), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 200:208-213, 1992.
17.1
Matthiesen DT, Scavelli TD, Whitney WO: Subtotal colectomy for the treatment of obstipation
secondary to pelvic fracture malunion in cats, Vet Surg 20:113-117, 1991.
The Hip Joint
LUXATIONS OF THE HIP
Coxofemoral (CF) luxations in dogs and cats are generally the result of external
trauma, with 59% to 83% caused by vehicular trauma.12 Most CF luxations are
unilateral injuries, and because of the massive forces required to produce the luxation,
about 50% have associated major injuries, often chest trauma.
 Soft tssue damage varies considerably; in all luxations, however, a portion of
o ao 'sas as  n 'n are s  a p asd sl a
more of the gluteal muscles may be partially or completely torn. Damage to the
articular cartilage of the femoral head or acetabulum may be present. Rarely, por-
tions of the dorsal rim of the acetabulum are fractured, or part of the femoral head
may be fractured. This is usually an avulsion fracture at the insertion of the round
ligament.
 The goals of treatment for luxation of the hip are to reduce the dislocation
with as little damage to the articular surfaces as possible and to stabilize the joint
sufficiently to allow soft tissue healing, with the expectation of normal clinical function.
Most patients can be treated by closed reduction. More chronic cases and those with
multiple injuries may require open reduction. Some of these patients may need
supplementary fixation to maintain reduction. In certain cases, hip luxation is
irreparable because of preexisting dysplasia, severe abrasion to the articular cartilage
of the femoral head, and irreparable concomitant fractures of the acetabulum or
femoral head. Such patients are generally treated with excision arthroplasty or total
hip replacement, which are covered later in this chapter.
Clinical Studies
 Because of the usual history of trauma with CF luxations, clinical signs are associated
with sudden onset, pain, deformity, crepitus, and limited or abnormal movement of
the limb. The specific signs vary somewhat, depending on the location of the femoral
head in relation to the acetabulum. (See Chapter 1 for a discussion of physical
examination of the hip.)
Craniodorsal Luxation
 Craniodorsal is the most common type of CF luxation, seen in 78% of affected dogs
and 73% of cats. The head of the femur rests dorsal and cranial to the acetabulum
461
462
 Part ll—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
(Figure 16-1, A and B). The limb is shorter than the opposite limb when positioned
ventrally and extended caudally. The thigh is adducted, and the stifle is rotated out-
ward and the hock inward (Figure 16-1, C). On palpation, the trochanter major is
elevated compared with the normal side, and the space between it and the tuber
ischii is increased (see Figures 1-3 and 1-4).
Caudodorsal Luxation
Caudodorsal luxation is a rare condition and may simply be a craniodorsal luxation
with a great deal of instability, allowing the femoral head to move caudally. In this
case the head of the femur rests caudal and dorsal to the acetabulum, and there is
some risk of sciatic nerve injury (Figure 16-1, D and E). There is a slight increase
in leg length when the limb is extended caudally but a decrease when the leg is
 positioned ventrally. The thigh is abducted, with inward rotation of the stifle and
outward rotation of the hock. On palpation, there is a narrowing of the space
between the trochanter major and the tuber ischii.
B
C
D
FIGURE 16-1. Luxation of the hip. A, Craniodorsal luxation, dorsal view. B, Craniodorsal
luxation, lateral view. C, Typical stance of a dog with a craniodorsal luxation. The leg is
externally rotated and adducted. D, Caudodorsal luxation, dorsal view.
16—The Hip Joint
463
G
FIGURE 16-1. Contirued E, Caudodorsal luxation, lateral view. F, Ventral luxation, ventral
view. G, Ventral luxation, lateral view.
Ventral Luxation
Ventral luxation is relatively rare (1.5%-3.2% in reported case studies34) and
may occur as a separate entity or may be associated with an impaction fracture
  a   o a a s a n  a 
the acetabulum, usually in the obturator foramen or cranial to it, hooked under
the iliopectineal eminence. Cranioventral luxations are probably craniodorsal luxa-
   a       
Caudoventral luxations, however, occur spontaneously from trauma and may
 si ro r  rn r a j a aq pd a
difficult to palpate (Figure 16-1, F and G). There is a definite lengthening of the
limb.
Diagnosis
Although the presence of a luxation can usually be determined on the basis of clinical
signs, it is imperative that radiographs be made for each case to rule out several
other injuries that present similar clinical signs and that will not respond to treatment
for luxation. These injuries include fractures of the acetabulum, luxation of the hip
and fracture of the aceta bulum, and fracture of the capital femoral physis or fracture
of the head or neck. Also, the presence of dysplasia or Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease
will generally prevent stabilization of a dislocated hip after reduction. Avulsion
fracture of the insertion of the round ligament generally prevents successful closed
464
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
reduction (see Figure 17-5); furthermore, on the rare occasion when closed reduc-
tion is successful, the presence of the bone chip generally creates degenerative joint
 disease. All these conditions require an open approach and specific treatment of the
 pathology present, as outlined in Chapters 15 and 17. If luxation follows trivial
trauma (e.g., falling down two stairs), beware of underlying hip laxity associated
with hip dysplasia.
Treatment
Closed Reduction
With craniodorsal luxation, the joint capsule can theoretically rupture in three
places (Figure 16-2): midway between the acetabulum and neck of the femur (type A)
avulsion from the acetabulum (type B), or avulsion from the neck (type C).
Type A is probably the most common type and perhaps the kind that responds well
 d sog au aus dy aisun Aaa e ui ssa g adn uon paso o
labrum of the acetabulum that normally aids femoral head coverage is missing.
 If grinding is palpated just as the femoral head reduces into the acetabulum during
reduction maneuvers, type B avulsion of the joint capsule may be present. When
type C is encountered, the joint capsule lies across the acetabulum "like a hammock,"
 preventing deep-seated reduction. On closed reduction attempts, the femur moves
to the right area but "just doesn't feel right"; it does not reduce with a "pop" or
"snap."*
 When there are no complicating factors, most simple luxations can be reduced
closed if they are treated within the first 4 to 5 days after the injury. As time passes,
many factors will interfere with closed reduction. After several days, simple muscle
contracture greatly limits the veterinarian's ability to reduce the luxation, particularly
 in large breeds. Soft tissue (e.g., joint capsule, hematoma, hypertrophy of round
ligament and fat pad) within the acetabulum will block the acetabulum and prevent
adequate reduction of the femoral head. In addition, the joint capsule may undergo
further degeneration. Maceration of the acetabular joint capsule by crushing and
movement of the luxated femoral head reduces potential femoral head coverage by
the capsule within 7 to 10 days after trauma. Fibrous scar tissue will begin to fixate
the displacement of the luxation within 14 to 21 days after traumatic injury.
Reattachment of the round ligament to the gluteal muscles or to the shaft of the
ilium will securely anchor the femoral head in some chronic cases. For all these
    3   5  a ' s  go s  
capsule has avulsed from the dorsal rim of the acetabulum. C, Type C, the capsule has avulsed
off the neck of the femur, resulting in a "hammock-like” obstruction to reduction.
16—The Hip Joint
465
reasons, it is best to attempt closed reduction as soon as general anesthesia can be
administered safely. Good relaxation of the animal is essential for the reduction
process. For successful closed reduction to occur, the hole in the joint capsule and
possibly torn muscle must be found and the femoral head returned through these
holes to seat into the acetabulum.
The manipulative technique for the craniodorsal luxation begins by anesthetizing
the animal and placing it in lateral recumbency with the affected hip uppermost.
A soft cotton rope is placed in the groin area, where it can be grasped by an
assistant or anchored to the rail of the surgical table to serve as countertraction.
This gives the operator a fulcrum with which to exert traction on the affected leg.
With one hand on the trochanter major and the other hand grasping the leg in
the hock region, the stifle is rotated inward (Figure 16-3, A). An alternative
method favored by many involves first externally rotating the femur, followed
by traction and internal rotation to clear the femoral head from rubbing on the
pelvis (Figure 16-3, B). This is followed in both methods by abduction of the
mon peu p a ai on aon a uo assd  pun q
the acetabulum. With this firm downward pressure on the trochanter and suffi-
cient abduction and internal rotation combined with traction on the limb, the
o au iae a o dod, oi  aq nsn uo peau lro
can be felt by the hand on the trochanter. If reduction is not possible, traction is
applied in different directions to find these “holes" in the soft tissues. If after
"reduction" there is binding with hip flexion, the femoral head is located cranial
to the acetabulum and ventral to the ilium. Reduction can then be accom-
plished by internally rotating the femoral head while pushing laterally and
caudally on the femoral head with the other hand. After reduction is achieved,
the trochanter is firmly pressed toward the acetabulum while the hip is rotated,
flexed, and extended to force blood clots, folded joint capsule, or granulation
tissue out of the acetabulum. These latter factors interfere with firm seating of
the femoral head (Figure 16-3, B). Once this reduction is accomplished, the hip
joint is moved through a full range of motion with only light pressure on
the trochanter major. In this way, the stability of the reduced joint can be
determined.
A similar technique is used for caudodorsal luxations. If the femoral head stays
 in position through a full range of motion without pressure being exerted on the
trochanter, the reduction is probably stable. If the femoral head luxates out of the
acetabulum rather easily or seems to bind on flexion, indicating cranial reduction,
additional measures need to be taken, as discussed later.
Closed reduction of ventral luxations varies with the type. Cranioventral
luxations can be either manipulated directly back into the acetabulum or con-
verted to craniodorsal luxations and reduced as just described. No attempt
should be made to similarly manipulate caudoventral luxations, however, because
damage may be done to bone and soft tissues. The limb is placed in traction
with one hand (left hand for left limb, right hand for right limb) while the
other hand applies countertraction against the ischium. The traction hand
then applies a levering or lifting action on the proximal femur that is aided by the
thumb of the opposite hand. The effect is to lift the femoral head laterally into the
acetabulum.4
Aftercare
(see Figure 2-31). If the femoral head snaps in somewhat loosely but seems to be
C
FGURE 16-3. Closed reduction of a craniodorsal hip luxation. A, The animal is secured
to the table with a rope around the groin. The right hand pulls and internally rotates the
femur to turn the femoral head toward the acetabulum while the fingers of the left hand are
pue and oi sanuo pueu uu aui peau reoag au apina diau ot rauon aul uo paeid
internally rotate the femur while abducting the limb. The left hand guides the trochanter and
head over the acetabular rim. B, Alternatively, the femoral head is first externally rotated as
traction begins, followed by internal rotation. C, Pressure is applied to the trochanter with
the left hand while the femur is rotated, flexed, and extended to force soft tissue out of the
acetabulum and to test stability of the luxation.
16—The Hip Joint
467
reasonably stable, an Ehmer sling is always indicated and is generally left in place
for 10 to 14 days. A very unstable hip is likely to need surgical intervention.
Continued successful reduction may be assessed by palpating the relative location of
the trochanter major (see Figures 1-3 and 1-4). If swelling or obesity prevents this
assessment, a radiograph should be carefully taken 3 to 5 days after reduction. If the
hip has reluxated, successful surgical repair is more likely early than if undertaken
2 to 3 weeks later.
To stabilize a ventral luxation, the leg is maintained in adduction by hobbling the
rear legs together for 10 to 14 days (see Figure 15-27). Constructing the hobbles at
the level of the stifle reduces stifle abduction, which is beneficial for treatment of
ventral luxation. Stifle hobbles require a supporting band over the dorsum attached
to the hobbles to prevent the hobbles from slipping distally (Figure 16-4). An Ehmer
sling is contraindicated because the reduced head is forced ventrally where the
joint capsule is ruptured. Additional restricted activity is advised for another 3 to
4 weeks.
Prognosis
Failure rates of 47% to 65% have been reported for single attempts at closed
 reduction.12 The presence of degenerative joint disease or hip dysplasia significantly
lowers the chance of success in closed reduction, but attempts at closed reduction
probably do not reduce the success of later open reduction procedures. Bilateral CF
luxations present quite a dilemma. If after reduction both feel unstable, bilateral
toggle-pin fixation (discussed later) can be used, or repair of one hip early followed
by surgery on the second side 10 to 14 days later can be attempted. Cage restrictions
should be maintained for another 3 weeks.
If a hip stays reduced for 3 weeks, the prognosis is excellent for continued
reduction unless another trauma is introduced or if there is underlying hip laxity
(dysplasia). Palpating the opposite hip for instability may confirm an underlying
factor.
Cats with CF luxation present the orthopedist with a challenge. Cats frequently
will not tolerate external bandages or coaptation. If closed reduction is not achieved
or if relaxation occurs, open techniques can be used. Often, however, cats function
well with a dislocated hip. The dilemma is whether to recommend more expensive
-ad  a moq aas ue im i ro ( os po iu sanrn ao
forms and consider femoral head and neck excision (discussed later) later if function
is unacceptable.
FIGURE 16-4. Hobbles may be con-
structed at the level of the stifle to help
prevent abduction of the stifle and
maintain joint reduction after treatment
for caudoventral coxofemoral luxation
(A). Multiple layers of white tape
adhering to itself prevents the hobble
from sticking to the skin. A separate
band is constructed to extend dorsally
over the cranial aspect of the pelvis (B),
which prevents slippage of the hobble
dista lly.
A
B
468
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Open Reduction—Dorsal Luxations
 Situations in which the hip remains very unstable following reduction or the femoral
 head cannot be reduced require an open approach. Open reduction is also necessary
for avulsion fractures of the femoral head and when immediate mobility of the
patient is needed to treat concurrent injuries better If possible, the hip should be
reduced before the approach because it makes dissection much easier. The choice of
approach varies with the situation. If the hip is reducible, the craniolateral approach
is adequate. If the joint capsule cannot be adequately sutured, or if the hip cannot
[ dp an ssu Aq papuedxa si yodde po a paan aq
tendon. If still insufficient, tenotomy of the superficial gluteal tendon and osteotomy
of the trochanter major (dorsal approach) can be done. This approach is the method
 of choice for chronic luxations (>5-6 days) or when extensive reconstruction is
required.
After the joint has been exposed, the objectives are (1) to remove or reduce any
soft tissue that may be blocking the acetabulum, (2) to reduce the femoral head into
the acetabulum, and (3) to stabilize the femoral head in the acetabulum. Exposure
of the acetabulum is facilitated by placing a Hohmann retractor (or curved scissors)
in or under the acetabulum and levering the proximal femur caudally. Soft tissue in
the acetabulum should be carefully identified. Hematomas, hypertrophic round
nss ansdeo suo! e inq pasixa are siue aps pue sped ie io su
is preserved. Avulsed bone fragments are removed, except in rare cases where they
are large enough to be fixed in place (see Chapter 1). After removal, a judgment
must be made regarding the potential stability of the remaining femoral head. If it
seems that the remaining head will not provide an adequate articular surface,
  nn d lon r so sia   p p 
performed. Fortunately, the fracture fragment rarely is too large that it cannot be
simply excised.
After reduction, several choices are available to maintain reduction. If there is
nonfrayed capsule on each side of the dislocation (type A; see Figure 16-2), simple
closure with relatively heavy-gauge, synthetic, absorbable or nonabsorbable sutures
au uo sains aun roqoue oi yonum uo ansdeo ou si arau  pasn si (o-z oi o)
acetabular side (type B), bone screws and washers or holes drilled in the labrum can
 be used to attach the capsule to the pelvis. If the capsule avulses off the neck (type C),
often the sutures may be attached to the muscles surrounding the trochanter major.
 If there is insufficient capsule on both sides, the anchorage techniques for types B
and C may be used. Alternatively, suture can be anchored to the intertrochanteric
fossa with a screw and washer, or holes can be made at the base of the trochanter
major or bony bridge of the neck (synthetic or prosthetic capsular repair). See the
description in Figure 16-5 for details
 If the capsule can be closed securely, fixation will often be sufficient, although
additional stability may be provided by reattaching the trochanter major distal and
caudal to its original position (Figure 16-5). This causes a temporary retroversion
 r  e s p p an n  s a  e 
abduction and thus seats it more deeply in the acetabulum.
When the capsule cannot be securely closed, additional measures must be taken
to ensure stability of the joint until the capsule is repaired by fibroplasia. The
method chosen should artificially provide stability for 3 to 4 weeks, by which time
the joint should have been restored to its original stability. The method chosen is not
important to success, since all the methods suggested next have about the same rate
of good to excellent results; therefore the choice is a method that appeals to the
surgeon and is compatible with the equipment at hand.
16The Hip Joint
469
Sciatic n.
Greater trochanter
and attached
gluteal mm.
 Sutures in
Bone scr
joint capsule
Hole in dorsal
acetabular rim
oint capsule
B
A
 Original site
of trochanteric
osteotomy
Reattachment site
D
C
FIGURE 16-5. Open reduction of coxofemoral luxation. A, The right hip has been exposed
by osteotomy of the trochanter major.? The hip joint has been reduced and several mattress
sutures are taken in the torn joint capsule. Size 3-0 to O synthetic absorbable or nonabsorba ble
 suture material is used. B, When the joint capsule cannot be reached to the acetabular side,
a bone screw on the dorsal acetabular rim or holes drilled in the labrum can be used to anchor
sutures. Nonabsorbable material is used with the bone screw, and synthetic absorbable material
is used in the bone tunnels. Usually, two screws are necessary to achieve good attachment of
the entire capsule. C, When no joint capsule is available on either side of the joint, two bone
screws are placed on the dorsal acetabular rim, at the 11- and 2-o'clock positions (or 10 and
1 o'clock for the left hip). A hole is then drilled transversely through the bony bridge of the
femoral neck. Size 1-5 nonabsorbable sutures are tied with the limb abducted and internally
rotated. Washers help prevent the sutures from slipping off the screw heads. D, When the
trochanter major is being reattached, additional stability may be gained by moving the
trochanter slightly distal and caudal to its original site. Increased abduction and internal
rotation of the femur results.
Synthetic Capsule Technique
The synthetic capsule technique is simple and effective (Figure 16-5, C).67 After reduction
as explained earlier, two bone screws of suitable diameter (2.7-4.0 mm) are inserted
in the dorsal rim of the acetabulum at the 10- and 1-o'clock positions for the left
hip and the 11- and 2-o'clock positions for the right hip. Care must be taken to
ensure that the screws do not penetrate the articular surface. Metal or plastic washers
are placed on the screws to prevent the suture from slipping off the head of the
screws. Pretying a half square knot of suture material under each washer is performed
before screw and washer insertion. This is helpful if difficulty has been encountered
470
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
in tying the knot after the screw and washer are already inserted. Two lengths of
monofilament polyester (size 1-5) or nylon (20 to 40 pound, or size 1-3) suture are
attached through a transverse hole created in the bony bridge between the femoral
head and trochanter (Figure 16-5, C). The head is reduced and leg positioned to
mimic its location in an Ehmer sling while the sutures are tied tightly. A few degrees
of internal rotation of the limb is probably useful because doing so creates femoral
head retroversion, which adds stability, but external rotation must be avoided as the
sutures are tied. A third screw and washer placed in the trochanteric fossa can be
 used to replace the drill hole.7
 An alternative to using a screw and washer for the prosthetic capsule technique
is the use of soft tissue anchors (see Figure 14-24, D). Tissue anchors have various
fixation configurations that allow attaching a suture directly to bone without having
a large screw head present.
Toggle-Pin Fixation
If the capsule has been severely damaged or if the luxation is chronic, it may not be
possible to stabilize the joint sufficiently by suturing the capsular remnants. In this
case, other techniques must be used in addition to reconstruction of the joint capsule.
A modified Knowles toggle-pin technique has worked well in a variety of situations,
such as chronic luxations, multiple limb injuries, mild hip dysplasia, and when early
use of the luxated limb is desirable.& The synthetic round ligament that is created is
not expected to function indefinitely, but it will maintain stability until the soft
tissue damage in the region of the hip joint has undergone healing, with maturation
of the scar tissue and re-formation of the joint capsule. No evidence has ever shown
that the suture material used to create the synthetic round ligament created a problem
in the joint. In those cases that have reluxated and undergone repeat surgery, the
i p  a u pnsd uaaq s  ans uo
 and thus was no longer intrasynovial.
 After a dorsal open approach with osteotomy of the trochanter major, a hole is
drilled through the femoral head and neck starting at the fovea capitis and continuing
laterally to exit the femoral shaft in the region of the third trochanter (Figure 16-6, A).
The size of the hole is either 7/64 or 5/32 inch (2.8 or 4.0 mm), depending on the size
of the toggle pin used (Figure 16-7). This relatively small hole minimizes additional
devascularization of the femoral head. The drill is then used to create a hole in the
upper end of the acetabular fossa (Figure 16-6, B).
 The stainless steel toggle pin is attached to two lengths of size 0-5 braided poly-
ester suture. The toggle pin is then placed in the acetabular hole and pushed through
to the medial side (Figure 16-6, C). By means of alternate tugging on the suture
ends, the toggle pin is made to turn 90 degrees to lock itself on the medial cortex of
the acetabulum (Figure 16-6, D). These sutures are then pulled through the drill
hole in the femoral neck (Figure 16-6, E) and held taut while the hip is returned to
the reduced position (Figure 16-6, F). A hole is drilled from cranial to caudal
through the lateral femoral cortex, slightly proximal to the exit hole of the sutures.
One pair of sutures is pulled through the second drill hole and then tied to the oppo-
ase  a  ii a x  a jo pis   uo d a
 is sutured to the extent possible (see Figure 16-2, A), and the trochanter major is
reattached with two Kirschner wires or a tension band wire (see Figure 17-7, D).
Triple Pelvic Osteotomy9
Iriple pelvic osteotomy (TPO) has been used to treat recurrent traumatic CF luxa-
tion in adult, large-breed dogs with a mild degree of hip dysplasia. Even mild hip
dysplasia is a major contributing factor to reluxation, and increasing dorsal acetabular
16The Hip Joint
471
 Osteotomized greater trochanter
and attached gluteal mm.
Drill bit in
fovea capitis
Sciatic n.
A
Toggle pin pushed
through hole
 Drill penetrates
 acetabular
Suture
wall in
 center of
acetabular
fossa
B
+
Suture pulled to
seat toggle pin
Wire loop used to
pull suture through
bone tunnel 
E
xa  s   a    e go x -a -it 
by means of a dorsal approach with osteotomy of the trochanter major.? A hole is drilled
from the fovea capitis, through the neck to emerge along the crest of the third trochanter.
(For proper drill size, see Figure 16-7.) B, With the hip luxated, the drill is passed through
the acetabular fossa wall. Care must be taken not to penetrate too deeply. C, The hip has been
aoi aue yanonu papeaun ae 's-o azis 'ains aisaaiod papiea jo spuens omi paexia
pin (see Figure 16-7). With the pin held in forceps, it is then pushed through the acetabular
hole. D, The ends of the suture are alternately pulled back and forth to cause the toggle pin
to turn 90 degrees and seat against the medial cortex of the acetabulum. E, All four ends of
the sutures are pulled through the bone tunnel with a piece of bent wire. The sutures are
 pulled taut, and the hip is reduced.
Continued
472
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Drill hole through.
lateral cortex
F
Double strands
 of suture tied
G
FIGURE 16-6. Contimued F, A small hole is drilled in the lateral cortex in the craniocaudal
 direction between the osteotomy and the bone tunnel. G, One set of sutures is passed through
the proximal bone tunnel and tied to the other suture set.
 coverage with TPO helps to maintain reduction of the joint (see Figure 16-10).
TPO may be used in conjunction with other stabilization techniques. In one report,
long-term hip reduction was successful, and three of the four dogs did not have
radiographic progression of coxofemoral degenerative joint disease at 1-year
follow-up.? TPO is contraindicated in treatment of hip luxation in dogs with
moderate to severe dysplastic changes.
Transarticular Pinning10
 This technique pins the femoral head to the acetabulum. Complications such as pin
 breakage or colorectal penetration can occur, and transarticular pinning should be
 avoided if possible. This technique starts as described for the toggle pin, with a
suitable size of intramedullary pin or Kirschner wire being driven from the fovea
capitis laterally through the neck and exiting the bone on the lateral femoral cortex
distal to the third trochanter (Table 16-1 and Figure 16-8, A). After reduction, the
 u aq pom ii se pd dy a m par a i si e ie
Ehmer sling while the pin is driven through the acetabular wall into the pelvic canal.
A few degrees of internal rotation of the limb is probably useful because it creates
femoral head retroversion, which adds stability, but external rotation must be
 avoided as the pin is driven. The entire point of the pin (5-6 mm) should be within
the pelvic canal, and this is checked by rectal palpation by an assistant. The protruding
(lateral) end of the pin is cut short but long enough to allow later removal
(Figure 16-8, B). The joint capsule is closed to the extent possible.
 An Ehmer sling is applied postoperatively for 10 to 14 days, at which time the
sling and the pin are removed. If the hip is very unstable at the time of reduction,
the pin and Ehmer sling are removed in 3 weeks. Maintaining an Ehmer sling is
 n  a s r so   d nd n 
avoided because of high morbidity and the availability of better techniques.
Aftercare
 Following all CF reduction techniques, the limb is usually supported in an Ehmer
sling for 7 to 10 days unless otherwise noted (see Figure 2-31). Exercise is limited
16—The Hip Joint
473
B
D
E
FIGURE 16-7. Fabrication of a toggle pin. Small pins are used in animals weighing up to
9 kg, and large pins are used in animals weighing over 9 kg. A, The pins are made from
Kirschner wire bent around a jig that is clamped in a vise. The small jig is 3/16 inch wide and
is made of 0.03s-inch Kirschner wire. The large jig is 5/16 inch wide and is made of
0.045-inch Kirschner wire. B, The pins are formed from the same-diameter wire as the jig.
The long end of the wire is bent 360 degrees around the taller post of the jig. C, The wire is
repositioned on the jig. One end is bent 180 degrees around the short arm of the jig.
D, The wire is cut just short of the center hole. E, The partially completed pin is rotated
 end-for-end and inverted to allow the second end to be formed, as in D. The entire pin is then
compressed with pliers to ensure that the small pin will pass through an l/s-inch drill hole and
that the large pin will pass through a 5/32-inch drill hole.
TABLE 16-1. PIN SELECTION ACCORDING TO BODY WEIGHT
Weight (kg)
Diameter (mm)
Diameter (inches)
4-7
1.6
1/16
8-11
2.0
9/s
12-19
2.3
3/32
20-29
2.7
9/2
≥30
3.1
1/8
From Hunt CA, Henry WB: I Atm Vet Med Assoc 187:828, 1985.
474
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Osteotomized
 greater
trochanter and
attached gluteal mm
Steinmann pin
Sciaticn
in fovea capitis
Steinmann pin
penetrates medial
acetabular wall
A
B
 FIGURE 16-8. A, Transarticular pinning of the hip joint. Following an open approach
(here a dorsal approach with osteotomy of the trochanter major), cleaning of the aceta bulum,
and a trial reduction of the femur, a small Steinmann pin is driven from the fovea capitis
laterally through the head and neck (see Table 16-1). It should exit the lateral cortex distal to
the trochanter major. B, With the hip reduced and the limb fixed at a normal standing angle,
the pin is carefully driven through the acetabular wall. It should protrude not more than
1/4 inch (6 mm) into the pelvic canal. The joint capsule is then sutured to the extent possible
before closing.
to the house or leash for 3 weeks, then gradually increased to normal over a 2- to
3-week period. Sometimes when limb fractures are on the opposite side, no sling
bandage is used, and early, limited weight bearing is allowed. Bilateral luxations
 have also been repaired without the use of postoperative slings but require meticulous
 postoperative care, which includes towel support under the lower abdomen when
outdoors, strict house inactivity, and avoidance of stairs.
Prognosis
 The prognosis for open reduction varies with the stability achieved after reduction
 and with the time interval between luxation and reduction. Cases that are reduced
early with adequate stability carry a good prognosis, and essentially normal func-
tion may be anticipated in 70% to 75% of these patients. Those cases that have been
luxated for a considerable time, especially in skeletally immature animals, may
result in increased degenerative joint disease and at times avascular necrosis of the
femoral head. Occasionally, a hip may reluxate after reduction, although this is rare
if reduction is maintained for 7 to 8 days unless there is preexisting hip laxity
(hip dysplasia). Varying degrees of osteoarthritis may develop if there has been
sufficient damage to the acetabulum or femoral head. Hips that are even slightly
dysplastic often will reluxate. Reluxation is an indication for femoral head and neck
 resection arthroplasty or for a prosthetic hip joint.
Open Reduction-Caudoventral Luxations
Although most caudoventral luxations can be handled by closed reduction,4 some
cases require open reduction. Typically, a craniodorsal approach? is used if the
 greater trochanter is fractured, since this allows access to the acetabulum as well as
to the trochanter. The joint is debrided as previously described, the hip is reduced,
and any available soft tissues are sutured. Once the greater trochanter is repaired
16—The Hip Joint
475
(see Chapter 17), the joint is usually very stable.3 If the joint is somewhat unstable,
a prosthetic restraint may be constructed with a single screw and washer placed at
the 9:30 to 10-o'clock position for the left hip and 2-o'clock to 2:30 position for the
right hip, with a figure-of-8 nonabsorbable suture attached to a hole drilled through
the femoral neck. This prosthetic restraint prevents caudal displacement of the
femoral head and assists in preventing reluxation.11
Some cases, however, remain very unstable after reduction, and it has been
suggested that a deficiency in the ventral transacetabular ligament is responsible.12
A ventral approach will allow inspection of this area.s Two techniques have been
from the iliac crest was implanted on the ventral acetabular region with success in
four cases.12 In another case, the pectineus muscle was used to stabilize the femoral
head.13 The muscle was detached distally and directed caudally ventral to the
femoral neck, then dorsally and cranially over the femoral neck and deep to
the gluteal muscles. The remaining free portion of the muscle was then sutured to
any soft tissue available to hold the pectineus in position.
 Remaining portions of the joint capsule are sutured and the hindlimbs
are hobbled together for 2 to 3 weeks postoperatively (see Figure 16-4). Slow
return to normal activity is allowed over the next 2 to 3 weeks. Because of the
 small number of cases available for evaluation, the prognosis in this situation is
uncertain.
HIP DYSPLASIA
Hip dysplasia is an abnormal development or growth of the hip joint, usually
 Occurring bilaterally. It is manifested by varying degrees of laxity of surrounding
soft tissues, instability, malformation of the femoral head and acetabulum, and
osteoarthrosis.
Incidence
One of the most prevalent disorders of the canine hip, hip dysplasia is the most
important cause of osteoarthritis of the hip in the dog. Incidence ranges from
0.9% for the borzoi to 47.4% for the Saint Bernard in dogs radiographically
evaluated by the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals (OFA).14 This is not the true
incidence for any breed or the general population because most radiographs with
recognizable dysplasia are not submitted, but it does indicate the relative incidence
among the breeds, and most of the large working and sporting breeds are well
represented.
The disease rarely occurs in dogs that have a mature body weight of less than
11 to 12 kg. Although hip dysplasia has been observed in toy breeds and cats, their
sp r ui uo sao Auoq ai and aeida ou op sdsy aeisn
 However, coxofemoral luxation after trivial trauma is seen.
Pathogenesis
Comprehensive reviews of hip dysplasia provide the basis for most of the following
discussion.1s-17 A book intended for the lay public is an excellent source for dog
owners and breeders.18 The International Symposium on Hip Dysplasia and
 Osteoarthritis in Dogs, published for a veterinary and scientific audience, is an
excellent source of scientific information.19
476
Part IIl—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Many observations have been made regarding the etiology of this complex disease
The more important points include the following:
1. There is a polygenic predisposition to congenital dislocation of the hip, with
multiple factors that influence and modify the disease.
 2. Environmental factors are superimposed on the genetic susceptibility of the
individual.
 3. The genes do not affect the skeleton primarily but rather the carilage,
supporting connective tissue, and muscles of the hip region.
 4. The biochemical explanation of hip dysplasia is that it represents a disparity
between primary muscle mass and disproportionately rapid skeletal growth.
 5. The hip joints are normal at birth. Failure of muscles to develop and reach
s n n s s a    
Abnormal development is induced when the acetabulum and femoral head
 pull apart and initiate a series of changes that end in the recognizable disease
of hip dysplasia.
6. Bony changes of hip dysplasia are a result of failure of soft tissue to maintain
congruity between the articular surfaces of the femoral head and acetabulum.
7. The disease is preventable if hip joint congruity is maintained until
ossification makes the acetabulum less plastic and the surrounding soft tissues
become sufficiently strong to prevent femoral head subluxation. Under usual
circumstances, tissue strength and ossification progress sufficiently to prevent
the disease by 6 months of age.
 8. Dogs with greater pelvic muscle mass have more normal hip joints than those
with a relatively smaller pelvic muscle mass.
9. The onset, severity, and incidence of hip dysplasia can be reduced by
restricting the growth rate of puppies.20
10.
 The frequency and severity of osteoarthritis in dysplastic dogs is reduced by
limiting food intake and therefore body weight in adult dogs.21
11. The occurrence of hip dysplasia can be reduced, but not eliminated, by
breeding only dogs that have radiographically normal hips. Only 7% will be
normal if both parents are dysplastic.18,22-24
History and Clinical Signs
s o  s ie aj e  m a s d  s 
'saop jo sdnone peou aqezuoi omi are aau 'siaumo iad Aq paieiadde ae
as follows:
1. Young dogs between 4 and 12 months of age.
2. Animals over 15 months of age with chronic disease.
 Young dogs often show sudden onset of unilateral disease (occasionally bilateral),
characterized by sudden reduction in activity associated with marked soreness of the
hindlimbs. They will show sudden signs of difficulty in arising with decreased will-
ingness to walk, run, jump upward, and climb stairs, and the muscles of the pelvic
and thigh areas are poorly developed. Often the client has noted short, choppy steps
and a “bunny-hopping" gait in the rear quarters while running. Most will have a
positive Ortolani sign (see Chapter 1). This is the click produced by the movement
of the femoral head as it slips in and out of the acetabulum with adduction and
I sami aas uope aq pamoe ae pis a oi pade assad pexd
and 16-10, C and D). Radiographically, the conformation of the femoral heads usually
appears normal; however, some degree of subluxation may be seen, and if the
16—The Hip Joint
477
 process has been present for a few months, the angle of inclination of the femoral
neck may increase beyond 146 degrees (valgus), and occasionally some lipping of
the ventral aspect of the femoral head will be seen radiographically.
The sudden onset of signs in young dogs is caused by occurrence of microfractures
of the acetabular rims. When femoral heads are subluxated, the area of contact
of the femoral head with the dorsal acetabulum is limited to the area between the
10- and 2-o'clock positions, with an extreme buildup of stress in that area. This
eventually overloads the acetabular rim, producing tissue fatigue, loss of tissue
elasticity and contour, and eventual microfracture. Pain results from tension and
tearing of nerves of the periosteum. Sharpey's fibers rupture, bleed, and form
osteophytes on the acetabulum and femoral neck. These usually do not become
radiographically visible until 17 or 18 months of age but may be seen as early as
12 months.1s These fractures heal by the time of skeletal maturity, with the result
that the hip joints become more stable and pain is greatly decreased. Most dysplas-
tic dogs between 12 and 14 months of age walk and run freely and are free of
significant pain, despite the radiographic appearance of the joint. Most exhibit a
bunny-hopping gait when running.
 Older dogs present a different clinical picture because they have chronic degen-
erative joint disease and its associated pain (see Chapter 6). Lameness may be uni-
lateral but is usually bilateral. The signs may become apparent over a long period
or may occur suddenly after brisk activity that results in a tear or other injury of
 d  e ss  ss   a o ss o
erative changes within the joint. The dog has lameness after prolonged or heavy
exercise, a waddling gait, and often crepitus and restricted range of motion of the
joint. This crepitus is best detected by placing the examiner's ear or stethoscope bell
directly on the proximal trochanter major region while applying proximal pressure
during abduction/adduction maneuvers with different degrees of hip extension. The
dog often prefers to sit rather than stand and arises slowly and with great difficulty.
Thigh and pelvic muscles atrophy greatly, with the result that the greater trochanters
become quite prominent and even more so if the hip is subluxated. Concurrently,
shoulder muscles hypertrophy because of the cranial weight shift and increased use
of the forelimbs. The Ortolani sign is rarely present in older larger dogs because of
the shallowness of the acetabulum and fibrosis of the joint capsule. The hip dysplasia
d   a ( d n  on  , 
cruciate ligament tears and (2) spinal problems such as disks or degenerative
myelopathy. Stifle palpation and radiographs help in detecting the additional
knee problems, and a delayed or absent conscious proprioception test is helpful in
distinguishing spinal problems.
Diagnosis
Radiographic Signs
Radiographic confirmation is essential in establishing a positive diagnosis of hip
ss r a an ss d e pr s   s
Columbia) and, as a result of examining many radiographs, has established seven
grades of variation in congruity of the femoral head and acetabulum. The dog must
be over 2 years of age to apply the following gradations; the first three are considered
within the range of normal:
1. Excellent: Nearly perfect conformation.
2. Good: Normal conformation for age and breed.
478
Part Il—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
3. Fair: Less than ideal but within normal radiographic limits.
4. Borderline: A category in which minor hip abnormalities often cannot be
clearly assessed because of poor positioning during radiographic procedures.
It is recommended that another radiograph be repeated in 6 to 8 months.
Dysplastic animals fall into the following three categories:
1. Mild: Minimal deviation from normal with only slight flattening of the
femoral head and minor subluxation.
 2. Moderate: Obvious deviation from normal with evidence of a shallow
acetabulum, flattened femoral head, poor joint congruency, and in some 
cases, subluxation with marked changes of the femoral head and neck.
 3. Severe: Complete dislocation of the hip and severe flattening of the
acetabulum and femoral head.
Dogs in moderate and severe grades are most likely to be clinically affected.
Many continually show lameness or discomfort.
Radiographic evaluation of dysplasia requires adequate relaxation for proper
positioning in dorsal recumbency, with the femurs extended parallel to each other
and to the cassette and the patellas centered on the femoral condyles. Evaluation of
 properly exposed radiographs is done by reference to several landmarks, as illus-
trated in Figure 16-9, A. The more important points are as follows:
· The femoral head should be congruent with the cranial acetabular margin,
which in turn should be perpendicular to the midline.
● The intersection of the physeal scar with the dorsal acetabular rim defines the
 amount of the femoral head that is under the acetabular rim. At least 50% of
the head should be covered by the acetabulum.
● Variable amounts of femoral head flattening and remodeling may obscure the
fovea capitis. The head becomes more oval in outline as osteophytes build on
 s r un asi  a jo a a ne yu  a
 acetabulum becomes filled with bone, and the medial wall appears very
thickened.
Reliability of radiographic evaluation for dysplasia is a function of age of the
dog. In the German shepherd (Alsatian), it is 70% at 12 months, 83% at 18 months,
and 95% at 24 months. In general, evaluation between 12 and 18 months has a
reliability of 77% to 85% compared with evaluation at 24 months.14.2s
Physical Examination
The ability to diagnose hip dysplasia early in life is economically useful to breeders
and could eliminate considerable distress for owners who become very attached to
a pet only to find later that the dog has hip dysplasia. Palpation of 6- to 8-week-old
puppies for hip joint laxity by the method of Bardens26 has been demonstrated to be
statistically significant in predicting hip dysplasia in at-risk breeds.27 Bardens
reported an accuracy of 83% in predicting dysplasia in puppies. The technique is
best done on 8- to 9-week-old puppies and requires deep sedation or light general
anesthesia. With the pup on its side, the thumb of one hand is rested on the tuber
ischii and the middle finger on the dorsal iliac spine. The index finger of the same
hand is placed on the greater trochanter as the opposite hand lifts the femur laterally,
raising the femoral head out of the acetabulum. The amount of lift can be estimated
by observation of the index finger on the acetabulum. This is a subjective and incon
sistently reproducible technique and is not currently used in young puppies to
predict dysplasia. Although this is a subjective measurement, a simple lever device
16—The Hip Joint
479
Osteophytes
Normal
Dysplastic
A
B
FIGURE 16-9.  Hip dysplasia. A, The right side is normal with several landmarks identified:
1, craniolateral rim; 2, cranial acetabular margin; 3, fovea capitis; 4, acetabular notch;
5, femoral head; 6, dorsal acetabular rim; and 7, physeal scar. (See text for details.) The left
 side is dysplastic: the femoral head is flattened and not congruent with the cranial acetabular
margin; the intersection of the physeal scar and the dorsal acetabular rim shows only about
 40% of the femoral head under the acetabular rim; and osteophytes have formed at the inter-
section of the joint capsule and the femoral neck, giving it a very thickened appearance.
B, The right side shows obvious subluxation. The craniodorsal rim is underdeveloped
because of pressure upon subluxation. Dramatic incongruency is noted between the femoral
head and the cranial acetabular margin, and the intersection of the physeal scar and dorsal
The femoral head has lost its spherical shape. The left side shows complete luxation with
secondary changes of the femoral head and neck. C, Dorsal acetabular rim (DAR) view of the
pelvis, providing a tomogram-like cross-sectional view of the acetabuli. Line A is the sagittal
saue woy pue sw renqiae lesiop aui on suasui ae  pue g sau 'sialad aui jo aueid
with a line perpendicular to the sagittal plane that define the angle of the dorsal acetabular
rims. Normal dogs typically have an angle of not more than 15 degrees, as seen on the left,
while dysplastic dogs show increased angulation. (Redrawn from Slocum B, Devine T: Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 22:645-682, 1992; and Slocum B, Devine T: J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 26:289-296, 1990. Drawing courtesy B. Slocum.)
480
 Part Il—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
has been described that allows an objective measurement.27 There is a correlation,
however, between the degree of laxity and the presence of hip dysplasia at 12 months
Ofage.
The usefulness of the Ortolani sign (see Figures 1-11 and 16-10, C and D) as a
predictor of dysplasia has not been documented in puppies of this age range, but a
similar correlation would be expected because both methods measure hip joint
laxity. Palpation for joint laxity in mature animals is usually unrewarding because
 of the fibrosis of the joint capsule and shallowness of the acetabulum. The general
 The definitive diagnosis of hip dysplasia must be based on the radiograph.
In young dogs with beginning lameness, however, the radiographs may not show
much change at all. Palpation for Ortolani motion is often helpful and is not a
painful maneuver. The Bardens technique to palpate for hip laxity is somewhat
painful in the young adult. In the older dog, listening for crepitus with the examiner's
ear or stethoscope bell on the trochanter major is often helpful. Diagnosing the
origin of lameness when there are concurrent problems such as cruciate ligament
rupture or luxating patellas is problematic, especially when each of these conditions
is known to be occasionally asymptomatic. If the dog has sustained a cruciate
ligament injury, this problem is usually addressed first. After recovery from surgery,
if lameness is still present, the hips are then treated.
Additional Diagnostic Methods for Hip Dysplasia
The need for earlier predictors and improved accuracy of diagnosis continues to
stimulate the development of additional radiographic methods for diagnosis and
characterization of hip dysplasia in dogs. Each method attempts to quantify a specific
radiographic characteristic of subluxation or laxity of the hip joint, with the expec-
tation that a strong correlation exists between hip laxity and the development of
degenerative joint disease (DJD). Breeding programs based on elimination of animals
with expressed physical characteristics (phenotype) of hip laxity can expect success
 in making slow improvements in the genetic stock of specific breeds.2224 Even the
 newest diagnostic radiographic indices cannot be expected to eliminate hip dysplasia
from any breed of dog because of the existence of phenotypically negative genetic
carriers of the disease. As the canine genome becomes more fully characterized in
the future, we can now anticipate diagnostic improvements in genetic testing for hip
dysplasia that will eclipse all previous testing based on physical characteristics.
Norberg Angle28
Norberg angle is a radiographic characteristic of the standard ventrodorsal radio-
 graph used as a measure of hip joint laxity in research studies and as a selection
criterion in some hip registries and breed standards. This measurement characterizes
the relationship of the center of the femoral head to the craniolateral aspect of the
dorsal acetabular rim. A general Norberg angle of 105 degrees or greater has been
considered to be normal for all breeds; however, one study has indicated breed-
specific Norberg angles. It is suggested that 99.9 degrees for Labrador retrievers,
101.9 degrees for Rottweilers, 92.6 degrees for golden retrievers, and 100.3 degrees
for German shepherds are breed-specific normal limits for Norberg angle.
Distraction Stress Radiography
Techniques for adding stress to the coxofemoral joints during radiographic evaluation
have been well characterized to improve sensitivity and specificity of detection of
joint laxity in puppies as young as 4 months of age 29.32 Distraction index is a radio-
 graphic measure of passive hip joint laxity. Breed-specific differences are noted for
16—The Hip Joint
481
 measurements of the distraction index; however, a general distraction index of less
than 0.3 indicates a separation between normal dogs and dogs with conformation
reported to be a more reliable predictor of DJD in hip dysplasia than Norberg angle,
 Ortolani sign, or OFA measurement of hip conformation.30.31
Dorsolateral Subluxation
Other radiographic methods distinguish between passive laxity and passive sublux-
ation of the coxofemoral joint.33 Passive subluxation is described radiographically
with the coxofemoral joints in a weight-bearing position, without lateral stress
applied, as described for the distraction index. A strong correlation between the
dorsolateral subluxation score and distraction index suggests that minimal practical
difference exists between the two methods.
Treatment
Conservative Therapy
Many dogs with hip dysplasia show no signs of pain; others have only mild, inter-
mittent signs. Indeed, in 68 dogs in which hip dysplasia was diagnosed at an early
age, 76% had minimal gait abnormalities at a mean of 4.5 years later.34 A large number
of these animals can be treated by conservative methods, including minimizing exer-
cise below the threshold level that the hips can tolerate without clinical signs of pain
and fatigue. This might include retiring the dog from strenuous athletic competition
or moderating the amount of exercise demanded in some pet situations, such as
 Frisbee chasing or jogging with the owner. This will often cause relief of signs with
e  s asaqo n ssa si u ia a o oun
flare-ups, exercise should always be curtailed.
 The use of analgesics and other antinflammatory agents is indicated in many
animals (see Chapter 6 for further discussion of osteoarthritic drugs). Aspirin and
sodium salicylate do much to improve the well-being of the dog and improve the
quality of life. Buffered aspirin is generally the first choice, in a twice-daily dose of
325 mg (5 grains) for a 25- to 30-pound animal (25 mg/kg). Aspirin is inexpensive
and accessible to most clients at any pharmacy. Newer nonsteroidal antinflammatory
drugs (NSAIDs) are available to veterinarians that have scientifically controversial
selectivity for the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) enzyme partially responsible for
inflammatory components of arthritic pain. Although these products theoretically
have fewer adverse side effects than aspirin, any NSAID may cause adverse effects
to the gastrointestinal (GI), renal, and hepatic systems. All these products are 
relatively expensive and available by prescription only. Carprofen (Rimadyl, Pfizer)
is useful and often seems to be more effective than aspirin in many individual dogs.
A therapeutic dose is 2.2 mg/kg orally twice daily, but once-daily dosing is also
available. Side effects are less common than for aspirin but may include stomach or
GI irritation. Hepatic toxicosis is reported rarely and may warrant monitoring liver
enzymes during treatment, especially in older patients.3s Etodolac (Etogesic, Fort
Dodge) is another useful NSAID for arthritis; therapeutic dose is 10 to 15 mg/kg
orally once daily. Adverse effects are uncommon, although GI irritation has been
observed. Deracoxib (Deramaxx, Novartis), a recent addition, may be the most
specific COX-2 drug available; dosing for chronic osteoarthritis is 1 to 2 mg/kg/day.
Early reports indicate a low rate of adverse effects with deracoxib, although GI,
renal, and hepatic effects have been observed, as with other medications. Older
NSAIDs include phenylbutazone and meclofenamic acid (Arquel, Fort Dodge).
482
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
These products may find some use in dogs, but for the most part, they have been
replaced by carprofen, etodolac, and deracoxib, which have fewer adverse effects.
 Corticosteroids hasten degenerative changes in the joint and should be avoided for
chronic use in most canine patients.
Hannan and associates36 have demonstrated a chondroprotective effect by poly
sulfated glycosaminoglycan (Arteparon, Luitpold Werk, Munich, FRG; Adequan,
Luitpold Pharmaceutical Inc., Shirley, NY) following experimental meniscectomy.
This is also supported by limited clinical experience in treating hip dysplasia.
 sd o s xis r sp t  i  i  aes
improvement. This dose is then repeated to effect, usually every 4 to 6 weeks.
The drug had previously been approved only for use in horses in the United States,
but it now has been approved for use in dogs. In a double-blind study of dogs
with advanced hip dysplasia arthritis, however, Adequan did not improve clinical
 performance compared with placebo.37
Oral "disease-modifying osteoarthritis agents" are now widely used for symptomatic
treatment in human and veterinary patients. These compounds are not approved by
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) and thus are marketed as “oral nutri-
Combinations of glucosamine and chondroitin sulfate are most often used. Glucosamine
acts by providing stimulus and raw materials for the synthesis of glycosaminoglycans
and also decreases stromelysin in ribonucleic acid (RNA) in chondrocytes.38
Chondroitin sulfate stimulates glycosaminoglycan and proteoglycan synthesis
and also competitively inhibits degradative enzymes in cartilage and synovium.38
A significant antinflammatory effect by these supplements has been documented in
an experimental model of joint inflammation.39 Numerous formulations are available
and are dosed per individual manufacturer instructions.
Surgical Therapy
 The veterinary orthopedist is truly in a quandary when trying to decide on a course
of treatment for an individual dog when the clinical signs of hip dysplasia develop
at an early age. Although the results of triple pelvic osteotomy (TPO) are very
encouraging, they must be balanced against the observation that 76% of dogs
diagnosed with hip dysplasia at a young age never had serious clinical signs of
u Pnm s asn  ase sua a te r sa zt d-m ie eids
develop problems later in life. However, if these figures hold true, only 10% to 17%
of the affected puppies really will benefit from TPO or intertrochanteric femoral
osteotomy. Conversely, it is impossible to predict how any individual puppy willfare
later in life. Thus the decision to pursue early surgical treatment needs to be carefully
considered, since the results are predictable. If the animal is destined to be primarily
a house or yard pet, a conservative approach is probably rational. If pain becomes
a problem, femoral head and neck ostectomy or total hip replacement is an alter-
native. If the dog is to be a sporting or working "canine athlete," a more aggressive
approach should be pursued at an early age, when the chances of success for a
reconstructive approach are best.
Surgical therapies can be broken down into two groups: (1) therapies that
provide relief from pain and (2) therapies that prevent or lessen the amount of
future DJD.
 The preventive surgeries are performed on young, large, growing dysplastic dogs.
The theory behind these surgeries is to realign the pelvis or femoral head so that the
head coverage by the acetabulum, reducing the amount of subluxation present. TPOs
pubic symphysiodesis, and possibly intertrochanteric osteotomies are examples of
16—The Hip Joint
483
the preventive therapies. Pain relief may result from pectineal myectomy, femoral
head and neck ostectomy, and total hip arthroplasty.
PelvicOsteotomy
Pelvic osteotomy is indicated for young dogs with clinical signs of hip dysplasia, as
discussed earlier, and who demonstrate signs of instability (laxity, subluxation) of
the hip joint. The procedure provides axial rotation of the acetabulum to stabilize
the femoral head within the acetabulum in a functional position (Figure 16-10, A
and B). It has been shown to be a clinically effective method of treating dysplasia,
especially in young animals.40-42 Theoretical analysis has suggested that the proce-
dure may reduce the magnitude of forces acting on the femoral head.43 Force plate
analysis has confirmed that weight-bearing forces improve in operated versus non-
operated hips.44
Patient Selection. The operation should be done early, most often between 4
and 8 months of age, to take advantage of the remodeling capacity of immature
bone and before the articular cartilage is badly damaged. With instability and sub-
luxation over time, the acetabulum becomes filled with new bone that covers the
original surface, thus preventing congruency and stability between the femoral head
and acetabulum. These changes become increasingly severe by age 10 to 12 months,
although age is not the most important criterion for determining success. The pri-
mary consideration is the condition of the joint surfaces, that is, the degree of degen-
erative changes that has occurred. If the acetabulum is filled with bone, if the dorsal
acetabular rim (labrum) is lost because of eburnation, or if the cartilage of the
femoral head is destroyed, pelvic osteotomy will not result in a successful out-
come.40,41
 Radiographic examination.45,46 In selecting patients for pelvic osteotomy, standard
ventrodorsal and lateral radiographs are taken and analyzed for the pathology
previously described (see Figure 16-9, A and B). Of particular interest is the shape
of the dorsal acetabular rim, which will become increasingly cupped or S-curved in
its outline. This is probably a result of lack of development caused by pressure from
the subluxated femur and abrasion from the femoral head. Osteophytes form first
at the joint capsule insertion on the femoral neck and are responsible for the thickened
appearance of the neck. Osteophytes on the acetabular rim are signs of advanced
degenerative changes. Filling of the acetabulum with new bone is evidenced by a loss
 of definition of the original deep acetabular outline, replaced by a less well-defined
surface that is farther from the medial acetabular cortex than normal. The lateral
views are examined closely for signs of loss of cartilage thickness. As the bright
white lines of the subchondral bone approach each other without the intervening
radiolucent cartilage, they indicate cartilage thinning. Acetabular osteophytes are
well defined in this view as a radiographic density dorsal to the acetabulum. The
"frog-leg" view is used to determine the depth of the acetabulum. In dorsal recum-
bency the femurs are abducted 45 degrees, with the femurs perpendicular to the
pelvis and spine. This stress forces the femoral head deeply into the acetabulum, and
if the head is not deeply seated, it indicates bony filling of the acetabulum or hyper-
trophy of the round ligament as a result of instability of the femoral head.
Abduction of the femurs more than 45 degrees can cause the dorsal acetabular rim
to contact the femoral neck, especially in the presence of acetabular osteophytes,
and can lever the femoral head ventrolaterally out of the acetabulum.
Additionally, the dorsal acetabular rim (DAR) view4 is helpful in “ruling in" or
"ruling out" a given animal for pelvic osteotomy. The animal is placed in sternal
recumbency, the hips are flexed, and the stifles are fixed against the body wall with
484
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Section through acetabulum
preoperatively
Section through acetabulum
postoperatively
A
B
Abduction
Adductior
Section
through
acetabulum
dog supine
C
D
E
loosely in the acetabulum and contacting only a small area of the dorsal acetabular rim,
setting the stage for the structural changes we identify as "hip dysplasia." B, After osteotomy, 
the acetabular portion of the pelvis has been rotated laterally over the femoral head, greatly
increasing the contact area between head and acetabulum and thus decreasing local bone and
cartilage loads. C, D, and E, Finding the acetabular rotation angle45,46 C, With the dog
supine, the Ortolani sign (subluxation of the femoral head) is elicited by adduction and pressure 
on the femur directed toward the table. This is most easily done bilaterally, which eliminates
the problem of the dog rotating when pressure is applied. D, While continuing to apply pressure
to the femur, the femur is slowly abducted. At some point a distinct click or popping sensation
will be felt and perhaps heard as the femur reduces into the acetabulum. In addition, a visible
a po a a  s  an e n r an u s a  o
femur relative to the sagittal plane (i.e., the plane 90 degrees to the tabletop) is identified as the
"reduction angle” and represents the maximum angle the acetabulum would need to be rotated
to stabilize the femur. In this example the angle measured 30 degrees. The optimal angle of
rotation is about 5 to 10 degrees less than the angle of reduction. E, With the femur in the
reduced position, it is slowly adducted while maintaining pressure toward the table. Again, a
distinct point will be appreciated visually, audibly, and by palpation that represents the femur
luxating from the acetabulum. This is measured as in D and is called the "angle of luxation,"
 20 degrees here, and represents the minimum angle of rotation of the acetabulum.
16The Hip Joint
485
Origin of 
Superficial
pectineus m.
 gluiteal m.
Section ofpubic
ramus removed
Internal 
 obturator m.
Table surface
Sad
crotuberous
 of ischium 
Gigli saw
G
Holes in
ischium for
Osteotomy
wire
 of ischium
fixation
F
Sacroiliacjoint
Osteotomylines
Referenceline
forosteotomy
Rotated
segment
of pelvis
Dorsal
acetabular
joint
surface
Rofated
Canine'pelvic
segment
osteotomy plate
of pelvis
Interfragmentary
wire
FIGURE 16-10. Contimued F and G, Pubic ostectomy and ischial osteotomy. F, A section of
 the pubic ramus is removed through a ventral approach and detachment of the pectineus muscle
obturator muscle and osteotomy of the ischial table from the lateral border of the obturator
as are the 2-mm drill holes, through which 20- or 18-gauge (0.8- to 1-mm) wire is threaded
but not tightened at this time.
Continued
486
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 16-10. Contirmued H, Osteotomy of the iliac shaft. A horizontal reference line is cre-
ated by passing a small, blunted Steinmann pin from the dorsal surface of the tuber ischi cra.
mially to a point one-third the distance from the ventral to the cranial dorsal iliac spines. The
transverse osteotomy is 90 degrees to the horizontal line and at the caudal aspect of the sacroil-
iac joint. The sciatic nerve must be protected when the osteotomy is made (see text). A trian
gular piece of bone will be removed dorsally after the plate is attached. I and J, The completed
triple pelvic osteotomy procedure. The iliac osteotomy is stabilized with a Canine Pelvic
Osteotomy Plate (Slocum Enterprises, Eugene, Ore) and the ischial osteotomy with a twisted
interfragmentary wire. A standard 2.7- or 3.5-mm plate can be twisted to provide a similar
effect. Note how the rotated acetabular segment would provide greater dorsal coverage for the
femoral head.
tape or a strap. When the tuber calci are elevated 2 to 4 inches (5-10 cm), depending
on body size, above the tabletop, the pelvis is vertical to the table, and the x-ray
beam can be directed through the long axis of the pelvis. The acetabuli can then
be seen in cross section in the frontal plane (see Figure 16-9, C). A line is drawn
tangentially to the curvature of the dorsal aspect of the acetabular surface where it
contacts the femoral head. The angle formed by this line can be measured against a
reference line drawn between the dorsal acetabular rims or against a vertical line
drawn in the sagittal plane. Normal dogs will have a summed angle of 15 degrees
from horizontal (165 degrees from vertical) or less; 15 to 20 degrees is suspicious of
hip dysplasia, and animals with greater than 20 degrees will have the other signs of
wearing of the rim is evidenced by rounding and loss of definition and sclerosis.
 Most of the information gained from the DAR view can be inferred from the other
radiographs and palpation, but the DAR is useful in documenting the acetabular
changes.
Palpation. Equally as important as the radiographs is palpation of the hips with
the dog anesthetized or deeply sedated. The objective is to assess passive laxity
(subluxation) of the hip both quantitatively and qualitatively. The trochanteric
compression test is done with the dog on its side while moderate pressure is applied
to the greater trochanter. If chronically subluxated, the hip will be reduced by this
pressure, and the change in position of the trochanter will be sensed.
With practice the examiner can recognize breakdown of the dorsal acetabular rim
and the condition of the cartilage of the femoral head by the character of the “click"
evidenced during testing for the Ortolani sign. The sign of Ortolani is elicited with
the dog on its back, with the femur held vertically and the stifle flexed (Figure 16-10,
C, D, and E). The femurs are grasped distally, and gentle pressure is applied proximally
(toward the pelvis), causing the femoral head to subluxate and rest on the dorsal
acetabular rim because of capsular laxity. This movement may or may not be appre-
ciated at this time; it will be more evident later in the test. As the femur is abducted
with the pressure maintained, a distinct "click" or "clunk" is heard and felt when
the femoral head reduces. The angle of the femur from vertical at this point is the
angle of reduction. Reversing the procedure by adducting the femur results in another,
softer "click" when the head subluxates from the acetabulum, and the angle of the
femur from vertical at this point is the angle of subluxation. If the articular cartilage
is undamaged, these clicks will be appreciated as abrupt motions of the femoral
head with a smooth and crisp feeling. The sensation of the reduction phase produces
a solid-feling “clunk." The subluxation phase is less dramatic. Wearing of the
cartilage of the femoral head and acetabular rim causes a muffling of the sounds and
16—The Hip Joint
487
a less crisp, to a grating, fibrillated, or crepitant feeling as the femoral head glides
over the acetabular rim. The reduction motion, particularly, is less abrupt and crisp
when the dorsal rim is lost and the acetabulum becomes shallow as a result of
filling with new bone.
The angle of reduction (AR) increases as capsular laxity increases, and the angle
 of subluxation (As) increases as the acetabular rim is lost due to wear.4s As the
capsule becomes thickened due to fibrosis and the acetabulum fils with bone, the
angles approach each other in value, and the Ortolani sign cannot be elicited because
the femoral head is permanently subluxated and supported mainly by the capsule.
The femoral head cannot be reduced because there is no functional acetabulum.
This is typical of the mature dog with hip dysplasia. Occasionally, young dogs will
show a positive AR (e.g., 15 degrees, with an AS of 0 degrees). This may represent
 a situation of passive laxity without functional laxity, and although in the absence
of clinical signs it does not require pelvic osteotomy, this situation does merit
monitoring for future degenerative changes. Although passive hip joint laxity is
closely associated with development of DJD,31 considerable difference apparently
exists between breeds regarding this correlation.47
The ideal candidate for pelvic osteotomy would be 5 to 7 months of age with
clinical signs of hip dysplasia and would show minimal or no signs of degenerative
changes radiographically and on palpation. The trochanteric compression test
would be negative, and the summed DAR angles would be 20 degrees or less.
 The AR would be 30 degrees or less and the AS 10 degrees or less, indicating an
acetabulum without filling and with an intact dorsal acetabular rim. As the AR
increases above 30 degrees and the AS above 10 degrees, the prognosis declines
because of the preexisting changes in the acetabulum. An AR/AS reading of 45/20
 degrees is the highest value to rate a good prognosis with pelvic osteotomy.4s
Contraindications.  Pelvic osteotomy is contraindicated when there are radio-
 graphic or palpable signs of advanced DJD, breakdown of the dorsal acetabular
rim, shallow acetabulum, or neurological disease.
 s    o  o    i
most dependable in our hands.40414s The AR represents the probable maximum
angle the acetabulum needs to be rotated to achieve stability, whereas the AS represents
the minimal angle of rotation of the acetabulum that will produce instability of the
hip. These two angles are used to select the appropriate implant for axial rotation
of the acetabular segment of the pelvis.41 To prevent overrotation of the pelvis and
subsequent impingement of the dorsal acetabular rim on the femoral neck and
excessive narrowing of the pelvic canal, the angle selected should usually be closer
to the AS than to the AR and should not exceed 45 degrees. In an in vitro study
using computed tomography (CT), Dejardin and colleagues48 reported the effect of
axial rotation of the acetabular segment on contact area and articular coverage in
of acetabular ventroversion. This study supports that the angle of rotation selected
for TPO should be at the lower end of the range.
Slocum has devised a bone plate for this procedure, the Canine Pelvic Osteotomy
 Plate (CPOP, Slocum Enterprises, Eugene, Ore), using 3.5-mm screws. The CPOP is
made in three angles of rotation: a 20-degree plate with a fixed angle, a 30-degree
plate that can be twisted to angles between 20 and 40 degrees, and a 45-degree plate
rotate the acetabulum more than 30 degrees, since further rotation usually causes
488
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 difficulty in abduction as the femoral neck impinges on the dorsal acetabular rim.
It is our practice to limit the rotation to 30 degrees and supplement this with
   si  n       
30 degrees of rotation. The CPOP device has proved most satisfactory and easy to
use and is our method of choice (Figure 16-10, I and J). It is superior to a twisted,
conventional bone plate because it provides eight potential points of fixation
(six screws, two cerclage wires) and thus minimizes fixation failure. It also lateralizes
the acetabular portion of the pelvis and thus widens the pelvic canal. A standard
five-hole to seven-hole, 2.7-mm or 3.5-mm straight plate can be used by twisting the
plate in its midsection. However, studies have confirmed the advantages of the
 CPOP in providing superior dorsal acetabular coverage and minimal disruption of
 normal pelvic architecture compared with twisted plates.49,50
adp-a pe paedad s qu au ss aa u pad si apard au
so as to allow access to both the inguinal and the lateral aspect of the pelvis. With
the animal in dorsal recumbency and the limb held in a vertical position, the pubic
ramus is exposed through a ventral approach (Figure 16-10, F). The pectineus
muscle is severed close to its origin on the iliopectineal eminence and the prepubic
tendon. The muscle belly is allowed to retract and is not sutured. Elevation of the
 gracilis muscle caudally and the abdominal muscles and prepubic tendon cranially
exposes the pubic ramus. Most of the ramus is removed after two cuts in the bone,
one near the medial limit of the obturator foramen and the other at the junction of
the pubis with the ilium, medial to the iliopubic eminence. It is important to make
this cut as close as possible to the body of the ilium to minimize the length of the
bone spike that will be turned into the pelvic canal.s1 The obturator nerve must be
protected during this cut because it lies very near the caudal limit of the cut.
The abdominal muscles and prepubic tendon are sutured to the cranial border of the
 gracilis muscle, and the rest of the tissues are sutured in layers.
The dog is returned to lateral recumbency, and a second incision is made over the
medial angle of the ischiatic tuberosity. After elevation of the internal obturator
dorsally and the semimembranosus and quadratus muscles ventrally, the ischiatic
table is osteotomized in a paramedian plane, beginning cranially at the lateral aspect
of the obturator foramen (Figure 16-10, F and G). This can be done with a Gigli
wire saw, a hand saw, or a power saw, but not with an osteotome, because there is
a good chance of cutting into the ramus of the ischium. Dril holes are placed 5 mm
from the cut edges, and a 1-mm (18-gauge) wire is threaded through the holes but
not tightened
Next, a lateral approach is made to the shaft of the ilium, and the gluteal muscles
are elevated from the body and ventral wing of the ilium. Taking care to protect the
cranial gluteal, obturator, and sciatic nerves, all muscles are elevated from the iliac
shaft ventrally, medially, and dorsally. An iliac osteotomy is performed just caudal
to the sacrum (Figure 16-10, H). The cut is made perpendicular in both planes to a
line between the dorsal side of the ischiatic tuberosity and the ventral third of the
iliac crest. This line is established by inserting a small Steinmann pin from the
dorsal surface of the tuber ischium cranially toward the cranial ventral iliac spine,
where it is positioned by palpation one third of the distance between the ventral and
 dorsal iliac spines. The pin can then be used to establish the proper angle for the
iliac osteotomy. The object of this exercise is to make the osteotomy perpendicular
to the axis of rotation of the acetabular portion rather than perpendicular to the
long axis of the ilium. The resulting angle of the osteotomy is approximately
 20 degrees to the long axis of the ilium and allows for optimal contact of the bone
surfaces, while minimizing the decrease of pelvic inlet area and increasing the
interischiatic tuberosity distance and acetabular version.49
16—The Hip Joint
489
After this osteotomy, the acetabular segment is moved cranially and laterally with
bone-holding forceps, and the sharp spike of ilium dorsal to the plate is removed to
prevent irritation of the gluteal muscles. The plate is now attached to the caudal
segment with 3.5-mm screws. If the CPOP is used, at least one of these screws is
u auoq aun isuae dais rennue au ssando oi uosod peo aun u panid
acetabular segment is rotated laterally and the plate temporarily clamped cranially
to the cranial iliac segment. The hip should now be stable with no Ortolani sign;
if not, the plate is removed and twisted more or replaced with another plate of
increased angle. If the Ortolani sign is eliminated but there is still lateral transla-
tional movement of the femoral head of more than a few millimeters, transposition
of the greater trochanter (see Figure 16-5, D) can be used to augment the stability
of the femoral head.42 Another alternative in this situation is femoral neck length-
ening, as described later. Neck lengthening is the equivalent of adding 10 degrees of
acetabular rotation.4s Even without either of these ancillary procedures, most hips
will stabilize within a few weeks because of the basic stability afforded by the pelvic
Osteotomy, and definitive guidelines for these procedures await longer term experience.
After the proper angle is found for the acetabular segment, the ischial wire is tightened,
and the plate is then fixed to the cranial iliac segment (Figure 16-10, I and J). In very
  e      a  s 
through holes in each end of the CPOP. The triangular bone fragment from the ilium
or the pubic ramus fragment can be cut into small fragments and used as bone
 graft in the osteotomy site to hasten healing. Both surgery sites are closed routinely
by layers.
Aftercare.  Postoperatively, the dog is confined to the house or leash exercise for
 4 to 6 weeks, at which time the opposite side undergoes surgery if indicated.
 In severely dysplastic, 4- to 7-month-old puppies, the opposite side should be
repaired in 2 to 3 weeks because the bony structures and joint cartilage are remodeling
rapidly.
Prognosis.S
 Slocum and Devine41 reported on follow-up evaluation of 138 dogs
that underwent TPO. Of these dogs, 122 had hip dysplasia: 30% had grade 4
dysplasia, 33% grade 3, and 34% grade 2. Regarding age at surgery, 13% were less
than 6 months; 47% were 6 to 12 months; 22.5% were 1 to 2 years; and 17% were
weight bearing and activity. In another study, 92% of operated limbs showed remis-
sion of lameness at 28 weeks postoperatively, and progression of detectable DJD
was minimal, despite gross and microscopic degenerative changes being similar in
treated and untreated hips.4 In another long-term prospective study, 40% of dogs
that had TPO developed progression of DJD, and 76% had good or excellent
at-home activity scores.s2 Preoperative DJD and long-standing DJD were not
associated in this study; however, the risk of DJD was increased with age at surgery.
A dog that had TPO surgery at age 12 months was seven times as likely to have DJD
compared to a dog that had surgery at age 6 months. s2
Femoral Neck Lengthening
In addition to the mechanical stability afforded the femoral head by a deep acetabulum
with a normal dorsal acetabular slope, a dynamic component of hip stability is
caused by muscular forces, primarily the internal and external rotator muscles.
These muscles all insert on the greater trochanter; therefore, increasing the length of
the femoral neck increases the lever arm over which these muscles operate, and thus
 increases the medially directed force they apply to the femur.
490
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 Indications.  Femoral neck lengthening has been proposed as primary treatment
for dysplastic dogs that have adequate dorsal acetabular coverage, but whose hips
 are unstable because of insufficient muscular force to prevent the hip from sublux-
ating.$3 These dogs typically have a short femoral neck, and some breeds (e.g., chow
chow, Akita) are prone to this problem. Suitable candidates for primary neck length-
ening should have an AS of O degrees or less and a normal dorsal acetabular rim
angle.s4 The second indication for neck lengthening is mentioned earlier with TPO.
If the acetabular rotation angle needed to obliterate the Ortolani sign (approximately
equal to the AR) exceeds 30 degrees, it is probably better to add neck lengthening
rather than exceed 30 degrees of rotation, since doing so creates problems with
abduction of the hip. Neck lengthening has the same stabilizing effect as 10 degrees
 of acetabular rotation.45
Surgical Tecbnique.  The proximal femur is approached by detaching the vas-
tus lateralis muscle from its origin on the proximocranial aspect of the femoral neck
and shaft. A parasagittal osteotomy is made in the proximal femur, starting at the
 junction of the greater trochanter and the femoral neck and ending distally at the
lateral cortex 1 to 2 cm distal to the lesser trochanter (Figure 16-11, A and B).
Before the osteotomy is made, a 2-mm hole is drilled at the distal end of the intended
osteotomy, and the osteotomy ends at this hole. The purpose of the hole is to
prevent cracks from propagating beyond this point when the trochanter is forced
hole as additional insurance against cracking the lateral cortex.
A second 3.5-mm cortical screw (typically about 35 mm long) is placed in the
greater trochanter, threaded only in the first cortex. The tap hole is drilled only to
the depth of the osteotomy. As the screw is tightened, the tip of the screw contacts
's ms ae g  e   po a g aq ra s
the trochanter is distracted laterally. This distraction is slowly continued until the
B
C
A
FIGURE 16-11. Femoral neck lengthening. A, Cranial view of the femoral head and neck
region showing the line of osteotomy. A 2-mm drill hole at the end of the osteotomy and a
the osteotomy deep and medial to the insertions of the obturator-gemellus muscles on the
greater trochanter. C, A 3.s-mm screw is inserted to the osteotomy line after drilling and
tapping only the lateral cortex. As the screw is tightened, the tip of the screw bears against
the bone of the femoral neck, and the trochanter is distracted laterally along the screw
threads. Distraction is continued until lateral translational motion of the femoral head is
abolished. D, A positional screw, threaded in both cortices, is placed distal to the distraction
screw to maintain the lateralized position of the trochanter.
16—The Hip Joint
491
lateral translational laxity of the femoral head is abolished (Figure 16-11, C). At this
s  a in ps   eid si as  'e p e od
(Figure 16-11, D) and is threaded in both cortices (positional screw). If the distract-
ing screw protrudes lateral to the trochanter, it is replaced with a shorter screw.
 The origin of the vastus lateralis muscle is sutured to the cranial border of the deep
gluteal muscle.
Aftercare.
 Postoperatively, the dog is confined to the house or leash exercise for
     po s i oo a  g o ts
4 weeks if indicated.
Pubic Symphysiodesis
Induced pubic bone growth arrest has been shown to result in beneficial acetabular
rotation in experimental animals and puppies with hip dysplasia.sss7 This new and
simple technique has potential use in some dysplastic puppies. Clinical trials are
underway that will help define the limits of pubic symphysiodesis, but early results
are encouraging. Pubic bone physeal closure is induced either with a simple stapling
technique"6 or an electrocautery technique.s7 Premature pubic physeal closure
results in clinically insignificant (24%) reduction of pelvic inlet area, but it also
causes a 40% and 46% improvement in acetabular angle and dorsal acetabular
rim angle, respectively, compared with control dysplastic puppies.$7 A successful
case has pelvic rotation and conformation similar to that seen with a healed bilat-
eral TPO. The improvement that can be expected in pubic symphysiodesis is age
related, with best acetabular results if symphysiodesis is performed at 12 to
16 weeks of age. If pubic physeal closure is completed at an older age, up to 24 weeks,
acetabular rotation develops, but to a lesser degree that may not be beneficial
for the dog.
This technique is dramatically simpler and less invasive than pelvic osteotomy.
A practical concern will be that most dogs with hip dysplasia present for diagnosis
 and treatment at a later age than would be suitable for symphysiodesis. Combined
with client education and early screening techniques, pubic symphysiodesis may find
a useful niche for the treatment of hip dysplasia. Selection of cases will remain
controversial until more clinical trials are completed.
recumbency. A 2- to 3-cm ventral approach is made to the cranial aspect of the
pelvic symphysis. The skin, subcutaneous tissue, rectus abdominis muscle, adductor
muscle, and aponeurosis of the gracilis muscle are incised and minimally reflected
 from the midline to expose the pubic portion of the pelvic symphysis.? Insertion of
the rectus abdominis may be released from the pelvic brim, which allows the
surgeon to insert a finger dorsal to the pubis to deflect the rectum and urethra
and to judge the depth of cauterization (Figure 16-12). Standard electrocautery is
used to induce closure of the pubic symphysis. A unipolar spatula or needle-tip
electrode may be used to apply cautery at approximately 2-mm intervals. A 30-W
o ydap e on ahs yoea ie spuoos ot nqe rog pap si uas uoeo
approximately 6 mm.57 The surgeon's finger in the pelvic canal judges depth of
standard technique.
  a   a   i s s s
day of surgery. Exercise should be moderate for 2 to 3 months after surgery while
bony and articular structures are remodeling.
492
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
B
FIGURE 16-12. Juvenile pubic symphysiodesis. Induced pubic bone growth arrest has beer
demonstrated to cause beneficial acetabular rotation in experimental animals and puppies with
hip dysplasia. A, Standard electrocautery is used to induce closure of the pubic symphysis.
B, A unipolar spatula or needle-tip electrode may be used to apply cauterization to the pubic
symphysis at approximately 2-mm intervals. (Photos courtesy Dr. Loic Dejardin.)
Intertrochanteric Varus Osteotomy of Femur
The true angle of inclination of the canine femoral neck in relation to the diaphysis
 is about 146 degrees.$8 In animals with hip dysplasia, this angle increases as much
( 'si-9l anni) rapa rxo se umouy uouoo ayi oi supea saaiaap se oi oe se
This is caused by subluxation of the hip joint and subsequent lack of normal stress
on the femoral neck, which is necessary for development of the normal angle. This
valgus angle of the head and neck contributes to further subluxation and instability,
 perpetuating a vicious cycle. Additionally, the femoral neck inclines farther cranially
(anteversion) from the normal angle of about 27 degrees and again contributes to
subluxation and instability.$
The principle of varus derotational osteotomy for treatment of congenital hip luxa-
tion and instability is well established in humans and in the dog.s9,60 By making the
femoral neck more perpendicular to the femoral shaft (varisation) and reducing ante-
version, the femoral head can be placed more deeply within the acetabulum, and forces
acting on any given area of the bone and cartilage of the acetabulum and femoral
head can be reduced by distributing weight-bearing loads through greater congruency
immature animal with a high potential for bony remodeling, there can be permanent
improvement in joint congruity In the mature animal with DJD and instability, pain
may be relieved by reducing forces on the acetabulum and femoral head and redis-
tributing weight-bearing forces more uniformly over the diseased cartilage.
The purpose of intertrochanteric osteotomy is to improve the biomechanics of
-sad si f aaq auop um aaa a si ll esud d anp oi pue d a
ent, between the ages of 4 and 10 months in most patients. Patient selection is iden-
tical to that for TPO, with careful radiographic evaluation and palpation of the
joints to aid in evaluating the condition of the joint surfaces. Contraindications
include DJD that is radiographically obvious, shallow acetabulum, and loss of the
dorsal acetabular rim. Because the amount of increased dorsal acetabular coverage
does not seem to be as great as with TPO, we reserve intertrochanteric osteotomy
for less severe cases.
16—The Hip Joint
493
A
Angle of
Angle of inclination 155°
inclination 1350
Holes for
hooks
Bone wedge
AO/ASIF3.5-mm
toberemoved
Osteotomy
doublehookplate
B
+
Kirschner
wires
Tensionband
wire
E
FIGURE 16-13. A, Finding angle of inclination of the femoral neck by the symmetric
axis-based method.6i Tracings are made from the ventrodorsal pelvic radiograph, with the
hips extended, femurs parallel to the cassette, and the patellae centered (see Figure 16-9, A).
Continued
494
Part Ill—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FGURE 16-13, Continued Best-fit circles are superimposed on the femoral head, the
femoral neck-trochanter region, and the femoral condyles. Connecting the center points of
the circles provides the angle of inclination. B, C, and D, Intertrochanteric varus osteotomy
using AO/ASIF 3.5-mm double hook plates (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa). (See text for details.) B,
The hooks on the proximal end of the plate are placed in holes in the trochanter major.
C, Instability of the hip joint is created by the valgus angle of inclination of the femoral neck.
Removal of the wedge of bone will create a slightly varus 13s-degree angle and restore
stability. D, The bone wedge has been removed and the intertrochanteric osteotomy fixed
with the double hook plate. Note the improved congruity of the joint surfaces, and compare
 ud ad e sd yoo an a nog ls on s u ' 'a 'oi-at  
tension band wire fixation technique can be used.
Preoperative Planning. Extensive planning is necessary to establish the proper
angles for osteotomizing the femoral neck in order to end with an inclination angle
of 135 degrees.$9 This is about 10 degrees less than normal, thus a varus position,
because in this position the femoral head is more deeply placed within the acetabulum
and therefore is more stable (Figure 16-13, D). It is first necessary to establish the
angle of inclination of the femoral head and neck. A well-positioned radiograph is
needed (see Figure 16-9, A). It is particularly necessary that the patella be well
centered on the femoral condyle and that the femur be as parallel to the x-ray
cassette as possible; this may require general anesthesia because the hip is often
 painful in extension. Tracing paper can then be used to produce a drawing similar
to Figure 16-13, A.61 Best-fit circles are superimposed on the femoral head, the
femoral neck and trochanter, and the femoral condyles. The centers of these circles
are connected, and the angle formed by the femoral neck and femoral midlines is the
angle of inclination of the femoral head and neck.
s jo a a q  si  g a e a
increasing anteversion increases the projected angle of inclination seen in the radio-
 graph. Measurement of anteversion can be performed, but it is not essential to do
so. If anteversion is normal, the lesser trochanter will protrude only slightly beyond
ssa a  ao p a u p si ed a j xa p a
trochanter is prominent, it can be assumed that anteversion is increased and that the
measured angle is larger than the true angle. Experience has shown that reducing
s ssodnd sud r roeses si srap s Aq aue pans a
reduction of anteversion does not depend on measurements because the angle can
only be estimated intraoperatively
d e o n a se iasaas a e mp Aq sann 
just proximal to the lesser trochanter (Figure 16-13, C). This represents the first
osteotomy of the femur. The angle of the wedge of bone to be removed is determined
by subtracting 135 from the final determined angle of inclination. Using a protractor,
this angle is drawn so that the wide end of the wedge is medial and the proximal
line intersects the medial cortex just distal to the femoral neck. A new drawing can
 now be made by tracing the femoral head with the bone wedge removed and placing
it on the femoral shaft in its final position (Figure 16-13, D). The bone plate, or a
tracing of it, can be superimposed on the final drawing to determine the position of
the holes for the hooks. This is transferred back to the original drawing to indicate
the position of the holes in the proximal segment before the first osteotomy.
Surgical Tecbnique. Special AO/ASIF 3.5-mm hook plates (Figure 16-13, B),
 drill jigs, and cutting jigs are available from Synthes, and the technique of using
16—The Hip Joint
495
and certain fractures has also been reported.64 In principle, an intertrochanteric
osteotomy is performed, a wedge of bone is removed from the medial side of the
base of the femoral neck, and the hook plate is used to create rigid internal fixation
of the osteotomy (Figure 16-13, D). The femoral head is also rotated caudally
(retroverted) until the anteversion angle is about 5 to 10 degrees in relation to the
femoral shaft.
Although the double hook plate and its accompanying instrumentation represent
an elegant and precise method of accomplishing this osteotomy, the plate is too large
for use on most dogs weighing less than 20 kg. Multiple pin and tension band wire
fixation is a satisfactory method in these animals (Figure 16-13, E). Preoperative
planning is similar to that previously explained, and the AO/ASIF jigs can be used
to assist in the osteotomies, although with some practice they can be done "freehand"
with good accuracy.
Aftercare.  Postsurgical care is uncomplicated and consists primarily of restricted
  a  p     a       
 aaadoisd saam e se aea se padan aes aq ueo d asoddo a
indicated.
Prognosis. Walker and Prieurs9 reported on 183 dogs with hip dysplasia that
received intertrochanteric femoral osteotomies. At follow-up 1 to 7 years postoper-
atively, 89.6% of these dogs had good to excellent function. Most animals had only
one hip repaired. Those animals operated on before DJD was present did better than
 those in which the disease was established at surgery. Other clinical studies report
contradictory information. In one study, 82% of dogs were functionally good or
passaid pu a ynoe dn-mo s s a ue e pnou
examination results between preoperative examination and up to 4 years after
  s       
osteotomy is now less common than TPO because of its equivocal success.
Total Hip Replacement
Total hip replacement (THR) consists of implanting a high-density polyethylene
acetabular cup and stainless steel or titanium femoral head and femoral stem
component. The implantation is preceded by removing the femoral head and neck
and preparing the acetabulum by reaming and the femoral medullary canal to accept
the implants. These prostheses are usually permanently bonded to bone by poly.
methyl methacrylate bone cement (Figure 16-14), although cementless prostheses
available, allowing replacement in most dogs weighing more than 18 kg (40 pounds).
The procedure should not be done before the physes are closed. Thus, most large
breeds cannot undergo surgery before 12 to 14 months of age, but there are no
specific upper age limits. The Richards Canine I prosthesis ( Richards Manufacturing
Co., Memphis, Tenn) has been replaced in our hands by the Modular Canine Total
Hip Replacement System (BioMedtrix, Allendale, NJ). The latter system is more
versatile because of the increased choice of sizes of the acetabular, femoral head, and
femoral stem components. Specialized instruments necessary for implantation are
available for both systems.
Indications. In addition to hip dysplasia, THR can be used in dogs larger than
18 kg to replace hip joints damaged by DJD from causes other than hip dysplasia;
496
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Acetabular region of pelvis
Bone cement
Acetabular cup
FIGURE　
16-14. The Richards
Canine Il Total Hip Replacement
(Richards Manufacturing Co., Memphis,
Femoral
Tenn).  Polymethyl  methacrylate  bone
component
cement anchors the high-density poly-
ethylene acetabular cup to the pelvis
and the cobalt-chrome alloy femoral
component to the femur.
nonunion or malunion of femoral head, neck, or acetabular fractures; traumatic hip
luxation; or avascular necrosis of the femoral head. Chronically luxated hips should
of the prostheses because of chronic contracture of the gluteal and external rotator
muscles and scar tissue adhesion of the displacement.
Contraindications. Not every dog with hip dysplasia is a candidate for THR
because not all dysplastic dogs show clinical signs. Such animals should be periodi-
cally reevaluated for deterioration of their condition. Extreme wearing of the dorsal
acetabular rim is seen occasionally in older dogs and makes good seating of the
acetabular component difficult; the result is eventual loosening of the cup. It is often
suggested that THR might be done in dogs with unsatisfactory function after
 femoral head and neck excision (discussed later). The bone remodeling that follows
excision arthroplasty makes THR extremely difficult to do in this situation and is
not recommended. Neurological causes of abnormal gait must be carefully eliminated
as a cause of the dog's problems. Degenerative myelopathy is the most common
problem in these patients, but ruptured intervertebral disk, spinal or nerve root
tumor, and cauda equina disease are other possibilities. When hindlimb lameness
suddenly worsens in a known dysplastic dog, there is a strong tendency to blame it
on the dysplasia, but rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament is a much more
common cause. Any infectious process, such as dermatitis, otitis, anal sac disease,
dental disease, cystitis, or prostatitis, must be successfully treated before THR to
 prevent contamination of the surgical site.
Surgical Technique.
The THR technique most widely used in North America
was perfected by Olmstead and Hohn.66.67 The original techniques have been
 slightly modified to utilize the BioMedtrix modular prosthesis.68 The operation is
technically demanding and unforgiving of errors in technique. Adequate instrumen-
tation and assistance must be available to the surgeon to allow the procedure to be
completed within 2 hours, or the infection rate will be unacceptable. Special training
should be obtained before attempting this operation, such as mentoring from a
16The Hip Joint
497
surgeon familiar with the technique or enrolling in specific short courses." The
following description is intended only to familiarize the reader with the surgical
technique in a general manner (Figure 16-15).
The most aseptic precautions, with careful preparation of the patient and surgeons,
draping, and speed of surgery are necessary to minimize complications of infection.
 Intraoperative and postoperative cephalosporin-type antibiotics are used routinely
as an adjunct to good aseptic technique. A craniolateral approach is made, and the
femoral head is ostectomized, leaving most of the ventral portion of the neck intact
(Figure 16-15, A). Templates or the femoral prosthesis are positioned over the bone
*Total hip replacement workshop, Division of Continuing Education, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Ohio State University, Columbus.
B
FIGURE 16-15. Basic steps in total hip replacement using a modular cemented prosthesis.
These steps are for orientation only and do not represent a detailed description of the surgery.
A, Resection of the femoral head using a template that is aligned with the axis of the shaft
and of the head and neck. B, An acetabular reamer is used to enlarge and deepen the acetabulum
to receive the acetabular cup. C and D, Three or four holes are drilled around the craniodorsal
aceta bular bed to allow better penetration of bone cement. Attention to placement of the drill
between the deep acetabular cortex and the acetabular rim is needed to prevent penetration
of cortical bone. These holes are connected by curetting the exposed cancellous bone.
Continued
498
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
E
G
FIGURE 16-15. Contimued E, The acetabular cup is cemented with the aid of a positioner
that allows proper orientation of the cup. (a) Lateral view showing the horizontal arm of the
 positioner aligned with the iliac crest and the tuber ischium. (b) The positioner is retroverted
approximately 10 degrees, as seen in this ventral view. (c) From the caudal view, the vertical
bar of the positioner is parallel to a line through the tuber ischi. F, Enlargement of the
femoral canal starts with a large drill that must be centered in the canal and aligned with the
axis of the bone to prevent penetration of the cortex. A Hohmann retractor is used to elevate
the proximal femur above the pelvic muscles. G, The femoral canal is further enlarged by first
 passing a fluted reamer to remove cancellous bone from the neck and shaft.
to ensure the correct angle. The cut must also be made at near O degrees anteversion
for maximum stability of the femoral component relative to the acetabulum.
 The acetabulum is reamed with a hemispherical reamer to accept the polyethylene
cup (Figure 16-15, B). The correct-diameter cup can be estimated from preoperative
radiographs and verified at surgery. Choosing too large a diameter will result in too
16—The Hip Joint
499
H
吊
K
FIGURE 16-15. Continued H, A fle is used to further remove bone from the endosteal surface.
I, A rasp, sized to the femoral prosthesis, is used to obtain a good fit of the femoral component
(J). Space is needed around the prosthesis for a mantle of bone cement. K, A trial femoral
 prosthesis and femoral head is positioned and the hip is reduced to allow testing for position-
ing of the components, range of motion, and lateral or ventral translational laxity. Once
(All illustrations courtesy BioMedtrix, Allendale, NJ.)
much loss of the bone of the dorsal rim and can lead to late loosening of the cup.
The reaming is carried medially into the acetabulum through the bone that has filled
the acetabulum, often to a depth of 5 to 10 mm. To attain maximum depth of the
cup, the reaming continues to the medial cortex of the acetabulum. An angled
curette is used to remove the exposed cancellous bone in the acetabular area.
Removing cancellous bone into the iliac shaft, along the dorsal rim, and caudally
into the ischial shaft provides space for more bone cement and creates an irregular
500
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
surface for the attachment of cement to the bone. Drilling into the ilial and ischiatic
shafts and dorsal acetabular rim is another method of achieving this (Figure 16-15, D);
long drill bits and drill sleeves to protect soft tissues are necessary. Once the acetab-
ulum is prepared, a trial insertion of the prosthesis is done to ensure proper fit.
The acetabular component is then cemented in place (Surgical Simplex P bone
cement, Howmedica International, Ltd., London; Howmedica, Inc., Rutherford, NJ),
using a positioner to ensure proper orientation (Figure 16-15, E). The positioner
must be oriented so that the handle is aligned with a line from the ischiatic tuberosity
to the dorsal iliac spine. Also, the shaft of the positioner must be vertical to the
sagittal plane of the pelvis and inclined caudally about 10 degrees.
Preparation of the femoral canal is completed with the ideal goal of orienting the
cemented femoral stem parallel to the long axis of the femur, surrounded distally by
 a symmetric cement mantle, with no contact distally between the stem and the
endosteal surface of cortical bone. Implantation technique and femoral anatomy
variations may affect femoral stem placement and therefore implant mechanics
and longevity.69,70 The technique as described next is considered to be *standard"
technique.
The femoral canal is enlarged to the appropriate size with a powered drill and
tapered reamer (Figure 16-15, F and G). Reaming is often facilitated by removing
the thin bone of the caudal femoral neck that remains after excision of the head,
thus opening the trochanteric fossa and allowing better centering of the reamer in
the femoral shaft. This is followed by hand filing and rasping with a broach to fit
the femoral component completely within the femoral medullary canal and firmly
 in contact with the femoral neck ostectomy (Figure 16-15, H, I, and J). A trial pros-
thesis with a femoral head attached is inserted, and the hip is reduced and checked
for stability (Figure 16-15, K). If the chosen femoral head is of the correct neck
length, the hip will be moderately difficult to reduce and there will be virtually no
lateral translational movement of the head with vigorous pulls laterally on the
femur. The femoral head prosthesis is replaced as necessary to achieve this goal.
Once satisfied with the combination of trial femoral head and stem, the surgeon
joins the permanent implants together; tapping the head with a mallet produces an
interference fit that maintains the head on the stem. The head can be attached either
before or after the femoral component is cemented. Bone cement is introduced into
the femoral canal, preferably by injection of liquid-phase cement, and the prosthesis
is placed into the canal, with care to prevent anteversion. Additional mixing and
implantation techniques are described elsewhere that improve the quality of the
cement mantle. The goal of any advanced cementing technique is to develop a
will be less susceptible to cracking and subsequent loosening. After hardening of the
cement, the hip is reduced, the joint capsule is closed with several interrupted
sutures, and the remaining tissues are closed by layers.
Aftercare.  No external support is used on the limb after THR. Oral cephalexin
is started as soon as possible and continued for 3 days. Close confinement and limited
leash exercise are stressed for the first month postoperatively. Most dogs are walking
comfortably by 2 weeks and trotting easily at 4 weeks. At this time, a physical
evaluation for range of motion, evidence of pain, and degree of function is done,
and if all is well, the exercise is slowly increased over the second month. If function-
ally sound, the animal is released to return to normal activity, although it may take
as much as 6 months for muscle atrophy to resolve and for maximal function to
return. At this point, it is not necessary to impose any limitations on the dog's activity.
Decisions about the advisability of a second procedure on the opposite hip should
16—The Hip Joint
501
be delayed until at least 6 months, since it is difficult to evaluate the unoperated leg
until the operated leg achieves normal function. Should the nonoperated leg remain or
become lame, the options are either another hip replacement or excision arthroplasty.
Prognosis.  Most dogs return to full function by 8 weeks after THR. Satisfactory
function occurred in 95% of 362 cases followed 3 months or more.67 This was
defined as full weight bearing, normal range of motion, normal gait, and normal
level of activity with no signs of pain in the hip. Another study reported good to
excellent function in 96% of patients.71 The nature of reported complications varies
 in the published reports. One report indicates a 7.2% prevalence of aseptic loosening
of the femoral component, but this report was made before specific changes were
aseptic loosening of the acetabular component was the most significant complication
and developed in 3% of cases.71 A third study reports that dorsal luxation of the
femoral component was the most common complication and developed in 4.7% of
cases.73 Some complications, such as component luxation, are likely secondary to
nuances of surgical technique that may be under the surgeon's control. Other
 Femoral medullary infarction has been reported to develop in 14% of canine total
hip arthroplasties, with no described cause and little or rare clinical significance.74
Osteosarcoma has been reported at the THR site in several dogs, with devastating
effect.7s.76
When complications such as aseptic loosening of the cement have developed,
salvage of the limb is usually achieved by removing the prosthesis and bone cement
and treating it as an excision arthroplasty, although revision by implanting a new
q D sasad ae r an ou aq on sas a arssod i sisao
down or loosen with time as in human patients, except as noted earlier. Thus, at this
 point, the procedure does not appear to be time limited, which indicates that the
THR technique has established itself as a reliable clinical procedure for the treatment
of a variety of abnormal conditions of the hip.
Femoral Head and Neck Excision
Femoral head and neck excision to allow formation of a fibrous false joint is also
termed excision arthroplasty or femoral head and neck ostectomy (FHO). Pain is
relieved by elimination of bony contact between the femur and the pelvis as scar
tissue interposes. Because of slight limb shortening and some loss of range of motion,
 some gait abnormality persists. The procedure may be performed bilaterally, preferably
with procedures separated by an interval of 8 to 10 weeks.
Patient Selection.  Excision arthroplasty is a nonreversible procedure and must
be considered a salvage operation. Nevertheless, it is a valuable method for improv-
ing the quality of life for many pets by elimination of pain. Indications will vary
with the skill of the surgeon, internal fixation devices available, and financial
considerations. There is some tendency to overuse the procedure for conditions that
are reparable.
 Degenerative joint disease resulting from dysplasia is the most common indication
for excision arthroplasty. The procedure is often the first choice of treatment for a
mature animal that is basically a house or yard pet only; it is also the treatment of
choice for Legg-Calve-Perthes disease. More pragmatically, it may be used when
financial constraints preclude expensive orthopedic reconstruction. Other common
indications include chronic osteoarthrosis from any cause, comminuted fractures of
the acetabulum or femoral neck, fractures of the femoral head, and chronic luxation
502
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
of the hip with erosion of the femoral head. In summary, the procedure is suitable
for any condition in which the integrity of the hip joint has been compromised and
primary repair is not feasible or in which osteoarthrosis is well established.
 Surgical Tecbnique.  A craniolateral approach to the hip is preferred (Figure 16-16,
A and B) because it does not involve transection of the gluteal muscles, as do the
p  ii-ii ani yoodde peua e roaey suons aos s'syode pesi
D) because it is more cosmetic. In the craniolateral approach, it is important to
incise and reflect the joint capsule and origin of the vastus lateralis muscle to expose
the cranial aspect of the femoral neck adequately. The gluteal muscles are retracted
dorsally by inserting a Hohmann retractor inside the joint capsule. Bone-holding
forceps attached to the region of the trochanter may be used to subluxate the femur.
This facilitates cutting of the round ligament with curved scissors and elevation of
the rest of the joint capsule from the femoral head.
The neck may be cut with an osteotome or power saw with the limb externally
s Pa o a ou ds n  e  s  P
(depending on animal size) prying between the acetabulum and the femoral head.
In a large dog, this osteotome should be at least 1 inch wide (2.5 cm). If a wide
 Osteotome is not available, the predetermined osteotomy line is prescored in steps.
Deep gluteal m.
Incision in
Femoral head
joint capsule
Osteotomy of
Tensor
Greater
fasciae latae m.
trochanter
femoral neck
Vastus
lateralis
m.
B
Vessels and nerve
retracted
Femoral head
Cranial
lliopsoas m.
Incision in 
Osteotomyline
retracted
joint capsule
Pectineus m.
C
FGURE 16-16.
 Approaches for femoral head and neck excision. A, Incision of the joint
capsule in the craniolateral approach? in the left hip. The incision starts on the acetabulum
and extends over the center of the femoral head and neck into the origin of the vastus later-
alis muscle. B, The joint capsule has been retracted and the femoral head luxated by cutting
the round ligament. The position of the femoral neck osteotomy can now be visualized.
C, Incision of the joint capsule in the ventral approach? in the right hip. D, The joint capsule
has been retracted and the femoral head luxated after cutting the round ligament. The position
of the femoral neck osteotomy can now be visualized.
16—The Hip Joint
503
 The cut should extend from the base of the trochanter major across the neck in a
line that will intersect the medial cortex of the femur without leaving a sharp angle
(Figure 16-17, A). The cut may include part of the trochanter minor in some cases,
but care should be taken to minimize or eliminate this.
Once this line of cut has been established, the handle of the osteotome or saw is
moved toward the animal's trunk until it is parallel to the sagittal plane of the thigh
(Figure 16-17, B). This plane is best visualized by observing the position of the
patella and tibial tubercle. The tendency is to align the osteotome or saw perpendi-
cular to the femoral neck, as shown in Figure 16-17, C. Such a cut will result in a
spur of the caudal neck being left on the femur, which then rubs on the acetabular
rim and prevents fibrous tissue interposition between the bones. With the osteotome,
the cut is made from a slightly distal-to-proximal direction to avoid splitting the
medial cortex of the femur. Once the femoral head and neck are free, they can be
grasped with bone-holding forceps or a towel clamp to allow cutting the remaining
soft tissue attachments with curved scissors.
 The femoral neck is palpated for irregularities, splinters, or a shelf of neck on the
caudal surface. The stifle is grasped and pushed proximally and distally to mimic
weight bearing in order to discover crepitus. Further neck debridement is accom-
plished with a rongeur, osteotome, or power saw. Leaving too long a neck that rubs
 aae oi a ro uosan uo iso a si  rnqian pesp au uo
function. Some recommend using a rasp, but it is awkward to use. Exposure of this
area of the femoral neck is facilitated by externally rotating the limb until the
lateral aspect of the hock can be placed against the thoracic or abdominal wall. In
some animals, osteophyte production on the dorsal acetabular rim results in contact
irritation and should also be debrided.
anss os susoai Aq pano are snsan raq anun shdan aon
between the femoral neck and the acetabulum. Two methods have been proposed
for soft tissue interposition. Berzon and colleagues77 recommend detaching the
cranial third of the deep gluteal muscle from the trochanter major and suturing its
tendon to the insertion of the iliopsoas muscle on the trochanter minor (Figure 16-18).
Lippincott78 detached a pedicle of biceps femoris muscle, wrapping it around the
B
C
FIGURE 16-17.1
 Femoral head and neck excision. A, The osteotomy lines as seen from the
cranial aspect (frontal or transverse plane) of the femur. B, Once the proper angle of cut in
the transverse plane is established, the osteotome is moved toward the animal's trunk until it
is parallel to the sagittal plane of the femur. C, If the osteotome is directed perpendicular to
the femoral neck, a spur of the caudal neck (arrow) will be left on the femur.
504
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Suture in tendon
of deep gluteal m.
Incision in 
Middle gluteal m.
deep gluteal m.
retracted
lliopsoas
tendon
Acetabulum
Cut surface
of femoral
neck
 Incision in joint 
capsule and origin
of vastus lateralis m.
A
B
Portion of deep
gluteal m. sutured
 to lesser trochanter
FIGURE 16-18. Provision for a soft tissue pad between the femoral neck and the pelvis.
A, Following a craniolateral approach, a pedicle of the deep gluteal muscle can be detached
from the trochanter major, cutting close to the bone to leave as much tendon as possible on
 the muscle. B, With strong external rotation of the femur, the pedicle is sutured through its 
tendinous end to the tendon of the iliopsoas muscle near its insertion on the lesser trochanter.
C, With the femur returned to a neutral position, the deep gluteal pedicle covers the cut
surface of the femoral neck.
femoral neck and suturing it to the gluteal and vastus lateralis muscles (Figure 16-19).
Experimental observations have not shown any objective difference when this
method is compared with the conventional noninterpositional method,79 but the
study was done on normal dogs, so its application to clinical situations is open to
question. The authors have observed a more rapid return to active use of the limb
but generally no difference in long-term results when the deep gluteal muscle
pedicle is used. The exception is when excision arthroplasty is done in the presence
of irreparable acetabular fractures. In this case, deep gluteal interposition has been
helpful. The joint capsule may also be closed over the acetabulum if possible, but
this is contraindicated if it attaches to the femur because it would hinder range of
motion.
Aftercare.
 Early, active use of the limb is necessary after excision arthroplasty.
Passive range of motion exercises, prescribed 20 to 30 times four times per day, are
 started immediately and continued until the dog or cat can bear weight at a run, in
16The Hip Joint
505
Middle gluteal m.
Incision in
biceps femoris m.
Acetabulum
Incision in joint
capsule and'origin
ofvastuslateralism.
A
 Middle gluteal m.
Superficial gluteal m.
Deep gluteal m.
Pedicle of
biceps femoris m.
Sutures positioned
to place pedicle
overfemoral neck
C
FIGURE 16-19.
A, Another method of soft tissue interposition involves freeing a pedicle of
biceps muscle (dashed line). B, A suture is attached to the muscle pedicle and is pulled under
the gluteal muscles from a caudal-to-cranial direction. C, The muscle pedicle is sutured to the
 elevated vastus lateralis in a position that holds it across the femoral neck ostectomy.
506
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
animal to move about a confined area are encouraged until suture removal. After
 2 weeks postoperatively, active exercise such as running and swimming is encouraged.
Animals usually will be toe touching in 10 to 14 days, partially weight bearing in
3 weeks, and actively using the leg by 4 weeks. When indicated, bilateral operations
should be done 8 to 10 weeks apart. In some cases, it will be necessary to delay the
second surgery even further until active use of the first limb has been achieved
In cases of severe pain from bilateral hip problems, bilateral excisions can be done
simultaneously. Aftercare is difficult because it takes several days for such animals
to become ambulatory. This care is much easier in smaller breeds (e.g., <25 kg body
weight).
Prognosis.  Return to active and pain-free use of the limb depends on surgical
skill, length of time the hip pathology has been present, and severity of the pathology.
Animals undergoing surgery for acute trauma, such as head and neck fractures, may
be functional within 30 days. Those having chronic dysplasia with long-standing
pain and muscle atrophy may require 6 months or more. These animals benefit
particularly from swimming as an exercise. Patients with extremely displaced
acetabular fractures and some with chronic dysplasia may never again regain good
function.
 Reported results vary considerably. Gendreau and Cawley's analysis of 32 cases
 indicated only 37% excellent results and 26% good results, with only three of seven
dogs weighing over 25 kg experiencing excellent results.80 Berzon and colleagues,77
however, reported 90% to 100% use of the limb in 83% of all cases, with no signif-
icant difference in results between large and small breeds.77 It is pointless to assess
results in this surgery by evaluating the postoperative gait. Smaller breeds undoubt-
edly experience less change in gait, but femoral head and neck excision is usually
successful in large breeds for relieving pain and restoring the animal's quality of life.
Pectineal Myectomy
A variety of procedures on the pectineus muscle have been proposed to treat hip
 dysplasia and to prevent it. These surgeries include myectomy, myotomy, tenectomy.
and tenotomy. All are designed to relieve tension produced by the muscle and trans-
mitted to the hip joint. It has been speculated that this dorsal force on the femoral
head pushes it against the dorsal aceta bular rim and thus contributes to development
 of hip dysplasia.81 Subsequent studies have indicated no effect in preventing dyspla-
sia as a result of pectineal tenotomy82 or myotomy.&83 Nevertheless, symptomatic
 improvement does result in many mature dogs for a variable time after pectineal
resection.
 Pectineal resection does not affect the radiographic changes associated with hip
P se Aas rae is e isea ie ssad s aa e reids
be expected without surgery. It is possible that increased abduction of the femur
results, with a more varus position of the femoral head relative to the pelvis, which
places the head more deeply in the acetabulum (see previous discussion of
the load-bearing areas of the femoral head and neck, thus decreasing the load per
unit area of articular cartilage. Stress on the joint capsule may also be lessened.
 Because the joint is still unstable, however, degenerative changes continue, and pain
usually returns after a variable period, ranging from a few months to years.
 There is no way of predicting how long the effects of surgery will be beneficial;
therefore, pectineal surgery has only limited value in treating hip dysplasia. It is useful
under conditions in which short-term effects are acceptable, such as completing a
field trial campaign.
16—The Hip Joint
507
Surgical Tecbnique.  The pectineal muscles are exposed by means of the ventral
approach to the hip joint. After the pectineus tendon is undermined and its origin
incision. The distal tendon is incised and the entire muscle removed. Subcutaneous
tissues and skin are closed only after attaining perfect hemostasis in the field.
Aftercare. Moderate exercise should be started 2 to 3 days after surgery to
minimize the possibility of fibrous bands forming in the excision site, which could
restrict the femur. Such bands are minimized by total myectomy; however, they are
not totally eliminated.
LEGG-CALVE-PERTHES DISEASE
Known by several other names, such as Legg-Perthes or Calve-Perthes disease,
osteochondritis juvenilis, avascular necrosis, and coxa plana, Legg-Calve-Perthes
disease is noninflammatory aseptic necrosis of the femoral head and neck in small-
breed dogs (Figure 16-20). The cause of such necrosis is not known with certainty,
but ischemia resulting from vascular compression*4 and precocious sex hormone
activity&s have been proposed. A genetic cause, homozygosity for an autosomal
recessive gene, has been reported.8 In our experience the prevalence of this condition
is much less than that encountered 20 to 30 years ago.
 In all cases the bone of the femoral head and neck undergoes necrosis and defor-
mation, during which the animal manifests pain. The articular cartilage cracks as a
result of the collapse of subchondral bone. Bone eventually returns to the necrotic
 area, but the femoral head and neck are deformed, with resulting joint incongruity
and instability. This condition leads to severe degenerative changes within the entire
hip joint and to development of marked osteoarthrosis.
 Male and female animals are equally affected. Bilateral involvement has been
reported as 16.5%87 and 12%.*8 The toy breeds and terriers are most susceptible.
A
B
FIGURE
16-20. Legg-Calvé-
Perthes disease. A, Bony destruc-
tion early in the disease causes both
radiographic lucency and actual
loss of substance in the femoral
head (gray circular spots) and neck.
The epiphysis seems unaffected
in this early stage. B, At the end
point of the process, the femoral
head has collapsed and deformed.
Occasionally, loss of bone will result
in pathological avulsion fracture.
508
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
The peak incidence of onset is 5 to 8 months of age, with a range of 3 to 13
months.86
Clinical Signs
Often the first abnormality noted is irritability. The animal may chew at the flank
 and hip area. Pain can be elicited in the hip, especially on abduction. Later, crepitus
may be present, with restricted range of motion and shortening of the limb. Atrophy
of the gluteal and quadriceps muscles becomes apparent. Onset of lameness is usually
s ajo a aa oi ssard oi p si sam g oi  pue e
although pain can be acute when there is fracture of the femoral head at lytic areas.
 Radiographic signs include increased joint space and foci of decreased bone
 ea n a a   o- a yu e a a u as
where it contacts the dorsal acetabular rim, then distorts further to a variable
degree. Osteophytes, as well as subluxation and fracture of the femoral head and
neck, may be seen occasionally.
Treatment
 Once the femoral head becomes distorted in animals with Legg-Calve-Perthes disease,
femoral head and neck excision is warranted (see Figures 16-16 and 16-17).
Excision of the femoral head and neck produces more favorable results than conser-
vative treatment with rest and analgesics.87.ss Results are better, and recovery time
 is much shorter. With the proper surgical technique, virtually 100% of these animals
will become ambulatory and free of pain. A slight limp may remain because the leg
is shortened by removal of the femoral head and neck, and the thigh and hip muscles
remain somewhat atrophied. In rare instances where lucencies are seen without
collapse of the femoral head, an Ehmer sling may be tried for 3 to 4 weeks. This
 allows the necrotic bone to remodel without weight bearing causing collapse of
the head.
References
1. Basher AWP, Walter MC, Newton CD: Coxofemoral luxation in the dog and cat, Vet Surg 15:356,
1986.
2.1
Bone DL, Walker M, Cantwell HD: Traumatic coxofemoral luxation in dogs: results of repair,
Vet Surg 13:263, 1984.
3.1
Harari J, Smith CW, Rauch LS: Caudoventral hip luxation in two dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
185:312, 1984.
4.
Thacher C, Schrader SC: Caudal ventral hip luxation in the dog: a review of 14 cases, J Arm Anim
Hosp Assoc 21:167, 1985.
5.1
Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
6.
Allen SW, Chambers JN: Extracapsular suture stabilization of canine coxofemoral luxation,
Cont Educ 8:457, 1986.
and chronic coxofemoral luxations, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 1:26, 1988.
8.Piermattei DL: A technique for surgical management of coxofemoral luxations, Smatl Anim Clin
3:373, 1963.
9.1
with a triple pelvic osteotomy: results in four dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 10:136-140, 1997.
10.Hunt CA, Henry WB: Transarticular pinning forrepair of hip dislocation in the dog: a retrospective
study of 40 cases, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 187:828, 1985.
11.1
 DeCamp CE: Dislocations. In Olmstead ML, editor: Small animat orthopedics, St Louis, 1995,
Mosby, p 353.
12.
Herron MR: Atraumatic ventral coxofernoral luxation in dogs, Vet Surg 15:123, 1986 (abstract).
13.
Wadsworth PL, Lesser AS: Use of muscle transfer to prevent reluxation of the hip: two case reports.
In Proceedings of 14th Annuat Meeting of Veterinary Orthopedic Society, 1986.
16The Hip Joint
509
14. Corley EA: Hip dysplasia: a report from the Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, Semin Vet Med
Surg 2:141, 1987.
15. Riser WH, Newton CD: Canine hip dysplasia as a disease. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Pathophysiotogy
in smatt animat surgery, Philadelphia, 1981, Lea & Febiger, pp 618-623.
16. Lust G, Rendano VT, Summers BA: Canine hip dysplasia: concepts and diagnosis, J Ar Vet Med
Assoc 187:638, 1985.
17.
 McLaughlin R, Tomlinson J Symposiu on CHD. Part 1. Diagnosis and medical management,
Vet Med,January 1996,p25.
18.
Lanting F: Canine hip dysplasia and other orthopedic diseases, Loveland, Colo, 1981, Alpine
Publications.
19.
The International Symposium on Hip Dysplasia and Osteoarthritis in Dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
210:1443-1498, 1997.
20.
Kealy RD, Lawler DF, Ballam JM, et al: Five-year longitudinal study on limited food consumption and
development of osteoarthritis in coxofemoral joints of dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 210:222-225, 1997.
21.
KealyRD,Olsson SE,MontiKL,et al:Effects of limited food consumption n the incidence of hi
 22. Swenson L, Audell L, Hedhamrmar A: Prevalence and inheritance of and selection for hip dysplasia
in seven breeds of dogs in Sweden and benefit:cost analysis of a screening and control prograrm,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 210:207-214, 1997.
type of dogs in the United States, J Amm Vet Med Assoc 211:1542-1544, 1997.
 24. Reed AL, Keller GG, Vogt DW, et al: Effect of dam and sire qualitative hip conformation scores on 
progeny hip conformation, J Ar Vet Med Assoc 217:675-680, 2000.
25.
CorleyEA,KellerGG,LattimerJC,et al:Reliabilityf earlyradiographicevaluations forcanin hi
dysplasia obtained frorm the standard ventrodorsal radiographic projection, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
211:1142-1146, 1997.
26.
Symposium and Warkshop, Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, St Louis, 1972, pp 105-109.
27.
Wright PJ, Mason TA: The usefulness of palpation of joint laxity in puppies as a predictor of hip
dysplasia in a guide dog breeding programme, J Smatt Anim Pract 18:s13, 1977.
28. Tomlinson JL, Johnson JC: Quantification of measurement of femoral head coverage and Norberg
angle within and among four breeds of dogs, Am J Vet Res 61:1492-1500, 2000.
29.
Srmith GK, Biery DN, Gregor TP: New concepts of coxofemoral joint stability and the development
of a clinical stress-radiographic method for quantitating hip joint laxity in the dog, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 196:59-70, 1990.
and its contemporaneous and prospective correlation with laxity, subjective score, and evidence of
degenerative joint disease from conventional hip-extended radiography in dogs, Am J Vet Res
54:1021-1042, 1993.
31. Smith GK, Popovitch CA, Gregor TP, et al: Evaluation of risk factors for degenerative joint disease
associated with hip dysplasia in dogs, J Amm Vet Med Assoc 206:642-650, 1995.
32.
Smith GK, Hill CM, Gregor TP, et al: Reliability of the distraction index in two-month-old German
shepherd dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 212:1560-1563, 1998.
33.Farese JP,Todhunter RJ, Lust G,et al: Dorsolateral subluxation of hip joints in dogs measured ina
weight-bearing position with radiography and computed tomography, Vet Surg 27:393-405, 1998.
 34. Barr ARS, Denny HR, Gibbs C: Clinical hip dysplasia in growing dogs: the long-terrm results of
conservative managerment, J Smalt Ani Pract 28:243, 1987.
35. MacPhail CM, Lappin MR, Meyer DJ, et al: Hepatocellular toxicosis associated with the adminis-
tration of carprofen in 21 dogs,J A Vet Med Assoc 212:1895-1901, 1998.
36.
Hannan N, Ghosh P, Bellenger C, Taylor T: Systemic adninistration of glycosarminoglycan polysulfate
{Arteparon) provides partial protection of articular cartilage from damage produced by rmeniscectomy
in the canine, J Orthop Res 5:47, 1987.
37. DeHaan JJ, Goring RL, Beale BS: Evaluation of polysulfated glycosaminoglycan for the treatment
of hip dysplasia in dogs, Vet Surg 23:177-181, 1994.
38.
McLaughlin RM: Chondroprotective agents: fact or fiction? In Procedings of Tenth Annuat ACVS
Symposium, 2000, pp 40-43.
39.
Canapp SO Jr,McLaughlin RM Jr, Hoskinson JJ, et al: Scintigraphic evaluation of glucosamine and
40.
SlocumB,DevineT:Pelvicsteotmytechniqueoraxial rotationf theacetabulr segment inog
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:331-338, 1986.
41.
Slocurn B, Devine T: Pelvic osteotorny in the dog as treatrment for hip dysplasia, Serin Vet Med Suig
2:107-116, 1987.
42.
Schrader SC: Triple osteotomy of the pelvis and trochanteric osteotomy as a treatment for hip
dysplasia in the immature dog: the surgical technique and results of 77 consecutive operations,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 189:659-665, 1986.
43.
Dejardin LM, Perry RL, Amoczky SP, Torzilli PA: The effect of triple pelvic osteotomy on hip force
in dysplastic dogs, Vet Surg 25:114-120, 1996.
44.
McLaughlin RM Jr, Miller CW, Taves CL, et al: Force plate analysis of triple pelvic osteotomy for
the treatrment of canine hip dysplasia, Vet Surg 20:291-297, 1991.
510
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
45. Slocum B, Devine T: Pelvic osteotomy for axial rotation of the acetabular segment in dogs with hip
dysplasia, Vet Clin North Am Smatt Anim Pract 22:645-682, 1992.
46.
 Slocum B, Devine T: Dorsal acetabular rim radiographic view for evaluation of the canine hip, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 26:289-296, 1990.
47.1
Popovich CA, Smith GK, Gregor TP, Shofer FS: Comparison of susceptibility for hip dysplasia
between Rottweilers and German shepherd dogs, J Amm Vet Med Assoc 206:648-650, 1995.
48.1
Dejardin LM, Perry RL, Arnoczky SP: The effect of triple pelvic osteotomy on the articular contact
area of the hip joint in dysplastic dogs: an in vitro experirmental study, Vet Surg 27:194-202, 1998.
49.
Graehler RA, Weigle JP, Pardo AD: The effect of plate type, angle of ilial osteotmy, and degree of
axial rotation on the structural anatomy of the pelvis, Vet Surg 23:13-20, 1994.
50.1
Koch DA,Hazewinkel HA,et al: Radiographic evaluation and comparison of plate fixation aftr
triple pelvic osteotomy in 32 dogs with hip dysplasia, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 6:9-15, 1993.
51.
 Sukhiani HR, Holmberg DL, Hurtig MB: Pelvic canal narrowing caused by triple pelvic osteotormy
in the dog, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 7:110-113, 1994.
 52. Rasmussen LM, Kramek BA, Lipowitz AJ: Preoperative variables affecting long-term outcome of
triple pelvic osteotomy for treatment of naturally developing hip dysplasia in dogs, J Arm Vet Med
Assoc 213:80-85, 1998.
53.
Slocum B, Devine T: Femoral neck lengthening for hip dysplasia in the dog, Vet Surg 18:81, 1989
{abstract).
54.
Slocum B:Femoral neck lengthening,Eugene,Ore,1993,Slocum Enterprises(bulletin).
55.1
Mathews KG, Stover SM, Kass PH: Effect of pubic symphysiodesis on acetabular rotation and pelvic
development in guinea pigs, Amm J Vet Res 57:1427-1433, 1996.
56.
Swainson SW, Conzermius MG, Riedesel EA, et al: Effect of pubic symphysiodesis on pelvic
development in the skeletally immature greyhound, Vet Surg 29:178-190, 2000.
57.1
Dueland RT, Adams WM, Fialkowski JP, et al: Effects of pubic symphysiodesis in dysplastic
puppies, Vet Surg 30:201-217, 2001.
58.
Hauptman J, Prieur WD,Butler HC, Guffy MM: The angle of inclination of the canine femoral head
and neck, Vet Surg 8:74, 1979.
59.
Walker TL, Prieur WD: Intertrochanteric femoral osteotomy, Sermin Vet Med Surg 2:117-130, 1987.
60.
 Braden TD, Prieur WD, Kaneene JB: Clinical evaluation of intertrochanteric osteotomy for
treatment of dogs with early-stage hip dysplasia: 37 cases {1980-1987), J Arm Vet Med Assoc
196:337-341, 1990.
61.
Rumph PF, Hathcock JT: A symmetric axis-based method for rmeasuring the projected femoral angle
of inclination in dogs, Vet Surg 19:328-333, 1990.
62.1
Prieur WD: Double hook plate for intertrochanteric osteotomy in the dog, Synthes Vet Bull 1:1-4, 1984.
63.1
Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD: Manuat of internat fixation in smatt animats, New York, 1984,
Springer-Verlag.
64.1
 Leger L, Sumner-Smith G, Gofton N, et al: AO hook plate fixation for rmetaphyseal fractures and
corrective wedge osteotomies, J Smalt Anim Pract 23:209-216, 1982.
65.1
 Evers P, Kramek BA, Wallace LJ, et al: Clinical and radiographic evaluation of intertrochanteric
osteotomy in dogs: retrospective study of 18 dogs, Vet Surg 26:217-222, 1997.
66.
 Olmstead ML, Hohn RB, Turner TT: Technique for total hip replacement, Vet Surg 10:44, 1981.
67.
Olmstead M: Total hip replacerment, Vet Clin North Arm 17:943, 1987.
68.
Olmstead M: The canine cemented modular hip prosthesis, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 31:109-124,
1995.
69.
 Schulz KS, Vasseur PB, Stover SM, Kass PH: Transverse plane evaluation of the effects of surgical
technique on stem positioning and geometry of reconstruction in canine total hip replacerment,
Arm J Vet Res 59:1071-1079, 1998.
70.
 Schulz Ks, Nielson C, Stover SM, et al: Comparison of fit and geometry of reconstruction of fermoral
71.
Massat BJ, Vasseur PB: Clinical and radiographic results of total hip arthroplasty in dogs: 96 cases
{1986-1992), J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:448-454, 1994.
72.1
Edwards MR, Egger EL, Schwarz PD: Aseptic loosening of the femoral implant after cemented total
hip arthroplastyin dogs: 11 cases in 10 dogs (1991-1995),JAmm Vet Med Assoc 211:580-586,1997.
73.1
Dyce J, Wisner ER, Wang O, Olmstead ML: Evaluation of risk factors for luxation after total hip
replacement in dogs, Vet Surg 29:524-532, 2000.
74.
 Sebestyen P, Marcellin-Little DJ, Deyoung BA: Fermoral medullary infarction secondary to canine
total hip arthroplasty, Vet Surg 29:227-236, 2000.
75.1
Roe RC,Deoung D, Weinstock D,Kyles A: Ostesarcoma eight years after total hip arthroplasty.
Vet Surg 25:70-74, 1996.
76.
Marcellin-Little DJ, DeYoung DJ, Thrall DE, Merrill CL: Osteosarcoma at the site of bone infarction
associated with total hip arthroplasty in a dog, Vet Surg 28:54-60, 1999.
77.1
Berzon JL, Howard PE, Covell SJ, et al: A retrospective study of the efficacy of femoral head and
neck excisions in 94 dogs and cats, Vet Surg 9:88, 1980.
78.1
 Lippincott CL: Excision arthroplasty of the femoral head and neck utilizing a biceps femoris
muscle sling. Part 2. The caudal pass, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 20:377, 1984.
79.1
excision and femoral head and neck excision using a biceps femoris muscle lap inthe dog,Vet Surg
16:223, 1987.
16—The Hip Joint
511
80. Gendreau C, Cawley AJ: Excision of the fermoral head and neck: the long-term results of 35 operations,
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 13:605, 1977.
81.
Bardens JW, Hardwick H: New observations in the diagnosis and cause of hip dysplasia, Vet Med
Small Anim Clin 63:238, 1968.
82. Cardinet GH, Guffy MM, Wallace LJ: Canine hip dysplasia: effects of pectineal tenotomy on the
coxofemoral joints of Gerrman shepherd dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 164:591, 1974.
83.
unilateral pectineal rmyotomy, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 161:899, 1972.
84.
Gambardella PC: Legg-Calve-Perthes disease in dogs. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Pathophysiology in
surgery, Philadelphia, 1981, Lea & Febiger, pp 625-630.
85.
Ljunggren GL: Legg-Perthes disease in the dog, Acta Orthop Scand Suppt 95:7, 1967.
J Small Anirm Pract 19:729, 1978.
87.
Lee R, Fry PD: Some observations of the occurrence of Legg-Calve-Perthes disease {coxa plana) in
the dog, and an evaluation of excision arthroplasty as a method of treatment, J Small Anim Pract
10:309, 1969.
88. Ljunggren GL: Conservative vs surgical treatrment of Legg-Perthes disease, Anim Hosp 2:6, 1966.
Fractures of the Femur
and Patella
The incidence for fractures of the femur is about 20% to 25% of all fractures in most
veterinary practices; this rate is higher than for any of the long bones in the body.
Additionally, femur fractures represent 45% of all long-bone fractures, a rate more
than double that of other bones.1 The femur also has the highest incidence of
nonunion and osteomyelitis of all fractures. Open reduction and internal fixation
 are indicated in almost all femoral fractures.23 Because of the eccentric loading of
the femur during weight bearing (see Figure 2-70), it is in this bone that the surgeon
    s ssisn a ro o is q 
implants. Defects in the medial (compression/buttress) cortex place enormous
bending loads on the implant, and thus femoral fractures are the most severe test for
 an internal fixation device.
 In this chapter we suggest methods of treating various types of fractures as clas-
sified in the AO Vet fracture classification scheme (see Table 2-1).1 Patellar fractures
are included with distal femoral fractures. Treatment recommendations are keyed to
FIXATION TECHNIQUES
Coaptation
 The coaptation form of fixation has almost no application in femoral fractures
adi-eids y 'ie pue op au u sul d au uo yo A au o asneq
cast in small animals have not been solved.
For about 20 years, starting in the early 1930s, use of the modified Thomas splint
was the most common method of immobilizing femoral fractures.7 (see Figure 2-25).
With the advent of internal fixation, this splint has rapidly faded from common use
as the sole method of immobilizing femoral fractures. When used as the sole method
of fixation, the modified Thomas splint must be confined to greenstick fractures,
fissure fractures, and fractures with minimal displacement in the very young patient.
The veterinarian must keep in mind that the ring, when properly applied, lies at the
proximal third of the femur and may act as a fulcrum at the fracture site, resulting
in displacement of the proximal fragment. The splint also adds significant mass and
elongates the distal lever arm, which can add to displacement of the distal fragment.
512
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
513
The leg may be attached to the modified Thomas splint with the joints in various
angles to exert the best mechanical advantage on the fracture. In most cases, however,
the leg is splinted in the angulation of the normal standing position. Placing the leg
in full extension over time may lead to a decrease in range of joint movement in the
stifle and to some loss of function or total dysfunction if fibrous ankylosis occurs in
the hyperextended position. The splint must be frequently checked for pressure
points, readjusted, and repaired during the healing period. It must be protected
against moisture, both inside and out. Exercise must be restricted to help protect the
splint from becoming loose or damaged. The presumed economic advantages of
 coaptation over internal fixation are seldom realized in the treatment of femoral
fractures.
 A long lateral molded splint can also be applied to greenstick fractures, fissure
fractures, and fractures with minimal displacement in the very young patient
(see Figure 2-24). The advantage over the Thomas splint is the absence of the ring
proximally.
Intramedullary Pins and Wires
There are numerous types of intramedullary (IM) pins available with various types
the IM pins most often used.
Steinmann Pin
When the Steinmann pin is used as the sole method of fixation of diaphyseal frac-
tures, it should be reserved primarily for fractures that are inherently stable, such as
type A1 and some type A3 (see Figure 17-20). More instability can be tolerated in
skeletally immature animals because of the rapidity of callus formation. Steinmann
pins may be used for unstable fractures only with supplemental fixation such as an
external fixator, multiple pins, plate, cerclage wire, or lag screws.
Pin Insertion
The pin may be inserted from the proximal end (normograde) by entering at the
s ae au  aprroai ni ssd aq ro (ii ai) ess oauon
proximally through the medullary canal (Figure 17-2).
 Normograde pin insertion is applicable to both closed and open reductions and
is preferred because it has the advantage over retrograde placement of positioning
the pin more laterally in the trochanteric fossa and thus farther from the femoral
head and sciatic nerve.? Additionally, less sof tissue is penetrated, facilitating cutting
the pin shorter, which minimizes seroma formation and decreases patient discomfort.
For midshaft and proximal femoral fractures, it is best simply to extend the
approach incision proximally for insertion of the pin. Transection of the tendon of
insertion of the superficial gluteal muscle and elevation of the muscle before inserting
the pin will allow for cutting the pin quite short at the conclusion of surgery.
In other cases a short skin incision is made just dorsomedial to the greater trochanter.
The pin is inserted through the subcutaneous fat and the gluteal muscles until the
trochanter is felt on the tip of the pin. During the insertion process, the proximal
femur is held in the angulation and rotation of the normal standing position.
Keeping the pin chuck and pin axially oriented to the femur, the pin is “walked"
medially off the trochanter into the trochanteric fossa, where it will center itself with
some pressure through the pin chuck. When performing an open reduction, the
proximal femoral bone segment exposed in the open approach can be grasped with
a bone-holding forceps to stabilize it. The pin is driven into the bone by quarter
514
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 FIGURE 17-1.  Normograde intramedullary
pinning technique using Steinmann pin,
with the proximal femur in the angulation
and rotation of the normal standing pos-
ture. A, The pin is inserted through the skin
and underlying soft tissue at the eminence
of the trochanter major. B, The pin slides 
along the medial surface of the trochanter
major into the trochanteric fossa, through
the cortical bone, and down the medullary
cavity. C, The pin is held in axial alignment,
and the bone fragment is held with bone-
holding forceps to prevent rotation during
pin insertion.
FGURE 17-2. Retrograde intramedullary pinning
technique using Steinmann pin, with the proximal femur
in the angulation and rotation of the normal standing
posture. Correct position of the proximal femur, particu-
larly avoiding abduction, external rotation, and excessive
flexion of the hip, is essential to avoid potential sciatic
neuropraxia. A, The distal end of the proximal bone
fragment is grasped with bone-holding forceps, and
'juo Areau au ul Aemxond panasu si ud aul
B, As the pin is driven proximally, an effort is made to
direct it along the craniolateral surface of the medullary
cavity. The proximal bone fragment is adducted until it is 
parallel to the surface of the table and held in the rotation
 and angulation ofthe normal standing position as the pin
penetrates the proximal bone and soft tissues.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
515
turns of the hand chuck in a back-and-forth motion, constantly applying firm pressure.
Axial alignment is easily maintained by watching the proximal femoral segment,
and the medullary cavity is quickly entered and the pin continued distally to the
fracture site.
 If the retrograde technique is used, care should be taken to have the proximal
 fracture fragment adducted (parallel to the table) and in the angulation and rotation
of the normal standing position. On passing the pin proximally, it is directed along
the craniolateral surface of the medullary cavity (see Figure 17-2). All these precautions
u s e P i a  ame nd a yo aa daa di
(See later discussion on sciatic nerve injury associated with IM pinning.)
The method of seating the pin distally varies with the patient's bone type. Most
dogs have pronounced cranial bowing of the femoral shaft (Figure 17-3, A). If the
pin is allowed to follow its own course into the distal segment, it will often
penetrate the cranial cortex just proximal to the femoral trochlea (Figure 17-3, B).
In this case, simple pin retraction is not appropriate because postoperatively the pin
often migrates distally through the pin track and reenters the joint. The pin should
be retracted to the fracture site, the fracture reangulated as described later, and the
pin driven distally into unpenetrated trabecular bone. Even if the pin does not
penetrate the cortex, it is not stable fixation for fractures of the middle or distal
ap a u peas aq ud au ien uod si i sa asau un suas
trabecular bone of the distal metaphysis and condyles.
After the fracture is reduced and as the pin is directed into the distal segment,
s rda ro se s no s sas oq ae in sa si !
of the pin in the cancellous bone of the distal metaphysis and also for more stable
fixation (Figure 17-3, C). When the bone is relatively straight, as in the toy dog
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 17-3. Effect of femoral shape on pin insertion. A, Sagittal section through a canine
femur showing the cortical bone, cancellous bone, and marrow cavity. B, The canine femur
has some cranial curvature, and the intramedullary pin cannot be inserted to a sufficient
caudally at the fracture site, the intramedullary pin can be passed along the caudal cortex into
cancellous bone at the distal end. This anchorage in cancellous bone greatly improves stability.
D, Anatomical reduction of a cat femur and insertion of a Steinmann pin for fixation. The
diaphysis of a cat femur is straight.
516
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
breeds and in the cat, the pin naturally follows the medullary canal distally into the
condyles (Figure 17-3, D). In any situation the pin should penetrate distally at least
to the proximal border of the patella when the stifle is placed at the normal standing
angle. With the pin chuck removed from the pin, another pin of the same length can
be positioned external to the leg to verify the depth of insertion. Rotation of the
distal femoral segment while seating the pin is neutralized by flexing the stifle and
using the proximal tibia as a lever to control the femur. This also allows some
 compressive force to prevent distracting the fragments while driving the pin.
After the pin is inserted to the full depth with the point of the pin near but not
 penetrating, the subchondral bone, it is cut as short as possible, or it may be
retracted 1 cm, cut off, then driven back into position by means of a countersink
and mallet. Do not allow the fracture to distract during this type of pin seating.
A long pin in the gluteal area can lead to discomfort and seroma formation as well
a anss a q sdea aau s jo Aiissod s ue on s
 incited by the pin (see following discussion). Some prefer that the depth of insertion
be checked by taking a radiograph before cutting the pin. The incision may be
closed; taking precautions to maintain sterility of the protruding pin, a lateral
radiograph is taken, and depth adjustments are made before cutting the pin.
PinDiameter
 Ideally, pin diameter should approximate 75% to 80% of the marrow cavity. This is
possible throughout the medullary canal in the cat and toy dog breeds because the
aaq sop iso ui aissod ou si nu aamoy fa 't-I ait aas) ies si a
 of the cranial bowing of the femur (see Figure 17-3, A) and the narrowing of the canal
at the midshaft. In these dogs the pin should occupy about 75% to 80% of the marrow
cavity diameter at the midshaft, which will give the pin 50% to 75% diameter relative
 to other areas of the medullary canal.
Complications
 Horizontal shearing and rotary instability are the most common complications
when a round pin is used. Any instability at the fracture site will invariably cause
the pin to loosen because of bone resorption and to migrate proximally, sometimes
completely out of the bone. Additional supplemental fixation should be added to
guard against instability and movement at the fracture site. Supplemental fixation is
described later in this chapter.
The sciatic nerve can become irritated or trapped over the top of the cut-off IM
pin either at the time of insertion or, more often, during the convalescent period if
because of their limb positions during grooming. The incidence of such sciatic injury
o u y Add ss s ois ads auo u s'ti sm
experience, especially if the pin is placed as close to the trochanter as possible and
cut as short as possible. Most cases are the result of excessive fibroplasia caused
by leg motion and an overly long and medially placed pin, rather than outright
damage to the nerve during pin insertion. Clinical signs were delayed for 2 or 3 weeks
postoperatively in 79% of cases, probably from contracture of maturing fibrous tissue.
 Usual clinical signs included pain in the hip region on palpation, carrying of the leg
with the hip flexed, and the proprioceptive reflex of the foot being diminished or
lost. Immediate surgical intervention is indicated in such a situation. After careful
dissection down to the area, the pin is either cut shorter or removed if the fracture
is healed. It is helpful to find the normal sciatic nerve several centimeters distal to
the trochanter and trace it proximally to avoid accidental nerve damage in the rare
circumstance in which the sciatic nerve has become displaced cranial to the trochanter
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
517
Enveloping fibrous tissue is dissected away from the nerve. Injury to the sciatic
nerve is usually temporary, with no cases of permanent neurological deficit in a
 series of 14 cases.10
Postoperative Management
Activity must be restricted until the stage of clinical union is reached. Union should
be checked radiographically before removal of the pin. After clinical union is
achieved, the pin may be removed by incising over its top and retracting it by pulling
with quarter turns back and forth. This is usually done with the patient under a
short-acting anesthetic, but in some cases it may be removed under sedation and
local anesthesia. Aseptic procedures are used for removal of the pin. If the pin has
been cut sufficiently short to preclude soft tissue irritation, it is sometimes left
in place with no adverse effects. Occasionally, such a pin will loosen and migrate
 proximally, necessitating immediate removal.
Kuntscher Nail
The Kintscher nail has the advantage of affording rigid stability to both bending
and torsion or rotation; however, insertion requires attention to the details in its use.
 Frequent complications include the following: (1) the nail may jam in the medullary
canal or may split the bone; (2) longitudinal fracture lines already present may be
opened up; and (3) if too small in diameter, the nail may not provide suficient
stability. The Kintscher nail is rarely used in North America for small animals
because of these complications and the availability of other fixation methods.
Interlocking Nai!
The interlocking nail is an effective fixation method for diaphyseal femoral fractures
of the dog and cat.1121 Whereas standard Steinmann IM pinning alone is of little
value in unstable fractures, the interlocking nail can provide both rotational and
compression (buttress) stability previously available only by bone plate fixation.
The disadvantages are maintaining the equipment inventory necessary to handle an
array of bone sizes and becoming adept at using the system.
 Bone healing with the interlocking nail has been very good in early clinical
reports. The main complication reported is that approximately 9% resulted in broken
nails, attributed to selection of a smaller nail than indicated or positioning of a nail
hole too close to the fracture site.? In vitro biomechanical studies of interlocking
material properties of bending and stiffness for interlocking nails, but significantly
less rigidity when subjected to torsion.17,21 Clinical experience and biomechanical
testing have led to revision of the 6-mm and 8-mm nails and expansion of the
system to 4.0-mm and 4.7-mm nails. The current system is now sized appropriately
for femoral fractures of adult cats and dogs of most sizes, except perhaps for giant
breeds.
Technique
 Preoperative planning with a template onlay to the radiograph helps the surgeon
to select the correct diameter and length of the implant. A choice of the standard
interlocking nail, with two screw holes proximal and distal, or a nail with three
holes is based on the proximity of the nail hole to the fracture. It is recommended
u jd oi as an a on aou u Aun o ais i e uu oi
breakage. A limited lateral surgical approach to the femur is completed for fracture
reduction. IM pins of smaller diameter are used first in normograde fashion to open
the medullary canal. The interlocking nail is driven into the intramedullary space
518
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
with standard “pin technique." The machined joint of the interlocking nail is
attached to the extension and the drill guide jig (see Figure 2-54, E). Drill guide
inserts and sleeves are used through the jig to place the locking screws.
Kirschner Wires
 In reality only a small-diameter Steinmann pin, Kirschner wires are used as transfix-
ation pins in a variety of femoral fractures, both as primary and supplemental
fixation (see Figures 17-7, 17-10, 17-12 to 17-15, and 17-32).
Pins and Tension Band Wire
This method is widely applied for fractures and avulsions of the trochanter major
(see Figure 17-7, C). The tendon of the superficial gluteal muscle is cut and the muscle
elevated off the trochanter before placing the pins. The pins can be either anchored
distally in the medial cortex distal to the lesser trochanter or driven straight down
the medullary canal, in which case the pins should be slightly longer for greater
stability. Proximally, the tension band wire is passed around the pins through the
middle gluteal muscle close to the bone to prevent cutting of the muscle as the wire
is tightened. The transverse hole for distal anchorage of the wire can be drilled
through the distal end of the third trochanter without elevating the vastus lateralis
muscle if the drilling proceeds from caudal to cranial, with internal rotation of the
femur and strong retraction of the biceps femoris muscle. Careful bending of the
 protruding pins and seating them close to the bone are necessary to avoid soft tissue
irritation, which can be a problem in thin dogs.
Cerclage Wires
ments when a reconstructive approach is taken to the fracture repair (see Figures 17-21,
17-24, 17-25, and 17-27). Cerclage wires are always used as a supplemental fixation
 and never as primary stabilization in shaft fractures.
 Because of the insertion of the adductor magnus muscle on the diaphysis, most
fragments from the caudal half of the femur have a viable periosteal blood supply.
Great care should be taken in reducing such fragments to preserve the muscle
attachment and its blood supply. Proof of the usefulness of this blood supply is pro-
vided by the observation that the first callus seen in femoral fractures is always
along the caudal side of the shaft. Considerable effort must also be expended to pass
the wire around the femur in the most atra umatic manner possible in order to elevate
 a minimal amount of muscle from the bone. The use of a wire passer greatly assists
in this maneuver (see Figure 2-61). The passer is used as if it were a large needle and
is inserted into the adductor muscle as close as possible to the bone surface, then
rotated around the bone to emerge cranially. The wire is inserted into the lumen in
the tip of the passer and inserted until the tip of the wire is visible in the hole of the
passer. The wire is grasped and the passer backed out through the same track.
Because the shaft of the femur is reasonably tubular, there is no problem of wire
 slippage in the central portion of the bone. As the subtrochanteric and supracondylar
juaid asimiauo no aoq a yoiou oi Anessaau aq Ae il pauoeoidde are seare
migration of the wires in these tapering areas (see discussion of cerclage wires in
Chapter 2).
External Fixators
When an external fixator is applied on femoral fractures as the sole method of fix-
ation, it is used primarily on small breeds of young dogs and cats. In general, these
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
519
repairs heal quite rapidly. When used on other femoral fractures, and especially in
dogs, it is best to combine the fixator with the IM pin.
The surgeon is restricted to use of the unilateral type IA one-plane configuration
on the femur Double connecting bars are often indicated when using the Kirschner-
Ehmer fixator system in medium to large dogs because of the bending load imposed
in most unstable fractures. Another choice would be to use a stiffer external fixator
system. One fixation system (IMEX SK, IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview, Texas) uses
larger connecting rods of aluminum or carbon fiber for increased stiffness at the
fracture site, which is better suited to the difficult mechanical environment of the
canine femur. In general, the fixator is well tolerated by the patient, although dogs
are sometimes reluctant to bear weight on the limb, apparently because of the
penetration of both the quadriceps (stifle extensor) and the biceps femoris (stifle flexor)
formation of adhesions may become a permanent limitation. Passive range of motion
 a am o ss  d s a d  s
tolerated as long as no other limb fractures are present. In such a situation it is usually
necessary to achieve early, equalized load sharing between the limbs to minimize stress
on the implants. This problem with function is not usually encountered in the cat.
The fixator may be applied with the fracture site closed or open. Open reduction
is usually preferable because the reduction can be visualized during the insertion
 procedure. The muscle mass of the thigh makes closed reduction difficult in most
animals. Because the splint is inserted on the lateral surface of the femur and pene.
trates large muscles, it is vulnerable to trauma, pin track drainage, and premature
fixation-pin loosening. This loosening can be partially overcome by inserting six or
eight pins; however, the more fixation pins used, the greater the muscular impingement
problem. The use of enhanced threaded pins may also help with this concern, since
fewer pins will be required to maintain fixator stability. Early pin loosening will be
less likely with enhanced threaded pins. Postoperative use of bulky dressings to
stabilize the soft tissues has been advocated to reduce pin loosening caused by
muscular motion around the pins.22
External Fixator and Intramedullary Pin
The external fixator is added to the IM pin fixation to help increase stability by
reducing movement and rotation at the fracture site and helping to maintain
 r d n s re udi  ad   
 and short oblique fractures (Figure 17-4), and a four-pin or six-pin type IA fixator
is used on comminuted fractures. As a general rule, it is advisable to use a minimum
of four fixation pins; only with a fracture patient score of 9 to 10 and a body weight
 of less than 15 pounds (6.8 kg) should two pins be considered.24
 This combination of methods is used because the presence of the IM pin will
allow the fixator to be removed as soon as stabilizing callus is radiographically
visible, typically at 4 to 6 weeks. Early removal allows greater weight bearing on the
limb, which favors fracture healing and minimizes chances of permanent loss of
motion in the stifle joint.
 If a complex, multifragment fracture is present, with a fracture patient score of
  'd i a m po aq A ox xa xa a e  on 1
type I-II external fixator may be used with an IM pin (see Figure 17-33, B).
The increased frame stiffness of the hybrid is needed for healing of the complex
fracture; however, the pin and fixator combination can be applied through a very
limited surgical approach. The limited surgical approach reduces damage to
fragment blood supply, and a "biological osteosynthesis" with rapid healing is
achieved. A maximum of five to seven fixator pins is used to reduce the amount of
520
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 17-4. Insertion of an intramedullary pin and type IA external fixator, 1/1 pins for
fixation. A, Transverse fracture of the femur. Fractures of this type have a tendency to rotate.
B, Self-locking bone-holding forceps holds fracture reduced during insertion of the Steinmann
pin into the distal segment. Holding both fracture segments so that they do not rotate during
the insertion process makes for a tighter fitting pin. The two circles show approximate
location of fixation pins. Fixation pins can also be placed caudal to the intramedullary pin.
C, Caudocranial view of reduced and fixed fracture. D, Wedge fracture (caudocranial view)
immobilized by use of an intramedullary pin and external fixator, 2/2 pins. Four pins are
inserted for added sta bility.
muscular impingement. Also, the frame may be partially disassembled and the
fixator pins removed as healing progresses, to restore weight-bearing stress to the
bone and enhance muscular function of the limb.
Some circumstances warrant development of a more complex fixator frame, such
 as severe comminution or expected delayed healing. A type IB frame or a type IB
xadoo rog uox se pasn aq Ae ud l aui on xul an, on paou roexy
of single or double clamps and an additional connecting bar (see Figure 11-15).
Technique
The procedure for inserting the IM pin (Figure 17-4, A and B) is the same as
described earlier. When using this combined fixation, the IM pin can be reduced
somewhat in diameter from the normal size to provide better clearance for the
fixation pins that are inserted in the proximal and distal fragments. The following
steps are used:
1. Start the fixation pin insertion with the soft tissue in its normal position.
The pin should pierce intact skin and preferably not enter on the incision
line.
2. Insert the pins near the proximal and distal ends to obtain the best mechanical
advantage. Placement of these pins to avoid the IM pin is facilitated by
femur distally (Figure 17-4, B).
 3. Insert pins slightly off center to miss the IM pin.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
521
 4. If smooth fixation pins are to be used, place the fixation pins at approximately
a 70-degree angle to the long axis of the bone, penetrate both cortices,
and connect the pins with single clamps and a connecting bar (Figure 17-4, C
and D).
5. When four or six fixation pins are used, the end pins are inserted first with two
or four empty single clamps assembled on the connecting bar. The remaining
 d  au fn a a o sd au  ps  ae su
insertion through the uniplanar configuration, double clamps and bars may be
needed (see Figure 2-47, B).
6. Enhanced threaded fixation pins may be used if prolonged healing is
anticipated with a difficult fracture. Threaded pins will prolong stability of the
fixator pins and prevent early loosening and pullout. Enhanced threaded pins
are most easily used in the end positions, if used with the Kirschner-Ehmer
system, but can be used in any pin position if IMEX clamps (IMEX SK) are used.
a us oi shaaq ane arau op raei e u suasad s a xaduo e jl /
 IMEX SK external fixator system. The carbon fiber or aluminum connecting
rods have greater stiffness than the rods used in the Kirschner-Ehmer system.
As previously stated, the Imex clamps allow convenient use of enhanced
threaded pins at any clamp position. The resulting fixator construct is stronger,
more rigid, and more durable
The wound may be closed before or after application of the external fixator.
Closure after application has the advantage of enabling visualization of the fracture
 site until all fixation is in place.
Postoperative Management
Activity should be restricted during the healing period. The external fixator usually
can be removed after a good primary callus is visible radiographically, this takes
about 4 to 6 weeks. If a complex fracture is treated, the disassembly of the external
fixator may be staged at several intervals, beginning at 4 to 6 weeks, to stimulate
fracture healing by reintroduction of weight-bearing stres. The IM pin is removed
when the fracture has reached the stage of clinical union.
Bone Plates
Bone plates are adaptable to practically all types of shaft fractures and have the
distinct advantage of providing uninterrupted, rigid internal fixation. In most cases
the bone plate is the fixation of choice in large dogs.? Depending on the fracture
type, the plate may be used as a tension band compression plate in short oblique,
transverse, and some segmental fractures; as a neutralization plate in long oblique
and reducible wedge fractures; and as a buttress or bridging plate in nonreducible
wedge fractures. These functions are sometimes combined according to the fracture
type. Figure 2-75 lists applicable plate sizes according to body weight.
The plate is usually applied on the lateral surface and contoured to fit that
surface. Usually, the curvature pattern for contouring is taken from a craniocaudal
may be contoured at the time of application for reducible fractures. A considerable
lateral twist is necessary in the caudodistal end of the plate if it is necessary to
extend the plate onto the condyle. Failure to do so will result in the craniodistal
corner of the plate being elevated from the bone. A liberal exposure is necessary for
application of the bone plate. To extend the plate distally to the condyle, it is
necessary to open the stifle joint as an extension of the approach to the shaft.
522
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
At least three or preferably four or more bone screws (penetrating six to eight or
more cortices) should be placed in each of the proximal and distal bone segments.
o sn xs  s a  io   an  as 
each side of the fracture, whereas eight cortices is the minimum number needed in
buttress (bridging) applications. Whenever possible, the plate and screws should be
inserted to develop compression at the fracture site. This has the distinct advantage
of providing a more rigid fixation and making conditions more nearly optimal for
healing.
The choice of a buttress plate for multiple fractures has become more common
with the recent emphasis on biological osteosynthesis. Bone healing of the femur
associated with the use of the buttress plate has been faster than healing of femoral
neutralization plate.2s A buttress plate can be applied to a femoral fracture with
minimal manipulation of bone fragments, therefore preserving the blood supply and
healing potential of the soft tissue associated with the fracture. The disadvantage of
using a buttress plate on the femur is that the lateral position of the plate subjects it
to extreme bending stress during weight bearing. The combination of an IM pin
(see Figure 2-80). The IM pin is placed first, which allows efficient alignment of the
 a j u p m a p d s r
 a j as  a oi pde pe pa u si ad au 
Bicortical screws may often be used through the plate, with some adjustment to
the angle of screw placement to avoid the IM pin. If interference with the pin is
encountered, monocortical screws may be placed. A minimum of three monocortical
and one bicortical screws above and below the fracture is recommended for
plate/pin combinations.26 The pin will function during healing to share loading and
to protect the plate from the bending forces of weight bearing. A pin diameter that
occupies approximately 35% to 40% of the diameter of the midshaft medullary
space has been proposed to provide adequate stiffness at the fracture site for healing.27
This diameter can be adjusted for the severity of the fracture, with slightly larger
 diameters chosen for the more complex fractures.
Lag Screws
The primary site of application of lag screws as primary fixation is in fractures of
the proximal and distal zones, where they are invaluable in providing rigid fixation
(see Figures 17-7, 17-10, 17-13, 17-17, 17-18, 17-34, and 17-35). Figure 2-75 lists
applicable screw sizes according to body weight. Lag screws are never used as the
sole method of fixation in immobilizing shaft fractures of the long bones. They can
be used advantageously for interfragmentary compresson in oblique, spiral, and
butterfly segments and in certain types of multiple fractures when combined with a
primary fixation method (see Figures 17-22, 17-23, 17-26, and 17-27). If diaphyseal
bone segments are large enough for bone screws to be used, they are to be prefered
 over cerclage wire. When properly inserted, bone screws are superior for compression
and rigid fixation and are less apt to disrupt periosteal blood supply during their
insertion.
PROXIMAL FRACTURES
Fractures of the proximal zone account for approximately 25% of femoral
fractures1 and offer significant challenges to provide adequate internal fixation
ea ensuu o podsan m sa asal jo ma aa (-l ani)
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
523
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 17-5. Proximal fractures of the femur. A: A1, Avulsion; A2, intertrochanteric
simple; A3, multifragmentary. B: B1, Basicervical; B2, transcervical; B3, with trochanteric
avulsion. C: C1, Articular simple; C2, articular multifragmentary; C3, multifragmentary
cervical and trochanteric. (From Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop
Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
Fracture Type 3-1-A; Proximal, Trochanteric Region
(Figure 17-5, A)
Open Approaches
Type A fractures of the trochanteric region are exposed by the approach to the
ai ( i a)  a go uai sns ue ro en
a Aq pasoxa ae n ar sa pdeo  ad pue pa
craniolateral approach to the hip (Figure 17-6, B), sometimes combined with the
trochanteric approach.29
Type A1, Avulsion
In most cases the type A1 fracture is a physeal separation at the trochanter accom-
panied by dislocation of the femoral head? (Figure 17-7, A). With the animal under
anesthesia, a closed reduction of the femoral head is usually attempted first. If this
can be accomplished and the reduction feels stable, fixation of the fracture is indicated
 next. If the dislocation cannot be reduced or is unstable on reduction, the open
 approach should include the coxofemoral joint.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
The following steps are observed:
1. If closed reduction of the hip was successful, or if there is no luxation, make
the approach to the trochanteric region and proceed with fixation of the
trochanter major The trochanter major may be fixed by using two small pins
or Kirschner wires (K-wires), and this is sufficient for most animals under
4 months of age (Figure 17-7, B). These pins must be anchored in the medial
cortex of the cervical region to provide good stability. Fixation by use of a
tension band wire is usually the procedure of choice, particularly in larger dogs
(Figure 17-7, C). Fixation with a cancellous bone screw is used only for
 animals approximately 41/2 months of age or older (Figure 17-7, D). In our
experience, this procedure has not significantly altered anatomical growth of
the femur (length or shape) in dogs over 41/z months of age.
 2. When open reduction and repair of the coxofemoral joint capsule are
 indicated, proceed directly with the approach to the hip joint.
 3. Some of the origin of the vastus lateralis muscle is usually still attached to the
lateral surface of the fractured trochanter major. This muscle is gently elevated,
524
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
just sufficiently to reduce the fracture, with tag ends remaining attached to the
trochanter major, to be sutured on closure.
4. After replacing the femoral head, obtain stability by closing the joint capsule.
Abduction of the leg allows for easier and tighter closure of the joint capsule.
 Other measures for stabilizing the hip joint are discussed in Chapter 16.
 5. Apply fixation of the trochanter major.
Aftercare.  If the coxofemoral joint was luxated, place the leg in an Ehmer sling
or off-weight-bearing sling for 5 to 7 days (see Figures 2-31 and 2-32), and limit
exercise during the healing period of 4 to 6 weeks. No external support is needed
for simple trochanter fracture.
Type A2, Intertrochanteric Simple
Reduction and Internal Fixation
After exposure by the approach to the trochanter and subtrochanteric region of the
femur, the pin and tension band wire method can be used for fixation in animals
with a relatively high fracture patient score (e.g., 8-10). Although similar in
principle to the method previously described for the trochanter (Figure 17-7, C),
some modification of pin size is needed. Rather than small, flexible K-wire,
larger Steinmann pins are used, and they are driven distally, as usual for Steinmann
Area of elevation of 
vastus lateralis m.
Vastus lateralis m.
retracted
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
525
B
Middle gluteal m.
Deep gluteal m.
loint capsule
Vastus lateralis m.
retracted
FIGURE 17-6. Continued B, Approach to the craniodorsal aspect of the hip joint through
a craniolateral incision. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches
to the bones and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
4
B
c
D
FIGURE 17-7. A, Type A1 fracture of the trochanter major with dislocation of the femoral
head. B, Fixation by two small pins. C, Fixation by tension band wire; this is usually the 
method of choice. D, Fixation of the trochanter major with a cancellous bone screw.
526
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 pins (Figure 17-8). Because of their diameter, it may not be possible to bend the
proximal end of these pins; in this situation they are driven as closely as possible to
the bone surface without the wires slipping over the end. Carefully passing the wire
through the middle gluteal muscle close to the bone will help prevent slipping over
the pins. Rush pins can also be used in place of Steinmann pins, and their hooked
end eliminates the problems just described. Drilling of the distal hole for the tension
wire will require elevation of the vastus lateralis muscle. The position of the hole is
adjusted so that the wire crosses close to the fracture line.
 s ad rn nxu s se sd aq ro sx pxs
Aftercare. No external support is required, only restriction of exercise for the
healing period. Removal of the implants after clinical union may be necessary if soft
tissue irritation is noted.
Type A3, Multifragmentary
Reduction and Fixation
Although somewhat formidable in appearance, these fractures heal surprisingly
well, probably because of the highly vascularized trabecular bone in the area and
the relatively short proximal lever arm of the fracture. Movement of the hip joint
 partially neutralizes disruptive forces at the fracture line.
Fracture patient scores may be at the bottom of the scale (see Table 2-6),
especially if concurrent injuries are present. The key consideration relative to fixation
is the degree of fragmentation of the calcar region, that portion of the medial cortex
between the femoral head and lesser trochanter. Weight-bearing forces create
considerable bending strain in this bone, and if it is fragmented, the fixation device
must be capable of withstanding both bending and compression loads (Figure 17-9).
If this area of bone is intact (see Figure 17-5, A), the fixation can function primarily as
a tension band to neutralize bending forces.
Both external fixators and bone plates offer suitable fixation. The external fixator
is a type IA, single plane, with at least two but preferably three pins in each major
 p an  aa paai aq u d ao '-i a aas saas a
d px  a a re a ad n no ae m 
B
FIGURE 17-8. Fixation of a type A2 intertrochanteric simple
fracture of the proximal femur. A and B, The fracture is pinned
with two small Rush or Steinmann pins from the eminence of
the greater trochanter. A tension band wire is then applied,
anchored around the protruding ends of the pins and through a
a an on u si ao  aui is aou l
figure-of-8 wire to cross close to the fracture line.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
527
FIGURE 17-9. Fixation of a type A3 multifragmentary fracture of the
proximal femur by means of a type IA external fixator. A double connecting
bar is used for very large breeds or when significant fracture gaps remain.
penetrate the calcar region medially. Bone plate fixation is similar to that shown for
type C3 fractures (see Figure 17-18), with some of the plate screws probably acting
as lag screws to stabilize fragments. Double hook plates, as used for intertrochanteric
osteotomy (see Chapter 16), have also been applied to these subtrochanteric
 fractures.?30 Autogenous cancellous bone graft should be used in any unreduced
fracture gaps.
Aftercare.
 No external support is required, only restriction of exercise for the
healing period. The external fixator is removed when clinical union is verified.
Removal of the bone plate after clinical union may be necessary if soft tissue irritation
or loosening of the implant is noted. An additional reason to remove the plate is that
because the plate ends in the diaphysis and creates a stress raiser, there is an
increased risk of accidental fracture at the end of the plate.
Fracture Type 3-1-B; Proximal, Simple Cervical (Figure 17-5, B)
In these femoral neck fractures, the fracture line varies and is usually simple; however,
it may be multiple in nature. Various degrees of compromised blood supply to the
head and neck may occur in association with the original injury.33132 Considerable
 mechanical damage from abrasion can be done to the fracture surfaces if the animal
starts actively walking on the limb before fixation is accomplished. This abrasion
can destroy the irregular surfaces of the fracture and make accurate reduction very
difficult. The incidence of unfavorable complications can be greatly reduced by
(1) early surgery, (2) accurate reduction, (3) rigid uninterrupted fixation with com-
pression at the fracture site, and (4) careful supervision of the postoperative care.
In general, if these issues are successfully addressed, the prognosis is favorable.
 Because of this, excision of the femoral head and neck or total hip replacement is
usually considered a second choice in most fresh fractures of the femoral neck in
larger breeds. Technical difficulties arise in repairing neck and head fractures in small
breeds, and because of their excellent function with femoral head and neck excision,
many consider this the best treatment in cats, toy breeds, and miniature breeds.
Note: Repair of a fractured femoral neck or of a fracture of the proximal femoral
epiphysis in a young growing animal may result in shortening of the femoral neck
and instability of the hip joint, which may give rise to alterations of the hip joint
characteristic of hip dysplasia.
528
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Open Approaches
The craniolateral approach to the hip joint is preferred for open reduction
(Figure 17-6, B), since it is generally more sparing of blood supply to the bone than
the dorsal approaches. 32
Type B1, Basicervical; Type B2, Transcervical
Both these fracture types are handled in a similar manner. An impacted fracture with
no displacement may heal with external immobilization and restricted exercise
 The safer and preferred procedure is to apply fixation using a bone screw or multiple
pins without further disturbing the position. Fractures showing various degrees
Mechanical studies indicate that a lag screw or three parallel 2.0-mm (5/64-inch)
K-wires were able to resist a force of three times body weight, equivalent to the
forces placed on a normal hip during walking exercise. Two K-wires, either parallel
(sis mas addde r 1- aii aas) ce os e iou aam ip 1
Reduction and Fixation
After making the approach, temporary reduction is usually carried out to see if
reduction and fixation are feasible. This usually can be accomplished by grasping
the trochanter major with vulsellum or pointed reduction forceps and manually
maneuvering the fracture segments back into position (see Figure 2-15). Abduction
of the femoral shaft is usually necessary to accomplish reduction.
Lag Screw Fixation.A cortical lag screw is preferred over partially threaded
     as  sa  aq x  sss
 threads are in the neck/head fragment.
1. The gliding hole is first drilled through the femoral neck (Figure 17-10, A and B).
Note carefully the angle of the drill relative to the femoral shaft. The hole is
started at the distal end of the third trochanter to keep the screw entirely
within the femoral neck. The screw is often started too high on the trochanter,
with the result that the screw is too acutely angled to the shaft. This results in
high bending loads on the screw, with subsequent failure or loosening. Another
common error is to aim the drill too caudally, which results in a screw that
exits the neck or head caudally and is therefore of insufficient length
   mas a d  s  s a
cranial cortex of the femoral neck, which will result in perfect screw position
central and deep within the femoral head.
 2. With the fracture segments reduced and compressed either by a pointed
reduction forceps or by medial pressure on the trochanter, one or more K-wires
(0.045-0.062 inch; 1.2-1.6 mm) are inserted through the trochanter, femoral
neck, and head. Unlike the screw, the K-wire should traverse the dorsal bridge
of bone between the trochanter major and femoral head, not the trochanteric
fossa, for maximum holding power (Figure 17-10, C and D). The pin is
positioned proximally so that it does not interfere with insertion of the bone
screw. It will assist in maintaining reduction and will help keep the femoral
head from turning during the drilling, tapping, and insertion of the bone screw.
s a a ie assrd de q ps s u jo a
using bone forceps attached to the trochanter major.
 3. An appropriate-size drill sleeve is inserted through the gliding hole; this serves as a
guide for centering and drilling the appropriate-size tap hole in the femoral head.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
529
D
C
E
 FIGURE 17-10. When a cortex screw is used for cervical fracture fixation, the gliding hole
is drilled up through the femoral neck before reduction so that the hole is properly placed.
A, Drilling the hole using regular drill guide. B, Drilling the hole using a pointed drill guide.
 This is advantageous in placing the hole properly. C and D, The fracture is next reduced, and
small Kirschner wire is inserted to aid in sta bilizing the fragments. The appropriate drill sleeve
is inserted into the femoral gliding hole. This functions as a guide for drilling the appropriate-
size hole in the femoral head. E, Afer the hole is measured and tapped (unless a self-tapping
screw is used), the appropriate size and length of screw is inserted. This serves as a lag screw
in compressing the fragments. A cancellous screw could be used to accomplish the same
objective if all the threads are on the far side of the fracture line.
Ideally, the depth of the hole should be to the subchondral bone; this depth can
be estimated by visualizing and measuring the head and neck segment before
reduction and by measurement from the radiograph. Before the drill bit is
removed, penetration of articular cartilage should be checked by rotation and
flexion-extension of the hip joint to check for crepitus. A curved hemostat can 
also be passed along the surface of the femoral head through a small joint
capsule incision. The depth of the hole is measured, tapped, and the
appropriate-size cortical screw is inserted (Figure 17-10, E). Compression of
s a n   a pn a s a a a
The K-wire is usually left in place. When the basicervical fracture line is quite
oblique, as in Figure 17-11, special attention must be paid to reduction because
530
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 17-11. A, Oblique type B1
fractures of the femoral neck require
care, B, to reduce and compress the calcar
region before bone screw fixation.
FIGURE 17-12. Fixation of a type B1 femoral neck fracture using
Kirschner wires. This method is used primarily for small dogs and cats.
contact may not be good at the distal part. Elevation of a portion of the vastus
lateralis off the fractured neck allows visualization of the reduction.
Application of reduction forceps during fixation in the distal calcar area is
essential in most cases of this type. It may be possible to insert a second lag
screw from the midpoint of the third trochanter into the calcar.
Kirscbner Wire Fixation. After reduction as just described, the K-wires are best
placed with a low-speed power drill; they are difficult to drill accurately with a hand
chuck. The angle of insertion is as described for the screw (Figure 17-12). The outer
wires are placed as proximally and distally in the neck as possible, and the central
pin is then placed between the wires.
Aftercare.  At the completion of surgery, radiographs should be taken from two
a-son,) sd aui ie paxa sa au moys pinous maa auo (smaa esoona
 position), and another should show the rear legs extended. The frog-leg position
           n   
 The leg is usually placed in an off-weight-bearing or Ehmer sling for 7 to 10 days
(see Figures 2-31 and 2-32). Exercise is restricted for the next month or until the
stage of clinical union is reached, as evaluated radiographically, then activity is
slowly returned to normal over the next month. The bone screw and pin usually are
not removed.
Type B3, Cervical with Trochanteric Avuision
 A combination of the methods described for A1 and B1 and B2 fractures is applied
 to type B3 fractures.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
531
Fracture Type 3-1-C; Proximal, Capital or Multifragmentary
Cervical (Figure 17-5, C)
Type C1, Articular Simple
This group of fractures includes both fractures through the articular surface
(Figure 17-13) and those involving the physis only (Figure 17-14).
Avulsion Fracture of Femoral Head
With this fracture, a small portion of the femoral head remains attached to the
round ligament, and the femoral head is dislocated in the craniodorsal position
(Figure 17-13, A). The fracture segment remaining attached to the round ligament
varies in size and is usually visible on a radiograph. Treatment varies with the individ-
ual case, depending primarily on the size of the fragment and the exact location of the
fracture line. This discussion presents several suggested courses that may be followed.
Closed Reduction. An Ehmer sling is applied for approximately 2 weeks
(see Figure 2-31), and activity is restricted for an additional 2 to 4 weeks. Success of
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 17-13. Fixation of a type C1 avulsion fracture of the femoral head. A, Avulsion
fracture with dislocation of the femoral head. B, Small, double-pointed thread pin is inserted
in the center of the fracture surface and passed retrograde through the head and neck, emerging
at the base of the trochanter major. C, Pin chuck is attached at a distance from the bone
(a) corresponding to thickness of avulsed segment (b); fracture segments are reduced and
compression is applied during insertion of the pin. D, About l/s inch of the pin is left
protruding so that removal is possible. E, Alternate method is to cut the round ligament,
reduce the fracture, and stabilize by inserting two or more countersunk Kirschner wires.
F, Occasionally a portion of the femoral head and neck is fractured off in an oblique fashion.
If the fragment is large enough, it may be fixed using a small screw and Kirschner wire.
532
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
this procedure depends on perfect reduction at the fracture site and maintenance of
the reduction until the fracture segments have healed. Both these conditions must be
met if this procedure is to be successful, but this is difficult to accomplish unless the
fragment is very small.
Surgical Excision of Bone Fragment and Reduction of Femoral Head.
The avulsed segment is permanently removed through a craniolateral approach to
expose the hip joint. The femoral head is replaced and stabilized by one of the methods
discussed in Chapter 16; after closure, the leg is immobilized for approximately
7 to 14 days (e.g., with an Ehmer sling). If the removed avulsed segment is too large,
the remaining portion of the femoral head may not remain stable in the acetabulum,
and dislocation will occur. Development of significant degenerative joint disease is
to be anticipated if the fragment is large.
Open Reduction and Fixation.23 A dorsal open approach with osteotomy of
 a asd asd osu s r 
A small, threaded K-wire is started in the center of the fracture surface of the
femoral head and passed retrograde through the head and neck, emerging at the
base of the trochanter major (Figure 17-13, B). The retrograde pin may need to be
inserted through the retracted gluteal muscles first in order to start the pin at the
 proper angle. The pin is inserted until it is flush with the fracture surface, and the
chuck is attached on the opposite end at a distance from the bone corresponding
to the thickness of the avulsed fragment (Figure 17-13, C). The fracture is held
 in reduction and compressed during insertion of the threaded pin. The pin is then
bent to minimize migration and cut off 1/s inch beyond the trochanter major
(Figure 17-13, D). If the fracture segment is large enough, two pins are inserted.
After closure, the leg is immobilized in a non-weight-bearing or Ehmer sling for
about 10 to 14 days (see Figures 2-31 and 2-32). Exercise is restricted until healing
is complete.
Another method of fixation worth consideration, especially if reduction cannot
be visualized in the dorsal approach, is to cut the round ligament, reduce the frac-
ture fragments, and stabilize by use of two or more small, countersunk K-wires
(Figure 17-13, E). Miniscrews (1.5-2.0 mm) can also be used from the articular surface,
as illustrated in Figure 17-16. In some cases the ventral portion of the head and neck
is fractured obliquely and may be reduced and fixed in place using a miniscrew and
K-wire placed from the edge of the articular surface (Figure 17-13, F).
A third method of fixation also uses miniscrews and K-wire but uses a ventral
 approach to the hip joint.34 Although only a limited number of cases have been
described, advantages to this technique are that it is not necessary to cut the round
ligament and the fragment can be directly visualized.
Total Hip Replacement.  When the femoral head cannot be reconstructed and
saved, total hip replacement should be considered as an option (see Chapter 16).
Excision of Femoral Head and Neck.  Excision arthroplasty is usually considered
a last resort in large dogs because the intact joint should be maintained if possible
(see Chapter 16).
Fracture of Femoral Capital Physis
This condition is limited to young animals in which the capital physis is still present
(Figure 17-14, A). It usually occurs between ages 4 and 11 months in dogs. Capital
femoral injury in cats, regardless of apparent previous physeal closure, may
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
533
B
C
multiple Kirschner wires. A, Physeal fracture. B, Two to four Kirschner wires are driven from
the base of the trochanter major up through the femoral neck to the fracture surface. C, After
reduction, a pin chuck is set at a distance from the bone corresponding to the thickness of the
epiphysis; pins are driven into the epiphysis. D, All pins are deeply seated into the epiphysis
but do not penetrate the articular cartilage.
occasionally be seen as late as 12 to 16 months of age. In most cases this fracture is
primarily a separation at the epiphyseal line (usually Salter-Harris I, occasionally II;
see Table 22-1). The joint capsule can be attached to the epiphysis, partially
detached, or completely stripped of, which undoubtedly affects healing.
Fortunately, in most cases there is some attachment. Occasionally, breeds prone to
Legg-Perthes disease develop fractures of the femoral head that mimic physeal
separation. Lameness may be acute, however, without a history of significant trauma.
 If open reduction and internal fixation are to be done, they should be performed
as soon as possible, preferably within the first 24 hours, to avoid the danger of
thrombosis occurring in the kinked capsular vessels at the junction of the femoral
head and neck, and to avoid further injury to the surface of the neck caused by abra-
sion from the epiphysis. The femoral neck also undergoes demineralization quite
rapidly, and this change is usually evident on the radiograph within 7 to 10 days.
a aa s e sop  op p-ae u pi si ex pa
and predictable function with excision arthroplasty (femoral head and neck excision).
 However, internal fixation in small dogs and cats also results in excellent function
and in most cases can be readily accomplished with the pin techniques described
here.3s
534
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 patient, (2) concurrent injuries of the hip joint, (3) early accomplishment of surgery,
(4) preservation of blood supply in the procedure, (5) accurate reduction at the
fracture site, (6) rigid uninterrupted fixation, and (7) restriction of early weight
bearing. The percentage of successful outcomes decreases with each day's delay in
 t um pen sd r ssod si assar  o  as
Success has been achieved in patients treated within 10 days; after this period, however
rigid fixation is difficult to obtain because of demineralization and abrasion of the
femoral neck. All dogs will show evidence of degenerative joint disease at some
point postoperatively.36 Arthritic changes are more pronounced in animals that are
4 months of age or younger at the time of injury and in those that have concurrent
the femoral neck occurs in about 70% of cases after internal fixation, this seldom
results in collapse of the neck.37
Kirschner Wire or Pin Fixation.
. The pin techniques described here are preferable
to use of a lag screw in most cases and particularly in younger animals (<7 months
of age) because these methods are less likely to result in premature closure of the
physeal plate and resultant femoral neck shortening. Figure 17-14 shows the surgical
procedure for fixation of a proximal femoral physeal fracture.23 The exposure of
the area should be conservative to minimize destruction of blood supply. Reduction
of the fracture is best accomplished by grasping the trochanter major with vulsellum
(see Figure 2-15). The capitus is usually rotated in relation to the neck because of
the round ligament and may cause some difficulty in reduction. Medial pressure on
the trochanter while flexing and extending the hip joint with the femur abducted
will usually cause the epiphysis to derotate and lock into the femoral neck in the
reduced position. Small, pointed reduction forceps applied with finger pressure only
can be attached to the periphery of the capitus to assist in the derotation. Pressure
must be applied in a medial direction while driving pins across the fracture site to
 pre vent distraction.
Note: A review of the contour of the epiphysis and epiphyseal line is most helpful
before undertaking anatomical reduction.
Two to four small, smooth pins are inserted for immobilization. Pin size corre-
sponds with the size of bone and may range from a 0.03.5-inch K-wire to a 5/64-inch
Steinmann pin (1-2 mm). The pins may be inserted in antegrade (see Figure 17-14) or
sd au sas iso u paaard si apeie suy (sii a) apeon
may be inserted parallel or in a converging-diverging manner; mechanical studies
indicate superior strength of parallel placement over diverging pins.33 The main
objective is to have the pins well distributed at the fracture surface. Three-pin fixation
techniques are stronger and stiffer than one- or two-pin fixation techniques.38
  on  a  a an  os d a   si  d a
femoral cortex corresponds with the thickness of the epiphysis (Figures 17-14, C,
and 17-15, C). With the fracture compressed in the reduced position, the pins are
inserted into the epiphysis one at a time (Figures 17-14, C and D, and 17-15, C and D)
 The pins should not penetrate the articular cartilage. Pin penetration can be checked
and by palpation of the femoral head using a small, curved hemostat.
Aftercare. At the completion of surgery, radiographs should be taken from two
ventrodorsal views; one view should show the legs flexed at the hip (frog-leg view),
and the second should show the rear legs extended. The frog-leg view is superior for
judging depth of penetration of the pins. An Ehmer or non-weight-bearing sling is
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
535
B
c
D
FIGURE 17-15. Retrograde fixation of a proximal femoral physeal fracture with multiple
Kirschner wires. A, Physeal fracture of the proximal femur B, Two to four double-pointed
Kirschner wires are driven retrograde from the fracture to exit distal to the trochanter major
bone corresponding to the thickness of the epiphysis; pins are driven into the epiphysis.
D, All pins are deeply seated in the epiphysis but do not penetrate the articular cartilage.
The converging/diverging pins may not be as strong as parallel pins.33
applied to the leg for about 7 to 10 days (see Figures 2-31 and 2-32). Exercise should
be limited for the next 5 weeks. The pins are usually left in place unless indicated
otherwise.
should reveal healing or any complications.
Lag Screw Fixation. Lag screw fixation through the articular surface has been
advocated by some?9 (Figure 17-16). However, severing the round ligament further
sa  e jo s  un rao siop u ns o an sss
may be reattached by lag screw fixation through the femoral neck (Figure 17-17).
There is no mechanical advantage over pin fixation,33 and we do not find either of
technique is more technically difficult to perform properly because of the thin cross
 aars ue pea mars aamiaq ap ae aue pe sisudia au yo u
 If lag screw placement through the articular surface is chosen, the epiphysis must
be freed of soft tissue attachments and removed from the acetabulum. After reduction
536
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 17-16. Fixation of a proximal femoral physeal
fracture with lag screws from the articular surface. Two
1.5- to 2.0-mm screws are used, with the screw heads
countersunk below the cartilage surface. One screw is in the
fovea capitus, and the second is near the cranial border of
the epiphysis.
 FIGURE 17-17. Lag screw fixation of a physeal fracture
of the femoral head. Care must be taken in tightening the
screw because the threads in the epiphyseal end are in
cancellous bone.
 onto the metaphysis, a K-wire is inserted through the fovea capitus for temporary
stabilization while a 1.5- to 2.0-mm screw is inserted in lag fashion cranial to
the fovea. The head of the screw must be countersunk below the articular surface.
The K-wire is removed and replaced with a second screw.
Fracture of Femoral Physis and Trochanter Major
Combined fracture separation of both the femoral capital physis and the trochanter
major physis occasionally occurs (see Figure 17-5, B). Radiographs must be studied
carefully to detect both fractures preoperatively because the trochanter is frequently
obscured by the femur. Often the trochanter is in the proper location, but the shaft
of the femur is displaced proximally and cranially.
The open approach is made difficult by the gluteal muscles and vastus lateralis
muscles remaining on the large trochanter major. The vastus attachment at the
distal end of the trochanter major should be incised to gain exposure for reduction.
 The femoral capital physis is pinned as described in Figure 17-14 and the trochanter
is wired as in Figure 2-65, A.
Type C2, Articular Muitifragmentary
Successful internal fixation of these fractures is very unlikely, and degenerative joint
 disease is the almost inevitable consequence of such attempts. Most of these animals
are candidates for either total hip replacement or excision arthroplasty, which are
covered in Chapter 16.
Type C3, Muitifragmentary Cervical and Trochanteric
Reduction can only be accomplished by performing an open approach. The expo-
 sure of choice is usually a combination of the craniolateral approach to the hip
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
537
joint (Figure 17-6, B) and the lateral approach to the femur (see Figure 17-19).
Fixation can usually best be accomplished using a bone plate and bone screws.2.3
Fractures of this type in some of the larger dogs are amenable to the use of a hook
plate. 30 Depending on the degree of fragmentation, the pin or external fixator
techniques such as shown in Figures 17-8 and 17-9 may be applicable, since a screw
 for the femoral neck can be accommodated in both instances.
Bone Plate and Lag Screws
 In Figure 17-18, a craniolateral approach to the hip joint and a lateral approach to
the femur are performed to expose the fracture site. The approach procedure is
modified to fit the individual fracture. Reduction is usually accomplished by start-
ing at the proximal end and working toward the distal end. Bone-holding forceps,
tion. The bone plate is contoured. An easy and helpful procedure is to prebend the
plate to the curvature of the lateral surface of the opposite femur, as shown from a
craniocaudal view on the radiograph. The use of a dynamic compression plate
(DCP) has the added advantage of allowing oblique insertion of the bone screw
proximally into the femoral neck and head along with affording compression of the
various fracture segments. Usually, the first bone screw is inserted through the base
of the trochanter major and neck and into the femoral head. Judicious effort must
a ai o maos su aa s jo uasi daap rdord a n sn aq
part of the femoral head. The trochanter major is then reduced and fixed in
position (Figure 17-18, A and B). The remaining bone screws are inserted as
indicated (Figure 17-18, C and D). In some cases, additional bone screws that
produce a lag effect may be used advantageously to assist in compressing at the
fracture site.
Aftercare.  Following closure, an off-weight-bearing sling may be indicated for
S               
 Radiographs taken at 6 to 8 weeks are used to evaluate the healing, and if satisfactory,
a gradual resumption of normal activity is started.
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 17-18. Fixation of type C3 fractures of the femoral neck, trochanter major, and
femoral shaft. A, Fracture as seen in a craniocaudal radiograph. B, The plate is contoured,
and a long lag screw is placed in the femoral neck. The trochanter major is reduced and fixed.
C, The subtrochanteric fracture is reduced. A tension device or dynamic compression plate
(DCP) is used to obtain compression. D, Fixation plate in place.
538
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Complications in Proximal Femoral Fractures
Most complications in femoral head and neck fractures are caused by the following:
1. Compromised blood supply to the femoral head and neck that occurs at the
time of the initial injury or during the surgical procedure.
 2. Poor bone reduction.
3. Inadequate fixation.
4. Premature weight bearing.
The most frequently occurring complications are as follows:
1. Delayed union or nonunion.
2. Avascular necrosis.
 3. Secondary osteoarthritis.
 4. Cessation of neck growth in young animals as a result of premature closure
 of the physis, leading to subluxation of the hip.
Radiographic Signs
Radiographic evidence of a complication may appear as a loss of density in the
femoral neck or along the fracture line in contrast to the surrounding bony tissue.
 Such a sign indicates a disturbance in blood supply, demineralization, and possible
movement at the fracture site. In long-standing cases, a mottled appearance of the
femoral head indicates replacement of some areas of necrotic bone by new bone.
 In some patients, the femoral neck may disappear partially or completely in 3 to
6 weeks, leading to varying degrees of segmental collapse of the neck. In most cases,
clinical and radiographic evidence of complications is evident within 6 weeks.
However, about 6 months should elapse before the clinician attempts to determine
the ultimate fate of the femoral head and neck, even in those patients that appear
to be healing initially. Most animals with coxofemoral dislocation, physeal separa-
tion, or femoral neck fracture that made a good recovery show some temporary
 demineralization and slight narrowing of the femoral neck.
Treatment
If reduction and fixation are satisfactory, restricted activity and more healing time
are indicated. In some cases, a more rigid internal fixation with restriction of activity
is indicated. Those beyond salvaging with a functional hip joint are subjects for
excision arthroplasty of the femoral head and neck or for total hip replacement, as
discussed in Chapter 16.
DIAPHYSEAL FRACTURES
Diaphyseal fractures are usually the result of direct trauma and are accompanied by
various degrees of soft tissue damage and hematoma.23 The fracture pattern may be
quite variable: transverse, oblique, spiral, multiple, fragmented, or occasionally,
greenstick in the young animal. Diaphyseal fractures account for 56% of femoral
fractures.40 As discussed earlier, external fixation is rarely adequate. Treatment recom-
mendations are keyed to the fracture patient scoring system detailed in Table 2-6
when applicable.4s The internal methods of fixation include use of the following:
1. Intramedullary Steinmann pin alone.
 2. Intramedullary Steinmann pin plus auxiliary fixation (unilateral external.
fixator, cerclage wires, lag screws).
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
539
3. Interlocking intramedullary nail. Although still in the early stages of clinical 
use, the interlocking nail holds promise of being as useful in femoral
 fractures as bone plates have been in the past.
4. Unilateral external fixator with an IM pin and other auxiliary fixation as
indicated. The caveats applicable to external fixators used on canine femoral
fractures are discussed earlier under Fixation Techniques.
5. Plate with or without lag screws or cerclage wires. In general, the multiple
and very unstable fractures respond best to bone plate and screw fixation. In
large dogs, almost all femoral shaft fractures make a better functional response
and are accompanied by fewer complications with bone plate and screw fixation.
 6. Plate with IM pin for bridging osteosynthesis. The most complex diaphyseal
fractures are often treated with a plate using buttress function. This
 configuration is subjected to considerable bending stress during weight
bearing, attributable to the mechanical environment of the canine femur.
The addition of an IM pin shields the buttress plate from bending stress to
prevent fatigue failure from weight bearing.
Open Approach and Reduction
 us p a asoxa oi pas si nde p e sunaxa ma 
reduction and internal fixation (Figure 17-19).29 In middle to proximal femoral frac-
tures, the proximal fragment rotates caudally, allowing excessive anteversion of the
femoral head. The surgeon must remember this when applying fixation, especially
in comminuted fractures (see Figure 17-25). Oblique or multiple wedge fractures
develop considerable overriding and can be very difficult to reduce, especially in
large breeds or when several days have elapsed since the injury. The use of fracture
distractors or reduction by means of an IM pin is helpful (see Figures 2-18 and 2-19).
Fracture Type 3-2-A; Diaphyseal Simple or Incomplete
(Figure 17-20, A)
Type A1, Incomplete
The temptation to treat these fractures by external splintage should be resisted,
Sn   is a n a  s a s
FIGURE 17-19. Open approach to expose the
Vastus
Biceps
femoral shaft.29 The belly of the biceps femoris
lateralis m.
femoris m.
muscle is reflected caudally, and the vastus lateralis 
muscle and fascia lata are reflected cranially,
Shaft of femur
exposing most of the femoral shaft.
540
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 17-20. Diaphyseal fractures of the femur. A: A1, Incomplete; A2, oblique; A3,
transverse. B: B1, One reducible wedge; B2, reducible wedges; B3, nonreducible wedges.
C: C1, Reducible wedges; C2, segmental; C3, nonreducible wedges. (From Unger M,
Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
 Additionally, these fractures occur primarily in growing animals, and immobilization
 of the limb in these animals often leads to development of coxa valga with resulting
instability of the coxofemoral joint. Fracture patient scores typically are in the 9 to
10 range (see Table 2-6). It is very simple to insert a Steinmann pin in a normograde
-ae ud au (ei pue iI s as) yodde uado ue nom uo ra
quately stabilizes the fracture against the bending forces of the hamstring muscles
and allows early weight bearing. The pin can be a smaller diameter than usual and
should be seated close to the bone in the trochanteric fossa to minimize compromise
of hip joint function. Because of bone growth, it may not be possible to remove the
 pin after healing.
Type A2, Obligue
Reduction and Fixation
A long oblique fracture of the femur is shown in Figure 17-21. A fracture patient
score of 8 to 9 would be expected. After a lateral open approach, the Steinmann pin
 is inserted in the proximal segment, the fracture is reduced and maintained by using
self-retaining bone forceps, and the pin is then inserted into the distal segment.
 In long oblique fractures with a fracture line length equal to twice the bone diameter,
cerclage wires are inserted at about 1-cm intervals (Figure 17-21, B and C). After
clinical union, the IM pin is removed, and the cerclage wires are left in place.
Figure 17-22 presents another case of a long oblique femoral fracture, with a
fracture patient score of 8 to 9, in a large-breed or giant-breed dog. After reduction
and insertion of the Steinmann pin, one or more lag screws may be inserted to bring
eter is used. The lag screws are inserted off center to avoid the IM pin. After clinical
union, the IM pin is removed, and the lag screws are left in place.
Type A3, Transverse
 Providing rotational stability is the primary concern in these fractures, and in large
breeds this could easily drive the fracture patient score down to 7 to 8. Although
considered a “simple" fracture, type A3 is one of the most common types to result
in nonunion, no doubt because of underestimating the biomechanical forces involved.
Age and size of the patient are important determinants as to type of fixation.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
541
A
B
C
FIGURE 17-21. A, Type A2 long oblique fracture of the femur. B, Following a lateral open
approach, an intramedullary pin is inserted into the proximal segment. The fracture is
reduced and maintained by self-retaining bone forceps; the pin is inserted into the distal
segment. C, In long oblique fractures, cerclage wires are inserted at 1- to 2-cm intervals; after
clinical union, the intramedullary pin is removed and cerclage wires are left in place. If there
is any doubt in regard to stability after applying the above, an external fixator may be added
atsurgery.
B
A
 FIGURE 17-22. A, Type A2 long oblique fracture of the femur. B, After reduction and
compression. C, Lag screws may be inserted off center to avoid the intramedullary pin. After
 clinical union, the intramedullary pin is removed and the lag screws are left in place.
542
 Part IIl—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Internal Fixation
Steinmann Pin. If the patient is less than approximately 6 months of age,
     o  a   
rotational stability, and simple Steinmann pin fixation would be adequate
(see Figures 17-1 to 17-3). In mature dogs, however, some additional auxiliary
fixation is needed. If the patient is less than 15 to 20 pounds (7-9 kg), interfrag-
mentary wire fixation is often adequate. These patterns are described in Chapter 2
(see Figure 2-63). Such wire fixation must be very carefully applied to ensure
that the wire is truly tight, and this author is very conservative in recommending
them.
Steinmann Pin and External Fixator.  In larger breeds, a type IA fixator com-
(h ai as x am p d n as ao  si d au m p
 The technique is described earlier under Fixation Techniques.
Interlocking Nail. Expansion of the interlocking medullary nail fixation system
(Figure 2-54, E) to smaller sizes has improved its versatility of application to large
cats and dogs of most sizes.14,18,19
 Bone Plate.  Compression bone plate fixation is a very simple and highly effective
method of treatment in animals of all sizes, especially in large and giant breeds.
 s- a aas as aeid au Aq Pe aq Pis so ia oi xi
choice of plate size).
Aftercare.  See aftercare suggestions at the end of this section.
Fracture Type 3-2-B; Diaphyseal Wedge (Figure 17-20, B)
Increasing degrees of instability characterize these fractures; therefore, simple
 ss d an e ssa s d s r
from 3 to 7.
Type B1, One Reducible Wedge
 Reduction and stabilization of the wedge by means of cerclage wires or lag screws
 described for those fractures. Fracture patient scores typically are 6 to 7.
Internal Fixation
Bone Plate and Lag Screws.  Figure 17-23 illustrates the combination of lag
screw and compression plate fixation.
Steinmann Pin, Cerclage Wires, and External Fixator.  After reduction and
cerclage wire stabilization of the wedge, this fixation can be completed as shown in
 Figure 17-4.
Interlocking Nail and Cerclage Wires. After reduction and cerclage wire stabi-
lization of the wedge, the interlocking nail would be appropriate fixation in large
cats and dogs of most sizes.
Type B2, Several Reducible Wedges
 Increasing instability and complexity cause fracture patient scores to drop to
4 to 6.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
543
A
B
C
D
         a    
fracture and fixation in place using a lag screw for interfragmentary compression. C and D,
Contoured bone plate applied on lateral surface of the femur.
A
B
C
FIGURE 17-24. A, Type B2 fracture of the femur. B and C, Rigid fixation by use of an
intramedullary pin, three cerclage wires, and an external fixator.
Internal Fixation
The methods of fixation are an extension of those for type B1 fractures. Figure 17-24
illustrates stabilization by multiple cerclage wires, Steinmann pin, and type IA external
fixator. Bone plates are typically applied to function as neutralization plates rather
than compression plates. A minimum of six cortices must be captured by plate
544
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
screws in each of the proximal and distal segments. Either cerclage wires under the
plate or lag screws are used to secure the wedges.
Type B3, Nonreducible Wedge
Although not all the fragments can be reduced and stabilized, the bone is still able
to assume some buttress function, and shortening of the bone is not the major problem
as long as the major diaphyseal sections are held in alignment. It is best to take a
biological fixation approach to these fractures, since total reduction is not possible;
on the other hand, a bridging or buttress fixation is not needed.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
Bone Plate.  The principles of biological fixation can be respected during plate
fixation only if the temptation to attempt reduction of the fragments is resisted. The
fracture hematoma and fragments should be disturbed as little as possible, consistent
with reduction of the major diaphyseal fragments. It is usually possible to place the
fracture under compression with the plate, and this will add stability. Six to eight
 cortices must be captured by plate screws in each major segment.
The major problem with plate fixation occurs when the nonreducible fragments
are on the medial cortex, which is the natural buttress cortex of the femur. Failure
to bone graft this area (see Chapter 3) can lead to plate failure because of repetitive
bending stresses applied to the plate over a very short segment of the plate. If the
fragmented area of the medial cortex is relatively small, autogenous cancellous bone
graft will stimulate early callus formation and relieve the bone plate of bending stress
 Larger, nonreduced areas on the medial cortex can be physically reinforced by onlay
( e ai as r soao sooe m ps se  
Fragmentation of the caudal cortex usually does not need grafting, since the
fragments have intact periosteal blood supply from the adductor magnus muscle if
they are not stripped away from the muscle.
Interlocking Nail. Because bending stresses are more evenly distributed over
the length of the interlocking nail than in the bone plate, loss of the medial cortex
is not as critical. Autogenous cancellous bone grafting is still a useful procedure to
ensure early callus formation. Minimal exposure of the fracture site may be necessary
to ensure passage of the pin into the distal segment. Interlocking nails are available
with diameters appropriate for the medullary canal of large cats and dogs of most sizes.
Steinmann Pin and Type IA External Fixator. As with the interlocking nail,
 bending stresses resulting from loss of the medial cortex are less critical with this
fixation than with plates. This is a very useful alternative to plate fixation in the cat,
although slightly less satisfactory in the dog because of the problems with function
mentioned earlier (see Fixation Techniques). Minimal exposure of the fracture site
of six fixation pins is advisable, and a double-bar configuration (see Figure 2-43, E)
(8 oz) spunod st Alanewixoidde ueq aaie sjeuue u pasn s!
Aftercare.  See aftercare suggestions at the end of this section
Fracture Type 3-2-C; Diaphyseal Complex (Figure 17-20, C)
These segmental fractures represent the most challenging fixation problems of all
long-bone fractures because of the magnitude of the mechanical forces acting at the
fracture site. Fracture patient scores are very low, in the 1 to 3 range.
17—-Fractures of the Femur and Patella
545
Type C1, Reducible Wedges
Reduction and Internal Fixation
As may be anticipated, fixation is a combination of methods previously described.
 The fracture is intermediate in fracture patient score relative to the other two fractures
in this group. Either cerclage wires (Figure 17-25) or lag screws (Figure 17-26) are
used to join the wedges, followed by a primary fixation. The surgeon's experience
will determine whether a reconstructive technique should be used to reduce the
fragments without compromise to healing, or whether the fragments should be left
 unreduced for a more “biological" approach, regardless of fixation method.
FIGURE 17-25. A, Type C1 fracture of the
femoral shaft with numerous fissure fractures
 present. B, Reduction of fracture segments, one 
by one. Cerclage wires immobilize fragments and
reconstruct femur. Neutralization plate applied;
screw holes in plate directly overlying fracture
lines are left vacant.
A
B
FIGURE 17-26. A, Type C1 fracture of the
femur. B, Fracture reduced; interfragmentary
compression achieved by use of lag screws
through the bone alone and through the
plate. A neutralization plate is applied to
 overcome rotary, bending, and compressive
forces. In this case, it was more advantageous
to apply the plate on the cranial surface.
A
B
546
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Bone Plate. This is probably the most widely used form of fixation in this
situation. The function of the plate will vary, depending on the obliquity of the
 proximal and distal fracture lines. If all the fracture lines can be compressed by
cerclage wires or lag screws, the plate functions as a pure neutralization plate
(see Figures 17-25 and 17-26). If the proximal and/or distal fracture line is greater than
Jo aaap aos u paoeid aq ueo aeld an 'sixe ui au on anai saaap st
compression, typically with one screw placed in the load position in the plate hole.
Steinmann Pin and Type IA External Fixator. If the wedges can be stabilized
with cerclage wires, a type IA external fixator and Steinmann pin can be used as
primary fixation. Because of the instability inherent to these fractures, a minimum
of six fixation pins along with an IM pin is advisable, and a double-bar configuration
( o) spunod st Aaiixodde uqi ai siee u pasn s (a 'ttz ant aas)
Interlocking Nail. If the wedges can be stabilized with cerclage wires, the inter-
locking nail can be used as primary fixation.
Type C2, Segmenta!
Type C2 is the most stable fracture within this group, consisting of only two fracture
lines (Figure 17-27).
A
B
C
FIGURE 17-27. Type C2 multiple fracture of the femoral shaft and neck in 1-year-old Border
collie. A, On open approach, numerous fissures were noted in the various fracture segments.
B and C, The femoral shaft was first reconstructed and fixed together with one lag screw and
four cerclage wires. A neutralization plate was applied with a 4.5-mm lag screw to immobilize
the femoral neck fracture. Note the twist in the distal plate necessary in the supracondylar
region. The plate was removed at 7 months; shaft lag screw and cerclage wires were left in place.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
547
Reduction and Internal Fixation
Bone Plate.  Depending on the obliquity of the fracture line, the plate can function
a sas ae s an yoq  'o u r ussaon 
plate is applied with compression at both ends (see Figure 2-72, D, E, and F). If the 
fractures are oblique, they can be compressed with either cerclage wires or lag
screws and the plate applied in the neutralization mode. In some cases the plate is
applied in compression at one end of the intermediate segment and in neutralization
at the other end. At least six cortices must be captured by plate screws in each of
the proximal and distal segments.
Steinmann Pin and Type IA External Fixator Because of the instability
inherent to these fractures, a minimum of six fixation pins is advisable, and a
double-bar configuration (see Figure 2-43, E) is used in animals larger than
approximately 45 pounds (20 kg). If the fracture lines are oblique enough, cerclage
wires or lag screws can be used to compress these fractures before the fixator is
applied.
Interlocking Nail. If the fracture lines are oblique enough, cerclage wires can
be used to compress these fractures before the interlocking nail is applied.
Type C3, Nonreducible Wedges
Bridging osteosynthesis is applicable to type C3 fractures, with fracture patient
scores ranging from 1 to 3.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
Maximal advantage of bridging osteosynthesis is taken when the fracture is reduced
either in a closed manner or with a minimal open approach and no manipulation of
fragments. Reduction attempts may ruin soft tissue attachments and hinder early
callus formation. Care must be taken to ensure rotational alignment when using
closed or minimal open reduction.
Bone Plate. Although a much larger exposure is needed to apply the plate
in buttress or bridging function, bone plates still work well in this application
if proper care is taken. Application of a bridging plate is illustrated in Figure 17-28.
The temptation to disrupt and manipulate the wedges must be overcome.
"Neat freaks" have a distinct disadvantage here! The plate is contoured from a
craniocaudal radiograph of the normal femur and applied to the proximal seg-
ment, ideally ensuring that at least eight cortices are captured by plate screws.
Proximal screws placed deeply in the femoral neck are counted as two cortices;
s  a su  as xd  ase aq  s 
 aisod isaq aun p 'sd i-aoq m ad an on pane s
is attained by traction, the fracture distractor (see Figure 2-18), or IM pin dis-
traction (see Figure 2-19). The proximal segment must be rotated cranially to
eliminate excessive anteversion before the plate is clamped to the distal segment.
The distal screws are then applied through the plate, with at least eight cortices
ee a au on pdde si  auoq sonno snov pade
(see Chapter 3), taking care to not disturb the wedges. If a large gap is observed at
the fracture site because of severe displacement of large fragments, either the gap
o sdo omn no auo o  auoq so soune m a aq is
absorbable suture must be used to gently move the displaced fragment closer to the
fracture gap.
548
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
B
FIGURE 17-28. Biological osteosynthesis with a bone plate. A, Complex type C diaphyseal
fracture of the femur. B, The plate is contoured from the radiograph of the opposite femur
and attached proximally and distally without any handling or reduction of the fragments,
which will tend to be pulled into the fracture gap by muscular forces. It is important to
restore bone length as accurately as possible to allow the fragments to drift into position.
Eight cortices proximally and distally should be engaged by plate screws for this type fixation
of the femur C, An intramedullary pin has been placed into the femur before application of
the plate to aid in alignment of the bone and to protect the plate from bending stress during
weight bea ring.
Plate and Intramedullary Pin.  Plates applied with bridging or buttress function
are subjected to considerable bending stress during weight bearing, which can cause
fatigue failure of the implant. The combination of buttress plate with an IM pin
helps to shield the plate from bending stress26.27 (Figure 17-28, C). An IM pin with
a diameter 35% to 40% that of the intramedullary space is placed first, with care
 taken to prevent disruption of the fracture hematoma.27 Placement of the pin also
helps to align the major proximal and distal fracture fragments. The plate is then
contoured and applied with bone screws. Screws are placed to avoid the IM pin
 if possible. If the pin interferes with screw placement, a unicortical screw may be
used in place of bicortical screws. Often, bicortical screws are successfully placed.
A minimum of one bicortical and three monocortical screws is placed above and
below the fracture.
Steinmann Pin and Type IA or IB External Fixator.
The goals of bridging
osteosynthesis are respected by the use of the pin and type IA fixator, applied as
previously described. This is a very useful alternative to plate fixation in the cat,
although slightly less satisfactory in the dog because of the problems with function
 mentioned earlier (see Fixation Techniques). Because there will be no load sharing
of the bone with the fixator, a minimum of six fixation pins is advisable,
larger than approximately 45 pounds (20 kg) if the Kirschner-Ehmer fixation
system is used.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
549
Another fixation configuration useful in complex fractures is the combination of
an IM pin with the type IB fixator (Figure 2-45, B). Whether used with the
 Kirschner-Ehmer system or with the more rigid IMEX SK external fixation system,
the type IB fixator adds increased strength and stiffness for use in a difficult
fracture. The type IB external fixator may be attached to the IM pin with a “tie-in"
configuration.41 The IM pin is not cut short but is attached to the fixator with a
double clamp.
Interlocking Nail.  Because of its ability to act as a buttress, the interlocking nail
is a good choice for type C3 diaphyseal fractures with nonreducible wedges.
Minimal exposure of the fracture site may be necessary to ensure passage of the pin
into the distal segment. This system is now available with nails 4.0, 4.7, 6.0, and
8.0 mm in diameter for use in femoral fractures in dogs of most sizes and in cats.
Aftercare of Diaphyseal Fractures
Ideally, the animal would be allowed early, limited active use of the limb. This
requires totally stable internal fixation, good owner compliance with confinement
and exercise restrictions, and a patient that will not overstress the repair with hyper-
activity. If any of these elements are less than optimal, an off-weight-bearing sling is
advisable for 2 to 3 weeks (see Figure 2-32). Exercise should be severely restricted
for 4 to 6 weeks, with a gradual return to unrestricted activity at 8 to 12 weeks.
Radiographs should be taken at 4 to 8 weeks for IM pins and external fixators and
8 to 10 weeks for plates to confirm clinical union before any significant increase in
exercise is allowed.
DISTAL FRACTURES
 Fractures of the distal segment represent about 20% to 25% of all femoral fractures 
and 11% of all diaphyseal fractures140 (Figure 17-29). Fractures involving the
distal femoral physis are relatively common in young animals between ages 4 and
11 months. Salter type I and II fractures are seen most frequently.2342
Supracondylar fractures are seen most often in the mature animal. Both fracture
types present similar biomechanical problems relative to reduction and fixation and
are discussed together. (See Chapter 22 for further discussion of physeal injuries.)
Articular fractures are relatively uncommon, accounting for about 17% percent of
 all distal segment fractures.140
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Pleaserefer to theprintedpublication.
B: B1, Lateral condyle sagittal; B2, medial condyle sagittal; B3, frontal unicondylar. C: C1,
Simple, meta physeal simple or wedge; C2, simple, metaphyseal complex; C3, multifragmentary.
550
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Open Approaches
Arthrotomy of the stifle joint is necessary to expose all these distal fractures.
The exact approach varies with the extent of the pathology, but the lateral approach
 is most common because it is suitable for allthe nonarticular fractures (Figure 17-30).29
 Medial and bilateral approaches are used for articular fractures, and osteotomy of
 the tibial tuberosity is sometimes useful for type C fractures.
Fracture Type 3-3-A; Distal, Extraarticular (Figure 17-29, A)
The distal segment is usually displaced caudally and accompanied by a sizable
hematoma (Figure 17-31, A). The objectives of treatment should include
(1) anatomical reduction and (2) rigid uninterrupted fixation so that the animal is
 free to move the stifle joint during the healing period. Suggested methods of treatment
 include Rush pins and small transfixation pins/K-wires inserted across the fracture
d e m  s (1 a) h a  d pd  hs e  a!
of the metaphysis is attached to the distal epiphysis, it may be advantageous to
 insert a lag screw transversely to attach the metaphyseal wedge.
Type A1, Simple; Type A2, Wedge
Closed Reduction and Fixation
 In early cases with minimal displacement, especially in cats and small dogs, closed
 reduction is sometimes possible if the patient is seen within the first 24 hours. The
 fracture is reduced by flexing the stifle joint with the tarsus extended and applying
distal traction on the caudal surface of the proximal part of the tibia. With the
femur stabilized, flexion of the stifle with proximal pressure on the tibia usually
maintains the reduction. Immobilization is applied, holding the stifle in flexion by
means of a modified Thomas splint or Ehmer sling (see Figures 2-25 and 2-31).
Joint
capsule
 Patella,
FGURE 17-30. Approach to
Femoral
the distal femur and stifle joint
condyle
through a lateral incision. (From
Tendon of 
Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An
long digital -
ext. m.
atlas of surgical approaches to
 Cranial
Lateral
the bones and joints of the dog
cruciate lig.
collateral
and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004,
lig.
Saunders.)
Infrapatellar
fat pad
retracted
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
551
B
C
A
D
F
FIGURE 17-31.
Rush pin fixation of type A1 distal femoral physeal fractures. A, Salter-Harris
type I fracture of the distal femoral physis. B and C, Position on femoral condyles of entry
holes for Rush pins. These holes should be the same diameter as Rush pins and placed in the
caudal half of the physis (condylar area). D and E, After reduction of the fracture, double
Rush pins are driven into the femoral medullary canal. Pins should be two thirds to three
fourths of the length of the femur. The pins bend in two planes as they are driven, thus storing
energy that is transferred to the bone as compression.
With splint fixation, padding, gauze, and adhesive tape are applied to maintain
caudal traction on the femur and cranial traction on the tibia. Reduction should be
confirmed radiographically. This treatment may result in some stiffness of the stifle
 because the joint is not free to move during the healing period, and intraarticular and
extraarticular adhesions are more likely to form during immobilization of the joint.
 Removing the fixation at 2 weeks will minimize this problem.
Open Reduction
The patient is placed in the dorsal recumbent position. A lateral approach to the stifle
joint is made, and the fascia lata incision is extended proximally to allow separation
 of the biceps femoris muscle from the quadriceps muscles, exposing the fracture site.
The same basic maneuvers just described for closed reduction are used, but
 reduction can be aided by levering the epiphysis back into position. A flat bone skid
or scalpel handle can be used to assist in this approach. The most proximal edge of
the epiphysis containing the trochlear groove is quite fragile and must be protected
from secondary fracture. Grasping the epiphyseal segment with a bone-holding
 sdaory uonnpar pauod e Kressasau  alqissod j! Papioae aq Pnous sdas
vulsellum forceps can be applied to the medial and lateral nonarticular surfaces of
the condyles. If a week or more has elapsed since the fracture occurred, it may be
[xoid aui jo pua jesp aun o auoq jo sunoe leus e anoai on Aressa
segment. Perfect reduction is ideal; if this is not possible, however, the distal segment
should be overreduced cranially to avoid patellar impingement during extension of
the stifle. Failure to reduce the epiphysis adequately was the main cause of poor
results in a study of 47 distal femoral fractures.43
552
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Internal Fixation
Although retrograde insertion of small Steinmann pins has been an accepted
fixation in the past, this method was more likely to be associated with sciatic nerve
impingement, as discussed earlier under Fixation Techniques.10 Other methods are
suggested here for this reason.
Rush Pins.   Two Rush pins are inserted by first drilling diagonal holes (20 degrees
to the sagittal plane of the femur) into the medial and lateral surfaces of the condyles
just proximal to the gliding surfaces (Figure 17-31, B and C). The two pins are then
inserted and driven into the femoral shaft simultaneously (Figure 17-31, D and E).
Note that the pins are also aimed cranially so that they curve in both the frontal and
the sagittal planes. This requires that the holes be drilled as far caudally on the
condyles as possible, near the collateral ligaments. Care must be taken so that the
holes in the distal segment are not "split out" in the drilling and insertion process.
In most cases, no additional fixation is necessary. Healing is rapid, and the pins are
removed in 3 to 5 weeks if they are used in a young growing animal. Alternatively,
in young animals the hook end is cut off after pin placement, which lessens the
chance of causing premature closure of the growth plate. If the animal is close to
skeletal maturity, the pins are routinely left in situ because they have minimal ten-
 dency to loosen and migrate. Using true Rush pins, this method is most applicable
to large breeds of dogs, where 3/32- or 1/s-inch (2.4- to 3.2-mm) pins are most com-
mon. In cats and toy breeds of dogs, 0.045- to 0.062-inch (1.2- to 1.5-mm)
 K-wires can be used in a manner similar to that for Rush pins. The hook end can be
 bent before setting the pin against the condyle.
Transfixation Pins or Kirscbner Wires. For this simple nailing fixation, the pins
can be applied in a crossed or parallel position (Figure 17-32). Pin size varies from
D
 s     s ss   e a  i 
ation may be accomplished by the use of two transfixation cross pins. These may be inserted
 a     n o  n  n  
into the opposite cortex with the pin cut and seated flush with the cartilage. Note the caudal
angulation of the pins to ensure their being seated well into the condyle. D, An alternative
method of pinning is placing the pins parallel to each other.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
553
 0.045-inch (1.2-mm) K-wires to 3/32-inch (2.4-mm) Steinmann pins. This method is
 particularly advantageous in chondrodystrophic breeds, where the extreme curvature
of the distal femur and condyles makes other methods difficult. When using cross
pins, they are usually started in the metaphyseal area and extend distally into the
opposite condyles (Figure 17-32, B and C). Parallel pins are similar, except that they
are driven into the ipsilateral condyle (Figure 17-32, D). Note that the pins must be
started far enough medially and laterally in the femur to avoid the quadriceps muscle,
which must be free to glide. A common error is failure to angle the pins sufficiently
caudal to enter the large part of the condyles. Both methods avoid penetration of
the articular cartilage, and thus no pin ends are in the joint. Crossing-pin fixations 
caused more complications than single Steinmann pin or modified Rush pin fixation
in one study, primarily because the fracture could be more easily fixed while still
underreduced than with the other fixations.43
Crossing pins are driven from the articular surface by some surgeons, but this
method has the disadvantages of the pins protruding into the joint and often less stable
fixation. The latter disadvantage is caused by the flare of the condyles relative to the
shaft; starting the pin into the condyle at an angle sufficient to cause the pin to
*"bite" in the bone creates a more acute pin angle relative to the shaft than is desirable.
The result is that the pin exits the metaphyseal cortex too close to the fracture line
to provide optimal stability.
Lag Screus. Bone screws can be substituted for the transfixation pins just
described and can provide additional stability, especially in large breeds and chon-
drodystrophic breeds. Care must be taken to ensure a lag effect for maximum stability.
Insertion from proximal to distal is advisable.
Aftercare
Activity should be restricted, and no additional fixation is usually indicated.
Healing is rapid in physeal fractures, usually being clinically united in 2 to 3 weeks.
Nonphyseal fractures take 3 or 4 more weeks for clinical union. If there is con-
siderable trauma in the area, it may be advisable to have the owner apply 20 to
 30 gentle passive flexion-extension movements of the stifle joint two or thre times
daily.
Prognosis
The younger the animal sustaining physeal fractures, the greater is the potential for
growth abnormalities. Functional problems were seen in 18% of young animals
because of femoral shortening.4 In another study of 48 physeal fractures, good to
excellent clinical function was obtained in 88% of cases.24
Type A3, Complex
There is no possibility for closed reduction of these fractures; they must be handled
 by open approach and internal fixation.
Reduction and Fixation
Bone Plate.1
 Neutralization plate fixation can be considered if the fragments are
large enough to reduce and fix by any method. The reconstruction plate (Synthes.
Ltd., Paoli, Pa) is adaptable to this location because it can be contoured to curve
 an i  s i   a a an o s an 
be reduced and that the plate is truly a neutralization plate because this plate is not
stiff enough to function as a buttress plate. Conventional straight plates are rarely
useful, since it is difficult to insert sufficient screws into the distal segment because
554
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 17-33. Fixation of type A3 complex
distal femoral fractures. A, Reconstruction plate
(Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) contoured on edge to
closely fit the femoral condyle. B, Hybrid type
I-Il external fixator with a curved connecting
bar controls rotation and length while the
intramedullary pin provides axial stability. The
double clamp on the connecting bar can be
avoided by attaching it to the third fixation pin
with a single clamp.
of the curvature of the bone. The hook plate used for intertrochanteric osteotomy
Sued Aq saop ae ui aned ssanq e se uouny oi apeu aq ueo (9l iaideu aas)
the two hooks and one screw in the distal segment.
 i si d an n si a  o ux ad ym d 
periarticular at its distal end. This can lead to irritation of the joint and varying
degrees of lameness; therefore, these plates are usually removed after several
months. Additionally, a very secure closure of the lateral parapatellar retinaculum
is needed to prevent dehiscence and medial patellar luxation. Gentle passive flexion/
extension movements at the stifle are helpful in reducing a decreased stifle range of
motion.
 and buttress or bridging fixation is needed (Figure 17-33, B). The Steinmann pin
is placed in conventional manner, with care taken to seat it as deeply as possible in
the condyle, and a center-threaded, positive-thread-profile fixation pin is placed
transversely through the condyle. This pin is attached to the straight lateral connecting
bar, and a curved connecting bar is used to attach the medial end of the pin to the
 lateral bar. The Steinmann pin and fixation pin provide stability in both axes of
the condyle.
Fracture Type 3-3-B; Distal, Partial Articular (Figure 17-29, B)
Type B1, Lateral Condyle, Sagittal; Type B2, Medial Condyle,
Sagittal
Condylar fractures are quite rare (Figure 17-34). When they occur, the medial
condyle is the one most frequently involved. In most cases the caudal cruciate ligament
 and the medial collateral ligament are attached to the fractured segment. In some
u u a si  so  fs as e si an p a sa
The latter may be difficult to treat and restore to good function. A good functional
recovery depends on anatomical reduction, rigid fixation, and movement of the
 joint during the healing period.
17—-Fractures of the Femur and Patella
555
A
B
C
D
E
              
inserting a cancellous bone screw diagonally from proximally into the fractured segment.
C and D, Craniocaudal and lateral views of the fracture reduced and cancellous bone screw
in place. E, If the fractured condylar segment is large enough, it may be immobilized by a
transcondylar bone screw (cancellous or cortical screw with lag effect).
Reduction and Fixation
An open approach is performed as already described. If the fracture is primarily in
 one piece, and particularly if it includes attachments of the cruciate and collateral
ligaments, reduction and fixation should be attempted. Reduction is usually accom-
plished by use of a hook to pull the segment cranially, and levering is used for final
reduction. If reduction is impossible, especially if the injury is several days old, a
partial horizontal capsulotomy in addition to the standard vertical parapatellar
incision allows room for maneuvering the caudally displaced condyle (approach to
the caudomedial or caudolateral parts of the stifle joint29). Exposure can also be
improved in some large dogs by osteotomy of the origin of the collateral ligament.
 the exact location and direction of the fracture line. In many cases it is necessary to
drill and insert a bone screw diagonally from proximally in the opposite metaphyseal
cortex into the fractured condyle (Figure 17-34, B, C, and D). In larger dogs it is
 advantageous to insert two bone screws. If the intercondylar fracture surface is large
enough, the screw may be inserted in a transcondylar manner (Figure 17-34, E).
 Before closure, the joint should be inspected for small fragments of loose bone and
cartilage, which should be removed.
Aftercare.
 Every effort should be made to keep the joint moving. Passive range
of motion exercises, 20 to 30 cycles, two or three times a day, should be started as
soon as the animal will tolerate them. If external support is needed, an off-weight-
bearing sling is preferred to any immobilization because some limited motion will
be possible (see Figure 2-32).
Type B3, Frontal Unicondylar
As in the sagittal fracture, the medial condyle is most often involved. Open
approaches are similar to those described above for type B1 and B2 fractures.
556
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Reduction and Fixation
Lag screw fixation is indicated, but it is difficult to place the screws so that the head
of the screw does not interfere with joint function. It is preferable to direct the screw
from cranial to caudal by starting the screw just outside the trochlear ridge, then
across the fracture line. The other possibility is lag screw or K-wire fixation directed
 from the condyle surface cranially into the metaphysis. The head of the screw or end
of the K-wire must be countersunk below the articular cartilage, unless it is possible
to place the screw or pin outside the gliding surface. The miniscrews in 1.5-mm or
 2.0-mm sizes are easiest to countersink.
Aftercare.
The postoperative considerations are similar to those for type B1 and
B2 fractures.
Fracture Type 3-3-C; Distal, Complex Articular (Figure 17-29, C)
Type C1, Simple, Metaphyseal Simple or Wedge
This is a supracondylar and bicondylar fracture in combination, commonly called a
T or Y fracture. In addition to the condyles being fractured at their junction with the
shaft, there is a sagittal fracture between the condyles (Figure 17-35, A). This fracture
is relatively rare and is usually accompanied by displacement, extensive soft tissue
 damage, and hemarthrosis. The joint should be checked for ligament and meniscal
Aea pue suas a au jo uoex piu uan leiu a
 postoperative movement of the stifle joint are essential to ensure good return of
function.
 Reduction and Fixation
An open approach is performed as previously described. The fractured condyles are
reduced and held together by vulsellum or pointed reduction forceps. Because the
fracture involves an articular surface, anatomical reduction is essential. A hole is
FIGURE 17-35. Fixation of a
type C1 bicondylar fracture (T or Y)
of the distal femur. A, Fracture.
B, Transcondylar lag screw
is
applied first. C and D, The supra-
condylar fracture is fixed with two
Rush pins.
A
C
D
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
557
drilled transversely through the condyles, and a cancellous or cortical screw inserted
with a lag effect will compress the fracture site (Figure 17-35, B). Essentially,
the fracture has now been converted into a supracondylar type A1 or A2 fracture.
The condyles are attached to the femoral shaft using two Rush pins (Figure 17-35,
C and D), two crossing or parallel transfixation pins (see Figure 17-32, B, C, and
D), or a curved reconstruction plate (see Figure 17-33, A).
Aftercare. Every effort should be made to keep the joint moving. Passive range
of motion exercises, 20 to 30 cycles, two or three times a day, should be started as
soon as the animal will tolerate them. If external support is needed, an off-weight-
bearing sling is preferred to total immobilization because some limited motion will
be possible (see Figure 2-32).
Type C2, Simple, Metaphyseal Complex; Type C3,
Multifragmentary
Surgical exposure, reduction, and fixation of this group involve a combination
 of methods described earlier. A transcondylar lag screw is always the first step
(Figure 17-35, B), converting the remaining fracture to a type A3 fracture, which is
e s o ox a-  sas  a 'i a ui e 
sd ae s ad fn sp s a se prs si sai
above the condyle that cannot be reduced, a reconstruction plate is used with
buttress function. However, the plate will be subjected to considerable bending
stress and should be combined with an IM pin for additional support. Aftercare is
 as previously described.
PATELLAR FRACTURES
 Fractures of the patella are rarely encountered in small animals. Being a sesamoid
bone located between the tendon of the quadriceps femoris muscle and the patellar
ligament, the bone fragments are subjected to strong distracting forces. Internal
fixation is indicated in simple two-piece fractures when the fragments are of approx-
imately equal size. Because of the strong tension forces over the cranial cortex, tension
band wire fixation is indicated. Monofilament stainless steel wire of sufficient
strength is used for immobilization. Wire of 22 gauge (0.025 inch, 0.635 mm) is
suitable for toy breeds and cats, 20 gauge (0.032 inch, 0.812 mm) for average dogs,
and 18 gauge (0.040 inch, 1.02 mm) for large breeds. It is always safest to err on
the side of wires that are too large rather than too small.
Apical fragments of less than one third of the patella are difficult to stabilize and
are best treated by excision and reattachment of the tendon or ligament to the
remaining fragment. Some multifragmentary fractures may require total patellectomy
(see Chapter 18), but an attempt should be made to salvage at least one large fragment
because this will often provide better function than a total patellectomy.
Undisplaced Fissure Fracture
Figure 17-36 shows a fissure fracture of the patella immobilized by use of two tension
band wires. The first wire is inserted through the quadriceps tendon and patellar
ligament close to the patella. Passage of the wire through the tissue can be facilitated
by first passing a bent hypodermic needle and then inserting a wire through it.
The second wire is inserted in a similar or figure-of-8 fashion, but in a more cranial
position. The wires are then tightened.
558
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 17-36. Fissure fracture of the
patella immobilized by two tension wires.
A, One wire is inserted through the quadriceps
tendon and patellar ligament close to the
patella. Passage of the wire through the
tissue can be facilitated by first passing a
bent hypodermic needle and then inserting a
wire through it. B, The second wire is
inserted in a similar or figure-of-8 fashion,
but in a more cranial position. The wires are
then tightened.
A
B
Transverse Fracture
Figure 17-37 illustrates a transverse fracture fixed with one Kirschner wire and a
tension band wire in a small or medium-size dog; in large breeds a second wire is
used (see Figure 17-38). A medial or lateral parapatellar incision is made for
examination of the fracture line and articular surface. A retrograde hole is drilled
with a 1.5-mm drill bit in the proximal patellar segment (Figure 17-37, B). This is
helpful because patellar bone is very dense, and predrilling will allow easy passage
 of a K-wire. The fracture is reduced and held in position by pointed reduction
 forceps. The hole is extended into the distal segment by reversing the drill, and a
K-wire is inserted (Figure 17-37, C and D). The K-wire must be somewhat larger 
than the hole drilled or a loose pin will result. The tension band wire is inserted and
tightened, and the pin is cut distally (Figure 17-37, E). The joint capsule, retinaculum
of the quadriceps, and skin are sutured.
Multifragmentary Fracture
   d   a  e so  a
K-wire and two tension band wires. If too small to be reduced and fixed, the small
chips are removed. A K-wire is inserted after drilling a 1.5-mm hole. A tension band
usuat ieuope ue ssop raae u (a 'se-l anii pauaun pue padde si am
band wire is inserted through the tendon of the quadriceps and patellar ligament for
increased stability (Figure 17-38, C).
Postoperative Care
Additional auxiliary fixation, such as a modified Thomas splint (see Figure 2-25),
reinforced padded bandage, or off-weight-bearing sling (see Figure 2-32), may be
indicated in some cases to relieve the surgical area of excessive tension during the
early healing period (1-2 weeks). Activity should be restricted until clinical union at
 4 to 6 weeks. The K-wires and tension wires may need to be removed at this time if
 there is any migration of implants or soft tissue irritation.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
559
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 17-37.
Transverse fracture fixed with one Kirschner wire and a tension band wire.
A, Medial or lateral parapatellar incision is made to enable examination of the fracture line
and articular surface. B, With a 1.5-mm drill bit, a retrograde hole in the proximal patellar
 segment is drilled. C, The fracture is reduced and held in position by compression forceps.
The hole is extended into the distal segment by drilling, and a Kirschner wire is inserted.
D and E, The tension wire is inserted and tightened, and the pin is cut distally. The joint 
 ca psule, retinaculum of the quadriceps, and skin are sutured.
560
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
B
C
A
FIGURE 17-38.  Multifragmentary fracture of the patella fixed with one Kirschner wire and
two tension wires. A and B, If indicated, the small chips are removed. Kirschner wire is 
an additional tension wire is inserted through the tendon of the quadriceps and patellar
ligament for more stability.
References
1. Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UF: Classification of fractures of the long bones in the dog and cat:
introduction and clinical application, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.
2.1
Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974, American
Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
3.0
Olmstead ML: Fractures of the femur. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD, editors: Manuat of
internat fixation in smalt animats, New York, 1984, Springer-Verlag, pp 165-175.
4.
treatment plans. In Proceedings of 20th Annual Conference of Veterinary Orthapedic Society, 1993
(abstract).
5.
Palmer RH: Decision making in fracture treatrment: the Fracture Patient Scoring System.
In Proceedings of (Small Animat) ACVS Veterinary Symposium, 1994, pp 388-390.
6.
Schroeder EF: Fractures of the fermoral shaft of dogs, Narth Am Vet 14:38, 1933.
7.
Leonard EP:Feline therapeutics and hospitalization,North Am Vet 19:58,1938.
8.
Rudy RL: Principles of intramedullary pinning, Vet Clin North Amm 5:209-228, 1975.
9.
 Palmer RH, Aron DN, Purington PT: Relationship of fermoral intramedullary pins to the sciatic
10.1
Fanton JW,Blass CE,Withrow SJ:Sciatic nerve injury as a complication of intramedullary pin
fixation of femoral fractures, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:687-694, 1983.
11.
Dueland RT, Johnson KA, et al: Forty-two interlocking nail fracture cases in the dog, Proc Vet
Orthop Soc 21:51-52, 1994.
12.1
Dueland RT, Berglund L, Vanderby R Jr, Chao EY: Structural properties of interlocking nails, canine
fernora, and femur-interlocking nail constructs, Vet Surg 25:386-396, 1996.
13.
Dueland RT, Vanderby R, McCabe RP: Fatigue study of six and eight mm diameter interlocking
nails with screw holes of variable size and number, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 10:194-199, 1997.
14.
Dueland RT, Johnson KA, Roe SC, et al: Interlocking nail treatment of diaphyseal long-bone
fractures in dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 214:59-66, 1999.
15.1
 Durall I, Diaz MC, Morales I: An experimental study of compression of fermoral fractures by an
interlocking intramedullary pin, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 6:93-99, 1993.
16.1
 Durall I, Diaz MC: Early experience with the use of an interlocking nail for the repair of canine
femoral shaft fractures, Vet Surg 25:397-406, 1996.
17. Bernarde A, Diop A, Maurel N, Viguier E: An in vitro biomechanical study of bone plate and
interlocking nail in a canine diaphyseal femoral fracture model, Vet Surg 25:397-408, 2001.
18.1
locking intramedullary nails: 12 cases (1996-2000), J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1098-1104, 2001.
19.1
Duhautois B: Use of veterinary interlocking nails for diaphyseal fractures in dogs and cats: 121 cases,
Vet Surg 32:8-20, 2003.
17—Fractures of the Femur and Patella
561
20. Horstman CL, Beale BS, Conzermius MG, Evans RR: Biologic osteosynthesis versus traditional
anatomic reconstruction of 20 long-bone fractures using an interlocking nail: 1994-2001, Vet Surg
33:232-237, 2004.
21.
Von Pheil DJ, Dejardin LM, et al: Biomechanical comparison of interlocking nail and plate-rod
fixation: an in vitro analysis in a canine tibia fracture model, Vet Surg 32:499, 2003.
22.
 Aron DN, Dewey CW: Application and postoperative managerment of external skeletal fixators,
Vet Clin North Am Smatl Anim Pract 22:69-98, 1992.
23.
 Brinker WO, Flo GL: Principles and application of external skeletal fixation, Vet Clin North Am 
5:197-208, 1975.
24.
 Foland MA, Schwarz PD, Salman MD: The adjunctive use of half-pin (type I) external skeletal
fixators in combination with intramedullary pins for femoral fracture fixation, Vet Comp Orthop
Trauma 4:77-85, 1991.
25. Johnson AL, Smith CW Schaffer DJ: Fragment reconstruction and bone plate fixation versus bridging
plate fixation for treating highly comminuted fermoral fractures in dogs: 35 cases (1987-1997),
J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:1157-1161, 1998.
26.
Hulse DA, Hyman W, Nori M, et al. Reduction in plate strain by addition of an intrarnedullary pin,
Vet Surg 26:451-459, 1997.
 27. Hulse D, Ferry K, Fawcett A, et al: Effect of intrarmedullary pin size on reducing bone plate strain,
Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 13:185-190, 2000.
28. Reems MR, Beale BS, Hulse DA: Use of a plate-rod construct and principles of biological
osteosynthesis for repair of diaphyseal fractures in dogs and cats: 47 cases (1994-2001), J Arm Vet
Med Assoc 223:330-335,2003.
29. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
30.
Lewis DD, Bellah JR: Use of a double-hook plate to repair a subtrochanteric femoral fracture in an
immature dog, J Arn Vet Med Assoc 191:440-442, 1987.
31.
 Daly WR: Femoral head and neck fractures in the dog and cat: a review of 115 cases, Vet Surg 7:29,
1978.
 32. Kaderly RE, Anderson WD, Anderson BG: Extraosseous vascular supply to the mature dog's
coxofemoral joint, Arm J Vet Res 43:1208, 1982.
study, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 6:188-193, 1993.
34.
LEplattenier HF, Montavon PM: Avulsion fractures of the femoral head: internal fixation using a
ventral approach to the hip joint, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 10:23-26, 1997.
35.
 Culvenor JA, Black AP, et al: Repair of femoral capital injuries in cats: 14 cases, Vet Comp Orthop
Trauma 9:182-185, 1996.
36.
Gibson KL, vanEe RT, Pechman RD: Femoral capital physeal fractures in dogs: 34 cases {1979-
1989), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 198:886-890, 1991.
37. DeCamp CE, Probst CW, Thomas MW: Internal fixation of femoral capital physeal injuries in dogs:
40 cases (1979-1987), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 194:1750-1754, 1989.
38.
Belkoff SM, Millis DL, Probst CW: Biomechanical comparison of three internal fixations for
treatment of slipped capital femoral epiphysis in irmature dogs, Arm J Vet Res 53:2136-2140, 1992.
39.
Tillson DM, McLoughlin RM, Roush JK: Evaluation of experimental proximal femoral physeal
fractures repaired with two cortical screws placed from the articular surface, Vet Comp Orthop
Trauma 7:140-147, 1994.
40.
Braden TD, Eicker SW, et al: Characteristics of 1000 femur fractures in the dog and cat, Vet Comp
Orthop Trauma 8:203-209, 1995.
41.
 Aron DN, Foutz TL, Keller WG, et al: Experimental and clinical experience with an IM pin external
fixator tie-in configuration, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 4:86-94, 1991.
42.
in the dog and cat, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 17:579-586, 1981.
43.
a retrospective study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:927-931, 1984.
44.
femoral physeal injuries in 17 dogs, Vet Surg 13:1172-1180, 1984.
osteotomies involving the supracondylar region of the fermur, J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 29:171-178,
1993.
18
The Stifle Joint
PATELLAR LUXATION
Patellar luxations occur frequently in dogs and occasionally in cats and are often
seen in most small animal practices. These luxations fall into the following classes:
1. Medial luxation: toy, miniature, and large breeds.
2. Lateral luxation: toy and miniature breeds.
3. Medial luxation resulting from trauma: various breeds (rare).
4. Lateral luxation: large and giant breeds (genu valgum).
Categories 3 and 4 are discussed separately in later sections.
The extensor (or quadriceps) mechanism of the stifle consists of the quadriceps,
patellar tendon, patella, patellar ligament, and tibial tubercle. This mechanism
should lie in a straight line from the proximal femur to the middle of the hock
(Figure 18-1, A). Most often in animals with patellar luxation, even after patellar
reduction, there is malalignment of the extensor mechanism (Figure 18-1, B). This
malalignment contributes to the luxation.
Medial Luxation in Toy, Miniature, and Large Breeds
Most luxations are termed "congenital" because they occur early in life and are not
 associated with trauma. Although the luxation may not be present at birth, the anatom-
ical deformities that cause these luxations are present at that time and are responsible
for subsequent recurrent patellar luxation. The only well-researched investigation into
the cause of these luxations concluded that the occurrence of medial patellar luxation
 is characterized by coxa vara (decreased angle of inclination of femoral neck) and a
        e is
changes were considered to be the cause of the complex series of derangements of
the pelvic limb that characterize medial patellar luxations in the small breeds. The
changes are depicted in Figure 18-1, A and B. Patellar luxation in these breeds should
be considered an inherited disease. Breeding of affected animals is not advisable.2
Medial luxation is much more common than lateral luxation in all breeds, repre-
senting 75% to 80% of cases, with bilateral involvement seen 20% to 25% of the
time. We have noted a dramatic increase in medial luxation in large and giant breeds
 in recent years, especially in the Akita, Labrador, husky, and malamute. Concurrent
rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament is present in 15% to 20% of the stifles of
middle-aged and older dogs with chronic patellar luxation. In this situation, the
cruciate ligament is placed under increased stress because the quadriceps mechanism
562
18—The Stifle Joint
563
Femur
Tibia
-Patella
Normal
Normal
Grade 4
medial patellar luxation
Grade 3
Grade 4
B
c
FIGURE 18-1. Skeletal abnormalities with severe congenital medial patellar luxation.
A, Normal left hindlimb, cranial view. Note that the quadriceps mechanism is centered over
the femur and that the dashed line through the proximal femur and distal tibia also runs
through the patella. B, Deformities typical of medial patellar luxation. Note the position of
the quadriceps mechanism and patella; the dashed line from proximal femur to distal tibia
lies well medial to the stifle joint. Inset, The straight arrow represents the corrected extensor
mechanism after tubercle rotation and the line of patellar movement. The dotted rectangle
represents the location and angle of the newly created trochlea, which is necessary to have
the patella track properly. This illustrates the inadequacy of some trocleoplasty techniques.
1, Coxa vara. 2, Distal third of femur bowed medially (genu varum). 3, Shallow trochlear
sulcus with poorly developed or absent medial ridge. 4, Medial condyle hypoplastic; joint
tilted. 5, Medial torsion of the tibial tubercle, associated with medial rotation of the entire
tibia. 6, Medial bowing of the proximal tibia. 7, Internal rotation of foot despite lateral
torsion of distal tibia. C, Position of the tibia relative to the femur and shape of femoral
trochlea in grades 1 through 4 of medial patellar luxation. The femoral cross section in the
region of trochlear sulcus is shown in dark outline, and the proximal tibial cross section is
shaded. Progressive medial rotation of the tibia and deformity of the medial trochlear ridge are
noted. (See the text for a complete explanation of grades 1 through 4, according to Singleton.4)
is ineffective in stabilizing the joint. The leg is also internally rotated, which
 stretches the cruciate ligament. In the cat, medial luxation is also more common
than lateral luxation. One series of 21 cases included 52.4% bilateral medial, 33.3%
unilateral medial, and 14.3% unilateral lateral luxations.3
 A method of classifying the degree of luxation and body deformity is useful for
diagnosis and for deciding on the method of surgical repair. Such a classification
564
 Part IIl—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
was devised by Putnam' and adapted by Singleton.4 The following classification is
adapted from Singleton (Figure 18-1, C):
Grade 1
● Intermittent patellar luxation causes the limb to be carried occasionally. The patella
 easily luxates manually at full extension of the stifle joint, but it returns to the trochlea
when released. No crepitation is apparent.
●When the patella is reduced, deviation of the tibial tubercle from the midline is minimal.
After the patella is reduced, flexion-extension of the stifle is in a straight line with no
abduction of the hock.
Grade 2
● Luxation occurs more frequently than in grade 1. Lameness signs are usually intermittent
 and mild. The patella luxates easily, especially when the foot is rotated (internally for
medial luxation, externally for lateral luxation) while the patella is pushed. Reduction
occurs with opposite maneuvers.
● The proximal tibial tuberosity may be rotated up to 30 degrees with medial luxations
 and less so with lateral luxations. With the patella luxated medially, the hock is slightly
hock may be adducted with the toes pointing laterally ("seal-like").
● Many cases in grade 2 "live” with the condition reasonably well for many years, but the
 constant luxation of the patella over the medial lip of the trochlea can cause erosion of
the articulating surface of the patella and also the proximal area of the medial lip. This 
results in crepitation becoming apparent when the patella is luxated manually. Increased
discomfort may result in the dog throwing its weight to the forelimbs on ambulation.
Grade 3
● The patella is permanently luxated (ectopic), with torsion of the tibia and deviation of
the tibial crest between 30 and 60 degrees from the cranial/caudal plane. Although the
luxation is not intermittent, many animals use the limb with the stifle held in a
semiflexed position.
● Flexion-extension of the joint causes abduction and adduction of the hock.
● The trochlea is very shallow or even flattened.
Grade 4
● The tibia is medially twisted, and the tibial crest may show further deviation, with the
 result that it lies 60 to 90 degrees from the cranial/caudal plane.
· The patella is permanently luxated (ectopic).
● The patella lies just above the medial condyle (if medial luxation), and a “space" can be
palpated between the patellar ligament and the distal end of the femur.
 The limb may be carried if unilateral, or the animal moves in a crouched position, with
the limbs partly flexed.
●The trochlea is shallow, absent, or even convex. The trochlea often is twisted,
 necessitating placement of the newly made trochlea (chondroplasty) at an angle different
from that of the original trochlear region in order to track vertically after tubercle
transposition (see Figure 18-1, B, inset).
Clinical Signs
Four classes of patients with patellar luxation are identifiable, as follows:
1. Neonates and older puppies often show clinical signs of abnormal hindleg
 s a s  a a    
represent grades 3 and 4.
18—The Stifle Joint
565
2. Young to mature animals with grade 2 to 3 luxations usually have exhibited
abnormal or intermittently abnormal gaits all their lives but are presented
when the symptoms worsen.
3. Older animals with grade 1 and 2 luxations may exhibit sudden signs of
lameness because of further breakdown of soft tissues (e.g., cruciate rupture) as
4. Dogs that are asymptomatic.
Signs of lameness vary from animal to animal. Lameness may be intermittent or
continuous. Usually it is a mild to moderate weight-bearing lameness with occasional
carrying of the limb. A few dogs will carry their leg most of the time. Dogs with
lateral luxations in general have more ambulation problems than those with medial
luxations. The owner may see the dog stretch its leg backward in its effort to reduce
the patella. Reluctance to jump may be noted.
 Signs may worsen as the animal gains weight, articular cartilage erosion occurs,
 the luxation becomes permanent, the cruciate ligament ruptures, or the hip becomes
luxated.
Examination of the limb for patellar luxation is best performed in lateral
recumbency. Gentle palpation usually does not cause pain. In small animals or in
severely deformed legs, the patella is best located by starting at the tibial tuberosity
     rd   d  
internally/externally rotated while trying to push the patella medially/laterally.
Observations should include the following:
1. Instability in both directions.
2.
 Presence of crepitus.
3. Degree of tibial tuberosity rotation.
 4. Limb torsion or angulation.
 5. Inability to reduce the patella.
 6. Location of the reduced patella within the trochlea. In straight-legged dogs
such as the Akita or Shar-pei, the patella occasionally rides proximal in the
distal in the trochlea ("patella baja")
7. Inability to extend the limb to a normal standing angle (in puppies with
 severe contracture accompanying patellar ectopia).
 8. Presence/absence of drawer movement.
Each of these features affects the types of steps needed for surgical repair.
Surgical Repair of Patellar Luxation
Asymptomatic patellar luxation often is found during routine physical examination.
We do not recommend immediate surgery, but instead counsel owners on subtle
signs indicative of problems, such as kicking the leg out behind, reluctance to jump,
and reluctance to exercise vigorously. These dogs still respond well to late surgical
repair, even if cruciate ligament rupture subsequently occurs. However, there are two
puppies with patellar ectopia, it is advisable to consider repair early (3-4 months)
before irreparable contracture. In medium to large breeds, surgery is recommended
early before erosion and deformity to the trochlea. Surgical choices are then more
restricted and the prognosis more guarded.
Arthroplastic techniques applicable to stabilization of patellar luxations can be
566
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Considerable judgment and experience are necessary to decide the best procedure or
combination of procedures for a given case. After the descriptions of various surgical
techniques, we provide an algorithmic approach of progressive surgical procedures
to be used to achieve patellar stability (the treatment plan). The animal should not
leave the surgery table with a loose patella in the hopes that fibrosis will later tighten
it. This often fails. In addition, the patella should be evaluated for luxation in the
A cardinal principle is that skeletal deformity, such as deviation of the tibial
tuberosity and shallow trochlear sulcus, must be corrected by bone reconstruction
 techniques. Attempting to overcome such skeletal malformation by soft tissue
reconstruction alone is the most frequent cause of failure. Soft tissue procedures, by
themselves, must be limited to obvious grade 1 cases. Failure to transpose the tibial
tubercle may be the most common cause of failure. The surgeon must be aggressive
 in deciding to move the tubercle without moving it too great a distance. In some
cases, 2 to 3 mm is a sufficient amount to realign the quadriceps mechanism with
the femoral trochlea and thus stabilize the patella. Both stifles are routinely repaired
at the same time in small dogs and cats, regardless of the type of procedures done.
With practice, the surgeon will not find these to be lengthy procedures, and the
extra costs and dangers of a second surgery outweigh the slightly more difficult
postoperative course with bilateral surgery.
Large mature dogs with grade 3 or 4 medial luxation present a special problem
with the trochlear groove. If the distal femur has become twisted, the location of the
trochlea is at an angle to the straight, vertical extensor mechanism (see Figure 18-1, B,
inset).
Soft Tissue Reconstruction Procedures
Overlap of Lateral or Medial Retinaculum
The retinacular overlap procedure can be used on either the lateral side for a medial
luxation or the medial side for a lateral luxation. The retinacular fascia and joint
capsule are incised 3 to 5 mm from and parallel to the patella. This incision extends
from the tibia proximally to a point 1 to 2 cm above the patella. An incision of the
fascia lata continues to the midfemur level (Figure 18-2, A). With size 2-0 or 3-0
nonabsorbable suture, the cut edge of the fascia attached to the patella is sutured
beneath the more lateral fascia, with several mattress sutures placed through the
fornix of the capsule (Figure 18-2, A and B). The superficial layers of fascia and cap-
sule then are sutured to the fascia that remains attached to the patella. In some
cases, this fascia will extend beyond the cranial midline of the joint and will be
sutured to fascia on the opposite side of the patella (Figure 18-2, B). Suturing con-
tinues the length of the fascial incision (Figure 18-2, C).
This technique can be combined with patellar and tibial antirotational suture liga-
ments (see Figure 18-4). For lateral luxation, a similar procedure is performed on the
medial side. The fascial incision is made through fascia between the caudal belly of the
sartorius muscle and the vastus medialis muscle and the cranial belly of the sartorius.
Fascia Lata Overlap
The fascia lata overlap technique^ is applicable only to medial luxations; when used
alone, the procedure is indicated only in the limb that has normal conformation
(grade 1 luxation). This overlap is opposite that of the retinacular overlap. Fascia
lata overlap can be combined with patellar and tibial antirotational sutures
(see Figure 18-4).
Subcutaneous tissues are reflected to expose the lateral retinaculum and fascia
lata to the midpoint of the femur. The fascia lata is incised at its junction with the
18—The Stifle Joint
567
Incision in
Incision in 
lateral retinacular
 joint capsule
fascia
-Suture row 2
Suturerow2
Suture row
Suture row2
B
C
 FIGURE 18-2. Lateral retinacular overlap. A, Lateral parapatellar incision has been made
from the tibia to the midfemoral level. Suture row 1 is started well back from the edge of the
fascia caudally; it passes through the fornix of the joint capsule, through the cranial fascia
close to the incision, and back through the caudal fascia like a mattress suture. All these
sutures are placed before row 2 is placed. Size 2-0 or 3-0 nonabsorbable suture is preferred.
B, Cross-sectional view shows the two suture rows. Note that row 2 may actually be medial
to the midline, depending on the looseness of the caudal fascia. C, Row 1 and 2 sutures are
complete. The biceps creates increased tension on the patellar ligament, the patella, and the
distal half of the quadriceps.
biceps femoris muscle from the level of the patella proximally as far as possible.
 Distal to the patella, the incision runs parallel to the patellar ligament over the
tendon of the long digital extensor (Figure 18-3, A). The fascia lata proximal to the
patella is reflected cranially and bluntly elevated off the underlying vastus lateralis
muscle until the white aponeurosis between the vastus lateralis and rectus femoris
muscles is visualized. Nonabsorbable size 2-0 and 3-0 sutures are placed between
the cranial edge of the biceps muscle and the exposed aponeurosis. The first suture
is in the patellar tendon at the proximal end of the patella, with three or four more
sutures placed proximally (Figure 18-3, A and B). If the patella can still be luxated,
 one or two more sutures are placed just proximal to the patella to further tighten
the biceps muscle. Distal sutures are placed in the patellar ligament. The cranial fas-
cia lata is pulled caudally over the surface of the biceps muscle and sutured in place
with a combined simple pattern and a Lembert pattern (Figure 18-3, B and C).
Patellar and Tibial Antirotational Suture Ligaments
An adaptation of Rudy's technique6 creates a synthetic lateral patellar ligament
by anchoring the lateral fabella toward the patella with nonabsorbable suture
(Figure 18-4, A and B). Medial tibial rotation can be prevented by another suture
passing from the lateral fabella to the tibial tubercle or distal patellar ligament
(Figure 18-4, B). The two sutures can also be combined (Figure 18-4, C). Similar
placement of sutures around the medial fabella is used for lateral patellar luxations
Such sutures are most often used in conjunction with trochleoplasty in older dogs
568
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Suture row 2
Suture row 1
Vastus lateralis m.
Suture row 1
Rectus femoris m.
Biceps femoris m.
Suturerow2
B
Suture
row 1
Suture
row2
A
B
C
FIGURE 18-3. Fascia lata overlap. A, Lateral parapatellar incision has been made through
the fascia lata and joint capsule. This incision follows the cranial edge of the biceps muscle
proximally, and distally it ends over the long digital extensor tendon. The cranial fascia is
reflected and elevated to identify the white aponeurosis between the rectus femoris and
vastus lateralis muscles. Row 1 sutures are placed to pull the biceps to this aponeurosis
proximal to the patella and to the lateral border of the patella and patellar ligament distally.
Row 2 sutures complete the overlap. B and B', Two cross-sectional views show the relationship
of the biceps muscle and fascia lata to the rectus femoris muscle and patella. The biceps has
been pulled cranially to exert lateral tension on the quadriceps and patella. C, Suture rows 1
and 2 are completed.
with grade 2 luxation and also work well as primary treatment in neonates as young
as 5 days.6
The fabella is the center of the arc of rotation of the patella; thus the suture
 remains relatively taut during both flexion and extension of the stifle. By adjusting
the point of insertion on the distal patellar ligament or tibial tubercle (Figure 18-4, B),
the surgeon can make the suture taut at whatever degree of flexion produces the
most medial tibial rotation. In many cases, particularly in dogs that are several years
 ps  o si a   s  rd ara 
rotated relative to the rest of the tibia and foot (grades 1 and 2). In this situation the
surgeon will note that when the patella luxates medially, the whole tibia rotates 
medially. This phenomenon is particularly noticeable in lateral luxation, a condition
in which the tibia rotates laterally. Prevention of tibial rotation will greatly reduce
the tendency of the patella to luxate. These sutures will probably break or loosen
eventually in most cases; however, the fibrous tissue formed around the suture, plus
Fascia lata is incised along the cranial edge of the biceps muscle to allow retrac-
tion of the biceps caudally (Figure 18-4, A). Braided polyester (suture size 2-0 to 0
 e uo eaqey ae uoe paeid si (saaq ae ro z oi o 'spaanq ls rog
 sap r -ti ai as aau  a s  o o 
technique for needle placement). The needle passes around the fabella in a distal-to-
 proximal or cranial-to-caudal direction most easily. The joint capsule can be opened
18—The Stifle Joint
569
Incision in 
fascia lata
Lateral fabella
Quadriceps
 tendon
Patellar
ligament
T
4
Patellar
ligament
Hole in
tibial tubercle
B
C
B
opened along the cranial border of the biceps muscle to expose the lateral fabella by caudal
retraction and elevation of the biceps. Braided polyester suture material (size 2-0 in toy breeds
to size 2 in large breeds) is passed behind the lateral fabella and around the patella, as shown
in A'. The suture is tied just tight enough to stabilize the patella. B, To prevent medial tibial
rotation, a suture can be passed around the fabella as in A, then placed either in the distal
patellar ligament or in the tibial tuberosity. B', Various locations are tried to find one that
results in the suture being tightest when the stifle is flexed to the degree that causes greatest
internal tibial rotation. The suture is tied tightly enough to prevent rotation. C, The two
 sutures can be combined. The caudal fascia lata has been overlapped in closing.
570
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 on the lateral side to allow inspection of the joint and to perform trochlear arthroplasty
if indicated. The suture is attached around the patella in semi-purse-string fashion
xd aie p o   u sd a o  a, e aq
end of the patella. The suture is then passed distally along the medial border of the
 patella and laterally along the distal end of the patella (Figure 18-4, A).
All "bites" are placed deeply and as close to the patella as possible. With the
suture passing medial to the patella, it cannot pull out. The lateral joint capsule is
closed and sometimes imbricated if there is redundant tissue. The patellar suture
must not lie on exposed articular cartilage. With the patella in place, the suture is
tied with enough tension to prevent patellar dislocation.
The same method can be used on the medial side for lateral luxation. An incision
is made along the cranial border to the caudal belly of the sartorius muscle, which
is retracted caudally to expose the medial fabella. Suture placement is similar to that
described for medial luxation.
The tibial antirotational suture is placed around either the medial or the lateral
 fabella. The suture can be attached to the distal patellar ligament or through a hole
 in the tibial tuberosity (Figure 18-4, B). The leg is positioned in various degrees of
 flexion to find the angle of maximal tibial rotation. The suture material is then tied
tightly enough to prevent tibial rotation. In addition, lateral or medial retinacular
 overlap can be performed to imbricate the joint (Figures 18-2 and 18-4, C), or the
fascia lata overlap method can be used (Figure 18-5).
Desmotomy and Partial Capsulectomy
 Rarely used alone, these steps are frequently used in combination with other steps.
Desmotomy refers to a simple release of the contracted medial or lateral retinaculum
on the side toward which the patella is luxated (see Figure 18-7, B). The dynamics
Suturerow 1
Suture row 2
Incision in
fascia lata
 Sutures in
joint capsule
Lateral
fabella
A
B
A, The lateral fascia has been incised (see Figure 18-3). The joint capsule has been sutured
cartilage. B, After the fascia lata overlap, the suture "ligaments"” are almost completely covered
by fascia, emerging only for a short distance before being inserted around the patella or in
the patellar ligament.
18—The Stifle Joint
571
of this contraction are visualized during flexion and extension. The patella normally
glides proximally and distally, paralleling the trochlea. With joint capsule contracture,
the patellar excursion runs obliquely to that plane even after tubercle rotation.
Desmotomy may eliminate this oblique movement. The incision begins at the tibial
plateau and continues proximally through both layers of the joint capsule and reti-
nacular tissues proximal enough to relieve all tension on the patella. The incision is
the joint to prevent synovial fluid leakage. Sutures connecting the edge of the patella
to removing an elliptical piece of stretched joint capsule and retinaculum on the side
 opposite the direction of the patellar luxation. Suturing the edges together results in
imbrication or tightening of the joint capsule.
Quadriceps Release
In some grade 3 and most grade 4 luxations, the quadriceps is so misaligned that it
causes displacing tension on the patella after reduction of the luxation. In this situation,
the entire quadriceps mechanism must be dissected free to the midfemoral level.
 Bilateral parapatellar incisions are made through the joint capsule and retinaculum,
as in the bilateral approach to the stifle joint.7 These indications are continued prox-
imally along the borders of the quadriceps muscle groups. Laterally, the separation
is made between the vastus lateralis and biceps muscles; medially, it is made between
the vastus medialis and caudal belly of the sartorius. The entire quadriceps is then
elevated from the femur, freeing the insertion of the joint capsule proximal to the
trochlea. The superficial fascial incisions are sutured after the rest of the reconstructive
 procedures are completed.
Bone Reconstruction Procedures
Trochleoplasty
 Trochleoplasties are techniques that deepen a shallow, absent, or convex trochlea.
There are several ways to achieve this, each involving injury to the articular cartilage,
and this should be avoided if possible, especially in the larger dog. Small dogs and
cats tolerate these procedures well, although return to full function may be some-
what delayed. Trochleas that are flat or convex often accompany a twisted distal
femur With medial luxation, the area of the medial ridge is twisted caudally, causing
o i aoo  n a g  a i    r 
to a surgically corrected, straight extensor mechanism (see Figure 18-1, B). In cats,
small dogs, and many large dogs, this can be overcome by trochleoplasties. However,
some large-breed and giant-breed dogs require a derotational and angular osteotomy
to obtain a heightening of the medial ridge needed to achieve patellar stability.
To assess sufficiency of trochlear depth, the patella is reduced. On reluxating the
patella, there should be an obvious "catch" or impedance to luxation, especially at
the level of the trochlea where luxation occurs. If this is not the case, more aggressive
 deepening is performed.
Trocblear Cbondroplasty.&9  This "cartilage flap" technique is useful only in
puppies up to 10 months of age. As an animal matures, the cartilage becomes
thinner and more adherent to the subchondral bone, making flap dissection
difficult. A cartilage flap is elevated from the sulcus (Figure 18-6, A), the sub-
chondral bone removed from beneath it (Figure 18-6, B), and the flap pressed back
into the deepened sulcus (Figure 18-6, C). If not deep enough, the process is
repeated. This results in a deepened trochlea, with maintenance of articular cartilage
in the sulcus and with fibrocartilage or fibrous tissue at the incisional gaps.
572
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 The cartilage flap survives, and experimental dogs have shown no adverse effects
from the procedure.8
Wedge Recession Sulcoplasty.io A V-shaped wedge, including the sulcus, is
removed from the trochlea with a saw (Figure 18-6, D). The resulting defect in the
trochlea is widened by another saw cut on one edge to remove a second piece of
bone (Figure 18-6, E). When the original bone wedge is replaced, it is recessed into
the defect, creating a new sulcus composed of hyaline cartilagel1 (Figure 18-6, F).
The sides of the defect become lined with fibrocartilage. This method is preferred in
mature animals.
Trocblear Block Recession.i2 Instead of a V-shaped wedge as in the recession
sulcoplasty, the sides of the piece removed are parall rather than angled (Figure 18-6,
G, H, and I). This allows the trochlea to be deepened somewhat more proximally
cartilage and bone along the widest part of the trochlear ridges are made from the
top of the trochlea to a level almost at the origin of the caudal cruciate ligament
(Figure 18-6, G). A wide osteotome or power saw is used to make the cut above the
caudal cruciate origin connecting the previously made cuts; this cut is angled toward
Elevation of
cartilage
 Cuts in
articular cartilage
Caudal cruciate
Patella
ligament
Cartilag
flap
C
Subchondral
bone
Cartilag
flap
B
-Gy
FIGURE 18-6. Trochleoplasty techniques. A to C, Trochlear chondroplasty. For this
technique, the animal must be less than 10 months old. A, The new sulcus is outlined by cuts
through the thick adolescent cartilage. The proximal transverse cut is at the level of the proximal
trochlear ridges. A sharp periosteal elevator is used to raise cartilage from subchondral bone.
B, The cartilage flap is hinged distally to allow removal of subchondral bone with rongeurs.
C, When the cartilage flap is replaced, the sulcus is deep enough to retain the patella. Fixation
of the cartilage is not required.
18-TheStifleJoint
573
Second cut
Third
First
cut
cut
Caudal cruciate
ligament
 Patella
Bone/
cartilage
wedge
F
Removedblock
H
Rece
ed block
G
FIGURE 18-6. Continued D to F, Modified recession sulcoplasty.10 D, A thin-blade hobby
saw (X-Acto, Long Island City, NY), ethylene oxide or chemically sterilized, is used to cut a
V-shaped wedge from the trochlea, extending from the caudal cruciate origin to the proximal
trochlear ridges. E, Cuts made in the indicated order create a V-shaped defect and slightly
 smaller wedge. F, When the original bone and cartilage wedge is replaced in the defect, it is
blockrecession.
Continted
574
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Subchondral
bone
K
Caudal cruciate
 Patella
ligament
Newsulcus
FIGURE 18-6. Continued G, An osteotome or thin blade power saw is used to outline the
troclear block to be removed. H, The distal end of the block is cut just above the origin of
the ca udal cruciate ligament and angled to meet the proximal trochlear incision. The proximal
trochlear deepening is important because the patella usually luxates adjacent to the shallow
proximal trochlea. The recession sulcoplasty (D-F) does not deepen the proximal trochlea as
far as the block resection does. I, After deepening the subchondral cancellous bone, the block
is replaced without fixation, and cancellous bone is packed along the sides of the block.
J to L, Trochlear sulcoplasty ("curettage"). An outline of the proposed sulcus is made in the
cartilage with a scalpel along the condylar ridges. J, Articular cartilage and bone are then
removed within the outlined area to create a straight-sided, curved-bottomed trough, as shown
in K. After removal of cancellous bone, the bed is made smooth by scraping across the groove
with an osteotome. Others prefer a rasp or power bur. The distal end of the trough is near
the origin of the caudal cruciate ligament, and it extends to the proximal trochlear ridges.
L, The trough should be deep enough so that the patella does not touch bone in the bottom
of the trough and wide enough so that the patella rides deeply in the new sulcus. Done in this
manner, articular cartilage of the patella is not damaged by abrasion on subchondral bone, and
fibrocartilage can fill in the gap and conform to the excursions of the patella.
the proximal aspect of the trochlea. Great care must be taken to prevent dropping
and contaminating the loosened block (Figure 18-6, H). The block is removed and
wrapped in a bloody sponge while trabecular bone is removed from the femur to recess
the block. The wedge is then pressed back into this recessed femur and cancellous
graft packed into the gaps at the side of the block (Figure 18-6, I). The advantage
of this technique is that the proximal trochlea can be made deeper than with the
V-shaped wedge recession.
Trochlear Sulcoplasty.i3 In the curettage technique, articular cartilage is
 removed to the level of subchondral bone to create a sulcus deep enough to prevent
patellar luxation (Figure 18-6, J, K, and L). By cutting completely through articular
18—The Stifle Joint
575
cartilage to subchondral bone, fibroplasia will result in a sulcus lined with fibrocar-
tilage, which is an acceptable substitute for hyaline cartilage in non-weight-bearing
areas. The width of this new groove must accommodate the width of the patella and
 must be smooth. This can be accomplished by scraping the convex surface perpen-
dicularly with an osteotome (Figure 18-6, K) or by using a rasp. Others prefer to use
high-speed burs. Although destructive to the entire cartilaginous trochlear sulcus,
 this sulcoplasty still results in good function in small dogs and cats.
Because of the relatively wide patella in the cat, it does not fit into the trochlea
well. The patella can be narrowed by removing bone from the medial and lateral
sides.
Transposition of Tibial Tuberosity14,15
When the tuberosity is deviated, relocation to a more cranial position on the leg
helps patellar stability. Degree of deviation can best be assessed by placing the
animal in dorsal recumbency with the surgeon standing at the end of the table near
the animal's feet (Figure 18-7, A).
 A medial skin incision is made for lateral or medial luxations.7 For medial luxations,
 a lateral arthrotomy with or without a capsulectomy is used. For lateral luxations,
a medial arthrotomy with or without capsulectomy is performed. An incision is
made in the periosteum medially along the tibial tuberosity and crest, including the
Aq p si i rd  jo un is ixa au e p
nicking the joint capsule along the medial aspect of the patellar ligament (the begin-
ning of the desmotomy). To osteotomize the tuberosity, an osteotome as wide as the
tuberosity should be used to avoid splitting it. The bone is cut starting 3 to 4 mm
proximal to the insertion of the patellar ligament, which leaves a flange of bone that
will be shaped similar to the notch of bone that will be cut on the tibia (Figure 18-7,
B and D). The osteotome should not be twisted (keep flat side parallel with the
patellar tendon) in order to avoid an asymmetric osteotomy. The attachment of the
tibialis cranialis is not detached from the lateral aspect of the tubercle and crest, thus
saving blood supply to the small, osteotomized bone. The periosteum and fascia
distal to the tubercle osteotomy are incised, allowing the entire tubercle to be moved
laterally and distally (Figure 18-7, D, E, and F). Another procedure involves leaving
this periosteum intact; however, the tubercle then can only be swiveled, not moved
 in other planes (Figure 18-7, G).
 After the tuberosity crest is loosened medially and distally, it is pushed laterally
while the tibialis cranialis muscle is dissected away from the lateral aspect of the
tibia. The soft tissues are not removed from the lateral aspect of the osteotomized
tuberosity crest. To expose the area for the notch to be made along the lateral side
of the tibia, a curved hemostat is levered between the tuberosity and caudal tibia
(Figure 18-7, C). A triangular notch is usually made 5 to 8 mm distal from the prox-
imal end of the osteotomy. In large dogs with "patella alta," the notch should be
deeper trochlear groove. If the tuberosity is extremely deviated, this notch is placed
farther caudal and lateral on the tibia. For lateral luxations, the tubercle is
osteotomized the same way, but the bed for the tubercle to relocate medially is made
larger than the lateral notch.
mechanism, and the top of the tuberosity is placed in the notch and held tightly
(Figure 18-7, D, inset) while drilling 0.035- to 0.062-inch Kirschner wires (depending
on animal size). The pin is driven through the thickest part of the tubercle in a
slightly proximal and caudomedial direction (Figure 18-7, E). The pin should
engage the opposite tibial cortex to avoid pin migration and should not penetrate
576
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
T
FIGURE 18-7.
needed. The dotted line demonstrates the correct relocation of the deviated tuberosity (solid
line). B, The medial fibrous joint capsule is "released," correcting medial capsular contraction.
The attachments lateral to the tubercle and crest are not incised. The tuberosity and crest
a y   rd a jo u a   t on  s si i
tuberosity and crest retracted with a hemostat, a triangular piece of tibia is removed from the
lateral aspect of the tibial crest (assuming medial luxation). D, The notch made on the side
of the tibia is similar in shape to the flange of bone left proximal to the patellar ligament
insertion (see inset). With the knee hyperextended, the tuberosity is placed into the notch.
 E, With the tuberosity held in place with thumb forceps (omitted for clarity), a pin is driven
toward the caudal medial tibial condyle, with great care taken not to drive it proximally into
the joint.
18—The Stifle Joint
577
Medial
desmotomy
FIGURE 18-7. Contirued F, The pin is cut so that there is l/8 inch of pin protrusion to
prevent the bone from slipping off the pin. Alternatively, the pin may be bent before being cut
if the tuberosity is thick enough. G, An alternative method for transposing the tuberosity
involves incising lateral and medial attachments to the tuberosity but leaving the distal bone
and periosteum intact. The tuberosity is swiveled and pinned.'s (Note: This is the opposite
leg from the rest of this series.)
joint surfaces. The tuberosity has now been transposed distally (thereby tightening
the patellar ligament), laterally, and twisted so that the flat side of the tuberosity is
flush with the side of the tibia. Realignment is checked, and if satisfactory, the pin
is cut 2 to 3 mm from the tuberosity (Figure 18-7, F). In large dogs, two pins may
be used. Some surgeons bend the pins before cutting them, but this should be
avoided in small tuberosities to prevent splitting.
Closure commences by suturing the external fascia of the tibialis cranialis to the
 periosteum on the medial aspect of the tibia. The lateral joint is closed and the
patella checked for stability. If still unstable, the groove may need to be deepened or
the tuberosity rotated farther.
 In dogs with severe deformity, the lateral and medial attachments to the tuberosity
may need to be incised to move the tuberosity to the area of the fibula. In cases of
"patella alta," the tuberosity may have to be moved more distally after freeing more
of the soft tissues proximal to the patella.
 Another technique for osteotomizing the tuberosity is to incise the periosteum
medially and tibialis cranialis laterally, freeing up both sides of the tuberosity.
However, the tuberosity is left attached distally. The tuberosity is then swiveled
laterally and pinned to a newly made notch1s (Figure 18-7, G).
Patellectomy
Patellectomy should be used only in very rare occasions when erosion is severe and
the dog has not improved clinically with successful realignment procedures. It is
accomplished by incising vertically over the midline of the patella. With a sharp
scalpel blade, the quadriceps tendon, retinaculum, and joint capsule and patellar
ligament are peeled off the patella in quadrants, leaving as much soft tissue as
 possible. After the patella is removed, the large defect over the femoral trochlea
578
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
(Figure 18-8, A) is closed by simple interrupted or purse-string sutures using nonab-
sorbable suture. If there is a large void of soft tissue and a concern of tissue breakdown,
a vertically placed, locking loop suture pattern may be used (Figure 18-8, B).
Osteotomy
 In rare cases with severe deformity, after the extensor mechanism has been relocated
to a more normal cranial position, the osteotomized tibial tuberosity lies above the
 proximal end of the tibia due to muscle contracture and cannot be pinned. In a few
instances the femur has been osteotomized, 1 or more cm of bone removed, and
then repaired with intramedullary pins (or plated if trochleoplasty interferes with
 proper seating of the pins). This relaxes the extensor mechanism and allows the
tibial tuberosity to be moved distally for pinning to the tibia. In cases of severe
q a aq a sso sa  p e  j un
these are complex, and we have not used them. In such cases, arthrodesis is probably
a more feasible procedure.
With the increase in patellar luxations seen in large dogs, aggressive osteotomy
techniques may need to be performed more often than previously.
Femoral Osteotomy for Medial Luxation. Ater realigning the tubercle and
deepening the groove in large and giant dogs with grade 3 or 4 medial luxations, the
 patella may still not be stable. Distal torsion of the femur moves the medial side of
the distal femur more caudal from a frontal plane (see Figure 18-1, C), thereby
lowering the location of the medial ridge. A distal derotational femoral osteotomy
with bone plate fixation brings the medial side of the trochlea more cranially. If the
trochlea is angled relative to the straight extensor mechanism, a closing wedge
component of the osteotomy is performed as well. The osteotomy is planned so that
at least three plate screws can be placed distal to the osteotomy. Other reconstructive
 procedures may be needed to achieve stability of the patella.
Femoral Osteotomy for Lateral Luxation.  In the large and giant breeds, lateral
luxation (see later discussion) may be associated with valgus deformity and distal
torsion of the femur (Figure 18-9, A and B). If these deformities are severe enough,
bone corrective procedures as previously described may not be sufficient to stabilize
the patella. In such patients, a midshaft opening wedge osteotomy is done, the femur
B
FGURE 18-8. Patellectomy. A, After exposure with a
medial parapatellar skin incision, a vertical incision has
been made on the midline of the patella. The patella is
"shelled" out in quadrants with a sharp scalpel, leaving
an oval hole (the dotted line represents the previous
location of the patella). B, Closure of the hole in the soft
tissue can be accomplished by two horizontal mattress or
interrupted sutures with nonabsorbable suture. If there is
concern of dehiscence, a vertical locking loop suture
pattern may be added.
18—The Stifle Joint
579
FIGURE 18-9. A, Large
 Great Dane puppy with genu
C
valgum. Note the wide hips,
narrow stifles and hocks,
with the toes pointing out-
Bone plate
Osteotomy site
ward. B, Femur and tibia
filled with
from a large Great Dane with
autogenous
genu valgum showing valgus
cancellous
 angulation and torsion of the
bone graft
Femur
femoral condyles. C, Surgical
 derotated
correction  involves a  mid-
shaft transverse osteotomy;
internal rotation of the distal
femur, creating a varus bow-
ing of the femur sufficient to
realign the quadriceps mech-
anism; and stabilization with
a bone plate. The osteotomy
gap is filled with autogenous
 cancellous bone graft.
is derotated and placed in sufficient varus position to allow the patella to center in
the trochlear sulcus, and a bone plate is used for fixation (Figure 18-9, C). The
 defect created in the lateral cortex is filled with autogenous cancellous bone graft
(see Chapter 3). Lateral desmotomy, various soft tissue reconstructions, and recession
trochleoplasty may be necessary in addition to the osteotomy.
Aftercare for All Surgical Techniques
sep tI oiot rop oddns aepueq paped sadum, are spaaq asau jo Au asne
may be useful in the active patient. If bilateral surgery has been performed, postop-
erative pain may seriously inhibit attempts to use the limbs. Aspirin or other pain
medications may be used for 5 to 7 days (see Chapter 6).
Because toy and miniature breeds are not very tolerant of pain, some difficulties
are occasionally encountered. If the dog is not starting to bear weight by 4 weeks,
active physiotherapy must be started. Swimming is best but often is not possible.
 In small dogs, bathtub hydrotherapy may be substituted. Passive flexion-extension,
 20 to 30 times four times a day, may be helpful. Leash walking, ball throwing, and
 other activities to tempt the animal into a running gait are also useful. Taping a
 small, plastic syringe cap or glass marble between the toes and metatarsal pad of
the opposite limb for a few hours at a time also works well on some dogs. Placing the
 opposite leg in an Ehmer sling for several days may be done as a last resort.
Prognosis
Willauer and Vasseurl6 have reported on the follow-up evaluation of medial patellar
luxation repair in 52 stifles. No lameness was observed in 92% of the stifles,
although 48% had persistent, palpable patellar luxation. The recurrent luxations
 grade 1. Regardless of the degree of lameness or stability of the patella, most dogs
had radiographic signs of degenerative joint disease. It must be inferred from these
findings that stability of the femoropatellar joint is not essential to good function in
the small breeds, which supports the common clinical observation that some small-
breed dogs with medial patellar luxations never show clinical signs. Early correction
 of severe deformities will undoubtedly play a major role in ensuring good function.
580
 Part IIl—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Medial Luxation Treatment Plan
 Although not all cases can be fitted into rigid categories, we have attempted to
 outline procedures that may be useful for each grade of luxation. Treatment is aimed
at reducing the anatomical defects. The procedures are done in the following order
until patellar stability is achieved.
Grade 1
1. If the extensor mechanism is straight:
a. Lateral fascia lata overlap (see Figure 18-3).
b. Tibial antirotational suture (see Figures 18-4, B, and 18-5).
2. If the tubercle is deviated:
Tibial tubercle transposition (see Figure 18-7), with or without partial capsulectomy,
retinacular overlap, or fascia lata overlap (see Figures 18-2 and 18-3).
Grade 2
1. Medial desmotomy if the medial retinaculum prevents easy patellar reduction
(see Figure 18-7, B).
2.
Tibial tubercle transposition (see Figure 18-7) and partial lateral retinacular capsulectomy
or fascia lata overlap (see Figures 18-2 and 18-3).
 3. If the patella is still unstable, add:
Trochleoplasty (see Figure 18-6).
Grade 3
1. Medial desmotomy (see Figure 18-7, F).
 2. Tibial tubercle transposition (see Figure 18-7).
3. Trochleoplasty (see Figure 18-6).
4. Partial capsulectomy, lateral retinacular or fascia overlap (see Figures 18-2 and 18-3).
 5. Lateral patellar and tibial antirotational sutures (see Figures 18-4 and 18-5) if the patella
is still unsta ble.
Grade 4
1. Procedures for grade 3.
2. Release of quadriceps.
 3. If still unstable, consider:
a. Femoral (see Figure 18-9, B and C) derotation and shortening and possibly tibial
osteotomy.
b. Arthrodesis (see Figures 18-31 and 18-32).
The limiting factor in grade 4 luxation repair is flexure contraction at the stifle.
If the shortening is severe, the osteotomized tubercle may not reach the tibia in the
rotated position, necessitating femoral shortening or quadriceps lengthening. If the joint
cannot be extended to a near-normal angle, arthrodesis may be the only viable option.
Lateral Luxation Treatment Plan
 Surgical treatment is as follows:
Grade 1
 1. Medial retinacular overlap or capsulectomy (see Figure 18-2) in all cases.
2. Medial tibial antirotational suture (see Figure 18-4, B) if the patella is still unstable after 1.
18—The Stile Joint
581
Grades 2 and 3
1. Lateral desmotomy if the lateral retinaculum prevents easy patellar reduction
(see Figure 18-7, F).
2.
 Medial tibial tubercle transposition (see Figure 18-7).
3. Medial retinacular overlap (see Figure 18-2).
4. If the patella is still unsta ble, add:
a. Trochleoplasty (see Figure 18-6).
b. Medial patellar and tibial antirotational sutures (see Figures 18-4, B, and 18-5).
Combined Medial and Lateral Luxation Treatment Plan
 Surgical procedures are as follows:
The tubercle is usually in straight alignment:
1. Trochleoplasty (see Figure 18-6).
2. Combined medial and lateral retinacular overlap (see Figure 18-2) or
capsulectomies.
Medial Luxation Resulting from Trauma
All breeds are subject to this relatively rare injury, although minor skeletal changes 
and mild patellar instability predispose to the problem. Traumatic luxation of the
hip can be accompanied by medial patellar luxation. In our experience, we have not
 patella may become luxated. If undetected, and the fracture stabilized with coaptation,
 an ectopic patella results. The patella should be checked on all tibial fractures and
an iatrogenic complication after failure to close the fascia lata adequately during
distal femoral fracture repair.
Clinical Signs
Mechanically, the situation is similar to that of a grade 1 luxation, with signs of
acute inflammation superimposed. Pain is severe, and anesthesia or deep sedation is
usually required for palpation. The limb is carried in flexion and internal rotation.
Joint effusion and swelling of soft tissue are evident.
 Radiographic examination to rule out hip luxation, patellar fracture, and avulsion
or tearing of the patellar ligament is indicated. (See Chapter 16 for a discussion of
these injuries.)
Treatment
 Closed reduction and immobilization in a sling or Schroeder-Thomas splint may be
indicated if the patella is reasonably stable after reduction. If the patella is extremely
unstable or if luxation recurs after immobilization, surgical treatment should be
undertaken.
1. Fascia lata overlap.
 2. Lateral patellar suture (see Figures 18-4 and 18-5) if stability is not achieved by 1.
Lateral Luxation (Genu Valgum) in Young Large
and Giant Breeds
Also called genu valgum, this condition is seen in the same breeds that are affected
by hip dysplasia. The distal femoral trochlea becomes twisted externally, with the
582
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
lateral aspect of the femur shortened relative to the medial side. We have noted an
unusual incidence in certain strains of flat-coated retrievers. Rudy postulated a
 pe 'spg s 'sa i pou p anno jo uand s
wolfhounds as being affected most often. Olsson17 proposed that genu valgum of
large and giant breeds of dogs is caused by osteochondrosis of the distal femur.
Components of hip dysplasia, such as coxa valga (increased angle of inclination
of the femoral neck) and increased anteversion of the femoral neck,18 are related to
lateral patellar luxation. These deformities cause internal rotation of the femur with
lateral torsion and valgus deformity of the distal femur, which displaces the quadriceps
 mechanism and patella laterally (see Figure 18-9, A and B). Early treatment consists
'sso uex reed jn suea Area Aq aen mona sdnd au os o
 surgical correction is necessary.
Clinical Signs
Bilateral involvement is most common. Animals appear to be affected by the
time they are 5 to 6 months of age. The most notable finding is a "knock-knee"
(genu valgum) stance. The patella is usually reducible, and laxity of the medial
collateral ligament may be evident. The medial retinacular tissues of the stifle joint
are often thickened, and the foot can often be seen to twist laterally as weight is
placed on the limb.
Treatment
The following procedures are used:
 1. Mildly affected: lateral luxation without marked rotational deformity of the femur.
a. Trochleoplasty (see Figure 18-6).
b. Tibial tubercle transposition, although rotated medially (similar to Figure 18-7).
C. Retinacular overlap medially (see similar to Figure 18-2).
d. Periosteal incision and stripping to stimulate growth on lateral (concave) aspect of
 the physeal plate to stimulate growth.19
 2. Greatly affected: lateral luxation with marked valgus deformity of femur.
Corrective osteotomy of the femur (see Figure 18-9, C).
RUPTURE OF CRANIAL CRUCIATE LIGAMENT
Cranial cruciate ligament ruptures are one of the most common injuries in the dog
 mentous injury may be a complete rupture with gross instability or a partial rupture
changes within a few weeks and severe changes within a few months. The severity
 of degeneration seems to be directly proportional to body size, with animals weighing
i  n  ass s s  s  si e n
the ligament in dogs over 5 years of age. The intensity of the changes became worse
with age, but animals less than 15 kg had significantly less change in material prop-
erties than larger dogs. This confirms the earlier observations of Paatsama?i and
 Rudy.6 Systemic inflammatory joint diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis) in humans
and dogs have long been known to be associated with rupture of the cranial cruciate
ligament.2
Synovial fluid analysis of partial cruciate tears demonstrated increased nucleated
white cells, suggesting a moderate inflammation compared with the typical nonin-
flammatory changes seen with complete tears and DJD 23.24 There was no historical
evidence of systemic (i.e., multiple joints or limbs) joint disease.
18—The Stifle Joint
583
The function of the cranial cruciate ligament is to constrain the stifle joint so as
to limit internal rotation and cranial displacement of the tibia relative to the femur
the small craniomedial band (CMB) and the larger caudolateral band (CLB).
Mechanisms of injury can be related to these normal functions: most often the ligament
xa yo sap o o o un sot au ym Aideu pau si as au am pa s
or when the joint is forcefully hyperextended.26 The former occurs when the animal
suddenly turns toward the limb with the foot firmly planted. This causes extreme inter
nal rotation of the tibia with stress on the cranial cruciate ligament. Hyperextension
 probably occurs most frequently by stepping into a hole or depression at a fast gait.
From 30% to 40% of dogs sustaining a cruciate ligament rupture will rupture the
opposite ligament within 2 years. Young, straight-legged breeds (mastiffs, chow
 chows, Labrador retrievers) seem to have an increased prevalence of this problem in
the last 15 to 20 years. Bilateral problems are even more common in these young
dogs. Straight-leggedness, angle of the tibial plateau, and narrowing of the inter-
condylar notch may be contributing factors
The medial meniscus may be torn acutely at injury but is more often damaged as
a result of chronic instability of the joint, producing crushing and eventual shred-
ding of the caudal horn of the medial meniscus. Some type of meniscal injury is pres-
ent in about 50% of the animals we have seen. These injuries are discussed later in
In these cases the patellar luxation is probably the initial condition and the cruciate
ligament ruptures most likely caused by the tibial instability produced by the lux-
ated patella and subsequent stretching of the crucial ligament. Partial cruciate liga-
ment disease is becoming more frequently diagnosed and is seen especially in
straight-legged dogs (see later discussion)
Clinical Signs and Diagnosis
Although pain is noted early with non-weight bearing, most animals will start to
use the limb within 2 to 3 weeks and apparently improve for several months until a
gradual or sudden decline in the use of the limb is noted, often as a result of secondary
meniscal damage. At this time, the degenerative changes of osteoarthrosis are present,
and functional decline is continuous. Diagnosis is based on demonstration of
cranial drawer motion using direct and indirect palpation techniques (see Chapter 1).
Drawer motion should be tested in flexion, normal standing angle, and extension.
With acute injuries and gross instability, drawer motion may be evident. Joint effusion
may be noted for several days after injury. With chronic injuries and with partial
tears, drawer motion is much less evident and requires very careful examination.
With chronic cruciate ligament instability, periarticular tissues become thickened
and fibrotic, with only limited stretching possible. Drawer motion in these patients
may be almost imperceptible, but any drawer motion is abnormal. In skeletally
immature dogs, slight drawer motion ("puppy drawer") may be possible, but such
motion stops abruptly as the ligament is stretched taut. This abrupt stoppage of cranial
drawer motion is also noted in cases of isolated caudal cruciate rupture.
With partial cruciate ruptures, a small amount of drawer motion will be appreciated
only in flexion, emphasizing the need to check drawer in extension, neutral, and
flexion. Testing the joint for increased internal rotation of the tibia is also helpful in
animals with chronic conditions and in those with partial rupture. The amount of
torsion of the tibia can be compared with the opposite limb.
Fibrosis of the joint capsule and associated structures partially stabilizes the joint,
but not sufficiently to prevent its continual deterioration. Animals of all ages often
584
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
have firm swelling of tissues on the medial surface of the joint between the medial
collateral ligament and the proximal tibial (*"buttress sign"). The significance of this
swelling is uncertain, but we believe it is associated with chronic meniscal injury.
 Radiographs are of little value in the typical unsta ble cruciate ligament rupture other
than to document the amount of osteoarthrosis present. These are better appreciated
on arthrotomy. Radiographs are helpful in animals in which drawer motion is subtle
 or absent. If radiographs are taken, observations should include the following:
1. Osteophytes. These are seen especially around the distal patella, the
supratrochlear region, the tibial and femoral margins, and fabellae.
i n nn jo a pu e uld pa an u uis pd  7
 present from the distal patella to the femur and tibia (Figure 18-10). The
cruciates and menisci account for the normal radiodensity just caudal to this
triangle. With synovial effusion or fibrosis of the fat pad region, the area
cranial to the femur becomes whiter (Figure 18-10, B). Good-quality soft tissue
 technique films are necessary to define this change.
 3. Cranial drawer. Normally with cruciate rupture, the unstressed leg lies in a
neutral drawer position (Figure 18-11, A). If cranial drawer is detected on the
radiograph (Figure 18-11, B), it may indicate the presence of a torn meniscus
wedging the tibia forward.
4. Arulsions. These seen rarely and usually occur in the young animal.
B
FIGURE 18-10. A, On a lateral projection of a normal stifle, the fat pad is represented by
a triangle of dark lucency (arrows) that reaches the femoral condyle. B, On a lateral projection
of a swollen stifle, the “fat pad sign" is represented by a smaller triangle farrouws) of dark
lucency that does not reach the femoral condyle. The increased sof tissue density caudal to
the lucency is caused by fluid or by fibrosis of the fat pad.
18—The Stifle Joint
585
FIGURE 18-11. Tibial position
 in neutral and cranial drawer posi-
tions. A, In a neutral position, a
straight line made from the fabella,
end of the femoral condyle, and
tibia/fibula will touch the head of
the fibula/tibia. B, With significant
cranial drawer, this line will not
touch the fibula. Note: Unless a
meniscus is wedging the tibia
forward, it is rare to find cranial
drawer on radiography of the
unstressed stifle.
A
B
Modes of Therapy
It is well agreed that once instability resulting from cranial cruciate insufficiency
occurs, progressive degenerative changes, such as periarticular osteophytes, articular
erosions, and meniscal damage, begin within a few weeks. Controversy exists,
however, regarding the best treatment for a ruptured cranial cruciate ligament.
Conservative treatment by splintage has been advocated. Close confinement
for 4 to 8 weeks was reported to yield satisfactory function in the majority of small
dogs (body weight <20 kg).27 Vasseur28 reported similar results. He found that dogs
of 15 kg or less had satisfactory function several months after injury, whereas larger
breeds uniformly functioned poorly. All animals had evidence of DJD, and one
must speculate how well they would function several years later. Despite this
evidence to the contrary, if owners want the best treatment for their pet, our clinical
 experience leads us to recommend surgical treatment of all dogs and cats with this
injury.
 No surgical technique consistently stops the development or progression of DJD.
It is hoped that less DJD develops as a result of the surgical stabilization than if no
surgery is performed. Clinically, most authors cite an 85% to 90% clinical "success"
rate after surgery, even after dogs have been lame for months.
Most stifle joints should be opened, explored, and “cleaned up" regardless of the
stabilization technique. A medial arthrotomy is most helpful for examining and
removing the commonly ruptured medial meniscus. It may be accomplished through
a lateral arthrotomy if the stabilization technique dictates a lateral approach. The
synovium should be inspected; rough or voluminous periarticular osteophytes are
removed to prevent physical irritation to the synovium; and menisci are inspected
carefully (meniscectomy is discussed later). The stump of the cruciate ligament, as
well as the remainder of a 20% or more partial cruciate tear, is debrided to prevent
degenerative inflammatory products from irritating the synovial lining. The joint is
anat uzs jo ad aul jo asnesaq paeiuuo ssauni pasoi u
used) with nonabsorbable interrupted sutures and the stabilization procedure
 performed.
 Extracapsular methods embrace a wide variety of stabilization techniques for the
cruciate-deficient stifle joint. Most of these involve use of heavy-gauge suture to
decrease joint instability, although some rely instead on transposition of soft or
bony tissues. The indication for these approaches as opposed to the reconstructive
intraarticular methods has been debated constantly over the last 40 years.
Regardless of the type of repair done, most published reports indicate between 85%
586
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
and 90% good to excellent function at follow-up. Intracapsular methods usually
involve anatomical (or near-anatomical) replacement of the cruciate ligament with
autogenous or autologous grafts or synthetic materials. An in vitro examination of
various methods of repair indicated that intraarticular methods of repair result in
more normal joint motion than extraarticular methods.29 This seems to be particu-
larly important in dogs weighing more than 17 to 20 kg and most especially in the acute
 injury to the athletic animal. Extraarticular methods work well in smaller breeds but
often have been considered not to be as satisfactory in the larger, athletic animal
with an acute cruciate rupture. In a study of dogs undergoing experimental cranial
cruciate ligament repair, there was essentially no functional difference in peak verti-
cal forces measured by force plate analysis (see Chapter 1) between the dogs' pre-
operative and 20-week postoperative evaluations after an extracapsular technique
(modified retinacular imbrication technique) .30 Dogs undergoing an under-and-over
intracapsular technique still had significantly decreased vertical peak forces 20 weeks
postoperatively. Stability with extracapsular suture techniques is attributed to thick-
ening of the joint capsule and retinaculum because of inflammation from the
surgical procedure and implanted sutures. The experience of one of us (DLP), how-
ever, suggests that the fibular transposition method discussed later in this chapter is
highly satisfactory for large dogs. On the other hand, one of us (GLF) uses the
suture technique exclusively, including performance dogs, varying the number of
sutures used depending on animal size, amount of drawer movement, and function
ever, are household pets. Experience also indicates that extraarticular techniques are
more appropriate than intraarticular techniques when the cruciate injury is chronic
In this situation the inflammatory response and chronic changes within the joint
create an adverse environment for transposed autologous tissue. Synthetic replace.
ments for the cranial cruciate ligament have had some success in humans, but none
of the available protheses is economically feasible for widespread veterinary use.
A question arises as to the advisability of surgery for a symptomatic animal with
chronic instability and severe DJD. Simply providing stability will not cause the DJD
to disappear, but the animal usually improves dramatically in function after surgery.
In addition, most patients undergo torn menisci and severe osteophytosis; their
removal, along with stabilization, usually improves the animal's function. In ani-
mals with chronic conditions that have no instability even after a partial cruciate
injury is debrided, stabilization procedures are unnecessary. The veterinarian also
must address medical management of the joint disease, as discussed in Chapter 6.
The following surgical section reviews extracapsular techniques (imbrication,
retinacular, modified retinacular imbrication, three-in-one, fibular head transposition,
tibial plateau leveling), intracapsular techniques (Paatsama, over-the-top, under-and-
 Over), and a combination (four-in-one over-the-top technique).
Postoperative care may or may not include a soft bandage for 2 weeks (surgeon's
preference), followed by 6 weeks of strict leash walks of only 5 to 10 minutes
duration. After this, the animal's activity is slowly increased over the next 4 to
 8 weeks depending on physical demands. Weight reduction (usually indicated) is
attempted by lowering caloric intake, and clients are warned that there is a 30%
 or more chance that the opposite cranial cruciate ligament will rupture in the next
2 years.
Extracapsular Techniques
Imbrication Techniques
A long-standing technique for stabilizing drawer movement involves the placement
of Lembert sutures on the medial and lateral aspects of the joint capsule.?31 In our
18—The Stifle Joint
587
experience, this repair, by itself, stretches and becomes lax. However, it is the basis
for combination techniques that we perform.
Retinacular Technique
The retinacular technique, as first described by DeAngelis and Lau,32 involves placing
one or two large, nonabsorbable sutures around the lateral fabella and anchoring to
 the distal patellar ligament (see Figure 18-13, B). This becomes a restraint to drawer
movement.
Modified Retinacular Imbrication Technique
The modified retinacular imbrication technique (MRIT)33 borrows from the techniques
just described. Instead of one or two sutures around the lateral fabella that are
anchored to the patellar ligament, mattress sutures are passed around both the
lateral fabella and the medial fabella and anchored to a hole in the tibial tuberosity.
Another suture is passed from the lateral fabella to the retinaculum along the side
of the lateral aspect of the patella and acts as an imbrication suture (Figure 18-12, A).
Currently, this imbrication suture is used only on small dogs. Dogs over 20 kg
instead have a second lateral suture placed at the tibial tubercle region. A landmark
for finding the fabella is directly caudal to the distal third of the patella. The suture
material we presently use for both the MRIT and the three-in-one procedure is
monofilament nylon fishing leader material (20- to 80-pound test available); the
material size approximates the weight of the animal (Hard Nylon leader, Mason
Tackle Co., Otisville, Mich). Very few reactions have been encountered compared
with other suture materials used. Breakage occasionally occurs, usually on the cau-
dal side of the fabellae. This material is carefully rinsed and sterilized with ethylene
s rog 0 azis) as rasaod papienq areg 'is jo aoso Pioo, e ro aixo
breeds and 2 to 4 for larger breeds) can be substituted and is recommended if
sutures are placed in the patellar ligament rather than the tibial tuberosity (see
 Figure 18-13, B), which may be more suitable for toy and miniature breeds of dogs
and cats. Soaking braided imbrication sutures in chlorhexidine solution a few min-
utes before implantation reduces the number of infections and draining tracts asso-
ciated with burying large-gauge, braided nonabsorbable sutures, which has been 
reported as high as 21%.34
the cruciate ligament, as well as large rough osteophytes, and to inspect the menisci.
Inspection and removal of damaged medial menisci are more difficult through a lat-
eral arthrotomy (see later discussion). The arthrotomy is closed with interrupted
nonabsorbable or synthetic absorbable simple interrupted sutures before the stabi-
lization technique. To gain easier access to the fabella, a cutdown is made. The dis-
tal biceps femoris insertion on the fascia lata is incised just enough (approximately
5 cm) so that a large needle may be retrieved around the back of the fabella (Figure
18-12, B). Another advantage of a cutdown is that the sutures are not lying on top
of muscle, which may undergo pressure atrophy, leading to suture looseness. In
techniques using advancement of muscle for active countertraction to dra wer move-
 si si as sp s sq a ad a--aarn s s
proximally and distally. The fabella is identified by passing a curved mosquito for-
ceps around and under the fabella. The forceps is quickly elevated several times so
that the junction of the femur-fabella is delineated. A stout half-curved needle
(Martin's uterine needle) is passed from cranial to caudal at the level of the proxi-
mal fabella (Figure 18-12, C). To achieve needle passage, the needle tip must be
inserted perpendicular to the tight fabellar-femoral junction, and once it is inserted
588
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
C
FIGURE 18-12. Modified retinacular imbrication technique (MRIT).33 A medial approach7
to the stifle joint has been performed, remnants of the cruciate ligament and torn menisci
 removed, and the joint closed. Stabilization is accomplished with variations of the placement,
size, and numbers of heavy-gauge monofilament nylon sutures (see text). A, Final placement
of three sutures: one lateral fabellar/tuberosity, one medial fabellar/tuberosity, and one 
imbrication suture adjacent to the patella (sometimes omitted or rerouted to the tuberosity in 
large dogs).
18—The Stifle Joint
589
identify the fabella, allow identification of the peroneal nerve, and allow tightening of the suture
without trapping muscle. This would have caused necrosis and relative loosening of the
suture. The dotted line indicates extension of the fascial incisions if biceps muscle advance-
ment is desired at closure. C, Half the length of suture material is threaded through a heavy
half-curved needle and passed around the proximal third of the lateral fabella. It is then cut
close to the needle, which then forms two strands. D, The medial fabella is exposed by incis-
ing along the cranial edge of the caudal belly of the sartorius muscle and partially detached
at its insertion if later muscle advancement is desired. The medial suture is placed similar to C.
E, Horizontal hole is made with a 3/32-inch or 5/64-inch pin in the tuberosity, 1 cm caudal and
distal to the patellar ligament insertion (see A). Inset, Relationship of the mattress sutures
with the plane of the cranial cruciate ligament when the hole in the tubercle is properly
placed. F, The caudal strand of the medial suture is passed from medial to lateral. The caudal
strand of the lateral suture is passed through the same hole. G, With all drawer movement
removed by an assistant (see text), the first throw of the lateral suture is tightly tied and
grasped with a smooth-tipped forceps (ground-down needle holder works well). If drawer is
eliminated, the knot is completed. If not, the forceps is released, and the suture is retightened
and tied. The medial suture is similarly tied. An additional support suture is placed adjacent
to the patella, being careful not to create a lateral luxating patella (see A). H, Alternatively,
four sutures are placed from the fabella to the tubercle in large dogs with moderate or marked
(grade 3 or 4) drawer. Closure of the deep fascia, subcuticular layers, and skin layers is routine.
5 to 6 mm, the needle arcs around and hugs the fabella to avoid injury to the fibular
nerve, which lies about 2 to 3 cm caudally. Just after the needle emerges, the suture
is cut behind the eye of the needle. Now there are two sutures around the fabella
with one pass. The medial fabellar area is approached by longitudinally incising the
cranial fascial insertion of the caudal belly of the sartorius (Figure 18-12, D). With
the muscle reflected caudally, the needle and suture are similarly passed around the
medial fabella. In dogs over 45 kg with grade 3 or 4 drawer, the suture is doubled
The hole on the tibial tuberosity is made with a 5/64- or 3/32-inch Steinmann pin
1 cm distal and 1 cm caudal to the proximal and cranial surface of the tibial
tubercle in a 40-pound (20-kg) dog (Figure 18-12, E). This ensures that the mattress
suture is in the same plane as the cruciate ligament. The sutures are threaded
through these holes by first bringing the medial suture from a medial-to-lateral
direction (Figure 18-12, F). It is then taken back toward the medial fabella either
under or over the patellar tendon. Likewise, the lateral suture is passed from the
lateral to the medial side and then passed under or over the patellar tendon. Placing
the sutures under the tendon avoids pressure on it. The knots may be placed near
the hole on the tibial tuberosity or near the patellar ligament, depending on how the
sutures are brought through the tuberosity (i.e., the top proximal part of the medial
suture is brought through from lateral to medial, or the bottom distal part of the suture
is brought through from medial to lateral). The surgeon should be consistent so that
 the knots can be located if removal is necessary.
To make the sutures effective, all slack and drawer movement must be removed from
the joint as the sutures are tied tightly. To do this, an assistant finds the stifle angle
of most drawer movement, and while keeping this angle, externally rotates the tibia
and pushes it in "caudal" drawer. The first throw of the lateral suture is held gently
with a smooth forceps (a filed-down needle holder works well) (Figure 18-12, G),
and dra wer motion is checked. If drawer remains, the suture is released, retightened,
590
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
and regrasped with the forceps and checked again for drawer, then tied completely.
The medial fabellar suture is similarly tied, with the assistant holding the leg in the
same overreduced position. Alternatively, some use a slipknot, thereby eliminating
the need to grasp and potentially weaken the suture material. In our hands, suture
breakage occurs behind the fabella, not at the knot. The fabellar sutures lie on top
-ae si sa an in an os pan aq iou pous pue s eed au g
ciably indented. The lateral imbrication suture, which passes from the lateral fabella
to the retinacular fascia adjacent to the lateral aspect of the patella, is tied last
(Figure 18-12, A), with care not to overtighten and cause patellar luxation. In larger
dogs this suture is instead placed as a second suture at the tibial tubercle. The num-
ber, placement, and size of these sutures are modified depending on the degree of
drawer movement, size and function of animal, and the existence of concurrent
patellar luxation. For example, a 120-pound dog may have two lateral and two
medial fabellar sutures placed without the imbrication suture (Figure 18-12, H).
Dogs with minimal drawer may receive only one lateral fabellar-to-tibial tubercle
suture and one imbrication suture.
Three-in-One Technique
The technique shown here is a slight modification of the MRIT procedure previously
 described. The major differences are (1) the addition of advancement of the caudal
sartorius muscle medially and the biceps femoris laterally to add some immediate
 postoperative support to the repair and (2) the position of the knots on the fabel-
lar sutures. In small breeds (<30 pounds, or 15 kg) the medial fabellar suture
is eliminated (see earlier comments in MRIT section relative to suture material con-
siderations).
Surgical Tecbnique.  A medial arthrotomy is performed.7 Fragments of the
cruciate ligament are removed, and menisci are inspected and removed only if severely
torn or fragmented (see later discussion of meniscus). The medial joint capsule is
closed with synthetic absorbable suture material (Figure 18-13, A). To expose the
medial fabella, an incision is made through the fascia on the cranial edge of the
caudal belly of the sartorius muscle and extended distally into the proximal portion
of this muscle's insertion on the tibial crest (Figure 18-12, D). A monofilament nylon
suture is passed around the medial fabella with a half-circle Mayo catgut or Martin's
uterine suture needle, as shown in Figure 18-12, C.
 The skin is next undermined and reflected laterally to expose the lateral side of
the joint (Figure 18-13, B). The fascia lata is incised on a line from the cranial edge
of the biceps femoris muscle toward the patella, where the incision is angled toward
the proximal tibia, paralleling the patellar ligament. The fascia lata is reflected caudally
to expose the lateral fabella and collateral ligaments without incising the synovial
capsule. Two sutures are placed around the lateral fabella, as in Figure 18-12, E,
if the patellar ligament imbricating suture is to be used (see later); if not, only one
suture is placed. A small hole is drilled transversely through the tibial tuberosity
near the insertion of the patellar ligament (Figure 18-12, E). The more proximal end
of the medial suture is brought through the bone tunnel from a medial-to-lateral
direction, and the distal part is passed under the patellar ligament to emerge laterally
near the hole in the tuberosity, resulting in a figure-of-8 pattern (see Figure 18-13, A).
A similar but opposite maneuver is performed with one of the two lateral sutures
With the stifle held at a standing angle and all drawer motion removed (i.e., the tibia
externally rotated and forced caudally), these sutures are then tied snugly, thus elim-
inating drawer movement. Having the sutures placed so that the knots are tied as if
a horizontal mattress suture helps maintain tension within the knot while placing
18—The Stifle Joint
591
?
FIGURE 18-13. Three-in-one technique, a modification of MRIT method of Figure 18-12.
The changes include advancement of the biceps femoris and caudal sartorius muscles for
additional muscle traction to combat drawer motion, method of suture placement, and position
of the knots. A and B, After closure of the medial arthrotomy, part of the distal insertion of
the caudal belly of the sartorius muscle is detached from the tibia for later advancement
an incision is made in the fascia lata starting proximal to the fabella and ending distally at
the tibia, paralleling the patellar ligament. A transverse hole has been placed in the tibial
tuberosity (see Figure 18-12, E) and a lateral fabellar suture placed as in Figure 18-12, C.
The proximal end of the suture is placed from lateral to medial through the drill hole, and
the distal end of the suture is brought under the patellar ligament. A similar but opposite
maneuver is used on the medial suture. The knots are tied distally, with the lateral suture tied
first. The second lateral suture, placed in the distal patellar ligament and tied under tension
to produce slight caudal displacement of the ligament, is optional. C, The detached portion
of the caudal sartorius is sutured to the patellar ligament proximally to the level of the patella.
The fascia of insertion of the biceps femoris muscle is overlapped over the patellar ligament
distally to place the muscle under increased tension.
the second throw, thus more easily being done by surgeon without an assistant.
The lateral suture is tied first. The second lateral suture may be used, if desired, to
imbricate the joint further by placing it in the lateral third of the distal end of the
patelar ligament (Figure 18-13, B). The fascia lata is closed by overlapping it onto
the patellar ligament and quadriceps fascia to increase tension on the muscle. The
 previously detached portion of the caudal belly of the sartorius and medial fascia
are sutured to the patellar ligament medially. The proximal portion of the medial
fascial incision is closed conventionally. The final closure has the fabellar sutures
completely covered, except for the knots, by muscle and fascia (Figure 18-13, C)
This may help prevent seroma formation and contamination of these large sutures
from partial disruption of the skin incision during the first few days postoperatively.
Postoperative Care.  The limb may or may not be bandaged postoperatively
(surgeon's preference). Very restricted exercise is allowed for the first 8 weeks, with
a gradual return to normal activity over the next several weeks. The muscle force
Ae qu au jo asnqe, pue yiam Apoq sa aa o noy si suof aau au soe
cause implant failure before the development of strong fibrous tissue.
592
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 Clinical experience indicates that if the lameness does not improve over the next
8 to 12 weeks, or if it improves but then worsens, there is either a torn meniscus or
a suture break or reaction. It is therefore important for the surgeon to know exactly
where the knots were placed in order to expedite suture removal. Such removal of
the imbricating sutures after 3 months postoperatively does not increase drawer
motion because the fibrosis created by surgery provides long-term stability.
Fibular Head Transposition
An alternative extraarticular technique that has gained increasing acceptance is the
fibular head transposition (FHT) of Smith and Torg.3s By freeing the fibular head
and attached lateral collateral ligament (LCL), the fibula can be moved cranially and
attached to the tibia. The LCL is placed under tension and functions similarly to the
sutures in the MRIT or three-in-one method. Drawer motion and internal tibial
rotation are resisted by the transposed ligament. Biomechanical studies have confirmed
that the stiffness of the LCL is sufficient to stabilize the stifle joint.36 Further
mechanical studies after transposition of the LCL indicated a gradual increase in
structural qualities, reaching approximately 135% of their original values 10 months
postoperatively.37
 Smith and Torg?s found the method produced good to excellent clinical grades in
90% of patients, and the experience of one of us (DLP) with the FHT over a 7-year
 period is similar. The clinical results are similar to intraarticular methods, but there
is the major advantage of significantly decreased recovery time (see following
discussion). The effectiveness of the technique has been questioned in one experi-
 mental study, which concluded that this method did not control drawer motion or
rotational stability, did not prevent progression of DJD, and was associated with
meniscal damage in 25% to 50% of the dogs in the study.38 Objectively, these are not
impressive results, but they are more an indication of the “state of the art" at that
time in stabilizing the cruciate-deficient stifle than a condemnation of the technique.
If all the then current used methods were subject to such a rigorous evaluation,
it seems certain that they would all show similar results. In fact, relative to the
incidence of postsurgical meniscal injuries requiring second surgeries in 665 stifles
stabilized with three methods (lateral retinacular imbrication, intraarticular over-the
top, and FHT), significantly fewer dogs with FHT returned with meniscal injuries
(8.6%) than with the other two methods (16.5% and 19%).39
Surgical Tecbnique. This surgery for FHT is more demanding than will be
appreciated from the following description, and it should be thoroughly practiced
on cadavers before attempting it in a patient. Once familiarity is gained, the level of
difficulty, operating time required, and incidence of postsurgical complications are
similar to the over-the-top procedures. Potential intraoperative problems include
fracture of the fibular head or neck, accidental transection or avulsion of the collateral
ligament, and injury of the peroneal (fibular) nerve. Wire breakage and pin migration
 are the most common late complications but are minimal with good technique.
 The technique described is slightly modified from the original description.3S
 The anatomical relationships of the LCL and the fibular head are illustrated in
Figure 18-14, A. After a lateral skin incision, a medial parapatellar approach (to allow
better exposure if meniscectomy is required) to the joint is made. After inspection
of the joint, with removal of the remnants of the cranial cruciate ligament and
inspection of the meniscus (see later discussion), the medial capsule and retinaculum
are closed, including the caudal belly of the sartorius muscle in the closure, as in
Figure 18-13, C. The fascia lata is incised next so that the incision continues distally
along the lateral edge of the tibial tuberosity for 2 to 3 cm, avoiding the underlying
18—The Stile Joint
593
Lateral
Caudal
Lateral
collateral lig.
 Tendon of 
 popliteus m.
Lateral meniscus
 Cranial fibular lig.
Head of fibula
Caudal fibular lig.
Long digital ext. m.
C
D
FIGURE 18-14. Fibular transposition technique, modified from method of Smith and
ligament will be dissected free from the joint capsule and the ligaments of the fibula incised
to free it from the tibia. B, Lateral skin incision and medial parapatellar approach to the joint.
The medial capsule and retinaculum have been closed as in the three-in-one technique, but
without a suture around the medial fabella (see Figure 18-13, C). The fascia lata is incised as
in Figure 18-13, B, except that the incision continues distally along the lateral edge of the
tibial tuberosity for 2 to 3 cm. After sharp elevation from the tibia, caudal retraction of the
fascia lata exposes the fibular head, collateral ligament, and the underlying muscles. The peroneal
(fibular) nerve must be identified and protected. (See text for further description of the 
incisions depicted.)
594
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 18-14. Continued C, The dissection plane for incising the tibiofibular ligaments is
45 degrees to the sagittal plane of the tibia. D and E, A 0.62-inch (1.5-mm) Kirschner wire is
driven into the center of the head of the fibula and is then used to move the fibula cranially
under the caudal edge of the tibialis cranialis muscle. When the collateral ligament is taut and
most drawer motion abolished, the Kirschner wire is driven into the tibia to penetrate the
transcortex. A hole is drilled in the tibial tuberosity for a 16- or 18-gauge (1.2- to 1.0-mm)
eyelet cerclage wire, which is passed cranially through the tibialis cranialis muscle, around the
tuberosity, and back through the muscle (see text for details). As the wire is tightened, the pin
will bend and produce more tension on the collateral ligament; when cranial drawer motion
is abolished, the wire is cut and the end buried in the muscle. A twisted wire is then placed
around the pin through a second bone tunnel and is tightened on the craniomedial aspect of
the tibial tuberosity.
fascia of the tibialis cranialis muscle. Caudal retraction of the fascia lata and biceps
femoris muscle, after sharp elevation of the fascia from the tibia, exposes the fibular
head, LCL, and underlying muscles (Figure 18-14, B). The peroneal (fibular) nerve
must be identified and protected. The nerve is most readily seen if all fat and areolar
tissue is elevated from the fascia of the peroneus longus muscle; the nerve and an
 accompanying vessel enter the muscle caudally 1 to 2 cm distal to the fibular head.
The first incision is into the fibularis longus muscle along the caudal side of the
fibula, starting just proximal to the peroneal nerve, and continuing proximally
along the caudal border of the collateral ligament. The muscle is elevated from the
fibular head. Sharp dissection is used to free the cranial border of the collateral
ligament from underlying joint capsule. Undermining and freeing of the ligament
from the joint capsule is done from the caudal side of the ligament by blunt dissection
using a curved forceps or scissors and a spreading action. The incision made to free
the cranial border of the ligament is continued distally into the intermuscular fascia
between the peroneus longus and tibialis cranialis muscles, then cranially through
the origin of the tibialis cranialis until the tendon of the long digital extensor muscle
is exposed. The tibialis cranialis muscle and the tibial origin of the peroneus longus
muscle are elevated from the tibia.
 The ligaments of the fibular head are incised to free it from the tibia by working
 from the cranial aspect of the fibular head while retracting the peroneus longus
 45 degrees caudal from the sagittal plane of the tibia (Figure 18-14, C). Incision of
the ligaments can be done with a variety of instruments, such as a scalpel, a sharp
 periosteal elevator, or osteotome, but the most useful instrument has been a canine
meniscus knife (Veterinary Instrumentation, Sheffield, England; Jorgensen
Laboratories Inc., Loveland, Colo; see Figure 18-22, E). This instrument follows the
plane between the bones without cutting bone and greatly reduces the chance of
accidental fracture of the fibular head. This dissection is difficult only in more
chronic cases because osteophytes may protrude into the interosseous plane.
After the proximal fibula is freely movable, a 0.62-inch (1.5-mm) Kirschner wire
(K-wire) is driven into the center of the head of the fibula and is then used to help move
the fibula laterally and then cranially under the caudal edge of the tibialis cranialis
(  no spunod os<) spaaq aaie Aaa u pasn si ud (uz) yu-/s  asnu
Use of larger pins will not allow them to bend easily, which is essential to the tech-
nique as described here. The tibia is externally rotated, and the stifle is held at a
standing angle, with drawer movement removed during the transposition maneuver.
18—The Stifle Joint
595
A Schroeder vulsllum forceps or an AO/ASIF pointed reduction forceps (Synthes,
Ltd., Paoli, Pa) is useful to maneuver and hold the fibula in the desired position. One
jaw of the forceps is placed caudal to the fibular head, and the other jaw is engaged
on the tibial tuberosity. Be certain that the jaw of the forceps does not trap the
peroneal nerve or penetrate the insertion of the collateral ligament because this will
 s p p au  a x s a  a 
allows testing of drawer motion before drilling the K-wire into the tibia. Most, but
not all, of the motion will be neutralized at this time.
The K-wire is then driven into the tibia to penetrate the transcortex (Figure 18-14,
D and E). The K-wire should not be cut short yet. A 3/3z-inch (2.5-mm) hole is
drilled in the tibial tuberosity by laying the pin on the surface of the fibula and
penetrating the tibialis cranialis muscle. A 16-gauge hypodermic needle is passed
caudally through the bone hole and the tibialis cranialis muscle toward the surface
of the fibula where the K-wire penetrates it. A 16- to 18-gauge (1.2- to 1.0-mm)
eyelet wire is inserted into the needle, which is then withdrawn, leaving the wire
in place. The larger wire, 16 gauge or 1.2 mm, is used for dogs over 80 pounds
(35 kg). The cranial end of the wire is looped laterally around the tuberosity and
then passed back through the tibialis cranialis muscle toward the K-wire.
 The free end of the wire is passed through the eyelet, which is positioned to face
cranially by bending the wire around the pin. As the wire is tightened, the pin will
bend cranially and produce more tension on the collateral ligament, thus the need
for a small-diameter bendable pin. When cranial drawer motion is abolished, the
wire is bent over and cut, the cut end being buried in the tibialis cranialis muscle.
Substituting a twisted wire for the eyelet wire is possible but is slightly more difficult
to tighten without breaking the wire because of the large number of turns required
to move the fibula. A second wire is placed in a similar manner through a second
hole in the tibial tuberosity, except that this wire is secured by twisting on the
 craniomedial aspect of the tuberosity and bent flat against the bone. Overtightening
of this wire should be avoided because it will loosen the first wire. This could also
be an eyelet-type wire if desired. We have seen some wire breakage when a single
wire is used, thus the addition of the second wire. A hook is now bent in the K-wire,
which is then driven flush with the fibula, taking care not to entrap the fibular
nerve. The end of the K-wire protruding from the medial side of the tuberosity is cut
flush with the bone. For very large dogs, over 100 pounds (45 kg), a second pin is
used, placed caudal to the fibular head and driven into the tibia. The second wire is
placed around this pin as previously described.
Addition of a large, monofilament nylon lateral fabella-to-tibial tuberosity
suture, as described earlier in the MRIT and three-in-one sections, has clinically
 proved to be a useful addition to this procedure. Based on the work of Dupuis and
colleagues,37 the transposed collateral ligament undergoes elongation after transpo-
sition, but this all occurs in the first 3 weeks postoperatively. If the lateral suture can
serve as a protector of the ligament during this period, there should be better long-
term stability of the joint, and this has been borne out in practice, with very mini-
mal long-term drawer motion observed. After placement of the imbrication suture,
the fascia lata is sutured by advancing it as far craniomedially as possible, thereby
placing the biceps femoris muscle under tension (see Figure 18-12, C).
Aftercare. The limb is not splinted postoperatively. Only very restricted
exercise is allowed for 4 weeks, followed by a gradual increase of activity and
full resumption of activity at 8 weeks. Most animals will be partially weight
   e      a  an  
3 to 4 weeks.
596
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Tibial Plateau Leveling Osteotomy
A technique that has gained popularity over the last several years is the tibial plateau
-xd i uo sua s otis Aq pasodod se ot) oso u
imal tibia, rotating the plateau caudally and distally, and plating to stabilize the
osteotomy. The theory is that the correct plateau angle will counteract cranial tibial
thrust during weight bearing (see Chapter 1 and following discussion). It does not
 Enterprises, Eugene, Ore), but the patent has expired, allowing more widespread
teaching and use of TPLO. Specialized saw blades and jigs are available from
 Slocum Enterprises. A variety of alternative bone plates and saws for this procedure
are now available from several manufacturers
Although those who perform this surgery are enthusiastic about it, long-term
objective data on efficacy are minimal. A consistent subjective impression by many
surgeons is that limb function recovers more quickly than with other cruciate ligament
techniques, subjective evaluation of parameters such as time to recovery, range of
motion (ROM), owner satisfaction and willingness to recommend the procedure,
ability to sit normally, and postoperative complications were judged to be better for
TPLO than for imbrication techniques.43 Another study compared intracapsular,
TPLO, lateral retinacular imbrication, and FHT techniques using force plate evalu-
ations and found no clear superiority of any method, although the author admitted
accurate conclusions could not be made because of the variability between 206 dogs
and the statistical power of the study.44
 However, another study comparing a postoperative progression of osteoarthritis
in 40 dogs showed 16 dogs to have a statistically significant progression of mean
osteophyte score 6 months postoperatively, whereas 57.5% showed no progression
of osteophytosis.4s Another study showed zero to minimal changes in the radio-
graphic score of 30 stifle joints at least 1 year after TPLO.46 Lazar's group evaluated
the long-term results of cranial cruciate ligament injury in large dogs treated by
there was a statistically significant increase in progression of osteoarthritis within
the ECR group compared with the TPLO group. When standardized for time, the
mean percent change in osteoarthritis score for each month after surgery was an
increase of 9.8% per month for ECR and 3.0% per month for TPLO, a significantly
slower rate of progression for TPLO. Thus, although TPLO does not totally prevent
 the progression of osteoarthritis, such progression is noted in all techniques.
Long-term objective studies regarding function and pathological changes after
TPLO have not been well documented. Questions regarding long-term clinical
impact on caudal cruciate ligament stress, ROM, and further documentation of
 progression of osteoarthritis are of importance.48
Cranial Tibial Tbrust. During weight bearing in the normal dog, forces
across the knee joint consist of body weight and muscle forces (quadriceps, ham-
ss  t p  a xd s si a s iss
together, causing a cranial thrust of the proximal tibia resulting from the caudodis-
tal slope of the tibial plateau (see Figure 18-15, A). This places passive restraints
(e.g. cranial cruciate ligament) under great tension. If hamstrings are weak or forces
too great (leaping, twisting, turning), the degenerate ligament tears, allowing
 u ) i i   sd e p r 
In theory, if the caudodistal slope of the tibia is reoriented to a more neutral
position (research has shown the proper angle to be 6.5 degrees, with a clinical rec
panpond si snun eian lpneo e a 'si-st an) (srap s jo uonpuao
18—The Stifle Joint
597
However, excessive correction of the slope places the caudal cruciate ligament
atrisk.49
n a p ae nd pn sd ya osa pi
needed to achieve an end point of 5 to 6.5 degrees are calculated using preoperative
radiographs (Figure 18-15, A and B). A craniomedial parapatellar skin incision is
made, followed by medial parapatellar arthrotomy. The frayed tags of the ligament
are removed as well as torn menisci. If the meniscus is intact, a meniscal release is
performed to prevent subsequent meniscal injury (see following discussion). This is
followed by an approach to the proximal tibia through a medial incision.7 Muscle
insertions of the proximal medial tibia are incised (gracilis, semitendinosus, caudal
belly of sartorius), leaving the medial collateral ligament intact. A jig (Slocum
Enterprises) is applied to the medial tibia and guides a curved osteotomy, which will
allow reorientation of the plateau to the desired angle. The curved osteotomy is
performed using a biradial saw blade (Slocum Enterprises), and the proximal tibia
is rotated to the proper 5-degree angle (Figure 18-15, B) and stabilized with a TPLO
bone plate (Figure 18-15, C). This should eliminate cranial tibial thrust, as evidenced
by elimination of the indirect drawer.
Aftercare.5o  Activity level is restricted to leash walking for 3 months or more,
with gradual increase in the frequency and duration of walks. ROM exercises
(25-50 repetitions of flexion-extension) are performed two or three times per day
by the owner. Analgesics are given as needed. Massage, cold therapy, and other
modalities (e.g., ultrasound, neuromuscular stimulation) have been advocated.
 Reevaluation and radiographs are performed 6 to 8 weeks postoperatively, at
which time clinical union of the osteotomy is usually achieved. Swimming may then
 in 6 to 8 weeks, with full function expected by 4 to 6 months.
Complications.  Complications after TPLO include infection, inflammation of
 the patellar tendon, fracture of the tibial tubercle, breaking of the plate or loosening
of the screws, delayed healing of the osteotomy, rupture of the caudal cruciate
ligament, meniscal injury, improper placement of the proximal screw into the stifle
joint,41 and inadequate tibial plateau correction. Also, with a "pivot shift," there is
increased internal rotation of the tibia during weight bearing, probably caused by
the relative relaxation of the lateral collateral ligament, which results from the
increased femoral-tibial flexion angle.48 Internal rotation of the distal tibia and
femoral varus predispose to this problem. Although TPLO was associated in one
study with more complications than other cranial cruciate ligament stabilization
methods, the incidence of major complications was similar.$1 As in all technically
demanding procedures, complications decrease with experience. The learning curve
is steeper for TPLO than for other techniques, and the procedure is probably best
limited to experienced orthopedic surgeons. Publications aimed at honing surgeon
skills are needed.
Meniscal Release.  During drawer movement, the medial meniscus moves forward
with the tibia (see later section on meniscal injuries), and the caudal horn is subjected
to crushing by the femoral condyle. After TPLO, passive drawer remains and active
drawer is possible under some loading scenarios, potentially subjecting the meniscus
to shear and crushing forces. Slocum and Slocum-Devines2 proposed a release of
the medial meniscus that relatively elongates the meniscus, keeping the caudal pole
caudal to the condylar crush during drawer movement. Some orthopedists are
598
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
PreoperativeTPA=25°
PostoperativeTPA=5°
Tibial slope
Functional
tibial axis
B
 Patellar ligament
Medial
 collateral
ligament
Caudal tibial ligament
C
FIGURE 18-15. Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy (TPLO). A, Line is drawn on a true 
the proximal tibia to the center of the talocrural joint (functional tibial axis). Another line
is drawn along the tibial plateau slope from the cranial-to-caudal limits of the medial
tibial condyle. The angle created between these two lines is called the "tibial plateau angle"
(TPA) and in this illustration is 25 degrees. B, After a curvilinear osteotomy has been
performed, the proximal tibia is rotated distally and caudally to achieve a desired TPA of
 5 degrees. C, Specially designed plates (Slocum Enterprises) for right and left limbs are used
to stabilize the fracture. D, Meniscal release. Through a craniomedial arthrotomy, the caudal
tibial ligament of the medial meniscus is incised with a #11 scalpel blade. Alternatively,
the meniscus is released by a midbody transection. After a limited caudomedial approach,
a #11 scalpel is used to incise the meniscus at an angle 30 degrees to the frontal plane.
The blade is aimed toward a point slightly caudal to the lateral edge of the patellar ligament
         e 
Veterinary Medicine).
18—The Stifle Joint
599
performing meniscal release in conjunction with other stabilization techniques as
well. No original research was performed on this recommended technique as to what
fills the "void, how long it takes, and whether it will last. Research studies using
 dog models and clinical studies are needed to prove the efficacy of this technique,
which is controversial at this time.
Techniques for release. As proposed by Slocum, if drawer movement is consider-
able, as in a fresh, complete cruciate rupture, the caudal horn can be accessed by
levering the tibia and meniscus forward by placing a Hohmann retractor between
the front of the caudal cruciate ligament and the back of the caudal tibial plateau.
A #11 scalpel blade is used to incise the tibial ligament of the caudal medial meniscus
(Figure 18-15, D). With minimal drawer from a partial cruciate ligament rupture,
Slocum recommends performing a caudomedial arthrotomy' just caudal to the
medial collateral ligament and cutting the meniscus 30 degrees cranial to a frontal
plane, aiming at a point just lateral to the insertion of the patellar ligament on the 
retracted caudally with a small, sharp skin hook. With an adequate arthrotomy
(1.0-1.5 cm proximal to the tibial plateau) and some experience, the condition of
the meniscus can be evaluated and damaged areas excised with a small, curved
meniscus knife. Most early partial cruciate ligament tears do not have meniscal
injuries. Evidence indicates that the caudomedial approach to evaluate the meniscus
may have some advantage over the conventional craniomedial approach, even
 though the cranial cruciate ligament cannot be debrided.53
 There was significantly less postoperative progression of osteoarthritis in dogs
 that had the caudomedial arthrotomy than in those that had a craniomedial arthrotomy
with excision of the remnants of the cranial cruciate ligament.S3
Intracapsular Techniques
Paatsama Technique
 One of the first intracapsular techniques was developed by Saki Paatsama21 in the
1950s, and practitioners still perform this popular cruciate surgery. The technique
involves harvesting a 1- to 2-cm-wide strip of fascia lata from the thigh and leaving
it attached distally. Holes are drilled in the femur and tibia at the anatomical origin
and insertion of the ruptured anterior cruciate ligament. Care must be taken to
avoid injury to the caudal cruciate ligament. The end of the fascia lata strip is
threaded through each of these two holes using looped wire. The graft is then pulled
tightly and anchored with sutures along the patellar ligament.
Over-the-Top Technique
The over-the-top procedure, developed by Arnoczky and co-workers,$4 involves
harvesting a cruciate replacement composed of the medial third of the patellar
ligament, part of the patella, and the quadriceps tendon. It should be considered
only in acute injuries of athletic dogs over 25 to 30 kg. Harvesting this graft is
technically demanding because significant injury to the patella can occur. The graft
is brought through the joint and then over the top of the lateral condyle and sutured.
Auq w yen ay jo sue aqissod pue and aoy radodu spoe s
edges, as can occur with the Paatsama technique.
 Following a medial arthrotomy, the medial third of the patellar ligament is split
away from the rest of the ligament but is left attached to the tibia and patella.
Incisions in the patellar tendon and fascia lata continue proximally (Figure 18-16, A).
A portion of the medial edge of the patella is split away from the patella with a small
osteotome. Care should be taken not to penetrate the articular cartilage of the
patella. The attachments of the patellar tendon proximally and patellar ligament
600
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Incisions in
fascia lata
Incision in
 joint capsule
Incisions in
patellar tendon
Incision in 
medial third of
patellar ligament
A
B
Fascia lata
strip
Portion of
patella
Patella
Patellar
ligament
Fascial strip
 sutured to
fascia, periosteum,
and collateral ligament
C
D
FIGURE 18-16. Intraarticular cranial cruciate stabilization: over-the-top technique.4
A, Medial approach7 with a lateral skin incision has been made to the right stifle. The medial
arthrotomy is made on the medial edge of the patellar ligament and patella and continues
proximally into the cranial sartorius and vastus medialis muscles. The medial third of the
patellar ligaments is split away from the remainder of the ligament. Incisions in the patellar
tendon and fascia lata define the fascial strip proximal to the patella. B, Part of the patella
is removed with an osteotome, and care is taken not to cut into the articular surface. The
patellar ligament attachment distally and the patellar tendon proximally must be preserved.
C, The patellar ligament-patella-fascia lata strip is freed. D, The medial incision is continued
as far proximally as necessary to allow lateral luxation and retraction of the patella and expo-
sure of the lateral condyle. The fascial strip is pulled through the joint as in Figure 18-17, D
and E, except that the forceps are passed from inside the joint capsule. After fixation of the
fascial strip to the periosteum, fascia, and the lateral collateral ligament (see Figure 18-17, H
and I), the joint is closed as in Figure 18-17, F.
18—The Stifle Joint
601
distally must be preserved (Figure 18-16, B). When the bone fragment is free,
dissection is continued proximally into the fascia lata, where the strip is prepared
(Figure 18-16, C), as described later for the four-in-one over-the-top technique.
The fascia-bone-ligament strip needs to be only two times as long as the tibial tubercle-
patella distance. The medial capsule incision is continued as far proximally as
necessary to allow lateral luxation and retraction of the patella and exposure of the
lateral condyle. The fascial strip is pulled through the joint similar to Figure 18-17,
D and E, except that the forceps is passed from inside the joint capsule. After fixa-
tion of the fascial strip to periosteum, fascia, and the lateral collateral ligament
(Figure 18-17, H and I), the joint is closed (Figure 18-17, F).
Aftercare. No postoperative splinting is used with the over-the-top technique,
but very restricted exercise (confinement to house, leash walking) is ordered for
12 weeks, followed by gradual return to activity and freedom for moderate exercise
after 18 weeks. Intensive training of working dogs should not start until 6 months
postoperatively.
 Under-and-Over Technique
 The under-and-over technique uses a fascia lata strip harvested as in the Paatsama
technique. However, the strip goes all the way to the tibia. A tunnel is made under
 s a r pssd si  a p  ps a
into the interior of the joint. It is then pulled through the joint and over the top of
the lateral condyle-fabellar region. After it is pulled tight enough to eliminate
drawer, the graft is attached to the lateral femoral condyle with a spiked washer and
screw.ss
Intracapsular and Extracapsular Technique
Four-in-One Over-the-Top Technique
This technique involves using the three-in-one procedure plus a fascia strip used in
 Over-the-top fashion. Four separate procedures have served to stabilize the joint:
advancement of the caudal sartorius and biceps muscles creates caudal traction on
the tibia; fabellar-distal patellar ligament sutures prevent drawer motion immedi-
ately and serve as an internal splint for the fascial strip; and the fascial strip replaces
the cruciate ligament.
This technique?6 is indicated for animals weighing over 15 kg and can be used for
smaller breeds if they are athletic, such as hunting beagles. The procedure is a mod-
ification of the over-the-top technique of Arnoczky and associates.4 Although the
original technique (see Figure 18-16) results in excellent stabilization, some surgeons
used for cruciate ligament replacement. An attempt has been made to simplify the
procedure by using a fascia strip collected entirely from the fascia lata. Additionally,
lateral stabilizing sutures (as in the three-in-one technique) provide immediate
stability and protection for the fascial strip. The following procedure is described as
done in dogs weighing more than 20 kg. The next-smaller suture sizes can be used
in dogs between 15 and 20 kg.
Surgical Tecbnique.  A medial arthrotomy following a lateral skin incision is
made to allow inspection of the joint, removal of ligament fragments, and meniscec-
tomy (see Figure 18-22) when needed. A strip of fascia 1.5 to 2 cm wide at the base
is isolated from the lateral aspect of the joint and remains attached at the junction
of the patellar ligament with the tibial tubercle distally (Figure 18-17, A). The strip
is fashioned by cutting its cranial edge from the lateral border of the patellar ligament
602
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
and is continued proximally a few millimeters lateral to the patella. This incision,
which is made with a scalpel, is ended just proximal to the patella, and the caudal
edge of the strip is formed by incising 1.5 to 2 cm caudal and parallel to the first
incision. Care is taken to avoid incising the underlying synovial membrane.
 Proximal to the patella, the fascia lata is easily elevated from the quadriceps, and
Fascialatastrip
Incision in
Biceps
joint capsule
femoris m.
Infrapatellar
fat pad
Hole through
tibial tubercle
Lateral
A
B
Vastus medialis m.
Gastrocnemiusm.
Caudal belly
of sartorius m.
Lateral
fabella
Infrapatellar
fat pad
Medial
Lateral
D
E
F
FIGURE 18-17. Intracapsular and extracapsular cranial cruciate ligament stabilization:
four-in-one over-the-top technique.$6 A, Lateral view of right stifle. A medial arthrotomy has
already been performed, the ligament remnants removed, and the joint explored. A fascia lata
strip is developed, based on the tibial-patellar ligament junction. The strip is 1 to 1.5 cm wide 
at the base and slightly wider proximally. Its total length is 2.5 to 3 times the distance from
the tibial tubercle to midpatella. B, A 5/32- to 3/16-inch hole has been drilled transversely
through the tibial tubercle, close to the tibial plateau. A heavy monofilament suture has been
attached to the fascial strip, which is then reflected distally and pulled through the hole from
lateral to medial. C, The fascial strip is pulled into the joint by tunneling it through the fat
pad. D, The lateral edge of the fascia lata incision is dissected and retracted to expose the
lateral fabella. The portion of the gastrocnemius muscle originating proximal to the fabella
is elevated, and a curved forceps is passed medial to the fabella, through the caudal joint
capsule, and into the intercondylar notch of the femur E, The curved forceps must emerge in
the intercondylar space lateral to the caudal cruciate ligament. One end of the monofilament
suture attached to the fascial strip is grasped so that the strip can be pulled proximally
through the joint. F, The medial arthrotomy is closed in one layer. The caudal sartorius muscle
is partially detached from the tibia, then sutured with the joint capsule and medial fascia to
the patellar ligament, creating increased tension in the muscle (see also Figure 18-13, C).
18—The Stifle Joint
603
dissection is continued with scissors. The caudal cut is continued proximally first
and follows the cranial border of the biceps femoris muscle. The cranial border from
the proximal patella is cut next, taking care to maintain or slightly increase the 
strip's width at the proximal end. The length of this strip is equal to 2.5 to 3 times
the distance from the tibial tubercle to the midpatella.
A 5/32- to 3/16-inch (4- to 4.8-mm) hole is drilled transversely through the tibial
tubercle close to the tibial plateau, and the proximal end of the fascial strip
is drawn through the hole, thus transferring the strip to the medial side of the
Staple
suture
Fascia lata strip
Lateral
fabella
G
Femorofabellar
Groove in
tendon
supracondylar
tuberosity
 of femur
Biceps
femoris m.
Caudal belly
Gastrocnemiusm
of sartorius m.
Lateral
Fascia lata
strip
fabella
Fascia lata
strip
H
FIGURE 18-17. Cortirmued G, Two sutures of size 2-4 nonabsorbable material are placed
from the lateral fabella to the distal patellar ligament or tibial tuberosity and tied under tension
with drawer motion reduced (see Figure 18-13). H, The femorofabellar ligament is elevated
from the supracondylar tuberosity of the femur to allow a groove to be produced in the
cortical bone of the tuberosity by rongeur, rasp, or osteotome. A wire loop can then be used
to “fish" the suture attached to the fascia strip through this opening. I, The fascial strip is
pulled tight and attached to joint capsule or patellar ligament with the suture attached to its
end. The strip is then sutured to the femorofabellar tendon, fascia, and joint capsule with
3-4 cruciate “staple” sutures (see inset). J, This cranial view shows the bilateral closure that
places caudal traction on the tibia as a result of increased tension from the biceps femoris and
caudal sartorius muscles. Because of the removal of the fascial strip, the lateral closure places
the biceps femoris muscle under tension.
604
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
tibia (Figure 18-17, B). Size 0 to 1 monofilament suture is attached to the fascia strip
to aid in pulling it through the bone. The graft is pulled into the medial arthrotomy
through the fat pad into the joint, medial to the patellar ligament (Figure 18-17, C).
On the lateral side of the joint, the lateral edge of the fascia lata incision is
dissected and retracted to expose the lateral fabella. The portion of the gastrocnemius
 e p  n  a si  n  pxd  a
curved Crile or Kelly hemostatic forceps is passed through this opening medial to
the fabella with the curve facing cranially, through the caudal joint capsule, and into
the intercondylar notch of the femur (Figure 18-17, D). The tips of the forceps are
 positioned lateral to the caudal cruciate ligament, where one end of the suture
attached to the fascial strip is grasped with the jaws of the forceps (Figure 18-17, E).
The forceps is pulled proximally, and the suture is used to pull the graft over the top
of the lateral fabella.
 The medial arthrotomy is then closed in one layer. The insertion of the caudal
belly of the sartorius is partially detached from the tibia and sutured to the patellar
ligament along with the joint capsule and medial fascia as far proximally as the
patella. From that point proximal, the sartorius is not included in the remainder of
the medial closure (Figure 18-17, F).
Two sutures of size 2 to 4 braided polyester or monofilament suture material are
placed from the lateral fabella to the distal portion of the patellar ligament and tied
tightly to eliminate drawer movement and to act as internal splints (Figure 18-17, G).
The femorofabellar ligament is elevated from the supracondylar tuberosity of the
femur to allow a groove to be produced in the cortical bone of the tuberosity by
  aq   do am    ) no no d 
"fish" the suture attached to the fascia strip through this opening. The fascial strip
is pulled taut and then sutured to the femorofabellar fascia and joint capsule with a
 aa s i  s  u i e   e,
strip of fascia removed, this closure results in tightening of the lateral retinaculum
(Figure 18-17, J).
Evaluation of Over-the-Top Procedures
These techniques generally provide a more anatomically placed pseudoligament
than does Paatsama's original method involving the fascia lata.17 Although in theory
 Paatsama's technique should result in anatomical placement of the fascial strip,
surface of the condyle to the point of the ligament's femoral origin. Additionally, the
fascia usually made a sharp bend as it emerged from the bone tunnel and then
turned distally, thus subjecting it to shearing forces. Arnoczky and colleaguess4
normal ligament, remaining taut during the complete range of motion of the stifle.
Because the pseudoligament is subjected only to tension and not shearing stress, it
is not as likely to break. The fascial strip becomes vascularized, then undergoes
fibroplasia and reorganization of collagen to resemble a normal ligament. This process
appears to take 5 to 6 months; however, the animal is at risk until the tissue transfer
regains strength, which is the reason for using the lateral support sutures in the
3 and 6 months postoperatively and will redevelop drawer motion. Such cases have
undergone reoperation using extraarticular stabilization because the remaining
fascia was unfit for use again. Previously these cases underwent repeat surgery
by replacing the lateral sutures and adding a medial suture, as in the three-in-one
technique. More recently, reoperation has been done with the fibular transposition
method.
18—The Stifle Joint
605
PARTIAL RUPTURE OF CRANIAL CRUCIATE LIGAMENT
A surprising number of cases of stifle lameness are caused by partial rupture of the
cranial cruciate ligament. The veterinarian needs only to explore joints in the face
of minimal physical findings to verify this. An increasing number of dogs (especially
Labrador retrievers and Rottweilers) sustain partial tears at a young age (6-24 months).
Often, it is bilateral and mimics hip dysplasia clinically, which may also be a
concurrent problem. It is our experience that cruciate problems cause more clinical
signs than hip dysplasia and should be addressed first before it is deemed necessary
to perform any surgical procedure on the hips.
Clinical signs and history mimic those of complete rupture but are not as dramatic,
 and secondary arthrosis is much slower in developing, probably because the meniscus
is not damaged as often as in complete ligament rupture. Degenerative changes can
 be extensive given enough time.
The cranial cruciate ligament functionally is composed of two parts: the small
craniomedial band (CrMB) and the larger caudolateral band (CLB). The CrMB is
taut in both flexion and extension, whereas the CLB is taut only in extension. The
ability to diagnose these injuries by examination for drawer motion depends on
which part of the ligament is damaged. If the injury is caused by hyperextension, it
 asaq sd aa l  amp o  a a aep oi  s 
CrMB is intact. An injury caused by rotation or twisting with flexion is more likely
to injure the CrMB. Under these circumstances, there is a small amount of drawer
motion in flexion (the CLB is relaxed) but no motion in extension (the CLB is taut).
Partial rupture of the CrMB in a single case was first reported by Tarvin and
Arnoczky,$7 and another series was described later by Scavelli and associates.58
In this later series, partial ruptures accounted for 8% of 320 cases of isolated cranial
cruciate rupture. Drawer motion was detected in 52% of the cases and was found
in flexion in only 69% of cases when detected. At surgery, 80% of the injuries were
to the CrMB, 4% to the CLB, and 16% were interstitial tears (grade 2 sprain), in
which the ligament was grossly intact but had undergone damage sufficient to render
 it functionally incompetent. Medial meniscus damage requiring surgical treatment
was present in only 20% of these cases.
 As can be seen from these figures, the incidence of partial tears of the cranial
cruciate ligament is not insignificant and should be carefully considered as a cause
of lameness in midsize to large breeds with pain in the stifle region and minimal or
no drawer motion. Radiographs demonstrating the "fat pad sign" (see Figure 18-10)
s  s asn      so n
should approach them as if they were complete ruptures, since the ligament is no
longer functional.26
Recently, we have seen dogs with chronic lameness, fat pad sign on radiographs.
some presence of osteophytosis, and minimal or zero drawer movement. At surgical
exploration the cruciate ligament may have a dull appearance, with or without the
    e r  o a a  o 
intact ligament reveals either cavitation within or separation of the craniomedial or
caudolateral bands of the ligament or extreme friability of the ligament. This action
is not taken without much trepidation. Subsequent stabilization of the drawer
movement with a modified lateral imbrication technique resolved the chronic
lameness in all cases. Therefore, if there is osteoarthrosis (and no indication of
inflammatory joint disease) of the stifle without overt causes, such as osteochondritis
dissecans, luxating patella, the rare instance of isolated meniscal damage, or synovial
cell sarcoma, then the cruciate ligament is suspect. Careful probing to detect tears
606
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 of the caudal side of the ligament and observing the color and reflectivity of the
ligament are warranted. Arthroscopic evaluation, magnetic resonance imaging
 (MRI), or ultrasound may have identified these unusual cases preoperatively.
AVULSION OF CRANIAL CRUCIATE LIGAMENT
As with most avulsions, cranial cruciate avulsion is a condition of skeletally immature
dogs. Ligamentous attachments to bone by Sharpey's fibers are stronger than the bone
in some cases; thus an avulsion rather than a tear of the ligament results (Figure 18-18).
 Usually seen as an avulsion of the insertion, this lesion is rare in the dog.
 Physical examination findings are similar to those described for rupture of the
cranial cruciate ligament, except that drawer motion is obvious and joint effusion is
marked. Radiographs demonstrate the avulsed bone fragment in the intercondylar
space.
Surgical Technique
 The joint is exposed by a medial approach.7 Hematoma and granulation tissue are
small holes are drilled from the medial and lateral sides of the tibial defect toward
the medial tibial cortex (Figure 18-18, B). Stainless steel wire (size 20-22 gauge;
0.8-0.6 mm) is placed through the ligament close to the bone. Each end is then
xa p ipa a uo an psimi pue siau auq au yno pasd
Alternatively, three diverging K-wires can be used (Figure 18-18, C). In rare
 instances the bone fragment is large enough to allow lag screw fixation (see Figure
18-20, B). If the fragment is comminuted, or if stretching of the ligament has also
occurred, it may be advisable to pursue standard stabilization techniques, especially
after 5 to 6 months of age.
Cranial cruciate
ligament 
Avulsed bone
fragment
 FIGURE 18-18. Avulsion of the tibial insertion of the cranial cruciate ligament. A, A bone
fragment with the cranial cruciate attached has been elevated from the tibial plateau of the
left tibia. A medial approach to the stifle is used for exposure.7 Lag screw fixation is ideal if
the bone fragment is large enough (see Figure 18-20, B). For smaller fragments: B, stainless
holes that exit through the medial tibial cortex where the wire is twisted. C, Three Kirschner
wires, inserted at diverging angles, provide good fixation.
18—The Stifle Joint
607
Aftercare
The limb must be immobilized for 4 weeks to allow healing of the fracture.
A Thomas splint or a long lateral splint is suitable (see Figures 2-24 and 2-25).
The stifle must be fixed at the standing angle to minimize complications of immo-
bilization, such as periarticular fibrosis and quadriceps contracture. Full exercise
should not be allowed until 4 weeks after splint removal.
RUPTURE OF CAUDAL CRUCIATE LIGAMENT
 The caudal cruciate ligament is slightly larger than the cranial ligament and is an
important stabilizer of the joint. It is the primary stabilizer against tibial caudal
subluxation (drawer movement) and combines with the cranial ligament to limit
 internal tibial rotation and hyperextension.2s
Little is known about the handling of ruptures of the caudal cruciate ligament
 because it is a relatively uncommon injury. Most cases are caused by severe trauma
and are accompanied by rupture of the medial collateral and cranial cruciate ligaments.
Medial meniscal injury is also common in this situation. However, isolated caudal
cruciate ruptures do occur. It has been suggested that the caudal cruciate is not
n as srop  o ae s pu a asq is a
to work against caudal drawer motion.s9 Also, experimental se vering of the ligament
by Harari and co-workerso did not create any functional or pathological changes
in seven dogs observed postoperatively for 6 months. In the absence of any reports
on clinical series, it is difficult for the clinician to decide on the best method of
handling a case. We have seen cases of chronic lameness caused by chronic caudal
cruciate ligament tears. Our approach is to attempt surgical stabilization of an isolated
injury only in working and sporting dogs or when the injury occurs with other
ligament injuries of the stifle
Clinical Signs
Demonstration of caudal drawer motion is fundamental to diagnosing caudal cruci-
ate ligament injury. This can be complicated by the concomitant injuries mentioned.
 a asoaq shns hsuo annd uo uono mp lno og hus
seems always to be subluxated caudally at rest from the pull of the hamstring muscles.
Therefore, what may appear to be cranial drawer motion is actually the reduction
of tibial subluxation. From this reduced position, we can then demonstrate caudal
motion. Therefore, unlike testing for cranial motion, it is more important to note
the relative position of the thumbs as they grasp the femur and tibia before motion
drawer movement is less than that with full cranial cruciate rupture. Often a definitive
end point ("thud") may be detected on drawering cranially, as the cranial cruciate
tightens, especially with the leg in flexion. Drawer may disappear when the leg is
tested in a neutral position. With both cranial cruciate and caudal cruciate rupture,
there is a severe amount of instability, unless the menisci are torn so badly that they
impede adequate palpation.
Diagnosis
Radiographs are important in caudal cruciate injuries because of these injuries'
frequent association with other traumatic injuries and because of a higher percentage
608
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 of avulsion injuries than with the cranial cruciate ligament. This probably results
from the caudal ligament being larger and stronger than the cranial cruciate ligament
 and therefore resisting rupture but predisposing to avulsion. The definitive diagnosis
is made on arthrotomy. The caudal cruciate stump is evident in the intercondylar
notch of the femur. Often it is covered by a proliferative mass that must be debrided
before the rest of the joint can be inspected.
Surgical Treatment
 Little has been documented concerning clinical management of caudal cruciate
injuries. No really satisfactory technique exists for large, active dogs. The technique
shown here (Figure 18-19) is satisfactory for small breeds and cats but is not always
as useful in large breeds. Avulsion injuries are well stabilized by wire or screw fixation
(see Figure 18-20). Repair of collateral injuries is described next.
Technique for Ruptured Ligament
A medial or lateral arthrotomy is combined with approaches to the medial and
lateral caudal compartments of the stifle joint.7 Fragments of ligament are excised,
and meniscectomy is performed when indicated. The joint capsule is then sutured,
and collateral ligament repairs are made if needed. Stabilization is initiated on the
medial side, with placement of mattress sutures (size 2-0 to 0 nonabsorbable material)
to imbricate the caudomedial joint capsule (Figure 18-19, A). A large, imbricating
suture of size 0 to 3 braided polyester material or heavy monofilament nylon
Joint capsule
/closure
Caudal belly
of sartorius m
Incision in
joint capsule
Medial collateral
ligament
Patellar
ligament
Hole through
caudomedial tibia
joint capsule
Medial
B
FIGURE 18-19. Rupture of the caudal cruciate ligament. A, The left stifle has been exposed
by a medial approach to the stifle joint combined with an approach to the medial collateral
been imbricated with mattress sutures of nonabsorbable material (size 3/0-0) placed vertically
to the joint caudal to the medial collateral ligament. B, After closure of the joint capsule, a
heavy-gauge (size 0-4) braided polyester suture is placed between the proximal patellar ligament
and a drill hole in the caudomedial corner of the proximal tibia. This suture is tightened with
the stifle at a normal standing angle and with drawer motion reduced.
18—The Stile Joint
609
Incision in
fascia lata
Biceps femoris m.
Lateral head of
 gastrocnemius m.
Patellar
Fascia lata
ligament
strip
Sutures in
 joint capsule
 Popliteus m.
Lateralcollateral
ligament
Fibula
Lateral
C
D
FIGURE 18-19. Continued C, The skin is retracted laterally to allow incision of the fascia
caudolateral joint capsule.7 The joint capsule is imbricated caudal to the lateral collateral
ligament, and a heavy-gauge braided polyester suture is placed around the head of the fibula
to the proximal patellar ligament. This suture is tied tightly with the stifle in a normal standing
angle. D, For further augmentation, a strip of fascia lata may be dissected free proximally and
left attached to the lateral border of the patella distally. This strip is passed around the fibular
head, pulled taut, and then sutured to itself and to the surrounding fascia.
(see MRIT) is then placed from the medial half of the proximal patellar ligament to
a hole drilled through the caudomedial corner of the tibia (Figure 18-19, B). This
suture is tied tightly, with drawer motion reduced and the stifle positioned at the
standing angle.
Similar sutures are placed on the lateral aspect of the joint (Figure 18-19, C), but
the large suture is anchored around the fibular head. The fibular nerve should be
 protected during suture placement. A fascia lata transfer is also used on the lateral
side. The strip is based on the lateral side of the patella and is long enough to be
pulled around the head of the fibula and sutured to itself (Figure 18-19, D).
The fascia strip and large imbricating sutures are similar to those used in the tech-
nique of DeAngelis and Betts.61 However, they are positioned more distally at the
 l ipn jo ae an aexde as ar o pua rnd
of the caudomedial and lateral joint capsule is based on the technique of Hohn and
Newtons9 for cranial cruciate rupture.
Aftercare
No splint is used unless the medial collateral ligament was repaired. Exercise is
a a a  s  e se t  s s
Technique for Avuision
Most avulsions occur at the femoral origin of the caudal cruciate ligament and are
easily accessible for lag screw or wire fixation (Figure 18-20, A). If the fragment is
large enough, fixation with a lag screw is preferred (Figure 18-20, B). Wire fixation
610
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Avulsed
Bone
Fragment
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 18-20.  Avulsion of the femoral origin of the caudal cruciate ligament. A, Fragment
of bone with the attached ligament has been avulsed from the medial femoral condyle.
 spd as au oi yoie ieiaii y u aui xy on pasn uaaq sy mas set 
best exposure.7 C, Stainless steel wire (20-22 gauge) is threaded through the ligament close
to the bone fragment. Two parallel holes are drilled at opposite points on the edge of
the femoral defect; the wire is passed through these holes, then twisted on the medial surface
of the condyle. D, Three Kirschner wires can be inserted at diverging angles to stabilize the
fragment.
can also be used if the bone fragment is small. The wire should pass through the
ligament close to the fragment and then pass through bone tunnels to the medial
condylar cortex, where it is twisted tightly (Figure 18-20, C). Another fixation
method involves placing two or three K-wires through the fragment at diverging
angles. These pins should penetrate the opposite condylar cortex.
Avulsion of the tibial insertion is treated similarly, although the fragment is much
 more difficult to expose. Best exposure is probably afforded by the approach to the
 a j p i a g a j n ps
muscle and popliteal vessels must be strongly retracted.
Aftercare
A Thomas splint or long lateral splint is maintained for 4 weeks (see Figures 2-24
and 2-25), and exercise is severely restricted. After splint removal, activity is slowly
increased through the eighth week.
MENISCAL INJURIES
 In mammalian stifle joints there are two menisci, which are fibrocartilaginous
structures interposed between the femur and tibia. The inner two thirds of the
 meniscus is avascular, and when the meniscus is injured, healing is poor.
Unlike the situation in humans, damage to the meniscal cartilages of the dog and
cat rarely occurs as a primary injury; in almost all cases, one or more stifle ligaments
 are torn or stretched. Most often, the caudal horn of the medial meniscus is damaged
as a result of the cranial tibial drawer motion that results from rupture of the cranial
cruciate ligaments. Because the medial meniscus is firmly attached to the tibia by the
caudal tibial ligament and to the medial collateral ligament, it moves with the tibia.
Cranial drawer motion displaces the caudal horn cranial to the femoral condyle and
18—The Stifle Joint
611
subjects the caudal horn to injury as a result of crushing and shear forces. Cranial
  ss a o son o n si oisa  oo rm
  a r n  ' n   si  s
have been seen by us, but rarely. A chronic, lateral femoral condylar osteochondritis
dissecans lesion may cause a “"kiss lesion" injury to the lateral meniscus.
The two most common injuries to the canine and feline meniscus are (1) the caudal
longitudinal tear (so-called bucket-handle tear in human patients) (Figure 18-21,
A and E), which separates the circumferential fibers completely from the tibial to
the femoral surfaces, and (2) the "crush" of the caudal horn or limb of the menis-
cus, which is just an incomplete longitudinal tear (Figure 18-21, C and D). Other
abnormalities include the double or triple "bucket-handle" tear (Figure 18-21, F),
 degenerative “fringe" tears (Figure 18-21, G) seen in the degenerate knee below an
old femoral osteochondritic lesion, a rare transverse tear, and congenital lateral dis-
coid menisci (Figure 18-21, I). Occasionally, we as well as others have seen calcified
menisci. Peripheral detachments (Figure 18-21, H) or avulsions are usually seen in
A
D
G
H
FIGURE 18-21. A, With the joint opened, a medial "bucket-handle" tear can be seen
between the cranial horn of the meniscus and the femoral condyle. Vision and displacement
of the torn part are assisted by levering a protected hemostat between the intermeniscal
ligaments and femoral condyle (see Figure 18-22, B). B, Dorsal and cross-sectional view of a
normal meniscus. C, Early fraying of the superficial layers of the meniscus. D, Crushed
   ss s p aaad  r a aa 
I, Congenital lateral discoid meniscus. Dotted lines represent normal boundaries of the meniscus.
612
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
the significantly traumatized knee with multiligament derangement (e.g., automobile
injury).6,64 The incidence of meniscal injuries after rupture of the cranial cruciate
ligament can be as high as 53%.646s This incidence reflects a predominance of
chronic cases as seen in a referral practice. Early surgical repair of the cruciate injury
 results in a much lower incidence of meniscal injury.
Clinical Signs and Diagnosis
 Usually, dogs and cats with meniscal injury along with cruciate tears have more pain
and lameness in the subacute or chronic stages than with cruciate rupture alone.
Often there is a history of improving lameness after the cruciate rupture, followed
by worsening as the meniscus subsequently is injured by the instability. An owner
or observer may hear a “click" in 10% to 15% of dogs with meniscal injury. This
click or grating sensation is often "felt" (and sometimes heard) when flexing,
extending, performing the drawer test, or performing the cranial tibial thrust. Often
(is ssanq ia au ol pa a ie ums  e s ana
The definitive diagnosis is made on observing the abnormally displaced meniscus
 or portion of it. If, on arthrotomy, the caudal horn is reduced and injury unobservable,
the tibia is levered forward by placing a curved mosquito hemostat forceps, guarded
with a 1-inch piece of discarded sterilized suction tubing or urinary catheter, under
a    s   s    
(45 degrees of flexion), the curved hemostat is levered against the femoral condyle.
If the caudal horn becomes visible or luxates forward of the femoral condyle (normally
the caudal horn of the medial meniscus, unlike the lateral meniscus, is not visible
when drawer motion is produced in this way), it is deemed abnormal and removed.
When the caudal horn becomes visible during the drawering maneuver and is
slightly elevated off the tibia, it usually means the fibers of the caudal horn are
becoming crushed and separated. If not removed, this may subsequently become a
significant full meniscal tear. Excessive force should not be used because it will cause
a normal meniscus to be displaced forward. Other surgeons use a Hohmann retrac-
tor placed through the interior of the joint to the back of the tibia and similarly lever
the tibia forward. Often with this maneuver, a normal caudal horn of the meniscus
will be pushed forward toward the front of the femoral condyle. Only if the meniscus
(or parts of it) luxates totally in front of the condyle should it be considered abnormal
when using this technique.
 If drawer motion is slight because of chronicity or partial tears, observation of
the caudal horn may be difficult.
 Radiography has not been a reliable diagnostic method for this condition. MRI
pue aaisuadxa s inq salnju aauy anss yos Susouseip ioy spiepueis pios, aui s!
rarely available to our small animal patients. Arthroscopy may become important
in the future, but at present, it is not widely available for routine examination of the
canine stifle joint. Surgical exploration remains the most common and useful
 method of definitive diagnosis.
Treatment
Meniscectomy
Indications
The outer 25% to 30% of the meniscus is avascular, and tears do not heal for all
 practical purposes.
Removal of a normal medial meniscus in otherwise intact stifles results in
 regenerative material (consisting of fibrocartilage) filling the defect but does create
18—The Stifle Joint
613
some DJD.6-68 Although meniscectomy in small animals does not result in devastat-
ing DJD as can occur in humans, meniscectomy should not be performed unless
often results in persistent lameness.
In human patients, total or partial meniscectomy was performed depending on
surgeon preference. As long-term clinical follow-ups became available, it was appar-
ent that some patients developed severe DJD on the side of the joint where the
meniscus was removed. With the development of arthroscopic surgery, the meniscal
damage can be totally assessed. The top and bottom surfaces may be visualized and
the meniscus probed for stability. The abnormal tissue can selectively be removed,
resulting in fewer long-term clinical problems. In the last decade, with further refine-
ment of arthroscopic techniques, tears in the outer vascular areas may be healed if
sutured. This is usually considered only in the young (<40 years of age), athletic
patient. It is a much more involved surgical procedure and has a more extensive
rehabilitation program than with simple meniscectomy.
 In dogs and cats, arthroscopy is not readily available, and thorough evaluation
of the entire meniscus is impossible by open surgery. However, close inspection is
meniscus that has flipped forward of the femoral condyle. A total or subtotal menis-
cectomy means removing the meniscus at its perimeter, more peripheral than the
actual tear in the parenchyma.
Some surgeons prefer total to partial meniscectomy for the following reasons:
1. Total meniscectomy is easier to perform, without iatrogenic articular
cartilage damage during the surgical procedure.
2. It does not leave an unseen double or multiple bucket-handle tear (seen in
about 10% of meniscal tears)
3.
 More precise removal of the “crushed" meniscus is possible.
 4. Better regeneration is possible (debatable because the vascular portion is
violated).
 5. In our experience, dogs returning years later with debilitating DJD is not a
clinical problem. The difference in life span between dogs and humans may
be the reason.
Technique
A medial arthrotomy? is preferred for medial meniscectomy because it provides better
exposure. Visualization of the caudal meniscal horns is aided by joint instability.
 Total medial meniscectomy begins by cutting of the intermeniscal and cranial tibial
ligaments"s (Figure 18-22, B). All cutting is done with great care to avoid injury to
articular cartilage of the tibia and femur. Number 11 and 15 blades or #64 Beaver
miniblades (R. Beaver, Inc., Belmont, Mass) are the most useful sizes for the procedure.
A Kocher forceps or meniscus clamp (Ascott Enterprises, Missassauga, Ontario) is
attached to the freed cranial horn. It is pulled axially while the medial joint capsule
is retracted abaxially. The meniscus is dissected away from the joint capsule with the
 blade in a vertical position to avoid cutting the medial collateral ligament and joint
capsule (Figure 18-22, C). When beginning the dissection, it is well to keep in mind
the abaxial edge of the medial femoral condyle. Incising more abaxially may lacer-
ate the medial collateral ligament and fibrous joint capsule. Dissection continues
using a small scalpel blade caudal to the medial collateral as strong traction is
applied to the clamped meniscus in a cranial and axial direction. Cutting the caudal
synovial attachment is the most difficult part of the procedure and may require
additional exposure, as discussed later Fortunately, with traction most pathological
614
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
ransve
Medialmeniscus
Lateral meniscus
Cranialcruciateligament
- Medial collateral ligament 
Lateral collateral ligament -
Meniscal femoral ligament
Caudalcruciateligament
Medial collateral
ligament
Meniscus
knife
D
FIGURE 18-22. Medial meniscectomy.6 A, Menisci and meniscal ligaments of the left
 stifle joint, dorsal aspect. B, The left stifle has been exposed by a medial parapatellar approach.7
The cranial tibial and intermeniscal ligaments are severed, with a hemostat inserted to protect
the underlying cartilage. C, Strong craniolateral traction is applied to the meniscus, and the
medial joint capsule is retracted to allow dissection of the cranial horn free from the joint
[ay aui jo aapa iixee aui ie pawe pue aioaa panuao si apia pdies aui ansdeo
 normally not visualized but is inserted here for orientation. D, Continued traction allows the
caudal joint capsule attachments to be cut. E, A small, curved meniscus knife (Veterinary
Instrumentation, Sheffield, England; Jorgensen Laboratories, Inc., Loveland, Colo) simplifies 
freeing the meniscus caudal to the collateral ligament.
18—The Stifle Joint
615
Cutting caudal
tibial ligament 
Transverse
of meniscus 
joint capsule
Medial collateral
incision
ligament
F
Cutting caudal
tibial ligament
of meniscus
G
FIGURE 18-22. Contirued F, The caudal tibial ligament of the meniscus is cut with the
blade held parallel to the tibial surface. G, For additional exposure of the caudal peripheral
attachments, a medial transverse joint incision is made from the parapatellar incision, extending
caudally deep to the medial collateral ligament. Caudal capsular attachments can be easily
cut, but care must be taken to avoid the popliteal vessels. The meniscus is dissected free of
the deep portion of the medial collateral ligament. The caudal tibial meniscal ligament is cut,
as in F. The transverse incision is closed with mattress sutures, followed by interrupted
sutures in the para patellar arthrotomy.
menisci will tear in the correct area at the caudal peripheral attachments. If the
meniscus is "normal," it will not do this. A small, curved meniscus knife (Veterinary
 Instrumentation; Jorgensen Laboratories) greatly simplifies this part of the surgery.
The knife is worked around the periphery of the meniscus, freeing it from the synovial
membrane and collateral ligament. Alternatively, a #11 scalpel blade or a #64 Beaver
blade can be used. If these attachments can be freed at this point (Figure 18-22, D),
the entire meniscus can be pulled cranially, and the caudal tibial ligament can be cut
(Figure 18-22, F) to free the meniscus.
If additional exposure is required, a medial transverse joint incision is made from the
medial collateral ligament cranially to join the parapatellar incision (Figure 18-22, G).
The medial collateral ligament is elevated to allow the incision to be extended cau-
 dally deep to it. The meniscus is dissected away from the caudal joint capsule and
medial collateral ligament. Care is taken to avoid the popliteal vessels immediately
caudal to the capsule. After the caudal capsular attachments are freed, the caudal
 tibial ligament is cut as previously described to free the meniscus.
 If by mistake a cranial hemimeniscectomy has been created by inadvertently cut-
ting too axially into the bucket handle, the abnormal caudal horn should be
and then sweeping a curved mosquito forceps caudally and along the inside of the
medial collateral ligament. Another technique is to sweep the forceps from the caudal
616
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
tibial attachment area outward toward the abaxial side or medial joint capsule.
Once the horn is displaced forward, the material is grasped and carefully incised.
Aftercare
No specific aftercare is required for meniscectomy. The care is usually dictated by
repair of associated ligament damage. Heavy exercise should be withheld for 6 months.
if possible, to allow for regeneration of the meniscus before extreme stress is placed
 on the joint.4.6s Hannan and associates69 have demonstrated a chondroprotective
effect with the use of polysulfated glycosaminoglycan (Arteparon, Luitpold Werk,
Munich, FRG; Adequan, Luitpold Pharmaceutical, Inc., Shirley, NY) following
experimental meniscectomy. Dosage of 2 mg/kg body weight subcutaneously three
times per week for 3 weeks, then twice weekly until the dogs were killed at
23 weeks, significantly improved the biochemical and morphological parameters
studied in articular cartilage.
Meniscal Release
 After the advent of the TPLO procedure, discussed earlier, Slocum subsequently
recommended a prophylactic incision in the caudal half of a normal medial meniscus.
This allows the caudal meniscus to “sag" caudally, theoretically decreasing the
crushing effect of the femoral condyle on the meniscus during drawer motion and
 preventing a subsequent bucket-handle tear. Long-term results of this prophylactic
procedure are unknown at this time, are controversial, and may be difficult to
document.
COLLATERAL LIGAMENT INJURIES
Ligament injuries that overstress the structure and damage ligament fibers are
known as sprains (see Chapter 7). Such injuries may be minor (first degree) or more
severe, with stretching and rupture of ligament fibers (second degree), or they may
result in tearing or avulsion of the ligament (third degree).70 Only third-degree and
some second-degree injuries require surgical therapy.
Damage to collateral ligaments of the canine stifle occurs relatively infrequently.
Severe injury is usually associated with traumatic incidents, such as being hit by
an automobile or direct blows. Meniscal and cruciate damage should always be
suspected with any collateral ligament injury se vere enough to produce instability of
the joint.
An understanding of the functional anatomy of these ligaments is necessary to
diagnose the resulting instability.71 Both ligaments are taut in extension and function
with the cruciate ligaments to prevent internal tibial rotation. In extension, the
collateral ligaments are the primary stabilizers of lateral (valgus) and medial (varus)
angulation of the tibia. In flexion, the lateral ligament relaxes and allows internal
tibial rotation to be limited only by the cruciates while the medial ligament remains
taut and limits external tibial rotation. Because the cruciates do not limit external tibial
rotation, the medial collateral is the primary stabilizer of this motion.
Clinical Signs
Injury to the medial collateral ligament is more common than injury to the lateral
side. Tearing of the cranial cruciate ligament is almost always present, and medial
meniscus injury often accompanies the collateral damage. Joint effusion and tender-
ness with no weight bearing are the obvious signs. Tibial angulation is checked with
18—The Stifle Joint
617
the joint in extension, and any drawer motion is reduced. Varus instability is present
with lateral laxity, and valgus instability is present with medial laxity. When the
medial collateral ligament is completely torn, marked external tibial rotation is
 possible with the stifle flexed.
Physical examination will usually provide the diagnosis, but radiographs with the
joint stressed to accentuate the instability are often useful.
Surgical Treatment
Injuries that produce observable instability in large, active dogs should be surgically
repaired as early as possible. Even if the ligament is grossly intact and even if it heals
by fibroplasia, it will always remain loose and will allow joint laxity.
Stretched ligaments (second-degree injury) are tightened by suture imbrication,
torn ligaments are sutured, and avulsed ligaments are reattached or synthetically
replaced (Figure 18-23; see also Figures 7-6 and 7-7). Exposure of either ligament is
readily done, either primarily or during an approach to the stifle joint.7 Collateral
ligaments of the stifle, especially the lateral ligament, must always be sutured or
reattached with the stifle in extension to prevent shortening of the ligament, which
either limits extension or overstresses the repair when the animal extends the joint.
Aftercare
 All injuries are immobilized in a Thomas splint or long lateral splint for 4 weeks
(see Figures 2-24 and 2-25), followed by 2 more weeks of leash-only exercise.
Activity can be slowly increased after 7 or 8 weeks.
LUXATION OF THE STIFLE JOINT
Total derangement of the knee, with rupture of all four major ligaments, is a disas-
trous injury seen on occasion. Cats appear to have a higher incidence than dogs.
Vascular integrity of the limb distal to the stifle must be carefully evaluated because
the popliteal vessels may become entrapped by the tibial luxation.
as si siuaeall ieiaeoo pepau pue aieino pepneo pue pe aul jo Anu
more often. Also damaged to varying degrees are the secondary restraints of the
joint, such as joint capsule, menisci, and patellar ligament. Additionally, most
patients have a variety of other traumatic injuries, such as fractures or ruptured
viscera. Despite the magnitude of this injury, good function can be obtained if a
meticulous repair is made of each injury.72 Paramount to attempting such repairs is
a thorough preoperative assessment of the stifle joint. Such an examination can be
done adequately and humanely only under general anesthesia in this circumstance.
Because of the multiple derangements of the joint, palpation can be confusing, and
the diagnoses reached must always be regarded as presumptive.
 Surgery should start with a thorough exploration of the joint, which requires
adequate surgical exposure. Meniscal injuries in this condition do not often require
meniscectomy; most damage is usually done to meniscofemoral or meniscotibial
ligaments or the joint capsule attachments. These can usually be sutured and should
be done first, while the exposure is greatest. The collateral ligament injury should
be stabilized next, since this will restore basic alignment to the joint and simplify the
remaining surgery. Stabilization of the cruciate instability follows. The authors have
usually used extracapsular methods. It is most helpful to place a small (0.062-inch)
K-wire temporarily across the joint with the joint held in a neutral, reduced posi-
tion before tightening the sutures or tissues so that the tibia is not stabilized in a
618
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Plastic spiked
washer
E
FIGURE 18-23.  Surgical repair of collateral ligament injuries. A, Midportion medial collateral
tear has been sutured, using a locking loop pattern (see Figure 7-6). The ligament repair is
Suuis e ie io puaixa juol aui um pan si anins sui sare uoasun pue uao au
 angle. B, Midportion lateral collateral tear has been sutured as in A. Only one bone screw is
 needed, since a bone tunnel drilled in the fibula functions well for the distal insertion of the 
protective suture. C, Avulsion of the origin of the medial collateral ligament. D, The avulsion 
has been secured using a plastic spiked washer on a 3.5-mm screw. E, Reattachment is also
 possible with three diverging Kirschner wires placed through the fragment. F, This tear close
to the origin of the medial collateral ligament was sutured with a locking loop pattern, and
the suture was then secured around a bone screw. When possible, a bone tunnel can be used
rather than a screw, as in B.
18—The Stifle Joint
619
H
Fascia lata
 sutured to
Incisions in
lateral collateral
fascia lata
ligament
J
K
FIGURE 18-23. Contirued G, A stretched ligament is being imbricated by means of a
modified locking loop suture pattern. H, Tying the suture results in shortening of the ligament
between the suture loops. I, Fascial lata reinforcement of a lateral collateral ligament injury6
begins by elevating a strip of fascia that is left attached at each end. J, The fascia is sutured
to the repaired ligament. K, The fascial defect is sutured.
deviated position. Hulse and Shires72 attribute much of their success with these
 problems to intraarticular stabilization. Extraarticular repair of the cruciate ligament 
injuries and postoperative support with transarticular external skeletal fixators were
 jo uq paen si dais peu au eur aq paoar sas ei u mssns
A newer stabilization procedure for luxated stifles in cats and small dogs (after
0 -i e m an  n  ss on si (xa 
3/16-inch pin with the leg held at a functional angle of 30 to 40 degrees of flexion.74
A reinforced bandage or cast is recommended until pin removal in 5 to 7 weeks.
We have used this method successfully in selected small animals when cost constraints
 or open wounds were of concern.
Aftercare consists of exercise limitation, as previously described for the individual
procedures. Surprisingly good function has been seen in these patients, both by us
and others.72.73 A consistent finding is reduction of 30 to 40 degrees in range of
motion in the stifle joint. Arthrodesis is a possible option for a chronically unstable
620
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
and painful joint (see Figure 18-30, A and B), but amputation results in better overall
function of the animal.
OSTEOCHONDRITIS DISSECANS OF FEMORAL CONDYLE
The pathophysiology of osteochondrosis and osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) is
discussed in Chapter 6.
The shoulder joint is most often involved, but the stifle is occasionally involved
and is often overlooked. OCD is seen in all large breeds of dogs, especially the
nosis is more guarded than for lesions of the shoulder, but about 75% will be
normally functional if surgical treatment is done at an early age. Some degree of
osteoarthrosis is to be expected. Later in life, the meniscus beneath the OCD bed
may become degenerate (*kiss lesion"), resulting in clinical lameness or worsening
of previous lameness.
Clinical Signs
n a n r a  s s n i  s s
muscles may demonstrate evidence of mild disuse atrophy. Palpation of the joint is
muscle atrophy is present. Joint effusion can often be noted. If a "joint mouse" has
 formed from detachment of the cartilage flap, popping or crepitus can be present.
Radiographic Findings
Radiographs are necessary for diagnosis, and high-quality films are necessary to
detect a small lesion. Mediolateral and caudocranial views are needed, the latter in
two different degrees of flexion-extension. Lesions are most often found on the
medial aspect of the lateral femoral condyle (Figure 18-24, A and B), although the
medial condyle can be affected. Slight flattening of the articular surface and sub-
chondral sclerosis are the most common findings. Care must be taken not to mis-
take the radiolucent area of the extensor fossa (where the long digital extensor
tendon inserts craniolateral on the distal end of the femur) for an OCD lesion
(Figure 18-24, C). On the lateral radiograph, a saucer-shaped lucency may be seen
at the joint line (Figure 18-24, A).
Diagnosis
 The diagnosis may be made based on the findings of lameness, stifle swelling, and the
typical radiographic lesions in dogs over 41/2 months of age. At an earlier age, the
osteochondrotic lesion may not become a flap and could spontaneously heal. However,
joint effusion and large radiographic OCD lesions merit a joint exploration.
Surgical Treatment
 Either a lateral or a medial parapatellar approach provides adequate exposure
(Figure 18-25, A). The cartilage flap is excised, and the edges of the defect are
trimmed to make a clean vertical border (Figure 18-25, B) and to ensure that the
cartilage left has firmly adhered to the subchondral bone. Multiple drilling of the
defect with a K-wire may assist in early revascularization of a sclerotic lesion.
18—The Stifle Joint
621
A
C
FIGURE 18-24. A, Lateral radiograph of the distal femur. Note the saucer-shaped
radiolucency (wbite arrous) indicative of osteochondrosis in this 4-month-old dog. This large
radiographic lesion was explored and found to be mostly intact despite joint effusion.
The cartilage and bone were drilled with several pinholes, and the cartilage never became a
flap. B, Craniocaudal view of an osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) lesion (black open arrow)
of the lateral femoral condyle. C, Craniocaudal view of a normal distal femur demonstrating
  s r   a e  a    a
mista ken for an OCD lesion.
If lesions are very deep, curettage with or without cancellous bone grafting may be
indicated.
 If a flap is not seen in surgery, it may mean that osteochondrosis, not osteochon-
dritis dissecans, is present. Multiple drill holes (0.045-inch K-wire) have been
 successful in "tacking" down the cartilage and preventing the flap from forming.
622
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
B
FIGURE 18-25. Osteochondritis
dissecans of the femoral condyles.
A, Lesion of the lateral femoral
condyle has been exposed by a
medial  parapatellar  approach.7
B, The cartilage flap has been
excised, and the edges of the lesion
 are debrided by curettage.
We have seen several cases of degenerate lateral meniscal lesions under presumed
 old OCD lesions in the lateral condyles of 4- to 6-year-old dogs. Meniscectomy in
such cases has helped the lameness.
Aftercare and Prognosis
A light bandage is applied for 2 weeks to protect the arthrotomy, followed by 2
more weeks of restricted activity. The prognosis for large weight-bearing lesions is
 guarded to fair, depending on size and lesion location.
RUPTURE OF PATELLAR LIGAMENT
Rupture of the patellar ligament is a rare injury. If both the ligament and the joint
capsule are torn, the patella rides at the top of the trochlea or proximal to it
accomplished with a tendon suture pattern (see Figures 7-6 and 7-7) as well as
simple interrupted sutures in the joint capsule. A supporting figure-of-8 wire is
ann pn a on uoa uun sda pxnd an  paasui os
(Figure 18-26).
Additional auxiliary fixation, such as a modified Thomas splint or reinforced
padded bandage, for 1 to 2 weeks relieves tension at the anastomosis site. Wire
d  s    s    e  a os po
AVULSION OF PROXIMAL TENDON OF LONG DIGITAL
EXTENSOR MUSCLE
Although it occurs infrequently, avulsion of the origin of the long digital extensor
(LDE) muscle is a disabling injury resulting in DJD.7s Avulsion is a disease of skeletally
immature, long-legged breeds such as sighthounds and Great Danes in the age range
of 5 to 8 months, but rupture of the tendon can occur in mature animals, especially
those with lateral patellar luxation.
The tendon crosses the joint and passes deep to the cranial tibial muscle through a
18—The Stifle Joint
623
A
B
C
FIGURE 18-26. Rupture of the patellar ligament. A, Lateral view of rupture. B, Lateral
view of ligament sutured, with a supporting figure-of-8 wire in place. C, Cranial view with
sutures in place.
sulcus in the proximolateral tibia. It is apparently not important to stability of the
 stifle joint. The detached bony fragment rapidly hypertrophies to several times its
original size. The injury rarely is associated with known significant trauma. Surgical
Clinical Signs
Pain and joint effusion are seen immediately after the injury. Pain is most pronounced
in the craniolateral aspect of the joint. Lameness is variable and subsides quickly.
 If not surgically repaired, a chronic low-grade lameness may result. Loss of toe
function does not seem to be a common problem. Firm nodular thickening of the
lateral joint area is evident in 2 to 3 weeks, and pressure applied over this area may
produce pain and crepitus.
Diagnosis
 Radiographs of the stifle in flexed lateral and caudocranial views reveal an opaque
density within the joint (Figure 18-27). On the lateral view, the opacity is seen cra-
nial to the femoral condyle and distal to the extensor fossa. The caudocranial view
reveals the calcified mass to be just lateral to the femoral condyle. The radiographic
size of the mass is much less than actual size, since a portion of it is cartilaginous
and secondarily fibrotic. An early lesion may appear only as a sliver on bone
because of this cartilaginous nature.
Surgical Treatment
Reattachment of the avulsed fragment is the treatment of choice in recent injuries.
If the fragment is so hypertrophic that the outline of the original fragment is no
longer discernible, it is better to detach the bone fragment and reattach the tendon
to adjacent soft tissue.
624
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
FGURE 18-27. Avulsion of the long digital extensor (LDE) tendon of origin from the
lateral femoral condyle. A, The avulsed osteochondral fragment that was the origin of
the tendon can be seen opposite the arrow in the cranial compartment of the stifle joint;
a  sl ae no n  a   a o  s a a a 
cra niocaudal view, but it is less obvious.
Exposure of the lesion is by way of a lateral approach to the stifle joint.7 The
avulsion is immediately visible when the joint capsule is incised (Figure 18-28, A).
 If the injury is recent and the avulsed fragment is not hypertrophied or covered with
granulation tissue, it is reattached with a 3.5- or 4.0-mm lag screw and plastic
spiked washer (Figure 18-28, B) (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa). Three diverging K-wires
can also serve as fixation.
 Because the tendon is not important in stabilizing the joint, it is better to exercise
hypertrophic bone than to try reattachment and risk a delayed or fibrous union.
 This removes the mechanical irritation of the hypertrophic fragment. The bone can
be cut free and the tendon attached to the joint capsule or fascia of the cranial tibial
muscle (Figure 18-28, C and D).
Aftercare
Special precautions are not needed. Two weeks of house confinement and leash
exercise are needed for soft tissue healing.
LUXATION OF PROXIMAL TENDON OF LONG DIGITAL
EXTENSOR MUSCLE
This unusual luxation, in which the LDE tendon displaces caudally out of the tibial
sulcus, causes variable clinical signs. The dog may show marked lameness, with the
leg occasionally not bearing weight,76 or the dog may have no lameness but a clicking
sound accompanying each step. This sound mimics a meniscal "click" and often can
18—The Stifle Joint
625
Avulsed
bone fragment
Plastic
spiked
washer
Bony hypertrophy
and fibrous tissue
 Long digital
extensortendon
 sutured to
joint capsule
D
FIGURE 18-28. Avulsion of the tendinous origin of the long digital extensor muscle.
auoq aui iag aui oi yooidde ieaiel e Aa pasodxa uaaq su aioy uoisa ysai 'y
fragment and attached tendon have pulled away from the femur. B, A 4.0-mm lag screw and
plastic spiked washer (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) have been used to attach the avulsed fragment.
C, Example of a case of several weeks" duration, with bony hypertrophy and fibrous
tissue covering the avulsed fragment. The bone fragment is not reattached in this situation.
D, The hypertrophic avulsed fragment has been resected and the tendon sutured to the joint 
capsule. The fascia of the cranial tibial muscle can also be used for attaching the tendon.
626
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
be produced on palpation by flexing the stifle while pushing proximally on the foot
to simulate weight bearing, and it can be felt by placing a hand on the limb while
the animal is walking. Surgical repair carries a good prognosis. We have also seen
luxation of the LDE tendon accompany patellar luxation.
Surgical Treatment
Although an acute injury may respond to external immobilization for 2 to 3 weeks,
most cases are chronic when seen and require surgery.
A vertical skin incision is made between the tibial tubercle and the fibula.
 Dissection will easily reveal the tendon and the tibial sulcus. Nonabsorbable sutures
are used to create a "roof" over the sulcus to trap the tendon (Figure 18-29). If pos-
sible, the suture is placed through a bone tunnel along the edge of the sulcus. Where
there are no suitable points for bony anchorage, the suture is placed through perios-
teum and fascia. In some cases it may be necessary to deepen the sulcus to obtain
adequate reduction of the tendon.
Aftercare
External immobilization is not required; exercise should be restricted for 2 to 3 weeks.
ARTHRODESIS OF THE STIFLE JOINT
Chapter 7 provides a general discussion of indications for and principles of
arthrodesis. Strict attention to detail to establish proper joint angle and rigid internal
fixation is necessary for success.
Arthrodesis of the stifle is an alternative to amputation for severely comminuted
intraarticular fractures, acute total luxation (Figure 18-30), chronic luxation or
subluxation from a variety of causes, severe osteoarthritis, and severe patellar luxations
that have not responded to conventional repair.
Function of the limb is greatly affected; however, when the fusion is at the proper
angle (135-140 degrees in the dog and 120-125 degrees in the cat), function is
FIGURE 18-29. Luxation of the
proximal tendon of the long digital
extensor muscle. Two mattress sutures
are placed across the tibial sulcus to
prevent luxation of the tendon.
Long dligital
extensor tendon
18—The Stifle Joint
627
A
B
FIGURE 18-30.   A 4-year-old 20-kg mixed-breed dog sustained a vehicular accident resulting
in a dislocated stifle and multiple small fractures surrounding the joint. A, Preoperative
lateral radiograph. B, View 19 months after plate arthrodesis.
satisfactory for pet animals. With fusion, the limb is sometimes circumducted, espe-
cially at faster gaits, when the limb becomes relatively too long compared with the
opposite limb. Knuckling of the toes may also occur at these times. Overall function
of the fused limb is not as good in most dogs as with amputation. Bone plate fixation
is the most suitable fixation for large breeds and is useful in all sizes of animals
-pa ot les no aqems are am puq usuat pue smas set (e-l amal a)
sized animals (see Figure 18-32, A). Pins with tension band wire are satisfactory in
cats and small breeds (see Figure 18-32, B).
Surgical Technique
Bone Plate
 Because of the large size of the contact surfaces at the fusion site, it is difficult to
change the angle of the joint after the initial cut to remove articular cartilage and
subchondral bone without sacrificing large amounts of bone and thus shortening the
limb. It is therefore worth the effort to do precise planning of the initial ostectomy cuts.
A bilateral approach is made to the stifle, and the tibial tuberosity is osteotomized to
allow proximal retraction of the entire quadriceps group.7 The meniscal cartilages
are completely excised. Although the collateral ligaments can be sacrificed at this
time, maintaining them simplifies intraoperative manipulation of the limb.
Kirschner wires are driven into the distal femur and proximal tibia, perpendicular
to the long axis of each bone (wires 1 and 2, Figure 18-31, A). Both these pins
should lie in the sagittal midline plane of the limb. The selected joint angle is sub-
tracted from 180 degrees to obtain the complementary angle. In the illustrated case,
the chosen angle is 140 degrees and the complementary angle 40 degrees. Since bone
can easily be removed from both the femur and the tibia, a 20-degree wedge of bone
is removed from each. The plane of these ostectomies is parallel to K-wires placed
at angles of 20 degrees to the original wires (wires 3 and 4, Figure 18-31, A).
628
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Tibial tubercle
Ostectomyof
Parallel
femoral condyles 
Ostectomy of proximal tibia
Tendon of long digital
Parallel
extensor m.
Site of tibial
tubercle osteotomy
B
Temporary
Kirschnerwires
C
D
FIGURE 18-31. Arthrodesis of the stifle by bone plate fixation. A, Planning of the
 ostectomies. Kirschner wires 1 and 2 are placed perpendicular to the femoral and tibial shafts.
The joint angle chosen, 140 degrees, has a complementary angle of 40 degrees. Dividing this
by 2 gives a result of 20 degrees, so that pins 3 and 4, placed at an angle of 20 degrees to pins
1 and 2, are parallel to the ostectomy lines desired. B, The tibial ostectomy is complete.
The femoral cut is made with an osteotome held parallel to pin 3. An oscillating saw can also
be used. C, The joint is temporarily fixed by crossed pins. Kirschner wires 1 through 4 are 
kept in alignment with the sagittal plane to prevent rotation of the lower limb. The wires are 
removed after the crossed pins are placed. D, A bone plate is contoured after removing
sufficient tibial crest to allow good contact. Screws 3 and 6 are placed first in a dynamic
compression plate (Synthes) to supply compression, or a separate compression device can be
used in the tibia. At least one lag screw should cross the joint, and two are preferable, as
shown here.
18—The Stifle Joint
629
The initial ostectomies are performed with an osteotome (Figure 18-31, B) or an
oscillating saw held parallel to pins 3 and 4. The popliteal vessels must not be severed.
 Rongeurs or a rasp is used to smooth the contact surfaces. Once the proper angle
has been established, the bones are temporarily stabilized with two K-wires placed
in an "X" fashion (Figure 18-31, C). Pins 1, 2, 3, and 4 should be maintained in the
sagittal midine plane during placement of the “X" pins to ensure that the lower
limb is not rotated; pins 1 through 4 are then removed.
A bone plate that will allow at least four screws in each fragment is contoured to
the cranial bone surfaces. Some of the tibial tuberosity and crest is removed to allow
better contact of the plate (Figure 18-31, D). At least one screw should be lagged
across the contact surfaces after compression is obtained with the plate screws
inserted in a dynamic compression plate (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) or with a separate
 compression device. The tibial tuberosity is pinned to one side of the plate in such
a position that the patella does not contact the plate. Alternatively, the patella may
be excised. The “X" pins can be removed or left in place. Bone graft is not needed
because of the large contact surfaces of the femur and tibia.
Aftercare
Most dogs and cats do not require external support of the limb. Because the plate
the plate is angled and because there is a natural fulcrum at the stifle joint, the plate
or screws may break if activity is excessive. External support of the limb should be
used if there is any question about the ow ner's ability to restrict the animal's activity.
About 8 weeks is required for radiographic signs of fusion, and activity should be
restricted during this period. Fracture of the tibia at the distal end of the plate
sometimes occurs and is probably a good reason to remove the plate 6 to 9 months
 postsurgically. Pins, wires, and screws are not removed unless they loosen.
Screw and Pin Fixation
These procedures begin as just described for the other surgical techniques. After
uuse sX, ue u paoeld are sud no smais bel paiedard ane saoens ioeiuos au
across the joint (Figure 18-32). The pins or screws must penetrate the tibial cortices
FIGURE 18-32.Arthrodesis
Tension band wire
of the stifle by lag screw or pin
fixation. A, After the contact
surfaces are prepared, crossed
lag screws are placed from the
femoral condyles to the proxi-
mal tibia. A small pin is driven
Lag screws
from the proximal trochlear
sulcus into the proximal tibia,
and  a tension  band  wire  is
placed from the head of the
pin to the tibial crest. B, Pins
can be substituted for lag
 screws in small dogs and cats.
A
B
630
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
for best holding power. Pins 1, 2, 3, and 4 are removed. A pin is then driven from
the proximal trochlear sulcus into the proximal tibia, emerging on the cranial cortex
crest, and a tension band wire (size 18-22 gauge; 1.0-0.6 mm) is placed between the
pin and the tibial crest.
Aftercare
 External support using a Thomas splint or a long lateral splint is advisable for
4 weeks postoperatively (see Figures 2-24 and 2-25). Exercise is severely restricted
until radiographs show advanced fusion, usually about 8 to 10 weeks postoperatively.
References
1. Putnam RW: Patellar luxation in the dog, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada, 1968 {master's
thesis).
2.1
Priester WA: Sex, size, and breed as risk factors in canine patellar dislocation, J Am Vet Med Assoc
160:740,1972.
3.
 Johnson ME: Feline patellar luxation: a retrospective case study, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 22:835, 1986.
Singleton WB: The surgical correction of stifle deformities in the dog, J Smatt Anim Pract 10:59, 1969.
5.
 Flo GF, Brinker WO: Fascia overlap procedure for surgical correction of recurrent medial luxation
of the patella in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 156:595, 1970.
6.
Rudy RW: Stifle joint. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974, American
Veterinary Publications, pp 1104-1159.
7.1
Pierrmattei DL, Johnson KA: An attas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
8.1
luxations utilizing a cartilage flap and subchondral grooving, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, 1969 (master's thesis).
9.
Whittick WG: Canine orthopedics, Philadelphia, 1974, Lea & Febiger, pp 319-321.
10.
patella, Clin Orthop Rel Res 164:48, 1982.
11. Boone EG, Hohn RB, Weisbrode SR: Trochlear recesson wedge technique for patellar luxation: an
experimental study, J Am Anir Hosp Assoc 19:735, 1983.
 12. Johnson AJ, Probst CW, DeCamp CE, et al: Comparison of trochlear block recession and trochlear
wedge recession for canine patellar luxation using a cadaver rmodel, Vet Surg 30:140, 2001.
13.
Vierheller RC: Surgical correction of patellar ectopia in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 134:429,
1959.
14.1
 Brinker WO, Keller WE: Rotation of the tibial tubercle for correction of luxation of the patella,
MSU Vet 22:92, 1962.
15.
 Singleton WB: The diagnosis and treatment of some abnorrmal stifle conditions in the dog, Vet Rec
69:1387, 1957.
16.
Willauer CC, Vasseur PB: Clinical results of surgical correction of medial luxation of the patella in
dogs, Vet Surg 16:31, 1987.
17.
Olsson SE: Osteochondrosis in the dog. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterincary therapy,
Philadelphia, 1977, Saunders, pp 880-886.
18.
Olmstead MR: Lateral luxation of the patella. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Pathophysiology in surgery,
Philadelphia, 1981, Lea & Febiger, pp 638-640.
19.
1999, Saunders, p 736.
20.
Vasseur PB, Poof RR, Arnoczky SP, et al: Correlative biomechanical and histologic study of the
cranial cruciate ligament in dogs, Amm J Vet Res 46:1842, 1985.
21.1
 Paatsama S: Ligament injuries in the canine stifle joint: a clinical and experimental study, Royal
Veterinary College, Stockholm, 1952 (thesis).
22.1
Newton CD, Lipowitz AJ: Canine rheumatoid arthritis: a brief review, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
11:595-599, 1975.
 23. Griffen DW, Vasseur PB: Synovial fluid analysis in dogs with cranial cruciate ligament rupture, J Am
Anim Hosp Assoc 28:277-281, 1992.
24.1
Pedersen NC, Pool RC, Castles JJ, et al: Noninfectious canine arthritis: rheumatoid arthritis, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 169:295-303, 1976.
25.
Arnoczky SP, Marshall JL: The cruciate ligaments of the canine stifle: an anatomical and functional
analysis, Arn J Vet Res 38:1807, 1977.
26.
27. Pond MJ, Campbell JR: The canine stifle joint. I. Rupture of the anterior cruciate ligament:
an assessment of conservative and surgical rmanagerment, J Smatl Anirm Pract 13:1, 1972.
18—The Stile Joint
631
 28. Vasseur PB: Clinical results following conservative management for rupture of the cranial cruciate
ligament in dogs, Vet Surg 13:243, 1984.
in the dog: an analysis of the instant center of motion, J Am Ani Hosp Assoc 13:553, 1977.
30. Jevens Dj, DeCamp CE, Hauptman J, et al: Use of force-plate analysis of gait to compare two
surgical techniques for treatment of cranial cruciate ligament rupture in dogs, Arn J Vet Res 57:
389-393, 1996.
31.
Childers HE: New rmethod for cruciate repair, Mod Vet Pract 47:59-60, 1966.
32.
 DeAngelis M, Lau RE: A lateral retinacular imbrication technique for the surgical correction of
anterior cruciate ligament rupture in the dog, J Am Vet Med Assoc 157:79-84, 1970.
33.Flo G: Modification of the lateral retinacular imbrication technique for stabilizing cruciate ligament
injuries, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 11:570, 1975.
34.DulischM: Suture reaction following extra-articular stifle stabilization in the dog.Part I.Aretr-
spective study of 161 stifles, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 17:569, 1981.
35.
 Smith GK, Torg JS: Fibular head transposition for repair of cruciate-deficient stifle in the dog, J Am 
Vet Med Assoc 187:375, 1985.
dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma S:158-162, 1992.
37.
 Dupuis J, Harari J, Blackketter DM, Gallina AM: Evaluation of the lateral collateral ligarment after
fibular head transposition in dogs, Vet Surg 23:456-465, 1994.
 38. Dupuis J Harari J, Papageorges M, et al: Evaluation of fibular transposition for repair of experimental.
cranial cruciate ligament injury in dogs, Vet Surg 23:1-12, 1994.
stabilization procedures as they relate to postoperative meniscal injuries, Vet Commp Orthop Traumd
8:118-123, 1995.
 40. Slocum B, Devine-Slocum T: Tibial plateau leveling for cranial cruciate ligament rupture. In Bojrab MJ,
41.
8th Annuat ACVs Symposiurn, Chicago, 1998, American College of Veterinary Surgeons, p 99.
42.
Lozier SM: Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy: two years of clinical experience and findings.
In Proceedings of the 7th American Cottege of Veterinary Surgeons Symposium, Orlando, Fla, 1997,
p 107.
43.
In Proceedings of the 9th American College of Veterinary Surgeons Symposium,San Francisco,
1999, p 379).
44.
 Conzermius MG, Besancon MF, Hoeffle WD, et al: The effect of surgical technique on limb function
after surgery for cranial cruciate ligament disease in the dog. In Proceedings of the 28th Annuat
Conference of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Lake Louise, Canada, 2001, p 20.
45.Rayward RM,hmsonDG,DaviesJ,et alProgressionf osteoarthritis follwing LO surgery:
a prospective radiographic study of 40 dogs, J Smalt Anim Pract 45:92, 2004.
46.GormanSCPetersenSWwensRadiographicanalyisof the progresonofostearhritisin
stifle joint of dogs with cranial cruciate ligament injury treated surgically with tibial plateauleveling
osteotomy. In Proceedings of the Annuat Meeting of the Veterinary Orthopedic Society, Reno,
Nevada, 2002.
47. Lazar TP, Berry CR, Dehaan JJ, Pelk JN: Long-terrm comparison of stifle osteoarthritis in dogs with
surgical repair of cranial cruciate ligarment injury utilizing tibial plateau leveling osteotomy versus
extracapsular stabilization. In Proceedings of the 1lth American Cottege of Veterinary Surgeons,
Chicago, 2001.
48. DeJardin LM: Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of small anima!
surgery, ed 3, vol 2, Philadelphia, 2002, Saunders, pp 2133-2143.
49.
tibial thrusts in canine cruciate ligament-deficient stifles: an in vitro experimental study, Vet Surg
30:278,2001.
the 8th American Colege of Veterinary Surgeons Symposium, Chicago, 1998, p 100.
51.PacchianaPDMrrisEGillingsSLtalSurgicaladpostperativecomlicatinassocatedwith
tibial plateau leveling osteotomy indogs withcranial cruciate ligament rupture: 397cases1998-
2001), J A Vet Med Assoc 222:184-193, 2003.
52.
Slocurm B, Devine-Slocum T: Meniscal release. In Bojrab MJ, editor: Current techniques in small
animat surgery, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1998, Lea & Febiger, p 1991.
53. Lineberger JA, Allen DA, Wilson ER, et al: Comparison of radiographic arthritic changes associated
anterior cruciate ligament substitution in the dog, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 15:283, 1979.
55.
Shires PK, Hulse DA, Liu W: The under-and-over fascial replacement technique for anterior cruciate
ligament rupture in dogs: a retrospective study, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 20:69-77, 1984.
56.
.Piermattei DL, Moore RW: A prelirminary evaluation of a modified over-the-top procedure for ruptured
cranial cruciate ligament in the dog. Presented at 8th Annual Conference of Veterinary Orthopedic
Society, Snowbird, Utah, 1981.
632
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
10:94, 1981.
58. Scavelli TD, Schrader SC, Matthiesen DT: Incomplete rupture of the cranial cruciate ligament of the
stifle joint in 25 dogs, Vet Surg 18:80, 1989 (abstract).
59.1
Hohn RB, Newton CD: Surgical repair of ligamentous structures of the stifle joint. In Bojrab MJ
editor: Current techniques in smalt animat surgery, Philadelphia, 1975, Lea & Febiger, pp 470-479.
60.1
Harari J, Johnson AL, Stein FL, et al: Evaluation of experimental transection and partial excision of
the caudal cruciate ligament in dogs, Vet Surg 16:151, 1987.
61.
DeAngelis MP, Betts CW: Posterior cruciate ligament rupture, J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 9:447, 1973.
62.
Stone EA, Betts CW, Rudy RL: Folding of the caudal horn of the medial meniscus secondary to
severance of the cranial cruciate ligament, Vet Surg 9:121, 1980.
63.1
Flo G, DeYoung D, Tvedten H, et al: Classification of meniscal injuries in the canine stifle based
upon gross pathological appearance, J A Anirm Hosp Assoc 19:325, 1983.
64.
Flo GL: Meniscal injuries, Vet Clin North Am 23:832-843, 1993.
65.1
 Flo GL, DeYoung D: Meniscal injuries and medial meniscectomy in the canine stifle, J Am Anim 
Hosp Assoc 14:683, 1978.
66.
Cox JS, Nye CE, Schaefer WW, et al: Degenerative effects of partial and total resection of the medial
meniscus in dogs' knees, Clin Orthop 109:178, 1975.
67.1
Meeting of Veterinary Orthopedic Society, 1980 (abstract).
68.1
 DeYoung D, Flo GL, Tvedten H: Experirmental rmedial meniscectomy in dogs undergoing cranial
cruciate ligament repair, J Arm Anim Hosp Assoc 16:639, 1980.
69.1
Hannan N, Ghosh P, Bellenger C, Taylor T: Systemic administration of glycosaminoglycan polysulfate
(Arteparon) provides partial protection of articular cartilage from damage produced by meniscectormy
in the canine, J Orthop Res 5:47, 1987.
70.1
Farrow Cs: Sprain, strain, and contusion, Vet Clin North Arm 8:169, 1978.
71.
Vasseur PB, Arnoczky SP: Collateral ligaments of the canine stifle joint: anatomic and functional
analysis, Arm J Vet Res 42:1133, 1981.
72.1
Hulse DA, Shires P: Multiple ligament injury of the stifle joint in the dog, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
22:105, 1986.
73. Aron D: Traumatic dislocation of the stifle joint treatment of 12 dogs and one cat,J Am Anim Hosp
Assoc 24:333, 1988.
74.
Welches CD, Scavelli TD: Transarticular pinning to repair luxation of the stifle joint in dogs and
cats: a retrospective study in 10 cases, J Am Anir Hosp Assoc 26:207, 1990.
75.1
 Pond MJ: Avulsion of the extensor digitorurn longus muscle in the dog: a report of four cases,
J Smalt Anim Pract 14:785, 1973.
76.
Bennett D, Campbell JR: Unusual soft tissue orthopaedic problems in the dog, J Smatt Anim Pract
20:27, 1979.
Fractures of the Tibia
and Fibula
Fractures of the tibia are relatively common in dogs and cats, comprising 21% of
long-bone fractures! and 11.7% of appendicular fractures.2 The entire spectrum
 of internal and external fixation devices is applicable to these fractures. The AO
Vet fracture classification scheme is used for nomenclature1 (see Table 2-1), and
treatment recommendations are keyed to the fracture patient scoring system
 detailed in Table 2-6 when applicable.3.4
FIXATION TECHNIQUES
Coaptation
A variety of coaptation devices are applicable in tibial fractures, particularly in type
A1 and A3 diaphyseal fractures in skeletally immature animals, in which one study
reported a relatively short healing time of about 4 weeks in 69 fractures. Some distal
fractures are amenable to external fixation, but very few proximal fractures can be
adequately stabilized by this method because of their inherent instability and the
difficulty of securing good immobilization of the distal femur.
s aui aeo oi uaei si aieo j e aui rn iasn si iseo iapu sa-ul a
high enough to immobilize the distal femur (see Figure 2-21). This is difficult in
short-legged and muscular breeds. The same comments apply to the long lateral
splint (see Figure 2-24). Thomas splints provide good fixation of the tibia, with the
 ability to cause cranial pull or caudal pull on either segment of the bone by varying
the application of the wrapping and padding (see Figure 2-25). With all these
devices it is important to maintain at least normal standing angles of flexion in both
the stifle and the hock joints to both keep the device as short as possible and to min-
imize joint stiffness. The Robert-Jones dressing is an excellent emergency splint for
 the tibia, and it is particularly useful in type I open fractures to prevent protrusion
of sharp bone fragments until definitive treatment is started (see Figure 2-33).
Intramedullary Pins
The main shortcoming of an intramedullary (IM) pin as the sole method of fixation
is that it permits rotation at the fracture site. This method of fixation is reserved
for transverse, short oblique, and minimally fragmented fractures of the tibia in
skeletally immature or smaller mature dogs and cats.
633
634
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 The IM pin is best inserted from the proximal end of the tibia. Results of one study
indicate that even when the pin is directed in a craniomedial direction, retrograde
point on the tibial plateau, invasion of the joint space, damage to the insertion of
the cranial cruciate ligament, and interference with the femoral condyles.6 A similar
study found no significant differences between craniomedially directed retrograde
pins and normograde pins, although nondirected retrograde pins did cause more
interference with the cranial cruciate ligament and femoral condyles.7 This study also
found that if the pin was not seated so that less than 1.5 cm protruded from the
tibial plateau, interference with the femoral condyle was seen with all techniques.
We continue to advocate normograde pinning because as in the femur, it eliminates
some variables that can cause complications. Closed normograde pinning may be
used for fractures that can be reduced closed with a minimum of manipulation and
trauma to the soft tissue in the area.
Normograde Intramedullary Pin Technique
Figure 19-1, A, shows a short oblique fracture of the tibia. The proximal aspect of
the left tibia shows the menisci and limits of the articular surface (Figure 19-1, B).
It is usually advantageous to have the stifle flexed at a right angle and the animal in
 a e pe us a  pas  si ud au n p
border of the patellar ligament, entering the proximal end of the tibia approximately
one third to half the distance from the cranial surface of the tibial tubercle to
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 19-1.
 Intramedullary (IM) pinning technique for the tibia. A, Serrated short
oblique fracture of the tibia. B, Proximal aspect of the left tibia showing menisci and limits 
of articular surface. Circle depicts the approximate location for insertion of an IM pin. The
stifle should be flexed at a right angle. The pin is inserted through the skin along the medial
border of the patellar ligament, entering the proximal end of the tibia approximately l/4 inch
caudal to the tibial tubercle. C, Reduced fracture and IM pin, lateral view. The pin should be
inserted well into the distal end. D, IM pin retracted about 1/4 inch (d'); pin cut (d'). E, With
a countersink and mallet, the IM pin is returned to the original depth. Sufficient pin is left
protruding for removal at the time of clinical union.
19—Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
635
the medial condyle of the tibia (Figure 19-1, B and C). Entering the pin too far
caudally will not allow full extension of the stifle joint because of interference of the
pin with the femoral condyle. The pin is started close to the medial border of the
tibial plateau and angled slightly medially and caudally. After entering the marrow
cavity, increased resistance and a coarse grating will be felt as the pin strikes the
medial cortex. Drilling motion should stop, and the pin should simply be pushed
until it bends slightly and then glides along the medial cortical surface. Because of
its bending, a pin with a slightly smaller-than-normal diameter is necesary, typically
about 50% of the medullary canal diameter. This bending causes the Steinmann pin
qs pasu sui dud i os e se uu ud ysn e se aro uonu oi
 If the pin is too large to bend, it will straighten the normal S curve of the tibia and
cause valgus angulation of the distal tibia and hindpaw. Drilling back-and-forth
quarter turns must be resumed as the pin is seated in the trabecular bone of the distal
metaphysis (Figure 19-1, D), just short of the articular cartilage of the tibial trochlea.
 Palpation of the medial malleolus is used as a guide as to depth of penetration, using
the radiograph to estimate how far the malleolus overhangs the surface of the tibial
trochlea. The pin is retracted about 1/4 inch (6 mm), then cut. With a countersink
and mallet, the pin is returned to the original depth. This seats the pin so that the
proximal end does not interfere with movement of the stifle joint and still keeps
the pin protruding sufficiently for removal (Figure 19-1, E). The fracture site should
be compressed by counterpressure from the distal end of the bone while the pin is
redriven with the countersink and mallet. If the pin has a diameter that is small enough
to allow bending, the pin can be driven to the desired depth, bent craniomedially,
and cut short with a pin cutter. The bend will ensure that the pin does not interfere
with the femoral condyle.
A second method is to use a true Rush pin placed through the insertion of the
 patellar ligament on the tibial tuberosity (Figure 19-2). The pilot hole is drilled
A
B
+
D
E
FIGURE 19-2.  A, Long oblique fracture of the tibia. B and C, Insertion points in the proximal
tibia for Rush pins. Either site can be used for a single pin, and both are used for double
pinning. The cranial pin is placed through the tibial tuberosity at the insertion of the patellar
ligament. The axial alignment of the pilot hole relative to the tibial shaft is approximately
 20 degrees caudal and 5 degrees medial. The medial pin is positioned similar to the Steinmann
pin (see Figure 19-1) but can be angled more laterally to provide for bending of the Rush pin.
D and E, Fracture immobilized by Rush pin through the tibial tuberosity and cerclage wires or,
636
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
caudally and slightly medially from the tuberosity at an angle of 20 degrees to the
long axis of the bone. The hook end of the Rush pin is driven close to the bone and
 produces no soft tissue reaction and therefore rarely needs to be removed. Rush pins
can also be driven from the same point on the tibial plateau as described for
Steinmann pins (see Figure 19-1).
Intramedullary Pin and Cerclage Wires
The use of cerclage wires in addition to an IM pin works well on long oblique fractures
(Figure 19-3, A), spiral fractures, and certain reducible wedge fractures. Chapter 2
 provides guidelines for cerclage application, and Figure 19-3, B, presents an example
of this method. Note that it is usually necessary to place the cerclage wires around
the fibula from the midshaft distally because of the interosseous ligament. The IM
 pin is usually removed after clinical union, and the cerclage wires are left in place.
Intramedullary Pin and Lag Screws
Figure 19-3, C, shows the same fracture as in A and B, immobilized with the use of
 an IM pin and lag screws inserted off center to avoid the pin. This procedure is most
'asn ae ria ls aaeau j sd i e smas  sop re oi a
The IM pin is usually removed after clinical union and the lag screws left in situ.
Interlocking Nail
Although the interlocking nail has been used mostly for fractures of the femur, this
system is now described as an effective fixation method for diaphyseal tibial fractures.8
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 19-3. Rotational stability may be achieved for intramedullary fixation of tibia
fractures by several different means. A, Long oblique fracture of the tibia. B, Two cerclage wires
and an intramedullary (IM) pin are sufficient fixation for cats and small dogs. C, Two lag
screws and IM pin. Care must be taken to avoid interference. D, IM pin and external fixator,
1/1 pin (half-Kirschner) splint, for unsta ble fractures. If this does not accomplish stability, use
a 2/2 pin external fixator. E, Interlocking nail with two screws proximal and two screws
distal to an unsta ble fracture.
19—Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
637
Whereas the standard Steinmann IM pin has little value in unstable fractures, the
interlocking nail provides rotational and axial stability (Figure 19-3, E) with insertion
techniques that allow the surgeon to employ concepts of biological osteosynthesis.
Less soft tissue dissection and bone fragment manipulation are required for inter-
locking nail insertion than for bone plate application. Bone healing with the inter-
locking nail has been very good in initial clinical reports; however, approximately
7% resulted in broken nails.α Clinical experience and biomechanical testing have led
to revision of the 6-mm and 8-mm nails and expansion of the system to 4.0-mm and
4.7-mm nails. The current system now uses the appropriate sizes for tibial fractures of
 dogs of most sizes, except perhaps the largest giant breeds.
The introduction of the interlocking nail provides the surgeon with another good
choice for tibial fracture fixation. Case selection should be limited to fractures with
 Interlocking nail fixation is not an optimal fixation choice for open, contaminated,
or infected tibial fractures, especially since external fixators are available and so well
suited for this application to the tibia.
Interlocking Nail Technique
 Preoperative planning with a template onlay to the radiograph helps the surgeon to
select the correct diameter and length of the implant. A choice of the standard nail
with two screw holes proximal and distal or a nail with three holes is based on the
proximity of the nail hole to the fracture. Maintaining a 2-cm distance from any nail
hole to the fracture site is recommended to prevent nail breakage. A limited medial
surgical approach to the tibia is completed for fracture reduction. IM pins of smaller
diameter are used first in normograde manner to open the medullary canal. The
interlocking nail is driven into the intramedullary space with "pin technique."
The machined joint of the interlocking nail is attached to the tibial extension and the
drill guide jig (see Figure 2-54, E). Drill guide inserts and sleeves are used through
the jig to place the locking screws through each hole of the interlocking nail.
External Fixators
This splint may be used on almost all fractures of the tibial shaft, including delayed
unions and nonunions. Choosing between bone plates, interlocking nails, and external
of fixator are applicable to the tibia because both medial and lateral aspects of the
bone are available. Type I splints are placed on the medial surface of the leg; in this
position they are less subject to being bumped or becoming hooked on objects, and
they do not interfere with walking. Type IA one-plane splints, with the fixation pins
placed in the same plane and connected by a common connecting bar, are used when
there is load sharing between the bone and the fixator, as in simple, wedge, and
segmental fractures (see Figure 19-14), as well as in most fractures of skeletally
m pae are sex ad-auo i a pue il adi sd a
no load sharing is possible (see Figure 19-12, B and C), as in nonreducible complex
wedge fractures. Type IB two-plane (see Figure 19-16) and type II bilateral two-plane
splints are used when there is a very short proximal or distal segment.
 The Kirschner-Ehmer external fixator system may be applied to tibial fractures
using allfixator configuration types. Other fixator systems are also appropriate for
the tibia, including the use of acrylic connecting bars or newer fixator systems, such
as the IMEX SK (IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview, Texas). The increased stiffness
 of the carbon fiber or titanium connecting rods of the SK system allows simpler, type
I fixator configurations to be applied to more complex fractures, without loss of
638
 Part IIl—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
stability or concern for fracture healing. Another advantage of the SK system is that
it permits the convenient use of positive-profile threaded pins through clamps at any
or all positions on the fixator.
 An important advantage of the external fixator in tibial fractures is the ability to
employ the biological osteosynthesis concept by applying the splint with the fracture
closed or with a very limited open approach and reduction. Because of the limited
musculature of the crus, closed reduction is more feasible than in the humerus or femur
The animal is prepared and draped for surgery with the limb suspended as shown
in Figure 2-12. Sterile towels or bandage material are wrapped around the suspending
 material a sufficient distance to prevent the chance of accidental contamination of
the surgeon during reduction.
Although any type of fixator can be used, the type II has special application during
closed reduction. If the most proximal and distal fixation pins are inserted first, at
90 degrees to the bone, they become a visual indicator of the adequacy of reduction
 in the frontal plane, since they will be parallel to each other when angular deformity
in this plane is reduced. Additionally, they can be used to anchor a fracture distractor
to aid in the reduction if desired. If difficulty is encountered in reducing the fracture
closed, a limited open approach to the tibia will allow reduction under direct vision,
but with minimal disruption of the fracture site, thus maintaining maximal vascu-
larity of the fracture segments. The open approach also allows the use of auxiliary
fixation, such as Kirschner wires or lag screws, both of which can be inserted with
minimal disruption of soft tissues.
The external fixator is particularly adaptable to open fractures because the
segments can be immobilized without invading or placing metallic fixation in the
contaminated open area. On the other hand, the external fixator can also be used
in combination with other supplemental fixation (e.g., cerclage wires, lag screws,
IM pins; see Figure 19-3), although there seems little reason for the latter. The main
reason for combining IM pinning with the external fixator in the humerus and
h       r  a e n si 
with the fixator on the tibia is not a problem, however, because dogs walk well even
with bilateral fixators. It would seem better simply to employ the appropriate fixator
for the fracture and not use the IM pin.
Application of external fixators to the tibia results in few complications because
of the limited musculature of the crus. Pin tract drainage is generally minimal, with
the exception of pins placed lateral and proximal on the tibia. Soft tissue ulceration
may develop at this site, and some surgeons will avoid this region for fixator pin
placement. If a modified type II fixator is applied to the tibia, a half pin may be used
at the proximal site, medially, with no pin at the lateral proximal site, thus avoiding
later tissue ulceration. Pin sites that are positioned farther distally generally do not
cause this same concern.
Bone Plates
Plates can be used on most fractures of the tibial shaft, including nonunions, and in
corrective osteotomies. 910 Choosing between bone plates and external fixators often
is merely a matter of personal choice by the surgeon. Plates are usually placed on
the medial or craniomedial surface of the bone. Contouring of the plate to fit the
curvature of the medial cortex closely is critical (see Figures 19-13 and 19-15).
Failure to do so results in marked deformity of the tibia and lower limb. Most fre.
quently the distal end of the plate is underbent and the distal tibia moved laterally
(valgus deviation), as with the overly large Steinmann pin. Whenever possible, it is
best to apply plates so that compression is exerted at the fracture site. (See Figure 2-75
19—Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
639
for proper selection of plate and screw size relative to body weight.) The principle
of biological osteosynthesis emphasizes limited fragment manipulation to minimize
disruption of soft tissue and blood supply to healing bone. Complex tibial fractures
with multiple fragments may necessitate the use of buttress configuration for the
bone plate. The buttress plate may be combined with an IM pin, which prevents
extreme or repetitive bending stress from causing plate failure.
Lag Screws
Bone screws applied in lag fashion to produce interfragmentary compression are
applicable in many tibial fractures (see Figures 19-2, 19-5, 19-13, and 19-20; see
PROXIMAL FRACTURES
Fractures of the proximal segment are not common, comprising only about 7%
of tibial fractures.' Most clinical fractures are the simple types, with multifragmen-
tary types being extremely rare. These types are included here mainly to make the
classification system complete.
Open Approaches
 Exposing the medial side is done by simple skin incision over the area of interest, an
extension of the approach to the diaphysis shown later. Exposing the lateral aspect
will involve elevating a variable portion of the origin of the tibialis cranialis muscle
from the tibial tuberosity and the lateral border of the tibial plateau.
Fracture Type 4-1-A; Proximal, Extraarticular (Figure 19-4, A)
Type A1, Avulsion
Avulsion of the tibial tuberosity occurs infrequently and is limited to younger animals,
usually between 4 and 8 months of age. The tuberosity is a separate growth center
and becomes fused to the proximal epiphysis and then to the metaphysis of the tibia
as the animal reaches skeletal maturity. In large dogs the endochondral ossification
process of the physis may be irregular, as seen radiographically; frequently, this is
point of the quadriceps muscles through the patellar ligament, and avulsions result
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Pleaserefer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 19-4. Proximal fractures of the tibia. A: A1, Avulsion; A2, simple; A3, multifrag-
mentary. B: B1, Lateral simple; B2, medial simple; B3, unicondylar multifragmentary. C: C1,
Simple, metaphyseal simple; C2, simple, meta physeal multifragmentary; C3, multifragmentary.
(From Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
640
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
from contraction of the muscle while the stifle is flexed and the foot firmly on the
 ground. Such a mechanism could easily occur during jumping or running and perhaps 
in a fall.
Clinically, the detached tuberosity can usually be palpated and is dislocated prox-
imally, and the distal end is rotated cranially (Figure 19-5, A). The patella also rides
higher in the trochlear groove of the femur and may be noted in radiographs, but
not by palpation. Considerable joint effusion, soft tissue swelling, ecchymosis, and
D
E
F
G
  a  s   e    'a 
 B and C, Ligament-bone suture technique using nonabsorbable suture material. D, Two
Kirschner wires. E, Two stainless steel wire sutures. F, Cancellous bone screw and pin.
G, Tension band wire.
19—-Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
641
lameness characterize the first 3 to 4 postinjury days. There are varying degrees of avul-
sion, from just a few millimeters to complete detachment, as seen in Figure 19-5, A.
 If in doubt about the displacement, the radiograph should be compared with one of
the contralateral stifle.
Closed Reduction and Fixation
 Conservative management can be considered when the displacement is only partial,
that is, 2 to 3 mm, with only a slight angulation of the tuberosity. If the breed is
small, and if optimal athletic function is not of paramount interest to the owner,
external fixation will be adequate. It is less likely to be successful in the large, active
breeds, partly because of the difficulties in maintaining external fixation on these
vigorous young dogs. Any of the splints or casts mentioned in the Fixation Techniques
 section are applicable and should be maintained 2 to 3 weeks.
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation
When avulsion is complete, failure to return the tibial tubercle to its original posi-
tion results in loss of power to the quadriceps muscles and in extension of the stifle
joint. Loss of function can be significant in large, athletic breeds, especially racing
 greyhounds. Reduction and internal fixation should be accomplished early in these
cases.
 A longitudinal incision is made just medial or lateral to the patella, the patellar
ligament, and the tibial tuberosity. The blood and fibrin clot is removed from the
original location of the tuberosity (see Figure 19-5, A). With the hip flexed and
the stifle extended, and with a hook or small, pointed reduction forceps attached to
the ligament at its insertion on the tuberosity, the tuberosity is slowly and gently
pulled back into its original position. A pull is necessary to fatigue and overcome the
spastic contraction of the quadriceps muscles. At this stage the tuberosity can be rather
friable, and care must be taken to avoid fragmentation. The tuberosity is then
anchored in place using one of the methods shown in Figure 19-5, as follows:
 1. Ligament-bone suture technique using nonabsorbable suture material
(Figure 19-5, B and C).
2. Two Kirschner wires (Figure 19-5, D). This is recommended only for small
breeds and in less than total avulsion.
3. Two stainless steel wire sutures (Figure 19-5, E). In very young animals the
bone may not be well ossified, and the wire could tear out; recommended
only for small breeds and in less than total avulsion.
 4. Cancellous bone screw and pin (Figure 19-5, F). There is some danger of
implant loosening or breakage because of being loaded in bending rather
than tension.
5. Pins and tension band wire (Figure 19-5, G). This is the preferred technique
 because it is biomechanically sound and is universally applicable in both
large and small breeds.
Aftercare
Additional support such as an off-weight-bearing sling may be indicated for the first
2 weeks in poorly controlled or unruly patients (see Figure 2-32). Exercise should
be restricted for an additional 2 to 3 weeks. If the animal has a considerable amount
of growth potential remaining (large and medium breeds under 6 months and small
breeds under 31/2 to 4 months), the fixation should be removed as early as possible
to help avoid premature fusion of the tuberosity to the shaft and eventual distal
translocation of the tuberosity.
642
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Complications
Fixation complications include avulsion of the tuberosity from the implant, wire
breakage, bending of a pin, patellar luxation, and a pin through the proximal tibial
 growth plate.11 These can be largely eliminated by close attention to good reduction
and proper placement and size of implants (see Chapter 2). An additional problem
reported by Goldsmid and Johnson11 was deformity of the tibial plateau, thought to
be caused by injury to the germinal cells of the proximal tibial epiphysis (Salter type
V injury), premature fusion of the tuberosity to the epiphysis, or a combination of
both. Although the authors recognized distal translocation of the tuberosity, they
did not attribute any interference with function to this, unlike our experience, where
late lameness has been associated with this complication.
Type A2, Simple, Physea!
Type A2 physeal proximal fractures are usually Salter type I (Figure 19-6, A) or type
II (Figure 19-6, B) injuries (see Chapter 22). After skeletal maturity, fractures in this
 region are slightly more distal (see Figure 19-7). The entire epiphysis and tibial
D
E
F
FIGURE 19-6. Fixation methods for type A2 simple fractures. A, Epiphyseal separation of
the proximal tibia and fracture of the fibula. B, Fracture-separation of proximal tibia and
fibular fracture. C and D, Insertion of pins through the epiphysis distally into the tibia. If it
is unstable, the fibula may also be pinned. E, Insertion of a cancellous bone screw. F, Insertion
 of bone screws in a transverse direction, indicated in some impacted fractures.
19—-Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
643
tuberosity are usually involved, and the tendency is for dislocation in a caudolateral
direction in relation to the tibial shaft. Occasionally the epiphysis will separate from
the tuberosity. This injury may be accompanied by damage to the ligamentous
structures (collateral ligaments in particular), which may vary from a sprain to a
complete rupture. If the fracture is not reduced and maintained in position, both
function and appearance are affected.9
Closed Reduction and Fixation
 In some cases, further reduction is not essential, or it can be accomplished by closed
means. Immobilization is achieved by a modified Thomas splint or long lateral
splint for 2 to 3 weeks (see Figures 2-24 and 2-25). The splints are usually applied
su a un u sd hs a jo u an u as a m
splint can be attached so that some outward force is exerted on the medial surface
of the proximal tibia, which aids in maintaining reduction. If this technique is used,
the modified Thomas splint must remain firmly attached and kept in good repair.
Loosening invariably results in a crooked leg.
Open Reduction and Internal Fixation
In most cases of type A2 physeal fractures, an open approach is necessary for return-
ing the epiphysis to its proper position. A longitudinal skin incision is made on the
to make the skin incision on the craniolateral surface of the proximal tibia and stifle.
 Reflection of the proximal belly of the tibialis cranialis muscle may aid in exposing
the fracture to best advantage for reduction and fixation, particularly if a portion of
the metaphysis remains attached to the epiphyseal end laterally. By gentle elevation
of the epiphysis with an osteotome or similar instrument, the dislocated part can
usually be levered back into position. It may be necessary to dislocate the proximal
end farther, remove the blood and fibrin clot, and then reduce by levering. If the
fibula is fractured and overriding, its reduction may be helpful in supporting and
restoring length to the lateral surface. If the fibula cannot be reduced and is interfer-
ing with reduction of the epiphysis, it can be shortened to eliminate the interference.
The method of fixation varies. Usually, one of the techniques shown in Figure 19-6
will accomplish the objective, as follows?10.
1. Insertion of a Steinmann pin in the usual manner through the epiphysis and
distally into the tibia (Figure 19-6, C and D). There may not be good rotational
stability in some cases. The fibula may also be pinned in large breeds or an
angled transfixation added, as described next, to provide rotational stability.
 2. Transfixation by multiple Kirschner wires or small Steinmann pins
(Figure 19-6, D). This is probably the easiest and most versatile fixation
method. The medial and lateral pins are started near the periphery of the
tibial plateau, where they do not interfere with the femoral condyles. These
 pins should penetrate the opposite cortex for best stability, and the proximal
ends are bent away from the bone to further protect the femoral condyles.
 One pin medially and one laterally are often adequate, but a third one in the
 tibial tuberosity adds even better three-point stability. This pin need not
 penetrate the opposite cortex.
3. Insertion of a cancellous bone screw (Figure 19-6, E). This method is
restricted to patients close to skeletal maturity so that there is no
interference with growth.
4. Insertion of one or more cancellous bone screws in a transverse direction,
indicated in some Salter type II fractures (Figure 19-6, F).
644
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Aftercare
 Additional support such as an off-weight-bearing sling may be indicated for the first
 2 weeks in poorly controlled or unruly patients (see Figure 2-32). Exercise should
be restricted for an additional 2 to 3 weeks. If the animal has a considerable amount
of growth potential remaining (large and medium breeds under 6 months and small
breeds under 31/2 to 4 months), screw fixation should be removed as early as possible
to help avoid interference with the growth plate. Pin fixation need not be removed
 unless it loosens and migrates.
Type A2, Simple, Nonphysea!
Fractures occurring in the proximal metaphysis of the tibia and fibula are usually
transverse, impacted, or short oblique in nature .910 If the proximal segment is dis-
located, it will usually be tilted caudally (Figure 19-7, A).
Closed Reduction and Fixation
In some cases, reduction can be accomplished by closed manipulation and fixation
 by a modified Thomas splint (see Figure 2-25), long lateral splint (see Figure 2-24),
or a Steinmann or Rush IM pin that is inserted normograde.
Open Reduction and Fixation
Most often, an open approach is indicated for reduction. In these cases, fixation
is usually accomplished by the insertion of a Steinmann pin (Figure 19-7, B),
 a Rush pin (Figure 19-7, C), a medial bone plate, or rarely a cancellous bone screw
(Figure 19-7, D). Additional filling with autogenous cancellous bone graft may
rarely be indicated in some fractures in which a deficit remains after reduction.
 If the proximal end of the fibula is fractured and detached, it should be reattached
i s1i uo sa s iiao pia ai aaq mas aoq e jo a q
surface.
  y  s  ae po a  h a  a 
and fibula. B, Fracture reduced and Steinmann intramedullary pin inserted. C, Fixation with
Rush pin. D, Fixation with a cancellous lag screw.
19—-Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
645
Aftercare
 Usually, no auxiliary immobilization is nee ded with IM pinning, bone screw fixation,
or bone plating with type A2 nonphyseal proximal fractures. Exercise is severely
restricted until clinical union, with a gradual return to full activity 1 month later.
Type A3, Multifragmentary
Type A3 is an infrequent fracture in the dog and cat. There is no real possibility of
closed reduction and external fixation because of the instability of the fracture pattern.
 Open reduction and internal fixation are the norm, and the fracture is approached
as described earlier. Buttress plate fixation by means of a T-plate is the most practi-
cal method of fixation (Figure 19-8). The plate must be applied on the side of the
comminution to function as a buttress. Contouring of the plate is complicated on
the lateral side by the extreme curvature of the metaphysis in this region. The two
proximal screws must be carefully directed to avoid entrance into the joint surface.
If possible, a third screw is directed into the proximal fragment. Aftercare is as
described above for type A2 nonphyseal fracture.
do ue iou si ux ad j aissod aq Ae ex pxa ue jo as
A hybrid type I-III splint can be applied as illustrated for distal radial fractures
(see Figure 13-23). If the proximal segment is long enough for three fixation pins,
the type IB two-plane fixator shown later is applicable (see Figure 19-16, A).
Fracture Type 4-1-B; Proximal, Partial Articular (Figure 19-4, B)
Unlike the case in humans, partial articular fractures are uncommon in quadripeds
(Figure 19-9, A); when they occur, however, type B fractures are potentially devas-
tating injuries because severe degenerative joint disease results from untreated or
FIGURE 19-8. Fixation of type A3 multifragmentary, some type B3
partial articular, and most type C complete articular fractures will require
a buttress plate. The T-plate is usually the most adaptable to this situation.
FIGURE 19-9. A, Type B1 lateral simple frac-
ture of the proximal tibia. B, Fixation by two
cancellous lag screws. The proximal screw is
inserted parallel, and as close as possible, to the
tibial plateau articular surface. The second
 screw ideally should be perpendicular to the
fracture line, but the acute curvature of the
lateral cortex here ma kes it difficult to insert the
screw at that angle.
646
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 inappropriately treated cases. Fractures involving the medial condyle of the tibia are
more demanding, since there are more weight-bearing forces on the medial side than
 the lateral side. As with all intraarticular fractures, precise anatomical reduction and
rigid internal fixation are essential.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
Open approach to the area is by a medial or lateral parapatellar approach to the
stifle,12 with extension of the skin incision distally to expose the metaphyseal region,
 as for extraarticular fractures. The reduction must be viewed from within the joint
to ensure the accuracy of reduction.
Fixation by lag screw is imperative to obtain good fixation (Figure 19-9, B). The
interfragmentary compression obtained by screw fixation is the only method that
will resist the shear forces present at the fracture line. Simple pin fixation is not
appropriate here. Two lag screws are advisable if the fragment is large enough. The
scre ws are paired horizontally or vertically, depending on the shape of the fragment.
Aftercare
Additional support such as an off-weight-bearing sling may be indicated for the first
be severely restricted for an additional 4 to 6 weeks, then slowly returned to normal
at about 12 weeks postoperatively. The implants are rarely removed.
Fracture Type 4-1-C; Proximal, Complete Articular
(Figure 19-4, C)
 Even less common than type B partial articular fractures, complete articular fractures
are treated by a combination of methods described earlier in this section. Reconstruction
of the articular surface and fixation by lag screws is the first consideration.
Plate fixation of the metaphyseal part of the fracture is the most common and
easiest method and is similar to that shown in Figure 19-8 for type A3 fractures.
Because of the necessity for at least two and preferably three screws in the proximal
fragment, T-plates are the usual choice. If the animal is small enough that 2.7-mm
screws are appropriate (see Figure 2-75), two cuttable plates (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli
Pa) side-by-side can provide several screws in the proximal fragment. The proximal
screws are usually inserted in lag fashion to secure fragments. If the fragments are
entirely reducible and can be compressed by lag screws (type C1), the plate will
function as a neutralization plate. If the fragments are irreducible, as in type C2 and
C3 fractures, the plate must function as a buttress. Aftercare is as previously
 described for type B fractures.
 Use of an external fixator for metaphyseal fixation may be possible if plate fixa-
tion is not an option. The intraarticular portion of the fracture must be reduced and
stabilized by lag screws. Depending on the position and planes of the fracture lines,
it may be possible to apply a hybrid type I-II splint as illustrated for distal radial
fractures (see Figure 13-23). The fixation pins can be applied across, but not within,
fracture lines. If the proximal segment is long enough for three fixation pins, the
type IB two-plane fixator shown later may be applicable (see Figure 19-16, A)
DIAPHYSEAL FRACTURES
The tibia is the third most common long bone fractured, after the femur and
radius/ulna,2 and diaphyseal fractures account for 75% to 81% of all tibial fractures.1,$
19—-Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
647
Oblique and spiral fracture patterns are the most common in all ages, whereas
multifragmentary fractures are seen most often in adults, as are open fractures.
Although clinicians typically believe that tibial fractures, especially of the distal
diaphysis, heal more slowly and less predictably than in other long bones, this is not
supported by facts; in a series of 195 fractures of canine and feline tibial diaphyseal
fractures, the nonunion rate was only 4.1%.s Treatment recommendations are keyed
to the fracture patient scoring system detailed in Table 2-6.34
Open Approach
Shaft fractures are invariably approached from a medial or craniomedial skin incision,
since there are no significant muscles on the medial side of the crus (Figure 19-10).
If access is required to the lateral cortex, it is easily attained by elevating the tibialis
cranialis muscle.
Fracture Type 4-2-A; Diaphyseal, Simple or Incomplete
(Figure 19-11, A)
Type A1, Incomplete Tibial or Fibula Intact
Fracture patient scores of 9 to 10 are typical for these fractures (Table 2-6), which
are seen primarily in immature animals. Because an intact fibula in the immature
animal will maintain length, these fractures can be handled with either a long-leg
cylinder cast or a Thomas splint (see Figures 2-21 and 2-25). In a young animal,
less than 6 months old, a long lateral splint will usually suffice (see Figure 2-24).
See previous discussion in Fixation Techniques relative to cast fixation.
Type A2, Simple Oblique Tibial
Because of their instability relative to shortening, simple oblique tibial fractures are
not suitable to external coaptation.
FIGURE 19-10. Approach to the shaft of the tibia.12
1, Craniomedial skin incision showing approximate location of
medial saphenous vessels and nerve. 2, With care, the saphenous
vessels and nerve, which cross the field obliquely in the middle
third of the tibia, can be avoided. This approach can expose the
entire length of the tibia.
648
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media.
Please refer to the printed publication.
FIGURE 19-11. Diaphyseal fractures of the tibia. A: A1, Incomplete tibial or fibula intact;
A2, simple oblique tibial; A3, simple transverse tibial. B: B1, One reducible wedge; B2, reducible
wedges; B3, nonreducible wedges. C: C1, Reducible wedges; C2, segmental; C3, nonreducible
wedges. (From Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
Open Reduction and Fixation
 aoos sd a  a a a sa x go Aaa 
available equipment.
Intramedullary Pin.  In immature animals, typically with a fracture patient
score of 9 to 10, simple Steinmann pinning will suffice (see Figure 19-1), since early
callus formation would be expected to aid in providing rotational stability.
Intramedullary Pin and Auxiliary Fixation.With the long oblique fracture shown
in Figure 19-3, A, the fracture patient score typically would be 8 to 9. If the fracture
 line length is at least twice the bone diameter, cerclage wires are placed at about 1-cm
intervals (see Figure 19-3, B). In large patients, there may be an option to replace the
cerclage wires with lag screws (see Figure 19-3, C). If the length of the fracture line is
less than twice the bone diameter, the fracture is treated as a transverse type A3 fracture.
Interlocking Nail. Interlocking nails may be applied with closed reduction or
minimal open reduction (see Figure 19-3, E). Nail sizes of 4.0, 4.7, 6.0, and 8.0 mm
are applicable to tibia fractures for most sizes of dogs and large cats. Auxiliary fixation
with cerclage wires may be used for long oblique fractures.
External Fixator  Type IA or HIA and B external skeletal fixators are easily
applied here (Figure 19-12), often by closed, or minimal open, reduction (see Fixation
Techniques). Auxiliary fixation in the form of interfragmentary Kirschner wires or
lag screws can be used in oblique fractures.
 Bone Plate. Neutralization plating of these fractures is an “elegant" method in
the sense that it is applicable to animals of all sizes, the results are quite predictable,
and minimal aftercare is required. The technique is identical to the medial neutraliza-
tices should be captured by the plate screws (see Figure 2-75 for choice of plate size).
Type A3, Simple Transverse Tibial
 In skeletally immature dogs, a fracture patient score of 9 to 10 is usual, whereas in
older animals and larger breeds it may go down to 8 (see Table 2-6).
19—Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
649
B
C
FIGURE 19-12. External skeletal fixation of diaphyseal fractures of the tibia. A, Type IA
fixator on a wedge fracture. B, Type IIA full-pin fixator on fracture with several wedges.
C, Type IIB fixator with half pins in the middle positions is simpler to apply than the type
IIA, at a cost of some loss of stiffness.
Closed Reduction and Fixation
In theory, simple transverse tibial fractures are treatable by closed reduction and
external fixation by cast or splint. This method should be reserved for fractures
at or below midshaft, since it is difficult to achieve good stability of the proximal
fragment by cast or splint if the fragment is short. Short-legged or heavily muscled
 breeds also present a problem in this regard. See the discussion earlier under Fixation
Techniques relative to cast fixation.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
Providing rotational stability is the primary concern in these fractures. Age and size
of the patient are important determinants as to type of fixation.
Steinmann Pin. If the patient is less than about 6 months of age, the exuberant
callus expected will compensate considerably for lack of rotational stability, and
simple Steinmann pin fixation would be adequate. In mature dogs, however, some
additional auxiliary fixation is needed. If the patient is less than 15 to 20 pounds
(7.0-9.5 kg), interfragmentary wire fixation is often adequate. These patterns are
described in Chapter 2 (see Figure 2-63). The wires must be properly oriented on
the bone to counteract the external rotation of the distal fragment that characterizes
tibial fractures. Such wire fixation must be carefully applied to ensure that the wire
is truly tight, and this author is very conservative in recommending it.
Interlocking Nail. The interlocking nail is most applicable to mature dogs
greater than 20 pounds (see Figure 19-3, E). The interlocking screws counteract
rotation at the fracture site until callus has developed. The nail may be applied with
closed or minimally open surgical technique.
External Fixator.
 Fixators are applicable as described for type A2 diaphyseal
fractures and are usually applied in a closed manner (see Figure 19-12).
650
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Bone Plate.   Compression bone plate fixation is a very simple and highly effective
method of treatment in animals of all sizes, especially large and giant breeds. Six to
eight cortices should be captured by the plate screws (see Figure 2-75 for choice of
plate size).
Aftercare
See aftercare suggestions at the end of this section on diaphyseal fractures.
None of these tibial wedge fractures is amenable to coaptation fixation because of
ano p a  ont   a ss d a  
as low as 3. If the wedges are reducible, a reconstructive approach can be taken with
several fixation methods. If the wedges are not reducible, the choice of fixation is bone
plating, bone plating with IM pin, external skeletal fixators, or interlocking nail.
Type B1; One Reducible Wedge
 If there is only one reducible wedge, and if the fracture lines are long enough for
cerclage wire fixation, an IM pin is possible, especially in small and medium-sized
d uu pe mas si ' o g jo aross juand a e ym spa
 a ym rn ei-ah ai s ar u uo raaq e si ux
 patient score could be 5 to 6. A minimum of six cortices must be captured by plate
screws in each of the proximal and distal segments. Cerclage wire fixation can be
 substituted for lag screws in some cases. An external fixator of either type I or type 
II can be substituted for the bone plate (see Figure 19-12).
Type B2; Several Reducible Wedges
Increasing instability and complexity drive fracture patient scores to 4 to 6.
Intramedullary pinning with cerclage wire fixation is not reliable, especially in large
breeds. Neutralization plating and external fixators are the primary choices for
fixation. Although the wedges are reducible, bridging fixation is also an option,
A
B
C
FIGURE 19-13. A, Multiple fracture
of the tibia. B and C, Shaft has been
anatomically reconstructed using two
lag screws. Neutralization plate is
applied on medial surface of tibia.
19—Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
651
as described later for type C3 fractures. Bridging or buttress plate, pin and buttres
plate combination, and interlocking nail are suitable choices for fixation.
Type B3; Nonreducible Wedges
Although not all the fragments can be reduced and stabilized, the bone still is able
to assume some buttress function, and shortening of the bone is not the major problem
as long as the major diaphyseal sections are held in alignment. It is best to take a
biological osteosynthesis approach to these fractures because total reduction is not
possible; on the other hand, a bridging or buttress fixation is not always needed.
Fracture patient scores are typically 3 to 5.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
Bone Plate. The principles of biological osteosynthesis can be respected during
plate fixation only if the surgeon resists the urge to attempt reduction of the fragments
The fracture hematoma and fragments should be disturbed as little as possible, con-
sistent with reduction of the major diaphyseal fragments. If possible, the fracture
should be placed under compression with the plate, which will add stability. Six to
eight cortices must be captured by plate screws in each major segment.
The major problem with plate fixation occurs when the nonreducible fragments
are on the lateral cortex, which is the natural buttress cortex. Failure to place bone
graft in this area (see Chapter 3) can lead to plate failure resulting from repetitive
bending stresses applied to the plate over a very short segment of the plate. If the
fragmented area of the lateral cortex is relatively small or is in other areas of the
 cortex, autogenous cancellous bone graft will stimulate early callus formation and
relieve the bone plate of bending stress. Larger, nonreduced areas on the lateral cortex
can be physically reinforced by onlay or inlay grafts supplemented with autogenous
cancellous graft (see Figure 3-3, E)
Bone Plate and Pin Combination.  Another method to reinforce a bone plate
subjected to bending stress is to use it in combination with an IM pin. The IM pin is
placed first to allow efficient alignment of the major fragments with minimal disruption
of the fracture site. A pin diameter is selected that will fill approximately 35% to
40% of the diameter of the medullary space. This diameter allows proper placement
of the pin in the medullary space of the tibia to preserve alignment of the bone and
imum of three monocortical screws and one bicortical screw above and below the
a au ie paod ye auoq sauo snoua ei'papuaau si ao
 site will encourage early healing.
External Fixator  Bending stresses caused by loss of the lateral cortex are less
critical with type II fixators than with plates. A minimum of six fixation pins is
(biological osteosynthesis) is the best choice for application because this will result
in the least disruption of the vascular supply to the fragments (see Fixation Techniques).
Proximal or distal fractures with a very short segment may require a type IB biplanar
splint with three pins in the short fragment (see Figure 19-16, A).
Interlocking Nail. Whereas the standard Steinmann IM pin has little value in
unstable fractures, the interlocking nail provides axial and rotational stability for
this fracture type. The surgeon can use a minimally invasive approach for nail insertion,
consistent with concepts of biological osteosynthesis. Considering the early reports
652
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
of nail failures on long-bone fixation with the interlocking nail, this system should
not be selected unless the interlocking screws can be positioned 2 cm from the fracture
site in an average-sized dog.
Aftercare
 See aftercare suggestions at the end of this section.
Fracture Type 4-2-C; Diaphyseal, Tibial Complex
(Figure 19-11, C)
As stated for wedge fractures, none of these injuries is amenable to coaptation.
 Fracture patient scores will be 1 to 3 or 4.
Type C1, Reducible Wedges
Type C1 fractures are similar to type B2 fractures, differing mainly in the amount
of the diaphysis involved with the wedges, and their fixation is similar. Although the
wedges are reducible, there is also the option of bridging fixation, as described for
type C3 fractures.
Type C2, Segmental
Segmental fractures are treatable by either plates or external fixators (Figure 19-14).
With dynamic compression plates, both fracture lines can be compressed, as shown
 in Figure 2-72. A minimum of four cortices must be captured by plate screws in each
 of the bone segments. The disadvantage with plate fixation is the need for a very
long plate if the middle bone fragment is long. External fixators of type I or II are
both applicable to segmental fracture. A minimum of two fixation pins is required
in each fragment or three pins in each end segment.
Type C3, Nonreducible Wedges
 Plate fixation in the bridging or buttress mode or in combination with an IM pin is
applicable to type C3 fractures (Figure 19-15). The plate is supplemented with
autogenous cancellous bone graft in the fragmented area.
FIGURE 19-14. Unilateral external fixator,
 3/3 pins. A, Open multiple fracture of the tibia.
 B, Splinting offers rigid uninterrupted fixation
of fracture segments without invading the
contaminated area. The use of 3/3 pins helps to
further distribute the forces to which the pins
are subjected, thus reducing the possibility of
pin loosening before clinical union.
A
B
19—-Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
653
FIGURE 19-15.1
 Multiple fracture of the
tibia in a 10-year-old dog. A, Entire center
portion is greatly comminuted. B, After
application of a buttress plate, the small
fracture fragments were left in place and
the imperfections filled with autogenous
cancellous bone. C, Buttress plate can be 
protected from bending stress by first
placing an intramedullary pin. Pin size
selection of 35% to 40% of the width of
the medullary canal allows placement of
bicortical screws.
B
C
Interlocking nail fixation is also applicable to nonreducible wedge fractures
(see Figure 19-3, E). Proper nail selection is important, with a minimum distance of
2 cm between the fracture site and the nearest screw hole.* If sufficient distance is
una vailable, another fixation system should be chosen.
 Although bone plate fixation is feasible, these fractures heal more reliably and faster
when a more biological approach is taken, with closed or limited open reduction
 and external skeletal fixation. Closed reduction or limited open reduction (biological
osteosynthesis) is the best choice for application because this will result in the least
disruption of the vascular supply to the fragments (see Fixation Techniques). Type
II external fixators are sufficient for patients with the highest fracture patient scores
for diaphyseal tibial fractures (see Figure 19-12, B and C). A short proximal or distal
segment is an indication for the type IB biplanar splint or a type II splint in the
largest breeds (Figure 19-16, A and B). The use of positive-profile threaded fixator
 pins and the new stiffer external fixation systems (IMEX SK) will enhance fixation
longevity and fracture fixation stability (see Chapter 2).
Aftercare
Ideally the animal would be allowed early, limited active use of the limb. This requires
totally stable internal fixation, good owner compliance with confinement and exercise
restrictions, and a patient that will not overstress the repair because of hyperactivity.
If any of these elements is less than optimal, an off-weight-bearing sling is advisable
for 2 to 3 weeks (see Figure 2-32), although this will not be possible if an external
fixator has been placed. Exercise should be severely restricted for 6 weeks, with a
gradual return to unrestricted activity 3 to 4 weeks after clinical union. Radiographs
should be taken at 6 to 8 weeks to confirm clinical union before any increase in
exercise is allowed.
DISTAL FRACTURES
Fractures of the distal tibia account for about 21% of all tibial fractures.' In a series
of 43 fractures, the predominant fracture patterns were physeal and malleolar, 41%
were in animals less than 1 year of age, and 37% were open fractures, primarily
shearing injuries of the malleoli.14 Despite the percentage of physeal fractures,
654
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 19-16. A, Type IB two-plane external fixator is useful when there is one short
 metaphyseal segment. B, Type Il bilateral two-plane external fixator is used when there is a
large area of bone loss or fragmentation, especially in gunshot fractures, and maximum stiffness 
and long-term stability are needed.
growth disturbance of the distal epiphysis is rare. Pin and wire fixation is the
predominant approach because complex fractures are uncommon.
Open Approaches
Because the distal tibial region has no muscular covering, the bone is virtually subcuta-
 neous. Proximal extension of the approaches to the malleoli shown in Figure 19-17
allows exposure of the metaphysis.
Fracture Type 4-3-A; Distal Tibia, Extraarticular (Figure 19-18, A)
Type A1, Simple
This fracture is observed primarily in the immature animal as a physeal fracture of
Salter type I or type I (see Chapter 22). In mature animals, type A1 is a metaphyseal
fracture with a very short distal segment (Figure 19-19, A and B).
Closed Reduction and Fixation
Reduction and fixation vary with the individual case. In some patients, reduction
may be accomplished closed by a combination of traction, countertraction, and
manipulation. If any degree of stability is obtained after reduction, fixation may be
accomplished by use of a long-leg fiberglass cast or a modified Thomas splint
(see Figures 2-21 and 2-25). Flexing the hock joint slightly beyond the normal
19—-Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
655
 Incision in 
 joint capsule
Medial ridge
of talus
Tendon of deep
digital flexor
m., med. part
Tendonofperoneus
longus m.
Lateral extensor
Lateral malleolus
retinaculum
Lateral collateral
ligament, long part
Tendon of lateral
digital extensor
Lateral trochlear
m.
ridge of talus
Tendon of peroneus
Incision in joint 
brevis m.
capsule
B
FIGURE 19-17. A, Approach to the medial malleolus and talocrural joint. B, Approach to
the lateral malleolus and talocrural joint. (From Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical
approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
656
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Rights were not granted to include this figure in electronic media
Please refer to the printedpublication.
FIGURE 19-18. Distal fractures of the tibia. A: A1, Simple; A2, wedge; A3, complex.
B: B1, Lateral malleolar; B2, medial malleolar; B3, multimalleolar. C: C1, Simple, metaphyseal
simple; C2, simple, metaphyseal multifragmentary; C3, multifragmentary. (From Unger M,
Montavon PM, Heim UF: Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.)
A
B
C
FIGURE 19-19. Fixation of a distal tibial type A1 physeal fracture. A and B, Salter-Harris
I fracture of the distal tibia and fibula. C, Diagonally placed transfixation pins or Kirschner
wires are started at the medial and lateral malleoli and driven into the opposite cortices.
Supplemental coaptation fixation is also needed. D, Slightly more stability can be provided
necessary if good sta bility is achieved. It is not usually possible to place a Rush pin similarly
from the lateral side because the fibular malleolus interferes. A transfixation Kirschner wire
 can be used for additional rotational sta bility.
standing angle increases the stability. In very young patients, a short lateral splint
 may suffice (see Figure 2-26). Clinical union is usually achieved by 3 to 4 weeks.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
An open approach may be mandatory for satisfactory reduction in most cases; the
 approach is usually made on the medial side.
Transfixation Pins.   The insertion of two small, diagonally placed pins starting
at the medial and lateral malleoli is often the only practical method of fixation
because of the shortness of the fragment (Figure 19-19, C). Supplemental fixation 
using a short lateral splint is indicated (see Figure 2-26), since rotational stability
from the pins alone can be marginal. Additional rotational stability can also be
achieved by a tension wire placed between the protruding pins on one or both sides.
Rusb Pin.  A small Rush pin can often be started on the medial malleolus and
driven proximally into the shaft (Figure 19-19, D). Because it is difficult to insert
this pin from the lateral malleolus, a small transfixation pin is used on the lateral
19—Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
657
side to ensure rotational stability. A short lateral splint can be added if there is any
doubt about rotational stability (see Figure 2-26).
Steinmann Pin.  Another method of internal fixation is use of a Steinmann IM
pin. The pin is inserted from the proximal end, traverses the entire length of the
tibial shaft, and is anchored into the distal tibial epiphysis. The amount of anchorage
sq e an ex iexa aq pdns m ji aae q ls si p
  d x      as s  s no 
medial malleolus can also be used for additional rotational stability.
Aftercare
Whichever form of immobilization is used, activity is restricted during the healing
period. The external fixation can be removed when adequate primary callus has
formed (in about 3 weeks). The IM pin or transfixation pins are usually removed
after clinical union has been reached.
Type A2, Wedge
 Type A2 fractures can be handled in basically the same manner as type A1 fractures,
with the addition of some form of interfragmentary fixation of the wedge. Ideally,
this would take the form of lag screw fixation, but cerclage wires may be possible
in some cases. Some fractures can be adequately fixed entirely by lag screws.
 Transfixation by Kirschner wires is not as stable but is often adequate; supplementary
external support is often essential.
Type A3, Complex
Fortunately, type A3 fractures are very rare injuries in the dog and cat because they are
rarely injured while sking, unlike their human masters. Buttress fixation is essential.
Bone Plate
Plate fixation is the best method of accomplishing the required buttress fixation.
As many of the fragments as possible are stabilized by lag screws, either directly in
the fragments or through the plate holes. The type of plate used is variable, depending
on the size of the dog and the fracture pattern. Straight plates may be applicable in
some cases, especially in large dogs. T-plates are useful if the length of the fracture
area is not too long. Multiple cuttable plates spaced around the tibia may provide a
method of inserting sufficient screws in the distal end to provide good buttressing.
The drawback of this method is that the largest screws that can be used are 2.7 mm.
 Any cortical defects should receive autogenous bone grafting. External support, as
described for type A1 and A2 fractures, is probably required in most cases.
External Fixator
s s adi ui sriexg raxa aneid oi pasn aq ueo spoa omi isea i
The first is the use of a hybrid type I-II splint as illustrated for distal radial fractures
(see Figure 13-23), placing fixation pins across but not within fracture lines.
 The second method is a splint that bridges the joint and places it under tension
the collateral ligaments to maintain the bone in position. (Some transarticular fixa-
tor patterns are illustrated in Chapter 2o.) The fragments can be reconstructed
as best as possible by interfragmentary compression or by transfixation pinning.
 o  a n p  aq s  a 
a biological osteosynthesis approach. This is definitely a last resort when nothing
else is possible.
658
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Fracture Type 4-3-B; Distal, Partial Articular (Figure 19-18, B)
Fractures of either malleous or both malleoli give rise to instability of the tarsocrural
joint, resulting in subluxation or dislocation. Many of these malleolar fractures are
a result of shearing injury (see Chapter 20). The two most important factors in the
treatment of articular fractures of the tarsocrural joint are the following:
1. Maintenance of integrity of the joint “"mortise" created by the malleoli
 2. Complete reestablishment of the weight-bearing surfaces of the tibia and
tibial tarsal bone.
The hock is functionally a hinge with motion in one plane, flexion and extension.
 The bony structure is designed as a mortise and tenon with considerable inherent
stability. The mortise is formed by the lateral malleolus (distal end of fibula), distal
articular surface of the tibia, and the medial malleolus. The tenon is the trochlea and
body of the tibial tarsal bone, which is shaped to fit snugly into the mortise. The
tibia and fibula and the tibial tarsal bone are bound together by numerous ligaments
Complete malleolar fractures create ligamentous instability of the tarsocrural joint,
and treatment by external fixation always results in malunion, continued instability,
and eventual degenerative joint disease. Intraperiosteal fractures of the malleolus
without displacement may be seen in immature animals, and these usually respond
 to casting or splinting.
Reduction and Internal Fixation
Rigid fixation can be best instituted by the use of bone screws, transfixation pins,
or tension band wire and pins.
Lateral Malleolus
The lateral malleolus is part of the fibula and usually fractures some distance from
the end, particularly in the cat (Figure 19-20, A). Fixation of the fracture is indirect;
the fragment is fixed to the tibia. Screws are usually used in medium-sized and
large dogs, and threaded Kirschner pins are used in small dogs and cats, although
 sa s i ae a ss '  -i'i n  s
 screws or pins should pass in a proximal direction and anchor completely through
the cortex on the opposite side of the tibia (Figure 19-20, B and C). Stability of
the joint should be tested after fracture fixation, and ligaments that have been
ruptured should be repaired by suturing (see Chapter 20). Supplemental fixation may
be indicated in the form of a short lateral splint for 3 to 4 weeks postoperatively
(see Figure 2-26).
Medial Malleolus
breeds (Figure 19-20, E and F). More widely applicable is the Kirschner wires and
figure-of-8 tension band wire method (Figure 19-20, G). In small breeds the fixation
can be accomplished with one Kirschner wire. With this fixation and restricted activity,
no additional external fixation is usually needed. Bilateral malleolar fractures are
treated in a similar manner (Figure 19-20, F and G).
Fracture Type 4-3-C; Distal, Complex Articular (Figure 19-18, C)
The least common of tibial fractures, complex articular injuries are treated by a
xado e rg pid si s iui os po ss e uo ae sa  pu
19—-Fractures of the Tibia and Fibula
659
B
C
E
F
G
FIGURE 19-20. Malleolar fractures. A, Fracture of the lateral mallolus {distal end of
fibula): immobilization using B, a cancellous screw, or C, two threaded Kirschner wires.
D, Fracture of the medial malleolus. E, immobilization using a cancellous bone screw.
F, Fractures of both malleoli with fixation. G, Fixation with two Kirschner wires and a
figure-of-8 tension band wire.
fractures, the first order is to reconstruct the articular surface with lag screws
parallel to the joint surface. The remaining extraarticular metaphyseal fracture is
handled by the methods detailed for type A fractures. In some multifragmentary
fractures, there is no hope of preserving a functional joint, and these should receive
arthrodesis as primary treatment. (See Chapter 20 for a discussion of tarsocrural
arthrodesis.)
References
1. Unger M, Montavon PM, Heim UFA: Classification of fractures of the long bones in the dog and
cat: introduction and clinical application, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 3:41-50, 1990.
 2. Johnson JA, Austin C, Bruer GJ: Incidence of canine appendicular rmusculoskeletal disorders in
16 veterinary teaching hospitals frorm 1980 through 1989, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 7:56-69,
1994.
 3. Palmer RH, Hulse DA, Aron DN: A proposed fracture patient score systerm used to develop fracture
treatrment plans. In Proceedings of 20th Annuat Conference of Veterinary Orthopedic Society,1993
{abstract).
4. Palmer RH: Decision making in fracture treatrment: the Fracture Patient Scoring System. In Proceedings
of (Small Animat) ACVs Veterinary Symposium, 1994, pp 388-390.
 5. Boone EG, Johnson AL, Montavon P, Hohn RB: Fractures of the tibial diaphysis in dogs and cats,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:41-45, 1986.
6.
Pardo AD: Relationship of tibial intramedullary pins to canine stifle joint structures: a comparison
of norrmograde and retrograde insertion, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:369-374, 1994.
7. Dixon BC, Tomlinson JL, Wagner-Mann CC: Effects of three intramedullary pinning techniques on
proximal pin location and articular damage in the canine tibia, Vet Surg 23:448-455, 1994.
Dueland RT, Johnson KA, Roe SC, et al: Interlocking nail treatment of diaphyseal long-bone
fractures in dogs, J Arm Vet Med Assoc 214:59-66, 1999.
9. Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald),Santa Barbara, Calf, 1974, American
Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
in small animals, New York, 1984, Springer-Verlag, pp 180-190.
11.
Goldsmid S, Johnson KA: Complications of canine tibial tuberosity avulsion fractures, Vet Commp
Orthop Trauma 4:54-58, 1991.
660
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
12. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
13.1
Hulse DA, Hyman W, Nori M, et al. Reduction in plate strain by adition of an intramedullary pin,
Vet Surg 26:451-459, 1997.
14. Boone EG, Johnson AL, Hohn RB: Distal tibial fractures in dogs and cats, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
188:36-40, 1986.
20
Fractures and Other
Orthopedic
: Injuries of
the Tarsus, Metatarsus.
and Phalanges
Injuries to the tarsus generally involve fracture of one or more bones, impairment
of ligaments, or occasionally a combination of both these injuries. Ligamentous
 injuries are most often seen in athletic animals, whereas fractures are common in a
variety of animals. Ligamentous injuries of the tarsus resulting in varying degrees of
instability are relatively common in athletic breeds because of the propulsive force
supplied by the hindlegs. Unlike those of the carpus, tarsal injuries are more likely
to be caused by spontaneous overstress rather than by outside traumatic forces.
 Conservative treatment of second-degree and third-degree ligamentous injuries by
cast immobilization is not recommended because permanent instability is the usual
result (see Chapter 7). Aggressive surgical treatment is much more rewarding, but
it does require a good working knowledge of the anatomy of the region.
 Unfortunately, the official terminology of the tarsus differs greatly from that in current
popular use.
OVERVIEW
Anatomy of the Hindpaw
The bony anatomy of the hindfoot is complicated and must be well understood
before any repairs are attempted. Figure 20-1 reviews these bones and provides a
tarsus are shown in Figure 20-2. Beginning at the tarsocrural joint and
continuing distally, the terms cranial and caudal are replaced by the terms dorsal
and plantar.
The bones of the tarsus are arranged in several levels, with a complex arrange-
ment of ligaments. The joint between the tibia and fibula and the talus and calca-
neus is the tarsocrural joint, often called the tibiotarsal, talocrural, or hock joint. It
consists of both the talocrural and talocalcaneal joints, which are continuous with
661
662
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Medial
malleolus
Lateral
malleolus
Lateral 
malleolus 
Medial
malleolus
Talus
Talus
Calcaneus
Calcaneus
Central
Central
tarsal
tarsal
bone
bone"
Numbered
_Numbered
tarsals
tarsals
Metatarsal
Metatarsal
bones
bones
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 20-1. Bones of the tarsus, metatarsus, and phalanges. A, Dorsal view. B, Plantar
view. C, Medial view. D, Lateral view.
each other. Intertarsal joints include all articulations between tarsal bones, with four
of them named specifically, as follows:
1. Talocalcaneal joint. The joint between the talus and calcaneus.
 2. Talocalcaneocentral joint. This joint is primarily an articulation between
a im s si ansd of an iq auo pesn pa pu si as
calcaneus.
3. Calcaneoquartal joint. The joint between the calcaneus and the fourth
tarsal. This joint and the talocalcaneocentral joint collectively are known as
the “ proximal intertarsal joint." This name is useful to the surgeon because
of the awkwardness of the official names.
4. Centrodistal joint. The joint between the central tarsal bone and the
distal numbered tarsal bones. The common name is the “distal intertarsal
joint."
The remaining joints of the hindpaw include the following:
 1. Tarsometatarsal joints. The joints between the distal tarsal and metatarsal
bones.
 2. Metatarsophalangeal joints. The joints between the metatarsal bones and
the first phalanges.
 3. Interphalangeal joints. The joints between the first and second and second
and third phalanges.
The most common ligamentous injuries of this region involve the collateral
ligaments of the tarsocrural joint (see Figure 20-2) and the plantar ligaments and tarsal
fibrocartilage. Both collateral ligaments have long and short parts. The long parts
- d   d sd s an P a i  ass
ments and tarsal fibrocartilage are tension bands that limit extension of the intertarsal
 and tarsometatarsal joints. The remaining ligaments are much smaller and shorter,
connecting individual bones.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
663
Tibia
Fibula
Pro>
extensor retinaculum
Tibiofibular lig
Lateral collateral lig.
Sustentaculum tail
Tarsal fibrocartilage
Plantar
T
B
Proximalextensorretinaculum
Lateral collateral lig.
Short part
Medial collateral lig.
Long part 
- Short part
Distal extensor .
retinaculum
_ongpart
T3
C
D
Medial
Lateral
aspect. D, Lateral aspect. C, Calcaneus; T1, T3, and T4, first, third, and fourth tarsals;
T, talus; I through V, metatarsals; TC, central tarsal. (From Evans HE: Miller's anatomy of
the dog, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders, pp 253, 254.)
Surgical Approaches and Technique
Several approaches to the bones and joints of the tarsus have been described.1
Generally, approaches to the various bones are made directly over the injured bone
or ligament because there are no muscles of any size covering them. Nerves, vessels,
 and tendons are retracted as necessary to allow exposure.
 Surgery of the lower limbs can be done with a tourniquet, which is invaluable for
decreasing oozing hemorrhage and thus increasing visibility and decreasing operating
time. Although pneumatic cuffs are the best way of creating the tourniquet more
proximally in the limbs, distal tourniquets can be made more simply. Vetrap (3M
Animal Care Products, St. Paul, Minn) elastic bandage material has proved very
satisfactory for this purpose, as illustrated in Figure 14-4. Although the bandage is
best sterilized in ethylene oxide, it can be steam-sterilized at minimal time and
temperature, similar to the method of sterilizing rubber gloves (250° F for 12 minutes).
664
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
 Use of the tourniquet has the disadvantage of producing more postoperative
swelling. Application of casts or splints should be delayed 48 to 72 hours postoper-
atively, with the lower limb supported in a Robert-Jones bandage during this time
(see Figure 2-33).
Clinical Signs and Diagnosis of Injuries
 Many tarsal injuries are a result of overstress of ligamentous structures and bone
 and occur without a history of known trauma. Sudden exertion, such as jumping.
 A usxaa e as e s rd ap o ss aq u
fracture of a metatarsal bone. Affected animals are usually non-weight bearing,
have variable swelling in the tarsal region, and show varying degrees of instability
  x u p a si ql a s  s a jo
usually sufficient to localize the area of probable injury.
Radiographs are necessary to verify the diagnosis and to localize the damage. Stress
radiographs will show the area of instability. Standard dorsoplantar and lateral or
 medial views, plus oblique views, will also identify avulsions and other fractures.
Nonscreen film or fine-detail screens are essential.
THE TARSUS
Tarsocrural Luxation and Subluxation
 Many complete luxations of the tarsocrural joint are accompanied by fracture of
one or both malleoli, and internal fixation of the fractures results in stability of the
joint. Treatment of such injuries is described in Chapter 19.
Clinical Signs
 Rupture or avulsion of the collateral ligamentsgrade 3 sprains—produces subluxation
(Figure 20-3, A and B). Medial injuries allow valgus (lateral) deviation of the foot, and
Avulsedbonefragment
Holethrough
malleolus
A
B
C
D
 FIGURE 20-3. Collateral ligament injuries of the tarsocrural joint. A, Long part of the
medial collateral ligament is torn near its origin on the malleolus. A hole is drilled through
the malleolus, and a locking loop suture is passed through this hole to pull the ligament
against the bone. B, Avulsion of origin of short part of the medial collateral ligament. C,
Diverging Kirschner wires used to stabilize the avulsed fragment. D, Lag screw fixation is
ideal if the fragment is large enough to allow screw placement.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
665
lateral injuries allow varus (medial) angulation. These deviations are easily palpated
and confirmed radiographically. Rupture of just the long or short part of the ligament
produces only moderate instability and may be difficult to diagnose preoperatively
Treatment
Principles of treatment are similar to those described in Chapter 7, such as imbricat-
ing, suturing, reattaching, or replacing ligaments as indicated. It is important to
repair both the long and the short part of the ligament to achieve good function.
Figure 20-3, A, illustrates reattachment of the long part of the ligament; a bone tun-
nel is used in the malleolus to anchor the suture. Figure 20-3, B, shows an avulsion
  Passd se s ha om m px d us ae 
fragment into the tibia or a small lag screw (Figure 20-3, C and D).
If good repair or reattachment of the ligament is not possible, the repair can be
augmented by synthetic ligaments (see Figure 20-4, C and D). The purpose of syn-
thetic ligaments is to provide ligamentous support to the joint until suffcient tensile
strength is achieved in the healing ligament and joint capsule. Synthetic ligaments
may be constructed using a screw and washer technique, or soft tissue (suture)
anchors are available in numerous configurations as an alternative technique
(see Figure 14-24, D). Tissue anchors have good pull-out strength and a low profile
that may cause less tissue irritation than a screw and washer.
Aftercare
Ligamentous repairs are protected with a short lateral splint for 4 to 6 weeks (see
Figure 2-26),followed by an elastic bandage for an additional 2 weeks (see Chapter 7).
Exercise is restricted to leash walking until 8 weeks, then gradually increased to
normal at 10 to 12 weeks.
Shearing Injury of the Tarsus
This abrasion injury occurs when the dog's lower limb is run over by the tire of an
automobile with its brakes locked attempting to avoid the animal. Soft tissues in
contact with the pavement are simply ground away, often eroding skin, muscle,
ligaments, and even bone. The medial tarsal and metatarsal region is most often
affected, with the medial malleolus and collateral ligaments often completely
destroyed (Figure 20-4, A and B). One or more tarsal or metatarsal joints may be
is involved less often and represents a less serious injury than a comparable injury
on the medial side. Because the dog normally stands with a few degrees of valgus
(lateral) deviation of the hindpaw, ligamentous stability of the medial side of the
 adse lenaiei aul uo ueu jeo anou yon s snseieiau pue snsiei
 Best results are obtained by treating these wounds in an open manner, with early
stabilization of the joints and any accompanying fractures. Skin grafting is delayed
and indicated only where granulation tissue does not adequately close the skin,
which is a rare occurrence. Early or delayed arthrodesis is indicated when it is not
possible to restore reasonable joint function. The following variables should be
considered in choosing a plan of action:
1. Assuming that the joint(s) can be stabilized, is there enough articular surface
to allow good function? Loss of bone in the tarsocrural articulation is critical.
If the answer is " no," arthrodesis is indicated.
2. What will the owner accept as reasonable function? A large, active breed
 presents different problems from a small and sedentary animal. In the former,
666
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Bone screw in
Bone screw in
body of talus
coracoid process
Bone screw
in tibia
. Suture 
Bone screw in
head of talus
material
Bone screw
in body of
Areaof
calcaneus
shearing injury
Dorsal
Medial
Medial
Lateral
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 20-4. Shearing injury of the tarsus. A and B, Medial malleolus and medial aspects 
of the proximal tarsal bones have been ground away, resulting in insta bility and valgus defor-
mity. C, Placement of medial synthetic ligaments.2 The proximal screw is placed as distally as
 possible while the tibial cochlea is avoided. One screw is placed in the body of the talus to
simulate the short part of the ligament, and another screw is placed in the head of the talus to
simulate the long ligament. Two strands of size 0-2 braided polyester suture are placed
between each of the screws and tied with the short portion taut in flexion and the long por-
tion taut in extension. D, Placement of lateral synthetic ligaments.2 Placement is similar to that
of the medial side, with the screws placed in the coracoid process and base of the calcaneus.
aggressive ligamentous repair, augmentation, or replacement is necessary,
A aq san poo uo oi aissod aq  il aseo raei a ui sana
conservative methods. Stabilization of joints by scar tissue may well
 provide adequate support in the smaller and less active animals, but it
rarely will support the tension loads of the medial side in large, athletic
individuals.
of which approach is taken to the ligamentous instability, the involved joints 
must be stabilized during the healing period. Because of the necessity for daily
bandage changes for 2 to 3 weeks when treating these large open wounds, the 
use of conventional casts or splints is difficult. External skeletal fixators have
greatly aided in solving this problem.
Reconstruction
 Initial debridement must be meticulous but not too aggressive, with emphasis on
removal of obviously dead tissue and foreign matter from both soft tissue and joint
this time. Some recommend the addition of 10% povidone-iodine (after dilution of
10 parts water to 1 part 10% povidone-iodine) or 0.2% chlorhexidine. After ade-
quate debridement, it may be possible to close the wound partially by suturing skin
to minimize the amount of granulation tissue. This can be helpful, but care must be
taken to do the following:
1. Leave adequate open area for unimpeded wound drainage. Placement of
Penrose or tube drains under the sutured skin is usually advisable for 2 to
5 days.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
667
 2. Avoid closing skin under tension. Serious circulatory stasis develops because
of the tourniquet-like effect of excessive skin tension in the lower limbs.
 3. When in doubt about tissue viability, do not suture skin. Delayed primary
closure can be done in a few days with no loss of healing time.
Several debridements over a number of days may be necessary to remove all devi-
talized tissue adequately because of the difficulty in determining viability of severely
traumatized tissue. If portions of ligaments, joint capsule, or other tissues can be 
sutured to support the joint and to close the synovial membrane, this should be done
Monofilament or synthetic absorbable suture is most trouble free. Reestablishment of
the tibiotarsal collateral ligament complex is usually hampered by loss of bone, and
small bone screws may need to be used to anchor the synthetic ligament. There is a
tendency to use monofilament wire in this contaminated area, but heavy braided
polyester or monofilament nylon suture is a much more functional ligament and has
resulted in very few problems related to suture sinus drainage tracts.
Three bone screws are positioned to mimic the normal ligaments as closely as
possible (Figure 20-4, C and D). Precise placement of these bone screws for attachment
of heavy braided polyester suture and adequate soft tissue debridement are neces-
sary for successful treatment.2 The proximal screw is placed as distally in the tibia
as possible, bearing in mind that the tibial cochlea is recessed a considerable distance
into the distal tibia and can be seen by stressing the tarsus to open the joint. The
screw must not enter the joint. The distal screws are placed to simulate the insertion
points of the long and short parts of the collateral ligaments. Medially, both screws
are placed in the talus, with the proximal one in the body (Figure 20-4, C). This
screw should be angled slightly distad to avoid the trochlear sulcus of the talus. The
distal screw is placed in the head of the talus, approximately halfway between
the base of the medial trochlear ridge and the distal articular surface. Laterally, the
screws are similarly placed in the calcaneus (Figure 20-4, D). The proximal screw
goes into the base of the coracoid process, and the distal screw is placed halfway
between the distal base of the coracoid process and the distal articular surface.
Double strands of heavy braided polyester suture (size 0-2) or a single strand of
40- to 60-pound test monofilament nylon fishing line are placed between the screws.
The short ligament should be moderately taut in flexion and the long portion taut
in extension. The sutures are tied tightly enough to stabilize the joint, but motion
without binding should still be possible. The long ligament is tied with the joint in
s a jo peau a rao ds  a ai rd o sars au u pa
Soft tissue anchors can be used as an alternative to the screw and washer technique
(see Figure 14-24, D). Most tissue anchors require intact cortical bone for maximum
 pull-out strength. If the cortical bone has been lost in a shearing injury, a deeply
seated screw, with washer, may be a better choice for ligament fixation than a tissue
anchor.
 Treatment of the open wound is simplified by use of transarticular external skeletal
fixator to stabilize the joint (Figure 20-5). Fixation is maintained until granulation
tissue has covered the defect, usually 3 to 4 weeks. A recently introduced external
fixator hinge joint has potential for application in this situation (Jorgensen
Laboratories, Inc., Loveland, Colo). This device allows for joint motion in one plane
and would stabilize the joint during healing while allowing motion, which should
case, sterile laparotomy sponges soaked in saline or saline solutions of povidone
iodine or chlorhexidine are loosely bandaged to the limb for several days, and
debridement is repeated daily or every other day until all dead tissue is removed.
668
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
B
 FGURE 20-5. A, Simple external skeletal fixation splint used to support and protect a
 of ligamentous repair in large breeds.
The wound must be kept moist and provision made for adequate drainage of
exudate.? Moist gauze with copious absorbent padding covered by a moisture bar-
 rier (e.g., polyvinyl sheet) and dressing changes are used daily until healthy granu-
lation covers the wound. (Hydrocolloid, hydrogel, and polyethylene semiocclusive
dressings have received considerable attention for treatment of full-thickness skin
wounds. Hydrogel and polyethylene dressings were significantly better in all param-
eters tested in one study.4) At this point, nonadherent dressings, either dry or with
antibacterial ointment, and minimal absorbent padding are used in place of the
moist dressings. Intervals between dressing changes can gradually be extended as
discharge lessens. The wound must be kept protected until it is well epithelialized,
which may take up to 10 to 12 weeks.
Prognosis
A retrospective study of 98 shearing injuries by Beardsley and Schrader? revealed
some previously unknown facts regarding the outcome of these cases. All were
treated essentially as just described, except that none received joint stabilization by
means of external fixators; all were supported in some form of external coaptation.
Healing time ranged from 2 to 9 weeks, depending on the size and depth of the
wound and the amount of the wound that was able to be closed by suture. A mean
of 1.7 surgical procedures was performed on each patient, with a mean of 5.5 rechecks
required after hospital discharge. "Good to excellent" outcome was attained in 91%
of the dogs, defined as clinically normal or with only minimal functional abnormali-
ties after healing of the injury. Only one case required skin grafting. As can be seen,
these are expensive injuries because of the amount of care required, and owners not
20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
669
prepared for this type care are well advised to consider amputation as a primary
treatment. It is our subjective opinion that support with external fixators simplifies
treatment because owners can do more therapy at home due to the absence of the
coaptation splint, but we do not have data to suggest that it shortens the healing
period or affects the final outcome.
Aftercare
When granulation tissue completely covers the wound, but not before 3 weeks post-
maintained for another 3 weeks with very restricted activity. Normal exercise is not
allowed until weeks 8 to 12, depending on the stability achieved. Loosening of the
 bone screws and skin irritation from screw heads are both indications for removing
the screws. This should not be done before 3 to 4 months postoperatively if possi-
ble. Failure to stabilize the joint adequately will result in degenerative joint disease
and poor function. In such a situation, arthrodesis offers the best chance of restor-
ing function.
Arthrodesis
 Some shearing injuries of the tarsus are too extensive to be successfully reconstructed.
These injuries are invariably those with extensive bone loss of the medial malleolus,
tibial trochlea, and less often the condyle of the talus. If the bone loss extends into
the articular surface of the tibia, there may not be sufficient articular support for the
talus. Additionally, the ability to provide sufficient medial ligamentous support is
 questionable. In this situation, arthrodesis of the talocrural or tarsocrural joint is the
 best method of maintaining limb function. Although it is possible to attempt recon-
 pp  e se sn  sisae m mo n pn s
time and expense can be wasted.
With the use of external skeletal fixation (see Figures 20-24 and 20-25, A), the
arthrodesis can be performed very early, before the wound is healed, with a high
probability of successful fusion and a low chance of bone infection. The procedure
can be delayed for a few days, until the debridement phase is complete and, it is
hoped, some granulation tissue has begun to appear. The tarsus is supported during
this phase entirely by the bandage, sometimes augmented by thermomoldable plastic
splints or wire frames. If it seems necessary to use the external fixator immediately
to support the joint, the fusion is done at the same time. The technique is performed
basically as described later in this chapter under Tarsocrural Arthrodesis. The major
difference is in the manner of applying the autogenous cancellous bone graft, since
there must be sufficient soft tissue available to cover the graft and allow its early
vascularization. Exudation is another contraindication to early grafting because the
 n us s u me s n a a ad A aa
debridement and fixation are completed as usual, but grafting is delayed until there
is a healthy granulation tissue bed, without exudation. At that point the granulation
tissue is carefully elevated from the joint surfaces sufficiently to allow the graft to
be packed into the joint spaces. The area is kept covered by petrolatum-impregnated
gauze sponges for several days, until granulation tissue again covers the area.
Aftercare from this point onward is as described earlier.
Fractures of the Calcaneus
A calcaneal fracture is a very disabling injury because it destroys the ability of the
gastrocnemius muscle and the rest of the common calcanean tendon apparatus to
prevent hyperflexion of the hock joint, resulting in a plantigrade stance. As a result
029
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
of muscle tension on the tendons, there is considerable pull on the free fragment and
therefore marked displacement of the fragment.
 Fractures occur most often at the tuber or in the shaft (see Figures 20-7, A, and
20-8, A) and less often near the base (see Figure 20-9, A). Because the plantar liga-
ment of the calcaneoquartal part of the proximal intertarsal joint originates at the
 base of the calcaneus, fractures in this region cause subluxation and hyperextension 
of this joint (see later for further discussion of tarsal hyperextension). Calcaneal frac-
tures may be seen in the racing greyhound and are usually associated with central
tarsal bone fractures. When there is no accompanying central tarsal bone fracture,
there is invariably a plantar proximal intertarsal subluxation.6
Open Approach
 The calcaneus is exposed by a lateral approach, with medial displacement of the
tendon of the superficial digital extensor muscle when tension band wire fixation is
employed (Figure 20-6).
Treatment
The bending loads on the free fragment in calcaneal fracture make conservative
treatment with an external cast impossible. Fixation by a Steinmann pin or a screw
is very questionable as well because both will usually bend, even with the limb in
Tendon of deep
digital flexor m.,
med. part
Tendon of 
gastrocnemius m.
Tendon of
superficial digital
flexor m.
Abductor
dligiti quinti m.
 FIGURE 20-6. Approach to the calcaneus from the lateral aspect. The superficial digital
flexor tendon has been elevated by incising the retinaculum attaching it to the bone. (From
Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgical approaches to the bones and joints of the
dog and cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.)
20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
671
a splint. Tension band wiring with Kirschner wires is an ideal fixation method in
most cases because it allows the bending loads to be converted to compression
forces, is applicable to any size of animal, is inexpensive, and requires no special
equipment. To be successful, however, the cortex opposite the tension band wire must
be intact to act as a buttress. (For further explanation of the tension band technique,
see Figure 2-64.)
Tension Band Wire Fixation
Surgical approach by means of a lateral incision to the calcaneus is not complicated.
Reduction of the fracture and application of fixation are simplified if the tendon of
the superficial digital flexor is freed from the tuber by incision of the lateral retinac-
ulum and retracted medially. The tension band wires must be applied between the
tendon and the bone, not superficial to the tendon (Figure 20-7, B and C).
 Two methods of application of the tension band are shown. The method shown
sq i raqni ae yo sa og pasn si pue auo puouuo aui s -o ani u
the disadvantage of creating some irritation of the tendon of the superficial digital
flexor as it glides over the tuber. This is minimized by placing the pins as plantaro-
lateral and medial as possible and seating the bent end of the pin close to the bone.
Ater bone healing, these pins and the wire occasionally must be removed because
 of soft tissue irritation. The method shown in Figure 20-8 eliminates these problems
by countersinking the pin, but it is applicable only to fractures of the shaft or base.
Note the option of placing the pins in the sagittal plane shown in Figure 20-8, D; this
is helpful in small breeds. The stainless steel tension wire must be adequate in size.
The following sizes are recommended: up to 15 to 20 pounds, 22 gauge (0.635 mm);
20 to 40 pounds, 20 gauge (0.812 mm); and over 40 pounds, 18 gauge (1.02 mm).
Tension Band Wire and Lag Screw Fixation
Comminuted fractures involving the base of the calcaneus (Figure 20-9, A and B)
usually require small lag screws for fixation of the slablike bone fragments from the
distolateral region of the bone, as illustrated in Figure 20-9, C and D.
Bone Plate
Occasionally, a comminuted fracture requires application of a bone plate, which is
best placed laterally. When possible, the plate should be supplemented with a tension
band wire, placed as shown in Figure 20-8.
FIGURE 20-7.A, Fracture of
the tuber calcanei. B and C,
Two Kirschner wires 0.045 or
0.062 inch in diameter, placed
side by side, as far medially and
laterally as possible. Note that
the tendon of the superficial dig-
ital flexor has been retracted
medially. The exact position of
the transverse hole for the wire is
not critical and is usually at mid-
shaft or slightly distal, as shown
here.
A
B
C
672
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
D
FIGURE 20-8. A, Fracture of the shaft of the calcaneus. B and C, Single Steinmann pin
%4 to % inch in diameter has been countersunk in the tuber. This pin position allows the wire
to be placed through a drill hole in the tuber, which minimizes irritation of the tendon of the
superficial digital flexor. A single pin is used when the fracture reduces well and is stable
minuted, two smaller countersunk pins or Kirschner wires in the sagittal plane are used
because they provide more rotational stability.
A
B
C
D
FGURE 20-9. A and B, Comminuted fracture of the base of the calcaneus. The tarsus
hyperextends at this level. Further instability is created by a dorsomedial luxation of the central
tarsal bone, a fairly common complication of this type of calcaneal fracture. C and D, The cen-
tral tarsal bone is reduced first to establish some stability at the proximal intertarsal joint.
Fixation is accomplished with a 3.5-mm bone screw through the central tarsal bone into the
fourth tarsal bone. This screw is not lagged but is threaded into both bones with the central
tarsal held in a reduced position with vulsellum forceps. (For more details, see Figure 20-30.)
The slab fracture on the lateral side of the calcaneus is lag-screwed with a 2.0- or 2.7-mm screw.
A %%4-inch Steinmann pin is placed in the calcaneus and seated in the fourth tarsal bone. The
tension band wire is placed from midshaft in the calcaneus to the plantar tubercle of the fourth
holds the second fragment in place. An additional lag screw may be useful in some cases.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
673
Aftercare
Generally, external casts are not necessary postoperatively, except for severely com-
minuted fractures. In such cases a short lateral splint is applied for approximately
4 weeks or until some radiographic signs of bone healing are seen (see Figure 2-26).
A Robert-Jones bandage may be useful for a few days to minimize soft tissue swelling
(see Figure 2-33). Exercise is restricted until clinical union occurs. Prognosis is
 generally good.
Luxation of Tendon of Superficial Digital Flexor Muscle
The superficial digital flexor muscle and tendon form the most superficial part of
the calcanean tendon group and cross the tuber calcanei as a flat tendon, with a
bursa between tendon and bone. The tendon continues distally to split into branches
to each toe. Spontaneous rupture of the medial or lateral retinacular insertion of this
tendon on the tuber calcanei allows the tendon to luxate medially (Figure 20-10, A)
or, more often, laterally. The injury is usually associated with vigorous activity and
may be caused by rotational force applied to the tendon's insertion on the calcaneus.
The medial insertion and retinaculum seems to be less well defined than the lateral
insertion and may rupture more easily.7 Dysplasia of the tuber calcanei has been
proposed as either causing or contributing to the luxation.8 The groove of the calca-
neus was observed to be shallow or absent, with a distolateral slant in some patients,
both of which could lead to instability of the tendon. The sheltie and collie breeds
seem overrepresented in our cases. Surgical repair done before the development of
extensive fibrosis is very successful. Chronic tendinitis and bursitis can cause marked
changes in the tendon and decrease chances for success.
Clinical Signs
Lameness is not dramatic and may be intermittent. Moderate swelling on either side
of the calcaneus may be noted, and a distinct popping sensation willbe felt as the
hock is flexed and extended. Accompanying bursitis may result in somewhat fluctu-
ant swelling over the tuber calcanei. The tendon can sometimes be palpated in the
 luxated position and then reduced as the hock is extended. Flexion then results in
reluxation.
Surgical Repair
An incision is made along the calcaneus on the side opposite the direction of the lux-
ation, curving from the distal calcanean tendon toward the calcaneus. This approach
Tendon of the
Tendon of the
superficial
gastrocnemius m.
cdigital
flexor m.
Tear in lateral
Tuber
retinaculum 
calcanei
Lateral retinaculum
suturecd
A
B
FIGURE 20-10.
.A, Medial luxation of the tendon of the superficial digital flexor muscle
follows tearing of the lateral retinaculum at the calcaneus. B, Surgical repair consists of sutur-
ing the retinaculum with nonabsorbable suture material.
674
 Part IIl—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
is similar to that previously described for the calcaneus. The bursa is opened and any
sutures are placed from the edge of the tendon to adjoining retinacular insertion
tissue to maintain the tendon in the reduced position (Figure 20-10, B). Redundant
retinacular tissue may result from stretching and can be imbricated or excised.
Because the medial soft tissue available for attachment is often scant, it may be nec-
essary to create another method of attachment of the tendon to the calcaneus. One
or two 1.5- to 2.0-mm screws can be inserted in the calcaneus near the tendon edge
and sutures from the tendon attached to the screw heads. Alternatively, holes can be
 drilled through the calcaneus to allow a horizontal mattress pattern for placement
of sutures through the bone and tendon.7
Aftercare
The lower limb is supported in a short lateral splint for 2 weeks (see Figure 2-26),
and exercise is restricted for 2 to 3 more weeks.
Prognosis
Normal function can be routinely expected.7 We have seen shelties break down in
 the opposite limb within a few weeks of the first injury.
Avulsion of Gastrocnemius Tendon
The common calcanean tendon, or Achilles mechanism, consists of three tendons
that insert on the tuber calcanei of the talus: the gastrocnemius; the common ten-
don of the biceps femoris, semitendinosus, and gracilis muscles; and the tendon of
the superficial digital flexor muscle. The gastrocnemius tendon is the largest of this
group and the most powerful extensor of the tarsocrural joint. It can be avulsed
from the tuber by normal activity, without outside trauma.? Most injuries develop
during running and presumably occur as the animal pushes off the limb with the
-m  s  a  aed ae sp p d  o
ing breeds and are usually 5 years of age and older. The Doberman pinscher and
Labrador retriever breeds seem to be overrepresented. These facts suggest that
 degenerative changes in the tendon may play a part in the pathogenesis of this
injury, but this is only speculative at this time. Bilateral injury is also seen, resulting
in severe disability. Prolonged weight bearing in a bilateral plantigrade stance may
cause development of full-thickness skin ulceration, exposing the calcaneus, which
further complicates orthopedic repair Obesity and other systemic diseases, such
as diabetes or Cushing's disease, are sometimes associated with this presentation.
 Because of contracture of the muscle, any attempt at nonsurgical treatment will
 invariably result in permanent deformity. Surgical reattachment of the tendon to the
 bone is necessary to restore function
Diagnosis
Clinical Signs
 The lameness seen with an avulsed gastrocnemius tendon is severe, and the patient
is non-weight bearing for several days; within 1 to 2 weeks, however, the animal starts
using the leg again. During weight bearing at this time, the stifle will be seen to be
slightly extended, the tarsocrural (hock) joint moderately flexed, and the digits flexed.
The position of the digits results in a crablike stance, with the foot resting on the
distal ends of the digital pads. Because the superficial digital flexor tendon is intact,
it is forced to take a longer course to reach the digits when the hock joint is flexed
beyond the normal standing angle. The result is as if the digital flexor muscle were
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
675
contracted, so the digits stay flexed during weight bearing. They can easily be man-
ually extended if the tarsocrural joint is extended with the stifl flexed. This is a type
 Shortly after the injury, regional edema and pain are the predominant physical
findings. Later the region becomes engulfed in fibroplasia and the gastrocnemius
muscle contracts, pulling the distal end of the tendon proximally. Often, careful
palpation will reveal the end of the tendon 2 to 3 cm proximal to the tuber and deep
to the superficial digital flexor tendon. The distal end of the tendon mushrooms and
the tuber and the tendon becomes filled with fibrous tissue and gives the impression
 during palpation that the tendon is intact. Radiographs are useful at this time in
 establishing the diagnosis.
Radiographic Signs
During the acute phase, edema of the soft tissues will be appreciated, and it may be
possible to visualize the retracted tendon if soft tissue radiographic technique is used.
(lo an ouso are raueo raq a reau s auoq pasae 
 More chronic cases have visible roughening of the tuber and increased sof tissue
density in the region between the tuber and the retracted tendon. Rarely, a large
fragment from the tuber calcanei may be seen attached to the retracted tendon.
Surgical Repair
A lateral paramedian approach is made over the distal tendon and tuber calcanei
 Proximally, the superficial digital flexor tendon is separated from the gastrocnemius
tendon, and its lateral retinacular insertion on the calcaneus is incised to allow
medial retraction of the tendon (see previous discussion regarding reluxation of
tendon of superficial digital flexor muscle). In acute injuries the avulsed end of the
A
B
FIGURE 20-11. Avulsion of the tendon of the gastrocnemius muscle tendon at the tuber
calcanei. A, Large bone fragment is visible here. The position of the fragment is an indication
tendon (broad arrowbeads). A roughened area on the tuber calcanei (narrow arrowbead)
indicates the area of avulsion. Marked sof tissue density in the area suggests a chronic course.
676
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
gastrocnemius tendon will be immediately evident (Figure 20-12, A). The tendon is
debrided to create a smooth end for suturing. In chronic cases, considerable debride-
ment is necessary to free the tendon and tuber from the fibroplasia. The tuber should
be cleared of all tissue before suturing, and the tendinous end should be resected prox-
 imally until normal tendinous tissue is identified. With moderate tension it should be
possible to bring the cut end into apposition with the tuber when the stifle and hock
 joints are at normal standing angles. Medial and lateral bone tunnels are drilled from
the center of the tuber toward the medial and lateral cortices (Figure 20-12, B and C).
Tendon of the gastrocnemius m.
 Conjoined tendon of the
 biceps femoris and
semitendinosus mm.
Area of
 avulsion
 on tuber
calcanei
Locking loop
Tendon of the
suture
superficial
dligital flexor m.
A
D
FIGURE 20-12. A, Avulsion of the tendon of the gastrocnemius muscle from the tuber
calcanei. Note that the tendon of the superficial digital flexor muscle and the conjoined
tendons of the biceps femoris and semitendinosus muscles are intact and partially support the
tarsocrural joint. B and C, The tendon of the gastrocnemius muscle is reattached to the tuber
calcanei with locking loop sutures (see Figure 7-1) of size 0-2 nonabsorbable suture secured
through bone tunnels in the calcaneus. D, Temporary tarsocrural immobilization. In medium-
sized and larger dogs, a malleolar screw (to avoid tapping through the soft tissue) is inserted
from the widest part of the calcaneal tip into the tibia and is angled above the joint. It is help-
ful to preplace a stay pin above the intended screw placement to immobilize the joint during
the screw placement process. It is removed after screw insertion. The screw is normally left
in place for 8 weeks and supported with a soft bandage.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
677
These holes should emerge in an area where they will not interfere with gliding of
the superficial digital flexor tendon. Alternatively, these tunnels can be drilled trans-
versely through the calcaneus. Locking loop sutures are placed medially and laterally
in the tendon. Suture material should be large, size 0-2, and preferably monofilament
nylon, polybutester, or polypropylene for ease of handling in the tendon. Braided
polyester is also acceptable, but monofilament stainless steel wire should be avoided
because it will quickly fracture as a result of movement in this area. One end of each
suture is then passed through a bone tunnel, the hock is extended and the stifle flexed
to relax the gastrocnemius, and each suture is tied over the bone to its opposite end.
 The lateral retinaculum of the superficial digital flexor tendon is sutured, and the
remaining tissues are closed in layers.
In the event of a large bone fragment from the tuber being attached to the tendon,
it may be possible to reattach this by the pins and tension band wire technique shown
in Figure 20-7.11
Aftercare
A short-leg cylinder cast or lateral splint is applied for 6 to 8 weeks (see Figures 2-22
and 2-26). Alternatively, an external fixator, such as that shown in Figure 20-5, may
be used if difficulty arises in maintaining a coaptation device. It is not necessary to
immobilize the stifle joint. The splint is followed by a Robert-Jones bandage for 7 to
then slowly increased to normal at 12 weeks
An alternative stabilization method in large dogs is to place a 4.5-mm malleolar
(self-tapping) screw from the calcaneus to the tibia proximal to the tarsocrural joint,
along with a soft padded bandage12 (Figure 20-12, D). Placed with the joint in slight
extension, the screw relaxes the tendon to allow healing. Restricted activity is imper-
ative because the screw can break. The screw is removed after 6 to 7 weeks.
Prognosis
Very good function has been obtained in our cases and has been reported by others.911
Considerable periosteal bony proliferation of the tuber has been seen in some animals,
 but this abates and remodels with time and does not cause permanent changes.
Laceration of Calcanean/Achilles Tendon and Superficial
Digital Flexor Tendon
Mowing machines, fan belts, and blunt injuries from snowboards, bed frames, and
other objects have been known to tear the Achilles tendon and superficial flexor
tendon. Skin laceration may not be present. Acutely, the animal carries the leg, and
a plantigrade weight-bearing position of the distal limb may not be observed.
Careful palpation demonstrates a gap in its normal cordlike structure. After a couple
weeks, however, this gap is filled with granulation tissue, and a thickening or nodular
swelling may be palpated. If forced to bear weight, or if pain has decreased to allow
voluntary weight bearing, the animal displays an obvious plantigrade ("bearlike")
stance.
Treatment
Surgical treatment consists of primary repair if undertaken within the first 4 to 5 hours
of a skin wound. If longer than 5 hours, a secondary repair should be considered
after infection is controlled. At surgery, blood clots and devitalized tissue are
removed. With primary repair, tendon ends are mobilized with small hooks (skin
 hooks) and placed in the peritendon. A locking loop (see Figure 7-6), pully tendon
678
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
(see Figure 7-7), or double Bunnell-Meyer suture pattern can be used with 0-2 monofil-
 ament nylon, polybutester, or polypropylene. Simple interrupted sutures with smaller
sutures can be used to fine-tune apposition. While these sutures are tightened, the
hock should be extended to relax the anastomosis site. No effort is made to suture
the superficial digital flexor tendon separately.
With tears of the gastrocnemius muscle, the surgeon may be well advised to delay
surgery for several weeks, then resect a portion of the Achilles tendon (about /4-1z inch)
to shorten it. Otherwise, a permanent plantigrade stance willresult. Sutures do not hold
well in muscle. Postoperative care is undertaken as previously outlined for gastrocne-
mius avulsion.
Chronic Calcanean/Achilles Tendinitis
Chronic swelling of the common calcanean tendon just proximal to the tuber calcanei is
seen occasionally in large-breed dogs. There is increased flexion of the digits, as
described earlier for avulsion of the gastrocnemius tendon, and there may be pain with
 forced extension of the toes, but there is no increase in tarsocrural flexion. Lameness
is variable but is usually slight to none. This may represent chronic tendinitis of the
superficial digital flexor tendon or a grade I strain injury of the gastrocnemius tendon
(see Chapter 7). We have seen this as a bilateral condition in English setters and
Doberman pinschers.
Treatment consists of resting the tendon by immobilizing the tarsocrural joint
s r -ius e se ns a o e q ase aq  s
or a lateral splint (see Figures 2-22 and 2-26). Alternatively, an external fixator, such
as that shown in Figure 20-5, or a calcaneal/tibial screw (Figure 20-12, D) could be
swollen tendon itself is unnecessary. Immobilization is maintained for 6 to 8 weeks.
Osteochondritis Dissecans of the Talus
Osteochondritis dissecans (OCD) occurs in the same canine population as do the
other manifestations of osteochondrosis, although the Rottweiler, Labrador retriever,
 and bullmastiff are overrepresented (see Chapter 6). The disease may be bilateral and
may affect either the medial ridge (most common) or the lateral ridge of the talus,
where it is most often seen in the Rottweiler.13 The cartilage flap usually contains
bone because, unlike OCD of the shoulder, elbow, and stifle, the flap usually remains
connected to and vascularized by the synovial membrane, allowing endochondral
ossification to progress. At times the flap may become extruded and lie outside
the weight-bearing surface of the joint, or it may migrate up the deep digital flexor
tendon sheath, creating a tendinitis (see Figure 20-13, D).
Surgical treatment of OCD of the talus is controversial, with conflicting results
reported in the literature. OCD and traumatic injury to the tarsocrural joint are less
forgiving than in other joints. In one study, surgical treatment resulted in a worse score
for function and radiographic changes 16 to 79 months postoperatively (blinded assess-
ments) than did nonsurgical treatment in another series of cases (11 dogs, 17 joints:
11 surgical, 6 nonsurgical).14 All dogs had significant degenerative joint disease clini-
cally and radiographically. Another study, involving 12 cases with a mean follow-up of
 52 months, found that only 25% had attained full function postsurgically and that
 ee s s sis e  ssd e s 
aging figures for surgical treatment, Montgomery and co-workers16 noted that of
98 treated joints (74 surgical, 24 nonsurgical) with treatment response reported in the
literature, 39% of the surgicall treated animals were free of lameness versus 8% of
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
679
the nonsurgical cases. Some degree of lameness persisted in 57% of surgical and
79% of nonsurgical cases, and severe lameness was reported in 4% of surgical and
13% of nonsurgical cases. The authors concluded that surgical treatment was prefer-
able to conservative treatment.
Early surgical removal (4-6 months of age) of the semidetached cartilage flap is
essential for best results.14 With each passing month, the chances of good results
    s   a sr  o aaq 
at surgery have a poor prognosis and should probably be treated conservatively.
Animals with severe lameness of short duration may have a poorer prognosis than
 those with less severe and slower development of lameness. Degenerative joint disease
may progress after surgery because of instability or incongruity of the joint following
removal of a large flap. If the flap is large enough to be reattached, every effort should
be made to do so in order to minimize postoperative instability. Early surgery
 increases the probability of being able to reattach the flap. It is imperative to remove
 all loose and undermined articular cartilage. If arthrotomy inspection alone cannot
allows inspection of the entire talar surface and detection/removal of undermined
flaps as well as extruded loose bodies under the medial collateral ligament. Failure
 to detect remaining flaps or osteotomy technical errors may be reasons for previous
 poor clinical response.
Diagnosis
 Diagnosis of OCD is based on finding caudomedial or caudolateral tarsocrural joint
 swelling and effusion in appropriate breeds with a history of lameness beginning
 after 4' months of age, as well as appropriate radiographic signs.
Clinical Signs
 Hindlimb lameness is characterized by a shortened stride. Often there is hyperex-
tension at the tarsocrural joint. Caudomedial or caudolateral (less common) joint
effusion is seen early, and thickening of the tarsus on the medial aspect of the joint
 develops later as degenerative changes progress within the joint; these are consistent
signs. Less effusion and soft tissue changes are appreciated when the lateral ridge of
the talus is involved. Pain may be manifested on flexion and extension of the joint,
which may also show a decreased range of motion in flexion. Crepitus is occasionally
 present.
Radiographic Signs
 Radiographs in the extended dorsoplantar and flexed lateral position will reveal
a defect in the medial ridge of the trochlea (Figures 20-13, A and B, and 20-14).
A dorsolateral-plantaromedial 45-degree oblique view in full extension further out-
lines the medial ridge of the talus. Increased joint space is often seen, and free ossicles
may also be seen occasionally. Fragments may dislodge caudally in the slightly older
dogs (11-13 months of age). Occasionally, "joint mice” are found in the tendon sheath
of the flexor hallicus longus muscle, which communicates with the tarsocrural joint.
In addition, some fragments may be extruded and trapped under the medial collat-
tral ligament. Mediolateral views may show flattening of the dome of the talus.
Lateral lesions are much more difficult to demonstrate because of the superimposi-
tion of the calcaneus in conventional craniocaudal views. The dorsal 45-degree
lateral-plantaromedial view is usually helpful in outlining the lateral trochlear
ridge13 (Figure 20-13, C). A flexed dorsoplantar view has also been proposed for
 outlining the trochlear ridges without summation from the calcaneus.17 With the
dog in dorsal recumbency, the calcaneus is elevated from the table to allow the
680
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
c
D
E
FIGURE 20-13. Osteochondritis dissecans of the talus. A, In this chronic case, many signs
of degenerative joint disease are present, such as osteophytes and subchondral sclerosis. Note
flattening of the ridge of the talus (black-outlined arrouwbeads) and the free osteochondral
fragment within the joint (white-outlined arrouwhead); lateromedial view. B, Large fragment
C, Displaced fragment of the lateral ridge of the talus is visualized in this caudocranial-
the deep digital tendon sheath (top arrow) and distally (bottom arrouw). E, Postsurgical view
 after removal of a fragment from the medial ridge. Note the precise reduction of the malleolar
 Osteotomy achieved by predrilling the lag screw hole before performing the osteotomy.
FIGURE 20-14.
 Osteochondritis dissecans lesion on the medial ridge
 of the talus. The lesion can be located anywhere on the ridge but is
most likely to be centrally placed, as here, or more proximally.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
681
x-ray beam to be parallel to the metatarsus and capture a skyline view of the talar
ridges. Changes are often subtle in lateral lesions, and arthrography or computed
tomography (CT) scanning may be needed for a definitive diagnosis.
Surgical Technique
Electrocautery is very helpful in surgery for OCD because there is a tremendous
proliferation of blood vessels. A tourniquet may also be used but may impede joint
manipulation. For lesions of the medial ridge, a medial approach to the joint is made
with arthrotomies dorsal and palmar to the collateral ligament.1 Synovial incision
 superficial to the deep digital flexor tendon allows palmar retraction of the tendon
to permit visualization of the caudomedial part of the joint and exploration for
migrated joint mice.18 If exposure is inadequate because of lesion size or position,
the medial malleolus can be osteotomized in rectangular fashion (Figure 2o-15).
The rectangular bone gives inherent rotational stability to the fragment, allowing
one screw and washer to suffice for fixation. The periosteum is incised 1l/2 inches
proximal to the tip of the malleolus and the origin of the medial collateral ligament.
 Cranial and caudal periosteal incisions connect the proximal incision to the joint.
Predrilling and pretapping a screw hole 3/4 inch above the malleolar tip before 
s 's a ro x pn a n asa dq 
a 4.0-mm malleolar or 3.5-mm cancellous screw and washer (Figures 20-13, D
and E). An osteotome 6 to 7 mm wide is used to cut bone in the following manner
(see Figure 20-15). First, a transverse cut 1/4 inch deep at the center is made in the
proximal limit of the fragment to be removed. This cut stops short of the most cra-
nial or caudal extremes of the tibia. Second, the small tendon (lateral part of digital
flexor tendon, or flexor hallucis longus) lying in the caudal tibial sulcus is sharply
dissected from its tight fascial covering and retracted caudally. The osteotomy con-
 ss p p  oe  an oi  s pxd  siun
 osteotomy, care must be taken not to injure the talus, which curves up and under
the concave tibial joint surface. Third, the cranial osteotomy connects the proximal
cut to the joint and the caudal osteotomy. The fragment of bone and collateral
FIGURE 20-15. Medial malleolar
Osteotomy. A, Screw head represents
the location of the predrilled, pre-
tapped screw hole. Cut #1 is the
location of the first osteotomy, pene-
trating approximately % inch deep.
Cut #2 is made vertically in the cau-
dal tibial sulcus,joining the proximal
cut to the end of the tibia, again
%4 inch deep, except near the joint,
where the talus lies underneath. Cut
#3 connects the proximal osteotomy
to the caudal cut #2. B, Location of
this third cut is important. The tip of
the osteotome should be just proxi-
mal to the medial ridge of the talus.
B
 Leaving part of the malleolus will not 
allow luxation of the joint.
682
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
ligament are reflected distally, allowing exposure of the entire joint, including rare,
lateral OCD lesions and the inside region of the medial collateral ligament, where
extruded loose bodies are occasionally attached. In addition, the eroded tibial surface
may be evaluated. Loose cartilage and bone are removed and all nonadherent edges
curetted. Forage, bed curettage, or possibly stabilization of large bone and cartilage
 a shelf of malleolar bone remains, making exposure inadequate.
Because the tendon sheath of the deep digital flexor is confluent with the tarsocrural
joint, free carilage fragments can escape proximally into the sheath. In this situa-
tion, they calcify and become visible on radiography. In some cases the fragments
can be "milked" distally into the joint arthrotomy. If this fails, the tendon sheath must
 be opened proximally to free the joint mice.
m pe mas e end Aq pae Aa s s aq e o uon
in the predrilled hole.
We have seen two dogs with OCD in which lameness did not develop until 2 to
n pip dap ae yo ud pa ae ae sdxa uo ' jo s t
(flexor hallucis longus) was either lacerated or inflamed because of impingement by
a large caudal osteophyte on the distal tibia. Both patients responded to osteophyte
 debridement and additional fascial coverage of the tendon sheath. In addition, we
have seen two older dogs with OCD that worsened suddenly, caused by cracks of
a long caudal tibial osteophyte. Both responded to osteophyte removal.
An arthrotomy approach dorsal and palmar to the lateral collateral ligament can
be made to expose the lateral ridge, where OCD lesions are more often located on
the distal part, near the body of the talus. If the lesion cannot be fixed in place, the
loose cartilage fragment is removed and minimal curettage performed to minimize
the amount of instability produced. Evidence suggests that some lateral lesions may
A sis as ynoa ari l gi'sa pso o aq 
lend themselves to fixation, as explained later; small fragments are excised.
Aftercare
pamoe sou si asiraxa peou pe syaam z rog pausnur si aepueq papped y
until 4 to 6 weeks postoperatively
Prognosis
Although the debate over surgical versus conservative treatment for OCD remains
open, the message is clear. Surgical treatment must be done early, and the lesion must
be small for surgical treatment to be worthwhile. In any case, the prognosis is not
 encouraging because a substantial portion of the ridge is absent, and the owner should
 be forewarned regarding long-term function of the dog. Large lesions may benefit 
from internal fixation with biodegradable pins, but as yet this remains untried.
Fractures of the Talus
Fractures of this bone may be intraarticular, involving either the medial or the lateral
ridge of the trochlea (see Figures 20-16 and 20-17), or fractures may be extraarticu-
lar in the talar neck (see Figure 20-18), the talar body (see Figure 20-19), or the base
of the talus (see Figure 20-20). Fractures of the ridges, especially the lateral ridges,
are difficult to visualize radiographically. Dorsolateral oblique views in both flexion
and extension are most useful. (See previous section on diagnosis of OCD for further
discussion of radiographic views.) Lameness is severe, and there is generally some effu-
sion in the joint. Severely comminuted fractures may require arthrodesis. The etiology
is usually obscure but may involve a fall or jump. Prognosis for intraarticular fractures
20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
683
is variable, depending on the accuracy of reduction of the fracture. Moderate to
severe degenerative joint disease (DJD) is common after these injuries. The prognosis
is good for talar neck and body fractures.
Fracture of Trochlear Ridges
Internal Fixation
These talar fractures are generally stabilized by 0.035- or 0.045-inch (0.9- to 1.2-mm)
Kirschner wires that are countersunk beneath the articular surface (Figure 20-16).
Lag screw fixation is preferable, but the fragments are often too small; when fragment
size permits, 1.5-mm and 2.0-mm screws can be used. The screw heads may be coun-
tersunk beneath the cartilage surface when used in an articulating area. Fractures of
the medial ridge are approached by incision of the joint capsule proximal and distal
to the collateral ligament (see previous OCD discussion) when possible. Rectangular
osteotomy of the medial malleolus of the tibia gives much better visualization but
is a second choice because of increased surgical complexity (see Figure 20-15).
 a        a  n   nn ss
way, the lateral ridge is approached by osteotomy of the distal fibula to allow maxi-
mum exposure of the lateral side if simple arthrotomy is not sufficient (Figure 20-17).
Aftercare.  A lateral splint is placed on the lower limb for 4 weeks (see Figure 2-26),
followed by a support bandage for 2 weeks. Exercise is restricted for 8 to 12 weeks.
Prognosis. The outlook for trochlear ridge fracture ranges from poor to good,
depending on the exactness of reduction and stability achieved. DJD is the sequela
when this joint fracture does not heal perfectly but may ensue regardless of exact
reduction and good stability.
Fracture of Talar Neck
A fracture of the talar neck is usually accompanied by luxation of the body of the
bone, with the fracture surface rotating dorsally and distally (Figure 20-18, A and B).
Closed Reduction
 In cats and small dogs seen soon after injury, it may be possible to do a closed reduc-
tion and to maintain fixation by a snug-fitting short-leg cylinder cast (see Figure 2-22).
In most animals, however, it will not be possible to maintain position of the fragments
with a cast.
FIGURE 20-16. A, Fracture of
the medial ridge of the talus. B,
Medial malleolus osteotomized and
reflected to allow placement of two
Kirschner wires, which are counter-
sunk beneath the surface of the
articular cartilage. Alternatively,
1.5- or 2.0-mm screws could be
used. The malleolus is replaced by
the pin and tension band wire tech-
nique (see Figure 2-64).
A
B
684
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
C
FIGURE 20-17. A, Fracture of the lateral ridge of the talus. B, The fibula is osteotomized
1.5 to 2.0 cm from the tip of the malleolus, dissected free from the tibia, and rotated caudally
 or distally on the intact short part of the collateral ligament. (See Figure 20-3 for more detail.)
It is necessary to cut a short ligament between the tibia and fibula to reflect the fibula. When
the foot is supinated (rolled inward), the fracture can be visualized. It is fixed by two or three
Kirschner wires countersunk beneath the articular cartilage. Alternatively, 1.5-mm or 2.0-mm
screws could be used. C, The fibula is attached by two lag screws, small pins, or Kirschner
wires. The small cut ligament is not sutured. Note: If exposure of the caudal portion of the
condyle is essential, the short collateral ligament is cut close to the fibula. It is reattached with
a suture that engages the ligament and is then passed medial to lateral through two drill holes
in the malleolus and tied on the lateral side.
A
B
D
FIGURE 20-18. A and B, Fracture of neck of talus with typical luxation of body and base.
 C and D, Reduction is obtained by flexion and lateral bending at the proximal intertarsal
joint and is maintained with vulsellum forceps. A 3.5- or 4.0-mm screw (shown here) is used in
 average-sized to large breeds. It is not essential that this screw be lagged if the bone is properly
reduced and held in place with forceps.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
685
Internal Fixation
Most animals require internal fixation, which is best supplied by a lag screw
between the body of the talus and the calcaneus (Figure 20-18, C and D). A neck
fracture is exposed by proximal extension of the approach to the central tarsal
bone.1 The 3.5-mm cortical screw is considerably stronger in bending than the
 4.0-mm cancellous screw shown here and may be a better choice in this application.
Aftercare. Because the lag screw crosses the tarsal sinus (a gap between calca-
neus and talus), it is somewhat subject to bending with early weight bearing. Thus
the screw is best protected by a short lateral splint for 4 weeks (see Figure 2-26).
Exercise is restricted for 8 to 12 weeks.
Fracture of Talar Body
In fractures of the talar body the base of the talus does not luxate, but there is a
slight subluxation of the talocalcaneal joint (Figure 20-19, A and B)
Internal Fixation
Fixation is usually by means of multiple Kirschner wires because the neck of the
bone is often too small to accommodate a lag screw. Ideally, two wires are crossed
in the talus (Figure 20-19, C, D, and E). In some cases, bone plates can be used for
fixation. T-plates of the 1.5-, 2.0-, and 2.7-mm series can be adapted to this fracture
Aq pde si auo au (t bio a Aes po u rd 
a combination of the approaches to the medial malleolus and the central tarsal
bone.1
Aftercare.  Neither fixation is very rigid, and both should be protected for 4 to
 6 weeks postoperatively by a short lateral splint (see Figure 2-26). Exercise is
restricted for 8 to 12 weeks.
Prognosis.
Good long-term function is expected after repair of talar body
fracture.
A
B
c
D
E
F
FIGURE 20-19.  A and B, Fracture through the body of the talus. C, D, and E, Kirschner
wires are crossed in the bone. The proximal pin must be cut close to the bone to avoid irri-
tation of the deep digital flexor tendon. F, T-plates of the 1.5-, 2.0-, and 2.7-mm series can
be used in some cases. Here, a 2.7-mm plate has been cut to fit the bone. Because only one
screw is placed in the proximal fragment, external support is essential.
686
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
LuxationofBaseofTalus
Luxation of the base of the talus is an infrequent but very disabling injury that is
difficult to repair if not diagnosed early (Figure 20-20, A). Surgical stabilization is
 quite successful and is indicated in most animals, but closed reduction and casting
have been satisfactory in cats and small dogs.
Diagnosis
 Considerable swelling and deformity of the proximodorsal tarsus are evident, with
lameness typified by the animal carrying the leg. Because of possible concurrent
damage to the insertion of the medial collateral ligament, the tarsus should be eval-
 uated for medial instability. Radiographs are necessary to confirm the diagnosis
Internal Fixation
The bone is exposed by a proximal extension of the approach to the central tarsal
bone.1 The base of the talus can be reduced after the proximal intertarsal joint is
opened by flexion and lateral (varus) stress on the metatarsus. A positional screw is
placed between the talus and calcaneus and as distally as possible in the talus to
avoid crossing the tarsal sinus (Figure 20-20, B and C). If medial instability remains
 at the talocentral joint, joint cartilage of the calcaneocentral joint is debrided, and a
second bone screw is placed in the medial side of the central tarsal bone. Stainless
steel wire is placed around the head of both screws and tightened, similar to the
Aftercare. A short lateral splint is applied and maintained for 4 weeks (see
aa sd a e    axg  a
Talocrural Arthrodesis
Indications for arthrodesis of the hock joint may be seen in small animal practice
under the following circumstances:
1. Severe shearing injury.
2. Degenerative joint disease (most often caused by OCD)
A
B
C
FIGURE 20-20. Luxation of the talus. A, The base of the talus luxates dorsally. There may
also be injury to the insertion of the medial collateral ligament. B and C, Positional screw is
placed distally in the talus to avoid the tarsal sinus. The screw is driven into the calcaneus.
20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
687
 3. Chronic instability or hyperextension.
4. Comminuted intraarticular fractures.
5.1
 Irreparable injury of the calcanean (Achilles) tendon apparatus.
 6. Sciatic nerve palsy when combined with transposition of the long digital
extensor tendon.20
Assuming there are no disease conditions of the hip or stifle, function of the fused
 aesdo on pu  ar xa is si as es i q
fusion at the hock level, and if they do not function normally, the leg will be circum-
'sse le ym s  yo asd ms e a   
additional strain is placed on adjacent joints and may lead to DJD, particularly in
the more distal tarsal joints. For this reason, pantarsal arthrodesis is receiving
 increased attention as a substitute for talocrural arthrodesis.21.22
Surgical fusion of the talocrural joint is a great challenge to the surgeon because
 of the magnitude and orientation of weight-bearing forces. Additionally, the small
size of the bones of the tarsus imposes limitations on the size and shape of implants
used in internal fixation. Failure rates, as high as 50% in our hands23 and in other
reports,21 have led us to be much more aggressive in using more and larger implants
 and in supporting the bones with external casts and splints until fusion is certain. It
also seems useful to cross the joint with one of the screws or pins in order to neu-
tralize shear forces. Lag screw, bone plate, and external skeletal fixation techniques
are all applicable when properly executed.
The talar and tibial articular surfaces can be prepared either by osteotomy with
q paads- e ym no A a Aq no (y 'i- a) me auoq e
(Figure 20-21, B). Osteotomy by saw provides a flat surface that is more stable
relative to bending shear forces, but it makes rotational alignment more difficult.
Reference Kirschner wires can be placed in the tibia and tarsus to help realign the
 parts before fixation is applied.
Screw Fixation
Single-lag screw fixation is suitable only for cats and dogs weighing less than 8 to
10 kg. All others should receive two or three screws. The joint is approached medi-
ally by malleolar osteotomy.1 The malleolus and medial collateral ligaments are
detached, and the bone is cut into very small chips with a rongeur to be used as bone
 graft to supplement autogenous cancellous bone from the proximal tibia. The func-
 i s 1 s n  5t Pe 1 q  si so r e p
125 degrees. This angle should be carefully checked in the opposite limb preopera-
is 45 degrees. Because it is most convenient to cut the distal tibia at 90 degrees to its 
long axis, the talus is cut at a 45-degree angle to the axis of the tarsus-metatarsus.
Considerable bone must be removed from the tibia because of the depth of the
cochlea. The cartilage can also be removed with power burs, curettes, or rongeurs by
following the bony contours (Figure 20-21, B). In some cases the fibula will prevent
apposition of the tibia and talus after bone and carilage removal, and it may be nec-
essary to resect the lateral malleolus or perform a short supramalleolar ostectomy of
 the fibula through a separate, short lateral incision.
  om q  an  pon n x 
 driven across the contact surfaces in a plantarolateral direction (Figure 20-21, C).
 Drilling for the lag screw can then proceed without motion of the contact surfaces.
Screws of 4.5 mm are appropriate for animals of 15 to 18 kg or larger, and 3.5-mm
screws are ideal for smaller animals. Fully threaded screws are preferred because
of their ease of removal and greater strength. The glide hole is drilled in the tibia
688
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Site of
medial malleolar
osteotomy
 Ostectomy line
 in distal tibia
glidehole
Articular cartilage
debrided from:
stectomy
Trochlea of tibia
line
Dome of talus
in talus
Positional
screw
Positional
screw
G
FIGURE 20-21.
Arthrodesis of the tarsocrural joint by screw fixation. A, The angle chosen
here for the fusion is 135 degrees. The complementary angle of 45 degrees also describes the
si suiol aui sixe shi 0t saaiaap 0e in isaq si eau aui aouis 'siei aui yaoui ino aq oi alu
exposed medially by a malleolar osteotomy.! B, An alternative method of removing articular
cartilage involves debridement with a power bur or curettes, following the normal contour of
the articular surface. C and D, Temporary fixation is obtained by two Kirschner wires placed
across the joint at an angle. A 4.5-mm (or 3.5-mm) glide hole has been drilled, and the 3.2-mm
{or 2.0-mm) tap drill is inserted through a drill sleeve. The drill penetrates the plantarolateral
 cortex of the calcaneus near its base. E and F, The hole is tapped, and a screw of appropriate
length and diameter is inserted. A second hole is drilled from the cranial aspect of the distal
tibia into the tuber calcanei with a tap drill sized for the screw diameter selected. Soft tissue
in the space between the distal tibia and calcaneus must be protected. Both bones are tapped
and the screw inserted. G, In dogs weighing more than 10 kg, it is preferable to insert two
screws across the joint. In this situation a single Kirschner wire is placed between the screws.
first (Figure 20-21, C and D). The tap hole is then drilled through the talus and cal-
caneus. (Placement of 4.5-mm screws is illustrated in Figure 20-21.) The glide hole
is started at a point on the tibia 2.0 to 2.5 cm from the end of the bone and at an
angle of 15 to 20 degrees from the tibial sagittal plane. The hole is measured with
the depth gauge and is tapped, and a screw of appropriate length is inserted and
tightened (Figure 20-21, E and F). An alternate technique consists of drilling the
3.2-mm tap hole first, then enlarging the tibial hole with the 4.5-mm glide drill.
A second hole is drilled from the cranial aspect of the distal tibia into the tuber cal-
canei with a tap drill sized for the screw diameter selected. Soft tissue in the space
between the distal tibia and calcaneus must be protected. Both bones are tapped,
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
689
and the screw is inserted. This positional screw protects the lag screw from bending
loads. In dogs weighing more than 10 kg, it is preferable to insert two screws across
the joint (Figure 20-21, G). In this situation a single Kirschner wire is placed between 
the two screws. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is packed into and around the
contact surfaces (see Chapter 3). The Kirschner wires are left in place.
Aftercare
 splint or cylinder cast is maintained for 8 weeks (see Figures 2-22 and 2-26) or until
radiographic signs of fusion are evident. Exercise is severely restricted until radi-
ographic fusion is complete, then slowly increased to return to normal 6 weeks later.
Implants should be removed routinely about 6 months postoperatively. Because of
bending loads exerted on the fusion site, micromotion eventually results in screw
loosening or breakage, which causes irritation and pain. Fully threaded screws are
more easily removed than partially threaded cancellous screws.
Bone Plate Fixation
Talocrural arthrodesis with a cranially placed bone plate is possible if one screw
is placed through the plate and into the calcaneus to act as a positional screw
(Figure 20-22). All four cortices are tapped, since the purpose of this screw is to pre-
vent bending loads on the plate. Care must be taken to avoid extending the plate
beyond the proximal intertarsal joint. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is packed
around the arthrodesis site before closing the soft tissues.
Talocrural arthrodesis with a laterally placed straight plate is possible with a
plate that allows a large number of screws per unit of length, such as the veterinary
cuttable plate (VCP) (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa). Because the plate is loaded on edge, it
is very resistant to the bending loads of this joint. Despite this mechanical advantage,
such techniques have not been satisfactory in the past because of inability to place
a sufficient number of screws distal to the arthrodesis site. The VCP solves this
difficulty by the number of screw holes available. Additionally, the plates are available
in both 1.0- and 1.5-mm thickness and can be stacked to increase their thickness and
stiffness. In Figure 20-23 a 1.5-mm-thick plate and 2.7-mm screws are used, follow-
ing the method of Sumner-Smith and Kuzma.24 The distal one third of the fibula
 Positional
screw
FIGURE
20-22.Talocrural
arthrodesis with a cranially placed
bone plate is possible if one screw
is placed through the plate and
into the calcaneus to act as a posi-
tional screw. All four cortices are
tapped. Care must be taken to
avoid extending the plate beyond
the proximal intertarsal joint.
690
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 20-23.
 Talocrural arthrodesis with
a laterally placed plate is possible only with a
Ostectomy
@
plate that allows a large number of screws per
of fibula
unit of length, such as the AO/ASIF veterinary
cuttable plate (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa). Here, a
Osteotomy
1.5-mm-thick plate and 2.7-mm screws are
of tibia
used, following the method of Sumner-Smith
and talus
 and Kuzma.24 At least one screw must cross the
joint as a lag screw, to provide compression at
Lag
screw
the arthrodesis site. The distal one third of the
fibula is resected to allow lateral placement of
the plate, which is molded around the calcaneus
distally.
Lateral
Plantar
P
B
is resected, and the joint surfaces are prepared as in Figure 20-21. A lag screw (3.5- to
4.5-mm diameter) is placed across the joint to provide compression at the arthrodesis
site, from the calcaneus distally, through the talus, and into the tibia proximally
 reduction ensures accurate placement of this hole. In small breeds the lag screw may
be passed from the distal plate hole.
The plate is molded to the tibia and around the calcaneus distally, where a sharp
bend and slight twist are necessary to fit the bone closely. Screw placement starts
distally with two screws in the calcaneus. The next screw is placed in the distal tibia
and is positioned eccentrically in the plate hole to provide compression. Two more
screws are similarly placed in the tibia, taking care to avoid the lag screw. The rest
of the screws are placed in the center of the plate holes, and the lag screw is retight-
ened. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is packed around the arthrodesis site before
closing the tissues (see Chapter 3).
A second method of lateral plating involves the use of a reconstruction plate
(Synthes). These plates can be curved on the flat dimension to follow the curvature
from the tibia to the tarsus (see Figure 20-25, B). The illustration shows application
for pantarsal arthrodesis; for talocrural arthrodesis the plate would be shortened to
extend only to the distal end of the calcaneus. Lag screw fixation across the
talocrural joint is accomplished as described for the VCP.
Aftercare
 External support is imperative to prevent bending loads on the screws. A short lat-
eral splint or cylinder cast is maintained for 8 weeks or until radiographic signs of
 fusion are evident (see Figures 2-22 and 2-26). Exercise is severely restricted until
radiographic fusion is complete, then slowly increased to return to normal 6 weeks 
later. Implants should be removed routinely about 6 months postoperatively.
Because of bending loads exerted on the fusion site, micromotion eventually results
in screw loosening or breakage, which causes irritation and pain. Fully threaded
screws are more easily removed than partially threaded cancellous screws.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
691
External Skeletal Fixator
Fixation by means of the external fixator is particularly applicable to open or shear-
ing injuries of the hock (Figure 20-24). Open luxation with comminuted fractures
of the tibial trochlea or condyles of the talus is also a relatively common injury best
treated by arthrodesis. Minimal metal at the area of contamination reduces infec-
tion problems, and all the metal can easily be removed. Because of the morbidity
associated with the prolonged casting or splinting needed for the procedures previ-
ously described, the external fixator has become the method of choice in our hands.
A variety of configurations are useful, depending on patient size. Mechanical studies
 of transarticular fixators are lacking, so their application is more art than science. In
all methods the contact surfaces are prepared as already described after adequate soft
tissue debridement (see Figure 20-21, A).
Type Il Fixator and Steinmann Pin
A Steinmann pin is driven through the calcaneus and talus into the distal tibia with
the joint at the desired angle (Figure 20-24, A). If the pin follows the medullary
canal, it is driven into the proximal metaphyseal region. If the pin penetrates the tib-
ial cortex, it is driven completely through the cortex. The pin is cut about 1 cm from
the calcaneus and left protruding through the skin. An alternative method consists
of driving the pin from the proximal tibia, as described for fracture repair in
Chapter 19. After penetrating the calcaneus, the pin is pulled from the distal end
until the proximal end is below the proximal articular surface of the tibia and cut
distally. Centrally threaded positive-thread-profile transfixation pins are driven
through the tibia and through the bases of the metatarsals. These pins are connected
by single clamps and connecting rods in small dogs and cats (Figure 20-24, A).
A large autogenous cancellous bone graft taken from the proximal tibia will signif-
icantly speed healing and can be used in a contaminated site. Fixation can be made
even more rigid in larger breeds (10-20 kg) by placing a transfixation pin through
the calcaneus and connecting it with double clamps to the proximal ends of the
other connecting rods (Figure 20-24, B). Double clamps can be avoided by using
single clamps outboard of the tibial fixation pin clamps.
Type lIB Fixator
 In larger breeds over 20 kg, a more rigid frame is used to neutralize bending loads at
the arthrodesis site. One of the easier methods is shown in Figure 20-24, C, using
ously described. Using half pins for the middle sets of fixation pins simplifies the prob-
lem of fitting the pins to the connecting rods on both sides. At least one of the fixation
half pins should cross the talocrural joint to control shearing motion at the arthrode-
sis site. Three half pins on each side of the joint can be substituted for the second full
pin, as illustrated in Figure 20-25, A, which simplifies application. The use of double
e pxd a p po e s as s  e aq  s
distal pin clamps.
Aftercare
Healing of the arthrodesis will be slow in the case of open injuries, and fixation may
need to be maintained for 10 to 12 weeks or until radiographic signs of fusion are
present. Closed cases generally show radiographic fusion by 8 to 10 weeks. Exercise
should be restricted to the house, a small pen, or a leash until the apparatus is
q sd si us po um p are sd uexn  ao
Steinmann pins can be left in place for several months to absorb some of the bending
stress on the arthrodesis during the remodeling phase of bone healing.
692
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Steinmann
pin
Double
clamp
Single
/clamp
Single
clamps
B
FIGURE 20-24. Arthrodesis of the talocrural joint by external skeletal fixation. A, The
  u si urd u  'g o h 'i-ot a ui se d ae sas s
calcaneus into the proximal tibia with the joint at the selected angle. Transfixation pins
are driven through the tibia and metatarsal bones. These pins are connected with bilateral
rods secured by single clamps. B, Additional stability in large dogs is provided by a second
with single clamps distally and double clamps proximally. C, When no intramedullary pin is
used, a more rigid frame is used to prevent bending loads at the arthrodesis site. One of
the easier methods is shown here, using a curved connecting rod to eliminate the need for 
 double clamps. Using half pins for the middle sets of fixation pins simplifies the problem of
fitting the pins to the connecting rods on both sides when drill guides are not available. At
least one of the fixation pins should cross the tarsocrural joint to neutralize shear forces.
B
C
D
FIGURE 20-25. Pantarsal arthrodesis. A, The type IIB external fixator used for tarsocrural
arthrodesis (see Figure 20-24, C) has been extended to place fixation pins in the central and
fourth tarsal bones. Also note that all the fixation pins except the proximal and distal are half
pins, which simplifies construction of the frame. B, The reconstruction plate can be contoured
on edge to follow the curvature of the lateral aspect of the tibia and tarsus. The distal fibula is
Ostectomized as in Figure 20-23 to allow good contact of the plate with the tibia. C, A standard
bone plate may be used as fixation if placed along the cranial and dorsal surface of the tibia and
tarsus. External coaptation is needed for 8 to 12 weeks after surgery because the plate is sub-
jected to considerable bending stress until fusion of the tarsus is complete. D, An intra medullary
 pin may be used with the plate, extending through the talus and calcaneus to the medullary canal
 of the tibia, to reduce the bending stress on the plate during healing. External coaptation is
advised as previously described.
694
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Pantarsal Arthrodesis
We have noted that some dogs with apparently successful talocrural fusion do not
return to full function. In many of these patients, no specific reason for the
decreased function has been found, but in some cases, progressive DJD of the more
 distal tarsal joints has been documented.21.22 Because the talocrural joint is the site
of most motion in the tarsus, when it is fused, the other joints are subjected to
increased functional loads that they are not designed to accommodate. Chronic
-qond jeuonouny aqn no sunooe Ae (a se lam se siuai au on Annfu uds
lems observed. For this reason, pantarsal arthrodesis may be a better solution to
talocrural problems, just as carpal panarthrodesis has yielded better function than
antebrachiocarpal arthrodesis. Gorse and colleagues22 found a tendency for better
function with panarthrodesis than with lag screw fixation of the talocrural joint.
Surgical Technigues
The basic preparation of the talocrural joint and establishing the angle of the joint
are carried out as described for talocrural arthrodesis. The additional consideration
is curettage of articular cartilage in the other joints involved and the additional fixa-
tion required to immobilize them. Although the small joints of the tarsus do not
require as thorough debridement as do the large joints, bony bridging still will
progress more surely if most of the cartilage is removed It is difficult to insert curettes
 into the small joints, and if high-speed power burs are not available, several passes
with a powered twist drill will suffice. The intertarsal joints often fuse spontaneously
when they are bridged by a screw or pin, but the transverse joints require more prepa-
ration. The curettage is done primarily from the dorsal, medial, and lateral aspects,
leaving the large plantar ligaments intact. Multiple incisions may be necessary to
approach all the joints.1
External Fixator
 Perhaps the simplest method of fixation is the type IIB fixator (Figure 20-25, A).
This is essentially the same device shown in Figure 20-24, C, for talocrural arthrode-
sis, modified to place fixation pins in the central and fourth tarsal bones. Aftercare
is as described for talocrural arthrodesis with the external fixator.
Bone Plate Fixation
Dynamic compression plates, limited-contact dynamic compression plates, and
lengthening plates can be used for panarthrodesis by application to the cranial and
dorsal surface of the tibia and tarsus (Figure 20-25, C). A minimum of three screws
is placed in the tibia and metatarsus, one or two screws in the talus, and one screw
may be placed in the central or third tarsal bone. Lengthening plates (with no central
screw holes) may be used only for very large dogs; only proximal tibial and distal
 metatarsal screws are placed for this plate type.
 In using reconstruction plates for panarthrodesis (Figure 20-25, B), the plate is
applied laterally to the tibia after resection of the distal fibula (see Figure 20-23),
then contoured to allow attachment to the calcaneus, fourth tarsal, and proximal
 metatarsus. A minimum of three screws must be anchored in the tibia and in the
metatarsal bones. Regardless of plate type, plate fixation may be combined with a
Steinmann pin driven from the calcaneus and talus into the distal tibia. The pin is
driven before plate application with the joint at the desired angle. The plate is then
applied, taking care to avoid the pin during placement of the screws (Figure 20-25, D)
The addition of the Steinmann pin reduces bending stress on the plate during weight
bearing.2s
20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
695
Aftercare is as described for plate fixation of talocrural arthrodesis. All plate appli-
cations for pantarsal arthrodeses are subjected to considerable bending stresses.25
 Successful outcome depends on meticulous adherence to aftercare protocols.
Fractures of Central Tarsal Bone
 Fractures of the central tarsal bone are seen infrequently except in the racing grey-
hound, where they are usually seen in the right foot26,27 (see Figures 20-26 through
20-29). When these fractures occur in other breeds, there is no predilection for right
or left. In the racing greyhound the right foot is the "off" foottoward the outside
 of the track—and the bone is subject to tremendous compression forces during
turns. These forces literally explode the bone out of its position in the midst of
the other six tarsal bones, producing a variety of fractures and subluxations of
the bone.
 In nonracing animals the simpler fracture types are seen; more often, however, the
bone is luxated intact except for a portion of the plantar process. Fixation is by one or
two lag screws, followed by coaptation in a lateral splint or short cast; closed reduction
and simple coaptation are not effective. The bone is approached by a dorsomedial
incision.'
 Fixation methods for each fracture type are discussed next.
Type 1 Fracture
A small slab is seen on the dorsal surface of the bone, with minimal displacement
(Figure 20-26, A). In the past, type 1 fractures have been treated primarily with a
short lateral splint. Generally, they heal well with 4 to 6 weeks of immobilization,
but occasionally they displace a little more during healing and thus create a slight
incongruity at the proximal intertarsal joint space. For this reason, type 1 fractures
are best treated with a lag screw, as are type 2 fractures.
Type2Fracture
Slightly more displacement of the dorsal slab differentiates a type 2 fracture from a
type 1 fracture (Figure 20-26, B). A single 2.7- or 3.5-mm lag screw centered in the
middle of the fragment is placed in a dorsoplantar direction (Figure 20-26, C).
A
B
C
FIGURE 20-26.A
 A, Dorsal slab fracture of the central tarsal bone with minimal displacement
(type 1). B, Dorsal slab fracture of the central tarsal bone, slightly displaced (type 2). C, A 2.7-mm
lag screw is placed in the center of the fragment. The fragment is held in the reduced position 
696
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Type3 Fracture
 Approximately one third to one half of the bone is fractured in the median plane and
is displaced medially or dorsally (Figure 20-27, A and B). A single 3.5-mm or 4.0-mm
 lag screw is placed in a mediolateral and slightly plantar direction and seats in the
fourth tarsal bone. The screw is placed just proximal to the origin of the ligament
between the central and third tarsal bones (Figure 20-27, C and D).
Type 4 Fracture
-osse Aq panuedoe Ann ae pue (%so) uoo iso ae san t ad
ated fractures of the fourth tarsal bone (T4), the calcaneus, or T4 and the lateral
 aspect of the base of metatarsal V.28 This injury is a combination of fracture types 2
and 3 (Figure 20-28, A and B). The distance between the talus and T1-3 may be
narrowed if the lateral undisplaced half of the bone is comminuted. This will lead
to slight hyperextension and varus deformity of the foot. Because of the severe insta-
bility of the tarsus induced by this injury, fractures of other tarsal bones, especially
the base of the calcaneus and T3 and T4, should be suspected.
 Fixation for type 4 fracture is a combination of the two lag screws used for type
2 and 3 fractures. Exact placement of the screws is critical to ensure that both can
be placed in this small bone (Figure 20-28, C and D). The mediolateral screw must
be placed first at the junction of the middle and distal third of the bone. The dorso-
plantar screw is placed at the junction of the proximal and middle third of the bone.
The angle of the drill bit is important because it must pass proximal to the first
screw and also avoid entering the proximal intertarsal joint. If other fractures are
present, they are often reduced spontaneously during reduction of the central tarsal
bone. Fixation of these fractures is illustrated in Figures 20-9, 20-31, and 20-32.
Type 5 Fracture
for racing (Figure 20-29, A and B). If soundness of the animal for kennel activity
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 20-27. A and B, Dorsomedial displacement of the medial portion of the central
tarsal bone (type 3 fracture). C and D, The 3.5- or 4.0-mm lag screw has been inserted in a
mediolateral direction. The tendon of insertion of the tibialis cranialis muscle and the liga-
ment between the central and third tarsal bones are shown for orientation. Reduction is
accomplished by laterally displacing and flexing the metatarsus to allow the fragment to be
wedged back into the joint space. It is held by vulsellum forceps while the screw is inserted.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
697
is the only consideration, closed reduction and immobilization in a short cylinder
cast for 6 weeks are sufficient. These animals will have slight hyperextension and
varus deformity of the foot. If optimal results are desired, a buttress plate and can-
cellous bone graft (see Chapter 3) are utilized (Figure 20-29, C and D). The objec-
tive is to restore and maintain the normal joint space and thereby prevent deformity
of the foot. Fragments of the bone are left in place, and cancellous graft is packed
A
B
D
FIGURE 20-28. A and B, Dorsal and medial displacement of two fracture fragments of
the central tarsal bone (type 4 fracture). There may be comminution of the central part of the
bone with slight varus deformity of the foot. C and D, The medial fragment is reduced first,
and the 4.0-mm lag screw is placed mediolaterally as far distally in the bone as possible. The
2.7-mm lag screw is placed next in a dorsoplantar direction. Because this screw must not
enter the proximal intertarsal joint, the exact angle of the drill hole is critical. Using partially
threaded 4.0-mm screws for the mediolateral lag screw gives an extra millimeter of clearance
A
B
C
D
FIGURE20-29.
 A and B, Comminuted fracture of the central tarsal bone (type S). Note the
varus deformity of the tarsus and metatarsus. C and D, Finger plate (2.7-mm screws) has been
used as a buttress plate to restore the joint space occupied by the tarsal bone. No fixation of
the fragments is possible because of their small size. The fragments are placed loosely back
from the proximal tibia.
698
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
into the spaces. Ligamentous injury on the lateral side of the joint may accompany
these fractures and may be difficult to evaluate until the fracture is stabilized. Repair
of the ligament or arthrodesis of the unstable joint should be performed for
optimum function (see following discussion).
Aftercare
Lag screw fixation in these central tarsal fracture cases is not sufficiently rigid to
allow early weight bearing, especially in the greyhound. These animals are very tol-
erant of pain and will use the limb excessively, even in kennel confinement. A short
lateral splint or short cast is applied for 4 weeks (see Figures 2-22 and 2-26). Close
confinement is maintained for 8 weeks, at which point radiographs are made. If
fracture healing is satisfactory, gradually increasing exercise is allowed; at 12 weeks
postoperatively, regular training is allowed. Bone screws do not need to be removed
unless the screw enters the proximal intertarsal joint, as may happen with the
 dorsoplantar screw in type 4 fractures (see Figure 20-28, C and D). These animals
remain slightly lame until the screw is removed. A screw in the joint may also loosen
and back out, again requiring removal. The plate used in type 5 injuries should be
removed in most cases at 3 to 6 months postoperatively, especially if any attempt
will be made to race the dog. Motion in the tarsus will cause the screws to loosen,
which causes pain and prevents return to racing form.
Prognosis
With anatomical reduction and rigid fixation, good healing and return to competi-
tive racing can be anticipated in 71% of dogs with fracture types 1 through 4.29
Type 5 injuries carry a more guarded prognosis for racing, although most patients
will become sound for breeding or pet purposes. Some type 4 and 5 injuries also
have fractures of the base of the calcaneus (see Figure 20-9) or proximal intertarsal
plantar ligament injuries with subluxation and hyperextension of that joint (see
following discussion). Again, the prognosis for racing is poor, but soundness of
condition for kennel activity can be expected. Treatment is a combination of the
methods previously described with the methods for a fracture of the calcaneus and
 for hyperextension at the proximal intertarsal joint.
Fracture-Luxation of Central Tarsal Bone
 Unlike most fractures of the central tarsal bone, which are almost exclusively a frac-
ture of the racing greyhound, fracture-luxation of this bone is seen sporadically in all
breeds (Figure 20-30, A and B). Fracture of the bone occurs at the plantar tubercle,
which remains attached to the plantar ligaments, while the rest of the bone displaces
 dorsomedially. Closed reduction and cast fixation are rarely successful, and surgical
 stabilization is always advisable. Good function can be anticipated.
Diagnosis
s os p i a aq dd  si aq  ro 
swelling. If the bone is luxated completely out of contact with the talus and distal
tarsal bones, mild varus deformity and hyperextension may be noted. Radiographs
 confirm this diagnosis.
Internal Fixation
The bone is approached by an incision directly dorsal to it.1 The bone is reduced by
flexing and lateral bending at the joint. A positional screw is directed laterally into
sd s r o a  -o aii aq is  a
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
699
 Plantar process
of central
FIGURE
20-30. Fracture-
tarsal
luxation of the  central tarsal
bone. A, The central tarsal lux-
ates dorsomedially. B and C,
Fixation is by means of a posi-
tional screw through the central
tarsal into the fourth tarsal bone.
A threaded Kirschner wire or
Medial
 small pin may be substituted in
small dogs.
B
A
C
FIGURE 20-31. A, Dorsal slab
fracture of the third tarsal bone.
B and C, Lag screw fixation with
 2.7-mm screw placed in the cen-
ter of the fragment.
A
B
of this screw. Threaded Kirschner wire has been successfully substituted for the bone
 screw in toy breeds.
Aftercare
A short lateral splint is applied and maintained for 4 weeks (see Figure 2-26).
Exercise is limited through the eighth postoperative week.
Fractures of Numbered Tarsal Bones
 In our experience, we have not seen fractures of the first and second tarsal bones.
 Occasionally, the third tarsal bone may be fractured on the dorsal surface in racing
greyhounds (Figure 20-31, A). This slab fracture is similar to the central tarsal type
1 and 2 fractures and may be treated by closed reduction and casting or preferably
aq p y a jo sg ( pe g ie-o a uex ms e q
seen in nonracing animals are usually nondisplaced and respond well to casting.
More serious injuries are seen in greyhounds, usually in conjunction with fractures
 of the central tarsal bone (Figure 20-32, A). Some of these require internal fixation,
whereas others heal well with a cast after internal fixation of the central tarsal bone.
700
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 20-32.  A and B, Type 4 fracture of the central tarsal bone with fracture of the head
of the fourth tarsal bone. C and D, Double-lag screw (4.0 and 2.7 mm) fixation of the central
tarsal bone is accomplished first, followed by placement of a 3.5-mm lag screw that is started
in the second tarsal bone and passes through the third and into the fourth tarsal bone.
The decision is based primarily on the amount of displacement, always bearing in mind
the central tarsal bone is indicated, it is minimal additional work to place a screw or
Kirschner wire in the fourth tarsal bone (Figure 20-32, C and D). The third and fourth
tarsal bones are exposed by incision directly over the bones. The third tarsal incision is
simply a distal continuation of the approach to the central tarsal bone.
Aftercare
A short lateral splint or short-leg cylinder cast is applied for 4 weeks (see Figures 2-22
 and 2-26). Exercise restrictions for racing animals are the same as for animals with
central tarsal fractures. For nonracing animals, close confinement is maintained for
 6 weeks, followed by 4 weeks of gradual return to normal activity.
Hyperextension with Subluxation of Proximal Intertarsal Joint
This is a common injury of the tarsus in small animals (Figure 20-33, A). The major-
ity of affected animals have no history of known trauma. Although hyperextension
(dorsiflexion) is seen in all breeds of dogs, the Shetland sheepdog and collie seem to
be predisposed, whereas the injury is apparently unrecorded in the cat. Affected
animals fall into two groups: highly athletic animals, such as racing greyhounds or
 coursing dogs, and obese, poorly conditioned dogs.
Diagnosis
Although the entire proximal intertarsal joint is affected, the primary instability is
at the calcaneoquartal joint. Stability of the talocentral joint distinguishes this injury
from complete luxation, described next (see Figure 20-34, A). Tearing or avulsion
 Of the plantar ligament between the fourth tarsal and calcaneus is the primary injury
(Figure 20-33, A and B). Loss of this tension band structure results in a character-
istic hyperextension and variable degrees of plantigrade stance. The degree of planti-
grade stance varies; the worst cases appear to be standing on the calcaneus bone,
whereas many have only 30 to 40 degrees of angulation. Pain and soft tissue
swelling are not severe, and most animals tolerate palpation with little show of
resentment. The joint is unstable only on the plantar aspect.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
701
FIGURE 20-33. Arthrodesis of
Talocentral
the calcaneoquartal joint for
joint stable
hyperextension with subluxation
of the proximal intertarsal joint.
A and B, Tearing or avulsion of
the plantar ligament of the calca-
neoquartal joint allows hyperex-
Torn plantar ligament
tension (dorsiflexion) at the
and avulsed bone
proximal intertarsal joint. C and
D, The joint is exposed by a
plantarolateral  approach with
medial retraction of the superfi-
B
cial digital flexor tendon.' The
calcaneoquartal joint cartilage is
Recessed
debrided, and an autogenous
 Steinmann pin
cancellous bone graft is inserted.
C
Stainless steel
A1
tension band wire {18-
wire
Cancellous
20 gauge) is placed between the
bone graft,
calcaneus and plantar tubercle of
the fourth tarsal but not tight-
ened. A small Steinmann pin
%4 to k inch in diameter is
driven through the calcaneus
into the fourth tarsal and then
countersunk beneath the carti-
ncisior
lage of the tuber calcanei. The
tension band wire is now tight-
ened. E, Plantarolateral view of
the completed fixation. The
Tendon of
D
superficial digital extensor ten-
superficial digital flexor m.
don is retracted medially.
E
A mediolateral radiograph, with the joint stressed in extension, will confirm
the site of instability and may demonstrate avulsed fragments of bone from either
the fourth tarsal bone or the base of the calcaneus (Figure 20-33, A). Note that the
talocentral joint remains unaffected by the instability of the calcaneoquartal joint.
Arthrodesis
 Primary repair of the soft tissue injury or cast fixation is rarely successful, and
arthrodesis of the calcaneoquartal joint is recommended. Arthrodesis of this joint
causes little functional disability, although racing animals rarely return to the track.
The tension band wire fixation described here is applicable to any size of animal and
is relatively simple to perform.
 The joint is exposed by a plantarolateral approach, with medial retraction of the
are excised to allow access to the joint. Articular cartilage is debrided on the joint
surfaces with a high-speed bur or by curettage. A hole is drilled transversely through
the midportion of the calcaneus and the plantar tubercle of the fourth tarsal bone
(Figure 20-33, C and D). An 18- to 20-gauge (1.0- to 0.8-mm) stainless steel wire is
threaded through both holes in a figure-of-8 manner. A pilot hole for the intramedullary
pin is drilled through the shaft of the calcaneus, favoring the dorsal aspect of the
medullary canal. This hole is best made with a slightly undersized bone drill rather
702
 Part IIl—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
than a pin because of the extreme hardness of this bone. Autogenous cancellous
bone graft from the proximal tibia is placed into the joint space with the joint
extended to open it. A single pin 5/64 to 1/s inch (1.9-3.2 mm) in diameter is started
at the proximal calcaneus and driven to the distal end of the fourth tarsal bone. The
pin is retracted 1 cm, cut, and countersunk beneath the surface of the tuber calcanei
to protect the superficial digital flexor tendon. The tension band wire is now tightened
 ssn a (a p  'o a 8o-a a j s yoq ui  q
cut and bent flat against the bone. The lateral retinaculum of the superficial digital
flexor tendon is sutured as in Figure 20-10, B, to prevent its luxation, and the skin is
closed routinely.
Aftercare
Although external casts or splints are not required, a padded bandage is useful during
the first postoperative week. Exercise is restricted to the house, a small pen, or a leash
aadoisd sam g on 9 Ansn paou ane usn jo suis odeon lun
At this time, activity can be slowly increased to normal at 12 weeks.
Hyperextension with Luxation of Proximal Intertarsal Joint
A much less common injury than subluxation, this luxation is usually a result of severe
( teo amb) sauo iesn a jo same Aq pand aq A pue en
 Arthrodesis of the joint is the preferred method of fixation, since primary repair of
the ligaments is fruitless. Function is excellent with this fusion. Because the entire
 proximal intertarsal joint is involved, bone plate fixation results in more stable
fixation of the talocalcaneal portion of the joint than does tension band wire fixa-
tion (see Figure 20-33). The tension band wire method can be used if modified to pro-
vide additional stability of the talocalcaneal joint by adding the medial wire fixation
shown in Figure 20-35, C, D, and E. External skeletal fixators are also adaptable to
 this procedure.
Diagnosis
This condition is differentiated from subluxation by instability of the joint in all
planes and is confirmed radiographically by marked dorsal displacement of the
distal segment rather than hinging at the dorsal aspect of the proximal intertarsal
joint. This shows clearly in stressed mediolateral radiographs.
Arthrodesis
Bone Plate Fixation
 The joint is exposed by a lateral incision from the tuber calcanei to the base of the
metatarsals. An alternative plantar approach for plate fixation has also been
 described but will not be detailed here.30 Articular cartilage is removed from the
entire joint by high-speed bur or curettage. The lateral side of the base of the calca-
neus must be flattened to allow firm seating of the bone plate. This may involve sac-
rificing a portion of the insertion of the long part of the lateral collateral ligament,
which can be reattached by a suture running beneath the plate. A seven-hole plate
of a 3.5- or 2.7-mm screw size is typically used (Figure 20-34, B and C), although
the VCP (Synthes) is particularly useful here to ensure an adequate number of plate
holes to match the bones. A minimum of three screws is placed proximally, one
 penetrating the calcaneus and talus and the rest attached only to the calcaneus. One
screw spans the tarsus distal to the proximal intertarsal joint, and at least three
screws are placed in metatarsals IV and V. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is used
 in the joint space (see Chapter 3).
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
703
Entire proximal
intertarsal joint
unstable
FIGURE 20-34.
Arthrodesis
for hyperextension with luxation
Torn plantar ligaments
of the proximal intertarsal joint.
A
A, Complete luxation is differen-
tiated from subluxation
marked dorsal displacement of
the distal tarsus at the proximal
intertarsal joint. B and C, After
curettage of the proximal inter-
tarsal joint. Bone plate fixation
requires smoothing of the lateral
Cancellous
surface of the calcaneus and base
bone graft
 of the fifth metatarsal. Plates are
usually of the 3.s- or 2.7-mm
screw size. At least three screws
are placed in the calcaneus. The
third screw is angled to engage
the head of the talus, and the
fourth screw spans the tarsus.
Lateral
Plantar
The distal screws are placed in
B
C
metatarsals IV and V. D, External
skeletal fixation is applicable to
this surgery. Both the use of con-
Connecting
ventional clamp fixation (left)
rod
Fixation
and the use of polymethyl
Single
pin bent
methacrylate dental tray cement
clamp
as a connecting rod (right) are
illustrated. Fixation pins are bent
for more stability in the cement.
 See text for details.
Polymethyl methacrylate
D
 In larger breeds it may be possible to place three screws in the fourth tarsal bone
by using the VCP. If so, the plate does not need to be extended distally to the
metacarpal bones; this helps prevent some complications explained next.
Aftercare.
 External support is advisable because the lateral plate is not in the
tension band position. A short lateral splint or cylinder cast is maintained until radio-
graphic signs of fusion are present, usually 6 to 8 weeks (see Figures 2-22 and
2-26). If the plate crosses the tarsometatarsal joint, it will always loosen as a result
of joint motion, which causes the metatarsal screws to loosen. The plate should be
left in place at least 4 months, preferably 6 months. If the distal metatarsal screws 
loosen before this, it is advisable to remove them, but the tarsal screws should be 
0
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
left in for 4 to 6 months. Loss of blood supply to the skin as a result of the original
or surgical trauma may lead to skin necrosis over the plate. This should be treated
as an open granulating wound, with the plate left in place. The plate is removed
about 4 months postoperatively if fusion is good, and if still present, the skin defect
 is grafted or allowed to granulate.
External Skeletal Fixator
Stabilization of this arthrodesis is also possible by means of a type II external skeletal
fixator. This method is advantageous when open wounds are associated with the
injury and when bone plate fixation is not available. The fixation pins can be con-
nected conventionally with clamps, as on the left side of Figure 20-34, D, or by
means of polymethyl methacrylate cement (dental tray cement or hoof repair acrylic;
see Chapter 2), as on the right side of Figure 20-34, D. The joint is approached from
a dorsal incision centered over the joint, and articular cartilage is removed by high-
speed bur or curettage. Autogenous cancellous bone from the proximal tibia is
q is ae 'sd u asn im uoex au j sn ue snao au u
taken to ensure that the pins are spaced widely enough to allow placement of the
clamps. Two more pins are placed distally in the tarsal bones. If there is not suffi-
cient room to place both pins in the tarsus, the distal pin is driven through the bases
of the metatarsal bones. The pins are then connected by clamps or cement. If cement
 is to be used, the fixation pins can be bent at a right angle at the protruding end to
provide more surface contact for the cement. The cement is mixed until reaching a
 doughlike consistency, then molded into a rod approximately 3/4 inch (2 cm) in diam-
eter and hand-packed onto the fixation pins. The arthrodesis site must be stabilized
 until the cement has hardened, typically 8 to 10 minutes from the start of mixing.
Aftercare.  The animal is closely confined and the fixator maintained until radio.
graphic signs of bony fusion are well defined, typically 8 to 10 weeks. Exercise is
slowly returned to normal 4 weeks after fixator removal.
Proximal Intertarsal Subluxation with Dorsal Instability
This subluxation injury is much less common than hyperextension at the
proximal intertarsal joint. Although the primary damage is to the dorsal ligaments
(Figure 20-35, A and B), medial or lateral instability is often present, with varus
deformity resulting from lateral instability being most common. The condition is
evidently caused by overstress (i.e., self-induced) because outside trauma is rarely
reported by the owner, although some animals have sustained this injury while
climbing woven wire fences.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of the condition can be difficult because the proximal intertarsal sublux-
ation can be demonstrated only by palpation. There are few clinical signs with this
condition other than a mild hindlimb lameness. The dog stands normally because
the plantar ligaments are intact, but instability creates inflammation and pain in the
joint and causes mild lameness, which is worse if medial or lateral instability is
superimposed. Physical examination will reveal abnormal flexion at the proximal
intertarsal joints. Medial and lateral stability should be tested, and stress-position
radiographs should be made to confirm the physical findings. Figure 20-35, A and B,
illustrates the dorsolateral instability.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
705
Stretched
Stainless
Torn
ligament
steel wire
ligament
+
Lateral
A Lateral
Dorsal
B
D
Medial
F
Dors
FIGURE 20-35. Surgical repair of proximal intertarsal subluxation with dorsal instability.
A and B, Excessive flexion and often varus deformity occur when the dorsal ligaments are
ruptured. C, Lateral instability is stabilized with stainless steel wire (20-22 gauge) placed
through drill holes in the bony prominences of the distolateral calcaneus and proximolateral
fourth tarsal bones. D and E, Dorsomedial instability is stabilized by placing stainless steel
wire (20-22 gauge) between screws placed in the base of the talus and central tarsal bones.
Treatment
Because the dorsal ligaments do not function as tension bands, conservative treatment
by casting for 3 to 4 weeks is often effective if there is no medial or lateral laxity. The
smaller the patient, the more likely conservative treatment is to succeed. In larger
breeds and in athletic animals, surgical treatment is more frequently indicated.
Arthrodesis
Surgical repair is indicated when dorsal ligamentous instability is complicated by
 medial or lateral instability. Surgery becomes even more important in a large athletic
dog. Stabilization from both the medial and the lateral side is usually indicated. Because
primary repair of such smalligaments is usually not possible, arthrodesis is preferred.
The areas are approached by incisions directly over the bones. Medial and dorsal insta-
bility can be eliminated by placing stainless steel wire of 20 to 22 gauge (0.8-0.6 mm)
between screws placed in the talus and central tarsal bones (Figure 20-35, D and E)
 Articular cartilage of the proximal intertarsal joint is debrided before screw place-
ment, and suturing of any available ligament fragments is useful. Bone grafting is
not routinely needed. If there is significant lateral instability, a tension band wire can
be added laterally (Figure 20-35, C). Bony projections are available on both the
706
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
distal calcaneus and the proximal fourth tarsal to allow bone tunnels to be drilled
for wire placement. Stainless steel wire of 20 to 22 gauge (0.8-0.6 mm) is used for
the tension band.
Aftercare. A short lateral splint is applied for 4 weeks (see Figure 2-26), with
fuse, the screw may loosen and back out, thus requiring removal.
Distal Intertarsal Subluxation with Dorsomedial Instability
 This subluxation injury can be seen in isolation or combined with hyperextension
at the proximal intertarsal joint or tarsometatarsal luxation with dorsal instability
 (Figure 20-36, A). Cast fixation has been disappointing in our experience, and we
advise surgical stabilization.
Diagnosis
Valgus deformity resulting from dorsomedial ligamentous instability can be appre-
ciated on palpation. Soft tissue swelling is minimal. Radiographs in the stressed
 position confirm the site of instability and should be studied carefully for fractures
 of the fourth tarsal bone, a frequent complication.
Treatment
 Because primary repair of such small ligaments is usually not possible, arthrodesis is
preferred. The technique shown here is combined with proximal intertarsal arthrode-
sis when the distal intertarsal subluxation is concurrent with hyperextension.
FIGURE 20-36. Distal intertarsal
Torn ligaments
subluxation with dorsomedial insta-
bility. A, Valgus deformity is evident
Stainless steel
after rupture of the medial and dorsal
wire
ligaments of the centrodistal joint.
B and C, Bone screws are placed
through the central and distal tarsals
into the fourth tarsal. Articular carti-
lage of the centrodistal joint is
debrided, and stainless steel wire
(20-22 gauge) is looped around the
screw hea ds and tightened.
Dorsal
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
707
Arthrodesis
The area is exposed by a distomedial extension of the approach to the central tarsal
bone.1 Articular cartilage is removed from the centrodistal joint by high-speed bur
or curettage. Bone screws are placed from the central and second tarsal bones later-
ally into the fourth tarsal bone. Stainless steel wire, 20 to 22 gauge (0.8-0.6 mm), is
looped around the screw heads and twisted tightly (Figure 20-36, B and C).
Aftercare.  A short lateral splint is applied and maintained for 4 weeks (see
Figure 2-26). Exercise is limited through the eighth postoperative week.
THE METATARSUS, PHALANGES, AND SESAMOIDS
Fractures of these bones are virtually identical to fractures of the corresponding
bones of the metacarpus and forefoot and are covered in Chapter 14
Hyperextension with Subluxation of Tarsometatarsal Joints
This injury is not as common as proximal intertarsal hyperextension. The plantar
tarsal fibrocartilage is torn in this hyperextension injury with subluxation of the
tarsometatarsal joints (Figure 20-37, A).
Diagnosis
This condition seems to be related more often to known trauma than does proximal
intertarsal hyperextension; thus, more soft tissue swelling is seen. The injury often
occurs when an animal becomes tangled in a wire mesh fence while attempting to
a few days, with a typically plantigrade stance. Radiographs taken with hyperexten-
sion stress readily confirm the injury (Figure 20-37, A). In some cases, more com-
plete luxation with plantar displacement of the bases of one or more metatarsal
bones will be seen. Rarely are all four metatarsals completely luxated.
Treatment
As with other hyperextension injuries, conservative treatment by cast fixation is
usually unsuccessful. Arthrodesis of the tarsometatarsal joints is the best treatment
and yields good results, and virtually normal function is anticipated.
Arthrodesis
The joints are exposed by means of a dorsal or plantar approach.1 The digital flexor
or extensor tendons are alternately retracted medially and laterally to allow debride-
ment of articular cartilage of the joints. These joints do not form a straight
line across the tarsus; therefore, each one must be curetted independently. Several
fixation techniques are adaptable to this condition.
Intramedullary Pin and Tension Band Wire.  This method works well and
requires minimal equipment (Figure 20-37, C and D). Transverse holes for the wire
(18-20 gauge) are drilled in the bases of the calcaneus and the metatarsal bones.
 Placing the proximal end of the wire in the base of the calcaneus shortens the wire
compared to placing it over the pin at the tuber calcanei and causes the wire to cross
closer to the tarsometatarsal joint. The wire must be placed deep to the superficial
digital flexor tendon. Because of the collective quarter-moon cross-sectional shape
of the proximal metatarsal bones, it is unlikely that the drill will go through more
708
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
Torn plantar tarsal
fibrocartilage
A
Lateral
B
Plantar
Recesser
Steinmann pin
Stainless
steel wire
Cancellous
bone graft
C
Lateral
DPlantar
Cancellous
bone graft
_atera
G
H
Dorsal
FGURE 20-37.
 Hyperextension of the tarsometatarsal joints. A and B, Rupture of plantar
 tarsal fibrocartilage removes the tension band support for the joint and allows hyperexten-
sion to develop. C and D, Arthrodesis by pin and tension band wire. A plantar approach is
used to expose the joint for cartilage debridement.' Stainless steel wire (18-20 gauge) is placed
through bone tunnels in the distal calcaneus and proximal metatarsals. The Steinmann pin
%4 to % inch (2.0-3.2 mm) in diameter is driven into the fourth metatarsal and recessed into
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
60
simpler method than the tension band wire involves replacing the wire with two transfixation
pins placed to penetrate tarsal and metatarsal bones. The cost of this simpler procedure is the
use of coaptation splintage until fusion is present. F and G, Lateral bone plate fixation for
arthrodesis. At least two screws in the fourth tarsal bone and three screws in the metatarsals
are needed for this situation. The cuttable plate (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) will simplify plac-
ing an adequate number of screws in each segment. In large breeds, bending loads on the
medial side are neutralized with screw and wire fixation. External support in a cast or splint
ventional clamp fixation (left) and the use of polymethyl methacrylate dental tray cement as
a connecting rod (rigbt) are illustrated. Fixation pins are bent for more stability in the cement.
See text for details.
than three of the four bones. A small Steinmann pin 5/64 to 1/s inch (2.0-3.2 mm) in
diameter is driven through the calcaneus, across the fourth tarsal bone, and into the
base of metatarsal IV. It is then retracted 1 cm, cut short, and countersunk beneath
the cartilage of the tuber calcanei. It is worthwhile to predrill a hole in the calcaneus
for the pin with a slightly undersized bone drill. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is
packed into the joint space before the wire is tightened (see Chapter 3). Because the
pin crosses the calcaneoquartal joint, spontaneous fusion of the joint often follows.
If the joint does not fuse, the IM pin will usually migrate proximally and irritate the
superficial digital flexor tendon, necessitating removal of the pin.
Intramedullary Pin and Transfixation Pins.  A simplified method of tarso-
 metatarsal arthrodesis has been reported by Penwick and Clark.31 The tension band wire
is replaced by transfixation pins that cross the joint in an X pattern (Figure 20-37, E).
The advantage of being able to do the procedure from a dorsolateral approach and
thus avoid the more complicated plantar area for wire implantation is offset by the
need for coaptation splintage until fusion. The Steinmann pin can be placed in a ret-
rograde manner from the distal surface of the fourth tarsal proximally through the
calcaneus, where it is retracted and then driven distally into metatarsal IV. The
 rg ud al no snu a u unsiano aq uo ud uus
removal.
Bone Plate. Lateral plate fixation also provides excellent stabilization
(Figure 20-37, F and G). A five-hole plate of appropriate size is attached to the
fourth, central, and distal tarsal bones proximally and to the metatarsals distally.
Ideally, three screws should be placed in the fourth tarsal bone, but this is rarely pos-
sible with normal plates. The VCP (Synthes) is particularly adaptable to the small
and medium-sized breeds because it will ensure an adequate number of screws in
each bone. Rarely will more than three of the metatarsals be engaged by any drill
hole. A lateral bony projection of the base of metatarsal V will need to be removed
to allow seating of the plate. Addition of wire and screw fixation medially is indi-
 sas eid a xa  A ae p asaq saaa r  pa
metacarpal I1. Autogenous cancellous bone grafting of the joint spaces is advisable
 of the tarsometatarsal joints has been described.30
Extemal Fixator Stabilization of this arthrodesis is also possible by means of a type
 II external skeletal fixator This method is advantageous when open wounds are associ-
ated with the injury and when bone plate fixation is not available. The fixation pins can
710
Part Ill—Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
be connected conventionally with clamps, as on the left side of Figure 20-37, H, or by
means of polymethyl methacrylate cement (dental tray cement or hoof repair acrylic;
see Chapter 2), as on the right side of Figure 20-37, H. The joint is approached and
articular cartilage removed by power bur or curettage as described earlier.
 Autogenous cancellous bone from the proximal tibia is placed in the joint space
(see Chapter 3). Two fixation pins are placed transversely in the distal tarsal bones
Sd a i aua o uae aq isn re sdu u asn m uex a 
are spaced widely enough to allow placement of the clamps. Two or more pins are
placed distally in the metatarsal bones. The pins are then connected by clamps or
cement. If cement is to be used, the fixation pins can be bent at a right angle at the
protruding end to provide more surface contact for the cement. The cement is mixed
until reaching a doughlike consistency, then molded into a rod approximately
 3/4 inch (2 cm) in diameter and hand-packed onto the fixation pins. The arthrodesis
site must be stabilized until the cement has hardened, typically 8 to 10 minutes from
the start of mixing.
Aftercare.  External casting is not needed with the tension band wire or external
fixator technique, but it is advised with bone plating, because the plate is not in a
tension band position, and for the pin and transfixation pin method. A short lateral
splint or cast or the external fixator is maintained until radiographic signs of fusion
are noted, usually 8 to 10 weeks postoperatively. Exercise should be severely limited
through this period and is slowly returned to normal 4 weeks after splint or fixator
removal. If the calcaneoquartal joint does not fuse spontaneously with IM pin and
tension band wire or transfixation pin fixation, the pin may migrate because of
motion at the joint. This will create considerable soft tissue irritation and require
removal of the pin after fusion is complete.
Tarsometatarsal Subluxation with Dorsomedial Instability
Although angular displacement may not appear severe with this injury, it is nonethe-
less a disabling problem (Figure 20-38, A). This is because the medial tarsus is the
tension side, and attempted weight bearing further aggravates valgus deviation.
Diagnosis
Tarsometatarsal subluxation with dorsomedial instability is rarely spontaneous and
usually is directly attributable to trauma; thus it may be associated with other local
or remote injuries. The instability can be appreciated on palpation but probably
cannot be differentiated from distal intertarsal subluxation. Radiographs of the
ssp    snu ae sod passs a u ns
Treatment
Cast fixation generally yields poor results, and primary repair of these small ligaments
is rarely possible. However, simple arthrodesis carries a good prognosis.
Arthrodesis
A medial incision is made directly over the affected joints. Articular cartilage is debrided
 in the second and third tarsometatarsal joints by high-speed bur or curette. Bone screws
are placed in the central and fourth tarsal bones and in the bases of metatarsals II, III,
and IV. Stainless steel wire (20-22 gauge; 0.8-0.6 mm) is looped around the screw heads
and tightened (Figure 20-38, B and C). A second technique applicable here is cross-
pinning of the tarsometatarsal joint with Kirschner wires (Figure 20-38, D). A tension
band wire placed between the pins provides good stability.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
711
Torn
Stainless
ligaments
steel wire
BDorsal
CMedial
ADorsal
FIGURE 20-38. Tarsometatarsal subluxation with dorsomedial instability. A, Valgus defor-
mity develops as a result of disruption of the dorsomedial tarsometatarsal ligaments. B and
C, Direct medial approach exposes the affected joints, and articular cartilage is removed.
Bone screws are placed in the central and fourth tarsal and metatarsals II, Il, and IV. Stainless
steel wire (20-22 gauge) is placed around the screw heads and tightened. D, Support can also
Aftercare.  A short lateral splint or cast is applied and maintained for 3 weeks
(see Figures 2-22 and 2-26). Exercise is limited throughout the eighth postoperative
week. The pins may migrate after active weight bearing starts, at which time they
should be removed.
Tarsometatarsal Subluxation with Dorsal Instability
s ae si  s  pe pd e  spm s
induced in most cases; it is rarely associated with known trauma (Figure 20-39, A).
Diagnosis
 History and clinical signs of tarsometatarsal subluxation with dorsal instability are
similar to those of proximal intertarsal dorsal instability, that is, a rather vague and
 intermittent lameness. Because the deformity is not seen when the dog is standing,
stress position will confirm the site of instability.
Treatment
This tarsometatarsal subluxation may be one of the lesser tarsal injuries, often
responding to cast fixation for 3 to 4 weeks. The larger the dog and the more insta-
bility present, the greater is the need for surgical treatment. All chronic cases should
712
Part ll—-Fractures and Orthopedic Conditions of the Hindlimb
FIGURE 20-39. Tarsometatarsal
subluxation with dorsal instability.
B Medial
A, Flexion deformity can
be
induced from tearing of the dorsal
ligaments of the tarsometatarsal
Torn
joints. B and C, Cross-pinning
ligaments 
through paired medial and lateral
Steinmann pin 
 incisions is sufficient to stabilize
or
this condition. The pins should be
Kirschner wire
seated close to the bones to pre-
 vent skin irritation. These pins can
also be driven from the tarsus in
the opposite direction.
A Medial
C Dorsal
undergo surgical treatment. Primary repair of these small ligaments is rarely possi-
 ble, but simple arthrodesis carries a good prognosis. Because the plantar ligaments
and fibrocartilage are intact, only minimal fixation is required.
Arthrodesis
Paired medial and lateral incisions expose the joints. Small pins or Kirschner wires
are driven from the proximal metatarsals into the tarsal bones in an X fashion
(Figure 20-39, B and C). It is best not to cross the proximal intertarsal joint with
the pins. Each pin is driven to the desired depth, retracted 1 cm, and cut 1 cm from
the bone. A hook is bent in the pin and is then tapped back against the bone. Pins
ss an o s a   a ai u  aq oe ns
Alternatively, combined medial and lateral screw and wire fixation similar to
Figure 20-38, B and C, can be used.
Aftercare.  A short-leg lateral splint or cast is maintained for 4 weeks
(see Figures 2-22 and 2-26). Exercise is restricted through 8 weeks postoperatively.
The pins will almost certainly migrate when active weight bearing starts; they
should then be removed.
Luxation and Subluxation of Metatarsophalangeal and
 Interphalangeal Joints
These injuries are identical to those of the forefoot (see Chapter 14, Figures 14-39
through 14-43).
References
1. Piermattei DL, Johnson KA: An atlas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
2.
Assoc 23:41, 1987.
 20—Fractures and Other Orthopedic Injuries of the Tarsus, Metatarsus, and Phalanges
713
3. Swaim SF: Management and bandaging of soft tissue injuries of dog and cat feet. J Arm Anirm Hosp
Assoc 21:329, 1985.
4. Morgan PW, Binnington AG, Miller CW: The effect of occlusive and semi-occlusive dressings on the
healing of acute full-thickness skin wounds on the forelimbs of dogs, Vet Suig 23:494-502, 1994.
5. Beardsley SL, Schrader SC: Treatment of dogs with wounds of the limbs caused by shearing forces:
98 cases {1975-1993), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 207:1071-1075, 1995.
6. Ost PC, Dee JF, Dee LG: Fractures of the calcaneus in racing greyhounds, Vet Surg 16:S3, 1987.
7. Mauterer JV, Prata RG, Carberry CA, Schrader SC: Displacerment of the tendon of the superficial
digital flexor muscle in dogs: 10 cases (1983-1991), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 203:1162-1165, 1993.
 8. Reinke JD, Mughannam AF, Owens JM: Lateral luxation of the superficial digital flexor tendon in
12 dogs, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:303-309, 1993.
 9. Bonneau NH, Olivieri M, Breton L: Avulsion of the gastrocnemius tendon in the dog causing
flexion of the hock and digits, J A Ani Hosp Assoc 19:717, 1983.
10. Muetstege FJ: The classification of canine Achilles tendon lesions, Vet Commp Orthop Trauma 6:
53-55, 1993.
11. Reinke JD, Mughannarm AF, Owens JM: Avulsion of the gastrocnernius tendon in 11 dogs, J At
Anim Hosp Assoc 29:410-418, 1993.
12. Braden TD: Musculotendinous rupture of the Achilles apparatus and repair using internal fixation
only, Vet Med Smatl Anim Clinician 69:729-735, 1974.
13.
Weisner RE, Berry CR, et al: Osteochondrosis of the lateral trochlear ridge of the talus in seven
Rottweiler dogs, Vet Surg 19:435-439, 1990.
14. Smith MM, Vasseur PB, Morgan JP: Clinical evaluation of dogs after surgical and nonsurgical
management of osteochondritis dissecans of the talus, J A Vet Med Assoc 187:31, 1985.
talus in the dog, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 4:168-176, 1989.
16. Montgomery RD, Hathcock JT, et al: Osteochondritis dissecans of the canine tarsal joint, Comp
Cont Educ 16:835-845, 1994.
17. Miyabayashi T, Biller DS, Manley PA, Matushek KJ: Use of a flexed dorsoplantar radiographic view
of the talocrural joint to evaluate lameness in two dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc 199:598-600, 1991.
18. Dew TL, Martin RA: A caudal approach to the tibiotarsal joint, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 29:
117-121, 1993.
19.Aron DN,Mahaffey MB,Rowland GN:Freechondral fragment involving the lateral trochlear ridge
of the talus in a dog, J A Vet Med Assoc 186:1095-1096, 1985.
20. Lesser A,Solimen Ss: Experimental evaluation of tendon transfer for the treatment of sciatic nerve
paralysis in the dog, Vet Surg 9:72, 1980.
21. Doverspike M, Vasseur PB: Clinical findings and complications after talocrural arthrodesis in dogs:
experience with six cases, J Amm Anim Hosp Assoc 27:553-559, 1991.
22. Gorse MJ, Earley TD, Aron DN: Tarsocrural arthrodesis: long-terrm functional results, J Am Ani
Hosp Assoc 27:231-235, 1991.
23. Klause SE, Piermattei DL, Schwarz PD: Tarsocrural arthrodesis: complications and recormmenda-
tions, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 12:119, 1989.
24. Sumner-Smith G, Kuzma A: A technique for arthrodesis of the canine tarsocrural joint,J Smatl Anim
Pract 30:65, 1989.
25.Kirsch JA,Dejardin LM,DeCamp CE,et al: Effect of an intramedullary pin on the mechanical prop-
erties of plate pantarsal arthrodesis: a comparative in vitro analysis in dogs, Vet Surg 32:489, 2003.
26. Dee JF, Dee J, Piermattei DL: Classfication, management, and repair of central tarsal fractures in
the racing greyhound, J Am Anir Hosp Assoc 12:398-405, 1976.
27. Taylor RA, Dee JF: Tarsus and metatarsus. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of sall animal surgery,
ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders, p 1885.
28. Boudrieau RJ, Dee JF, Dee LG: Central tarsal bone fractures in racing greyhounds: a review of
114 cases, J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:1486, 1984.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 184:1492, 1984.
30. Wilke VL, Robinson TM, Dueland RT: Intertarsal and tarsometatarsal arthrodesis using a plantar
approach, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 13:28-33, 2000.
31. Penwick RC, Clark DM: A simple technique for tarsometatarsal arthrodesis in small animals, J A
Anim Hosp Assoc 24:183-188, 1988.
21
Fractures and Luxations
of the Mandible and Maxilla
Fractures of the jaws are usually caused by automobile or other forms of trauma
and are characterized by swelling, deviation of the segments, malocclusion of the
teeth, and blood-stained saliva.1 With few exceptions, all jaw fractures are open and
contaminated or infected. These fractures may be unilateral or bilateral with single
or multiple fracture lines. Mandibular fractures accounted for 3% of all canine and
15% of all feline fractures in two studies.23 Symphyseal fractures were the most
common injury in cats (73%), and the premolar region of the mandibular body was
the most common site for fractures in the dog. Fractures of the maxilla are relatively
rare compared with mandibular fractures. Vehicular trauma is the most common
cause of fractures in the head; therefore, associated life-threatening trauma of other
regions is often present. Small and toy breeds with gingivitis and alveolar disease are
prone to pathological fracture. Extreme care must be taken during dental extraction
to avoid iatrogenic problems
 In general, healing is rapid (3-5 weeks) in the rostral mandible but more delayed
(4-17 weeks) in the caudal region.2 The exception to this general statement on healing
is fractures through infected sockets and symphyseal fractures in elderly toy breeds
when considerable osteoporosis precedes the fracture. Complications are fairly com-
mon (34% in dogs), with malocclusion the most frequent complication, followed by
infection and delayed union or nonunion.2
DIAGNOSIS AND GENERAL TREATMENT
Diagnosis is usually based on a history of trauma, sudden onset, appearance, and a
palpable fracture. Radiography is also helpful in discerning fracture lines and dis-
placement; however, it is supplemental to a thorough physical examination under
anesthesia or sedation because fracture lines can be difficult to see and to orient
radiographically.
The objective of treatment should be restoration of functional occlusion by fixa-
tion that allows the animal to have sufficient use of the mouth to eat and drink after
reduction and fixation. With few exceptions, this goal can be achieved.
 Treatment varies considerably, and in many cases, some type of internal fixation
is indicated. The tension band side of both jaws is the alveolar border, and fixation
should be applied as close to this side as possible (Figure 21-1). With a few excep-
tions, bone fragments are replaced in the reduction process and are not discarded.
Realignment is usually best checked with the jaw closed and the teeth occluded.
717
718
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
FIGURE 21-1. Masticatory forces
exerted by muscles (black arrows)
Rights were not grantedtoinclde thi fgure in electroicmedia.
cause ventral bending of the
Pleasereferto the printed pubication.
mandible, with tension forces on
the lingual border and compressive
forces on the ventral border (open
arrows). (From Sumner-Smith G:
Fractures of the mandible and
maxilla. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB,
Prieur WD, editors: Manual of
internal fixation in small animais,
New York, 1984, Springer- Verlag.)
FIGURE 21-2. Pharyngostomy
tube. After the animal is stabilized
on gas anesthesia, the tracheal
tube is changed to pass through
a pharyngostomy opening and
down the trachea. This allows
fixation to be applied with the
mouth closed and the teeth
occluding.
After reduction and fixation, the torn gingiva is sutured to keep food and contaminants 
out of the wound. Suturing also aids in stabilizing the fracture segments and in convert-
ing the area to a closed fracture. Even though the tissues in the mouth are effective
in eliminating infection, administration of systemic antibiotics is recommended.3
 Chronic osteomyelitis associated with primary jaw fractures is rare when the patient
is treated with antibiotics at fixation.
more complicated cases, a tracheostomy, or preferably a pharyngostomy, is done to
 maintain anesthesia. This technique ensures an open airway while the animal's mouth
is closed, and the teeth can be occluded during the procedure, ensuring adequate
reduction during application of fixation. After the animal is stabilized on gas anes-
thesia, the tracheal tube is changed to pass through the pharyngostomy opening
(Figure 21-2). After the surgery is completed, the tracheal tube is removed, and the
pharyngostomy opening is allowed to heal by granulation. In some cases a stomach
tube is implanted through the pharyngostomy for postoperative feeding, although
 direct gastrostomy intubation is preferred.
FRACTURES OF THE MANDIBLE
Mandibular Symphysis
The method of immobilization depends on the presence or absence of incisor teeth,
the stability of the reduced fragments, presence of infection or osteoporosis, and to
some extent the size of the patient.14
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
719
FixationMethods
Interdental Wiring
 If the incisor teeth are present and the fracture-separation is stable, a simple, stainless 
steel interdental wire may be adequate, especially in smaller patients (Figure 21-3, A).
 If the bases of the third incisor and canine teeth fit too close together to permit
E
F
G
H
FIGURE 21-3.  Fixation of the mandibular symphysis. A, Simple interrupted stainless steel wire
suture. B, Hand chuck forces a Kirschner drill wire between the base of the third incisor and
ca nine teeth, allowing easy placement of wire sutures. C and D, Immobilization by use of an encir-
cling wire. The wire (usually 20 gauge) is inserted by using two 16-gauge needles and is twisted
Outside the skin on the ventral surface. The mouth is closed with the teeth occluding when the final
twisting is done. E, Insertion of a mandibular transfixation pin, smooth or threaded, or a bone
screw (F) to improve stability. G, Additional stability can be achieved by adding a figure-of-8
 orthopedic wire to a mandibular transfixation pin. This wire loops around each end of the pin and
is laid across the surface of the oral mucosa to compress the fracture as it is tightened. H, Suggested
location from the lateral surface for insertion, which is usually just rostral to the mental foramen.
720
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
 passage of the wire, a hand chuck may be used to force a Kirschner wire between
them, allowing easy placement of the wire (Figure 21-3, B). Wire gauge size 20 to
 22 (0.8-0.6 mm) is usually applicable.
Cerclage Wire
 The method most often used in smaller dogs and cats consists of an encircling wire
(Figure 21-3, C and D). Table 21-1 lists the gauges of wire that fit into preplaced
holes and of surgical wire that fits into different sizes of needles.
 The wire is inserted through the skin using a 16- to 18-gauge hypodermic needle
 from the ventral midline at a point that will result in the wire being placed at the
caudal gingival margin of the incisor teeth. The needle is directed along the bone on
one side to follow the bone under the skin and gums, and the wire is inserted
through the needle. The needle is withdrawn so that the wire protrudes ventrally,
after which the needle is redirected through the same skin hole to the opposite side
of the mandible. The free oral end of the wire is inserted into the needle, and the
needle and wire are withdrawn ventrally. The wire is tightened until no vertical
shearing motion can be induced between the mandibles. It is important to test
for this motion because the fracture line cannot be seen. The twist is cut so that it
just protrudes from the skin; removal is accomplished by cutting the wire intraorally
and pulling it out ventrally by means of the twist. Wire of 20 to 22 gauge
(0.8-0.6 mm) is used in cats and small dogs, with 18 gauge (1.0 mm) used for larger
breeds.
Transfixation Pin or Lag Screw
Stability may be improved by the insertion of a transmandibular pin (smooth or
threaded) or a bone screw to neutralize shear forces at the fracture site (Figure 21-3,
 E to H). Figure 21-3, H, suggests the location from the lateral surface for insertion,
which is usually just rostral to the mental foramen. These methods, especially the
lag screw, are indicated when gross instability is present, as is often the case when
the symphyseal fracture is associated with other mandibular fractures. Combining
 cerclage wiring and transfixation pinning is also a simple way of providing excellent
stability.
Transfixation Pin and Figure-of-8 Wire
Another fixation method for rostral fractures, if other wiring techniques are insuf-
ficient for stability, is the pin and figure-of-8 wire. After the fracture has been reduced,
a small Steinmann pin is inserted across the mandibles, either just rostral or caudal
to the canine teeth, carefully avoiding the teeth roots. Figure-of-8 orthopedic wire
TABLE 21-1. STAINLESS STEEL WIRE (SSWW) DIAMETER SIZES FOR PINHOLES
AND NEEDLES
Gauge
Fits Into/Through
Pinhole/Needle
18-gauge SSW
Fits into
0.045-inch Kirschner pinhole
20-gauge SSW
Fits into
0.045-inch Kirschner pinhole
22-gauge SSW
Fits into
0.035-inch Kirschner pinhole
24-gauge SSW
Fits into
0.028-inch Kirschner pinhole
18-gauge sw
Fits through
16-ga uge needle 
20-gauge SSw
Fits through
alpaau aan ea-i1
 22-gauge Ssw
Fits through
18-gauge needle 
24-gauge SSW
Fits through
20-gauge needle
18-gauge needle
Fits into
0.062-inch Kirschner pinhole
20-gauge needle 
Fits into
0.035-inch Kirschner pinhole
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
721
of 22, 20, or 18 gauge (0.6-1.0 mm) is placed around each end of the pin and
through the mouth over the oral mucosa of the mandible. The figure-of-8 wire is
tightened with the knot at the aboral surface, and the pin is cut off short or bent
 Over (Figure 21-3, G). A small quantity of dental acrylic may be applied to the sharp
points of the pin and wire to reduce irritation of the mucosa of the lips and gums.
Aftercare
 Good stability is usually achieved by these fixation methods, and postoperative care
Pious soq no son mauo , ou pue os Aey aq Pous poog ado sou st
be allowed. Fractures in the mandibular symphysis usually heal rapidly, but there is
little that can be done to evaluate healing because no callus is usually seen radio-
graphically. The implants cause little irritation, so there should be no urgency to
remove them. Eight weeks is adequate for healing in most cases, and this allows for
the delay seen in older osteoporotic patients and the delay caused by infection.
Mandibular Body
A wide variety of fractures may be encountered in the mandibular body because it
is the most common fracture location in the dog.2 Ingenuity is required to devise the
best type of fixation. No single technique is applicable to all fractures, and the choice
often must be made between several applicable methods. A method or combination
of methods must be used that gives stability at the fracture site. Critical to under-
standing the mechanics of fixation in the mandible is to appreciate that normal
masticatory muscle forces will bend the rostral fragment ventrally (see Figure 21-1).
Thus the gingival margin of the bone is loaded in tension and the ventral cortex is
 loaded in compression, and the effects of both these forces must be evaluated relative
 to each specific fracture and each fixation technique.
Open Approach
The body of the mandible is approached simply by an incision over the ventral border
(Figure 21-4) or by incision and elevation of gingival tissue.
FIGURE 21-4. Ventral approach to the body of the
mandible showing the digastricus muscle (caudal),
platysma muscle (lateral), and mylohyoid muscle (medial).
A branch of the facial vein crosses the digastricus muscle.
722
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
Fixation
Tape Muzzle Coaptation
Simple tape muzzles are typically used on many shaft fractures. Muzzling the upper
 and lower jaws together provides mediolateral stability to the mandible by the inter-
digitation of the canine teeth, as well as stability in the vertical plane by simply lim-
 iting motion. Muzzles are used for primary fixation and for support and protection
of internal fixation. Primary fixation muzzles are most useful for sta ble body fractures
in the midbody and caudal regions; these muzzles are not suitable for rostral fractures
 or for cats or brachycephalic breeds. Soft tissue injuries of the facial or mandibular
regions can complicate muzzle application.
Muzzles are best applied to the sedated or anesthetized patient. They usually are
not applied tightly enough to shut the mouth completely; rather, an opening large
enough for the tongue is left rostrally so that liquids can be consumed. A 1- to 3-ml
syringe casing works well as a bite block during muzzle application, as shown in
Figure 21-5. Feeding consists of slurried dog food. The small amount of motion of
the mandible permitted by this opening does not create a problem if the fracture is
reasonably stable. If the muzzle is used for unstable fractures, however, it must be
applied tightly, and feeding by stomach, pharyngostomy, or jejunostomy tube is
 necessary. This results in considerable nursing care and is a good reason to consider
p man e pasn aq ose r odns azzn sa aqisun rn ex peua!
after internal fixation (see following discussion). This prevents muscle spasms from
deviating the adequately reduced jaw to the side. Fixation for 3 to 4 weeks is adequate
 in many midbody fractures, especially in immature patients.
Interarcade Wire
Wiring the mandible to the maxilla can be substituted for muzzle application when
the muzzle cannot be used, for the reasons stated earlier. The basic method shown
in Figure 21-6 can be applied at many levels of the mandible, taking care to avoid
teeth roots. As with the muzzle, the mouth can be left slightly open to allow liquids
B
+
FIGURE 21-5. Tape muzzle application. A, Bite block, such as a syringe case, is placed
between the incisor teeth. The block should be just thick enough to allow passage ofthe tongue
for drinking. Adhesive tape is placed around the jaws with moderate pressure, with the adhesive
facing out. B, Straps for tying behind the head, to prevent slippage of the muzzle, are fashioned
by additional pieces of tape on either side, with the adhesive side out and then folded back
onto itself. C, Additional circular wraps of tape anchor the straps. A ventral chin strap can
be added at the caudal end of the mandible to prevent the tied straps from coming over the
top of the head. Test to be certain that there is room for the tongue to protrude.
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
723
to be consumed, or it can be closed tightly for maximum stability. Maximum stability
is provided by the method shown in Figure 21-17.
Interdental Wire
Wiring around the crowns of the teeth near the gingival margin works best when
there is a solid tooth on each side of the fracture line and when the fracture is simple
in nature (Figure 21-7, A and C). The wire functions as a tension band, and the
B
FIGURE 21-6. Interarcade wiring is useful when the tape muzzle is not applicable because
of soft tissue injuries, in brachycephalic dogs, or in cats. A, Kirschner wire is used to develop
a hole at the margin of the alveolar bone between the roots of the fourth premolar teeth, and
a loop of 20- to 22-gauge (0.9- to 0.7-mm) wire is placed through the holes. B, With a bite
block in place as in Figure 20-5, one end of the wire is brought over or around the crown of
the lower premolar and twisted. Test to be certain that there is room for the tongue to protrude.
FIGURE 21-7. Fixation of a fracture of the body of the mandible. A, Interdental wire
 around the bases of the fourth premolar and the first molar. C, Interdental wire around the
bases of the first and second molars. B, Modified method, with wire through drill holes
between the roots of the adjacent teeth.
724
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
ventral cortex must be intact to buttress the compression forces. Occasionally, wire
placement is modified so that the wire can be passed between the roots of the adjacent
teeth when the shape of the crown prevents secure wire anchorage (Figure 21-7, B).
The guide hole is made with a small Kirschner wire and a pin chuck. The wire is passed
through gingival tissue, with no attempt made to elevate the soft tissue. The twisted
ends should be kept on the labial side of the gum and must be carefully bent flat with
the gum to ensure no soft tissue irritation. Pressure necrosis of gingiva will result even-
tually in complete or partial covering of the wire by gum tissue and little irritation
as long as the wire remains tight and stable. (See later section for aftercare instructions.)
Interfragmentary Wire
Additional stability can be added to interdental wiring by supplementing it in some
 oblique, multiple, and noncomminuted unstable fractures with simple interrupted
wire fixation placed ventrally on the mandible (Figure 21-8). After a ventral open
approach, the fragments are drilled, usually with a Kirschner wire or 2-mm bone
drill, so that the inserted wire crosses the fracture line at a right angle. These wires
are left in place unless removal is indicated because of loosening or infection.
Stability must be accomplished at the fracture site; if not, some modification or
another fixation method is in order. (See later section for aftercare instructions.)
Intramedullary Pinning
Although intramedullary pin fixation has been used for mandibular fractures, the
difficulty of pin insertion and the marginal stability provided argue against their
continued use when so many other methods are available.
Intraoral Splint
A simple intraoral splint can be used for midbody and rostral fractures (Figure 21-9).
A Steinmann pin 5/64 to 1/s inch (2.0-3.2 mm) in diameter is bent to fit on the lin-
gual side of the mandible along the gingival margins. It is then secured to the
 mandible by wire that is looped around the pin and then passed through the bone
to the labial side, where the wire ends are twisted and bent flat.
Intraoral splinting with dental acrylic molded to the crowns of the teeth has been
 used by some, but results have not been encouraging, with accumulation of food
A
B
FIGURE 21-8. Examples of combined interdental and interfragmentary wiring of stable
 ma ndibular body fractures.
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
725
B
C
FIGURE 21-9. A and B, Dorsal and ventral views of a rostral stable bilateral body fracture
treated with both interfragmentary and interdental wires. C, Dorsal view of bilateral rostral
body fracture stabilized with an intraoral splint fashioned from a Steinmann pin. The splint
is bent to shape and wired to the mandible through holes in the mandibular body placed
between teeth or between tooth roots. Rostrally, the wiring incorporates the canine and
incisor teeth. The most rostral wire may also be placed through a drill hole if good wire security
cannot be obtained on the teeth.
particles and exudate complicating postoperative treatment. An alternative is to use
 dental composite to cement the canines of the upper and lower jaws together; in effect,
this splints the fractured mandible to the intact maxilla.6 Teeth are cleaned and
smoothed with pumice to prepare them for bonding. The canine teeth are etched with
acid, and a dental adhesive is applied. The fracture is then reduced, and the dental
the mouth open approximately 1 cm. The effect is similar to the interarcade wiring
technique. One study reports consistent success at achieving healing of mandible
fractures, although the dental composite usually broke at 3 to 7 weeks after repair.6
External Fixator
Th external fixator device is useful for the following14,s.7:
1. Nonunion fractures; bone grafting is indicated in many cases (see Chapter 3).
2. Multiple fractures (Figure 21-10, A and B).
3. Bilateral fractures (Figure 21-10, C).
 4. Unstable or gunshot fractures when bone is missing (Figure 21-10, D).
The gums are sutured after reduction and fixation. During the healing
 process the missing segment may fill in if bone chips and periosteum are still
present. In other cases a bone graft is indicated.
Surgical Procedure.  Two pins are usually inserted in each fragment, but one pin
 in the rostral fragment may be sufficient if it passes transversely through both halves
of the mandible (Figure 21-10, A, B, C). The procedure is usually as follows:
1. Close the animal's mouth with the fracture reduced and the teeth occluding.
2. Insert the rostral and caudal pins through the skin and soft tissues into the
bone as ventrally as possible to avoid tooth roots, nerves, and vessels.
726
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
C
D
FIGURE 21-10.
External fixator. A and B, Multiple fractures. C, Bilateral fractures.
 D, Unstable fracture with bone missing. In most cases the splint can be applied so that it does
not extend beyond the length of the mandible; thus it does not interfere with eating or drinking.
If the bone chips are left in place and the gums closed, in most cases the bone deficit will
bridge over without the addition of a bone graft.
3. Positive-profile threaded fixator pins improve fixator stability and
 durability. The use of threaded fixator pins is most important in 
comminuted mandibular fractures or fractures with deficits of bone that
may require longer-duration fixator stability.
 4. Attach the bar with single clamps and an empty center clamp.
5. Insert the third and fourth (if needed) pins through the center clamp and
tighten. This essentially lines up the pins in a common plane and attaches
them with single clamps and a common connecting bar.
In some patients, interdental wiring is indicated to improve stability (Figure 21-10, C).
In general the splint is well tolerated. (See later section for aftercare instructions.)
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
727
Acrylic Bar External Fixator
Because the external fixator splint has some inherent limitations in pin placement
and connecting bar attachment, polymethyl methacrylate (nonsterile dental acrylic)
may be substituted as the connecting bar and is often simpler to apply than the splint
with clampss (Figure 21-11, A-C). See Chapter 2 for more complete description of
the application of this type of connecting bar.
Surgical Procedure. A tracheal tube is inserted through a pharyngostomy or
tracheostomy incision to ensure an open airway. The mouth is closed, and functional
be placed in each major bone segment. Small fragments may be skewered with diver-
gent Kirschner wires. A major advantage of this technique is the ability to stabilize
multiple fragments from a variety of angles, usually using more and smaller-diameter
pins than with clamp fixation. This is especially important in smaller dogs and cats
with complex fractures, where there is no room for standard fixator clamps. “Mini"
positive-profile threaded fixator pins (IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview, Texas) are
available with a roughened pin surface that is designed to assist with adherence to
the acrylic (see Figure 21-11, A). If smooth pins are used, the protruding pins are
bent to better hold the molded acrylic connecting bar (Figure 21-11, C). The acrylic
usually takes about 8 to 10 minutes to set, and the teeth are maintained in occlusion
until hardening is well advanced. Unilateral or bilateral splints can be constructed
depending on the instability of the fracture (Figure 21-11, B and C). (See later section
for aftercare instructions.)
After healing, the pins can be cut between the acrylic and jaw and removed with
a hand chuck. Alternatively, the acrylic bar can be cut with a saw between each pin
to allow pin removal. Because bilateral fixation extends rostrally beyond the lower
jaw, it may interfere with eating, and hand feeding of semisolid food may be necessary.
Bone Plates
Bone plates are particularly useful for the more complex fractures and bilateral
fractures.s7 They afford good rigidity and almost unrestricted use of the jaws
 immediately after surgery.
Surgical Procedure. A pharyngostomy or tracheostomy incision is made, with
insertion of a tracheal tube to ensure an open airway. The jaw is exposed with a
ventral incision. Compression forceps are applied to compress the fracture segments
and hold them in the reduced position while the bone plate is contoured to fit the
surface as perfectly as possible (Figure 21-12, A and B). The plate is then attached
with bone screws. Contouring the plate is the most important step in ensuring
 proper occlusion of the teeth. Reduction and occlusion will be lost as the screws are
tightened unless the contouring is almost perfect. The plate is usually placed laterally
near the ventral border to avoid placing the screws in the mandibular canal and
injuring tooth roots. The reconstruction plate (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) is particu-
larly useful to allow bending to follow the curve of the ventral cortex of the
mandible (Figure 21-12, C). (See Figure 2-75 for suitable plate and screw sizes.)
 In some cases, it is advisable to add interdental wiring for additional tension band
stability.
Microplates and miniplates are available in stainless steel and titanium for use in
mandibular and maxillary fractures in small dogs and cats.8-10 Plates vary from
0.4 to 1.0 mm in width, with screw sizes of 0.9 to 2.0 mm, depending on the
manufacturer. These tiny plates are similar to the larger reconstruction plates in that
they are malleable in three dimensions. Some are also designed as cuttable plates.
728
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
B
C
 FIGURE 21-11. Modified acrylic external fixator. A, With the mouth closed, the fracture
reduced, and the teeth occluding, two or more Kirschner wires are inserted into each major
segment. “Mini” positive-profile threaded fixator pins (IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview,
Texas) are available with a roughened pin surface designed to aid in adherence to the acrylic.
 B, Acrylic has been molded to incorporate the pins into a unilateral fixator C, Smooth pins
have been used to construct this bilateral fixator. The wires are bent and included in an acrylic
 mold to prevent slippage of the pins. This apparatus has the disadvantage of protruding
beyond the length of the jaw, thus making it more vulnerable to bumping and cumbersome
when eating. In many cases the same Kirschner-Ehmer configuration can be applied by first
bending the stainless steel connecting bar of the external fixator, then inserting the fixator
 pins through the holes in the clamps and through the skin and soft tissue and into the bone.
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
729
FIGURE 21-12.
A, Fractured mandible immobilized with a "mini” dynamic compression
plate and tension wire, ventral view. B, Lateral view. C, Bilateral fracture immobilized with
two reconstruction plates, ventral and lateral views. The reconstruction plate is very adaptable
to contouring to fit the bone surface.
Although most appropriate for jaw fractures in small dogs and cats, microplates and
miniplates may also be used in larger dogs.
Aftercare
 Postoperative treatment in all cases of internal fixation consists primarily of restricting
the animal's jaw activity by feeding soft, small pieces of food. As mentioned earlier,
a muzzle interlocking the canine teeth helps prevent deviation caused by muscle spasm.
Chew bones, toys, or play that would stress the jaws should be eliminated until heal-
 ing is evident. Wire fixation requires the most protection, and plates or fixators
730
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
require the least. Some care must be exercised with fixators to keep food particles
cleaned from between the lips and the splint, particularly when the splint is bilateral
Vertical Ramus
 Because of the extensive musculature covering the vertical ramus region, there is
often little displacement of the fragments, and most ramus fractures can be treated
conservatively by muzzling or interarcade wiring. Various methods of internal fixation
may be used when conservative treatment is not practical, including Kirschner wires,
interfragmentary wire, and “mini" bone plates. External fixators are not applicable
because of the mediolateral thinness of the ramus.
Figure 21-13 illustrates a lateral approach to the ramus and temporomandibular
joint. Fixation methods for fractures of the ramus are shown in Figure 21-14.
Fractures of the condyles are usually not amenable to fixation because of the small
size of the bone fragments. Initial conservative treatment is indicated; if good function
does not return after removal of the muzzle or interarcade wires, excision arthroplasty
will permit adequate function. The condyle is excised to remove bony contact between
the mandible and temporal bone and to allow fibrous tissue invasion and a subsequent
false joint.
Luxation of Temporomandibular Joint
The temporomandibular joint (TMJ) can luxate either cranially or caudally as a
result of trauma. TMJ luxation may occur as an isolated injury, especially in the cat,
or may be associated with fractures of the mandible.
Diagnosis
The mandible and lower canine teeth are visibly displaced to either side of the upper
canines. Palpation will establish mediolateral laxity of the mandible, but it is usually
not possible to be sure of the direction of luxation. Standard-position radiographs
adequately outline the canine TMJ, but in the cat, slight rotation of the head in the
lateral view provides better visualization. The mandibular condyle can be seen either
cranial or caudal to the mandibular fossa. When the luxation is cranial, the rostral
mandible will be displaced to the contralateral side, and with a caudal luxation, the
displacement will be toward the ipsilateral side.
Reduction
 Closed reduction is usually possible for TMJ luxation. A fulcrum is introduced at
the level of the last molar teeth on the affected side. This is usually a plastic tuberculin
syringe for a cat, up to a 3- or 5-ml syringe for a large dog. The syringe is placed
transversely between the upper and lower last molars, and the rostral end of the
mandible is squeezed dorsally toward the maxilla, thus levering the caudal end
ventrally and " unlocking" the luxation. While holding the mandible in this position,
the rostral end is levered in the appropriate direction to reduce the luxation, then
slowly released. Reduction is verified by interdigitation of the canine teeth, since
several attempts may be needed to obtain reduction. Failure to reduce may lead
to open reduction, but little joint capsule is available to imbricate, and excision
arthroplasty as described earlier for condylar fractures may be indicated.
Aftercare
In the rare instance where the TMJ luxation is stable after reduction, no stabiliza-
tion is necessary, and soft food is provided as previously described for fractures
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
731
B
E
approach to the caudal angular portion of the ramus. Skin incision along the ventrolateral
border; separation of the platysma muscle exposes the digastricus muscle. B, Further separation 
of the soft tissue exposes portion of the mandible, masseter muscle, and digastric muscle.
C, Subperiosteal reflection of the masseter muscle exposes angular and condyloid processes
and masseteric fossa. D, Longitudinal skin incision along ventral border of zygomatic arch and
temporomandibular joint. E, Platysma muscle and fascia incised along same line. This tissue
is reflected ventrally, exposing the lateral surface of the joint and the upper portion of the
condyloid process. F, The tissue between the two incisions is tunneled beneath the visualization,
reduction, and fixation.
732
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
E
c
D
E
FIGURE 21-14. Fixation methods for fractures of the ramus. A, Fracture just rostral to the
angular process immobilized by a bone plate. B, Fracture between the angular and condyloid
processes immobilized by a bone plate. C, Condyloid process fracture immobilized by an
intramedullary pin placed from the ventral border of the mandible. D, Fracture rostral to the
angular process immobilized with an intramedullary pin placed through the angular process
and an intraoral wire at the angle of the mandible. E, Fracture between the angular and
condyloid processes immobilized by an interfragmentary wire and an intraoral wire at the
angle of the mandible.
In most cases, 1 to 2 weeks of support with a tape muzzle or interarcade wiring is
indicated.
Spontaneous Locking Open of Temporomandibular Joint
 Dysplasia and subluxation of the TMJ may result in locking of the jaw of the dog
in an extreme open position by lateral displacement of the mandibular coronoid
process outside and lateral to the zygomatic arch.11 This condition is generally spon-
taneous and is not the result of trauma. The clinical presentation is very dramatic
and causes serious mental distress to both dog and client. The dog can sometimes
successfully reduce the subluxation, but recurrence is common and may result in
chronic inflammation and fibrosis of the tissues surrounding the mandibular coronoid
process.
Diagnosis
The mandible is fixed in an extreme open position and cannot be closed manually.
Careful palpation of the zygomatic arch may reveal the malposition of the mandibu-
 lar coronoid process, or palpation may be nondiagnostic because of local swelling
 Lateral deviation of the jaw may be difficult to appreciate in the extreme open position.
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
733
A
B
FIGURE 21-15.
 Spontaneous locking open of the temporomandibular joint. A, Coronoid
process of the mandible is displaced and "locked" lateral to the zygomatic arch. B, Coronoid
process may be resected in recurrent cases and is generally curative.
captured lateral to the zygomatic arch (Figure 21-15, A). Computed tomography is
 generally not needed for diagnosis; however, it can describe the fibrotic mass associated
with the mandiublar coronoid in cases of chronic recurrence.
Reduction
Reduction is usually not possible without anesthesia. The mandible is opened as far
 as possible, and direct pressure is applied to reduce the mandibular coronoid process
 locked position, although chronic recurrence is common. Surgical resection of the
mandibular coronoid is very successful and prevents recurrence of the coronoid's
 malposition (Figure 21-15, B). An alternative surgical method is partial resection of
the zygomatic arch. The condition is usually unilateral; however, an intermittent
bilateral condition is possible.
Aftercare
No ancillary stabilization is necessary. Soft food is recommended for 1 month. The
client should be cautioned that locking could develop on the side opposite the surgery.
FRACTURES OF THE MAXILLA
Fractures of the incisive and maxillary bones are usually diagnosed readily by obser-
vation and palpation.4s.7 These fractures are accompanied by bleeding from the
nose and mouth, swelling, and varying degrees of malocclusion. The primary objec-
tive is reestablishment of dental occlusion and closing any communication between
nasal passages and the mouth. Accomplishing this goal usually returns approximately
normal appearance to the nose, upper jaw, and face.
Maxillary Fractures of Facial Region
Many undisplaced fractures require no fixation at all. Closed reduction and taping or
wiring the jaws together represent the next level of stabilization. Wiring of fragments 
734
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
is easily accomplished and useful, especially when fragments are depressed into the
nasal cavity. Open approach and reduction of these nonoral fractures are done by
incision directly over the affected areas. Fractures in this thin bone area frequently
collapse inward and are reduced with a small, hook-shaped probe that can be used
to lever the fragments outward from below. Occasionally, a flat spatula or probe can
be inserted from the nares to aid in reduction. Most of these fractures do not need
fixation, and those that do can be handled by interfragmentary wire or Kirschner
wire stabilization. Little stability is required once the fragments are reasonably reduced.
In the case of multiple fractures with marked displacement, the acrylic bridge external
e a sam as uo arads, are s a aa si rx
then connected by acrylic. This technique is applicable to a variety of situations.
Intraoral Maxillary Fractures
Midsagittal fracture of the hard palate in the cat is the most common injury of this
area. Most of these fractures are a result of hitting the nose on the ground after a fall
 or an automobile strike. A wire suture(s) inserted underneath the mucosal covering
of the hard palate and anchored to a tooth on each side is the simplest method of
stabilization (as in Figure 21-16). The torn gingiva of the palate can be sutured,
although this is not necessary if the fracture is well reduced and stabilized.
Various other fracture patterns are seen. Fixation can usually be accomplished by
placing a stainless steel wire around the base of the teeth on each side of the fracture
line (Figure 21-16, A, B, and C). If interdental wiring is insufficient fixation, pin and
11
E
FIGURE 21-16. Fixation of fractures of the upper jaw. A and B, Suturing of a torn gingiva
and palate with interdental wiring of adjacent teeth. C, Insertion of wire suture underneath
mucosal covering of hard palate and anchored to a tooth on either side, in addition to the
above. D, Additional stability may be achieved with application of a transfixation pin and
figure-of-8 wire. The pin may be placed rostral or caudal to the canine teeth, depending on
location of the fracture. The wire is placed around the ends of the pin and over the surface
of the oral mucosa. E, Bone plate fixation.
21—Fractures and Luxations of the Mandible and Maxilla
735
figure-of-8 wire can be a useful fixation for rostral fractures, as discussed for mandibu-
lar fractures. After the fracture has been reduced, a small Steinmann pin is applied
across the maxilla and fracture site, either just rostral or caudal to the canine teeth,
carefully avoiding the roots. Figure-of-8 orthopedic wire of 22, 20, or 18 gauge
(0.6-1.0 mm) is placed around each end of the pin and through the mouth over the
 oral mucosa of the hard palate. The figure-of-8 wire is tightened, and the pin is cut
off short or bent over. A small quantity of dental acrylic may be applied to the sharp
points of the pin and wire to reduce irritation of the mucosa of the lips and gums
(Figure 21-16, D). Some fractures of the incisive bone or maxilla are amenable to
bone plate fixation (Figure 21-16, E). Exposure is gained by incising the gums along
the base of the teeth and reflecting the soft tissue dorsally to expose the fracture area.
As described for mandibular fractures, microplates and miniplates are available
in stainless stee and titanium for use in maxillary fractures.&-10 Plate widths vary
from 0.4 to 1.0 mm, with screw sizes of 0.9 to 2.0 mm. These tiny plates are similar
to the reconstruction plate in that they are malleable in three dimensions. Some are
designed as cuttable plates. Microplates and miniplates are most appropriate for appli-
cation in jaw fractures of small dogs and cats but may also be used in larger dogs.
Another fixation device is the intraoral pin splint (see Figure 21-9), which is
adaptable to the maxilla and is useful for fractures of the incisive bone that leave
the entire rostral end of the jaw loose.
Occasionally, massive bilateral fractures of the nasal and maxillary bones and
mandible are encountered. Reconstruction and immobilization are best accomplished
with acrylic external fixators^ used in combination with other fixation techniques
described in this chapter. An alternate method is wiring the jaws together using the
eyelet method to maintain occlusion during the healing period (Figure 21-17). Food
and liquids may need to be given through an implanted pharyngostomy, jejunostomy,
A
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 21-17. Surgical procedure for bilateral fractures of both upper and lower jaws if
they cannot be stabilized separately. A through F, Procedure for wiring the jaws together
using the eyelet method.
736
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
 or gastrostomy tube. Healing is usually rapid, and the jaws are wired together for
 3 to 6 weeks. Note: Occasionally the eyelet style of wiring can be used to advantage
on certain fractures of the mandible to provide immobilization of the entire lower jaw.
 Large deficits of maxillary or incisive bones occur with gunshot wounds or other
major trauma and may result in large oronasal fistulas that cause serious dysfunction
in mastication and chronic nasal infection. Primary closure of the soft tissues may
be possible; however, debridement and delayed closure techniques may be needed for
 grossly contaminated wounds with compromised soft tissue. Mucosal advancement
flaps or labial mucosal rotation flaps are useful to provide soft tissue closure to prevent
large oronasal fistulas.
References
1. Brinker WO: Fractures. In Canine surgery (ed 2, Archibald), Santa Barbara, Calif, 1974, American
Veterinary Publications, pp 949-1048.
2.1
Umphlet RC, Johnson AL: Mandibular fractures in the dog: a retrospective study of 157 cases, Vet
Surg 19:272-275, 1990.
3.
Umphlet RC, Johnson AL: Mandibular fractures in the cat: a retrospective study, Vet Surg 17:
333-337,1988.
4.
 Rudy RL: Internal fixation of jaw fractures, 19th Annual AO/ASIF Course on Surgical Fixation of
Fractures, Ohio State University, Colurmbus, 1988.
5.
Egger EL: Skull and mandibular fractures In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery,
ed2,Philadelphia1993,Saunders,pp 1910-1921.
6.
Wallace Bennett J, Kapatkin AS, Manfra Marretta S: Dental composite for the fixation of mandibular
fractures and luxations in 11 cats and 6 dogs, Vet Surg 23:190-194, 1994.
7. Sumner-Smith G: Fractures of the mandible and maxilla. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD,
editors: Manuat of internal fixation in smalt animats, New York, 1984, Springer-Verlag, pp 210-218.
8.1
Boudrieau RJ, Kudisch MK: Miniplate fixation for repair of mandibular and maxillary fractures in
15 dogs and 3 cats, Vet Surg 25:277-291, 1996.
9.
Von Werthen CIBernasconi CE:Application of the maxillofacial mini-plate compact 1.0 in the
fracture repair of 12 cats/2 dogs, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 13:92-96, 2000.
10.
Verez-Franguela JL, Vives Valles MA: Maxillofacial surgery: maxillary osteosynthesis craniomax-
illofacial CMS-titanium plates, Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 13:119-122, 2000.
11. Robins G, Grandage J: Temporomandibular joint dysplasia and open-mouthed locking in the dog.
J Arm Vet Med Assoc 171:1072-1076, 1977.
22
Fractures in Growing Animals
This chapter describes separations and fractures involving the physis before closure
and diaphyseal fractures in animals up to 4 or 5 months of age. After this age, treat-
J A  i e a r se as a aisq si s s jo 
fractures involve the growth plate, and all have the potential to retard or arrest bone
is  r hs po is e s sp q aa pe yo
Correction of these deformities is discussed in Chapter 23.
Isia, a se oi pa uo si saq i yo ad yo a yn
plate," it is actually the metaphyseal growth plate. The term physis, referring to the
zone of growth in a long bone, is more convenient and is used throughout this text.
The epiphysis is a separate center of ossification found at the ends of long bones,
is initially entirely cartilaginous, grows by endochondral ossification, and forms
the articular surface in many bones. Fractures involving the physis may, but do not
necessarily, involve the epiphysis.
 The shafts of long bones are more resilient and elastic than older bones and thus
withstand greater deflection before incomplete or complete fracture. Incomplete, or
 sd a s p snd n n an s ns,
attached loosely to the diaphysis and strips easily when subjected to trauma. Blood
collects beneath it, and the resulting subperiosteal hematoma is soon converted to
callus. The periosteum is thick and may act as a restraining and stabilizing sleeve,
helping to prevent displacement of bone fragments and generally adding stability.
Healing is rapid—2 to 4 weeks, depending on age—and most animals produce an
abundant callus regardless of the method of stabilization. Remodeling is very active
and is completed quickly, with all evidence of the fracture obliterated within a few
weeks. Nonunion is very unusual. Physeal fractures are accompanied by consider-
able hemorrhage, rapid organization of callus, and often considerable displacement
resulting from muscle forces. Because these changes occur so quickly after trauma, it is
o pa q s psd jo x p an  p
as soon as possible. In articular fractures, anatomical reduction and rigid fixation are
 necessary to restore a functional joint.
DIAPHYSEAL FRACTURES
External Fixation
 Some fractures may be treated by closed reduction and supported by coaptation
(Figure 22-1), as described in Chapter 2. If used, limb splintage must be properly
applied and kept in good repair; otherwise, adverse effects may result, including valgus 
737
738
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
C
D
FIGURE 22-1. A, Transverse fracture of the tibia in a toy poodle 8 weeks of age. B, After
reduction, a modified Thomas splint was applied. C, Splint removed 2 weeks after treatment.
D, Fracture remodeled 4 weeks after treatment.
deformity, rotation, ligamentous laxity, and joint stiffness. Immobilization of the
increased anteversion, and the result is identical to the pathology of congenital hip
 dysplasia (see Chapter 16). This effect is most pronounced in the large breeds but
can affect dogs of all sizes. Hindlimb immobilization also can result in quadriceps tie-
 down and fibrosis of the stifle joint. Immobilization of the forelimb typically causes lax-
ity and hyperextension to develop in the carpus. Fortunately, these carpal conditions
are usually reversible, whereas the hip and stifle problems are not. Coaptation should
 be left in place for the absolute minimal amount of time necessary for clinical union.
Internal Fixation
Internal fixation is used primarily for the following types of acute fractures:
 1. Fractures causing rotational deformity or excessive shortening.
2.F
 Fractures resulting in incongruency of an articular surface.
3.F
 Fractures affecting the physeal plate and thus future bone growth.
 4. Fractures of the femur, especially in large breeds.
Applicable types of fixation for diaphyseal fractures include the intramedullary
(IM) pin, external fixator, and bone plates.
Intramedullary Pin
 In proportion, IM pins used in the young animal are relatively smaller in diameter
than those used in the adult.2 Because cancellous bone is present in a high percentage
22—Fractures in Growing Animals
739
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 22-2. A, Oblique fracture of the distal humerus in a 7-week-old animal. B,
Postoperative Steinmann pin fixation. C, Pin removed 2 weeks postoperatively. D, Fracture
remodeled 4 months postoperatively.
FIGURE 22-3. A, Comminuted open fracture of the
tibia in a 9-week-old animal. B, Clinical union at 2l/2
weeks; the external fixator was removed at this time.
A
B
of the medullary cavity, the IM pin stabilizes the fracture better in young animals.
Auxiliary fixation is rarely used because the rapid development of periosteal callus
stabilizes rotational and shortening forces (Figure 22-2).
External Fixator
The fundamentals of using the splint are the same in young as in adult animals;
however, healing is rapid, less fixator stiffness is required, and 2/2 pins are usually
sufficient (Figure 22-3). The fixation pins should not traverse the physis or penetrate
 paired bones such as the radius and ulna. The splint must not bridge the physis; keep
all fixation pins in the diaphysis and metaphysis. Because fissure fractures of the
740
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
 shaft often accompany complete fractures, care must be taken not to place fixation
pins into these fissures. It is acceptable to cross the fissure lines with pins.
Bone Plate
 Although often disregarded, bone plates offer many advantages in juvenile patients,
 p as a saa a a jo s  u as
ment fractures of the femur are difficult to repair by any other means (Figure 22-4).
-ds seue sumos u uedde aed o yoeodde anun e pasap s ai
cally in femoral fracture stabilization. The femoral cortex in growing animals is
quite thin, more so than in other long bones. This thinness, combined with the rigidity
of bone plates relative to the bone, causes screw loosening in many cases, especially
when contact of the main fragments cannot be reestablished. Latte proposed using
relatively small (2.7-mm) and flexible plates, combined with 3.5-mm screws, and
placing the screws only in the end holes of the plate, where the bone is metaphyseal;
 that is, containing much trabecular bone within the medullary canal. This allows the
 surgeon to avoid the thin cortex in the middiaphyseal area. Some motion of the frac-
ture will occur, but since callus formation is rapid and quickly stabilizes the fracture,
this motion is not important. Latte's recommendations for biological osteosynthesis
 of femoral fractures include the following:
1.1
Wait 36 hours after injury before fixation to allow for some attachment to
fragments and organization of the hematoma.
2. Do not attempt to reduce fragments. Correct angular and rotational
malalignment and restore length only to the extent possible without
disruption of the hematoma. Use only pointed reduction forceps on the
major fragments to avoid damage to periosteum.
3. Use radiographs of the normal limb to measure and contour the plate.
Do not cross growth plates with the plate.
 4. Do not use any lag screws, and do not place screws close to the fracture
line. Three screws on each major fragment are needed. No tapping is done
in metaphyseal areas.
5. Do not use limb splintage postoperatively.
A
B
C
FIGURE 22-4. A, Type C complex
diaphyseal fracture with nonre-
ducible wedges in an 11-week-old
large-breed dog. B, Postoperative
view showing plate fixation in the
manner of Latte.2 A 2.7-mm plate
is attached in the metaphyseal
regions with 3.5-mm screws. No
screws are used in the diaphysis,
and the fragments are not reduced.
C, At 6 weeks the femur is com-
 pletely healed and remodeled. The
bone has continued to increase in
length distally, which is the normal
pattern. The plate is removed at
this time.
22—Fractures in Growing Animals
741
Good results have been reported using conventional plating technique in frac-
tures of the radius in growing animals.? The cortex of the radius, humerus, and tibia
in the young animal is much thicker than the femur, and screw loosening is not an
issue. When used, bone plates should be removed early, after approximately 3 to
entrapment of the plate by appositional bone growth.
PHYSEAL FRACTURES
Longitudinal growth of bone is the result of enchondral ossification occurring in the
epiphyseal and metaphyseal areas. The process is a sequence of coordinated events:
(1) multiplication, growth, and degeneration of the cartilage cell; (2) calcification
and vascularization of the cartilage matrix; (3) production of primary spongiosa;
and (4) bony trabeculae of the metaphysis. Excess load applied to the immature
bone may result in dislocation, fracture, or a crushing type of injury. Because the
strength of the fibrous joint capsule and ligaments is two to five times greater than
that of the metaphyseal-physeal junction, the latter is more prone to injury (e.g..
separation, dislocation, fracture).
Growth plates can be classified on the basis of their location. There are two types:
pressure and traction growth plates. Pressure growth plates are located at the ends of
the long bones and transmit forces through the adjacent joint. Pressure growth
plates produce the majority of the longitudinal growth. Traction growth plates are
located where muscles originate or insert. A traction growth plate contributes little
to bone length (e.g., tibial tuberosity).
Salter and Harris4 have anatomically classified physeal injuries into five types
(Table 22-1 and Figure 22-5). Although the original intent was to give prognostic
information based on fracture type, this has not proved to be a valid concept. In a
histological study of 13 physeal fractures, 10 were shown to have damage to the
tive zone because it is the weakest area of the physis. It would appear that growth
TABLE 22-1.
SALTER-HARRISCLASSIFICATIONOFSEPARATIONSORFRACTURE-
EPIPHYSIS
 Principal Anatomical
Type of Fracture
Radiographic Findings
Regions Involved
Type 1
Physeal separation; displacement of
Proximal humerus and femur,
{Figure 22-5, A)
epiphysis from rmetaphysis at
 distal femur
growth plate.
Type II
Small corner of metaphyseal bone
 Distal femur and humerus,
{Figure 22-5, B)
fractured, with displacement of
 proximal humerus, proximal 
epiphysis from metaphysis at
tibia
growth plate.
Type III
 Fracture through epiphysis and part of
Distal humerus
{Figure 22-5, C)
growth plate, but rmetaphysis unaffected.
Type IV
Fracture through epiphysis, growth plate,
 Distal femur, distal humerus
(Figure 22-5, D)
and metaphysis; several fracture lines
 may been seen.
Type V
Soft tissue swelling but no bony
Distal ulna, distal radius, distal
{Figure 22-5, E)
 abnormalities seen after injury.
femur
Type V
Two months after trauma, shortening
(Figure 22-5, F)
of ulna and partial closure with
angular deformity of radius.
742
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
C
D
4
B
E
FIGURE 22-5. Salter-Harris classification of epiphyseal fractures involving the growth
plate, adjacent metaphysis, and epiphysis. A, Type I physeal fracture, with displacement of
the epiphysis from the metaphysis at the growth plate. B, Type II fracture of small corner of
the metaphyseal bone, with displacement of the epiphysis from the metaphysis at the growth
plate. C, Type Ill fracture through the epiphysis and part of the growth plate; metaphysis is
unaffected. D, Type IV fracture through the epiphysis, growth plate, and metaphysis. E, Type
V injury, with soft tissue swelling but no bony abnormalities seen immediately after injury.
F, Type V injury, 2 months after the trauma; closure and shortening of the ulna and partial
closure with an angular deformity of the radius are evident.
disturbance is not the only factor related to the type of fracture, and that other fac-
tors are important as well, such as the age of the patient, extent of displacement,
degree of reduction, time since injury, and type of fixation. The various types of injuries
are the result of different types of forces being applied to various areas of the leg at
different stages of maturity of the growth plate. The younger the animal, the greater
is the chance for growth deformity, even with early reduction and fixation. Despite
failure to fulfill the original expectations, the Salter-Harris classification remains as
a standard system for nomenclature.
Incidence6
About one fourth to one third of long-bone fractures involve the physes, and Salter-
a yo a an oi sdn so sisd a 'd sn ll ad s
bone is most often involved, except in the humerus, where the distal physis is injured
more often than the proximal physis. The distal femoral physis is most often injured,
22—Fractures in Growing Animals
743
followed by distal humerus, proximal femur, distal ulna, distal radius, proximal
tibia, and distal tibia. Between 5% and 10% of these patients will develop growth
deformities, of which the majority will require corrective osteotomy to restore nor-
mal function. The tendency to develop a growth abnormality is most likely in
medium-size to large-breed dogs that are less than 5 months old at time of injury.
Salter-Harris type V injuries of the distal ulnar physis are more likely to produce sig-
 nificant deformity than any other injury.
Treatment of Salter-Harris I to IV Injuries
Open reduction and internal fixation of fractures involving joints are indicated if
congruent articular surfaces cannot be obtained and maintained by conservative
i pue uonpan uado anbai siuue us ui sann jo Aofeu au suea
internal fixation.1 Kirschner wire fixation of bone fragments is an excellent method;
healing is rapid, and the wires can be removed in 2 to 4 weeks. With meticulous sur-
 gery, early reduction, and rigid fixation, the response to Salter-Harris I to IV injuries
 Aes i ie ro pu n n  h r  Aa si
tion. The surgical approach and fixation methods are similar to those described for
the corresponding areas in the adult animal (see Chapters 11, 13, 17, and 19).
jo uoaan an u oo iqn suoerdas-ae iso iidap -i pue g-z san
the physes and suggest methods of stabilization.
Principles of Treatment
1. Do the least reduction and fixation that is compatible with good function and
rapid healing. The younger the animal, the less reduction and fixation are
needed.
 2. Closed reduction and fixation are preferable when possible, as in the distal
tibia, distal radius, and occasionally the distal humerus. The ability to perform
a closed reduction successfully is limited to cases that are seen early and have
splintage in growing animals, as discussed earlier with diaphyseal fracture
treatment. Splints can usually be removed in 2 weeks for physeal fractures in
animals less than 5 months of age.
3. Reduce physeal fractures as early as possible. Within 72 hours, many are
virtually impossible to reduce because of rapid organization of the copious
 fracture hematoma, along with severe muscular contracture.
 4. The following principles apply during open reduction:
· Be aware of the epiphyseal blood supply and spare it during all
manipulations
e '1 1 sad un sae peasdida a o aeo pa pu ou o -
III during the reduction process.
 damage articular cartilage. Pointed reduction clamps will minimize these
injuries, but reduction should be accomplished by traction and leverage of
the epiphysis through the ligaments attached to the adjoining long bone
5. Principles for internal fixation are as follows:
● Do not bridge the physis with any fixation that prevents an increase in bone
length (e.g., lag screws, bone plates, tension band wires, threaded pins,
external fixators). The younger the animal, the more important this is to
prevent growth disturbances.
744
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
E
G
H
K
M
N
0
FIGURE 22-6. Physeal fractures of the femur and humerus. A, Type 1 injury (Salter-Harris
type I) to the pressure physis; separation of the proximal femoral physis. B, Fixation is with
three smooth Kirschner wires. C and D, Type 1 injury to the traction physis; avulsion or frac-
ture of the trochanter major and dislocation of the coxofemoral joint. After reduction of the
femoral head, the trochanter is relocated and fixed in place with two Kirschner wires. E, F,
and G, Type 1 injury to the pressure physis; separation of the distal femoral physis. Reduction
and fixation are accomplished using two small intramedullary pins. H and I, Type 1 injury to
the pressure physis; fracture of proximal humeral epiphysis. Fixation is by insertion of two
Kirschner wires entering on the ridge of the greater tuberosity. J, K, and L, Type 3 injury
(Salter-Harris type Il) to the pressure physis; fracture between the medial and lateral aspects 
of the humeral condyle with separation at the lateral part of the epiphyseal line. Fixation is
with a transcondylar lag screw. M, N, and O, Type 3 bicondylar fracture of the humeral
screw and two pins.
● Small-diameter, smooth Steinmann pins or Kirschner wires are adequate
fixation in most cases. Diameters typically range from 0.035 to 5%4 inch
(1-2 mm). With smooth pins the epiphysis is free to grow in length and glide
 along the pin, which often becomes completely buried within the epiphysis.
Bone will quickly grow into threads, locking the pin to the implant and
 preventing growth unless the pin slides backward with epiphyseal growth.
Lag screws are needed in Salter-Harris types III and IV, but these run parallel 
to the physis and do not cross it.
22—Fractures in Growing Animals
745
D
G
M
H
K
FIGURE 22-7. Physeal fractures of the tibia and radius and ulna. A and B, Type 1 injury
(Salter-Harris type I) to the pressure physis; fracture of the proximal tibial physis with a frac-
ture of the fibula. Fixation is with three obliquely inserted Kirschner wires. C and D, Type 2
injury (Salter-Harris type I) to the pressure physis; fracture of the proximal tibial physis and
a small portion of the metaphysis. Fixation is with a cancellous screw under the physis. E, F
 and G, Type 1 injury to the pressure physis; fracture of the distal tibial and fibular physis. If
the parts are stable on reduction, the hock is flexed to a right angle and fixed in this position
for 2 to 3 weeks with a cast. The right angle places the bone segments in the most stable posi-
tion. If this fracture is unstable on reduction, a small intramedullary pin is inserted from the
proximal end of the tibia down into the epiphysis, or two small pins are inserted through the
malleoli. A cast is applied for additional stabilization. H and I, Type 1 injury to the traction
physis; avulsion of the tibial tubercle. Fixation is by a tension band wire. J, K, and L, Type 1
separation of the distal physis of the radius and fracture of ulna. The segments are usually
stable on reduction (K) but require external stabilization with a coaptation splint. If segments
appear unstable after reduction, a Kirschner wire (L) should be inserted diagonally through
the radial styloid process into the diaphysis.
746
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
● Pins should cross the physeal plate at an angle as perpendicular as possible to
minimize any effect on the plate. Angles greater than 45 degrees will cause
some locking effect and predispose to epiphysiodesis. Rush pins will produce
 a locking effect because of the hooked end, preventing movement of the
epiphysis along the pin. These hooks should be cut off after the pin is seated.
· If a form of fixation that does bridge the physis is unavoidable to secure
fixation, it should be used. The first priority is to obtain fracture healing with
 a functional reduction. In this situation the fixation is removed as soon as
 possible, usually within 3 to 4 weeks, and as early as 2 weeks in very young
animals.
● Strive for stable internal fixation that will allow early, limited, active weight
bearing on the limb to minimize secondary bony deformity resulting from
 disturbed stress/strain patterns on other bones.
References
1. Brinker WO, Braden TD: Fractures in immature animals. In Brinker WO, Hohn RB, Prieur WD,
editors: Marual of internat fixation in smallanimats,NewYork,1984,Springer-erlagpp225-238.
2.LatteY: Semi-rigid internat fixation for the treatment of diaphyseal fractures Of the femur in growing
dogs, Frankfort, Germany, 1987, European Society of Veterinary Traurmatology.
3.McLain DL,Brown SG: Fixation of radius and ulna fractures in the immature dog and cat: a review
of popular techniques and a report of eight cases using plate fixation, Vet Surg 11:140-145, 1982.
fractures, Vet Surg 23:81-86, 1994.
6. Maretta SM, Schrader SC: Physeal injuries in the dog: a review of 135 cases, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
182:708-710, 1983.
23
Correction of Abnormal Bone
Growth and Healing
Angular and rotational deformities of long bones induce considerable functional
problems when the deformity is beyond the animal's ability to compensate. Angular
deformities have the effect of shortening the limb, and although dogs and cats have
remarkable ability to compensate for this, beyond a certain point the gait is greatly
altered. Both rotational deformity and angular deformity cause abnormal stress and
strain on adjacent joints, which will induce degenerative joint disease over time.
These deformities are most often caused by premature arrest of long-bone growth
n aad o osd e u a ao-i e po q q o sd
Many deformities can be corrected by division and repositioning of the bone, which
is the subject of this chapter.
OSTEOTOMY
An osteotomy is the surgical division of the bone and is usually indicated to correct
bony deformities that may include length, angular, or rotational changes. These changes 
may occur in one plane, but most involve two or more planes.
Angular deformities are most common and include varus, valgus, hyperexten-
sion, and hyperflexion. Length can be shortened or (rarely) lengthened, and rotation
can be internal or external. Malunion can include the previous conditions plus over-
riding of diaphyseal segments in all planes and directions. These deformities are
treated by corrective osteotomy; simple osteotomies are usually performed as part
of a surgical approach or as part of another procedure, such as arthrodesis
Common Indications for Corrective Osteotomy
Corrective osteotomy is typically performed for the following conditions:
● Angular deformity of the radius and ulna caused by premature physeal arrest of
the radius and/or ulna.
· Angular deformity of the distal tibia caused by premature physeal arrest of the
distal tibia and/or the distal fibula
· Correction or prevention of hip dysplasia.
· Malunion of all long bones and pelvis.
747
748
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
Types of Corrective Osteotomy
Transverse Osteotomy
The transverse technique is used for correction of rotational deformity (Figure 23-1,
A, B, and C). Kirschner wires may be inserted in each section of bone (dashed lines
in B and C) before the osteotomy is done so that the amount of derotation can be
determined.
Opening Wedge Osteotomy
ue ue iao on pa Anaiso asau e si anuoai apam uuado a
 deformity (Figure 23-1, D and E). Rotational correction is also possible, and length
is maintained.
Cuneiform Osteotomy
 The cuneiform technique is a closing wedge osteotomy, with a predetermined-size
wedge of bone removed from the point of maximal deformity (Figure 23-2, A and B).
Some limb length is lost. Figure 23-17 provides a case illustration of its use.
Obligue Osteotomy
In this technique an oblique cut is usually made parallel with the articular surface
to be realigned. The point of the long segment is inserted into the medullary cavity
of the articular fragment (see Figure 23-7). The oblique procedure maintains or
increases length slightly and can be used to correct rotation and varus or valgus defor-
 mity. It is most frequently used in corrective surgery for radius curvus. The oblique
 approach is less suitable to diaphyseal osteotomies because of the large gaps that it
creates.
Stair-Step Lengthening Osteotomy
A simple method for lengthening is the stair-step method illustrated in Figure 23-2,
C and D.
A
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 23-1. Transverse osteotomy. A, B, and C, Correction of a predetermined rota-
tional deformity. D and E, Opening wedge type. A single transverse cut is made, rotational
 and angular deformities are corrected, stabilization is applied, and the deficit is filled with a
bone graft.
 23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
749
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 23-2. A and B, Cuneiform osteotomy, closing wedge type. A predetermined-size
wedge of bone (a) is removed from the point of maximal deformity. C and D, Lengthening
osteotomy. The sagittal osteotomy is twice as long as the desired lengthening in order to
 provide good bone contact for healing.
Surgical Principles of Corrective Osteotomy
1. Because corrective osteotomy is an elective procedure, there is no urgency.
The animal must be in optimal condition to undergo anesthesia and surgery;
the procedure should be well planned; and all equipment and implants
necessary should be available.
 2. Plan the procedure by obtaining radiographs of the bone in two planes,
allow the osteotomy to be preplanned to some degree (see Figure 23-17).
Because rotational changes cannot be adequately appreciated radiographically,
a certain amount of error is introduced that must be compensated for at
surgery. Nevertheless, it is useful to have a plan preoperatively, even if it is not
on paper.
 3. For angular deformity, the osteotomy must be done as close as possible to the
 point of maximum angular change (see Figure 23-17) while still allowing room
for implant stabilization. This will minimize the overall cosmetic deformity
 induced by the osteotomy. Make the osteotomy parallel to the joint surface to
be realigned.
 4. When practical, make the osteotomy so the cut surfaces will fit together.
 Although this is useful to minimize the amount of bridging callus necessary, it
is often not possible, as in the oblique osteotomy (see Figure 23-7). It is more
 important to minimize the osteotomy gap in diaphyseal locations than in
adult dogs than in juvenile dogs that have rapidly healing bone.
5. Axially align the proximal and distal joints relative to the shaft. The animal
should be draped in a manner that will allow good visualization of the distal
limb because the final alignment is done visually.
 eare uoq aado ai asodxa oi ino peo si yondde uado u '9
 skeletally immature dogs, a longitudinal incision is made through the
periosteum, which is peeled back as a layer using the osteotome or periosteal
elevator. The bone is osteotomized using a powered bone saw, Gigli wire, or 
osteotome. With the power saw, constant irrigation is necessary to dissipate the
heat generated in the cutting process. The osteotome should not be used as the
750
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
primary cutting instrument in the diaphysis because there is undue risk of
splintering the bone. Instead, a row of closely spaced holes is drilled on the
osteotomy line with a Kirschner wire or 1.5- to 2.0-mm drill, and a narrow
osteotome is used to connect the holes. This is a very good method, since it
produces an irregular surface that tends to lock together, unlike the smooth
surface of the power saw or Gigli wire cut.
 7. Autogenous cancellous bone graft is added at the osteotomy site in diaphyseal
skeletally immature patients.
 8. Fixation appropriate to a similar fracture pattern in the same bone is applied,
and the surgical area is closed in layers.
 9. Aftercare is as for a similar fracture pattern in the same bone.
TREATMENT OF PREMATURE PHYSEAL GROWTH
ARREST
Salter-Harris type V injury to the growth plate can result in temporary delay in
growth, altered growth, or premature closure and cessation of growth.1 The entire
growth plate or a localized eccentric region within the growth plate may close pre-
 a r  a  p si s 
growth plate with uniform bone density, known as bone bridging. In paired bones
the premature closure may involve one or both bones, resulting in partial or com-
 plete growth impairment. The degree of alteration of growth is proportional to the
 growth potential remaining at the time of injury. Frequently, the immediate result-
 ant pathology may be too insignificant for clinical observation, but with time (1 week
S a ee oi q s pn re re (sam ia 
common injuries involve the distal radial and ulnar physes in medium-sized to large
canine breeds.
Clinical characteristics of premature partial or complete closure of the physes
include lameness, shortened limb, angular deformity, valgus or varus (Figure 23-3),
rotation, discomfort, crepitation, and restricted range of movement. Radiography
should include both limbs, with special attention to the physis, the adjacent meta-
physis, and the joints above and below the growth arrest. This radiographic study
should determine (1) length of bone or bones, (2) width of the joint space at either 
 end of the shortened bone, (3) direction of diaphyseal bowing, (4) angulation of the
foot, (5) range of movement, and (6) extent of pathological changes in the joints
FIGURE23-3.A,Eccentric
injury to the physeal growth plate
(* ) can result in complete cessation
or reduction in rate of bone forma-
tion in that part of the physis. B
and C, Diaphyseal angular defor-
mity and varying degrees of sub-
luxation  of  the  adjacent  joint
follow because of a greater amount
of bone growth on the uninjured
side. (From O'Brien T, Morgan JP,
Suter PF:J Small Anim Pract
B
C
12:19-35, 1971.)
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
751
above and below the physeal injury. O'Brien and colleagues? provide an excellent
description of the radiological changes of forelimb growth disturbances
The treatment of pathological changes in Salter-Harris type V injury presents
more complex problems when paired bones are involved (e.g., radius and ulna, tibia
and fibula). The most common problems involve the radius and ulna; each bone must
 grow in a synchronous manner to promote normal growth and maintain congruency
of their common articular surfaces. The vlna grows from two growth plates. The
proximal ulnar physis, which closes between approximately 187 and 222 days, con-
tributes only to olecranon length and is usually not significant relative to premature
physeal closure anomalies. The distal ulnar physis, however, is responsible for 100%
of the longitudinal growth distal to the elbow joint and must equal the combined
growth of the proximal and distal radial physes. The radius grows from both the
 proximal radial physis (40%) and the distal radial physis (60%) and provides the
major weight-bearing surface of the elbow joint (75%-80%). Closure of these phy-
ses ranges from about 220 to 250 days (7-8 months).3 Abnormal development from
asynchronous growth between the radius and ulna can result from retarded growth
of the distal ulnar physis, distal radial physis, or proximal radial physis. Resultant
dysplasias are common orthopedic problems and vary depending on the physis or
physes involved, the age of the animal at time of involvement, and the span of time
since injury.
o a ( e ae s a d u sin i o
ative procedure should increase or at least maintain length because closure of the
physis always results in a shorter bone (limb), and (2) corrective surgery should be
carried out early to avoid or to at least minimize irreversible pathological changes
in the adjacent joints. In this discussion of surgical treatment, the following criteria
are used:
· Skeletally immature. Two to 3 months of growth potential remaining: giant
breeds less than 8 months of age, large breeds less than 7 months, and small
breeds less than 4 months.
● Skeletally mature. Growth plates not necessarily totally closed, but little
lengthening remaining: giant breeds over 8 months of age, large breeds over
7 months, and small breeds over 4 months.
Distal Ulnar Physis Closure
Premature closure of the distal ulnar physis and subsequent deformities are the most
common complications of forelimb physeal injuries, accounting for 83% of fore-
limb growth disturbances in 39 dogs in one study.2 The conical shape of the distal
ulnar physis is unique to the dog. In all other animals, the radial and ulnar physes
are flat and predisposed to shearing fractures, and after reduction, the prognosis for
uninterrupted growth is usually good. The canine distal ulnar physis is unable to shear
because of the conical configuration, and thus shear forces are transformed to com
pressive forces and injury to germinal cartilage.4 Significant retardation in growth
of the distal ulnar physis results in a shortened ulna, which, because of the interosseous
ligamentous connections between the bones, acts as a “bowstring" to restrict longi-
tudinal growth of the radius.
Clinical and Radiographic Signs
 Retardation of ulnar growth produces varying degrees of cranial and lateral bowing
of the distal radius, radial shortening, valgus deformation and external rotation
(supination) of the foot, elbow subluxation, and degenerative joint disease in the
752
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
carpal and elbow joints (Figures 23-4 and 23-5). Measurement of carpal valgus and
cranial bowing can be done from the radiograph, as shown in Figure 23-6. With ces-
sation of growth of the ulnar diaphysis and continued growth of the radius, the
humeral condyle is forced proximally relative to the ulna. In normal straight-limbed
dogs, this usually results in subluxation of the humeral condyle and damage to the
anconeal process. The most severe lesion occurs in the distal half of the trochlear
notch, resulting in degenerative cartilage changes, fracture of trabeculae in the sub-
chondral bone, and alteration in joint morphology. Another effect is seen at the distal
radial physis, where the compression of the physis laterally can cause eccentric slowing
or complete cessation of growth and further carpal valgus and cranial bowing defor-
mities. In chondrodystrophic breeds the radial head usually subluxates laterally and
rests on the lateral edge of the humeral condyle articular surface, where it causes
mechanical damage to both the radial head and the humeral condyle. Because the
radius is released from some of the compression force, there may be less carpal valgus
and cranial bowing.
Lameness is usually the first clinical sign of premature closure of the distal ulnar
 growth plate. Elbow subluxation may be accompanied by regional pain. Beginning
radiographic changes are usually visible at this time. If taken at the time of injury,
radiographs often reveal a fracture line in the region of the growth plate.
Surgical Correction
Skeletally Immature
 Early corrective surgery is indicated to avoid or to at least minimize subsequent
changes. It is important to decide if the distal radial physis has bridged laterally or
caudolaterally; if this is seen radiographically, see the later description for combined
ulnar and distal radial physeal closure.
is required to remove the bowstring effect and to allow radial remodeling. The distal
FIGURE 23-4. Radiographic changes characteristic of
 premature closure of the distal ulnar physis. With a cessa-
tion of growth of the ulna and continued growth of the
radius, there is remodeling of the anconeal process with scle-
rosis (a), elbow subluxation with flattening of the trochlear
notch (b) and distal displacement of the styloid process (c),
anterior bowing of the radius (d), opening of distal radial
physis (e) with increased angulation of the radiocarpal joint
(f), and secondary arthritic changes. There is proximal relo-
cation of the ulnar styloid (g) because of the shortened ulna.
The distal ulnar physis is closed (b).
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
753
A
B
C
FIGURE 23-5.(
 Common bony changes seen radiographically after premature closure of the
distal ulnar physis. A, Elbow region. 1, Sclerotic and remodeled anconeal process with
decrease of the distance between the process and the radial head; 2, trochlear notch shallow
and subluxation of the humeroulnar joint; 3, distal displacement of the coronoid processes.
B and C, Region of the distal radius and ulna. Lateral view (B) and dorsopalmar view (C): 4,
cranial bowing of the radial diaphysis and metaphysis; 5, open distal radial growth plate;
6, cranial and medial subluxation of the distal radius with increased angulation of the ante-
brachiocarpal joint and secondary degenerative joint disease; 7, closed distal ulnar growth
plate; 8, proximal location of ulnar styloid process resulting from shortened ulna. (From
O'Brien T, Morgan JP, Suter PF: J Small Anim Pract 12:19-35, 1971.)
FIGURE 23-6. A, Lining method
for determination of angulation
of the carpus from dorsopalmar
radiographs; 0 to 10 degrees is
normal. B, Lining method for
determination of angulation of the
carpus from lateromedial radi-
ographs; 0 to 8 degrees is normal.
(From O'Brien T, Morgan JP,
Suter PF: J Small Anim Pract
12:19-35, 1971.)
A
ulna is approached laterally, and the lateral digital extensor muscle is retracted. The
a ae o   sd ae n d t i aia   si
ulnar segment should be about 1.5 times the bone diameter, and it is critical that it
be exposed extraperiosteally so that no periosteum is left to cause rapid bony bridging.
Cutting of the bone is done with a power saw, Gigli wire saw, or osteotome, which
can be used here because the bone is still quite soft at this age. Care must be exercised
to avoid severing the radial artery on the caudal side of the radius. A fat graft placed
in the defect will discourage bone bridging.6 The fat can be collected from the falci-
form ligament or the subcutaneous gluteal region. It should be collected in a single
block and handled gently to avoid necrosis. The fat should be large enough to fit tightly
in the available space, and soft tissues are closed to secure it. A firm padded band-
age is maintained for 7 to 10 days postoperatively. If bilateral procedures are done.
the limbs should be lightly splinted for 2 weeks to avoid motion at the graft site,
which interferes with incorporation of the graft.6 Moderate malalignment of the
754
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
brachi muscle forces. More severe malalignment accompanied by elbow pain requires
proximal dynamic proximal ulnar osteotomy and is described later (see Figure 23-9).
The original report on partial ulnar ostectomy concluded that partial correction
 of the radial deformity was obtained.6 No mention was made of the exact amount
of carpal valgus preoperatively. A later report found the procedure to be effective
only in young dogs (median age 5 months) with less than 25 degrees of carpal valgus
or in older animals (median age 6.5 months) with less than 13 degrees of valgus.7
 This further reinforces the urgency of early surgical treatment.
CarpalValgus GreaterThan2sDegrees.
 Corrective osteotomy of the radius to
realign the foot should be performed at the same time as the partial ulnar ostectomy
(as previously described). Use of the external fixator is usually the preferred method
l adai se m se a '-7 a) pasn aq ueo siexg ieaxa i adai uoexg jo
(Figure 23-7, C and D). Because the osteotomy is in the metaphyseal area in an immature
animal, healing is rapid; the fixator can usually be removed by 6 weeks postoperatively.
e p j asa  j aa r a  d s rx ll a a
The proximal full pin is placed in the frontal plane of the proximal radius; this will
be perpendicular to the humerus when the elbow is flexed 90 degrees. The distal full
A
B
C
D
E
FGURE 23-7.(
 Oblique osteotomy of the radius for correction of angular deformity caused
by premature arrest of the distal ulnar growth plate. A and B, The osteotomy line is drawn
parallel with the antebrachiocarpal joint surface at the area of greatest radial curvature. A
transverse osteotomy of the ulna is planned at or slightly proximal to the radial osteotomy.
Center-threaded fixation pins are placed proximally and distally in the radius, parallel to the
adjacent joint surfaces. The distal pin is also positioned to keep it in the frontal plane of
the rotated carpus/metacarpus. These pins are placed before the osteotomy is done. C and D,
The pointed proximal segment of the radius is reduced into the center of the distal segment.
Connecting bars and clamps are loosely positioned on the fixation pins, and the foot is dero-
tated and held so that it is in a straight line with the proximal portion of the radius and ulna
and its frontal plane is continuous with the plane of the proximal segment. The two full pins
should be approximately parallel to each other and in the same frontal plane at this point.
The connecting-bar clamps are tightened and the half pins driven through the empty clamps
 'aaoe s 'pdde aq ose ueo riexy i adai au g riexy al adai ai ahald 0
proximal and distal fixation pins are placed before the osteotomy is done.
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
755
 pin is placed as close to the joint as is practical. A small hypodermic needle is used
to probe for the joint space and is left in place to mark the distal end of the radius.
This pin is placed in the frontal plane of the distal radius, carpus, and metacarpus.
It will be perpendicular to the paw when the carpus is flexed 90 degrees. Because of
possible supination of the distal radius, the pins will be in different planes as viewed
from the distal end of the limb.
aa psp se e  e   pd s so rn ai
The osteotomy is done at or distal to the proposed radial site; if cut too proximally,
the cut end will protrude laterally after angular correction. The radial osteotomy site
 pe pedrno au jo uo pue uodas ym a pande s!
extensor tendons.$ Periosteum is incised longitudinally and elevated from the bone
and the osteotomy performed as previously described. Connecting bars and clamps
are positioned loosely, with three empty clamps on the medial bar.
The distal segment is aligned first by placing the pointed end of the radius within
the medullary canal and rotating the full pins until they are in the same plane, then
angulating the distal bone until the pins are parallel to each other in the frontal
plane. The foot should be in axial alignment with the proximal radius. Rotational
alignment is checked by flexing the elbow and the carpus; the paw should be aligned
with the humerus. It is often difficult to reduce the cranial bowing completely because
of contracture of the flexor apparatus. If insufficient correction of cranial bowing or
valgus deformity is achieved after oblique osteotomy of the radius, a closing wedge
osteotomy of the radius may be performed to enhance angular correction. Slight
bone shortening will occur with this procedure. At this point, the four clamps on the
full pins are tightened, and a half pin is driven through the distal empty clamp into
the distal fragment and the clamp tightened. Two more half pins are then driven into
the proximal segment to complete the fixation. Bone grafting is not necessary, and
closure is routine.
 Type I fixators are applied in a similar manner, with the proximal and distal pins
inserted first and the remaining pins driven after realignment (Figure 23-7, E).
 Prognosis for satisfactory function is good, regardless of degree of deformity, when
performed at this skeletally immature age.7 Some limb shortening can be expected
in most animals.
 Figure 23-8, A and B, shows a healed fracture of the radius with premature clo-
sure of the distal ulnar physis in a 5-month-old Afghan hound. Treatment originally
consisted of application of a Mason metasplint. The radiographs taken 3 weeks
after the injury revealed a clinically healed radius, leg shortening of 10 mm, premature
closure of the distal ulnar growth plate, moderate valgus deformity of the foot, and
early signs of incongruency of the elbow joint.
 The primary objectives were to restore congruency of the elbow joint and to cor-
rect the cranial bowing of the radius and valgus deformity of the foot. Removal of
a 11/2-inch section of the ulna (including periosteum) corrected the bowstring effect,
and in most cases (with minor deformity) the proximal ulna will readjust in position
and make the correction needed for congruency at the elbow joint. An oblique
osteotomy of the radius at the fracture site was used to derotate the foot and straighten
the radius. In Figure 23-8, C, the type I external fixator is in place, following par-
tial ulnar ostectomy and corrective osteotomy of the radius. At 41/z weeks postoper-
atively, the radius was healed, and the elbow joint was congruent and had a full
 s    x x    i s  
Dynamic Proximal Ulnar Osteotomy. If there is marked incongruency of the
elbow, with or without distal changes, a proximal ulnar osteotomy allows the proximal
end to shift proximally and reestablish congruency as well as possible with the
756
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
A
B
C
D
FGURE 23-8. A and B, Healed fracture of the radius with premature closure of the distal
ulnar physis in 5-month-old Afghan hound. Preoperative lateral and craniocaudal views. C,
A 1l/2-inch section of the ulna (including periosteum) was removed; the oblique cut (a) in the
radius was made at the point of greatest curvature; the point of the radius was inserted into
the medullary cavity of the distal radial segment; the foot and distal section of radius was held
so that it was in line with the proximal end of the leg; and the external fixator was applied
on the medial surface. D, At 41/2 weeks postoperatively, healing of the radius has occurred,
and the elbow joint is congruent with a good range of motion; the external fixator was
removed at this point.
 deformed articulating surfacesα (Figure 23-9). A caudal approach to the proximal
ulna exposes the ulna and the humeroulnar joint,^ which can be inspected for fibrous
tissue invasion and osteophytes; these are removed as indicated. The osteotomy is
made slightly distal to the coronoid proces. In most cases the bone will spring apart
 after cutting, but in some cases a periosteal elevator is needed to break down the
interosseous and annular ligaments. A small, smooth Steinmann pin driven normo-
grade is used for stabilization. In immature dogs a fat graft, as described earlier, is used
to pre vent premature osseous bridging.
Skeletally Mature
After cessation of most long-bone growth, there is no hope of meaningful correction
of carpal valgus by eliminating the bowstring effect of the short ulna, and all attention
should be directed toward correcting angular and rotational deformities and in
reestablishing elbow congruity. Angular and rotational deformities are eliminated by
corrective radial osteotomy, as previously described. Bone plate fixation is possible only
with moderate angular deformity and little or no rotational component. A closing
 23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
757
FIGURE 23-9. A, Incongruency and subluxa-
tion of the elbow joint caused by shortening of
the ulna. B, Dynamic proximal ulnar
Osteotomy of the ulna just distal to the coro-
noid processes allows the ulna to move into
physiological reduction because of muscle and
weight-bearing forces. A smooth Steinmann
pin or Kirschner wire is used for stabilization.
B
wedge osteotomy is advisable when using plate fixation, which further shortens the
limb. If the elbow incongruity is minor, it will correct itself after the distal ulnar
a un ud q pauedoe pue pau si auou a ji taamo ois
elbow region, the dynamic proximal osteotomy just described will provide more
rapid and complete realignment.
Distal Ulnar and Eccentric Distal Radial Closure
 The primary injury in this situation most likely is distal ulnar physis closure. The
- r p a jo us e a  e ius a jo ioa o
dolateral region of the distal radial physis that can cause complete shutdown of the
growth plate in this region and replacement by a bone bridge. As the medial side of
the physis continues to grow, the valgus angulation of the distal radius continues, even
after the ulna is sectioned, and probably accounts for some of the failures of ulnar
ostectomy alone to correct radial deformities. If the bridging involves primarily the
caudolateral aspect of the physis, increased cranial bowing accompanies the lateral
 deviation. Careful inspection of fine-detail screen or nonscreen radiographs is nec-
aq s se asp as an sy m  aq an Aan on Assa
 compared to the radiolucent active physis.
Surgical Correction
Skeletally Immature
 In distal ulnar and eccentric distal radial closure, simple partial ulnar ostectomy will 
 fail because the radial bone bridge will prevent radial correction. Ulnar ostectomy
 should be accompanied by resecting the bone bridge to free its restriction to radial
remodeling? (Figure 23-10).
A skin incision is made over the craniolateral region of the radial physis, and fascia
d o pasnsi aaau dy as  sisuida  asoxa oi pasus
for the growth plate, beginning medially and working laterally. The needle easily
758
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
FIGURE 23-10.
. Premature closure of the distal ulnar growth plate
accompanied by lateral closure and bone bridge of the radial growth
plate (see also Figure 23-7, A). A partial ulnar ostectomy of the distal
ulna is accompanied by resection of the lateral bone bridge in the radius.
 Both bone defects are packed with fat grafts to discourage bone healing.
 penetrates the cartilage of the active physis and is used to locate the medial limits of
the bone bridge. A curette, fine-nose rongeur, osteotome, or power saw is then used
to create a generous V-shaped bone defect corresponding to the location of the orig-
inal growth plate and extending medially into the active physeal cartilage. The point
of the V should be in the active growth cartilage. It is important to be sure that the
bone bridge is completely removed. A fat graft (see previous discussion) is collected
'll ro pas si anss os ue raap an ou paed pue uan pan au o
 The partial ulnar ostectomy is then completed as described earlier.
 There seems to be little published regarding the outcome of this surgery. One case
available for follow-up by Vandewater and Olmstead? returned to normal, and the
author's experience has been encouraging. As with the other techniques that depend
on bone remodeling, the earlier they are done, the better the prognosis.
Skeletally Mature
 Correction at this age is corrective osteotomy, as described for distal ulnar physis
closure.
Retained Cartilaginous Cores in Distal Ulnar Physis
This condition is seen in growing large and giant breeds of dogs and is caused by
delayed endochondral ossification of a zone of distal ulnar metaphysis, resulting in
cores or "candlesticks" of hypertrophied cartilage cells rather than bony trabecula10
(Figure 23-11, A). This cartilage core slows distal ulnar lengthening, and the ulnar
styloid is seen to not extend distally to the ulnar carpal bone. This results in some loss
 of lateral support for the carpus, and mild carpal valgus deformity ensues. The distal
radius may also respond to the ulnar shortening by cranial bowing (Figure 23-11, B),
although lateral deviation or elbow incongruity has not been seen.
The cause of retained cartilage cores is unknown, athough some think it is
a form of osteochondrosis.11 Although the role of hypernutrition and accelerated
growth remains to be proved, when presented with a 3- to 4-month-old puppy with
these changes, we advise decreasing the plane of nutrition to slow growth. Corrective
ond o  op  e   isno i 
resulting from deformity.
Proximal or Distal Radial Physis Closure
Less common than premature closure of the distal ulnar physis is premature closure
 of either the proximal or the distal radial physis. Of all cases of forelimb growth
 23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
759
FIGURE 23-11. A, Four-month-old female Great Dane with painful forelegs. Note the
"candlestick” core of cartilage extending from the ulnar epiphysis into the metaphysis. B,
Five-month-old male Saint Bernard with increased valgus angulation of the carpus and pain
bowing of the radius with secondary thickening of the caudal cortex (Wolff's law).
arrest, there was an 11% incidence of distal closure and a 6% incidence of proximal
closure.2 Premature closure of either physis results in shortening of the radius, although
the leg may remain straight if the distal closure is symmetrical. Asymmetrical distal
 closure usually results in some degree of angular deformity, either varus or valgus.
Clinical and Radiographic Signs
Proximal Closure
As the ulna grows, the shortened radius is pulled distally by the radioulnar ligament,
bringing about an increase in joint space between the radial head and humeral
condyle2 (Figures 23-12 and 23-13, A). As discrepancy of growth between the radius
and ulna continues, the medial and lateral collateral ligaments of the elbow impinge
the humeral condyle on the coronoid processes, with subsequent displacement and an
increase of humeroulnar joint space, elongation of the articular notch, and sometimes
fragmentation of either coronoid process212,13 and degenerative joint disease (DJD).
Shortening of the limb usually occurs.
Distal Closure
Several variables determine the types of abnormality seen.14 Because ulnar growth usu-
ally continues, elbow malarticulation develops as described for proximal closure. With
complete symmetrical closure, the limb usually remains straight and shortened, but
carpal varus has been reported.1s There are also changes in the antebrachiocarpal
760
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
A
B
C
FGURE 23-12. Common bony changes sen radiographically after premature closure of
the proximal or distal radial physis. 1, Increased space at the humeroradial joint, resulting in
subluxation of the entire elbow joint. 2, As a result of the increased distance between the
anconeal process and radial head, the anconeal process appears displaced proximally.
3, Sclerosis and remodeling of the coronoid processes, accompanied by varying degrees of
degenerative joint disease. 4, Displacement of the radial head caudally and laterally.
(From O'Brien T, Morgan JP, Suter PF: J Small Anirm Pract 12:19-35, 1971.)
 joint, which may include an increase in joint space and later DJD. A caudal bowing
of the radius and ulna may occur in some cases. Asymmetrical distal closure is more
common, and lateral closure results in valgus deformity and external rotation
(supination) of the paw similar to that seen with distal ulnar closure. Indeed, some
degree of closure of the distal ulnar physis may be concurrent. Medial closure of the
radius is less often seen and causes varus angular deformity and inward rotation
(pronation) of the paw. In some cases, particularly with lateral closure, caudal clo-
sure is more pronounced than cranial, resulting in caudal angulation of the antebra-
chiocarpal joint.
The first clinical sign of closure is a gradual onset of lameness and pain in the
elbow region. Radiographic changes are present at this time, and early surgery is
indicated to check or minimize joint changes.
Surgical Correction
Skeletally Mature
The most pressing problem is restoration of congruency of the elbow joint because
degenerative changes occur rapidly. A choice must be made regarding the existing
radial shortening: the ulna can be shortened by partial ostectomy, or the radius can
 be lengthened by osteotomy to achieve contact of the radial head with the humeral
condyle. The ideal choice would always be radial lengthening, but technical and eco-
nomic considerations often prevent employing this method. Shortening the ulna is
technically much easier, and good results can be anticipated.1s If limb length is suf-
ficient for reasonably good function, ulnar shortening is probably the preferred
 method. If distal angular and rotational deformity is present, it generally must be
corrected by osteotomy. There is also the possibility with eccentric distal closure for
 resection of the bone bridge and achieving correction in younger animals.14 Corrective 
ostectomy could be done later if the deformities persist.
Dynamic Partial Ulnar Ostectomy.
 For cases in which the radial shortening is
minimal and the animal is nearly mature, the surgeon can remove a short section
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
761
A
B
C
FIGURE 23-13. A, Bony changes characteristic of premature closure of the distal or prox-
imal radial physis (also see Figure 23-12). With a cessation of growth of the radius, there is
increased width of the humeroradial joint space (a), proximal displacement of the anconeal
process (b), remodeling of the trochlear notch and coronoid process (c), and development of
secondary degenerative joint disease. There is caudal and lateral displacement of the radial
head (d). Angular deformity may or may not be present; however, there is usually some increase
in radiocarpal joint space (e) and evidence of radial physis closure. B, If lengthening of the
radius is not possible, the ulna is shortened by dynamic proximal ulnar ostectomy, removing
 a section of ulna (shaded area) slightly longer than the distance between the humeral condyle
and radial head. The ostectomy is immediately distal to the coronoid processes. C, Shortening
of the ulna caused by weight-bearing and muscular forces results in physiological reduction
(ostectomy) of the ulna to restore congruency of the radial head with the humeral
condyle& (Figure 23-13, B and C). The proximal ulna and elbow joint are approached
 from a caudal incision.? The ulnar segment removed should be slightly longer than
the observed gap between the humeral condyle and radial head. A small Steinmann
pin is used for stabilization. Muscular forces and weight bearing will cause the ulna
to shorten by sliding on the smooth pin until the radial head contacts the condyle.
Fragments of the lateral coronoid process can be removed from the same caudal
approach to the proximal ulna, but those of the medial coronoid will probably require
a separate medial approach. Analgesic and antinflammatory agents are given to
encourage early postoperative weight bearing.
 The advantage of this approach over a static shortening ostectomy with rigid fix-
ation is that the radial head will find its own position relative to the humeral
condyle and thus will form a more physiological joint. This procedure is often com-
bined with a distal corrective osteotomy of the radius and ulna to correct angular
and rotational defects1s or with resection of the bone bridge of the distal physis.
762
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
Bone Bridge Resection. When the distal radial physis closure is eccentric,resection
of the bone bridge can allow varying degrees of angular and rotational correction
because of continuing growth of the remaining growth plate.41s This is most appli-
cable to younger patients with considerable bone growth remaining and is usually
combined with partial ulnar ostectomy. The technique is explained in the previous
section Distal Ulnar and Eccentric Distal Radial Closure (see Figure 23-10).
Dynamic Lengtbening Osteotomy of the Radius. Progressive spreading of a
radial osteotomy has the potential for elongating the radius to match the ulna and
thus reduce the elbow incongruity. This process is termed distraction osteogenesis and
creates new bone at the site where the osteotomy callus has been slowly distracted.
Although the conventional external fixator applied with threaded connecting rods
or the Charnley apparatus has been employed to lengthen the radius, correction of
angular deformity is restricted to one plane. The advent of the Ilizarov-type circular-
frame fixator and linear and hinged distraction motors (see Figure 2-35, E) offers the
possibility of simultaneous lengthening with angular and rotational correction.416.17
Such an apparatus is now commercially available for veterinary use in North America
(IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview, Texas; Jorgensen Laboratories, Inc., Loveland,
Colo) and in Europe.
The circular-frame (ring) fixator is usually assembled before it is applied.
Appropriate size and number of rings are selected for the deformity present and the
size of the dog. The average large-breed dog 4 to 6 months of age requires three rings
of appropriate diameter with approximately 2 cm between the ring and the skin.
One ring will be distal to the proposed osteotomy of the radius and two proximal.
If the dog is of sufficient size, two rings should be used on either side of the osteotomy.
Number of rings and ring diameter, wire diameter and tensioning, and configuration
of the wires and threaded rods on the circular frame will affect the axial stiffness of
the fixator construct and therefore the quality of distraction osteogenesis.18-22
After the surgical approach, osteotomies of the radius and ulna are performed
 as previously described. Angular and rotational deformities are realigned and the
osteotomies reduced to the extent possible. The previously assembled circular-frame
fixator is applied to the leg. Two small pins (1.0-1.6 mm) are driven through connect-
ing bolts for each ring of the circular frame and are tensioned, to increase stiffness, to
 30 to 60 kg for an average, growing, large dog.19
Careful examination and radiographs are used to assess surgical results. After a
latency period of 2 to 4 days, distraction of the osteotomy is begun. One-millimeter
daily spreading of the osteotomy divided into two to four increments is continued
until the elbow is reduced. The distraction period may be as short as 10 to 14 days
for a simple, small, humeroradial space or may be protracted up to 4 to 6 weeks in
uation is necessary to monitor the progress (Figure 23-14). After the distraction phase
is complete, the fixator is left in place for another 4 to 6 weeks to allow solidifica-
tion of the distracted callus. In cases of severe deformity where acute correction
of angulation is difficult to achieve, an additional useful method is to add hinges and
an angular distraction motor to the circular frame for a dynamic correction of the
angular deformity.20,21
 If only the proximal physis is closed, or if there is no angular deformity with dis-
tal closure, simple axial lengthening is sufficient. This can be accomplished with the
Ilizarov apparatus, the Charnley apparatus (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa), or a slightly
modified, conventional Kirschner-style apparatus applied in type IA configuration.
Threaded 3/6-inch (3.2-mm) rods (available at hardware outlets) are substituted for
normal connecting rods. There are two methods for providing the sliding motion
 23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
763
necessary for distraction. In the first, conventional medium clamps are attached to
the two distal fixation pins, and these are tightened to the rod in the normal manner.
 The proximal pin clamps are modified by drilling or filing the connecting-rod hole
to 岁1e-inch diameter with a fixation pin in the bolt and the nut tightened (modified
clamps are available from IMEX Veterinary, Inc., Longview, Texas). This allows the
clamps to slide on the threaded rod, and they are secured to the rod by a normal nut
 on each side of each clamp. Distraction is accomplished by loosening the nuts on the
 proximal side of the clamps and tightening the distal clamps. The second method is
to divide the connecting rods in the middle area and connect each pair of rods by a
A
B
D
E
F
FIGURE 23-14. Limb lengthening with a ring (llizarov) fixator. The patient was a 4-month-
old greyhound with a deformed left antebrachium. A and B, Premature closure of the distal
radial physis and malunion of a distal radial metaphyseal fracture. Varus deviation of the distal
limb and cranial bowing of the radius. The elbow joint is stable and congruent. C and D,
 Postoperatively, after transverse radial osteotomy and segmental ulnar ostectomy. The angular
deformity and cranial bowing have been corrected with the ring fixator. Distraction was
started 10 days later at the rate of 0.25 mm four times daily. E and F, At 20 days postopera-
 dea Auooiso aui ui suapia si uoeuoy auoq mau uosesip yo shep ot 1aje pue kia
The el bow joint has become incongruent.
Continued
764
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
G
H
K
L
FIGURE 23-14. Cortinued G and H, Approximately 5 cm of lengthening has occurred at
8 weeks postoperatively. Regenerate new bone appears as axially oriented striations, and the
elbow has realigned. I and J, Distraction has been discontinued at 4 months postoperatively,
and approximately 8 cm of length has been gained. The fixator was left in place an additional
6 weeks to allow maturation of new bone formation. K and L, Eleven months postoperatively
and 5'/h months after removal of the fixator. The limb is 5 mm longer than the opposite, and
A ai ou sradde mona aui pue uae lxe poo si aau ou si uou
of the regenerate bone is excellent. (Photos and case material courtesy Dr. Erick Egger.)
threaded turnbuckle. Rotation of the turnbuckle causes the rod to lengthen. The dis-
traction procedure is managed as previously described.
Static Lengtbening Osteotomy of the Radius. Bone lengthening with plate fix-
ation or conventional external fixators is also possible. For animals older than 5 to
6 months of age, one lengthening will usually be sufficient. For those under this age,
the procedure may need to be repeated in 6 to 8 weeks to restore length and con-
gruency. If the closure is accompanied by angular deformity, corrective osteotomy for
this defect may be delayed until the lengthening osteotomy is almost healed.
Figure 23-15 shows premature closure of the distal growth plate of the radius,
with shortening and early secondary incongruency of the articular surfaces in the
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
765
elbow joint in a 4-month-old large-breed dog. The animal had started to favor the leg
 2 weeks before presentation. The leg appeared to be straight from both lateral and
 cranial views. The objective was to restore approximately normal length to the radius 
and thus restore congruency to the articular surfaces of the elbow joint. Because the
animal had approximately 4 months of growth left, the surgical procedure was
expected to be repeated to maintain a good elbow joint.
A transverse midshaft osteotomy of the radius was performed (Figure 23-15, B).
-s e pe rapads auq e ym uu Sl rede ppm aram sumas auq a
tubular plate was inserted for fixation. Congruency of the elbow joint was restored.
At the 3-month reexamination, the osteotomy area was filled with bone. Shortening
of the radius and incongruency of the elbow were again evident. Lameness returned
 about 3 weeks before this reexamination. Discrepancy between the coronoid process
of the ulna and the articular surface of the radius was evident (Figure 23-15, C). The
bone plate was removed, and the radius was again osteotomized and lengthened
by 10 mm. A semitubular plate was applied for fixation (Figure 23-15, D). At the
2-month follow-up, the leg was straight, the elbow joint range of motion appeared
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 23-15. A, Premature closure of the distal physis of the radius with shortening and
early secondary incongruency of the articular surfaces in the elbow joint in a 4-month-old
dog. B, Transverse midshaft osteotomy of radius was performed. Bone segments were wedged
apart 15 mm, and a semitubular plate was inserted for fixation. Congruency of elbow joint
was restored. C, At the 3-month follow-up, osteotomy area is filled with bone. There is evi-
dence of shortening of the radius and incongruency of the elbow; lameness has returned. Note
the discrepancy between the coronoid process of the ulna and the articular surface of the
radius. D, The bone plate was removed, the radius again osteotomized and lengthened 10
mm, and another semitubular plate applied for fixation. The osteotomy area deficit was filled
with autogenous cancellous bone.
Continued
766
 Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
E
F
FIGURE 23-15. Contirued E, At the 2-month follow-up, the leg is straight, the elbow joint's
shorter, although this is not evident when the animal moves or stands. The plate was
removed. F, Normal opposite leg.
normal, and function was good (Figure 23-15, E). The overall length compared with
the opposite leg was 16 mm shorter; however, this was not evident on standing or
moving (Figure 23-15, F).
Figure 23-16 illustrates partial or complete premature closure of the distal and
 proximal radial physes in the same limb. For this condition, the objectives of correc-
tive osteotomy were to restore congruency of the elbow joint and realign the foot. Because
 the leg was already shorter than the opposite leg, a lengthening procedure was planned.
 The 61/2-month-old Doberman had sustained a foreleg injury approximately 8 weeks
 before being treated. Lameness was intermittent at first but became continuous and
progressive during the 3 weeks before surgery. Radiographs revealed premature closure
of the proximal radial physis, shortening of the radius, and incongruency of the elbow
joint (Figure 23-16, A and B). There was also evidence of damage to the distal radial
physis with altered growth, resulting in some valgus deformity and outward rotation
of the foot, which was becoming more pronounced. The first objective was to
restore radial length and elbow congruency; the second objective was to correct the
angular deformity and external rotation of the foot at a later date.
A transverse osteotomy was performed, and the segments were wedged apart by
11 mm using a bone spreader; this restored length to the radius and congruency to the
 articulating surfaces of the elbow joint. A semitubular plate (buttress plate) was applied
for fixation (Figure 23-16, C). In 1 month, healing at the osteotomy site was well under
way, and the elbow appeared stable. Leg function had greatly improved. At this time,
the ulna and radius were again osteotomized, angulation and rotation were cor-
rected, and an external fixator was applied for fixation (Figure 23-16, D and E).
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
767
 In 7 weeks the osteotomy sites were well healed; the bone plate and external fixa-
tor were removed (Figure 23-16, F). When the animal was rechecked at 1 year of
age, good functional use of the leg was evident (Figure 23-16, G and H). The leg
appeared straight from both lateral and cranial views. There was a 10-degree loss
of flexion at the elbow joint; however, it was not discernible at the walk or running.
The affected radius was slightly shorter than the opposite normal radius. The ani-
mal adjusted by slightly increasing extension at the shoulder and elbow joints; this
was not evident on standing or moving.
Skeletally Mature
The objectives of treatment of mature animals are identical to those previously
detailed for immature animals, and the same procedures are applicable, with the
exception of resection of physeal bone bridges. The elbow joint may need to be
explored to resect fibrous tissue and osteophytes and to remodel bone deformity.14
Partial ulnar ostectomy alone or combined with distal corrective osteotomy for
B
C
D
E
FIGURE 23-16.(
 Growth plate injury with closure of the proximal radial physis and partial
closure of the distal radial physis. A and B, Eight-week-old foreleg injury in a 6V/2-month-old
Doberman with progressive lameness, shortening of the radius, and incongruency of the
elbow joint. Damage to the distal radial physis with partial closure resulted in some progressive
valgus deformity and outward rotation of the foot. C, Lateral view after transverse osteotomy.
 e  asd  xa   h  p o a ss a
spreader, restoring length to the radius and congruency to the elbow joint. A semitubular buttress
plate was applied. In 1 month, healing at the osteotomy site was nearly complete, the elbow joint
appeared congruent, and leg function had greatly improved. D and E, The ulna and radius
were osteotomized, derotation and straightening of the foot were carried out, and an external
fixator was applied to the medial surface of the radius.
Continued
768
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
F
G
H
FIGURE 23-16. Continued F, After 7 weeks, both osteotomy sites were well healed, and the
plate and external fixator were removed. G and H, At 1 year the leg was straight when viewed
laterally and cranially. There was a 10-degree loss of flexion at the elbow joint, the elbow
joint appeared congruent, the affected leg was slightly shorter than the opposite normal leg,
and function was good.
angular and rotational deformity are the most common procedures. Static lengthen-
ing of the radius by stair-step osteotomy is simpler than in the growing animal
because only one procedure is needed. Because of the degenerative changes present
 due to elbow incongruity, the prognosis for function is not as good as in animals
treated early in life.
Distal Tibial Deformity
 Deformity as a result of disturbed growth of tibial physes is very rare. Trauma involv-
ing the proximal tibia totaled 3.7% of 135 cases and the distal physis 3% in one
report; none of these developed any deformity23 As in the radius/ulna, however,
 premature closure of the distal fibula is possible in a two-bone system, with resulting
valgus deformity of the tibia, as reported in at least one case.?4 Premature closure
 of the medial side of the distal tibial growth plate without traumatic injury may be
 an inherited condition in the dachshund, termed "pes varus" by Johnson and co-
workers.2 Lameness of the affected limbs before skeletal maturity was seen in both
types of cases.
Surgical Correction
Valgus Deformity
 Either an opening wedge or closing wedge24 osteotomy can be performed according to
 the principles described earlier. A closing wedge method is illustrated in Figure 23-17.
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
769
A
B
C
FIGURE 23-17. Cuneiform closing wedge osteotomy used for correction of an angular
deformity caused by partial premature closure of the distal tibial physis. A, Preoperative
craniocaudal view. To plan the size of wedge to remove, a paper tracing is made from the
radiogram. Line a is drawn parallel to the distal joint surface, line a', and intersects the medial
cortex at the apex of the curvature. Line b is parall to the proximal joint surface, line b',
and connects to line a at the lateral cortex. Because angular deformities and rotation encompass
more than one plane, final adjustments will need to be made before application of fixation.
B, Because the distal segment was relatively short, cross pins were used for fixation at the
osteotomy site. The removed wedge of bone was cut into small pieces and laid in the area as
a bone graft. The fixation was further stabilized with a coaptation splint. C, Clinical union
was present at 7 weeks, and the splint and pins were removed.
In addition to the fixation shown in Figure 23-17, C, an external fixator similar to
that described next for varus deformity could be employed (see Figure 23-18). Bone
plate fixation may be applicable if the osteotomy can be made proximally enough
to allow at least two plate screws in the distal fragment.24 The veterinary cuttable
plate (VCP) (Synthes, Ltd., Paoli, Pa) is helpful in this situation if 2.7-mm screws are
suitable for the size of animal (see Figure 2-75).
Varus Deformity
 Opening wedge osteotomy and type I external fixators were used in a series of five
cases for correction of pes varus in dachshunds (Figure 23-18).2s As these authors
note, the proximal and distal tibial articular surfaces are usually not parallel in the
dachshund, so careful study of craniocaudal radiographs of the normal tibia is nec-
essary to determine the angular correction needed. The method of application of the
770
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
B
FIGURE 23-18. Opening wedge osteotomy for pes varus in the dachshund. A, Preoperative
planning is complicated by the fact that the plane of the proximal joint, line a, is not perpen-
dicular to the sagittal plane of the tibia. Radiographs of the normal limb are essential to
understanding the correction needed. The planned osteotomy, line b, is parallel to the distal
joint surface at the point of maximum curvature of the tibia. The distal full fixation pin is
parallel to line b and is placed before the osteotomy is completed. B, The proximal fixation
pin is placed perpendicular to the sagittal plane of the tibia. The wedge is opened by lateral
angulation of the distal segment until the full pins are parallel to each other, at which point
the lateral connecting bar is attached and clamps tightened. A 0.062-inch (1.5-mm) Kirschner
wire is driven through the medial malleolus and across the osteotomy into the medial cortex,
and a second pin is placed in the proximal segment. A molded acrylic connecting bar simpli-
fies connecting the fixation pins medially. (From Johnson SG, Hulse DA, Vangundy TE,
Green RW: Vet Surg 18:373-379, 1989.)
external fixator illustrated here allowed the osteotomy to be made very distally, at
the point of maximum curvature. Because the fixation pin in the medial malleolus
was only 0.062 inch, methyl methacrylate acrylic bars were used instead of conven-
tional clamps.
MALUNION
Malunion may be described as a fracture healed or healing in malalignment.
 Function of the part is disturbed to a variable degree depending on the type of defor-
mity induced. Minor degrees of malalignment are well tolerated by animals, for
which the veterinary orthopedist should be grateful. When function is interrupted,
 however, corrective surgery is advisable.
 Malunion can be caused by lack of fracture treatment or inappropriate treatment.
 Recognition of a developing malunion during fracture healing, while the callus is still
 plastic, provides an opportunity for treatment by augmenting the fixation after closed
reduction of the deformity. Closed application of external skeletal fixation works well
 in most diaphyseal fractures. Kaderly26 has proposed the following classification:
1.(
 Overriding: long diaphyseal fragments pulled past each other by muscular
forces but still axially aligned.
2.
 Angular: diaphyseal fragments in end-to-end contact with axial angular
deformity.
23—Correction of Abnormal Bone Growth and Healing
771
 3. Rotational: diaphyseal fragments in end-to-end contact with torsional
deformity.
4. Intraarticular: malalignment of articular surfaces.
Most clinical cases exhibit a mixture of these types. A secondary effect of most
malunions is that joints may become malaligned and subsequently undergo DJD
Ligamentous tissues are abnormally stressed, and joint instability can follow. Soft
tissues adjacent to involved bones may become impinged by the bone. Valgus and exter-
nal rotation seem to be more poorly tolerated by the limb than do their opposites.
Bowing in the craniocaudal direction causes limb shortening, but this is relatively well
tolerated because joint surfaces remain parallel to each other and to the ground plane.
Surgical correction by osteotomy is the preferred method of treatment when the
metic, problems. Consideration must be given to the extent of the soft tissue shorten-
ing when the angular deformity is severe. It may not be possible to achieve significant
straightening of the limb in a single procedure without endangering soft tissue vas-
cularity. This situation requires either multiple procedures or gradual lengthening,
such as previously described for correction of bone growth abnormalities. The choice
of an appropriate osteotomy technique will depend on the type and location of defor-
mity and the age of the patient. Adequate internal fixation is imperative for uninter-
rupted healing and generally is identical to that required for a type A fracture of the
bone, as described in previous chapters. It would be tragic to convert a malunion
into a nonunion because of poor choice of fixation.
Clinical Considerations in Common Malunions
Femur
 Malunion of the femoral shaft can be disastrous because of the complexity of the
resulting changes. The proximal femur and neck undergo anteversion and valgus
 d  sp s  se a n a 
and lead to dysplasia-like changes. Proximal femoral intertrochanteric varus and
derotational osteotomy may be needed to correct the hip changes. Severe degenerative
changes in the hip probably warrant total hip replacement or excision arthroplasty.
Torsional and angular changes in the shaft also can predispose to patellar luxa-
tion, usually lateral. Conventional patellar stabilization techniques may suffice if the
structural changes are minor, but diaphyseal osteotomy may be necessary in more
severe cases. Closing wedge techniques are usually preferred because of their inher-
ent stability and because loss of length is rarely a problem.
Marked overriding of fragments results in severe shortening of the quadriceps
and hamstring muscles. Lengthening osteotomies may be difficult to perform as a
result of these soft tissue changes. Sciatic nerve entrapment and hyperextension of
the stifle are potential problems associated with femoral malunions and must be
dealt with appropriately.
Other Long Bones
 Malunion of the tibia and radius/ulna typically result in tarsal/carpal valgus and
external rotation. Treatment of humeral malunion, as with fractures of this bone,
requires identification and protection of the radial nerve.
Pelvis
 Pelvic malunion may affect the rectum and the hip joint. Chronic constipation
results from narrowing of the pelvic canal. Treatment is pubic osteotomy, followed
772
Part IV—Other Fractures and Reconstruction of Bone Deformity
by spreading to enlarge the canal (see Chapter 15) or by triple pelvic osteotomy (see
Chapter 16). Malarticulation of the hip joint caused by pelvic fracture can result in
severe DJD. If treated early, triple pelvic osteotomy may stabilize the joint. After severe
ai so dar d pe no Asdoe usxa A sd s 
Mandible
 Mandibular malunions may result in poor mastication and wear of the teeth. They
are usually handled better by extraction of the involved teeth than by osteotomy of
the mandible.
References
1. Salter RB, Harris WR: Injuries involving the epiphyseal plate, J Bone Joint Surg 45A:587-622, 1953.
2.
O'Brien T, Morgan JP, Suter PF: A radiographic study of growth disturbances in the forelimb,
J Small Anim Pract 12:19-35, 1971.
3.1
Noser G, Carrig CB, Merkley D, et al: Asynchronous growth of the canine radius and ulna: effects
of cross-pinning the radius to the ulna, Arm J Vet Res 38:601-610, 1977.
 Skaggs S, DeAngelis MP, Rosen H: Deformities due to premature closure of the distal ulna in
fourteen dogs: a radiographic evaluation, J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 9:496-500, 1973.
5. Pierrmattei DL, Johnson KA: An atas of surgicat approaches to the bones and joints of the dog and
cat, ed 4, Philadelphia, 2004, Saunders.
6.
Vandewater A, Olmstead ML, Stevenson S: Partial ulnar ostectomy with free autogenous fat
grafting for treatrment of radius curvus in the dog, Vet Surg 11:92-99, 1982.
7.
Shields LH, Gambardella PC: Prermature closure of the ulnar physis in the dog: a retrospective
clinical study, J Am Ani Hosp Assoc 25:573-581, 1989.
8.(
     o       
dynamic ulnar osteotomy: a review of 13 cases, Vet Suig 18:114, 1989.
9.
Vandewater A, Olmstead ML: Premature closure of the distal radial physis in the dog: a review of
eleven cases, Vet Surg 12:7-12, 1983.
10.F
 Riser WH, Shirer JF: Normal and abnormal growth of the distal foreleg in large and giant breed
dogs, J Am Vet Radiot Soc VI:50-64, 1965.
11.
Olsson SE: Osteochondrosis in the dog. In Kirk RW, editor: Current veterinary therapy, Philadelphia,
1980, Saunders.
12.
 Macpherson GC, Lewis DD, et al: Fragmented coronoid process associated with premature distal
radial physeal closure in four dogs, Vet Camp Orthop Trauma 5:93-99, 1992.
13.
 Olson NC, Brinker WO, Carrig CB, et al: Asynchronous growth of the canine radius and ulna: surgical
14.F
Egger EL: Premature radial physeal closure. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl animat surgery,
ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders, pp 1754-1756.
15.9
Shields LH, Gambardella PC: Partial ulnar ostectomy for treatrment of premature closure of the
proximal and distal radial physes in the dog, J Am Ani Hosp Assoc 26:183-188, 1990.
16.
Elkins AD, Morandi M, Zembo M: Distraction osteogenesis in the dog using the Ilizarov external
ring fixator, J Am Anirm Hosp Assoc 29:419-426, 1993.
17.1
Latte Y: Treatment of radius curvus by Ilizarov apparatus, Proc Vet Orthop Soc 16, 1989.
18.S
 Stallings JT, Lewis DD, et al: An introduction to distraction osteogenesis and the principles of the
Ilizarov method, Vet Camp Orthop Trauma 11:59-67, 1998.
19.
27:454-464, 1998.
20.1
Marcellin-Little DJ, Ferretti A, Roe SC, DeYoung DJ: Hinged Ilizarov external fixation for correc-
tion of antebrachial deformities, Vet Surg 27:231-245, 1998.
21.I
fixation system. Part I. Use in bone lengthening and correction of angular and rotational deforrmities,
Vet Comp Orthop Trauma 12:118-127, 1999.
22.
Cross AR, Lewis DD, Murphy ST, et al: Effects of ring diameter and wire tension on the axial biome-
chanics of four-ring circular external skeletal fixator constructs,Am J Vet Res 62:1025-1030, 2001.
23.1
Manfretta SM, Schrader SC: Physeal injuries in the dog: a review of 135 cases, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
182:708-710, 1983.
 24. Jevens DJ, DeCamp CE: Bilateral distal fibular growth abnormalities in a dog, J Arm Vet Med Assoc
202:421-422,1993.
25. J
Johnson SG, Hulse DA, Vangundy TE, Green RW: Corrective osteotomy for pes varus in the dachs-
hund, Vet Surg 18:373-379, 1989.
26.1
Kaderly RE: Delayed union, nonunion, and malunion. In Slatter D, editor: Textbook of smatl
animat surgery, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1993, Saunders, pp 1682-1684.
24
Disease Conditions in
Small Animals
PANOSTEITIS
 Panosteitis is a common condition of the long bones in large breeds of young dogs.
especially the German shepherd and basset hound. The condition is also called
eosinophilic panosteitis, osteomyelitis, enostosis, fibrous osteodystrophy, juvenile
osteomyelitis,' and "eo pan" or "long-bone disease" by breeders.
Although this disease causes severe lameness, it is self-limiting, and there is no
permanent impairment. Therefore, intensive investigations of the various stages of
this disease have been lacking. Many contradictions exist as to its clinical features.
The etiology of panosteitis is unknown, although infection, metabolic disease,
endocrine dysfunction, allergy, autoimmune mechanisms, parasitism, and hereditary
factors have been postulated.1 Viral infection appears the most probable cause of
panosteitis.2 In their review of this condition, Muir and colleagues? reported no new
information as to its cause.3
 Clinical Signs
The clinical picture is that of a healthy dog with lameness of acute onset but no history
of trauma. Males are affected four times more often than females.4 The lameness
may be marked, and often the dog will "carry" or favor the limb. This lameness may
last a few days to several weeks.4 In about 53% of cases, other limbs have become
involved, thereby characterizing the condition as causing a *shifting leg lameness.*s
These recurring bouts usually subside by the time the animal reaches 2 years of age.
 However, dogs up to 5 years of age have developed panosteitis.56
Examination
 Gentle palpation along the distal, middle, and proximal areas of long bones may
elicit exquisite pain when the involved area is reached, even in stoic animals. This
reaction may consist of crying out, wincing, pulling the leg away, or occasionally
snapping at the examiner When palpating, the clinician's fingers should push aside
muscle bundles (especially of the humerus and femur) so that bone is reached before
squeezing. This avoids misinterpretation resulting from hurting normal muscle tissue
trapped in the palpation.
775
776
Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
Depending on when thorough veterinary attention is sought and how elaborate the
workup, other factors may be present, such as fever,14 muscle atrophy,4 eosinophilia,14
decreased activity, and inappetence. Others have disclaimed the occurrence of fever,
in the first 2 days of clinical signs.1
Radiographic Signs
Radiographically, panosteitis may be separated into three stages.6 Often the clinician
sees the case in the middle phase and learns about the other stages only during
extensive studies of this condition.
Early Phase
Although the limb may be asymptomatic, radiographic changes may be detected
during a survey of all the long bones. These consist of blurring and accentuation of
trabecular patterns, best seen at the proximal and distal ends of the diaphysis
(Figure 24-1). The contrast between the cortex and medullary canals is diminished.
 In some cases, a few granular densities are seen.
Middle Phase
 Patchy, mottled, sclerotic-looking densities appear, especially around the nutrient fora-
 men in the early stages (Figure 24-2). In some cases the entire diaphysis is involved; in
others there may be only pea-sized lesions (Figure 24-3). In a third of panosteitis
cases, the periosteum becomes involved. Initially, a subtle roughening appears that
becomes more dense within 1 or 2 weeks and eventually becomes as dense as the
cortex (see Figures 24-2 and 24-3).
FIGURE 24-1. Early stage of eosinophilic
panosteitis in the humerus of a 9-month-
 old male German shepherd. Granular den-
sities are seen.
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
777
FIGURE 24-2. Middle stage of eosinophilic
panosteitis, with increased densities around
the nutrient foramen in a 6-month-old male
Great Pyrenees. Note the periosteal thicken-
ing caudal to the foramen.
FIGURE 24-3. Middle stage(
of
us e suimous sisoud soisos
sclerotic area in the distal humerus of a
6-month-old German shepherd. Note the
thickened caudal cortex adjacent to the
sclerotic patch.
778
Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
Late Phase
 In the process of recovery, the medullary canal attains normal density while the
coarse trabecular pattern remains. In about a third of cases, the cortex remains
thicker than normal. A few granular densities may be present. It may require several
 e s    e e i s s  s
central part of the radius, the proximal third of the ulna, the distal and central parts
 of the humerus, the proximal third of the tibia, and the central and proximal parts
 of the femur.
Histopathology
Histopathological findings of the lesions consist of accentuation of osteoblastic and
fibroblastic activity in the periosteum, endosteum, and marrow. Fibrosis occurs in
the marrow. There is no evidence of either acute or chronic inflammation or malig-
nancy. In highly mature lesions, the cortical thickening consists of thickened lamellar
bone with haversian systems, whereas in immature lesions, cellular fiber bone is pres-
ent with many osteoblasts and osteoclasts.
Differential Diagnosis
Differential diagnosis includes osteochondritis dissecans (OCD), fragmented coro-
noid process, ununited anconeal process, hip dysplasia, cruciate disease, coxofemoral
luxation, and fractures. When there is a shifting leg lameness, other conditions, such
as rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), and bacterial endo-
 carditis, must be considered. The diagnosis of panosteitis is determined by palpation
and radiography.
Treatment
Treatment is symptomatic to relieve pain by using aspirin, corticosteroids, and other
 agents. None of these has been documented to hasten the resolution of panosteitis.13
NUTRITIONAL DISORDERS
Although nutritional problems affecting bone and muscle are beyond the scope of
this text,17-11 this section discusses some clinical situations that may confront the
orthopedist.
Clinical Problems
We see three main clinical problems in our practice: obesity, consequences of the
 all-meat diet, and oversupplementation in large and giant breeds of dogs.
Obesity
Although obesity has not been proved to cause osteoarthritis, at least in mice,12
p a r p  m asnxa  s sn s 
joints or spinal conditions can affect musculoskeletal performance. Prevention of
obesity is accomplished more readily than treatment. Interesting clinical studies in
people have shown that obesity precedes and increases the risk of osteoarthrosis of
the knee (especially in women)13.14 and probably results from mechanical stresses.15
 In addition, other studies suggest that weight loss can both prevent the onset of
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
779
 symptomatic osteoarthrosis of the kneel6.17 and alleviate pain when present.1 If the
veterinary clinician observes patients gaining weight, or if an animal has a potential
for arthritis or back problems or becomes neutered, the client should be warned to
watch the animal's weight carefully and to cut back food intake before weight gain
becomes unmanageable. In known periods of inactivity (e.g., winter months, cessation 
of hunting season), food intake should be diminished.
 If an animal is obese, the endocrine system, especially the thyroid, should be
examined. For a “diet," we usually recommend cutting the total daily caloric intake
by one third to half to reduce the animal's weight. Canine vitamin supplementation
 n e sro  ne o p aq 
restriction. Often, if the owner is sincere and conscientious, decreasing the current
amount of food by one third to half is all that is necessary. Owners (even those who
are overweight themselves) seem to understand and accept that “the more weight
 your pet carries, the more it abuses its bad joint, which could hasten joint destruc-
tion, requiring surgery or leading to a painful life." When this does not seem to be
effective, prescribed weight reduction diets may be tried. Our usual goal is to
achieve a conformation in which there is an observa ble indentation or " waist" along
the flank region and the presence of individually palpable ribs. Some clients may
need to be told, "Your dog needs to lose 4 pounds," instead of these guidelines. For
a lighter-weight bred, the owner may monitor progress using a bathroom scale at
home.
The All-Meat Diet
Publicity concerning all-meat diets has been widespread enough that the syndrome
is rarely seen today. Low in calcium and high in phosphorus, this diet has the ten-
dency to cause secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidism (SNH), a condition in
- s d as in ps a s rd an 
mone increases the resorption of calcium from bone to maintain proper serum levels.
In the young animal the result may be loss of skeletal density and thinning of the
bone cortex. Lameness or pathological fracture may result (Figure 24-4). In an adult
animal that is fed an all-meat diet, the process is slow and can result in osteopenia.
Treatment involves feeding the animal a balanced commercial diet, as well as sup-
plementation with calcium.
Hypernutrition and Oversupplementation
The most perplexing nutritional problem facing the orthopedist is presented when a
breeder asks the veterinary clinician to test serum calcium and phosphorus levels in
a young dog of large or giant breed that has poor bony conformation. Although it
may appear that improper nutrition is the cause, this may or may not be the answer.
A few points are worth emphasizing in this regard. In giant breeds the phosphorus
may be twice as high in the dog 3 to 6 months old as in the adult (8.7 mg/100 ml
vs. 4.2 mg/100 ml). The calcium may be slightly higher in a younger animal (11.1 mg/
100 ml vs. 9.9 mg/100 ml for an adult).7 In those dogs with known dietary excesses
or imbalances of calcium and phosphorus, the serum calcium and phosphorus levels
usually are in the normal range as a result of the dog's homeostatic mechanisms, if
the parathyroid gland is working properly. More sensitive indicators of dietary
imbalance are the quantities of calcium and phosphorus excreted in the urine over
24 hours and the creatinine clearance ratios.
 Most commercial dry dog foods contain the proper quantities of and balance
between calcium and phosphorus. People owning large breeds believe that this com-
n g o q o -ao-, pu an r o aq  ia 
dog, which is going to be large. Often the owner feeds a mixture of foods suggested
780
Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
FIGURE 24-4.  Five-month-old male
Gordon setter with pathological fracture
of the tibia from secondary nutritional
hyperparathyroidism. Note the thin cor-
tices of the femur. This dog was fed a
balanced home diet by a breeder using
eggshells (which are not absorbed in the
ca nine intestine) for the calcium source.
by the breeder, for whom the diet produced champions. These mixtures include vita-
 mins, dicalcium phosphate, bone meal, high-protein cereals, meat, milk, cottage cheese,
eggs, wheat germ, and other nutrients. This highly palatable diet may lead to an inges-
tion of excessive quantities of nutrients, which can lead to a nutritional imbalance.
Young Great Danes fed a balanced diet ad libitum (as desired) had accelerated bone
 growth, sinking of the metacarpophalangeal joints, lateral deviation of the forepaws
(valgus deformity of the carpus), cow-hocked rear limbs, enlargement of the distal
radial and ulnar metaphyses, enlargements of the costochondral junctions, pain,
arched backs, and inactivity. Those dogs fed two thirds of the quantity of protein
and calories of the other group had slower bone growth and better conformation, and
they were more active and playful.? It is therefore wise for the veterinarian to discuss
diet with the owners of these large breeds. The importance of slow bone growth should
 be stressed, and the owners should be warned not to push their dogs nutritionally.
Signs of overnutrition may be mistaken for “rickets" and therefore improper
acceleration of the plane of nutrition prescribed. Rickets is extremely rare and has
been seen usually only under starvation or research conditions.
 si  a   i a s a no a a a
while the dog is still growing. Severe deformities, however, may require corrective
osteotomy after skeletal maturity is complete.
RETAINED CARTILAGINOUS CORES
 Retained cartilaginous cores (RCCs) or retained hypertrophied endochondral carti
lage in the ulnar metaphysis may give an outward appearance of valgus deformity
of the carpus (abduction of the foot).
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
781
FIGURE 24-5. Four-month-old female
Great Dane with painful forelegs. Note the
"candlestick" core extending from the
ul nar epiphysis into the meta physis.
These cores may extend 3 to 4 cm into the metaphysis of the ulna and on radio-
graphs appear similar to "candlesticks" (Figure 24-5). The cores are composed of
core retards the overall length of the ulna. The styloid process does not extend to
the ulnar carpal bone. Therefore the lateral support of the carpus is lost, and the
foot abducts. Because the ulna is shortened, the normal sliding of the radius on the
ulna during growth is altered, and the distal radius is then bent caudally, resulting
in cranial bowing of the radius (Figure 24-6).
The cause of RCCs is unknown. Whether this condition is a form of osteochon-
drosis12 or whether hypernutrition or accelerated body growth plays a role remains
to be proved. When these changes are seen in the puppy, it may be advisable to
decrease the plane of nutrition if it is on the high side. If the dog is mature and the
deformity is severe, corrective osteotomy may be indicated.
HYPERTROPHIC OSTEODYSTROPHY
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy (HO), also called vitamin C deficiency, metaphyseal
osteodystrophy, or scurvy,19 is a syndrome seen in young dogs of medium-sized and
giant breeds (Great Danes, Irish setters, boxers, Labrador retrievers). The condition
is characterized by grossly observable swellings of the distal metaphyses of the
radius, ulna, and tibia. This disorder has been misinterpreted by some clinicians as
"joint swellings." The etiology is unknown.
Clinical Signs
Often the dog with HO appears to show systemic involvement, with pyrexia,
anorexia, pain, arched back, and reluctance to move,1 and has a history of diarrhea
782
Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
FGURE 24-6. Five-month-old Saint
Bernard with increased valgus angulation
 of the carpus and pain elicited on its palpa-
tion. Note the "candlestick" formation of
the ulna and cranial bowing of the radius
with secondary thickening of the caudal
cortex (Wolff's law).
the preceding week.19 Cranial bowing of the forelegs and a valgus deformity of the
carpus may occur:^ The acute phase may last 7 to 10 days'; however, recurrences
have been seen.19
 Radiographic Signs
Radiographically, the initial finding in HO is a thin, radiolucent line in the metaph-
ysis parallel to the epiphyseal plate, especially of the radius. Secondarily, there is an
extraperiosteal cuff of calcification along the metaphysis (Figure 24-7). The lucent
line disappears and is replaced by an increased radiodensity. If relapses occur, a new
radiolucent line appears between the physis and the radiodense region.20 As the dog
matures, these extraperiosteal thickenings often regress (Figures 24-8 and 24-9) but
may leave a permanently thickened metaphysis.21
Pathogenesis
The scurvy theory arises from the radiographic similarity to scorbutic changes seen
 in children.1 Whether HO and scurvy are the same disease, or whether vitamin C
deficiency is involved at all, remains to be proved.19 The mean value of serum ascor-
bic acid in 18 dogs with HO was only slightly below the mean of serum ascorbic
acid in 28 normal, young, large breeds of dogs.19 Because serum ascorbic acid levels
vary with exercise, food intake, and stress, these values may be meaningless because
 dogs with HO are under stress and anorexic. Circumstantial evidence suggests that
the canine distemper virus may be involved with HO, especially after vaccination.
Virus has been detected in bones of some dogs with HO.22
Treatment
 This disease appears to improve with whatever treatment is undertaken. In one
study, 24 dogs with HO were managed by one of these methods: no treatment;
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
783
FIGURE 24-7. Six-month-old male
Great Dane with extraperiosteal prolifer-
ation and calcification of the distal radius 
and ulna.
FIGURE 24-8. Same dog as shown in
Figure 24-7, now 9 months old.
784
Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
FIGURE 24-9. Gross specimen of the ulna shown in
Figure 24-8.
antibiotics; antibiotics and corticosteroids; or antibiotics, corticosteroids, and
 vitamin C. There was no statistical difference in the rates of recoveries among these
treatments.19 Most dogs recovered from systemic signs in 7 to 10 days,119 whereas
bony changes have required several months for resorption.21 In severe cases, if bac-
teremia has been verified by blood cultures, broad-spectrum antibiotics are indicated.20
Death has been reported in some cases.19 Generally, analgesics and antidiarrheal
medications are indicated.
RENAL OSTEODYSTROPHY
Although renal osteodystrophy, or "renal rickets," is infrequently seen by the orthope-
dist, it can occasionally produce pathological fractures or present the appearance of
generalized skeletal demineralization on radiography. With renal disease, phosphorus
is retained, which causes secondary hyperparathyroidism similar to that caused by
nutritional imbalances or excesses of phosphorus.
When an adult dog spontaneously fractures a leg or jaw or experiences minimal
trauma, such as falling down two stairs, particular attention should be paid to the
density of the bone on the radiograph. It is only with chronic severe kidney disease
that the bone will show obvious demineralization, and usually the client would have
sought veterinary attention because of the problems related to uremia.
HYPERTROPHIC PULMONARY OSTEOPATHY
 Hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy (HPO) has been known as hypertrophic pul-
 monary osteoarthropathy (HPOA)23 and hypertrophic osteoarthropathy (HOA).24
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
785
HPOA is a misnomer because the joints are not really involved, and some prefer
 HOA because the lung occasionally is not involved.24
Clinical Signs
This syndrome is characterized by lameness, reluctance to move, and firm swellings
of the distal limbs. The lungs usually are involved. In a study of 60 cases, 30%
showed thoracic disease signs before musculoskeletal signs.24 Lung disease was
eventually seen in 95% of the cases. The cause of the thoracic disease was cancer
in 91%. Spirocerca lupi infestation of the esophagus and dirofilariasis can also
cause HPO.
Radiographic Signs
The classic radiographic signs of HPO consist of extensive, rough periosteal forma-
tion beginning in the distal phalanges, metacarpal bones, and metatarsal bones
(Figure 24-10). Other bones may become involved (Figure 24-11). In peracute cases
with swollen limbs, the radiographs may not show the extensive periosteal changes,
but such changes will be apparent within a few days.
Pathogenesis
The pathogenesis of these periosteal changes is speculative. Some theories include
chronic anoxia, obscure toxins, and autonomic neural vascular reflex mechanisms
mediated by aferent branches of the vagus or intercostal nerves.22s When HPO is
diagnosed, a thorough diagnostic workup, especially of the thorax, is indicated. The
 probability of finding a nonlethal cause is low. Lung lobectomy may allow regression
FIGURE 24-10. Phalanges, metacarpus,
radius, and ulna affected with hypertrophic pul-
monary osteopathy in a S-year-old female collie
mix with metastatic carcinoma to the lungs from
22
the ovaries or uterus.
786
 Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
    g  g a s  
pulmonary osteopathy affecting the vertebrae, pelvis, long bones, and metacarpal and
phalangeal bones.
of bony lesions until death occurs or until additional lung cancer intercedes.224.26
ssd  yi rae ss oi  t oi e a  s o
nonlethal causes (i.e., S. lupi infestation, dirofilariasis), removal of the inciting cause
may or may not bring about regression of HPO signs.23.24
CRANIOMANDIBULAR OSTEOPATHY
An uncommon proliferative bone disease, craniomandibular osteopathy (CMO),
commonly called "lion jaw," usually involves the mandibular rami and the tym-
 panic bullae in Scottish, cairn, and West Highland white terriers.27 Other breeds that
occasionally experience this condition include the Boston terrier, Labrador retriever,
Great Dane, Doberman pinscher,28 German shepherd, boxer, and a mongrel.22
Other bones of the head and some long bones have occasionally been involved. In
some animals, only the mandibles are involved, whereas in others only the tympanic
bullae seem affected.
Occurrence
 The occurrence of CMO is infrequently reported in the literature. At the small animal
clinic at Michigan State University, only seven cases were seen in 9 years (1970-1979),
and during that time, a total of 130,000 admissions had been recorded. In a literature
review, Watson and colleagues?2 reported on collated data from 81 dogs and discussed
 information on an additional 13 cases.
Clinical Signs
 The signs of CMO usually relate to persistent or intermittent pain around the mouth
in growing male and female puppies 4 to 7 months of age. Mild cases may be asymp-
tomatic and are discovered by palpation or radiography. If the angular processes of
the mandible and tympanic bullae are involved, jaw movement is diminished, even
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
787
n re si a as ass e  eiss ran
may become inadequate if the condition is so severe that the dog cannot drink liquids
The mandibular thickening may be palpable, and there may be intermittent fever.
Exacerbations may recur every 2 to 3 weeks.28 However, once skeletal maturation
 nears (11-12 months of age), the pain disappears and the exostoses may even regress.
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of CMO is made based on breed, signs, physical findings, and radiography
Radiographic Signs
Radiography helps to document the condition. Changes consist of beadlike osseous
proliferations of the mandible or tympanic bullae (Figures 24-12 and 24-13). When
the exostoses stop proliferating and eventually regress, the roughened borders become
quite smooth. With early lesions, however, swellings may not be very radiopaque.
Histopathological Appearance
Histologically, normal lamellar bone is replaced by an enlarged, coarse-fiber
(woven) bone. The bone marrow is replaced by a fibrous-type stroma and some
inflammation.27 Inflammatory cells at the periphery of the invading bone have been
documented and would seem to make CMO an inflammatory disease. However,
 others claim that CMO is a noninflammatory, nonclassifiable disease,$28.29 based on
earlier histopathological literature that may or may not have had sufficient case
material to offer adequate study of the disease in various stages. Although the cause
of CMO is unknown, Riser and colleagues27 suggested possible infection (arising
from the fever and histological inflammation at the periphery of the lesion), with a
 genetic influence, because of its occurrence in the terrier breeds. Others have postu-
lated an autosomal recessive trait.30 Watson and co-workers22 suggested that the
FIGURE 24-12. Open-mouth radio-
graph of a 6-month-old female West
Highland  white  terrier  with  canine
mandibular osteopathy. Note the bilateral
roughened proliferations of the mandible.
788
Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
FIGURE 24-13. Proliferation of the tympanic bullae of a 7-month-old male Scottish terrier.
canine distemper virus may be involved, similar to that suggested for hypertrophic
osteodystrophy.
Treatment
Treatment is usually aimed at decreasing pain and inflammation with medication,
such as aspirin, cortisone, and other agents. Signs may wax and wane spontaneously,
 and the disease is self-limiting, which makes treatment responses in sporadic cases
within 3 weeks in one documented case.29 Rostral hemimandibulectomy in one dog
unable to move its jaws allowed better food intake, resulting in weight gain.22
 Feeding highly nutritious fluids would be important in dogs with minimal ability to
open the mouth. Euthanasia may be necessary in a very few cases.
SYNOVIAL CHONDROMETAPLASIA
Synovial chondrometaplasia (SCM) is a condition in which nodules of sclerosis,
fibrocartilage, and even bone form in the synovial layer of the joint capsule, causing
chronic lameness in the dog.31 We have also seen SCM in a cat, as well as several
more cases in the dog. SCM has been reported in the shoulder, stifle, and hock of dogs
 and in the tendon sheath and bursae of horses.31-34 SCM affects the large joints in
humans.3s
The cause of the spontaneous nodular formation is unknown, but secondary
SCM can be stimulated by traumatic, degenerative, or inflammatory conditions in
humans.3s
The diagnosis is made by radiography and histological examination of the joint
 ovial lining appears nodular. Differential diagnoses include synovial sarcoma,
immune-mediated inflammatory joint disease, and infection. Multiple (10-100)
"joint mice" seen radiographically, as well as nodular formation seen histologically,
are diagnostic of the condition (Figure 24-14). Surgical removal of loose bodies and
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
789
A
B
FIGURE 24-14. Anteroposterior (A) and lateral (B) radiographic views of a hock of a
1-year-old golden retriever with synovial chondrometaplasia. Note the severe soft tissue
swelling and the multiple concentric loose bodies ("joint mice") caudal to the distal tibia {in
flexor hallucis longus tendon sheath) and the talocrural joint.
SURGICAL ASPECTS OF LONG-BONE NEOPLASMS
Appendicular bone tumors may be separated into the following three categories:
1. Primary bone tumors (osteosarcoma, chondrosarcoma, or fibrosarcoma).
 2. Secondary metastatic tumors (arising most often from the mammary gland,
lung, and prostate).
 3. Local invasion from soft tissue tumors (e.g, synovial cell sarcoma).
All are malignant and carry a grave prognosis. Osteosarcoma is the most common
tumor type seen in a dog's bone.
 Often the presenting sign is lameness with or without systemic signs such as
lethargy and anorexia. Neoplasia should be suspected and ruled out in the older dog
with a rapidly progressive lameness (2-4 weeks) as well as swelling. Palpation may
reveal muscle atrophy, swelling, and increased heat and sensitivity. Neoplasia should
 also be suspected in dogs sustaining fractures following minimal or no trauma. Careful
scrutiny of good-quality radiographs is required in such cases.
 Fine-detail radiography is often the best diagnostic tool to use in finding bone neo-
 plasia, but it may be inappropriate to predict histological type based on radiographs.36
However, often the radiograph is very characteristic and therefore diagnostic of
osteosarcoma. Biopsy in such cases is sometimes misleading because of the lack of
tumor cells in small biopsy samples. Biopsy should be used, however, on uncharacter-
istic lesions, especially if potentially curable conditions exist (e.g., infection, cysts,
790
Part V—Miscellaneous Conditions of the Musculoskeletal System
undifferentiated carcinoma, lymphomas, transmissible venereal tumor, plasma cell
myeloma). Biopsy is also helpful when an owner wants a more knowledgeable
answer as to the probable life expectancy of the pet. Chondrosarcoma and fibrosar-
coma are slow growing, allowing slower progression until natural death.
Limb amputation is the most frequent surgical treatment in the dog and cat, with
or without chemotherapy. It improves the quality of life, but 85% of dogs still die
Recent advances in treatment of osteosarcoma in humans have increased overall sur-
vival rates to 60% to 70% in patients with nonmetastatic osteosarcoma.39 However 
80% to 90% of human patients do not have gross evidence of metastatic disease in
the bone at the time of osteosarcoma diagnosis.39 This is in contrast to our canine
patients, in which 85% to 90% have metastatic disease when the primary tumor is
removed.38 Treatments in people include various chemotherapy regimens, pulmonary
resection of metastases (often multiple surgeries), and limb salvage procedures. The
 goals of limb salvage procedures are to remove the tumor completely and to avoid
local recurrence while reconstructing a functional extremity.39 Endoprostheses may be
inserted (metal, allografts, or autoclaved autograft of resected tumor). However, the
overall survival rates have not differed from those seen with amputation.39 Ten per-
cent of dogs undergoing amputation or limb sparing alone will survive 1 year.40
Limb salvage in dogs has been used in selected cases and includes tumor resec-
tion and stabilization using whole cortical allografts and bone plates.3841 The use of
cisplatin has shown improved survival rates, with more than 50% of dogs living
d m p si une no hs q fl se sa re ra 1
35% to 50% will survive 1 year.42 Newer immunotherapeutic regimens are being
 investigated,4 but at this time the prognosis remains poor for long-term benefit.
Exact statistics about survival rates are difficult to obtain because of euthanasia
  s     s o  s
References
1. McKeown S, Archibald J: The musculoskeletal system. In Cattcott ES, editor: Canine medicine,
ed 4, Santa Barbara, Calif, 1979, American Veterinary Publications, pp 533-678.
2. Johnson KA, Watson ADH, Page RL: Skeletal diseases. In Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC, editors:
Textbok of veterinary intenat medicine, ed 4, Philadelphia, 1995, Saunders, pp2077-2106.
3. Muir P, Dubielzig RR, Johnson KA: Panosteitis, Cormpend Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:29-34, 1996.
4. Barrett RB, Schall WD, Lewis RE: Clinical and radiographic features of canine eosinophilic
panosteitis,J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 4:94-104,1968.
5. Brown SG: Skeletal diseases. In Ettinger SJ, editor: Textbook of veterinary internat medicine,
Philadelphia, 1975, Saunders, pp 1715-1741.
6.Bohning R Jr, Suter P, Hohn RB,Marshall J: Clinical and radiographic survey of canine panosteitis,
J Am Vet Med Assoc 156:870-884, 1970.
 7. Fletch SM, Smart ME: Blood chemistry of the giant breeds: bone profile, Bult Arm Soc Vet Clin Patho!
2:30,1973.
 8. Morris ML: Nutrition and disease. In Cattcott EJ, editor: Canine medicine, ed 4, Santa Barbara,
Calif, 1979, American Veterinary Publications, pp 223-252.
 9. Hedharmmar A, Wu FM, Krook L, et al: Oversupplementation and skeletal disease: an experimental
study in growing Great Dane dogs, Cornelt Vet 64(suppl 5):32-45, 1974.
  i        o 
Philadelphia, 1977, Saunders, pp 1048-1050.
11. Krook L: Metabolic bone disease in dogs and cats. In Proceedings of 38th Annuat Meeting of the
American Animat Hospitat Association, 1971, pp 350-355.
12. Moskowitz RW: Symptoms and laboratory findings in osteoarthritis. In Hollander JL, editor:
Arthritis and altied conditions, Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger, pp 1032-1053.
13. Felson DT: The epidermiology of knee osteoarthrosis: results from the Framingham Osteoarthritis
Study, Semin Arthritis Rheum 20:42-50, 1990.
14. Felson DT, Anderson JJ, Naimark A, et al: Obesity and knee osteoarthritis: the Framingham Study.
Ann Intern Med 109:18-24, 1988.
24—Disease Conditions in Small Animals
791
15. Hartz AJ, Fischer ME, Bril G, et al: The association of obesity with joint pain and osteoarthritis in
the HANES data, J Chronic Dis 39:311, 1986.
16. Felson DT: Weight and osteoarthritis, J Rheuatot Suppt 43:7-9, 1995.
 s r   s   e        
osteoarthritis in women: the Framingham Study, Ann Intern Med 116:535-539, 1992.
18. Riser WH, Shirer JF: Norrmal and abnormal growth of the distal foreleg in large and giant dogs.
J Am Vet Radiot Soc VI:50-64, 1965.
study, J Smalt Anim Pract 17:721, 1976.
20. Muir P, Dubielzig RR, Johnson KA: Hypertrophic osteodystrophy and calvarial hyperostosis,
Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 18:143-152, 1996.
21. Morgan JP: Radiotogy in veterinary orthopedics, Philadelphia, 1972, Lea & Febiger.
22. Watson ADJ, Adams WM,Thomas CB: Craniomandibular osteopathyin dogs, Compend Cont Educ
Pract Vet 17:911-923, 1995.
23. Thrasher JP: Hypertrophic pulmonary osteoarthropathy, J A Vet Med Assoc 39:441-448, 1961.
24. Brodey RS: Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy in the dog: a clinicopathologic survey of 60 cases, J Am
Vet Med Assoc 159:1242-1255, 1971.
25. Holling HE, Danielson GK, Hamilton RW, et al: Hypertrophic pulmonary Osteoarthropathy,
J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg 46:310-321, 1963.
 26. Suter PF: Pulmonary neoplasia. In Ettinger SJ, editor: Textbook of veterinary internat medicine,
Philadelphia, 1975, Saunders, pp 754-766.
27. Riser WF, Parkes LJ, Shirer JF: Canine craniomandibular osteopathy, J Arm Vet Radiot Soc 8:23-30,
1967.
28. Palmer N: Bones and joints. In Jubb KVF, Kennedy PC, Palmer N, editors: Pathology of domestic
animats, ed 4, San Diego, 1993, Acadermic Press, pp 1-181.
29. Pool RR,Leighton RL: Craniomandibular osteopathyinthe dog, JA Vet Med Assoc 154:657-660,
1969.
30. Padgett GA, Mostosky UV: The mode of inheritance of craniomandibular osteopathy in West Highland
White terrier dogs, Amm J Med Genet 25:9-13, 1986.
 31. Flo GL, Stickle RL, Dunstan RW: Synovial chondrometaplasia in five dogs, J Am Vet Med Assoc
191:1417-1422, 1987.
32. Schmidt E, Schneider J: Synovial chondromatosis in the horse, Monatsschr Vet 37:509, 1982.
33. Schawalder VP: Die synoviale osteochondrormatose (synoviale chondrormetaplasie) bierm Hund,
Schweiz Arch Tierheitk 122:673-678, 1980.
 34. Kirk MD: Radiographic and histologic appearance of synovial osteochondromatosis of the
fermorotibial bursa in a horse: a case history report, Vet Radiot 23:167-170, 1982.
35.Schajowicz F: Turor and tumor-like lesions of bones and joints,New York,1981,Springer-Verlag.
36. Probst CW, Ackerman N: Malignant neoplasia of the canine appendicular skeleton, Compend Cont
Educ Pract Vet 4(3):260-270, 1982.
37. Brodey RS, Abt DA: Results of surgical treatment in 65 dogs with osteosarcoma, J Am Vet Med
Assoc 168:1032, 1976.
38. Withrow SJ, LaRue SM, Powers BE, et al: Osteosarcoma: new trends in treatment. Presented at 10th
39. Goorin Am, Abelson HT, Frei E: Osteosarcoma: fifteen years later, N Engl J Med 313(26):
1637-1642, 1985.
 40. Spodnick GL, Berg J, Rand WM, et al: Prognosis for dogs with appendicular osteosarcoma treated
by amputation alone: 162 cases (1978-1988), J Arm Vet Med Assoc 200:995, 1992.
41.Vasseur PB: Limb salvage in a dog with chondrosarcoma of the tibia, J Ar Vet Med Assoc
187(6):620-623, 1985.
42. Withrow SJ et al: Recent advances in surgical oncology, Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet 15:939,
1993.
NDEX
Angle of reduction, hip dysplasia diagnosis and, 486, 487
Accessory carpal bone, fracture of, 392-396
Angle of subluxation, hip dysplasia diagnosis and,
Acetabular cup, replacement of, 495
486, 487
Acetabular plate, acetabular fracture treated with, 450-451
Animal
Acetabular rim
growing (See Growing animal)
dorsal, 483, 486
small, disease conditions in, 775-790
microfracture of, 477
Anorexia, hypertrophic osteodystrophy indicated by, 781
Osteophytes on, hip dysplasia treatment and, 483
Antebrachiocarpal joint
Acetabulum
distal ulnar fracture and, 378
bone plate for, 133f
hyperextension of, 400,401
closed reduction of hip luxation and, 465-466
luxation of, 387
fracture of, 447-454
panarthrodesis for, 404
hip luxation and, 463
premature closure of radial physis and, 759-760
internal fixation for, 450-453
subluxation of, 387-388
oblique, 454f
Antibiotic drugs
surgical approaches to, 447-453
arthritis treated with, 204
transverse,450f
bone infection treated with,180-181
treatment of,447-453
following external fixation, 92-93
malformation of, 475
hypertrophic osteodystrophy treated with, 784
 pelvic fracture treatment and, 436
joint wound treated with, 228
in total hip replacement, 498-499
mandibular fracture treatment and, 718
Acetylsalicylic acid, osteoarthrosis treated with, 199
Achilles mechanism, avulsion of, 674
AO/ASIF wire passer, 116f
Achilles tendinitis, 678
 AO Vet Alphanumeric Morphological Fracture
Achilles tendon, laceration of, 677-678
Classification System, 26t
Achondroplasia, degenerative joint disease associated
AO Vet fracture classfication, 633
with, 191t
AR. See Angle of reduction
Acromion process
Arthritis, 203-205
arthroscopy on, 255-257
arthroscopy for diagnosis of, 247
fracture of, 9
definition of, 190
Actinomyces, bone infection caused by, 177
diagnosis of, 204
Acupuncture, osteoarthrosis treated with, 200
septic, 227
Adult dog, causes of lameness in, 4t
synovial fluid changes in, 204t
Aging, osteoarthrosis and, 197
treatment of, 204-205
Allograft
Arthrocentesis
bone collection for, 163-164
bicipital tenosynovitis treated with, 290
definition of, 161
as diagnostic tool, 21-24
Aminoglycoside, bone infection treated with, 181
Arthrodesis, 229-230
Amoxicillin, bone infection treated with, 181
bone graft for, 160
Amphiahrosisescriptionof8
of calcaneoquartal joint, 701-702
Ampicillin
carpal hyperextension treatment and, 400-401
 arthritis treated with, 204
carpal shearing injury treated with, 412
 joint wound treated with, 228
elbow, 355-357
Amputation
interphalangeal joint instability treated with, 425-427
long-bone neoplasm treated with, 790
of intertarsal joint, 702-704
osteoarthrosis treated with, 202
jntertarsal joint subluxation treated with, 705-706
of toe, 425-427, 426f
intertarsal joint subluxation with dorsal instability
Anconeal process
treated with, 706-707
hypoplasia of, 330
 medial patellar luxation repair with, 580
removal of, 343
 metacarpophalangeal joint instability treated with,
ununited (See Ununited anconeal process)
425-427
Anesthesia
osteoarthrosis treated with, 201
 closed reduction of hip luxation and, 465
pantarsal, 687, 693f, 694-695
gas, fracture reduction and,38
partial
general, closed reduction of fracture with, 41-42
 mandibular fracture reduction and, 718
T-plate for, 404
Page numbers followed by f indicate figures; t, tables.
793
794
Index
Arthrodesis—cont'd
Avulsion
of shoulder joint, 276-278
of gastrocnemius tendon, 674-677
for shoulder luxation, 269
 of tibial tuberosity, 639-641
shoulder luxation treated with, 266
Azathioprine, rheurmatoid arthritis treated with, 207
of stifle, 626-630
of talocrural joint, 686-693, 692f
B
bone plate for, 689-690
Bacterial endocarditis, 178
tarsal shearing injury treated with,665,669
Bacteroides, bone infection caused by, 177
tarsormetatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
Bandage
treated with, 707-710
flexion,58-60
tarsometatarsal subluxation treated with,
example of, 65f
710-711
padded, 65
Arthrography
Robert-Jones, 62, 65
of biceps brachi tendon, 293
example of, 68f
biceps tendon tenosynovitis diagnosed with,
for tibial fracture, 633
287-288
Banked bone, 160
as diagnostic tool, 16
Bardens technique, 478,480
 of norrmal shoulder, 289f
Biceps femoris muscle, fibular head transposition and,
Arthrology, 185-215
594, 595
Arthroplasty
Bioflm, production of, 179
excision, 501-506
Biological fixation, bone fracture treatment and, 35
surgical techniques for, 502-506
Biological osteosynthesis
for femoral head and neck excision, 448
with bone plate,548f
osteoarthrosis treated with, 201
for femoral fracture, 519
for shoulder, 273-275
fixation of tibial fracture and,637
for shoulder luxation, 266, 269
fracture in growing animal treated with, 740
Arthroscope, description of, 236-237
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 651, 653
Arthroscopy.
tibial fracture treatment and, 638
as diagnostic tool, 18-19
for ulna and radius fractures,362
of elbow, 244-245,246f
BioMedtrix modular prosthesis, 496
electrocautery in,243-244
Bite block, mandibular fracture treatment and, 722
 humeral head osteochondritis dissecans
Bivalve splint, for phalanges fracture, 420
repaired with,283
Bladder, rupture of, pelvic fractures and, 434
instrurmentation for, 235-244
Bleeding, control of, fracture reduction and, 44
in joint surgery, 233-251
Blood, infection in, 178
manual instrumentation for, 238-242
Blood supply
open surgery compared to, 233
bone healing and, 29-33
for osteochondritis dissecans, 233-234
cortical, cerclage wire placerment and, 111
principles of, 235-244
inadequate, delayed union and, 168
radiofrequency in, 243-244
medullary, 100
on shoulder, 245-247,248f-250f
BMP. See Bone morphogenetic protein
specific joints and, 244-251
Bolt cutter, fixator pin cut with, 107
on stifle,247
Bone. See also names of specific bones (e.g., Femur)
Arthrosis, definition of, 190
autogenous cancellous, 162
Arthrotomy
talocrural arthrodesis with, 687
cranial cruciate ligament rupture
autogenous corticocancellous, 163
diagnosis and, 608
blood supply to, 30-31
fragmented coronoid process diagnosed with, 348
carpal,383f
medial
central tarsal
rmeniscectormy and, 613
fracture of, 695-698, 698-699
three-in-one patellar luxation repair and, 590
luxation of, 698-699
 medial rmeniscus, cranial cruciate ligament
collection of, for grafting, 162-163
treated with,585
delayed union of, 32
principles of, 217-218
ee 'ze 'go uoun pa
Articular cartilage, in synovial joint, 187-189
disease in, fracture caused by, 25
AS. See Angle of subluxation
distal long, fractures in, 27f
ASIF systerm, 125
effect of infection on, 178-180
ASPCA sling, 62
epiphyseal, bone screws for, 123
Aspirin
healing of, 31-33
craniomandibular osteopathy treated with, 788
average times to, 169t
hip dysplasia treated with, 481
blood supply and, 29-33
Osteoarthrosis treated with,199
callus formation in, 32
panosteitis treated with, 778
correction of abnormal, 747-772
rheumatoid arthritis treated with, 207
evaluation of,37
Autogenous graft, definition of, 160
with external fixation, 99
Autograft, definition of,160
radiographic signs of, 41t
Avascular necrosis, 507-508
radiographs of, 38f-39f
hindlimb lameness associated with, 431
tibial fracture and, 637
Index
795
Bonecont'd
Bone plate—cont'd
hip dysplasia effects on, 476
 articular humerus fracture treated with, 322
indirect union of, 31-32
bone lengthening and, 764-765
infection in (See Infection)
bone screw used with, 124
Jengthening of, fixation and, 764
bridging (See Bridging plate)
Jong
buttress, 128-130, 131f
angular and rotational deformities of, 747
femoral fracture treated with, 521-522
corrective osteotomy for, 747
humeral fracture treated with, 307f
fracture involving, 737
premature closure of radial physis and, 766
growth plate of, 737
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 651
pin placement in, 107
calcaneal fracture treated with, 671-673
pressure growth plate in, 741
cerclage wire with, 113f
traction growth plate in, 741
 compression (See Compression plate)
metacarpal,383f
contouring of,132,134f
metaphyseal, bone screws for, 123
delayed union treated with, 170
necrotic, infection and, 180
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 542
neoplasm in, 789-790
for diaphyseal femoral wedge fracture,
reconstruction of, for patellar luxation repair, 565-566
544, 546, 547
tolerance of, to interfragmentary strain, 33t 
for diaphyseal fractures of humerus, 309
tumor in,789-790
distal femoral fracture treated with, 553-554
union of, 31-32
for elbow arthrodesis, 355, 356f
rate of, 36-37
femoral fracture treated with, 521-522
vascularization of, 30-31
fracture in growing animal treated with,
effect of fracture on, 31
740-741
Bone banking, bone grafting and, 163-164
humeral fracture treated with, 301-302, 303f
Bone bridge
ilial fracture treated with, 443-446
physeal growth plate arrest and, 750
intertarsal joint luxation treated with, 702-703
removal of, 758
intramedullary pin used with, 137-140
resection of, 757,762
ischial fracture treated with,455-456
Bone fragment, fracture and, 44-45
mandibular fracture treated with, 727-729
Bone graft, 160-167
 medial, humeral fracture treated with, 301
autogenous, definition of, 160
 metacarpal fracture treated with, 418
autogenous cancellous
neutralization, 127-128
 bone infection treated with, 181
for open fracture, 148
calcaneoquartal joint arthrodesis with, 702
open reduction of fracture with, 47-48
corrective osteotomy and, 750
pantarsal arthrodesis with, 694-695
talocrural arthrodesis with, 690
pelvic fracture treated with, 436
tarsal shearing injury treated with, 669
in pelvic osteotomy,487-488
autogenous free vascularized, 166-167
 pin and wire fixation compared with, 100
cancellous, 161, 164-165, 231
proximal femoral fracture treated with,
panarthrodesis with,405,407,408
526-527
characteristics of, 160-161
reconstruction, 136-137
dinical application of, 162-167
removal of, 140-142
cortical, 161
care after, 142
cortical tubular intercalary, 164-165
screws used with,130-131
corticocancellous, 161, 164-165
selection of, 134
hip luxation treatment and, 475
sequestrum formation and, 181
external fixation and, 88
size of, 132
function of, 161
stacking of,135-136
indications for, 160
stifle arthrodesis with,627-629
inlay, 165
talocrural arthrodesis with, 689-690
onlay, 165
tarsometatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
for open fracture, 149
treated with, 709
placement of, 164-167
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 648,
talocrural arthrodesis with, 687, 689
650, 651
types of, 164-167
tibial distal fracture treated with, 657
 Bone growth
tibial fracture treated with, 638-639
abnormal, correction of, 747-772
trochanteric femoral fracture treated with, 537-538
bone plate and interference of, 140
type B2 radial fracture treated with, 370
diet oversupplermentation and, 780
ulna and radius diaphyseal fractures treated with, 374
 Bone marrow, fibroblastic activity in, panosteitis
ulna and radius fractures treated with, 364
indicated by, 778
 ulnar and radial distal fractures treated
 Bone rmorphogenetic protein, nonunion treated with,
with, 378
175-176
veterinary cuttable, 135
Bone plate, 125-142
Bone screw, 121-125. See atso Lag screw
acetabular fracture treated with, 450-451
articular humerus fracture treated with, 321-322
antebrachiocarpal joint fusion with, 405
cancellous, 123
application of, 130-140
cortical, 123
796
Index
Bone screw—cont'd
Canine Pelvic Osteotomy Plate, in pelvic osteotomy,
distal hurmerus fracture treated with, 318
487-488, 489
femoral fracture treated with, 522
Cannula, in arthroscopy, 237, 238f
jn femoral neck lengthening,490
Capsulectomy
hip luxation treatment with, 469
 desmotomy and, patellar luxation repair with,
indications for, 123-124
570-571
insertion of, 123-125
lateral patellar luxation repair with, 580
for open fracture, 148
partial, definition of, 571
pelvic fracture treated with, 436
Carpal bone 
 proximal tibial fracture treated with, 641
accessory, fracture of, 392-396
reduction of hip luxation with, 468
numbered, fracture of, 396-397
selection of, 134
radial, fracture of, 389-392
sizes for, 123f
Carpal joint 
tarsal shearing injury treated with, 667
arthrocentesis of, 23-24
tibial proximal fracture treated with, 643
arthroscopy on, 247-251
 Bone transport osteogenesis, nonunion fracture
distal ulnar physis closure and, 752
treated with, 176
Carpal valgus
Bowel function, pelvic fracture and, 458
correction of, 756
Bowstring effect,751, 752,755
distal ulnar physis closure and, 752-754
of short ulna, 756, 757
Carpometacarpal joint, hyperextension of,
400, 401
external fixation application and 79
Carprofen
 gunshot fracture and, 155
hip dysplasia treated with, 481
Bridging osteosynthesis, 32
osteoarthrosis treated with, 199
bone fracture treatment and, 35
Carpus
bone plate and, 125
bones of, 383f
bone plate use and, 137-138, 139
forelimb lameness caused by problems in,
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 539
262,263,264
for humeral fracture, 310, 312
fracture of, 389-397
Bridging plate, 128-130
hyperextension of, 399-409
bone healing with,31
treatment of, 400-409
femoral fracture treated with, 521-522
immobilization of
gunshot fracture treated with, 155
cast for, 52
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 651
Schroeder-Thomas splint for, 58
 Bucket-handle tear, rmeniscal injury from, 611
short caudal splint for, 58
Bunnel-Meyer suture, 225f
injury to,387-412
Buttress effect, 101
ligaments of, 382, 384f
Buttress plate, 128-130, 131f, 138
luxation of, 388-389
femoral fracture treated with, 521-522
middle
humeral fracture treated with, 307f
Juxation of, 397
premature closure of radial physis and, 766
subluxation of, 397-399
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 651
palpation of, 6
 Buttress sign, cranial cruciate ligament rupture
panarthrodesis of, 404-409
diagnosis and, 584
shearing injury of, 409-412
surgical approach to,385f
C
Cartilage
Calcanean tendon
abnormalities of, 190
avulsion of, 674
articular, 187-189
laceration of, 677-678
degeneration of, 191-192
 Calcaneoquartal joint
degenerative joint disease and changes in,193194
arthrodesis of,701-702
healing of, 189
description of, 662
schematic drawing of, 188f
instability at, 700
candlestick core of,758,759f
Calcaneus
degenerative joint disease and changes in,
fracture of, 669-673
193-194
surgical approach to, 670
fragrnent of, osteochondritis dissecans in
Callus
shoulder and, 278
 bridging, nonunion fracture and, 171-172
in synovial joint,186
formation of
of tarsocrural joint, 662
in bone healing, 32
tolerance of, to interfragmentary strain, 33t
with external fixation, 99
Cartilage flap
fracture treatment and, 36
osteochondritis dissecans of talus and, 678, 679
Camera,jnarhroscopy,236237
surgical excision of, 346
Canine distemper virus
Cast, 49-69
 craniomandibular osteopathy
cylinder, central tarsal bone fracture treated with, 697f
associated with, 788
definition of, 50
hypertrophic osteodystrophy
jntertarsal joint subluxation treated with, 705
associated with, 782
long-leg cylinder, 51-52
Index
797
Cast—cont'd
Chondroitin sulfate
example of, 53f-54f
hip dysplasia treated with, 481
fixation for distal ulnar and radial
osteoarthrosis treated with, 200
fractures with, 378
Chondromalacia, prevention of,448
materials for, 50
Chondroplasty, trochlear, 571-572
for open fracture, 148
Chondrosarcoma, description of, 789, 790
padding for, 66-67
Circular-frame fixator, radial lengthening and,762
patient tolerance of, 67-69
Cisplatin, long-bone neoplasm treated with, 790
for radius fracture, 360
Clamp
short-leg cylinder, 52
configuration of,78-79
example of, 55f
design of, 78
sprain treated with, 223
external fixator, 72-74
tarsometatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
fixation, placement of, 88
treated with, 707
Clindamycin, bone infection treated with, 181
for tibial fracture, 633
Clostridium
for ulna fracture, 360
bone infection caused by, 177
Cathepsin, cartilage degeneration and, 191
Cauda equina lesion, hindlimb lameness
Cloxacillin, bone infection treated with, 181
 associated with, 430
CMO. See Craniomandibular osteopathy
Caudal longitudinal tear, meniscal
Coaptation
injury from, 611
for femoral fracture, 512-513
 Caudolateral band, cranial cruciate
for fibular fracture, 633
ligament and, 583, 605
for humeral fractures, 297
Cauterization, arthroscopic, 244
indications for, 51
Cefazolin, bone infection treated with, 181
for radius fracture, 359-360
Centrodistal joint, description of, 662
splint for, 49-69
Cephalexin, following total hip replacement, 500
tape muzzle,722
Cephalosporin, arthritis treated with, 204
for tibial fracture, 633
Cerclage wire,110-117
for ulna fracture, 359-360
for auxiliary fixation, 81f
Coaptation fixation device, 49
bent eyelet wire rmethod for, 113-115
Coaptation splint, 49-69
bone plate with, 113f 
Collagen
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with,
cartilage composition and, 187, 188
539, 542
in joint connective tissue, 186t
for distal humerus fracture, 313
osteoarthrosis effects on, 194
double-loop, 115-116
Collagen fiber bundle, 218
double-wrap, 116, 117
Collateral ligament
eyelet,115-116
injury to,616-617
femoral fracture treated with, 518
instability of, 13
humeral fracture treated with, 299, 310
lateral, fibular head transposition and, 592
 indications for, 111
medial, 615
loop/twist, 116-117
injury to, 616-617
 mandibular symphysis fracture
surgical repair of, 617,618f, 619f
treated with, 720
Compression plate, 126-127
metacarpal fracture treated with, 417f, 418
bone healing with, 31
open reduction of fracture with, 47-48
femoral fracture treated with, 521-522
technique for, 111-113
limited-contact dynamic, 136, 137f
tibial fracture treated with, 636, 638
 mandibular fracture treated with, 729f
twist method for, 113
nonunion treated with, 174
CF luxation. See Coxofemoral luxation
panarthrodesis with, 405
Charnley apparatus, radial lengthening and, 762
pantarsal arthrodesis with, 694-695
Chisel point, intramedullary pin and,
Compression wire, ilial body fracture
102-103
treated with, 446-447
 Chloramphenicol, bone infected
Computed tomography
treated with, 183
as diagnostic tool, 16-17
Chlorhexidine
of fragmented coronoid process, 347
irrigation of carpal shearing injury with, 410
fragmented coronoid process diagnosed with,
irrigation of tarsal shearing injury with, 666
350f, 351f
Javage with, for open fracture, 147
Connecting bar, 78-79
sutures soaked in, 587
acrylic,78
Chlortetracycline, bone infected
in external fixator,70-72
treated with, 183
optimal size of, 86
Chondroblast, bone formation and, 175
placement of, 88
Chondrocyte
Connective tissue, joint function and, 185, 186t
cartilage composition and, 187, 188
Contracture, joint immobilization as cause of, 228
degenerative joint disease and, 193
Coronoid process
in joint connective tissue, 186t
fragrmentation of (See Fragmented coronoid process)
Chondroitin, cartilage matrix and, 189
hypoplasia of, 330
798
Index
Corticosteroid drugs
Cyclophosphamide, rheumatoid arthritis
bicipital tenosynovitis treated with, 290
treated with, 207
hypertrophic osteodystrophy treated with,784
Cyst
panosteitis treated with, 778
excision of, bone graft for, 160
rheumatoid arthritis treated with,207
subchondral, degenerative joint
Cortisone, craniomandibular osteopathy treated with, 788
disease and, 193
Corynebacterium pyogenes, joint infection caused by, 204
Cosequin, osteoarthrosis treated with, 200
D
COX-1 inhibitor drugs, osteoarthrosis treated with,
DAR. See Acetabular rim, dorsal
198-199
DCP. See Dynamic compression plate
COX-2 inhibitor drugs
Debridement
hip dysplasia treated with, 481
for carpal shearing injury, 410
osteoarthrosis treated with,198-199
for gastrocnermius tendon avulsion, 676
Coxa plana, 507-508
for osteoarthrosis, 201
Coxa valga, 492
of osteophytes in arthritic joint, 218
genu valgum and, 582
tarsal shearing injury and, 666-667
Coxa vara, patellar luxation indicated by, 562
Degenerative joint disease
Coxofemoral joint
acetabular fracture and, 447
arthrocentesis of, 21
 avulsion of long digital extensor
arthroscopy on,247-251
muscle and, 622-623
Coxofemoral luxation, 461
cranial cruciate ligarment rupture and, 582
caudodorsal, 462
cranial cruciate ligament 
craniodorsal, 461-462
treatment and, 585
cranioventral, 463
definition of, 190
Ehmer sling used after fixation of, 472
distal ulnar physis closure and, 751-752
open reduction of, 468-475
excision arthroplasty for, 501
treatment of, 464-475
fibular head transposition and, 592
ventral,463
following triple pelvic osteotomy, 489
CPOP. See Canine Pelvic Osteotomy Plate
fracture malunion as cause of, 771
Cranial cruciate ligament 
hindlimb lameness associated with,
avulsion of, 606-607, 609-610
430,431
collateral ligament injury and, 616
hip dysplasia and, 477, 480
function of, 583
hip luxation treatment and, 467
hindlimb lameness associated with tear of, 430
 meniscal injury and, 613
partial rupture of, 605-606
osteochondritis dissecans of talus and,
rupture of,562,582-604,607-610
678-679
clinical signs of, 583-585
 pantarsal arthrodesis and, 694
diagnosis of, 583-585, 607-608
 premature closure of radial physis and,
extracapsular techniques for repair of, 586-599
759-760
treatment of, 585-604
primary, 190-191
stabilization of, 602f-603f
secondary, 191
Cranial drawer
talocrural arthrodesis and, 686-687
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture diagnosis and, 584
Delayed union, 168-176
tibial position in, 585f
bone graft for, 160
Cranial tibial thrust, 596-597
causes of, 168
Craniomandibular osteopathy, 786-788
definition of, 168
 Craniomedial band, cranial cruciate ligament and,
treatment of, 169-171
583, 605
Deracoxib
Creeping substitution, description of, 161
hip dysplasia treated with, 481
Crepitus
osteoarthrosis treated with, 199
description of, 8
Desmotomy
hip dysplasia indicated by, 477
 lateral patellar luxation repair with, 581
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease indicated by,508
 medial patellar luxation repair with, 580
osteoarthrosis indicated by, 195, 197
 partial capsulectomy and, patellar luxation repair with,
recumbent examination and, 8
570-571
sesamoid fracture indicated by, 421
Diagnosis, tools for, 3-24
 ununited anconeal process indicated by, 340
Diamond point, intramedullary pin and, 102-103
Cruciate ligament
Diarrhea, hypertrophic osteodystrophy
instability of,10,11-12
 indicated by, 781
rupture of, 203
Diarthrosis, description of, 185
CT. See Computed tomography
Diatrizoate meglumine, arthrography with, 16
Curettage
Diet
for osteochondrosis, 212
all-meat, 779
surgical repair of humeral head osteochondritis
osteoarthrosis treated with, 200
dissecans and, 280
oversupplementation in, 779-780
Curette, arthroscopic, 242
Distemper virus
Cyclooxygenase, osteoarthrosis treated with,
craniomandibular osteopathy associated with, 788
198-199
hypertrophic osteodystrophy associated with, 782
Index
799
 Distraction index, hip dysplasia diagnosed with, 480-481
Elbow—cont'd
Distraction osteogenesis, 762
Jigaments in, 327-328
DJD. See Degenerative joint disease
luxation of, 325-330
Documentation, in arthroscopy, 244
congenital, 330-336
Dorsal plate, panarthrodesis with, 405, 406f
lateral, 326f
Dorsolateral subluxation score, hip dysplasia
radiographic findings of, 330-333
 diagnosis and, 481
normal, radiographs of, 335f
Drainage, surgical, for bone infection, 181
Osteoarthrosis of,causes of,339
Drawer movement, 11-12
osteochondrosis of, 339-354
cranial cruciate ligament rupture indicated by, 583, 607
example of,342f
 examination of cranial cruciate ligament 
palpation of, 6
rupture and, 605
recumbent examination of, 9
fibular head transposition and, 592
subluxation of, distal ulnar physis closure and, 751
indirect,12
surgical approaches to, 328-329
meniscus release and, 597, 599
Elbow joint effusion, 6
osteochondritis dissecans of femoral condyle
Electrocautery
indicated by, 620
in arthroscopy, 243-244
palpation of, 13f
closure of pubic symphysis with,491
 Drill, Steinmann pin inserted with, 106
 osteochondritis dissecans of talus treated with, 681
Drill bit, sizes for, 123f
 Elephant foot, nonunion as cause of, 171
Drilling
Ellis pin, 77
in femoral head, 528-529
Endocarditis, bacterial, 178
for fixation pin,77
Endosteum, fibroblastic activity in, panosteitis
for fixator pin,82-83
indicated by, 778
for lag screw, for sacroiliac fracture, 440
Enostosis, 775
 in total hip replacement, 500
Enthesiophyte, forrmation of, 193
DUS. See Utrasonography, diagnostic
Eosinophilia, panosteitis indicated by,776
 Dynamic compression plate, 129f, 132
Epiphysiodesis, fracture in growing animal and746
interlockingnail comparedto,104-105
Epiphysis
pantarsal arthrodesis with, 694-695
fracture involving,737
for ulna and radius fractures, 364
Salter-Harris classification of fractures and, 741t, 742f
Dynamic partial ulnar ostectomy, 760-761
Erythema, infection indicated by, 177
Dynamic proximal ulnar osteotomy, 755-758
Escherichia coti
Dynamization, bone healing and, 99
bone infection caused by, 177
open fracture infection from, 147
E
Etodolac
Ecchymosis, tibial fracture indicated by, 640
hip dysplasia treated with, 481
Ectopia, patellar, 565
osteoarthrosis treated with,199
Ehmer sling, 60-62
Examination. See Physical examination
 acetabular fracture treated with, 447
Exercise, osteoarthrosis treated with, 198
 closed reduction of hip luxation and,
Extracapsular repair, 596
465-466, 467
coxofemoral luxation treatment and, 472
F
example of, 66f
Fabella
Elastin,njoint connective tissue,186t
 modified retinacular imbrication technique and, 587,
Elbow, 325-358
589, 590
abduction of, 326
 patellar luxation repair and, 568
arthrocentesis of, 23
Facial region, maxillary fracture of, 733-734
arthrodesis of, 355-357
Fascia lata
arthroscopy on, 244-245,246f
J6l9 pue redan ue ree
congenital abnorrmalities of, surgical
fibular head transposition and, 592, 593f
options for, 333-336
 intracapsular techniques for patellar luxation repair
developmental abnormalities affecting.
and, 602-604
330-339
 patellar and tibial suture with, 570f
distal ulnar physis closure and, 752
895 9-995 ue idai uex 1d
forelimb lameness caused by
three-in-one technique and, 590, 591
problems in,262,263,264
Fascia lata overlap procedure
fracture of, 202
 medial patellar luxation repair with, 580
reduction of, 317-320
patellar luxation repair with, 566-567, 568f
humeroulnar regionof, approach to, 314f
Fat graft
hyperextension of, 9
bone defects packed with, 758f
immobilization of, 228
ulnar ostectomy and, 753
cast for, 52
Fat pad sign 
long lateral splint for, 58
cranial cruciate ligament rupture and, 605
Schroeder-Thomas splint for, 58
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture diagnosis and, 584
spica splint for, 52
FCP See Fragmented coronoid process
incongruity of,755,757f
Femoral canal, enlargement of, in total hip
radiographs of, 334f
replacerment, 500
800
Index
Femoral capital physis, fracture of, 532-533
 Fermoral neck—cont'd
Femoral condyle, osteochondritis dissecans of, 620-622
excision of, 527
Femoral fracture, 512-561
femoral head avulsion fracture and, 532
articular rmultifragmentary, 536
for hip dysplasia, 501-506
avulsion, 523
surgical techniques for, 502-06
capital, 531-536
fracture of, 527
cervical with trochanteric avulsion,530
fixation for, S37f
complications of pin fixation for, 516-517
lengthening of, 489-491
condyle, 554-555
multiple fracture of, 546f
diaphyseal,538-549
necrosis of, 507-508
complex,544-549
Femoral physis, fracture of, 536
incomplete, 539-542
Femoral shaft,fracture of,tye
nonreducible wedge, 547-549
Femur
oblique, 540, 541f
bone plate for,127,133f
reducible wedge, 545
distal
segmental, 546-547
radiograph of, 621f
simple,539-542
surgical approach to, 530
transverse,540-541
effect of pin insertion on, 515f
wedge,542-544
external fixator location for, 80f
distal,549-557
fracture of (See Femoral fracture)
complex,553-554
internal rotation of, 582
complex articular, 556-557
intertrochanteric varus osteotomy of, 492-495
extraarticular, 550-554
nonunion fracture of, 175f
multifragmentary, S57
osteochondrosis of, genu valgum and, 582
partial articular, 554-556
osteotomy of,for patellar luxation, 578-579
simple, 550-551
 subtrochanteric region of, surgical approach to, 524f
wedge, 550-551, 556
surgical approach to, 539
external fixation for,518-521
Fever
fissure,512,513
infection indicated by, 177
fixation for,512-522
panosteitis indicated by, 776
frontal unicondylar, 555-556
FHT. See Fibular head transposition
greenstick, 512, 513
Fiber, cartilage composition and, 187, 188
in growing animal,740,742-743,744f
Fiberglass, cast made with, 50, 51
immobilization of, 512
Fibroblast, in joint connective tissue, 186t
infection and, 183
Fibrocartilage
interlocking nail for, 104
 plantar tarsal, rupture of, 708f
intertrochanteric sirmple, 524-526
of tarsocrural joint, 662
malunion of, 771
Fibrosarcoma, description of, 789, 790
multifragmentary, 526-527
Fibrosis
multifragmentary cervical, 531-536, 536-538
 infection indicated by, 177
normograde fixation of, 533f
 joint immobilization as cause of, 228
pin insertion for, 513-522
Fibrous osteodystrophy, 775
proximal,522-538
Fibula
complications in, 538
fibular head transposition and, 592
retrograde fixation of, 535f
immobilization of
simple cervical,527-528
cast for, 52
tension band wire for,120
Schroeder-Thomas splint for, 58
transcervical, 528
Fibular fracture, diaphyseal, 646-653
trochanteric, 536-538
Fibular head transposition, 592-595
Figure-of-8 wire
Femoral head 
angle of inclination of, 494
 maxillary fracture treated with, 735
avulsion fracture of, 468, 531-532
Fixation, 48-69
closed reduction of hip luxation and, 465-466
 of accessory carpal bone fracture, 394-395
dislocation of, 525f
ancillary, intramedullary pin for, 101
excision of, 527
of articular humerus fracture, 321-324
femoral head avulsion fracture and, 532
auxiliary, 80-81
for hip dysplasia, 501-506
bone screws and, 124-125
surgical techniques for, 502-506
cerclage wire for, 112f
loosening of, total hip replacement and, 501
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 538
malformation of, 475
for distal humerus fracture, 315f
necrosis of, 507-508
for humeral fracture, 299
replacement of, 495
intramedullary pin for, 112f
stabilization of, 483
lag screw for, 112f
Femoral neck
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 648
angle of inclination of, 493f, 494
biological, 79
anteversion of, patellar luxation indicated by, 562
bone plate, for elbow arthrodesis, 355, 356f
bone plate for, 133f
bone plate compared with, 100
Index
801
Fixation—cont'd
Fixation—cont'd
bone screw for, 122-125
lag screw
calcaneal fracture treated with, 671
for elbow arthrodesis, 355-357
carpal hyperextension treated with, 401-404
of tarsocrural joint, 687-689
carpal shearing injury treated with,411
mandibular fracture treated with, 719-721, 722-730
case studies of, 150-151
of mandibular symphysis, 719f
cast, 67
 metacarpal bone fracture treated with, 413f
central tarsal bone treated with, 695-698
methods of, 49
choice of, 144-145
olecranon fracture treated with, 369f
 delayed union treated with, 170
open fracture treated with,148
diaphyseal fractures of hurmerus treated with, 309-310
 pelvic fracture treated with, 436
distal femoral fracture treated with, 555, 556-557
pin
distal humerus fracture treated with, 321-324
for carpal hyperextension, 401, 40f
external
proximal femoral fracture treated with, 534-535
antebrachiocarpal joint fusion with, 405
stifle arthrodesis with, 629-630
complications following, 92-94
proximal femoral fracture treated with, 526-527,
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 539
528-530
for fracture in growing animal, 737-738
proximal tibial fracture treated with, 641
for humeral fracture, 299
radial carpal bone luxation treated with, 389
of rmiddle carpal joint subluxation, 398-399
radius fracture treated with, 359-364
panarthrodesis with, 408
ramus fracture treated with, 732f
external skeletal, 69-99
screw
diaphyseal fracture treated with, 770
of accessory carpal bone fracture, 394
indications for, 69
 ununited anconeal process treated with, 344
tarsocrural joint shearing injury treated with,
selection of method for, 142-145
691-693
of splint, 67
femoral fracture treated with, 512-522
stable internal, fracture treatment and, 35
femoral head avulsion fracture treated with,532
stainless steel wire diameter sizes for, 720
fibular fracture treated with, 633-639
tarsormetatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
gunshot fracture treated with,155
treated with, 707-710
hurmeral fracture treated with, 297-302, 303
tension band, for ulna and radius fractures, 365
 inadequate, delayed union associated with, 168
tibial fracture treated with, 633-639
interna]
tibial proximal fracture treated with, 643-644, 646
acetabular fracture treated with, 450-453
toggle pin, 470, 471f, 472f
for acromion process of scapula, 255-257
trochanteric fermoral fracture treated with, 537-538
for artiular acef scaul5
ulnar and radial diaphyseal fractures treated with,
for central tarsal bone luxation, 698-699
373-374
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with,
ulnar fracture treated with, 359-364
542,543-544
Fixation pin, 70, 77-78. See atso Intramedullary pin
distal femoral fracture treated with, 552-553
bone location for, 79
distal humeral fracture treated with, 312-316
bone screw used with, 124
distal hurmerus fracture treated with, 317-320
drainage and, 92, 93, 94
femoral fracture treated with, 523-524, 524-526
drilling technique for placerment of, 82-83
fracture in growing animal treated with, 738-741
insertion of, for fermoral fracture, 513-516
humeral fracture treated with, 297-300, 306
loosening of, 93
ilial body fracture treated with, 443-447
normograde insertion of, 513, 514f
joint fracture reduction with,230
optimal size of, 86, 87
mandibular fracture treated with, 717
removal of, 94
maxillary fracture treated with, 717
retrograde insertion of, 514f, 515
rmetacarpal bone fracture treated with, 414
smooth, 77
for neck of scapula, 255-256
stack pinning of, 106-107
open fracture treated with, 148
threaded,77
pantarsal arthrodesis and, 694
types of, 102-108
patellar fracture treated with, 557
Fixator
physeal fracture in growing animal and, 743
application of, fracture reduction during,81
proximal femoral fracture treated with, 534
biomechanical considerations for, 76-77
proximal tibial fracture treated with, 641
circular-frame, radial lengthening and, 762, 763f, 764f
sacroiliac fracture treated with, 440-441
double-bar
for scapula, 255-260
for fermoral fracture, 519
talar fracture treated with, 685
for hurmeral fracture, 301
tibial distal fracture treated with, 656-657
external
trochlear ridge fracture treated with, 683
acrylic bar, 727
ulna and radius fractures treated with, 365-368
advantages of, 69
intramedullary
application of, 79-89
-0  
bilateral, 87f
disadvantages of, 101
biplanar, 88f
intramedullary pin, for femoral fracture, 519-521
bone healing with, 31, 99
 intraoral maxillary fracture treated with, 734-736
clamps used in, 72-74
802
xapu
Fixator—cont'd
Foreleg—cont'd
 complications following application of, 92-94
proprioception of, 6
components of, 69-74, 71f
spica splint for, 52
configuration of, 84f-85f,86f
example of, 55f-57f
 diaphyseal fermoral wedge fracture treated with,
Forelimb
544, 548-549
 causes of larmeness in, 4t
 distal femoral fracture treated with, 554
immobilization of, adverse effects of, 738
fermoral fracture treated with, 518-521
recumbent examination of, 9
fibular fracture treated with, 637-638
Forepaw
gunshot fracture treated with, 155
anatomy of,382
humeral fracture treated with, 301
surgical approaches to, 382-383
for intertarsal joint luxation, 704
 Four-in-one over-the-top technique, patellar luxation
joint immobilized with, 228
repair with, 601-604
location of, 80f
Fracture,25-159
mandibular fracture treated with, 725-726
of accessory carpal bone, 392-395
modified acrylic, 728f
of acetabulum, 433, 447-454
nonunion treated with, 174
acromion, 9
postoperative dressing of, 91f
activity of bone healing after, 37
radius fracture treated with, 361-363
alignrment of bone after, 37
removal of, 94
apparatus used for treatment of, 37
tarsal shearing injury treated with, 667, 668f
apposition of bone after, 37
tarsormetatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
arthrodesis of shoulder and, 276-278
treated with, 709-710
bicondylar, of humerus, 320, 322
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 648, 649, 651
bone fragments at site of, 44-45
tibial distal fracture treated with, 657
bone healing after, radiographs of, 38f-39f
tibial fracture treated with, 637-638
bone screw for treatment of, 122-125
two-plane,654f
bone vascularization affected by, 31
ulnar and radial diaphyseal fractures treated with,
of calcaneus, 669-673
374-375
carpal,382-428
ulnar and radial distal fractures treated with, 378
case studies of, 150-151
ulnar and radial fractures treated with, 362f
cast or splint for treatment of, 51
ulnar fracture treated with, 361-363
causal factors of, 25
unilateral, 84, 85f, 86f
central tarsal bone, 695-698
classification of, 25-29
519-521
 clinical signs of, 34
protective cover for, 92f
closed,25
ring, 99
 cast or splint for treatment of, 51
single-bar, for humeral fracture,301
infection associated with, 179
single bar, for ulna and radius fractures, 362
complete, 27
skeletal, bone screw used with, 124
complete articular, 29
type I, radial osteotomy and, 755
complex
type I-JI,for femoral fracture,19
bone plate for, 125
typeIA,forfemral fractre0
of distal humerus, 316
typeII
treatment of, 145
for intertarsal joint luxation, 704
definition of, 25
radial osteotomy and, 754
delayed union, 168-171
for tarsocrural joint shearing injury, 691
treatment of, 169-171
for ulna and radius fractures, 362-363
diagnosis of, 33-36
type IIB,692, 693f
diaphyseal,28f
 pantarsal arthrodesis and, 694
fixation for, 738-741
type Il bilateral two-plane, 89f
in growing anirmal, 737-741
uilateral external,652f
evaluation of, 37
Flexion bandage, 58-60
extraarticular, 28-29
Flow system, in arthroscopy, 237-238
femoral, 512-561
Fluid pump, in arthroscopy, 237-238
fissure, 512,513
Fluid system, in arthroscopy, 237-238
greenstick,512, 513
Fluoroscopy,as diagnostictool16
proximal,522-538
Forage, surgical repair ofhumeral headosteochonrti
femoral neck, 527
dissecans and, 280
fibular, 633-660
 Force plate analysis, 19-20
genoid, 259-260
Forceps.
greenstick,512,513
jn arthroscopy, 239-241
cast or splint for treatment of, 51
bone-holding, 45
in growing animal, 737
open reduction of fracture with, 47-48
in growing animal, 737-746
Forearm, palpation of, 6
gunshot,151f,152-156
Foreleg
classification of,153t
 landmarks for observation of, 5-6
pathophysiology of, 152-153
palpation of, 5-6
treatrment of, 153-156
Index
803
Fracture—cont'd
Fracture—cont'd
healing of, radiographic signs of, 37, 41t
scapula, 255-261
hindlimb lameness associated with, 430
segmenital, 28
humeral, 297-324
selection of treatment for, 142-144
approaches to, 305-306
of sesamoids, 421-423, 707-712
diaphyseal, 306-312
severity of,26-29
distal,312-324
short oblique, treatment of, 145
ilial body, 433, 442-447
spiral, 27
jial wing, 433, 441-442
treatrment of, 145
ilium, 441-447
stable, 29
immobilization of, 35, 48-69
T-Y, of humerus, 320, 322
impacted, 29
of talus, 682-686
incomplete, 27
tarsal,664-707
 in growing animal, 737
tibial, 633-660
interlocking nail for, 104
transverse, 27
intraarticular, 230, 260
interfragmentary wire for, 117
stifle arthrodesis for treatment of, 626
treatment of, 145
ischial, 433, 454-456
treatment of,35-36
jaw,717-736
treatment principles for, 33-36
joint, treatment of,230-232
trochlear, 682, 683
joint surface involved in, 40
type of, method of fixation and, 143
location of,26-29
ulnar,359-381
 method of fixation and, 143
proximal, 365-371
long bone
unstable, 29
bone plate for, 125
wedge, 27
 in growing animal, 742
 of diaphyseal humerus, 310-312
immobilization of, 69
of distal humerus, 316
long oblique, treatment of, 145
of humerus, 306
malunion of, 770-772
treatrment of, 145
osteotomy for correction of, 771
of ulna and radius, 374-375
pelvic collapse associated with, 457-459
Fracture distractor, 46-47
maxillary, 733-736
Fracture patient scoring system, 144t
metacarpal, 382-428
Fragmented coronoid process, 347-352
of metacarpal condyle, 418-420
arthroscopy for, 245,246f
metatarsal, 707-712
clinical signs of, 348
Monteggia, 365-368
diagnosis of, 348-349
morphology of, 26-29
osteochondrosis as cause of, 339
multifragrmentary, 27
osteochondrosis in, 208, 209
multiple, 28
radiographic signs of, 348
acetabular fracture and, 453-454
surgery for, 349-352
bone plate for, 125
Frame
nonunion, 171-176
acrylic, 95-99
 mandibular, 725
application of, 96-97
oblique, 27
removal of, 97-99
open, 26, 151f
biomechanical considerations for, 76-77
classfication of, 145-146
configurations of, 74-76
emergency treatment for, 147
description of, 69
 infection associated with, 179
removal of, 94
infection from, 178
ring, 76
stabilization of, 148
stiffness of, 77
surgery for,147-149
clamp design and, 78
treatrment of,145-151
type I, 74-76
 partial articular, 29
type II, 76
patellar, 557-560
type II, 76
pelvic, 433-460
Fusobacterium, bone infection caused by, 177
postoperative management of, 459
pelvic floor, 433, 456-457
G
of phalanges, 382-428, 707-712
GAG. See Glycosaminoglycan
physeal, in growing animal, 741-746
Gait
of radial carpal bone, 389-392
 abnormal, patellar luxation indicated by, 565
radiography for diagnosis of, 34-35
q peu esedsspdy uddy-
radius, 359-381
476, 477
proximal, 365-371
evaluation of, 19-20
ramus, 730
orthopedic problerm diagnosis and, 5
reduction of, 35, 36,37-48
stilted, osteochondritis dissecans of medial humeral
sacroiliac, 433
 condyle indicated by, 344
sacroiliac joint, 436-441
Gastrocnemius muscle, calcaneal
Salter-Harris classification of, 741t
fracture and, 669
804
 xapu
Gastrocnemius tendon, avulsion of, 674-677
Hip—cont'd
diagnosis of, 674-675
jmmobilization of, Ehmer sling for, 60
Gastrostomy tube, feeding through, 735-736
Jaxity in,hipdysplasia and,480
Gentanicin,joint wound treated with,228
luxation of,461-475
Genu valgum
clinical studies of, 461
in large breeds, 581-582
diagnosis of, 463-464
patellar luxation associated with, 579f
open reduction of, 468-475
Giant cell tumor, neoplastic joint disease and, 203
treatment of, 464-475
Gingiva, pressure necrosis of, 724
 malarticulation of, 772
Gingival tissue, surgical approach to mandible and, 721
osteoarthritis of, 475
Glacial acetic acid precipitate test, 187
osteoarthrosis of, 192
palpation of, 14-15
Glenoid
replacement of (See Total hip replacement)
 articular fracture of, 258
surgical approach to craniodorsal aspect of, 525f
fracture of, 259-260
 shoulder arthrodesis and, 276-277
transarticular pinning of, 474f
resection of, 274
Hip dysplasia,475-507
surgery for partial resection of, 274, 275f
biochemical explanation of, 476
Glucosamine, hip dysplasia treated with, 482
bones affected by, 476
Glycocalyx, production of, 179
clinical signs of, 476-477
Glycoflex, osteoarthrosis treated with, 200
corrective osteotomy for, 747
Glycosaminoglycan
diagnosis of, 477-481
cartilage matrix and, 189
diagrams of, 479f
osteoarthrosis effects on, 194
femoral head and neck excision for, 501-506
 in synovial fluid, 198
femoral neck lengthening for, 489-491
Gordon extender, 42, 43
genu valgum and, 582
 distal humerus fractured treated with, 317
hindlimb lameness associated with, 430
Granulation tissue
hip luxation and, 463, 467
bone infection and, 179, 180
incidence of, 475
formation of, after carpal shearing injury, 411
intertrochanteric osteotomy for, 492-495
tolerance of, to interfragmentary strain, 33t
osteoarthrosis associated with, 195
Grasping forceps,in arthroscopy, 239-241
palpation for, 14
Gravity, traction and, 42
pathogenesis of,475-476
Gravity flow system, in arthroscopy, 237238
physical examination for, 478-480
Growing animal
treatment of, 481-507
diaphyseal fracture in,737-741
triple pelvic osteotomy for, 487-489
fractures in, 737-746
Hip dysplasia registry, 477
physeal fracture in,741-746
HO. See Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
treatment of, 743-746
HOA. See Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy
Growth plate
Hobbling, after closed reduction of hip luxation, 467
injury to,750
Hock joint. See Tarsocrural joint
 radial physis closure and, 767f
HOD. See Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
physeal, premature arrest of, 750-770
Homograft, definition of, 161
Salter-Harris classification of fractures and, 741t, 742f
Horner's syndrome, examination for, 10
Gunshot, kinetic energy of, 152t
Horse hoof, nonunion as cause of, 172
Gunshot fracture, 152-156
HPO. See Hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy
Humeral condyle
H
arthroscopy for, 245,246f
Hagie pin, sacroiliac fracture treated with,440
bone plate for, 133f
Halothane, anesthesia with, fracture reduction and, 38
fracture of, 317-318
Hand chuck, Steinmann pin inserted with, 106
prermature closure of radial physis and, 759
Handle, abnorral carriage of, patellar luxation
subluxation of, 752
indicated by, 564
Heat, osteoarthrosis treated with, 198
Humeral epicondyle, surgical approach to, 319f
Hemarthrosis, degenerative joint disease
Humeral fracture, 297-324
associated with, 191t
articular, 321-324
Hemicerclage wire, 110
diaphyseal, 306-312
 for humeral fracture, 299
distal,312-324
Hemorrhage, fracture treatment and, 33
in growing animal, 739f,743, 744f
Hemostasis, fracture reduction and, 44
interlocking nail for, 104
Hind paw, anatomy of, 661-663
proximal, 302-306
Hindfoot, anatomy of, 661-663
reduction of, 317-320
Hindlimb
tension band wire for, 120
immobilization of, adverse effects of, 738
treatment of, 297-300
lameness in, 429-431
Humeral head
Hip, 461-511
excision of, surgical repair of shoulder
dislocation of, 8f
luxation and, 274
fracture of, 202
fracture of, shoulder arthrodesis and, 276-277
Index
805
 Humeral head—cont'd 
osteochondritis dissecans of, 278-283
 bone plate and, 141
 osteochondroplasty of, 280
case studies of, 183-184
surgery for partialresection of, 275f
chronic, 177
Humerus
treatment of, 181-183
bone plate for, 133f
clinical approach to, 180-184
diaphyseal fractures of, 306-312
delayed union and, 168
distal, surgical approaches to, 312-313
following tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, 597
external fixator location for, 80f
joint, 203-205
immobilization of, spica splint for, 52
open fracture and, 145
 medial condyle of, osteochondritis dissecans of,
routes of, 178
344-347
Inflammation, patellar tendon, following tibial plateau
proximal fractures of, examples of, 304f
leveling osteotomy, 597
proximal shaft of surgical approachto305306
Inflammatoryjoint disease,203-208
shaft of, surgical approach to, 308-309
treatment of, 204-205
as site for bone graft collection, 162
 Instability, recumbent examination and, 8
supracondylar region of, surgical approach to, 313f, 314f
 Interarcade wire, mandibular fracture treated with,
Hyaluronic acid
722,723f
osteoarthrosis treated with, 200
Interdental wire
 in synovial fluid, 186, 187
nandibular fracture treated with, 719, 723-724, 726
Hydrocolloid dressing, carpal shearing injury
maxillary fracture treated with, 734-735
treated with, 411
Interfragmentary wire, 117-118
Hydrogel
acromion process fixation with, 257f
carpal shearing injury treated with,411
humeral fracture treated with, 299
Hypaque, arthrography with, 16
 mandibular fracture treated with, 724
Hyperextension
 maxillary fracture treated with, 734
of intertarsal joint, 702-704, 704-706
Interlocking nail101104-105
of tarsocrural joint, arthrodesis for, 687
diaphyseal fermoral fracture treated with, 539, 542
of tarsometatarsal joint, 707-710
diaphyseal fermoral wedge fracture treated with, 544,
Hypernutrition
546, 547
effects of, 779-780
diaphyseal fractures of humerus treated with, 310
 retained cartilaginous cores and, 781
femoral fracture treated with, 517-518
Hypertrophic osteoarthropathy, 781
gunshot fracture treated with, 155
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy, 781-784
humeral fracture treated with, 300-301
Hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy, 784-786
open fracture treated with, 148
placement of,110
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 648, 649,
Iliac wing, fracture of, 441-442
651-652
Ilial body, fracture of
tibial fracture treated with, 636-637
 acetabular fracture and, 453
Interphalangeal joint
surgical approaches to, 442-443
amputation of toe at,426f
Ilium
arthrodesis of, 427f
bone plate for, 133f
description of, 662
fracture of, 441-447
luxation of, 423-427
fixation for,443-447
subluxation of, 423-427
oblique,445,454f
Intertarsal joint
surgery for, 435
 arthrodesis of, tension band wire for, 121
 pelvic fracture treatment and, 436
description of, 662
 llizarov-type circular-frame fixator, radial lengthening
hyperextension with luxation of, 702-704
and, 762,763f, 764f
hyperextension with subluxation of, 700-702, 704-706
Imbrication technique, cranial cruciate ligament repair
subluxation of, with dorsomedial instability, 706-707
with, 586-587
 Intracapsular technique, patellar luxation repair with,
IMEX-SK systerm, 74, 78
599-604
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 549
Intramedullary fixation, indications for, 105
femoral fracture treated with, 519, 521
Intramedullary pin, 100-110
humeral fracture treated with, 301
acetabular fracture treated with, 452
tibial fracture treated with,637-638
articular humerus fracture treated with, 322
ulna and radius fractures treated with, 362
for auxiliary fixation, 80-81
 Immobilization, 48-69
biormechanical factors with, 101-102
inadequate, delayed union and, 168
bone plate used with, 130, 137-140
of joints, 228-230
buttress plate used with, 138
of mandibular synphysis, 718
diaphyseal femoral wedge fracture treated with, 548
Immunological joint disease, 205-208
diaphyseal fractures of humerus treated with, 309
IN system, 104
disadvantages of, 101
Infection, 177-184
distal humerus fracture treated with, 315f, 322
acute,177
external fixator and, for femoral fracture, 519-521
treatment of, 180
fermoral fracture treated with, 513-522
bacteria as cause of, 177
fibular fracture treated with, 633-636
806
Index
Intramedullary pin—cont'd
 Joint-cont'd
fracture in growing animal treated with, 738-739
misalignment of, fracture malunion as cause of, 771
humeral fracture treated with, 303f
open wounds of, 227-228
humeral fractures treated with, 297-300
structure and function of, 185-189
ilial body fracture treated with, 446
insertion of, 513-516
synovial
jnterlocking nail used with, 104-105
components of, 186-189
ischial fracture treated with, 455-456
description of, 185
mandibular fracture treated with, 724
Joint capsule, 186
 metacarpal fracture treated with, 416, 417f
incision into,217
nonunion treated with, 174
sclerosis in synovial layer of, 788
normograde, for tibial fracture, 634-636
Joint disease
open fracture treated with,148
immunological, 205-208
open reduction of fracture with, 48f
neoplastic, 203
 pelvic fracture treated with, 436
nonerosive inflammatory, 207-208
radius fracture treated with, 360-361
traumatic, 202-203
tarsocrural joint shearing injury treated with, 691, 692f
Joint effusion
tarsometatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
 collateral ligament injury and, 616
treated with, 707-709
Osteochondritis dissecans of femoral condyle
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 648, 651
indicated by, 620
tibial fracture treated with, 633-636, 638
tibial fracture indicated by, 640
types of,102-108
ununited anconeal process indicated by, 340
types of points on, 102-103
Joint surgery, 216-232, 217-232
ulnar fracture treated with, 360-361
arthroscopy in,233-251
Intrarmedullary wire, for humeral fractures, 297-300
 Juvenile osteomyelitis, 775
Intraoral pin, maxillary fracture treated with, 735
 Intraoral splint, mandibular fracture treated with,
K
724-725
Keratosulfate, cartilage matrix and, 189
Involucrum
Kinematic gait analysis, 19-20
definition of, 177
Kirschner-Ehmer clamp, 70, 78
production of, 179
Kirschner-Ehmer splint, 69, 75, 86-87
Johexol, rmyelography with, 16
example of,73f
Joparmidol, rmyelography with, 16
type IA,89f
Ischiatic ramus, fracture of, 456
Kirschner-Ehmer systerm, 72
Ischiatic tuberosity, fracture of, 456
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 549
Ischium
for fermoral fracture, 521
fracture of, 442, 445, 450f, 454-456
for hurmeral fracture, 301
oblique,454f
tibial fracture treated with,637
surgery for, 435
Kirschner wire,102-103,118,119f
surgical approaches to,455-456
acetabular fracture treated with, 451-452
ilial shaft fracture and, 444f
acromion process fixation with, 257f
 Isoflurane, anesthesia with, fracture reduction and, 38
for auxiliary fixation, 81f
calcaneal fracture treated with, 671, 672f
r
for carpal hyperextension, 401, 402f
Jacobs keyed chuck, Steinmann pin inserted with, 106
distal fermoral fracture treated with, 552-553
aw
elbow luxation treated with,330
femoral fracture treated with, 518, 523
craniomandibular osteopathy and, 786-788
fibular head transposition and, 594-595
fixation of fracture of,734f
for humeral fracture, 303
fracture of, 717-736
ilial fracture treated with, 443
locking of, 732-733
interphalangeal joint arthrodesis and, 427f
Jejunostomy tube
ischial fracture treated with, 455-456
feeding through,735-736
mandibular fracture treated with, 723f, 727
 mandibular fracture treatment and, 722
 mandibular symphysis fracture treated with, 720
 Joint. See also named joint (e.g., Hip)
maxillary fracture treated with, 734
abnormalities of, 190
 metacarpal bone fracture treated with, 413f
arthrocentesis of, 21-24
metacarpal fracture treated with, 416, 417f
cartilaginous, description of,185
open reduction of fracture with,47-48
classification of, 185-186
patellar fracture treated with, 559f, 560f
connective tissue in, 186t
pelvic fracture treated with, 436
dislocation of, 202
physeal fracture in growing animal treated with, 744f
fibrous, description of, 185
proximal femoral fracture treated with, 528-529,530,
fracture through, 202-203
534-535
immobilization of, 228-230
 proximal tibial fracture treated with, 641
incision into, 217
radial carpal bone fracture treated with, 391f
 inflammatory condition in, 186
sacroiliac fracture treated with, 440
jnstability in,ligament rupture as cause of,203
shoulder luxation surgery and, 268
ligamentous injury and, 218-226
stifle arthrodesis with, 627-629, 629
Index
807
Kirschner wirecont'd
Lameness—cont'd
 surgical repair of humeral head osteochondritis
 osteochondritis dissecans of medial humeral condyle
dissecans and, 280
indicated by, 344
talar fracture treated with, 683, 684f
panosteitis indicated by, 775
talocrural arthrodesis and, 687, 688f, 689
patellar luxation indicated by, 565
tibial proximal fracture treated with, 643
 prermature physeal growth plate arrest
ulna and radius fractures treated with, 378-379
indicated by, 750
ulnar fracture treated with, 370
sesamoid fracture indicated by, 421
Kirshner-Ehmer splint, 69
shoulder osteochondritis dissecans
Klebsiefta, bone infection caused by, 177
indicated by, 279
Knife, arthroscopic, 241-242
subluxation as cause of, 10
Kintscher nail, 103-104
sudden onset of, 294
femoral fracture treated with, 517
supraspinatus tendon calcification
indicated by, 283
L
tibial fracture indicated by, 641
Lag screw, 121. See atso Bone screw
ununited anconeal process indicated by, 340
acetabular fracture treated with, 451-452
ununited medial epicondyle
for auxiliary fixation, 81f
indicated by, 352
bone healing with, 31
 Lateral retinacular overlap technique, patellar luxation
calcaneal fracture treated with, 671
repair with, 567f
central tarsal bone fracture treated with,695-698
LDE. See Muscle, long digital extensor
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 539, 540
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease, 14, 507-508
distal femoral fracture treated with, 553
excision arthroplasty for, 501
for elbow arthrodesis, 355-357
hindlimb lameness associated with, 431
femoral fracture treated with, 522
hip luxation and, 463
in femoral meck lengthening, 490
treatment of, 508
fully threaded, 122
Levering, open fracture reduction with, 45, 46
humeral fracture, 299
Ligament
humeral fracture treated with, 302, 310
avulsed, 224
ilial body fracture treated with, 446
carpal, 382, 384f
interfragmental compression with, 124-125
shearing injury to carpus and, 410
 mandibular symphysis fracture treated with, 720
carpometacarpal, injury to, 412
 rmetacarpal bone fracture treated with, 414
caudal cruciate, following tibial plateau leveling
 metacarpal fracture treated with, 417f, 418
osteotorny,597
osteochondritis dissecans of elbow treatment and, 346
caudal tibial, 615
partially threaded,121f
collateral (See Collateral ligament)
phalanges fracture treated with, 420f, 421f
composition of, 218
proxima femoral fracture treated with,528529,
cranial cruciate (See Cranial cruciate ligament)
535-536
cruciate
radial carpal bone fracture treated with, 391f, 393f
instability of, 10, 11-12
sacroiliac fracture treated with, 439f, 440
rupture of, 13
stabilization of scapula fracture with, 259
elbow
stifle arthrodesis with, 627, 629
aplasia of, 330
talar fracture treated with, 683, 684f
examination of, 327-328
tarsocrural joint treated with, 687-689
repair of, 328-329
tibial fracture treated with, 636, 638
injury to,218-226
trochanteric femoral fracture treated with, 537-538
meniscofemoral,617
type B2 radial fracture treated with, 370
meniscotibial, 617
ulna and radius fractures treated with, 364, 378-379
 palmar, carpal hyperextension and, 399
ununited anconeal process treated with, 344
palmar sesamoid, 422f
Lameness
patellar
 bone plate as cause of, 140
rupture of, 622,623f
causes of, 4t
synthetic, 567-569
fibrotic contracture of infraspinatus muscle as
tightening of,577
cause of, 294
phalanges, repair of, 424
forelimb,262-264
replacement of,for antebrachiocarpal joint
biceps tendon tenosynovitis indicated by, 286-287
subluxation, 388
gastrocnermius tendon avulsion indicated by, 674
rupture of, 203
hindlimb
stretched,224
causes of, 429-431
surgical repair of, 223-226
osteochondritis dissecans of talus indicated by, 679
synthetic, for tarsocrural joint injury, 665
infection indicated by, 177
tarsocrural, 662
 inflammatory joint disease indicated by, 203
injury to, 664-665
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease indicated by, 508
of tarsus, 663f
 meniscal injury and, 14
torn, 224
osteoarthrosis indicated by, 196
ventral transacetabular, 475
osteochondritis dissecans of femoral condyle
Light source, in arthroscopy, 236-237
indicated by, 620
Ligmentotaxis, 657
808
xapu
Limb
 Mandibular coronoid process, temporomandibular joint
 lameness in, 429-431
 Jocking open and, 732-733
pelvic
Mandibular symphysis, 718-721
causes of larmeness in, 4t
Matrix,cartilage composition and9
landmarks on, 7
Maxilla
rear, palpation of, 10-14
fracture of, 733-736
shortened, premature physeal growth plate arrest
diagnosis of, 717-718
indicated by, 750
general treatrment for, 717-718
surgical shortening of, 333-334
intraoral, 734-736
 Limited contact dynamic compression plate, for ulna 
mandible wired to, 722
 and radius fractures, 364
Meclofenamic acid, hip dysplasia treated with, 481
Lion jaw, 786-788
Medial carpal joint, shearing injury of, 409
Locking-loop tendon-igament suture,224f
Medial coronoid process, fragmentation of.
Long bone, palpation of, 10
See Fragmented coronoid process
Long-leg cylinder cast, for tibial fracture, 633
Medial malleolus, surgical approach to, 655f 
Lower limb, surgery of, 383
 Medial retinacular overlap, lateral patellar luxation repair
Lumbosacral disease, 7
with,580,581
Lupus. See Systermic lupus erythematosus
 Medial retinacular overlap technique, patellar luxation
Luxation
repair with,566
carpal, 383-386, 388-389
Meloxicam, osteoarthrosis treated with, 199
central tarsal bone,698-699
Meniscal injury, 13-14
coxofemoral (See Coxofemoral luxation)
elbow,325-330
 meniscal injury treated with, 612-613
congenital, 330-336
partial, 613
hindlimb lameness associated with, 430, 431
Meniscus
hip, 461-475
caudal horn of, 597, 610-611
interphalangeal joint,423-427
injury to, 610-616
intertarsal joint, 702-704
 collateral ligament injury and, 616
metacarpophalangeal joint, 423-427
cranial cruciate ligament rupture and05
 middle carpal joint, 397
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture
patellar, 10,562-582
diagnosis and, 583
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture and, 583
diagnosis of, 612
 stifle arthrodesis for treatment of, 626
treatment of,612-616
of phalanges, 423-427
 medial, cranial cruciate ligament rupture and, 583
of proximal tendon of long digital extensor muscle,
release of, drawer motion and, 597-599
624-626
surgical approaches to, 599
sacroiliac joint, 436-441
Mesenchymal cell, bone formation and, 175
scapula,264-265
Metacarpal condyle, fracture of, 418-420
shoulder,265-273
Metacarpal joint, shearing injury of, 409
stifle, 617-620
Metacarpophalangeal joint
talus, 686
luxation of, 423-427
tarsocrural, 664-665
sesamoid fracture and, 421
temporomandibular joint,730-732
subluxation of, 423-427
tendon of superficial digital flexor rmuscle,
toe amputation and, 425, 426f 
673-674
Metacarpus
Lyme arthritis, 207
bones of, 383f
fracture of, 412-420
M
hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy effect on, 785f
Magnetic resonance imaging
immobilization of
as diagnostic tool, 17
cast for, 52
meniscal injury diagnosed with, 612
short caudal splint for, 58
Malleolus
nonunion fracture of, 419f
fracture of, 658, 659f
Metaphyseal growth plate, 737
medial
Metaphyseal osteodystrophy,781-784
arthrodesis following injury to, 669
 Metaphysis, Salter-Harris classification of fractures and,
osteotomy of, 681
741t,742f
Mandible
Metatarsophalangeal joint, description of, 662
bilateral body fracture of, 725f
Metatarsus
craniomandibular osteopathy and, 786788
bones of, 662
fracture of, 718-733
fracture of, 707-712
bilateral,225
immobilization of 
diagnosis of, 717-718
cast for, 52
general treatment for, 717-718
short lateral splint for, 58
malunion of,772
Methoxyflurane, anesthesia with, fracture
nonunion,225
reduction and, 38
maxilla wired to, 722
Methyl methacrylate, acryli frame made from,
surgical approach to, 721
95-96
Mandibular body, fracture of, 721-732
Metronidazole, bone infection treated with, 181
Index
809
Microplate
Noninflammatory joint disease, 190-203
mandibular fracture treated with,727
Nonsteroidal antinflammatory drugs
maxillary fracture treated with, 735
bicipital tenosynovitis treated with, 289-290
Microsurgery
hip dysplasia treated with,481
bone grafting and, 166-167
osteoarthrosis treated with, 198-199
nonunion fracture treated with, 176
Nonunion, 168-176
Middle carpal joint, hyperextension of, 400, 401
atrophic, 173
Miniplate
bone graft for, 160
 mandibular fracture treated with, 727, 729f
causes of, 168
 maxillary fracture treated with, 735
classification of, 171-172
Modified recession sulcoplasty, 573f-574f
defect, 173
Modified retinacular imbrication technique
definition of, 168
cranial cruciateligament repairwith,87-90
dystrophic,173
surgical technique for, 587-590
hypertrophic, 171
Modular Canine Total Hip Replacement System, 495
example of, 174f
Monteggia fracture, 365-368
 metacarpal bone fracture and, 414-416
Morbidity, following external fixation, 92
necrotic, 173
Mosquito forceps, in arthroscopy, 241f
nonviable, 173
Motion analysis, diagnosis with, 19-20
oligotrophic, 172
MRI. See Magnetic resonance imaging
treatment of, 174-176
MRIT. See Modified retinacular imbrication technique
Norberg angle, 480
MTU. See Muscle-tendon unit
Nuclear imaging, as diagnostic tool, 17-18
Muscle
Nutrition, disorders of, 778-780
atrophy of, panosteitis indicated by, 776
biceps brachii, rupture of, 291-293
0
biceps femoris, fibular head transposition and, 594, 595
Obesity
brachial, diaphyseal fracture of hurmerus and, 306
osteoarthritis associated with, 778-779
contracture in, infection indicated by, 177
osteoarthrosis and, 195, 197
infraspinatus,fibrotic contracture of,294-295
Observation, distant, orthopedic diagnosis and, 4-5
injury to,226-227
OCD. See Osteochondritis dissecans
long digital extensor
OFA. See Orthopedic Foundation for Animals
avulsion of proximal tendon of, 622-624
Olecranon, fracture of, 369f
luxation of proximal tendon of, 624-626
Olecranon process, fracture of, tension band wire for, 119
pectineus, hip dysplasia treatment and, 506-507
Orthopedic disease, diagnostic tools for, 15-24
relaxation of, fracture reduction and, 38
Orthopedic Foundation for Animals, 475,477
rhomboideus, rupture of, 264
Ortolani sign,14,15f
serratus ventralis, rupture of, 264
hip dysplasia indicated by, 476, 480, 486
supraspinatus, fibrotic contracture of, 295
Os coxae, pelvic fracture and, 456-457
tibialis cranialis
Ossicle, definition of, 278
fibular head transposition and, 594
Ostectomy
transposition of tibial tuberosity and, 575, 577
dynamic partial ulnar, 760-761
traction growth plate of long bones and, 741
femoral head and neck, 501-506
trapezius, rupture of, 264
partial ulnar, 752
Muscle atrophy
pubic, 485f
 infection indicated by, 177
ulnar, 757
palpation of, 5
Osteitis, definition of, 177
Muscle-tendon unit, 226-227
Osteoarthritis
Muzzle, mandibular fracture treatment and, 722
definition of, 190
Myectomy,ectineal hipdysplasiatreated with,50607
obesity and, 778-779
Myelography, as diagnostic tool, 16
stifle arthrodesis for treatrment of, 626
Myocarditis, pelvic fractures and, 434
Osteoarthrosis, 190-202, 195-197
Myocyte, in joint connective tissue, 186t
bone changes associated with, 192
Myotomy, pectineal, hip dyslasia treated with, 506507
clinical signs of, 194-195
cranial cruciate ligament rupture and, 583
N
definition of, 190
 Necrosis, thermal, fixation pin placement as
elbow, ununited anconeal process associated
cause of, 106
with, 339
Neoplasm
hip dysplasia and, 475
excision of, bone graft for, 160
histological progression of 193
1ong bone,789-790
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease and, 507
Neoplastic joint disease, 203
treatment of,197-202
Nerve function, assessment of,sacroiliac
Osteoblast, bone formation and, 175
fracture and, 436
Osteochondritis dissecans, 208-213
Neurectomy, osteoarthrosis treated with, 202
arthroscopy for, 233-234, 245
Neurofibroma, examination for, 10
degenerative joint disease associated with, 191t
Neurofibrosarcoma, examination for, 10
diagnosis of, 279-280
Neutralization plate, 127-128
of femoral condyle,620-622
femoral fracture treated with, 521-522
hindlimb lameness associated with, 430
810
Index
Osteochondritis dissecans—cont'd
forelimb lameness caused by, 262
 osteoarthrosis treated with, 201
of humeral condyle, osteochondrosis as cause of, 339
pelvic
of humeral head, 278-283
contraindications for, 487
surgical repair of, 280-283
hip dysplasia treated with, 483-489
of medial hurmeral condyle, 344-347
surgical techniques for, 487-489
clinical signs of, 344-345
proximal ulnar,755-757
diagnosis of, 346
radius lengthened with,762-763,764-768
radiographic signs of, 345-346
for shortening of radius, 337
treatment of, 346
stair-steplengthening,748
osteoarthrosis associated with, 195
tibial plateau leveling, 596-599
shoulder, treatment of, 280
transverse,748,766
of talus, 678-682
triple pelvic (See Triple pelvic osteotormy)
Osteochondritis juvenilis, 507-508
ulna lengthened with, 335
Osteochondroplasty, of humeral head, 280
wedge, 768
Osteochondrosis, 208-213
Over-the-top technique, patellar luxation repair with,
in distal femur, radiograph of, 621f
599-601
elbow, 339-354
Oxytetracycline, bone infected treated with, 183
example of, 340f
femoral, genu valgum and, 582
P
histopathology of, 209-210
 Paatsama technique, patellar luxation repair with,
pathogenesis of, 210-211
599-600
radiography of, 212
Padding, external fixation and, 90
 retained cartilaginous cores and, 758, 781
Pain
treatment of, 2i2-213
hypertrophic osteodystrophy indicated by, 781
 Osteoconduction, bone graft and, 161
infection indicated by, 177
Osteocyte, in joint connective tissue, 186t
osteoarthrosis indicated by, 194-196
Osteodystrophy
 recumbent examination and, 8
hypertrophic,781-784
Palmar carpal fibrocartilage, carpal
hindlirmb lameness associated with, 430
hyperextension and, 399
renal, 784
 Palmar plate, panarthrodesis with, 407, 408f 
Osteogenesis
Palpation
 bone graft as source of, 161
for cruciate ligament instability, 11
distraction, 762
of drawer rmovement, 13f
Osteoinduction, description of, 161
of elbow luxation, 325
Osteomyelitis, 177-178, 775
hip dysplasia diagnosed with,478
 Osteopenia, al-meat diet and, 779
of hip joint,14-15
Osteophyte
hip laxity assessed with,486
biceps tendon tenosynovitis and, 287,288f
of pelvis, 14-15, 434-435
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture and, 605
of rear limb, 10-14
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture diagnosis and, 584
signs to, 5
fragmented coronoid process and production of,
standing, orthopedic problerm diagnosis and, 5-8
350f, 351
Panarthrodesis, 694-695
 osteoarthrosis and formation of, 192-193
 carpal hyperextension treated with, 400, 404-409
Osteosarcoma
carpal shearing injury treated with, 412
description of, 789
Pancuroniu, anesthesia with,fracture
 total hip replacement and, 501
reduction and, 38-39
Osteosynthesis, bridging. See Bridging osteosynthesis
Panosteitis, 213, 775-778
Osteotome
hindlimb lameness associated with,430
arthroscopic, 242
Pantarsal arthrodesis, 693f, 694-695
fracture reduction with, 45
Parathyroid gland, all-meat diet and, 779
Osteotomy
Pasteuretta, bone infection caused by, 177
bone graft for, 160
Patella
closing wedge, 755
ectopic, 581
correction of abnormal bone growth with, 747-750
fracture of, 557-560
corrective, 747-750
fissure, 557-558
surgical principles of, 749-750
multifragmentary, 558
types of,748
transverse, 558
cuneiform,748,749f
luxation of, 562-582
femoral, for patellar luxation, 578-579
classification of, 563-564
iliac shaft, 485f, 486
clinical signs of, 564-565
intertrochanteric,492-495
cranial cruciate ligament rupture and, 583
for hip dysplasia, 482
intracapsular techniques for repair of, 599-604
ischial, 485f
lateral,580-581
of medial epicondyle, 346
medial, 562-565
of medial malleolus, 681
prognosis for repair of, 579
oblique, 748
skeletal abnormalities associated with, 563f
opening wedge,748, 770f
soft tissue reconstruction for, 566-571
Index
811
Patella—cont'd
 Polyglycolic acid, suture composed of, 217-218
 stifle arthrodesis for treatment of, 626
Polyglyconate, suture composed of, 217-218
surgical repair of, 565-580
Polymethyl rmethacrylate
trauma as cause of, 581
acetabular fracture treated with, 453
treatment of, 580
external fixator bar rmade frorm, 727
Patella alta, 565,575, 577,622
 Polysulfated glycosaminoglycan, 199
Patella baja, 565
hip dysplasia treated with,481
Patellar ectopia, 565
meniscectomy and, 616
Patellectomy, patellar luxation repair with, 577-578
Position screw, 121
Pa w
 Posture, defects in, degenerative joint disease associated
forelimb lameness caused by problems in, 262
with,191t
palpation of, 6, 10
Povidone-iodine
recurmbent examination of, 9
irrigation of carpal shearing injury with, 410
valgus deformity of, 755
irrigation of tarsal shearing injury with, 666
Pectineal myectomy, hip dsplasia treated with,
lavage with,for open fracture,147
506-507
Prednisolone, rheumatoid arthritis treated with, 207
Pelvic canal, collapse of, 457-459
Prednisolone acetate, bicipital tenosynovitis
Pelvis
treated with, 290
anatomy of,433
Pressure growth plate, 741
asymmetry of, 7
Probe, inarthroscopy,238-239,240f
fracture of, 433-460, 456-457
Proprioceptiversonse,cncius,elcitationf
categories of, 433
Prostaglandins, osteoarthrosis treated with, 198-199
examination for, 433-435
Protein, in joint connective tissue, 186t 
history of, 433-435
Proteoglycan
malunion of, 771-772
cartilage composition and, 187
 postoperative managerment of, 459
degenerative joint disease and, 193
treatment of, 435-436
Proteus, bone infection caused by, 177
 malunion of, corrective osteotomy for, 747
Pseudoarthrosis, 202
 palpation of, 14-15
definition of,168
 Penicillin, arthritis treated with, 204
Pseudomonas, bone infection caused by, 177
Peptostreptococcus, bone infection caused by, 177
Pubic symphysiodesis,491-492
Per varus, 769
for hip dysplasia, 482
 Periosteum, fibroblastic activity in, panosteitis
Pubis
indicated by, 778
fracture of, 442,450f
Pes varus, 768
ilial fracture and, 445
 Phalanges, 383f
surgery for, 435
bones of, 383f, 662
ilial shaft fracture and, 444f
fracture of,420-423,707-712
Pulley tendon-igament suturef
hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy effect on, 785f
Punch forceps, in arthroscopy, 239-241
Juxation of,423-427
Puppy
subluxation of, 423-427
joint laxity in,480
patellar luxation in, 564
Pharyngostomy tube
prediction of hip dysplasiain,478
feeding through, 735
trochlear chondroplasty for, 571-572
mandibular fracture treatment and, 722
Puppy drawer motion, 1i, 13
Phenylbutazone, hip dysplasia treated with, 481
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture diagnosis and, 583
Physeal growth plate, prermature arrest of, 750-770
 Pyrexia, hypertrophic osteodystrophy indicated by, 781
Physical examination
for collateral ligament injury, 617
Q
for cranial cruciate ligament avulsion, 606
Quadriceps, patellar luxation repair and, 571
of elbow ligaments, 327-328
Quinolone, bone infection treated with, 181
general, 3-15
hip dysplasia diagnosed with, 478-480
R
orthopedic, 3-24
RA. See Rheumatoid arthritis
for orthopedic problems, 3-15
Radial carpal bone, fracture of, 389-392
panosteitis diagnosed with, 775-776
Radial head
for patellar luxation, 565
fracture of, 369f
recumbent, 8-15
luxation of, 336-339
Physis
radiograph of proximal displacement of, 338f
fracture involving,737
Radial physis, prermature closure of, 758-768
long bone fractures and, 742
surgical correction of,760-768
Plaster of Paris, cast made with, 50, 51
Radial styloid,fracture of,378,380f
Plastic, therrmomoldable, cast made with, 50
Radiofrequency, in arthroscopy, 243-244
Pneumothorax, pelvic fractures and, 434
Radiography
Polydioxanone, suture composed of, 217-218
biceps tendon tenosynovitis diagnosed with, 287-288
 Polyethylene semiocclusive dressing, carpal shearing injury
bone fracture diagnosed with, 34-35
treated with, 411
carpal hyperextenision diagnosed with, 399-400
Polyglactin, suture cormposed of, 217-218
 carpal injury diagnosed with, 386
812
Index
Radiography—cont'd
Radius—cont'd
corrective osteotomy and, 749
 hypertrophic pulmonary osteopathy
cranial cruciate ligament rupture diagnosed with, 584,
effect on, 785f
605, 607-608
immobilization of
craniormandibular osteopathy diagnosed with, 787
cast for, 52
as diagnostic tool, 15-16
Schroeder-Thomas splint for, 58
distraction stress, hip dysplasia diagnosed with,
lengthening of, 333
480-481
physis closure and, 760
of elbow luxation, 330-333
luxation of, 336-339
fracture healing evaluation with,37
Monteggia fracture of, 365-368
for fragmented coronoid process, 348
oblique osteotomy of, 754f
gastrocnemius tendon avulsion diagnosed with, 675
osteotomy for shortening of,337
hip dysplasia diagnosed with,477-478
premature closure of distal physis of,
hip luxation diagnosed with, 463-464
765f, 766
hypertrophic osteodystrophy indicated by, 782
 premature closure of radial physis and, 759 
premature growth plate arrest and, 751
diagnosed with,785
proximal, approaches to, 366f
Legg-Calve-Perthes disease diagnosed with, 508
short, 336
neoplasia diagnosed with, 789-790
static lengthening osteotomy of, 764-768
 osteochondritis dissecans of femoral condyle diagnosed
surgical approaches to, 372
with, 620
Ramus
 osteochondritis dissecans of medial humeral condyle
fracture of, 730
diagnosed with, 345-346
fixation for,732f
 osteochondritis dissecans of talus diagnosed with,
surgical approach to, 731f
679-681
Range of motion
of osteochondrosis, 212
altered
panosteitis diagnosed with, 776-778
hip dysplasia indicated by, 477
pelvic fracture diagnosed with, 435
osteoarthrosis indicated by, 195
for pelvic osteotormy, 483-484
recumbent examination and, 8
proxirmal fermoral fracture diagnosed with, 538
elbow luxation repair and, 329
radial head displacement diagnosed with, 338f
exercises for
radial head luxation diagnosed with, 337
following excision arthroplasty, 504
shoulder osteochondritis dissecans diagnosed with,279
osteoarthrosis treated with, 198
supraspinatus tendon calcificationdiagnosed with,
RCC. See Retained cartilaginous cores
283-284
Reconstruction plate
tarsal injury diagnosed with, 664
acetabular fracture treated with, 450-451
ulnar physis closure diagnosed with, 751-752
ilial body fracture treated with, 445
Radius
 mandibular fracture treated with, 727
angular deformity of, corrective osteotomy for, 747
talocrural arthrodesis with, 690
bone plate for, 133f 
Reduction
calcification of, example of,83f
of accessory carpal bone fracture, 394-395
closing wedge osteotomy of, 755
of acetabular fracture, 448-450
corrective osteotomy of, 754
of articular elbow fracture, 317-320
cranial bowing of, 755
of articular hurmerus fracture, 321-324
distal, surgical approach to, 384f
of carpal fracture, 390
dynamic lengthening osteotomy of,762-763
closed, 37, 41-44
external fixator location for, 80f
for elbow luxation, 330
fracture of, 359-381
for hip luxation, 464-467
coaptation for, 3590360
methods of, 42-44
diaphyseal, 371-376
physeal fracture in growing animal and, 743
distal, 376-381
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with,649
external fixator for, 361-363
tibial fracture treatment and, 638
fixation for, 359-364
for tibial proximal fracture, 643
in growing animal, 743, 745f
closed for proximal tibial fracture, 641
incomplete, 372-373
definition of, 37
intrarmedullary pins and wires for, 360-361
of diaphyseal fermoral fracture, 539, 544
malunion of, 771
 of diaphyseal fractures of humerus, 309
with premature closure of distal ulnar physis, 756f
of distal femoral fracture, 555, 556-557
splinting for, 359-360
of distal humerus fracture, 317-320
type 2-1-B,368
of elbow luxation, 326-326, 328-329
type 2-2-B, 374-375
of femoral fracture, 523-524, 524-526
type 2-2-C,375
of femoral head avulsion fracture, 531-532
type 2-3-C,379-381
of humeral fracture, 303
type A2,368,37337,77
of ilial body fracture, 442-443
type A3,368,377
of ischial fracture, 455-456
type B2, 370, 376f
 of metacarpal bone fracture, 413-414
type C3, 376f
of metacarpal fracture, 416
growth plates of, 751
of middle carpal joint subluxation, 398-399
Index
813
 Reduction—cont'd
Sacroiliac joint—cont'd
open,37,44
 stabilization of, 440
for distal femoral fracture, 551
surgical approaches to, 436-438
for hip luxation, 468-475
Saline solution
methods of, 45-48
 irrigation of tarsal shearing injury with, 666
physeal fracture in growing animal and, 743
jrrigation with, for carpal shearing injury, 410
for proximal tibial fracture, 641
Javage with, for open fracture,147
for tibial proximal fracture, 643-644
Salter-Harris classfication of fractures,741t,42f
of pelvic fracture, 436
Salter-Harris type V injury, 750-751
of proximal femoral fracture, 526-527, 528-530
Sarcoma, neoplastic joint disease and, 203
 of radial carpal bone luxation, 389
Scapula
of sacroiliac joint fracture or luxation, 436-441
fracture of, 255-261
of temporomandibular joint locked open, 733
shoulder arthrodesis and, 276-277
of temporomandibular joint luxation, 730
tension band wire for, 120
of tibial distal fracture, 656-657
luxation of, 264-265
of tibial proximal fracture, 644, 646
neck of, fracture of, 258
of ulna and radius diaphyseal fractures, 373-374
open approach to, 256f
of ulna and radius fractures, 370
palpation of, 6
of ulna and radius proximal fractures, 365-368
surgery on, 264-265
 Reduction angle, hip dysplasia diagnosis and, 486
Scapulartuberosity, avulsion of, 293
Refracture, causes of, 142
Scapulohumeral joint
Renal osteodystrophy,784
arthrocentesis of, 23f
Rest, osteoarthrosis treated with,197-198
ligaments of, 9
Retained cartilaginous cores, 780-781
osteochondrosis in, 208
Reticulin, in joint connective tissue, 186t 
surgical approach for, 282f
Retinacular overlap procedure, patellar luxation repair
Scapulohumeral region, palpation of, 6
with,566,582
Schroeder-Thomas splint, 50, 58
 Retinacular technique, cranial cruciate ligament repair
 Sciatic nerve, femoral fracture treatment and, 516
with,587
Sciatic nerve palsy, tarsocrural joint, arthrodesis for, 687
Retinaculum, composition of, 217
Sclerosis, degenerative joint disease and, 193
Rheumatoid arthritis, 205-206
SCM. See Synovial chondrometaplasia
 cranial cruciate ligament rupture and, 582
Scurvy, 781-784
Rib, as site for bone graft collection, 163
Secondary nuritinal hyperparathyroidism, 779
Richards Canine II Total Hip Replacement, 495, 496f 
Secur-U external fixation clamp, 72f, 74
Rickets, diet and, 780
Sedation, for intramedullary pin placement, 100
Ring sequestrum, 95f
Sequestrum
fixation pin and, 94
chronic bone infection and, 181, 182
Ringer's solution
definition of, 177
irrigation of tarsal shearing injury with, 666
Sesamoid, fracture of, 421-423, 707-712
jrrigation with,for carpal shearing injury,410
Shaver, arthroscopic, 242-243
lavage with, for open fracture, 147
Shock, fracture treatment and, 33
Robert-Jones bandage, 62, 65, 89
Shoulder, 262-296
example of, 68f
arthrocentesis of, 22-23
Robert-Jones dressing, 49
arthrodesis of, 276-278
for tibial fracture, 633
arthroscopy for, 245-247
Rudy's technique, patellar luxation repair and, 567
arthroscopy on,248f-250f
Rush pin, 103, 105, 107-110
forelimb fameness caused by problems in, 263, 264
carpal hyperextension treated with, 401, 402f
immobilization of, spica splint for, 52
distal femoral fracture treated with, 551f, 552-553
luxation of,265-273
distal humerus fracture treated with, 316
surgical repair of, 270f, 271-273, 276-278
humeral fracture treated with, 300
open approach to,256f
rmetacarpal fracture treated with, 416, 417f
osteochondritis dissecans in, 262, 278-283
 physeal fracture in growing animal
recumbent examination of, 9-10
treated with,746
Sinus track, drainage from, infection indicated by, 177
proximal femoral fracture treated with, 526
SK clamp, 73f, 74
technique for placerment of, 108-110
SK systerm. See IMEX-SK systerm
tibial distal fracture treated with, 657-658
SLE. See Systermic lupus erythermatosus
tibial fracture treated with, 635, 636
Sling
ASPCA,62,67f
S
Ehmer, 60-62,66f
Sacroiliac joint
Velpeau, 58, 64f
bone plate for, 133f
SNH. See Secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidisrm
fracture of, 436-441
Sodium aurothiomalate, rheumatoid arthritis
case studies of, 441
treated with, 207
fixation for, 440-441
 Sodium salicylate, hip dysplasia treated with, 481
luxation of, 436-441
Soft tissue
reduction of, 436-441
acetabular fracture fixation and closure of, 454
 pelvic fracture treatment and, 436
in femoral head and neck excision, 503, 504, 505f
814
Index
Ponss 
Sprain-cont'd
fixator pin placed through, 81
definition of, 218
fracture reduction and, 44
fixation for, 223
gunshot fracture and, 152,153
surgery for, 223-226
hip luxation and, 461
treatment of,219-223
infection in, 178
Stabilization, of middle carpal joint subluxation,
injury to, repair of, 231-232
398-399
reconstruction of, for patellar luxation repair, 565-566,
Stack pinning, description of, 106-107
566-571
Staphylococcus
swelling of, tibial fracture indicated by, 640
 joint infection caused by, 204
trauma to, from fracture, 90-91
 open fracture infection from, 147
wounds of, fracture treatment and, 34
Staphylococcus aureus, 177
Spica splint 
Staphylococcus pyogenes, bone infection caused by, 183
after elbow luxation surgery, 330
Steinmann pin, 102-103, 105
fixation of shoulder luxation with, 268
application of, 105-106
for humeral fractures, 297
calcaneal fracture treated with, 672f
 Spinal cord, lesion on, hindlimb larmeness 
description of, 70
associated with, 430
diaphyseal femoral fracture treated with, 538, 540, 542
Spine
diaphyseal femoral wedge fracture treated with, 544,
fracture of, pelvic fractures and,434
546,547,548
as site for bone graft collection, 163
distal femoral fracture treated with,552-553
Splint
distal humerus fracture treated with, 312-313
 application of, frature reduction during, 81
femoral fracture treated with, 513-517
coaptation, 49-69
insertion of, 513-516
configuration of, external fixation and, 79
humeral fracture treated with, 297-300, 303
cranial cruciate ligament treated with, 585
 mandibular fracture treated with, 724
definition of, 50
 metacarpal fracture treated with, 416, 417f
elbow luxation repair and, 329
open reduction of fracture with, 47-48
fixation by, 49
pantarsal arthrodesis with, 694
intraoral, mandibular fracture treated with, 724-725
physeal fracture in growing anirmal treated with, 744f
Kirschner-Ehmer (See Kirschner-Ehmer splint)
proximal femoral fracture treated with, 524, 534-535
limb, adverse effects of, 737-738
sacroiliac fracture treated with, 440
long lateral, 58
tarsocrural joint shearing injury treated with,
example of, 59f
691, 692f
materials for, 50
tibial diaphyseal fracture treated with, 649
for open fracture, 148
tibial distal fracture treated with, 657
padding for, 66-67
tibial fracture treated with, 635
patient tolerance of, 67-69
tibial proximal fracture treated with, 643
phalangeal, 58
Stiffness
example of,63f
osteoarthrosis indicated by, 195, 197
for phalanges fracture, 420
 osteochondritis dissecans of rmedial hurmeral condyle
for radius fracture, 359-360
indicated by, 344
Schroeder-Thomas, 58
Stifle,562-632
sesamoid fracture treated with, 422
arthrocentesis of, 21-22
short caudal, 58
arthrodesis of, 626-630
example of, 62f
arthroscopy for, 247
short lateral
cruciate ligament instability and, 10
example of, 61f
fracture of, 202
hindleg, 58
immobilization of, 228
spica
cast for, 52
example of, 5sf-57f
long lateral splint for, 58
for foreleg, 52
Schroeder-Thormas splint for, 58
for humeral fractures, 297
jnstability in, ligament rupture as cause of, 203
sprain treated with, 223
luxation of, 617-620
temporary, 49
palpation of,7-8,10
Thomas, 49
surgical approach to, 530
example of, 60f
Stifle injury, description of, 7
for tibial shaft fracture, 637
Stomach tube, feeding by, mandibular fracture
type I, 74-76
treatment and, 722
type I1, 76
Strain
type I1, 76
of biceps tendon, 287
type Ibilateral two-plane, 89f
definition of,218
for ulna fracture, 359-360
description of, 226-227
unilateral, 74-76
findings in, 227t
Spoon forceps, in arthroscopy, 241
Streptococcus,177
Sprain,218-223,220t
joint infection caused by, 204
classification of, 219
 open fracture infection from, 147
collateral ligament injury as, 616
Stress, fracture caused by, 25
Index
815
Subluxation
Surgery—cont'd
 dorsolateral, hip dysplasia diagnosis and, 481
elbow,congenital,330-336
for shoulder luxation, 266-268, 268-273
of interphalangeal joint, 423-427
sprain repaired with,223
of intertarsal joint, 704-706
for supraspinatus tendon calcification,
with dorsomedial instability, 706-707
285-286
 of rmetacarpophalangeal joint, 423-427
of tarsus, 663-664
of middle carpal joint, 397-399
for three-in-one technique for patellar luxation,
of phalanges, 423-427
590-592
 premature physeal growth plate arrest and, 750
for total hip replacement, 496-500
tarsocrural, 664-665
Suture
of tarsometatarsal joint, 707-710
for antebrachiocarpal joint subluxation, 388
with dorsal instability,711-712
Bunnel-Meyer,225f
with dorsomedial instability,710-711
for carpal shearing injury, 411
 Subluxation angle, hip dysplasia diagnosis and, 486
gastrocnermius tendon avulsion treatment with,
Succinylcholine, anesthesia with, fracture reduction and,
676f, 677
38-39
Lermbert, 586
Sulcoplasty
locking-loop tendon-ligarment, 224f
modified recession,573f-574f
materials for, 217-218
trochlear, patellar luxation repair with, 574-575
in rmodified retinacular imbrication technique,
wedge recesson,patellar luxation repair with, 572
587, 589, 590
 Superficial digital flexor muscle, luxation of tendon of,
patellar, synthetic, 567-569
673-674
in patellar luxation repair, 566-570
Superficial digital flexor tendon, laceration of, 677-678
 patterns of, for surgical repair of sprain,
Supraspinatus tendon, calcification of, 283-286
223,224-226
Surgery
for phalanges ligament repair, 424
for acetabular fracture, 447-453
pulley tendon-igament,225f
for anconeal process removal,343-344
reduction of hip luxation with,468
for antebrachiocarpal joint subluxation, 388
for tarsal shearing injury, 667
for bicipital tenosynovitis, 291
tibial antirotational, medial patellar luxation repair
for carpal fracture, 390-391
with, 580
for carpal injury, 382-383
Swelling
9 a  
cast as cause of, 50
for congenital elbow abnorrmalities, 333-336
infection indicated by, 177
corrective osteotomy,749-750
Symphysiodesis, pubic, 491-492
for cranial cruciate ligament avulsion, 606-607
for hip dysplasia, 482
for cranial cruciate ligament rupture, 608-610
Symphysis
distal radial closure corrected with, 757-758
mandibular,718-721
for elbow arthrodesis, 355-357
pelvic fracture and, 456-457
for elbow luxation, 328-329
Synarthrosis, description of, 185
exploratory, 21
Synovial cel sarcoma, description of, 789
extraarticular, 231
Synovial chondrometaplasia, 788-789
for fragmented coronoid process, 349-352
hindlimb lameness associated with, 431
for glenoid partial resection, 274
 Synovial fluid, 186-187
for gunshot fracture, 153-156
arthritis and, 204t
for hip dysplasia, 482-507
 cartilage composition and, 188
for hip luxation, 465-475
Synovial membrane, 186 
for humeral head osteochondritis dissecans, 280-283
degenerative joint disease and, 193
for ilial body fracture, 442-447
Synoviocyte,in joint connective tissue,186t
intraarticular, 230-231
Synovioma, neoplastic joint disease and,203
joint fusion by, 229-230
Synovitis, osteochondrosis and, 211
for long digital extensor muscle repair, 624, 626
Synovium
for luxation of scapula, 264-265
 inspection of, cranial cruciate ligament 
for rmandibular fracture, 717-730
treatment and, 585
for modified retinacular imbrication technique, 587-590
stifle joint sealed with, 571
open
Synthetic capsule technique, hip luxation treatment with,
arthroscopy compared to,233
469-470
for osteochondritis dissecans, 233
Systermic lupus erythematosus, 207, 208
for open fracture, 147-149
for osteoarthrosis, 200-202
T
for osteochondritis dissecans of femoral condyle,
T-plate, ilial body fracture treated with, 445
620-622
Talar neck, fracture of, 683-685
for osteochondritis dissecans of talus, 678, 681-682
Talocalcaneal joint, description of, 661-662, 662
for patellar luxation, 565-580
Talocalcaneocentral joint, description of, 662
for pelvic fracture, 435-436
Talocrural joint
for premature radial physis closure, 760-768
arthrodesis of, 669, 692f
pubic symphysiodesis, 491-492
description of, 661-662
for sacroiliac fracture or luxation, 436-441
surgical approach to, 655f
816
xapu
Talus
Tenotomy
body of, fracture of, 685
 for contracture of infraspinatus muscle, 294
fracture of, 682-686
pectineal, hip dysplasia treated with, 506-507
luxation of, 686
triceps, humerai condyle fracture and, 320
osteochondritis dissecans of, 678-682
Tension band wire, 118-121
Tarsal joint, arthroscopy on, 247-251
acetabular fracture treated with, 452
Tarsocrural joint
acromion process fixation with, 257f
arthrocentesis of, 22
calcaneal fracture treated with, 671
arthrodesis of, 669, 686-693
calcaneoquartal joint arthrodesis and, 701
articular fracture of, 658
femoral fracture treated with, 518, 523
description of, 661-662
interphalangeal joint arthrodesis and, 427f
jnjury to, treatment of, 665
ischial fracture treated with, 455-456
ligaments of, 662
mandibular fracture treated with,729f
injury to,664f
metacarpal bone fracture treated with, 413f
Juxation of, 664-665
patellar fracture treated with, 557, 559f, 560f
palpation of, 8, 10
proximal tibial fracture treated with, 641
screw fixation of, 687-689
stabilization of scapula fracture with,259
shearing injury of, 691
stifle arthrodesis with, 627
subluxation of, 664-665
tarsometatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
swelling of, osteochondritis dissecans of talus
treated with, 707-709
indicated by, 679
technique for, 119-121
 Tarsometatarsal joint
ulna and radius fractures treated with, 378-379
 description of, 662
Thomas splint, 49
hyperextension with subluxation of, 707-710
after elbow luxation surgery, 330
subluxation of
example of, 60f
with dorsal instability, 711-712
for femoral fracture, 512-513
with dorsomedial instability, 710-711
for tibial fracture, 633
Tarsus
THR. See Total hip replacement
bones of, 661-663
Three-in-one technique, patellar luxation repair with,
central bone fracture of, 695-698
590-592
fracture of, 664-707
Tibia
immobilization of
angular deforrmity of, corrective osteotomy for, 747
cast for, 52
approach to shaft of, 647
Schroeder-Thomas splint for, 58
bone plate for, 133f
short lateral splint for, 58
external fixator location for, 80f
ligaments of, 663f
fibular head transposition and,592
shearing injury of, 665-669
fracture of (See Tibial fracture)
prognosis of, 668-669
immobilization of
reconstruction after, 666-668
cast for, 52
surgical approach to, 663-664
Schroeder-Thomas splint for, 58
Temporomandibular joint
long oblique fracture of,635f,636f
luxation of, 730-732
media condyle of, fracture of, 646
spontaneous locking open of, 732-733
proximal, deforrmity of,768-770
surgical approach to, 731f
rotary motion of, 12
Tendinitis
rotationof
Achilles, 678
following tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, 597
calcanean, 678
patellar Juxation repair and, 568
Tendon
as site for bone graft collection, 162
biceps.
Tibial antirotational suture, rmedial patellar luxation
surgical repair of shoulder luxation and, 271
repair with,580
tenodesis of, 266, 268, 269
Tibial compression test, 12, 596
tenosynovitis of, 286-291
Tibial fracture, 40f 
biceps brachii
avulsion, 639f
rupture of,291-293
bone plate for, 638-639
tenodesis of, 292f
diaphyseal, 646-653
gastrocnermjus, avulsion of, 674-677
complex,652-653
injury to,226-227
external fixation of, 648, 649f
proximal, of long digital extensor muscle, 622-624,
incomplete, 647-650
625-626
segmental, 652
superficial digital flexor muscle, luxation of, 673-674
simple, 647-650
supraspinatus, calcification of, 283-286
wedge, 650-651
Tenectomy, pectineal hip dysplasia treated with, 06-507
distal,653-659
Tenodesis
complete articular, 658-659
of biceps brachi tendon, 292f
complex,657
of biceps tendon, shoulder luxation treated with,
complex articular, 658-659
266,268,269
extraarticular,654-657
of bicipital tendon, 291
partial articular, 658
Tenosynovitis, biceps tendon, 286-291
wedge, 657
Index
817
Tibial fracture—cont'd
Transfixation pin
in growing animal, 739f, 743, 745f
for carpal hyperextension, 403
interlocking nail for, 104, 636-637
distal fermoral fracture treated with, 552-553
intramedullary pin or, 633636
mandibular symphysis fracture treated with, 720
Jateral simple,639f
tarsometatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
long oblique, 636
treated with, 709
malunion of, 771
tibial distal fracture treated with, 657
multifragmentary, 639f
Trauma
multiple, 650f, 653f
hindlimb lameness associated with, 430, 431
oblique, 647
jaw fracture caused by, 717
proximal, 639-646
osteoarthrosis associated with, 195
complete articular, 646
patellar luxation from, 581
extraarticular, 639-642
Traumatic joint disease,202-203
multifragrmentary, 645
Traumatic lung syndrome, pelvic fractures and, 434
nonphyseal, 644-645
Triple pelvic osteotomy, 470-472
partial articular, 645-646
description of, 487-489
physeal, 642-643
fracture malunion corrected with, 772
simple, 639f, 642-643
for hip dysplasia, 482
spiral, 636,647
hip dysplasia treated with, 484f-485f
tension band wire for, 120
pelvic fracture malunion and, 459
transverse, in growing animal, 738f
Trocar point, intramedullary pin and, 102-103
unicondylar multifragmentary, 639f
Trochanter
wedge, 636
closed reduction of hip luxation and, 465-466
Tibial physis, disturbed growth of, 768-770
fracture of, 536
Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy, 596-599
fixation for, 537f
complications following, 597
osteotomy of, 448
Tibial trochlea, arthrodesis following injuryto,669
surgical approach to,524f
Tibial tubercle
type A1 fracture of, 525f
fracture of, tension band wire for, 120
Trochantericcompressiontest486
patellar luxation repair and, 566
Trochlea
Tibial tubercle transposition
 deepening of, patellar luxation repair and, 571
lateral patellar luxation repair with, 581, 582
fracture of, 682, 683
 medial patellar luxation repair with, 580
Trochlear block recession, patellar luxation repair with,
Tibial tuberosity
572-574
avulsion of, 639-641
Trochlear sulcoplasty, patellar luxation repair with,
complications associated with, 642
574-575
transposition of, 575-577
Trochleoplasty
Tibialis cranialis muscle
fibular head transposition and, 594, 595
 medial patellar luxation repair with, 580
transposition of tibial tuberosity and, 575, 577
 patellar luxation repair with, 571-575
Tibiotarsal joint. See Tarsocrural joint
Tuber calcanei, fracture of, 671f
Tissue, reconstruction of, patellar luxation repair with,
Tumor, bone, hindlimb lameness associated with, 430
571-580
Titanium, bone plate made from, 136
U
Toe, amputation of, 425
UAP. See Ununited anconeal process
Toggeling, fracture reduction and, 43
Una
Toggle pin
angular deformity of, corrective osteotomy for, 747
fabrication of, 473f
hip luxation treatment with, 470, 471f, 472f
bone plate for, 133f
Total hip replacerment, 495-501
calcification of, example of, 783f
 contraindications for, 496
distal, eccentric radial closure and, 757-758
femoral head avulsion fracture and, 532
fracture of, 359-381
osteoarthrosis treated with, 201
coaptation for, 359-360
prognosis following, 501
diaphyseal,371-376
surgical techniques for,49600
distal, 376-381
external fixator for, 361-363
carpal fracture reduction and, 390
fixation for, 359-364
lower limb surgery and,383
jn growing animal, 743, 745f
surgery on tarsus and, 663-664
incomplete, 372-373
Vetrap,386f
intrarmedullary pins and wires for, 360-361
TPLO. See Tibial plateau leveling osteotomy
malunion of, 771
TPO.See Triple pelvic osteotomy
splinting for, 359-360
Tracheal tube,mandiula fractur rgeryand7
type 2-2-A,372-373
Tracheostomy, anesthesia maintained with, 718
type 2-3-A, 377
Traction, fracture treatment with, 41-42
type2-1-B,368
Traction growth plate, 741
type 2-2-B, 374-375
Transarticular pin, hip luxation treated with,
type 2-3-C,379-381
472,474f
type A2,373-374
818
xapu
Ulna—cont'd
Ununited medial epicondyle, 352-354
type A3, 368
osteochondrosis as cause of, 339
type B1, 370
radiographic findings of, 353-354
type B2, 370, 376f
treatment of, 354
type B3, 370
Urethra, rupture of, pelvic fractures and, 434
type C3,376f
growth plates of, 751
V
Valgus deformity, treatment of, 768-769
immobilization of
Varisation, intertrochanteric osteotomy and, 492
cast for, 52
Varus deformity
Schroeder-Thomas splint for, 58
hindlimb lameness associated with, 430, 431
lengthening of, 333
treatment of, 769-770
Monteggia fracture of, 365-368
Vascular systerm, bone healing and, 29-33
numbered bones in, fracture of, 396-397
VCP. See Veterinary cuttable plate
ostectomy for rermoval of section of, 760-761
Velpeau sling,58
osteotomy for lengthening of, 335
example of,64f
osteotomy of, ununited anconeal process
Venous drainage, of cortical bone, 30-31
treatment and, 344
Vet-Lite, cast rmade with, 50
premature closure of distal physis of, 751-717
Veterinary cuttable plate, 135
premature growth plate arrest and, 751
intertarsal joint luxation treated with, 702-703
proximal, approaches to, 366f
talocrural arthrodesis with, 689-690
short,osteotomy for,335-336
tarsometatarsal joint hyperextension with subluxation
shortening of, 333, 760
treated with, 709
 Unar metaphysis, retained cartilaginous cores in,
for ulna and radius fractures, 364
780-781
Veterinary Thermoplastic, cast made with, 50
Ulnar physis
Vetrap elastic bandage, surgery on tarsus and, 663-664
Video recording,in arthroscopy,244
distal, closure of,751-757
Vitamin C, hypertrophic osteodystrophy treated with, 784
retained cartilaginous cores in,758-759
Vtamin C deficiency, 781-784
Ulnar styloid, fracture of, 377f, 378f
Utrasonography, diagnostic, 18
Utrasound, therapeutic, osteoarthrosis treated with, 198
Wedge recession sulcoplasty, patellar luxation
UME. See Ununited medial epicondyle
repair with,572
Under-and-over technique, patellar uxation
Weight
repair with, 601
bone plate choice and, 133f
Union
reduction of,hip dyslasia treatment and481
average times to, 169t
Wire-tightening instrurment, 114f
clinical, rate of, 36-37
Wound, clsure of for pen ractre149
Ununited anconeal process, 208, 209,339-344
Wright's stain, 204
clinical signs of, 340-341
diagnosis of, 341-343
X
elbow luxation and, 331
X-Lite, cast made with, 50
osteochondrosis as cause of, 339
Xenograft, definition of, 161
screw fixation for, 344
treatment of, 343-344
Z
Ununited coronoid process, osteochondrosis as
Zygomatic arch, temporomandibular joint locking open
cause of, 339
and,732-733