FIFTHEDITION
SmallAnimal
CLINICALDIAGNOSIS
by LABORATORYMETHODS
Michael D.Willard
Harold Tvedten
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Small Animal
CLINICALDIAGNOSIS
byLABORATORY METHODS
Small Animal
CLINICALDIAGNOSIS
by LABORATORY METHODS
FIFTH EDITION
Michael D. Willard, dvm, Ms, DAcviM
Professor of Small Animal Medicine
Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
 College of Veterinary Medicine
Texas A&M University
College Station, Texas
Harold Tvedten, DVM, PhD, DAcvP, DEcvcP
Professor Emeritus
Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic Investigations
College of Veterinary Medicine
Michigan State University
East Lansing, Michigan
Department of Clinical Sciences
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Uppsala, Sweden
ELSEVIER
ELSEVIER
SAUNDERS
3251 Riverport Lane
St. Louis. Missouri G3043
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS.
FIFTH EDITION
ISBN: 978-1437706574
Copyright @ 2012, 2004, 1999, 1994, 1989 by Saunders, an imprint of Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.
 No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means., electronic
or mechanical, including photocopying. recording. or any information storage and retrieval system.
without permission in writing from the publisher. Details on how to seek permission, further
information about the Publisher's permissions policies and our arrangements with organizations such
as the Copyright Clearance Center and the Copyright Licensing Agency. can be found at our website:
www.elsevier.com/permissions.
Publisher (other than as may be noted herein).
Notices
Knowledge and best practice in this feld are constantly changing. As new research and experience
broaden our understanding. changes in research methods. professional practices. or medical
treatment may become necessary.
evaluating and using any information, methods, compounds. or experiments described herein. In
using such information or methods they should be mindful of their own safety and the safety of
With respect to any drug or pharmaceutical products identified, readers are advised to check
each product to be administered. to verify the recommended dose or formula. the method and
duration of administration, and contraindications. It is the responsibility of practitioners. relying
and the best treatment for each individual patient. and to take all appropriate safety precautions.
To the fullest extent of the law, neither the Publisher nor the authors, contributors., or editors.
shnpoid jo iaeu e se Aladond no suosiad oi sewep io/pue Ainqu Aue ioy Alqel Aue aunsse
liability, negligence or otherwise, or from any use or operation of any methods. products.
instructions, or ideas contained in the material herein.
Previous editions copyrighted
ISBN: 978-1437706574
Vice President: Linda Duncan
Contemt Strategy Director: Penny Rudolph
Comntent Development Specialist: Brandi Graham
Publishing Services Manager: Julie Eddy
Project Manager: Jan Waters
Desigr: Teresa McBryan
Working together to grow
libraries in developing countries
Printed in the United States of America
www.clsevier.com | www.bookaid.otg | www.sabtr.org
ELSEVIER
BOOK AID
Sabre Foundation
Last digitis the print number:987654321
Contributors
Jeanne A. Barsanti, DVM, Ms, DACVIM
Mark C. Johnson, DVM, DACVP (Clinical
Josiah Meigs Distinguished Teaching Professor, Emeritas
Pathology)
Small Animal Internist, Emeritas
Clinical Associate Professor
 Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
Asojoqoued Aeuaa jo suaueda
The University of Georgia Teaching Hospital
College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences
The University of Georgia
Texas A&M University
Athens, Georgia
College Station, Texas
Dawn Merton Boothe, DVM, MS, PhD, DACVIM,
Ned F. Kuehn, DVM, MS, DACVIM
DACVP
Chief of Internal Medicine Services
Professor
Michigan Veterinary Specialists 
Department of Physiology and Pharmacology
Southfield, Michigan
College of Veterinary Medicine
Director, Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory
Michael R. Lappin, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Auburn University
Professor
Auburn, Alabama
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences
Sharon A. Center, DVM, DACVIM
Colorado State University
Professor
Fort Collins, Colorado
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Gwendolyn J. Levine, DVM
Cormell University
Veterinary Clinical Associate
Ithaca, New York
 Department of Pathology.
College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences
Stephen P. DiBartola, DVM, DACVIM
Texas A&M University
Associate Dean for Administration and Curriculum
College Station, Texas
Professor of Medicine
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
Jonathan M. Levine, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
College of Veterinary Medicine
Assistant Professor of Neurology/Neurosurgery
The Ohio State University
Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Columbus, Ohio
College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences
Texas A&M University
Sonya G. Gordon, DVM, DVSc, DACVIM
College Station, Texas 
Associate Professor
 Department of Small Animal Medicine and Surgery
Richard W. Nelson, DVM, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine & Biomedical Sciences
Professor of Internal Medicine
Texas A&M University
 Department of Medicine and Epidemiology
College Station, Texas
School of Veterinary Medicine
University of California
Paula Martin Imerman, BS, MS, PhD
Davis, California
Clinician and Associate Scientist
 Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production
Gary Osweiler, DVM, MS, PhD, DABVT
Animal Medicine
Professor
College of Veterinary Medicine
Department of Veterinary Diagnostic and Production
Iowa State University
Animal Medicine
Ames, lowa
Veterinary Toxicologist
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory
Cheri A. Johnson, DVM, MS, DACVIM
College of Veterinary Medicine
Professor
Iowa State University
 Department of Small Animal Clinical Sciences
Ames, Iowa
College of Veterinary Medicine
Michigan State University
East Lansing. Michigan
vi
Contributors
Rose E.Raskin, DVM, PhD, DACVP
David C. Twedt, DVM, DACVIM
Professor of Veterinary Clinical Pathology
Professor
 Department of Comparative Pathobiology
 Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
School of Veterinary Medicine
 College of Veterinary Medicine and Biomedical Sciences 
Purdue University
Colorado State University
West Lafayette, Indiana
Fort Collins, Colorado
Jennifer S. Thomas, DVM, PhD, DACVP
Douglas J. Weiss, DVM, PhD
Associate Professor
Professor Emeritus
Department of Pathobiology and Diagnostic
 Department of Veterinary Biomedical Sciences
 Investigation
College of Veterinary Medicine
 College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Minnesota
Michigan State University
St. Paul, Minnesota
East Lansing, Michigan
Preface
e s a e sa d  a   
Pidei pue 'ieoieid 'aidus s ui sisn Aroieoqel iaidaiu Aianeine pue paas
a manner as possible The popularity of the frst and then subsequent editions
has surprised and pleased us. Simple is good. With age one forgets the small
details and remembers only the major principles that get one through the day.
As with the firstfour editions, this ffth edition ofSmall Animal Clinical Diagnosis
by Laboratory Methods is intended to present organized methods of answering
commonly asked questions that reflect the problems frequently encountered
with interpretation of laboratory test results. Most authors have updated their
chapters as opposed to writing new ones with the idea that they could focus on
 making them as timely as possible. New authors have been added in some areas.
We have attempted to make this text as current as possible, but this goal borders
on impossible in a profession that is continually advancing. References and
pathophysiology have been kept to a minimum because this text is designed to
be user-friendly to both the busy clinician in the middle of a hectic day, as well
 as the student who is learning the art/science of problem solving.
Michael D. Willard and Harold Tvedten
vill
Dedicated to my wife, Gladys,
without whom I could not have done this,
nor would I have cared to do it.
Michael D. Willard
Dedicated to the thousands of veterinary students
and teterinarians, hundreds of medical technicians,
and tens of clinical pathology residents with whom I have
shared tens of thousands of discussions on diagnosis
with laboratory methods over the last 40 years. It is for them
and twith them that it is fun to come to worh each day.
Speahers at veterinary meetings need not fear my questions,
for they are only questions I ash myself each day.
Harold Tvedten
General Laboratory Concepts
Harold Tvedten and Jennifer S. Thomas
TEST SELECTION AND ASKING THE
context of the history, physical examination, and other
RIGHT OUESTION
diagnostic findings in a patient. Unexpected results are
common and should stimulate the clinician to reevaluate
Veterinarians have many choices regarding laboratory
the provisional diagnosis and look for additional diseases
testing. Important factors include availability of reference
Or consider possible causes for erroneous laboratory
laboratory testing, reliability and ease of in-clinic testing.
results. Trends over several days are often more informa-
cost-effectiveness, accuracy, and turnaround time. One
tive than test results on a single day. Typically, not all test
must determine what tests to perform in-clinic and what
results that "should be" abnormal in a disease situation
tests to send out to a veterinary reference laboratory or to
are abnormal in each affected patient.
a local human laboratory. Recent improvements in the
 automation and ease of use of analyzers designed for
NOTE: A reasonable level of skepticism about laboratory
in-clinic use are changing what is acceptable. Correct
results should be maintained.
ech veterinary clinic. No one answer fits all situations.
 To get a specifc and meaningful answer from labora-
When interpreting laboratory tests, it is important to
tory testing. the diagnostician must ask a specific and
keep in mind that reference intervals include the results
meaningful question and understand whether a particular
expected in 95% of normal animals. Thus 5% of results
laboratory test is likely to yield a useful answer. As an
in normal animals (ie, l of 20) are expected to be
example, compare the likely outcome of asking the fol-
outside the reference intervals. If a profile of 20 tests is
lowing questions: "Is the animal anemic? "What is wrong
performed, only 36% of normal animals would have all
with the animal?" A microhematocrit procedure (in addi-
20 results within the 95% confidence interval reference
tion to knowledge of the animal's hydration status) will
values. Diagnosticians must expect some false-positive
usually answer the frst specifc question, but a serum
and false-negative test results. No tests are l0o% sensitive
chemistry profile, complete blood count (CBC), urinaly-
and 100% specific for a disease.
sis, and fecal examination may or may not answer the
second vague, nonspecific question. A clinician should
NOTE: Only slightly more than one third of normal animals
ask, "what will a high, low, or normal test result specifi-
are likely to have "normal" results in all tests of a 20-test
cally mean in terms of making a correct diagnosis, pro-
profle. The clinician should not overinterpret small changes
viding accurate prognostic information, or choosing an
from reference intervals.
[i.e., it will change some action taken by the clinician), the
Abnormal results in normal animals are often only
test is worth the cost. Normal laboratory results may elimi-
slightly above or below the reference interval. The mag-
nate certain diseases [ie., have high negative predictive
nitude of a change helps determine one's confidence
value [NpV]) and can be as valuable as abnormal results.
that a disease is present Large alterations usually allow
greater confidence that the animal is abnormal, because
NOTE: To choose the appropriate test that will provide
they are less likely the result of statistical chance. With
 a specific diagnostic answer, a very specific question must
many tests, increasing magnitude of deviation from
 normal also reflects a more severe disease and worsening
prognosis.
apiaoid on Aie naul ui Aea spoyau Aoieoqel
SIMPLE STATISTICS AND PRACTICAL
the same result when a sample is repeatedly analyzed (i.e.
INTERPRETATIONS
analytical precision). The coefficient of variation (CV) is
often used to indicate the precision of an assay. Assays
A reasonable level of skepticism about laboratory results
with a low CV have a high degree of precision; small
should be maintained. Clinicians should not believe all
changes in results can be attributed to changes in the
numbers. All laboratory data should be interpreted in the
patient and not random variation in the assay itself.
2
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Assays with a high CV have poorer precision; small
changes in results may be due to variation in the assay
1
and not indicative of disease in the patient. For example.
 because of the great imprecision of a manual leukocyte,
60
platelet, or erythrocyte count, results can vary 10% to 20%
0,8
only because of technique; therefore mild changes from
(es)
one day to the next may reflect only imprecision in the
0,7
positiv
 Evaluating populations of apparently healthy animals
0.6
0/C
with screening tests is much different from testing indi-
(true
vidual sick animals. The predictive value of a test is
0.5
strongly affected by the prevalence of disease in a popula-
0.4
tion.* For example, ifa disease occurs in 1 of 1000 animals
and a test is 95% specific and sensitive for the disease,
0.3
what is the chance that an animal with a positive test result
actually has the disease (ie., positive predictive value [PpV]]?
0.2
Most students, residents, and clinicians answered this
question incorrectly: the average response was 56% with
0,1
a range of 0.095% to 99%. If the test is 95% sensitive,
95% of all animals with the disease should be detected.
0,10,2 0,3 0,4 0,5 0,6 0,70,80,9
Therefore the one animal in l000 that has the disease
1
should be positive. If the test has a specificity of 95%.
1- Specificity (false positives)
then 5% of the 999 animals in 1000 that do not have the
disease, or about 50, will have a false-positive test result.
FIGURE 1-1. A ROC curve is a way to show the effectiveness
of a test. Increased serum urea concentration, creatinine con-
The PPV [ie., the number of true-positive tests/total
number of positive test results) of this test is only about
centration, and urea/creatinine ratios were compared in diag-
nosis of 417 dogs with renal failure, 1463 normal dogs, and
2%, because only 1 of those 5l animals with a positive
2418 sick dogs without renal disease.2 The area under the ROC
test result will have the disease. There are mainly false-
curves show that serum creatinine and urea concentrations
positive results to interpret and explain to the animal
auueansyeaun au ing Aenee ssoubeip ui newis Aan aam
owners.
ratio was obviously worse than either of them.
Screening tests with a high sensitivity are often useful
to rule out a disease In the example above with a test that
has a sensitivity of 95%, 5% of animals with the disease
will not be detected and will be false negatives. Using the
above situation, if 1 in l000 animals has the disease, then
indicated by the diagnostic sensitivity of an assay) against
0.05 animals will have a false-negative result. If the speci-
the false-positive rate [1 - the diagnostic specificity of an
ficity is 95%, then 949 of 999 animals in 1000 that do
assay) calculated at various concentrations over the range
not have the disease are true negatives. Thus the NPV
of the test's results. A good test has a great increase in the
[number of true-negative tests/total number of negative
true-positive rate along the y axis for a minimal increase
test results; 949/949.05) is greater than 99.9%.
in the false-positive rate along the x axis. The 45-degree
line in Figure 1-1 would indicate an ineffective test, which
would have an equal increase in false positives and in true
NOTE: Evaluating test results from populations of appar-
positives. Whether a positive result on such a test was a
 ently healthy anirmals is much different from evaluating
true positive or a false positive would be random chance.
results in individual sick animals.
like tossing a coin. Figure l-1 illustrates that serum creati-
nine and urea (measured as blood urea nitrogen [BUN])
are very good tests of renal failure in dogs and very similar
If a test is performed only when the disease is likely
in effectiveness.? The urea/creatinine ratio is noticeably
instead of screening all animals (including those with no
worse than either creatinine or urea, as illustrated by
clinical signs) for a disease, then the frequency of diseased
being closer to the 45-degree angle line [and having less
animals in the test population is higher. Testing for
area under the curve).
 ROC curves are also useful in selecting upper and
testing. Consider an example in which a test for heart-
lower decision thresholds that can be used to decide
worm disease is 99% sensitive and 90% specific and is
when a diagnosis can be ruled in or ruled out. Note that
used in l00 outside dogs in a heartworm-endemic area.5
decision (or diagnostic) thresholds are different than ref-
If the incidence of disease is 50%, then one should iden-
erence intervals. Animals with a test result below the
tify 49.5 of the 50 ill dogs and obtain 5 false-positive
lower decision threshold limit are unlikely to have the
results in the 50 dogs without heartworms. Thus the PPV
disease being tested for; animals with a test result above
in this situation is 49.5/54.5 or 91%. There are still false
the higher decision threshold limit are likely to have the
positives to interpret, but greatly fewer.
disease.
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves ( Figure
 Diagnostic thresholds for renal failure are suggested
1-1) are used to determine the effectiveness of a test in
where the creatinine or urea ROC curves in Figure 1-1
diagnosis. ROC curves plot the true-positive rate [as
rapidly change their upward angle and begin to turn and
Chapter 1: General Laboratory Concepts
3
plateau to the right. Lower to the left along the curve is a
dog versus calm dog), or changes in instrument software
higher concentration threshold with greater specifcity
may change the sensitivity of detection of reticulocytes.
 and lower sensitivity. More to the upper right is a lower
Mean values are used to detect trends that depart
threshold with greater sensitivity and lower specifcity. At
from the norm. For example, if a dog has a low carbon
the bend in the curve, the test has optimal sensitivity
dioxide partial pressure (Pco2) (indicating a respiratory
[increase in true positives) with minimal loss of specific-
alkalosis trend) and a low bicarbonate (HCO;) concen-
ity (increase in false positives).
tration (indicating a metabolic acidosis trend), the diag-
nostician uses pH to indicate which is the disease change
and which is likely compensation. A pH that is within the
REFERENCE VALUES
reference range can still be discriminating by how it devi-
ates from the mean for pH. For example a low-normal
Reference values [i.e., reference ranges, reference intervals,
pH indicates an acidifying tendency and that the disease
"normal" ranges) are used to determine if a test result
process is more likely metabolic acidosis with respiratory
appears normal or abnormal. A laboratory result is mean-
compensation, rather than respiratory alkalosis with met-
ingless without knowing what values normal animals in
abolic compensation. Means are used with increases in
that situation should have It is not unusual for a veteri-
enzyme activity that should be reported as an x-fold
narian to request that a test be performed in a species for
increase (eg.. a tenfold increase over the mean). It is more
which the laboratory has no reference values, nor is it 
common to use the fold increase over the upper reference
unusual to fnd that the laboratory has not validated the
value, because mean values are often not available.
test for accuracy in disease diagnosis in species not com-
Reference values are often suboptimal. New reference
monly tested. Reference intervals may be presented as a
intervals should, theoretically, be established whenever a
piepueis Zsnuju pue snjd (uepau io) ueau e io aue
laboratory changes instruments, methods, or even types
deviations. Reference intervals should optimally also have
 of reagents. The expense is considerable and often pro-
95% confdence intervals around the upper and lower
hibitory considering the number of species involved; the
o zy, aq u si a e ms day oh s
variety of breeds; the effect of age, sex, and other factors:
often veterinarians use an upper or lower value as an exact
and the number of "normal" animals for a reference
breakpoint between normal and abnormal. For example,
 population optimally needed for each category. An ideal
if a serum sodium reference interval is 146 to 156 mmol/L,
reference population should include 120 individuals for
a common error is to consider 146 mmol/L normal but
parametric and 200 individuals for nonparametric dis-
145 mmol/L as indicating hyponatremia despite the fact
tributed values. A robust method for determining refer-
that imprecision in the method or rounding off of values
ence intervals is recommended when only 20 to 40
may mean that these values are essentially the same.
individuals are available.?
Another example is that less than 60,0o0 reticulocytes/μl
Unfortunately. use of readily available animals for
 is often incorrectly given as a breakpoint between regen-
reference populations is often is found to be inappropri-
erative and nonregenerative anemia. The 60,000 should
ate because of later findings of subclinical disease or
be considered an approximate, rule-of-thumb, mean ref-
deviations from "the typical adult dog or cat" because of
erence value.
factors such as breed, age, sex. Results from any reference
One uses the mean or range of reference values in
population should be evaluated for animals with values
different situations. Upper and lower reference values are
that deviate from the main group to see if those animals
best for individual patients without a previous evaluation.
came from one kennel (eg., breed-related deviations such
The best reference values are a patient's own values [if
as those in greyhounds, nutritional or toxic disorder in
available) before an illness, because individual animals
the kennel population) or for any other explanation for
or members of special groups (eg., sight hounds, puppies)
why those animals should be removed from the reference
may have unique characteristics. When comparing groups
population.
of animals (eg., a research project), one should use a
 An alternative method to generate reference intervals
mean or median value for the groups for interpretation
 when new techniques, reagents, or instruments are added
of changes (eg. packed cell volume [PCV] 45%) instead
to laboratories is to perform at least 20 to 60 duplicate
of published reference values (e.g., PCV 37% to 54%).
analyses with both the new and the previous or "stan-
Specific reference values should be used for different
dard" procedure. Regression analysis is used to predict the
methods and instruments. One laboratory's reference
new procedure's reference values from the previous refer-
values for canine reticulocytes for the ADVIA 120 instru-
ence values, assuming the previous values were properly
ment (Siemens Healthcare Diagmostics) is ll,000
to
established from an appropriate reference population. It
11l,000/μul (see Appendix I1). The XT-2000iV analyzer
is very important to include a wide range of low and high 
(Sysmex Corporation) reports higher numbers of reticulo-
results in the group of duplicate samples
cytes than the ADVIA 2120 and should have a different set
 Reference values in hematology or clinical chemistry
of canine reference values (19,400-150, 100/μl). A current
books and articles will vary from a clinic's own instru-
 problem with available automated reticulocyte results on
ments and methods but are useful to identify factors that
most hematologic samples is that many nonanemic dogs
typically cause deviations from "the typical adult dog or
asuodsai pnaodonuiaia aeiauaan e aey 0l ieadde
cat" due to breed, age sex, and the like. The number of
because they have reticulocyte counts higher than cur-
tests analyzed in most clinics for some species (eg. pet
rently available reference values. This may occur because.
birds, wildlife, zoo animals) might be too low to justify
even with properly established reference values, there may
establishing reference values. Literature values are often
be variations in how some samples were collected (excited
used for many tests if a laboratory does not have its own.
One example is the International Species Inventory
System (ISIS) Physiologic Data Reference Values for zoo
BOX 1-1. COmmON CAUSES FOR
animals. Many of the species are uncommon, and only a
PREANALYTICAL LABORATORY ERRORS
few may be present in a state or country. The ISIS values
+ Incomplete sample labeling
were derived from normal animals at 65 institutions so
that a reasonably sized database could be established.
● lImproper venipuncture techniques 
● Sample contamination when collecting via catheter
be used to reevaluate reference values for one or more
● Wrong anticoagulant
parameters that come under question. For example, a
· Delayed mixing of blood with anticoagulant
reagent company may change the formulation of reagents
oiui uoieidse alojaq isn! poolq jo buixw aenbapeu ·
for a test (eg. calcium) and suddenly many patients
the instrument
appear to have abnormally high or low calcium concen-
+ Delayed removal of serum or plasma from cells 
trations. Patient values are not from animals proven to be
 Delayed sample analysis
normal but are a readily available source of recently
● Improper sample storage
obtained, inexpensive, and locally produced data. These
data represent the laboratory's current patient popula-
● lnadequate warming of refrigerated samples before
analysis
tion. In the above example, if values for calcium concen-
● lnadequate patient preparation (e.g., not fasted)
tration in the laboratory's current patient population
● Interfering aubstances in sample
(minus patients having a disease affecting calcium) are
compared to previous reference values, then new refer-
ence values derived from patient results can be a tempo-
rary adjustment. One would expect to find a shift in the
quality control (QC) results that chronologically matches
obtaining new reagents.
cause, artifacts may make it impossible to determine the
real concentration or activity of an analyte. Anytime one
spurious result is found in a panel of tests, all results
INTERNATIONAL SYSTEM OF UNITS
should be closely evaluated to determine whether they
have also been affected.
The International System of Units (Systeme Internatio-
nale d'Unités [SI units]) has standardized the reporting
Preanalytical Errors
of data for improved comparison of results throughout
most the world, with the exception of the United States,
When an artifact is suspected, it is useful to determine if
Brazil, and a few other countries. Units used for serum
the spurious findings resulted from a preanalytical or
enzyme activity were particularly inconsistent in the past,
analytical error. 12 Preanalytical problems occur before the
when many enzyme procedures had results reported in
laboratory analyzes the sample and are the most common
units named after the author of the procedure. Now
cause for laboratory errors.l!l Common types of preana-
enzyme activity is reported as international units per liter
lytical errors are listed in Box l-l. Most preanalytical
(IU/L) in the United States or ukat/L in many other coun-
errors are the result of sample collection or handling
tries. Note that IU/L for enzyme activity is not an SI unit!
problems that can be avoided. Whenever possible, new
The SI unit for enzyme activity is ukat/L. U.S. laboratories
samples should be collected if these types of preanalytical
still use "traditional" units such as mg/dl. Appendix II
errors are suspected. Treatment with dnugs often causes
includes common conversion factors to convert a result
artifacts in laboratory testing. For example, chloride con-
from one unit of measure (e.g. mg/dl) to another unit of
centration usually cannot be accurately measured in
measure (e.g., mmol/L). Unfortunately, laboratories in
patients receiving potassium bromide because the most
the same hospital may report results using different units
commonly available assays cannot distinguish bromide
of measure causing confusion for clinicians when inter-
from chloride Certain drugs are insoluble in urine (e.g..
 preting those results.
sulfa drugs), causing crystalluria.
Some sources of preanalytical errors [e.g., hyperbili-
rubinemia, lipemia, or in vivo hemolysis) are physiologic
SOURCES OF LABORATORY ERROR
or pathologic in the patient and may not be easily con-
trolled. The severity of effect of these interferants depends
Laboratory error is common and needs to be detected
on the analyte measured, the species involved, and the
early to avoid misdiagmosis. Laboratories should be asked
analytical method used.
to recheck results that do not make sense in the context
of the animal's history, physical examination, or other
Hemolysis
diagnostic findings, such as marked hyperkalemia or
hypoglycemia in a clinically normal animal. A variety of
Hemolysis is recognized by reddish discoloration of
artifacts may cause the measured concentration or activity
plasma or senum. It can cause significant artifacts on a
of an analyte or multiple analytes in a panel to be falsely
CBC, hemostasis profle, and chemistry panel. Hemolysis
increased or decreased. Spurious results make it diffcult
occasionally occurs in vivo; it more commonly results
to accurately interpret laboratory results: artifacts may
from in vitro erythrocyte damage associated with improper
cause abnormal results in a healthy animal or mask
sample handling or collection. Samples that are hemo-
abnormal results in a sick animal. Depending on the
lyzed due to handling or collection errors are best
Chapter 1: General Laboratory Concepts
5
discarded. In vitro hemolysis can be minimized with
laboratories; however, ultracentrifugation is not available
the following: (1) use of sharp needles to collect blood;
in most practices. When using clearing polymers, it is
(2)  employment of proper  venipuncture  technique,
important to frst determine whether the procedure will
including clean entry into a vessel, limiting vessel stasis.
falsely alter the concentration or activity of measured
and avoidance of excess negative pressure during blood
analytes for the analyzer system used.
collection; (3) gentle mixing and handling of tubes
promptly after collection; (4) proper centrifugation tech-
Analytical Errors
jduoid (s) (sias ouy wmas io euseld aeiedas ci sanbiu
removal of serum or plasma from cells; and (6) preven-
Analytical problems occur during actual performance
tion of overheating or freezing.
 of a laboratory assay. Operator errors include improper
Hemolysis may falsely increase the measured serum
sample aliquoting, incorrect analyzer use, improper
concentration of substances that are present in higher
reagent handling. and unauthorized modifcation of a
concentrations in the erythrocyte cytoplasm than in
 procedure. Reagent problems include using out-of-date or
plasma [e.g. lactate dehydrogenase [LDH], aspartate ami-
improperly stored reagents. Analyzer malfunctions may
notransferase [AST]. creatine kinase [CK]).l14 These
result from improper maintenance, aging of instruments.
changes vary according to species or breed and are inde-
or purchase of a lower quality instrument In general,
pendent of the analyzer or methodology used. Hemolysis
analytical errors are minimized by proper training of tech-
nicians and strict adherence to a quality assurance
photometric assays that measure substances at wave-
 program, including documented standard operating pro-
lengths similar to the absorbance range of hemoglobin.
cedure for testing protocols, equipment maintenance,
Finally, hermolysis releases erythrocyte contents that may
and QC.
positively or negatively interfere with the chemical reac-
If a laboratory error is suspected, the first step is
tions used to measure analytes. The errors associated with
usually to repeat the analysis using the same sample If
these last two hemolysis effects vary significantly, depend-
the suspect results do not repeat, operator error or a
ing on the specific analyzer and methodology used.
aul uo jeadai shinsau iadsns aul jl Kiatll st ioa wopuei
Therefore referral laboratories or analyzer manufacturers
second analysis, a new blood sample should be collected
should provide information about the effects of hemoly-
and the analysis repeated. If the suspect results do not
sis on their specific analytical system. Veterinarians should
repeat on the new sample, then a preanalytical error is
not choose laboratories that report out results on hemo-
likely. If the suspect results repeat, then either there is an
lyzed, lipemic, or icteric samples over laboratories that
analytical problem or the results accurately reflect the
refuse to do so. Reporting out a result may not indicate
patient's status. Test reagents and analyzer function
that a laboratory has better methods unaffected by hermo-
should be evaluated. If they are functioning properly.
lysis, lipemia, or icterus, but merely that they report ques-
then the patient should be reassessed for an alternative
tionable results with a disclaimer at the bottom of the
diagnosis. If laboratory error is still suspected, then the
report.
sample should be sent to a referral laboratory for
analysis.
Lipemia
aum ai readde on eseid io as sasnin eadi
and turbid when triglyceride concentrations exceed 300
SAMPLE COLLECTION:
to 400 mg/dl. Lipemia alters the light-scattering property
RIGHT AND WRONG
of blood, causing alterations of a variety of hematologic
and chemical results, depending on the methodology and
Proper sample collection and handling techniques are
analyzer used. Fat in lipemic senum displaces an equal
pue sioa Aoieioqel Iekleueaid pioae Cl pa1mba1
volume of the aqueous part of senum. Because analytes
obtain reliable results. Tubes should be labeled to assure
such as sodium are dissolved in the water portion of
that results are reported for the correct patient Clean
serum, and not in the lipid portion, this may cause a false
venipuncture is needed to avoid hemolysis, tissue con-
decrease in sodium (pseudohyponatremia) and other
tamination, or inappropriate clotting. Samples should be
substances but not a physiologic hyponatremia, because
collected from a blood vessel that can rapidly provide the
it is the concentration of electrolytes in the aqueous
required amount of blood without causing vessel col-
plasma in contact with cell membranes that have a bio-
lapse. If blood is collected from a catheter, it is important 
logic effect. Whether this volume-related problem occurs
to discard an appropriate amount of fluid from the cath-
depends on how an instrument aspirates and dilutes a
eter to assure that the patient sample is not contaminated.
sample or on the method of analysis. Lipemia increases
Collection tubes containing anticoagulant should be
erythrocyte fragility and often causes hemolysis.
filled first and promptly mixed (see Chapter 5 for sample
Recent feeding is the most common cause of lipemia.
collection for platelet counting and hemostasis testing).
Fasting l2 hours before blood collection can usually
Improper flling (usually incomplete) of the tubes alters
prevent postprandial lipemia. If lipemic samples are
the ratio of anticoagulant to blood and significantly
unavoidable (e.g. patient with a lipid metabolism disor-
affects hemostasis testing and even some CBC, cytologic,
der), then the serum or plasma can be cleared by ultra-
or chemical assays. Collection of blood into the wrong
centrifugation or by the addition of a polymer that binds
anticoagulant may interfere with some chemical assays?
lipids for removal by centrifugation (eg.. LipoClear).
(see Box 1-2 for recommendations for collection tubes).
Ultracentrifugation is the standard by which other lipid-
Serum tubes with clot activator can damage cell morphol-
clearing methods are judged and is used by many referral
ogy in cytologic samples. Delayed analysis of blood or
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
handling and submission and routine charges should be
BOX 1-2. SELECTION OF COLLECTION TUBES
directed to the medical technologist, clerk, or secretary
who answers them daily. The pathologist's time should
No Anticoagulant: Red-Top Tube
 Serum for chemistry testing
be used for questions that are interpretive, diagnostic, 0r
 of a policy nature.
 Huid for cytologic examination
Heparin:Green-Top Tube
PROFILES VERSUS INDIVIDUAL
 Plasma for chemistry testing
TEST SELECTION
EDTA* (Sodium or Potassium): Purple-Top Tube
 Binds divalent cations: ↓ Ca and Mg concentrations
 Some criticize profiles for being a "shotgun approach" or
 Preferred anticoagulant for CBC
aq pnous peaisui sagoid a'du suusy, oyiadsuou e
 Huid for cytologic examination
considered cost-effective screens for a large number of
Interferes with chemistry testing: methodology
common problems. It usually costs less for most labora-
uapuadap 
tories to perform a standard profle of 20 chemistry tests
↑ Na or K concentration
than to perform 3 or 4 individual tests that vary for each
individual patient. This is due in part to using the auto-
 Sodium Citrate: Light Blue-Top Tube
mation of the instruments to perform profiles. Also, labor
Bnds divalent cations: ↓ Ca and Mg concentrations
costs required to enter patient information into the com-
 Preferred anticoagulant for hemostasis testing 
puter system, label tubes, and prepare the instrument are
 Interferes with chemistry testing: methodology
the same if 20 tests are performed per sample or only 1
dependent
to 3 tests. A profile of many tests is recommended for
those clinicians who have access to a larger laboratory not
Fluoride (Sodium): Gray-Top Tube
only for cost-effectiveness but for the reliability and accu-
Use for glucose or lactate determinations only
Inhibits glycolytic enzymes
racy of labs using QC and experienced laboratory profes-
sionals [see also later discussions on stat and point-of-care
testing).
*EDTA, Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid; CBC, complete blood
 Serum chemistry profles have variable numbers
count.
and types of tests included, although the "basic profile"
includes the same or similar tests in most laboratories.
A well-designed profile should, for a minimal fee and
minimal redundancy, have a high probability of detecting
the common diseases for the particular situation. A CBC
other body fluids causes loss of cells and may make it
is actually a profle that includes many tests to screen for
impossible to identify celltypes or evaluate morphology
anemia, inflammatory disease, stress, thrombocytopenia,
on a smear. Whole blood or body fluids should be kept
and various other problems. The urinalysis is a profle
refrigerated until analyzed. Direct smears of fresh blood
of chemical, morphologic, microbiological, and physical
and fluid cytology samples should be made promptly.
tests designed not only to reveal hemorrhagic, inflamma-
following collection and should accompany tubes of
tory, or functional deficits in the urogenital tract but also
blood or fluids. Smears should be air-dried and not be
to detect systemic disorders such as diabetes mellitus.
refrigerated. Exposure to excessive heat or cold can cause
hepatic disease, massive acute muscle injury, or intra-
lysis of cells, leakage of intracellular constituents, or loss
vascular hemolysis. A hemostatic profile for evaluating
of temperature-sensitive analytes. Delayed separation of
bleeding disorders is discussed in Chapter 5.
plasma or serum from blood cells causes leakage of intra-
Individual test selection becomes important if the
cellular constituents and consumption of glucose.12 To
method or instrument locally available requires that
avoid breakdown or loss of enzymes or other substances,
each test be individually performed or if certain tests are
it is best to keep serum or plasma refrigerated or frozen
not offered in an inexpensive profle Some tests may
if it will not be analyzed promptly after collection.
not be cost-effective enough to include in an initial
A key to effective sample collection is good commu-
screening profile. Tests that infrequently have abnormal
nication with referral laboratories. Laboratory personnel
results or that are expensive are requested only when
will explain how to submit samples properly. When an
patient information indicates a problem that justifies
umsatisfactory sample is received by a laboratory or when
their use After a specifc disease has been diagnosed
instructions or sample labeling are incomplete, someone
(e.g.. diabetes mellitus), only one test may be needed to
lay iy ueeua asq aun oeuo ci A iaua i
monitor the treatment process and may be most
instructions or arbitrarily decide what to do with the
cost-effective.
specimen. This may delay results or may lead to unor-
aisem oi nou jueiodu sil pauoad suiaq saesse paiap
the effort used in obtaining the sample or lose a diagnos-
STAT TESTS
tic opportunity that may not be available later. Many
laboratories have prepared written information on sub-
Very short turnaround time between sample collection
mission procedures pertaining to their laboratories on
"ies, auuos ul juejodl st shnsai jo Aiqelleae aut pue
their websites (see Appendix I, Listing of Selected Referral
situations (eg. designing fluid therapy for acid-base and
and Commercial Laboratories). Questions about sample
electrolyte abnormalities). Instruments that can analyze
Chapter 1: General Laboratory Concepts
plasma or heparinized whole blood save the time (eg..
consistent staining characteristics of blood smears, bac-
30 minutes) required for blood to fully clot before har-
teria and fungi. and cytologic smears. New methylene
vesting serum. Unlike cost-effcient batches, stat tests are
blue (NMB) is easy to use for urine sediments, cytology
 usually analyzed individually. Stat tests require laboratory
smears, and reticulocytes in blood (see stain and micro-
personnel to interrupt their effcient work routines to
scope discussions in Chapter l6). Air-dried smears of
perform single tests.
cytology, blood, or urine sediment should be sent to a
clinical pathologist whenever there is any doubt about
the diagnosis. Manual erythrocyte and leukocyte count-
SEND IT OUT OR DO IT YOURSELF?
ing techniques are discussed in Chapter 2, and platelet
counting is discussed in Chapter 5. A refractometer is
In-Clinic Laboratory Testing
needed to determine urine specific gravity, plasma total
Veterinarians must decide what testing to do “in clinic"
protein concentration, and total protein concentration
and what to send out. Major advantages to in-clinic
in various body fluids.With the refractometer, only a
testing are rapid turnaround time and potentially
drop of urine is needed to determine specific gravity.
improved client satisfaction by eliminating the need to
which is essential for evaluating renal function. Simi-
delay treatment or surgery until results are received from
larly. only the volume of plasma in a microhematocrit
a referral laboratory. Other advantages include minimiz-
tube is needed for an accurate estimate of plasma
protein.
samples, providing an additional source of revenue for
 Most laboratories need at least two good-quality cen-
the clinic, and increased incorporation of biochemical
trifuges: a single-purpose centrifuge for microhematocrit
profles into presurgical screens, geriatric screens, and
tubes to ensure consistent PCV determinations and a
routine health maintenance examinations.13 Disadvan-
basic centrifuge for separating serum or plasma. Addi-
tages to in-clinic testing include the costs required to
tional centrifuges to consider include a high-speed micro-
 purchase equipment and maintain adequate stock of
centrifuge for small (Eppendorf-type) tubes that allows
reagents, the need to perform QC testing, and the need
more effective separation of serum or plasma from small
for additional staff time to properly perform assays in the
samples. A refrigerated centrifuge is needed for some
laboratory. (See later discussion of calculation of the cost
labile substances. If the clinic has a blood bank, a blood
to perform a test based on test volume, etc.) A laboratory
banking centrifuge is needed to separate fresh frozen
can be a revenue-producing unit, but this is seldom true
plasma from concentrated red blood cells (RBCs) or
for low-volume, ineffcient testing situations.
platelet-rich plasma. A cytocentrifuge is needed for prepa-
The quality of in-clinic laboratories varies greatly.
ration of cytologic smears with good morphology of cere-
Accurate and reliable laboratory results require invest-
brospinal fluid (CsF) or bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL)
 ment in experienced medical technologists or their equiv-
samples. Serum or plasma may need to be stored in a
alent, and a willingness to provide them adequate time
refrigerator [4°C) or freezer (-20"C) before it is mailed
to set up and maintain a system of good laboratory
to a referral laboratory. Freezers included in refrigerators
testing. Many clinics have nonlaboratory personnel per-
and many home freezers may not maintain a consistent
temperature below -20°C.
typical for technical staff in referral laboratories. Techni-
cian time must be allotted for training. inventory and
Veterinary Referral Laboratories
maintenance of reagents, equipment maintenance, trou-
bleshooting problerms, and performing repeated measure-
Large referral laboratories offer more cost-effective testing
leu shnsau io siee painadsns yiim saides uo jua
(large profles usually cost less than two to four individual
are questionable.
tests), top-end instruments, more experienced personnel
The clinic is responsible for assuring the laboratory's
specializing in laboratory testing, better quality assurance.
results are reliable. One person should be designated to
better detection of laboratory errors, and a wide range of
be in charge of a quality assurance program to ensure that
tests. Many veterinarians purchase in-office analyzers only
results are accurate, repeatable, and properly reported. QC
to find that, without frequent calibration and consistent
testing must be performed, recorded, and monitored to
use of controls, the results are untrustworthy. Over the
prove validity of the answers sold to the client Practices
years, different instrument manufacturers have promoted
with low test volume should analyze control samples
various in-clinic systems that disappeared (along with
- ist j a ea r e as s ea 
reagents) a few years later.
formed. Because this is a significant expense in time and
The larger, more sophisticated instruments not only
money, the frequency and extent of QC testing is often
analyze tests more quickly and cheaply but also better
suboptimal and trust in the reliability of test results fades.
detect sample and laboratory errors. Small, simplified
Standard operating procedures should be in place to
instruments often report only numbers, with limited
assure that testing is properly and consistently performed
additional information to detect errors. In contrast,larger.
no matter who performs the test.
automated hematology cell counters have graphic dis-
 Microscopic analysis of cytology and hematology
plays to illustrate errors in what is being counted. Analy-
smears rapidly provides useful diagnostic information.
ses may be performed by more than one method (e.g..
Therefore someone in a practice should learm and
two types of total white blood cell [wBC] count), and if
practice these techniques (see Chapters 2 to 5 and 16).
results forthesame parameter do not match, a flag signals
suieis simo. Aressasau sl adoosonoiu Aenb-poos y
the operator to check that value. These more sophisticated
(eg., Diff-Quik or Hemocolor) are easy and provide
instruments usually also provide a much broader range
8
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
of data that are more precise, accurate and rapid than are
Reference values for heparinized whole blood may differ
 obtained by small in-clinic instruments (see Chapters 2
from routine serum values.
to 5).
The ideal analyzer should be easy to use, provide fast
Referral laboratories employ well-trained, experi-
and accurate results, require minimal operator time and
enced personnel and often board-certified veterinary
A 'si ais a ' c asa aq 
clinical pathologists. These are specialists focusing only
break down, and be easy to repair or be immediately
on laboratory testing, analogous to specialists in other
replaced by the manufacturer as needed. Published objec-
fields (eg. cardiology. ophthalmology, orthopedics).
tive evaluation is available for relatively few commercially
Referral laboratories offer a wider variety of tests, whereas
the variety of tests a veterinary clinic may offer is limited
 Manufacturers of the analyzers should be able to provide
by test volume. Offering a wider variety of tests requires
data showing the precision of their assays and how well
more reagent storage and increases the likelihood that
the results compare with those obtained using a reference
reagents will be outdated before they are used in a veteri-
method for each species of interest.
nary practice. Outdated reagents should never be used, and
The simplest analyzer measures the concentration of
loss of unused reagents adds significant cost to testing.
 only one analyte such as blood glucose. Advantages of
Some referral laboratories have courier systems that pick
blood glucose analyzers include rapid results, require-
up samples and return results (eg.. by fax) within hours.
ment for small quantities of blood (minimum require-
fulflling the need for rapid answers.
ment of 3 to 5 μl whole blood). affordability. and
portability. Comparison of results obtained using a
variety of portable blood glucose meters [AlphaTrak
[Abbott Laboratories]. Precision Xtra [Abbott Laborato-
NOTE: It is recommended to use larger veterinary labora-
ries]., Ascensia Elite XL [Bayer Diagnostics, Inc], Ascensia
Contour [Bayer Diagnostics, Inc.], Accu-Chek Advantage
tories with experienced laboratory personnel, better quality
assurance, better instrumentation, and lower cost per test
[Roche Diagnostics, Inc]. and OneTouch Ultra2 [Life-
as much as possible and practical.
Scan, Inc.]) with a reference method in dogs revealed
differences in the accuracy of the different analyzers. In
some samples, this leads to misclassification of the glyce-
mic state of the patient.4
Use of Human Laboratories
Many in-clinic chemistry analyzers have the capacity
to measure multiple analytes (see Table l-1). Those that
Many chemistry tests for animals, such as electrolytes,
allow the clinic to measure a single analyte or to custom-
glucose, urea, and creatinine, are performed accurately in
ize a biochemical panel are the most flexible but tend to
large human laboratories. However, veterinary referral
be more labor intensive and require more technician
laboratories avoid methods that fail to work with animal
attention when performing multiple tests. Analyzers
samples. Veterinary-specific testing is needed with various
offering a limited number of biochemical panels that are
protein, hemostasis, immunologic and hematologic
predetermined by the manufacturer are less flexible but
analyses. Occasionally uncommon tests, such as methe-
ssa arai on puat ose au isl a ssa iso aleaua
moglobin and drug testing, may be only be available at a
technician time and expertise.1&
local human laboratory, because they are too infrequently
Different chemistry analyzers often use different
requested to offer at veterinary laboratories. Human labo-
reagents or methods; therefore each analyzer system
ratories do not produce their own laboratory-derived ref-
requires its own species-specific reference intervals. Two
erence intervals for animal species and cannot help with
Or more different instruments analyzing the same sub-
diagnosis of animal diseases.
stance may be used in the same clinic, which causes con-
fusion in comparing results to a reference interval or
Point-of-Care Chemistry Analyzers
results on the same patient from different instruments.
Reference intervals from referral laboratories should not
For tests that are truly “stat" (eg. measuring blood
be used for in-clinic chemistry testing unless the same
glucose concentration for suspected hypoglycemic sei-
analyzer system and reagents are used. If a clinic is unable
zures), point-of-care testing is necessary. Point-of-care
to generate its own reference intervals, it is important to
testing is performed in close proximity to the patient; it
determine if appropriate reference intervals are available
includes analyzers used at the patient's side and bench-
from the manufacturer for the species of interest Manu-
top instruments found nearby (eg. in the ward). The
facturers and laboratories should provide information
test available must match the clinic's needs and the
about how their reference intervals were calculated (e.g.
species being tested. Sample size requirement is impor-
the number, age. breed, and sex of animals used) upon
tant with regard to how little can be collected from dehy-
request. It is also important to know if in-clinic analyzers
drated cats or puppies (Table l-1). Analyzers that use
were validated to perform well with ill patients, because
the data provided by manufacturers are often established
 nate some artifacts associated with plasma or serum sep-
in healthy animals.
aration. Use of analyzers that require plasma or serum
Cost and time required for QC procedures must
means collection of 2 to 3 times more blood than
be considered. Manufacturers shoul d provide recommen-
needed for an instrument using heparinized whole
 dations for a QC program. If a QC program from the
blood, because of "dead space" and the fluid-cell inter-
manufacturer is not recommended, is unavailable, or is
face involved in separation of senum from blood cells.
inadequate, then that analytical system should be suspect.
Chapter 1: General Laboratory Concepts
VATIRSTIORXS
Serum or plasma
 pinbi Auuon
6 min for panel 
supported
controls
Dry slides 
26
Whole blood, serum,
<12 min for panel 
VETSCGAN VS2
 23 plus canine
heartworm, T4
Dog, cat, horse 
manufacturer
Plastic rotors 
Check with 
 001
Dog, cat, horse,
mouse, rabbit,
Whole blood,
erret,cow
(s
01 ()
#
Slides
22
Yes
Dog, cat, horse 
Whole blood,
Dry test strips
request
Liquid
~
15 plus hemoglobin
Individual tests only 
Whole blood, serum,
recommended
Liquid controls 
hamster
pooiq 'aseq-pi2e snid 6 
Automatic testing of 
coagulation,
troponin assays
ISTAT1 ABAXIS 
Whole blood 
Cartridges
's26
 562
u z>
NA*
Yes
Number of available chemistry and 
Species with available reference
s  s ss
Recommended quality control 
Panels or individual tests 
De
electrolyte tests 
procedures 
Sample type
Reagent type
intervals
Sample size
Assay time
10
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Electronic QC is provided with some instruments. It ade-
cost for one test [eg-. glucose or alanine aminotransferase
quately tests the electronic circuitry in the instrument and
[ALT]] using an in-clinic chemistry analyzer was described
 is fne as such, but electronic QC will not detect reagent
in earlier editions of this book to vary from $3.00 a
 problems or some types of operator error.
test (if 10 tests are analyzed per day) to $17.50 (if 3 tests
 The ease of operation of the analyzer and training
are analyzed per week). Similarly. the cost for a blood
requirements of the operator should be taken into
pue '[od] ainssaid [eued uasAxo "ood 'Hd] sisAleue ses
account. One must keep in mind the technician time
HCOs) with a standard blood gas instrument (Nova 4)
required for sample setup as well as the time it takes to
was only $9.63 if 4000 tests were analyzed per year versus
complete testing. Most in-clinic chemistry analyzers can
provide panel results within 10 to 20 minutes; however.
are outdated and the tests are likely more expensive now.
dn-em juagean io iazaleue apul iou Ae aun s
but the trend holds true.
times. Improper warm-up procedures can dramatically
As an example, the costs for a full Michigan State
alter results. Finally. the linearity range of the assays
University (MSU) small animal profle in 20l0 can be
should be determined. Results above the linear range are
compared to the cost for individual tests from the same
inaccurate and require dilution and retesting so that
laboratory. A profle for $40 included: urea, glucose,
results are in the acceptable testing range. Dilution of
total protein, albumin, globulin, ALT, AST, SDH (sorbi-
patient samples is time consuming and creates a source
tol dehydrogenase), calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P), mag-
of operator error. Some analyzers provide automated
nesium (Mg). sodium (Na), potassium (K), chlorine
sample dilution.
(Cl), HCOs, anion gap, total bilinubin, direct bilinubin,
Reagent and equipment features are the final consid-
indirect bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase [ALP), amylase,
erations. For reagents, the cost per test, shelf life, and
cholesterol, CK, creatinine, osmolality, iron, and Na:K
storage requirements should be evaluated. If shelf life is
ratio. This is 22 analyzed tests and 5 calculated results.
short, reagents will often become out-of-date if the
at a cost of about $l.82 per analyzed test. Individually
number of tests performed is low. Out-of-date reagents
analyzed tests are more expensive because the QC, time,
must be discarded and can be a significant expense.
and labor expense to do a batch of 10 to 15 tests is often
Equipment considerations include cost (e.g., purchase
little more than for l or 2 tests. Individual tests from the
or lease, maintenance, service contract) and the techni-
same MSU laboratory in 2010 were: amylase $19, urea
cian time required for maintenance. If an analyzer mal-
$14, bilinubin (total and conjugated) $26, and AST $14.
function occurs, one should determine the technical
Thus 4 individual tests would be $73 whereas the 22
support offered by the manufacturer (e.g., times of day or
tests in a profile (actually analyzed) would be only $40
week when available cost), the expected turnaround time
(55% the cost of 4).
for repairs, and whether a loaner analyzer is available
The lower cost per test when profiles are performed
during the repair period. Because many of the analyzers
is due to efficiency. A laboratory has certain fixed costs
currently available are software driven, one should fnd
 uo paad si isan I aua raam a ra
out the expected frequency of upgrades and any associ-
amol Aisnoiqo si isal iad isos aul sisal 57 io aldes
ated costs.
when these fixed costs are divided by 25 tests compared
to only 1 to 4 tests. Information on the sample (e.g..
owner, date animal data, tests requested) must be entered
into the laboratory computer system, the sample needs to
COST ANALYSIS FOR IN-CLINIC
be labeled and perhaps centrifuged and divided into
ANALYZERS
more tubes and transferred to work stations, the instru-
ment must be programmed to perform the tests, QC
In-office instruments have many overlooked costs. Often
testing must be done each day, and a report must be sent
salespeople discuss only the cost of the instrument and
to the submitting veterinarian. Laboratories also have
reagents. The final cost per test is affected by many more
regularly scheduled profile runs during the day, but indi-
factors than just the base cost of the instrument and cost
vidual tests come in a haphazard fashion.
for reagents. The cost of validating the instrument, the
One estimate for assigning hospital overhead costs
service contract, establishing reference ranges, QC testing.
(by Dr. Jack Judy, the MSU University Hospital director
calibration, repeating questionable tests, diluting and
in 1995) to income-generating areas of a veterinary clinic
renunning samples out of range, instrument depreciation,
was $50.00 per square foot of floor space If a laboratory
labor, lost interest (if the money for the instrument had
floor space is 88 square feet, one should divide $4400 per
been invested), and hospital overhead should be calcu-
 year of overhead by the number of tests performed in that
lated in the lowest and highest possible sample volume
area. If one performs five tests per day during 250 working
situations. Actual cost per test is often much more than
days per year, or 1250 tests per year, the overhead per test
what a salesperson suggests. Other hidden costs include
would be $3.52. Income-generating areas should com-
repeat testing on problem samples, disposable supplies,
pensate for other areas (eg. medical records, reception
waste disposal, and optional and accessory equipment. A
area, offce space). The total cost of depreciation of the
realistic cost per test should be used in determining if
instruments each year is similarly divided by the number
laboratory testing is actually a profit center for the clinic
of test analyzed each year to determine this additional
or if the convenience of having in-clinic testing is worth
cost per test The labor cost per test can be estimated by
the true expense.
dividing the annual salary costs of medical technologists
Volume of patient samples analyzed per day, week,
and others working in the lab by the number of tests
and year is critical in determining the cost per test The
performed per year.
Chapter 1:General Laboratory Concepts
11
QUALITY CONTROL
renoued e io yooq stun u passnosp sinpoid s auedo
referral laboratory listed in Appendix I over those unin-
A QC program must be in place to assure accurate results,
tentionally excluded.
because all instruments, reagents, and laboratory person-
nel eventually make errors. Properly performed QC
References and Suggested Readings
detects these problems so they can be corrected in a
timely manner. QC should be a major consideration in
1. Alleman AR: The effects of hemolysis and lipemia on serum
laboratory testing but is often poorly performed in
biochemical constituents. Vet Med 85:1272. 1990.
in-clinic laboratory testing.
2. Braun ∫P, Lefebvre HP: Early detection of renal disease in the
Within-laboratory QC is performed by repeated anal-
canine patient. Presented at the 8th annual Hills Sympo-
sium. Rodos, October 3-5. 2004.
ysis of control reagents containing known amounts of
3. Casscells W. Schenberer BS, Graboys TB: [nterpretation by
various substances (i.e, analytes) such as glucose or cre-
physicians of clinical laboratory results. N Engl J Med
atinine. Results on control samples must be within the
299:999. 1978
range of expected QC results before patient samples can
4. Cohen TA et al: Evaluation of six portable blood glucose
be analyzed. Control samples with high, low, and normal
meters for measuring blood glucose concentration in dogs. 
levels of each substance should be used. In laboratories
Am Vet Med Assoc 235:276, 2009.
with a large volume, all three control samples [ie., high,
 5. Courtney CH, Cornell JA: Evaluation of heartworm immu-
normal, low) are analyzed with each batch of patient
nodiagnostic tests. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:724, 1990.
samples. The number of control samples used in small-
6. Ehrmeyer SS. Laessig RH: Electronic "Quality Control"
(EQC): Is it just for unit use devices? Clin Chim Acta 307:95,
volume situations is more open to discussion. Using one
2001.
or two QC samples (low, high, or normal) is better than
7.Cerstman BB: Evaluating the reliability of diagnostic test
not doing any QC. Results from QC testing are recorded
results. J Am Vet Med Assoc 188:248. 1986.
daily and reviewed to detect sudden shifts or gradual
8. Henry IB, Kurec AS: The clinical laboratory: Organization,
trends suggesting instrument, personnel, or reagent prob-
purposes and practice. In Henry [B. editor: Clinical diagnosis
lems. Gradual trends may be the result of slow deteriora-
@d management by laboratory methods, ed 19, Philadelphia PA.
tion of a reagent or slowly decreasing light intensity in an
1996, WB Saunders.
instrument. Rapid shifts may be the result of introducing
9. Horn PS, Pesce AJll, Copeland BE: A robust approach to
-oduos juaumsui ue ui agueup uappns e 'uageai mau e
eference interval estimation and evaluation. Clin Chem
44:622. 1998.
nent, or human error.
10. Lanevschi A, Kramer [W: Comparison of two dry chemistry
External QC programs document that the results of
unas aujues Sursn lazh[eue Anstauo jam e pue siazh[eue
one's own laboratory's procedures are comparable to
Vet Clin Pathol 25:10, 1996.
those of other laboratories using the same instruments
11. Lippi G et al: Preanalytical vaniability: The dark side of the
and procedures. Veterinary laboratories are not legally
moon in laboratory testing. Clin Chem Lab Med 44:358.
required to participate in external QC programs, but they
2006.
would certainly benefit from them. The College of Ameri-
12. MacWilliams PS, Thomas CB: Basic principles of laboratory
can Pathologists (CAP) program is high quality, expen-
medicine. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 7:253. 1992.
sive, and required by laboratories testing human samples.
13. Metzger FL: 10 compelling reasons to offer in-house testing.
Larger veterinary laboratories may purchase the program.
Vet Economics 37(11):70. 1996.
14. ONeill SL, Feldman BF: Hemolysis as a factor in clinical
Laboratories in these programs receive test samples.
chemistry and hematology of the dog. Vet Clin Pathol 18:58.
analyze the samples, and report their results. The perfor-
1989.
mance of each laboratory in the testing program is com-
15. Sutton A et al: Analyte comparisons between 2 clinical chem-
pared with that of others using the same test method. This
istry analyzers. Can Vet } 40:255. 1999.
requires a large database of many laboratories using the
16. Trumel C et al: Comparison of measurements of canine
 same methods. Other external QC programs are available
plasma creatinine. glucose. proteins, urea, alanine amino-
(e.g, from reagent or instrument producers). A practi-
tansferase, and alkaline phosphatase obtained with
tioner can check a referral laboratory's precision
Spotchem SP 4430 and Vitros 250 analyzer. Res Vet Sci
by
or by
79:183, 2005
17. Tvedten HW, Thomas JS: General laboratory concepts. [n
submitting split samples to two or more laboratories to
Willard MD, Tvedten HW, editors: Small animal clinical diagno-
test accuracy.
sis by laboratory methods. ed 4. St. Louis. 2004, WB Saunders.
Although reference is made to certain instruments
18. Vap LM. Mitzner B: An update on chemistry analyzers. Vet
Or products, readers should not favor one particular
Clin North Am 26:1129, 1996.
Che 
 Complete Blood Count,
2
Bone Marrow Examination,
and Blood Banking
General Comments and Selected Techniques
Douglas I. Weiss and Harold Tvedten
COMPLETE BLOOD COUNT
 Test results outside reference intervals for a given
species are usually considered abnormal. However, refer-
The complete blood count (CBC) is a common name for
ence values are often not optimal because they are diff-
a hematologic profle of tests used to describe the quan-
pue ioieioqel yoea ioy ysqeisa oi aaisuaxa pue ii
tity and morphology of the cellular elements in blood
suaui saueu qel e aun Aiaa pasiai aq pinous
and a few substances in plasma. The CBC is a cost-effective
Or methods. Reference intervals are usually derived from
profile that detects many abnormalities and disease con-
limited numbers of adult animals not segregated by age.
ditions. Bone marrow examination is used in selected
sex, or breed (see Chapter 1). These factors can be signif-
patients to answer questions that the CBC cannot.
cant For example, a general adult reference interval for
canine packed cell volume (PCV; hematocrit; Het) is 37%
to 55%. St. Bernards, however, tend to have PCVs that
NOTE: The CBC is a cost-effective profle of hemato-
range from 35% to 40%, whereas the PCVs of greyhounds
logic tests that detects many abnormalities and disease
typically range from 52% to 60%o: therefore what is
conditions.
normal in these two breeds hardly overlaps. Prominent
age-related changes also occur. At birth, canine RBCs are
very large, with a mean corpuscular volume (MCV) of
This chapter discusses how conclusions are derived
about 95 femtoliters (fl). The MCV decreases to adult
from information in the CBC and bone marrow examina-
values by 2 to 3 months of age. At 5 to 6 weeks of age.
tion, in addition to describing selected hematologic tech-
puppies normally have a PCV around 30%. a plasma
niques. Explanations about interpretation are brief,
protein around 5.3 g/dl, and 3% to 4% reticulocytes.
because detailed discussions about the use of diagnostic
Puppy values could be confused with a regenerative.
tests for erythrocytes [i.e., red blood cells [RBCs]). leuko-
blood loss anemia if compared with adult reference inter-
cytes [i.e., white blood cells [WBCs]), and platelets are
vals. Detailed references with information on breed, age,
presented in Chapters 3, 4, and 5, respectively, and in
instrument, method, and other variables that affect inter-
other references. Technical comments emphasize the
pretation should be on hand.16
basic tests used in small clinics, but they may include
The second step in evaluating abnormal results is to
more advanced techniques when they clearly illustrate a
group abnormal data within the CBC. For example, a low
basic hematologic principle.
PCV (i.e., anemia) should be linked to tests of bone
CBC results should be evaluated systematically. The
marrow erythropoiesis, such as reticulocyte count and
first step involves identifying which test results are abnor-
polychromasia, and observations on RBC morphology
mal. Appropriate scientific terms should be used to
(see Chapter 3) to describe the anemia. Additionally.
describe the abnormalities (Box 2-1). Adjectives such as
severe thrombocytopenia, hypoproteinemia, and icterus.
"mild, moderate, or marked" are applied to reflect the
often aid in diagnosis of the cause of anemia. The mental
magnitude of the change, which aids in interpretation.
-sns Auanbag uodsap poo e suenuoy jo ssanand
Although these adjectives are subjectively based on clini-
gests a diagnosis. For example, deciding an anemia is
cal experience, some published guidelines are available.
severe, erythroid regeneration is marked, and identifying
Greater deviations from reference values allow more con-
 moderate to many spherocytes in the smear and autoag-
fidence that the change is truly a disease change and
glutination in the EDTA blood, clearly leads to a diagnosis
serious than do mild deviations in results.
of immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA). Total
leukocyte count should be linked with the differential
leukocyte count and WBC morphology (see Chapter 4).
For example, severe neutropenia with more immature
NOTE: First determine which test results are abnormal
and how greatly they deviate from normal. Then evaluate
neutrophils than mature neutrophils and marked toxic
abnormal results in groups of related types of data.
change usually indicates gram-negative infection or sep-
ticemia. A leukopenia with only lymphopenia and a
12
Chapter 2:The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
13
BOX 2-1. DEFINITION OF SELECTED HEmATOLOGIC CHANGES
HEMATOLOGIC
CHANGE
DEFINITION
Anemia
Decreased red blood cell (RBC) mass, clinically noted by decreased packed cell
volume (PCV)
 Polycythemia
Increased RBC mass in body (increased PCV)
Polychromasia
Increased number of polychromatophils
 Poikilocytosis
 Ihcreased variation in RBC shapes
 Microcytic
Increased number of small RBCs
 Macrocytic
Increased number of large RBCs
 Normocytic
RBCs are of normal size
 Hypochromic
RBCs have lower hemoglobin (Hgb) concentration (lower mean corpuscular
Hgb concentration [MCHC]
Normochromic
RBCs have normal MCHC
Spherocytosis
Increased number of spherical (ie., small and dense-appearing) RBCs
 Echinocytosis
Increased number of RBCs with many spiny projections
Acanthocytosis
Increased number of RBCs with a few elongated, blunt projections
Schistocytes
Small RBC fragments
Rouleaux
Clumping of RBCs into linear formations resembling stacks of coins
 Autoagglutination 
Immune aggregation of RBCs into grapelike clusters
Heinz bodies
Precipitated Hgb resulting from oxidation
Thrombocytopenia
Decreased number of platelets
Thrombocytosis
Increased number of platelets
Leukocytosis
Increased number of white blood cells (WwBCs)
 Leukopenia
Decreased number of wBCs
 Neutrophilia
Increased number of neutrophils
Neutropenia
Decreased number of neutrophils
Left shift 
 Increased number of immature neutrophils (nonsegs)
 Rght shift
Increased number of hypermature neutrophils (hypersegmentation)
Toxic neutrophils 
Neutrophils with degenerative changes in their cytoplasm
 Reactive lymphocytes
Lymphocytes with morphologic evidence of immunologic activation
Monocytosis
 Increased number of monocytes
 Monocytopenia
Decreased number of monocytes
Lymphocytosis
Increased number of lymphocytes
Lymphopenia
Decreased number of lymphocytes
 Eosinophilia
Increased number of eosinophils
Eosinopenia
Decreased number of eosinophils 
 Basophilia
Increased number of basophils
Basopenia
Decreased number of basophils
Bicytopenia
Decrease in two cell lines (RBCs, WBCs, or platelets)
 Pancytopenia
Decrease in three cell lines (RBCs, WBCs, and platelets)
normal number of leukocytes indicates a chronic stress/
Magnitude of Hematologic
steroid process and not inflammation.
Abnormalities
The third step in interpretation involves drawing
hematologic conclusions from related sets of CBC results
The magnitude of a change has great diagnostic signif-
(Box 2-2). For example with anemia one should deter-
cance and must be evaluated. Anemia in sick animals
mine the degree of RBC regeneration by reticulocytes and
is often mild. For example, in Table 2-1, 29% of 737
polychromasia, note RBC morphology, and consider
blood samples indicated anemia; however, 55% of the
plasma protein concentration and platelet count. If there
anemic dogs had mild anemia [i.e., PCV 30% to 37%).
is a deficiency of one cell type (e.g.. thrombocytopenia),
Mild anemia is often not a primary hematopoietic disease
then one should check for leukopenia, neutropenia, and
but secondary to other problems such as inflammatory
nonregenerative anemia to judge bone marrow produc-
disease, malignancy, hepatic failure, or renal disease.
tion of all cell lines.
Diagnostic effort should pursue the primary disease.
14
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 2-1.FREQUENCY(%} OF SELECTED
BOX 2-2. H
HEMATOLOGIC CONCLUSIONS
ABNORmAlItiEs IN TWO SuRvEYs OF
THAT mAY BE DRAWN FROM
COMPLETE BLOOD COUNTS PERFORMED
HEMATOLOGIC DATA
AT MICHIGaN STATe UNIvERSITY
HEMATOLOGIC
DOGS
DOGS
CATS
CATS
CONCLUSION
HEMATOLOGIC DATA
[N=
E=
N =
E=
Regenerative
Anemia with appropriate
ABNORMALITY
100
737)
30
159)
anemia
reticulocytosis
Anemia (PCV)
23
29
10
20
 Nonregenerative 
 Anemia with no or insufficient 
Anemia (Hgb)
13
29
anemia
reticulocytosis
10
21
Hemolytic anemia 
 Strongly regenerative anemia
 Polychromasia
10
na
na
with additional evidence,
 Abnormal RBC
38
na
53
na
 such as hemoglobinuria,
morphology
normal to high plasma 
Microcytic (low MCV)
na
3
na
7
 protein, and one of the
Hypochromic (low
causes of hemolytic anemia 
2u
6
na
9
MCHC)
 Blood loss anemia
 Regenerative anemia with
Macrocytic (high
na
5
na
7
normal to decreased plasma 
 protein, evidence of iron
MCV)
deficiency, or proof of 
Hyperchromic (high
na
1
na
8
MCHC)
Moderate to marked 
Polycythemia
Immune-mediated
5
3
7
D
hemolytic
spherocytosis,
Hypoproteinemia
9
na
7
na
anemia
 autoagglutination, and/or
Hyperproteinemia
24
na
47
na
 positive direct Coombs test
Hemolysis
4
na
na
Oxidant-induced
Large numbers of Heinz 
Lipemia
5
na
3
na
hemolytic
bodies, eccentrocytes, or 
Leukocytosis
16
28
13
19
anemia 
pyknocytes
Large number of keratocytes,
Leukopenia
 Fragmentation 
na
6
na
22
anemia
 schizocytes, or acanthocytes
 Left shift 
5
na
10
na
(s6op)
Lymphopenia
27
na
43
na
 Iron deficiency
 Microcytic hypochromic
Lymphocytosis
2
na
na
anemia 
 anemia with variable RBC
Monocytosis
14
na
13
na
regeneration
Monocytopenia
0
na
A
na
 Inflammation 
Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, left 
 Eosinophilia
17
na
10
na
 shift, eosinophilia 
 Neutrophil toxicity
4
na
23
Lymphopenia and eosinopenia;
na
Stress or steroid
Reactive lymphocytes
reaction
 often neutrophilia, and 
7
na
>
na
 occasionally monocytosis 
Thrombocytopenia
5
15
7
60
 Excitement/
Lymphocytosis, leukocytosis,
 Clumped platelets 
6
na
23
na
epinephrine
neutrophilia, and perhaps
Thrombocytosis
5
11
6
response
polycythemia, especially in
cats
Hgb,Hemoglobin; MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration;
Toxemia
 Significant number of very
 MCV, mean corpuscular volume; na, not available because of design;
 PCV, packed cell volume; RBC, red blood cell.
toxic neutrophils 
Severe anemia [(i.e., PCV <20% in dogs), however, should
was a computer search of quantitative values. The smaller
be evaluated as a primary hematologic problem. An
 survey was a manual search of records that included sub-
exception is in pancytopenia, where life span of different 
jective observations.
cells becomes important RBCs have a long life span com-
Anemia occurred frequently (10% to 29% of hospital
 pared to neutrophils and platelets, so anemia in pancyto-
patients); thus diagnosis of the cause of anemia is
penia can be mild or unapparent early, while neutropenia
 si oe  e r as) 
and thrombocytopenia may already be moderate to
frequent finding in dogs and cats that may be the result
severe.
of dehydration, inflammation, and immune stimulation
(see Chapter 12).
Frequency of Abnormalities
Numerous hematologic abnormalities are detected by
routine CBC testing. The frequency data in Table 2-1
NOTE: Anemia and hyperproteinemia are frequent find-
were from two surveys of CBC results from consecutive
patients at Michigan State University. The larger survey
ings in hospitalized dogs and cats.
Chapter 2:The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
15
Results from microscopic evaluation of blood smears
Tubes with less than l ml of blood or with visible clots
are subjective and commonly evaluated as 0 to 4+, with
should be rejected. If very small amounts of blood are
 0 indicating the change is absent and 4+ indicating a
collected into tubes with liquid anticoagulant, dilution of
maximal increase An altermative is to use adjectives such
blood may be significant, resulting in lower cell counts.
as "mild, moderate, or "marked."
Overflling the tube can potentially dilute out the anti-
Abnormal RBC shape (e.g poikilocytosis) was fre-
coagulant enough to permit clotting. Citrate blood
quently reported in cats and dogs: however, the abnor-
collection tubes, used for hemostasis testing, are marked
malities were often mild and clinically insignificant (eg.
with a line that shows the proper final volume to give a
1+ crenation). Although reporting small variations in
1:9 ratio of anticoagulant to blood. A properly flled
RBC size and shape may be technically correct, it may
citrate tube is 10% anticoagulant fluid. It is very important
 not be helpful to the veterinarian reading the report
to fill tubes to this line (±l0%) to avoid dilution or con-
because too many details can obscure the diagnostically
centration errors in hemostasis testing.
important findings. Findings such as blood parasites,
If not analyzed within 2 to 3 hours, EDTA blood
Heinz bodies, or 2+ to 4+ spherocytes are less common
should be refrigerated (4° C). RBC swelling after 6 to 24
 but are of important diagnostic significance.
hours of storage raises PCV and MCV and lowers mean
corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC). RBC
was moderately frequent (5% to 10%) in these hospital
swelling may prevent detection of microcytic hypochro-
 populations of dogs and cats. The greater frequency of
mic cells in iron deficiency anemia. The RBC count,
toxic changes in feline neutrophils [23%) is due to the
hemoglobin (Hgb) concentration, Hct, and RBC indices
propensity of cats to form Dohle bodies [a very mild form
(i.e., MCV, mean corpuscular Hgb [MCH], MCHC) have
of toxic change: see Chapter 4).
minimal changes if blood is refrigerated for up to
24 hours.
QUANTITATION TECHNIQUES
NOTE: H not analyzed within 2 to 3 hours, EDTA blood
Sample Submission
should be refrigerated. A freshly made, air-dried blood
 smear should be submitted to allow proper interpretation
Anticoagulated blood is required for cell counts. Any
of cell morphology.
visible clots in a blood sample will alter WBC or platelet
counts, because distribution of cells in blood is then not
uniform. Clinical laboratories should not process clotted
samples, because results are invalid and clots may plug 
Blood smears should be prepared immediately and
hematology instruments. Blood smears submitted with a
air-dried to avoid artifacts caused by exposure of cells to
clotted sample may still be evaluated.
anticoagulants and cell deterioration during storage and
shipment A great deal of information can be obtained
from a fresh blood smear even ifthe EDTA tube is too old
to analyze. Fresh capillary blood (ear prick) provides a
NOTE: EDTA is the recommended anticoagulant for
higher concentration of parasitized RBCs if blood parasite
routine CBC samples.
examination is needed. Blood from an ear prick is streaked
out immediately on a blood smear.
Slides should not be mailed in the thin, cardboard
mailing cards that fit into envelopes. These envelopes are
often machine processed by the post office and the
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) is the best
machines crush the slides. Instead, they should be mailed
in rigid plastic containers (eg.. boxes) too bulky to be
poor staining with a diffuse blue background. Formalin
machine cancelled.
or formalin fumes cause poor staining of wright-stained
blood smears, resulting in a blue background. One must
keep formalin away from blood and cytology smears.
Microhematocrit
[eajai 0i juas saseyoed ul pue Aoieioqel aul un yioq
The microhematocrit method for determining PCV (Hct)
laboratories. Formalin fumes can affect smears without
has several advantages (over hemoglobin concentration
direct contact A citrate-based anticoagulant that reduces
or RBC count) to make it the recommended way
aggregation of feline platelets (Diatube-H; Becton
to estimate RBC mass in evaluation of anemia and poly-
Dickinson, Oxford, UK) was associated with good cell
cythemia in small clinics. Additionally, the microhemato-
detail on smears.8
crit provides a good quality control check on an automated
Commercial blood collection tubes contain a vacuum
   e m i s
and should be permitted to fill until flow stops to have a
automated testing.
proper blood volume-to-anticoagulant ratio. Moderate to
severe underfilling of the tube may result in an excessive
concentration of EDTA salt, which draws water out
of cells, causing RBC shrinkage and decreased PCV and
NOTE: The microhematocrit method (PCV, Hct) is recom-
MCV. However, prominent errors are not expected if at
mended for evaluation of anemia or polycythemia in small
dinics.
least l ml of blood is collected into a 4-ml EDTA tube.
16
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
PCV, hemoglobin concentration, and RBC count are
is tighter. This exaggerates the decrease in the PCV and
equivalent methods to estimate RBC mass in the properly
makes the animal seem slightly more anemic. Micro-
hydrated patient Microhematocrit is more precise and
hematocrit centrifuges attain high speeds (ll,500 to
technically easier than a manual RBC count and provides
15,000 rpm), which ensures the proper centrifugal force
additional useful information over Hgb determination
to pack cells. The speed should be checked periodically.
and RBC count. Gross examination of plasma in the
because slower speeds cause poorer cell packing that
microhematocrit tube allows detection of ictenus, hemo-
-nyuuan jo spouad iaguol Aq ioy paiesuaduon aq rouun
lysis, or lipemia (Figure 2-1). The microhematocrit can
gation. One should check the centrifuge's brushes three
even be used to screen for heartworm disease, because
to four times per year and replace them if they are worn.
actively moving microflariae are concentrated in the
Microhematocrit tubes should be evenly balanced in the
plasma just above the buffy coat. Plasma protein concen-
centrifuge's head to prevent unequal weight distribution.
tration can be quantified using a refractometer on plasma
If the head is not properly balanced, the wear on the
obtained from one or two microhematocrit tubes.
motor is uneven and eventually causes the head to vibrate.
o   aa si d
 One should not use the brake when the head is still rotat-
blood in a microcapillary tube to separate cells from
ing at high speeds, because this also causes excessive
plasma. Microhematocrit tubes are filled about two-thirds
motor wear.
to three-fourths full. After centrifugation in a special
microhematocrit centrifuge, RBCs are well packed at the
Hemoglobin Concentration
bottom. WBCs and platelets appear as a thin white line
(i.e., buffy coat) between RBCs and plasma (see Figure
Under most ciraumstances, hemoglobin concentration
2-1). The volume of blood that is packed RBCs (PCV in
[(i.e., Hgb), RBC count, and PCV are essentially equivalent
% or L/L) is determined. Microhematocrit tubes that
 in estimating the animal's RBC mass.
contain heparin may be used for direct collection of non-
anticoagulated blood. To calculate PCV, one divides the
length of packed RBCs by the total length of the packed
RBCs, buffy coat, and plasma. The clay plugging the
NOTE: Under most circumstances Hgb, RBC count, and
bottom of the tube should not be included. Various
PCV are essentially equivalent measures of RBC mass.
 microhematocrit reading devices are available.
Error in microhematocrit determination is minimal
but, when present, is usually related to centrifugation or
very fragile RBCs. Microhematocrit tubes should be cen-
Because the microhematocrit technique is simple.
trifuged for 5 minutes. When the PCV is greater than 50%.
accurate, and inexpensive, most veterinarians interpret
packing of RBCs by the centrifuge is less complete [i.e..
PCV results rather than Hgb or RBC count. However, Hgb
J d a ja uaaan ue sas s (n ss
is provided by most hematology instruments, and redun-
the microhematocrit tubes are filled to more than two-
dant information helps ensure a correct diagnosis. Hgb
thirds to three-fourths full, cell packing is also less com-
may be more accurate than PCV if poor RBC packing, cell
plete. When a PCV is less than 25%, the packing of RBCs
shrinkage, cell swelling. or increased cell fragility is
present. Hgb is inaccurate if lipemia interferes with
Large numbers of Heinz bodies may cause an erroneous
increase in optical density, thus artifactually increasing
Hgb concentration.
Total Cell Counts
Total WBC, RBC, and platelet counts can be determined
manually using a hemocytometer or with automated
instruments. A hemocytometer is an inexpensive, simple
glass counting chamber that fits easily in a microscope
and does not require calibration and quality control
reagents. A hemocytometer count takes more time and is
imprecise, but it is a useful method for small clinics that
perform WBC or platelet counts only occasionally. Thus
this method will be explained. Automated instruments
FIGURE 2-1. The upper two microhematocrit tubes appear
are much more precise, are easier to use, and save time
normal. The far right side of the tubes has white clay that plugs
when the number of hematology samples to analyze justi-
the tube.The dark red area left of the clay is packed RBCs
fies their purchase.
(PCV; about 45% of blood volume). To the left of the RBCs is
 yal ayi o (sialaed pe s jo reo yngi lae ay e
the buffy coat is clear plasma (about 55% of blood volume).
The next tube down indicates a severe anemia (PCV <10%) with
clear plasma. The next tube illustrates anemia with icteric
NOTE: Manual cell counts in a hermocytometer are practical
plasma. The next tube illustrates anemia with hemolyzed
in small clinics with only occasional need to do a cell count.
plasma. The bottom tube illustrates lipemia in the plasma.
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
17
-1 mm—
3mm
WBC
WBC
R
PLT
1.0 cu mm
PLT
1-sq mm
0.1 cu mm
(1.0 μl)
0.1 mm
WBC
WBC
FGURE 2-2. Dimensions of a hemocytometer. The hemocytometer grid consists of 9 mm? and it is 0.1 mm deep. The central
1 mm? is additionally divided into 25 squares. The areas usually used for erythrocyte, leukocyte, and platelet counts are indicated
by R, WBC, and PLT, respectively. To determine the cells in 1 mm? (which is equal to 1 μl), conversion factors for RBCs, WBCs,
and platelets are listed in Table 2-2.
Hemocytometer
does not have an automated hematology instrument. A
 iaqueuo ssa suaedsun e si iaaiaouau a
microhematocrit is even useful for bloody fluids such
holds a cell suspension for microscopic cell counting.
as abdominal fluid to estimate the amount of hemor-
The hemocytometer is 0.l mm deep and is divided into
rhage. WBC dilution is usually l:20 and platelets are
subunits by a grid with a precise 3-mm by 3-mm
diluted l:l00. The reciprocal of the dilution [i.e., 1/
surface area (Figure 2-2). The surface area of the grid
dilution) is used in calculation of the final conversion
used in a procedure thus determines volume of the
factor (Table 2-2).
hemocytometer containing the cells counted. One can
 The portion of grid in which cells are counted varies
mathematically determine the number of cells in a
for each cell type and even type of counting chamber. For
cubic millimeter [i.e, mm*; see Figure 2-2) based on
WBC counts in the United States, the outer four squares
this volume. One should understand these calculations
are counted (see Figure 2-2). For platelets, two squares
so that the hemocytometer can be used to count cells in
(2 mm?) are counted. The reciprocal of the area is used
other fluids such as cerebrospinal and synovial fluid. In
in calculating the final conversion factor. Because the
the United States, cell numbers are reported in cells/μul,
hemocytometer is only 0.1 mm deep, counting 1 mm?
which equals cells/mm?. This was likely because origi-
represents one tenth of 1 mm?.
To convert cell counts to number/mm', cell count
t0 represent portions as mm?. Most other countries
must be adjusted for the portion of l mm? counted and
report hematologic cell concentrations in cells x lo?/L.
the dilution of the blood sample (see Table 2-2). The
A liter contains l million (lo°) μl; therefore a
liter
WBC factor of 50 is based on adjustments for depth of
would have a million times more cells than l μl (see
the hemocytometer (0.1 mm), area counted (4 mm²),
Chapter 1).
and dilution factor ( l : 20). A different factor can be deter-
The blood (or other fluid) must be diluted so that
 mined if one chooses to vary from the standard approach.
the number of cells in the chamber is easy to count. A
Hemocytometers have two counting chambers (one
dilution system with plastic containers is easiest. Becton
on each side). Both chambers should be filled and
Dickinson (BD) discontinued the Unopette System and
counted. The number of cells counted from each side
now recommends, as an alternative, similar products
should vary by less than l0% for WBC counts. If the cell
made by Bioanalytic GmbH (uww bioanalytic.de).
. The
Aq paieipul se 'painqusip Aiuaaa iou sem uoisuadsns
amount of dilution needed to provide a reasonable
 greater variation, the test should be repeated.
concentration of cells in the chamber varies 
with
Manual counts with a hemocytometer have signif-
expected concentration of cells in blood (or other fluids
cant error (eg., 20% error may occur with WBC counts).
such as abdominal fluid). Erythrocytes in blood are very
This magnitude of error should be considered when inter-
numerous, so blood is greatly diluted (eg.. l:200).
preting day-to-day changes in WBC counts in animals. For
Note that manual RBC counts are so inaccurate and
example, a count of 2100 WBCs/μl varies too little from
time consuming that a manual RBC count is not recom-
a count of 1900 WBCs/μl the previous day to be con-
mended. A microhematocrit is more practical if one
sidered an improvement Despite imprecision, manual
18
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 2-2. HEMoCYTOMETER CONVERSION FACTORS
DEPTH
AREA
DILUTION
CONVERSION FACTOR
 Conversion factor
10/1 x
1/area (mm²) x
1/Dilution x
RBC factor
10/1 x
25/5 x
200/1 x
= 10,000
WBC factor
10/1 x
%x
20/1 x
= 50
Platelet factor
10/1 x
x
100/1 x
= 500
RBC, Red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
counts are adequate for most clinical diagnoses for clini-
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration
cians who do not have need of or access to an automated
(MCHC) in g/dl:
hematology instrument. Manual counts may be per-
formed when errors in automated counts are suspected.
=Hgbx100 +PCV
MCV indicates the average volume of the RBCs. An
Corrected White Blood Cell Count
increased, normal, or decreased MCV indicates that the
Because nucleated RBCs (NRBCs) are included in manual
average RBC was macrocytic, normocytic, or microcytic,
and automated instrument total WBC counts, it is neces-
respectively. A normal or decreased MCHC tends to indi-
sary to reduce the WBC count (actually a nucleated cell
cate if RBCs were normochromic or hypochromic, respec-
count) to account for NRBCs when they are numerous.
tively. Hyperchromic RBCs (ie, increased MCHC)
The correction is made if more than 5 NRBCs are noted
indicate an instrument error, such as hemolysis or the
presence of Heinz bodies. MCH indicates absolute Hgb
[(i.e., >5% error). A proportion is used to mathematically
content per average RBC. MCHC indicates concentration
adjust the nucleated cell count to a corrected WBC count
of Hgb in an average RBC.
as follows:
Note that these mean values require a large percent-
age of abnormal RBCs for the MCV or MCHC to be drawn
Corrected wBC count =
 out of the reference interval. Therefore MCV and MCHC
Nucleated cell countx100 +{NRBCs+100)
often give a misleading picture of the true presence of
macrocytic hypochromic or microcytic hypochromic
RBCs. For example, only 8.3% of blood samples of 6752
Absolute Nucleated Red Blood
Ao paseaul yoq pey eiaue aaeiauasai yim saop
Cell Count
 and decreased MCHC despite the fact that regenerative
anemia (increased reticulocytes) is tnuly macrocytic and
The absolute NRBC count is the difference between the
hypochromic.^ Use of MCV and MCHC usually gives the
nucleated cell count and the corrected WBC count.
wrong morphologic classification of the animal's anemia.
Reporting only the relative ratio of NRBCs/ 100 WBCs can
be misleading if the WBC count is very high or low. For
example, NRBCs are released in sepsis and heat stroke,
and in these instances there is often neutropenia and
NOTE: Use of MCV and MCHC often gives an incorrect
leukopenia. For these cases, the absolute NRBC count
morphologic classification of the animal's true type of
'andianui ot iaisea st (iaoiiu io iail iad)
anemia because large numbers of abnormal RBCs are
needed to pull mean values out of the reference values.
Erythrocyte Indices
 The RBC indices describe the average size and Hgb content
of RBCs. Indices were originally calculated from directly
Automated Hematology Cell Counters
determined measurements [i.e, PCV, RBC count, Hgb)
by the following equations. Automated cell counters 
Impedance Counters
may directly measure cell volume or Hgb concentration
The impedance principle was the standard method of cell
of RBCs.
counting in hematologic instruments and remains a
common method in many current instruments. Using
 Mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in femtoliters (f):
the impedance counting principle (ie., Coulter princi-
ple), cells are diluted in an electrolyte solution and drawn
=PCVx10 +RBCs (10°)
through an aperture (hole in an electrode). The electrical
 ad e e s ae a ss asis
Mean corpuscular hemoglobin (MCH) in picograms
each cell because cells are poor conductors of electricity.
(pg):
The frequency of the change in resistance indicates
cell number, and the magnitude of the change in resis-
=Hgbx10+RBCs (10°)
tance indicates cell size. Impedance counters must be
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
19
electronically adjusted to count only cells within an
appropriate size interval. This size interval is set by adjust-
ing electronic thresholds for each species. Impedance
counters directly count cell numbers, measure cell size.
and then mathematically calculate the Hct, MCHC.
and MCH.
NOTE: Inspection of platelet-erythrocyte histograms can
PLT
RBC
avoid errors in imped ance platelet counts.
 Platelet-erythrocyte histograms should be inspected
for adequate separation between the platelet and erythro-
cyte peaks to avoid errors. The histogram should show
two peaks and indicate which cell types were counted as
platelets or RBCs by the impedance instrument (Figure
2-3). There must be a clear separation "valley" between
the RBC and platelet peaks. This valley and a dashed line
PLT
RBC
correctly placed between RBC and platelet peaks assures
that the counts were accurate. A frequent error is that
FGURE 2-3. Two examples of red blood cell (RBC) platelet
there is overlap in the size of platelets and RBCs so that
and platelet (PL T) histograms from an impedance platelet and
the instrument cannot correctly determine the division
RBC count from a Cell-Dyn instrument. The upper histograms
between them.
are from a normal dog. In the upper right histogram, two
 Impedance counters count the number of RBCs and
distinct peaks are seen, a smaller orange platelet peak and a
large red RBC peak.The orange platelet peak is repeated on
determine the size of each RBC in that sample and then
the left as only a PLT histogram, which shows distribution of
calculate a hematocrit (Hct) essentially by multiplying the
platelets by size. When the platelets and RBCs are distinctly
number of RBCs by their size (eg. RBCs x MCV ÷ 10) or
different in size, an impedance instrument can differentiate
by a summation of individual RBC sizes. This is unlike
and count them accurately. The lower histograms are from a
the classic method of centrifugation of blood to pack
dog with iron deficiency anemia. There are three populations
RBCs and determine a PCV. Therefore instrument counts
(peaks) of cells in the right histogram, and the abnormal middle
are better called a hematocrit (Hct) instead of packed cell
peak represents microcytic RBCs. Because there was no clear
volume (PCV). For simplicity, PCV is usually used in this
separation of platelets from RBCs (no valley between two
book to indicate Hct or PCV. PCV by the microhematocrit
peaks), the instrument could not correctly distinguish between
two cell types and drew the border right through the middle
method is a good quality control addition to performing
of the microcytic RBCs. Part of the microcytic RBCs were
 a    e  e
counted as platelets (orange) and part as RBCs (red). Thus the
between the microhematocrit's PCV and the instrument's
platelet count was in error. Usually the relative error with an
Hct is greater than 3% to 5%, this suggests a technical
RBC count is minor because there are a great many more RBCs
error, which should be clarified.
than platelets, but in a case of severe anemia and strong
Newer impedance instruments provide additional
thrombocytosis, even the RBC count can be prominently in
information, such as three to four cell differential leuko-
error.
cyte counts, mean platelet volume (MPV), platelet distri-
bution width (PDW), and reticulocyte count, and they
may identify the presence of NRBCs.4
Laser Light Scatter Cell Counters
  s    
Newer automated hematology analyzers often use a
Tvedten prefers interpreting the morphology of the
laser detection system in a flow cytometer to measure
graphics rather than many numerical results such as
size and internal complexity of cells based on light
RDW, HDW, and several others.
scatter at different angles.? Stains are added to help dif-
Graphic displays of cells aid in diagnosis and detec-
ferentiate types of leukocytes or reticulocytes. Two veteri-
tion of laboratory errors.1 The Advia measures and
nary instruments designed for large referral laboratories
reports the volume and Hgb content of each erythrocyte
are the Advia 120/2120 (previously the H-l; Siemens
analyzed (Figures 2-4 and 2-5). The Advia system is the
Medical Solutions) and the Sysmex XT-2000iV (Sysmex
most sensitive and specific way to correctly classify anemia
Corporation, Kobe Japan). The Sysmex reports both
as normocytic normochromic, macrocytic hypochromic.
aeid (i-lld) aueadm pue (o-ild ieondo) rase
or microcytic hypochromic. As described in RBC indices,
counts. These newer instruments provide
abundant
the use of MCV and MCHC more often gives an incorrect
information about each cell type. The RDW numerically
dassification than the tnue type of anemia. RBC cyto-
describes the variability in RBC size (anisocytosis), and
 grams illustrate normal and abnormal RBC populations
the hemoglobin distribution width (HDW) describes
based on cell size and Hgb concentration. The Advia
20
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
RBC
RBCVHC
RBCVOLUI
RBCVOLUME
RBC HC
RBC HC
RBCVHO
RBCVOI
RBC HC
$
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
21
FIGURE 2-4. The Advia 2120 instrument graphics best illustrate the three basic types of anemia, which are normocytic normo-
chromic anemia (A), macrocytic hypochromic anemia (B), and microcytic hypochromic anemia (C). The graphics include a red blood
cell (RBC) cytogram, whichis a nine-box grid, in the toprow.TheRCcytogram displays each individual erythrocyte analyzed
based on that cell's volume {V) on the vertical axis and that cell's Hgb concentration {HC) on the horizontal axis. There are two
histograms under this nine-box grid. The RBC volume histogram is equivalent to the vertical axis of the cytogram and shows the 
number of RBCs based on volume. The two vertical lines reflect upper and lower reference limits. The Hgb histogram is equivalent
to the horizontal axis of the cytogram and shows the number of RBCs based on cell hemoglobin concentration. A, The dog with
normocytic normochromic anemia had all RBCs within the central box or vertical lines on the histograms, as would a normal non-
anemic dog. B, The dog with macrocytic hypochromic anemia was an IMHA case with many immature (macrocytic hypochromic)
RBCs that extended up and to the left from the central box on the cytogram. Extension of cells to the right on the RBC volume
histogram reflect that they were macrocytic. These RBCs also extended to the left on the cytogram and Hgb histograrm, indicating
they were hypochromic. Unique to the Advia 2120 is the display of hypochromic RBCs. The Hgb histogram shows two peaks, and
the area "under the curve" reflects the relative number (%) of RBCs in the left peak, which were hypochromic. In the IMHA case,
there were more hypochromic (left peak)than normochromic (right peak) RBCs. Thus at a glance one can determine the magnitude
of a regenerative response of immature RBCs (usually reticulocytes). Additionally, a cluster of RBCs in the upper central box of
the cytogram were RBCs in autoagglutination. C, This dog had a microcytic hypochromic anemia due to iron deficiency that was
found. The straight lines at the bottom and left of the cellsin the cytogram and aline on the left of the two histograms indicate
that the Advia 2120 did not believe canine RBCs could be small or hypochromic and excluded them from analysis (truncated).
RTC VHC
RBC VHC
RBC volume
RBCHC
RTCSCATABS
RTCscatter
RBCCH
FGURE 2-5. Erythrocyte and reticulocyte graphics from the Advia 2120 showing both cell types from a dog with a regenerative
anemia. Reticulocytes are stained blue. Two separate RBC populations are shown in the four RBC cytograms, including normal
RBCs and macrocytic hypochromic RBCs. The upper central cytogram (RBC VHC) was described in Figure 2-4B. The Advia 2120
recalls which RBCs were stained as reticulocytes and displays them as blue dots in various graphics. The upper left cytogram (RTC
VHC) displays the macrocytic hypochromic RBCs as blue dots, illustrating that they were reticulocytes and reflect a regenerative
response. The RTC SCAT ABS cytogram (fower left) shows the cells that took up the reticulocyte stain and further divides those
reticulocytes into three boxes reflecting increasing RNA content to the right. The RBC VOLUME histogram (upper right) shows a
smaller second, though prominent, peak of macrocytic RBCs on the right. The RBC HC cytogram shows a similar-sized peak (about
one third the size of the normal RBC peak) of hypochromic RBCs to the left of the larger normochromic peak. The area under the
aurves of the histograms reflects the relative number of normal or macrocytic hypochromic RBCs. Exact numbers of cells in each
of the nine boxes are available from the instrument.
22
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
120/2l20 automated reticulocyte analysis provides not
less precise than an impedance instrument. Correlation
 only the absolute and relative reticulocyte counts but
to reference methods was only fair for platelet counts, but
even mean reticulocyte volume, which may aid in judging
the response of a dog with iron deficiency to treatment.
hematocrit for erythrocytes, the plateletcrit indicates
The color-coded reticulocyte graphics in Figure 2-5
the percentage of blood volume composed of platelets.
show at a glance that the anemia in the dog was clearly
The plateletcrit is converted in the QBC V to a platelet
regenerative Advia 120/2120 and Sysmex XT-2000iv
count, which veterinarians are accustomed to interpret-
reticulocyte analysis works well for canine reticulocytes.
ing. The average size of platelets (MPV) is important in
The Advia and Sysmex instruments detect mainly the
determining the actual number of platelets. For example,
aggregate-type feline reticulocyte but do not detect even
Cavalier King Charles spaniels (and Norfolk terriers)
great changes in punctate reticulocytes.
often have a hereditary platelet dysplasia in which plate-
The Advia 2120 and Sysmex XT-2000iV provide an
lets are very large and few in numbers. Especially with
automated four-cell differential leukocyte count (total
impedance platelet counts, the number of platelets is
neutrophils, lymphocytes, eosinophils, and monocytes).
often so low in these Cavaliers that they seem like they
Neither the Advia, Sysmex, nor LaserCyte correctly identi-
 should tend to bleed. Measuring the plateletcrit in these
fies basophils in the dog or cat There are other limitations
Cavaliers indicates that their plateletcrit is the same as
of currently available automated instrument leukocyte
aul z paalq oi Aouapual ou aney Aaut pue ssop leuou
differential counts (Diff), but the automated Diff can be
QBC V “platelet count" (actually a number reflecting the
used effectively if its limitations are recognized. Patterns
plateletcrit) is normal in these Cavaliers, while all other
in the automated instrument graphic displays are useful
methods that actually enumerate the number of platelets
u pue saa oam jo uoneyisse ui siaa suaiap io
indicate they are abnormal. Thus the QBC V could be
detecting blast cells in leukemia, NRBCs, eosinophilia.
called the "Cavalier instrument" because it was the only
left shifts, and toxic changes in neutrophils.13
instrument validated to accurately measure plateletcrit in
Laser-type hematology instruments such as the Advia
Cavaliers. The Advia 2l20 plateletcrit has just been vali-
2120, Sysmex XT-2000iV, and LaserCyte identify platelets
dated for use with Cavalier's blood (data in press).
with an optical system and not only by size as with
impedance-type instruments (see also Figure 2-3). With
two characteristics such as size and internal complexity
NOTE: The QBC V directly determines a plateletcrit.
(Advia) or size and nucleic acid staining (Sysmex), the
 Plateletcrit is the best way to evaluate the platelet mass in
instrument can correctly identify platelets larger than
the blood of Cavalier King Charles spaniel and Norfolk
small erythrocytes. This is important in cats, where 60%
terrier dogs with hereditary platelet dysplasia with very
to 74% of the platelets may be too large to be detected
large but few platelets.
by an impedance platelet count. Platelets up to 60 fl are
counted by the Advia instrument while RBCs are fre-
quently smaller than 60 fl (especially in cats). Platelet
Feline Platelet Counts
cytograms and histograms of the Advia and Sysmex
instruments can often identify when nonplatelet particles
Platelet counts are usually inaccurate in cats {see also
(such as RBC ghost cells) were miscounted as platelets.
discussion of platelet counting in Chapter 5). Low platelet
Figure 2-6 shows a normal canine platelet histogram and
counts (<200,000/μul) were frequent in feline samples
cytogram, and an abnormal histogram and cytogram in
(71%), but only 3% were true decreases.? Approximately
    s i a 
60% to 74% of feline platelets were too large to be
were erroneously included in the platelet count. The MPV
-esaiae yoq uim ,iauno auepadul ue Aq paiaap
indicates the average size of platelets. The platelet cyto-
tion and large platelets causing such great and approxi-
grams and histograms illustrate distribution of platelets
 mately equal error, many believe it is impossible to obtain
in the sample based on size and internal complexity. The
an accurate platelet count. However, if a true thrombocy-
mean platelet concentration (MPC) decreases in activated
topenia is suspected in a cat, use of optical platelet count-
platelets. Various flags and cytograms warn of potential
ing (laser-type analyzers) which include even the large
errors (eg., clumped platelets).
platelets and prostaglandin E, (PGE,) to inhibit platelet
aggregation, can produce an accurate platelet count even
Quantitative Buffy Coat VetAutoread
in clinical settings." PGE, must be frozen until just prior
The IDEXX VetAutoread Haematology Analyzer (QBC V)
to use and is expensive, but true thrombocytopenia in cats 
(IDEXX Inc, Westbrook, ME) is an in-offce hematology
is uncommon, so PGE, need not be used often.
analyzer. Cell counts in the QBC V are determined from
the width of various layers of different cell types in an
expanded buffy coat. A plastic float spreads out the buffy
 NOTE: Feline platelet counts are often inaccurate, because
approximately 70% of feline blood samples have clumping
(Figure 2-7). Boundaries of the layers must be distinct
of platelets and 60% to 74% of feline platelets are too large
enough to measure and may be less distinct in abnormal
to be detected by impedance-type analyzers.
samples. The QBC V determines a two- to three-part WBC
differential cell count consisting of mononuclear cells
(i.e., lymphocytes and monocytes) and granulocytes, and,
If platelet clumping is observed in blood smears, dis-
in dogs, eosinophils. QBC V analysis is more rapid and
tribution of platelets in the blood sample is uneven and
precise than manual counts using a hemocytometer but
the accuracy of manual counts, automated counts, and
Chapter 2:The Complete Blood Count,Bone Marrow Examination,and Blood Banhing
23
Platelet Vol
Platelet Vol
三
PLT scatter
PLT scatter
..
：
a dog with iron deficiency anemia but look relatively normal. The upper-left platelet volume (Platelet Vol) histogram shows the
number of platelets of increasing size from left to right along the xaxis. The mean platelet volume (MPV) was about 4 to 6 fl. The
(aa) leo poolg pau Auew pue eiwad 'aseasip s,buysng ylm bop e woy anam hybu ayn uo weboi/o pue weuboisiy lalaield
ghost cells. This histogram shows a reverse tendency with mainly large platelets and particles shown with a peak far to the right
eyi au aul Aisuap leoido pue azis uo pasea shalaield moys molag (raes iidi sweiboio palaield ayi weiboisy ayt jo apis
approximately follows the yaxis up to the top indicates increasing size. The upper x-axis is particle size and detects particles from
30 to 60 fl. Most dots (i.e., platelets) are within the counting area. The RBC ghost cells are in a cluster along the left edge of the
counting area with some outside of the counting area. This was an instrument error that can be detected by visually inspecting
the histograms and cytograms.
estimates from the blood smear are adversely affected.
magnitude of the pseudothrombocytopenia. Addition-
(saiesaiie paaieid Aq pairage osie aie siunos ienu
ally, collecting blood by placing a needle into a vein and
therefore a manual platelet count using the same blood
allowing blood to drip directly into a Vacutainer tube
sample with platelet aggregates or clots will also be in
[with stopper removed) containing EDTA, or using a two-
error. Manual counts include large feline platelets, which
tube method (collect blood frst into a tube not used for
are often not counted by impedance-type hematology
cell counting and then later collect blood into an antico-
instnuments, so even if imprecise, manual counts can be
agulated tube for cell counts), helps to prevent platelet
more accurate than impedance counts. The presence of
clumping.
platelet clumps on the smear does not disprove that true
thrombocytopenia was present A citrate-based anticoag-
uant (Diatube-H; Becton Dickinson) reduces pseudo-
BLOOD SMEAR ANALYSIS
thrombocytopenia in feline blood samples. The Diatube-H
includes citrate theophylline, adenosine, and dipyridam-
Automated analysis of blood by hematology instruments
ole (CTAD), which inhibit platelet clumping better than
validated for a given veterinary species provides abundant
EDTA.8 CTAD tubes do not provide a consistently accurate
and useful information. However, blood smear evalua-
feline platelet count but do reduce the frequency and
tion is an important complement to hematology
24
NOTE: Blood smear evaluation is a rapid source of abun-
dant information that, together with data from an auto-
mated hematology instrument, is an essential part of the
 initial CBC in a sick animal.
Making the Smear
One or more freshly made and quickly air-dried blood
smears must accompany any complete hematologic
examination and blood sample submission. Cells in
FGURE 2-7. Five blood samples from Cavalier King Charles
tubes of anticoagulant have artifactual changes such as
shalateld jo eiselds<p aaissanal ewosoine ue ylim sbop aueds
vacuolization and increased basophilia of neutrophils,
degeneration of any cell type, and platelet aggregation,
number of platelets is low but the dog's plateletcrit is normal
which occur over hours and days. These can be confused
because the platelets are very large. The plateletcrit indicates 
with disease changes or prevent some subjective evalua-
the mass of platelets in blood and can be reported as a per-
tions. Cells in a freshly made smear retain proper mor-
centage of blood volume that is platelets (similar to the hema-
phology. and platelet aggregation is less likely. Blood
tocrit). The IDEXX VetAutoread Haematology analyzer (QBC V; 
smears should be mailed with the EDTA blood to a refer-
(IDEXX Inc., Westbrook, ME) converts this plateletcrit to a
ral laboratory. EDTA blood is required for cell counts.
platelet count. The width of the yellow layer (platelets, yellow
Smears must have a thin area where cells are distrib-
arrow) in the five tubes reflects the plateletcrit, and all five
Cavaliers had a normal plateletcrit despite platelet counts
uted in a monolayer. This area provides optimal morpho-
sometimes even less than 10,000/μl by impedance instru-
logic detail and reasonable cell distribution (Figure 2-8).
ments. The clear area to the left of the platelets is the top of
 RBCs in the monolayer should be close together but infre-
a clear plastic float that spreads out the buffy coat into layers
quently touching. RBCs in dogs should show central
of different cell types. The darker yellow-to-orange layer to the
pallor to show they lay flat. Cells should not be distorted.
right of the platelets is the layer of leukocytes.
Cells at the far edge [feathered edge) of a smear are often
physically distorted, which can confuse or prevent inter-
pretation. WBCs must lie flat and expose a large surface
area for viewing (see Figure 16-2). Cells in the thin mono-
instruments and often provides diagnostic information
layer are stained best and lay flat and wide on the glass.
that an instrument does not Evaluation of a blood smear
allowing good evaluation of cytoplasmic and nuclear
by a skilled observer is a rapid source of abundant infor-
detail.
mation even in the absence of a hematology instrument.
No currently available hematology instrument can iden-
tify canine or feline basophils nor even consistently iden-
tify all cell types in all species. A full five- to six-cell
NOTE: Freshly made blood smears with a thin "monolayer"
differential leukocyte count, including immature neutro-
 area are essential to allow proper identification of cells and
phils, basophils, and atypical cells, is only possible by
make several diagnostic decisions.
microscopy (manual Diff). Immature neutrophils, toxic
change in neutrophils, reactive lymphocytes and mono-
cytes, basophils, eosinophils, and leukemic cells typically
are inconsistently identified by instruments. Detection of
Two common errors in reading blood and cytologic
many morphologic alterations in RBCs, WBCs, and plate-
smears are [1) trying to identify cells in thick areas of the
lets requires morphologic evaluation in a microscope.
smear and (2) trying to identify damaged or distorted
Blood smear evaluation can be used to quickly detect
cells. Only cells with sufficient morphologic detail for
clinically significant changes in WBC and platelet
evaluation should be included in any report. All smears
numbers. RBC estimates are inconsistent, so the PCV or
have some damaged cells with distorted shapes and stain-
another method should be used for enumeration of
ing characteristics, which should not be included in the
RBCs. Instrument cell counts are more precise and usually
differential cell count. A large percentage of these cells is
more accurate, but gross errors in instrument counts can
a cause for concern, and their origin (eg. artifact, toxic
be detected by blood smear estimates.
change. dysplastic or neoplastic change) should be
A full CBC includes automated instrument data and
pursued. These cells may be placed in an "other" classif-
subjective evaluation of the blood smear and should be
 cation if more than 5% of WBCs were not interpretable.
done at least for the frst hematology examination of a
The technique of making a smear should be practiced
sick patient. Use of the results of automated instruments
to produce good, readable smears. A wedge-type blood
alone allows great time savings and can be adequate to
smear method starts by placing a proper-sized drop of
blood on a glass slide near the frosted edge and using
Several qualitative morphologic observations of WBCs.
another spreader slide to make the smear. The spreader
RBCs, and platelets permit clinically useful conclusions
slide should be drawn back across the slide, going through
(see Chapters 3, 4 and 5).
the drop of blood. Without pausing, the spreader slide is
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
25
Stains
Stains for hematology and cytology are discussed in
Chapter 16.
 Autoagglutination
Evaluating Blood Smears
A routine should be established to consistently evaluate
and describe blood smears. All three cell types [i.e., WBCs,
RBCs, platelets) should be evaluated for distribution,
quantity, and morphologic characteristics.
Platelet Estimation
Platelet numbers can be estimated more accurately than
WBC or RBC numbers (see Figure 5-5). The average
number of platelets in a 100x oil immersion field in the
A
29 platelets/l0ox oil immersion field is expected on
normal canine blood smears. The number varies with the
field of view of the microscope used and what part of the
blood smear (how thick) was examined. One estimate
is to multiply the average number of platelets/ l0ox oil
immersion feld times 15,000 to 20,000 platelets/μl.
However, platelet estimates should be evaluated in semi-
quantitative terms [eg., very low, low, normal, high, very
high). Precise instrument platelet counts should be used
for judging response to treatment. One should check for
platelet clumping especially at the distal end of the
B
smear. If platelets are prominently clumped, they are not
FGURE 2-8. Examples of blood smears. A, The upper of the
evenly distributed; therefore, neither an estimate nor an
two blood smears has autoagglutination and an uneven distri-
actual platelet count (instrument or manual) is accurate.
bution of cells, unlike the normal blood smear under it. Note
It has not been well determined what severity of platelet
that the upper smear had aggregated RBCs in the unstained
clumping (how many aggregates or how large the platelet 
original drop of blood on the left and ridges of cells at the
clumps) is too severe to accept a clinically useful platelet
feathered edge at the right. Smears should be properly labeled
count The presence of few and small clumps does not
with lead pencil on the frosted end with the animal's identifica-
seem to cause clinically inaccurate counts, but large aggre-
tion, date, and other information needed to atribute any
gates or many aggregates should prevent reporting a plate-
abnormality to the correct patient and sample. B, The three
blood smears vary inlength but have an evenly distributed thin
let count. (See previous discussion of platelet counts in
this chapter and Chapter 5.)
[(i.e., monolayer) area shown by green boxes near the ends of
smears where cell evaluation should be performed. The mono-
layer area is also shown as a green box in the lower of the two
smears in A. The upper smear with autoagglutination in A has 
NOTE: Platelet numbers can be estimated reasonably well 
no monolayer area, which makes it difficult to evaluate RBC
on blood smears. An average of 8 to 29 platelets per oil
morphology, such as the presence of spherocytes.
immersion (100x) field indicates a normal platelet count.
Multiplying the average number of platelets/100x oil
pushed forward with a single smooth stroke (stopping to
patelets/μl also gives a rough estimate of the platelet
permit the blood to spread along the spreader slide will
-ipui saieba.bbe talaield Xuew 1o abiel Aian bupu!y '1unos
result in altered WBC distribution in the smear). The
Gtes that an estimated or actual platelet count will be in
angle of the spreader slide can be changed to vary the
error.
length of the smear [i.e, a lower angle produces a longer
smear). A common mistake is to make a smear that
extends to the end of the glass slide, causing the mono-
Platelet Morphology
layer area to be lost. The size of the drop(s) can also be
regulated to alter the length of the smear. If the drop of
Larger-than-normal platelets are consistently seen with
EDTA blood is too large it is likely that the smear will go
thrombocytopenia and usually indicate active platelet 
too long and off the end of the glass slide. The smear
 production. However, the presence of large platelets on a
should only extend to the middle or distal two thirds of
blood smear—and, more precisely, an increased MPV or
the slide so that the monolayer is in an area of the slide
PDW—does not discriminate among different causes of
that is easily stained and examined. To prevent an irregu-
thrombocytopenia in dogs, including immune-mediated
lar smear, one should use good-quality glass slides that
thrombocytopenia, bone marrow disease, and dissemi-
have smooth edges and a clean surface and learm to make
nated intravascular coagulation in several retrospective
a calm, even stroke during the smear.
 studies. Large platelets and increased MPV are seen even
26
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
in dogs without thrombocytopenia, perhaps because of
Leukocyte Morphology
generalized bone marrow stimulation caused by another
problem.
Left Shift · One of the major conclusions from a CBC
Leukocyte Estimation
indicates an inflammatory disease with rare exceptions
Estimating the WBC count from a smear is less precise
(i.e., granulocytic leukemia, Pelger-Huet anomaly).
than estimating with platelets, because the larger WBCs
 are not as evenly distributed and fewer in number. Esti-
mation is made by scanning the smear using the l0x
 NOTE: Documenting a left shift indicates the patient has
microscope objective and subjectively estimating whether
an inflammatory disease. A manual Diffis required to docu-
the number of wBCs is more or less than normal. One
ment a left shift (increased immature neutrophils).
 should look throughout the smear and especially at the
end of the smear [i.e, feathered edge), where many WBCs
may be unevenly distributed. Appropriate adjectives (eg..
 Identifying immature nonsegmented neutrophils
-sa ue ol pappe aie (payieuu, .'aheiapou, .'subis.
(nonsegs or bands) to detect a left shift requires blood
mated leukocytosis or leukopenia. Another method is to
smear examination and a manual Diff. The criteria used
count the number of wBCs in several 10x objective felds
to identify segmented neutrophils (segs) and nonsegs
in the monolayer area, where the platelet estimate and
are subjective and vary with the observer. Just as no one
WBC differential are performed. In the authors' labora-
criterion consistently identifies a person as mature, no
tory. counting between 18 and 51 WBCs/10x objective
one criterion consistently delineates the transition of a
field indicated a normal WBC count for canine blood
iooqdiou shouea aiinboe sbas gas e oiul pueq
smears. Correlation of the WBCs/ l0x feld and the actual
markers of maturity that distinguish them from bands,
WBC count was good, as indicated by an r value of 0.87.
including:
Because accuracy deteriorates when the number of
● Nuclear shape: lobe formation with focal narrowing
WBCs/ 10x field is greater than 60 (too numerous to count
(i.e., indentation) of the nuclear margin and loss of
accurately), one should stop counting at 60 and not
parallel sides
attempt to differentiate the magnitude of a leukocytosis
●Thin, dark nucleus
based on the number of WBCs/l0x feld. This method
· Elongated nucleus
depends on even distribution of wBCs in the smear and
● Coarse cumping of nuclear chromatin
the field of view of the microscope lens. Uneven distribu-
(heterochromatin)
tion, such as WBCs being pulled to the feathered edge of
● Rough nuclear margin (where chromatin clumps
the smear, can causing falsely low WBC estimates.
protrude)
When uncertain if a cell is a nonseg or a seg. one
Leukocyte Aggregation
 should call it a seg, because segs are usually much more
Rare dogs and cats have strong aggregation of wBCs in
common than bands and younger nonsegs. Toxic neutro-
EDTA blood tubes. Collection of blood in other anti-
phils develop abnormally (i.e., asynchronous maturation;
coagulants (e.g., heparin, citrate) sometimes prevents or
Figure 2-9), making consistent identification of various
slows the aggregation and allows a more accurate total
stages of maturation diffcult or impossible. A description
WBC count. Usually the error from WBC aggregates is
of the blood picture as, for example, a severe left shift back
minor, but in one cat with large WBC aggregates, the WBC
to metamyelocytes with severe toxic change may be more
count was 36,920/μl in EDTA but 64,650/μl when blood
honest than trying to report a specific number (%) of
nonsegs.
cat's WBCs also aggregated in heparin after 15 to 30
The magnitude of the left shift reflects the severity
minutes. The agglutination is thought to result from anti-
of inflammation. Neutrophils younger than segs include
bodies that are affected by anticoagulants, and the ten-
bands, metamyelocytes, myelocytes, promyelocytes, and
dency for WBCs to aggregate can be absent at the next
myeloblasts. All immature neutrophils are nonsegs.
examination.
Nonsegs in blood are usually bands, because the bone
marrow preferentially releases the most mature forms of
Leukocyte Differential Count
neutrophils. If the left shift includes nonsegs younger
WBCs are reported by absolute (cells/μl) and relative (%)
than bands, each type should be noted to reflect increased
differential leukocyte counts (Diff). A Diff can be from
severity of the left shift.
manual or automated methods. (See section on hematol-
 ogy analyzers in this chapter or Chapter 4 for more on
Toxic Neutrophils ● Significant toxic change in neutro-
the automated Diff.) The manual Diff is determined by
phils (see Figure 2-9) indicates more severe disease and a
classifying 100 to 200 or more WBCs on a blood smear
worse prognosis (see Chapter 4). Toxic neutrophils
to determine the percentage of each type of WBC present.
usually are associated with left shifts, leukopenia, and
The percentage of each type (eg., 18% eosinophils) is
leukocytosis, but they may be present while the WBC
multiplied by the total WBC count/μl to obtain the abso-
count is normal, in which case a blood smear is required
lute count of each WBC type [e.g., if the total wBC count
to document the abnormality. Toxic change should be
is 15,0o0/μul, then the absolute eosinophil count with
reported both by the number of neutrophils affected and
18% eosinophils is 2700 eosinophils/μl). Absolute counts
by the severity. When toxic change is mild, or few neutro-
are more consistently interpreted than percentages of cells 
 phils are affected (or both), abnormal clinical signs may
[see Chapter 4)
not be noted. When toxic changes are moderate to severe
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
27
BOX 2-3. SIMPLE GRADING SCHEME FOR
REPORTING APPEARANCE OF TOXIC
NEUTROPHILS
MORPHOLOGIC CHARACTERISTICS
SEVERITY
OF TOXICITY
1+
Only few to moderate number of 
 Dohle bodies are present in clear
cytoplasm
2+ or 3+
 Mainly variable intensity of 
cytoplasmic basophilia, cytoplasmic
foaminess, but also giant 
neutrophils or toxic granulation
Cytoplasm is too blue, vacuolated,
and nuclei are too rounded to 
differentiate toxic neutrophils from 
reactive monocytes or reactive 
lymphocytes
FGURE 2-9. Toxic neutrophils from a cat with pyothorax. The 
dark blue (not neutral-colored) neutrophil cytoplasm indicates 
moderate to severe (3+) toxic change. The lower cell has indis-
tinct clearing lighter colored areas), indicating toxic vacuola-
tion. Both are bands (nonsegs) even though the lower
EDTA basophilia and distinct vacuoles). Finding only a
neutrophil has a distinct narrowing of the width of the nucleus
few Dohle bodies in clear cytoplasm indicates a mild
(asynchronous maturation). However, the rest of the nucleus
change. More severely toxic neutrophils have several
has smooth parallel sides and the chromatin density (clumping)
changes, including cytoplasmic basophilia, vacuolization,
is similar to the classic U-shaped band above.
and, more often in cats, giant nuclei. Grading cytoplasmic
basophilia or vacuolization is subjective and affected by
the type of stain used and how long the neutrophils
remained in EDTA. EDTA-induced vacuoles (artifact) have
distinct membranes around them, whereas toxic "vacuol-
and many cells are affected, signs such as fever, vomiting.
ization" is a more diffuse and irregular clearing in bluish
diarrhea, depression, shock, and sepsis are more common;
cytoplasm. A simple reporting systerm for severity of toxic-
 hospitalization days are longer; and prognosis is worse.1.10
ity is provided in Box 2-3. A more complex grading system
for a research project on feline toxic neutrophils is shown
in Table 2-3.10 Total scores from that system were mild
NOTE: Moderate to severe toxic changes in moderate to
many neutrophils indicates a worse prognosis, longer stays
in the hospital, and more frequent signs such as fever.
vomiting, diarrhea, depression, shock, and sepsis.
TABLE 2-3. SEGEV'S GRADE FOR TOXIC CHANGE
IN FELINE NEUTROPHILS
 Cells Affected with Change
Enteric disease (e.g., parvoviral diarrhea) and bacte-
MOPHOLOGIC
 CHANGE INTENSITY
<10%
10%-30%
>30%
rial infections cause the most severe toxic changes and
 often degenerative left shifts. Toxic change is not restricted
Dohle bodies
to bacterial toxemia and may be seen in diseases such as
Mild
IMHA and metabolic diseases such as diabetes and
1
1
1
Moderate
1
1
hepatic lipidosis.
2
 The following guidelines may be used for uniformity
Marked
2
2
3
in reporting. The number of neutrophils that appear toxic
Cytoplasmic basophilia
is reported as few, moderate, or many. No comment is
Mild
1
2
made with 0% to 4% toxic neutrophils; few indicate 5%
Moderate
2
2
to 10%; moderate indicates 11% to 30%; and many indi-
Marked
3
xot paieadde siudonau yo oe ueui iaieaig eyi aie
 Cytoplasmic vacuolation 
 Dohle bodies in feline neutrophils appear frequently and
Mild
1
1
2
may be seen in cats without severe clinical signs. However,
Moderate
 Dohle bodies are a morphologic change most consis-
2
2
3
Marked 
2
E
tently recognized by microscopists and thus important in
documenting toxic change in contrast to artifact (eg..
Giant toxic neutrophils 
3
3
3
28
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
(1 to 6 points), moderate (7 to 12 points), and marked
 eccentrocytes, blood parasites, and RBCs with distemper
(>13 points) toxic change.
inclusion bodies (Figure 2-10 and 2-1l).
Reactive Lymphocytes ● Lymphocytes vary greatly in
 NOTE: The morphologic changes in RBCs that are diagnos-
type and appearance. Immune stimulation of lympho-
cytes occurs in both healthy and diseased animals. Stimu-
tically useful include polychromasia (i.e., reticulocytosis),
     
hypochromasia, spherocytes, autoagglutination, rouleaux
formation, Heinz bodies, eccentrocytes, and blood parasites,
Occasional reactive lymphocytes are common in blood
 or viral inclusions.
smears of both sick and healthy animals. Numerous reac-
puaiue suois isans sieue yis ui saioqdal aai
stimulation, but the number of reactive lymphocytes does
not reliably indicate the strength of an immune reaction.
 Many common RBC changes are of little clinical sig-
They have prominent dark-blue cytoplasm that reflects
nificance (eg. anisocytosis, echinocytes, elliptocytes.
increased protein synthesis and increased messenger RNA
codocytes, leptocytes), especially in low numbers (see
(mRNA) in the cytoplasm. The nucleus may undergo
Chapter 3). Although it is technically correct to report
blast transformation and have a convoluted shape. Reac-
these, excessive details may distract the clinician who is
tive lymphocytes may be only slightly enlarged with
reading a report from concentrating on the more diagnos-
slightly bluer cytoplasm or may transform into large blast
tic findings.
cells with dark-blue cytoplasm. Reactive lymphocytes
RBC morphology should be evaluated on the thick
tend to be more numerous in young animals. Blast-
edge of the monolayer area. On the thin edge of the
transformed lymphoid cells resulting from immune stim-
monolayer area (i.e., near the feathered edge), RBCs are
ulation (eg.. Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection) can
distorted and lose their original shape. Canine RBCs, in
erroneously mimic acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).
the thick edge of the monolayer area of the smear, should
display central pallor. It is particularly important in iden-
NOTE: Reactive lymphocytes may be large, immature, and 
tifying spherocytes to have normal RBCs with distinct
dark. Increased numbers of reactive lymphocytes that are
central pallor near the spherocytes for comparison. RBCs
large and immature may be confused with leukemia. Reac-
lack central pallor near the feathered edge and may be
 misidentified as spherocytes, causing a misdiagnosis of
tive lymphocytes are commonly seen in sick animals.
IMHA.
 The frequency of the morphologic change in the RBC
Leukemia · Most dogs and cats with leukemia have
population is usually related to its signifcance and
acute leukemia. Acute leukemia is usually characterized
important in interpretation of the change. Abnormal
by marked leukocytosis with many blast cells (see Chapter
RBCs may be found in low numbers on blood smears
4). The cell type of neoplastic cells may be hard to iden-
 from normal animals. One should disregard rare abnor-
eide, io sisea. pa aq Adus Aeu Aayi pue yn
mal RBCs.
cells" unless specific staining procedures are done The
number of leukemic cells in peripheral blood can vary
Polychromasia ● Polychromasia, as seen in Wright- Or
from many to none. In some leukemia patients, the blast
Giemsa-stained (i.e, Romanowsky-type stains) blood
cells are retained in the bone marrow.
smears, indicates increased numbers of larger, bluer RBCs
called polychromatophils. Polychromatophils corre-
Erythrocyte Estimation
spond fairly well to canine reticulocytes or feline aggre-
Estimating RBC numbers from a blood smear is not con-
gate reticulocytes. However, different Romanowsky stains
sistent due to variability in the thickness of manually
 e si a  m u a
prepared blood smears. The severity of an anemia may be
darker blue than erythrocytes and thus how well they can
reflected by the gross staining intensity of the slide and
be identifed. Reticulocytes have dark granules represent-
greater length of the monolayer area. Blood smears from
ing ribosomal material and RNA when stained with new
E isuie aled iadde Aisso sleue raue Aiaa
methylene blue (NMB) or other reticulocyte stains (see
white background, whereas blood smears from patients
Chapter 3). Polychromasia indicates increased release of
with a normal PCV appear red or orange. In blood smears
reticulocytes from the bone marrow in regenerative
from animals with a normal PCV, the monolayer area is
anemias (see Chapter 3). Reticulocytes are macrocytic
a small to moderate elliptical area just behind the feath-
hypochromic RBCs.
ered edge of the smear (see Figure 2-8A and 2-8B). In
smears of very anemic blood, the monolayer area extends
farther back, even to where the drop of blood was initially
NOTE: Polychromasia indicates that increased numbers of
reticulocytes were released from bone marrow in regenera-
applied in severe anemia. In hemoconcentrated blood
 tive anemia. Polychromatophils correspond to canine retic-
(e.g., dehydration), the monolayer area is small or absent.
uocytes and feline aggregate reticulocytes.
Erythrocyte Morphology
Many RBC morphologic changes are described with
Relative guidelines to quantify reticulocytes and poly-
Latin and English names. Some morphologic changes
chromatophils in dogs are as follows: normal, less than
are diagnostically useful, such as polychromasia (i.e..
1%; slight increase, 1% to 4%: moderate increase, 5% to
reticulocytosis), true hypochromasia, spherocytes, auto-
20%: and marked increase, 21% to 50% (see Chapter 3).
agglutination, rouleaux formation,
Heinz bodies,
For feline aggregate reticulocytes and polychromasia,
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
29
Canine
Feline
Polychromatophil
Reticulocyte
Spherocyte
Erythrocyte
Erythrocyte
(Wright Stain)
(NMB Stain)
(Discocyte)
 RBC Fragment 
 Blister Cell
Helmet Cell
Crenation
Acanthocyte
(Schizocyte)
(Keratocyte)
(Keratocyte)
(Echinocyte, Burr Cell)
(Spur Cell)
Budding
Eccentrocyte
Target Cell
Mycoplasma
Heinz Body
Howell-Jolly
Fragmentation
(Codocyte)
Haemofelis
(NMB Stain)
Body
FIGURE 2-10. Selected erythrocyte inclusions and shape changes. Some common terms and synonyms are given beneath draw-
ings of selected morphologic alterations of red blood cells (RBCs). These are illustrated as they appear on Wright-stained blood 
smears, except for reticulocytes and Heinz bodies, which are preferentially stained with new methylene blue (NMB). Two normal
erythrocytes are shown first for comparison. (See text for descriptions and diagnostic significance.)
guidelines are as follows: normal, less than or equal to
spherical and do not lay as flat as discs on the smear.
0.4%; slight increase, 0.5% to 2%: moderate increase, 3%
Because they are spherical, they are thicker and thus
to 4%; and marked increase, greater than or equal to 5%.
areas and near the feathered edge of blood smears, normal
 Spherocytes · Blood smear analysis is frequently diag-
canine RBCs do not lay fat so lack central pallor and
nostic in hemolytic anemias.
Several
morphologic
 mimic spherocytes, so this area should be avoided. Feline
changes in RBCs are specific for certain disease conditions
RBCs normally lack central pallor; therefore spherocytosis
(see Chapter 3). Moderate to abundant spherocytes or
is difficult to detect.
autoagglutination, or both, are good indicators of IMHA.
Since IMHA is the most common severe anemia of dogs.
Autoagglutination · True autoagglutination is immune-
these changes must be correctly identified and interpreted
induced aggregation of RBCs into grapelike clusters. True
(see Chapter 3).
autoagglutination is equivalent to a positive Coombs'
reaction and strong evidence for IMHA. Incompatible
transfused blood is removed by immune-mediated agglu-
 NOTE: Good indicators of IMHA are finding moderate
to abundant spherocytes in blood smears and/or auto-
tination, opsonization and phagocytosis, or hemolysis
agglutination remaining after mixing EDTA blood with 3 to
and may have the features of IMHA. Both autoagglutina-
tion and strong rouleaux formation may be visible grossly
5 times more saline.
as RBCs clumping in EDTA collection tubes and may be
difficult to differentiate on blood smears.
To identify spherocytes in canine blood smears, it is
Rouleaux formation is the linking of RBCs into chains
important to examine only the monolayer area where
resembling stacks of coins. Some rouleaux is normal in
e i al ai sia a a ieo
dogs, and more occurs in normal cats. Increased rouleaux
exhibit central pallor (see Figures 2-8 to 2-11). By com-
formation in canine blood smears is associated with an
parison to normal disc-shaped canine erythrocytes, sphe-
increase in fbrinogen or acute phase proteins and is
rocytes are more spherical and do not lay flat on the
usually seen in inflammatory diseases. Rouleaux forma-
smear so they appear smaller in diameter, are darker in
tion is also associated with excessive antibody production
color, and lack central pallor (see Figure 2-llC). Sphero-
 seen in some cases of lymphoid neoplasia (e.g. plasma
cytes have normal cell volume and hemoglobin
cell myeloma), but this is an uncommon cause. Auto-
a1e Aaul asnesaq ialleus ieadde inq uonenuasuon
agglutination may be differentiated from rouleaux
30
C
D
FIGURE 2-11. A, Canine iron deficiency anemia. The erythrocytes have marked central pallor (hypochromasia) with only thin rims
of hemoglobin. Erythrocyte fragmentation is also visible. B, Feline Heinz body anemia. Many of the erythrocytes have a round,
usually lighter staining Heinz body at the margin, with about half of the Heinz body extending above the surface. A free, round
Heinz body has the same color as the hemoglobin in erythrocytes. C, Canine immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. There is a
cluster of four spherocytes, slightly up and left of center, and two spherocytes to the far right of center. Note that this is in an
area where other erythrocytes show central pallor, so it is easy to see the smaller diameter, darker color, and lack of central pallor
in the spherocytes. D, Canine distemper. The rounded viral inclusion bodies vary in color from gray to reddish. The most obvious
inclusion body is above the dark-blue, smaller Howell-Jolly body. E, Canine distemper. There is a large, gray, viral inclusion body
in the cytoplasm of the neutrophil at about 7 o'clock at the cell margin.
formation by vigorous mixing of EDTA blood with
 NOTE: Both autoagglutination and strong rouleaux forma-
a greater amount of saline (3 to 5 times more saline)
 tion may be visible grossly in test tubes. Autoagglutination
and observing it as a wet mount under the microscope.
may be differentiated from rouleaux formation by mixing
Saline causes RBCs to disperse from gross and micro-
 blood with 3 to 5 times more saline and observing it as a
scopic clumps resulting from rouleaux formation but
wet mount under the microscope.
does not cause dispersal if the clumping is from
 autoagglutination.
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
31
Poikilocytosis ● Poikilocytosis is a nonspecific term for
cells have a thin, faint rim of Hgb (see Figure 2-llA). A
variation in RBC shape and should be further classifed
common form of leptocyte is the codocyte [ie, target
as to the type of shape change present (see Figure 2-10).
cell), which has a small circle of Hgb in the middle of the
Echinocytes are frequently artifacts (eg., crenation) but
area of central pallor (see Figure 2-l0). Leptocytes and
may be physiologic/pathologic changes. Echinocytes may
codocytes are nonspecifc findings and may be associated
be more numerous in some metabolic diseases. Echino-
with regenerative anemias and splenic or hepatic disease.
cytes have numerous, uniform, usually pointed or occa-
sionally rounded projections from the RBC surface These
Other RBC Morphologic Changes · Many other RBC
projections, when viewed from above the cell, resemble
shapes have descriptive names, such as elliptocyte [i.e..
dots and tiny letter o's that may mimic the ring forms
oval RBCs or ovalocyte) and dacryocyte [i.e., teardrop-
Of Mycoplasma haemofelis or Mycoplasma haemocanis [pre-
 shaped RBCs). If RBCs have abnormal shapes that do not
viously Haemobartonella). Canine distemper inclusion
easily fit the common classifcations, one should simply
bodies are rare in RBCs and WBCs (see Figures 2-ll D and
report the presence of poikilocytosis and quantify it from
2-1lE) but are diagnostic when present.
1+ to 4+. Prominent poikilocytosis indicates an abnor-
mality, but a cause may not be apparent.
Acanthocytes · Acanthocytes have a few irregular pro-
jections with rounded ends often forming a bud. Some
RBCs resemble both acanthocytes and echinocytes in
OTHER DETERMINATIONS
having sharp pointed projections that are irregular in
Plasma Protein Determination
length and few in number. They have been called echino-
acanthocytes. In dogs. acanthocytes are associated with
Plasma total protein can be determined from the plasma
RBC fragmentation and with altered lipid metabolism,
layer in a centrifuged microhematocrit tube. The tube is
such as what occurs in hepatic disease. In cats, acantho-
scored with a file just above the buffy coat and broken,
cytes are often associated with liver disease, including
and the plasma is placed into a refractometer. Most refrac-
hepatic lipidosis and cholangiohepatitis. Some cats
tometers have an internal scale for plasma total protein
have prominent poikilocytosis with acanthocytes but
and a scale for urine specific gravity. If the scale is gradu-
ated for only refractive index, a conversion chart is neces-
Persian cats).
sary to convert the index to a protein concentration.
Plasma protein concentration is useful in interpretation
Red Blood Cell Fragmentation · RBC fragmentation
of anemia or polycythemia (see Chapter 3), dehydration,
results when RBCs are forced through altered vascular
and other problems (see Chapter 12).
channels, or occurs as a result of turbulent blood flow
RBC fragmentation has been associated with dissemi-
nated intravascular coagulation, iron deficiency anemia,
myelofibrosis, congestive heart failure, glomenulonephri-
 NOTE: Because both plasma protein and PCV are affected
tis, hemangiosarcoma, and hemophagocytic histiocytosis
by hydration status, it is helpful to determine both plasma
in dogs.
protein and PCV to evaluate anemia, polycythemia, or
protein disorders.
NOTE: In the dog, RBC fragmentation has been associated
with disseminated intravascular coagulation, iron defi-
Acute Phase Proteins
 dency anemia, myelofibrosis, congestive heart failure, glo-
merulonephritis, hemangiosarcoma, and hemophagocytic
The total and differential leukocyte counts (with left shift)
histiocytosis.
are usually used for documenting inflammation in dogs
and cats, but acute phase protein responses are an addi-
tional and very sensitive way to document inflammation.
Some feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) profles for cats
Vascular disorders such as disseminated intravascular
include an acute phase protein such as ol-acid glyco-
coagulation cause fibrin strands in circulating blood that
protein or senum amyloid A. C-reactive protein is more
can split RBCs by hitting them. The small, irregular RBC
commonly used in dogs to document and monitor
fragments are called schistocytes (also termed schizo-
inflammatory diseases. Fibrinogen is a plasma acute
 s   (  s 
phase protein that begins to increase with the onset of
Figure 2-10). The acanthocyte is the most frequent shape
inflammatory diseases, continues to increase for several
change associated with RBC fragmentation in dogs
days, and remains elevateduntil the inflammatory process
resolves. C-reactive protein, αl-acid glycoprotein, and
Leptocytes · Leptocytes are flexible RBCs with seem-
 la      ie 
ingly excessive membrane. When they lie flatter than
during inflammation than fibrinogen. C-reactive protein,
normal on the slide, one sees an enlarged area of central
haptoglobin, and senum amyloid A are globulins that
pallor often misclassified as hypochromasia. This wider
area of central pallor of leptocytes is differentiated from
retogram (SEP) are positive acute phase proteins that
true hypochromasia of iron deficiency by the thickness
increase as the result of inflammatory mediators. Albumin
and color of the rim of Hgb and by RBC indices. Lepto-
cytes have a dark rim of Hgb, whereas iron-defcient
sis during inflammation.
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
NOTE: C-reactive protein, αl-acid glycoprotein, and serum
Color of Blood
amyloid A are acute phase proteins that are very sensitive
Abnormal color of blood may be evaluated by putting a
indicators of inflammation in the dog and cat. Fibrinogen
drop on white flter paper. Brown blood (or perhaps only
and haptoglobin also increase in response to inflammation
darker-than-normal blood) suggests methemoglobin-
but to a lesser degree.
emia. To obtain normal red color of oxyhemoglobin
in normal blood, one should expose EDTA blood to air.
A drop of blood on filter paper is well exposed to air,
but to oxygenate blood in a tube, one should remove the
Increased fibrinogen or other globulins will cause
cork and pour blood back and forth between 2 tubes.
increased rouleaux formation on canine blood smears
Blood with methemoglobin remains brown after airing.
as an additional indicator of inflammation. Rouleaux
In cyanide poisoning blood may be cherry red, and in
formation causes RBCs to sediment more rapidly. RBC
carbon monoxide poisoning blood should be bright red.
sedimentation can be measured by determining the eryth-
rocyte sedimentation rate (EsR) to monitor inflamma-
tion, but this is more often done now in human patients
BONE MARROW EXAMINATION
than dogs and cats. Rouleaux formation is prominent in
blood from healthy cats; thus it is harder to note increased
 Bone marrow is usually examined to answer specific ques-
rouleaux formation.
tions that were not answered by evaluation of routine
CBC examinations.
Lipemia, Hemolysis, and lcterus
Lipemia (turbid, white plasma), hemolysis (red color).
NOTE: lndications for bone marrow examination include
 aq  ( a  m) s 
 nonregenerative anemia, persistent neutropenia, persistent
detected in plasma of the microhematocrit tube and aid
thrombocytopenia, bicytopenias, pancytopenias, unex-
in diagnosis (see Figure 2-1).
plained polycythemia or thrombocytosis, atypical cells in
blood, unexplained hypercalcemia, hyperproteinemia,
 monoclonal gammopathy, and staging of lymphomas.
NOTE: Lipemia (turbid, white plasma), hemolysis (red
color), and icterus (yelow to orange color can be visually
detected in plasma of the microhematocrit tube.
Indications for bone marrow examination include
moderate to severe nonregenerative anemia, persistent
neutropenia, persistent thrombocytopenia, bicytopenia,
pancytopenia, unexplained polycythemia or thrombocy-
Lipemia occurs with recent ingestion of a fatty meal,
tosis, atypical cells in blood, unexplained hypercalcemia,
pancreatitis, diabetic ketoacidosis, hypothyroidism,
hyperproteinemia, monoclonal gammopathy, and staging
hepatic disease, and primary lipid disorders (e.g. in
of lymphomas. Mild anemia with a likely primary cause
schnauzers; see Chapter 8). Lipemic plasma causes an
such as inflammation or a regenerative anemia in which
altered refractive index, so plasma protein determination
aadodide supuodsa aq on sieadde mouu auoqa
in a refractometer or hemoglobin concentration in hema-
are not indications to undertake the effort of obtaining
tology analyzers may be erroneous. RBCs are more fragile
bone marrow samples. A brief summary of general bone
sisalouaq os 'oa ul asil ot puat pue eseld sruuadi u!
marrow conclusions is given in Box 2-4. For more specific
frequently accompanies lipemia (turbid red plasma).
details on diagnostic approaches in certain disorders of
Lipemia will affect the erythrocyte fragility test. RBCs
RBCs, WBCs, and platelets, see Chapters 3. 4, and 5.
appear fuzzy on blood smears, and the background
respectively.
appears blue and foamy.
 The conclusions obtained from evaluation of a bone
Hemolysis is often an artifact of collection and han-
marrow aspirate and a biopsy are quantitative and quali-
dling but may also be an indicator of intravascular hemo-
tative. The quantity of various cell types is determined. In
lysis. Hemolytic anemia must be acute and massive to
animals with peripheral cytopenia, bone marrow exami-
cause true intravascular hemolysis and should be associ-
nation should indicate whether decreased bone marrow
ated with hemoglobinuria. Artifactual hemolysis will
production is the cause With blood loss (eg. hemor-
falsely decrease PCV and MCV values and increase the
rhage) or blood destruction (eg., hemolysis), the numbers
MCHC. Hyperchromasia (i.e., increased MCHC) is always
of marrow precursor cells should be increased (i.e., ery-
an indication of laboratory error that may be associated
throid hyperplasia) after 1 to 3 days. With decreased cell
with lipemia, free Hgb in plasma, Heinz bodies in the
production, the numbers of the particular cell type in
RBCs (laser counters), or Heinz bodies in suspensions of
bone marrow may be decreased (i.e., hypoplasia) but
lysed RBCs (Hgb determination).
quite often the bone marrow conclusion is ineffective
Icterus suggests either hemolytic anemia or a hepatic
hematopoiesis, in which the number of precursor cells in
problem (see Chapters 3 and 9). Some laboratories
the marrow is normal to increased despite no effective
perform an icterus index on plasma to roughly quantify
increased release of cells. Cells are destroyed before being
ictenus. The ictenus index compares the color of plasma
released into the blood (e.g. apoptosis). In order to make
with a set of color standards.
a proper conclusion from bone marrow examination, the
Chapter 2:The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
 In hemolytic or blood loss anemia, erythroid hyper-
BOX 2-4. SELECTED BASIC BONE MARROW
plasia is the expected and appropriate physiologic
CONCLUSIONS
response in bone marrow. Inflammatory disease stimu-
lates myeloid hyperplasia in bone marrow. Consumption
BONE MARROW
CONCLUSION
DEFINITION
of platelets in immune-mediated thrombocytopenia or
 Erythroid hyperplasia
 Increased marrow cellularity with
disseminated intravascular coagulation induces mega-
 decreased M/E ratio
karyocytic hyperplasia. Additionally, megakaryocytic
Erythroid hypoplasia
 Decreased marrow cellularity with
increased M/E ratio
response to a hemolytic anemia. A systemic immune
Myeloid hyperplasia
Increased marrow cellularity with 
response may result in lymphocytic and plasmacytic
increased M/E ratio
hyperplasia. A marked increase in immature (i.e.,
Myeloid hypoplasia
 Decreased marrow cellularity with
>20% blast cells) cells in any cell lineage indicates hema-
decreased M/E ratio
tologic neoplasia with rare exceptions. Myelodysplastic
 Megakaryocytic
 Increased number of 
syndromes have large numbers of dysplastic (ie., abnor-
mal development) cells and frequently have a mild to
hyperplasia
megakaryocytes in marrow
 Megakaryocytic
 Decreased number of
moderate (i.e., 5% to 20%) increase in blast cells (see
hypoplasia
 megakaryocytes in marrow
Chapter 4).
Aplastic anemia (also 
 Marked decrease in erythroid,
termed aplastic
myeloid, and megakaryocytic
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
pancytopenia)
cells in marrow
Lymphoid
 Increased proliferation of
Myelodysplastic syndromes identify qualitative bone
hyperplasia
lymphocytes and plasma cells 
marrow defects that result from acquired genetic muta-
in marrow
tions in hematopoietic stem cells.
 Myelodysplastic
Anemia, bicytopenia, or
syndrome
pancytopenia in blood; variably
NOTE: Myelodysplastic syndromes identify qualitative
cellular marrow; variable
bone marrow defects that result from acquired genetic
increase in blast cells 
mutations in hematopoietic stem cells.
(5%-20%); and consistent
 prominent dysplastic features
in blood or marrow
Bone marrow cellularity is usually normal or
Acute leukemia
 Hypercellular marrow with greater
than 20% blast cells
increased, but cells are destroyed before entering the
blood (see Chapters 3 and 4). Myelodysplastic syndromes
M:E ratios is the percentage of myeloid cells divided by percentage
are characterized by cytopenias in the blood, variable
of erythroid cells.
mild increases in numbers of immature cells [i.e, 5% to
20%) in bone marrow, and prominent morphologic alter-
ations (dysplastic changes) in precursor cells. Myelodys-
number of cells in the blood and bone marrow should
plastic syndromes have been subclassified according to
be known; therefore a CBC should be performed the
a World Health Organization classifcation system into
same day as a bone marrow examination.
categories, including refractory anemia (RA), refractory
anemia with ringed sideroblasts (RARS). refractory
Hypoplasia and Aplasia
anemia with multilineage dysplasia (RAMD), and refrac-
 sl si s   n
The marrow may have decreased numbers [i.e., hypopla-
changes associated with myelodysplastic syndromes must
sia) or severe deficiency (ie., aplasia) of one or more cell
be differentiated from secondary dysmyelopoiesis that is
types. Hypoplasia or aplasia indicates that cytopenia
associated with certain diseases and with exposure to
is due to insuffcient marrow production of that cell
certain drugs and toxins. 15
type. When all cell lines (erythroid, granulocytes, and
megakaryocytes) are decreased, the condition is termed
Acute Leukemia
aplastic anemia or aplastic pancytopenia. Specific causes
of marrow hypoplasia and aplasia are described in the
Acute leukemias are caused by genetic defects similar to
appropriate chapters.
those seen in myelodysplastic syndromes. The number of
Hyperplasia and Neoplasia
disorders.
A proliferation of one or more cell types in the bone
NOTE: The number of blast cells in blood or bone marrow
marrow may be a normal response to an increased need
differentiates leukemia from myelodysplastic syndrome.
for RBCs, WBCs, and platelets, or it may be an abnormal
Myelodysplastic syndromes have less than 20% blast cells
neoplastic or dysplastic process.
and leukemia has greater than 20% blast cells.
 NOTE: Proliferation of cell types can result from a normal
 Normally, blast cells account for less than 5% of the
need for increased production or from an abnormal neo-
plastic or dysplastic process.
total nucleated cell population in bone marrow. In
 myelodysplastic syndromes, blast cells are less than 20%
34
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
of nucleated bone marrow cells. In leukemia, blast cells
exceed 20% (see Chapter 4). Myelodysplastic syndromes
BOX 2-5. INFORMATION PROVIDED BY THREE
 may progress to acute leukemias.
TESTS USED IN EXAMINATION
OF HemaTOpoIesIs
Bone Marrow Histopathology
TEST
INFORMATION PROVIDED
 Complete blood 
Quantitative information on all three 
When a bone marrow core biopsy is examined, several
count (CBC)
cell types in peripheral blood and 
disease conditions can be identifed that cannot be identi-
 excellent morphology of blood 
fed on bone marrow aspiration smear. Major pathologic
cells
changes include myelofbrosis, myelonecrosis, and acute
Bone marrow
 Excellent morphology of individual
inflammation.
aspirate
marrow cells, best determination
 of percentages and ratios of cell
types (e.g., M/E ratio and %
NOTE: When a bone marrow core biopsy is examined,
ymphocytes)
several disease conditions can be identified that cannot be
Bone marrow
 Best for determination of cellularity 
identified on bone marrow aspiration smear. Major patho-
biopsy for
 of marrow and iron stores,
logic changes include myelofibrosis, myelonecrosis, and
histopathology
architectural patterns, and 
acute inflammation.
identification of pathologic 
dhanges, including myelofibrosis,
rTtyelonecrosis, and inflammation
Myelofbrosis is bone marrow replacement by fibro-
 blasts, collagen, or reticulin fibers. Myelofibrosis can be
primary or secondary. Bone marrow aspirates from a
fibrotic marrow are often poorly cellular and not diagnos-
tic so a core biopsy for histopathologic evaluation is
are often undiagnostic because they lack actual bone
required.
marrow (eg. are only cortical bone). Therefore the
Various
chemicals (e.g. chemotherapeutic dnugs.
surgeon should take two or more cores or be certain the
estrogen, phenobarbital) and infectious agents (eg..
biopsy includes the marrow area. The histopathology
gram-negativebacteria, panleukopenia virus) may directly
report is not available for 2 to 3 days, and if the biopsies 
or indirectly damage the marrow, resulting in ischemic
 are not diagnostic, the surgery must be rescheduled.
injury and cell death. Marrow necrosis is often diagnosed
 The bone marrow smears can be prepared from aspi-
in acute toxicity studies of new drugs or chemicals at
rated marrow or cores can be rolled on glass slides before
pharmaceutical or chemical companies. Myelofbrosis
exposure to formalin. Core samples are later placed in
may follow necrosis of marrow tissue. Acute inflamma-
neutral-buffered 10% formalin or other fxative and sent
tion in bone marrow has been associated with infectious
to a referral laboratory for sectioning. A drop of aspirated
diseases, immune-mediated diseases, and some dnug
marrow is placed on a glass slide. To prepare smears for
treatments.
cytologic evaluation, a spreader slide is touched to the
drop. then picked up, and a wedge-type smear is made
on another clean slide [i.e, similar to the way a blood
BONE MARROW BIOPSY
smear is made). In this way several thin slides can be
AND ASPIRATE
made from one drop of marrow. An aspirate should only
obtain a drop of bone marrow; excessive aspiration col-
Complete evaluation ofthe bone marrow's status requires
lects more blood that dilutes out the bone marrow.
all of the following: a current CBC, blood smear, bone
Smears should be inspected for small white fatty
marrow aspirate, and bone marrow core biopsy.
specks (i.e., unit particles) on the feathered edge of the
smears. If not present, the slide (containing the drop of
blood) should be tilted to allow excessive blood to flow
NOTE: Complete evaluation of bone marrow evaluation
away from bone marrow particles before making a squash
requires: a current CBC, blood smear, bone marrow aspi
preparation. A second slide or coverslip is placed on the
rate, and bone marrow core biopsy.
marrow particle and marrow is allowed to spread between
the slides. The slides are gently pulled apart in the same
horizontal plane. Smears are stained with a Wright's type
of stain, but longer staining times than blood smears are
Different types of information are obtained from
required to allow adequate stain penetration of thicker,
these procedures (Box 2-5). The humerus and iliac crest
more cellular, smears.
are good sites for biopsy and aspiration. Cortex-to-cortex
biopsies through the iliac crest contain a sufficient volume
Evaluation of Bone Marrow
of bone marrow in which to judge total bone marrow
Aspiration Smears
cellularity and architectural changes. Bone marrow biopsy
needles (e.g. pediatric Jamshidi needle for core biopsy
A consistent pattern should be followed for describing the
and Ilinois sternal needle for aspiration) have stylets
 quantitative and qualitative aspects of the cells present in
locked in the needle to prevent plugging with bone. Core
bone marrow aspiration smears. Major steps in evalua-
biopsies of bone taken for histopathologic examination
tion include assessment of cellularity. megakaryocyte
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
35
numbers, myeloid/erythroid (M/E) ratio, and whether
TABLE2-4.APPROXIMATEPERCENTAGEOF
maturation in the myeloid and erythroid series is orderly.
DIFFERENT CELL TYPES IN CANINE AND
These observations can be made via the l0x scanning
FELINE BONE MARROW
objective.
CELL TYPE
DOGS
CATS
Rubriblasts
0.2
0.2
NOTE: Major steps in evaluation of a bone marrow aspirate
 Prorubricytes 
3.9
1.0
include assessment of cellularity, megakaryocyte numbers,
Rubricytes
27
21.6*
M/E ratio, and whether maturation in the myeloid and
 Metarubricytes 
15.3
erythroid series is orderly.
5.6
 Total erythroid
46.4
28.7
 Myeloblasts
0.0
0.8
 Progranulocytes 
1.3
1.7
Cellularity
Myelocytest
9.0
5.0
Cellularity should be evaluated as normal, increased, or
 Metarmyelocytest
66
10.6
 decreased by observing overall cellularity and celularity
Bandst
14.5
14.9
of tissue fragments [i.e., unit particles) present on most
Granulocytes (mainly segs)
18.7
13.5
smears. Aspirates from a normally cellular marrow should
 Total myeloid
53.4
45.9
have many more individual nucleated cells than are
M:E ratio
1.15: 1.0
usually visible in blood and should include immature
1.6: 1.0
forms. Low cellularity may result from dilution of samples 
Infarmation modified fromJain NC: Schalm's veterinary hematology,ed
with peripheral blood. Therefore when cellularity appears
4, Philadelphia, 1986, Lea & Febiger.
low, cellularity of unit particles should be evaluated. Unit 
*Rubricytes include basophilic and polychromic forms.
tNeutrophilic and eosinophilic forms are combined for myelocytes,
particles are present in most good smears and are fre-
metamyelocytes, and band forms.
quently found near the feathered edge Within the unit
particle, the percentage of space occupied by hemic cells
(ie., hematopoietic cells that stain dark blue) is com-
pared with the percentage of space occupied by fat [i.e.,.
clear, nonstaining). In normally cellular marrow, hemic
tissue occupies roughly 25% to 75% of the unit particle.
Hemosiderin
Megakaryocyte numbers can be readily evaluated
-uea uaaig-anq se sieadde sageqdonoeu ul uuapisouah
using the l0x objective Although normal numbers vary
ules. One should report the amount of hemosiderin. Its
among samples and among slides from the same aspirate.
absence in canine marrow is suggestive of iron deficiency
cellular smears containing several unit particles usually
anemia. Excessive hemosiderin is found in bone marrow
contain 10 to 60 megakaryocytes.
of dogs with anemia of inflammatory disease. Hemosid-
erin can also be excessive in dogs with persistent nonre-
Myeloid/Erythroid Ratio
generative anemias, dogs given multiple transfusions, or
The M/E ratio is akin to the CBC's differential leukocyte
dogs with hemolytic anemia. Hemosiderin is not usually
count. To accurately evaluate cell populations, one should
observed in cat bone marrow; therefore its absence cannot 
count 500 to l000 cells. For clinical use, the M: E ratio
be used as an indication of iron deficiency.
may be determined by performing two or three l00-cell
Cellular Morphology
counts on different smears. Some experienced hematolo-
gists estimate an M/E ratio by examining smears using the
Cell morphology is of diagnostic significance in some
10x objective Erythroid cells tend to be smaller than
cases. Dysplastic features occur in myelodysplastic syn-
myeloid cells, have coarse dark nuclear chromatin, and
dromes, iron deficiency, some acute leukemias, and pro-
have cytoplasm that is dark blue converting to orange in
liferative disorders of plasma cells and macrophages.
more mature stages. Myeloid cells have nuclei with fine
chromatin and gray cytoplasm with various granules
Summary of Bone Marrow Smear
and band- to polymorphonuclear-shaped nuclei in more
Evaluation Procedure
 mature cells. Normal M/E ratios for dogs are 0.75: 1 to
2.5 :1 and for cats are 1.2: 1 to 2.2: 1.
In evaluating a bone marrow smear, the following steps
are performed:
Maturation of Myeloid
1. Quantify cell density of the smear or smears.
and Erythroid Lines
a. Total nucleated cells
In normal marrow, 80% of nucleated erythroid cells
b. Density of nucleated cells in unit particles
should be relatively mature (i.e, rubricytes or metarubri-
C
 Number of megakaryocytes
cytes). These cells can be identifed by a densely clumped
2. Determine M/E ratio.
muclear chromatin and variable hemoglobinization of the
3. Verify that maturation of each cell line is orderly and
cytoplasm as identified by a gray to pink cytoplasm.
complete.
Eighty percent of myeloid cells should be metamyelo-
4. Estimate iron [i.e., hemosiderin) stores.
cytes, bands, and segmented granulocytes (Table 2-4).
5. Identify morphologic abnormalities such as
These cells can be identifed by their indented to fully
 neoplasia, dysplasia, infections, and inflammation.
lobed nuclei.
6. Summarize information into conclusions.
36
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
7. Correlate results with the clinical signs, CBC, blood
 smear morphology, and bone marrow core biopsy
RapidVet-H
RapidVet-H
and make a fnal conclusion.
(Feline A,B,AB)
(Feline A,B,AB)
Cat
Lex
Date
18f12-01
CatGGayDate02012Z
BLOOD BANKING
96-31891
Auto
Auto
Comments here are restricted to a few tests that may
Aalineine
be performed in small clinics. Hospitals that set up
full-service blood banks should refer to more detailed
information.16 Two tests that should be available are
crossmatching and blood typing. Crossmatching should
Patient
Patient
be performed prior to a blood transfusion to avoid trans-
Test
fusion reactions.
Crossmatching
Konkalbalino
 The principle is mainly to see if the recipient has antibod-
ies against the donor's cells (major crossmatch). The
minor crossmatch checks to see if the donor has antibod-
FIGURE 2-12. Blood typing is very important before blood
ies in the plasma against recipient's RBC. An autocontrol
transfusion, especially in cats. These two cards show a positive
J aas o Aiessanau st (sa umo ue esed suadioa)
pue (mopum g ad1 ayiui uoeunibbe) yal ay uo 1es g-ad
a type-A cat on the right (rmoderate agglutination in the Type
interpretation of the major crossmatch. Crossmatching is
A window). There is an autoagglutination control window at
performed as follows:
the top of the cards. If the patient has autoagglutination, one
1. Take EDTA blood tubes from recipient and donor.
cannot determine if the agglutination seen in the Type A or
Centrifuge them for 5 minutes. Separate plasma and
Type B windows was due to the blood type reaction or preex-
isting autoagglutination.
RBCs and transfer them to correctly marked small
test tubes. Note if there is any hemolysis or
autoagglutination.
 2. Wash RBCs three times with phosphate-buffered
saline (PBS) by adding 4 to 5 ml PBS to tubes of
RBCs, mixing, centrifuging 1 to 2 minutes, and
breeds are at most risk to receive blood from an A-type
washing again.
cat and die of a transfusion reaction. Type AB is rare and
3. After washing RBCs, mix them with a few drops of
has no alloantibodies to RBCs from type A or B cats. Both
PBS to make a 3% to 5% solution (estimated) of
recipient and donor cats should be blood typed prior to
 donor and recipient RBCs. Label tubes as major,
a blood transfusion. Blood typing cards are available for
minor, and recipient autocontrol.
in-clinic testing [RapidVet-H Feline blood typing cards;
a. Place l drop of donor's RBC suspension and 2
DMS Laboratories, Flemington, NJ) (Figure 2-12). No test
drops of recipient's plasma in major crossmatch
is 100% sensitive and 100% specific, but blood typing in
tube.
cats will minimize risks for severe transfusion reactions
 b. Place 1 drop of recipient's RBC suspension and 2
in type B cats.
drops of donor's plasma in minor crossmatch
Blood typing in dogs is more complex, because they
tube.
have several different blood types. Canine blood types are
c. Place l drop of recipient's RBC suspension and
currently termed dog erythrocyte antigen (DEA) and pre-
2 drops of recipient's plasma in autocontrol
viously were called canine erythrocyte antigen (CEA).
tube.
Types include DEA 1.1, 1.2, 3, 4, 5, and 7. DEA 1.1 and
4. Mix tubes gently and incubate in water bath at body
1.2 are the blood types that can give the strongest transfu-
temperature for 15 minutes. Centrifuge 15 seconds
sion reaction, with hemolysis and/or agglutination of
and note any hemolysis.
RBCs. Blood typing cards for canine DEA 1.1 are available
 5. Agitate the pellet of RBCs at the bottom of the
so donors and recipients may be typed to at least avoid
tubes by tapping the tube over a mirror. Look for
this type reaction. Because several other blood types may
agglutination of RBCs as the pellet breaks up. Report
be incompatible, it is recommended to crossmatch donors
agglutination as a few small clumps, moderate to
and recipient dogs prior to a blood transfusion, especially
large aggregates, or no agglutination. Agglutination
if the patient may have been exposed to canine blood
indicates an incompatible reaction.
products earlier.
Blood Typing
References and Suggested Readings
Blood typing in cats is very important. Over 95% of Amer-
1. Aroch I, Klement E. Segev G: Clinical, biochemical and
ican domestic shorthair cats are type A. Some breeds have
hematological characteristics, disease prevalence and prog-
high incidence of type B blood (British shorthair, Cormish
nosis of dogs presenting with neutrophil cytoplasmic toxic-
rex, Devon rex, and exotic cats). These less common
ity. I Vet Intern Med 19:64, 2005.
Chapter 2: The Complete Blood Count, Bone Marrow Examination, and Blood Banhing
37
 2. DeNicola DB, Matthews [A, Femandes P]. Frye MB: Compari-
10. Segev G, Klement E. Aroch I: Toxic neutrophils in cats: clini-
 son of reticulocyte counts to mean corpuscular volume and
cal and clinicopathologic features. and disease prevalence
mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration in anemic
and outcome—a retrospective case control study. / Vet Intern
dogs. Presentation at the [nternational Society of Animal
Med 20:20, 2006.
Clinical Biochemistry, 2006.
11. Tvedten H, Johansson P: Feline platelet counting with pros-
3. Jain NC, editor: Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 4, Philadel-
taglandin E, on the Sysmex XT-2000iv. Vet Clin Pathol 39:
phia, 1986, Lea & Febiger.
190, 2010.
4. Knoll JS: Clinical automated hematology systems. [n Feldman
12. Tvedten H. Lilliehook I. Hillstrom A. Jens Haggstrom J:
BF. Zinkl IG, Jain NC, editors: Schalm's veterinary hematology.
[ateletcrit is superior to platelet count for assessing platelet 
ed 5. Philadelphia. 2000. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins.
status in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. Vet Clin Pathol
 5. Knoll JS. Rowell SL: [n-clinic analysis, quality control, refer-
37:266, 2008.
ence values. and system selection. Vet Clin North Am Small
13. Tvedten H. Scott M, Boon GD: [nterpretation of cytograms
Animal Pract 26:98l, 1996.
 and histograms of erythrocytes, leukocytes and platelets. [n
6. Lilliehook I., Tvedten H: Validation of the Sysmex XT-2000iV
Bonagura ID. editor: Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIll.
'sanhoruiig l sasioy pue 'sies saop iot wansis horoneay
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders.
platelets and total leukocyte counts. Vet Clin Pathol 38:163.
14. Weiss DJ: A retrospective study of the incidence and classifi-
2009.
cation of canine bone ma1row disorders (1996-2004). J Vet
7. Moritz A. Becker M: Automated hematology systems. [n
Intern Med 20:955, 2006.
d
15. Weiss DJ: Myelodysplastic syndromes. [n Weiss DJ. Wardrop
ed 6. Hoboken, NJ, 2010, Wiley-Blackwell.
KJ, editors: Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 6. Hoboken, NJ.
 8. Norman EJ et al: Evaluation of a citrate-based anticoagulant
2010, Wiley-Blackwell.
with platelet inhibitory activity for feline blood cell counts.
16. Weiss DJ, Wardrop KJ: Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 6.
Vet Clin Pathol 30:24, 2001.
Hoboken, NJ. 2010, Wiley-Blackwell.
9. Norman EJ et al: Prevalence of low automated platelet
17.
Zelmanovic D. Hethenington E: Automated analysis of
counts in cats: comparison with prevalence of thrombocyto-
feline platelets in whole blood. including platelet count.
penia based on blood smear estimation. Vet Clin Pathol
 mean platelet volume and activation state. Vet Clin Pathol 27:2.
30:137.2001.
1998.
3
Erythrocyte Disorders
Douglas J. Weiss and Harold Tvedten
ANEMIA DIAGNOSIS
presence and severity of anemia, but for simplicity, only
the PCV is used in the following discussions. Exceptions
Anemia is the most common erythrocyte (red blood
to the rule that PCV, Hgb, and RBC count decrease in
cell [RBC]) disorder. Anemia can cause various clinical
parallel in anemia occur if the blood has many, very small
signs (e.g., weakness, lethargy, exercise intolerance, heart
murmur, hemoglobinuria, pica, shock, death) or may be
rocytic hypochromic) RBCs.
subclinical and detected only during a general diagnostic
 Hydration status and blood volume affect assessment
workup. Causes of anemia are listed in Box 3-l. An
of the severity of anemia. Clinical dehydration (i.e.,
approach to anemia diagnosis is outlined in Box 3-2. A
hemoconcentration) reduces plasma volume, which
detailed description follows in specific sections.
(eiaod aaeai ad ui asaui aaeiai e sase
Dehydration may mask detection of a mild to moderate
anemia, most often early in diagnosis. An animal's hydra-
NOTE: Anemia is very common and detected in 10% to
tion status must be normal before the PCV properly
 30% of canine and feline patients.
reflects the degree of anemia. After hemorrhage. for
example, it may take I to 2 days to refill the blood volume.
based on intake of water and other fluids, and then the
Anemia classification considers basically production
PCV will reflect the severity of the anemia. Hydration
of RBCs from the bone marrow in balance with destruc-
status is usually assessed by considering plasma protein
tion of RBCs (hemolysis) or loss by hemorrhage. Eryth-
(PP) concentration and PCV in combination. Disease-
rocyte production may be reduced, normal, or increased.
induced changes in PP or PCV (eg., anemia or hypopro-
and bone marrow production may be "effective or inef-
teinemia) interfere with the use of these values in
fective." Removal of RBCs by the monocyte phagocytic
system may be normal or accelerated in anermia. Treat-
[n 'au  ss u cn a aq a
ment ofanemia often aims to reduce macrophage removal
disease, glomerular disease or the like (see Chapter 12).
of RBCs. The three basic causes of anemia are ( 1) decreased
PP determination is not a sensitive test of dehydration but
effective RBC production by bone marrow, (2) loss from
is easily performed and commonly available. Addition-
the body (i.e, external hemorrhage), and (3) increased
ally, the spleen can affect PCV (and Hgb and RBC count)
destruction of RBCs in the body (i.e., hemolysis). Physi-
because it contains 20% to 30% of the RBC mass, and
ologic anemia can occur, for example, with methemoglo-
splenic contraction causes rapid changes in distribution
binemia, where the total mass of hemoglobin in the body
by releasing a concentrated bolus of stored RBCs, more
so in the dog than cat. The splenic effect is immediate and
is often caused by a combination of effects, such as
seen mainly in normal animals. To a lesser extent the
decreased RBC production, shortened RBC life span, and
spleen can relax to store RBCs, removing them from cir-
hemorrhage.
culation (e.g., under anesthesia).
Severity of anemia must be considered during inter-
 pretation of complete blood count (CBC) results. Mild
NOTE:  Hematocrit (PCV),  hemoglobin  concentration
anemia is frequently secondary to other disease condi-
(Hgb), and RBC count are usually equivalent indicators
tions (eg., anemia of inflammatory disease; neoplasia;
of the severity of anemia. PCV is recommended for
and renal, hepatic, nutritional, or endocrine diseases),
interpretation.
and these anemias typically resolve with correction of the
primary disease condition. Age and breed variations and
statistical chance should also be considered when slight
The presence and severity of anemia is usually docu-
variations from reference intervals are encountered. Grey-
mented by determining a packed cell volume (PCV;
hounds, for example, normally have greater PCV (45% to
hematocrit) (see Chapter 2). Hemoglobin concentration
aey ues punoyag iuaue ue os 'sop isouu uey (%59
(Hgb) and RBC count are equivalent indicators of the
 a PCV within the usual adult dog reference values. Puppies
38
Chapter 3:Erythrocyte Disorders
39
BoX 3-1. common types 0F ANemlA
 Regenerative Anemia
Anemia of chronic hepatic disease
Blood Loss Anemia
Hypothyroidism and hypoadrenocorticism
 External blood loss
Iron Deficiency Anemia
Internal blood loss 
Bone Marrow Disorders
Hemolytic Anemia
 Nonregenerative immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
 Immune-mediated anemia
Pure red cell aplasia
 Cold hemagglutinin disease 
Myelodysplastic syndromes
 Blood parasites
Congenital dyserythropoiesis
Mycoplasma haemofelis
Aplastic anemia
Mycoplasma haenocanis
 Bone marrow necrosis/inflammation
Babesia canis
Myelofibrosis
Cytauxzoon felis
Leukemia
 Heinz body anemia and methemoglobinemia
 Macrophage proliferative disorders
 Zinc or copper toxicity
Drug-induced Hematologic Dyscrasia
Hypophosphatemia
Estrogen toxicity
 Hereditary hemolytic anemia
 Sulfadiazine toxicity
 Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency
Phenylbutazone toxicity
Phosphofructokinase deficiency
Infections
Nonregenerative Anemia
Bhrichia
Secondary Anemia
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
 Anemia of inflammatory diseases
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
 Feline panleukopenia virus
Anemia of chronic renal disease 
 Canine and feline parvovirus
 between 2 and 8 weeks of age may normally have a mean
question in anemia is, "Is the bone marrow responding as
PCV of around 28%, which appears anemic by adult refer-
expected to the anemia, or is it the cause of the anemia?"
ence values.
 Bone marrow effective erythropoiesis is primarily judged
Moderate to severe anemias require more active and
by its release of reticulocytes (Tables 3-1 and 3-2). Bone
directed diagnostic and therapeutic attention. The follow-
marrow function should respond normally in blood loss
ing PCV ranges arbitrarily classify severity of canine
or hemolytic anemia, and reticulocyte production should
anemia: mild, 30% to 37%: moderate 20% to 29%;
be increased in proportion to the severity of the anemia.
severe, 13% to 19%: and very severe, less than 13%. In
Anemia with appropriately increased erythropoiesis is
cats, arbitrary classifications are mild, 20% to 26%; mod-
cassifed as regenerative anemia (see Box 3-2). A nonre-
erate, 14% to 19%; severe, 10% to 13%; and very severe,
 generative anemia is indicated by fnding clearly less than
less than l0%. Rapid, severe worsening of anemia should
 an expected reticulocyte response for the time after onset 
stimulate prompt action. Animals with chronic, severe
of an anemia and the severity of the anemia. A moderate
but stable anemia (eg., PCV of 5% to 8%) can survive for
weeks to months with minimal clinical signs because of
physiologic adaptations to hypoxemia.
TABLE 3-1. DEGREE OF ERYTHROID REGENERATION
IN ANEMIA
aseasip ol Aepuooas Ajuanbaly s! ejwaue PlW i3ioN
 Percentage of Reticulocytes
 processes in nonhematologic organs or systems. Moderate
DEGREE OF
to   severe  anemia  more  often indicates  a  primary
STIMULATION
DOGS
CATS*
hematologic disease and should be more aggressively
diagnosed.
Normal
1
0-0.4
Slight
1-4
0.5-2
Moderate
5-20
3-4
After documenting the presence of anemia and
Marked
21-50
5+
grading its severity, one should evaluate the bone mar-
row's erythroid production to determine if the bone
From Perman V, Schall WB: Diseases of the red blood cells. In Ettinger
Sl,editor:Textbook of veterinary nternalmedicine:diseases of the dog
marrow appears to be contributing to the anemia or
and cat, ed 2, vol 2, Philadelphia, 1983, WB Saunder5.
responding appropriately to decreased RBC mass. A key
*ndicates the percentage of aggregate reticulocytes in cats.
40
BOX 3-2. APPROACH TO ANEMIA DIAGNOSIS
I.Determine Severity of the Anemia (see text)
IV. Nonregenerative Anemia Diagnosis
A. Mild anemia (PCV > 30% dog, > 20% cat)
A. Way to a diagnosis varies with case presentation
1. Consider age, breed, and statistical chance of
B. Use history and severity of anemia to re-evaluate
normality
reticulocyte numbers to see if anemia is truly
 2. Check for laboratory or sample error; repeat
nonregenerative; duration exceeding 3-4 days
venipuncture
excludes pre-regenerative anemia; reticulocyte
 3. Often secondary anemia, go to IV
 response is weak or absent 2 weeks after the cause
of an anemia ceases; mild anemia will not stimulate
B. Moderate to severe anemia, go to Il
significant reticulocytosis 
 Il. Determine Bone Marrow Responsiveness
C. CBC Evaluation
A. No reticulocytosis or polychromasia expected during
1. Microcytic hypochromic RBCs; usually indicates 
first 2-3 days or in mild anemia (PCV > 30% dog.
iron deficiency anemia
> 20% cat)
 a. RBC cytograms and histograms more sensitive
B. Reticulocytosis and polychromasia peaks 4-5 days if
 than MCV and MCHC
 bone marrow function is normal
 b. Half of iron deficiency anemia cases 
1. Marked cnine reticulocytosis (>500,000/μl)
regenerative
 2. Marked feline aggregate reticulocytosis
2. Normocytic normochromic anemia most common
(>200,000/μl)
but nonspecific 
C. Later-stage responsiveness at 7-14 days, use:
3. Macrocytic normochromic feline RBCs without 
1. Feline punctate reticulocytosis, marked
reticulocytosis; suggests FeLV-induced
(>1,500,000/μl)
myelodysplasia (see text)
 2. Dogs: use increase in macrocytic hypochromic
 4. Evidence of inflammation (see Chapter 4); anemia
RBCS
of inflammatory diseases is very common (i.e.
a. RBC cytograms and histograms illustrate
mild, normocytic normochromic anemia)
amount
5. Evidence of leukemia or dysplastic hematopoiesis
D. Classification by RBC indices and hematology
[see Chapter 4] usually indicates bone marrow
instrument graphics 
evaluation; go to H
1. Macrocytic hypochromic: regenerative anemia
6. Thrombocytopenia (see Chapter 5); consider
 2. Normocytic normochromic: nonreg enerative or
Ehrlichia or other infections (see Chapter 15]
pre-regenerative anemia
7. Pancytopenia or bicytopenia; indicates bone
 3. Microcytic hypochromic: usually iron deficiency
marrow disease and bone marrow evaluation; go
anemia
to H
 4. Macrocytic normochromic (see text)
 D. Clinical dhemistry profile
E. If adequately regenerative, go to ll;if inadequately
1. Evidence of renal or hepatic failure; causes
regenerative, go to IV
secondary anemia (see Chapters 7 and 9) 
 2. Evidence of systemic diseases; variable causes of
Il. Regenerative Anemia Diagnosis
A. Blood smear analysis critical in hemolytic anemia
anemia
diagnosis
E. Virology, serology if infection is likely (e.g., fever.
1. Spherocytes, autoagglutination, Heinz bodies,
lymphadenopathy!
 F. Endocrinologic examination; hypothyroidism or
polychromasia, blood parasites, eccentrocytes,
RBC fragmentation (for interpretation, see
other dysfunction (see Chapter 8) (e.g., mild,
text)
normocytic normochromic anemia) 
 B. Hemoglobinuria is best proof of intravascular
G. Toxicity
hemolytic anemia. Icterus and splenomegaly
1. Check for testicular neoplasm or access to
suggest extravascular hemolysis.
estrogen
C. Internal blood loss resembles hemolytic anemia
 2. Withhold any current drug therapy and monitor
1. Document hemorrhage with cytology, etc.
for recovery
 D. External blood loss 
 3. Check for toxicants in environment
1. Often in history 
H. Bone marrow examination reveals many diagnoses
(see text and Chapter 2)
 2. Tendency toward hypoproteinemia,
hypoalbuminemia, or both
1. Myelofibrosis, aplastic anemia, bone marrow
necrosis/inflammation, dyserythropoiesis,
3. Check for thrombocytopenia or bleeding
leukemia, metastatic neoplasia, myelodysplastic
tendency (see Chapter 5)
syndromes, etc.
CBC, Complete blood count; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean corpuscular volume;
PCV, packed cell volume; RBC, red blood cell.
Chapter 3: Erythrocyte Disorders
41
TABLE 3-2. RETICULOCYTE GUIDELINES*
CANINE
FELINE AGGREGATE
FELINE PUNCTATE
DEGREE OF REGENERATION
RETICULOCYTES/μl
RETICULOCYTES/μl
RETICULOCYTES/μl
None
60,000
<15,000
<200,000
146!S
150,000
50,000
500,000
 Moderate 
300,000
100,000
1,000,000
Marked
>500,000
>200,000
1,500,000
*Used at Michigan State University and University of Minnesota as modified by Dr. D.J. Weiss.
to severe anemia should have a maximal response 3 to
 7 days after onset of the anemia.
DETERMINING ERYTHROID
REGENERATION
Reticulocyte Evaluation
 Reticulocyte enumeration in blood is the most consistent
way to evaluate the strength of erythropoiesis, but one
must consider time after onset of the anermia (Figure 3-1)
ers
and magnitude of the reticulocytosis (see Table 3-2)
Erythrocytes
during interpretation. A reticulocyte count should be per-
formed when the PCV is less than 30% in dogs and less
cell
than 20% in cats.
Canine
 NOTE: Enumerating the absolute number of reticulocytes
is the most consistent way to evaluate the strength of
erythropoiesis.
Reticulocytes
10
15
20
25
30
Reticulocytes are immature RBCs released in increased
numbers from normal bone marrow in response to
anemia. Reticulocytes have ribosomes (ribonucleic acid
[RNA]] for continued hemoglobin synthesis. Ribosomal
material appears as dark-blue granules when stained with
Erythrocytes
new methylene blue (NMB) (Figure 3-2). Feline reticulo-
and pue aeaee cu paians aq pous sa
forms, because the cat is unique in having large numbers 
cell
 of punctate reticulocytes. Reticulocytes are reported as
Feline
Punctate reticulocytes
 absolute reticulocyte numbers per microliter of blood,
reticulocyte index (RI), reticulocyte percentage, and cor-
rected reticulocyte percentage, or they can be estimated
by inspection of the number of polychromatophilic
Aggregate
 RBCs on blood smears (see later). Reticulocytes are larger
Reticulocytes
[i.e., macrocytes) and have a lower hemoglobin concen-
4
10
15
20
25
30
tration than mature RBCs.
s.Therefore documenting
Time (days)
increased numbers of macrocytic hypochromic erythro-
cytes usually reflects reticulocytosis and bone marrow
FGURE 3-1. Reticulocyte and red blood cell (RBC) responses
responsiveness.
in blood loss anemia in dogs and cats. The reestablishment of 
 sa  i s se a e a
Manual Reticulocyte Counting
count is similar in both species after one episode of blood loss.
For microscopic reticulocyte determination, ethylenedi-
Increase in hematocrit (or hemoglobin concentration or RBC
count) is rapid in the first 2 weeks and is slower during the next
aminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) blood is mixed with a vital
2 weeks. The reticulocyte response of the cat is more complex
stain. Stains used most often are new methylene blue [1%
than the dog's. The feline aggregate reticulocyte response is
NMB plus 1.6% potassium oxalate anticoagulant) and
weaker than in dogs, similar in onset, but of shorter duration.
brilliant cresol blue (BCB; 1% in saline). Blood and stain
The feline punctate reticulocyte response has greater numbers
 are mixed in equal amounts and incubated for 10 minutes
and persists much longer than the aggregate response.
42
about 6% punctate reticulocytes in its automated reticu-
locyte count in addition to aggregate reticulocytes. The
Sysmex automated reticulocyte count still should be
considered mainly an aggregate reticulocyte count. Feline
punctate reticulocytes must be determined by manual
evaluation of reticulocyte stained smears to identify
prominent changes in punctate reticulocyte numbers.
The LaserCyte (IDEXX Laboratories) uses NMB to stain
reticulocytes and is less sensitive than the Advia or
Sysmex instruments. The LaserCyte has a negative bias
and proportional error compared to manual or auto-
mated (Advia) methods. Instrument-specific values for
considering LaserCyte reticulocyte results nonregenera-
tive (<35,000/μl) or regenerative (>75,000/μl) were sug-
gested. A cutoff for canine regenerative anemia is often
stated to be greater than 60,000/μl, but 60,000/μl should
instead be considered a mean reference value and not
maximum value. Reference values for Advia automated
IX xass ioy sa auaaja s'%s'I o1 %1'o pue
automated canine reticulocyte counts are 19,400 
to
150,100/μl and 0.3% to 2.4%.30 With availability of
FIGURE 3-2. Five feline reticulocytes are shown, including four
aggregate reticulocytes with more than 12 to 15 dots of ribo-
routine automated reticulocyte counts, many nonanemic
somal material and one punctate reticulocyte with fewer dots
dogs are noted to have many more than 60,000
(arrow). Canine reticulocytes look mainly like aggregate feline
reticulocytes/μl. Excitement and splenic contraction may
reticulocytes but also have a small number of reticulocytes with 
cause reticulocytosis. The most common error in inter-
as little ribosomal material as punctate reticulocytes.
pretation of reticulocytes is to conclude an anemia is
regenerative based on slight increases in one of the ways
for NMB and 15 to 30 minutes for BCB. For birds, 0ne
of reporting reticulocytes.
can mix three drops NMB to one drop EDTA blood and
incubate 10 minutes. Residual endoplasmic reticulum in
NOTE: The most common error in interpretation of retic-
the reticulocytes appears as dark-blue granules. A smear
Uocytes is to conclude an anemia is regenerative based
of the mixture is air dried, and 1000 non-nucleated RBCs
on slight increases in one of the ways of reporting
are counted to determine the percentage of reticulocytes.
reticulocytes.
Mature erythrocytes lack RNA and are unstained. Nucle-
ated RBCs (NRBCs) are not included in the reticulocyte
count but are reported separately. The manual reticulo-
Reticulocyte volume can be measured and used in
cyte method is much more imprecise than an automated
cases of iron deficiency anemia to document response to
method, and variation among microscopists is signifcant.
treatment. Reticulocytes are smaller in iron deficiency but
However, no automated instrument currently detects
increase in volume with iron therapy. For example after
feline punctate reticulocytes; therefore only the manual
 experimental iron replacement in iron-deficient dogs, the
method provides this information. At least an estimate of
mean cell volume of reticulocytes (MCVr; Advia 2120)
the percentage of punctate reticulocytes (10%, 25%. 50%,
increased from 65 fl before iron treatment to 82 fl after
75%. or 90%) should be done from a stained smear to
 ll to 12 days of iron supplementation, and hemoglobin
 permit proper interpretation of the feline regenerative
per reticulocyte (cell hemoglobin reticulocyte, CHr)
response. Definition of a feline punctate reticulocyte is
increased from about 16 up to 22 pg.?
that it has 3 to 12 dots. An aggregate reticulocyte has more
than 12 to 15 dots or too many dots in an aggregate to
Absolute Reticulocyte Count
count those dots. A canine reticulocyte is defined as
The percentage of reticulocytes may be reported alone
having more than two dots. Canine reticulocytes can have
(see Table 3-i), but this can be misleading because per-
few dots, but dogs do not have so many punctate reticu-
centage is a ratio of reticulocytes to mature RBCs. In
locytes that they affect interpretation, thus only a total
anemia, the mature RBCs are variably reduced, thus the
reticulocyte count is determined.
reticulocyte percentage overestimates the hematopoietic
response (Figure 3-3). The absolute reticulocyte count is
Automated Reticulocyte Counting
calculated by multiplying the reticulocyte percentage by
Various veterinary hematology instruments use different
the RBC count, so it adjusts the reticulocyte percentage
reticulocyte stains for an automated reticulocyte count.
for the severity of the anemia. Absolute reticulocyte count
Sensitivity of reticulocyte detection varies among instru-
is the more consistent indicator of bone marrow produc-
ments and methods.17 The Advia 2120 and Sysmex
tion and is recommended as the best single indicator of
XT-200oiV reticulocyte counts are approximately correct
regeneration in the dog and cat (see Table 3-2). If an RBC
for canine reticulocytes and correlate best with feline
count is not available, a corrected reticulocyte percentage
aggregate reticulocytes (see Figure 2-5). Sysmex's reticu-
(CRP) and RI (also termed reticulocyte production index)
locyte staining is slightly more sensitive and detect
can be determined.
Chapter 3: Erythrocyte Disorders
43
PCV
45% PCV
30% PCV
Number of
6 × 10° RBC
15% PCV
RBCS
4 x 10° RBC
2 x 10° RBC
Number of
reticulocytes
60,000
60,000
60,000
Reticulocyte
1.0%
1.5%
3.0%
percentage 
AGURE 3-3. Increasing the severity of the anemia and thus decreasing the number of mature red blood cells (RBCs) increases
the relative percentage of reticulocytes even when the absolute number of reticulocytes per volume of blood remains constant.
PCV, Packed cell volume.
NOTE: In anemia, the percentage of reticulocytes overes-
reticulocytes [i.e., they contain a large mass of precipi-
 timates the strength of erythropoiesis. The absolute reticu-
tated RNA with few punctate forms). Canine reticulocytes
locyte count is a more consistent indicator of the true
are not subdivided because the small number of punctate
reticulocyte response.
reticulocytes in the dog is clinically insignificant given the
great variability and error potential in microscopic counts.
Most laboratories do not count RBCs with only one or
Reticulocyte Index and Corrected
Reticulocyte Percentage
Discussion of CRP and RI is included here, but only to
illustrate some principles. RI and CRP are not recom-
BOX 3-3. STEPS IN CALCULATION OF THE
mended for clinical diagnosis interpretation. The CRP is
RETICULOCYTE INDEX
adjusted for the degree of anemia (Box 3-3). The RI is
further adjusted for the life span of the canine reticulocyte
Step 1: Corrected reticulocyte percentage (CRP)
in peripheral blood. With increasingly severe anemia,
reticulocytes are released earlier from the bone marrow
CRP =
reticulocyte % (patient's hematocrit /normal hematocrit)
and live longer in blood before maturing into RBCs. The
imq 'ageuaad aionoai aul saseaoul ueds a iaguo
Example: Dog with packed cell volume (PCV) of 22.5%
that portion is not the result of release of increased
and 4% reticulocytes
numbers of reticulocytes from bone marrow. Feline retic-
ulocyte life spans in blood with increasingly severe
CRP = 4% (22.5% +45%) = 2%
anemia are not well determined, so the RI is not recom-
 Step 2: Dogs are similar to people in releasing reticulocytes
mended for cats.
from their bone marrow earlier than normal when they are
aeiauasai saheipul shop ul I ueu aleaig 1 y
anemic. These "shift" reticulocytes live longer than the
anemia. An RI of 3 or greater indicates a marked regenera-
Uual 1 day, as is shown in the table below. This exagger-
tive response Hemolytic anemia tends to have a greater
ates the reticulocyte percentage, so the CRP is further
reticulocyte response than does external blood loss
adjusted by dividing it by the expected maturation time in
anemia, because the various nutrients for erythropoiesis
days, which varies with the severity of the anemia:
remain in the body. Recent loss of large volumes of blood
 Rl = CRP /life span of reticulocytes
(e.g., 4 to 5 days ago) or internal blood loss, however,
may also be highly regenerative, so not all anemias with
EXPECTED RETICULOCYTE
an RI greater than 3 are hemolytic. Specific guidelines for
HEMATOCRIT
LIFE SPAN (DAYS)
interpreting the CRP are not available.
45
1.0
An example is as follows [see Box 3-3): A dog with a
35
1.5
PCV of 22.5% and 4% reticulocytes had an RI of 1 that
25
2.0
 denoted an inadequate regenerative response The reticu-
15
2.5
locyte percentage of 4% did not indicate a fourfold
increase in reticulocyte production.
The reticulocytes in the previous example should live about 
2 days when the PCV = 22.5%. Remaining in circulation
twice as long doubles the percentage of reticulocytes in
Canine Reticulocyte Response
blood. The reticulocyte index (Rl) is adjusted for 
 this to
reflect more truly marrow release by dividing by 2:
Canine reticulocytes normally mature to RBCs in about
1 day after release into the blood. As a result of this
Rl = 2% + 2 days = 1
rapid maturation, reticulocytes are primarily aggregate
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
two individualized granules as reticulocytes, to be certain
In persistent hemorrhage or a hemolytic process,
not to include RBCs with granular artifact or precipitate.
the combined punctate and aggregate reticulocyte count
Canine reticulocytes approximately equal polychromato-
ai s s on e a (und Au)
phils seen on Wright-stained blood smears, though
performance of reticulocyte counts tedious. Even with
different stains vary in how well they display polychro-
more normal numbers of reticulocytes, no Heinz bodies.
matophils. Some guidelines assess the degree of activity
and little or no stain precipitate, microscopic reticulocyte
of bone marrow according to the percentage of reticulo-
determinations are imprecise. Flow cytometric analysis of
cytes (see Table 3-1). This has been modified to provide
feline blood in which the RNAof reticulocytes was stained
absolute reticulocyte numbers to judge the magnitude of
with thiazole orange was a more sensitive and reliable
 bone marrow regeneration (see Table 3-2).
assay of feline reticulocytes than manual microscopic
Feline Reticulocyte Response
cats by this thiazole orange method were 0.1% to 0.5%
(8500 to 42,000/μl) for aggregate reticulocytes and 2% to
Cats vary from dogs in having large numbers of punctate
17% (22,500 to 1,270,000/ul) for punctate reticulo-
'saue aeaaan u pue aeou yoq sainan
cytes.' Manual reference values should be similar.
A total feline reticulocyte count does not provide the
same interpretation as it does in dogs. A feline reticulo-
cyte count should be subdivided into punctate and aggre-
gate reticulocytes to reflect significant differences in stages
 NOTE: Dogs release aggregate reticulocytes that normally
of maturation (see Figure 3-2). Aggregate reticulocytes
mature to erythrocytes in about 1 day, whereas cats release
mature rapidly, in about half a day, into punctate reticu-
 aggregate reticulocytes that rapidly become punctate
locytes. Punctate reticulocytes mature slowly over 10 to
reticulocytes, which persist for 10 to 12 days.
12 days and thus accumulate in blood in much greater
numbers than do aggregate reticulocytes. Reports that do
not identify the type of reticulocyte counted in a cat are
Polychromasia
worthless! The duration of a regenerative anemia may be
suggested by the pattern of reticulocyte response. For
 Polychromasia denotes an increased number of polychro-
example, at about 4 days into a regenerative response, the
matophils observed on Wright-stained blood smears.
aggregate reticulocyte response peaks and punctate reticu-
Canine polychromatophils are equivalent to reticulo-
locytes are still relatively low (see Figure 3-1). Thereafter.
 cytes, and polychromasia indicates reticulocytosis. These
aggregate reticulocytes decrease and punctate reticulo-
are larger than mature RBCs and have slightly bluer stain-
cytes continue to increase Polychromatophils on feline
ing because of ribosomes in the cytoplasm (see Figure
Wright-stained blood smears reflect the number of aggre-
) a c sn  (
gate reticulocytes (Figure 3-4).
colors with the orange staining of hemoglobin plus the
blue staining of RNA. Feline aggregate reticulocytes
do not. Therefore polychromasia on feline CBC reports
reflects only aggregate reticulocyte numbers, whereas
polychromasia on canine blood smears reflects total retic-
ulocyte numbers. I
Increased polychromasia in both
species denotes active bone marrow erythropoiesis 3 to 7
days earlier. The magnitude of the polychromasia reflects
the strength of the erythropoiesis.
Macrocytosis
Larger than normal RBCs (i.e., macrocytes) are docu-
mented by the mean corpuscular volume (MCV) or by
 RBC cytograms and RBC volume histograms [see Figures
2-3 to 2-5). Reticulocytosis is the most frequent cause of
macrocytosis, especially at 4 to 5 days after the onset of
anemia, but mature macrocytes can also be released
during accelerated erythropoiesis. Tvedten believes
macrocytosis—and especially the percentage of macro-
cytic hypochromic RBCs—is a more sensitive indicator of
increased erythropoiesis late (e.g.. 7 to 14 days) in the
FIGURE 34. The appearance of Mycoplasma haemofelis on
blood smears can be difficult to distinguish from stain precipi-
regenerative response, when polychromasia and reticulo-
cytosis are declining.22
tate. Seeing a ring form (like a letter o at arrow) on an RBC
and a more dull blue color to the bacteria than the refractive
Other causes of macrocytosis are artifactual swelling
of RBCs in EDTA tubes during prolonged storage, con-
metallic color of stain precipitate helps ensure correct diagno-
sis. Note a polychromatophil at the ypper left, which is an
 genital dyserythropoiesis in poodles, stomatocytosis, and
aggregate reticulocyte that has enough RNA in it to stain bluer
feline leukemia virus (FeLV) infections in cats. The mac-
than other non-nucleated erythroid cells.
rocytosis caused by swelling of RBCs during storage in
Chapter 3:Erythrocyte Disorders
45
EDTA is common in samples mailed to laboratories or
bodies. H-J bodies seen in poodle macrocytosis may be
samples analyzed the day after collection.
numerous and dysplastic.
Anisocytosis, Red Blood Cell
Siderocytes, Sideroblasts
Distribution Width, Hemoglobin
Siderocytes are abnormal RBCs with basophilic granules
Distribution Width
(i.e., Pappenheimer bodies) resembling basophilic stip-
Anisocytosis is variation in RBC size. Red blood cell dis-
pling in Wright-stained blood smears. Prussian blue
tribution width (RDw) is reported by automated hema-
stains the iron within Pappenheimer bodies but not gran-
tology counters to describe the amount of anisocytosis. A
ules associated with basophilic stippling. Sideroblasts
frequent cause of increased anisocytosis is regenerative
are nucleated erythroid cells in blood or bone marrow
anemia with release of reticulocytes, which are macro-
with iron-positive granules. Although some sideroblasts
cytic. Hemoglobin distribution width (HDW) numeri-
are considered normal, increased numbers and abnormal
cally describes variation in RBCs based on hemoglobin
sideroblasts are considered abnormal. Abnormal sidero-
concentration. Increases in RDW or HDW are indicators 
blasts have more numerous and larger granules that may
 thatthe RBC population has increased variation. Increased
form a ring around the nucleus (i.e, ringed sideroblasts).
Maaai oi uoeun ue s pasn aq Ae Mah io mad
Siderocytes and abnormal sideroblasts indicate abnormal
RBC morphology on a blood smear and not rely only on
erythropoiesis [i.e., dyserythropoiesis). Chloramphenicol
 automated results.
therapy, sideroblastic anemia, and some types of myelo-
dysplastic syndromes are causes of increased siderocytes
Nucleated Red Blood Cells, E
Basophilic
in blood and abnormal sideroblasts in blood or bone
Stippling, Howell-Jolly Bodies
marrow.24
Other hematologic findings expected in regenerative
MORPHOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION
anemia include Howell-Jolly bodies, nucleated RBCs (i.e.,
NRBCs; metarubricytosis), and basophilic stippling.
OF ANEMIA
These are visible on blood smears but are neither as quan-
titative nor as specific an indicator of RBC regeneration
One of the two anemia classification systems most fre-
as reticulocytes or macrocytic hypochromic RBCs.
quently used in veterinary medicine is called "morpho-
Circulating NRBCs are reported as the number of
logic classification of anemia," which is the traditional
NRBCs per l00 WBCs or absolute number of NRBCs per
name for classification by use of RBC volume and hemo-
volume of blood (see Chapter 2). The absolute number
globin concentration. The three important classifications 
is more consistent for interpretation because severe neu-
are normocytic normochromic, macrocytic hypochro-
tropenia, such as in sepsis and heat stroke, can exaggerate
mic, and microcytic hypochromic anemia. The other
the number of NRBCs/ 100 WBCs. NRBCs may be released
system is classification based on the presence or absence
in regenerative anemia, but NRBC numbers inconsis-
of bone marrow response to anemia (i.e, reticulocytosis,
tently reflect bone marrow erythropoiesis in dogs and
regenerative anemia). Evaluation of blood smear mor-
cats. NRBC release into blood may occur independently
01 sayoeoidde lle jo juauoduos leuassa ue si Asoioqd
of increased erythropoiesis in situations such as splenic
evaluation of anemia, but use of those morphologic
disease, extramedullary hematopoiesis, heat stroke, sepsis,
changes is different than the morphologic classifcations
lead poisoning, hyperadrenocorticism, leukemia, and
described here.
various bone marrow diseases.
Classification of Anemia by Use
 NOTE: NRBCs are often increased in regenerative anemia
of Erythrocyte Volume and
but may be increased due to other factors, and therefore
Hemoglobin Concentration
are not specific evidence of increased erythropoiesis.
Morphologic classification of anemia traditionally uses
RBC indices (i.e., MVC, MCHC). MCV and MCHC are
mean values of all RBCs. Mean values are not a sensitive
Basophilic stippling is most often associated with
indicator of small to medium increases of macrocytic
regenerative anemias and is no cause for alarm. Baso-
hypochromic or microcytic hypochromic RBCs. DiNicola
philic stippling may be caused by lead poisoning but is
et al. reported that only 8% of blood samples of 6752
neither a specifc nor a sensitive method for diagnosing
dogs with regenerative anemia had both increased MCV
and decreased MCHC despite the principle that regenera-
testing should be used to evaluate suspected lead poison-
tive anemia has increased numbers of macrocytic and
ing (see Chapter 17 and Appendix I).
hypochromic RBCs, which is true and important in
Howell-Jolly (H-J) bodies are small round nuclear
diagnosis.6
remnants in RBCs. They may be seen with increased eryth-
The identifcation of increased numbers of macro-
ropoiesis or with decreased splenic removal of thenm.
cytic and hypochromic RBCs is best performed by the
Feline spleens are less effective in grooming RBCs, and
Advia automated hematology system. The Advia instru-
therefore H-J bodies are more common in normal cats
ment measures the volume and hemoglobin concentra-
than dogs. Steroid treatment (or Cushing disease) reduces
tion of each individual RBC in its sample and displays
phagocyte function and can increase the number of H-J
each erythrocyte by size and hemoglobin concentration
46
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
(see Figure 2-4). In this way, even a few abnormal RBCs
anemia in people Macrocytic normochromic RBCs in
can be identifed on the RBC cytogram. A better estimate
q si pue sop un uaas iou aie uayap uneqo
of the number (%) of abnormal RBCs may be made from
are seen in people and primates. Most often the classifica-
the RBC volume and Hgb concentration histograms Or
tion of macrocytic normochromic anemia in dogs and
from precise numbers of cells in the nine boxes of the
cats has come from erroneous classifcation due to the
RBC cytogram that are available from a research screen.
insensitivity of MCV and MCHC in reflecting true changes
The morphologic classification of anemia works best
in the patient's RBCs. A regenerative anemia may have
with the Advia instrument and unfortunately poorly with
youa jou iq  a aseau oi sisoa yno
only the MCV and MCHC results that are provided by
hypochromic RBCs to drop the MCHC out of the refer-
 other instruments. Use of MCV and MCHC alone in diag-
ence interval. So some regenerative anemias may be mis-
nosis often gives incorrect classifcations of the true
classified macrocytic and normochromic if only MCV and
changes in the anemia, and this can cause incorrect
MCHC results are interpreted. Cobalamin (vitamin B12)
diagnosis.
malabsorption has been described as a hereditary disor-
Normocytic Normochromic Anemia
der in giant schnauzers and as acquired gastrointestinal
disorders in dogs and cats. Measurement of serum cobala-
Normocytic normochromic anemia is seen in nonregen-
min is recommended for diagnosis of a deficiency.
erative anemias with bone marrow release of no or too
There are other causes of macrocytosis besides regen-
few macrocytic reticulocytes. Most RBCs in the blood are
erative anemia. Some poodles have a congenital dyseryth-
those normocytic normochromic RBCs remaining from
ropoiesis (i.e., "poodle macrocytosis"; MCV > 80 fl) but
l0 ateuomay ol anp st ieul eiuauy 'uonpoid nod
are not anemic and show no other signs of hematologic
hemolysis that is of such recent onset (eg. 1 to 2 days)
disease. (See also stomatocytosis discussed under Other
as to preclude a regenerative bone marrow response is
Hereditary Hemolytic Anemias.) Macrocytic normochro-
also normocytic normochromic during that time and is
mic anemia in cats without reticulocytosis suggests FeLV
best classified as pre-regenerative.
infection or myelodysplastic syndromes and is not related
to vitamin Bz or folate deficiency.
Macrocytic Hypochromic Anemia
Macrocytic hypochromic anemia usually indicates a
Classification of Anemia
regenerative anemia with increased numbers of reticulo-
by Regenerative Response
cytes. Reticulocytes are relatively larger (i.e, macrocytic)
than mature RBCs. Reticulocytes are hypochromic because
Evaluation of bone marrow response to anemia divides
they have not completed hemoglobin synthesis. Tvedten
anemias into those with variably reduced or ineffective
believes that macrocytic hypochromic RBCs that lack
erythropoiesis (nonregenerative) and those with effective
ribosomes (are not reticulocytes) still remain late in a
and adequate erythropoiesis (regenerative). The anemia
regenerative response, reflecting earlier increased erythro-
is classifed as regenerative only if signs of increased eryth-
poiesis. There are other causes of macrocytic hypochro-
ropoiesis (i.e, reticulocytosis) are sufficient to match the
mic RBCs, such as swelling of RBCs during storage (e.g..
severity of anemia seen in the blood (see Table 3-2). Too
in mailed samples).
often a moderate to severe anemia is misclassifed as
regenerative with only a slight increase in reticulocytes.
Microcytic Hypochromic Anemia
Microcytic hypochromic anemia occurs most often in
NOTE: The anemia is classified as regenerative only if signs
hemoglobin. The RBCs are small (ie., low MCV) with
of increased erythropoiesis (i.e., reticulocytosis) are ade-
insuffcient hemoglobin production (ie., low MCHC).
quate for the degree of anemia seen in the blood.
Microcytosis and altered iron metabolism are common
in dogs with portosystemic shunts (PsSs) and hepatic
atrophy. Microcytic hypochromic anemias are also associ-
ated with sideroblastic anemias and some types of myelo-
REGENERATIVE ANEMIA
dysplastic syndromes in dogs. Note that Japanese Akita.
Shiba and Chow breeds normally have small RBCs (i.e.,
Anemia caused by RBC destnuction (i.e., hemolysis) or
MCV of about 60 fl).
blood loss should have normal bone marrow able to
respondto the anemia. Regenerative anemia thus suggests
the cause was hemolytic anemia or blood loss. (See Box
NOTE: Normocytic normochromic anemia indicates a non-
3-1 for a listing of types of regenerative anemia.) Greater
regenerative anemia. Macrocytic hypochromic anemia indi-
Microcytic hypochromic
than 500,000 reticulocytes/μl frequently occur in dogs
Gtes a regenerative anemia. 
 anemia indicates iron deficiency.
with hemolytic anemia, internal hemorrhage or recent
external blood loss (see Tables 3-1 and 3-2). Many
anemias, however, are neither markedly regenerative nor
completely nonregenerative Mild anemia (eg. canine
Macrocytic Normochromic Anemia
PCV 30% to 35%: feline PCV 20% to 26%) may not
Too much emphasis on vitamin Biz or folate deficiency
stimulate reticulocytosis, because the mildly stimulated
causing macrocytic hypochromic anemia has come into
bone marrow responds by releasing mature RBCs. Note
veterinary medicine as a result of reading human litera-
that puppies and kittens have active growth, including
ture that has great emphasis on diagnosis of pernicious
erythropoiesis, and have increased signs of regeneration
Chapter 3: Erythrocyte Disorders
47
such as mild reticulocytosis when very young. Demands
In adult animals, chronic hemorrhage over several
for expansion of blood volume also make puppies and
weeks causes iron deficiency (see Figure 3-l2) and a
kittens more susceptible to iron deficiency if they have
blood loss.
blood loss anemia initially (e.g., in the frst I to 2 days)
Mild to moderate regenerative states (see Box 3-2)
has no reticulocytosis in the blood (ie.. pre-
must be interpreted in terms of duration of anemia, sever-
regenerative), becomes most regenerative, and then over
ity of anemia, and potential for multiple causes. An intes-
time becomes poorly regenerative or nonregenerative
tinal neoplasm is an example of a situation with multiple
because of iron deficiency. Puppies and kittens are born
causative factors contributing to anemia. An intestinal
with small iron reserves and with maximum erythropoi-
auy y ssi oa ieaxa ay a io
into the intestine. Such external blood loss initially
rapidly with biood loss (e.g. hookworms or coccidia).
should stimulate good bone marrow regeneration, but
Even normal kittens just before weaning often have sub-
persistent bleeding may lead to iron and protein def-
clinical iron deficiency while drinking milk (an iron-
ciency. An intestinal neoplasm is often inflamed, and
poor diet).
anemia of inflammatory disease interferes with erythro-
 A low or low-normal PP level in regenerative anemia
 poiesis, resulting in reduced RBC production. Thus the
is frequently associated with external blood loss and is a
degree of regeneration could vary and be less than
useful diagnostic feature. PP is lost with external blood
expected from just external blood loss.
loss. In hemolytic anemia and intermal blood loss, PP
concentration tends to be normal to slightly increased,
Blood Loss Anemia
because no protein is lost from the body. The PP reference
interval may be too wide for the PP concentration to
External blood loss is often obvious from the history or
seem abnormal, but values may be in the lower end of
physical examination. However, external blood loss into
the reference interval. PPs are replaced by the liver and
the gastrointestinal tract or internal blood loss into a
lymphoid tissues more quickly than the bone marrow can
body cavity may be occult Gastrointestinal bleeding may
replace RBCs, so hypoproteinemia less consistently
be indicated by a black, tarry stool or fresh red blood in
reflects the presence or severity of external hemorrhage
the stool. Tests for occult blood in the stool are of ques-
than does PCV.
tionable value (see Chapter 9). because myoglobin
Feline PCV response to blood loss somewhat
present in meat diets frequently gives false-positive
parallels the canine response for the first 2 weeks. Feline
results. Fluid cytology can document bleeding into body
aggregate reticulocyte response reaches a peak about
cavities (see Chapter 10). PCV and volume of the fluid in
4 days after hemorrhage (see Figure 3-1). The maximum
body cavities indicates the amount of hemorrhage.
number of feline aggregate reticulocytes is much lower
Hematologic patterns in blood loss vary greatly
than the maximum number of canine reticulocytes
according to when hemorrhage occurred, severity of
in strong regenerative responses. Similarly, less poly-
blood loss, whether bleeding was one acute episode or
chromasia is needed on a feline blood smear to
was persistent, whether hemorrhage was internal or exter-
indicate strong regeneration than on a canine smear.
nal, and species variation. Time-related changes and
Punctate reticulocytes peak about l week after hemor-
species variations are illustrated in Figure 3-l and in the
rhage and may remain elevated for 3 weeks or more.
following discussions.
Punctate reticulocytes may remain increased after
the PCV has returned to the reference interval. There-
External Blood Loss
fore, a punctate reticulocytosis probably reflects acceler-
PCV in a dog does not fully reflect the severity of acute
ated erythropoiesis sometime within the previous
blood loss anemia for 1 to 3 days, until fluid volume of
2 weeks.
the vascular space is replaced and the remaining RBCs
 Feline aggregate and punctate reticulocyte numbers
and PPs are diluted by fluid replacement (thirst, redistri-
can help determine when an anemia began. Moderately
bution of body fluids, or fluid treatment). Splenic con-
to markedly increased numbers of aggregate reticulocytes
traction in the first few hours releases stored, concentrated
with few punctate reticulocytes indicates recent anemia
RBCs into the circulation and may initially mask the
(e.g.. 2 to 4 days). Increased punctate reticulocytes without
severity of anemia. Release of reticulocytes should be
increased aggregate reticulocytes indicate anemia of 1 to
 noticeable by 3 days after hemorrhage, and peak aggregate
3 weeks' duration or anemia too mild to stimulate an
reticulocytosis occurs 4 to 5 days after hemorrhage (see
aggregate reticulocyte response.
Figure 3-1). Improvement in the PCV occurs rapidly over
Age-related changes in puppies and kittens must be
the first 2 weeks until PCV reaches the low-normal refer-
considered. The PCV in healthy 2- to 6-week-old puppies
ence interval. Thereafter, hypoxia is too mild to stimulate
is approximately 28%, and the PP normally may be less
 strong erythropoietin production, so the PCV increases
than 6 g/dl. Puppies have approximately 3% to 7% reticu-
slowly and may take a month to return to the original
locytes at 2 months of age or younger, with the highest
value.
percentage (7%) occurring at 0 to 2 weeks of age. Con-
versely, adult dogs normally have less than 1.5% reticu-
locytes. Using adult reference intervals, one would
 NOTE: After a single episode of blood loss, improvement 
incorrectly conclude that a puppy has anemia, reticulocy-
in the PCV occurs rapidly over the first 2 weeks. The PCV
tosis. and hypoproteinemia, which indicate external
increases slowly thereafter and may take a month to return
blood loss. Therefore age-related reference intervals
to the original PCV.
should be used.28
48
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
NOTE: Healthy puppies at 2 to 6 weeks old have a PCV of
 28, PP less than 6 g/dl, and 3% to 7% reticulocytes. Age-
based reference values should be used.
Young animals are less able to respond to blood loss
than are adults. Puppies and kittens already have high
rates of bone marrow erythropoietic activity because of
the need to expand blood volume as they grow. When
bone marrow erythropoiesis is already at a high rate, one
Se ssol pooiq ulm aseaiul ue ieae se ioadxa nouue
Occurs in adults.
Internal Blood Loss
The hematologic pattern of internal blood loss is similar
to that associated with hemolytic anemia, because RBCs
lost into tissues are destroyed and their constituents con-
served to allow maximal bone marrow response. Iron
deficiency and hypoproteinemia are not expected because
iron and plasma proteins are not lost from the body.
Some RBCs lost into the body cavities may be recirculated
intact via the lymphatics.
FIGURE 3-5. Hemoglobinuria may be seen as hemoglobin
droplets in the urine sediment. Hemoglobin droplets are often
Hemolytic Anemia
not correctly identified. This sediment was from a dog with
phosphofructokinase deficiency after an intravascular hemo-
Hemolytic anemia is usually a very regenerative anemia
lytic crisis.
without hypoproteinemia or other evidence of blood
loss. Careful evaluation of the blood smear is essential to
identify evidence for specific types of hemolytic anemia,
such as spherocytes, autoagglutination, blood parasites,
Icterus (see Figure 2-1) occurs with intravascular and
Heinz bodies, and eccentrocytes.
extravascular hemolysis. Increased unconjugated bilinu-
Hemolytic anemia may be subclassified as intravascu-
bin production from RBC destruction in macrophages
lar or extravascular, which mainly indicates rate and sever-
temporarily exceeds the capacity of the liver to remove it.
ity of hemolysis. Intravascular hemolysis is due to rapid
 In severe anemia, the liver may also have hypoxic or toxic
and such severe damage to RBCs that they break down in
damage that causes decreased bilirubin metabolism and
the vascular system. The best proof of intravascular hemo-
cholestasis. Bilirubin concentrations are often greater in
lysis is hemoglobinuria (Figure 3-5; see also Chapter 7).
intravascular hemolysis than in extravascular hemolysis
Hemolysis in plasma or serum also supports intravascular
because of the more rapid rate of hemolysis. Serum bili-
hemolysis (see Figure 2-1). Extravascular hemolysis alone.
rubin determinations (i.e, total and conjugated) are of
without intravascular hemolysis, is more common. Extra-
vascular hemolysis is removal of damaged RBCs by
disease because many exceptions to the expected patterns
macrophages in the spleen, liver, and bone marrow.
occur. One should use specific hepatic tests to document
Splenomegaly. hepatomegaly, and icterus are evidence of
10y sisal poioieaq 1o (a iaideu aas) aseasi peday
extravascular hemolysis. RBCs damaged during intravas-
hemolytic anemia, as noted in this chapter.
cular hemolysis are also removed by macrophages, so
extravascular hemolysis always accompanies intravascular
Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia
hemolysis or can exist by itself during slower rates of
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA) is the most
hemolysis. Lysed RBCs (ghost cells) seen on blood smear
common severe anemia of dogs and is less frequent in
 Or on instrument graphics (Figure 3-6; see also Figure 2-6)
also reflect very fragile RBCs and hemolytic anemia.
to be due to antibodies directed against autoantigens on
The more severe intravascular hemolytic anemias with
RBCs (i.e, primary IMHA): however, infectious agents
hemoglobinuria include some immune-mediated hemo-
and certain drugs may induce IMHA directly or indirectly
lytic anemias, Heinz body anemias, Babesia infection,
as a result of exposure of foreign antigens on RBCs [i.e..
zinc toxicity, phosphofructokinase deficiency, and snake
secondary IMHA). Propylthiouracil has been documented
[viper) bite.
in cats and levamisole, carprofen, potentiated sulfon-
amides, and cephalosporins have been incriminated in
dogs as inducers of IMHA. Additionally, a variety of trig-
NOTE: Intravascular hemolysis with hemoglobinuria indi-
gers for IMHA have been identifed, including lymphoma,
ates very severe, often peracute hemolytic anemia. Spe-
dfic causes include Heinz body anemias, complement-fixing 
myeloproliferative diseases, and infectious diseases
(babesiosis, ehrlichiosis, leishmaniasis, rickettsioses) in
immune-mediated anemias, zinc toxicity, Babesia infection,
dogs and lymphoma, FeLV, Mycoplasma haemofelis, myelo-
phosphofructokinase deficiency, and viper bite.
dysplastic syndromes, and acute myelogenous leukemia
Chapter 3: Erythrocyte Disorders
49
proper proportion, gross or microscopic hemagglutina-
tion occurs [i.e., a positive reaction). Some laboratories
use monovalent antiglobulin to classify IMHA as either
immunoglobulin M (IgM) or immunoglobulin G (IgG)
types and detect the presence of complement on RBCs.
The pattern found in 48 dogs at the University of Min-
nesota was: 71% IgG positive 10% IgG and IgM positive,
and 19% IgG, IgM, and complement positive. The effect
 of steroid treatment in vivo is unpredictable Dogs remain
Coombs-positive for variable lengths of time during cor-
ticosteroid treatment of IMHA.
The direct Coombs test is neither highly specific nor
sensitive for IMHA. The test is positive in only 60% to
70% of canine IMHA cases. Possible reasons for false-
negative results include insuffcient quantity of antibody
on RBCs, temperature at which the test was performed.
improper antigen:antibody ratio, and elution of low-
avidity antibodies from RBCs during washing. To ensure
that the proper antigen: antibody ratio is achieved, serial
dilutions of the antiglobulin reagent should be routinely
used. Over time antibody and complement elute off the
RBCs in blood samples. The time that an EDTA blood
sample may be stored before a Coombs test is unknown.
Therefore results obtained from samples sent to labora-
tories by mail are questionable Alsever's solution is good
for storing antibody-coated RBCs but is not readily avail-
able to most veterinarians. Positive Coombs reactions are
expected in RBC parasite infections, incompatible blood
transfusions, and dnug reactions, which cause RBCs to
appear foreign to the immune system.
FIGURE 3-6. A, Heinz bodies and ghost cells in a cat with
The specificity of the Coombs test for IMHA is often
onion toxicity from eating baby food with onion powder. The
considered good, but positive reactions frequently occur
ghost cells appear as faint circles (cell membranes) with one
in the absence of evidence of IMHA. These false positives
round Heinz body (arrows) that has the same color as hemo-
are not detected as often as false-negative results, because
globin in the intact RBCs. This cat had intravascular hemolysis,
a Coombs test is usually not requested unless the patient
hemoglobinuria, and hemoglobin nephropathy. B, Heinz
has signs of IMHA. Of Coombs-positive anemias in 134
bodies in a new methylene blue-stained smear from a dog with
dogs, half were positive for the third component of com-
onion toxicity. The Heinz bodies are lighter blue than dark-
plement (C3), but there was infrequent evidence of intra-
purple granules in the two reticulocytes (arrows). Most Heinz
bodies are single round inclusions, but there are also smaller,
vascular or extravascular hemolytic anemia.2l Therefore a
more granular, blue-staining Heinz bodies in several RBCs.
 positive Coombs test should be supported by other strong
These small numerous Heinz bodies may be mistaken on reticu-
evidence of IMHA.
locyte stained smears for reticulocytes.
Canine Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia · Diag-
nosis of IMHA is typically based on identifying moderate
to large numbers of spherocytes, autoagglutination, or
in cats. The removal of incompatible transfused RBCs is
both in a dog." A typical CBC pattern in canine IMHA
an immune-mediated hemolytic process and thus a form
(mean fgures from an author's retrospective study) is:
of IMHA, though most authors exclude dogs with blood
moderate to severe anemia (e.g., PCV 16%), marked retic-
transfusions from classification of IMHA. Inability to
ulocytosis (eg., 625,000/μl), polychromasia (eg. 3+ or
document a specific cause of IMHA may be due mainly
4+), normal to slightly increased PP (e.g., 7.2 g/dl).
to a current lack of specific tools or knowledge to do so.
marked leukocytosis (eg., 54,000/ml), significant sphe-
rocytosis (eg., 2+ or more) in most [i.e., 82%) dogs. and
Direct Coombs Test ● The direct Coombs test identifies
autoagglutination and thrombocytopenia (e.g. 29%) in
the presence of antibodies or complement on RBCs. The
some dogs. The RI is usually greater than 3, suggesting
antibodies and complement on an RBC may or may not
hemolytic anemia. The mean RI in one study of IMHA
be directed toward the RBC itself and may or may not
was 4.8. Moderate to marked spherocytosis [e.g.. sphero-
damage the RBC. The screening test is a "polyvalent direct
cytes > 50% of RBCs) in dogs is diagnostic for IMHA with
antiglobulin test" in which a polyvalent Coombs reagent
rare exceptions, such as viper bite. RBC agglutination,
is mixed with the patient's RBCs. This reagent contains
persisting after saline dilution (i.e, autoagglutination),
species-specific antibodies against various classes of anti-
is also diagnostic of IMHA. Thrombocytopenia may be
bodies and complement If the patient's RBCs have
immune mediated or caused by a thromboembolic (dis-
enough antibody or complement to be detected and the
seminated intravascular coagulation [DIC]) problem.
ratio of these antibodies to the antiglobulin is in the
Some IMHA cases are nonregenerative if the immune
50
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
reaction damages erythroid precursor cells in the bone
100x oil objective (1000x magnification). One can find
marrow. A positive Coombs test is also good evidence for
an area of the blood smear where normal RBCs have
IMHA.
central pallor and compare spherocytes to the normal
 RBCs. A scale of 1+ to 4+ may be used; 1+ equals 5 to 10
II s[enba +z (% 01 %7} Pay o x001 1ad sa1oayds
NOTE: The diagnosis of canine IMHA is typically based on
(%09 01 %02} 051 01 I5 s[enba + (%07 01 %] 05 0
identifying moderate to large numbers of spherocytes,
and 4+ equals more than 150 spherocytes per field
autoagglutination after saline dilution, or a positive direct 
  ss  1 s 1  (9)
 Coombs test in a dog with a moderate to severe, regenera-
reported.
tve anemia.
juz ixon surz ul paodai uaaq sey sisoioiaus
toxicity can cause Heinz body anemia with pyknocytes
but may induce immunoglobulin binding to RBCs as
 Spherocytosis [i.e, increased spherocytes) is a subjec-
well. The spherocytic portion of eccentrocytes has led to
tive observation made from blood smears that is the most
their misidentification as spherocytes in vitamin K; and
common, and important, diagnostic feature of canine
zinc toxicity of dogs, but these cells should be called
IMHA. Errors in identifying spherocytes are common,
 pyknocytes instead of spherocytes to avoid misdiagnosis.
 u o    
 Certain cases of snake venom intoxication may have sphe-
smears or improper areas of blood smears, such as near
rocytosis or echinospherocytosis (Figure 3-8).
the feathered edge. However, spherocytes can be consis-
Autoagglutination is usually diagnostic for IMHA
tently identified in high-quality canine blood smears by
(Figure 3-9). Spontaneous autoagglutination of a blood
experienced observers ( Figure 3-7). Autoagglutination can
sample is equivalent to a positive Coombs test result
interfere with making a good blood smear (see Figure
because the end point of the Coombs test is agglutination
-ane ue se pasn aq um uoeedaid ,ysenbs, y (vg-z
of the RBCs.A
Antibodies causing RBC agglutination
tive to a routine wedge smear when blood has auto-
without need for addition of Coombs reagent are called
agglutination. One can lay a second objective glass or
complete antibodies. Autoagglutination must be differen-
coverslip over a drop of blood and the pull the two glass
tiated from prominent rouleaux formation resulting from
 slides apart to attempt to get a better monolayer.
acute phase protein reaction in inflammatory diseases
 The number of spherocytes is important in diagnosis.
and even paraproteinemia of lymphoid neoplasia. Auto-
A normal animal's blood may have occasional sphero-
agglutination on a wet mount preparation should resem-
cytes. A moderate to large numbers of spherocytes
ble grapelike clusters of RBCs. Rouleaux formation
are required to diagnose IMHA. Spherocytes can be quan-
microscopically resembles linear stacks of coins and
tified in the monolayer area of a blood smear using the
should disperse when blood is mixed with equal or pref-
dop y junou jam e ui aues jo sunome iaiel Aiqeia
of blood is mixed with one or three drops of saline on a
glass slide coverslipped, and evaluated grossly and micro-
aaid ao e oad as (a-e ani as] Aeidos
1: 4 or 1:9 dilution and mixing of EDTA blood to saline
in tubes to check for persistent agglutination. Note that
FIGURE 3-7. Identifying moderate to many spherocytes on
blood smears is excellent evidence of IMHA. This canine blood 
smear photo illustrates 11 spherocytes and 2 more normal
FIGURE 3-8. Spherocytes are in the blood of a dog bitten by
RBCs. Compare the more normal, biconcave disc-shaped
a Swedish viper.Spherocytes (arrows) and echinospherocytes
erythrocyte (arrow) with central pallr to the 11 spherocytes,
may be caused by snake venom. Even though there are sphe-
which being spherical and not flat discs have a smaller diameter
rocytes in this photo, it does not look like IMHA, because it
despite having the same volume. Spherocytes are thicker and
lacks polychromasia, anisocytosis, and leukocytosis. There are
so look darker but are not really hyperchromic. There are also
 only two platelets (fower left), suggesting thrombocytopenia.
two large platelets. One platelet has a wider diameter than
Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) is common in
most RBCs.
snake bite patients.
Chapter 3:Erythrocyte Disorders
51
Feline Immune-Mediated Hemolytic Anemia · Feline
IMHA is more diffcult to diagnose than canine IMHA.13
Unlike dogs. cats with IMHA are typically young (<3
years). Spherocytosis is diffcult to identify in cats because
feline RBCs often lack central pallor, and the marked
leukocytosis that is often seen in dogs with IMHA does
not occur in cats. Lymphocytosis in blood or bone
marrow is frequently associated with feline IMHA. A posi-
tive Coombs test and autoagglutination are common
fndings in affected cats. However, autoagglutination
must be differentiated from rouleaux formation. Cats
normally have more rouleaux than dogs and rouleaux is
increased during inflammation. Whole blood should be
diluted 1 :4 with isotonic or phosphate-buffered saline to
disperse rouleaux formation, and blood should be exam-
ined both grossly and microscopically. In the absence of
autoagglutination or a positive Coombs test result, a diag-
nosis of IMHA depends on resolution of anemia in
response to immunosuppressive therapy.
 NOTE: Unlike dogs, cats with IMHA are typically young, do
not have a marked leukocytosis, and spherocytes are dif-
 ficult to identify.
电话
Causes of IMHA in cats include FeLV, Mycoplasma
haemofelis, Babesia felis, lymphoma, and propylthiouracil
Or methimazole treatment. Additionally, myelodysplastic
syndromes and acute myelogenous leukemia appear to
act as triggers for initiation of IMHA in cats. Specific
testing should be directed toward detecting these condi-
tions. M. haemofelis may be identified in blood smears
(see Figure 3-4),. but polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
sada suoe ysimgusip ue pue aaiisuas aiou aie sisa
of feline hemoplasmas (M. haemofelis and Candidatus
Mycoplasma haemominutum or newer strains).
B
Cold Hemagglutinin Disease · Rare animals have clin-
FIGURE 3-9. Autoagglutination is excellent evidence of IMHA.
A, The upper slide has a drop of EDTA blood with icterus and
ical signs associated with antibodies that preferentially
clumps of RBCs. The lower slide has a drop of 100% EDTA
bind to RBCs below body temperatures (i.e, in peripheral
blood (red arrow) on the left side of a glass slide with part of
capillary beds: ears or paws). If these antibodies aggluti-
that blood drawn into three drops of saline on the right side
nate RBCs and occlude capillaries, poor blood flow and
of the slide and mixed. There is prominent RBC agglutination
ischemic necrosis ensue. Cold agglutinin disease may or
even in the well-diluted blood (black arrows), which indicates
may not be associated with chronic hemolytic anemia.
autoagglutination and not rouleaux. The plasma was very
 The antibody expected in cold hemagglutinin disease
icteric, which supports a diagnosis of hemolytic anemia.
is IgM.
B, If the agglutination before or after saline dilution is not
grossy apparent,then the blood should be examined as a wet
Test results for cold hemagglutinin disease should be
mount with a microscope. This photomicrograph of EDTA
interpreted cautiously. The disease occurs rarely enough
blood mixed with saline shows individual RBCs in focus
that most laboratories are inexperienced with proper
and several aggregates of RBCs just out of focus (arrows).
evaluation of cold agglutinins. More is involved than
Retention of aggregates after saline dilution indicates true
just refrigerating the blood sample and performing
autoagglutination.
agglutination tests at cool temperatures (4" C). RBCs
must be separated from the EDTA plasma at 37° C to
avoid binding of cold agglutinins to RBCs. Cold aggluti-
nins are normally found in dogs and people In humans.
the equivalent of this saline dilution occurs in hematol-
the titer should be greater than l:64 to be considered
Oogy analyzers. Electrolyte diluent for the analyzer dis-
abnormal. A diagnostic titer for cold agglutinins in sera
perses RBC clumping caused by rouleaux formation,
of dogs and cats is unknown. One cat with cold hemag-
but autoagglutination persists. Autoagglutination can be
glutinin disease had a titer of 1: 52,000.2 RBC agglutina-
identifed on RBC cytograms and causes a variety of
tion occurring at 4° C should disperse when blood is
instrument errors in the CBC.
warmed to body temperature.
52
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
0l sieadde peum uo guguei suonds aaeq Ae sso
be no evidence of anemia to life-threatening intravascular
hemolysis. Eccentrocytes are RBCs in which part of the
cell membrane is damaged and fuses together. This fusion
of the internal layers of cell membrane squeezes hemo-
globin out of that area, leaving a sharp line of demarca-
tion between the areas that contain hemoglobin and
Pyknocytes are RBCs formed by the same process but in
which no lip of membrane is seen. These are often mis-
diagnosis of IMHA instead of an oxidative toxin
poisoning.
FIGURE 3-10. Eccentrocytes are RBCs in which part of the cell
Canine Heinz Body Anemia · Heinz bodies are not
membrane has fused together, which squeezes out hemoglo-
normally found in canine blood; therefore finding any
bin from that area, leaving a clear rim of membrane on one
Heinz bodies is abnormal. Canine Heinz bodies are often
side of the RBC (red arrows). The displaced hemoglobin is
small, irregular, and multiple (see Figure 3-6B). Thus
forced into a spherical shape in the remaining part of the cell,
which is not a true spherocyte. Cells resulting from this process
canine Heinz bodies may be overlooked and on smears
that have no obvious tag of clear membrane are called pykno-
stained for reticulocyte evaluation may be misidentified
cytes and not spherocytes. Onion poisoning in this dog also
as reticulocytes. Heinz bodies stain a lighter blue color
caused Heinz bodies, which appear as small paler staining
than reticulocytes and vary in size; therefore they can be
round bodies at the edges of some RBCs (black arrows).
 differentiated from true reticulocytes when stained with
reticulocyte stains. Causes of canine Heinz body anemia
include exposure to onions, vitamin Ks, naphthalene,
propylene glycol, benzocaine, methylene blue copper.
Additionally, rare dogs may have cryoglobulins or
zinc, phenylhydrazine, and acetaminophen. Ingestion of
cryofibrinogen in their plasma or serum that can precipi-
cooked, uncooked, or dehydrated onions is the most
tate out of blood samples at cooler temperatures, such as
common cause of canine Heinz body anemia. Vitamin K;
in refrigerated centrifuges. Blood samples must similarly
is more toxic [and less effective) than K,; therefore vitamin 
be held at body temperature until a test for cryofbrinogen
K; should not be used therapeutically.
or cryoglobulin can be performed, and these tests are so
rarely performed that laboratories are not prepared to
Feline Heinz Body Anemia · Both healthy and sick cats
perform them.
often have Heinz bodies. Feline hemoglobin is more
susceptible to oxidative damage and the feline spleen
Heinz Body Anemia
is inefficient in removing Heinz bodies. Heinz body
Many toxic substances oxidize hemoglobin, causing it to
s suea se u paseaul a q aae aie siaqnu
precipitate and form Heinz bodies, methemoglobin, 0r
diets and diets containing propylene glycol). Heinz
both. Heinz bodies stain like normal hemoglobin on
Wright-stained blood smears, but they may appear as
3 μm in diameter), and singular. One must consider
lighter-colored round bodies within RBCs or may bulge
number and mass of Heinz bodies, PCV, reticulocyte
from the cell surface [Figure 3-10). Heinz bodies are more
response, and likelihood of exposure to oxidative toxins
obvious in lysed RBC ghost cells (see Figure 3-6A). Heinz
to determine their significance in causing a hemolytic
bodies stain prominently on smears stained with NMB or
anemia. The number of Heinz bodies in feline blood may
brilliant cresol green via the same method used for pre-
be categorized as occasional if less than l0%, moderate if
paring reticulocyte smears [see Figure 3-6B). Heinz bodies
10% to 50%, and marked if greater than 50%.
stain a lighter blue than granules in reticulocytes. Heinz
bodies in the dog can be small and more granular in size
and shape, which can confuse identification. RBCs with
NOTE: Feline hemoglobin is more susceptible to oxidative
small granular Heinz bodies may be misclassifed as
damage, and the feline spleen is inefficient in removing
reticulocytes.
Heinz bodies. As a result, healthy cats can have up to 10%
Heinz bodies in their blood. Cats with increased numbers
of Heinz bodies may not have hemolytic anemia.
NOTE: Heinz body anemias are typicaly regenerative
anemias (after a few days) and are characterized by Heinz
bodies, eccentrocytes, pyknocytes and even intravascular
hemolysis, after exposure to oxidative toxins. Methemoglo-
Oxidative toxins reported to cause Heinz body forma-
binemia is often caused by the same toxins.
tion in cats include methylene blue, acetaminophen,
phenacetin, phenazopyridine, propofol, propylene glycol,
salmon-based diets, canned meat-based baby foods con-
Eccentrocytes · Eccentrocytes, like Heinz bodies, result
taining onion powder, and diseases including diabetes
from oxidative injury to RBCs (see Figure 3-10). Onion
mellitus, hyperthyroidism, renal failure, and lymphoma.
poisoning and less commonly vitamin K; toxicity or dia-
Increased Heinz bodies in cats eating semi-moist diets
betes mellitus causes eccentrocytes in dogs. Onion-eating
were the result of propylene glycol; therefore the ULS.
Chapter 3:Erythrocyte Disorders
53
Food and Dnug Administration prohibited addition of
hemoplasmas and so is easily confused with the organ-
propylene glycol to cat food in 1994. Increased numbers 
isms, resulting in false-positive diagnosis. To differentiate
of Heinz bodies in cats are not always associated with
M. haemofelis from stain precipitate, distinct ring forms
 signs of a hemolytic anemia.
should be identifed (see Figure 3-4). A ring form looks
like a lower-case letter o with a dark exterior ring and a
Methemoglobinemia
pale interior. It may be harder to be certain of the diag-
Oxyhemoglobin is the normal, oxygen-carrying form of
nosis of Candidatus M. haemominutum if the organism is
hemoglobin in which iron is in the reduced (ferrous)
present in small numbers.
state Methemoglobin is a nonfunctional form of hemo-
globin in which ferrous iron is oxidized to ferric iron.
Methemoglobin is nonfunctional because it cannot bind
NOTE: The PCR test is a more sensitive test for detection
of feline Mycoplasma sp. infection of erythrocytes than
moglobin is converted to methemoglobin daily. Methe-
blood smear analysis and also appears to detect the canine
moglobin reductase reduces methemoglobin back to
organism.
oxyhemoglobin. Rarely, methemoglobin reductase defi-
sanpoid pue ssop u payap ieiuasuos e se sinoso Aouan
significant methemoglobinemia and cyanosis. The oxy-
Parasitemic episodes are often transient [i.e, l to 2
hemoglobin method for hemoglobin concentration
days) and separated by periods when few or no organisms
measures only oxyhemoglobin, whereas the usual cyan-
are found. Therefore smears should be evaluated on
methemoglobin method measures all types of hemoglo-
several consecutive days to improve the likelihood of
bin, including methemoglobin.
diagnosis. Obtaining fresh, nonanticoagulated, capillary
making a thin blood smear provides a higher concentra-
 NOTE: Methemoglobin is a nonfunctional form of hemio-
tion of parasitized RBCs. The parasites may fall off RBCs
 globin. Methemoglobinemia may cause cyanosis or signs
of anemia even in animals with normal PCV (physiologic
infectious anemia, because splenic macrophages remove
anemia).
damaged RBCs and organisms. More severe anemia is
expected with M.haemofelis than with Candidatus M.hae-
mominutum. Concurrent infection with FeLV or feline
Methemoglobinemia can be detected by observing
immunodeficiency vinus (FIV) can predispose a cat to
cyanosis of mucous membranes or brownish discolor-
hemoplasma infection and make the anemia more severe.
ation of blood, as well as specific testing for methemo-
FeLV and FIV testing is recommended for cats with anemia
globin. Test is available at many reference laboratories.
or other hematologic problems.
Methemoglobinemia should be suspected if Heinz bodies
 Or eccentrocytes are seen. The animal may appear more
Mycoplasma haemocanis ·Mycoplasma haemocanis prin-
hypoxic than the PCV suggests. The gross appearance of
cipally causes anemia in dogs that have undergone sple-
blood is frequently the frst suggestion of methemoglo-
nectomy. It may occur in carrier dogs after splenectomy
binemia. Blood with methemoglobinemia is darker and
Auoioaualds auogiapun Aisnoiaaid aney ieu saop ul 1o
browner than normal and may not turn red when exposed
after they contract infection via blood transfusion or tick
to air. Placing a drop of a patient's blood and a drop of
bite. Glucocorticoid therapy may produce a functional
normal blood on white flter paper allows one to detect
splenectomy and thereby predispose to M. haemocanis
the darker color more easily. The animal's mucous mem-
infection. M. haemocanis appears typically as distinct
branes may appear darker or cyanotic if more than 30%
chains of cocci on RBCs and less often with ring forms.
 of hemoglobin is affected. Causes of canine methemoglo-
The linearly arranged cocci must be differentiated from
binemia include benzocaine and acetaminophen admin-
stain precipitate.
istration. Causes of feline methemoglobinemia include
benzocaine (Cetacaine), acetaminophen, phenacetin,
Babesia spp. ● Several species of Babesia canis have been
methylene blue, DL-methionine and phenazopyridine
described in dogs that vary in virulence. All strains
toxicity. Toxic substances (eg. benzocaine, acetamino-
produce varying degrees of hemolytic anemia and throm-
phen, methylene blue) may cause Heinz body anemia.
bocytopenia. Both acute intravascular hemolysis and
methemoglobinemia, or both.
extravascular hemolysis are seen. Hemoglobinuria is
Blood Parasites
common. Transmitted by ticks, B. canis is frequently
accompanied by Ehrlichia canis and other infections.
Hemoplasmas · M. haemofelis and Candidatus M. hae-
B. canis infection is seen most often in racing greyhound
mominutum (e.g., feline infectious anemia, hemobartonel-
dogs. The diagnosis is made by demonstrating intraeryth-
losis) infection can be diagnosed by blood smear
rocytic piriform (i.e., pear-shaped or teardrop-shaped)
evaluation or by PCR testing. PCR is much more sensitive 
Aede Asoaas Aq io sieas poo uo susueaio
for detection of parasitemia and can indicate if the para-
blood has a higher concentration of parasitized RBCs, so
site is M. haemofelis, Candidatus M. haemominutum,
examination of fresh non-anticoagulated ear prick blood
 Or another hemoplasma. Blood smear evaluation is insen-
samples is recommended.
sitive because parasite numbers are often below the
Babesia gibsoni is smaller than B. canis; however, both
concentration needed to see them microscopically.
 Organisms are large enough to be readily seen microscopi-
 Stain precipitate is similar in size, shape, and color to
cally (Figure 3-1l). B. gibsoni may be transmitted by dog
54
Zinc or Copper Toxicity
Zinc-induced hemolytic anemia results from ingestion of
zinc-containing objects (eg. zinc nuts from portable
kennels or pennies [U.S. coin minted after 1982]} by
dogs. Zinc forms soluble salts in gastric acid and is
absorbed. Zinc toxicity causes intravascular hemolysis.
Clinical signs include severe anemia, icterus, leukocytosis,
vomiting, and diarrhea. Diagnosis is confirmed by detec-
tion of zinc-containing objects in the stomach by radio-
graphic
examination
and  increased  
senum
zinc
concentration (normal canine serum zinc = 0.6 to 2 mg/
kg) (see Chapter 17). An increase in Heinz bodies and
also in spherocytic RBCs has been reported in zinc toxic-
ity. It is unclear whether these are spherocytes, indicating
immune damage or pyknocytes resulting from oxidative
damage Treatment of canine RBCs with zinc chloride
induces IgG binding therefore zinc-induced hemolysis
may be a secondary form of IMHA.4 Copper toxicity
may also induce a hemolytic anemia. One example is
in copper storage disease in the liver of Bedlington terriers
where the excessive copper may suddenly be released
 from hepatocytes and induce hemolytic anemia and even
hemoglobinuria.
Hypophosphatemia
Hypophosphatemia causes hemolytic anemia in dogs and
-soud uas aun uaum noo uen sisioaq 'sop ul 'sie
phorus concentration is less than 1.0 mg/dl. However, in
cats, hemolysis may occur with less severe hypophospha-
temia (i.e., <2.5 mg/dl).12 Hypophosphatemia may be
anticipated when refeeding cats with hepatic lipidosis.
Hypophosphatemia may be a complication of insulin
therapy. Diagnosis of hypophosphatemia (see Chapter 8)
in hemolytic anemia is complicated by a common meth-
odology error. Conjugated bilinubin in icteric samples
二
assays.' The PO4 concentration may a
appear falsely
FIGURE 3-11. Babesia canis and Babesia gibsoni are recog-
ii Aian ul asa cn mol oon uaaa io paseaap
nized in blood smears. B. canis is larger (A) at 2.5 to 5 μm than
samples. If in doubt the clinician can verify the PO4
B. gibsoni (B), which is about 1 to 3 μm. A canine RBC is about
7 μm in diameter. The classic double-teardrop form is seen
 concentration in icteric samples using inductively coupled
with one RBC containing B. canis (blue arrow in A) but other
plasma emission spectrometry methods modified for
serum, which are typically l
used in toxicology
shapes are common (red arrow). B. gibsoni is more round to
oval (black arrows in B).
laboratories.
 NOTE: Hypophosphatemia-associated hemolytic anemia
bites and occurs frequently in pit bull terriers, so this
may result from refeeding cats with hepatic lipidosis or as
 a complication of insulin therapy.
breed should not be used as blood donors. B. gibsoni
causes hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia, but
once infected, dogs become subclinical carriers.
Pyruvate Kinase Deficiency
Cytauxzoon felis · Cytauxzoon felis is a fatal, tick-
Pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency in dogs is an autosomal
transmitted disease of cats. It is diagnosed most consis-
recessive genetic disease causing severe and persistent
tently at necropsy by finding large schizonts in endothelial
extravascular hemolysis. Characteristic features include
cells in lungs, liver, spleen, and lymph nodes. Endemic
moderate to severe anemia (i.e., PCV 18% to 25%) with
areas include Missouri, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Mississippi.
marked reticulocytosis (i.e, 25% to 45%). and spleno-
Georgia,Florida, and Louisiana. Small piriform or safety
megaly. It occurs in young basenji, West Highland white
pin-shaped organisms in RBCs are found on blood
terrier, and beagle dogs. Affected dogs die by 3 years of
smears in less than 50% of affected cats. These bodies
age, and many dogs have terminal myelofbrosis and
measure l to 5 μm and have a small, peripherally located
Osteosclerosis. PK-deficient RBCs have ineffcient energy
nucleus.  Clinical  signs  include 
icterus, depression,
anorexia, fever, and dehydration.
 shortened life span.
Chapter 3:Erythrocyte Disorders
55
Phosphofructokinase Deficiency
NONREGENERATIVE ANEMIA
Phosphofnuctokinase (PFK) deficiency is due to a single
missense mutation in the M-PFK gene in English springer
Nonregenerative anemia is usually normocytic normo-
and American cocker spaniels, whippets, and mixed breed
chromic and lacks diagnostic changes in RBC morphol-
dogs. PFK-deficient Wachtelhund dogs do not have the
ogy. Many nonregenerative anemias are only mild to
 same PFK mutation and thus the DNA test for this heredi-
moderate and occur as secondary complications of sys-
tary disease in those other breeds is negative in the
Wachtelhund patients. Periodic intravascular hemolysis
diseases. Diagnostic efforts in these cases should be aimed
and hemoglobinuria associated with strenuous exercise
at the primary disease An exception is anemia of renal
Or stress-induced hyperventilation causing respiratory
failure that can become severe in late stages of disease.
 alkalosis is a characteristic sign. Residual PFK activity in
affected dogs is inhibited by alkalotic conditions. Spleno-
part of generalized bone marrow suppression that results
 megaly, icterus, or both may be present. Diagnosis is sug-
in bicytopenia or pancytopenia. Potential causes are listed
gested by excessive reticulocytosis compared to severity of
in Box 3-1.
the anemia and by ruling out common causes of hemo-
lytic anemia. Dogs with PFK deficiency have decreased
2,3-diphosphoglyceride (DPG) concentration, which can
be an initial test prior to firm diagnosis by analysis of RBC
NOTE: Nonregenerative anemias can occur secondary to
phosphofructokinase activity.
non-hematologic problems like inflammation and organ
 failure or as a primary bone hematopoietic system disorder.
Other Hereditary Hemolytic Anemias
Familial nonspherocytic hemolytic anemia has been
described in poodles and beagles. In poodles the cause
was not determined, but PK activity was not evaluated.
Diagnostic Approach
It was fatal by as early as 3 years of age. Myelofbrosis.
 Osteosclerosis, and widespread hemosiderosis were noted
One should first determine if leukopenia or thrombocy.
Aeaiah Aouayap Xd yim saop ui se Ksdoioau ie
topenia is present in addition to nonregenerative anemia
(see Box 3-2). Pancytopenia (ie., decreased RBCs, leuko-
extensively without identifying a cause The anemia was
cytes, platelets) or bicytopenia (i.e, two of the three cell
not severe or fatal and lacked hemosiderosis, myelofibro-
types depleted) frequently indicates disease in the bone
sis, or osteosclerosis.
marrow, which is best diagnosed by a bone marrow
Dwarfism in Alaskan malamutes has been associated
biopsy and aspiration (see Chapter 2; also discussed
with stomatocytosis.
.Affected dogs have a well-
later).26
compensated
hemolytic
 anemia characterized
by
If only anemia is present, one should check the RBC
decreased RBC osmotic fragility, decreased RBC survival,
indices, RBC cytograms and histograms, and blood
and erythroid hyperplasia in bone marrow. Stomatocytes
smear to classify it as normocytic normochromic, micro-
are RBCs with mouth-shaped central pallor. RBCs are
cytic hypochromic, or macrocytic normochromic. Nor-
macrocytic and hypochromic. The MCHC was consis-
mocytic normochromic anemia is the most common. If
tently less than 30 g/dl. Compared with age-matched
the anemia is mild to moderate, causes of secondary
normal Alaskan malamutes, the dwarfs were not anemic.
bone marrow suppression should be evaluated. Severe
 Miniature schnauzers have stomatocytosis as an auto-
nonregenerative anemias are often associated with non-
somal recessive trait but lack clinical signs of anemia. A
regenerative IMHAs Or pure RBC aplasia. Microcytic
miniature schnauzer-beagle dog had inherited stomato-
hypochromic anemia occurs most frequently with iron
cytosis and prominent macrocytosis, apparently resulting
deficiency (discussed later). Macrocytic normochromic
from RBC swelling (see Figure 3-5). The dog had a PCV
anemia (discussed earlier) without reticulocytosis in cats
 of 48% but had a mild reduction in RBC numbers [i.e.,
is often associated with FeLV-induced myeloproliferative
5.01 x 10%/μl) and hemoglobin concentration (12.5 g/
disorders. If a cause for the anemia cannot be identified,
dl).* RBC survival was only slightly shortened. Stomato-
a bone marrow evaluation is indicated.
cytosis also occurs in the Drentse patrijshond breed as
familial stomatocytosis-hypertrophic gastritis.
Secondary Anemias
Hereditary elliptocytosis in dogs is associated with a
deficiency of membrane protein 4.1. RBC morphology
Anemia of Inflammatory Diseases
was characterized by macrocytosis, elliptocytosis, poikilo-
Anemia of inflammatory or neoplastic diseases is the
cytosis, and RBC fragmentation, but anemia was not
most common cause of nonregenerative anemia.7 Mild to
present.
moderate normocytic normochromic nonregenerative
Hemolytic anemia with increased osmotic fragility
anemia that does not become severe, low serum iron, and
has been described in Abyssinian and Somali cats. Affected
increased iron in bone marrow and other tissues is typical
cats have a recurrent moderate to severe direct Coombs-
of
 anemia of inflammatory diseases. Inflammatory
negative hemolytic anemia with a few stomatocytes
changes in the CBC are discussed in Chapter 4. During
 present. Splenomegaly, hemosiderosis, and lymphoid
inflammation, macrophages release inflammatory cyto-
hyperplasia are also present. RBC osmotic fragility is
kines, including interleukin-1, interleukin-6, and tumor
markedly increased.
necrosis factor-o, that initiate several inflammatory
56
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
processes, including fever. Inflammatory cytokines cause
Hypothyroidism and
iron to be sequestered in macrophages, which reduces
serum iron and restricts the availability of iron to devel-
Hypoadrenocorticism
oping rubricytes, thus limiting erythropoiesis. RBC life
Anemia secondary to hypothyroidism and hypoadreno-
 span is also reduced. Other causes of anemia associated
corticism usually is mild and clinically insignificant.
with cancer include blood loss, RBC fragmentation,
Evaluation of endocrine disorders is discussed in
neoplastic infltration of bone marrow, and immune-
Chapter 8.
mediated RBC destruction. Additionally, many chemo-
 therapeutic agents suppress erythropoiesis.
Severe Nonregenerative Anemia
Causes of severe nonregenerative anemia without accom-
panying leukopenia or thrombocytopenia include non-
NOTE: Anemia of inflammatory diseases is characterized
regenerative
immune-mediated hemolytic anemias
by mild to moderate normocytic normochromic nonregen-
(NRIMHAs), pure red blood cell aplasia (PRCA), iron
erative anemia that does not become severe, low serum
deficiency anemia, late-stage chronic renal failure, FeLV
iron, and increased iron in bone marrow and other tissues.
and FIV infection, and some types of myelodysplastic
syndrome.
Nonregenerative Immune-Mediated
Anemia of Chronic Renal Disease
Hemolytic Anemia
The diagnosis of anenmia of chronic renal disease is con-
NRIMHA is a form of IMHA in which erythropoiesis is
frmed by fnding nonregenerative anemia associated
inhibited.? This is thought to be caused by autoantibod-
with renal failure (see Chapter 7). The mechanism of the
ies that destroy relatively mature erythroid precursor cells
anemia is more complex than a relative defciency of
in bone marrow. Other concurrent pathologic changes
erythropoietin. Ineffective erythropoiesis, a shortened
that may be present in bone marrow include dyserythro-
RBC life span, and blood loss may contribute to the
poiesis, secondary hemophagocytic syndromes, myelo-
anemia. However, this type of anemia responds well to
fibrosis, and bone marrow necrosis. In many dogs. a
erythropoietin therapy.
maturation arrest is present in the erythroid series. A
maturation arrest is a situation in which immature ery-
Anemia of Chronic Hepatic Disease
throid cells are present in normal or increased numbers
Anemia of chronic hepatic disease may have multiple
but later stages of development are decreased or absent,
causes (see Chapter 9). Abnormal lipid metabolism may
 presumably due to antibody-mediated destruction.
cause altered RBC shapes [i.e., acanthocytes) and a short-
ened RBC life span. Marked poikilocytosis is a frequent
finding in cats with hepatic lipidosis and inflammatory
NOTE: NRIMHA and PRCA are forms of IMHA in which
liver disease Coagulation defects, caused by reduced
erythropoiesis is inhibited in the bone marrow, resulting in
hepatic synthesis of coagulation and anticoagulant
nonregenerative anemias.
factors, may cause hemorrhage particularly in cats.
Decreased hepatic function can lead to defciencies of
nutrients needed for hematopoiesis. Microcytosis is a fre-
Pure Red Cell Aplasia
quent finding in dogs with a PSs. These dogs often have
PRCA is a severe nonregenerative anemia characterized
a "functional iron deficiency" with increased hepatic
by bone marrow that has few or no erythroid precursors,
iron but low serum iron, normal total iron-binding
yet normal-appearing myeloid and megakaryocytic lin-
uo1 yo uoees aeuaad mol pue '(oai) Aede
(Table 3-3). 15
of less than 8% when initially examined. The cause is
TABle 3-3. CaNiNe iroN profiles In IroN DeFicIeNcY ANemIA, ANEmIA Of INFlammaTory DisEase,
AND PORTOSYSTemIC SHUNTS
NORMal* MeAN 
IRON DEFICIENT*
[RANGE}
MEAN (RANGE)
AIDt MEAN ± SD
PSStMEAN (RANGE)
 Serum iron (μg/dl)
149 (84-233)
30 (8-60)
62 ± 14
77 (24-163)
TIBC (jμg/dl)
391 (284-572)
387 (234-659)
193 ± 28
377 (302-452)
UIBC (μg/dl)
243 (142-393)
357 (216-633)
300 (184-379)
Saturation (%)
39 (20-59)
8 (2-19)
21 (6-45)
AID, Anemia of inflammatory disease; PSS, portosystemic shunt; TIBC,total iron-binding capacity; LBC, unbound iron-binding capacity.
*Data from Harvey, French, and Meyer (1982).
+Data from Feldman, Kaneko, and Farver (1981)?
st (b66 L) AaeH pue JaAaN wo4 ee
Chapter 3: Erythrocyte Disorders
57
believed to be immune-mediated destruction of early ery-
by macrocytosis in the blood and marked dyserythro-
throid precursor cells. Antibodies against erythroid pre-
poiesis in bone marrow. Dysplastic features in bone
cursor cells were found in four of eight dogs with PRCA.
marrow include megaloblasts, binucleated erythroid
The Coombs test is positive in some affected dogs. Most 
cells, nuclear fragmentation, multiple Howell-Jolly
-dnsounuml [epioiaisuou io [epioians ol puodsau ssop
bodies, and atypical mitotic figures. Despite the very
pressive therapy. Parvovirus infection has also been asso-
abnormal morphology. the dogs are not anemic and
ciated with PRCA.
have no clinical signs.
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Sideroblastic Anemia
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) are a group of hema-
Sideroblastic anemia is a moderate to severe microcytic
tologic disorders that are caused by an acquired genetic
defect in hematopoietic stem cells and result in cytope-
may be confused with iron deficiency anemia.25 A variety
nias in blood and dysplastic changes in blood or bone
of dysplastic features are present in blood and bone
marrow.28 In refractory anemia (RA) in dogs, anemia is
marrow. The role of pyridoxine deficiency (a known cause
moderate to severe, normocytic normochromic, and
in people) as a cause of sideroblastic anemia in dogs has
nonregenerative The disorder results in production of
not been investigated.
abnormal erythroid precursor cells that have atypical
morphologic features and die before being released into
Iron Deficiency Anemia
the blood. Bone marrow is usually normally cellular or
hypercellular and has erythroid hyperplasia. Morphologic
semitropical areas. Harvey. French, and Meyer docu-
alterations that may be observed in bone marrow ery-
mentediron defciency in li% of anemic dogs in Florida.10
throid precursor cells include binucleated RBC precur-
Reticulocytosis and polychromasia occurred in half of
sors, asynchronous maturation of cytoplasm and nucleus,
affected dogs. The most frequent cause of iron deficiency
macrocytes, microcytes, megaloblasts, and Howell-Jolly
is persistent blood loss [eg., hookworms, fleas, bleeding
bodies. Among the limited number of affected dogs
intestinal neoplasms). Blood loss anemias are initially
described, the anemia appears to respond to erythropoi-
strongly regenerative, then progress to nonregenerative as
etin therapy and affected dogs have prolonged survival.
iron deficiency worsens. Anemia varies from mild to
severe. Poikilocytosis with RBC fragmentation and hypo-
chromasia is typical. Thrombocytosis can be marked,
NOTE: Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs) are a group
with many large platelets.
of hematologic disorders that are caused by an acquired
Hypoproteinemia, when present, supports recent and
genetic defect in hematopoietic stem cells and result in
severe external bleeding: however, PP losses are replaced
cytopenias in blood and dysplastic changes in blood or
much faster than RBCs in the body, so PPs may be normal
bone marrow.
in chronic bleeding. Puppies normally have lower PP con-
centrations than adults do; therefore clinicians should
use age-matched reference intervals when evaluating
anemic puppies. Puppies also have lower PCV and higher
Congenital Dyserythropoiesis Syndromes
reticulocyte values than adults. Puppies become iron defi-
Congenital causes of dysmyelopoiesis include congenital
cient more rapidly than adults, because of their rapid
dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy, and cardiac disease in
growth and maximal erythropoiesis.
English springer spaniels; vitamin Bi2 malabsorption in
A CBC often identifies iron deficiency anemia ( Figure
giant schnauzers; and congenital dyserythropoiesis of
3-12). In the dog, microcytic (i.e., MCV < 60 fl), hypo-
poodles [described earlier in this chapter). Congenital
chromic (i.e., MCHC < 32 g/dl) RBCs are consistent with
dyserythropoiesis, polymyopathy, and cardiac disease in
a diagnosis of iron deficiency. Newer automated hematol-
English springer spaniels is characterized by moderate
 Ogy cell counters are more sensitive in detecting small
anemia with spherocytes, schistocytes, dacryocytes, codo-
numbers of microcytic hypochromic RBCs (see Figure
cytes, and vacuolated RBCs seen in blood smears. Bone
2-4) than are the MCV and MCHC.22 Exceptions include
marrow is characterized by erythroid hyperplasia with
Japanese Akitas, Shibas, and chow chows, dogs that nor-
dyserythropoiesis [(ie, binucleation and abnormal
mally have small RBCs. Microcytosis and decreased serum
mitotic figures).
iron often occur in dogs with PSSs and resemble iron
Vitamin Biz malabsorption in giant schnauzers is an
deficiency (discussed earlier).
autosomal recessive disorder characterized by chronic
The serum iron profile is the best proof of iron defi-
nonregenerative anemia and neutropenia. There is
ciency and can provide confidence in the diagnosis. The
increased anisocytosis (increased RDw) but the MCV
 owner and veterinarian may become discouraged at how
remains normal. Dysplastic features in the blood include
slowly the PCV returns to normal. Expected iron profle
 macrocytes, schistocytes, acanthocytes, elliptocytes, kera-
values in iron deficiency are listed in Table 3-3, and are
tocytes, hypersegmented neutrophils, and giant platelets.
Dysplastic features in bone marrow include giant band
matory disease in Table 3-4.7
neutrophils and asynchronous maturation in the ery-
TIBC reflects the concentration of transferrin, the
throid series. Clinical signs resolve with parenteral admin-
serum iron transport protein. Serum iron measures the
istration of vitamin B12-
iron bound to transferrin. Unsaturated iron-binding
Congenital dyserythropoiesis in poodles is a condi-
capacity (UIBC) measures the additional amount of iron
tion of toy and miniature poodles that is characterized
that transferrin can bind. TIBC is the sum of senum iron
58
Iron defciency anemia associated with microcytosis
Occurs often (ie, 70%) in 5-week-old kittens.23 By
7 weeks of age when they start eating solid food, kittens
 stop producing microcytic cells. The iron deficiency is
 probably the result of the low iron content of milk diets.
Feline Leukemia and Feline
Immunodeficiency Virus Infection
FeLV and FIV infections are major causes of feline nonre-
generative anemia. Macrocytosis (i.e, MCV > 52 fl)
without increased reticulocytes is an indication of FeLV
infection.
Pancytopenia or Bicytopenia
FIGURE 3-12. Canine iron deficiency anemia is characterized
 Moderate to severe nonregenerative anemia combined
by hypochromasia. True hypochromasia has thin rims of hemo-
globin in the RBCs. Leptocytes are cells with increased central
reflects a primary bone marrow disorder. If bone marrow
pallor and may be misclassified as hypochromasia. lron defi-
cell production (i.e, hematopoiesis) is abruptly
ciency often also has poikilocytosis and thrombocytosis.
sup-
pressed, leukocytes and platelets decrease in the blood
before RBCs because RBCs have a longer life span.
 Diagnoses associated with primary bone marrow dis-
orders include both etiologic diagnoses and pathologic
TABLE 3-4. COMPARISON OF SELECTED
[i.e., descriptive) diagnoses. Pathologic diagnoses provide
PARAMETeRs IN ANEMIA OF
an understanding of the general mechanism of marrow
INFLAMMATORY DISEASE AND IRON
injury but usually do not provide a specific diagnosis.
DEFICIENCY ANEMIA
Pathologic diagnoses include aplastic anemia, myelo-
ANEMIA OF
IRON
fbrosis, bone marrow necrosis, and bone marrow
INFLAMMATORY
DEFICIENCY
inflammation.
DISEASE
ANEMIA
Aplastic Anemia
RBC indices
Normocytic
Microcytic
 Diagnosis of aplastic anemia is confirmed by histopatho-
normochromic
hypochromic
logic examination of bone marrow core biopsies (see
Serum iron
Low
Low
 e  se  a  
Total iron-binding
Usually
Usually normal
are poorly cellular, perhaps only retrieving fat, so the
capacity
decreased
aspirate may seem to be a poor sample. Bone marrow
Bone marrow
Abundant to
Absent
core biopsies permit evaluation of marrow architecture
iron
 increased 
necessary to confirm marrow hypocellularity and replace-
Serum ferritin
High
Low
ment by fat. Possible causes of aplastic anemia in
Inflammation
Present
 Need not be
dogs include dnug toxicities (e.g., estrogen, phenylbuta-
present
zone, chemotherapeutic agents, sulfadiazine quinidine,
RBC, Red blood cell.
thiacetarsemide), E canis and parvovinus infections, and
immune-mediated processes.? In cats, causes of aplastic
anemia include drug toxicities (propylthiouracil, methim-
azole, griseofulvin, chemotherapeutic agents), anorexia/
starvation, and FeLV infection.
plus UIBC. Percent saturation is serum iron divided by
TIBC (normal = 20% to 60%). Percent saturation indi-
cates availability of iron for erythropoiesis. Hemoglobin
ueu ssal si uoeies juaiad jl paiiedl si sisauiuss
NOTE: Aplastic anemia is a pathologic diagnosis character-
 ized by bicytopenia or pancytopenia in the blood and
20%. Hemosiderin is not detectable in bone marrow
poorly cellular bone marrow replaced by fat.
samples of iron-deficient dogs. Serum ferritin correlates
with tissue iron stores; therefore it is a good indicator of
iron deficiency. Further, it is the best test to differentiate
iron deficiency anemia from anemia of inflammatory
Bone Marrow Necrosis/inflammation
diseases.
Ischemic and toxic injury to bone marrow results in
Aoneuuegu ue ui lnsan Aeu pue sisonau moue
response. Bone marrow necrosis has been associated with
avariety ofconditions, including septicemia/endotoxemia,
NOTE: lron deficiency anemia is typically characterized by
dnug and toxin exposure parvovinus and monocytic
microcytosis, hypochromasia, variable reticulocytosis, poi-
 ehrlichiosis infections, disseminated intravascular coagu-
kilocytosis, thrombocytosis, low serum iron concentration,
lation, and malignancies. Necrotic lesions may resolve
normal TIBC, and decreased serum ferritin.
 Over time or may progress to myelofibrosis.
Chapter 3: Erythrocyte Disorders
65
tumors have ranged from 6% to 38%. The reticulocytes
Myelofibrosis
Myelofbrosis is characterized by replacement of hemic
Platelet counts varied from 3000 to 93,000/μul.
tissue by fbrous connective tissue, collagen, or reticulin
fibers. Myelofbrosis can be primary or secondary. Sec-
Sulfadiazine Toxicity · Doberman pinschers appear to
 ondary myelofbrosis may occur after toxic injury to bone
be predisposed to sulfadiazine-induced hematologic dys-
marrow and perhaps can result from chronic overstimula-
crasia. Affected dogs have anemia, leukopenia, thrombo-
tion of marrow by erythropoietin or thrombopoietin.
cytopenia, or a combination thereof with variable
Therefore myelofibrosis tends to be associated with
polyarthritis, lymphadenopathy, polymyositis, glomenu-
bone marrow necrosis, immune-mediated anemias and
lonephritis, and retinitis. Affected Doberman pinschers
immune-mediated thrombocytopenias, and congenital
and other affected dogs usually recover after discontinu-
hemolytic anemias. Primary myelofbrosis is a chronic
ation of the drug.
myeloproliferative disorder of erythroid, myeloid, and
megakaryocytic cell lines. Growth factors released by
Phenylbutazone  Toxicity · Hematologic dyscrasias
abnormal megakaryocytes are implicated as the cause of
associated with phenylbutazone toxicity include severe
fibroblast proliferation.
aplastic anemia; transient neutropenia, with or without
thrombocytopenia; thrombocytopenia; PRCA; and hemo-
Drug-induced Hematologic Dyscrasia
lytic anemia. Dogs with phenylbutazone-induced aplastic
A large number of drugs have been reported to produce
anemia rarely recover.
bone marrow dyscrasias in dogs or cats. In dogs. these
dnugs include estrogens, phenylbutazone meclofenamic
Ehrlichiosis
acid, sulfonamides, quinidine, chloramphenicol, cepha-
Canine monocytic ehrlichiosis is caused by E. canis [see
losporins, chemotherapeutic agents, captopril, tranquil-
Chapter 15 for serologic diagnosis). Acute infection con-
izers, trimeprazinetartrate, mitoxantrone, thiacetarsemide,
sistently causes thrombocytopenia. Antiplatelet antibod-
albendazole, phenobarbital, and phenothiazine. Drugs
ies are consistently present during E. canis infection, and
reported to cause bone marrow dyscrasia in cats include
some dogs are direct Coombs-positive. Chronic ehrlichio-
chemotherapeutic agents, chloramphenicol, griseofulvin,
sis can cause nonregenerative anemia, thrombocytopenia,
 propylthiouracil, and methimazole.
and leukopenia.
Infected dogs become persistently
infected, and some dogs develop a severe chronic phase
Estrogen Toxicity · Canine estrogen toxicity may cause
with pancytopenia in blood and aplastic anemia in bone
bone marrow destruction, resulting in aplastic anemia.
marrow.
During the frst 3 weeks, however, thrombocytopenia,
leukocytosis, and mild but progressive anemia typically
characterize the CBC. Total leukocyte counts may exceed
100,000 WBCs/μl (Figure 3-13). The cause of the leuko-
cytosis is uncertain. After 3 weeks, pancytopenia may
NOTE: Ehrlichia canis can cause both acute hematologic
also cause pancytopenia or bicytopenia. Increased serum 
 alterations and a severe chronic phase infection that results
estradiol concentrations cannot be consistently docu-
in aplastic anemia. The severe chronic phase does not
 occur in granulocytic ehrlichiosis.
mented. The PCVs in anemias associated with testicular
120,000
44
 Leukocytes
110,000
40
23
100,000
36
90,000
ukC
32
80,000
(×10,0
28
70,000
24
60,000
20
RBC
Platelets
16
40,000
D
12
30,000
8
20,000
Platelets appear acequate
appeared decreased 
10,000
+
46 8 10 1214 1618 20 22 2426 2830 32 34 363840 42 44
51
Time (days)
4
B
FGURE 3-13. Estrogen toxicity in a dog. The transient, time-related hematologic changes in a dog with an excessive dose of
estradiol included a bicytopenia consisting of thrombocytopenia and nonregenerative anemia and a profound leukocytosis. A, A
bleeding episode occurred. B, Estradiol was given. RBC, Red blood cell; WBC, white blood cell.
60
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Granulocytic ehrlichiosis is caused by Ehrlichia ewingii
Macrophage Proliferative Disorders
and Anaplasma phagocytophila in the United States. Ana-
plasma phagocytophila is common in Sweden.Anaplasma
Macrophage and histiocyte proliferative disorders include
inclusions can be readily detected in neutrophils from
a spectrum of disorders in dogs, two of which (malignant
infected dogs 4 to 14 days after infection and persist for
4 to 8 days.14 Hematologic changes are maximal during
cant hematologic alterations.25 Malignant histiocytosis
parasitemia, are transient, and include mild nonregenera-
[disseminated histiocytic sarcoma) is an aggressive malig-
tive anemia, moderate thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia,
nant proliferation of atypical cells in a variety of tissues
neutropenia, and eosinopenia. Serum iron and TIBC
that is associated with pancytopenia. Hemophagocytic
decrease suggesting anemia of inflammatory disease. A
syndrome is a benign condition characterized by prolif.
 severe chronic phase does not occur.
eration of hemophagocytic macrophages, which results in
cytopenias in the blood. Hemophagocytic syndromes can
be idiopathic or occur secondary to IMHA, immune-
Feline Leukemia Virus
mediated thrombocytopenia, infectious diseases, MDS, or
In most (9o%) FeLV-infected cats, RBC parameters are
neoplasia
altered. FeLV infection is frequently associated with non-
regenerative anemia. One pattern suggestive of FeLV infec-
BLOOD TRANSFUSION
tion is macrocytosis [i.e., MCV > 52 fl) without increased
reticulocytes.
AND BLOOD TYPING
Blood transfusion may be a life-saving treatment, but it
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus
is best avoided unless the anemia is severe or causing
aau a a  m pau se
clinical signs. Blood contains many cell types and pro-
anemia. Neutropenia may be concurrent in some
teins that are highly immunogenic and may sensitize the
patients.? Rarely, hemolytic anemia, possibly caused by
patient to reactions to later transfusions. Indications for
the vinus, occurs.
transfusion include when the PCV is less than ll% in cats
[eiu jo aouasaid aul pue saop ul ei ueul ssal pue
signs including tachycardia, poor-quality pulse, lethargy.
Parvovirus
and weakness. In general, clinical sigms are more impor-
Parvovinus infection in both dogs and cats (feline panleu-
tant than is PCV in determining the need for transfusion.
Donors' blood should be crossmatched to find the blood
panleukopenia causes severe, absolute granulocytopenia
least likely to cause transfusion reactions. Acute transfu-
and lymphopenia. Anemia is mild and may not be
sion reactions include fever, hypersensitivity reactions.
detected, because PCV may not decrease below the refer-
 shock, hemolysis, and disseminated intravascular coagu-
ence interval. The mild anemia may be masked by dehy-
lation. Chronic transfusion reactions include decreased
dration. Anemia, when present, is usually nonregenerative.
life span of transfused cells or acquired immune reactions
but an increase in reticulocytes may occur during the
to the recipient's own cells, such as post-transfusion
recovery period.
purpura. In post-transfusion purpura, repeated transfu-
sions can lead to a sudden destruction of the recipient's
own platelets.
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Ideally, the blood types of the patient and donor
and Leukemias
animal should be determined. Altermatively, the clinician
Although some types of MDS result in nonregenerative
should use donor dogs that are negative for dog erythro-
anemias (refractory anemia [RA] and refractory anemia
cyte antigens (DEAs) 1.1, 1.2, and 7 (the RBC antigens
with ringed sideroblasts [RARS]), other types (refractory
most likely to cause transfusion reactions). Crossmatches 
cytopenias  with  multilineage  dysplasia  [RCMD]  and
should always be performed before transfusion, because
refractory anemia with excess blasts [RAEB]] result in
 at least eight blood groups have been described for dogs.
bicytopenia or pancytopenia.27 Dysplastic features are
Three feline blood groups have been described and des-
seen in two or more cell lines in bone marrow and myelo-
ignated A, B, and AB. As little as 5 ml of type-A blood
blasts are increased (i.e 5% to 20%) in RAEB. Dogs and
transfused into a type-B cat can cause a fatal transfusion
reaction. The incidence of type B is low in the United
and have a higher rate of progression to acute myeloge-
States, but some purebred cats (eg., Abyssinian, Himala-
nous leukemia than animals with other types of MDS.
yan, British shorthair) have a higher incidence of type B.
Acute leukemias are discussed in Chapter 4.
In-office kits (RapidVet-H:; DMS Laboratories Inc., Flem-
ington, NJ) to identify DEA l.1 and feline A, B, and AB
are available (see Figure 2-12).
NOTE: Some types of myelodysplastic syndromes (refrac-
tory anemia, refractory anemia with ringed sideroblasts)
POLYCYTHEMIA
tory cytopenias with multilineage dysplasia, refractory
anemia  with   excess  blasts]   cause  bicytopenias  or
count Polycythemia can result from absolute polycythe-
pancytopenias.
mia [i.e, increased RBC mass associated with increased
Chapter 3:Erythrocyte Disorders
61
bone marrow production of RBCs) or relative polycythe-
clinically useful indicators of hemoconcentration but are
mia [ie, increased PCV because of decreased plasma
insensitive indicators of dehydration because of wide ref-
volume or splenic contraction). Neurologic signs, such as
erence intervals. Changes in PCV and PP concentration
seizures and collapse, may occur when the PCV exceeds 
from the mean reference intervals can show a trend
70% (probably because of hyperviscosity of blood causing
toward hemoconcentration.
poor perfusion of the brain).
Relative polycythemia of splenic contraction may be
more diffcult to recognize, because one cannot consis-
tently predict the degree of splenic contraction or relax-
 NOTE: Polycythemia can result from absolute polycythe-
ation. Splenic contraction is expected after exercise,
mia i.e., increased RBC mass) or relative polycythemia (i.e..
excitement, or fear. The PCV should return to normal
decreased plasma volume or splenic contraction).
within l hour after the animal calms down.
Absolute Polycythemia
Relative Polycythemia
Absolute polycythemia is subdivided into primary and
Relative polycythemia results from decreased vascular
secondary conditions. The reader should not confuse
fluid (i.e, dehydration, hemoconcentration, hypovole-
secondary polycythemia with relative polycythemia dis-
mia). Another cause is splenic contraction, which releases
cussed above.
a concentrated bolus of RBCs from the spleen into the
peripheral blood. In relative polycythemia, caused by
Primary Absolute Polycythemia
hemoconcentration or dehydration, the PCV should
Primary absolute polycythemia is called polycythemia
return to normal after fluid replacement (Figure 3-14).
vera or primary erythrocytosis, which is an uncommon
Hemoconcentration is often accompanied by an increase
chronic myeloproliferative disorder. The disorder is
in PP concentration, clinical syndromes that cause fluid
caused by uncontrolled proliferation of a defective clone
loss (e.g.. diarrhea, vomiting). and clinical evidence
of erythroid cells. Primary absolute polycythemia is
of hypovolemia. The PCV and PP concentration are
usually
diagnosed by excluding other causes of
POLYCYTHEMIA
(PCV>59%)
/
RepeatPCV
PCVremainshigh
PCVretumns tonormal
Reiativepolycythemia
Fluid therapy
splenic contraction
Remainspolycythemic
PCVretums to normal
Absolutepolycythemia
Relativepolycythemia
fromhypovolemia
Blood gas analysis
>Hypoxia
>Secondarypolycythemia
appropriateresponse
Normal PO2
tohypoxia
Evaluatekidneys
>Renal neoplasia
>Secondaryinappropriate
orpyelonephritis
absolutepolycythemia
inappropriateerythro-
poietinrelease
No detectabie cause
→Primaryabsolute
polycythemia
polycythemia vera,
myeloproliferativedisease
FGURE 3-14. Diagnostic approach to polycythemia. The italicized common conclusions are made using the various procedures
listed. Primary absolute polycythemia is diagnosed by exclusion of causes listed above it (i.e., when splenic contraction is unlikely.
the hydration status is normal; no hypoxia is found from pulmonary, cardiac, or hemoglobin disorders; and the kidneys are normal)l.
PCv, Packed cell volume; PO2, partial pressure of oxygen.
62
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
polycythemia. The PCV usually remains at 70% to 80%
9. Fry MM, Kirk CA: Reticulocyte indices in a canine model of
despite fluid therapy. Serum erythropoietin concentration
nutitional iron deficiency. Vet Clin Pathol 35:172. 2006.
is not increased. Primary polycythemia is complicated by
10. Harvey [W. French TW. Meyer DJ: Chronic iron deficiency
se aiaas aou Ausaiui saaq ieu Aisosiaia
anemia in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:946. 1982.
11. Hillstrom A. Rowe A. Giger U. Tvedten H: Hereditary phos-
the PCV exceeds 60%.
phofructokinase deficiency in the Wachtelhund dog. } Am
Secondary Absolute Polycythemia
Anim Hosp Assoc 47:145, 2011.
12. Justin RB. Hohenhaus AE: Hypophosphatemia associated
with enteral alimentation in cats. J Vet Intern Med 9:228.
inappropriate forms. Appropriate secondary polycythe-
1995.
mia is caused by increased production of erythropoietin
 13. Kohn B et al: Primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
as the result of hypoxia (e.g. pulmonary or cardiac
in 19 cats: diagnosis, therapy. and outcome (1998-2004).
J Vet Intern Med 20:159, 2006.
documents hypoxemia (i.e, low partial pressure of
14. Lilliehook [E, Egenvall A. Tvedten HW: Hematopathology in
oxygen). Serum erythropoietin concentrations should be
dogs experimentally infected with a Swedish granulocytic
Ehrlichia species. Vet Clin Pathol 27:1l6. 1998.
increased. Additional evidence of secondary absolute
15. Meyer D]. Harvey [W: Hematologic changes associated with
polycythemia may include documentation of erythroid
 serum and hepatic iron alteration in dogs with congenital
hyperplasia in bone marrow samples or slight polychro-
portosystemic vascular anomalies. J Vet Intern Med 8:55.
masia in blood samples despite polycythemia.
1994.
Inappropriate secondary polycythemia may result
16. Moritz A et al: Canine and feline hematology reference
from renal diseases in which excessive erythropoietin
values for the ADVIA 120 hematology system. Vet Clin Pathol
secretion occurs. Polycythemia occurs in dogs with renal
33:32. 2004.
cell carcinoma, renal lymphoma, and chronic pyelone-
17. Perkins P, Carver E: Evaluation of the Hemavet automated
hematology system for reticulocyte enumeration. Vet Clin
 phritis. These cases have had PCVs that ranged from 64%
Pathol 33:570, 1996.
to 8l%. Serum erythropoietin concentration is usually
18. Perkins PC, Grindem CB, Cullins LD: Flow cytometic analy-
-uaa nas ul deaao aiqeiapisuon 'aaamoh paseau
 sis of punctate and aggregate reticulocyte responses in phle-
ropoietin activity has been found between normal dogs
botomized cats. Am J Vet Res 56:1564, 1995.
and dogs with primary and secondary polycythemia. In
19. Piek Cl et al: [diopathic immune-mediated hemolytic
cases of secondary polycythemia caused by renal neopla-
anemia: treatment, outcome, prognostic factors in 149 dogs.
 sia, removal of the diseased kidney results in return of the
J Vet Intern Med 22:366. 2008.
PCV to normal.
20. Schrader LA. Hurvitz Al: Cold agglutinin disease in a cat.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 183:121, 1983.
 21. Sappendale RJ: The diagnostic significance of the direct anti-
References and Suggested Readings
gobulin test (DAT) in anemic dogs. Vet Immunol Immuno-
puthol 1:49. 1979.
1. Alvarez F, Whalen K, Scott M: Conjugated, but not unconju-
22. Tvedten HW: Case E4: Basset hound hereditary thrombopa-
gated biirubin negatively interferes in Hitachi 747 assay of
 thy and iron defciency anemia. In Tvedten HW, editor: Multi-
inorganic phosphorus. Clin Chem 39:2345, 1993.
species hematology aflas: Technicon H-IE system. Tarrytown. NY.
2. Brazzell j. Weiss D): [diopathic aplastic pancytopenia
1993, Miles Diagnostic Division.
in the dog: 9 cases (1996-2003). Vet Clin Pathol 35:413.
23. Weiser MG. Kociba GJ: Sequential changes in erythrocyte
2006.
volume distribution and microcytosis associated with iron
 3. Brown DE et al: Erythrocyte indices and volume distibution
deficiency in kittens. Vet Clin Pathol 20:1. 1983.
in a dog with stomatocytosis. Vet Pathol 3l:247. 1994.
24. Weiss Dj: Sideroblastic anemia in 7 dogs (1996-2002). J Vet
4. Christian I et al: ZnCl, induced autologous [gG binding as a
Interm Med 19:325, 2005.
tool for evaluating immune-mediated clearance of dog RBC.
25. Weiss DJ: Hemophagocytic disorders in dogs: 24 cases
Vet Clin Pathol 32:548, 1995.
{1996-2004). I Am Vet Med Assoc 230:697. 2007.
 5. Christopher MM: Relation of endogenous Heinz bodies to
yim sjeo pue soop ui keooued moiew auog :a sslam '97
disease and anemia in cats: 120 cases (1978-1987). J Am Vet
non-regenerative immune-mediated haemolytic anemia and
Med Assoc 194:1089, 1989.
pure red cell aplasia. J Comp Pathol 138:46, 2008.
6. DeNicola DB, Matthews [A. Femandes P], Frye MB: Compari-
27. Weiss DJ: Myelodysplastic syndromes. [n Weiss DJ, Wardrop
 son of reticulocyte counts to mean copuscular volume and
KJ. editors: Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 6. Hoboken, NJ.
2010, Wiley-Blackwell.
dogs. Presentation at the [ntemational Society for Animal
28.Weiss DJ.Wardrop K], editors: Schalms veterinary hematology.
Clinical Biochemistry. 2006.
ed 6, Hoboken, NJ. 20l0, Wiley-Blackwell.
 7. Feldman BF. Kaneko JI. Farver TB: Anemia of inflammatory
29. Weissert D. Becker M. Monitz A: Paper title [abstract]. [n
 disease in the dog ferrokinetics of adjuvant induced anemia.
Proceedings of the Jahreskongress der DGK-DVG. Duessel-
Am J Vet Res 42:583. 1981
dorf. Gemany. 25-28 Sept 2008. City. 2008. pp 579-580.
 8. Flemming E[ et al: Clinical, hematologic. and survival data
30. Bourges-Abella N, Geffre A. Concordet D. Braun [P. Trume]
from cats infected with feline immunodeficiency vinus: 42
C: Canine reference intervals for the Sysmex XT-2000iV
cases (1983-1988). I Am Vet Med Assoc 199:913, 1991.
hematology analyzer. Vet Clin Pathol 40:303, 2011.
Leukocyte Disorders
Harold Tvedten and Rose E. Raskin
hematologic neoplasia such as malignant lymphoma,
BASIC LEUKOCYTE CONCEPTS
while cytology. histopathology, and histochemical and
Leukogram
immunologic evaluation of hematopoietic tissues that
appear abnormal on ultrasound, radiographs, or physi-
Leukocyte responses in the patient are evaluated by the
cal exam more consistently give a correct diagnosis
leukogram. The leukogram is the leukocyte portion of the
(see later discussion of hematopoietic neoplasia under
complete blood count (CBC) and includes the total leu-
Leukemia).
kocyte [white blood cell [wBC]) count, differential leu-
kocyte count (Diff), and description of WBC morphology.
Automated Versus Manual Differential
The relative leukocyte differential count (relative Diff) is
Leukocyte Counts
the percentages of various leukocytetypes (i.e., segmented
neutrophils [segs], nonsegmented neutrophils [nonsegs].
The automated total leukocyte count (WBC) from most
lymphocytes, monocytes, eosinophils, basophils). The
absolute differential leukocyte count (absolute Diff) is
The automated differential leukocyte count (AutoDiff) of
the number of each type of leukocyte per volume (micro-
liter or liter) of blood. Examination of leukocyte mor-
replaced the manual Diff (ManDiff) in human medicine
phology on the stained blood smear is used to determine
because this eliminates the cost of hiring a well-trained
a relative Diff and detect various abnormalities. Selected
person to evaluate the smears and because of the greater
hematologic techniques are described in Chapter 2.
precision with the AutoDiff. The AutoDiff has several uses
This chapter is intended to give an overview of under-
in the dog and cat, but these uses vary with the instrument 
standing the leukocyte response and to answer common
and the patient's problem. Current veterinary instruments
questions in diagnosis. Supplemental information regard-
fail to identify all types of canine and feline leukocytes.
ing leukogram interpretation may be found in other
No automated instrument enumerates the number of
textbooks.18,20.25,35.46
bands and younger neutrophils, and most instruments
Leukocytes are inflammatory cells, and changes in the
fail to identify nonsegs or basophils. Many instruments
leukogram are mainly used to identify the presence of
detect the total neutrophil and lymphocyte counts, and
inflammatory disease and characterize inflammation as
often eosinophil counts, well. A proper indication for use 
to severity and type The leukogram is not highly sensitive
of an AutoDiff is to monitor treatment response of these
in detecting mild, focal, or chronic inflammation; there-
types of leukocytes over days. This takes advantage of
fore, a normal WBC count and Diff does not exclude
the instrument's greater precision and cost savings in
inflammatory disease from the diagnosis. Acute phase
labor time.
protein concentrations, such as C-reactive protein in dogs
Some instruments have sporadic errors in detection
and senum amyloid A in cats, are much more sensitive
of eosinophils and monocytes. Some instruments offer
tests to document the presence of inflammation. The
only a three-cell Diff, which actually only indicates the
manual Diff is imprecise; therefore, the clinician should
number of total neutrophils and lymphocytes. Since a
use prominent changes in the number of types of WBCs
major use of the CBC and Diff is to document the pres-
for diagnosis.
essanau si ll 'aseasip Aroieeu yo Auaaas pue aa
The leukogram usually does not confirm infection,
to use a manual Diff to document a left shift and toxic
but some patterns, such as a very severe left shift together
change in neutrophils. A ManDiff is often required to
with very toxic neutrophils,strongly suggest severeinf
validate a monocytosis, eosinophilia, or basophilia
tion. Infection is more consistently confirmed by finding
recorded by an AutoDiff. The combination of precise data
the organism and associated inflammatory reaction
from hematology instruments and subjective observa-
with cytology (Chapter l6) and culture of tissues that
tions from the blood smear give the greatest chance to
look abnormal on ultrasound, radiographs, or physical
make a proper diagnosis and prognosis during initial
exam. Similarly. the leukogram often does not confirm
evaluation of an ill patient. Then, based on the
63
64
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
instrument being used and its ability to correctly measure
segs indicates severe neutropenia [i.e., 650 segs/μl). A
the hematologic abnormality documented by a full CBC.
WBC count of 50,000 leukocytes/μl with 65% segs indi-
including WBC, AutoDiff, and manual Diff, the clinician
cates neutrophilia (i.e, 32,500 segs/μl).
pue a iao aueu ieu iouou Auanasqns Ae
 Interpretation of the leukogram should begin with
 treatment using only automated results.
interpretation of the absolute cell count for each type of
leukocyte Then the changes are summarized by appropri-
 NOTE: The combination of precise data from hematology
ate hematologic terms indicating an increase or decrease
instruments and subjective but correct observations from
in a given leukocyte type. For example, “mild to moderate
the blood smear give the greatest chance to make a proper
leukocytosis with mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia.
diagnosis and prognosis during initial evaluation of an ill
patient.
total wBC count an increase in mature segmented neu-
trophils but no increase in band neutrophils, a decrease
in lymphocytes, and an increased numbers of monocytes,
Absolute Versus Relative Differential
respectively. This particular description is typical for a
Leukocyte Counts
recent glucocorticoid treatment or stress-type response.
Use of absolute WBC numbers allows more consistent
evaluation of leukogram responses than use of relative
percentages (Figure 4-1). For example a WBC count of
NOTE: Absolute cell numbers rather than percentages
10,000 leukocytes/μl with 65% segs has 6500 segs/μul. The
should be used to evaluate the leukogram.
6500 segs/μl is normal, but 65% segs are not always
normal. A wBC count of 1000 leukocytes/μl with 65%
Leukocyte Production, Circulation,
 and Emigration
To interpret the concentration of leukocytes in the blood,
one must consider the rate of leukocyte production in
bone marrow and release into blood, the distribution and
circulating half-life of leukocytes in the vascular system,
and the rate of emigration of leukocytes from blood into
tissues. Understanding of normal hematopoiesis is also
needed to understand classifcation of the leukemias
[neoplasia of hematopoietic cells, discussed later).
60,000
WBC
Leukocyte Production
Granulocytes [i.e, neutrophils, eosinophils, basophils)
and monocytes are produced in the bone marrow.
10,000
Although the bone marrow produces some lymphocytes,
WBC
most lymphocytes are produced by the peripheral lym-
phoid tissues [i.e., thymus, lymph nodes, spleen, tonsils,
bronchial-associated lymphoid tissue, gut-associated lym-
phoid tissue). Leukocytes develop in the bone marrow
1000
from pluripotent and committed stem cells influenced by
WBC
interleukins and colony-stimulating factors (Figure 4-2).26
Neutrophils compose the majority of leukocytes in
1200
 blood, and usually leukocytosis is caused by neutrophilia.
200
200
 Kinetics of neutrophils has been well studied and is best
understood. Thus the initial discussion here focuses on
20%
2%
2%
neutrophils. Cellular "pools" are used to conceptualize
and describe the “location" of neutrophils within the
FIGURE 41 Relative and absolute leukocyte counts. The
bone marrow and blood and to simplify interpretation of
bottom chamber of each bar indicates the absolute number of
bone marrow and CBC data (Figure 4-3). Bone marrow
band neutrophils, and the percentage below the bars indicates
is divided into two pools. The first, the mitotic pool of
the relative percentage of band neutrophils. The relative
myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and myelocytes, provides a
change between the first and second bar (i.e., 20% to 2%)
steady supply of neutrophils to meet tissue demand for
seems great; however, no change exists in the absolute
these cells. The second pool is maturation and storage.
number of band neutrophils in the blood (i.e., 200 bands/μl of 
which consists of metamyelocytes, bands, and segs that
blood). The relative percentage of band neutrophils between
lack mitotic ability. Precursor cells undergo progressive
the second and third bars seems identical. However, a normal
number of band neutrophils exists in the dog with 200 bands/μl
maturation and provide a reserve pool of segs to meet
of blood, but a true increase (left shift) in band neutrophils
sudden increased tissue demands for neutrophils until
occurs in the dog with 1200 bands/μl in the third bar. WBC,
the mitotic pool increases neutrophil production. It is
White blood cell.
uncommon in the dog and cat to have leukopenia during
Chapter 4: Leuhocyte Disorders
65
Pluripotent Stem Cell
MyeloidProgenitor
CFU-GEMM
Common
Lymphoid Progenitor
BFU-E
CFU-GM
CFU-Eo
CFU-Baso
CFU-Mast
CFU-E
CFU-Mega
Megakaryocytes
Neutrophils Monocytes
EosinophilsBasophilsMast Cells Erythrocytes
Platelets
T-Cells B-Cells NK-Cells
Interstitial Macrophages
DC
FGURE 4-2 Differentiation of the bone marrow pluripotent stem cells. Baso, Basophil; BFU, burst-forming unit; CFU, colony-
granulocyte-macrophage; Mega, megakaryocyte;NK,natural kller.
inflammatory diseases because this large storage pool is
in that order). As bone marrow stores of segs are depleted,
available for rapid release of neutrophils. The maturation
nonsegs (eg., bands, metamyelocytes, younger neutro-
and storage pools are combined in Figure 4-3. The most
phils) are released into the blood, and a left shift occurs:
mature stages of neutrophil are preferentially released
A left shift is a specifc indicator of inflammation, and
from the bone marrow into the blood first (segs. bands.
the severity of the left shift reflects the severity of
metamyelocytes, myelocytes, and finally promyelocytes,
inflammation.
BONE MARROW EXAM
CBC
CYTOLOGY
合
MATURATION
Circulating
MITOTIC
Metamyelocytes
TISSUES
Myeloblast
pool
Guts
Progranulocyte
band 
 Marginal
Lungs
Myelocyte
STORAGE
Segmenter
pool
Urine
BONE MARROW
BLOOD
TISSUE
FGURE 4-3 Neutrophil compartments in the body. Neutrophilsin various areas of the body are grouped into pools for evaluation.
The bone marrow cells are divided into the mitotic, maturation, and storage pools (see text). Neutrophils in blood are either in
the arculating pool, which is sampled by a complete blood count (CBC), or the marginal pool, which is hidden from sampling
via the CBC. Neutrophils move in one direction into the tissues, where they can be evaluated by cytology or histopathology.
(Modified from Boggs DR, Winkelstein A: White cell manual, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1975, FA Davis.)
66
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
The maturation and storage pool constitutes 80% of
TABLE 41.TOTAL BLOOD NEUTROPHIL POOL
the myeloid cell population, whereas the mitotic pool
CirCUlatING NEUTroPhiL pool, ANd
usually accounts for 20% of the myeloid series. In con-
MARGINAL NEUTROPHIL POOL IN DOGS
trast with neutrophils, promonocytes and monocytes are
AND CATS
released into blood at a relatively young age This lack of
DOG
CAT
monocyte maturation and storage in the bone marrow
explains why monocytes are observed infrequently in
TBNP x 10°/kg
10.2
28.9
most bone marrow aspirates, unless severe neutropenia is
CNP x 10%/kg
5.4
7.8
present.
MNP × 10°%/kg
 Leukocyte numbers and morphology within the bone
4.8
21.0
marrow can be evaluated by bone marrow aspiration for
Total blood neutrophil pool (TBNP) in cats is larger than in dogs because
cytology and core biopsy for histopathology. Aspirate
 of a very large marginal neutrophil pool. The relatively large feline mar-
smears of marrow allow qualitative and quantitative
ginal neutrophil pool (MNP), compared with that of the dog. allows
observations regarding cell morphology and maturation.
a larger potential shift of neutrophils into the circulating neutrophil
pool (CNP) with more dramatic leukocytosis during fear, excitement, or
Core biopsy provides the best estimation of bone marrow
strenuous exercise.
cellularity and detects stromal reactions (eg., myelofibro-
sis, granulomatous osteomyelitis). Chapter 2 discusses
the interpretation of a bone marrow examination.
and unidirectional (these cells do not return to the circu-
lation) event In health, neutrophils primarily migrate
into the respiratory, digestive, and urinary tracts at a low
NOTE: The production of segs from bone marrow myelo-
rate in response to bacteria and other stimuli. Neutrophils
basts takes approximately 6 days in the dog and cat, but
lyse quickly in the septic environment of the lumen of
rapid release of neutrophils from the normally large storage
the bowel. In inflammation, excessive tissue neutrophils
pool can produce a neutrophilia within minutes to hours.
Leukopenia is therefore uncomimon in dogs and cats during
may be visible as exudate or pus (see Chapter l6). In
even early stages of inflammatory disease. This is unlike the
diseases such as enteritis, tissue neutrophils may be
hidden from cytologic or gross observation; however,
delay in release of reticulocytes, which peak in numbers in
peripheral blood 4 to 6 days after onset of a regenerative
increased tissue demand for neutrophils usually is
anemia.
reflected in the leukogram.
Neutrophil Circulation
NOTE: The CBC allows quantitative and morphologic
When neutrophils are released into the blood, about half
observations about leukocytes in peripheral blood. The
hesitatively stick and roll along the endothelial cells (i.e.
leukogram represents the balance of leukocyte production
in the marginal pool) and are not in the central axial flow
in bone marrow, distribution in the vascular system, and
 of blood within vessels from which blood is taken during
emigration from blood vessels into tssues. Cytologic exarm-
ination of abnormal tssues, organs, or fluids can document
a venipuncture [i.e., in the circulating pool). Those neu-
where and what type of inflammation or infection exists.
trophils that are in the central axial flow of blood within
vessels and are taken into a blood sample [and counted
in the WBC count) are said to be in the circulating pool.
The marginal neutrophil pool is a "hidden" population
LEUKOCYTOSIS AND
associated with the endothelial lining of capillaries, espe-
cially the lungs and spleen. The circulating and marginal
NEUTROPHILIA
cell pools make up the total blood neutrophil pool
(TBNP). Neutrophils distribute between circulating and
Leukocytosis is usually synonymous with neutrophilia.
marginal cell pools, circulate for a brief period of time
For example, among 232 CBCs with a leukocytosis
(half-life of 7.4 hours), and emigrate from blood vessels
of greater than 17,000 WBCs/μl, 226 (97%) had
into tissues. Shifts between these pools can affect the
neutrophilia.
WBC count, especially in cats. In dogs, circulating and
d ieueu ai sie ui enba noqe aie siood eugie
Differential Diagnosis of
is two to three times the size of the circulating pool (Table
Neutrophilic Leukocytosis
4-1). Therefore, if neutrophils are mobilized from the
marginal pool to the circulating pool in response to fear.
The three most common causes of neutrophilia and leu-
excitement, or strenuous exercise, the neutrophil count
kocytosis are (1) inflammation, (2) stress and corticoste-
can potentially double in dogs and triple in cats. This
roids, and (3) exercise and epinephrine. Leukemia is
effect is called physiologic leukocytosis and is seen mainly
  q ( ss u aem
in young healthy cats.
massive to no increase in the WBC count. Inflammation
is most specifically identifed by the presence of a left
Neutrophil Emigration into Tissues
shift, or an absolute increase in nonsegs (Figure 4-4; see
Neutrophils normally spend about l0 hours in the vascu-
later discussion of left shift and hyposegmentation).
lar system before ermigrating from the blood vessels into
Inflammation is also suggested by leukocytosis greater
the tissues. Emigration is a random (i.e, non-age ordered)
than that usually expected with corticosteroid-
or
Chapter 4: Leuhocyte Disorders
67
NEUTROPHILIA/LEUKOCYTOSIS
Significant left shift.
>100o Nonsegs/μl
Yes
→INFLAMMATION
十
No
个
Marked leukocytosis-
Yes
→INFLAMMATION
Cats: WBCs > 30,000/μl
Dogs: WBCs > 40,000/μl
No
Lymphopenia-
→YeS-→STRESS/STEROID
No
EXERCISE OR
Lymphocytosis-
Yes
EPINEPHRINE
FGURE 4-4 Evaluation of leukocytosis and neutrophilia. The common causes of neutrophilia and subsequent leukocytosis usually
may be differentiated based on the immaturity of the neutrophils, the magnitude of the neutrophilia, and the tendency of the
ymphocytes to increase or decrease. When the laboratory finding is present (Yes), the conclusion to the right is made. When the
laboratory finding is absent (No), one moves down to the next differentiating feature. The values given are guidelines for more
certain diagnosis, and lesser values may still be interpreted to give certain conclusions. For example, dogs with inflammation often
have fewer than 40,000 white blood cells (WBCs)/μl and fewer than 1000 nonsegs/μl. Cases with mild neutrophilia may lack criteria
to make a definite diagnosis. Granulocytic leukemia is rare and not considered here.
epinephrine-associated changes. When mild neutrophilia
eosinophils, lymphocytes, plasma cells, and even baso-
is present without a left shift, the specifc cause of leuko-
phils, increase in blood and other tissues in various types
cytosis may be unclear. In such instances, the absolute
of inflammatory disease (see later discussions). Neutro-
lymphocyte count may be useful. Lymphopenia is com-
phils are specialists at killing bacteria, and bacterial infec-
monly associated with an endogenous stress-associated or
tion (i.e., sepsis) commonly causes neutrophilic types
exogenous glucocorticoid treatment effect. Transient lym-
of inflammation (e.g. exudative, purulent, suppurative.
 phocytosis may be caused by epinephrine-induced splenic
abscess) as well as pyogranulomatous inflammation.
contraction Oor an exercise-associated effect Persistent
However, neutrophilia occurs with other infections such
lymphocytosis is often caused by chronic immune stimu-
as certain mycotic, protozoal, and viral infections (e.g..
lus.
Concurrent processes occur often. For example,
feline infectious peritonitis). Inflammation also may
inflammation usually causes stress-related lymphopenia.
Occur from nonseptic processes such as necrosis (e.g..
Corticosteroid treatment is very common.
anemia. [IMHA]), chemical exposure (eg, turpentine is
 an experimental method of abscess formation), immune-
mediated diseases (eg. systemic lupus erythematosus.
IMHA), and toxins (eg., endotoxin, snake bite). Neo-
NOTE: Leukocytosis and neutrophilia are not only caused
 by inflammation. Leukocytosis may be a response to glu-
plasms may cause inflammation in several ways, such as
cocorticoid treatment or may result from acute stréss, an
causing ulceration, causing necrosis in normal tissues,
epinephrine-type response to fear or exercise, and occa-
outgrowing or damaging the blood supply with subse-
sionally leukemia.
quent necrosis in the tumor, predisposing the patient to
infection, or producing a paraneoplastic effect wherein
tumor products stimulate the bone marrow to produce
neutrophils or eosinophils.
Inflammation
Inflammation is a common and important laboratory
diagnosis. Inflammation usually causes neutrophilia and
NOTE: Neutrophilia with a left shift greater than 1000
is the major rule out for neutrophilic leukocytosis.
nonsegs/μl (1.0 nonsegs x 10°/L) specifically indicates
Neutrophils predominate in tissues during acute
inflammatory disease.
phases of many inflammatory diseases (eg. peritonitis.
 arthritis). Proliferation of macrophages and lymphocytes
occurs in more subacute to chronic inflammation
(especially within tissues other than blood). But many
Left Shift
chronic inflammatory diseases (suppurative or exudative
 A left shift (increased absolute numbers of immature neu-
diseases) may still have primarily neutrophils. (
Other
trophils) indicates inflammatory disease in the patient
inflammatory cells, such as monocytes-macrophages,
(see Figure 4-4). Identification of immature neutrophils
68
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
requires blood smear evaluation. Immature neutrophils
such bands, metamyelocytes, myelocytes, and younger
neutrophils are termed nonsegmented neutrophils (nonsegs)
/Non-
in general. Identifcation of nonsegs is subjective and
segmented
varies greatly among microscopists. Most experienced
CELL
 Segmented
microscopists, who examine blood smears daily, clearly
NUMBERS
neutrophils
recognize increased immaturity and toxic changes in neu-
trophils during inflammation. However, the number of
bands, metamyelocytes, and myelocytes reported will vary
among observers. Exact numbers of these cells are often
Lymphopenia=
impossible to determine when severe toxic change is
present, in which case a subjective description should be
Start
TIME (days)
used; for example "The blood had a severe degenerative
left shift with severe toxic change in neutrophils, though
FGURE 45 Expected leukocyte changes with resolving
exact numbers of each cell type could not be determined."
inflammation. The greatest leukocytosis and left shift are
may be the most honest description. Even in nontoxic
expected early in acute inflammation. This period is also
reactions the division between segs and nonsegs may be
accompanied by the lymphopenia of stress. During later
diffcult, and the term hyposegmentation is then used to
phases of inflammation,a more mature form of neutrophilia is
expected, because bone marrow hyperplasia and marrow pro-
indicate that the neutrophils looked more immature than
duction of neutrophils should be adequate to allow maturation
normal though the number of reported nonsegs was not
of neutrophils before release into blood. Tissue demand for
increased.
neutrophils also tends to decrease during recovery.
 Because of the effect of the observer's impression in
classification of nonsegs. one should use a definite
increase in nonsegs for a certain conclusion of inflamma-
tion. A finding of greater than l000 nonsegs/μl is a
Leukogram Changes in inflammation
reasonable threshold for a left shif. (Note that 1000
Figure 4-5 shows a likely pattern of leukocyte changes
nonsegs/μl equals 1.0 nonsegs × 10?/L.) Small changes
through a typical inflammatory response, with a distinct
a au uy su s io ep ot aep y
 onset of inflammation and then progressing uniformly to
values shoul d be interpreted with caution because manual
resolution. Changes in individual patients may vary from
differential leukocyte counts are especially imprecise with
this typical pattern due to treatment, rupture of an
nonsegs and cells found in low numbers, such as baso-
 absces, or the like. The greatest left shift is expected in
phils. Mild left shifts (i.e, 300 to 1000 nonsegs/μl) occur
early stages of the disease process, because as the preexist-
in hemorrhagic. chronic, or granulomatous diseases. No
ing bone marrow storage pool is depleted of segs, then
left shift may be noted in many patients with inflamma-
more bands and metamyelocytes are released to meet
tory disease, thus the absence of a left shift or a very mild
early intense demand. With time, myeloid hyperplasia
left shift does not exclude inflammation from the
within the bone marrow expands neutrophil production.
diagnosis.
When neutrophil production and maturation time are
The absolute number of nonsegs and their state of
sufficient, mainly mature segs are released into the blood
immaturity indicate the severity of the left shift Immature
 and the severity of the left shift should diminish or disap-
neutrophils (nonsegs) observed in blood include bands
pear. If tissue inflammation stabilizes at a persistent low
(stabs), metamyelocytes (juveniles), myelocytes, and pro-
to moderate level, the bone marrow should reach a pro-
myelocytes. Bands usually constitute most of the left shift
duction rate sufficient for most neutrophils to mature
because the more mature neutrophils are released from
before release. Thus chronic inflammation may be char-
bone marrow first Neutrophils younger than bands indi-
acterized by little to no left shift and minimal to no
cate an increasingly severe left shift associated with
leukocytosis. Therefore, chronic or mild inflammation
increasingly intense inflammation. If several myelocytes
may be diffcult to document by leukogram data alone.
and metamyelocytes are found, the number of meta-
Acute phase proteins, such as C-reactive protein or serum
myelocytes, myelocytes, and promyelocytes should be
amyloid A, are sensitive indicators of inflammation and
reported individually (not simply grouped as nonsegs) to
may be used to complement the leukogram. Increased
indicate severity of the left shift. Detectable numbers of
rouleaux (see Chapter 2) in canine blood smears or fever
blast cells (i.e, myeloblasts) or irregular maturation pat-
in the patient suggests inflammation. Increased rouleaux
terns may suggest granulocytic leukemia. More nonsegs
formation usually is associated with production of acute
than segs indicates a degenerative left shift and a poor
phase proteins such as fibrinogen. A normal leukogram
prognosis.
appearance does not exclude inflammatory diseases, espe-
cially if inflammation is mild or chronic, or only involves
a surface (e.g.. cystitis).
NOTE: The severity of a left shift is reflected by the abso-
lute number of nonsegs and individual numbers of the
NOTE: Chronic inflammation may have mild (slight, mature
more immature stages (e.g., metamyelocytes and myelo-
neutrophilia) or no dhanges in the leukogram because, with
 cytes) present. Increasing severity of the left shift indicates
time, increased bone marrow production of neutrophils
increasing severity of the inflammatory disease.
matches tissue consumption.
Chapter 4:Leurhocyte Disorders
69
Bone Marrow Response
Toxic Neutrophils). A degenerative left shift, leukopenia,
neutropenia, lymphopenia, leukemoid reaction, or a
During Inflammation
combination thereof is an atypical, unexpected response
Myeloid hyperplasia of the bone marrow is expected with
to inflammatory disease indicating severe disease,
inflammation of greater than 2 to 3 days' duration. Bone
toxemia, severe stress, inadequate bone marrow produc-
marrow sampling is seldom indicated in patients with
tion, problems interfering with an effective response, or
inflammatory diseases because a leukocytosis and left
a combination of these. A degenerative left shift has more
shift are usually present, and these indicate the marrow
nonsegs than segs, regardless of total leukocyte count.
is active. Persistent, moderate to severe leukopenia in a
Finding more immature than mature neutrophils indi-
dog or cat with inflammatory disease is unexpected and
cates that the bone marrow cannot produce neutrophils
thus may be an indication to examine the bone marrow
at a rate suffcient for them to mature completely prior to
for the cause (see Chapter 2)
release Either tissue demand for neutrophils has esca-
Prognosis
lated dramatically, cell production is decreased, or both.
Severity of change and trend over daily CBCs are impor-
Obviously factors other than neutrophil counts affect
tant in assessing prognosis. A degenerative left shift,
prognosis, such as the cause of the disease and site of
severe neutropenia and leukopenia, lymphopenia, and
inflammation. However, the neutrophil counts reflect the
ss uo suoau iso ui ae oxt pi
qurrent balance of effective bone marrow production and
 gram-negative sepsis, such as a ruptured intestine or par-
tissue demand. If the bone marrow is responding typi-
vovinus enteritis.
cally to an inflammatory process with a mild to moderate
Both leukopenia and neutropenia are unfavorable
 neutrophilia and mild to moderate left shift, the progno-
prognostic signs. These findings suggest that bone marrow
sis is relatively good. Leukocytosis in dogs is usually less 
is incapable of producing suffcient numbers of neutro-
than 40,000 WBCs/μl. In 182 canine CBC exams with
phils, that tissue consumption of neutrophils is over-
leukocytosis, 151 (83%) had 17,500 to 39,990 WBCs/μl.
whelming, or both. Neutropenia, whether primary (bone
Leukocytosis in this range is thus mild to moderate and
marrow disease) or secondary (excessive tissue consump-
suggests a favorable prognosis. Only 5% had marked to
tion), severely predisposes the patient to infection and
extreme leukocytosis of 61,050 to 127,500 cells/μl. Leu-
septicemia. Leukopenia is usually caused by neutropenia.
kemoid reactions of over 50,000 to 60,000 WBCs indicate
but lymphopenia may also cause leukopenia despite
a poor prognosis because, even in the presence of exces-
normal neutrophil numbers. Lymphopenia usually indi-
sive numbers of leukocytes (usually neutrophils),
the
cates stress. Severe or persistent lymphopenia indicates
cause of the inflammatory response is not corrected. The
severe or persistent stress. In severe leukopenia (e.g..
magnitude of feline leukocytosis is usually less than that
<100o WBCs/μl). a left shift is not concluded even if all
in dogs (i.e, 70% of cases are < 30,000 wBCs/μl). The
neutrophils are nonsegs. because an increase in the abso-
severity of eosinophilia in eosinophilic inflammation is
lute number of immature neutrophils greater than 1000
less than neutrophilia during neutrophil inflammation.
WBCs/μul is not possible. (Trying to perform a manual
Therefore, a leukemoid reaction of eosinophils (due to
differential wBC count is also not necessary because the
strong eosinophil inflammation, not leukemia or hypere-
total WBCs already indicates a neutropenia and lympho-
 osinophilic syndrome) is diagnosed when there are more
 penia, and imprecision of a 25 to 50 ManDiff count with
than 25,000 to 30,000 eosinophils/μl.
abnormally appearing cells is very great. Automated
Leukocyte count criteria, sugesting a poor prognosis.
instrument differential counts are more accurate in severe
are summarized in Table 4-2 (see also later discussion of
leukopenia.)
A leukemoid reaction is a marked leukocytosis
(>50,000 to 100,000 WBCs/μl) due to inflammatory
TABLE 4-2. LEUKOGRAM FINDINGS INDICATING
disease and not leukemia. Leukemoid means leukemia-
A POOR PROGNOSIS
like because of the magnitude of leukocytosis. A leuke-
 FINDING
moid reaction indicates a poor prognosis because, despite
REASON FOR POOR PROGNOSIS
abundant (and actually excessive numbers of) neutro-
Degenerative
Tissue demand exceeds bone marrow's
phils, the inflammatory disease is not being corrected.
left shift 
 production of neutrophils or causes 
Causes of leukemoid reactions are often severe localized
inadequate time for maturation of
infections (eg., pyometra, abscess). Additional causes are
neutrophils
IMHA, paraneoplastic syndromes with bone marrow
Leukopenia
Tissue demand exceeds bone marrow's
stimulation (e.g. metastatic fbrosarcoma, renal carci-
 production of neutrophil s
noma, rectal adenoma), rare parasitism (e.g. Hepatozoon
Leukemoid
 Even excessive numbers of neutrophils 
canis infection), and neutrophil functional defects (canine
reaction
 cannot correct the problem
leukocyte adhesion protein deficiency [CLAD] of Irish
Toxic
Moderate to many, moderately to
setters).3 With pyometra and some walled-off abscesses.
neutrophils
 severely toxic neutrophils are
 there is an anatomic problem preventing healing. Pus and
associated with longer hospitalization,
higher treatment costs, and increased 
the infectious agent or other cause cannot drain out of
the body, and antibiotics may not penetrate the lesion.
fatality
With CLAD, dysfunctional neutrophils are incapable of
Severe or
 Indicates severe and persistent stress
persistent
lymphopenia
The leukemoid reaction in IMHA seems an exception,
but acute massive destruction of erythrocytes and
70
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
phagocytosis of debris by macrophages is a strong stimu-
    so n  
lus for an inflammatory reaction.
with a significantly higher prevalence of shock, sepsis,
Differentiation of a leukemoid reaction from chronic
panleukopenia, peritonitis, pneumonia, and upper respi-
granulocytic leukemia (CGL) is diffcult. CGL is rare, s0
ratory tract diseases, as were infectious [viral and bacte-
the odds favor diagnosis of a leukemoid reaction when
 rial) and metabolic disorders.3 Negative fndings in cats 
massive neutrophilia exists. Both leukemoid reactions
with toxic neutrophils were milder than with dogs, sug-
and CGL lack the blast cells or atypia seen in acute granu-
 gesting that cats form toxic neutrophils with milder dis-
locytic leukemia (see Myeloid Neoplasms later in this
eases than dogs.
chapter). Left shifts in both leukemoid reactions and CGL
Classifcation of toxemia may be quite detailed’ or
often involve mainly bands, and both can have a few
more simplified (see Chapter 2). The number of neutro-
more immature forms. Cytologic examination of lymph-
phils that appeared toxic (percentage; or few, moderate.
adenopathy is often a key in diagnosis of CGL. Lymph
many) and severity of morphologic change should be
node aspirates [and even liver or spleen aspirates) with
reported. A few (i+) toxic neutrophils are of minimal
CGL look like bone marrow in having mixed hematopoi-
importance. However, moderate to many (2+ to 4+) toxic
esis with a few to moderate number of immature myeloid
neutrophils should not be ignored (see Figure 2-9). Toxic
cells, including myeloblasts. The number of blast cells is
change in neutrophils, though subjective, is sometimes
not obviously increased, so bone marrow aspirates in
the only indicator of disease because numerical results of
CGL are often not diagnostic. The leukocytosis of a leu-
the leukogram appear normal in many cases. A blood
kemoid reaction should resolve after appropriate treat-
smear evaluation by a competent observer should always
ment (e.g., removal of pyometra uterus). Clinical signs of
be included during initial evaluation of a sick patient.
illness, toxic neutrophils, and evidence of diseases that
cause leukemoid reactions (eg. pyometra) suggest diag-
Stress and Corticosteroid Response
nosis of a leukemoid reaction. Dogs with CGL have per-
sistent leukocytosis and often do not look sick.
Corticosteroid treatment and stress [endogenous corti-
sone release) are very common and cause prominent
changes in the leukogram (Table 4-3). The classic leuko-
gram pattern from recent corticosteroid treatment or
NOTE: A guarded to poor prognosis is indicated by the
acute stress is moderate leukocytosis with mature neutro-
presence of a degenerative left shift, leukopenia, leuke-
philia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia. In dogs, mild to
moid reaction, or moderate to marked neutrophil toxicity.
moderate monocytosis also may occur (e.g, 2500/μl).
Leukocytosis from corticosteroid treatment in dogs may
reach a maximum of 30,000 to 40,000 cells/μl, with a
predominance of neutrophils, but more commonly there
are 15,000 to 25,000 WBCs/μl. Neutrophilia develops
Toxic Neutrophils
o e    so i n t i
Toxic neutrophils were associated with increased fatality.
and returns to baseline values in less than 24 hours. In
length of hospitalization, and treatment costs in dogs.
cats, leukocytosis after corticosteroid treatment is usually
The prevalence of pyometra, parvovinus infection, acute
a little weaker (e.g..Z
22,000 WBCs/μl with 18,000
renal failure, peritonitis, IMHA, disseminated intravascu-
neutrophils/μl), without monocytosis.
lar coagulation (DIC), pancreatitis, septicemia, and neo-
Lymphopenia without neutrophilia is the most
plastic disorders was significantly higher among dogs
common change in the leukogram and usually indicates
with toxic neutrophils. Bacterial infections cause severe
stress. Chronic stress (e.g., chronic renal failure), long-
toxic changes in neutrophils, such as in secondary bacte-
term corticosteroid treatment, or hyperadrenocorticism is
rial enteritis in parvovirus enteritis. However, toxic neu-
 suggested by lymphopenia. The leukogram in chronic
trophils occur in disease without infection (e.g., IMHA,
stress may seem normal. Stress causes eosinopenia, but
 pancreatitis, chemotherapeutic agents, renal failure). The
normal animals may have few eosinophils so that
TABLE 4-3. LEUKOCYTE CHANGES IN A DOG TREATED WITH DEXAMETHASONE
FRIDAY
SATURDAY
MONDAY
TUESDAY
WEDNESDAY
WBCs/μl
12,200
22,200
19,600
31,100
29,300
 Segs/μl 
9525
18,648
10,976
26,433
25,491
Bands/μl
196
Lymphocytes/μl
1905
1998
5096
1866
879
Monocytes/μl 
635
1554
2156
2799
3132
 Eosinophils/μl
635
0
1176
0
0
WBCs, White blood cells.
Hematologic data are from an apparently normal dog teated daily with dexamethasone (except on Sunday) to illustrate the corticosteroid and stress
response. Data for Friday, the day before treatment began, should be used for baseline (reference) values. Exceptions to the clasic pattern occurred 
every day except Wednesday.
Chapter 4: Leurhocyte Disorders
71
TABLE4-4.EFFECTS OF CORTISONE ONCANINE GRANULOCYTES
GRANULOCYTE COUNT
GRANULOCYTE TURNOVER
(cells/μl}
TBGP (×10′/kg)
Ty(hours)
RATE (x10” cells/kg/day)
Control
5600 (3.0-8.4 x 103)
88 (53-112)
5.3 (3.8-6.3)
301 (157-468)
palea
13,800 (8.7-30.1 x 10)
162 (67-269)
7.6 (6.0-0.2)
352 (136-438)
Values are given as mean (range). Neutrophilia in the oortisone-treated dogs is reflected by an increased granulocyte oount, which is approximately
the absolute neutrophil count. The total blood granulocyte pool (TBGP) is the total number of granulocytes (mainly neutrophils) in the body and
is based on body weight. It illustrates a true increase in the neutrophils in the blood of dogs treated with glucocorticoids. The circulating half-life
(T f) of neutrophilsillustrates that neutrophils accumulate in the vascular system because of a longer life span. The granulocyte turnover rate docu-
ments an increased release of neutrophils from the bone marrow.
From Boggs DR, Winkelstein A: White cell manual, ed 3, Philadelphia, 1975, FA Davis.
eosinopenia is often overlooked. Stress or corticosteroid
Exercise and Epinephrine Response
treatment can help explain the lack of eosinophilia in
patients with eosinophilic inflammatory diseases.
Transient physiologic leukocytosis is noted mainly in
young. healthy cats during epinephrine release from fear
NOTE: Glucocorticoids (endogenous stress or treatment)
or after strenuous exercise [eg. struggling during veni-
puncture). This response is unlike the steroid-stress
have prominent effects on the leukogram. Lymphopenia is
iseal ie] oaoiun st ll isnoiaad paqusap asuodsan
the most common alteration in the leukogram of dogs and
hematologically incorrect) to call this epinephrine-
cats and reflects dhronic stress or long-term corticosteroid
treatment. The acute glucocorticoid effect is classically
a mature neutrophilia, lymphopenia, eosinopenia, and
but a sudden shift of cells occurs from the marginal to
in dogs  a monocytosis peaking  at  4  to 12 hours
the circulating neutrophil pool. This tends to cause a
post-treatment.
neutrophilic leukocytosis. Contraction of the spleen
tends to cause lymphocytosis and polycythemia. There is
no increased release of neutrophils from the bone marrow.
After corticosteroid exposure, the total blood neutro-
nor decreased emigration of neutrophils from the capil-
phil pool (TBNP) expands because of decreased emigra-
lary beds. Physiologic leukocytosis in cats is greater in
tion of neutrophils from the blood into the tissues and
magnitude than in dogs because cats have a larger mar-
increased release of neutrophils from the bone marrow
ginal neutrophil pool (three neutrophils in the marginal
into the blood (Table 4-4). In addition, neutrophils are
pool for every neutrophil in the circulating pool; see Table
shifted from the marginal pool (hidden) to the circulating
4-1). Physiologic leukocytosis in cats may be significant;
 pool (where they are included in blood collected by veni-
the WBC count often reaches 20,000/μl, and neutrophilia
puncture). A left shift is not expected with stress or corti-
may be overshadowed by lymphocytosis (6000
to
costeroid treatment because neutrophil release from the
15,000/μl).20 Dogs have such weak physiologic leukocy-
bone marrow is usually too mild to stimulate release of
tosis that it is seldom recognized clinically. Physiologic
bands and metamyelocytes in the presence of a normal
leukocytosis has been noted in research dogs that are bled
bone marrow storage pool of neutrophils.
sieue lenpiaipu ue pue uosiad aes a Aq aiauno
Nuclear hypersegmentation of neutrophils (called a
reference values are available from previous hematology
right shift) is more likely because corticosteroids decrease
emigration of and prolong the circulating half-life of neu-
(e.g. new blood taker), the mild increases in WBCs, neu-
trophils in the blood. As neutrophils age, progressive
trophils, lymphocytes, and packed cell volume (PCV) can
muclear hypersegmentation or  lobulation develops.
be detected.
Hypersegmented neutrophils have five or more nuclear
lobes.
Acute corticosteroid-induced changes are transient;
therefore, one or more of the expected changes may not
NOTE: Fear, through the fight-or-flight response, causes 
be seen depending on how long after treatment the
ui snoiiqo isou 'sisorsoxnal pasnpu-auuudeuida ue
healthy young cats. It is an immediate, mild to moderate 
sample was taken. Maximal leukocyte changes occur at 4
increase in neutrophils and lymphocytes that subsides
to 12 hours and may be normalized by 24 hours. For
gradually over 30 to 60 minutes. Lymphocytosis differenti-
example, Table 4-3 presents hematologic data from a
ates this physiologic leukocytosis from a steroid-stress
healthy dog treated daily with dexamethasone (except
response, which typically has lymphopenia.
Sunday). One day after initial treatment (Saturday), five
of the expected steroid-stress features occurred (i.e.,
leukocytosis, neutrophilia, no left shift, eosinopenia.
monocytosis). Lymphopenia was not present. On day 3
LEUKOPENLA AND NEUTROPENLA
(Monday with no dexamethasone treatment on Sunday)
there was lymphocytosis, monocytosis, and eosinophilia
most resermbling physiologic leukocytosis (described
aeiois moeu auoq aiel e aaey Aau asneaq se pue
next). Only on day 5 (Wednesday) was the full classic
pool of neutrophils. Leukopenia indicates a poor progno-
corticosteroid or stress pattern observed.
sis. Neutropenia is usually caused by excessive tissue
72
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 4-5. MAJOR CAUSEs oF NEUTROPENIA
degenerative left shift, marked toxic change, and leukope-
nia occur, gram-negative sepsis should be suspected.
Animals Affected
Neutropenia due to overwhelming infection may be
difficult to distinguish from that due to bone marrow
DOGS
CATS
depression. Neutrophils have a short life span in blood
(e.g. 10 hours), so neutropenia develops before anemia
 Consumption of Neutrophils
or thrombocytopenia. Thus neutropenia without throm-
Overwhelming sepsis/
endotoxemia (mportant) 
bocytopenia or anemia suggests severe inflammation.
Bicytopenia or pancytopenia (decreases in cells of two or
 Parvovirus enteritis (important)
 d s n sl  
Salmonellosis
marrow disease. However, overwhelming infection often
 Immune-mediated destruction
causes DIC, which causes thrombocytopenia (bicytope-
[rare)
nia). Inflammation causes anemia that may exist prior to
a severe exacerbation of the disease. Erythrocytes have
 Bone Marrow Suppression
u Aea juaiedde jou uao si eiuaue os sueds ayil guol
 Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
primary bone marrow disease. Primary bone marrow
(important)
disease may develop insidiously and lack clinical signs,
Feline immunodeficiency virus
whereas consumptive neutropenia develops rapidly in a
(FIV)
very ill animal. A left shift, toxic changes in neutrophils,
 Parvovirus (important)
and rouleaux formation suggest neutropenia as the result
Ehrlichiosis
of severe inflammation or infection.
Bone marrow toxicity
e a ssrd eu d s
 Estrogen (endogenous/
to septicemia. Thus neutropenia due to bone marrow
isnouaboxa
disease may first be noted when a secondary infection
Phenylbutazone*
develops. Neutropenia and leukopenia are side effects of
Phenobarbital
cancer chemotherapy. Neutrophil counts are often lowest
 Cancer chemotherapy
5 to 7 days after initiation of treatment. Neutrophil
counts of less than 1000 to 2000 cells/μl require monitor-
 Irradiation 
ing the patient for sepsis. Sepsis (probably from enteric
Leukemia (jmportant)
bacteria) is presumed to be present if the patient has fewer
 Myelophthisis/myelonecrosis
than 500 to 1000 neutrophils/μl and is febrile. It is recom-
Immune-mediated destruction of
neutrophil precursors (rare)
sive agents if the neutrophil count drops below 2500
*ncomplete list of other drugs is in text.
cells/μl or the platelet count is less than 50,000/μl.
(Courtesy of Dr. M.D. Willard.)
Bone Marrow Problems
Causing Neutropenia
Diagnostic testing of patients with persistent, undiag-
consumption of neutrophils during severe inflammation
nosed neutropenia includes bone marrow aspiration
and/or reduced bone marrow production (Table 4-5).
biopsy, core biopsy, or both. This may detect myeloid
(See also the discussion of bone marrow in Chapter 2 and
hypoplasia, ineffective granulopoiesis, bone marrow
the discussed of myeloid hypoplasia in the section on
necrosis, myelofibrosis,
.disseminated granulomatous
Bone Marrow Problems Causing Neutropenia later.) A
inflammation, leukemia, and other diseases (see Chapter
third cause of neutropenia, which is rare and more theo-
2). A proper history may reveal treatments or toxins that
retical, is a temporary shift of neutrophils from the circu-
can affect granulopoiesis (eg., estrogen or phenylbuta-
lating to the marginal pool, where they cannot be counted.
zone). Ineffective granulopoiesis confuses many clini-
Endotoxin can cause this change. This transient form
cians. The leukopenia is accompanied by normal to
asnesaq .'eiuadonauopnasd, Alenpe sl equadonau jo
increased numbers of myeloid cells [i.e., myeloid hyper-
the TBNP is unchanged. Rarely, immune-mediated or
plasia). Neutropenia due to myeloid hypoplasia seems
more logical, In ineffective granulopoiesis, neutrophils
some drug treatments.
are destroyed in the bone marrow by apoptosis before
During excessive tissue utilization of neutrophils,
they mature and are released into the blood. Apoptosis
neutropenia may be severe; this stimulates release of very
(programmed cell death) occurs in healthy dogs as part
immature neutrophils, even myelocytes and promyelo-
of the mechanism to regulate effective neutrophil produc-
cytes, from the bone marrow. The left shift is degenerative
tion. Apoptosis is affected by various mediators, and there
when nonsegs outnumber segs. An inflammatory process
is no morphologic change to allow diagnosis of a specific
involving a large surface area, such as septic peritonitis,
cause. Death of cells within the marrow may be excessive
enteritis, or septicemia, tends to cause severe neutropenia
in various infections and dnug treatments. Approximately
and leukopenia. In contrast, localized infections [abscess
half of feline leukemia virus (FeLV)-positive, neutropenic
or pyometra) with pyogenic bacteria usually cause
cats have marked granulocytic hyperplasia indicating
leukocytosis. Gram-negative bacterial infections are often
excessive apoptosis, whereas half have myeloid hypopla-
severe and cause consumptive neutropenia. when a
sia suggesting viral destruction of hematopoietic tissue as
Chapter 4:Leuhocyte Disorders
the cause. Ineffective granulopoiesis may also be an idio-
collies to life-threatening bacterial infections. A stem cell
syncratic drug reaction (e.g.. phenobarbital).
defect causes cyclic decreases in production of platelets,
Damage to or depletion of myeloid cells may cause
other granulocytes and monocytes, and erythrocytes [i.e..
myeloid hypoplasia (see Chapter 2). Causes of myeloid
reticulocytes). Because of a longer half-life of platelets
hypoplasia include parvovinus infection, endogenous and
and erythrocytes, numerical change in these cells is less
exogenous estrogen toxicosis in dogs, Ehrlichia canis infec-
noticeable than for neutrophils. Cyclic hematopoiesis,
tion, cancer chemotherapy, irradiation, and idiosyncratic
often with a more irregular periodicity, also has been
reactions to drugs such as phenylbutazone, trimethoprim-
observed in other breeds of dogs, in rare cats with FeLV
sulfadiazine, or chloramphenicol (see Chapter 
3).
infection, and after cyclophosphamide treatment of some
Immune-mediated neutropenia has not been well proven
dogs. Oscillations of neutrophils, other leukocytes, reticu-
in dogs and cats, but steroid-responsive neutropenias
locytes, and platelets occur at 8- to 29-day intervals.
have been described.
Hemograms obtained at 2- to 3-day intervals should
 Neutropenia may occur from laboratory error. The
doaument cyclic neutropenia, but daily CBCs may be
required to document cycling of other cells and
ment's leukocyte graphics (see Chapter 2) or by screening
platelets.
the blood smear. When in doubt, a full ManDiff should
be performed. The total wBC count is seldom wrong, but
MONOCYTOSIS AND
'aqoid e on oeiado aun jale pinoys sey suasu
Prominent leukocyte aggregation is uncommon but indi-
MONOCYTOPENIA
cates the WBCs were not evenly distributed in the EDTA
sample and therefore the WBC count may be incorrect.
Monocytosis occurs in about 30% of hospitalized dogs
In such cases new blood samples with different antico-
and 11% of cats. Blood monocytes mature into macro-
agulants should be obtained and analyzed without delay.
phages in tissues. Macrophages contribute to granuloma-
Blood specimens from intravenous fluid administration
tous and pyogranulomatous inflammation. Macrophages
lines may have excessive dilution by the fluid.
remove necrotic debris, kill fungi and some parasites,
inactivate vinuses, attempt to remove foreign bodies.
Parvovirus Infection
remove senescent and abnormal red blood cells (RBCs).
Parvovirus enteritis may be associated with leukopenia,
and destroy neoplastic cells. Monocytosis is expected in
neutropenia with severe toxic changes, and lymphopenia.
inflammatory diseases with a high need for macrophages.
Parvovirus infects and destroys rapidly dividing cells (eg..
For example, monocytosis is common in IMHA, in which
intestinal crypt epithelium, lymphoid tissue, hematopoi-
large numbers of RBCs are destroyed in macrophages.
etic cells). Massive neutrophil exudation through the
Necrotic cell debris also must be removed to allow tissue
damaged mucosa contributes to leukopenia. as does
regeneration and healing. Monocytosis accompanies sup-
hematopoietic cell damage in the bone marrow. Leuko-
puration, pyogranulomatous and granulomatous inflam-
shod aunn u aea Alensn pue juaisu si eiuad
    'su 
disease, so it may be missed without multiple CBCs. Mast
disease, and immune-mediated diseases.
cells from the inflamed gut may be detected in blood
Although macrophages are a “late"
”component of
smears. The mast cells come from damaged intestinal
mucosa and do not indicate mast cell neoplasia. Neutro-
both acute and chronic disease processes and monocyto-
philic leukocytosis is expected with recovery. During
sis alone should not be used to indicate chronicity of a
periods of intense granulopoiesis, a leukemoid reaction
process. (See earlier discussion on the canine corticoste-
Or other disturbances of normal cell maturation may
roid response, which commonly has a monocytosis 8 to
Occur With complete clinical recovery, baseline leuko-
12 hours after treatment.) If concurrent lymphopenia and
 gram values are regained. Diagnosis of parvovirus enteri-
eosinopenia are present, a stress or corticosteroid leuko-
tis is discussed in Chapter 9. Panleukopenia in cats has a
cyte response is likely. If lymphopenia and eosinopenia
similar hematologic response.
are not present, chronic inflammation or tissue destruc-
tion should be suspected. Monocytopenia is not signif-
Feline Leukemia Virus and Feline
cant Low numbers of monocytes normally are present in
Immunodeficiency Virus Infections
the blood. Monocytes are also unevenly distributed on
FeLV infection diagnosis and associated disorders are
the blood smear, so imprecision is great with manual
described in Chapter 15. FeLV causes many different
monocyte counts. Automated cell hematology analyzers
hematologic changes, including cytopenias, such as neu-
often have difficulty in differentiating monocytes and
tropenia.? Feline immunodeficiency vinus (FIV) infection
large lymphocytes. With low numbers of monocytes nor-
is also associated with cytopenias [i.e., neutropenia,
ou e 'wa suuno un uoisadi ea pue Ale
anemia, thrombocytopenia). Therefore any hematologic
cytopenia cannot be reliably detected.
abnormality in a cat indicates testing for FeLV and FIV.
Cyclic Hematopoiesis
LYMPHOCYTOSIS
Cyclic hematopoiesis (i.e, gray collie syndrome cyclic
neutropenia) is an autosomal recessive disease character-
Persistent non-neoplastic lymphocytosis usually signifies
ized primarily by cyclic neutropenia with 1ll- to 12-day
strong immune stimulation from chronic infection,
cycles, described originally in silver-gray collie pups. Neu-
viremia, immune-mediated disease, or recent immuniza-
tropenia as severe as 0 to 400/ul predisposes affected
tion. Supportive laboratory evidence of chronic infection
74
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
(in addition to history and physical fndings) may include
enteritis, and coronavirus enteritis. Cats may have lym-
hyperproteinemia with polyclonal gammopathy: pres-
phopenia in panleukopenia and FeLV infection.
ence of "reactive" lymphocytes; CBC evidence of inflam-
Loss of lymphocyte-rich lymph has been stated to
mation; or cytologic or histologic documentation of
cause lymphopenia. Examples include chylothorax in
inflammation, lymph node hyperplasia, or both. Lym-
dogs and cats, protein-losing enteropathy and lymphan-
phocyte counts up to 17,000 to 30,000/μul have been
giectasia in dogs, and disnuption of normal lymphatic
reported with Ehrlichia canis infection (or 9000/μl in Toxo-
circulation by inflammatory, infectious, or neoplastic dis-
eases in both species.18
(e.g, 4500/μl) may be seen during later recovery phases
Age affects the lymphocyte count Younger animals
Of Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection in dogs. Lympho-
usually have higher counts. For example, the minimal
 yim sieo pue sop un sasai aq iou ae siso
lymphocyte counts expected in dogs of various age cate-
u uaas sm m/ooo'oz on dn sisoooqdag soau
gories are 2000/μl from 3 to 6 months of age: 1500/μl
feline but not canine IMHA. Lymphocytosis up to
from 8 to 24 months of age: and 1000/μl over 24 months
13,000/μl and 9000/μl may be seen in canine and feline
of age. Thus one uses different lymphocyte counts to
hypoadrenocorticism (Addison's disease), respectively.
indicate lymphopenia in young dogs.
although only in 5% to 10% of patients.4 Transient lym-
Eosinopenia may be diffcult to document by routine
phocytosis occurs in physiologic leukocytosis (discussed
WBC counts. Eosinophils may be too few to be observed
earlier). Lymphocytosis in feline physiologic leukocytosis
in leukocyte differential counts of normal animals, so
is usually under 20,000/μl but may exceed 36,000/μl.40
reference values may go down to 0. Variation expected
The previous examples of lymphocytosis were often
with a l00-cell, manual differential leukocyte count when 
maximal values and not commonly expected values.
2% of a cell type (eg. eosinophils) is present is 0% to
Maximal values are useful in differential diagnosis of lym-
 8% (95% confidence interval).34 Eosinopenia in a sick
phoid leukemia but should not exclude diagnosis of
animal may be likely if 0% eosinophils are seen and if
other causes of lymphocytosis.
concurrent lymphopenia is present The most common
causes of eosinopenia are severe stress associated with
illness and response to corticosteroid administration.
Reactive Lymphocytes and
Blast-Transformed Lymphocytes
hounds, and occasionally other breeds of dogs may result
from misidentification of "vacuolated" or “gray" eosino-
Reactive lymphocytes are large immune-stimulated lym-
phils. Instead of having red-orange granules, gray eosino-
phocytes with dark-blue cytoplasm and irregular, scal-
phils have only clear-staining granules that look like
loped, or cleaved nuclei. They are also called immunocytes,
empty vacuoles. Alternatively. vacuolated eosinophils
virocytes, and wariant lymphocytes. In contrast blast-
may have mainly vacuoles with occasional typical red-
transformed lymphocytes have a large nucleus with a
orange granule or hints of red in mainly clear granules. It
light, dispersed chromatin pattern with prominent nucle-
is often uncertain if there are empty vacuoles from
oli or nucleolar rings. Rare reactive lymphocytes are
degranulation or if the granules are unstained. The clear.
visible in blood smears from healthy animals, whereas a
unstained granules in the greyhound eosinophil may be
few to several reactive lymphocytes may occur in blood
seen as granules and not empty vacuoles on electron
smears from sick or recently vaccinated animals. Reactive
microscopy. Hematology instruments (e.g. Advia 2l20)
lymphocytes are not of special diagnostic significance.
may occasionally fail to detect eosinophils in some
The number of reactive lymphocytes does not consis-
samples.
tently reflect the degree of immune stimulation, nor is it
pathognomonic for any specific disease. Reactive blast-
transformed lymphocytes may appear unusually numer-
EOSINOPHILIA
ous, large, or active (especially in young animals) and
may be been mistaken for lymphoid leukemia. Reactive
Eosinophilia usually indicates eosinophilic inflamma-
lymphocytes may confuse staging or diagnosis of recur-
tion. However, eosinophilic inflammation in tissues is
rence of disease in patients with lymphoma.
often unaccompanied by detectable eosinophilia in
blood because eosinophils have a very short half-life in
blood. Cytology or histology will document the eosino-
LYMPHOPENIA AND EOSINOPENLA
philic inflammation in tissues (e.g., lung, skin, gut).
Eosinophilia is an increase in eosinophils over the labora-
Severe stress or exogenous corticosteroid administration
tory's reference values, which may vary from less than 750
(see Stress and Corticosteroid Response earlier) usually
to less than 1300/μl eosinophils in dogs and less than
causes lymphopenia and eosinopenia. Lymphopenia is
750 to less than 1500/μl in cats. Over 5000/μl eosinophils
also expected early in inflammation (see Figure 4-5), and
is a very strong response and may be termed hypereosino-
the return of the lymphocyte count to normal is a good
philia. A leukemoid reaction of eosinophils (due to strong
prognostic sign indicating recovery from the stress of
eosinophil inflammation but not leukemia or hyper-
inflammation. Lymphopenia occurs in some viral dis-
eosinophilic syndrome) is concluded when there are
eases by direct viral damage of lymphoid tissue and
-i3ou au 'm/shqdouisoa 0oo'oe 0t ooo'57 ue4 aiou
through lymphocyte redistribution from stress or antigen
ler and German shepherd breeds have greater reference
exposure. Canine viral diseases causing lymphopenia
values for eosinophils and more eosinophilic diseases.22
include distemper, infectious canine hepatitis, parvoviral
The rottweiler has a tendency to develop eosinophilic
Chapter 4:Leuhocyte Disorders
75
PERSISTENT
EOSINOPHILIA
(>750-1500 cells/μ.l)
Yes
Skin examination
Flea bite dematitis
(look for)-
Eosinophilic plaque
Linear granuloma
Allergic dermatitis
Cuterebra
Respiratory tract
examination
Asthma
(look for) -
Paragonimus
Aleurostrongyius
Occult heartworms
Digestive tract
> Parasitic or nonparasitic
examination
enteritis
(look for) -
Oral lesions
Hypereosinophilic syndrome
Then look for other disorders such as hermatopcietic and
and infectious diseases, or idiopathic changes.
FIGURE 4-6 An algorithm to diagnose common causes of eosinophilia in cats.
diseases such as hypereosinophilic syndrome and eosino-
inflammation from inhaled allergens in feline asthma
philic meningoencephalitis. Siberian huskies and Alaskan
may cause damage to respiratory epithelium. Eosinophils
Aeuomnd jo Auanba paseaul aey osie sanmeie
are attracted to inflamed tissue by mast cell products and
infltrates with eosinophils (PIE: pulmonary broncho-
lymphokines.B
 Eosinophilic  inflammation is strongly
pneumopathy: eosinophilic pneumonia), eosinophilic
coupled to mast cells and basophils. Eosinophils may be
pulmonary granulomatosis, and oral eosinophilic granu-
abundant in mast cell tumors and lymphoma masses
loma. Cavalier King Charles spaniels are predisposed to
because of production of mediators from mast cells or
eosinophilic granuloma and eosinophilic stomatitis.
lymphocytes that attract eosinophils.
Eosinophils kill parasites, regulate the intensity of
hypersensitivity reactions mediated by immunoglobulin
Diagnostic Approach
E (IgE) antibodies, and may promote inflammation and
tissue damage. Eosinophils kill parasites by attaching to
Parasitic and allergic processes are considered frst when
them and forming a digestive vacuole between the eosin-
identifying the cause of eosinophilia (Figures 4-6 and
ophil and parasite Eosinophil granules contain potent
4-7). However, eosinophilia is often not associated with
molecules such as major basic protein and eosinophil
parasite infestations or allergy. Eosinophilia may accom-
peroxidase, which degranulate into the digestive vacuole
pany other inflammatory reactions; fungal (e.g. crypto-
and damage the wall of the parasite or ovum and kill it.
coccosis), viral (eg., FeLV), or bacterial (eg., Streptococcus
A more intense eosinophilic response occurs with para-
Or Staphylococcus species) infection; and neoplasia (e.g..
sites within tissues (e.g., heartworms, strongyles, migrat-
mast cell tumor, lymphoma, mucinous carcinomas, fbro-
ing lung flukes such as Paragonimus kellicotti). Endoparasites
sarcomas, eosinophilic leukemia). Hypereosinophilic
such as tapeworms or Giardia, which do not invade tissue,
syndromes can produce severe, persistent circulating and
generally do not incite eosinophilia. Some parasites may
tissue eosinophilia.
-ad asodxa pue ap Aaue iun eudousoa aeins iou
 Mast cells are sentinel cells, and are numerous near
viously hidden antigens. Production of eosinophilia is an
surfaces such as the skin, digestive tract, respiratory tract,
immune response. The frst exposure to a parasite pro-
and genitourinary tract Therefore, the cause of eosino-
 duces a modest, delayed eosinophilia. The second expo-
 philia can also be evaluated via a body systems approach.
 sure to the same parasite results in an intense, dramatic 
The integumentary system is examined for ectoparasites.
eosinophilia.
dermatitis, or masses. Flea bite allergy is a common cause
An eosinophilic inflammatory response occurs to
of eosinophilia in cats. The respiratory tract may be evalu-
certain allergens. Lymphocytes respond to the allergen by
ated cytologically by transtracheal wash, bronchial brush-
producing an IgE-type immune response. IgE binds to
ings, swabs, orcollecting materialadherentto endotracheal
mast cells, which triggers an inflammatory response.
tubes. Heartworm disease and PIE (pulmonary broncho-
Eosinophil inflammation unfortunately often damages
pneumopathy: eosinophilic pneumonia) are common
normal tissue locally.
.For example,
 eosinophilic
causes of eosinophilia in dogs (disease incidence varies
76
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
PERSISTENT
EOSINOPHILIA
(>750-1250 cells/μ)
Yes
Heartworm examination
Dirofflaria not
(look for)
Dipetaionema
Respiratory tract
Eosinophilic pneumonitis
examination
Filaroides
(look for)
Paragonimus
Skin examination
 Flea bite dermatitis
(look for)
Allergic dermatitis
(food; Staphylococcus)
Strongyioides
Others
Digestive tract
 Parasitic or nonparasitic
examination
enteritis
(look for)
Oral eosinophilic granuloma
FIGURE 48 A canine basophil and eosinophil are shown. The 
Then look for other disorders such as hermatopcietic and
canine basophil often does not have the distinct, dark-blue
nonhematopoietic neoplasms, a variety of inflammatory 
granules seen in many other species, but is identified by a long
and infecticus diseases, estrus, or idiopathic changes.
thin granulocyte nucleus and lavender-colored cytoplasm.
Granules may stain well with some stains. The canine basophil
AGURE 47 An algorithm to diagnose common causes of
is often mistaken for a toxic neutrophil or monocyte. The
persistent eosinophilia in dogs.
eosinophil has various-sized round granules.
depending on location). Fine-needle aspiration or surgi-
by the Advia 2l20. Basophilia of 2% may be missed in
cal biopsy may aid in evaluating dermal or pulmonary
manual differential counts because of imprecision of the
 masses. Examination of the upper alimentary tract should
method. Basophilia must be 3% to 6% to be consistently
include visual inspection of the oral cavity for eosino-
detected.
philic granulomas, especially the eosinophilic granuloma
Basophilia may not be detected because basophils are
complex of cats and Siberian husky dogs.
difficult to identify. Canine basophils have few, widely
Fecal ova examination is inexpensive though the
scattered purple [i.e, metachromatic) or poorly stained
 presence or absence of ova is usually unrelated to the
granules, especially with water-based stains. These cells
primary cause of eosinophilia. If eosinophilic gastro-
may be misidentified as monocytes or toxic neutrophils
enterocolitis is suspected, the clinician should consider
(Figure 4-8). Feline basophil granules are numerous,
endoscopic examination, surgical biopsy, and cytologic
 moderately sized, round to oval, and grayish beigeto light
evaluation of any lesions. Estrus in dogs occasionally
lavender (Figure 4-9). This appearance of feline basophils
causes eosinophilia. Differential diagnosis of very strong
is unique, but feline basophils may be mistaken for eosin-
eosinophilic inflammatory diseases, hypereosinophilic
ophils with faded granules or monocytes. Feline eosino-
syndromes, and eosinophilic myeloproliferative diseases
phils have red-orange, rod-shaped granules, whereas
 may be difficult in some cases without an obvious cause.
monocytes have blue-gray cytoplasm that is devoid of
distinct granules. Infrequently, feline basophils have one
BASOPHILIA
identification.
Basophilia is usually accompanied by eosinophilia.
Basophils are considered rare in normal dogs and cats.
and diagnosis is mainly directed toward identifying the
However, basophilia (defined as finding l or more baso-
cause of the eosinophilia. Basophils are an integral com-
phils during a manual Diff and reported as ≥l00/μl or
ponent of hypersensitivity reactions, as are mast cells and
0.1 x l0?/L) was seen in 8% of Swedish canine patients.
 eosinophils. Rottweiler dogs have an increased frequency
Extreme canine basophilia of greater than or equal to
of basophilia but also eosinophilia. Basophils are
ues pue aiei si eqdouisoa pnoum (h/ol xo'7) m/oooz
involved in hemostasis, lipid metabolism, rejection of
suggest chronic myeloproliferative disease if persistent
ticks, and tumor cell killing.1 Basophilia is often caused
and combined with prominent thrombocytosis. Auto-
by parasitism (especially Diroflaria immitis infection) and
mated instruments [i.e., Advia 2l20, Cell Dyn 3500,
hypersensitivity reactions. Additionally. basophilia
lis
Sysmex XT-2000iV, and LaserCyte) fail to detect canine
associated with lipemia or with canine and feline mast
and feline basophils and thus never detect basophilia.
cell tumors,
. or occurs as a form of chronic granulocytic
Basophils may be counted as large unstained cells (LUCs)
leukemia.18
Chapter 4: Leuhocyte Disorders
77
ABNORMAL NUCLEAR
like a severe degenerative left shift) (Figures 4-13 and
4-14). The characteristic WBC appearance in PHA should
MORPHOLOGY AND CYTOPLASMIC
be recognized and these neutrophils should be reported
INCLUSIONS
as Pelger-Huet cells and not nonsegs to avoid misdiagno-
sis by clinicians reading the CBC, who may falsely con-
Hyposegmentation is decreased nuclear segmentation of
clude very serious inflammation. The nuclear chromatin
granulocytes, which usually indicates immaturity and a
'a pue aso sieadde son thd jo uanid
response to inflammation. Hypersegmentation presents
and the cytoplasm is clear and devoid of toxic changes.
with excessive lobulation, defined as more than five lobes.
Neutrophils function normally, and a predisposition to
This nuclear change reflects more mature neutrophils.
infection has not been demonstrated. PHA occurs in both
Hypersegmentation may be the result of prolonged neu-
dogs and cats and is presumed to be inherited in an
trophil time in circulation, which is commonly associated
with corticosteroid treatment. However, genetic develop-
mental abnormalities, nutritional problems, preleukemic
 Or dysplastic conditions, and leukemia may be responsi-
ble for nuclear changes. Dysplasia and leukemia are dis-
qussed later in this chapter.
 Cytoplasmic inclusions, such as Dohle bodies and
toxic granulation, may be associated with toxic change in
neutrophils. Circulating neutrophils may contain parti-
cles phagocytized in blood, such as Heinz bodies, cell
debris, opsonized erythrocytes (or hemosiderin), medica-
tions, or mast cell granules. Infectious agents such as
bacteria [i.e, Anaplasma, bacteremia), protozoa [i.e., Hep-
atozoon canis, Leishmania spp.). or yeast [i.e, Histoplasma
capsulatum) may be found within the cytoplasm of circu-
lating leukocytes (Figures 4-10, 4-1l, and 4-12). Rarely.
genetic diseases are responsible for a variety of cytoplas-
mic inclusions. Staining artifacts and precipitate may
confuse the observer.
Pelger-Huet Anomaly
Pelger-Huet anomaly (PHA) is an inherited, lifelong dis-
FIGURE 410 A canine neutrophil with Anaplasma phagocy-
 order of leukocyte development characterized by nuclear
tophilum. There are three morula in the cytoplasm, but other-
hyposegmentation of neutrophils, other granulocytes,
wise the nuclear and cytoplasmic morphology is normal.
and monocytes. Almost all neutrophils resemble bands
 Or metamyelocytes (i.e., absolute leukocyte results look
FIGURE 49 A feline basophil has round lavender-colored
granules and the not bright-orange rod-shaped granules of
FIGURE 4-11 Two canine neutrophils containing Hepatozoon
the eosinophil. The feline basophil is often mistaken for an
canis. This was a buffy coat smear to concentrate the number
eosinophil.
of leukocytes.
78
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
FIGURE 4-13 A canine Pelger-Huet neutrophil has a nuclear
shape like a metarmyelocyte but a very mature dense dhromatin
pattern of a mature neutrophil. The cytoplasm is clear and not
toxic. A Pelger-Huet neutrophil should be recognized as such
and reported as a Pelger-Huét neutrophil and not a band or
metamyelocyte, which would mislead the person reading the
report.
FIGURE 4-12 Two monocytes (let) and two toxic, young band
neutrophils (right side of photo) in a 16-week-old Doberman
lower monocyte contains two rod-shaped bacteria. The dog
had a degenerative left shift with more bands than segs and a
moderate monocytosis. The monocytes had many vacuoles
and looked activated (blue cytoplasm). It is difficult to differ-
entiate toxic immature neutrophils from monocytes.
FIGURE 414 A canine Pelger-Huet eosinophil also has a
autosomal dominant manner.* However, PHA may be
metamyelocyte-shaped nucleus but with a dense dumped
inherited in an autosomal incompletely dominant pattern
chromatin pattern. Various-sized granules are typical of the
in Australian shepherds, suggesting that the expression of
canine eosinophil.
Bacterial infection, dnug treatment, developing granu-
locytic leukemia, or FeLV infection may cause acquired
nuclear hyposegmentation of neutrophils (i.e, pseudo-
with fusion of lysosomal granules into large pink cyto-
PHA). True PHA can be confirmed by finding the anomaly
plasmic inclusions in neutrophils, eosinophils, and other
in blood smears of parents, siblings, or other relatives or
cells. Coarse clumping of melanin granules is associated
by proving inheritance of the trait by prospective breeding
with color dilution of the haircoat and irises. In addition,
trials. True PHA has persistent nuclear changes on repeti-
decreased choroidal pigment causes a red fundic reflex
tive blood smear analysis and no clinical signs.
and photophobia in bright light. Blood smear examina-
tion and the cat's gross appearance confrm diagnosis of
Genetic Diseases
CHS. Neutrophil inclusions are positive on peroxidase
with Cytoplasmic Inclusions
and Sudan black B stains. In contrast with other animal
Chediak-Higashi Syndrome
species, cats with CHS have no predisposition to infec-
tion. Cats with CHS have an increased bleeding time
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) occurs as an autoso-
secondary to mild platelet dysfunction, however. Hemo-
 mal recessive trait in Persian cats with yellow-green eyes
stasis may be prolonged slightly after trauma, venipunc-
and a diluted smoke-blue haircoat.4 CHS is associated
ture, or elective surgery.
Chapter 4: Leurhocyte Disorders
79
LEUKOCYTE FUNCTION DEFECTS
Neutrophil function disorders have been reviewed by
Weiss.4 Primary neutrophil dysfunctional errors are rarely
documented. They may be suspected in animals with a
history of recurrent infections in association with a
normal to extremely elevated neutrophil count and lack
of neutrophil migration into sites of infection as deter-
mined by cytology. Diagnosis of a primary neutrophil
dysfunction requires excluding common causes of
immune suppression or secondary neutrophil dysfunc-
deficits, endocrine changes (eg., late luteal phase of estrus
in bitches), or various infections. Neutrophil function
tests include neutrophil adherence, chemotaxis, phagocy-
tosis, bactericidal activity, or a combination thereof. Tests
of neutrophil function are labor intensive, take a long
time to perform and are thus expensive, and are available
only through a few specialists or research laboratories to
which the animal must be referred for diagnosis.
Canine CD11/CD18 Adhesion
Protein Deficiency
Canine adhesion protein deficiency (i.e., canine leukocyte
adhesion molecule deficiency [CLAD], canine granulocy-
topathy syndrome) occurs infrequently in Irish setter and
Irish setter-cross puppies. CLAD is an autosomal reces-
sive disease Affected puppies have recurrent bacterial
infections before 12 weeks of age Leukogram abnormali-
FIGURE 4-15 A Birman cat neutrophil granulation anomaly
ties often include a leukemoid reaction (eg.. up to
with prominent granules resembling the staining of granules in
208,000 cells/μl). Fluids from sites of infection contain
progranulocytes in the bone marrow.
few neutrophils, because they are less able to emigrate
from the microvasculature to the sites of infection.
Neutrophils lack CDll/CDl8 adhesion proteins on the
Birman Cat Neutrophil
plasma membrane surface which normally facilitate
Granulation Anomaly
phagocytosis of organisms and cell emigration from
A staining anomaly of neutrophils stained with
blood vessels.3?
Romanowsky-type stains is an autosomal recessive trait in
Birman cats.4 The usually neutral-staining granules of
neutrophils instead stain prominently, similar to granules
Chronic Granulomatous Disease
in progranulocytes (Figure 4-15). The defect is asymp-
in Doberman Pinschers
tomatic but needs to be differentiated from toxic granula-
tion and mucopolysaccharidosis (MPS) types VI and VIl.
Chronic respiratory disease in eight closely related Dober-
man pinschers was attributed to impaired neutrophil
Lysosomal Storage Diseases
bactericidal activity.7 Neutrophils phagocytized bacteria
Storage diseases are rare inherited enzyme defects that
normally but were unable to kill them. Immunoglobulin
cause accumulation  of intermediate metabolites of
concentrations,
complement
concentrations,
puE
 complex molecules within cellular lysosomes. Depending
mitogen-stimulated lymphocyte transformation
were
on the nature of the metabolite and its affinity for
normal. Septicemia, monocytosis, and a degenerative left
Romanowsky-type stains, cellular inclusions may appear
shift are shown in a 16-week-old Doberman puppy in a
purple and stringy. as in MPS VI (i.e., Maroteaux-Lamy
litter of Swedish puppies with likely chronic granuloma-
syndrome) of cats or MPs VIl of dogs, or may appear as
tous disease of Doberman pinschers (see Figure 4-12).
clear vacuoles in leukocytes in cats with lysosomal acid
lipase deficiency. The characteristic purple granules of
Myeloperoxidase Deficiency
MPS can be differentiated from toxic granulation, because
cytoplasmic basophilia is absent and toxic granulation is
In addition to neutropenia in cyclic hematopoiesis of gray
uncommon in dogs and cats. Lysosomal storage diseases
collies, a bactericidal defect due to myeloperoxidase deff-
often are associated with progressive central nervous
-xaa paie u spaqsap uaq sey auan
system or skeletal disease but may be identifed on a CBC
dase deficiency was notedin dogs with severeconsumption
by observing characteristic inclusions or vacuoles in cir-
of neutrophils in inflammatory diseases such as parvo-
culating leukocytes.
vinus enteritis, pyometra, pyothorax, and pneumonia.17
08
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Recurrent Infections in Weimaraners
Pero
 Defective neutrophil function was identified in weimara-
ner puppies with recurrent fevers and infections. Their
 neutrophils had a decreased chemiluminescence response
to phorbol esters.
Acquired Neutrophil Dysfunction
Acquired neutrophil dysfunction has been reported in a
few dogs with poorly regulated diabetes mellitus, pyo-
derma, demodicosis, protothecosis, and lead toxicosis. A
lack of pyuria (no neutrophils seen) is noted in some
dogs with diabetes mellitus or hyperadrenocorticism in
which bacteria may be cultured from cystocentesis
samples. This suggests a defect in neutrophil migration in
those diseases. In cats, neutrophil dysfunction has been
infectious peritonitis.46
DYSPLASTIC AND NEOPLASTIC
FGURE 4-16 Acquired myeloperoxidase deficiency in dogs is
CONDITIONS OF BLOOD CELLS
seen with severe inflammatory diseases and may be detected
and the severity graded by the magnitude of an error in the
The proliferative responses of leukocytes previously dis-
Advia 2120 dassification of neutrophils. The Advia uses size (y
cussed arise from the purposeful need to replace missing
axis) and peroxidase staining (x axis) of leukocytes to perform
circulatory cells primarily related to increased utilization
an automated differential leukocyte count. In this peroxidase
Or consumption. The bone marrow in this condition
dot plot, the red dots are neutrophils but about half of the
demonstrates hyperplasia. Other hematopoietic cell pro-
neutrophil duster (in red ovall was dassified as monocyte
liferations may either be poorly regulated with abnormal
(green dots) reflecting decreased peroxidase activity in the
development and morphology. known as myelodysplasia,
neutrophils. The number of neutrophils misclassified as mono-
 or be nonpurposeful, unregulated new growth, recog-
half the neutrophils being incorrectly dassified as monocytes
nized as neoplasia. Malignant neoplasia of blood cells is
was used to indicate the worst grade of rtyeloperoxidase defi-
termed leukemia, literally meaning “white blood" from
dency. The Advia monocyte count was 40% in this blood
the observed large buffy coat. Leukemia reflects an abnor-
sample, but the manual monocyte count was only 11%.
mal population of hematopoietic cells found within the
blood or bone marrow as opposed to solid tissues, such
as lymph nodes, spleen, or liver.
This caused a misclassification of neutrophils as mono-
Non-Neoplastic Myelodysplasia
cytes by the Advia 2120 (Figure 4-16). The Advia uses size
of leukocytes and peroxidase staining for its AutoDiff. The
Criteria used by some to desigmnate significant dysplasia
percentage of neutrophils misclassified as monocytes was
involve having greater than 10% dysplastic cells in one or
used to grade the deficiency of myeloperoxidase. Grade 3
more hematologic cell lines in the bone marrow and
(worst deficiency) had greater than 50% of neutrophils
concurrent cytopenia in the blood.44 Morphologic abnor-
misclassified as monocytes (see Figure 4-16). Neutrophil
     s
function in these dogs was not evaluated.
or neoplastic conditions (Table 4-6)
TABLE 4-6. FORMS OF MYELODYSPLASIA ANDASSOCIATED CONDITIONS
GENERAL CATEGORY
ASSOCIATED CONDITIONS
Congenital
Toy and miniature poodles (erythrocytes and precursors)
myelodysplasia
Cavalier King Charles spaniels (platelets)
Giant schnauzers (neutrophilic precursors)
Secondary MDS
Drugs: azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, cytosine arabinoside, vincristine, dhloramphenicol
Infectious agents: FeLV, FIV, FIP
 Nutritional deficiencies: folate, cobalamin receptor defect in giant schnauzers 
Malignant diseases: lymphoma, plasma cell myeloma, lung adenocarcinoma
 Primary MDS
Idiopathic clonal defects
 FeLV, Feline leukemia virus; FIP, feline infectious peritonitis virus; FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus; MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.
Chapter 4:Leuhocyte Disorders
81
with leukemia; and (5) radiation, which may alter the
Congenital Myelodysplasia
health of progenitor cells.
Inherited myelodysplasia exists in breeds such as toy and
Clinical signs of leukemia vary. Common signs
han pue saa paereua m saioo aiu
include lethargy, pale mucous membranes, anorexia,
precursors, or in Cavalier King Charles spaniels with
weight loss, fever, frequent infections, icterus, and abnor-
abnormally large platelets related to an autosomal reces-
 mal bleeding such as petechiae. Physical findings often
sive defect. These dogs have no clinical signs, and the
-uot io Kqedouapeydul esamoualdsoeday apnpu
dysplastic findings are usually incidental.
sillar enlargement.
Secondary Myelodysplastic Syndrome
General Laboratory Findings
This form of myelodysplasia is not a neoplastic condition
 Strong laboratory indicators of leukemia include marked
but one that is acquired secondary to another disease or
leukocytosis of a monomorphic cell type, the presence of
condition and is the most common form of dysmyelopoi-
many blast cells, or morphologic irregularities in shape
esis, accounting for nearly 5% of bone marrow disorders
or size of late-stage forms. A prominent buffy coat may
 reported in a recent canine study.45 This may be associated
be noted when measuring the PCV related to a marked
with drug-induced and nutritional problems that are
leukocytosis or thrombocytosis. Blast cells have a large
reversible once the inciting cause is removed. Some
round nucleus, fine chromatin pattern, and one or more
myelodysplasia occurs with certain feline viral infections
prominent nucleoli. Reactive and blast-transformed lym-
and is commonly noted with immune-mediated disease.
phocytes are often present in small numbers [e.g.. I to 5/
For example, in IMHA, exuberant production of erythro-
blood smear) and are not diagnostic. Numerous reactive
cytes may occur related to the rapid and poorly regulated
and blast-transformed lymphocytes may occur in ill, non-
development, resulting in nucleated red cells with exces-
leukemic animals (eg., 1% to 5% of WBCs) and may
mimic leukemia. Rare mitotic figures do not indicate leu-
nucleus (Figure 4-17). A recent example of dyserythropoi-
kemia because mitotically active cells such as rubricytes,
esis was reported in a dog associated with bone marrow
promyelocytes, myelocytes, monocytes, and reactive lym-
metastasis of pulmonary adenocarcinoma.23
phocytes are encountered in nonleukemic animals. Rec-
ognition of the subtle morphologic irregularities may be
Leukemia
diffcult. Abnormalities include megaloblastic erythroid
precursors that have an excessive amount of cytoplasm
Leukemia may be suspected based on extreme increases
and unusual nuclear chromatin pattern, enlarged seg-
in WBC concentration numbers or relative to morphol-
mented neutrophils with many nuclear lobes (ie.,
ogy that is atypical or markedly immature for the
cell type Lymphoid or myeloid (nonlymphoid) cells
or dwarf megakaryocytes, and asynchronous maturation
may be involved in leukemia. Common causes of leuke-
 wherein the degree of maturity of nucleus and cytoplasm
mia include (1) virus infections, such as FeLV, which may
differ.
affect progenitor cell development; (2) genetic abnor-
White cell counts in leukemia are variable, ranging
malities, inherited or acquired, that lead to altered cell
[u    ' i si 
growth; (3) defective immune systems, such as with
limits. Anemia is often nonregenerative, but rarely hemo-
FIV infection, that do not permit normal defense mecha-
lysis is found in some forms of leukemia. Thrombocyto-
nisms against leukemia; (4) chemicals (e.g. benzene.
 penia, or less commonly thrombocytosis, is associated
with the other hematologic changes. Laboratory tests used
to diagnose hematopoietic neoplasia or myelodysplasia
and evaluate the extent of involvement include bone
marrow evaluation, biochemical profles, cytology. serol-
ogy, and urinalysis, in addition to hematology. If changes
in the blood are not diagnostic, bone marrow examina-
tion may confirm leukemia. Blast cells are often found in
much higher numbers in marrow than in blood. Bone
marrow evaluation should involve optimally an aspirate
 and core biopsy with concurrent peripheral blood evalu-
ation. Cytology of effusions or solid tissue masses may
help to determine a primary source. Serology is indicated
for evaluation of leukemia-causing viruses. Protein evalu-
ation of the serum and urine is helpful in determining
-doqdual yim paieosse sanyiedouea jo auasaid au
10μm
roliferative conditions (see Chapter 12).
FIGURE 4-17 Secondary myelodysplasia of three nucleated
NOTE: Leukemia is less common than other causes of
erythroid precursors is depicted in a sample from a dog with
alterations in leukocyte numbers and morphology. Stress,
a strongly regenerative spherocytic immune-mediated hemo-
inflammation, and reactive lymphocytes are much more
lytic anemia. Notice the faint basophilic stippling in the precur-
common.
sor (far right) and abundant cytoplasm in all three rubricytes.
82
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 47.SELECTED CYTOCHEMICAL STAINS
Advanced Diagnostic Testing
FOR IDENTIFICATION OF CELL TYPES
The following information is for those choosing to treat
IN CANINE AND FELINE LEUKEMIAS
diagnosis for treatment choices. Defnitive diagnosis of
STAIN
CELLS THAT STAIN
specifc leukemias usually requires a veterinary clinical
Peroxidase
Neutrophils—all stages positive 
pathologist. Slide review from routine CBC or bone
Monocytes—weakly positive
      
when present
anticoagulated blood may allow morphologic differentia-
 Eosinophils -positive in dog.
tion of the cellular origin, such as lymphoid versus
negative in cat
myeloid (i.e., nonlymphoid). If cell morphology in a leu-
Sudan black B
Neutrophils—all stages positive 
kemic patient is insuffcient to determine the cell lineage.
Monocytesweakly positive
 one may use specialized tests [i.e., cytochemistry, electron
when present
microscopy.
  
Eosinophils—positive in dog.
usually conducted at academic institutions or referral
 negative in cat
laboratories.* Cytochemistry involves nonimmunologic
 Leukocyte alkaline 
 Neutrophils—myeloblasts, strong
cytoplasmic markers for enzymes, lipids, or glycogen
phosphatase
Monocytes —monoblasts, weak or 
within the cell.31 Enzymes include peroxidase, found in
rare in dogs
Lymphocytes-subset of B cells
certain granulocytes, and nonspecific esterases, found in
Eosinophils—between the 
monocytes or T lymphocytes (Table 4-7). Electron micros-
 granules in cat
copy is helpful to study the ultrastructural features of the
 Basophils—weak or occasional
staining
4-8) involves staining of specific cell surface antigens by
Chloroacetate
Neutrophils-
6—strongly positive
the use of antibodies against CD3 (T cells), CD4 (T-helper
esterase
Basophils—moderately positive
cells), CD8 (T-cytotoxic or suppressor cells). CD14
Mast cells—variably positive
(monocyte progenitors), CD21 (B cells). and CD79 (B
Megakaryocytes—weakly positive
cells).?8 Blood and bone marrow specimens for these
when present
-uu ui suonsu suads aman sanpaid ieais
Apha-naphthyl
 Monocytes—diffuse positive 
dling, preparation, and fixation. Therefore, the clinical
butyrate esterase
Lymphocytes—focal positive in T
pathologist should be consulted to avoid delay in diag-
cells
 Megakaryocytes—diffuse positive 
nosis caused by improper sampling or sample handling.
Even more specialized diagnostic tests are available that
 Nonspecific esterase
Lymphocytes—positive in dog.
+ fluoride*
variable in cat
involve genetic testing such as clonality (eg polymerase
 Megakaryocytes—weakly positive
in dog
for lymphoid neoplasms and detection of cytogenetic
 Periodic acid-Schiff 
 abnormalities for all hematopoietic neoplasms.642
 Neutrophils—-all stages positive 
Megakaryocytes—positive in 
dog, variable in cat
Classification Schemes
 Mast cells—variably positive
Classification schemes for hematopoietic neoplasms were
Lymphocytes—-plasma cells 
developed and refined over many years, beginning with
Eosinophils—weak or variable
purely morphologic comparisons such as the French-
staining
Basophils—weak or variable
rates acute myeloid leukemia into eight subtypes, M0
 staining
Monocytes
weak or variable
through M7 (Figure 4-18) and its veterinary counterpart
 Staining 
(Figure 4-19),. both of which are based on the cell of
Acid phosphatase
Neutrophils—all stages positive 
origin and its degree of maturity as determined by exami-
Lymphocytes—focal positive in T
nation of Romanowsky-type (eg., Wright) stained blood
cells
and bone marrow smears. Various classifcation systems
 Eosinophils—positive 
also have been used to classify lymphoid neoplasms.
Basophils—positive in cat,
Other classification systems, such as the National Cancer
variableindog
Institute Working Formulation and updated Kiel System,
 Monocytes -diffuse positive 
rely on morphologic and immunologic features. Further
Megakaryocytes--diffuse positive
distinction of leukemia may be determined by cytochemi-
Mast cells—-positive
cal and immunochemical reactions (Figure 4-20). The
Jo tiqlu! ot pasn s! apuonlg 4ylm asejaisa ayigadsuou jo uoiqiyulk
most recent World Health Organization (WHO) classifi-
reduce the staining of monocytes.
cation scheme for hematopoietic and lymphoid neopla-
sia identifies the different disease types by tumor location
plus morphologic immunophenotypic, and cytogenetic
platelets singly or in combination; and the histiocytic
criteria to best determine the clinical prognosis for each
neoplasms involve macrophages and dendritic cells.
disease (Box 4-1).37 The lymphoid neoplasms involve
 A system based on the WHO classifcation of human
lymphocytes and plasma cells: the myeloid neoplasms
lymphoid tumors has been suggested for animals.41 This
involve the remaining nonlymphoid leukocytes, includ-
Aq susendou pioudu saneieas uass Aeuaa
ing mast cells, erythroid cells, and megakaryocytes or
immunophenotype and tumor site location, primarily
Chapter 4: Leuhocyte Disorders
83
TABLE4-8.IMMUNOCHEMICALANTIBODIESUSEFUL
has a proliferation of differentiated cells that may be
FOR THE RECOGNITION OF LEUKOCYTE
diffcult to distinguish from hyperplasia [e.g., reactive
SUBPOPULATIONSIN HEMATOPOIETIC
response). Generally, chronic leukemias have a more
NEOPLASIA
favorable prognosis than acute leukemias and therefore
patients survive for longer periods of time.
LEUKOCYTE
ANTIBODY
SUBPOPULATION
The morphologic criteria to classify acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) in dogs and cats was developed previ-
CD1c
Dendritic cells
ously by the American Society for Veterinary Clinical
CD3
T lymphocytes
Pathology (ASVCP).15 The percentage of blast cells was
CD4
T-helper lymphocytes,
-uAluou jo %0e ueql 1aneaig 1o 0l [enba se paisag3ns
canine neutrophils 
phoid and nonhistiocytic cells in the bone marrow for
CD5
T lymphocytes,
AML, whereas chronic myeloid leukemia, myelodysplas-
B-lymphocyte subset
 tic syndrome, and leukemoid reaction would be expected
CD8
T-cytotoxic lymphocytes
to have less than 30% blast cells (see Figure 4-19).
However, this percentage has shifted to 20% to reflect the
CD11b
Granulocytes, monocytes,
recognition in humans and animals that the range
macrophages
CD11c
Monocytes, granulocytes,
between 20% and 30% is a gray zone with a strong ten-
dendritic cells
dency toward a more aggressive clinical course.7 The
CD11d
Macrophages, granular
AMLs are further separated and a subtype is assigned (M1
to M7) depending on the cell type (see Figure 4-19).
ymphocytes
CD14
Monocytes
Adjectives (eg. granulocytic or myelogenous, monocytic.
Pan-leukocyte
lymphocytic: see Figure 4-18) are used to designate the
CD18
CD20
cell lineage If the cell type cannot be determined, it is
B lymphocytes
simply called an acute undifferentiated leukermia.
CD21
Mature B lymphocytes
CD34
Hematopoietic stem cells 
CD41/61
Platelets
CD45
 Pan-leukocyte
NOTE: In general, ymphoid neoplasms are more respon-
CD61
 Platelets 
sive to treatment than acute myeloid leukemia.
CD79a
B lymphocytes
Factor Vlll-related antigen
Megakaryocytes/platelets
Mac387
Granulocytes, monocytes
Lymphoid Neoplasia
 MHC II
Macrophages, dendritic
These lymphoid conditions may originate from solid
cells, lymphocytes
Granulocytes, monocytes
tissues, such as the lymph nodes [(i.e., nodal), alimentary
 Myeloperoxidase
 Neutrophil specific antigen 
Granulocytes
tract, thymus, spleen, eye, and skin, or from the bone
marrow, such as plasma cell myeloma or some forms of
leukemia. A persistent increase in differentiated lympho-
supported by morphologic criteria, and may provide
cytes over time without reaction to known infectious
better prognostic information than previous classification
agents or antigenic stimulants suggests neoplasia in lieu
schemes. Histopathology plays a key role in using this
of immune stimulation. Lymphoid neoplasms arranged
system. The lymphoid leukemic forms are classified as
in descending frequency of occurrence are lymphoma,
acute or chronic An abundance of blast cells or immature
plasma cell myeloma, chronic lymphocytic leukemia
cells identifies the leukemia as acute. Chronic leukemia
(CLL). and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). The
Acuteundifferentiated leukemia
Stem cell
Lymphoproliferative
 Lymphoblast -
disorders
Rubriblast
Myeloblast
Monoblast
Megakaryoblast
Erythroid
Granulocytic
Monocytic
M7
leukemia
leukemia
leukemia
M6Er
M6
M1-3
M4
M5
FGURE 418 Diagram depicting origin of the most common neoplastic disorders of immature hematopoietic cells using the
FAB classification. M1-3, Myeloblastic and promyelocytic leukemias; M4, myelormonocytic leukemia; M5, monoblastic leukemia;
M6Er, erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance; M6, erythroleukemia; M7, megakaryoblastic leukemia.
84
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
BONE MARROW ERYTHROID CELLS
<50%
>50%
BLAST CELLS
BLAST CELLS
BLAST CELLS
(% of All Nucleated Cells)
(% of Nonerythroid Cells)
(includes rubriblasts)
 % of All Nucleated Cells 
>20%
<20%
>20%
<20%
<20%
>20%
MDS-RC
AUL
MDS-EB
M6
MDS-Er
M6Er
AML
CML
e oy slan pie m a ar buisn se pe so ui sanal iia ai iss oi aays  t n
nucleated cells (ANC). ANC is a group that excludes ymphocytes, plasma cells, macrophages, and mast cells. Nonerythroid cells
are calculated as ANC minus erythroid cells. Blast cells include myeloblasts, monoblasts, and megakaryoblasts. AML, Acute myeloid 
leukemias M1-M5 and M7; AUL, acute undifferentiated leukemia; CML, chronic myeloid leukemias; MDS-EB, primary myelodys-
plastic syndrome with excess blasts; MDS-Er, rmyelodysplastic syndrome with erythroid predominance; MDS-RC, primary myelo-
dysplastic syndrome with refractory cytopenia; M6, erythroleukemia; M6Er, erythroleukemia with erythroid predominance.
Reprinted with permission from Raskin RE: Myelopoiesis and myeloproliferative disorders. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
26:1023, 1996.)
Acute leukemia (CD34+)
Peroxidase +
Peroxidase-
Sudan black B+
Sudan black B-
Acute myeloid leukemia
Acute lymphoid leukemia
Acuteundifferentiatedleukemia
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia
Chloroacetate esterase (CAE)
Factor Vlll-related antigen (FVlll rAg)
Nonspecific esterase (NSE)
Acid phosphatase (ACP)
Myeloperoxidase (MPO)
CD3
CD79a
CD 41/CD 61
CAE+
CAE+
CAE-
Diffuse + ACP
Focal + ACP
CD79a+
NSE-
NSE+
NSE+
FVIll rAg+
CD3+
MPO+
MPO+
MPO+/-
CD 41/CD61+
CD11b+
MAC387+
CD14+
Granulocytic
Myelomonocytic
Monocytic
Megakaryocytic
T-ALL
B-ALL
 FIGURE 420 Simplified dassification of acute leukemia using cytochemical stains and immunochemistry. B-ALL, B-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia; T-ALl, T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia; +, positive; -, negative.
Chapter 4:Leurhocyte Disorders
85
originates in the bone marrow, ALL may be associated
BOX 4-1. LisT 0F WElL-DEscRIbeD LYmphOID
with variable nonregenerative anemia, neutropenia, and
ANd mYElOId NEOPlASms
thrombocytopenia in any combination. As the condition
BASED ON THE 2008 WORlD
advances, lymphoblasts are found in enlarged visceral
HEALTH ORGaNIZATION
organs such as the liver and spleen. In ALL, lymphocyte
CLASSIFICATION SCHEME
size on the stained blood smear varies, with many
 LYMPHOID NEOPLASMS
lymphoblasts. A CBC usually allows diagnosis of ALL;
however, bone marrow is more consistently abnormal
Precursor:
Lymphoblastic Leukemia/Lymphoma (B-, T-, Nul-Cell Types) 
[i.e., dense infltration by lymphoblasts). Lymphoblasts
are difficult to distinguish from poorly differentiated
Mature:
myeloid precursors without cytochemical stains, cell
Lymphocytic Leukemia/Lymphoma (B-, T-Cell Types)
surface markers, or PCR clonality tests (see Figure 4-20).
Granular Lymphocyte Leukemia/Lymphoma (T-, NK-Cell
The presence of CD34 surface antigen is particularly
Types!
a ue a sisia tuusus u idian
 Plasma Cell Neoplasia
 solid tissue lymphoma from a blast cell originating from
 Myeloma
the bone marrow, and this in turn may influence response
Plasmacytoma (Extramedullary Sites)
to therapy. Most feline ALL cases have the T-cell immuno-
Lymphoma (B- and T-Cell Types of Nodal and Extranodal
 phenotype, but canine cases may be T-, B-, or null-cell
Sites]
phenotypes. Hypercalcemia is an infrequent laboratory
 Mycosis Fungoides/Sezary Syndrome (T-Cell Type)
finding.
Marginal Zone (B-Cell Type)
Reactive or blast-transformed lymphoid cells on
blood smears, especially in young animals undergoing
MYELOID NEOPLASMS
strong immune stimulus (e.g., infections), may confuse
Myelodysplastic Syndromes:
 Myelodysplastic Syndrome—-Refractory Cytopenia
the diagnosis of ALL or other leukemias. In many non-
neoplastic conditions (eg. immune stimulation by
Myelodysplastic Syndrome—Excess Basts
illness or vaccination), a few to several reactive lympho-
Acute Myeloid Leukemias:
 cCytes and blast-transformed lymphocytes (perhaps five
Acute Myeloid Leukemia (Myeloblastic, Monoblastic, Ery-
per blood smear) may be observed. In contrast, ALL has
throid, Megakaryoblastic)
  sad  sis   e
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms:
phoblasts per oil immersion field. The use of buffy coat
Chronic Myelogenous/Neutrophilic Leukemia
 preparations to concentrate the leukocytes to find a few
 Chronic Eosinophilic Leukemia
lymphoblasts is not advised, because these preparations
Chronic Basophilic Leukemia 
often have several blast-transformed lymphoid cells in
Polycythemia Vera
normal animals.
 Essential Thrombocythemia
 Primary Myelofibrosis
Mature Lymphoid Neoplasms
 Mastocytosis (Cutaneous and Systemic)
Chronic Lymphocytic Leukemia · CLL has a relatively
Histiocytic Neoplasms
favorable prognosis of continued life for about 12 months
Histiocytic Sarcoma (Dendritic Cell)
after diagnosis. It occurs mostly in middle-aged to elderly
Hemophagocytic Histiocytic Sarcoma (Macrophage)
dogs (mean 10 years), with a higher frequency in females.
Cats rarely have this form of leukemia; most that do are
Canine Cutaneous Histiocytoma Dendritic Cell)
FeLV negative Differentiation of CLL from ALL or lym-
Feline Progressive Histiocytosis Dendritic Cell)
phoma with a leukemic blood profle is based on the
relatively mature appearance of lymphocytes in CLL
versus finding lymphoblasts in the other two conditions.
Lymphocytes in CLL are larger than normal and more
homogeneous in appearance than in normal animals.
Diagnosis of CLL is aided greatly by magnitude of the
approximate annual incidence rate for leukemias in dogs
lymphocytosis, which may exceed 40,000 to 100,000
and cats is 3l and 224 cases per 100,000 animals, respec-
lymphocytes/μl. Maximum lymphocytosis in extreme
tively. Lymphoid malignancies, including lymphoma, are
immune reactions (eg., chronic canine rickettsial infec-
responsible for over 85% of cat leukemias and over 65%
tions) seldom exceeds 25,000 lymphocytes/μl and usually
of the dog leukemias. Cats have a 6-fold greater incidence
is less than 15,000 lymphocytes/μl. Lymphocytosis in cats
of lymphoma and a 16-fold greater incidence of myeloid
 neoplasia than dogs, primarily the result of induction of
diseases may reach higher maximum lymphocyte counts
neoplasia by FeLV infection.
(e.g. 40,000/μl). Reactive lymphocytosis in young.
asymptomatic cynomolgus monkeys can reach 70.000
Precursor Lymphoid Neoplasms
lymphocytes/μl for 1 or 2 weeks. These extreme changes
Arute Lymphoblastic Leukemia · ALL occurs less fre-
may be called a lymphocytic leukemoid reaction. CLL is
quently than lymphoma. This rapidly progressive condi-
the first entity to rule out when lymphocytosis exceeds
(sieak g ueaw] sgop pase-aiPpiwu ul Asou sinooo uon
25,000 to 40,000 lymphocytes/μl. The likelihood of CLL
and frequently in FeLV-infected cats. Because leukemia
laleaig sjunos sisoioqdal oi Aleuoodoid sasea
86
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
than 50,000 to 100,000/μl are particularly diagnostic.
spleen, skin). Four diagnostic features of PCM are (1)
Mild normocytic normochromic, nonregenerative anemia
hyperproteinemia with a monoclonal gammopathy. (2)
is common, with variable thrombocytopenia.
osteolytic lesions in the spine, (3) greater than 15% to
 Fine-needle aspirates of lymph nodes, spleen, and
20% plasma cells in bone marrow aspirates, and (4)
liver in CLL document lymphoid proliferation, but dif-
Bence Jones proteinuria (see Chapters 7 and 12). Bence
ferentiation of hyperplasia from CLL may be difficult. CLL
Jones proteinuria is infrequent in dogs and cats, and these
-gliaday seaaum 'uoendod snoauagooy anou e seu
light chains of antibodies are best identifed by electro-
sia has a more diverse population of lymphocytes, plasma
phoresis of urine with detectable proteinuria. Ehrlichiosis
cells, and lymphoblasts. Biopsy and histopathology may
may mimic plasma cell neoplasia in having strong
better document infiltration by neoplastic lymphocytes
plasmacytosis in the bone marrow and an oligoclonal
with loss of tissue architecture In bone marrow aspirates,
gammopathy
in senum resembling a monoclonal
 greater than 15% to 20% lymphocytes among the nucle-
gammopathy.
ated cells present suggests CLL.
Histologic or cytologic evaluation of osteolytic areas
Immunophenotyping has demonstrated many of
Or soft tissue masses is most diagnostic of PCM (see
these cases to be T cellin origin in the dog. Dysprotein-
 Chapter 16). Neoplastic plasma cells may exhibit aniso-
 a  a  s u   
cytosis, anisokaryosis, and a finely dispersed chromatin
clonal gammopathy (most often immunoglobulin M
pattern. Binucleate plasma cells occur frequently in PCM,
[IgM], but immunoglobulin A [IgA] and immunoglobu-
but binucleated plasma cells are normally visible in
lin G [IgG] gammopathies also occur). Use of a diagnostic
hyperplastic lymphoid tissue (e.g., lymph node aspirate).
test to determine clonality by analysis of gene rearrange-
Plasma cell leukemia [i.e., neoplastic plasma cells in
ments may be helpful to decide whether lymphocyte pro-
blood) occurs infrequently.
liferation is malignancy or hyperplasia.
Nodal Lymphoma · Lymphoma (formerly lymphosar-
Granular Lymphocyte Leukemia/ Lymphoma ● A sub.
coma) is the most common lymphoid neoplasm of dogs
type of lymphoid leukemia and lymphoma involves
 and cats. Lymphoma usually originates in peripheral lym-
mostly medium-sized lymphoid cells having abundant
phoid tissues but may develop within extranodal sites
light-blue to clear cytoplasm that contains several small
(e.g., skin) or from bone marrow lymphocytes that popu-
red or purple granules, termed azurophilic granules. These
late solid tissues. Multicentric disease is more common
e  (sii) s    ae s
in dogs and usually involves the peripheral lymph nodes.
normally present in the blood of many animal species:
spleen, and liver. In descending frequency, other forms
specifically in the dog. LGLs are present in 0% to 5% of
of canine lymphoma include alimentary, thymic, and
leukocytes or in 0% to 19% of lymphocytes. The LGL
cutaneous disease Thymic lymphoma is most common
count may be increased as a result of immune stimulation
in young cats, whereas alimentary lymphoma is more
ou  'sisa a u u s 
common in older cats. Cats may also develop multicen-
proliferations of LGLs are common. In the cat, granular
tric, renal, and cutaneous lymphoma. About 60% to 80%
 r  r o s
of cats with the thymic or multicentric forms of lym-
prominent large coarse purple cytoplasmic granules. In
phoma are positive for FeLV group-specific antigen,
the dog, LGL malignancies may appear as leukemia in the
whereas only 30% of cats with alimentary lymphoma are
blood or as lymphoma in tissues such as the lymph nodes
positive.
and spleen. In these tissue forms, blood lymphocyte
 The CBC is not sensitive in identifying canine lym-
counts can be normal; however, neutropenia may be
phoma; 2l% of affected dogs have lymphocytosis and
evident The granules do not stain well with aqueous-
25% have lymphopenia. At the time of diagnosis, up to
based Wright stains, such as those found in commercial
Jo o Aaeixy zsanal aq A sop yo %5
quick stains. However, the granules appear readily with
cats with lymphoma have a leukemic blood profile The
Wright-type stains. Immunophenotyping of these cells
CBC may document concurrent cytopenias, including
indicate most are cytotoxic T cells expressing CD3 and
anemia, thrombocytopenia, and leukopenia. Bone
CD8.
marrow involvement is used in staging lymphoma and so
 In the dog, LGL leukemia may be frst recognized as
helps to determine treatment Bone marrow evaluation is
a benign nontransitory proliferation of granular lympho-
needed, because CBC results may not reflect marrow
cytes in the peripheral blood, termed persistent lymphocy-
involverment and vice versa. Bone marrow core biopsies
tosis. These cells are thought to arise from the red pulp
are most sensitive in identifying leukemic involvement
of the spleen. As disease progresses, splenomegaly
is
(e.g. 97% of canine cases compared with 50% by blood
commonly noted and cytologic aspirates demonstrate a
smear analysis alone or 60% using bone marrow aspirate
marked increase in the LGL population. Typically, the
biopsies alone),32 Hypercalcemia (ie., >12 mg/dl). a
bone marrow appears normal or contains minimal LGL
factor most associated with T-cell lymphomas [see
involvement. Most dogs with LGL leukemia appear as
Chapter 8). is helpful in directing diagnostic efforts
though they have CLL, with a slow indolent course over
toward a lymphoid malignancy. Monodonal gammopa-
several years, whereas a small group may have a more
thy may ocur infrequently with B-cell lymphoma.
aggressive course, similar to ALL.24
Lymphoma is diagnosed daily by cytopathologists
(see Chapter 16). Fine-needle aspirates of lymph nodes
Plasma Cell Neoplasms · Plasma cell myeloma (PCM)
Or other affected tissues and organs usually disclose a
is a disorder ofbone marrow plasma cells. Extramedullary
homogeneous population of lymphoblasts or larger lym-
plasmacytoma occurs in soft tissues (eg., liver, kidney.
phocytes. If cytology is equivocal in distinguishing
Chapter 4:Leuhocyte Disorders
87
extreme lymphoid hyperplasia from early lymphoma,
dysplasia. Generally, AMLs are severe, rapidly progressive
surgical biopsy with histopathology may provide a defni-
diseases, essentially unresponsive to treatment In con-
tive diagnosis based on alterations of normal tissue archi-
trast, myeloproliferative neoplasms involve relatively
tecture. Surgical or endoscopic biopsies of deep tissues
mature cells that are released from the bone marrow and
also may be diagnostic This is often helpful in cases of
the clinical course may be long. This category also includes
marginal zone lymphoma, a type of B-cell lymphoma
the proliferative conditions involving mast cells, such as
with an indolent course that usually presents with a
cutaneous mastocytoma and systemic mastocytosis. In
mixed lymphocyte population of cells that mimics the
myeloid neoplasia, the leukemic cell type may vary over
appearance of a reactive lymph node.
time in the same animal; therefore, the diagnosis may
 Immunophenotyping is useful for prognostic evalua-
reflect a specific point in time.
tion of lymphoma cases; dogs with T-cell lymphoma are
Blast cells of various cell types often lack identifiable
at significantly higher risk of relapse and early death com-
characteristics, and the initial impulse is to designate an
pared with B-cell lymphoma. Diagnostic immunocyto-
umdifferentiated blast cell as a lymphoblast. Blast cells in 
chemistry of fne-needle aspirate material (or evaluation
myeloid neoplasia are distinguished by sequential dif-
by flow cytometry) and immunohistochemistry of tissue
ferentiation into more mature myeloid cells, if resent, or
sections are performed currently at certain academic insti-
with cytochemical staining of a poorly differentiated
tutions [e.g., University of Califormia at Davis and Colo-
leukemia (see Table 4-7). Cytogenetic investigations in
rado State University). However, while generally
"Tis
animals are beginning to determine chromosomal defects
terrible and B is best," this is not always the case, and
similar to those of people with the same disorders, and
prognostic indicators involve other parameters.
asau guean ul iydiay aq Aeu siaie osougoid
 In contrast to the mediastinal or thymic lymphoma
conditions.6 12.16
that is composed of neoplastic lymphocytes and most
associated with young cats and dogs. a neoplasm of
thymic epithelium, termed thymoma, contains a variable
NOTE: Myeloid neoplasia occurs infrequently in contrast
numbers of mature lymphocytes and is usually observed
to ymphoid neoplasia, which is much more commonly
in older dogs and cats. Both neoplasms will present as a
observed.
cranial mediastinal mass, often with evidence of cough-
ing, dyspnea, or thoracic effusion, including chylothorax.
Thymic tumors are associated with paraneoplastic hyper-
calcemia. Thymoma may involve a concurrent mature
lymphocytosis exceeding 25,000/μl of blood and may be
Myelodysplastic Syndromes
confused with CLL. Thymomas are potentially treatable.
Primary MDS is a clonal neoplastic disease, indicating it
Surgical biopsy is the preferred method of diagnosis for
originates from a single transformed stem cell that affects
thymoma, as cytology may be confusing because of sec-
multiple nonlymphoid lineages such as erythroid, granu-
ondary chylothorax or the presence of many mast cells.
locytic, andmegakaryocytic precursors. Dysplasticchanges
may occur as preleukemia [i.e, before the onset of overt
Extranodal Lymphoma (Mycosis Fungoides) · Myco-
leukemia, which may take months to years to develop).
sis fungoides is an uncommon form of epitheliotrophic
This neoplastic condition is best considered as “leukemia
a u q  )  s
in situ," that is, the defect remains localized to the bone
skin and progressing to involve lymph nodes, spleen, and
marrow and does not spread or metastasize through the
bone marrow. A diagnostic feature of mycosis fungoides
blood to other parts of the body. Generally primary MDS
is focal accumulation of lymphoid cells within the epi-
presents as persistent peripheral cytopenia in one or more
dermis, forming "Pautrier's microabscesses.""Sezary syn-
nonlymphoid lineages together with significant morpho-
drome" is a rare variant of ECL associated with a leukemic
blood profle characterized by large T cells with markedly
cellular in the affected cell line, and the blast cell
convoluted nuclei.21 The neoplastic cells of ECL are cyto-
 percentage is less than 20% of the nucleated cells using
toxic T cells that express CD3 and CD8.
the most current human WHO classifcation scheme.37
In comparison to the epitheliotrophic mycosis fun-
Two subtypes of MDS appear to have predictive value in
goides, nonepitheliotrophic lymphoma is less frequent.
cats, with significant differences in median survival time.44
This form was previously believed to be of B-cell origin;
One subtype, MDS with refractory cytopenia, was defined
however, recent findings indicate this is exclusively T-cell
as less than 6% myeloblasts in bone marrow specimens
lymphoma, although the morphologic and immunologic
and demonstrated ll.7 months' survival, while cats with
characteristics differ from mycosis fungoides. Both forms
the other subtype, MDS with excess blasts, defined as 6%
 are aggressive and respond sporadically or poorly to
to 30% myeloblasts in the bone marrow, survived less
treatment.2?
than I month.
Acute Myeloid Leukemia
Myeloid Neoplasms
AML refers to a collection of neoplastic disease affecting
Characteristics of selected myeloid neoplasms are
precursors of nonlymphoid cells. Subtypes M0 through
described under the following headings (see Box 4-1).
M7 are defined by the cell of origin and the degree of
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) involve a preleukemic
differentiation.3 Cytochemical staining [see Figure 4-20
condition as well as a neoplasia of mature and poorly
and Table 4-7), immunocytochemistry (see Table 4-8). or
differentiated nonlymphoid cells that display significant
flow cytometry can be used to distinguish the subtypes.43
88
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
For example, acute myeloblastic (myelogenous) leukemia
(AML-M2) usually consists of neutrophils, but coproduc-
Myeloproliferative Neoplasms
tion of basophils and eosinophils may occur. Total leu-
This group of neoplasms comprises most of the chronic
kocyte counts are variable, but extreme leukocytosis may
myeloid leukemias, which appear with a marked increase
occur. Blast cells are often found in circulation. Severe
in numbers of the affected specific mature cell type. Blast
anemia and thrombocytopenia may accompany AML.
cell percentages are less than 20% in the bone marrow.
Myeloblasts, promyelocytes, and atypical cells denote
and cytogenetic abnormalities have been documented in
subtypes M1 to M3. Myeloblasts may have a moderately
rare cases.6,12
basophilic cytoplasm with few small azurophilic gran-
Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) and chronic nel-
ules. A disorderly maturation sequence also suggests
trophilic leukemia (CNL) differ from acute granulocytic
neoplasia but may occur during repopulation of the
leukemia in that segmented and band neutrophils pre-
bone marrow after cellular destruction (eg.. toxin,
dominate. The two conditions are similar to each other
parvovirus).
except for the presence of the Philadelphia chromosome
Repopulation of the bone marrow begins with imma-
translocation in CML and not found in CNL. The left shift
ture cells [i.e, myeloblasts, progranulocytes, myelocytes).
in CNL may extend back to promyelocytes, and bone
without the expected predominance of mature bands and
marrow myeloid proliferation may involve orderly
segmenters; this appearance initially resembles leukemia,
myeloid maturation with a marked increase in the
but progressive maturation eventually restores a normal
myeloid:erythroid ratio. This ratio may fall between 4: 1
marrow cell population. Diagnosis may require re-
and 25: 1 or be as high as 36: 1. The bone marrow con-
evaluation of the bone marrow after a few days.
tains less than 20% myeloblasts of nonlymphohistiocytic
Myelomonocytic leukemia (M4) is characterized by
cells (see Figure 4-19). Diagnosis of CNL is often based
combined production of neutrophils and monocytes by
on finding marked, persistent leukocytosis [40,000 to
the bipotential stem cell, resulting in myeloblasts and
200,0o0/μl) and exclusion of a leukemoid reaction, such
monoblasts that equal or exceed 20% of nonerythroid
as inflammatory leukocytosis (discussed earlier in the
cells in the bone marrow. This is the most common non-
section on Inflammation). Anemia is mild to moderate
lymphoid leukemia. Percentage of monocytes and neu-
and platelet counts are variable. Lymphadenopathy with
 trophils may change as the disease progresses. Moderately
lymph node aspirates that resemble marked extramedul-
severe anemia is expected.
 lary hematopoiesis may occur in CGL. The prognosis and
Monocytic leukemia [M5) occurs infrequently. Cyto-
response to treatment are better than for AML, with death
-ouu jo sisoueeisu suaand Aru sunuiis ieiua
occurring months after diagmosis because of a blast cell
cytic leukemia as ALL. Monoblasts are increased to 20%
crisis.
Or greater of the nonerythroid cells of the bone marrow.
Chronic eosinophilic leukemia is a variant form of
Monoblasts have basophilic cytoplasm that lacks any
 myelogenous leukemia. This type of leukemia is rare but
obvious granulation; nuclei are irregularly rounded, pro-
has been reported in the dog and documented in the cat
ducing a folded or creased appearance.
associated with FeLV infection. It is characterized by a
Erythroleukemia [M6) involves proliferation of imma-
pue (m/ooo'os < uao) edouisoa juasisiad ayieu
ture and atypical erythroid and granulocytic cells. The
a shift toward immaturity. A moderate anemia may be
erythroid component exceeds 50%. with myeloblasts
present. It may be difficult to differentiate from hypere-
and monoblasts (together) equal to or greater than 20%
osinophilic conditions (e.g. hypereosinophilic 
syn-
of nonerythroid cells. A variant form, called M6Er, con-
drome, allergies, parasitism, eosinophilic inflammatory
sists predominantly of erythroid precursors: in this form
diseases, mast cell tumors, certain lymphomas). Leuke-
rubriblasts exceed 20%. The M6 conditions are more
mic eosinophils will leave the bone marrow and infl-
common in cats than in dogs. Severe nonregenerative
trate solid tissues, such as the lymph nodes, liver, and
d na ae sa se pe e
spleen.
Over time, this form of leukemia may change in appear-
Chronic basophilic leukemia is another variant form of
ance and progress to involve predominantly granulocytic
paodan pue uooun si ieul eiuaynal snouaoiaa
precursors. It is often associated with FeLV infection
to occur mostly in dogs. This form of neoplasia can be
in cats.
distinguished from mast cell leukemia by subtle nuclear
Megakaryoblastic leukemia (M7) has been reported in
indentation, segmentation, or lobulation. In dogs, the
both dogs and cats. Leukocyte and platelet counts vary.
 cytoplasmic granules in neoplastic basophils may be
and circulating megakaryoblasts may be found. These
coarser than those in mast cells. The disorder has been
cells have a round nucleus and scant basophilic cyto-
associated with thrombocytosis and anemia. Prognosis is
plasm with a ragged irregular cell surface. Platelet mor-
good with treatment.
phology is often bizarre, characterized by giantism and
Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia (CMMoL) is an
abnormal granulation. Diagnosis of this form of leuke-
uncommon disorder in which blast cells of both granu-
mia requires positive cytochemical reactions to periodic
locytic and monocytic lines involve less than 30% of
acid-Schiff, alpha naphthyl acetate esterase, acetylcholin-
nonlymphohistiocytic bone marrow cells. Cases often
esterase, factor VIll-related antigen, or immunologic
display peripheral monocytosis greater than 4000/μl.
markers. Electron microscopy may reveal characteristic
and dysplastic changes are significant. For this reason,
alpha granules or early intermal membrane demarcation
this form of chronic myeloid leukemia is placed in a
separate WHO category reflecting the myeloproliferation
diagnosed as AML-M7 that were more correctly identified
and myelodysplasia together. Diagnosis is suspected if
as myeloid hyperplasia with myelofbrosis.
marked monocytosis accompanies neutrophilia, without
Chapter 4:Leurocyte Disorders
89
indications of an inflammatory condition. CMMoL may
considered increased and supportive of hemolymphatic
progress over time to an AML.
involvement in disseminated mast cell neoplasia.
Polycythemia vera (primary erythrocytosis) is a rare
Mast cell leukemia can be distinguished from baso-
 disease in dogs and cats involving the neoplastic produc-
 philic leukemia based on morphologic and cytochemical
tion of mature, anucleated erythrocytes. Polycythemia is 
criteria. The total number of mast cells per blood smear
 suggested by brick-red mucous membranes related to
in dogs with enteritis and mastocytemia usually ranges
markedly increased hematocrits (i.e., PCV 65% to 82%).
aq u 1eas 1ad shla is2 06 01 0e imq '6 01 7 oy
Splenomegaly, if present, is mild. Polyuria, polydipsia,
found. It is rare to find ciraulating metastatic mast cells
hemorrhage and neurologic disorders occur in 50% of
from mast cell tumors of the skin in dogs and cats. Cir-
canine cases. Definitive diagnosis of polycythemia vera
qulating mast cells are more common in cats affected with
requires ruling out other causes of erythrocytosis or abso-
the visceral form of mast cell neoplasia producing diffuse,
lute polycythemia (see Chapter 3). Diagnosis is based on
moderate to marked splenomegaly. Erythrophagocytosis
demonstration of an absolute increased red cell mass, a
by the circulating mast cells is not unusual, and this may
normal arterial partial pressure of oxygen (Paoz), and a
contribute to anemia. Typically, disseminated disease
decreased senum erythropoietin concentration that is
involves the spleen, liver, distant lymph nodes, or bone
measured at specialized laboratories. Renal cysts, pyelo-
marrow. Cytology or surgical biopsy documents dissemi-
nephritis, and tumors must be excluded, because they can
nated mast cell neoplasia best.
also produce absolute polycythemia (ie, inappropriate
secondary erythrocytosis) as a paraneoplastic syndrome
Histiocytic Neoplasms
with increased serum erythropoietin concentration,
Essential thrombocythemia (i.e., primary thrombocy-
Histiocytic neoplasms are a significant and important
themia) is a rare chronic myeloproliferative disease
group of bone marrow and solid tissue neoplasms involv-
characterized by proliferation of megakaryocytes and
ing dendritic cells and macrophages. They range from
unregulated platelet production reported in the dog and
benign to highly aggressive malignancies in domestic
cat. It occurs unrelated to physiologic or responsive
animals.
thrombocytosis. Clinical signs include splenomegaly and
 Presentation of marked anemia suggests a variant of
platelet function abnormalities, such as spontaneous
histiocytic sarcoma, hemophagocytic histiocytic sarcoma.
 bleeding and thromboembolism (see Chapter 5). Platelet
which involves a malignancy of macrophages. Immuno-
counts are persistently above 600,000/μl and often greater
logic markers are helpful in making this distinction. Both
than l million/μl, which predispose to microthrombosis
dogs and cats may present with the histiocytic sarcoma
and microvascular ischemia. Neutrophilia or basophilia
complex of diseases. Solid tissue forms of dendritic neo-
may also be seen.
 plasia are seen in the dog as cutaneous benign histiocy-
 Primary myelofibrosis (previously idiopathic myelo-
toma and in the cat as feline progressive histiocytosis.
fibrosis) has been termed agnogenic myeloid metaplasia or
chronic megakaryocytic-granulocytic myelosis. This uncom-
Histiocytic Sarcoma
mon condition results in intramedullary and extramedul-
Histiocytic sarcoma is a localized neoplasm of myeloid
0 aaoeai e Aq paiuedoe si ieul sisaiodoieay Aie
dendritic cells that may become disseminated over time,
secondary marrow fbrosis late in the course of the disease.
at which point the condition is termed disseminated his-
The hematopoietic precursors most involved are granulo-
tiocytic sarcoma.' The disserminated form is very similar to
cytic and megakaryocytic forms, which infltrate the
a more aggressive disease known as malignant histiocyto-
spleen and liver. Some cases may be mistaken for AML of
sis, which forms multisystem lesions simultaneously.
megakaryocytic origin. The peripheral blood often has
That also arises from myeloid dendritic cells. Older
concurrent immature granulocytes and erythroid cells.
animals are at greater risk, and certain breeds such as
termed a leukoerythroblastic reaction. Erythrocytes may
golden and flat-coated retrievers, rottweilers, and Bernese 
display poikilocytosis with a teardrop formation. Bone
ss ae es'auau pasau aae s u
marrow aspiration is often diffcult related to the pres-
 affected include the periarticular subcutis, spleen, lungs.
ence of myelofibrosis; therefore, core biopsy is recom-
and bone marrow; secondary sites are the liver, lymph
mended to confirm the diagnosis. Survival varies from
nodes, and kidneys. Anemia, thrombocytopenia, and
months to years, depending on the response to treatment
hyperbilirubinemia are the most common laboratory
for the nonregenerative anemia.
abnormalities. Cytology demonstrates malignant histio-
 Mast cell neoplasia encompasses a variety of presen-
cytes to be large, frequently markedly pleomorphic round
tations from an isolated mass to dissemination. Mast cell
or stellate cells with abundant (sometimes vacuolated)
leukemia may originate in the bone marrow of dogs and
basophilic cytoplasm. Nuclei are oval to reniform with
is rare. Mastocytemia or systemic mastocytosis may occur
lacy chromatin and prominent multiple nucleoli. Multi-
secondary to a solid mast cell tumor (see Chapter 16) or
nucleate cells are common, and mitotic figures are often
may suggest severe inflammatory disorders, particularly
frequent. A prolonged survival may be possible with sur-
parvoviral enteritis. In general, the larger the number of
gical excision of a localized histiocytic sarcoma.
mast cells in blood, the more likely that systemic mast
cell neoplasia is present, especially in the absence of
Hemophagocytic Histiocytic Sarcoma
enteritis. Mast cells are not expected in blood smears from
A hemophagocytic variant of histiocytic sarcoma is associ-
healthy dogs. Normal canine marrow has 0 to l mast
ated with a Coombs'-negative regenerative anemia related
cell/l10o0 nucleated cells, and greater than 10 mast
to marked erythrophagocytosis by the neoplastic splenic
cells/loo0 nucleated cells in bone marrow smears is
red pulp and bone marrow macrophages.?7 A similar
90
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
situation may occur with infectious or inflammatory
14. Grindem CB, Perman V, Stevens [B: Morphological classifica-
disease. The more anaplastic appearance of the malignant
 tion and pathologic characteristics of spontaneous leukemia
cells and the lack of a history of concurrent infection may
in 10 cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 21:227, 1985.
help distinguish malignant histiocytosis from the inflam.
15. Jain NC, et al: Proposed cnitenia for cassification of acute
myeloid leukemia in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 20:63.
matory condition. Differentiation of malignant histiocy-
1991.
tosis from other neoplasms is confirmed by demonstration
16. Juopperi TA. Bienzle D. Bernreuter DC, et al: Prognostic
 of positive histiocytic cytochemical and immunohisto-
markers for myeloid neoplasms: a comparative review of the
chemical markers with negative lymphoid or epithelial
 literature and goals for future investigation. Vet Pathol 48: 182.
markers. Similar-appearing cells may actually be T-cell or
2011.
B-cell lymphoma when immunophenotyping or gene
17. Klenner S. Richarz J. Bauer N. Moriz A: Myeloperoxidase
rearrangement studies are performed. Due to the rapid
deficiency in dogs observed with the Advia 120. Tierirzil
progression of the disease prognosis is poor. Other labo-
Praxis Klientiere 3:139, 2010.
ratory fndings include hypoalbuminemia, thrombocyto-
18. Latimer KS: Leukocytes in health and disease. [n Ettinger SJ.
penia, and hypocholesterolemia, with the two former
Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine:
Diseases of the dog and cat, ed 4, vol 2. Philadelphia. 1995.
findings as negative prognostic variables.
WB Saunders.
19. Latimer KS. Campagnoli RP. Danilenko DM: Pelger-Huet
anomaly in Australian shepherds: 87 cases (1991-1997}.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Comp Clin Pathol 10:9. 2000.
20. Latimer KS. Mahaffey EA. Prasse KW: Veterinary laboraiory
The previous contributions of Dr. Ken Latimer to this
medicine, ed 4, Ames, [A, 2003, Iowa State llniversity Press.
chapter are acknowledged and appreciated.
21.L
Latimer KS. Rakich PM: Sezary syndrome in a dog. Comp Clin
Pathol 6:115, 1996.
22. Lilliehook I., Tvedten H: [nvestigation of hypereosinophilia
References and Suggested Readings
and potential treatments. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
33:1359. 2003
1. Affolter VK. Moore PF: Localized and disseminated histio-
23. Lukaszewska J. Lewandowski K: Cabot rings as a result of
cytic sarcoma of dendritic cell origin in dogs. Vet Pathol
severe dyserythropoiesis in a dog. Vet Clin Pathol 37:180,
39:74, 2002.
2008.
2. Allison RW. et al: Dendritic cell leukemia in a golden
24. McDonough SP, Moore PF: Clinical. hematologic. and
retriever. Vet Clin Pathol 37:190, 2008.
immunophenotypic characterization of canine large granular
3. Aroch I. Klement E. Segev G: Clinical. biochemical, and
lymphocytosis. Vet Pathol 37:637, 2000.
hematological characteristics, disease prevalence, and prog-
25.Meyer D].Harvey W:Veterinary laboratory medicine: interpreta-
nosis of dogs presenting with neutrophil cytoplasmic toxic-
tion and diagnosis, ed 3. Philadelphia, 2007. WB Saunders.
ity. J Vet Intern Med 19:64, 2005.
 26. Moore GE, Mahaffey EA, Hoenig M: Hematologic and serum
4. Avery AC, Avery PC: Determining the significance of persis-
biochemical effects of long-term administration of anti-
tent lymphocytosis. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
inflammatory doses of prednisone in dogs. Am J Vet Res
37:267, 2007.
53:1033. 1992
5. Bookbinder PF. Butt MT. Harvey HJ: Determination of the
27. Moore PE Affolter VK. Vernau W: Canine hemophagocytic
 number of mast cells in lymph node, bone marrow. and
histiocytic sarcoma: a proliferative disorder of CDlld+ mac-
oss p ra u I op woy suaads oo je kng
rophages. Vet Pathol 43:632, 2006.
200:1648.1992
28. Moore PF. Vernau W: Lymphocytes: Differentiation mole-
6. Breen M, Modiano IF: Evolutionarily conserved cytogenetic
aules in diagnosis and prognosis. In Feldman BE, Zinkl JG.
changes in haematological malignancies of dogs and
Jain NC. editors: Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 5. Balti-
humans: man and his best friend share more than compan-
more. 2000, Williams & wilkins. pp 247.
jonship. Chromosomz Res 16:145. 2008.
 29. Moriello KA: Cutaneous lymphoma and variants. [n Feldman
 7. Breitschwerdt EB, et al: Rhinitis. pneumonia. and defective
BE. Zink] JG. Jain NC, editors: Schalm's veterinary hematology.
neutrophil function in the Doberman pinscher. Am J Vet Res
ed 5, Baltimore, 2000, Williams & Wilkins.
48:1054, 1987.
 30. Raskin RE: Myelopoiesis and myeloproliferative disorders.
 8. Brockus CW: Leukocyte disorders. [n Ettinger SJ, Feldman EC,
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1023. 1996.
editors: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 6. Philadel-
31. Raskin RE: Cytochemical staining. In Weiss DJ. Wardrop KJ.
phia. 2005, WB Saunders. pp 1937.
editors: Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 6. Ames. [A. 2010.
 9. Brown MR, Rogers KS: Neutropenia in dogs and cats: a ret-
Wiley-Blackwell., pp 1141.
Tospective study of 26l cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:131,
32. Raskin RE, Krehbiel [D: Prevalence of leukemic blood and
2001.
bone mairow in dogs with multicentic lymphoma. J Am Vet
10. Center SA, et al: Eosinophilia in the cat: a retrospective study
Med Assoc 194:1427. 1989.
of 312 cases {1975-1986). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 26:349.
33. Rossi S. Gelain ME, Comazzi S: Disseminated histiocytic
1990.
sarcoma with peripheral blood involvement in a Bernese
ll. Comazzi S. Gelain ME, Bonfanti U. et al: Acute mega-
Mountain dog. Vet Clin Pathol 38:126, 2009.
karyoblastic leukemia in dogs: a report of three cases and
 34. Rumke CL: The statistically expected vaniability in differential
review of the literature. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2010;46:327.
leukocytecounting.nKoepke A.editor: Differential leukocyte
12. Cruz Cardona JA. Milner R. Alleman AR. et al: BCR-ABL
 counting. Stokie, [L. 1978. College of Amenican Pathologists.
 tanslocation in a dog with chronic monocytic leukemia. Vet
PP 69.
Clin Pathol. Article first published online: 10 December 2010.
 35. Schultze AE: [nterpretation of canine leukocyte responses. [n
DOI: 10.1111/j.1939-165X.2010.00277.x
13. Grindem CB, Perman V, Stevens [B: Morphological classifica-
ed 6, Ames [A, 2010. Wiley-Blackwell. pp 321-334.
tion and pathologic characteristics of spontaneous leukemia
 36. Segev G. Klement E. Aroch I: Toxic neutrophils in cats: clini-
in 17 dogs. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 2l:219. 1985.
cal and clinicopathologic features, and disease prevalence
Chapter 4: Leuhocyte Disorders
91
and outcome—a retrospective case control study. J Vet Intern
42. Vernau W, Moore PF: An immunophenotypic study of canine
Med 20:20, 2006.
k[od kq Aeuol jo juawssasse heurujaid pue serwayna[
37. Swerdlow SH. Campo E, Hanris NL, et al, editors. WHO clas-
merase chain reaction. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 69:145.
sifcation oftumours of haematopoietic andlymphoid tissues.
1999.
Lyon, France, 2008, [ARC.
43. Viliers E, Baines S. Law A-M, et al: [dentification of acute
38. Tasca S, et al: Hematologic abnormalities and flow cytomet-
myeloid leukemia in dogs using flow cytometry with myelo-
 nic immunophenotyping results in dogs with hematopoietic
peroxidase, MAC387. and a canine neutrophil-specifc anti-
neoplasia: 210 cases (2002-2006). Vet Clin Pathol 38:2. 2009.
body. Vet Clin Pathol 35:55, 2006.
39. Trowald-Wigh G, et al: Leucocyte adhesion protein deficiency
44. Weiss DJ: Evaluation of dysmyelopoiesis in cats: 34 cases
in [rish setter dogs. / Vet Immunol Immunopathol32:26l, 1992.
{1996-2005). I Am Vet Med Assoc 228:893, 2006.
40. Valenciano AC, Decker LS Cowell RL: [nterpretation of feline
45. Weiss DJ: A retrospective study of the incidence and the clas-
leukocyte responses. [n Weiss D]. Wardrop KJ. editors:
sification of bone marow disorders in the dog at a veterinary
Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 6. Ames [A. 2010. Wiley-
teaching hospital {1996-2004). J Vet Intern Med 20:955.
Blackwell. pp 335.
2006.
41.Valli VE.et al:Histological classifcation of hematopoietic tumors
46. Weiss Dl: Neutrophil function disorders. [n Weiss DJ.
of domestic animals. ed 2. Washington. DC. 2002. Armed
Wardrop KJ. editors: Schalm's veterinary hematology. ed 6.
Forces [nstitute of Pathology.
Ames, [A, 2010, Wiley-Blackwell, pp 275.
5
Hemostatic Abnormalities
Harold Tvedten
GOALS OF HEMOSTASIS TESTING
Evaluation of the cause of bleeding varies from han-
dling of overt problems [e.g., severe epistaxis), to detec-
Recently the goals of hemostasis testing have undergone
tion of suspected problems (e.g., von Willebrand's disease
a paradigm shift. Previously testing was primarily used to
[vWD] in a Doberman pinscher), to investigation of
determine why the patient was bleeding or if it would be
unexpected problems found during laboratory examina-
py sunn isou snu ains sunp paanq on Aial
tion (eg., mild to moderate thrombocytopenia, evidence
related to establishing platelet numbers and function,
of hepatic disease). Signs of bleeding problems may
tests of defects in coagulation, and tests of fbrinolysis for
include prolonged bleeding after parturition, estrus, or
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). More
minor trauma (e.g. venipuncture, loss of deciduous
recently there is emphasis in establishing if the animal is
teeth), or spontaneous hemorrhages (i.e., petechiae.
hypercoagulable and prone to thromboembolic prob-
ecchymoses, hematomas). Gastrointestinal tract bleeding
lems. Thromboelastography (TEG) has become very
si pue sioois A yiep io poo ai ysa se ieade Aeu
popular, especially in Europe, to establish whether the net 
often occult. Bleeding into joints and muscle may cause
effect of cells and plasma factors in blood shows a hyper-
lameness. Bleeding into body cavities may be diagnosed
coagulable, normocoagulable, or hypocoagulable ten-
dency. TEG testing has indicated that patients can be
and ecchymoses suggest a platelet or vascular defect
hypercoagulable even if they have thrombocytopenia
(Figure 5-l). Epistaxis is often associated with platelet
and/or deficiencies of coagulation factors causing prolon-
defects, perhaps because of the paucity of tissue between
gation of coagulation tests such as activated partial
the vessels and the nasal mucosa. In contrast, coagulation
thromboplastin time (aPTT). TEG is a more global test of
defects are characterized by large. deep hemorrhages
hemostasis than tests that evaluate specific deficiencies.
(e.g. hematomas, hemarthroses).
Evaluation of a patient with a suspected bleeding
Hemostasis and Diagnosis of Disorders
disorder requires not only selection of appropriate tests
but, for the best diagnosis. requires a complete history
The objective of hemostasis is to maintain a balance of
and physical examination because of the high association
coagulation and fbrinolysis to preserve proper vascular
 of hemostatic disorders with breed, age, treatments, and
structure and function and blood fluidity. When a vascu-
 poisonings. Some screening tests should be run in private
lar structure is damaged, it is necessary to have adequate
practice. Point-of-care analyzers such as the VetScan
platelet numbers and function (primary hemostasis), as
VSpro Coagulation Analyzer (Abaxis North America.
well as sufficient factors and cofactors of the coagulation
Union City, CA) are available for in-clinic analysis of aPTT
system [secondary hemostasis), to stop bleeding. An
and prothrombin time (PT). However, hemostasis testing
intact fibrinolytic system localizes clotting to the area of
byr
reference laboratories and especially hemostasis
vascular damage and acts to reopen blood vessels while
centers should have better control of methods and
healing occurs. An imbalance of these factors leads either
reagents and a more complete selection of tests that may
to hypercoagulation and thromboembolic disorders or to
be necessary to identify mild or uncommon problems
la ui qoq io aeuoay pue uoeneood
(see later discussion of methodology).
This chapter has three sections. The first section intro-
A simple approach for test selection is shown in
Bnui 'siis ieu jo suauou a san
Figure 5-2. If physical examination shows no cause of the
vascular endothelium, platelets, coagulation factors, and
bleeding or bleeding seems disproportionate to the
fibrinolysis. The second section describes selected hemo-
injury, the expense of hemostatic tests (relatively expen-
static tests and factors that affect how they may be used
sive testing) is warranted to document and localize the
in diagnosis. The third section briefly describes selected
defect. Some situations require only a singletest (e.g., von
inherited and acquired disorders of hemostasis and their
Willebrand's factor [vWF] assay or capillary bleeding time
laboratory diagnosis.
 as a presurgical screen for elective surgery on a Doberman
92
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
6
Normal
Collagen
Blood vessel
Fibrin-platelet
plug
Thrombo-
cytopenia
Petechial
 hemorrhage with
B
fibrin clot
Coagulopathy
Hematoma with
→ broken platelet 
+
plug
FGURE 5-1 Physical evidence of thrombocytopenia or coagulopathy. The difference in the size of hemorrhage in thrombocyto-
penia versus coagulopathy isillustrated. A, A break in a vessel is normally repaired quickly when platelets and coagulation factors
are stimulated by exposure to collagen to form a platelet plug that is rapidly stabilized by fibrin strands. B,A proper platelet plug
is not formed in thrombocytopenia, but only a little blood leaks into the collagen before a fibrin clot is formed. C, A coagulation
factor defect prevents rapid or firm fibrin stabilization of the platelet plug, and the platelet plug breaks, allowing abundant
hemorrhage.
due to their high incidence of having vWD). Similarly, PT
ue 0l peal Aeuu sisal oml 1o auo Aluo jo uoneneaa os
is the preferred single test for suspected ingestion of
incomplete or erroneous conclusion. Variation in produc-
warfarin-type rodenticide. However, a profile of tests per-
tion and inactivation of coagulation and anticoagulation
formed the same day is recommended to localize an
factors and variation in production and removal of plate-
unknown bleeding defect (Table 5-1; Table 5-2). Some
lets and effects of treatment confuse diagnosis; therefore,
hemostatic disorders affect multiple areas of hemostasis,
performing a complete profile of tests concurrently at
initial presentation permits a more likely correct diagno-
sis. Normal results in a profile exclude some diseases from
consideration.
TABLE5-1.HEMOSTATICSCREENINGPROFILE
A reasonable profle includes a platelet count a test
PREFERRED
ALTERNATIVE
PARAMETER
of platelet function, the aPTT to assess intrinsic and
TEST
TEST
TESTED
common coagulation pathways, the PT to assess extrinsic
and common pathways, and a test of fbrinolytic activity
Platelet count
Blood smear
Platelet number
such as D-dimer (see Table 5-1). Alternative and addi-
estimate
tional tests are used in certain situations (see section on
CBT, BMBT
PFA-100
Platelet function
Laboratory Tests)
aPTT
ACT
Coagulation factors 
 Hemostatic defects should initially be localized to a
(see text)
general area of the hemostatic mechanism, which has
PT
 Specific factor
 Coagulation factors
four main components: the blood vessels, the platelets.
analysis
[see text)
coagulation factors, and the fbrinolytic system (Table
D-dimer 
FDP, TEG
Fbrinolysis
5-2). A plug of aggregated platelets initially seals damaged
vWf assay
Genetic testing
vWWF, vWVD
vessels after circulating platelets come into contact with
exposed subendothelial collagen (primary hemostasis).
ACT, Activated coagulation time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin
Platelets bind to collagen and each other with the help of
time; BMBT, buccal mucosal bleeding time; CST, capillary bleeding time;
FDP fibrin degradation products; PFA-100, Platelet Function Analyzer;
vWF (Figure 5-3; see Figure 5-1). The coagulation factors
 PT, prothrombin time; TEG, thromboelastography; vWD, von Willebrand
stimulated by the collagen, tissue thromboplastin, and
disease; vWf, von Willebr and's factor.
platelets form fibrin strands to stabilize the platelet plug 
94
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
subendothelial collagen. During this time, larger sized
Overt or potential
bleeding
hemorrhages can occur before a fbrin clot is finally
formed or pressure of adjacent tissues stops the bleeding
(see Figure 5-1).
 Clinical signs, history,
physical examination
NOTE: It is usually more effective to use a profle of hemo-
 static tests during the initial diagnosis of an undefined
Potential hemostatic
Adequate cause
for bleeding
a2jeool 0l sisal mal 0ol loalas 01 ueyl walqoid 6uipaag
defect
the problem.
(e.g., nasal foreign body)
Correct the cause;
Select laboratory
COMPONENTS OF NORMAL
no laboratory tests
test approach
 unless persistent 
HEMOSTASIS
 bleeding 
Vascular Endothelium and Wall
Unknown cause or
Highly probable
 Endothelial cells secrete substances such as prostacyclin
multiple likely
single cause
 and nitric oxide that act as inhibitors of platelet adhesion.
causes
However, when the vascular endothelium is disrupted
because of trauma, inflammation, neoplasia, or toxicity.
coagulation is initiated by platelet adherence to exposed
Hemostatic profile 
Individual test
tiates the coagulation cascade and the formation of a
Table 5-1 and text 
 See selected diseases
fibrin mesh that subsequently stabilizes the clot (second-
ary hemostasis). Clot retraction and vasoconstriction also
FGURE 5-2 Selection of laboratory tests. No hemostatic tests
prevent continued blood loss.
are necessary if an adequate explanation for a bleeding
process exists. If a hemostatic defect is likely and either several
@auses are possible or the cause is uncertain, one should screen
Platelets and Primary Hemostasis
all parts of the hemostatic mechanism for a defect with a profile
Platelets are small cytoplasmic fragments shed from
of laboratory tests. When the dinical evidence suggests only
megakaryocytes in the bone marrow. They circulate for
one probable cause, one should select the most appropriate
test to evaluate that defect.
 approximately 5 days in dogs and about 30 hours in cats.
Increased thrombopoiesis is simulated by decreased total
not necessarily reduced platelet count (thrombocytope-
(secondary hemostasis). The fibrinolytic system degrades
nia). For example, Cavalier King Charles spaniels with a
the clot to reopen the vascular lumen to blood flow while
hereditary dysplasia with fewer but larger platelets have a
the vessel heals. A platelet plug forms in coagulopathies,
normal platelecrit54 Plateletcrit,like hematocrit, is the
but easily breaks down and allows rebleeding because it
percentage of blood volume composed of platelets. Thus
is not stabilized by fibrin strands. A severe deficiency of
the platelet count, though universally used to judge the
one or more coagulation factors slows the formation of a
adequacy of platelets for hemostasis, is not as physiologic
clot, which should form rapidly after contact with the
a test as the plateletcrit.
PLATELET
PLATELET
COAGULATION
FIBRINOLYTIC
BLOOD
NUMBER*
FUNCTION*
FACTORS*
SYSTEM*
VESSELS*
Normal functiont
Platelet plug
Platelet plug
Fbrin clot
Dissolve clot
 Retain blood 
Tests for
Platelet count
 Bleeding time
aPTT and PT
D-dimer, FDP
Histopathology
evaluationt
 Aternative tests 
 Platelet estimate
PFA-100
ACT or specific 
TEG
blood smear
factor analysis
Term for disease 
Thrombopathy
Coagulopathy
DC thromboembolic
Vascular disease
disease
ACT, Activated coagulation time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; DIC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; FDP, fibrin degradation 
pxroducts; PFA- 100, Platelet Function Analyzer; PT, prothrombin time; TEG, thromboelastography.
*Five basic portions of the hemostatic mechanism.
+Basic function of the five portions. All portions interact with the others (e.g., the fibrin clot stabilies the platelet plug. clots stimulate fibrinolysis,
platelets accelerate the clotting process).
+The hemostatic parameter in bold type (top of columns) is evaluated by these tests. Possible abnormality that may be identified from the tests is itali-
cized (term for disease; bottom row). Coagulation factor activity interpretation is described in the text and in Figures 5-4, 5-6, 5-7, 5-11, and 5-12.
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
95
 Multimers of vwF linked with fVlllc in blood
vWWF
M
?
fVIllIc
Platelet
aggregation
Fibrin
Coagulation
Platelet
adhesion
（）
Endothelial cells
Collagen
FGURE 5-3 Depiction of the factor Vll molecular complex. von Willebrand's factor (vWF) is a long multimer of many vWF units.
Factor Vll coagulant activity (fVilic) is a smaller molecule linked to vWF in the complex that protects fVlllc. To facilitate platelet
"uiiebaibbe ialaield syaads-loidanal saienie ose da rsanis ayt ie uabelos oi spug da Ainlu nein2sen jo sats oi uoisaype
In the intrinsic system, fvlllc acts to activate the common pathway at factor X, which ultimately results in fibrin formation to stabilize
the platelet plug. (Modified from Cotran RS, Kumar V, Robbins SL: Robbins pathologic basis of disease, ed 5, Philadelphia, 1994,
WB Saunders, p 621.)
Platelets adhere to a defect in a vascular wall and
more blood cells and stabilizes the platelet plug, which
clump together as a platelet plug. Platelets then enhance
is stronger than the initial plug and is resistant to proteo-
and accelerate the coagulation cascade and formation of
lytic degradation by plasmin, a fibrinolytic enzyme.
stabilizing clots. vWF is needed for primary hemostasis
Coagulation factor interactions are much more
and can affect some tests of platelet function. The binding
complex than this description, but may be divided into
 of platelets results in a conformational change to expose
three parts—(1) intrinsic pathway, (2) extrinsic pathway.
previously internalized phosphatidylserine (formerly
known as PF-3, a potent receptor for factor X and pro-
These three parts are diagrammed as a letter Y (see Figure
thrombin; Figure 5-4), which causes platelet activation,
5-4). The intrinsic pathway includes factors XIl, XI, IX,
release of platelet granule contents, aggregation of more
and VIll and is initiated by contact activation. Factor XlI
platelets, and initiation of secondary hemostasis by for-
is activated when it contacts a nonendothelial surface
mation of a procoagulant surface of fbrinogen receptors
such as collagen outside a blood vessel.
on the primary plug. Release of adenosine diphosphate
The extrinsic pathway is initiated by interaction of
[ADP) from the dense granules causes synthesis of throm-
tissue factor and activated factor VIl. The extrinsic system
boxane Az, a prostaglandin that causes irreversible platelet
initiates the coagulation response, whereas the intrinsic
aggregation and viscous metamorphosis and local vaso-
system sustains the generation of fibrin. These two path-
constriction. Primary hemostasis requires adequate
ways converge into the common pathway at the point
numbers of platelets that function adequately.
where factor X is activated, which then leads to formation
of a fibrin clot Most coagulation tests have fibrin forma-
tion as the end point of the test The common pathway
Coagulation Factors
consists of factors X, V, prothrombin, and fibrinogen.
Stabilization of the initial platelet hemostatic plug is
In the case of a diffcult venipuncture tissue throm-
accomplished by a mesh of fibrin formed by the coagula-
boplastin may be released from injured cells and initiate
tion cascade. The primary objective of the coagulation
the clotting cascade ex vivo. Deficiencies of tissue throm-
system is the formation of thrombin, which converts cir-
boplastin and ionized calcium levels are never low
culating fbrinogen to insoluble fibrin. These generated
saaieid pateay tuaaa asnes ci iuanied e u yanoua
fbrin strands then cross-link to form a mesh, which traps
are important in clot formation, because they provide a
96
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Intrinsic Pathway
 s u a aq a a ua
ExtrinsicPathway
used clinically to treat hemostatic abnormalities associ-
Rough surface
Tissue thromboplastin
ated with severe gastrointestinal disease, septicemia, and
(e.g., collagen)
endotoxemia.? Decreased AT Ill occurs in hepatic insuf-
Q
Xll
?
ficiency, owing to decreased synthesis, and in glomenular
X1
VIl
disease because of increased loss through the glomenulus.
Availability of the AT IIl assay varies. Automated assays
PF-3VI1
with chromogenic substrates are used by some veterinary
X
PF-3
laboratories and allow routine testing. However, tests of
Common
AT Il function, protein C, and protein S are expensive to
Prothrombin
pathway
maintain in terms of time quality control, and reagents,
Fibrinogen
so they are available only at a few hemostasis reference
Clot
laboratories. Lack of information about the activity of
these anticoagulant factors impedes ability to fully under-
stand the balance of hemostasis in a patient.
FGURE 5-4 A simplified coagulation cascade. One may con-
Fibrinolysis
sider the cascade as a letter Y with three portions (or path-
Fibrinolysis is the process of fibrin clot dissolution once
ways): The intrinsic pathway includes factors Xll, Xl, IX, and Illl;
the damaged blood vessel is repaired, which reestablishes
the extrinsic pathway contains factor Vll; and the common
pathway includes factors X, V, prothrombin, and filbrinogen.
normal vascular patency. Plasmin digests fibrin clots (and
Phosphatidylserine (i.e., platelet factor 3 [PF-3]l on the surface
 even circulating fibrinogen) to produce fibrin degradation
of activated platelets speeds the coagulation process. The
snpoid uoepeap uagouay o (sdde) sinpoid
intrinsic pathway is initiated by contacting abnormal surfaces
(FgDPs). FDPs have anticoagulant effects, which helps
(e.g., collagen] not covered by endothelium. The intrinsic
explain bleeding signs during DIC. Fibrinolysis may be
system activates the common pathway at factor X by a complex
 detected by quantification of products of fibrinolysis such
of IX, VIll, and phosphatidylserine on the activated platelet
as D-dimer, FDPs, Or alteration in TEG curves 30 to 60
surface. The end point of the common pathway (and thus the
minutes after clot formation.
intrinsic or extrinsic pathways) is the fibrin clot. Tissue throm-
boplastin from damaged cells and factor Vll in the extrinsic
pathway also activates the common pathway.
LABORATORY TESTS
When a profile of tests is used, one should interpret each
negatively charged phospholipid surface on which coagu-
test individually and list the individual conclusions of
lation factors assemble In severe thrombocytopenia, the
what is normal or abnormal. Then one makes a disease
coagulation process is slower [e.g, slight prolongation of
 diagnosis based on the total laboratory pattern and clini-
the activated clotting time). The negatively charged
cal evidence. Table 5-3 lists patterms expected in various
surface of platelets reacts with factors IX and VIll as a
diseases and may aid in diagnosis or understanding of the
complex in the intrinsic pathway. Activated factor IX from
diseases discussed in the next section. As with all such
this complex interacts with another complex of factors X
tables, exceptions occur in the complexity of real cases.
and V of the common pathway.
 To keep coagulation localized to the defect, once pro-
Blood Collection for Hemostatic Testing
coagulant factors have been activated, they are inhibited
by anticoagulant factors such as antithrombin IIl (AT III,
 Proper sample collection and management avoid preana-
complexed with heparin) and removed by the phagocytic
lytical errors in test results. A clean venipuncture is essen-
system. Those that escape AT II will bind with thrombo-
tial to minimize introduction of tissue factors, which
modulin on endothelial cells, which activates protein C.
could falsely activate platelets and clotting factors. One
Protein C is an anticoagulant and profbrinolytic factor
should avoid “raising" a vein by hitting it A sharp
that, with protein S as a cofactor, specifically hydrolyzes
20-gauge (1.l-mm) or larger needle should be used. A
factors V and Vll and inhibits thrombin formation.37
two-syringe technique is preferred for platelet counting
Several factors (II, VIl, IX, X and protein C) are dependent
and coagulation testing. The frst tube receiving blood
on vitamin K. Vitamin K antagonists [i.e, warfarin) inter-
with any tissue thromboplastin from the venipuncture is
fere with hemostasis by interfering with these factors.
used for another purpose (e.g., serum clot tube for chem-
These factors have different half-lives, which affects which
istry) or is discarded. Allowing blood to flow from a bare
of them become deficient earliest during warfarin poison-
needle also flushes out tissue thromboplastins. Blood
ing. Factor Vll and protein C become deficient earliest.
should be mixed well with the anticoagulant by inverting
 and lack of protein C can lead to often unexpected hyper-
the tube several times without violent shaking. The col-
lection tube may be swayed during collection to aid
warfarin treatment.
mixing. Additionally, turbulence, clotting. or extremes in
Heparin inhibits thrombin and other procoagulant
temperature may invalidate hemostatic testing. Ethylene-
factors indirectly by activating AT Ill, a circulating natural
 diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) is an excellent anticoagu-
anticoagulant that is the main physiologic inhibitor of
lant for canine platelet counts and routine hematology.
thrombin. Because AT Ill is usually decreased in DIC.
though exceptions occur in which EDTA (and even
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
97
TABLE 5-3.EXPECTEDHEMOSTATIC TEST RESULTSINSELECTED DISEASES
Hemostatic Profile*
DISEASE
BLEEDING TIME
PLATELET COUNT
aPTT
PT
D-D
Thrombocytopenia (e.g., ITP)
D
N
N
N
 Platelet dysfunction (e.g., uremia, aspirin teatment) 
N
N
N
N
Intrinsic pathway defect (e.g., hemophilia A or B) 
+N
N
N
N
Factor Vll deficiency
N
N
N
N
Warfarin-type toxicity (multiple factor deficiency)
+N
N-D+
1
1
Common pathway defect (e.g., factor X deficiency) 
N
N
1
1
N
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC)5
D
yon Willebrand's disease (vWD)
N
N'
N
N
See text for details on these diseases and other diseases that may give similar patterns. Note that any of these tests may be normal with mild to
variable disease dhanges.
aPTT, Activated partial thromboplastin time; D-D, D-dimer; ITP, immune-mediated thrombocytopenia; PT, prothrombin time.
*I, increased; D, decreased; N, normal.
tInitially stops in normal time period but may start bleeding again.
Thrombocytopenia occurs in some patients with warfarin toxicity.
DIC can have widely variable results (see Table 5-4).
IRare cases of vWD may have prolonged aPTT.
heparin and citrate to a lesser effect) seems to promote
hyperadrenocorticism, in which bleeding is secondary to
clumping of platelets to cause pseudothrombocytopenia
catabolism of supporting collagen around vessels.
in certain patients. A venipuncture adequate for a routine
complete blood count (CBC) is often inadequate for an
Platelet Enumeration
accurate platelet count (See later comments on feline
platelet counting and prostaglandin E,.)
Hematology instrument platelet counts are accurate, sen-
The citrated plasma-clotting tests [i.e, aPTT, PT,
sitive, and precise methods for detecting and evaluating
fibrinogen, thrombin time [TT], FDP) require nine parts
thrombocytopenia and should be used when available.
fresh whole blood and one part 3.8% trisodium citrate
However, blood smear estimates are often adequate for
anticoagulant to separate plasma from cells and platelets,
initial quick diagnosis of severe thrombocytopenia.
which must be done within 30 minutes of sample collec-
Severe thrombocytopenia is a very common cause of
tion. Citrate or oxalate blood collection tubes must be
bleeding. and an estimate may be used during off hours
flled completely to a mark on the tube's label to avoid
 Or when instruments are not available. After routine prep-
errors in dilution. Plasma can be stored at 4° C for 48
aration and staining of a blood smear, one should deter-
hours or 20° C for 6 hours, or frozen for transport, to
mine the average number of platelets in 5 to 10 microscope
preserve factors VII and VIll. Furlanello has stated that
fields using the 100x oil objective [i.e, 1000x magnifica-
samples were reasonably stable for 48 hours at room
tion) to estimate platelet numbers.52 Dogs normally have
temperature and so may be sent to a laboratory. 15 Certain
about 8 to 29 platelets/feld, and cats should have 10 to
tests require use of special tubes containing various
29/field. If the thrombocytopenia is severe enough to
reagents, so one should ask or read information from the
cause bleeding, only 0 to 3 platelets/feld are expected.
laboratory before collecting the sample. Plastic tubes 
Platelets should be counted in the thin “monolayer" area.
should be used because routine glass surfaces activate
On most smears, this is where the red blood cells (RBCs)
coagulation.
infrequently touch each other, and central pallor in
canine RBCs is prominent. Anemic, bleeding animals
Blood Vessel Evaluation
have fewer RBCs per field in the proper area, so it is easy
to look too deeply into the thicker areas of a smear.
Vascular disease is rarely diagnosed as the cause of bleed-
An altermative is to consider each platelet/ 10ox oil immer-
ing in dogs and cats. Blood vessels can be evaluated
sion feld as approximately equal to 15,000 to 20,000
histologically. Skin biopsy may document vasculitis in
platelets/μul. There is variation to the number of platelets
bleeding animals and is indicated in the presence of
-jalqo adonsoioiuu au uo guipuadap maia jo piay iad uaas
edema, petechiae, and a normal platelet count, or edema
tive. Better objectives have a larger feld of view.
 plus DIC. Immune-mediated vasculitis in dogs is uncom-
One must ensure uniform platelet distribution in the
mon, but antigen-antibody complexes occasionally
sample. Blood smears should be screened for platelet
deposit in vessels, causing an Arthus reaction and non-
aggregates to assure accuracy of any platelet count or
thrombocytopenic purpura with petechiae and edema.
estimate. Platelet clumps that are large enough to be seen
ae asoiu ie uaas s iaad pesa
at scanning magnification (4x or 10x objective) are usually
a sign of septicemia-induced DIC. In rare instances.
pulled to the distal end of the smear. If many or large
qutaneous 
hemorrhages are noted in dogs with
 platelet clumps are present, all platelet methods, such as
98
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
estimated, manual, and instrument platelet counts, will
to optical instrument platelet counts than impedance
be inaccurate. If an accurate platelet result is needed for
feline platelet counts.?? The hemocytometer must be
the patient, then a new sample should be taken in such
clean and free of scratches. Because platelets are the size
a manner as to avoid aggregation of platelets. Aggregation
of dust particles, nicks and scratches in the glass may
 of erythrocytes or leukocytes also causes laboratory error.
cause misidentification of dust as platelets. One very good
 All tubes of anticoagulated blood should be examined for
hemocytometer should be reserved just for platelet
 grossly visible clots and not submitted for hematologic
counts. A phase-contrast microscope helps to differentiate
testing.
platelets from other particles. Lowering the condenser on
a regular microscope also aids in visualizing the relatively
transparent platelets. A platelet stain improves platelet
NOTE: Severe thrombocytopenia is a common cause of
detection in a hemocytometer but is usually unnecessary.
bleeding, and an estimate from a blood smear is a quick,
If the blood sample is poor (e.g.. has clots or platelet
 inexpensive, and usually adequate means of diagnosis.
aggregates), it is not appropriate to request a manual
platelet count, because it too will be affected by uneven
platelet distribution in the blood.
 Thrombocytopenia is a common initial clue to the
 Blood must be diluted such that the number of cells
 presence of many diseases. Instrument platelet counts are
wasis uonni y juno oi Asea st lajaoiouay aul u
accurate and precise and are the preferred method to
with plastic containers is easiest. Becton-Dickinson (BD)
detect mild to moderate thrombocytopenia. Instrument
discontinued their Unopette System and now recom-
counts are preferred to monitor the course of a thrombo-
mends, as an altermative, similar products of Bioanalytic
cytopenia and response to treatment. Reference values
GmbH (www.bioanalytic.de). Bioanalytic's Trombo-tic is
vary with the instrument, method, and breed; thus spe-
 advertized to lyse RBCs, disaggregate platelet clumps, and
cifc reference values improve sensitivity in detection of
make platelets more rounded for better identification.
mild thrombocytopenia.
Delayed analysis favors platelet clumping and can
 Feline platelets have a strong tendency to clump, fre-
lead to a lower platelet count. Various references suggest
quently causing inaccurate and lower platelet counts.
 30 minutes to 6 hours as a maximum tolerable limit. This
may vary with the method, because an evaluation of 21
tion.5* If added immediately to a feline blood sample or
dogs with the Bayer H-1 hematology analyzer (precursor
 preferably included already in the tube, PGE1 will allow
to the Advia 2l20) suggested that clinically accurate plate-
accurate platelet counts that on average are 60% higher
let counts could be obtained with analysis of EDTA blood
than those without PGEl. Optical counts [in instruments
up to 2 days old (Figure 5-5). This suggests that EDTA
with laser systems) in routine feline patients can be 50%
blood sent to laboratories, remaining in the mail for l or
to 62% higher than impedance counts becauseimpedance-
2 days, may still have clinically acceptable platelet count
type instruments fail to identify large platelets, which are
results if platelet clumping is absent or minimal.
excluded from their platelet counts.2? Thus the combina-
oue ue se lad uisn pou pue suasu o
supplement will combine for substantial errors in feline
 NOTE: Do not request a manual platelet count if the blood 
platelet counts.5’ PGEl is expensive and must be frozen
sample has large or many platelet aggregates. Uneven
until just before use, but need only be used in cats where
distribution of patelets in the sample is a preanalytical
thrombocytopenia is likely or other dogs with persistent
error that will cause all types of patelet counting to be
platelet aggregation of blood samples. Fortunately true
inaccurate! Take a new blood sample with special effort to
and severe thrombocytopenia is rare in cats. In feline
avoid aggregation.
 myeloproliferative disorders, huge numbers of large and
bizarre platelets may not be counted. Other particles (e.g..
ghost cells: partially lysed RBCs) may be erroneously
Platelet Morphology
counted as platelets. Ghost cells are not uncommon prob-
lems in immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
 Platelets may be characterized in different ways by various
samples. An abnormal appearance of platelet dot-plots
instruments, including some of those mentioned in this 
from the Advia 2120 or Sysmex XT-2000iV suggests this
section. Blood smears should be evaluated routinely to
error (Figure 2-6).51 Small RBCs in iron deficiency anemia
ensure that the platelet count appears reasonable. Large
can be counted as platelets, especially with impedance-
platelets are usually seen on blood smears of dogs with
type instruments. This “small red" error may be detected
thrombocytopenia. However, neither increased numbers
by inspecting the platelet-RBC histogram and noting a
 of large platelets, increased mean platelet volume (MPV),
failure of separation of the two peaks representing plate-
nor abnormal platelet distribution width (PDW) have
lets [left peak) and RBCs [right peak) (see Figure 2-3) or
been shown in the dog to differentiate among any of the
by instrument error flags.
causes of thrombocytopenia or other diseases. Larger
 Manual counts with a glass counting chamber (hemo-
saeses
cytometer) may be used if automated hematology cell
related to platelet numbers, which thus may assure the
counters are not available or, rarely, if the automated
[ si i a u e e i u
count is in question (e.g., if ghost RBCs are counted as
and not a laboratory error. Large platelets are more
platelets). Manual platelet counts are imprecise and labor
functionally active, which may explain why some dogs
intensive but include large platelets and are more similar
with platelet counts less than l0,ooo/μl do not bleed
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
66
20
SD)
ue
ab
24
48
Storage time (hrs)
FGURE 5-5 Stability of the platelet count with the H-1 hematology instrument (precursor to the Advia 2120). The mean percent-
age dhange in the platelet count with time is compared with the initial platelet count for 21 canine ethylenediaminetetraacetic
acid (EDTA) blood samples stored at room temperature for 8 hours and refrigerated for 2 days. Bars indicate the standard devia-
tion (SD). This indicates platelet counts may be performed on blood samples sent by mail.
excessively. Cavalier King Charles spaniels often have a
Canine MPV may be artificially high in EDTA blood
samples held more than 4 hours at 4° C because of plate-
macrothrombocytopenia is due to a defect in betal-
let swelling.
tubulin. They have no signs of bleeding, though imped-
Large, RNA-rich platelets are named the high fuores-
ance platelet counts are often less than 10,0o0/μl. The
cent platelet fraction (HFPF) in the Sysmex XT-2000iV
Cavalier King Charles spaniels and Norfork terriers have
instrument. These HFPF platelets were shown to be equiv-
a normal plateletcrit (percentage of blood volume, similar
alent to reticulated platelets.4l HFPF platelets are consis-
to hematocrit) despite variably low platelet counts (see
tently increased during active thrombopoiesis due to
-sd an e st (sse naaieid] iiaaield ts'(- at
thrombocytopenia or treatment with thrombopoietin.
ologic measurement than platelet count but nobody can
The HFPF is greater in number in thrombocytopenia due
interpret plateletcrit in % blood volume or L/L. Platelet-
to DIC, IMHA, and ITP than in dogs with thrombocyto-
crit is directly measured by the IDEXX VetAutoread Hema-
Bueiaunua ieui ssasns stul ive euaynat oianp eiuad
tology Analyzer (QBC) but converted to a platelet number.
the absolute number of large RNA-rich platelets may be
which most veterinarians can interpret. The QBC mea-
useful in differentiating causes of thrombocytopenia
sures plateletcrit directly by measuring the width of the
("regenerative"t
thrombocytopenia). pending further
platelet layer in a centrifuged tube. The Advia 2120 per-
studies. However, greater numbers of large RNA-rich
forms a plateletcrit that works fairly well even in Cavalier
platelets (HFPF) are seen in hereditary macrothrombocy-
King Charles spaniels with their very large platelets
topenia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels and Norfork
(unpublished data). Other instruments enumerate plate-
terriers, which do not have increased thrombocytosis.
let numbers well, but most have problerms with accurate
n 1nouin aiel ae siaaiend aiel asau pue
measurement of MPV, especially when distribution of
lifespans.17
platelets by size is not typical. Plateletcrit equals platelet
Platelets often have pseudopodia and an irregular
count multiplied by MPV multiplied by a factor.
shape on blood smears that suggests platelet activation
Decreased MPV was consistently reported by the
during collection and handling of the blood. Decrease in
(then Technicon) H-1 Hematology analyzer in thrombo-
cytopenic dogs with immune-mediated thrombocytope-
(MPC) concentration is an indicator of platelet activation.
nia (ITP), but this was most likely an error in measuring
MPC was more decreased in dogs with IMHA then normal
MPV in very thrombocytopenic samples and not reflective
dogs and sick dogs without IMHA, and more decreased
of a true microthrombocytosis. Decreased MPV may occur
in those dogs with IMHA who died."l Primary platelet
if small particles (eg., lipid droplets, cell fragments) are
disorders such as thrombasthenic thrombopathia in otter
counted as platelets. This "background noise"
isnot
hounds, foxhounds, and Scottish terriers are rare causes
noticed in samples with many platelets but has a
of large and morphologically bizarre platelets.35 Ehrlichia
relatively strong effect in  severe thrombocytopenia.
platys may be visible in platelets.
100
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Platelet Function Testing
in uremia. BMBT is affected by the type of Suricutt used
and variation among operators. The BMBT is usually
Platelet function tests are needed when a defect in primary
"normal" in pure coagulation defects such as hemophilia.
hemostasis is suspected but platelet counts are not
 because the bleeding stops initially in the expected time
decreased (see also description of von Willebrand's
because of the formation of platelet plugs. However.
disease). Platelet function tests include use of the Platelet
because fbrin strands do not stabilize the platelet plug.
Function Analyzer (PFA-100), tests of platelet aggregation
the incision is prone to rebleed. The cuticle bleeding time
(Multiplate Analyzer), and capillary bleeding time (CBT)
test is not recommended because it is insensitive and
or buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT). Platelet aggre-
imprecise. However, the principle may be applied when
gation methods measure the ability of platelets to stick
during nail trimming one clips the claws too short. The
together and release granule contents, and thus measures
cuticle bleeding time can be determined by observing
platelet function in vitro in response to various com-
when the bleeding stops. It should stop within 5 minutes.
pounds. Some in-clinic tests are described here, but to
identify more specifically the mechanism of a platelet
Platelet Function Analyzer
function defect, veterinarians should contact a platelet
specialist such as Boudreaux. 1
The Platelet Function Analyzer (PFA-100) (Dade Behring.
Thrombopathy means defects in platelet function
Inc, Deerfeld, IL) has been validated for dogs.4 Citrate-
without alterations in platelet numbers. Thrombopathy is
anticoagulated blood is sucked through a capillary and
more commonly acquired than inherited and more
membrane into various cartridges. The membrane is
common in dogs than cats. Thrombopathy can be caused
-qdauida pue uagenos io dav pue uasenos ym paieo
by endocrinopathies, such as diabetes mellitus or hyper-
rine (two different cartridges). The collagen-epinephrine
adrenocorticism, IMHA, pancreatitis, or renal failure and
cartridge was found to be less suitable for dogs. Reference
may be associated with thrombosis. Inherited defects may
sas g on es aam da-a iog saa
include quantitative or qualitative defects in membrane
Decreased hematocrit also caused prolongation of
proteins needed for platelet adhesion, cyclic adenosine
closure time.
monophosphate (cAMP) metabolism, prostaglandin
metabolism, granule pools, vWF and fibrinogen
Platelet Aggregation
concentrations.
Aggregation of platelets after exposure to various agonists
allows evaluation of platelet function. The Multiplate
NOTE: The CBT capillary beeding time or BMBT may be
Analyzer (Dynabyte GmbH, Munich, Germany) is an
used as an in-clinic screening test for vwwD, thrombocyto-
impedance aggregometer validated for dogs.2 The platelet
penia, or reduced patelet function. Either can be used
glass bead retention test is useful in detecting general
as a presurgical test to exclude a problem in primary
abnormalities in hemostasis, including platelet adhesion
hemostasis.
defects in thrombopathies and vWD.°
Tests of Coagulation
Buccal Mucosal and Capillary
Activated Coagulation Time
Bleeding Time
The activated coagulation time (ACT) is a simple, inex-
 The BMBT or CBT is typically used as a presurgical screen
pensive, in-clinic screening test to evaluate the intrinsic
or to rule out defects in primary hemostasis. They are
and common pathways of the coagulation system.
platelet function tests but also are affected by decreases
However, it is insensitive. A specific coagulation factor
in platelet number or the presence of vWD or vascular
must be decreased to less than 5% of normal to increase
disease. The CBT has an advantage over the BMBT because
the ACT. Thus only severe deficits are detected. A carrier
severe bleeding in some vWD patients is easier to control
of hemophilia, for example has 40% to 60% of the
with a bandage on the paw than is bleeding from the
normal concentration of factor VIll or IX and would not
mouth.3? The CBT is performed on the lateral, shaved
be detected by the ACT or even the more sensitive aPTT.
surface of a front toe with the dog in lateral recumbence
The ACT may be slightly prolonged in severe thrombocy-
with a sphygmomanometer cuff on its leg (pressure 60
topenia (< 10,0o0/μl). ACT reference values are approxi-
mm Hg). The skin is cut twice with a blood lancet, 5 mm
spuoras 5Z 0l 05 pue saop 1oy spuooas 01l ol 09 Alaleul
apart near the horny part of the pad. Normally bleeding
for cats. It is a whole blood procedure, obviating the need
stops in about 1 to 2.5 minutes.
for using anticoagulants or obtaining plasma.
A spring-loaded disposable device (Suricutt) in the
A special ACT Vacutainer tube that contains an activa-
BMBT creates standardized cuts in the mucosal surface of
tor is used for venipuncture A heating block or water bath
the upper lip. which has been everted and tied tightly
is used to prewarm the tubes to 37° C and maintain that
enough to cause vascular congestion by impeding venous
temperature until the clot forms. The blood is incubated
o a au susa sau auaan au 'uan
at 37° C for 60 seconds after blood enters the tube for a
bleeding to cease. Blood is carefully removed by blotting
canine sample, or 45 seconds for a feline sample. Then,
near the incision with filter paper, without applying pres-
at 5-second intervals, the tube is inverted until the end
sure to the wound. The BMBT in healthy dogs is approxi-
point of the frst visible clot is detected. The time from
mately 2.6 ± 0.5 minutes and can be used to diagnose
addition of blood to the tube until a clot frst becomes
severe thrombocytopenia, vWD, and platelet dysfunction
visible is the ACT.
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
101
aPTT
PT
aPTT
PT
ACT
Intrinsic
ACT
Extrinsic
Prolonged ()
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
Common
Common
TT
TT
Fibrinogen
CLOT
CLOT
AGURE 5-6 Hemostatic tests of the coagulation cascade. The
FGURE 5-7 Test results for an intrinsic pathway defect. Only
activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and activated
activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and activated
coagulation time (ACT) test all factors of the intrinsic and
coagulation time (ACT) results should be abnormal. A star and
common pathways. The modified thrombin time (T7) deter-
termination of the arrow along the side of the intrinsic system
mines the fibrinogen concentration. The prothrombin time (PT) 
depict the site of the defect. Specific factor analysis and con-
tests factor Vll and the factors of the common pathway.
sideration of clinical signs, history, and physical findings iden-
tify a specific factor defect from factors Xll, Xl, IX, and Vill.
PT, Prothrombin time; TT, thrombin time.
NOTE: The ACT is a simple in-clinic test for most coagula-
tion defects, such as warfarin poisoning, though the aPTT
is a more sensitive test for coagulation factor deficiencies
Activated Partial Thromboplastin Time
 in the intrinsic and common pathways.
 The aPTTtests factors of the intrinsic pathway (i.e, factors
XII, XI, IX, and VIll) plus the common pathway factors
[i.e., all factors except Vll; see Figure 5-6). It is used to
detect decreased activity of one or more coagulation
Prothrombin Time
factors, as in hemophilia, DIC, acquired vitamin K def-
 The PT evaluates the extrinsic and common pathways
ciency, warfarin poisoning, or hepatic failure The aPTT
(Figure 5-6). The factors in the common pathway include
measures the time required for fibrin clot formation after
X, V, I1, thrombin, and fibrinogen. One of the major uses 
addition of a contact surface activator of the intrinsic
 of the PT, as a single test, is detection of vitamin K antago-
system and calcium. Factors must be less than 30% of
nist poisoning (e.g., warfarin). PT is the most sensitive test
normal to prolong the aPTT Thus aPTT (and certainly not 
of warfarin-type toxicity. Of the vitamin K-related factors
ACT) will not detect carriers of coagulation defects with
(II, VII, IX, and X), factor VII has the shortest half-life If
40% to 60% of normal factor concentrations. There is
synthesis of these factors is inhibited, factor VlI deficiency
prominent variation of the sensitivity of the aPTT test
develops earliest Because factor Vll is in the extrinsic
while using different reagents.33 More sensitive reagents
pathway, the PT is prolonged earliest and has the greatest
(e.g, Hemos IL SynthAFAX; Instrumentation Laboratory)
 relative increase above the normal mean. The PT is used
allow detection of hemophilia A (factor Vll deficiency).
 in conjunction with the aPTT (Figure 5-7) in localizing
but some of the less sensitive reagents may give normal
 other types of coagulopathies. Factors must be reduced to
aPTT results even in hemophilic patients. Monitoring
less than 30% of normal to prolong a standard PT, though
heparin therapy requires aPTT reagent and heparin
using a PT test optimized for dogs can detect milder
 preparation-specific calibration.
deficiencies.35
NOTE: The aPTT tests for all coagulation factors except Vll,
 NOTE: PT is the most sensitive test of warfarin-type toxicity
but variations in aPTT reagents cause different methods
 and is altered earliest and most after poisoning.
 to have variable to poor sensitivity. In-clinic point-of-care
instruments are available for aPTT and PT testing.
Calcium and activating agents are added during the
tests, and fbrometers or photo-optical coagulometers are
Thrombin Time
used to detect formation of fbrin strands or changes in
TT measures concentration of normal fibrinogen (see
the intensity of filtered light when clot formation occurs.
Figure 5-6). The TT may be used to monitor the antico-
PT measures the time required for fbrin clot formation
agulant activity of heparin and FDP The modifed TT
after addition of tissue thromboplastin and calcium. PT
has an excess of thrombin added to the reagent, making
is increased with factor deficiencies in the extrinsic or
it insensitive to anticoagulants. The modifed TT is the
common pathways, DIC, acquired vitamin K deficiency
type usually used in veterinary laboratories and should
such as in coumarin poisoning. or hepatic failure.
not be used to monitor heparin treatment. Cnude heat
102
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
precipitation methods used to measure fbrinogen con-
the patient Various assays of D-dimer concentrations
centration, for diagnosis of hyperfibrinogenemia asso-
have been validated for dogs (see later discussion of DIC).
ciated with inflammatory disease, are not sufficiently
sensitive to diagnose hypofbrinogenemia. Hypofibrino-
Thromboelastography
genemia is primarily the result of increased consumption
Thromboelastography (TEG) measures the viscoelastic
in DIC, but decreased production of fibrinogen may also
properties of whole blood during clotting under low
Occur in advanced liver disease.
shear conditions and indicates changes in the strength of
Specific Factor Analysis
the clot over time [30 to 120 minutes). TEG tests for a net
effect of the interaction of cellular elements [mainly
Specifc factor assays are performed when a hemostatic
platelets) and soluble elements (coagulation factors
Jo dnoi io ioisey Aial e ot paziesol uaaq sey iajap
[mainly fibrinogen] and anticoagulation factors) in clot
factors (eg, early intrinsic pathway factors). Hemostasis
formation. Interpretations are that the net hemostatic
laboratories use a modifcation of the aPTT to determine
effect is either hypercoagulation, normocoagulation, or
the percentage of specific factors (e.g. percentage of factor
hypocoagulation, and the test indicates how severely
VIII in hemophilia A). The percentage is compared with
abnormal the results are (Figure 5-8). Fibrinolysis less
normal pooled plasma, so about l00% is normal.
often may be indicated by lysis values (%) at 30 minutes
Immunologic assays [i.e, electroimmunoassay or
(LY30) or 60 minutes (LY60) or by interpretation of the
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay [ELISA]) of vWF are
curve. Figure 5-9 shows a decrease in amplitude (width)
used to diagnose vWD, and several subtypes of vWD have
of curve over time suggesting fbrinolysis. Fibrinolysis
been identifed by precise characterization of the size and
should be concluded with caution because similar
concentration of multimers of the molecule.5 The inci-
 u  s aq    an u s
dence of vWD in some breeds (e.g., Doberman pinschers,
(perhaps due to platelet contraction), giving a false
Airedale terriers) may be 50% or more, so any bleeding
impression of fibrinolysis.
tendency or need for surgery is a reasonable indication
 Different instruments and reagents are used for TEG
for vWF assay. One should measure vWF before any blood
and may vary from the following description. The basic
transfusions are administered, because transfusions add
principle is that calcium chloride and an activator of
vWF, which can mask a deficiency in vWD. vWF is an
coagulation are added to anticoagulated blood. Develop-
   a   a a
ment of a clot over time is measured in a plastic chamber
illness, stress, strenuous exercise, azotemia, hepatic
with a rotating piston or pin. The time from adding the
disease, parturition, and after administration of the
activator to initial formation of the clot (R) is similar to
vasopressin analogue deamino D-arginine vasopressin
the ACT. The rate of initial clotting is described by the
(DDAVP). Canine-specific vWF antigen assay has been
time (K) for the clot to reach an amplitude of 20 mm,
validated in both cats and dogs to diagnose vWD. Some
and K is inversely related to the angle [in degrees) of
human vWF kits have antibodies that cross-react with
the curve during this time period (see Figure 5-8). The
canine vWF. vWF function assays (eg. botrocetin) can
maximum amplitude (MA) reflects the maximal width or
also be performed.
strength of the clot and is strongly affected by amount of
Shipping plasma to referral laboratories requires
fibrin and number of platelets. G is a "global" or summa-
special care. Laboratories should be asked about the
tion value calculated from other results. Certain defects
required handling procedures: typically the plasma can
-aoy juaaand Aeu Aixon ueem io eiudouaq se yns
be stored at 4° to 22° C for up to 48 hours or rapidly
mation of a clot. Decreasing the hematocrit of a sample
frozen in l-ml aliquots and shipped on dry ice. One
will cause increase MA and G, suggesting a hypercoagu-
should use 3.8% citrate as the anticoagulant in a 1: 9 ratio
lable TEG result. Trust in the usefulness of TEG testing is
(e.g.. 0.5 ml Na citrate + 4.5 ml blood), keep the sample
generally stronger in Europe than the United States.
refrigerated or on ice, and separate the plasma within 30
minutes of collection by high-speed centrifugation [(i.e..
2500 to 3500 rpm) for 15 minutes. Plasma should be
DISORDERS OF HEMOSTASIS
collected using plastic pipettes and containers.
 In this section, a few selected diseases are discussed that
D-dimer
are either common or illustrate a defect in a part of the
D-dimer concentration indicates the amount of break-
hemostasis system not previously discussed.
down of clots in the body (fbrinolysis). D-dimer is a
specific FDP from cross-linked fibrin. Cross-linked fbrin,
Disseminated Intravascular Coagulation · DIC is a
which occurs at later stage of the formation of fibrin from
fbrinogen, is produced by the action of thrombin on
coagulation" is the usual term used for a patient with
soluble fbrin polymers. Therefore, D-dimer is more spe-
excessive coagulation, thrombus formation, infarction,
cifc for fibrinolysis than general FDPtests. Increased fbri-
fibrinolysis and consumption of platelets and plasma
nolysis usually indicates increased clotting in the body.
factors, and bleeding. However, there is disagreement on
which supports a diagnosis of DIC and other thrombo-
what criteria are needed to diagnose DIC compared to
embolic diseases. Hemorrhage (eg., trauma) in the body
"thromboembolic disease" or hypercoagulability of vari-
creates clots that are broken down to FDP and D-dimer;
able intensity and duration. Many veterinarians restrict
therefore, an elevated D-dimer concentration is not spe-
the term DIC to a very severe form with signs of bleeding.
cific for DIC. D-dimer less than 0.25 μg/ml has strong
thrombosis, and death, while DIC to others also includes
negative predictive value to more or less rule out DIC in
milder, subclinical, and chronic disorders. Therefore,
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
103
R
K
Angle
MA
PMA
G
min
min
deg.
mm
d/sc
5,0
1,8
65.2
61.4
7.9K
FGURE 5-8 Examples of thromboelastography responses. The blue-green and red-violet lines were from two normal dogs. The
algeinbeosan/y moys (yuid xybi pue 'abuero 'yoeig) saullaaiyt lano ayl 'asuodsa. algenbeosodky e smoys au!l uaarb zuby lauu
responses. The values given at the bottom were from one normal dog (blue-green line). The width of the curves is described by
maximum amplitude (MA), which is the maximal width of the developing clot in millimeters (mm). The three hypercoagulable
responses had a distinctly wider curve and larger MA. K and angle describe the initial stages of dotting. The rate of initial dotting
is described by the time (K) for the clot to reach an amplitude of 20 mm, and K is inversely related to the angle (in degrees) of
the curve during this time period. G is a "global" or summation value calculated from other results. The three hypercoagulable
ines have a steeper angle than in normal dogs and thus shorter time (K) during initial clotting. The hypocoagulable line in green
wnjeje buippe woy awj ayt s!y "(y) abueyp s!yt buunp aw jabuol snyt pue uoieinbeos lelu buunp albue ainse ssal e pey
to start of coagulation. The hypocoagulable line in green had a longer R and its curve starts to deviate from the zero point later
than the other examples. Ignore PMA which is not used in diagnosis.
R
K
Angle
MA
PMA
G
EPL
min
min
deg
mm
d/sc
%
4.9
3,3
50.7
45.5
0,0
4,2K
14,0
3-8
1-3
51 - 71
51-69
5,3K-11,3K0-15
decrease in the width of the curve (amplitude) with time.This figure shows alikely true case of flbrinolysis (black and light green
ines), an example of an artifact that looked like fibrinolysis (blue line), and the curves of two normal dogs (outer pink and orange
ines). The canine patient with filbrinolysis had pyometra, an adrenal tumor, and DlC. Note that this dog's two aurves decrease in
width with time (time is along the x axis). This was mild the first day (black line; LY30 was 4.6% while normal dogs have none, 0%),
but was worse the next day (green line; LY30 was 14%). LY30 is the amount of lysis (decrease from maximal amplitude) at 30
minutes. The black ine was from a normal blood donor dog without fibrinolysis but with an LY30 of 17.3%. Clot retraction may
explain an artifact of increased LY30. lgnore PMA and EPL which are not used in diagnosis. Other abbreviations as in Fgure 5-8.
104
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 5-4.FREQUENCY OF LABORATORY
during hemolysis. Vasculitis may induce DIC, because
ABNORMALITIES IN DISSEMINATED
vessels have damaged endothelial cells. Endothelial cells
INTRAVASCULAR COAGULATION(DIC)
provide a complete barrier between plasma and subendo-
thelial collagen and generate factors that inhibit platelet
ABNORMALITYFELDMAN14
KOCIBA?5
MARUYAMA?1
aggregation. DIC, as considered in this chapter, can be
 Increased FDP
61%
%
50%
localized or chronic and not always disseminated and
 Prolonged 
%S6
peracute Death in many diseases is secondary to infarc-
87%
70%
aPTT
tion, thrombosis, or bleeding because of DIC.
Platelets and coagulation factors are consumed
 Prolonged PT 
80%
72%
45%
during excessive clotting. Breakdown of these clots
Decreased PLT
%08
48%
%6
increases FDP and D-dimer, which act as anticoagulants
aPTT, Activated partial thromboplastin time; FDP, fibrin degradation
and interfere with platelet function and clotting by com-
products; PLT, platelet count; PT, prothrombin time.
peting with fbrinogen for platelet membrane receptors.
*No test is 100% sensitive or specific for DIC.
Thus a textbook pattern (see Table 5-3) would have all
tests in a hemostasis profle abnormal. However, variably
increased production of coagulation factors and platelets
compensate for variably severe consumption, and no
description of laboratory findings in DIC varies greatly
single result is predictable (see Table 5-4). Confidence in
with the authors, the methods they used, and their defini-
a DIC diagnosis is increased with the number of hemo-
tion of DIC (Table 5-4). For example Maruyama evalu-
static tests that are abnormal and how abnormal they
ated dogs with malignant neoplasia and reported
become. Any hemostatic abnormality in a patient with a
q sop un (%o) kuowo aou euadooqwo
 disease that commonly causes DIC should suggest DIC is
were classifed as non-DIC patients than those with DIC
present. When both thrombocytopenia and coagulopathy
(39%).3l But the mean platelet count in DIC dogs
Occur concurrently, DIC is likely. Thrombocytopenia and
(121,0o0/ul) was clearly more severely decreased than
coagulopathy occur in warfarin toxicity, but this is likely
that in non-DIC dogs with neoplasia (369,000/μl).
due to a hypercoagulable state that occurs the first few
Maruyama required four or more abnormal results to
days after poisoning. Warfarin-type agents cause a more
diagnose DIC, thus dogs with malignant neoplasia and
rapid decrease in vitamin K-related anticoagulation
 one to three abnormal hemostasis test results were not
factors (protein C) prior to sufficient decrease in proco-
classified as having DIC. Dogs with malignant neoplasia
agulant factors (ll, IX, and X) to cause hypocoagulation
and thrombocytopenia and/or coagulation defects had
and bleeding. Platelets are likely consumed during the
some hemostatic disorder, but many were classified as
hypercoagulable phase and are not decreased because of
non-DIC. Tvedten would have included many more of
blood loss. Decreased AT ll is a sensitive indicator of
Maruyama's cases as having DIC. DIC is used in this
 DIC. Hepatic insufficiency and protein-losing states may
chapter to include a wide variety of hemostatic disorders.
also decrease AT IIl. AT IIl testing is not commonly
Winberg and others [20l0) described a system for diag-
available.
nosis of canine DIC similar to a human scoring system
proposed by the International Society on Thrombosis and
Thrombocytopenia · Thrombocytopenia is the most
common cause of bleeding in dogs. Thrombocytopenia
diagnosis of DIC, one should identify a hemostatic
occurs in about 15% of canine patients (see Chapter 2).
abnormality is present and to characterize it as best one
Most of these cases, however, have mild thrombocytope-
can with the tests available.
nia and no signs of bleeding. Mild to moderate thrombo-
 DIC (thromboembolic disease, consumptive coagu-
cytopenia is often detected during initial laboratory
lopathy, hypercoagulation, etc.) is a common, variably
testing of patients and may be an early indicator of
severe disorder of hemostasis that affects primary and
thromboembolic problems or infectious diseases (see
uaa si uaaa pue sisiouuqy pue siseisouaq Arepuosas
Chapter 15). True thrombocytopenia is fortunately
associated with vasculitis. Thus any and all components
uncommon in cats, but pseudothrombocytopenia due to
of hemostasis may be affected. DIC occurs secondary to
platelet aggregation and platelets too large to detect with
a wide variety of diseases, including neoplasia, inflamma-
impedance-type hematology instruments is unfortunately
tion, infection, trauma, snake venom, necrotic tissue,
very common with feline blood samples. Platelet counts
rough surfaces, and vasculitis. The extrinsic pathway of
are often inaccurate in cats.
the coagulation system is initiated by tissue thromboplas-
Causes ofthrombocytopenia include decreased plate-
tin from damaged cells; the intrinsic pathway is activated
let production because of infectious, toxic, dnug-induced.
by abnormal surfaces such as exposed collagen beneath
 or neoplastic bone marrow disease or accelerated platelet
damaged endothelial cells. Inflammatory diseases create
destruction or use because of infectious, inflammatory, Or
areas of necrosis and exposed collagen, which stimulate
immune-mediated disease. The most common causes of
clotting Many infections, such as canine infectious hepa-
canine thrombocytopenia are immune-mediated, infec-
titis or feline infectious peritonitis (FIP),57.58 induce a
tious disease, and neoplasia, whereas thrombocytopenia
DIC-type episode.
in cats is most often the result of infectious disease, neo-
Neoplasms
(eg..l
hemangiosarcoma) often have
plasia, or thromboembolism.1? Platelet sequestration in
necrotic inflamed areas, and chemotherapy of neoplasms
the spleen can be accentuated with splenomegaly, hypo-
may create additional necrosis and increase the likeli-
thermia,
. splenic congestion, or splenic hyperplasia.
hood of DIC. IMHA produces abundant RBC debris
Tvedten dislikes the diagnosis of "hypersplenism," which
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
105
hemorrhage) become likely with severe thrombocytope-
54H
nia (<20,000 platelets/μl). Some animals may not bleed
with 10,000 platelets/μl, whereas others may bleed at
48
30,000 to 50,000 platelets/μl. Platelet size, platelet func-
tion, blood vessel and endothelial support, concentration
42
of anticoagulant and procoagulant factors, and severity of
the challenge to the hemostatic mechanism all contribute
36
to the presence or absence of bleeding. Linking the sever-
X00
ity of change in laboratory data to clinical signs is impor-
tant. For example, if the platelet count is greater than
29
L/#)
50,000/μl and the patient is bleeding, additional factors
24
(e.g, defective platelet function associated with DIC) are
likely. In contrast, disorders of coagulation tend to have
Plat
18
large areas of hemorrhage, hematomas, body cavity hem-
orrhages, and hemarthroses rather than petechial and
12
ecchymotic hemorrhages.
 The three common causes of thrombocytopenia are
(1) destruction (eg. ITP), (2) bone marrow production
defects (eg., estrogen toxicity, immune-mediated destruc-
tion of megakaryocytes, leukemia), and (3) consumption
166
250380
575
750
1000
of platelets (eg.. DIC). Infections such as Ehrlichia,
Platelet count
Anaplasma, or Rocky Mountain spotted fever and other
(× 10/μl)
bacterial and viral infections, commonly cause thrombo-
cytopenia. These infections should be investigated in
FIGURE 5-10 Estimation of platelet numbers for canine blood
areas where they are common. Bone marrow aspirate,
smears. The number of platelets in an average 100x oil immer-
biopsy. or both usually document megakaryocytic
sion field may be used to estimate the platelet count. Between
numbers and morphology (see Chapter 2). Bleeding at
8 and 29 platelets/100x oil immersion field represents a normal
the aspiration or biopsy site is usually easily controlled,
canine platelet count. A regression line indicates the relation-
so bone marrow collection should not be feared. DIC is
ship of the two factors.
diagnosed with a profile of hemostatic tests. ITP diagnosis 
lacks commonly available direct testing.
only gives a surgeon a reason to remove a large spleen
von Willebrand Disease · vWD is the most common
doing what it is supposed to do.
inherited hemostatic defect that has been reported in
many breeds of dogs, including Doberman pinschers.
 NOTE: Thrombocytopenia is the most common cause of
Scottish terriers, Shetland sheepdogs, and Chesapeake
 dinical signs of bleeding in dogs. Thus platelet numbers
Bay retrievers.7.ss vWF is required for adhesion of platelets
 should be evaluated first in unexplained bleeding disor-
to subendothelium at sites of vascular damage and to
ders. A platelet estimate from a blood smear is simple,
 Other platelets (see Figure 5-3). Therefore, vWD appears
quick, inexpensive, and sufficient to detect severe
similar to a defect of primary hemostasis.
thrombocytopenia.
NOTE: vWD is the most common inherited hemostatic
Thrombocytopenia is usually defined as a platelet
 defect. vWD may be detected by prolonged bleeding time, 
wWF assays, or genetic testing.
count less than the appropriate reference range (Figure
5-10). Platelet mass (plateletcrit) is a more physiologically
useful measurement but is not commonly available and
few clinicians are comfortable interpreting the units (%).
The clinical signs of vWD are often mild and variable,
Diagnosis of thrombocytopenia first requires confirming
which can obscure diagnosis. Often owners and surgeons
that thrombocytopenia is not an error of collection, the
 are unaware of any bleeding tendency in affected dogs
result of sample-handling delay, or laboratory error. The
until a surgical procedure is performed. A bleeding time
severity of the thrombocytopenia aids in interpretation
test may be done in-clinic as a presurgical screen in breeds
 and in treatment decisions. Persistent mild thrombocyto-
uaa s a  'ma yo uaa y e 
penia (100,000 to 175,000 platelets/μl) is not specifc
 Over the BMBT (see earlier description) because excessive
for a particular disease. Very severe thrombocytopenia
bleeding in some vWD patients is easier to control with
(<20,0o0/μl platelets) is highly associated with immune-
a bandage on the paw than pressure on the gums. vWF
 mediated thrombocytopenia (ITP), at least in areas where
 assay or genetic testing allows specific diagnosis. Most of
infectious causes of thrombocytopenia are uncommon.
the common hemostatic tests (i.e., aPTT, ACT, TEG) fail
Access to tests of antiplatelet antibodies is very limited;
to identify vWD despite very low levels of vWF Predispo-
thus ITP is often diagnosed by exclusion of other common
sition to bleeding tends to be noted with vWF levels of
causes and response to immunosuppressive therapy. Clin-
-uasiom yim iateaia aq o spuat suipaalq pue 'ssal io 0e
ical signs (e.g., epistaxis, hematochezia, melena, hemat-
Aq paze si aa I ad da jo uayap bu!
uria, hematemesis, cutaneous petechial or ecchymotic
decreased vwF antigen with proportional decreases in all
106
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 5-5.DIFFERENTIATION OF VON
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever · Rocky Mountain
WILLEBRAND'SDISEASE
spotted fever [i.e., Rickettsia rickettsii infection) results in
AND HEMOPHILIAA
vascular disease approximately 2 weeks after infection.
The organism replicates in and alters endothelial cells,
VON WILLEBRAND'S
TEST
DISEASE (vWD)
HEMOPHILIA A
which induces platelet and fbrinolytic activation, causing
thrombocytopenia and DIC. Hematologic abnormalities
aPTT
Usually normal
Increased
include altered vascular permeability, petechiae, ecchy-
BMBT
Prolonged
Normal
mosis, edema, splenomegaly, hyperfibrinogenemia, acti-
vation of the fbrinolytic system,thrombosis, and DIC.10
vWWF
Decreased 
 Normal to increased
Decreased plasma factor VIlI and increased factor V activ-
aPTT, Activated partial thromboplastin time; SMST, buccal mucosal
ity indicate a poor patient prognosis.43 Many infectious
 bleeding time; vWF, von Willebrand's factor.
diseases kill animals by DIC-type episodes secondary to
vascular damage, tissue necrosis, or both. A common
-aim si eiadas ym Asdoiu ie us uoisan ssan
spread petechial hemorrhages as the result of DIC.
au au u panan uaaq s l pue 'siuu
breeds. Type II vWD has decreased vWF antigen, but only
Heartworm Disease · Adult heartworms reside in the
the largest multimers have diminished concentrations; it
has been reported in German shorthaired and wirehaired
blood flow obstruction and interference with tricuspid
pointers. Type III vWD has essentially no vWF in the
valve closure, with resultant caval syndrome because of
homozygotes and has the most severe clinical signs; it has
retrograde migration of adult heartworms. Adult worms
been reported in Scottish terriers, Shetland sheepdogs.
cause direct endothelial damage, leading to exposure of
and Chesapeake Bay retrievers.
subendothelial collagen, and hypercoagulability, throm-
One function of vWF is to bind with factor VIll to
bocytopenia, and possible pulmonary thromboembolism
stabilize the molecule and prevent rapid clearance from
 or DIC. Administration of thiacetarsemide adulticide may
the circulation. Therefore, diagnosis of vWD was confused
contribute to the incidence of thromboembolism via
platelet aggregation.4
from hemophilia A by vWF concentration (Table 5-5):
vWF is normal to increased in hemophilia A. The aPTT
Leishmaniasis · Hemostatic abnormalities caused by
should be increased in hemophilia A (assuming the
leishmaniasis include epistaxis and thrombocytopenia.
reagents are optimized for dogs), whereas in vWD the
DIC may be triggered by endothelial damage Thrombo-
aPTT is usually normal despite the deficiency of vWF.
cytopenia, thrombopathia, and altered plasma fibrin and
Treatment recommendations include administration of
FDP concentrations have been reported. Epistaxis may be
juauan au ioy (anenado i) euseid uazoy ysay
caused by local nasal inflammation in the absence of
or prophylaxis of hemorrhagic episodes in dogs with
detectable hemostatic defects.
vWD or hemophilia.4
Arquired Hemostatic Disease · Acquired bleeding dis-
Disorders of Vascular Endothelium
orders are better investigated in people but these mecha-
nisms may be considered in confusing cases. A relatively
Inherited Vascular Wall Disease
rare acquired form of vWD is associated with human
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome · Several, rare inherited dis-
hematoproliferative disorders. Autoantibodies directed
orders of the vasculature result in aberrant hemostasis.
against vWF may lead to its more rapid clearance from
Ehlers-Danlos-like syndrome is one disorder that occurs
the circulation or interference with its function. Other
in dogs and cats.46 Cutaneous asthenia, or dermato-
diseases causing acquired hemostatic disorders include
sparaxis, is an inherited disease of abnormal collagen
neoplasia, which causes altered angiogenesis, alterations
synthesis that results in increased vascular fragility, joint
in tumor-associated vascular endothelium, hypercoagula-
laxity, and hyperextensibility of the skin. Skin tears are
bility, and venous thromboembolism, partially the result
accompanied by hemorrhage and defects in platelet func-
of increased synthesis of thrombin, tissue factor, clotting
tion that have been managed successfully with adminis-
factors, and vascular endothelial growth factor by tumor
 tration of desmopressin (i.e, DDAVP).
cells or tumor-associated cells. Diabetes mellitus and
hypoadrenocorticism may alter coagulation, including
Familial Vasculopathy · A second inherited vascular
impaired fbrinolysis, platelet aggregation, and increased
wall disease is familial vasculopathy, which is a rare idio-
plasminogen activator inhibitor. Acquired vascular lesions
pathic inherited vasculopathy that results in vasculitis and
Occur in FIP-associated vasculitis, immune-mediated
collagenolysis. This disorder has been reported in several
disease such as hemorrhagic vasculitis,38 drug reactions.
canine breeds, including the German shepherd, beagle.
trauma, gastrointestinal ulceration, and vitamin C
Scottish terrier and greyhound.5
deficiency.
Acquired Vascular Wall Disease
Thrombocytosis · Thrombocytosis is not uncommon
Commonly reported acquired vascular wall diseases
and was seen in 5% of canine and 3% of feline hematol-
include Rocky Mountain spotted fever, heartworm disease,
 Ogy samples. Causes include iron deficiency anemia, neo-
plasia,endocrinedisease,spleniccontraction, splenectomy.
purpura hemorrhagica, and various endocrinopathies.
and immunosuppressive therapy (eg.. prednisolone.
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
107
vincristine). Nonspecific bone marrow stimulation occurs
or reversibly acetylate platelet cyclooxygenase, prevent
during leukocytosis or anemia because of cross-stimulation
generation of thromboxane Az needed for secretion and
from thecytokines interleukin-3, interleukin-6, granulocyte-
aggregation. Toxins include estrogen (including testicular
macrophage colony-stimulating factor, and erythropoie-
tumors), phenylbutazone chemotherapeutic agents, and
tin. It also occurs with infectious and inflammatory
dapsone Often myelofibrosis or a fatty marrow remains
disease, tumors, blood loss, or endocrinopathies. The
without evidence of the causative agent A bone marrow
 spleen sequesters approximately one fourth to one third
aspirate is indicated when a patient exhibits bicytopenia,
of the total circulating platelets, so splenic contraction
 pancytopenia, or abnormal peripheral blood cell mor-
from an excitement (i.e, epinephrine) response may
phology (see Chapter 2).
result in a pseudothrombocytosis. Thrombocytosis is
- '   a  s i
Immune-Mediated Thrombocytopenia · ITP is a com-
bocytosis in cats is often associated with myeloprolifera-
mon disorder in which binding of antibodies results in
tive disorders or leukemia. Primary thrombocytosis.
platelet removal.52 ITP is often diagnosed by ruling out a
otherwise known as essential thrombocythemia, may
marrow production problem, DIC, and infectious dis-
cause thrombosis in some human patients. But it is less
eases. Response to immunosuppressive therapy44 further
clear how much risk of thrombosis exists in dogs and cats
supports the diagnosis. Detection of antiplatelet antibod-
with thrombocytosis and whether they should be treated
ies on platelets in blood or in senum has been validated
preventatively.
in dogs but not in cats. Tests are not widely available but
include highly sensitive flow cytometric tests for detection
Inherited Disorders
of serum platelet-bindable immunoglobulin G (IgG) and
of Primary Hemostasis
Greyhounds have asymptomatic lower circulating platelet
may be identified on bone marrow smears. A platelet
counts.4 Macrothrombocytopenia in Cavalier King Charles
dl oy asagns Aiyay s! 1m/ooo'oz ueyn ssl zuno
spaniels is an autosomal recessive trait, with a predomi-
and therefore are also clinical signs of bleeding because
nance of large platelets in circulation.2 It is due to a betal-
of so low platelet count ITP may be secondary to drugs.
tubulin defect'l (see earlier discussion on plateletcrit).
infections, multiple transfusions, or lupus, or it may be
 Norfolk terriers also have a macrothrombocytopenia.17
idiopathic.
Defective platelet function may be attributed to
certain dnugs or vWD (Table 5-6). Platelet dysfunction
Ehrlichiosis ● Thrombocytopenia, anemia, bicytope-
(i.e., thrombopathia) is documented by a platelet func-
nia, or pancytopenia in a dog warrant considering
tion test in animals with adequate platelet numbers. Rare
Ehrlichia. Different species of Ehrlichia infect dogs:
disorders of membrane glycoproteins, platelet adhesion,
Ehrlichia canis is discussed here Thrombocytopenia is
dense body and alpha granule secretion, ATP production.
typically found in ehrlichiosis. The platelet count is often
and generation of procoagulant activity include basset
greaterthan 20,000/μland yet may still be associated with
hound thrombopathia, Spitz thrombopathia, thrombas-
bleeding (e.g., epistaxis, hyphema, petechia). Platelet dys-
thenic thrombopathia of otter hounds, Bernard-Soulier
-ue Aq pasni aq e sisoiua au u uouny
syndrome, Hermansky-Pudlak syndrome, Wiskott-Aldrich
platelet antibodies.1 If the animal does not have bone
syndrome, Glanzmann's thrombasthenia of Great Pyre-
marrow destruction as the result of Ehrlichia, the platelet
nees, and dense granular storage pool disease of American
count is usually 75,000 to 175,000/μl. Other hematologic
fndings associated with ehrlichiosis include mild to
severe nonregenerative anemia (approximately 9o% of
Acquired Disorders
-xondde) eiuadonau pue eiuadoynal se lam se '(sas
of Primary Hemostasis
mately 50% of cases). Neutropenia may be severe enough
Acquired disorders of platelet numbers and function may
to allow overwhelming sepsis. In some dogs, the bone
 arise after infectious or neoplastic disease or secondary to
 marrow has ineffective hematopoiesis with a paradoxical
hyperthermia or dnug therapy. For example, aspirin and
pattern of normal to increased cellularity, despite pancy-
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory agents, which irreversibly
topenia. Anemia is not common in acute cases. Severe
anemia and severe leukopenia are generally only seen
TABLE 5-6. SELECTED CAUSES OF ABNORMAL
when chronic disease and loss of bone marrow cellularity
are found. The acute phase of the disease resembles
PLATELET FUNCTION
other infections, with fever, anorexia, weight loss, and
CAUSE
lymphadenopathy.
The chronic form is more variable, although hyper-
Drugs
Aspirin, ibuprofen, phenylbutazone,
proteinemia  and  hypergammaglobulinemia  are  fre-
indomethacin
ynoua aaas Aiso si ae aui uasaid Aua
Acquired
Lymphoproliferate disorders,
to induce serum hyperviscosity. Polyclonal gammopathy
 disseminated intravascular
is expected, but occasional serum protein electrophoreto-
 coagulation (DIC), uremia
grams with oligoclonal peaks may mimic the monoclonal
Hereditary
von Willebrand's disease (vwD) and 
peaks of a lymphoid neoplasm. Numerous plasma cells
rare disorders in basset hounds, 
in the bone marrow may also mislead one into diagnos-
otter hounds, foxhounds, Spitz,
ing a plasma cell myeloma. The exuberant immune
Great Pyrenees, Scottish terriers,
nau xaduos-aunu ue on peal aeu asudsan
American cocker spaniels
disease and proteinuria.
108
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Anaplasma phagocytophilum + Anaplasma phagocyto-
philum is a common tick-borme infection of dogs and
aPTT
PT
ntrinsic
Extrinsic
pue juaisue1 pue (m/ooo'og> Alleuoiseo) aie1a
ACT
Prolonged
lis
worse at peak parasitemia. Blood smear evaluation is
diagnostic during the acute phase [about a week). Poly-
merase chain reaction (PCR) and antibody titer tests are
Common
available.
Hemolytic Uremic Syndrome · Hemolytic uremic syn-
drome has been reported in dogs and cats. It is associated
with acute renal failure and thrombocytopenia after infec-
CLOT
tious and inflammatory disease, and has been observed
after renal transplantation in cats and gastroenteritis in
FIGURE 5-11. Test results of a factor Vll deficiency. Only the
dogs.220 Platelet hyperaggregability and platelet thrombi,
prothrombin time (PT) would be abnormal, as depicted by a
tissue ischemia, thrombocytopenia, and microangio-
star and termination of the arrow at the site of factor Vll in the
pathic hemolytic anemia characterize this syndrome.
extrinsic system. ACT, Activated coagulation time; aPTT, acti-
Alteration of the thrombogenic properties of the endothe-
vated partial thromboplastin time; TT, thrombin time.
lium with increased expression of tissue factor and
enhanced platelet deposition can occur after 24 to 72
hours of exposure to uremic serum.
aPTT
PT
Retroviral Disease · Cats with feline leukemia virus
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
Prolonged
ACT
(FeLV), feline immunodeficiency vinus (FIV), or both
Prolonged
often have moderate nonregenerative anemia with or
（☆
文
without concurrent granulocytopenia and thrombocyto-
penia.4s One should always test for FeLV, FIV, FIP and
Common
rickettsial disease in thrombocytopenic cats. Platelets
from FeLV-infected cats or those with DIC may have
decreased granularity or vacuolation.
CLOT
Hyperthermia · Hyperthermia has been used with
some success in the treatment of certain types of cancer
and viral infections. However, hyperthermia may cause
FGURE 5-12. Test results for vitamin K antagonist toxicity.
Inhibition of the vitamin Krelated factors (ll, Vill, IX, and X) in
thrombocytopenia, increased plasma FDPs, prolonged
warfarin poisoning creates defects in all three pathways. The
dlotting times, and evidence of spontaneous bleeding.
thrombin time (T7) should be normal, because fibrinogen is not 
caused (in part) by hyperthermia-induced liver injury. 12
primarily affected. A factor X deficiency would have the same
laboratory test pattern, because a defect in the common
Drug-Associated Platelet Dysfunction · Drugs that
pathway slows clot formation despite normal intrinsic and
may affect platelet function include corticosteroids, sul-
extrinsic pathways. Hepatic failure may have a similar pattern
finpyrazone methylxanthines, furosemide, carbenicillin
unless flbrinogen deficiency is present. ACT, Activated coagu-
and other synthetic penicillins, cephalosporins, nitrofu-
lation time; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time;
rantoin, chloroquine, levamisole, phenothiazine, sympa-
PT, prothrombin time.
thetic blocking and stimulatory agents, prostacyclin,
estrogen, ethanol, caffeine, heparin, antihistamine.
dextran, vitamin E, and dipyridamole. A return of normal
platelet function 4 to 5 days after discontinuing use of a
A defect in the intrinsic pathway [i.e, factors Xll, XI,
dnug suggests a cause-and-effect relationship. More rigor-
IX, Vlll) would be identifed by the combination of a
 Ous evidence is needed to prove the effect.
normal PT and prolonged aPTT (see Figure 5-7). A defect
in factor Vll is identified by the combination of a normal
Disorders of Secondary Hemostasis
aPTT and prolonged PT (Figure 5-ll).
A defect in the common pathway [i.e., factors X, V,
Abnormal coagulation test results indicate a coagulopa-
prothrombin, fibrinogen) or multiple defects involving
thy [i.e., impaired ability to form a clot). Shortened PT or
the intrinsic common, and extrinsic pathways would
aPTT results are usually ignored, because they do not
prolong both the PT and aPTT. All tests except the TT
correlate with clinical hypercoagulability. Abnormal test
would have prolonged results in vitamin K antagonist
results (reported in seconds) usually are prolonged (the
toxicity. because the vitamin K factors (i.e, II, VIl, IX, X)
PT may be reported as a percent of normal from some
would be deficient, creating defects in the intrinsic, extrin-
human and European veterinary laboratories). A 3-second
sic, and common pathways; however, the concentration
increase in the PT or a 5-second increase in the aPTT over
of fbrinogen should be adequate (Figure 5-12). Because
reference values is significant Lesser increases are possibly
the liver synthesizes most procoagulant and anticoagu-
abnormal, but this conclusion must be strengthened with
lant factors, and removes activated factors from blood,
other information or repeated testing.
au un saa ai sas ay oedau aaas
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
109
coagulation cascade, including decreased synthesis of
and beagles.3247 Deficiency of factor XIl, or Hageman
clotting and inhibitor factors, decreased clearance of acti-
factor, has been determined to have an autosomal reces-
vated factors, quantitative and qualitative platelet defects.
Ul aoai s yum iei o ieius 'se u uaed aais
hyperfibrinolysis, and accelerated intravascular coagula-
humans (i.e, Hageman trait).23 A Chinese shar-pei was
tion.' DIC is common in animals with hepatic disease. A
found to have a combined factor Xll deficiency and
defect in the common pathway prolongs both the PT and
impaired prekallikrein activity that resulted in episodes
 aPTT, because the normal intrinsic and extrinsic pathways
of intestinal hemorrhage and diarrhea. This is uncom-
must pass through the common pathway to form a clot
monly reported in the dog, and is not typically associated
(see Table 5-3).
with hemorrhagic tendencies.
Clinical signs, breed, sex, and history provide impor-
Acquired Disorders
'sisee rg sas araq sisoe a a sa 
For example, if only some of the males in a litter of young
of Secondary Hemostasis
dogs are affected with severe clinical signs of bleeding
Vitamin K Antagonism · Warfarin-type anticoagulant
(including hematomas) and the dogs have a normal PT
rodenticides are common causes of acquired bleeding
but prolonged aPTT, the problem is with either factor VIII
disorders. Second-generation rodenticides have a long
or factor IX. The combination of prolonged aPTT and
functional half-life (i.e., 15 to 20 days for diphacenone,
normal PT has localized the defect to the intrinsic
compared with 40 hours for warfarin). These rodenti-
pathway. The historical evidence of a sex-linked heredi-
cides act by causing a functional vitamin K deficiency
tary problem has implicated factors VIlI and IX, the only
and reduced hepatic synthesis of functional forms of
two sex-linked defects. The severity of the bleeding rules
factors II, VIl, IX, and X. Sulfaquinoxaline treatment
out factors Xll and XI in the intrinsic pathway, because
[i.e., coccidiostat) of dogs may cause bleeding by antag-
bleeding is absent with factor XIl or mild with factor XI
onism of vitamin K. Post-hepatic biliary obstruction or
deficiency. Factor IX and VIll defects (i.e., hemophilia B
severe enteric disease rarely causes vitamin K deficiency.
and A) have similar clinical bleeding problems and
The PT is preferred to monitor the coagulation defect.
genetic implications. The cost:benefit ratio of more spe-
When factor synthesis is inhibited, the factor with the
cific testing compared with the economic impact of the
shortest half-life becomes deficient earliest. The half-life
diagnosis determines whether additional tests for a more
of factor Vll is 2 to 4 hours, compared with 14 to 16
 definitive diagnosis are appropriate.
hours for factors IX and X and 41 hours for prothrombin
(factor II). Because factor VII is in the extrinsic system,
Inherited Disorders
the earliest and greatest relative increase is noted in the
of Secondary Hemostasis
PT. The thrombotest or PIVKA (proteins induced by
Hemophilia A (factor Vlll deficiency) is identifed by pro-
vitamin K absence or antagonism) is sensitive for the
longation of the aPTT. It is the most commonly reported 
 precursor coagulation proteins from the liver that accu-
inherited canine coagulopathy and has been reported cats 
mulate and spill into the circulation when vitamin K
with multiple factor deficiencies, leading to defects in
antagonism exists. After effective vitamin K, therapy, the
intrinsic coagulation. The causative mutation has been
determined to be an intron 22 inversion found in approx-
ll hours and the PT should be approaching normal
imately 45% of severely affected hemophilia A patients.21
within 24 hours. Warfarin also blocks protein C produc-
Several commercial tests have been validated to diagnose
tion, which, due to a short half-life like factor Vll, is
factor VII:C and factor IX deficiencies from the plasma
deficient earlier than factors II, IX, and X. This may cause
 of hemophiliac dogs.33
a hypercoagulable situation early before hypocoagula-
Factor IX deficiency (ie., hemophilia B or Christmas
tion occurs. This hypercoagulable state may cause
disease) is sex-linked like hemophilia A and is detected
thrombocytopenia.
by prolonged aPTT. Factor IX deficiency is much less com-
Other acquired coagulopathies arise secondarily from
monly reported and has more consistently severe clinical
maldigestive and malabsorptive gastrointestinal disor-
signs. It affects German shepherds and British shorthair.
ders, exocrine pancreatic deficiency, infiltrative enteritis,
Siamese, and American domestic shorthaired cats.
bile duct obstruction, or hepatic disease, or because of
Factor X deficiency occurs in cocker spaniels and Jack
increased circulating heparin from mast cells.
st a aa ui uaa i oed e 'saat lass
springer spaniels, and Pyrenees mountain dogs is a severe
bleeding disorder with postoperative hemorrhage and
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
prolonged aPTT.24 These dogs tend to bleed after trauma
or surgery but do not have spontaneous hemorrhage in
The contributions to this chapter in previous editions by
joints and soft tissue characteristic of hemophiliacs.16
Drs. Gary Kociba and Renee Prater are appreciated and
 Devon rex cats may have vitamin K-dependent coag-
acknowledged.
ulopathies. They are treated successfully with oral vitamin
K, or plasma transfusion, which normalizes clotting
factor II, Vll, IX, and X concentrations.3 Prothrombin
References and Suggested Readings
deficiency occurs in cocker spaniels, boxers, and otter
1. Amitrano L et al: Coagulation disorders in liver disease.
hounds and, as a common pathway defect, will have pro-
Semin Liver Dis 22:83, 2002.
longed aPTT and PT.
2. Aronson LR, Gregory C: Possible hemolytic uremic syndrome
Autosomal dominant factor Vll deficiencies have
in three cats after renal transplantation and cyclosporine
been reported in Alaskan malamutes, Labrador retrievers.
therapy. Vet Surg 28:135. 1999.
110
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
3. Boudreaux MK. Catalfamo IL: Molecular and genetic basis
27. Lewis DC, et al: Development and charactenization of a flow
for thrombasthenic thrombopathia in otterhounds. Am J Vet
cytometic assay for detection of platelet-bound immuno-
Res 62:1797, 2001.
globulin G in dogs. Am J Vet Res 56:1555. 1995.
4. Boudreaux MK, Dillon AR: Platelet function, antithrombin-
-womlieay ul uogenjuasuon uasouay pue Kranoe ll
dogs experminentaly infected with a Swedish granulocytic
treated with
Ehrlichia species. Vet Clin Pathol 27:1l6. 1998.
thiacetarsemide. Am J Vet Res 52:1986, 1991.
29. Lilliehook I, Tvedten H: Validation of the Sysmex XT-2000iV
 5. Boudreaux MK, Lipscomb DL: Clinical, biochemical, and
hematology system for dogs, cats and horses. I Erythrocytes.
 molecular aspects of Glanzmann's thrombasthenia in
platelets and total leukocyte counts. Vet Clin Pathol 38:163.
humans and dogs. Vet Pathol 38:249. 2001.
2009.
6. Brassard [A. Meyers KM: Evaluation of the buccal bleeding
30. Maddison [E. et al: Vitamin K-dependent multifactor coagu-
 time and platelet glass bead retention as assays of hemostasis
lopathy in Devon Rex cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 197:1495.
 in the dog the effects of acetylsalicylic acid, warfarin and von
1990.
Willebrand factor deficiency. Thromb Haemost 65:191, 1991.
 31. Maruyama H, et al: The incidence of disseminated intravas-
 7. Brooks M, Dodds W]. Raymond SL: Epidemiologic features
paw ia f rowm jueuat[ew yim sop u! uoge(naeo 1e[
of von Willebrand's disease in Doberman pinschers. Scottish
Sci 66:573.2004
teniers. and Shetland sheepdogs: 260 cases (1984-1988).
32. Mills IN, Labuc RH, Lawley MJ: Factor Vll deficiency in an
Am Vet Med Assoc 200:1123. 1992
Alaskan malamute. Aust Vet I 75:320, 1997.
 8. Budde ll, et al: Laboratory diagnosis of congenital von Wil-
33. Mischke R: [nfluence of factor VIl:C and factor IX activity in
lebrand disease. Semin Thromb Hemost 28:173. 2002.
plasmas of haemophiliac dogs on the acivated partial
9. Callan MB, et al: Inherited platelet delta-storage pocl disease
thromboplastin time measured with two commercial
in dogs causing severe bleeding an animal model for a spe-
reagents. Haemophilia 6:135, 2000.
cific ADP deficiency Thromb Haemost 74:949. 1995.
34. Mischke R, Keidel A: Preclinical studies for the use of the
10. Davidson MG. et al: Vascular pemmeability and coagulation
platelet function analyzer PFA-100 with the collagen/ADP
during Richetsia richetsi infection in dogs. Am J Vet Res
51:165. 1990.
109:235, 2002.
l1. Davis B. Toivio-Kinnucan M. Schuller S. Boudreaux MK:
 35. Mischke R, Nolte I: Optimization of prothrombin time mea-
Mutation in betal-tubulin correlates with macrothrombocy-
surements in canine plasma. Am J Vet Res 58:236, 1997.
topenia in Cavalier King Charles Spaniels. J Vet Iniern Med
36. Moore BR, Hinchcliff KW: Heparin: a review of its pharma-
22:540-545. 2008.
cology and therapeutic use in horses. J Vet Intern Med 8:26.
12. Diehl KA, et al: Alterations in hemostasis associated with
1994.
hyperthemia in a canine model. Am / Hematol 64:262, 2000.
 37. Mosnier LO. Meijers [C, Bouma BN: The role of protein S in
13. Dodds Wl: Canine factor X (Stuart-Prower factor) deficiency.
the activation of thrombin activatable fbrinolysis inhibitor
J Lab Clin Med 82:560, 1973.
{TAFl) and regulation of fibrinolysis. Thromb Haemost
 14. Feldman BF Madewell BR, O'Neill MA: Disseminated intra-
86:1040, 2001.
vascular coagulation: antithrombin. plasminogen, and coag-
 38. Nazarova OA, et al: Features of microciroulatory disorders in
ulation abnormalities in 4l dogs. / Am Vet Med Assoc 179:151,
acute and recurrent hemorrhagic vasculitis (Schonlein-
1981.
Henoch disease}. Ter Arkh 73:39. 2001.
15. Furlanello T, et al: Stability of stored canine plasma for
39. Nolte l, et al: A method for measuring capillary blooding
hemostasis testing. Vet Clin Pathol 35:204, 2006.
time in non-anaesthetized dogs: prolongation of the bleed-
16. Gailani D: Gene targeting in hemostasis: factor Xl. Front
ing time by acetylsalicylic acid. J Vet Med (Zentralbl Veterin-
Biosci 6:D201, 2001.
aermed) Series A 44:625. 1997.
17. Galain ME, et al: High fluorescent platelets fraction in mac-
40. Nurden AT, Nurden P: [nherited defects of platelet function.
Tothrombocytopenic Norfolk terTier (Poster 165). Presented
Rev Clin Exp Hematol 5:314, 2001.
at the 20th congress of the ECVIM. September 9-1l. 2010.
 41. Pankraz A. Bauer N, Moritz A: Comparison of flow cytometry
Toulouse, France.
with the Sysmex XT2000iV automated analyzer for the detec-
18. Harrus S. et al: Platelet dysfunction associated with experi-
tion of reticulated platelets in dogs. Vet Clin Pathol 38:30.
mental acute canine ehrlichiosis. Vet Rec 139:290, 1996.
2009.
19. Hisasue M, et al: Hematologic abnormalities and outcome
42. Pedersen HD. et al: Idiopathic asymptomatic thrombocyto-
of 16 cats with myelodysplastic syndromes. J Vet Intern Med
penia in Cavalier King Charles spaniels is an autosomal
15:471, 2001.
recessive trait. J Vet Intern Med 16:169, 2002.
20. Holloway S. et al: Hemolytic uremic syndrome in dogs. J Vet
43. Schmaier AH. et al: Hemostatic/fbrinolytic protein changes
Intern Med 7:220, 1993.
in C3 H/HeN mice infected with Ricketisia conorii—a model
 21. Hough C, et al: Aberant splicing and premature termination
for Rocky Mountain spotted fever. Thromb Haemost 86:871.
 of transcription of the FVlll gene as a cause of severe canine
2001.
 hemophilia A: similarities with the intron 22 inversion muta-
44. Scott-MoncrieffJC., et al: Hemostatic abnormalities in dogs
tion in human hemophilia. Thromb Haemost 87:659, 2002.
with primary immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. J Am
22. Kalbantner K. Baumgarten A. Mischke R: Measurement of
Anim Hosp Assoc 37:220, 2001.
 platelet function in dogs using a novel impedance aggregom-
45. Shelton GH, Linenberger ML: Hematologic abnomalities
eter. Vet j. October 2009.
associated with retroviral infections in the cat. Semin Vet Med
 23. Kier AB. et al: The inheritance pattem of factor Xll (Hageman)
Surg (Small Anim) 10:220. 1995.
deficiency in domestic cats. Can I Comp Med 44:309. 1980.
 46. Sinke ID, van Dijk JE, Willemse T: A case of Ehlers-Danlos-
 24. Knowler C. et al: Factor Xl deficiency in Kerry blue termiers. J
like syndrome in a rabbit with a review of the disease in other
Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1557. 1994.
species. Vet Q 19:182, 1997.
 25. Kociba GJ: Disseminated intravascular coagulation proceed-
47. Spurling NW: Hereditary blood coagulation factor-Vll defi-
ings. 29th Annual Meeting. American College of Veterinary
cency: a comparison of the defect in beagles from several
Pathologists. San Antonio, TX. 1978.
sources. Comp Biochem Physiol 89:46l. 1988.
26. Kristensen AT. Weiss DJ. Kausner JS: Platelet dysfunction
48. Stokol T. Parry B: Efficacy of fresh-frozen plasma and cryo-
associated with immune-mediated thrombocytopenia in
precipitate in dogs with von Willebrand's disease or hemo-
dogs. J Vet Intern Med 8:323, 1994.
philia A. J Vet Intern Med 12:84, 1998.
Chapter 5:Hemostatic Abnormalities
111
49. Sullivan PS. Evans HL, McDonald TP: Platelet concentration
57. Weiss RC, Dodds WI. Scott FW: Disseminated intravasoular
and hemoglobin function in greyhounds. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 cagulation in expenimentally induced feline infectious peri-
205:838. 1994.
tonitis. Am J Vet Res 41:663. 1980.
 50. Thomas IS: von Willebrand's disease in the dog and cat. Vet 
58. Wigton DH, Kociba GJ. Hoover EA: [nfectious canine hepa-
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 26:1089, 1996.
dtis: animal model for viral-induced disseminated intravas-
51.
A! ooz Ix xawss oml uaamiaq Kuedarnsia MH uanpaal
ular coagulation. Blood 47:287. 1976.
platelet counts. Vet Clin Pathol 39:395, 2010.
 59. Wilkerson MI. et al: Platelet size platelet surface-associated
52.1
Tvedten HW. Grabski S. Frame L: Estimating platelets and
[gG. and reticulated platelets in dogs with immune-mediated
Jeukocytes on canine blood smears. Vet Clin Pathol 17:4, 1988.
thrombocytopenia. Vet Clin Pathol 30:14l, 2001.
 53. Tvedten HW. Johansson P: Feline platelet counting with pros-
60. Winberg B, et al: Development of a model based scoring
taglandin El on the Sysmex XT-2000iV. Vet Clin Pathol
system for diagnosis of canine disseminated intravascular
39:190-192, 2010.
coagulation with independent assessment of sensitivity and
54. Tvedten H. Lilliehook I, Hillstrom A, Haggstrom J: Platelecrit 
specifcity. Vet jourmal 185:292, 2010.
js supenior to platelet count for assessing platelet status in
 61. Zola A, Dnigo M, Caldin M: Mean platelet concentration in
Cavalier King Charles spaniels. Vet Clin Pathol 37:266, 2008.
dogs with immune-mediated hemolytic anemia. Abstract in
 55. Venta P]. et al: Mutation causing von Willebrand's disease in
Poceedings European College of Veterinary [nternal Medi-
Scottish tenTiers. J Vet Intern Med 14:10, 2000.
dne, 2lst annual meeting. Sept. 8-10, 201l.
 56. Weir [A. et al: Familial cutaneous vasculopathy of Geman
shepherds: clinical. genetic and preliminary pathological and
immunological studies. Can Vet J 35:763, 1994.
Electrolyte and Acid-Base
Disorders
Stephen P. DiBartola
 Electrolyte and acid-base disorders may result from many
Artifacts · Serum potassium concentrations exceed
different diseases. Timely correction of fluid, electrolyte,
plasma concentrations because potassium is released
and acid-base disturbances is often of more immediate
from platelets during clotting. This difference is most pro-
beneft to patients than a specific diagnosis, although
nounced when thrombocytosis occurs. Hemolysis causes
 both are important.
hyperkalemia if red blood cells (RBCs) have a high potas-
sium content. Most dog and cat RBCs contain little potas-
sium; however, RBCs in some breeds (e.g., neonates,
Akitas, English springer spaniels) have a higher potassium
SERUM POTASSIUM
content (ie, ≥20 mEq/L), and hemolysis may cause
CONCENTRATION
hyperkalemia. In animals with white blood cell (WBC)
asl Aeu sam yanoua 'm/ooo'ool uey 1aeag suno
Commonly Indicated ● Common indications to meas-
and release potassium during clotting that serum potas-
ure serum potassium concentration include prolonged
sium is artifactually increased. These are causes of pseu-
anorexia, vomiting. diarrhea, muscle weakness, bradycar-
dohyperkalemia, because they only occur in vitro. Using
dia, supraventricular arrhythmias, oliguria, anuria, and
-eas ud snd ua i san uday un
polyuria. Serum potassium concentrations should be
tion of plasma from cells prevents these problems.
measured if hypoadrenocorticism, acute or chronic renal
Samples contaminated by drawing them through improp-
failure, diabetic ketoacidosis, prolonged vomiting, ure-
 P A sa (il   aa
thral obstruction, uroabdomen, or postobstructive diure-
increased or decreased potassium concentrations, depend-
sis are suspected, or if prolonged use of diuretics (eg..
ing on the fluid being administered. When obtaining
furosemide, thiazides, spironolactone) or angiotensin-
blood from an IV catheter, one should remove and discard
converting enzyme inhibitors (e.g. enalapril)
has
enough blood to clear the catheter before collecting the
occurred.
sample Using ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) or
potassium oxalate as an anticoagulant may markedly alter
Analysis · Serum potassium concentrations are mea-
measured values. Large amounts of bilirubin may slightly
sured in serum, plasma, or urine by dry reagent methods,
-uon yim painseau suoeiuanuon unisseod aseaiu
ion-specific potentiometry, and flame photometry (rarely
selective electrodes.
used now). Different methods provide comparable
results. Measured potassium concentrations obtained
Drugs That May Alter Serum Potassium Concentra-
with the new "point-of-care" instruments do not always
tion · Hypokalemia may be caused by administration of
correlate well with results determined by traditional
furosemide thiazides, acetazolamide, laxatives, mineralo-
analyzers. Point-of-care units that measure potassium
corticoids (e.g., fludrocortisone, desoxycorticosterone
 s     
pivalate), insulin, sodium bicarbonate amphotericin B,
0.5 mEq/L less than those obtained with other
large doses of sodium penicillin G given IV, chronic
instruments.
administration of ammonium chloride potassium-free
fluids, and glucose-containing crystalloid solutions. Peri-
Normal Values ● Dogs and cats, 3.5 to 5.5 mEq/L (mEq/L
toneal dialysis can be responsible if potassium-free dialy-
are the same as mmol/L for univalent ions).
sate is used long term.
Hyperkalemia may be caused by excessive potassium
Danger Values · Concentrations less than 2.5 mEq/L
chloride (either IV or oral), heparin solutions containing
(muscle weakness) or greater than 7.5 mEq/L (cardiac
chlorbutol, massive digitalis overdose and potassium
conduction disturbances) are considered dangerous.
penicillin G given IV. It may also be caused by trime-
Severely hyponatremic animals seem less able to compen-
thoprim, angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (e.g.
sate for hyperkalemia.
enalapril), blood transfusions (if from a dog with high
112
Chapter G:Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders
113
intracellular potassium), potassium-sparing diuretics
(e.g. spironolactone, amiloride), mannitol infusions
BOX 61. CAUSES 0F HYPOKALEmIA
causing acute hypertonicity, nonspecific beta blockers,
and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (if they cause
Pseudohypokalemia (infrequent and rarely causing
significant change)
renal failure).
Increased Loss (most common and important category)
Causes of Hypokalemia ● The three possible mecha-
Gastrointestinal (FE: < 6%)
nisms for hypokalemia are (1) decreased intake, (2)
Vomiting of gastric contents (comimon and important) 
translocation of potassium from extracellular to intra-
 Diarrhea (common and important)
cellular fluid, and (3) loss via the kidneys or gastro-
Urinary (FE: > 20%)
intestinal tract (Box 6-1 and Figure 6-1). Dilution of
Chronic renal failure in cats (common and important)
senum potassium concentration by giving potassium-
Diet-induced hypokalemic nephropathy in cats
free fluids, especially those containing glucose, may
[imporant)
 contribute to hypokalemia. Decreased intake may aggra-
Postobstructive diuresis (common and important)
atenbapeu! ym Aepadsa) Adeayt piny areudoiddeul 
location, but it is unlikely to cause hypokalemia by
potassium supplementation) (common and
itself. Hypokalemia often results from a combination
important!
of decreased intake plus urinary or gastrointestinal
 Diuresis caused by diabetes mellitus/ketoacidosis
losses (e.g.. administering potassium-free fluids to
(common and important)
anorexic animals).
Dialysis (uncommon) 
Translocation of potassium from extracellular to
s6n.a
 intracellular fluid may occur with bicarbonate adminis-
Loop diuretics (e.g., furosemide) (comimon and
tration or insulin-mediated glucose uptake by cells. Both
inportant)
n aissaee "ea) saei ae eid ss
Thiazide diuretics (e.g., chlorothiazide,
ment for diabetic ketoacidosis). Total parenteral nutrition
hydrochlorothiazide)
may do likewise if sufficient potassium is not present in
Amphotericin B
the solution. Hypothermia may cause potassium to enter
cells (this effect is reversed when hypothermia is cor-
Penicillins (rare)
Abuterol overdose (rare)
rected). Hypokalemic periodic paralysis in young Burmese
cats causes potassium to move intracellularly and is char-
Distal (type I) RTA (rare)
acterized by recurrent episodes of limb muscle weakness
Proximal (type Il) RTA after NaHCO treatment (rare)
and neck ventroflexion, increased creatine kinase activity.
Mineralocorticoid excess (rare)
and hypokalemia.
Hyperadrenocorticism (mild changes)
Excessive gastrointestinal (e.g.. vomiting, diarrhea)
 Primary hyperaldosteronism (i.e., adenoma,
and urinary (eg, polyuria) losses commonly cause hypo-
hyperplasia)
kalemia. Vomiting gastric contents causes loss of potas-
 Translocation (Extracellular Fluid → Intracellular Fluid)
sium and chloride. The resulting hypochloremia and
 Glucose-containing fluids ± insulin (common and
metabolic alkalosis causes additional urinary loss of
important!
potassium and hydrogen ions. Aldosterone secretion due
Total parenteral nutrition solutions (uncommon, but
-uan unos ul shnsn asni Aue woy uoepuap oi
tion but further potassium excretion. Loop diuretics (eg..
important)
Akalemia (uncommon)
furosemide) cause renal potassium wasting. Hypokale-
%1 pue sie> jo oe on %oz Aiaeuixodde u sino eu
Catecholamines (rare)
of dogs with chronic renal failure.
Hypokalemic periodic paralysis (Burmese cats) (rare)
Hypokalemic nephropathy characterized by tubu-
Hypothermia (questionable)
lointerstitial nephritis may develop in cats fed high-
Decreased Intake (Unlikely to cause hypokalemia by
tself unless diet is severely deficient)
diets that also contain urinary acidifers.
Administration of potassium-free fluids (e.g., 0.9% NaCl,
Hypokalemia commonly occurs during the postob-
 5% dextrose in water)
structive diuresis after relief of feline urethral obstruction.
Hypokalemia may occur in canine hyperadrenocorticism 
FE,. Fractional excretion of potassium; RTA, renal tubular acidosis.
because of mineralocorticoid effects of endogenous ste-
Modified from DiBartola SP: Auid therapy in small animal practice.
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 93.
roids and is more common with adrenal tumors than in
pituitary-dependent disease.
The most common causes of moderate to severe
hypokalemia (i.e.,<25 to 3.0 mEq/L) are vomiting
of gastric contents, urinary losses (eg. postobstructive
examination. Additional laboratory  tests are rarely
diuresis. polyuric chronic renal failure), use of loop
needed.
diuretics (especially in anorexic animals), aggressive
insulin and sodium bicarbonate therapy (eg., treatment
Causes of Hyperkalemia · The three mechanisms for
of
diabetic ketoacidosis), and inappropriate fluid
hyperkalemia are (1) increased potassium intake. (2)
therapy in anorexic animals. Causes of hypokalemia
translocation of potassium from intracellular to extracel-
can usually be ascertained from history and physical
lular fluid, and (3) decreased urinary potassium excretion
114
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Was blood drawn through an IV catheter?
No
Yes
Is animal receiving fluids or drugs
Check to be sure sample was not diluted
known to cause hypokalemia
(e.g., fluids with little or no potassium,
fluids with glucose or NaHCOg, furosemide,
thiazides, insulin)?
Yes
No
 Check for iatrogenic 
Is animal vomiting or diarrheic?
 hypokalemia
Yes
No
Assume Gl losses are responsible
 Evidence of primary renal disease
(i.e., pu-pd, azotemia, isosthenuria,
recent urethral obstruction)?
No
Yes
Check anion gap
 Chronic renal failure
 Diet-induced hypokalemic nephropathy
Postobstructive nephropathy
Hyperchloremic metabolic
 No hyperchloremic
acidosis
metabolic acidosis
Renal tubular acidosis
Mineralocorticoid excess
FGURE 6-1 Algorithm for clinical approach to hypokalemia. Gl, Gastrointestinal; IV, intravenous; pu-pd, polyuria-polydipsia.
(Modified from DiBartola SP: Fluid therapy in small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders, p 98.)
(most common) (Box 6-2 and Figure 6-2). Increased
of thumb is not reliable. Respiratory acidosis has minimal
intake is seldom the cause, unless potassium administra-
effect on potassium. Acute tumor lysis syndrome rarely
tion is greatly excessive or concurrent renal or adrenal
Occurs after radiation or chemotherapy for lymphoma.
impairment exists.
Other causes of massive tissue damage include reperfu-
 Translocation of potassium from cells to extracellular
sion injury and crush injury (rare). Insulin deficiency and
fluid may occur with acute inorganic acidosis, massive
     
tissue damage (eg. acute tumor lysis) or potassium
ketoacidosis. Acute hypertonicity (eg. mannitol infu-
retention (caused by acute renal failure), insulin defi-
0n isseiod pue ianem asnes Ae (eiualiaday 'uois
ciency, and acute hypertonicity. Acute acidosis due to
 exit cells and enter the extracellular space, causing hyper-
inorganic acids (e.g., NHCl, HCl) but not organic acids 
kalemia (uncommon).
(e.g., lactic acid, keto acids) may cause potassium to shift
Decreased excretion is the most important mecha-
out of cells (uncommon). The effect of inorganic meta-
nism; hyperkalemia seldom occurs if renal function is
bolic acidosis on serum potassium concentration varies,
normal. The most common causes of decreased urinary
usually raising potassium 0.17 to l.67 (mean, 0.75)
potassium excretion are urethral obstruction, ruptured
mEq/L per 0. 1-unit decrement in pH; however, this rule
bladder (or ureter), anuric or oliguric renal failure and
Chapter G:Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders
115
Very rarely.
 hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism
BOX 6-2. CAUSES OF HYPERKALEMIA
mia in patients with diabetes or renal failure This disease
Pseudohyperkalemia
Thrombocytosis (usually mild, but can produce marked
is diagnosed by measuring aldosterone (not cortisol) con-
changes)
centrations before and after ACTH administration. Hyper-
WBCs > 100,000/ul (are cause, but can cause significant
kalemic periodic paralysis is another rare cause of
changes!
hyperkalemia that has been reported in only one dog
 Hemolysis in breeds or individuals with high RBC
The most important causes of serious hyperkalemia
potassium concentration (e.g., Akitas, English springer
[ie., > 6.0 mEq/L) are oliguric and anuric acute renal
spaniels, neonates, occasional other dogs! 
failure [eg, ethylene glycol ingestion), urethral obstruc-
tion in male cats, and hypoadrenocorticism. Pseudo-
Decreased Urinary Excretion (most common)
hyperkalemia should be eliminated frst. If serum
Urethral obstruction (common and important)
 Ruptured bladder/ureter (uncommon but important)
the patient is asymptomatic (e.g., normal electrocardio-
Anuric or oliguric renal failure (common and inportant)
gram and physical examination), serum potassium con-
Hypoadrenocorticism (uncommon but important)
centration should be rechecked using lithium heparin
Selected gastrointestinal diseases (e.g., trichuriasis,
plasma. After artifact has been eliminated, history
salmonellosis, perforated duodenal ulcer)
should be examined for iatrogenic causes. If hyperkale-
Chylothorax with repeated pleural fluid drainage (rare)
mia might be iatrogenic the drug in question should
 Hyporeninemic hypoaldosteronism (with diabetes melitus 
be discontinued and serum potassium rechecked in l to
or renal failure) [rare)
2 days. Diagnostic evaluation should continue in case
 Drugs (angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors [e.g.,
another disease is present, however. Hyperkalemia is
enalapril],* potassium-sparing diuretics [e.g..
usually an indication for evaluation of some or all of the
spironolactone, amiloride, triamterenel,* prostaglandin
following: serum creatinine, blood urea nitrogen (BUN).
inhibitors,* heparin*)
urinalysis, and a resting serum cortisol concentration
Increased Intake
(see Chapter 8).
 Unlikely with normal renal/adrenal function, unless admin-
istration is greatly excessive (e.g., IV administration of fluids
with high KCl concentrations, administration of large doses
URINARY FRACTIONAL EXCRETION
of potassium penicillin G)
OF POTASSIUM
Translocation (lntracellular Fluid → Extracellular Fluid)
Insulin deficiency (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis) (uncomimon
and transient!
Seldom Indicated · Fractional excretion of potassium
Acute inorganic acidosis (e.g., HCI, NHgCl) (rare)
(FEk) helps distinguish renal from nonrenal potassium
 Massive tissue damage le.g., acute tumor lysis syndrome
loss. FE is calculated as follows:
[rare], reperfusion of extremities after aortic
[(Uk /Sk)/(Uc- /Sc)]×100
thromboembolism in cats with cardiomyopathy [rare],
crush injuries [rare]]
where
Hyperkalemic periodic paralysis (rare)
Drugs (nonspecific beta blockers [e.g., propranolol*] 
Uk = urine concentration of potassium (mEq/L)
 Sk = serum concentration of potassium (mEq/L)
IV, Intravenous; RBC, red blood cell; WBC, white blood cellr.
Ue =urine concentration of creatinine (mg/dl)
*Only likely to cause hyperkalemia in conjunction with other contrib-
Sc. = serum concentration of creatinine (mg/dl)
uting factors (e.g., decreased renal function, concurrent administra-
tion of potassium supplements).
Normal Values ● Dogs and cats, 6% to 20%.
Modified from DiBartola SP: Fluid therapy in small animal practice
ed 2. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 100.
Abnormalities ● FEs should be less than or equal to 6%
if the animal has nonrenal sources of potassium loss (e.g--
gastrointestinal loss). Values greater than 20% in hypoka-
lemic patients with normal renal function indicate exces-
hypoadrenocorticism. Hyperkalemia may occur within
sive renal potassium losses.
48 hours of feline urethral obstruction, but it does not
usually occur for at least 48 hours after urinary bladder
rupture Hyperkalemia seldom occurs in chronic renal
SERUM SODIUM CONCENTRATION
failure and then usually only in oliguric patients. Hyper-
kalemia, hyponatremia, and Na/K ratios less than 27: 1
Commonly Indicated · Serum sodium determination
 are often (but not always) found in animals with hypo-
is useful in systemic diseases characterized by vomiting.
adrenocorticism or renal failure An adrenocorticotropic
diarrhea, polydipsia and polyuria, muscle weakness.
hormone (ACTH) stimulation test (see Chapter 8) is nec-
abnormal behavior, abnormal mentation,
seizures,
essary to diagnose hypoadrenocorticism, because identi-
edema, pleural or peritoneal effusion, or dehydration.
cal electrolyte abnormalities can occur because of oliguric
Serum sodium should be determined whenever adrenal,
renal failure, whipworms, salmonellosis, and pleural or
renal, hepatic, or cardiac failure has been diagnosed; in
peritoneal effusions.
cases of prolonged fluid or diuretic therapy: or in patients
116
Check for evidence of obstructed urinary bladder
(i.e., large bladder, unable to urinate)
Present
Not present
Assume urethral obstruction
 and treat accordingly
Check for potential artifacts
(i.e., platelets >1,000,000/μl, WBC >100,000/μl, hemolysis,
 or lack of clinical signs expected in hyperkalemic patient)
If artifact possible or suspected, repeat electrolyte determination
 Check for use of drugs that can cause hyperkalemia
(e.g., KCl supplementation, β-blockers, thrombolytic therapy
for emboli, potassium-sparing diuretics, potassium penicillin G,
 angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors, heparin)
 Such drugs being used
Such drugs not being used
Stop using drug
Evaluate serum chemistry
Continue to look for other causes while
 panel and urinalysis 
waiting to see effect of stopping drug 
Hyperglycemia
Azotemia
Very low TcO2
No obvious diagnosis
Diabetes mellitus 
 Oliguric renal failure
 Primary renal failure
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hyporeninemic
Obstructive renal disease
Hypoadrenocorticism
Pleural or peritoneal effusion
hypoaldosteronism
Hypoadrenocorticism
 Ruptured urinary tract
Hyporeninemic
Acute tumor lysis
Acute tumor lysis
hypoaldosteronism
syndrome
 syndrome
Whipworms
Ruptured urinary tract
Acute inorganic acidosis
Salmonellosis
 due to various causes
 Other selected Gl disorders
FGURE 6-2 Agorithm for clinical approach to hyperkalemia. Gl, Gastrointestinal; TcOg, total carbon dioxide; WBC, white blood
cell. (Modified from DiBartola SP: Fluid therapy in small animal practice, Philadelphia, 1992, WB Saunders, p 107.)
that are not drinking water. Results obtained by using
sodium concentrations less than 120 or greater than
point-of-care instruments usually correlate well with
170 mEq/L in dogs.
 results obtained by traditional instruments.
Analysis ● Serum sodium is measured in senum, plasma,
rect potentiometry was used and hyponatremia plus
juaean Ap pue Aaouaod pyiads-uon Aq aun io
normal plasma osmolality was found, this was called
methods.
Or severe hyperproteinemia. Excessive lipid and protein
Normal Values · Dogs. 140 to 150 mEq/L; cats, 150 to
in serum caused the machine to inaccurately determine
160 mEq/L (mEq/L are the same as mmol/L).
the concentration. Pseudohyponatremia rarely occurs
when ion-specific electrodes are used. Hyperviscosity
Danger Values · Clinical signs of hyponatremia and
,sadues jous, oi peal ueo eiauaiodaday Aq pasnm
hypermatremia are more related to rapidity of onset than
(and artifactual hyponatremia) with certain aspiration
to magnitude of change and associated plasma hypo-
techniques. Samples drawn through improperly cleared
osmolality or hyperosmolality. Neurologic signs (eg..
IV catheters may yield falsely increased or decreased
disorientation, ataxia, seizures, coma) may occur at serum
 sodium concentrations, depending on the fluid being
Chapter G:Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders
117
administered. When obtaining blood from an IV catheter,
 one should remove and discard enough blood to clear the
BOX 6-3. CAUSES OF HYPONATREMIA
catheter before collecting the sample. Sodium salts of
various anticoagulants (e.g., oxalate, fluoride, citrate)
With Normal Plasma Osmolality (Pseudohyponatremia)
(rare with current instruments)
increase measured values.
Hyperlipidemia
Marked hyperproteinemia (rare)
Drugs That May Alter Serum Sodium Concentra-
tion ● Hyponatremia may develop because of thiazides.
With High Plasma Osmolality
furosemide, spironolactone, or trimethoprim combined
Hyperglycemia (common)
with a diuretic. Drug-induced syndrome of inappropriate
 Mannitol infusion 
antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) is reported in
With Low Plasma Osmolality
people (e.g, with vincristine), but not dogs or cats.
Overhydration (i.e., hypervolemia)
Hypernatremia may develop because of desoxycorticoste-
Severe hepatic disease causing ascites (comtmon)
rone acetate or pivalate, fludrocortisone, sodium bicar-
bonate, lactulose, inappropriate therapy with physiologic
Congestive heart failure causing effusion (commton) 
or hypertonic saline solutions, or sodium phosphate
Nephrotic syndrome causing effusion (commton)
enemas.
 Advanced renal failure (primarily oliguric or anuric)
Dehydration (i.e., Hypovolemia)
Abnormal Serum Sodium Concentrations · Serum
 Gastrointestinal loss (common) (ie., vomiting or
sodium concentration is the amount of sodium relative
diarrhea]
to the volume of water in the blood; it does not reflect
Third-space loss (i.e., pancreatitis, peritonitis,
total body sodium content Hyponatremic and hyperna-
uroabdomen [commonl chylothorax with repeated 
  'u 'saa a  sa 
 pleural fluid drainage!
total body sodium. Hypernatremia almost always causes
Cutaneous loss (i.e., burns)
Hypoadrenocorticism (uncommon but important)
hypo-osmolality.
Duretic administration (including osmotic diuretics)
Causes of Hyponatremia · Accurate evaluation of
Normal Hydration (i.e., Normovolemia)
saline solution, or hypotonic fluids (inportant)
Most hyponatremic patients are hypoosmolar, but hyper-
 Psychogenic polydipsia
glycemia (i.e., diabetes mellitus) or mannitol administ-
ration (Box 6-3) may cause hyponatremia with
 Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone
secretion (SIADH) (rare)
hyperosmolality. The next step in evaluating hyponatre-
mia is to estimate hydration status. History may indicate
 Antidiuretic drugs (e.g., heparin solutions containing
fluid loss. Physical examination allows some evaluation
dhlorbutol, vincristine, cyclophosphamide, nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs!
of a patient's hydration status (e.g., skin turgor, moistness 
of mucous membranes, capillary refill time, pulse rate
Myxedema coma of hypothyroidism (rare)
 and character, appearance of jugular veins, presence or
Modified from DiBartola SP: Auid therapy in small animal practice,
absence of ascites).
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 60.
Dehydrated hyponatremic patients have lost water
and sodium, but more sodium than water. Nonrenal
Or renal routes may result in loss of sodium-rich fluid.
Nonrenal losses may be gastrointestinal (e.g., vomiting.
diarrhea), third space (eg., pancreatitis, peritonitis.
Normovolemic hyponatremia may be caused by
uroabdomen, pleural effusion), or cutaneous (eg..
primary (i.e, psychogenic) polydipsia, fluid therapy (e.g..
burns). Gastrointestinal fluid losses may lead to hypona-
yim smp '(aie) Havi (aues %sto 1o asoxap %5
tremia if the loss of sodium is greater than the loss of
antidiuretic effects, and myxedema coma from hypothy-
water or if subsequent replacement of the lost fluids by
roidism (rare). Primary polydipsia (see Chapter 7) usually
drinking water dilutes the remaining sodium. Hypoadre-
anaaas aaey saop asaul 'saop jo spaaiq asiel ul sinooo
nocorticism, diuretics, diabetes mellitus, or renal disease
polydipsia, polyuria, severe hyposthenuria, mild hypona-
may cause renal fluid and salt loss. Once again, drinking
tremia, and mild plasma hypo-osmolality. SIADH refers
water replaces water but not sodium, causing hyponatre-
to excessive antidiuretic hormone [ADH) release despite
mia. Hyponatremia also has been associated with chronic
lack of normal stimuli; it can be caused by malignancy.
hemorrhage and hemoabdomen in dogs.
pulmonary disease, or central nervous system (CNS) dis-
Overhydrated hyponatremic patients (eg. ascites,
orders. Diagnosis of SIADH requires eliminating adrenal,
renal, cardiac, and hepatic disease and fnding inappro-
Impaired water excretion causes fluid retention, which
dilutes serum sodium. Clinical signs of hypervolemia
may not be visible, because the retained water may be
or potentiate its renal effects may lead to hyponatremia
intracellular or interstitial. Hypervolermic hyponatremia
with normovolemia.
primarily occurs in congestive heart failure, severe
 The most common causes of moderate to marked
hepatic disease, nephrotic syndrome, and advanced
hyponatremia (i.e, Na <135 mEq/L) in dogs and cats
renal failure.
include vomiting. hypoadrenocorticism, and advanced
118
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
occur in all animals; if the patient cannot or will not drink
BOX 6-4. CAuSEs OF HYPerNATrEmlA
(e.g, hypodipsia caused by an abnormal CNS thirst
mechanism in young female miniature schnauzers).
Loss of Free Water without Adequate Replacement
hypernatremia results. Clinical signs include anorexia.
(important)
 Normal insensible water loss without normal replacement
lethargy, weakness, disorientation, ataxia, and seizures.
Water unavailable or patient unable to drink
Hypotonic water loss is loss of both water and elec-
Abnormal thirst mechanism
trolytes, but more water than sodium. Such losses may be
renal or extrarenal (eg gastrointestinal, third space, cuta-
 Primary hypodipsia (e.g., miniature schnauzers) (rare)
neous). Vomiting, diarrhea, and small intestinal obstruc-
Central nervous system (CNS) neoplasia
tion may cause hypotonic gastrointestinal losses.
Increased insensible water loss without replacement
Third-space losses include pancreatitis and peritonitis.
 High environmental temperature, fever, tachypnea/
Cutaneous losses are rarely important in dogs and cats.
panting
Renal losses may result from lack of ADH, osmotic or
Urinary loss of free water
drug-induced diuresis, or renal disease that affects con-
 Diabetes insipidus (either central or nephrogenic)
centrating ability.
Loss of Hypotonic Fluids without Adequate
Replacement of Water (important)
NOTE: If a patient with hypotonic fluid losses replaces
Extrarenal
fluids by drinking water, it may become hyponatremic
Gastrointestinal (i.e., vomiting, diarrhea, small intestinal
instead of hypernatrenic, because it is diluting remaining
obstruction)
sodium with water it drinks.
Third-space loss (i.e., peritonitis, pancreatitis)
Cutaneous (e.g., burns)
Administration of excessive sodium (e.g.. hypertonic
Renal
saline, sodium bicarbonate, inappropriate fluid therapy)
 Diuresis (osmotic [e.g., diabetes mellitus, mannitol],
-ape isatul iou saop juaed au j eiaeaday sasnn
chemical [e.g., drugs]] 
quate water. Hyperadrenocorticism, sodium phosphate
 Renal failure, postobstructive diuresis
enemas, and primary hyperaldosteronism (rare) may
 Increased Intake of Sodium
cause hypernatremia.
Hypertonic fluid administration (e.g., hypertonic saline,
Clinically significant hypermatremia [i.e, Na >
 sodium bicarbonate, total parenteral nutrition
160 mEq/L in dogs and 170 mEq/L in cats) usually is due
 solutions, sodium phosphate enema)
to a pure water deficit (eg, unable or unwilling to drink).
Ihappropriate maintenance fluid therapy with sodium-
loss of hypotonic fluid (eg., gastrointestinal or renal
containing fluids (important) 
losses), or fluid therapy. History is usually adequate to
Salt poisoning
determine the cause of hypernatremia.
Hyperaldosteronism (rare)
Hyperadrenocorticism (mild changes)
URINARY FRACTIONAL EXCRETION
Modified from DiBartola SP: Fluid therapy in small animal practice,
OF SODIUM
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 53.
 Seldom Indicated · Determining fractional sodium
excretion (FEna) may help differentiate prerenal from
primary renal azotemia (seldom needed for this purpose).
congestive heart failure {with or without concomitant
and renal from extrarenal sodium loss in dehydrated
diuretictherapy). History or physical examination usually
patients with hypernatremia or hyponatremia. FEna is cal-
reveals the cause, but a resting senum cortisol should be
culated by using the equation:
measured (see Chapter 8) if the clinician suspects hypo-
adrenocorticism. If the cause is still unknown, plasma
[(UN/SN)/(Ua /Sc)]x100
 osmolality measurements are recommended.
where
Causes of Hypernatremia ● Hypermatremia is caused
UNa = urine concentration of sodium (mEq/L)
by loss of water, gain of sodium, or both (Box 6-4). It is
Sna = serum concentration of sodium (mEq/L)
rare for animals with normal thirst mechanisms and
Ue = urine concentration of creatinine (mg/dl)
adequate access to water to become hypermatremic unless
Se. = serum concentration of creatinine (mg/dl)
they are unable to ingest water.
 Free-water loss [i.e, loss of water without appreciable
Normal Values ● FEva should be less than 1% in normal
amounts of electrolytes) occurs in diabetes insipidus and
dogs and cats.
insensible losses. Central diabetes insipidus [see Chapter
7) is due to lack of ADH production and release Affected
Abnormalities ● FEn, should be less than 1% in animals
animals have severe polydipsia and polyuria, and hyper-
with prerenal azotemia; greater than 1% suggests primary
natremia is common. Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus is
renal azotemia. Prerenal azotemia with FENa greater than
a category that includes many disorders characterized by
 1% may occur despite normal renal function ifthe animal
renal urine concentration abnormalities (see Chapter 7).
is receiving diuretics (e.g. furosemide). In dehydrated
Insensible losses [i.e, normal respiratory tract losses)
 patients, FEna values less than 1% suggest nonrenal losses
Chapter G:Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders
119
(e.g, gastrointestinal, third space); values greater than 1%
where [Cl-] measured and [Nat] measured are the patient's
suggest renal losses [e.g., hypoadrenocorticism, diuretic
serum chloride and sodium concentrations, respectively.
administration, renal disease).
The values 146 and 156 reflect the mean value for senum
sodium concentrations in dogs and cats. Normal [Cl]
corrected is approximately 107 to l13 mEq/L in dogs and
SERUM CHLORIDE
117 to 123 mEq/L in cats. These values may vary among
CONCENTRATION
laboratories and analyzers.
Commonly Indicated · Serum chloride concentration
Danger Values · Unknown. Metabolic alkalosis and
commonly is measured in systemic diseases characterized
 decreased ionized calcium concentration probably cause
by vomiting. diarrhea, dehydration, polyuria, and poly-
muscle twitching or seizures in hypochloremic animals,
dipsia or in patients likely to have metabolic acid-base
whereas clinical signs associated with hyperchloremia are
abnormalities.
 probably caused by hyperosmolality.
Analysis · Serum chloride is measured in senum,
Artifacts ● Pseudohypochloremia results when chloride
plasma, or urine by dry reagent systems, colorimetric titra-
tion, spectrophotometry (i.e, autoanalyzers), ion-specific
samples via techniques that are not ion-selective. Hyper-
potentiometry, and coulometric and amperometric titra-
tion. Results obtained by using point-of-care instruments
samples before analysis. In lipemic samples, chloride con-
do not always correlate well with results obtained by
centration is underestimated by some titrimetric methods
traditional methods.
and overestimated by colorimetric methods. Halides (e.g..
bromide, iodide) are measured as chloride, falsely increas-
Normal Values ● Changes in water balance change chlo-
ing reported values (especially important in animals
ride and sodium concentrations proportionately. Chlo-
receiving potassium bromide as an anticonvulsant).
ride concentration can also change primarily: therefore,
evaluation of chloride concentration must be done in
Drugs That May Alter Serum Chloride Concentra-
conjunction with evaluation of sodium concentration.
tion · Administration of NH4Cl, KCl, physiologic saline
 Using this approach, chloride disorders can be divided
solution (with or without KCl), hypertonic saline solu-
 into artifactual (sodium and chloride change proportion-
tion, or total parenteral nutrition solutions containing
ately) and corrected (changes in chloride are proportion-
arginine HCl and lysine HCl may add excessive Cl to the
 ately greater than changes in sodium) categories (Boxes
body. Acetazolamide may cause renal chloride retention.
6-5 and 6-6). Changes in free water are responsible for
Hypochloremia may be caused by excessive renal loss of
the chloride changes in artifactual disorders. In corrected
chloride relative to sodium (e.g., furosemide, thiazides)
chloride disorders, chloride ion itself changes. Corrected
chloride can be estimated as:
[Cl-] corrected =
BoX 6-6. causes 0f HYpercHloRemlA
[Cl-] measured ×146/[Na+] measured (for dogs)
Artifactual (Concentration)
[Cl-] corrected =
Corrected Hyperchloremia
[Cl-] measured x156/[Na*] measured (for cats)
 Pseudohyperchloremia
Lipemic samples using colorimetric methods
Potassium bromide therapy (common and important)
BoX 6-5. causEs 0f HYpocHloReMIA
 Excessive loss of sodium relative to chloride
Small bowel diarrhea (commton and important) 
Artifactual (Dilutional)
 Excessive gain of chloride relative to sodium 
Corrected Hypochloremia
Therapy with chloride salts (e.g., NH,Cl, KCl)
Pseudohypochloremia (lipemic samples using titrimetric
methods)
Total parenteral nutrition 
 Huid therapy (e.g., 0.9% NaCl, hypertonic saline,
Excessive loss of chloride relative to sodium
Vomiting of stomach contents (common and important)
KCl-supplemented fluids)
 Salt poisoning
Therapy with thiazide or loop diuretics (common and 
important)
 Renal chloride retention
 Chronic respiratory acidosis
 Renal failure
 Hyperadrenocorticism 
Renal tubular acidosis
Exercise
Hypoad renocorticism 
Therapy with solutions containing high sodium
 Diabetes mellitus
concentration relative to chloride
Chronic respiratory alkalosis
 Sodium bicarbonate
Drugs (e.g., spironolactone, acetazolamide)
Modified from DiBartola SP: Fluid therapy in smallanimal practice.
Modified from DiBartola SP: Auid therapy in small animal practice,
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 78.
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 79.
120
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Or excessive intake of sodium without chloride (eg.
hypertonicity (ie., exert oncotic pressure), attracting
NaHCO,).
fluids. Everything that affects tonicity (e.g., sodium) also
affects osmolality, but not everything that affects osmolal-
Causes of Hypochloremia · Many causes of hypona-
ity also affects tonicity (e.g., urea).
tremia also produce hypochloremia. If changes in sodium
are proportional to changes in chloride [hypochloremia
Occasionally Indicated · Serum or plasma osmolality
with normal corrected chloride or artifactual hypochlore-
aea u sie 'eaodau gn sasni aeaa sa
mia), it is usually easier to search for the cause of the
diagnosis of ethylene glycol intoxication, evaluates hydra-
hyponatremia. Corrected hypochloremia results from
tion status and renal concentrating ability during water
excessive loss of chloride relative to sodium or adminis-
deprivation testing, and sometimes helps evaluate patients
tration of fluids containing high sodium concentration
with diabetic ketoacidosis and those being treated with
relative to chloride (see Box 6-5). The most common
mannitol for cerebral edema.
causes of corrected hypochloremia are chronic vomiting
of gastric contents and aggressive furosemide or thiazide
Disadvantage · Special equipment (e.g, freezing point
therapy. Administration of sodium without chloride (eg..
depression or vapor pressure osmometer) is required.
NaHCOs) also may cause corrected hypochloremia.
Hypochloremia caused by increased renal chloride excre-
Analysis · Osmolality is measured in serum, plasma, or
tion is a normal adaptation to chronic respiratory acido-
ausn anssand ioea io uod suzaa Aq aun
sis. Persistent hypochloremia is an indication to determine
[citrate anticoagulants cause artifactual increases). It is
senum sodium, potassium, and total carbon dioxide
estimated (i.e, calculated) by various formulas. In the
absence of excessive unmeasured osmoles (eg, ethylene
analysis).
glycol),
.the following formula closely estimates
osmolality:
Causes of Hyperchloremia · Most causes of hyperma-
tremia produce concurrent hyperchloremia. If changes in
Osmolality (mOsm / kg)=
sodium are proportional to changes in chloride [hyper-
1.86[[Nat]+[K+]}+(glucose /18) +(BUN /2.8)+9
chloremia with normal corrected chloride concentration
 Or "artifactual" hyperchloremia), it is usually easier to
where serum sodium and potassium are expressed in
search for the cause of the hypernatremia. Corrected
mEq/L and BUN and glucose in mg/dl. However, 2 x [Na]
hyperchloremia results from excessive sodium loss rela-
may be used as a quick estimate of osmolality. Tonicity
tive to chloride, excessive chloride gain relative to sodium,
may be estimated by the following formula:
Or renal chloride retention (see Box 6-6). Small bowel
Tonicity = Plasma osmolality - (BUN/2.8)
diarrhea can cause hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
because of loss of bicarbonate-rich, chloride-poor fluid
By/uso ul passaidxa aie Aeiowso pue Aiiuoi araum
[i.e., excessive sodium loss). Salt poisoning or therapy
'P/suu u! passaidxa s! Nna pue
with NH4Cl, KCl, cationic amino acids, hypertonic saline,
 or 0.9% NaCl with or without added KCl represent exces-
Normal Values ● Serum or plasma osmolality: dogs. 290
sive chloride gain (e.g.. physiologic saline solution has
to 310 mOsm/kg: cats, 308 to 335 mOsm/kg. Urine
154 mEq chloride/L but contains 174 mEq chloride/L if
 s  s 
supplemented with 20 mEq KCl/L).
2800 mOsm/kg (dogs) and 50 to 3000 mOsm/kg (cats).
 The most common cause of hyperchloremia is hypo-
tonic fluid loss leading to hyperchloremic [normal anion
Danger Values ● Signs caused by hypo-osmolality or
indication for determining serum sodium, potassium,
than magnitude of change. Neurologic signs (e.g., disori-
 and Tcoz concentrations and blood gas analysis.
entation, ataxia, seizures, coma) may occur when senum
or plasma osmolality is less than 250 mOsm/kg or tonic-
ity is greater than 360 mOsm/kg.
OSMOLALITY AND OSMOLAL GAP
Osmolal gap is defined as measured serum osmolal-
ity - calculated serum osmolality An increased gap is due
Osmolality refers to the number of osmotically active par-
to unmeasured osmoles (e.g. ethylene glycol metabo-
ticles in a solution. Tonicity describes the osmolality of a
lites), pseudohyponatremia (i.e, normal osmolality plus
solution relative to plasma. A solution with the same
hyponatremia). or laboratory error. Vapor pressure
osmolality as plasma is said to be isotonic, whereas one
osmometry does not detect volatile solutes (eg., metha-
with greater osmolality than plasma is hypertonic. A solu-
nol). If measured osmolality is less than calculated osmo-
tion with osmolality lower than that of plasma is hypo-
lality, a laboratory error is probably responsible.
tonic. Tonicity depends on the ability of these particles to
exert oncotic pressure and whether or not the particles
Normal Values (Osmolal gap) · Dogs. 10 to 15 mOsm/
 e 'a] auqa aqeaais e ss aiei u
kg: cats, unknown.
membrane). For example, urea does not cause hyperto-
nicity (i.e., exert oncotic pressure), because it rapidly dif-
Danger Values (Osmolal gap) · An osmolal gap greater
fuses across cell membranes and equilibrates throughout
than 25 mOsm/kg indicates the presence of an unmea-
the body. Sodium and glucose cannot rapidly cross mem-
sured osmole usually as a result of intoxication (e.g-.
branes; therefore, they tend to stay on one side and cause
ethylene glycol, methanol, ethanol).
Chapter G:Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders
121
Causes of Serum or Plasma Hypo-osmolality · See
TABLE 61. NoRMAL BlOOD GAs VAluEs
Causes of Hyponatremia.
PcO2
HCO,-
PO2
Causes of Serum or Plasma Hyperosmolality · Hyper-
pH
(mm Hg)
(mEq/L)
(mm Hg)
Dog venous
7.32-7.40
33-50
18-26
severe azotemia, glycerin, and intoxications [eg., ethylene
 Dog arterial
7.36-7.44
36-44
18-26
=100
glycol, ethanol, methanol). The most common causes of
Cat venous
7.28-7.41
33-45
18-23
serum osmolality greater than 360 mOsm/kg are diabetic
ketoacidosis, azotemia, and hypernatremia. Citrate anti-
Cat arterial
7.36-7.44
28-32
17-22
>100
 coagulants may cause increased readings. Hyperosmolal-
ity is an indication to measure senum sodium, potassium,
urea nitrogen, and glucose concentrations plus calculate
43 mm Hg for venous blood). Abnormal cardiovascular
anion and osmolal gaps.
function may change this relationship.
For routine blood gas analyzers, a 3-ml syringe with
Causes of Increased Osmolal Gap · Pseudohypona-
a 25-gauge needle is used to collect 0.5 to 1.5 ml of
tremia, glycerin, ethylene glycol, methanol, ethanol, and
blood. Heparin (1ooo U/ml) is drawn into the syringe
possibly other intoxications can increase the osmolal gap.
(coating the interior) and it and all air are expelled,
Mannitol or lactic acid might also be responsible. If
leaving the needle hub filled with heparin (approximately
pseudohyponatremia is ruled out, an increased osmolal
0. 1 to 0.2 ml). For point-of-care units, as little as 0. 125 ml
gap mandates a search for recent exposure to these toxins.
blood is required. After the blood is collected, air bubbles
The increase in osmolal gap in dogs with ethylene glycol
must be dislodged and expelled. Inserting the needle into
Z isea ie i sisisiad 'su y ie sead uoixu
aul iano de suny Aug e gupeid 1o 1addois iaqqn e
hours, but may be normal 24 hours after ingestion. If
syringe hub prevents exposure of the sample to room air.
ethylene glycol intoxication is likely, urinalysis looking
The syringe is rolled between the palms of the hands to
for calcium oxalate crystals, blood gas analysis, anion gap.
mix the sample, and then submitted. Analysis should
and appropriate toxicologic analyses (see Chapter 17) are
Occur within 15 to 30 minutes of collection (if stored at
indicated.
25 ° C) or within 2 hours if the sample is immersed in an
ice-water bath. Handheld devices (e.g., IRMA) developed
for use at the bedside (or cage) have been marketed as
BLOOD GAS ANALYSIS
point-of-care units. These units can provide rapid blood
gas data (as well as electrolytes and selected other deter-
Occasionally Indicated · Acid-base evaluation is useful
minations) on critically ill patients that can aid in deci-
in severely ill animals (e.g., severe dehydration, vomiting.
sion making while waiting for routine laboratory results.
diarrhea, oliguria and anuria, hyperkalemia, tachypnea).
There appears to be good correlation between results
Blood gas analysis is also necessary to evaluate gas
obtained with these small units and those coming from
exchange and Tco alterations in patients with respiratory
larger laboratory units.
disorders (see Chapter ll). Urine pH does not necessarily
reflect systemic pH and cannot substitute for blood gas
Normal Values ● Normal blood gas values are shown in
analysis.
Table 6-1.
Advantages · Blood gas analysis allows precise identifi-
Danger Values · pH less than 7.l0 indicates life-
cation of the different acid-base disturbances and aids in
evaluation of pulmonary function.
Disadvantages ● Equipment is expensive, and careful
Artifacts ● Pco, decreases, whereas pH and Po increase.
technique is required in obtaining and handling blood
if the sample is exposed to air. Air bubbles in the sample
 specimens to prevent artifacts. The need for rapid analysis 
 may produce the same artifacts, especially if they occupy
may prohibit use of remote laboratories; however, point-
greater than or equal to l0% of sample volume. Pco2
of-care units (eg. immediate response mobile analysis
Diqoiay pareiap si sisaieue ji saseaioap Hd pue saseaiu
[IRMA]] allow immediate determinations and are often
metabolism by WBCs may decrease Poz. Cooling the
affordable for busy practices.
sample from 25° to 4° C slows these changes. Prolonged
venous stasis during venipuncture increases Pco2 and
Analysis · Blood gas analyzers are equipped with spe-
decreases pH. Excessive heparin (>l0% of the sample
cifc electrodes to measure pH, carbon dioxide partial
volume) decreases pH, PcO2, and HCO;, whereas citrate,
pressure or tension (Pcoz), and oxygen partial pressure or
oxalate or EDTA may decrease pH. Blood gas analyzers
tension (Po2). The bicarbonate (HCO;) is calculated.
calculate HCO;- from pH and Pco2: Tco is measured on
Arterial blood is required to evaluate Poz for pulmonary
serum chemistry autoanalyzers but calculated on many
function, but free-flowing jugular blood is acceptable
blood gas analyzers. Tcoz usually is l to 2 mEq/L higher
for acid-base analysis. Pulmonary artery. jugular vein,
than HCO;
and cephalic vein samples usually have similar values in
normal dogs, whereas arterial blood has a slightly lower
Drugs That May Alter Blood Gas Results + Acetazol-
HCO; (2l mEq/L versus 22 to 23 mEq/L for venous
amide, NHCl, and CaCl, may cause acidosis. Antacids,
blood) and much lower Pcoz (37 mm Hg versus 42 to
sodium bicarbonate, potassium citrate or gluconate and
122
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 6-2.RENAL AND RESPIRATORY
COMPENSATIONSFOR PRIMARY
BOX 6-7. CAUSeS 0F METAbolIC ACIDoSIS
ACID-BASE DISORDERSIN DOGS
Increased Anion Gap (Normochloremic)
PRIMARY
COMPENSATORY
Ethylene glycol intoxication (important) 
DISORDER
CHANGE
RESPONSE
Diabetic ketoacidosis* (comimon and important)]
↓[HCO;]
Uremic acidosist (comimon and important)
 Metabolic
 0.7 mm Hg decrement in
 PcO2 for each 1-mEq/L
Lactic acidosis (common and important)
acidosis
decrement in [HCO;] 
 Salicylate intoxication
Metabolic
↑[HCO,]
0.7 mm Hg increment in 
Other rare intoxications (e.g., paraldehyde, methanol)
alkalosis
PcO2 for each 1-mEq/L
increment in [HCO;] 
Normal Anion Gap (Hyperchloremic)
Acute
↑ PCO2
1.5-mEq/L increment
Hypoadrenocorticismf (uncommon but important) 
respiratory
in [HCOs]for each
Diarrhea
acidosis
10 mm Hg increment 
Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g., acetazolamide)
in PCO2
Dlutional acidosis (e.g., rapid administration of 0.9% 
Chronic
↑PCO2
3.5-mEq/L increment
εaline)
respiratory
in [HCOs]for each
Ammonium chloride (infrequent)
acidosis
10 mm Hg increment
in PCO2
Cationic amino acids (e.g., lysine, arginine, histidine) (rare)
Post-hypocapnic metabolic acidosis (rare)
Acute
↓PCO2
2.5-mEq/L decrement
respiratory
in [HCO;]for each
Renal tubular acidosis (RTA) (rare)
alkalosis 
10 mm Hg decrement 
inPCO2
*atients with diabetic ketoacidosis may have some component of
↓ PCO2
 5.5-mEq/L decrerment
hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis in conjunction with increased
Chronic
in [HCO;]for each 
anion gap acidosis.
respiratory
swajoyaiady aq Aew ainlet leual u Ajea sisopipe soqetaw aylt
alkalosis 
10 mm Hg decrement
 and later convert to increased anion gap acidosis.
in PCO2
tpatients with hypoadrenocorticism typically have hypochloremia
 Gaused by impaired water excretion (dilutional effect) and absence
From DiBartola SP: Fluid therapy in small animal practice, ed 2.
Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 196.
Modified from DiBartola SP: Auid therapy in small animal practice.
ed 2. Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 213.
loop diuretics may cause alkalosis. Salicylates may cause
fndings, and other laboratory data, the blood gas analysis
metabolic acidosis, respiratory alkalosis, or both.
should be questioned.
Analysis of Blood Gas Results · The clinician should
Metabolic Acidosis · Metabolic acidosis [i.e., decreased
begin by evaluating the pH. If it is abnormal, an acid-base
pH and HCO;, with a compensatory decrease in Pco2)
disturbance exists. If the pH is within the normal range.
ssol 'pe aaoxa ol aunlley 'pie jo uoppe Aq pasnes si
the clinician should check the PcO and HCO;. If they
of HCO; . or a combination thereof (Box 6-7). Addition
are abnormal, a mixed acid-base disturbance is probably
of acid may be iatrogenic (e.g., ethylene glycol, salicylates.
present. If the pH is low and the HCO;- is decreased,
 NH4Cl, cationic amino acids) or spontaneous [i.e., lactic
metabolic acidosis is present If the pH is low and the
acidosis, ketoacidosis). Decreased acid excretion is due to
Pco is increased, respiratory acidosis is present If the pH
renal dysfunction (e.g.. renal failure, hypoadrenocorti-
is high and the HCO; is increased, metabolic alkalosis is
cism, type I renal tubular acidosis [RTA]). Loss of HCO;
present. If the pH is high and the Pcoz is decreased, respi-
is usually caused by small bowel diarrhea [i.e., diarrheic
ratory alkalosis is present.
fluid has more HCO; than plasma);: renal losses of
Next, the clinician should calculate the expected com-
HCO; (e.g., carbonic anhydrase inhibitors, type II RTA)
pensatory response [eg., respiratory alkalosis is compen-
are rare Metabolic acidosis is usually caused by renal
sation for metabolic acidosis:; metabolic alkalosis is
failure, diabetic ketoacidosis, lactic acidosis from poor
compensation for respiratory acidosis) using the guide-
perfusion, hypoadrenocorticism, and perhaps small
lines in Table 6-2. These guidelines are for dogs only. If a
patient's compensatory response is within the expected
tiate these causes and is discussed later. Measurement of
range [i.e, within 2 mm Hg or 2 mEq/L of the calculated
blood lactate concentrations may help determine the
values), the acid-base disturbance is simple. If the com-
cause of the acidosis and may also be prognostic [i.e..
pensatory response falls outside of the expected range,
 increased blood lactate is associated with a poorer prog-
more than one acid-base disorder [i.e, a mixed disorder)
nosis). See Chapter 14 for a brief discussion of blood
 is probably present.
lactate mea surement.
After classifying the type of disturbance and whether
it is simple or mixed, the clinician should determine
Respiratory
Acidosis · Respiratory acidosis 
(i.e.,
whether the acid-base disturbance is compatible with the
decreased pH,
. increased Pcoz, with a compensatory
patient's history and clinical fndings. If the acid-base
increase in HCO;) is due to hypoventilation (which
disturbance does not fit with the patient's history, clinical
,   t  (o s
Chapter G:Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders
123
BOX 6-8. CAUSES OF RESPIRATORY ACIDOSIS
BOX 69. CAUSES 0F METAboLIC ALKALOSIS
Airway Obstruction
Vomiting of gastric contents (comimon and important) 
Aspiration (e.g., foreign body, vomitus)
Duretic therapy (e.g., loop diuretics, thiazides)
Respiratory Center Depression
(important)
 Neurologic disease (e.g., brainstem, high cervical spinal 
Oral administration of sodium bicarbonate or other
cord lesion)
organic anions (e.g., lactate, citrate, gluconate,
 Drugs (e.g., narcotics, sedatives, barbiturates, inhalation
acetate)
anesthetics)
Hyperadrenocorticism (infrequent)
Toxemia
Post-hypercapnia (rare)
 Primary hyperaldosteronism (rare)
Cardiopulmonary Arrest (common)
 Neuromuscular Defects
Modified from DiBartola SP: Auid therapy in small animal practice,
 Myasthenia gravis, tetanus, botulism, polyradiculoneuritis,
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 231.
polymyositis, tick paralysis, hypokalemic periodic
paralysis in Burmese cats, hypokalemic myopathy in
cats
 Drug-induced (i.e., succinylcholine, pancuronium,
aminoglycosides administered with anesthetics,
obstruction) or administration of furosemide. Adding
organophosphates]
alkali may occur by administering NaHCOs, lactated
Ringer's solution, or potassium citrate. Normal kidneys
Restrictive Diseases
eliminate administered alkali, however, and iatrogenic
 Daphragmatic hernia, pneumothorax, pleural effusion, 
hemothorax, pyothorax, chest wall trauma, pulmonary
alkalosis seldom results unless renal dysfunction is
fibrosis
present.
Pulmonary Diseases (less common)
Respiratory Alkalosis · Respiratory alkalosis  (ie.
 Respiratory distress syndrome, pneumonia, severe
increased pH, decreased Pco2, with a compensatory
 pulmonary edema, diffuse metastatic disease, smoke
 inhalation, pulmonary thromboembolism, chronic 
saseaiap yoium) auduoet oi anp sl (-sooh ui aseaioap
obstructive pulmonary disease, pulmonary mechanical
,eudeoday Aemud, m snomuous si pue (ood
ventil ation fibrosis
(Box 6-10). It may be the result of pulmonary disease.
pulmonary thromboembolism, hypoxemia, direct stimu-
 Inadequate Ventilation
lation of the medullary respiratory center (e.g, Gram-
negative sepsis, hepatic disease, salicylates, xanthines.
CNS disease, heat stroke), and excessive mechanical ven-
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, WB Saunders, p 246.
tilation. Unexplained respiratory alkalosis may suggest
Gram-negative sepsis or pain. Pulmonary edema may
cause respiratory alkalosis, metabolic acidosis, or respira-
tory acidosis. Respiratory alkalosis may occur during
hypercapnia" (Box 6-8). Hypoventilation may be caused
recovery from metabolic acidosis because hyperventila-
by airway obstruction, cardiopulmonary arrest, restrictive
tion (the compensation for metabolic acidosis) persists
respiratory diseases (e.g., diaphragmatic hermia, pneumo-
for 24 to 48 hours after correction of the acidosis. These
thorax, pleural effusion, hemothorax, chest wall trauma,
patients are sometimes hypoxemic Respiratory disease
pulmonary fbrosis, pyothorax), severe pulmonary dis-
eases, and inadequate mechanical ventilation. Hypoven-
oy sisleed Aoinidsan uoy insan osle Ae uoi
BOX 6-10. CAUSEs OF TACHYpNEA RESULTING
neuromuscular disease (e.g. myasthenia gravis, tetanus,
IN respiratory AlkalOsIs
botulism, polyradiculoneuritis, tick paralysis), as well as
by neuromuscular blocking drugs (e.g., succinylcholine,
Hypoxemia from Almost Any Cause
pancuronium, aminoglycosides combined with anesthet-
Rght-to-left shunting, decreased PlO2 (e.g., residence at
ics). Airway obstruction, cardiac arrest, and respiratory
high altitude), congestive heart failure, severe anemia, pul-
paralysis usually cause respiratory acidosis. These patients
monary disease
are invariably hypoxemic if breathing room air. Breathing
Central Nervous System (CNS) (direct stimulation
oxygen-enriched air [i.e, anesthesia) sometimes causes
of medullary respiratory center)
normal or increased Po2
Central neurologic disease, hepatic disease, Gram-negative
sepsis, drugs (i.e., salicylate intoxication, xanthines such
Metabolic Alkalosis ·Metabolic alkalosis (i.e., in-
as aminophylline), heat stroke, fear, pain, fever, hyperthy-
Creased pH and HCO;, with a compensatory increase in
roidismi
 Pco) is caused by loss of acid from or addition of alkali
 Mechanical Ventilation
to the body (Box 6-9). Loss of acid usually is due to
vomiting gastric fluid, but loss of Cl via the kidneys (i.e.
PlO2 Partial pressure of inspired oxygen.
caused by furosemide) may be responsible. Metabolic
Modified from DiBartola SP: Auid therapy in small animal practice,
alkalosis is usually due to vomiting of gastric contents
ed 2, Philadelphia, 2000, wWB Saunders, p 247.
(especially but not exclusively because of gastric outflow
124
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
sometimes initially causes tachypnea and consequently
undiagnosed systemic disease is an indication for blood
hypocapnia, which can change to hypercapnia if the
 gas analysis. Ifblood gas analysis is unavailable, the clini-
disease worsens.
cian must correlate Tcoz with the clinical setting and
decide if NaHCO; therapy is indicated. This approach.
however, can be dangerous because the actual pH is
TOTAL CARBON DIOXIDE
not known. Measuring serum electrolyte concentrations
FOR ACID-BASE EVALUATION
allows optimal fluid therapy (i.e. disturbances that
affect acid-base balance often also cause electrolyte
Tco, is synonymous with HCO; in samples handled
abnormalities)
aerobically.
Causes of Increased Tco, · Tcoz concentrations are
Frequently Indicated · In any severe systemic disease
increased in metabolic alkalosis (most common) and
process, Tcoz helps determine if blood gas analysis is
compensated respiratory acidosis (rare). Senum sodium,
needed. Diseases in which Tcoz determinations and
potassium, and chloride concentrations should be mea-
 blood gas analysis are indicated include ethylene glycol
 i e  a 
Or salicylate intoxication, severe diabetic ketoacidosis,
common in metabolic alkalosis. If these changes occur,
and severe uremia.
they should be corrected {i.e, administration of 0.9%
NaCl + KCl) and the underlying cause (eg. pyloric
Advantage · Abnormal Tcoz may be an indication to
obstruction) diagnosed.
 obtain blood gas analysis.
Disadvantages · One cannot accurately define meta-
ANION GAP
bolic and respiratory acid-base disorders using just TcO2-
High Tcoz could be the result of either metabolic alkalosis
 Infrequently Indicated · The anion gap sometimes
or compensated respiratory acidosis. Low Tco could be
helps differentiate causes of metabolic acidosis and may
the result of either metabolic acidosis or compensated
help clarify mixed acid-base disorders. Metabolic acidosis
respiratory alkalosis.
with a high anion gap usually comes from acids that do
not contain chloride (eg. lactic acid, keto acids, salicylic
Analysis · Tco, is measured in serum or plasma by
acid, metabolites of ethylene glycol, phosphates, sul-
enzymatic and dry reagent methods. Serum or plasma
fates). Metabolic acidosis characterized by a normal
-d si uoa jo sa o on si um paz
anion gap has an increased plasma chloride concentra-
ferred. Samples may be stored in a capped syringe on ice
tion and is called hyperchloremic acidosis.
at 4° C for up to 2 hours before analysis.
Advantage · Only a simple calculation from values
Normal Values ● Dogs and cats, 17 to 23 mEq/L
already measured is required.
Danger Values ● Less than 12 mEq/L (implies but does
Disadvantage · The anion gap is affected by several
not confrm diagnosis of severe metabolic acidosis)
factors and can be diffcult to interpret.
Artifacts ● Tco, determined by dry reagent methods is
Analysis · The anion gap is calculated as (Nat + Kt) -
not affected by hyperlipidemia. Falsely decreased TcO2
(Cl- + HCO;) or Na+ - (Cl-+ HCO;). depending on the
occurs if processing of the blood sample is delayed for
clinician or laboratory's preference. The anion gap and its
several hours, if the blood collection tube is underflled,
component values are expressed in mEq/L. If the patient
and if heparin anticoagulant occupies greater than 10%
is severely hypoalbuminemic, the anion gap may not
of the sample volume.
reflect expected fndings. For each l g/dl decrease in
senum albumin, the anion gap decreases approximately
Drugs That May Alter Tco, · Acetazolamide and NH4Cl
2.4 mEq/L.
cause metabolic acidosis, reducing Tco,. Furosemide,
thiazides, and sodium bicarbonate cause metabolic alka-
Normal Values ● The normal anion gap calculated by
losis, increasing TcO.
(Na* + K") - (Cl- + HCO;) is approximately 12 t0
24 mEq/L in dogs and 13 to 27 mEq/L in cats.
Causes of Decreased Tco · Tcoz concentrations are
decreased in metabolic acidosis (most common cause)
Danger Values · Greatly increased values may be the
and compensated respiratory alkalosis. A hyperventilating
result of acute ethylene glycol intoxication and warrant a
animal with decreased Tco usually has metabolic acido-
careful review of the patient's history. There may be a
sis but could have chronic respiratory alkalosis. Blood gas
correlation between increasing anion gap and mortality
analysis may be necessary to determine which is present.
in seriously ill animals.
 e   e u   
cause of metabolic acidosis (e.g., diabetic ketoacidosis) is
Causes of Decreased Anion Gap · Hypoalbuminemia
usually assumed to represent metabolic acidosis. Blood
is probably the most common cause of a decreased anion
gas analysis is necessary to confrm the presence of meta-
gap: immunoglobulin G (IgG) multiple myeloma may
bolic acidosis and assess the severity of the change in pH.
also be responsible The magnitude of increase in unmea-
Tcoz less than or equal to 12 mEq/L in a patient with
sured cations (eg. calcium, magnesium) necessary to
Chapter 6: Electrolyte and Acid-Base Disorders
125
Aoqet leiy aq Aiqeqoid pinom deg uoiue au 1amo
Suggested Readings
errors resulting in overestimation of Tcoz or Cl or in
underestimation of sodium may artifactually decrease the
Alappan R, Perazella MA, Buller GK: Hyperkalemia in hospital-
anion gap. A decreased anion gap is seldom clinically
ized patients treated with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole.
Ann Intern Med 124:316. 1996.
significant.
Cunha MG. et al: Renal and cardiorespiratory effects of treatment
with lactated Ringer's solution or physiologic saline (0.9%
Causes of Normochloremic {Increased Anion Gap)
[eryain panpu! Aeuauadxa ynim sjen ui uognos (oen
Aridosis · The most common causes of an increased
obstruction. Am J Vet Res 71:840, 2010.
anion gap in acidotic patients are lactic acidosis, diabetic
-a saop nugta ut eaneuodky sisdpodky [e na 'se uewdey
ketoacidosis, uremic acidosis, ethylene glycol intoxica-
aerztiliche Praxis Ausgabe Kleintiere Heimtiere 37:15. 2009.
tion, and laboratory error.
de Morais HSA: Metabolic acidosis. a quick reference. Vet Clin
North Am Small Anim Pract 38:439, 2008.
Causes of Hyperchloremic (Normal Anion Gap) Aci-
de Morais HSA, Di Bartola SP: Hypernatremia, a quick reference.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:485, 2008.
dosis · Severe, acute small bowel diarrhea causes HCO;
loss and produces hyperchloremic (normal anion gap)
de Morais HSA, DiBartola SP: Hyponatremia, a quick reference.
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:491, 2008.
acidosis. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g. acetazol-
DiBartola SP: Fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base disorders in small
 amide) inhibit proximal renal tubular reabsorption of
animal practice, ed 3, Philadelphia, 2006, Elsevier.
HCO; and produce self-limiting hyperchloremic meta-
Foy D, de Morais HSA: Metabolic alkalosis, a quick reference. Vet 
bolic acidosis. Acidosis resulting from administration of
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:435, 2008.
NH4Cl decreases HCO;. but serum Cl increases and the
Haldane S. et al: Profound hypokalemia causing respiratory
 anion gap is unchanged Infusion of cationic amino acids
failure in a cat with hyperaldosteronism. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 
(e.g.. lysine HCl, arginine HCl) during total parenteral
17:202, 2007.
James KM. et al: Effects of sample handling on total carbon
nutrition may cause hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis,
 dioxide concentrations in canine and feline serum and blood.
because H+ ions are released when urea is generated.
Am I Vet Res 58:343, 1997.
Renal acid excretion decreases during chronic respiratory
 James KM, Lunn KF: Normal and abnomal water balance. Comp
alkalosis, with consequent reduction in plasma HCO;
Cont Educ 29:589, 2007.
and increase in Cl. When the stimulus for hyperventila-
Kilborn SH, Bonnett BN, Pook HA: Comparison of three different 
tion is removed and Pco, increases, pH decreases because
 methods of total carbon dioxide measurement. Vet Clin Pathol
it requires l to 3 days for the kidneys to increase acid
24:22, 1995.
excretion and increase plasma HCO; . This transient phe-
Kogika MM. de Moralis HSA: Hyperkalemia, a quick reference.
nomenon is called post-hypocapnic metabolic acidosis
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:477, 2008.
 and is associated with hyperchloremia.
Kogika MM. de Moralis HSA: Hypokalemia. a quick reference. Vet
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 38:48l, 2008.
 Dilutional acidosis occurs when extracellular volume
[agutchik MS. et al: Lactate kinetics in veterinary cnitical care:
is expanded via an alkali-free chloride-containing solu-
a review. J Vet Emerg Crit Care 6:81. 1997.
tion (eg, 0.9% NaCl). The high Cl- of physiologic saline
Oyer DL, et al: [nstrument corelation study between the i-STAT
solution (i.e, 154 mEq/L) and the highly resorbable
and the STAT 5 profile in an emergency setting. / Vet Emerg
nature of Cl- in renal tubules contribute to decreased
Crit Care 6:113. 1997.
plasma HCO; and hyperchloremia. RTA is a rare disorder
Rose BD: Clinical physiology of acid-base and electrolyie disorders.
characterized by hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis
ed 5, New York, 200l, McGraw-Hill.
because of either decreased HCO; reabsorption (type II
Siegling-Vlitakis C, et al: Qualification of the Stewart variables for
the appreciation of the acid-base status in healthy and differ-
RTA) or defective acid excretion (type I RTA).
ently diseased dogs. Berliner und Munchener Tierarziliche
Wochenshrift 120:148. 2007.
Other Causes of Increased Anion Gap · Severe dehy-
Waldrop [E: Uninary electrolytes. solutes. osmolality. Vet Clin
dration may increase both serum albumin concentration
North Am Small Anim Pract 38:503, 2008.
 and the anion gap. Alkalemia may increase the anion
Young Ds: Effects of drugs on clinical laboratory tests. ed 4.
gap slightly. Excessive standing of serum, especially in
Washington, DC, 1995. AACC Press.
uncapped containers, also may increase the anion gap
[a common error in samples not analyzed until the
(Aep ixau
Urinary Disorders
Jeanne A. Barsanti
DIFFERENTIATION OF
aa e  si ea aum ansun s uiu
blood count (CBC) and abdominal imaging are usually
POLYURIA-POLYDIPSLA, DYSURLA
definitive [neutrophilic leukocytosis with left shift and
AND INCONTINENCE
sisasans ie e ul pd-nd snld ssol ualam (snuan pasielua
hyperthyroidism, renal failure, or diabetes melltus
These three abnormalities must be differentiated early in
(hyperthyroidism is rare in dogs). Enlarged thyroid glands
the diagnostic workup by history or direct observation of
often may be palpated in the neck in hyperthyroid
urination. Polyuria-polydipsia (pu-pd) means urine pro-
patients. Feline kidneys are usually palpable; size and
duction and water consumption in excess of normal.
contour should be assessed. Postoliguric diuresis is
Dysuria means difficult urination and implies unduly fre-
usually diagnosed from the history (eg., a male cat that
quent urination with small or minimal amounts voided
has undergone removal of a urethral obstruction). Pu-pd
each time. Clients may assume that increased frequency
is the most common presenting complaint of owners of
means increased volume. The diagnostician must ascer-
shoinpuad e aaey saop paiae isou :ssop leuaipeiady
tain whether the amount of urine voided with each mic-
abdomen, hepatomegaly, alopecia, or a combination
turition is large small, or unknown. Animals with pu-pd
thereof on physical examination. Such dogs should
 Or dysuria are conscious of voiding and do not wake up
undergo adrenal function testing (see Chapter 8). Recent
in puddles of urine, unless they are too weak or in too
onset of cataracts suggests diabetes mellitus. Peripheral
-ou Areun yim sie pue soa 'dn a on uied yn
lymphadenopathy suggests lymphoma causing hypercal.
nence may wake up soaked in urine, leave a spot of urine
cemia. Other neoplasms (eg. anal sac apocrine gland
where they slept or dribble urine as they move.
adenocarcinomas) and certain infectious diseases (e.g..
systemic mycoses) may also cause hypercalcemia.
Polyuria-Polydipsia
If the cause is not obvious, a urinalysis, CBC, and
biochemical profle are the next steps (see Figure 7-1).
A precise history and consistently low urine specific gravi-
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) may be secondary to
em ieiot go zuauansea -nd isassns (oso'I>) sa
hyperadrenocorticism or diabetes mellitus, but renal
E jseal ie iaao (pooy ul ialem gupnou) uodunsuo
infection (i.e, bacterial pyelonephritis) can cause pu-pd.
24-hour period is necessary to definitively verify poly-
Neutrophilic leukocytosis, azotemia, white blood cell
dipsia (normal water intake is 20 to 70 ml/kg/day). This
 no a as o 'i  's ()
measurement is best performed at the client's home
pyelonephritis. Pyelonephritis can be difficult to diag-
because some polyuric animals will not readily drink
nose; excretory urography is the diagnostic method of
water at a clinic Quantifying urine production is diffcult
choice [although abnormalities may also be found with
umless a metabolism cage is available (normal 20 to
ultrasonography if the renal pelvis can be imaged). Some-
45 ml/kg/day).
times a presumptive diagnosis can only be made by the
Aoisth (I-2 alqel) sasnes alqissod Aueu sey pd-nd
necessity for long-term antibiotic therapy after failure of
and physical examination are cnucial in evaluating
short-term therapy. Clinicopathologic screening often
patients with pu-pd (Figure 7-1). Iatrogenic causes must
reveals changes indicative of the cause of pu-pd (e.g..
be sought from the history (e.g., diuretics, glucocorti-
renal failure, hyperadrenocorticism, hepatic insuffciency.
coids, anticonvulsants, high-salt or very-low-protein
hypercalcemia, diabetes mellitus) (see Figure 7-1). Serum
diets, excessive thyroid supplementation). Aminoglyco-
thyroxine determinations are always indicated in older
sides tend to produce polyuric, acute renal failure. Gluco-
cats (i.e., >10 years old).
corticoids can cause pu-pd, even when administered
Many dogs with hyperadrenocorticism are obviously
rectally or topically. Pyometra is usually suggested by
cushingoid on physical examination (i.e., cutaneous
history (2 months post-estrus) or physical examination
abnormalities., potbellied appearance, and hepatomeg-
fndings (enlarged uterus., vaginal discharge). If the
 aly). Common CBC and serum chemistry profle changes
126
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
127
TABLE 7-1. CAUSES OF POLYURIA-POLYDIPSIA (PU-PD) IN DOGS AND CATS
CAUSES
REMARKS
latrogenic; drugs (e.g..
History is informative 
diuretics, corticosteroids,
 BUN should be low with low-protein diets
thyroxine, anticonvulsants,
aminoglycosides, or
amphotericin B); salty or
very-low-protein diets
 Renal disease
Urine specific gravity should be persistently 1.008-1.029 (dogs)
 May be azotemic or nonazotemic 
For nonazotemic renal failure, measurement of GFR is useful for diagnosis of renal
dysfunction as the cause
 Upper urinary tract infection
May be hyposthenuric
 Excretory urography is diagnostic test of choice, but ultrasound may be helpful
Fanconi's syndrome
 Usually nonazotemic, hyperchloremic acidosis, glucosuric, and aminoaciduric
 Diabetes mellitus 
Hyperglycemic
Note: Cats are prone to stress-induced hyperglycemia; urine glucose measured at the same
time is usually (but not always) negative
 Central diabetes insipidus 
Hyposthenuric when euhydrated (see Figure 7-8)
 Nephrogenic diabetes
Hyposthenuric when euhydrated
insipidus
May be primary (congenital], idiopathic, or secondary (pyelonephritis, hyperadrenocorticism,
hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, pyometra, prostatic abscessation, E. coli septicemia,
hypoadrenocorticism)
Hyperadrenocorticism 
Isosthenuric, hyposthenuric, or concentrated urine
 Common cause of pu-pd in old dogs, rare in cats 
Hypoadrenocorticism 
 Pu-pd occurs in approximately 20% of patients; may closely resemble renal failure but 
 differentiated by absence of a stress leukogram and presence of hyperkalemia despite
polyuria; ACTH response test is necessary for confirmation 
Hypercalcemia
Isosthenuric or hyposthenuric, azotemic or nonazotemic
Hepatic insfficiency 
Isosthenuric, hyposthenuric, or concentrated; may resemble hyperadrenocorticism (hepatic
ds pue 1iy lewou aaey osie ue ing 'paseaioui aq Aew sawizua 
 Hyperthyroidism
 Primarily in older cats but may be iatrogenic because of supplementation
 Hyponatremia
 Loss of sodium from any cause
May cause isosthenuria whenever <120 mEq/L
 Post-urethral obstruction 
 Occurs occasionally after removal of a urethral obstruction that has resulted in uremia
Hypokalemia
Must be persistent and severe to cause polyuria
 Polycythemia vera
Rare
Apparent psychogenic
 Concentrate urine in response to water deprivation (see Fgure 7-8)
polydipsia
 Acromegaly
Raré
phosphatase.
include lymphopenia, eosinopenia, and increased serum
equal to 27: 1 with hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, or both.
alkaline phosphatase (SAP). alanine aminotransferase
Classically, no stress leukogram exists despite the animal
[ALT), and serum cholesterol. Approximately 40% to
being ill. An adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stim-
50% of hyperadrenal dogs have UTl. Bacteriuria is often
ulation test (see Chapter 8) is needed to confirm the
the only abnormality on urinalysis [i.e, no hematuria or
diagnosis, because other disorders may cause similar
pyuria). Adrenal function tests (see Chapter 8) or hepatic
changes. Most azotemic renal failure patients are hyper-
biopsy may be necessary to distinguish hyperadrenocorti-
'     
cism from primary hepatic disease.
<13 mg/dl), whereas most animals with hypercalcemia of
 Renal failure, hypercalcemic nephropathy, and hypo-
nonrenal origin are normophosphatemic or mildly hypo-
adrenocorticism can resemble each other. The first two
phosphatemic and may be markedly hypercalcemic. Nev.
sI u li sase ise aui sraum ind anpaid Aenn
ertheless, distinguishing whether hypercalcemia is the
to 25% of affected dogs. Each may have azotemia,
cause or consequence of renal failure can be difficult if
decreased renal concentrating ability (eg. specific gravity
 persistent hypercalcemia has produced renal damage plus
1.012 to 1.029), and hypercalcemia (10% to 15% of renal
failure patients and 30% of hypoadrenal dogs). Most
mild [1l.5 to 14 mg/dl]. Such patients need a thorough
hypoadrenal patients have a senum Na: K of less than or
search for neoplasia and require measurement of ionized
128
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Lymphadenopathy
aspiration
Hyentyrictem
Na:K < 27:1 or
loss
with
biochemi
profile
Serum
urinaly
Hyperadrenocorticism
 Adrenal function testing
tests
Hyperadrenocorticism
 (see Chapter 8)
 causing pu-pd 
Adrenal function t
'in leddn 
Eosinopenia
Lymphopenia
 Severely ill
CBC
History and physical examination
 Bacteriuria/pyuria → 
 or urethral obstruction
 Apparent psychogenic
Water deprivation test
 Prior episode of
 renal failure
Increased serum
Secondary UTI-
1.008-1.029
polydipsia
ss
鼻
 acute r
2-8 9
 No diagnosis 
Radiography
ultrasounc
Pyometra
Psychogenic polydipsia
Hypoadrenocorticism
Hyposthenuric urine
Diabetes insipidus
Hepatic insufficiency
nsoon on
 No diagnosis 
Hypercalcemic
Renal disease
Urinalysis -
thyroxine; UTt, urinary tract infection.
therapy or excessive
Glucosuria 
latrogenic (drug
Diabetes mellitus
protein diet)
causes
Hypokalemia
vera
Rare 
Jo raun
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
129
calcium and parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations
observation of voiding plus assessment of residual urine
(see Chapter 8). Most dogs with hypoadrenocorticism
volume in the bladder after micturition (i.e, palpation,
and primary renal failure have normal to decreased
ultrasonography, or catheterization) is usually diagnostic.
Palpation per rectum of the urethra in male and female
calcemic disorders [i.e., hyperparathyroidism, hypercalce-
dogs and the prostate gland in male dogs is important.
mia of malignancy) have increased ionized calcium
Mechanical obstructions, which may be intraluminal
concentrations.
(e.g., uroliths, urethral plugs, neoplasms) or extraluminal
More extensive testing is necessary if the diagnosis is
(e.g. caused by displacement as the result of bladder
still uncertain (see Figure 7-1). Some dogs with renal
entrapment in a perineal hernia, strictures, inflammation
failure are polyuric because of loss of functional nephron
Or edema of the urethra, severe prostatic diseases) are the
number (may occur with 67% reduction in renal func-
most common. In these cases, passing a urinary catheter
tion) but maintain a sufficient glomerular filtration rate
can be both diagnostic and therapeutic.
(GFR) to avoid azotemia (which requires a 75% reduc-
Even if a urinary catheter passes easily, a urethrocys-
tion in GFR). A creatinine or iohexol clearance test is a
togram with bladder distention should be performed
noninvasive way to identify these patients. Water depriva-
0n iapi ui appq sii Aua nouu le a uaum
tion and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) response testing
eliminate anatomic obstruction (a urinary catheter can
can be useful if the patient is not azotemic Elimination
pass by an obstruction, depending on the size of the
of other causes also allows a reasonable tentative
catheter, the size of the urethra, and the nature of the
diagnosis.
obstruction). Detrusor muscle dysfunction and func-
tional urethral obstruction [i.e, detrusor-sphincter dys-
synergia) are neuromuscular causes of inability to urinate.
NOTE: Renal failure typically produces urine specific gravi-
Detrusor muscle dysfunction is usually secondary to
 tes between 1.008 and 1.020, but rare dogs in renal failure
prolonged bladder overdistention secondary to urethral
may be hyposthenuric (1.006 to 1.007), and some dogs with
obstruction or neurologic diseases. Detrusor-sphincter
67% reduction in renal function can concentrate urine to
dyssynergia is diagnosed only when anatomic causes of
1.027. Some cats with renal failure have a urine specific
obstruction have been excluded. With functional obstruc-
 gravity greater than or equal to 1.035.
tion, neurologic examination usually detects defcits;
however, these deficits may be subtle.
Most dysuric dogs that are not experiencing obstruc-
'hidisut saaqep sisasins eunuauisody suaisisiad
 tion have lower urinary tract inflammation, UTI being a
although hyperadrenocorticism,
hepatic insufficiency.
common cause Finding bacteriuria, often with hematu-
and psychogenic polydipsia are also possible Adrenal
ria, proteinuria, and pyuria, identifes UTl. Urine culture
and hepatic function testing, water deprivation and ADH
is the definitive test, as discussed under Bacteriuria later
response testing, or both may be indicated. Water depriva-
in this chapter. If no evidence of UTI exists or if UTI does
tion testing should not be performed unless a CBC, uri-
not respond as expected to therapy, calculi, neoplasia,
nalysis, and biochemical profile have been evaluated.
cyclophosphamide therapy, and rarely parasitism of the
Animals with metabolic causes of pu-pd can be harmed
bladder should be considered.
by iatrogenic dehydration.
 Cats with dysuria and inappropriate urination may
have UTI, especially if they are over 10 years of age.
Dysuria
Younger dysuric cats [i.e, 2 to 6 years of age) usually have
idiopathic sterile cystitis. Cats with sterile cystitis usually
Alterations in behavior associated with urination (other
have hematuria with little or no pyuria. The second most
than polyuria) generally suggest disorders affecting the
common cause of these signs is urolithiasis. Idiopathic
urinary bladder, urethra, or both (Figure 7-2). Irritative or
sterile cystitis typically resolves spontaneously within 7
inflammatory (septic or nonseptic) lesions that do not
days. If the problem does not resolve, radiography or
impede urine flow typically cause animals to urinate
ultrasonography of the urinary bladder or both may be
small volumes and to urinate more often, perhaps with
needed.
 apparent discomfort (i.e, dysuria). Urethral obstruction
If surgery is performed because of a lower urinary
causes animals to make repeated voiding efforts that are
tract problem, the bladder and, in intact male dogs, the
either unproductive [i.e, complete obstruction) or some-
 prostate gland should undergo biopsy regardless of how
what productive but the bladder cannot be emptied (i.e.
normal or neoplastic the organs appear. Bladder abnor-
partial obstruction). Some animals with urethral obstruc-
malities may occur without gross lesions, whereas polyp-
tion have urinary incontinence. Such paradoxical incon-
i a a e j    s i
tinence occurs when accumulated urine is forced past
negative, cultures of bladder mucosal biopsies are also
an  obstruction  by markedly increased intravesicular
indicated.
pressure.
Urinary obstruction must be promptly identified
Incontinence
because uremia, hyperkalemia, and death occur within 48
to 72 hours of complete urethral obstruction, and severe
Urinary incontinence is defined as the lack of voluntary
structural damage occurs with chronic. partial urethral or
control of micturition. The diagnostic approach to incon-
ureteral obstruction. Urethral or trigonal obstruction typi-
tinence starts with a thorough history. The age of onset of
cally causes an enlarged, turgid, and inexpressiblebladder.
the problem, reproductive status of the animal, relation-
Partial obstruction is more difficult to identify: however.
ship between the onset of incontinence and neutering.
130
History, physical exarmination, observe micturition, and urinalysis
Large bladder or patient is 
 Small to normal bladder and patient 
unable to ermpty bladder
 is able to empty bladder
Obstruction
Urine abnormal
Urine normal
Catheterize
Not behavioral
Behavioral
No obstruction
If receiving
Submissive
cyclophosphanide,
Territorialisrm
Contrast
stop the drug and proceed
urethrocystograrn
Urinalysis via
Physical
Abnormal
Normal
cystocentesis
obstruction
 Urinalysis and urine 
Functional obstruction
Parasitic ova
Pyuria, hermaturia,
No pyuria, bacteriuria, or
culture plus plain or
 or detrusor dysfunction
bacteriuria, or WBC
 hematuria and not diabetes 
contrast radiographs
casts or diabetes
mellitus or suspect
 plus BUN and creatinine 
mellitus or suspect
hyperadrenocorticism
 Neurologic examination 
hyperadrenocorticism
 or polyuria
↑
LMN
UMN
UTI or nonseptic
Vaginitis
inflammation
Urethritis
Cystic calculi
Cystic neoplasia
No growth in a
No growth in a dog
Bacteria,yeast,or
cat with transient
or cat with persistent
 mycoplasma grown
stranguria-pollakiuria
orrecurrent
(<5 days)
stranguria-pollakiuria 
Sterile cystitis
Review history and
See Figure 7-6
 physical examination,
then urethrogran
cystograrm, ultrasound,
cystoscopy
Cystic calculi
Bladder wall
Urethral
Urethral calculi
abnormality
abnormality
 Extrarmural urethral
constriction
Neoplasia
Urethroscopy
Polypoid cystitis
biopsy
Idiopathic cystitis
FGURE 7-2 Diagnostic approach to dysuria in dogs and cats. BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; LMN, lower motor neuron; UMN, upper
 motor neuron; UT, urinary tract infection; WBC, white blood cell.
chronologic course ofthe incontinence, associated urinary
A complete physical examination follows. Special
tract problems, history of other neurologic abnormalities.
 attention should be paid to the bladder. Is it large and
whether normal micturition occurs at all, and when
distended, small and contracted, or normal? In a male
incontinence  occurs  in relation to micturition  are  all
 dog the prostate gland should be palpated. Anal tone and
important, as well as any dnug usage or dietary changes.
the integrity of the perineal reflex should be evaluated.
Any drug or dietary change or development of a disease
Any abnormal neurologic signs should be pursued by a
that stimulates a polyuria could precipitate a latent pre-
complete neurologic examination. Micturition should
disposition to incontinence by increasing the amount of
be observed and residual volume determined if there is
urine the bladder must store.
any question about the ability of the bladder to empty.
Chapter 7:Lrinary Disorders
131
Residual volume has not been measured in large numbers
  e aa  si o s
of dogs and cats, but most have only a small residual
perform and provides important information in patients
volume, less than 20 ml. One must remember that some
with systemic and urinary diseases.
male dogs may want to repeatedly mark territory before
the bladder is completely emptied. If complete micturi-
Analysis · Urine is preferably obtained by cystocentesis.
tion occurs, the empty bladder should be palpated for
Exceptions are patients with coagulopathy, those with
calculi, soft tissue masses, and wall thickness. If the
mild hematuria in which a voided sample is preferred to
bladder is not emptied, the urethra should be carefully
avoid mild iatrogenic hemorrhage associated with cysto-
 palpated externally and per rectum in males and females.
centesis, and those which may have pyometra or other
Any yellow fluid found dripping from the urethra in intact
intra-abdominal abscess in the vicinity of the bladder. If
 male dogs should be compared to urine since fluid from
cystocentesis cannot be performed, a mid-stream voided
a prostatic cyst communicating with the urethra may have
or catheterized sample can be used. The method of col-
the same color as urine.
lection should be recorded so abnormalities can be cor-
After the history and physical examination, the incon-
rectly interpreted.
tinence should be classifed as neurogenic (associated
 For greatest accuracy (especially regarding casts, cel-
with other neurologic problems) or not (unassociated
lular components, and crystalluria), urine sediment
with other neurologic signs). When the neurologic exami-
should be examined while the specimen is as fresh as
nation is abnormal, the lesion should be localized and
possible. If the urinalysis cannot be performed within 30
further diagnostic tests pursued to identify the cause. Even
minutes, the urine should be held at 4° C and brought
when the neurologic examination is normal, a local neu-
back to room temperature just before analysis.
romuscular cause (such as detrusor dysfunction) may be
 Analysis consists of four important steps: (1) deter-
the cause of incontinence Incontinence in animals with
mining color and turbidity. (2) chemical analysis using
multitest dipsticks, (3) measurement of specific gravity.
subdividing it into two categories on the basis of the
and (4) microscopic analysis ofthe sediment One should
physical examination: a distended bladder with inability
thoroughly mix the sample and determine the color
to completely empty or a normal bladder with ability to
and turbidity frst; then immerse the reagent strip into
void (Table 7-2).
the urine and rapidly remove it, tapping the edge of
the strip on the edge of the container to remove excess
urine. The dipstick should be held level to avoid runoff
URINALYSIS
between pads and prevent mixing reagents from different
test pads. One should compare the color of the pads with
Commonly Indicated ·● Urinalysis is part of a thorough
the scale provided by the manufacturer at the proper
 evaluation of patient health. It is essential in patients with
time interval. Automated dipstick analyzers have been
a urinary tract problem.
shown to have results similar to those of human dipstick
TABLE 7-2.CAUSESOFINCONTINENCE ANDDIAGNOSTIC TESTS
CATEGORY
RULE OUTS
POSSIBLE DIAGNOSTIC TESTS
ASSOCIATED WITH OTHER
Cerebral lesions 
MRI, CT, CSF
 NEUROLOGIC SIGNS
Brainstem lesions
MRI, CT, CSF
Spinal cord lesions (cervical,
MRI, CT, spinal radiographs,
thoracic, lumbar]
myelography, CSF, EMG
Lesions of the sacral spinal cord,
MRi, CT, epidurogram, CSF, EMG 
 roots, pelvic or pudendal nerves
UNASSOCIATED WITH OTHER
Urethral obstruction
Palpation per rectum, radiography,
NEUROLOGIC SIGNS; Inability
urethrography, urethroscopy
to Empty the Bladder
Mass in the bladder neck area
Palpation, bladder ultrasound,
cystourethrography, cystoscopy.
aspiration, biopsy.
Detrusor-urethra dyssynergia
Diagnosis by exclusion
Detrusor dysfunction
History, CMG 
UNASSOCIATED WITH OTHER
 Urethral incompetence
History, urinalysis, urine culture, urethral 
NEUROLOGIC SIGNS; Ability
pressure profile
to Empty the Bladder
Ectopic ureter(s)
History, vaginourethrogram, excretory
urography, urethrocystoscopy
Mass in the bladder neck area
 Palpation, bladder ultrasound,
cystourethrography, cystoscopy.
aspiration, biopsy
Patent urachus
 Physical examination
Reduced bladder capacity
Bladder ultrasound, cystourethrography,
CMG, cystoscopy, aspiration, biopsy
CMG, Cystometrogram; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CT, computed tomography; EMG, electromyography: MRI, magnetic resonance imaging.
132
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
readers. Urine specific gravity should be determined using
TABLE 7-3. POTeNTIAL CAUSEsS OF DISCOLORED
a refractometer. The accuracy of the refractometer should
URINE IN DOGS AND CATS
be checked periodically to be sure that a reading of 1.000
is obtained with distilled water.
URINE COLOR
CAUSES
Next, 3 to 5 ml of urine should be centrifuged at
Dark yellow
Concentrated urine
approximately 2000 rpm for 5 minutes. Standardization
 Pale yellow
Normal urochromes, urobilin 
of volume speed, and duration of centrifugation
is
Yellow-orange
important for comparing results from different samples.
Bilirubin 
If the uncentrifuged urine sample was visibly hemor-
Fluorescein
rhagic or very turbid, the clinician or technician should
Concentrated urine 
 Phenazopyridine
repeat the dipstick analysis and the specific gravity on the
supernatant. Next, most of the supernatant should be
Green-blue
Methylene blue 
Dithiazanine
decanted, leaving approximately 0.5 ml in the tube, and
Biliverdin
the sediment in the remaining supernatant should be
Brown-black
Bile pigments 
resuspended. The clinician or technician should transfer
Myoglobin
a drop of the reconstituted sediment to a microscope slide
Methemoglobin
and place a coverslip over it The intensity of the micro-
Yellow-brown
Bile pigments
scope light should be dimmed, and the clinician or tech-
Red
Hemoglobin
nician should examine under low power (lox) for casts,
RBCs
crystals, and cells. The number of casts per low-power
Myoglobin
feld (lpf) should be counted, and then the specimen
Dyes
should be examined under high power (40x) to identify
Phenazopyridine
cells and bacteria. The clinician or technician should
 Phenolsulfonphthalein 
count the number of WBCs and red blood cells (RBCs)
Millky
Pyuria
per high-power field (hpf) and estimate the number of
Lipiduria
Phosphate crystals
bacteria (i.e., trace, moderate, many). Sediment stains can
be used. Visualization of bacteria is enhanced by the use
Colorless
Dilute
of either Gram² or modifed Wright staining.4 Finally, the
RBCs, Red blood cells.
results should be recorded, with a notation of how urine
was collected and how many milliliters of urine were
 spun if it was less than 3 to 5 ml.
in euhydrated animals. Specific gravities less than 1.020
Color and Turbidity
may be associated with polyuria evident to the owner.
Analysis · Color and turbidity are analyzed by visual
dehydrated or azotemic animals. The urine of a dog with
inspection. Normal urine is clear to slightly turbid and
evident dehydration and normal renal function should
light yellow to amber. Dilute urine tends to be colorless,
have a specific gravity greater than l.030, and a cat's
and concentrated urine is dark yellow. Different colors
should be greater than 1.035. Puppies do not concentrate
and their significance are listed in Table 7-3. Significant
urine until they reach 4 weeks of age.17
disease may exist even if the urine is normal in color
and turbidity. If urine discoloration is noted, one should
Danger Values · None.
review the patient's history for dnug administration and
carefully examine the urine sediment. Hematuria, hemo-
 o     si  a
globinuria, and bilinubinuria are the most common
urine specific gravity may be caused by fluid therapy, glu-
causes of discolored urine Pyuria, hematuria, crystal.
cocorticoids, diuretics, anticonvulsants, and excessive
luria, and lipiduria are common causes of increased
thyroid hormone supplementation. Persistent use of low-
turbidity.
centrate urine (usually blood urea nitrogen [BUN]
Specific Gravity
concentrations are below normal in this situationj.
 Increased specifc gravity may be caused by radiographic
contrast media if the preadministration urine specific
tometer. One should periodically check the refractome-
gravity was less than 1.040 (if preadministration urine
ter's calibration by verifying that distilled water gives a
reading of 1.ooo. Storage of urine in capped containers
decrease because of osmotic diuresis).
at room or refrigeration temperature for at least 24
hours does not affect measurement of specific gravity.1
Some dipsticks have a test pad that indicates specific
 NOTE: lt is important to obtain urine specific gravity before
gravity; however, these results are inaccurate. Use of
 treatment, especially fluid or diuretic therapy.
dipstick test pads to evaluate urine specific gravity is not
recommended.
Causes of Altered Urine Specific Gravity · Urine that
Normal Values ● Specific gravity varies in normal dogs
is less than or equal to l.007 is hyposthenuric Hyposthe-
and cats, and any random specific gravity may be normal
nuria indicates renal function capable of diluting
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
133
glomenular fltrate and suggests that renal failure is absent;
a o si   e a 
however, some dogs with renal failure excrete mildly
urine pH may be the result of urinary acidifers such as
hyposthenuric urine. Persistent hyposthenuria suggests a
methionine, mandelate, phosphate salts, or ammonium
lack of ADH (i.e., central diabetes insipidus). excessive
chloride. Increased urine pH may be caused by acetazol-
water consumption (primary polydipsia), resistance to
amide, bicarbonate, or potassium citrate.
ADH (i.e., nephrogenic diabetes insipidus), or loss of
medullary tonicity. Primary polydipsia can be caused by
Causes of Acid or Akaline Urine · Any urine pH can
hyperthyroidism, hypercalcemia, hypokalemia, or hepatic
be normal. Urine pH is a crude index of acid-base balance
and is not a reliable index of blood pH (e.g., a vomiting
be caused by secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus 
(e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, hypercalcermia, severe hypo-
despite systemic alkalosis, because it is conserving bicar-
kalemia, pyelonephritis, pyometra, Escherichia coli septi-
bonate as an anion). Causes of acid urine include inges-
cemia, hypoadrenocorticism). Primary nephrogenic
tion of meat, respiratory and metabolic acidosis, severe
diabetes insipidus is rare and is due to congenital lack of
vomiting with chloride depletion, severe diarrhea, starva-
ADH receptor responsivenes An increased solute load
tion, pyrexia, and administration of urinary acidifers.
(e.g glucosuria, post-urethral obstruction, increased salt
Causes of alkaline urine include a recent meal (i.e, post-
intake) can also cause polyuria, as can decreased medul-
prandial alkaline tide), ingestion of alkali (e.g., bicarbon-
lary tonicity (eg. hepatic failure, a very low-protein diet,
ate or citrate). UTI with urease-producing bacteria
severe hyponatremia, chronic diuretic therapy).
(typically Staphylococcus or Proteus spp.), renal tubular aci-
Urine with a specific gravity of 1.008 to 1.012 is isos-
dosis (RTA), diets rich in vegetables and cereals, and
thenuric, meaning that the kidneys have not altered the
metabolic and respiratory alkalosis.
concentration of the glomerular filtrate. Urine with a spe-
Persistently alkaline urine is an indication for com-
cifc gravity of 1.013 to 1.029 (dog) or 1.013 to 1.034 (cat)
plete urinalysis and urine culture If no reason for alkaline
has been concentrated, but not enough to document
urine is found on history, urinalysis, or urine culture,
adequacy of renal tubular function.
distal RTA may be considered, although it is rare Both
Urine with a specifc gravity of greater than 1.030
distal and proximal RTA cause hyperchloremic metabolic
(dog) demonstrates concentrating ability suffcient to
apoid uao pue deg uonue leou e yim sisopie
indicate adequate renal function to maintain normal
hypokalemia (see Chapter 6).
a y  s e  i  si
greater than 1.030 could still have many of the diseases
that cause pu-pd (eg. hyperadrenocorticism, hepatic
Proteinuria
insufficiency, hyperthyroidism), as well as renal glomeru-
Analysis ● Urine protein is usually measured with semi-
lar disease.
quantitative tests such as a urine reagent strip (i.e, dip-
A single urine specific gravity greater than 1.007 and
stick) or by precipitation (i.e., sulfosalicylic acid). The
less than 1.030 (dog) or 1.035 (cat) does not imply renal
dipstick is more sensitive to albumin than to globulins.
tubular dysfunction or pu-pd unless the patient is clini-
Although semiquantitative test results correlate with
cally dehydrated or azotemic, in which case such a specific
quantitative results, semiquantitative test results should
gravity reflects abnormal renal tubular function. Other-
be regarded only as estimates because individual results
wise, one must document failure to concentrate urine
may differ considerably from quantitative results. Spec-
adequately during water deprivation testing to establish
trophotometric analysis is much more precise; it is dis-
urine concentrating ability as abnormal. Persistently
cussed under Urine Protein:Urine Creatinine Ratio later
hyposthenuric or isosthenuric urine is an indication for
in this chapter.
further testing (see Figure 7-1).
 Proteinuria must be interpreted in light of urine spe-
cific gravity. Because screening tests are qualitative, more
Urine pH
 protein must be lost into diluted urine than into concen-
trated urine to give the same result (e.g., a trace reaction
Analysis · Urine pH is usually measured with a pH test
with a specific gravity of 1.0l0 means that more protein
pad on a urine reagent strip. However, results are not very
is being lost into the urine than with the same trace reac-
accurate as compared to pH meters.29.34 Portable pH
tion with a 1.030 specific gravity).
 meters should be used when accurate urine pH measure-
Proteinuria associated with hyperglobulinemia due
 ments are needed. Storage of urine in capped containers
to myeloma (see Chapter 12) may be caused by Bence
at room or refrigeration temperatures for at least 24 hours
Jones proteins [free light chains). Bence Jones proteins do
does not affect urine pH as measured with a pH meter.
not cause a positive dipstick reaction but do cause a posi-
tive result on precipitation testing Serum and urine
Normal Values ● Normal dogs and cats may have a urine
protein electrophoresis are indicated in such patients, in
pH of 5.0 to 8.5.
which case most of the protein is a monoclonal spike in 
the β or y regions. Such a finding necessitates a search for
Danger Values · None.
osteolytic or lymphoproliferative lesions. Ehrlichiosis
occasionally mimics myeloma (i.e., glomenulonephritis,
Artifacts · Urine pH may be falsely increased if the
monoclonal-like gammopathy, bone marrow plasmacy-
urine specimen container is allowed to stand open at
tosis). A titer may be diagnostic (see Chapter 15).
room temperature, which leads to loss of CO2: or by
A semiquantitative test (ERD-HealthScreen; Heska
contamination by detergents or disinfectants.
Moi ioaap ot aqeae st (l xipuaddy as-uoeodio
134
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
concentrations [1 to 30 mg/dl) of albumin in urine, with
separate tests for dogs and cats. This test is affected by
BOX 7-1. SELECTED POTeNTIALlY NEPHROTOXIC
macroscopic hematuria and by inflammation indicated
DRUGS*
by pyuria. The test is indicative of any illness, not neces-
 Aminoglycoside antibiotics such as neomycin, kanamycin,
sarily primary renal disease, and positive results increase
 gentamicin, amikacin, and tobramycin (important)
Amphotericin B (important)
in cats with this test, and the test did not always detect
Arsenic
cats with urine protein:urine creatinine (UPC) ratios
greater than 0.5.40
Cephalothin (uncommron)
Cisplatin (important)
Normal Values ● A trace of proteinuria or 1+ reaction is
Cyclophosphamide (nephrotoxicity is uncomimton; sterile
cystitis is more common)
'Zho'I uei ssal st Ai syads aun a Jl zs'shop u
Dextran (low molecular weight)
any amount of proteinuria may be abnormal. Dipstick
Ethylene glycol (important)
and sulfosalicylic acid precipitation tests had such a high
Furosemide (uncommon)
level of false-positive results that a normal value was dif-
Heavy metals (i.e., gold, lead, mercury)
ficult to determine in cats.3.40 The dipstick and precipita-
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs such as aspirin,
tion tests are not quantitatively accurate. Quantitative
ibuprofen (important when there is preexisting renal
tests are needed to precisely determine severity of protein
disease, hypotension or other nephrotoxic drugs)
loss, as discussed under Urine Protein: Urine Creatinine
Polymyxin B (important)
Ratio in the next section of this chapter.
Radiographic contrast media (important when there is
 preexisting azotemia and dehydration)
Danger Values ● None; however marked loss of albumin
 Sulfonamides (uncommon if more soluble sulfonamides
in urine can lead to hypoalbuminemia.
are used)
Tetracyclines (uncommon)
Artifacts · Urine protein may be falsely decreased on
sulfosalicylic acid precipitation tests by very alkaline
Thiazides (uncomimon)
urine, or on dipstick tests by the presence of Bence Jones
proteins. Urine protein may be falsely increased on sul-
Vancomycin (uncommon)
fosalicylic acid precipitation tests by radiographic contrast
media; and on dipstick tests by phenazopyridine,
chlorhexidine allowing the test pad to become wet during
*Not all of these drugs reliably produce nephrotoxicity. Those drugs
storage, allowing prolonged contact of the test pad with
recognized as the most dangerous are denoted important.
excessive amounts of urine or highly alkaline urine
(pH ≥ 9).
Drug Therapy That May Cause Proteinuria · Any
persistence of proteinuria. The most common cause of
drug that causes renal tubular or glomerular injury can
inflammatory proteinuria is UTl. Urine culture should be
cause proteinuria (Box 7-1).
performed if infection is possible. To exclude extraurinary
postrenal causes of proteinuria (eg genital tract inflam-
Causes of Proteinuria · One must first decide if the
mation), a urine sample collected by cystocentesis should
proteinuria is signifcant or not by examining the specific
be examined
gravity, as described earlier (Figure 7-3). If it is insignif-
If hemorrhage and inflammation are excluded by a
cant one may ignore it unless the patient is receiving
-land pue juawas aun (.aaoeu, io "lainb,] [euou
nephrotoxic drugs (e.g., aminoglycosides). Such drugs
enal causes are unlikely, proteinuria is most likely of renal
should be stopped regardless of the amount of protein-
origin. Renal-origin proteinuria can be transient or per-
uria, because mild proteinuria may be an early sign of
sistent and due to glomerular or tubular dysfunction. One
nephrotoxicity and impending acute renal failure. Ami-
should measure serum albumin and repeat the urinalysis
noglycoside nephrotoxicity typically causes proteinuria or
to determine if proteinuria is persistent. If hypoalbumin-
other urinalysis changes (e.g.. isosthenuria, glucosuria,
emia is present in association with marked proteinuria,
cylindruria) before azotemia.
one can assume that the proteinuria is signifcant and
One should next determine if abnormal proteinuria
persistent. Transient (i.e, functional) proteinuria
has
could be prerenal (due to hemoglobinuria, myoglobin-
many causes (e.g., strenuous exercise, fever, seizures,
uria, or Bence Jones proteinuria) by examining serum
venous congestion of the kidneys) and is rarely signifi-
globulin concentration and the occult blood results on
cant Persistent proteinuria is defined as abnormal pro-
the urinalysis.
teinuria on at least three occasions, two or more weeks
 The most common causes of abnormal proteinuria
are postrenal, associated with hemorrhage or inflamma-
ment should prompt determination of a UPC ratio to
tion at or caudal to the renal pelvis. A urinalysis with
ascertain its severity.
sediment examination is performed to exclude hemor-
rhage and inflammation as causes. Proteinuria associated
NOTE: A normal serum albumin concentration does not 
with inflammation or hemorrhage requires resolution of
mean that proteinuria is insignificant.
the inflammation or hemorrhage and then rechecking for
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
135
insignificant (trace to 1+ at specific gravity >1.035), stop. Otherwise, proceed.
Eliminate artifact due to alkaline urine, drugs, and radiographic contrast agents, and perform a complete 
urinalysis (with microscopic examination of the urine sediment).
If proteinuria persists and is not due to hemorrhage or inflammation, measure urine protein:creatinine ratio.
If ratio <0.2, do not proceed. If ratio >0.2, proceed with further diagnostic tests.
Evaluate urinalysis and
Serum globulin
 serum chemistries 
Do both
concentration plus
urine sulfosalicylic acid test
Acute renal
Benign sediment (no pyuria,
Pyuria, hematuria, bacteriuria,
 /f hyperglobulinemic or dipstick 
failure or
hematuria, or bacteriuria)
 hemoglobinuria, or myoglobinuria
 negative but sulfosalicyclic
exposure to
or albumin <2.0 g/dl without
acid test positive, proceed 
nephrotoxic
other apparent causes
drugs
Resolve acute
 Glomerulonephritis
Urine culture and/or see
 Serum protein electophoresis
renal disease
Amyloidosis
 Figures 7-4 and 7-5
If proteinuria
 Polyclonal
 Monoclonal 
persists with
 Search for known
Recheck for proteinuria 
 gammopathy
gammopathy
urine protein:
 causes of these -
afterresolving underlying
creatinine
diseases
disease
ratio >1.0
Dirofilariasis
Myeloma
Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichiosis
Feline infectious
Still present
Resolved
peritonitis
Other chronic
Ehrlichia
diseases
titer
Bone marrow
Urine protein:
biopsy
 Renal radiographs or
Urine protein:
ultrasound; if kidney size 
 creatinine
creatinine
not decreased check 
ratio >1.0
ratio <1.0
clotting and consider
renal cortical biopsy
Periodically
monitor
FIGURE 7-3 Diagnostic approach to proteinuria in dogs and cats.
Urine Protein:Urine Creatinine Ratio
proteinuria, the UPC ratio varies day-to-day especially in
aq u ue si z ue jo s aoi a
Indication ● Measurement of the UPC ratio is indicated
as much as 80% at values near 0.5 and 35% at values
to determine the magnitude, and therefore the signifi-
about 12 even when the same methodology is used. A
cance of proteinuria.
single measurement will reliably estimate the UPC ratio
at values less than 4, but higher values require two to
Advantages · Measurement of the UPC ratio is more
five determinations. Such variation should be taken into
accurate than dipstick and precipitation procedures.
account when following UPC ratios in dogs and cats with
requires only a single random urine sample and corre-
chronic renal diseases. The ratio gives no information
lates well with 24-hour determinations. Urine samples
about the origin of the proteinuria; it only quantifes it.
can be collected by any method.7.25
Analysis · The UPC ratio should not be determined by
 Disadvantages · A complete urinalysis should be per-
dipstick estimates of urine protein and urine creatinine
formed on an aliquot of the same sample to look for
because these are inaccurate. Urine protein and creatinine
macroscopic hemorrhage or inflammation, which would
concentrations should be measured spectrophotometri-
alter assessment of the results. In dogs with abnormal
cally. Different assay types and equipment are used by
136
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
different laboratories, and results vary by methodology.
Danger Values · None.
making interlaboratory UPC ratio comparisons problem-
atic. After analysis, the following ratio is calculated: total
Artifacts · Urine glucose may be falsely decreased by
protein (mg/dl)/creatinine (mg/dl).
refrigerated urine, large amounts of ascorbic acid, tetracy.
cline [due to ascorbic acid in the formulation), formalde
Normal Values · Adult dogs and cats, less than 0.2
hyde (metabolite of methenamine, used as a urinary
[higher values are normal in puppies at least up to 2
antiseptic), low urine pH, and increased urine salt con-
weeks of age* and in noncastrated male cats);: borderline
centrations (paper test strip). Urine glucose may be falsely
0.2 to 0.5 (dogs), 0.2 to 0.4 (cats).
increased by hydrogen peroxide, hypochlorite or bleach.
and a nonglucose oxidizing substance in the urine of cats
Danger Values ● None. However, in azotemic and in
with urethral obstruction (dipstick). Overall, the urine
hypertensive cats, the risk for death or euthanasia increases
dipstick was found to be more accurate in cats than dogs.
sae 'sanazeuu ul isos oei dn usaui y
although false positives were more common in cats. In
cats, the UIPC ratio was predictive of survival and of devel-
dogs, the test strips had a high percentage of false-negative
opment of azotemia.* In dogs with renal failure, a UPC
results and tended to underestimate urine glucose
value greater than l at initial evaluation was associated
concentrations.$
with increased risk of uremic morbidity and mortality.32
The Clinitest reaction is not specific for glucose. Urine
Marked loss of albumin in urine can lead to
glucose may be falsely increased by galactose, pentose,
hypoalbuminemia.
lactose, fnuctose, salicylates, penicillins, some cephalo-
sporins, radiographic contrast media, and large amounts
Artifacts · See discussions of total protein (see Chapter
of ascorbic acid or sulfonamides. Very strong positive
12) and of creatinine later in this chapter.
reactions may be read out low because the final color is
less orange than that which occurred during the reaction
Causes of Increased UPC Ratio · Remember that
[i.e., "pass-through" phenomenon).
inflammation and hemorrhage can increase the UPC ratio
and that the UPC ratio should only be interpreted on
Drug Therapy That May Cause Glucosuria · Glucos-
urine with a normal urine sediment examination. In this
uria may be caused by drugs capable of producing hyper-
situation, moderate proteinuria (i.e., UPC ratios of 0.5 to
glycemia (see Chapter 8), intravenous (IV) infusion of
2) may be associated with renal tubular or glomenular
dextrose-containing solutions, and selected nephrotoxins
diseases.
causing proximal renal tubular dysfunction (eg., amino-
 Marked proteinuria {UPC ratio > 2) associated with
glycoside nephrotoxicity).
a quiet sediment and normal serum globulins or a poly-
clonal gammopathy is usually the result of renal glomeru-
Causes of Glucosuria · Glucosuria usually occurs
lar disease [i.e., glomerulonephritis, amyloidosis). One
 because the renal threshold for glucose reabsorption is
should search for causes of glomenulonephropathy:
exceeded because of hyperglycemia (i.e., blood glucose >
chronic parasitic disease such as heartworm disease, hepa-
180 mg/dl in dogs and > 300 mg/dl in cats). Glucosuria
tozoonosis, or leishmaniasis; chronic inflammatory dis-
always necessitates measuring blood glucose The most
eases such as systemic lupus erythematosus;
chronic
common cause of glucosuria because of hyperglycemia is
infectious diseases such as borreliosis, feline leukemia
diabetes mellitus (Table 7-4). If blood glucose concentra-
virus (FeLV) infection, feline immunodeficiency virus
tion is normal, urine should be re-evaluated with both
(FIV) infection, ehrlichiosis, pyometra, or endocarditis;
urine dipstick and Clinitest If glucosuria is still present,
neoplasia; endocrine diseases such as hyperadrenocorti-
proximal renal tubular dysfunction is likely. History
cism31.43 and diabetes mellitus48; and familial glomeru-
lopathies. Immunosuppressive glucocorticoid therapy
leads to mild proteinuria.47.53 If no underlying disease is
identified or if proteinuria persists despite treatment for
TABLE 7-4. CAUSES OF GLUCOSURIA IN DOGS
an identified disease, renal cortical biopsy should be con-
AND CATS
sidered to determine whether glomerulonephritis or amy-
ason6 poo
 Diabetes mellitus 
loidosis is present.
concentration
Stress (especially in cats)
exceeding renal 
Infusion of dextrose-
threshold
 containing fluids
NOTE: Feline amyloidosis usualy affects the renal medulla
 and may not cause proteinuria.
Hyperadrenocorticism (rarely
causes glucose > 180 mg/dl)
Pheochromocytoma (rare)
Glucosuria
Abnormal proximal
Aminoglycoside toxicity
 renal tubular function
Acute renal failure
Analysis · Urine glucose concentration is measured
Fanconi's syndrome
 Primary renal glucosuria
using a test pad on a urine dipstick or a paper test strip
(i.e., glucose oxidase method) or with a test for reducing
Contamination
Urinary hemorrhage in a
substances in urine (Clinitest).
patient with mild
hyperglycemia
Normal Values · Dog and cat urine should be negative
Artifact
 Pseudoglucosuria in cats with
for glucose by these tests.
urethral obstruction 
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
137
should be reviewed for nephrotoxins, and urinalysis and
pasodxa aneiaduan wooi ie spueis io iuoil ialoiaenn
BUN and serum creatinine concentrations measured to
to air (bilinubin oxidizes into biliverdin, which is
search for proximal renal tubular disease Occasionally.
not detected). Substantial hemoglobinuria also may
multiple tubular defects are found; Fanconi's syndrome
cause a falsely decreased reading by masking the
Occurs genetically in some breeds (eg., basenji) and can
bilirubin-induced color change on dipsticks. Urine
be induced by certain toxins, leading to hyperchloremia,
jo sunoue aiel Aq paseaui kiasiey aq Aeu uqnui
metabolic acidosis, hyperphosphatemia, aminoaciduria,
phenothiazines.
and glucosuria despite normoglycemia.
 Drug Therapy That May Cause Bilirubinuria · See
Chapters 3 and 9 for causes of hemolytic anemia and
Ketonuria
icterus, respectively.
Analysis · A test pad on a urine dipstick or a tablet
(Acetest) is commonly used to measure ketone concentra-
Causes of Bilirubinuria · Bilirubin must be conju-
tion. These detect acetoacetate and acetone but not
gated to be excreted into urine. The liver is principally
β-hydroxybutyrate (which is responsible for acidosis).
responsible for conjugation, but canine kidneys can also
conjugate bilirubin. The most common causes of hyper-
Normal Values · Urine results should be negative for
bilinubinemia in dogs and cats are hepatic disease post-
ketones.
hepatic bile duct obstruction, and hemolytic diseases.
Mild bilirubinuria may result from prolonged anorexia.
Danger Values ● Severity of ketoacidosis is not necessar-
Excessive bilirubinuria in a dog or any bilirubinuria
ily correlated with the degree of ketonuria. Large amounts
in a cat is an indication to determine total serum bilirubin
 of urine ketones plus lethargy and vomiting strongly
concentration, SAP and ALT activities, and a hematocrit.
 suggest ketoacidosis and warrant immediate measure-
If the hematocrit is below the lower limit of normal, a
ment of blood glucose plus evaluation of acid-base status
CBC plus reticulocyte count is indicated. See Chapter 9
(e.g, total carbon dioxide [Tcoz] determination, blood
for the diagmostic approach to ictenus.
gas analysis).
Urobilinogen
Artifacts · Urine ketone concentration may be falsely
increased by discolored urine, phenazopyridine, dimer-
Assay ● A test pad on a urine dipstick is used to test for
caprol, aspirin, captopril, mesna, N-acetylcysteine and
urobilinogen.
valproic acid.
Normal Values · 0.1 to 1.0 Ehrlich units. One cannot
Drug Therapy That May Cause Ketonuria · Strepto-
detect total absence of urobilinogen with this test.
zotocin and aspirin intoxication may cause ketonuria.
Danger Values · None.
Causes of Ketonuria · Lipolysis produces ketones.
Starvation, fasting. and diabetic ketoacidosis are the most
common causes. If ketonuria and glucosuria are present,
diabetes mellitus is highly likely and should be confirmed
 NOTE: Urobilinogen urine concentration correlates poorly
by measurement of blood glucose The presence of keto-
with hepatobiliary disease. The results of this test have no
nuria, glucosuria, and hyperglycemia confrms a diagno-
 dinical usefulness and should be ignored.
sis of diabetes mellitus, and serum sodium, potassium,
phosphorus, and Tcoz or blood gas determinations are
indicated. Ketonuria without glucosuria suggests exces-
Occult Blood
sive lipid catabolism and is not generally investigated
further in anorexic, nondiabetic patients.
Analysis · A test pad for occult blood on most urine
dipsticks detects hemoglobin, myoglobin, and, to a lesser
extent, intact RBCs. The assay is very sensitive, detecting
Bilirubinuria
0.03 mg hemoglobin/dl and 1 to 2 RBCs/hpf. 14
Analysis · A test pad on a urine dipstick [i.e, diazo
method) and occasionally the oxidation method (i.e..
Normal Values ● No hemoglobinuria or myoglobinuria.
Harrison's spot test) are used to test for bilinubinuria. The
A few RBCs (ie., 5 or fewer/hpf) may occur in normal
tablet method may be more sensitive than the dipstick.
urine. Higher numbers of RBCs are found in voided urine
in proestral bitches.
Normal Values ● Dogs (especially males) may have small
 amounts of bilirubinuria if the urine specifc gravity is
Danger Values ● None, although marked hemoglobin-
 greater than or equal to 1.030. Normal cats do not have
uria or myoglobinuria in a dehydrated animal may cause
bilirubinuria.
renal tubular injury.
Danger Values · None.
Artifacts · Occult blood test results may be falsely
decreased by ascorbic acid and captopril. Results may be
Artifacts · Urine bilirubin may be falsely decreased if
se yons stuase suizipixo io 1ip eay Aq paseaiul Aiasiey
the urine sample undergoes prolonged exposure
to
disinfectants.
138
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
 If patient is in shock and/or severely anemic, immediately check for coagulopathy and trauma 
History, physical examination, observe urination, and then do cystocentesis if not contraindicated
Cyclophosphamide
latrogenic
Mass in bladder
or urethra
 Preputial, penile, or
Hematuria
 Stop drug and
Hepeat, using
Radiographs,
vaginal bleeding
proceed
voided urine
ultrasound
Evidence of bleeding
Bloody urethral
Hematuria at any
Hypovolemia
Recent trauma
discharge or hematuria 
 other time during
 elsewhere in patient
only at beginning of
micturition
or exposure to
micturition
anticoagulant
Do both
Examine urethra and
Urinalysis and
 Coagulation profile
Contrast cystogram and
 prostate or vagina,
urine culture
 Mucosal bleeding time
 excretory urogram 
culture urine, and then
urethrogram, ultrasound
of prostate, ejaculate
cytology
 Ruptured bladder, renal 
or cystic contusion,
or other trauma
No UTI and
Parasite ova
 hematuria persists
Resolve UTI and 
Cannot
+ Plain and contrast radiographs of kidneys, bladder, and urethra; ultrasound of
recheck urinalysis cure UTI
urinary system and prostate gland, coagulation profile, von willebrand factor analysis 
Hematuria
Hematuria
resolved
persists
Lesion
Prostatic or
Coagulopathy
No abnormalities
renal cysts
Neoplasia
Dog
0
Calculi
(No signs except
(Lower urinary
Granuloma
hematuria)
tract signs)
Other
Biopsy
 Benign essential hematuria, 
Idiopathic cystitis
renal hemangiectasia
of Welsh corgis
FIGURE 7-4 Diagnostic approach to persistent hematuria (gross or microscopic) in dogs and cats. UTi, Urinary tract infection.
Causes of Positive Occult Blood · Hematuria is the
hematocrit and plasma color. If the plasma is pink or red
most common cause of a positive dipstick finding of
despite proper
r venipuncture technique (hemoglobine-
occult blood; therefore a urine sediment examination
mia) (Figure 7-5), hemoglobinuria is present. Hemoglo-
should be performed. If RBCs or RBC ghosts are found in
binuria because of hemoglobinemia indicates hemolytic
the sediment, hematuria is confirmed. Dilute or alkaline
anemia (see Chapter 3), and a complete CBC is indi-
urine may cause RBC lysis, and hemolyzed RBCs are not
cated. If no evidence of hematuria or hemolysis exists,
always visible Hemoglobinuria because of hematuria is
myoglobinuria
must
t be considered. One may test
followed up as for hematuria (Figure 7-4).
for
myoglobinuria by requesting urine precipitation
If no RBCs are found, especially if the urine is grossly
with 80% saturated ammonium sulfate. If the urine
discolored after centrifugation, one should determine
supernate remains red-brown after centrifugation, 2.8 g
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
139
 Positive blood reaction on test strip with or without urine discoloration
Artifact due to
Not artifact
 Intact RBCs or RBC
iodine, peroxides,
 ghosts in sediment
leukocytes, or bacteria
No RBCs or RBC
See Figure 7-4
ghosts in sediment
 Plasma clear, history
 Plasma pink or plasma
Plasma clear, no anemia, and
of trauma, muscular
clear plus significant
 no evidence of muscle disease
swelling, and/or positive 
 anemia or RBC destruction 
ammonium sulfate
prescription test
 Myoglobinuria
Repeat urinalysis. If hemoglobinuria
Hemoglobinuria due to
persists without evidence of
 hemoglobinemia
hematuria, proceed as for
hemoglobinuria. If cause still not
Exertional rhabdomyolysis
found, assume hematuria with
Muscle trauma
complete hemolysis
Hyperthermia 
(see Figure 7-4)
 biochemical profile, coagulation profile, and thoracic radiographs 
History
Severe
Strongly regenerative
RBC fragments,
Heartworm disease, 
 Abdominal
hypophosphatemia
anemia, Coombs-positive,
thrombocytopenia,
radiographic or
mass
autoagglutination 
increased FDP,
echocardiographic
or spherocytes
decreased AT l, or
changes
or blood parasites
prolonged cloting time
or Heinz bodies
Hemolysis
Immune-mediated
Transfusion reaction
Disseminated
Caval syndrome
Hemangiosarcoma
hemolytic anemia
Hypotonic fluid
intravascular
Splenic torsion
Heinz body anemia
administration
hemolysis
Disseminated
Hemobartonellosis 
Heat stroke
Vasculitis
intravascular
 Other RBC parasites
hemolysis
FGURE 7-5 Diagnostic approach to hemoglobinuria in dogs and cats. AT if, Antithrombin Ill; CBC, complete blood count;
FDP, fibrin degradation products; RBC, red blood cell.
ammonium sulfate should be added to 5 ml of urine
Normal Values · Less than 5 RBCs/hpf. If urine is
with a neutral pH. After centrifuging this mixture, if the
obtained by cystocentesis or catheterization, iatrogenic
supermate remains dark, myoglobin is confirmed. Occa-
 trauma in obtaining the sample can cause gross or micro-
sional interpretation problems occur if the urine is
scopic hematuria.
colored because of nonprotein pigments. Myoglobinuria
requires a search for rhabdomyolysis or myositis (see
Danger
Values · None
However, severe or persistent
 Chapter 14), and serum creatine kinase activity should be
hematuria can result in anemia, either regenerative Or,
measured.
with chronic loss, nonregenerative due to iron defciency.
 If no evidence of hematuria, hemoglobinemia, hemo-
lysis, or muscle disease is seen, one should recheck for
Artifacts ● Hematuria may be falsely decreased because
artifacts. Persistent hemoglobinuria of unknown cause
hemolysis occurs rapidly in hyposthenuric or alkaline
necessitates looking for occult urinary hemorrhage.
urine and may be complete within 2 hours. This causes a
positive occult blood reaction with no obvious RBCs in
Hematuria
the urine sediment, although RBC ghosts are sometimes
visible.
Analysis ● Atest pad on a urine dipstick for occult blood
and microscopic examination of urine sediment is used
Causes
of Hematuria · The clinician should frst
to test for hematuria.
consider
r iatrogenic hemorrhage during sampling (see
140
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Figure 7-4). Using voided urine avoids the possibility
Normal Values ·Less than 4 WBCs/hpf samples
obtained by cystocentesis are preferred to avoid distal
cystocentesis.
urethral and reproductive tract contamination.
If gross hematuria is present, timing of the most
intense urine discoloration during the urine stream helps
Danger Values · None.
localize the bleeding site. Blood independent of urination
 or most severe at the beginning of urination suggests the
Artifacts · Pyuria/leukocyte test results may be falsely
urethra, the prostate gland or prepuce in male dogs, or
decreased by alkaline urine, dilute urine, or prolonged
the uterus or vagina of females. Blood at the end of urina-
exposure ofthe urine sample to room temperature [causes
tion suggests thebladder as the site of origin. Bleeding at
WBC lysis).
any site can cause blood throughout urination. If urine
collected by cystocentesis has no blood but voided urine
Causes of Pyuria · Pyuria indicates inflammation.
has blood, the distal urethra, prepuce vagina, or uterus is
WBCs may also enter voided urine via preputial or vaginal
most likely. Blood from prostatic and proximal urethral
secretions. A cystocentesis-obtained urine sample should
lesions usually refluxes back into the bladder as well as
be used to eliminate these sites as possible sources. UTI
causing bleeding independent of urination.
is the most common cause of pyuria; calculi and neopla-
Hematuria may result from infection, calculi, other
sia are other common causes. Urine culture is indicated.
nonseptic inflammation, coagulopathies, trauma (exog-
enous, iatrogenic), neoplasia, cysts, renal infarcts, chronic
passive renal congestion, urinary parasites, strenuous
NOTE: Dilute urine or urine from patients with impaired
exercise, estrus in females, or glomerulonephritis (rare).
WBC function (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes melli-
In dogs, UTI is the most common cause of hematuria;
tus) may not have pyuria despite a UTl.
therefore, a urine culture is indicated even if pyuria and
bacteriuria are absent Calculi are another common cause,
and survey abdominal radiographs or ultrasound are
indicated. If the patient has a history of anticoagulant
If pyuria persists and bacteria cannot be cultured,
exposure, evidence of coagulopathy on history or physical
survey and contrast radiographs and/or ultrasonography
examination, hypovolemia or anemia because of hemor-
 of the urinary tract are indicated to eliminate calculi and
rhage, or no obvious genitourinary cause of the hemor-
neoplasia.
rhage coagulation screening tests (see Chapter 5) are
indicated. If all these tests are unrevealing, contrast radi-
Bacteriuria
ography, ultrasonography, or both are used to examine
kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, prostate and urethra. In
Analysis · Microscopic examination of urine sediment
male dogs. prostatic fluid (ejaculate 
：postprostatic
or urine culture (see Chapter 15) is used to test for bac-
massage, or aspiration of ultrasonically visible intrapros-
teriuria. Examination of urine sediment with modified
tatic cysts) should be examined.
In cats, idiopathic cystitis is a common cause of
tion of bacteriuria as compared to unstained wet mounts.4?
hematuria. Prostatic disease is an uncommon cause of
Unstained wet mounts were reasonably accurate when
feline hematuria. Other than these, the causes for hema-
negative, but positive prediction was poor.4? Medical
turia in cats are similar to those in dogs.
technologists were reasonably accurate in determining
whether bacteria seen on wet mount were rods or cocci.4
Nitrituria
Gram-stained slides of canine urine sediment also corre-
lated well with urine culture results.? Cystocentesis-
Analysis ● A test pad on a urine dipstick is used to test
obtained urine is preferred to avoid contamination from
for nitrituria.
the distal urethra and reproductive tract.
Normal Values ·Negative.
Normal Values· Bacteriuria is abnormal in urine
obtained by cystocentesis. Quantitative urine culture is
Danger Values · None.
needed to determine the significance of bacteria in urine
obtained by catheterization. Bacteria in voided urine
 NOTE: This test is inaccurate in dogs and cats and should
could be the result of infection or contamination with
 normal flora of the distal urethra and genital tracts.
be ignored.
Danger Values ● None although in rare instances, UTI
Pyuria/Leukocytes
can lead to septicemia or renal or prostatic abscessation.
Analysis · Microscopic examination of urine sediment
Artifacts · Bacteriuria test results may be falsely
is used to test for pyruia/leukocytes. The leukocyte ester-
decreased by recent antibiotic therapy, diuresis, contami-
ase test strip used to evaluate human urine for WBCs is
nation of urine with oxidants (eg. bleach), or delay
insensitive in dogs, failing to detect pyuria, and has a high
between collection and examination. Bacteriuria test
false-positive rate in cats. Results from the test strip should
results may be falsely increased by delay in examination
not be substituted for urine sediment examination in
with urine remaining at room temperature, or by con-
dogs and cats.6
taminated centrifuge tubes or stain solutions. Brownian
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
141
Was urine obtained by cystocentesis?
Yes
No
Probable UTI
 Perform cystocentesis
First-time UTI
Patient has
Not first time
Lumbar pain,
Palpable mass
Prostatomegaly
diabetes mellitus,
infected or is
fever, WBC casts,
in bladder
Prostatic pain
hyperadreno-
not responding
azotemia, or
corticism,urinary
to appropriate
leukocytosis
incontinence
therapy
Culture urine
Urine culture/
Ejaculate cytology
sensitivity
and cuture, prostatic
ultrasound with
aspiration of cysts
If therapynot
 Urine culture/sensitivity and plain/contrast
for cytology and
effective
radiographs ± ultrasonography
culture of any
fluid obtained
Look for complicated UTI
 or predisposing cause
Check for
Emphysematous cystitis 
Upper UTI
 Urogenital neoplasia 
Prostatitis -
hyperadrenocorticism
Granuloma
{iatrogenic or
Diverticulum
spontaneous)
Check for diabetes mellitus
Calculi
Urinary incontinence
 or hyperadrenocorticism
(iatrogenic or spontaneous)
FGURE 7-6 Diagnostic approach to bacteriuria in dogs and cats. UTt, Urinary tract infection; WBC, white blood cell.
motion of amorphous debris may be confused with bac-
pyelonephritis, prostatitis, calculi, granulomas, divertic-
 teriuria in unstained, wet mount preparations.
uli, incontinence, polyuria, urine retention, diabetes mel-
litus, and hyperadrenocorticism (Table 7-5).
Causes of Bacteriuria · Once artifacts and contamina-
tion are eliminated, bacteriuria allows diagnosis of UTI
Other Cells
(Figure 7-6). Bacteriuria, pyuria, and hematuria in prop-
erly obtained urine are classic findings for UTl; however.
Analysis ● Microscopic examination of urine sediment
not all UTIs have detectable pyuria, hematuria, or bacte-
is used to look for other cells. A few large and small round
riuria. Dilute urine may have such a low concentration of
cells may be visible in the urine sediment of normal
cells that they cannot be found in the sediment Greater
animals. Large numbers of urothelial cells suggest inflam-
than 104 rods/ml or 105 cocci/ml must be present before
matory or neoplastic disease.5 Urothelial cells begin to
they can readily be seen in the urine sediment Patients
degenerate within 30 minutes of collection.5
with hyperadrenocorticism (endogenous or iatrogenic) or
diabetes mellitus may not have any evidence of UTI on
Causes of Other Cells · Neoplastic cells are occasion-
urinalysis. Therefore, it is reasonable to culture urine from
ally found in the urine of patients with malignancies
all patients with these conditions.
(especially transitional cell carcinoma) of the bladder or
Urine culture is recommended in all patients with
urethra. If neoplastic cells are being sought in urine, a
 suspected UTI. If a UTI persists or recurs after treatment,
large volume of fresh urine should be immediately cen-
urine culture is mandatory. Recurrent UTls are indications 
trifuged, the sediment smeared on a slide and allowed to
for survey and contrast radiographs, ultrasonography, and
dry. and the slide stained with new methylene blue
ejaculate cytology and culture in intact male dogs. Careful
(NMB) or Wright-Giemsa. Swelling and early degenera-
 search must be made for underlying causes such as inap-
tion of cells exposed to urine are common, as are reactive
propriate therapy (ie. drug resistance), lack of drug
changes because of cystitis. These changes may mimic
administration by the owner, repeated or indwelling
malignancy (i.e., large or atypical nucleus and nucleolus).
urinary catheterization, neoplasia, partial obstruction,
Radiographic contrast agents may produce similar
142
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 7-5. CAUSES OF PERSISTENT OR RELAPSING
Pseudocasts can form from degenerating urothelial cells
URINARY TRACT INFECTIONS AND
after l0 hours of urine storage.
METHODS OF DIAGNOSIS
Causes of Cylindruria ● Casts originate in the kidney.
CAUSE
MEANS OF DIAGNOSIS
and their presence supports a diagnosis of renal disease;
Lack of owner
absence of casts does not eliminate renal disease. The type
History (check for leftover
 compliance in drug 
medications)
of cast provides some information about the disease
ad ministration
process. Number of casts is not correlated with revers-
 Upper urinary tract 
Excretory urogram showing
ibility or irreversibility of underlying disease.
 dilated pelvis, culture urine
Hyaline casts are colorless and composed of Tamm-
infection
from renal pelvis, white blood
Horsfall mucoprotein without cells. They may be found
 cell casts, ultrasonography
during diuresis, after correcting dehydration, or in patients
Calculi
 Survey and/or contrast
with proteinuria. Epithelial cell casts contain renal tubular
radiographs, ultrasonography,
cells that have not yet disintegrated. They occur in renal
cystoscopy
 diseases with tubular epithelial cellinjury. Granular casts
Prostatitis
Ejaculate cytology and culture,
are composed of degenerating epithelial cells, proteins.
prostatic aspirate, prostatic
and other substances. Distinguishing coarse granular casts
biopsy, ultrasonography
from fine granular casts is not useful. These casts are
Neoplasm
Cytology of urine sediment,
associated with diseases causing degeneration and necro-
contrast radiographs,
sis of renal tubular epithelium. Waxy casts represent
biopsy, ultrasonography,
older, degenerate granular casts. They are colorless to gray.
urethrocystoscopy
refractile and wider than hyaline casts. Broad casts are
 Diverticulum
 Positive-contrast radiographs
wide hyaline granular, or waxy casts. They are thought to
Granuloma
Contrast radiographs,
be wide because of formation in collecting ducts or
urethrocystoscopy, biopsy
dilated renal tubules. WBC casts signify renal tubuloint-
 Urinary incontinence
History, physical examination,
erstitial inflammation. This type is rare, and few patients
or urine retention 
determination of residual
with pyelonephritis have them. Therefore, absence of this
 asnes Aue ol anp
urine volume
cast type does not exclude pyelonephritis. RBC casts are
 Decreased resistance 
Hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes 
rare and signify hemorrhage into renal tubules or severe
to infection
mellitus, hyperthyroidism in 
glomenular injury, allowing RBCs to enter the tubules
cats (see Chapter 8)
Urinary catheterization
(e.g-. glomerulonephritis, vasculitis, renal infarction),
History, physical examination 
Crystalluria
changes. If urethral or cystic neoplasia is suspected but
Analysis · Crystalluria is identified by microscopic
either no abnormal cells are found in the urine or uncer-
examination of urine sediment. Crystal habit (i.e, the
tainty exists as to the nature of the cells seen, a catheter
characteristic shapes of mineral crystals) is used as an
biopsy procedure or ultrasound-guided aspirate is pre-
index of crystal composition (Table 7-6);: however, micro-
ferred to obtain a specimen suitable for cytologic
scopic identification of urine crystals is imperfect because
evaluation.
their appearance is altered by numerous factors. Defini-
 Rarely, funguria occurs in blastomycosis and dissemi-
tive identification of crystal composition requires special
nated aspergillosis. Other fungi and yeasts are usually
analyses. To minimize time and temperature effects on
contaminants, although infection can occur with Candida
crystal formation, urine should be examined within 60
albicans and Torulopsis spp., especially in association with
minutes of collection.
prolonged   antibiotic  therapy   immunosuppressant
Artifacts · Crystalluria means the urine specimen is
Sperm are normally visible in the urine of intact male
oversaturated with crystallogenic substances; however,
dogs.
numerous variables influence crystalluria. The signifi-
cance of crystalluria is easily misjudged if these factors are
Cylindruria
not considered. In vivo variables include urine concentra-
tion, urine pH, amount and solubility of crystalloids,
Analysis · Microscopic examination of urine sediment
presence of crystallization promoters and inhibitors, and
is used to check for cylindruria.
excretion of medications or diagnostic agents. In vitro
variables include temperature evaporation, pH, and tech-
Normal Values ● 0 to 2 hyaline or granular casts/lpf in
nique of specimen preparation. It is important to note
 moderately concentrated urine is expected in otherwise
that refrigeration of urine samples leads to precipitation
normal animals.
of crystals, a falsely positive result.
Danger Values · None.
Causes of Crystalluria · Crystalluria is usually clini-
cally insignificant, but can be important in limited situa-
 Artifacts • Casts disintegrate if urine is stored too long
tions. Crystal type is important in association with current
[hours) or subjected to vigorous mixing or handling.
or prior occurrence of calculi and when one suspects a
Casts are less commonly visible in alkaline urine.
portosystemic shunt, ethylene glycol toxicity (Figure 7-7).
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
143
TABLE 7-6. CRYSTALS THAT MAY BE FOUND IN CANINE AND FELINE URINE
NAME
DESCRIPTION
SIGNIFICANCE
 Struvite (magnesium
Colorless prisms with 3-6 sides
 Common in mildly acidic to alkaline urine in normal dogs
ammonium
(coffin lid)
and cats; may be associated with struvite calculi and 
phosphate)
infection with urease-producing bacteria
Calcium oxalate
Dumbbells or small spindles 
May be normal, due to ethylene glycol intoxication, or 
(monohydrate)
associated with oxalate calculi (see Figure 7-7)
 Calcium oxalate
Colorless envelopes or small 
May be normal, due to ethylene glycol intoxication, or
[dihydrate)
stars
 associated with oxalate calculi
Calcium phosphate
 Prisms (long] or amorphous 
May be normal or associated with calculi
Ammonium urate
Yellow-brown "thorn apples"
 Normal in dalmatians and English bulldogs; associated
with hepatic insufficiency and portosystemic shunts; 
may be associated with urate calculi
Uric acid
Yellow to yellow-brown prisms,
 Same as ammonium urate
 diamonds, or rosettes
 Bilirubin
Golden-yellow to brown
May be present in normal dogs with concentrated urine
needles or granules 
 or due to bilirubinuria 
Cystine
Colorless, flat hexagonal plates
Due to cystinuria; may be associated with calculi
 Cholesterol
Colorless, flat, notched plates 
May be found in normal dogs and cats
 Prisms (4-6 sides) with rounded
Uncertain; have been confused with calcium oxalate
corners
monohydrate crystals 
Sulfonamide
 Clear to brown eccentrically
 Associated with sulfonamide administration
bound needles in sheaves
Xanthine
Amorphous, spheroid, or ovoid; 
 Difficult to differentiate from amorphous urates; can
yellow-brown
form during allopurinol therapy
 Crystals associated
Yellow-brown spherical crystals
Present in urine from animals fed melamine/cyanuric
with melamine
with radial striations
acid-contaminated diets 
toxicity
Or melamine intoxication. Whenever crystalluria is con-
 pH should be noted. It is important to assess urine pH
sidered significant, it is important to examine fresh, unre-
within l hour of urine collection.
frigerated urine specimens. Number, size, and structure of
 Detection of ammonium urate crystals in cats and in
crystals should be evaluated, as well as their tendency to
dog breeds other than Dalmatians and English bulldogs
aggregate Urine pH is important in regard to precipita-
tion of crystals, with some types being less soluble in acid
shunt). Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals in animals
urine (cystine urate) and others in neutral to alkaline
in acute renal failure suggest ethylene glycol ingestion
urine [struvite). Whenever crystalluria is detected, urine
(see Figure 7-7). The presence of cystine crystals indicates
cystinuria, which places the animal at risk for cystine
calculi.
Crystalluria often causes concern about urolithiasis.
 Evaluation of urine crystals may aid in detecting condi-
tions that predispose to urolith formation, estimating
mineral composition of existing uroliths, and evaluating
effectiveness of therapy intended to dissolve uroliths or
prevent their reformation. Crystalluria must not be the
sole criterion for assessment of stone composition when
uroliths are present. Animals with crystalluria do not nec-
essarily form uroliths, and fnding crystalluria is not an
indication for treatment. For example, dogs and cats nor-
mally excrete a large amount of ammonium magnesium
phosphate (struvite). With urine pH greater than 6.5, this
normal excretion begins to become visible as struvite crys-
tals. The higher the urine pH, the more crystals become
cats. Urolithiasis becomes a risk when urine pH remains
consistently alkaline, usually from infection with urease-
FIGURE 7-7 Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals. These
 producing bacteria (dogs) or when urine is very con-
elongated six-sided crystals in urine of dogs and cats are very
centrated in association with a urine pH greater than
 suggestive of ethylene glycol toxicity.
6.5 (cats).
144
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Persistently hyposthenuric urine
Eliminate more common causes via Figure 7-1
(e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, hypercalcemia, pyelonephritis,
pyometra, hepatic insufficiency)
Water deprivation test (if not azotemic or dehydrated)
until 5% dehydrated or urine is adequately concentrated (>1.035)
Urine <1.030
Urine >1.030-1.035
Urine >1.035
Give 10 μg DDAvP IV
Normal
Normal
 Apparent psychogenic polydipsia
Apparent psychogenic polydipsia
 Partial diabetes insipidus
Urine <1.030
Urine >1.030
Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus
 Central diabetes insipidus
Renal dysfuncti on 
Hyperadrenocorticism
Medullary washout
Exogenous creatinine clearance
Adrenal function tests
Gradual water deprivation test
FGURE 7-8 Use of water deprivation and antidiuretic hormone (ADH) response testing for differentiation of causes of polyuria-
polydipsia, especially those that result in hyposthenuric urine.
WATER DEPRIVATION TESTING
Analysis · This test is performed only in nonazotemic.
euhydrated patients after taking a thorough history, per-
Indication · Water deprivation testing is indicated in
forming a complete physical examination, and evaluating
selected patients with confirmed pu-pd: generally those
a CBC, biochemical profle, and urinalysis. One must
that are hyposthenuric and in whom most causes of
eliminate drugs and diets that cause pu-pd (e.g. diuretics.
pu-pd have been excluded by history, physical examina-
glucocorticoids, anticonvulsants, excessive thyroid sup-
tion, CBC, urinalysis, biochemical profle [i.e, azotemic
plementation, low-protein or high-salt diets). Changes in
renal failure hepatic failure, diabetes mellitus, hypercal-
 environment are also possible causes of changes in water
cemia, marked hyponatremia, marked hypokalemia), and
intake.
endocrine testing where indicated (i.e, hyperthyroidism,
An abrupt water deprivation test is one approach.
 a  
 The patient is hospitalized for the test, which is begun
7-1). After excluding these diseases, water deprivation
with an overnight fast during which water intake is not
testing can distinguish apparent psychogenic polydipsia
limited. The first urine voided in the morning is col-
from central diabetes insipidus or nephrogenic diabetes
lected and specifc gravity is measured because urine is
insipidus (Figure 7-8).
most likely to be concentrated at this time of day. A
portion of the urine and a blood sample are saved for
Advantage · Water deprivation testing is specific for psy.
measurement of osmolality. The animal is walked to
chogenic polydipsia when more common causes of pu-pd
encourage defecation and complete urination.
The
have been eliminated.
bladder is palpated to be sure it has been emptied. The
animal is then accurately weighed. A 5% decrease in
Disadvantages · This test is not able to differentiate
body weight is calculated and becomes the target weight
between many common medical causes of pu-pd, and
at which point the test will be ended. The test is also
close monitoring is needed to avoid morbidity and
 ended if the urine specifc gravity reaches 1.035. All
mortality.
access to water is removed. Fasting is continued. Urine is
collected, specific gravity measured, and the animal
Contraindications · Water deprivation testing should
weighed every 1 to 4 hours, depending on the rate of
never be performed in a dehydrated animal or one with
weight loss. Once the target weight or specific gravity is
signifcant abnormalities on CBC and/or serum biochem-
reached, samples are collected for urine and plasma
ical profle.
osmolality.
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
145
A practical problem with water deprivation testing is
severe pu-pd as the result of hyposthenuric disorders (e.g.-
that the duration of the test is unpredictable and one may
diabetes insipidus). Failure to perform a urinalysis, CBC,
be faced with night approaching and an animal that has
and biochemical profile before the test can lead to desta-
neither reached 5% dehydration nor concentrated urine
bilization of a serious medical problem (e.g. azotemic
to 1.035. In this situation, one can transfer the animal to
renal failure, hypercalcemia, diabetes mellitus, hepatic
a facility with overnight care so that sampling can con-
failure).
tinue or one can provide the animal with a maintenance
water amount (calculated at 2.75 ml/kg/hr that the
Artifacts ● Urine specific gravity may be falsely increased
animal is to be unobserved). The next morning the
by contamination of urine, suggesting concentration. The
animal is weighed, specific gravity is measured, water is
accuracy of the refractometer should be confrmed by
again withdrawn, and the test is continued until the origi-
ensuring that water results in a reading of 1.000.
nal target weight indicating 5% dehydration or a specific
gravity of 1.035 is reached. With a prolonged test, dry
food can be fed.
 Several methods have been described for performing
ANTIDIURETIC HORMONE
gradual water deprivation testing. All methods involve
RESPONSE TESTING
frst measuring the animal's water intake over 24 hours.
Body weight is also measured, and a 5% body weight loss
 Indication ● If urine is not adequately concentrated
calculated. In one method, the amount of water offered
with water deprivation, ADH response testing is used
is gradually restricted to 100 ml/kg/day over 3 days and
to differentiate central from nephrogenic diabetes
then the animal is completely deprived of water.' In
insipidus.
 another method, volume of water given daily is reduced
each day from the initial measured amount by an amount 
Analysis · The clinician can use several methods to
equal to 2% of the initial body weight For example, if
perform this test One approach is to use a synthetic
the animal weighed 10 kg and drank 1.5 L/day. the
analog of vasopressin [i.e, deamino D-arginine vasopres-
amount offered each day would be reduced by 0.2 L; the
sin [DDAVP]). The animal should be euhydrated at the
animal would be given 1.3 L the first day, 1.1 L the second
time of the test and water is not withheld during testing.
day, and so forth. Regardless of method, urine specifc
Ten micrograms of DDAVP are injected IV, and urine
gravity and the animal's weight should be monitored each
specifc gravity is measured 1, 2, 4, 6, 8, 12, and 24 hours
day initially and then more frequently as the target weight
later. In another method, the nasal solution (0.1 mg/ml,
is approached. The test is interpreted the same way as the
1 to 4 drops) is administered into the conjunctival sac
abrupt test The reason for performing a gradual rather
ql2hr for 5 to 7 days or oral tablets aregiven (0.1 mg/20 kg
than an abrupt test is concern that medullary washout of
q8-12 hr) and the owner monitors response by measure-
solute secondary to prolonged polyuria can prevent urine
ment of water intake each day. If the owner notes a
concentration during abrupt water deprivation. Medul-
response, urine specific gravity should be measured for
lary washout is rare unless the animal has been on a
confrmation.
low-protein diet or has been receiving diuretics.
Normal Values · Exogenous administration of ADH
Normal Values ● Ninety-five percent of normal cats and
seems less effective in stimulating a maximal response
dogs concentrate urine to a specific gravity of 1.048 before
than water deprivation testing (endogenous release of
they lose 5% of their body weight Normal dogs and cats
ADH). Urine specific gravity greater than or equal to
require several days to reach this level of dehydration.
1 u  go o 1sd/a o 
Normal animals reach the target specific gravity of 1.035
'Hav ci ssauanisuodsai [euai saleoipul (l:s < Allesidai)]
before they reach the target degree of dehydration. A dog
Such a response in an animal that did not respond to
with pu-pd with normal response to water deprivation
water deprivation highly suggests complete or partial
most likely has psychogenic polydipsia; however, some
central diabetes insipidus (see Figure 7-8). Partial central
-udap iaem c puodsan uusionouapeada yim saop
diabetes insipidus and hyperadrenocorticism can be dif-
vation. Psychogenic polydipsia has not been described in
ficult to differentiate because both can cause some
cats. If urine specific gravity does not reach 1.030 with 5%
response (but less than normal) to water deprivation and
dehydration, the animal's response is definitively abnor-
some responsiveness to exogenous vasopressin. Adrenal
mal. Values between 1.030 and 1.035 are a questionable
function tests may be necessary to differentiate these two
response but may indicate a degree of medullary washout
conditions.
 Or partial central or nephrogenic diabetes insipidus. Mea-
 Animals not responding normally to water depriva-
surement of serum osmolality can confirm that dehydra-
tion or ADH most likely have preazotemic renal failure
tion has occurred by the change from the beginning to
Or primary or secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus.
the end of the test. A 1% to 2% increase in serum osmo-
Animals with nephrogenic diabetes insipidus usually
lality induces maximal release of ADH. Urine osmolality
have hyposthenuricurine before the test, whereas patients
changes are used to confrm the specifc gravity
with renal failure usually have isosthenuric or mildly con-
mea surements.
centrated urine Note that hyperadrenocorticism causes
secondary nephrogenic diabetes insipidus; thus responses
Danger Values · Warning: Failure to closely monitor
 of such animals to water deprivation and ADH response
patients may result in life-threatening hypernatremic
testing can mimic the responses in other diseases causing
dehydration, especially in small patients or those with
pu-pd (see Chapter 8).
146
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Danger Values ● Warning: Unlimited access to water in
concentrations suggest hypoadrenocorticism, one should
 a dehydrated animal to which ADH is administered could
begin appropriate fluid therapy and perform an ACTH
lead to water intoxication if the patient responds to ADH.
stimulation test. Most patients with hypoadrenocorticism
produce urine in response to IV fluids. If hypoadrenocor-
ANURLA-OLIGURLA
should commence after the ACTH test is completed. Most
dogs with hypoadrenocorticism will respond rapidly to
Anuria and oliguria necessitate aggressive diagnostic
fluid and glucocorticoid support Glucocorticoids should
efforts because the prognosis is guarded to poor unless
not be used indiscriminately in azotemic animals, because
appropriate therapy is quickly begun. The clinician's
the dnugs can worsen both azotemia and uremic
immediate diagnostic aims are to simultaneously deter-
enteritis.
mine the presence of life-threatening secondary changes
Renal ischemia from any cause [including dehydra-
and the cause of the oliguria (Figure 7-9). One must first
tion and hypoadrenocorticism) may produce oliguria.
determine from history and physical examination if the
Most affected dogs and cats produce urine once they are
patient has a urinary obstruction or rupture, severe dehy-
 properly rehydrated. It can be diffcult to distinguish if
dration, or any likelihood of nephrotoxins. Often passing
severe, prolonged ischemia has caused significant renal
a urethral catheter and checking for abdominal fluid can
parenchymal destruction. If the cause of the oliguria is
eliminate obstruction and rupture. If abdominal fluid is
uncertain and urine production remains inadequate
with that of the serum (see Chapter l0). Urine for uri-
excretion (see Chapter 6) may help determine if renal
nalysis and blood for CBC and chemistry profle should
tubular necrosis has occurred.
be obtained (at least serum sodium, potassium, calcium,
If oliguria persists despite appropriate IV fluid admin-
phosphorus, Tcoz, anion gap, glucose, BUN, and creati-
istration and cause is still uncertain, bilateral ureteral
nine). The clinician should check for hyperkalemia
 obstruction or unilateral ureteral obstruction in an animal
ae ] aa na sise sa)
with only one functional kidney must be considered,
the ECG is not as sensitive or specifc) and severe acidosis
especially in cats due to calcium oxalate ureteroliths.
(blood gas preferred, but Tcoz is useful). Severe azotemia,
Abdominal ultrasonography is useful for eliminating
hyperkalemia, and acidosis should be treated as soon as
these possibilities. Excretory urograms are contraindi-
they are identifed. Dehydration should be corrected, but
cated in markedly azotemic animals because insufficient
frst the clinician should try to collect a urine sample to
dye is excreted, and the contrast agent may worsen renal
determine specific gravity.
failure.
If UTI is present, a urine culture should be obtained.
 Hyperosmolar diabetes mellitus uncommonly causes
If an indwelling urinary catheter is being used for patient
acute oliguric renal failure. The blood glucose level in
management antibiotic therapy for the UTI should be
these patients is often greater than l0o0 mg/dl.
 avoided unless the clinician finds evidence of systemic Or
Patients with anuric and oliguric renal failure of
renal infection.?
unknown cause not responding well to initial therapy or
Ethylene glycol intoxication must be considered in
requiring prolonged, expensive therapy should undergo a
any dog or cat with acute oliguric renal failure, regardless
cotting screen and a renal biopsy for diagnosis and prog-
of “lack of exposure." Calcium oxalate crystalluria often
nosis. Biopsy is usually performed using laparoscopy.
occurs within the frst 24 hours of ingestion. The elon-
ultrasonography, or keyhole technique in dogs and per-
gated crystals found in association with ethylene glycol
cutaneously in cats.
toxicity are calcium oxalate monohydrate. In early stages
of intoxication, patients have severe metabolic acidosis.
central nervous system (CNS) signs (i.e, ataxia, seizures).
AZOTEMIA-UREMIA
and  hypocalcemia.
Hyperosmolality  and  increased
osmolal and anion gaps (see Chapter 6) suggest ethylene
Azotemia (i.e., above-normal BUN or senum creatinine
glycol intoxication. If ethylene glycol is even a remote
concentrations) and uremia (marked azotemia plus clini-
possibility, a blood test for ethylene glycol should be
cal signs such as lethargy. depression, reduced appetite,
performed (see Chapter 17). Anuria-oliguria and uremia
and vomiting) are caused by markedly decreased glo-
usually do not occur for l to 4 days after ingestion,
merular filtration. The clinician must remember three
depending on the amount ingested. By that time, calcium
things. First, a mild increase in BUN or serum creatinine
oxalate crystalluria and hypocalcemia may have resolved.
concentration signifies a substantial decrease in glomenu-
Hyperkalemia is not invariable. Utrasonography may
    u   o 
detect marked renal hyperechogenicity because of deposi-
substantial decrease in GFR can be caused by prerenal
tion of calcium oxalate crystals. Renal biopsy may be
(e.g. severe dehydration) and postrenal (e.g., urethral
needed to confirm the diagnosis once uremia has
obstruction) causes and by renal diseases. Third, factors 
developed.
unrelated to GFR can also mildly affect these tests (espe-
 Hypoadrenocorticism may mimic aaute renal failure
cially BUN)
and hypercalcemic nephropathy. Hyponatremia, hyper-
There can be significant renal disease without azote-
kalemia, and decreased Na:K ratio that occur in hypo-
mia. A complete urinalysis may document renal disease
adrenocorticism can occur in acute renal failure and
[i.e., proteinuria, glucosuria with normoglycemia, casts,
some hypoadrenal patients do not have normal renal
reduced concentrating ability) before azotemia occurs
concentrating ability. Therefore, if serum electrolyte
(e.g. aminoglycoside nephrotoxicity typically causes
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
147
10cortlclsm
Na:K <27:1
Do both
dehydration
Nex look for other useful informtion
dehydration
creatinine
n Jaddn
Check for
Ethylene glycol
Do both
ethylene glycol
Lookfor
aunsodxa dois
xsdn
 ethylene glycol  
renal failure
CNS signs
Check for
Chronic
uroabdomen
 See Chapter 8
Check for
Obstruction
Catheterize
Nephrotoxin
Checkclotting
check for:
yelor
148
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 7-7.DISTINGUISHING CHARACTERISTICS OF
dipstick, which provides an estimate. The dipstick is rea-
Prerenal, ReNal, ANd postreNal
sonably accurate for determining whether azotemia is
AZOTEMIAIN DOGS ANDCATS
present or not in an emergency situation, but results
should be confrmed.?
 Prerenal 
Urine specific gravity > 1.030 (dogs); no
azotemia
definitive specific gravity for cats (see 
Normal Values ·Dogs and cats, generally l0 to
below).
NOTE: Significant proteinuria with a
30 mg/dl.
 benign sediment may be due to primary
glomerular disease, in which case a
Danger Values ● Urea itself is nontoxic; however, marked
 concentrated urine specific gravity does
increases are associated with uremia in which acid-
not rule out primary renal disease.
base, fluid, and electrolyte disorders may become
 Renal
Urine specific gravity 1.008-1.030 (dogs)
life-threatening.
azotemia
or 1.008-1.035 (cats); some cats in early
renal failure have urine specific gravity of 
Artifacts · See Chapter 1.
>1.035, whereas dogs in renal failure
may have urine specific gravity of
1.006-1.007.
Patient may be polyuric, oliguric, or anuric.
BUN may be the result of drugs causing marked pu-pd.
 Animal cannot urinate because of urethral 
Increased BUN may be caused by corticosteroids, argi-
Postrenal
 obstruction or urine is emptying into the 
nine, and nephrotoxic drugs (see Box 7-1).
azotemia
abdomen because of a ruptured urinary
tract; ureteral or renal pelvic obstruction,
Causes of Decreased BUN · BUN is decreased by
either bilateral or unilateral, if there is 
decreased production (i.e, hepatic insufficiency, dietary
only one functional kidney.
protein restriction) or increased excretion (i.e., polyuric
Urine specific gravity may be any value.
conditions, overhydration, late pregnancy). Decreased
 BUN may be an indication for hepatic function tests [see
Chapter 9).
isosthenuria, proteinuria, glucosuria, and cylindruria
Causes of Increased BUN · Increased BUN requires
before causing azotermia). Therefore, patients treated with
-aandau adod rog siseun juaeaaid juanu
nephrotoxic drugs should be periodically evaluated with
tion. Serum creatinine concentration should also be mea-
both urinalysis and serum creatinine.
sured. If the serum creatinine concentration is normal,
A simultaneous urinalysis must be performed to
extrarenal factors affecting BUN must be considered
allow accurate evaluation of serum creatinine and BUN.
(Table 7-8). These extrarenal factors usually cause only
The first step in evaluating azotemia is to decide whether
mild changes unless underlying renal disease is present.
it is prerenal, renal, or postrenal (Figure 7-10 and Table
7-7); see the discussion of azotemia in the next section
 on Blood Urea Nitrogen.
TABLE 7-8. CAUSES OF INCONGRUITIES BETWEEN
BUN AND SERUM CREATININE
CONCENTRATIONS 
BLOOD UREA NITROGEN
INCREASED BUN PLUS
INCREASED SERUM
Indications · BUN can be used to screen for renal func-
 NORMAL SERuM
CREATININE PLUS NORMAL
tion as part of a general health profle or in any ill animal
CREATININE
TO LOW BUN
(especially those with vomiting, weight loss, chronic non-
regenerative anemia, pu-pd,anuria-oliguria, chronic UTI,
 Early prerenal azotemia 
[decreased urine flow
proteinuria, or dehydration). Serum creatinine should be
measured simultaneously.
rate)
 Increased BUN
Decreased BUN
High-protein diet
Hepati insufficiency 
Advantages ● Tests for BUN concentration are readily
 available and easy to use.
Gastrointestinal
Polyuria-polydipsia
hemorrhage
Disadvantages · BUN concentration is affected by
 Tetracycline or
Low-protein diet
corticosteroid
extrarenal factors (sometimes this is an advantage when
administration
 assessing owner compliance with recommended reduced-
protein diets). In addition, concentration is inversely
Fever
Severe tissue trauma (?)
affected by rate of urine flow.
 Decreased Creatinine
Increased Creatinine
Analysis · BUN is measured in serum or plasma
 Decreased muscle mass
 Myositis/muscle trauma
(heparin or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA]) by
{severe cachexia
(unlikely)
spectrophotometric, "dry reagent" reflectance meter, and
asne? ol papaau
Cooked meat diet (mild,
ammonia-sensitive electrode methods, as well as by
significant changes)
transient changes)
Ketonemia (falsely increased)
placing one drop of fresh whole blood on a dipstick. Dif-
ferent methods give comparable results, except for the
 BUN, Blood urea nitrogen.
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
149
Renal biopsy
Increased SAP/ALT ± icterus
 Serology for leptospirosis
 See Figure 7-4
+Hematuria
ACTH stimulation test
Conservative medical 
 Hypoadrenocorticism 
Na:K <27:1
IN
None of these changes
 None of these changes
 History and physical examin ation
 No known nephrotoxic exposure
Renal mass
Urinalysis
nfl ammation/infiltration
Kidneys enlarged
 Calcium oxalate crystals 
 Possible ethylene glycol
Hypercalcemia
 See Chapter 8
Check clotting
hyperosmolar diabetes mellitus
Kidneys irregular and small
End-stage renal disease
Urine protein:creatinine ratio →Ratio < 1.0
Renal failure due to
Ai y
(- xog eas) aunsodxa oixudau umouy
 Withdraw drug and proceed 
1
See Figure 7-3
 Proteinuria
150
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
If both BUN and creatinine are increased, decreased
specific gravity, BUN, and serum creatinine values that are
GFR is established. Decreased filtration, however, may be
not caused by morphologic renal lesions but are revers-
the result of prerenal causes (e.g., inadequate renal perfu-
ible with proper therapy. Although many patients with
 sion because of shock, dehydration, poor cardiac output),.
renal azotemia have chronic renal disease of unknown
renal parenchymal disease, or postrenal causes [e.g.. ure-
cause, hypercalcemia, pyelonephritis, drug nephrotoxicity
thral or ureteral obstruction; see Table 7-7).
(e.g., aminoglycoside, amphotericin B), leptospirosis, and
Prerenal azotemia is typically associated with urine
hyperosmolar diabetes mellitus are causes of renal azote-
specifc gravities of greater than 1.030 in dogs and 1.035
mia that, although potentially life-threatening, may be
in cats and similar increases in urine osmolality. However, 
resolved with early diagnosis and appropriate therapy.
cats with early renal disease may have azotemia and urine
Therefore renal azotemia is an indication for carefully
specific gravities of greater than 1.035. It is important to
reviewing history, physical examination, urinalysis, CBC,
obtain pretreatment urine for analysis. If a patient is
 and biochemical profile (e.g., serum sodium, potassium,
receiving fluid therapy or dnugs that alter renal concen-
calcium, total protein, albumin, glucose, Tcoz values; see
trating ability (eg..
diuretics, corticosteroids) or has
Figure 7-10). Although of poor sensitivity, survey abdomi-
another disease inhibiting renal tubular function (eg..
nal radiographs may reveal focal or difuse renomegaly.
hypercalcemia), urine specific gravity may be inappropri-
decreased renal size, or nephroliths. Utrasonography can
ately decreased, making it appear that renal azotemia is
also be used to evaluate the kidneys. Hyperechogenicity
present when in fact prerenal disease is present Occasion-
is common in both acute and chronic renal diseases;
ally, a clue may be the finding of hyposthenuric urine [i.e..
however, marked hyperechogenicity suggests ethylene
specific gravity <1.0o8). The ability to dilute the glomeru-
glycol toxicity. Excretory urography may be useful in mild
lar filtrate indicates normal renal tubular function up to
to moderate renal azotemia to document pyelonephritis.
the distal tubule and collecting duct. However, some dogs
nephrolithiasis, ureterolithiasis, and renal size and shape;
with renal failure may have mildly hyposthenuric urine
however, care must be taken to avoid exacerbating renal
(i.e., 1.006 to 1.007).
disease.
 A special case involves glomerular diseases. Glomenl-
lar lesions may impair glomerular filtration and cause
Blood Urea Nitrogen in Abdominal Fuids · Finding
azotemia with significant proteinuria, while urine can still
a significantly higher urea concentration in abdominal
be concentrated. Called glomenulotubular imbalance, the
fluid than in blood suggests urinary ract rupture; however,
urine is concentrated because glomerular lesions have not
urea readily diffuses across the peritoneal membrane.
yet resulted in suffcient tubular injury to impair renal
Forty-eight hours after bladder rupture, urea concentra-
concentrating ability.
tions may be similar between abdominal fluid and serum.
Inadequately
concentrated urine [urine specific
Therefore, measurement of fluid creatinine is preferred.
     (1 0 1  
serum creatinine concentration (i.e, renal azotemia)
suggest primary renal disease; however, other diseases
CREATININE
that can result in dehydration and decreased renal con-
centrating ability may produce similar results (Box 7-2).
Indications · Measurement of creatinine concentration
Hypoadrenocorticism  may  produce  identical  urine
is indicated for the same reasons as for BUN.
Advantages · Serum creatinine concentration is not
altered by as many extrarenal factors as BUN or by urine
flow rate.
BoX 7-2. DISEASEs/CONDITIoNS THAT MAY
Result In AZOTemIa With A uRInE
Analysis · Serum creatinine concentration is measured
SPECIFIC GRAVITY BETWEEN 1.008
l0 puamooydoads Aq (uedau) euseid no wnas u
AND 1.029
 dry reagent reflectance meter methods. These give compa-
rable results.
Acute or chronic renal insufficiency
 E. colisepticemia/pyometra/prostatic abscessation 
Normal Values · Dogs and cats, generally less than
 Pyelonephritis
1.7 mg/dl, although normal values may be affected by
Hypoadrenocorticism
 breed.30 Normal values are lower in kittens and puppies
Hypercalcemia
2 to 6 months of age due to less muscle mass and higher
U luy %r 0 s a1e sna n eg d
Marked hyponatremia
Marked hypokalemia
senum than in plasma.12 Creatinine was formerly mea-
sured by the nonspecific Jaffe reaction, which measured
 Ketoacidotic or hyperosmolar diabetes mellitus
 noncreatinine chromogens as well as creatinine; the Jaffée
Hyperadrenocorticism with dehydration
reaction has been largely replaced by specifc enzymatic
Diabetes insipidus with dehydration (rare)
Hepatic failure
20% to 45% lower.12
 Urinary tract obstruction or rupture (post-renal azotemia)
Treatment of any prerenal cause of azotemia with fluids
Danger Values ● Same as for BUN.
or diuretics
Artifacts · See Chapter 1.
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
151
Drugs That May Alter Results · Nephrotoxic drugs
MEASUREMENT OF GLOMERULAR
(see Box 7-1) and dnugs that decrease GFR hemodynami-
cally may increase serum creatinine concentration.
FILTRATION RATE
Causes of Decreased Serum Creatinine · Decreased
Indications · Measurement of GFR is indicated in
serum creatinine may be the result of significant loss of
nonazotemic patients with suspected renal disease or
muscle (see Table 7-8) or pregnancy (which increases
patients with nonazotemic or borderline azotemic renal
cardiac output and subsequently GFR) or portocaval
disease (International Renal Interest Society [IRIS] stages
shunts in dogs.12
1 and 2l) who are in need of serial monitoring. It is
important to note that patients must be hemodynami-
Causes of Increased Serum Creatinine · Feeding
cally stable and normally hydrated for meaningful GFR
cooked meat may increase serum creatinine by less than
mea surement.
1 mg/dl within a few hours of eating (see Table 7-8).
Acute myositis and severe muscle trauma are potential
Analysis · Three tests are readily available and reason-
causes, but their significance is uncertain. Decreased glo-
ably accurate for the measurement of GFR: (1) endoge-
merular fltration is the major cause of increased serum
nous creatinine clearance (2) exogenous creatinine
creatinine concentrations. As for BUN, decreased filtra-
clearance, and (3) iohexol clearance.13,27
tion may be prerenal, renal, or postrenal in origin. Urine
specific gravity is essential for differentiating renal and
Creatinine Clearance
prerenal causes, as described for BUN. An increased
serum creatinine concentration is an indication for uri-
Analysis ● For endogenous clearance a timed urine col-
nalysis and measurement of BUN. An increased serum
lection plus a serum sample taken approximately midway
creatinine concentration and BUN plus inadequately con-
through the urine collection is required. Total volume of
centrated urine is an indication for a CBC, biochemical
urine produced during the timed period is measured, and
profle (eg. senum sodium, potassium, calcium, phos-
creatinine concentrations are determined on the senum
phorus, total protein, albumin, glucose, Tco2), and renal
and a 3-ml aliquot of pooled urine. For accurate GFR
imaging (see Figure 7-10).
measurements, the Jaffé reaction should not be used to
measure serum creatinine An enzymatic assay specific for
Creatinine Concentration in Abdominal Fluid ·
creatinine should be used.22 The clearance is calculated as
Abdominal fluid creatinine concentration is useful in
follows:
diagnosing uroabdomen. An abdominal fluid creatinine
concentration substantially greater than senum creatinine
Urine volume (ml)x Urine creatinine (mg /dl)
is highly suggestive of uroabdomen and an indication for
Time (min)x Serum creatinine (mg /dl)x Wt (kg)
which gives a value in ml/min/kg.
For exogenous clearance, a sterile creatinine solution
URINE CREATININE
(50 mg/ml) is administered subcutaneously at 2 ml/kg
for patients up to 20 kg and 1.5 ml/kg for those over
Indications ● Urine creatinine measurement is indi-
20 kg after an 8-hour fast Only 10 ml should be injected
cated for calculation of clearance or fractional excretion
per site. Time of injection is noted. A stomach tube is
and in assessing significance of proteinuria (i.e., UPC
passed, and water equal to 3% of body weight is admin-
ratio).
istered. A urinary catheter is inserted and left in place The
bladder is carefully emptied and rinsed with saline twice
Analysis · Urine creatinine is measured by spectropho-
at 38 to 40 minutes after the subcutaneous injection. At
tometric methods.
40 minutes after injection, a 20-minute urine collection
is begun and a serum sample is obtained at the beginning
and end of the urine collection. At 60 minutes, a second
URINE FRACTIONAL EXCRETION
20-minute collection is begun with a final blood sample
collected at 80 minutes. Volume of urine for each
Indications ● Determination of urine fractional excre-
20-minute collection plus the three serum and two urine
tion is indicated to assess renal clearance of various sub-
creatinine
concentrations  (from  an  a
aliquot of each
stances [i.e, sodium, potassium, calcium, phosphorus, or
20-minute collection) are determined. GFR is calculated
albumin). Single-sample measurements ("spot" tests)
often do not correlate well with 24-hour excretion.1?
formula is used as described for endogenous creatinine
Clinical usefulness of spot tests is not established and
clearance, except that the serum creatinine concentration
likely to be limited.
used in the calculation is the mean of the two measured
senum values for each collection period.
Analysis ·● The clinician can use the following formula
in which all values are determined on simultaneous
lohexol Clearance
blood and urine samples:
The patient is fasted for 12 hours, but allowed free access
Urine substance
-iad si isat aul (oy u] pauaiam si iuaed aul latem o
Plasma substance
Urine creatinine
formed by administering a single dose of iohexol at
152
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
300 mg iodine/kg IV and recording the time to the nearest
PHOSPHORUS
minute. At 2, 3, and 4 hours after administration, a 3- to
4-ml blood sample is collected, the blood is allowed to
Senum phosphonus concentrations increase in patients
clot, and the senum is transferred to a plastic vial (at least
1.2 ml of serum is needed). The exact sampling time
ence of azotemia. In dogs with chronic renal failure, sever-
within the nearest minute must be recorded. The serum
ity of hyperphosphatemia correlates with severity of
aza yim uaza io pai paddus uau aie sandes
azotemia.15 Evaluation of serum phosphorus is discussed
gel packs in an insulated container to the Animal Health
in Chapter 8.
Diagnostic Laboratory at Michigan State University (See
Appendix I). The laboratory will then report the GFR.
URINE CULTURE
Normal Values · If the laboratory used reports normal
ranges, the clinician should ask how those were obtained
Indications · Culture of urine is indicated whenever
and use those, if they were appropriately determined,
bacteria are suspected based on urinalysis [ie, bacteri-
rather than the values listed below.
uria, pyuria, proteinuria, and/or hematuria) or when an
Endogenous creatinine clearance: Dogs. 2.5 to 3.5 ml/
with UTIs.? These include hyperadrenocorticism, diabetes
min/kg21: cats, 1.8 to 2.8 ml/min/kg.45
mellitus, hyperthyroidism, chronic renal failure, uroli-
Exogenous creatinine clearance: Dogs, 3.5 to 4.5 ml/
thiasis, and other structural or functional urinary tract
min/kg20: cats, 2.3 to 3.3 ml/min/kg.4
abnormalities [e.g., ectopic ureters; incontinence; pres-
Iohexol clearance: Dogs, 2.5 to 3.5 ml/min/kg": cats,
ence of tubes, catheters, or stents). UTIs are also common
3.2 to 6.2 ml/min/kg.41
cially with glucocorticoid therapy.
Danger Values · None although very low values are
associated with azotemia.
Advantages · Isolation and identification of the organ-
ism causing UTI helps differentiate relapses from reinfec-
Artifacts · Factors that affect measurement of creatinine
tions. Antimicrobial sensitivity testing allows more
affect creatinine clearance tests. Failure to collect all urine
rational therapy.
produced during the time period causes significant error
in creatinine clearance tests. Measurement of noncreati-
Disadvantages · Depending on the laboratory, urine
nine chromogens in plasma as creatinine (eg,Jaffe
culture and sensitivity testing can be relatively expensive.
method of creatinine measurement) can falsely lower
Quantitative as well as qualitative cultures are required
endogenous  creatinine  clearance  values.  Inaccurate
on samples collected by catheterization. In addition,
recording of dose time of administration, and actual
voided samples are often contaminated by organisms
times of sample collection yields inaccurate calculation
distal to the bladder, making interpretation difficult; and
of GFR by iohexol clearance. Hydration status affects
bacterial numbers in urine change signifcantly upon
results, so tested animals should be euhydrated. A signifi-
storage, necessitating culture within a relatively short time
cant negative linear relationship was found between body
frame. Sensitivity testing based on expected serum con-
weight and estimated GFR using iohexol, suggesting that
centrations of antimicrobials do not reflect effcacy to
normal values should consider body weight.0.28
urine concentrations of antimicrobials.
Drug Therapy and Other Factors That May Alter
Contraindications · Coagulopathies and the possibil-
Results · Decreased GFR may be caused by nephrotoxic
ity of pyometra are contraindications for cystocentesis.
drugs (see Box 7-1). State of hydration affects GFR; thus
There are no contraindications for culture of urine.
fluid therapy may affect results.
Analysis · Any bacteria isolated from a properly col-
Causes of Decreased Glomerular Filtration Rate ·
lected cystocentesis sample indicates UTI. In samples col-
Decreased GFR can be the result of prerenal, renal, and
lected by catheterization, greater than 104 bacteria/ml in
postrenal causes. Because of this, it is important to
male dogs and greater than lo? bacteria/ml in male and
rule out prerenal (e.g., dehydration, decreased cardiac
female cats indicate infection. After collection, urine
output) and postrenal (eg. urinary tract obstruction,
 should be refrigerated and cultured within 6 hours unless
rupture) causes before measuring GFR If these causes are
placed in tubes with preservatives. Before culture, urine
excluded, renal dysfunction is the most likely cause of
should not be incubated, kept at room temperature, or
decreased GFR. Administration of a water load at the
frozen. If a practice cannot deliver urine samples to a
beginning of exogenous creatinine clearance avoids sub-
laboratory within this time frame, the practice can inocu-
clinical dehydration as a factor. Decreased GFR in a
late blood agar plates with a calibrated loop and incubate
patient without prerenal or postrenal problems 
and
therm at 37° C for 24 hours. If bacteria grow, the plates
without any evident reason for renal dysfunction on renal
can be sent to a commercial laboratory for species iden-
imaging is reason for blood pressure measurement and
tifcation and antimicrobial sensitivity testing.
renal biopsy.
Normal Values · Urine collected from the bladder should
Causes of Increased Glomerular Filtration Rate · Not
be sterile. Note that contamination from the lower tract
significant.
can occur with other methods of urine collection.
Chapter 7: Lrinary Disorders
153
Danger Values · None.
Calculi Analysis
Artifacts ● If urine is stored at room temperatures, bac-
Indications · Urinary calculi obtained from a cat or
 terial numbers will increase after 2 hours. With storage at
dog by any method (routine voiding. urinary hydropro.
room or refrigeration temperatures longer than 6 hours.
pulsion, catheter-assisted retrieval, cystoscopy, or surgery)
bacterial numbers can increase or decrease and bacteria
should be analyzed for mineral content. If a urine culture
can die, leading to a falsely negative culture. Contamina-
is negative, bacterial culture of the urolith and a bladder
tion of a sample during or after collection can lead to a
u aenadsa gz'v papuai ose aie adues ison
falsely positive sample.
dogs in which struvite uroliths are suspected. The entire
urolith(s) should be submitted in a dry, clean, unbreak-
able container. Refrigeration is not required.
URINE DRUG SCREENING
Advantages · Calculi analysis determines the type of
calculi, which allows appropriate approaches to preven-
Canine urine samples can be reliably screened for bar-
tion of recurrence. Culture of calculi permits recognition
biturates, opiates, benzodiazepines, and amphetamines/
of the role of infection in calculus formation when urine
methamphetamines using an on-site test designed for
culture is negative.
humans that is rapid, available, and affordable.52 Such
a test may be useful in an emergency room setting
Disadvantage · The clinician needs to send calculi to
where cases with signs possibly related to such drugs
laboratories equipped for proper analysis.
are seen. The test did not detect marijuana or
methadone.
Analysis · Calculi are most commonly analyzed by
optic crystallography, x-ray diffraction, and chemical anal-
ysis [e.g.. the spot test). Less commonly used methods
URINE INFECTIOUS
include scanning electron microscopy, electron micro-
probe, and infrared spectroscopy. Crystallography and
DISEASE TESTING
diffraction give accurate results, but chemical analysis
Antigen Testing for Blastomycosis
does not." Chemical analysis should not be used.
Antigen testing of urine for blastomycosis is a very accu-
Artifacts · Chemical or qualitative analysis (eg., the
rate diagnostic method, more accurate than using serum,
 spot test) is fraught with inaccuracies.l
and urine antigen testing correlated better with clinical
remission than serum testing.23 See Chapter 15.
References and Suggested Readings
1. Albasan H, Lulich IP, Osborne CA. et al: Effects of storage
6me and temperabure on pH. specifc gravity. and crystal
CALCULI
formation in urine samples from dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Assoc 222:176, 2003.
Urinary calculi may cause urethral obstruction (eg.
2. Allen TA. Jones RJ. Purvance J: Microbiologic evaluation of
anuria and oliguria, azotemia, uremia), cystitis and ure-
canine unine: direct microscopic examination and preserva-
ton of specimen quality for culture. J Am Vet Med Assoc
thritis (e.g., dysuria, hematuria), ureteral or renal pelvic
190:1289, 1987.
obstruction (e.g.. azotemia, uremia), and destruction of
3. Barsanti IA: Genitouninary infections. [n Greene CE. editor:
renal tissue (eg., azotemia, uremia). Calculi should be
Infectious diseases of the dog and cat. ed 3. St. Louis. 2006.
considered in any patient with urinary obstruction, per-
Esevier pp 935-961.
sistent or recurrent UTI, hematuria, Or renal failure of
4. Barsanti J. Sanchez S. Wall W, et al: Accuracy of urinalysis in
unknown cause. Uroliths are diagnosed by physical exam-
predicting the type of infecting bacteria in urinary tract infec-
ination [i.e, bladder or urethral palpation, urinary cath-
tion {UTI). J Vet Intern Med 20:738, 2006.
eterization), survey or contrast radiographs (some calculi
5. Batamuzi EK. Kristensen F: Diagnostic importance of
are radiolucent), or ultrasonography. All calculi removed
wothelial cells of the dog and cat. J Small Anim Pract 36:17.
or spontaneously passed should be analyzed quantita-
1995.
6. Bauer N, Rettig S. Moritz A: Evaluation the Clinitek status IM
tively and urine should be cultured. Many canine uroliths
automated dipstick analysis device for semiquantitative
are struvite and form secondary to urine alkalinization by
testing of canine urine. Res Vet Sci 85:467, 2008.
urease-producing bacteria (principally Staphylococcus or
7. Beatice L Nizi F Callegani D. et al: Companison of urine
0 apuoas n as sad saio saaum ( dds sotd
protein-to-creatinine ratio in urine samples collected by cys-
tissue injury. Therefore, a diagnosis of UTI and urolithia-
tocentesis versus free catch in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
sis does not mean an infection has caused a struvite cal-
236:1221, 2010.
culus unless the urine is alkaline and a urease-producing
8. Behrend EN. Tapia J. Welles EG. et al: Evaluation of a
Organism is cultured. Even in this situation, calculus iden-
 conventional urine glucose test strip method for detection
of gucosuria in dogs and cats. J Vet Intern Med 22:790.
tity is only an educated guess. If therapy does not proceed
2008.
as expected, calculi should be retrieved and analyzed.
9. Berent AC. Murakami T. Suroggin RD, et al: Reliability of
Accurate determination of the crystalloid composition of
using reagent test strips to estimate blood urea nitrogen con-
calculi is essential for prevention and appropriate medical
centration in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 227:1253.
dissolution.
2005.
154
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
10. Bexfeld NH, Heine R, Gerritsen RJ, et al: Glomenular filtra-
death in dogs with naturally occuing chronic renal failure.
tion rate estimated by 3-sample plasma clearance of iohexol
I Am Vet Med Assoc 226:393, 2005.
in 118 healthy dogs. J Vet Intern Med 22:66. 2008.
33. Jepson RE. Brodbelt D. Vallance C. et al: Evaluation of the
 11. Bovee KC., McGuire T: Qualitative and quantitative analysis
development of azotemia in cats. J Vet Intern Med 23:806.
of uroliths in dogs: definitive determination of chemical
2009.
type. I Am Vet Med Assoc 185:983, 1984.
 34. Johnson KY, Lulich JP, Osborne CA: Evaluation of the repro-
12. Braun [P, Lefebvre HP, Watson ADJ: Creatinine in the dog: a
ducibility and acouracy of pH-determining devices used to
review. Vet Clin Pathol 32:162, 2003.
measure urine pH in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 230:364, 2007.
13. Brown SA, et al: Evaluation of a single injection method.
35. Lane [F, Shaw DH, Burton SA, et al: Quantitative urinalysis
using iohexol, for estimating glomerular fltration rate in cats
in healthy Beagle puppies from 9 to 27 weeks of age. Am J
and dogs. Am I Vet Res 57:105. 1996.
Vet Res 61:577. 2000.
14. Cohen RA. Brown RS: Microscopic hematuria. N Engl J Med
 36. [aroute V, Chetboul V, Roche L, et al: Quantitative evaluation
348:2330, 2003.
 of renal funcion in healthy Beagle puppies and mature dogs.
15. Cortadellas O. Fernandex del Palacia MJ. Talavcra J. et al:
Res Vet Sci 79:161, 2005.
Prevalence of hyperphosphatemia in dogs with chronic
37. Lees GE, Brown SA. Elliott J, et al: Assessment and manage-
kidney disease secondary to leishmaniasis.J Vet Intern Med
 ment of proteinuria in dogs and cats: 2004 ACVIM Forum
21:599, 2007.
consensus statement (small animal). J Vet Intern Med 19:377.
16. Elliott J. Watson ADJ: Chronic kidney disease: staging and
2005.
management. [n Bonagura ID. Twedt DC, editors: Current
38. Levy IK. Crawford PC. Werner LL: Effect of age on reference
veterinary therapy IV. St. Louis. 2009. Saunders Elsevier.
intervals of serum biochemical values in kittens. / Am Vet Med
D 883.
Assoc 228:1033, 2006.
17. Faulks RD, Lane [F: Qualitative urinalyses in puppies 0-24
39. Lyon SD. Sanderson MW. Vaden SL, et al: Comparison of
weeks of age. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:369. 2003.
wine dipstick, sulfosalicylic acid, urine protein-to-creatinine
18. Feldman EC. Nelson RW: Canine and feline endocrinology and
ratio. and species-specific ELISA methods for detection of
reproduction, ed 3, St. Louis, 2004, Elsevier/Saunders.
albumin in urine samples of cats and dogs. J Am Vet Med
19. Finco DR, Brown SA, Barsanti [A, et al: Reliability of using
Assoc 236:874, 2010.
random urine samples for "spot" determination of fractional
40. Mardell El. Sparkes AH: Evaluation of a commercial in-house
excretion of electrolytes in cats. Am I Vet Res 58:1l84, 1997.
 test kit for the semi-quantitative assessment of microalbu-
20. Finco DR, Coulter DB, Barsanti JA: Procedure for a simple
minuria in cats. J Fel Med Surg 8:269, 2006.
method of measuning glomerular fltration rate in the dog.
41. Miyamoto K: Clinical application of plasma clearance of
J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:804, 1982.
johexol on feline patients. J Fel Med Surg 3:143, 2001.
21. Finco DR, Coulter DB, Barsanti [A: Simple accurate method
42. Nabity MB. Boggess MM, Kashtan CE, et al: Day-to-day varia-
for clinical estimation of glomerular filtration rate in the dog.
tion of the urine protein:creatinine ratio in female dogs with
Am J Vet Res 42:1874, 1981
stable glomerular proteinuria caused by X-linked hereditary
 22. Finco DR, Tabanu H. Brown SA, et al: Endogenous creatinine
nephropathy. / Vet Intern Med 21:425. 2007.
clearance measurements of glomerular filtration rate in dogs.
43. Ortega TM, Feldman FC, Nelson RW, et al: Systemic artenial
Am I Vet Res 54:1575, 1993.
saop u! oger aujugean/uajoid aujun pue ainssaid poo[q
23. Foy DS. Trepanier LA, Hackett E, et al: Correlation of urine
with hyperadrenocorticism. J Am Vet Med Assoc 209:1724.
 and serum Blastomyces antigen levels with clinical remission
1996.
in dogs with blastomycosis. J Vet Intern AMed 24:705, 2010.
44. Ross LA, Finco DR: Relationship of selected clinical renal
24. Gatoria IS. Saini NS, Rai TS, et al: Comparison of three tech-
 function tests to glomenular filtration rate and renal blood
niques for the diagnosis of urinary tract infections in dogs
flow in cats. Am J Vet Res 42:1704, 1981.
with urolithiasis. J Small Anim Pract 47:727, 2006.
45. Russo EA. Lees GE. Hightower D: Evaluation of renal func-
 25. Grauer GF Thomas CB, Eicker SW: Estimation of quantitative
tion in cats. using quantitative urinalysis. Am J Vet Res
proteinuria in the dog using the urine protein-t-creatinine
47:1308, 1986.
ratio from a random, voided sample. Am J Vet Res 46:2116.
46. Schafer-Somi S. Bar-Schadler S. Aurich JE: Proteinunia and
1985.
immunoglobulinuna in neonatal dogs. Vet Rec 157:378.
26. Hamaide AJ. Martinez SA, Hauptman I. et al: Prospective
2005.
comparison of four sampling methods (cystocentesis,
47. Schellenberg S. Mettler M. Gentilini F et al: The effects of
 bladder mucosal swabs. bladder mucosal biopsy. and urolith
hydrocortisone on systemic artenial blood pressure and
culture) to identify uninary tract infections in dogs with uro-
' p   I sh u uxa ud um
Jithiasis. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 34:423, 1998.
2008.
27. Heiene R, Moe L: Pharmacokinetic aspects of measurement
48. Struble AL, Feldman EC, Nelson RW, et al: Systemic hyperten-
of glomerular filtration rate in the dog: a review. J Vet Intern
sion and proteinuria in dogs with diabetes mellitus. J Am Vet
Med 12:401, 1998.
Med Assoc 213:822, 1998.
28. Heine R. Reynolds BS, Bexfield NH, et al: Estimation of glo-
49. Swenson Cl, Boisvert AM, Kruger [M. et al: Evaluation of
merular filtration rate via 2- and 4-sample plasma clearance
 modifed Wnight-staining of urine sediment as a method for
 of iohexol and creatinine in clinically normal cats. Am J Vet
accurate detection of bacteriuria in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Res 70:176. 2009
224:1282, 2004
29. Heuter KJ. Buffngton T. Chew DJ: Agreement between two
 50. Syme HM, Markwell PJ. Pfeiffer D, et al: Survival of cats with
methods for measuring urine pH in cats and dogs. / Am Vet
 naturally occurring chronic renal failure is related to severity
Med Assoc 213:996, 1998.
of proteinunia. J Vet Intern Med 20:528, 2006.
30. Hill RC, Crawford PC, Scott KC, et al: Creatinine disposition
 51. Syme H: Proteinunia in cats: prognostic marker of mediator?
and daily production in healthy greyhound dogs. I Vet Intern.
J Fel Med Surg 1l:21l, 2009.
Med 21:647, 2007.
52. Teitler JB: Evaluation of a human on-site urine mulidrug test
31. Hurley KJ. Vaden SL: Evaluation of urine protein content in
'655 sossy 4so uuy y I sop 4m an u3eiawa 1o
dogs with pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism. } Am
2009.
Vet Med Assoc 212:369, 1998.
 53. Waters CB. Adams LG, Scott-Moncnieff JC. et al: Effects of
32. [acob E Polzin D]. Osborne CA, et al: Evaluation of the
glucocorticoid therapy on urine protein-to-creatinine ratios
 association between initial proteinuria and morbidity rate Of
and renal morphology in dogs. I Vet Intern Med ll:172. 1997.
Chapter 7:Lrinary Disorders
155
54. Whittemore JC, Gill VL. Jensen WA, et al: Evaluation of
56. Whittemore [C, Miyoshi Z. Jensen WA, et al: Association of
the association between microalbuminunia and the urine
 microalbuminuria and the urine albumin-to-creatinine ratio
albumin-creatinine ratio and systemic disease in dogs. J Am
with systemic disease in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 230:ll65.
Vet Med Assoc 229:958, 2006.
2007.
55. Whittemore IC. Jensen WA. Prause L, et al: Comparison of
57. Zatelli A, Paltrinieri S, Nizi F et al: Evaluation of a urine
 microalbuminunia, urine protein dipstick, and urine protein 
dpstick test for confirmation or exclusion of proteinuria in
Creatinine ratio results in clinically ill dogs. J Vet Intern Med
dogs. Am J Vet Res 71:235. 2010.
17:437. 2003.
Endocrine, Metabolic, and
Lipid Disorders
Richard W. Nelson
CALCIUM
used in dogs less than 24 weeks of age because high values
may be obtained, nor are they used in cats because there
Commonly
Indicated · Common indications for
is no linear relationship between serum total calcium and
serum calcium concentration include patients with leth-
senum albumin and total protein concentrations in cats.1l
argy, anorexia, vomiting, constipation, weakness, poly-
These formulas yield a rough estimate of the corrected
dipsia, polyuria (i.e., signs of hypercalcemia),. facial
total serum calcium concentration and were developed
pruritus, restlessness, muscle tremors, fasciculations,
without verifcation by senum ionized calcium measure-
cramping of rear legs, tetany, or seizures (i.e, signs of
ments. Unfortunately, the correlation between "corrected"
hypocalcemia). Other indications include azotemia,
serum calcium concentration and ionized calcium con-
diffuse bone disease, and selected abnormalities on an
centration is weak,24 suggesting that corrected total serum
electrocardiogram (ECG), such as prolonged QT interval
calcium concentrations may not be reliable indicators of
with a normal QRS complex or unexplained premature
calcium homeostasis.
ventricular contractions.
 The biologically active, ionized fraction of calcium
can be determined directly, thus bypassing the influence
Analysis · Calcium can be measured in serum (pre-
of plasma proteins on the total serum calcium concentra-
ferred), heparinized plasma, and urine by photometric
tion. Ionized calcium measurements are generally supe-
assays that use colorimetric reactions or potentiometry
using ion-specific calcium electrodes. Oxalate, citrate, and
calcium in dogs and cats. Automated equipment that uses
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) anticoagulants
a calcium ion-selective electrode allows accurate mea-
should not be used, because calcium is bound to these
surement of ionized calcium in blood, plasma, or serum.
chemicals and becomes unavailable for analysis. Most
Ionized calcium results can be affected by many variables.
automated and in-house serum chemistry analyzers
including method of sample collection (samples col-
measure total serum calcium concentration, which con-
lected anaerobically provide more precise results); the
sists of biologically active ionized calcium (55%).
amount and type of heparin, if used (may underestimate
protein-bound calcium (35%), and calcium complexes
or overestimate ionized calcium results); and change in
(10%). In dogs, alterations in the plasma protein concen-
sample pH (ionized calcium increases as pH decreases).
tration may alter the total serum calcium concentration,
Protocols established by the clinical chemistry laboratory
yet the ionized calcium levels remain normal. Simple
for submitting blood samples for ionized calcium deter-
quantitative changes in the albumin and total plasma
mination should be followed to ensure accurate results.
proteins do not cause hypocalcemia or hypercalcemia in
dogs. even though the total serum calcium levels may
Normal Values for Total and lonized Serum Calcium ·
Adults:
lowing formulas can be used to determine the corrected
total serum calcium concentration?2:
Total Ca, 9.0 to 11.5 mg/dl
Ionized Ca, 1.12 to 1.42 mmol/L
Adjusted calcium (mg /dl) =
measured calcium (mg /dl)- albumin (g/dl)+ 3.5
Adjusted calcium (mg /dl) =measured calcium (mg /dl)
 NOTE: An estimate of total Ca = ionized Ca x 8. To convert
from mg/dl to mmol /l, multiply by 0.25.
- [0.4 x serum protein (g/dl)] + 3.3
The formula based on albumin is preferred because
 Immature: The serum total and ionized calcium con-
of the stronger relationship between serum albumin and
centration can be as much as l mg/dl and 0.l mmol/L
total calcium concentrations. The formulas should not be
higher in young dogs [i.e., <12 months old), especially
156
Chapter &:Endocrine, Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
157
in the large and giant breeds, than in adults. The senum
total calcium concentration does not fluctuate with age
BOX 8-1. cAUSES OF HYPERCALcemIA In DOGs
 in cats, but the serum ionized calcium concentration may
AND CATS
be as much as 0.1 mmol/L higher in cats less than 2 years
Hypercalcemia of malignancy (very comtmon)
of age, compared with results in older cats.
 Humoral hypercalcemia 
Danger Values ● Total serum Ca less than 7.0 mg/dl
Lymphoma
(tetany).
Apocrine gland adenocarcinoma
Carcinoma (squamous cell, mammary, bronchogenic,
prostate, thyroid, nasal cavity)
NOTE: This value depends on the blood pH. The lower the
Local osteolysis
blood pH (ji.e., the more acidemic), the lower the calcium
Lymphoma
@n be without causing clinical signs and vice versa.
 Multiple myeloma 
Squamous cell carcinoma 
Total serum Ca greater than 16 mg/dl (depending on
Osteosarcoma
serum albumin concentration) can result in acute renal
Filbrosarcoma
failure (especially in the presence of hyperphosphatemia)
Primary hyperparathyroidism (uncommon but important)
 and cardiac toxicity.
Hypoadrenocorticism (uncomimon but important)
Artifacts · Serum Ca may be falsely decreased by
Chronic and acute renal failure (common)
increased bilirubin concentrations or laboratory error.
Hypervitaminosis D (uncommon but important)
qe  sa as aq  e ua
Excess supplementation
error, dehydration (mild increase), and lipemia (see
Plants containing glycosides of calcitriol (e.g., jasmine)
Chapter 1).
Cholecalciferol rodenticides
Idiopathic hypercalcemia of cats (common)
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Calcium
 Granulomatous disease 
Concentration · Mithramycin, EDTA, glucagon, anti-
Systemic mycosis
convulsants, citrate, fluoride, glucocorticoids, phosphate-
 Feline infectious peritonitis
containing enemas, and intravenous (IV) phosphate
administration (i.e., potassium phosphate) may cause
 Nonmalignant skeletal lesions
hypocalcemia.
 Osteomyelitis
Vitamin D, cholecalciferol rodenticides, estrogen,
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
progesterone, testosterone anabolic steroids, acetamino-
 latrogenic disorders
phen, hydralazine, 1
 parenteral calcium administration,
Excessive calcium supplementation
and excess oral
phosphate binders may
cause
Excessive oral phosphate buffers
hypercalcemia.
Doronex ointment (calcipotriene)
Dehyd ration
Causes of Hypercalcemia · In dogs. nonparathyroid
 Factitious
malignancy (i.e, humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy
Lipemia
[HHm]). most notably lymphosarcoma, is the most
 Postprandial measurement 
common cause of hypercalcemia (Box 8-1). Other hemo-
 Young dog (<6 months), large or giant breed
lymphatic malignant tumors (i.e, lymphocytic leukemia.
multiple myeloma, myeloproliferative diseases), anal sac
Laboratory error
apocrine gland carcinoma, and soft tissue tumors metas-
tasizing to bone (eg., mammary gland adenocarcinoma)
may also cause hypercalcemia. Less frequent causes
include primary hyperparathyroidism, chronic renal
failure, hypoadrenocorticism, and hypervitaminosis D
physical examination findings often provide clues to
[(i.e., cholecalciferol rodenticide toxicity, ingestion of toxic
the diagnosis (Figure 8-l). Special attention should
plants containing glycosides of calcitriol). In the cat, idio-
be paid to the serum electrolytes and renal parameters.
pathic hypercalcemia, hypercalcemia of malignancy
Hypoadrenocorticism-induced hypercalcemia occurs in
(especially lymphoma and squamous cell carcinoma),
conjunction with mineralocorticoid deficiency; hypona-
chronic renal failure, and primary hyperparathyroidism
tremia, hyperkalemia, and prerenal azotemia should
are the most common diagmoses. Calcium oxalate uroli-
usually be present The serum phosphorus concentration
thiasis and consumption of acidifying diets are com-
is in the lower half of the normal range or low with HHM
monly identified in cats with hypercalcemia; however.
and primary hyperparathyroidism (Figure 8-2). If the
their role, if any, in causing hypercalcemia is unknown.
serum phosphorus concentration is increased and renal
Hypercalcemia should always be reconfirmed, prefer-
function is normal, hypervitaminosis D or bone osteoly-
ably from a nonlipemic blood sample obtained from
sis from metastatic or primary bone neoplasia are the
the dog or cat after a 12-hour fast, before embarking
 primary differentials. Measurement of serum ionized
on an extensive diagnostic evaluation. 1
Results of a
se pue sop Auapi diay au uoason uie
complete blood count (CBC), serum biochemistry
with renal failure-induced hypercalcemia; serum ionized
panel, and urinalysis, in conjunction with the history and
calcium concentrations are typically normal or decreased
158
History and physical examination
Toxins/drugs capable
No mass or history of
Mass or infiltrate
of causing hypercalcemia
toxin or iatrogenic cause
Biopsy
Withdraw and/or treat
CBC, chemistry profile,
Not
Granulomatous
Neoplastic
 and recheck calcium 
electrolytes, urinalysis
 diagnostic
disease (fungal,
parasites, etc.)
Hypercalcemia
of malignancy
鼻
 Hypercalcemia and 
 Hypercalcemia and normal
Hypercalcemia and hyponatremia and/or
hyperphosphatemia
 or low phosphorus
 hyperkalemia with Na:K <27:1, or
hypercalcemia in youngto middle-aged
dog with no evidence of other disease
Azotemic
Nonazotemic
A
Abdominal
 Check for vitamin D
ACTH stimulation test looking
radiographs or
 intoxication (diet,
 for hypoadrenocorticism
ultrasound
cholecalciferol)
Small
Normal or
Repeat physical examination
kidneys
 enlarged kidneys 
Chest/abdominal radiographs,
Diffuse pulmonary
ultrasound -abdomen, neck
infiltrate
 Check serum globulins
Primary
Seek other
renal failure
causes, including 
Fine-needle aspiration
cholecalciferol;
Fungal serology
 if none found,
diagnose primary
renalfailureby
elimination
No mass or
Lameness
Hyperglobulinemia
Mass
lameness
or paresis
PTH, parathyroid hormone
Skeletal
Figure 12-5
related peptide (PTHrP)
radiographs
(look for monoclonal
gammopathy)
Nomal to
Decreased PTH 
If lytic lesions
increased PTH
or increased PTHrP
found, biopsy
 and nonazotemic
to search for
neoplasia or
fungal infection
Primary
Probably occult
 hyperparathyroidism
neoplasia 
Treat with
Biopsy bone marrow, lymph nodes,
Recheck patient
L-asparaginase
spleen, ± liver via fine-needle 
repeatedly for evidence
and observe response
aspiration, ultrasound, or surgery
of an infitrative process
FGURE 8-1 Diagnostic evaluation of hypercalcemia in dogs and cats. ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; CBC, complete blood
count; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
Chapter &:Endocrine, Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
159
Severe
Mild
Calciu
Normal range
Serum
Mild
Severe
Primary
Hyper-
 Renal
Vitamin D Nutritional Addison's
HP
calcemia
failure
toxicity
2° HP
disease
of malignancy
鼻
Severe
Mild
Normal range
Serum
Mild
Severe
Primary
Hyper-
Renal
Vitamin D Nutritional Addison's
HP
calcemia
failure
toxicity
2° HP
disease
 of malignancy
FIGURE 8-2 The range of serum calcium and phosphorus concentrations for the more comimon causes of hypercalcemia and for
hyperparathyroidism in dogs. HP, Hyperparathyroidism; 2°, secondary. (From Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and feline endo-
crinology and reproduction, ed 2, Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.)
in renal failure and increased in hypercalcemia caused by
suggest multiple myeloma (see also Ehrlichia, Chapter
other disorders.
15). Cytologic evaluation of peripheral lymph node, bone
Hypercalcemia of malignancy and primary hyper-
marrow, and splenic aspirates can be helpful in identify-
parathyroidism  are  the  primary
differentials when
ing lymphoma; involvement of the peripheral lymph
hypercalcemia and normal-to-low serum phosphorus
oum juasad aq u roudk Aq uaads io saou
concentrations are identifed. The most common malig
causing their enlargement. Ideally the largest lymph node
nancy is lymphoma. A careful review of the history and
should be evaluated. Normal lymph node, bone marrow.
physical examination findings may provide clues to the
and splenic aspirates do not rule out lymphoma.
diagnosis. Systemic signs of illness suggest HHM. Dogs
Measurement of serum ionized calcium, PTH, and
Ann aie usiinayieedaday Ared ym sies pue
PTHrP from the same blood sample is helpful in differ-
healthy, and clinical signs are mild. The appendicular
entiating primaryl
hyperparathyroidism  from  HHM
skeleton, peripheral lymph nodes, abdominal cavity, and
(Figure 8-3). Excessive secretion of biologically active
rectum should be carefully palpated for masses, lymph-
PTHrP plays a central role in the pathogenesis of hyper-
adenopathy. hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, or pain on
calcemia in most forms of HHM. Increased serum ionized
digital palpation of the long bones. Diagnostic tests that
calcium concentration, detectable serum PTHrP concen-
are helpful in identifying the underlying malignancy
tration, and nondetectable serum PTH concentration is
 include thoracic and abdominal radiographs; abdominal
diagnostic for HHM. Lymphoma is the most common
ultrasound; cytologic evaluation of aspirates of the liver,
cause for detectable PTHrP concentrations, but other
spleen, lymph nodes, and bone marrow; determination
tumors, including apocrine gland adenocarcinoma and
of serum ionized calcium, parathyroid hormone (PTH),
various carcinomas (e.g., mammary gland, squamous
and parathyroid hormone-related peptide (PTHrP) con-
cell, bronchogenic), can also cause hypercalcemia by this
centrations; and cervical ultrasound.
mechanism. In contrast, increased serum ionized calcium,
 Sternal and hilar lymphadenopathy is common with
normal-to-increased senum PTH, and nondetectable
lymphoma-induced hypercalcemia and can be readily
PTHrP concentrations are diagnostic of primary hyper-
identifed with thoracic radiographs. Radiographs of
parathyroidism. Ultrasonographic examination of the
the thorax and abdomen can also be used to evaluate
thyro-parathyroid complex may reveal enlargement of
bones; discrete lytic lesions in the vertebrae or long bones 
one or more parathyroid glands. Most parathyroid ade-
nomas measure 4 to 8 mm in diameter, although some
uria, and plasma cell infltration in the bone marrow
can exceed 2 cm.1 In contrast, the parathyroid glands
160
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Severe
Serum Ca
SerumPTH
Mild
 Normal
range
Mild
Severe
Primary
Primary
Renal
Lymphoma and
hypo PTH
hyper PTH
failure
hypercalcemia
alterations in serum calcium or parathyroid gland function. (From Nelson RW, Couto CG: Essentials of small animal internal medi-
cine, St. Louis, 1992, Mosby.)
will be small (<2 mm in diameter) or undetectable with
BOX 8-2. CAUSEs 0F HYpOCALCEmIA IN DOGs
HHM. Evaluation of the change in serum calcium con-
AND CATS
centration after L-asparaginase administration should be
considered for the patient with hypercalcemia of undeter-
[(ueodu! nq uouuosun) wsipiouAyeiedody Aew!d
mined cause to rule out occult lymphoma. A marked
 Naturally acquired
reduction in serum calcium within 48 hours, usually into
Post-thyroidectomy (bilateral) 
the normal range is strongly suggestive of occult
Puerperal tetany (eclampsia) (uncommon but important)
lymphoma.
 Idiopathic hypercalcemia is an increasingly common
Acute and chronic renal failure (mrore common in acute)
diagnosis in young to middle-aged cats.23 Hypercalcemia
Ethylene glycol toxicity
is usually mild (<13 mg/dl) and asymptomatic. Serum
 Critical llness (e.g., systemic inflammatory response 
phosphorus concentration and renal parameters are
syndrome, sepsis!
normal. The cause is unknown. Results of a complete
Acute pancreatitis (rare)
diagnostic evaluation as described previously are unre-
 Intestinal malabsorption syndromes
markable Serum PTH concentrations are in the normal
Hypoproteinemia or hypoalbuminemia (commton)
range or low; primary hyperparathyroidism has not been
Hypomagnesemia
confirmed in any of these cats. Excessive serum PTHrP
Rhabdomyolysis (rare)
25-hydroxyvitamin D, or calcitriol concentrations have
Tumor lysis syndrome (rare)
not been identifed. Nephrocalcinosis and urolithiasis
 may develop. presumably secondary to increased urinary
 Nutritional secondary hyperparathyroidism (rare)
calcium excretion. Effective treatment has not been iden-
Hypovitaminosis D (rare)
tifed, primarily because the pathogenesis of this problem 
 Phosphate-containing enemas
remains unknown. Serum calcium concentrations have
Anticonvul sant medications
decreased in some cats following a dietary change to a
 Sodium bicarbonate administration
high-fiber diet, a diet designed for renal failure or a diet
Laboratory error
designed to prevent calcium oxalate urolithiasis, or after
 prednisone treatment (initial dose, 5 mg q24hr) was initi-
ated, but the response has been unpredictable and often
short lived.
syndromes, and primary hypoparathyroidism (especially
after thyroidectomy in hyperthyroid cats (Box 8-2).
Causes of Hypocalcemia ● The most common causes
The serum total calcium concentration is typically
of hypocalcemiain(
dogs and cats are puerperal
decreased in animals with concurrent hypoalbuminemia
 tetany, acute and chronic renal failure, malassimilation
for reasons discussed in the Analysis section on calcium.
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
161
If symptomaticobtain blood sample,then treat before diagnostics.
I not symptomatic,first eliminate artifacts,iatrogenic causes,and laboratory error.
Lactating
 Recent exposure to
No clinical
Diarrhea
Vomiting and/or
 ethylene glycol 
signs
abdominal pain
Eclampsia
Check for calcium
CBC, chemistry
Check for hypo-
 Check abdominal
 oxalate crystalluria
 profile, and 
albuminemia due
radiographs/ultrasound 
and osmolar gap
urinalysis
to protein-losing
for pancreatitis
enteropathy
Hypoalbuminemia
Normal albumin
Correct calcium for low albumin
Evaluaterenalfunction
 or measure ionized calcium 
Corrected calcium 
 Corrected calcium
Renal azotemia
Not azotemic
is normal
is low
No further
Abdominal
Check for
Check diet,
tests needed
radiographs,
calcium oxalate
serum magnesium 
ultrasound to
crystals and
phosphorus,
look for small 
osmolar gap
serum PTH
kidneys
indicative of
ethylene glycol
intoxication
T
Nutritional
Hypopara-
Hypomag-
secondary
thyroidism
nesemia
hyperpara-
thyroidism
FGURE 8-4 Diagnostic evaluation of hypocalcemia in dogs and cats. CBC, Complete blood count; PTH, parathyroid hormone.
 Depending on the underlying etiology. the serum ionized
PHOSPHORUS
calcium concentration may or may not be decreased.
Measurement of serum ionized calcium should be done
Commonly Indicated · Measurement of serum phos-
before rendering a diagnosis of hypocalcemia in an
phorus concentration is commonly indicated in patients
animal with decreased serum total calcium and albumin
with any indications mentioned for calcium, plus unex-
concentrations.
plained hemolysis, anorexia, weakness, ataxia, or seizures.
Hypocalcemia should be confirmed before initiating
diagnostic tests to identify the cause. The list of differen-
Analysis ·● Phosphorus can be measured in serum (pre-
ferred), heparinized plasma, and urine as inorganic phos-
the history, physical examination findings, CBC, senum
phorus by photometric assays that use colorimetric
biochemistry panel, and urinalysis usually provide the
reactions.
cues necessary to establish the diagnosis (Figure 8-4).
Measurement of serum pancreatic lipase immunoreactiv-
Normal Values ● Adult: 3.0 to 6.0 mg/dl.
ity and evaluation of an abdominal ultrasound should be
Immature: Young dogs (ie., <12 months) especially
done if pancreatitis is suspected (see Chapter 9). Primary
of the large and giant breeds, and young cats (i.e, <6
hypoparathyroidism is the most likely diagnosis in the
months) have higher serum phosphorus concentrations
nonazotemic, nonlactating dog or cat with clinical signs
(dog, 4 to 9 mg/d; cat, 4 to 8 mg/dl) than do adults.
of hypocalcemia. Documentation of a low baseline
Serum phosphorus concentration should decrease to
serum PTH concentration confirms this diagnosis (see
adult values by 12 months of age.
Figure 8-3).
To convert from mg/dl to mmol/L, multiply by 0.323.
162
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
BOX 8-3. CAUSES OF ALTERED SERUM PHOSPHORUS IN DOGS AND CATS
HYPERPHOSPHATEMIA
HYPOPHOSPHATEMIA
Young growing animal (common) 
Decreased intestinal absorption 
Renal failure (common)
Decreased dietary intake 
 Prerenal and postrenal azotemia (common)
 Malabsorption, steatorrhea 
Endocrine
Vomiting, diarrhea
 Prirmary hypoparathyroidism
 Phosphate-binding antacids
wsipio/yeed adry Aepuonas euoguinn 
Hypovitaminosis D
Hyperthyroidism (cats)
Increased urinary excretion
Acromegaly
Primary hyperparathyroidism (uncommon but important)
Hyperadrenocorticism
Humoral hypercalcemia of malignancy (important) 
Hypervitaminosis D
 Dabetic ketoacidosis
 Excess supplementation
Eclampsia
 Cholecalciferol rodenticides
 Fanconi's syndrome
Jasmine ingestion
Diuretics
Osteolytic bone lesions (neoplasia)
 Transcellular shifts
Rhabdormyolysis (rare)
Hypothermia recovery
Aggressive parenteral fluid therapy
Necrosis
Insulin administration, esp. for DKA (common and inmportant)
Tumor cell lysis syndrome (rare)
 Sodium bicarbonate administration
 Metabolic acidosis
 Parenteral glucose administration 
Hemolysis 
Hyperalimentation
Drugs-see text
Respiratory, metabolic acidosis
latrogenic
Laboratory error
Intravenous phosphorus supplementation
 Phosphate-containing enemas
Diuretics
Laboratory error
Danger Values · Less than 1.5 mg/dl (hemolysis, neuro-
phosphate from the intracellular to the extracellular com-
logic signs).
partrment. Translocation of phosphate between the intra-
cellular and extracellular compartments is similar to that
Artifacts ● Serum phosphorus may be falsely increased:
of potassium. The most common cause for hyperphos-
by postprandial protein intake (mild change), hemolysis,
phatemia is decreased renal excretion secondary to renal
hyperlipidemia, hyperproteinemia, and thrombocytosis.
failure (Box 8-3). History. physical examination, and
The effect is dependent on the methodology used to
routine clinical pathologic assessment (e.g., CBC, serum
measure phosphorus. Serum phosphorus may be falsely
biochemical panel, urinalysis) usually enable the clini-
decreased: by postprandial carbohydrate intake (mild
cian to identify the cause. Azotemic patients may require
change; see Chapter 1).
additional tests to distinguish between prerenal, renal,
and postrenal azotemia (see Chapter 7). (Evaluation for
Drug Treatments That May Alter Phosphorus Values *
sasne iapun passnosip st wsipioiauieedodaq Aeund
 Phosphate-binding antacids, anesthetic agents, anticonvul-
 of Hypocalcemia earlier in this chapter.) Serum thyroxine
sants, bicarbonate, diuretics, insulin, parenteral glucose
concentration should be determined in the nonazotemic
administration, hyperalimentation,  mithramycin, and
cat with signs of hyperthyroidism [i.e., weight loss, poly-
salicylates may cause hypophosphatemia. Hyperphos-
phagia, restlessness). Survey skeletal radiographs may
s     
identify osseous neoplasia.
enemas in cats or obstipated small dogs, IV potassium
 phosphate supplementation, anabolic steroids, vitamin
Causes of Hypophosphatemia · Hypophosphatemia
D supplements, furosemide, hydrochlorothiazide, and 
results from decreased phosphate absorption in the intes-
minocycline.
. Tetracyclines have a variable effect on
tinal tract, increased urinary phosphate excretion, or a
phosphonus.
shift from the extracellular to the intracellular compart-
ment Hypophosphatemia is commonly associated with
Causes of Hyperphosphatemia ● Hyperphosphatemia
-osqe aeusoud reusau paseau uoy insan u
ism, and aggressive therapy for diabetic ketoacidosis
tion, decreased phosphate excretion in urine, or a shift in
(DKA; see Box 8-3).1 Translocation of phosphate between
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
163
the intracellular and extracellular compartments is similar
to that of potassium. Factors that promote a shift of potas-
BOX 8-4. CAUSES OF ALTeRED SERUM
sium into the intracellular compartment (e.g., alkalosis.
MAGNESIUm IN DOGS AND CATS
 insulin, glucose infusion) also promote a similar shift in
HYPOMAGNESEMIA
phosphate.
When evaluating hypophosphatemia, one should
Gastrointestinal Causes (comimton]
 Inadequate intake
eliminate artifacts and iatrogenic causes first. Mild hypo-
 Chronic diarrhea and vomiting
is often ignored unless the animal is ketoacidotic [see
 Malabsorption syndromes
 Acute pancreatitis
Causes of Hyperglycemia later in this chapter). If concur-
rent hypercalcemia is present, diagnostic evaluation for
Cholestatic liver disease
-lad aq Pinous usipioiayeiediaday Aieud pue WHH
 Nasogastric suction
formed (see Causes of Hypercalcemia earlier in this 
 Renal Causes
chapter).
Glomerulonephritis 
 Acute tubular necrosis
MAGNESIUM
 Postobstructive diuresis
 Drug-induced tubular injury (e.g., aminoglycosides,
 Occasionally Indicated · Serum magnesium should be
cisplatin)
Prolonged intravenous fluid therapy
measured in dogs and cats with disorders and predispos-
-y pue euasauoy yim paneiosse sioney su
Diuretics
magnesemia (Box 8-4), especially those with unexplained
Digitalis administration
Hypercalcemia
tion and actions of PTH and promote calcium uptake into
Hypokalemia 
bone); hypokalemia resistant to parenteral supplementa-
 Endocrine Causes
tion (hypomagnesemia may cause potassium-losing
Dabetic ketoacidosis (comtmon)
nephropathy): DKA (hypomagnesemia may develop
during the initial 24 hours of therapy); cardiac arrhyth-
Hyperthyroidisrt
 Prirmary hyperparathyroidism 
 mias refractory to conventional therapy: and unexplained
Prirmary hyperaldosteronism
muscle weakness (including dysphagia and dyspnea),
 Miscellaneous Causes 
muscle fasciculations, or seizures.
 Acute administration of insulin, glucose, amino acids
Analysis ● Magnesium can be measured in serum (pre-
Sepsis
ferred), heparinized plasma, or urine by photometric
Hypothermia
assays that use colorimetric reactions. Measurement of
 Massive blood transfusion
senum ionized magmesium concentration via an ion-
Peritoneal dialysis, hemodialysis
selective electrode more accurately assesses total body
 Total parenteral nutrition 
magnesium.
HYPERMAGNESEMIA
Normal Values · 1.5 to 2.5 mg/dl; ionized magnesium,
Renal insufficiency, failure (commton)
0.4 to 0.6 mmol/L.
Excessive oral intake (e.g., antacids, laxatives)
 Excessive parenteral administration (e.g., Mg2t-containing
Danger Values ● Development of clinical signs of hypo-
fluids)
 magnesemia varies widely, but treatment is probably indi-
cated if serum magnesium concentration is less than
1.0 mg/dl. Serum magnesium concentrations greater than
10 mg/dl are associated with respiratory depression,
apnea, coma, and cardiac arrest in people.
absorption of magnesium (eg, small intestinal disease
causing malabsorption), increased gastrointestinal loss
Artifacts + See Chapter 1.
(e.g, protracted vomiting, diarrhea), increased urinary
magnesium excretion (eg. interstitial nephritis, diuret-
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Magnesium Con-
ics), or a shift of the cation from the extracellular to the
centration · Drug-induced renal tubular injury (eg..
intracellular compartment. The most common causes of
cisplatin, aminoglycosides, amphotericin B), diuretics
(eg., furosemide thiazides), digitalis, insulin, glucose,
causing small intestinal malassimilation, renal disorders
amino acids, massive blood transfusion, and total paren-
with high urine output osmotic diuresis of DKA, and
teral nutrition solutions may cause hypomagnesemia.
shift of potassium, phosphate, and magnesium from the
 Magnesium-containing drugs (especially oral antacids
extracellular to the intracelular compartment occurring
and laxatives), chronic aspirin therapy, lithium, and pro-
within the first 24 hours of therapy for DKA (see Box 8-4).
eiasauaead ane Ae suaesaa
Magnesium is predominately an intracellular cation.
Translocation of magnesium between the intracellular
Causes
of
 Hypomagnesemia · Hypomagnesemia
 and extracellular compartments is similar to that of potas-
results from decreased oral intake or gastrointestinal
sium. Factors that promote a shift of potassium into the
164
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
intracellular compartment (e.g., alkalosis, insulin, glucose
Analysis · PTH concentration is measured in serum
infusion) also promote a similar shift of magnesium.
by immunoradiometric and chemiluminescent immu-
During therapy for DKA, serum magnesium concentra-
noassays.12 The sample should be centrifuged as soon
tion can severely decline [i.e., <l mg/dl) because of the
as possible after clotting, frozen, and shipped frozen
dilutional effects of fluid therapy and intracellular shift of
to the laboratory. Different PTH assays measure differ-
magnesium after initiation of insulin and bicarbonate
ent parts of the PTH molecule and may give different
therapy.
s hhd ahs-oh, au d as a un shns
Identifying hypomagnesemia is problematic because
system uses two different polyclonal antibodies to
no simple, rapid, and accurate laboratory test is available
measure midregion and C-terminal 39 to 84 amino
to identify total body magnesium status. Serum total
acids and N-terminal 1 to 34 amino acids of PTH
magnesium represents 1% of the body's magnesium
simultaneously, is valid for measurement of dog and
stores, and serum ionized magnesium represents 0.2% to
cat PTH, and is currently used by most veterinary
0.3% of total body magnesium stores. As a result, serum
laboratories.
total and ionized magnesium concentrations do not
always reflect total body magnesium status. A normal
Normal Values ● 2 to 13 pmol/L. Normal values may
senum magnesium concentration can occur despite total
'pasn Aioeiqel au uo suuadp ia
body magnesium deficiency. A low serum magnesium
concentration, however, supports a total body magne-
Danger Values · None.
 r i r  a  is
current electrolyte abnormalities are consistent with
Artifacts ● Prolonged storage or transport at tempera-
hypomagnesemia. A serum-ionized magnesium concen-
tures above freezing may produce erroneous results.
tration determined using an ion-selective electrode more
Ueu juauos unisauaeu Apoq ieiol sassasse Aianeinsne
      
measurement of serum total magnesium and is recom-
tions · Any drug therapy affecting serum calcium con-
mended.27 In animals with low serum magnesium con-
centration can affect senum PTH concentration (see
centration, a review of history, physical examination, and
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Calcium Concen-
routine clinical pathologic assessment (e.g., CBC, serum
tration earlier in this chapter). Drugs that decrease
serum calcium may increase serum PTH concentration
the underlying cause [see Box 8-4).
and vice versa.
Causes of Hypermagnesemia · Hypermagnesemia
Causes ofIncreased Serum PTH Concentration · Dis-
occurs in dogs and cats with renal failure and postrenal
orders that cause increased serum PTH concentration
obstruction (see Box 8-4) or is iatrogenically induced after
include primary hyperparathyroidism, secondary renal
excessive magnesium intake (e.g., IV administration, ant-
hyperparathyroidism, secondary nutritional hyperpara-
acids., laxatives). Because the healthy kidney rapidly
thyroidism, secondary adrenal hyperparathyroidism3139
excretes excess magnesium, iatrogenically induced hyper-
and nonparathyroid causes of hypocalcemia (see Causes
magnesemia usually reflects underlying renal insuff-
 of Hypocalcemia earlier in this chapter). A midnormal or
panieaday e ul uoeuanuon Hid was paseau
with thoracic neoplasia and pleural effusion, although
patient with normal renal function strongly suggests
the mechanism involved with the development of hyper-
 magnesemia in these cats is unknown.42 Measurement of
with nonparathyroid-induced hypercalcemia have low to
undetectable serum PTH concentrations. Serum PTH
semia. Evaluation of history. physical examination, and
concentrations can be increased in animals with renal
routine clinical pathologic assessments (e.g., CBC, serum
failure because of concurrent secondary renal hyperpara-
biochemistry panel, urinalysis) usually identifies the
thyroidism. Serum calcium concentration in these
cause of hypermagnesemia.
q A inq aun jeou aq un nsn si siue
decreased or, less commonly, increased with chronic end-
stage renal failure. Serum ionized calcium concentration
is usually normal in dogs and cats with secondary renal
PARATHYROID HORMONE
hyperparathyroidism. Serum calcium is in the low-
normal or low range in animals with secondary nutri-
Occasionally Indicated · Serum PTH concentration is
tional hyperparathyroidism.
required to diagnose primary hyperparathyroidism and
Causes of Decreased Serum PTH Concentration *
hypocalcemia, respectively.
Nondetectable serum PTH concentration in a hypocalce-
mic animal strongly suggests primary hypoparathyroid-
Advantages ● Serum PTH measurement can establish a
ism. Patients with nonparathyroid-induced hypocalcemia
diagnosis of primary parathyroid disease without surgical
should have normal or increased senum PTH concentra-
intervention.
tions. Nonparathyroid disorders causing hypercalcemia
(see Causes of Hypercalcemia earlier in this chapter) also
Disadvantages · Validated PTH assays are limited,
have low to undetectable serum PTH concentrations. The
samples must be frozen during transit, and azotemia may
notable exception is hypercalcemia of chronic renal
interfere with interpretation.
failure.
Chapter &:Endocrine, Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
165
GLUCOSE
Drug Therapy That May Alter Blood Glucose Con-
centration · Hypoglycemia may be caused by insulin,
Commonly Indicated · Measurement of blood glucose
Oral hypoglycemic drugs (eg., sulfonylureas, biguanides),
 s    si 
 propranolol, atenolol, and ethylene glycol. Hyperglyce-
polyuria, polydipsia, weakness, coma, behavioral change.
mia (especially in prediabetic patients) may be caused
Or seizures (partial or complete). It should also be deter-
by
beta-adrenergic2
agonist dnugs. corticosteroids,
mined in patients with known hepatic or adrenal insuf-
diazoxide, carbonic anhydrase inhibitors (e.g, acetazol-
ficiency, severe sepsis, pancreatic neoplasia, or glucosuria
amide, methazolamide), thiazides, glucagon, levothyrox-
and in patients receiving insulin or total parenteral
ine, progestagens, estrogens, and xylitol. Megestrol
nutrition.
acetate may cause transient or persistent hyperglycemia
in cats.
Advantages · The test is easily performed and readily
available.
Causes of Hypoglycemia · Hypoglycemia is typically
the result of excessive glucose use by normal (e.g., with
 Disadvantages · A single blood glucose concentration
hyperinsulinism) or neoplastic cells, impaired hepatic
may not detect disorders causing clinically significant but
gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis (e.g., hepatic insuf-
episodic hypoglycemia in some patients. Prolonged
ficiency), a deficiency in diabetogenic hormones (e.g..
storage of blood before separation of serum or plasma
hypocortisolism), inadequate dietary intake of glucose
may cause artifacts [i.e., low glucose results).
and other substrates required for hepatic gluconeogenesis
(e.g, starvation in neonates), or a combination of these
Analysis · Glucose can be measured in whole blood,
mechanisms (e.g., sepsis; Box 8-5). Iatrogenic hypoglyce-
serum, or plasma (heparin, sodium fluoride, or EDTA).
One can measure blood glucose in two main ways: (1)
administration to diabetics.
reagent strips and a reflectance meter (portable blood
Hypoglycemia should always be confirmed before
Aoqel eueis () ue (a] aa aso
beginning diagnostics to identify the cause. Careful evalu-
 methods. The latter usually entail photometric assays that
ation of history, physical fndings, and routine clinical
use glucose oxidase or hexokinase to initiate colorimetric
 pathologic assessments (e.g., CBC, serum biochemical
reactions. PBGMs use whole blood, and are quick, simple.
 panel, urinalysis) usually provides clues to the underlying
inexpensive, and readily available. Correlation between
cause (Figure 8-5). Starvation, hepatic insuffciency (i.e.,
results obtained with PBGMs versus standard laboratory
portosystemic shunt), sepsis, or idiopathic hypoglycemia
methods varies widely.5
are the usual causes in the puppy or kitten. In young
Differences between these methods are more pro-
adults, hepatic insuffciency, hypoadrenocorticism, or
nounced at higher glucose concentrations (i.e., >300 mg/
sepsis usually causes hypoglycemia. In older animals.
dl). Blood glucose concentrations measured by PBGMs
hepatic insufficiency beta cell neoplasia, extrapancreatic
are usually lower than corresponding results with stan-
neoplasia, hypoadrenocorticism, and sepsis are the most
dard laboratory methods. The exception is a PBGM
common causes.
designed for use in dogs and cats [AlphaTrak; Abbott
Hypoglycemia tends to be mild (ie., >45 mg/dl)
Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL), with which results may be
 and is often an incidental finding in animals with hypo-
higher or lower than corresponding results with standard
adrenocorticism and hepatic insufficiency. Additional
laboratory methods.
alterations in clinical pathologic assessments (e.g., hypo-
natremia
or
hyperkalemia
[hypoadrenocorticism].
Normal Values ● 70 to 120 mg/dl. To convert from mg/dl
increased alanine aminotransferase [ALT] activity, hypo-
to mmol/L, multiply by 0.056.
albuminemia
[hepatic
insufficiency]）
are
usually
present. An adrenocorticotropic hormone [ACTH) stim-
Danger Values · Less than 40 mg/dl (coma or seizures)
ulation test or hepatic function test (see Chapter 9) may
 Or greater than 1000 mg/dl (hyperosmotic diabetes with
be required to confirm the diagnosis. Severe hypoglyce-
 central nervous system [CNS] dysfunction and possible
mia [i.e., <35 mg/dl) may develop in neonates and juve-
coma).
nile kittens and puppies (especially toy breeds) and
with sepsis, beta cell neoplasia, and extrapancreatic neo-
Artifacts · See Chapter 1.
plasia (especially hepatic adenocarcinoma and leiomyo-
Serum or plasma must be separated from red blood
sarcoma). Sepsis is readily identified by physical fndings
cells (RBCs) and white blood cells (WBCs) within
30
and CBC abnormalities, including a neutrophilic leuko-
minutes after collection to minimize consumption of
glucose by cells. At 22° C, glucose concentration decreases
neutropenia, and/or toxic neutrophils (see Chapter 4).
Aewu sut pue 'sanuu og oi oe Aiaa oi Aianeuixoidde
Extrapancreatic neoplasia can usually be identifed on
occur more rapidly if large concentrations of metaboli-
physical examination or on abdominal or thoracic
cally active cells (eg., leukocytosis, leukemia) are present.
imaging. Dogs with beta cell neoplasia typically have
PBGMs are less accurate at high glucose concentra-
normal physical examination results and lack abnormal-
tions (ie.,>300 mg/dl). Inadequate or excessive coverage
ities except hypoglycemia. Measurement of baseline
of the reagent pad with blood may cause erroneous
serum insulin concentration when blood glucose
i5
results. Expired reagent strips, meters that have not been
less than 60 mg/dl (preferably <50 mg/dl) is necessary
 properly calibrated, and inaccurate timing may also cause
to confrm a beta cell tumor (see next section on
erroneous results.
Insulin).
166
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
BOX 8-5. CAUSES OF ALTERED BLOOD GLUCOSE IN DOGS AND CATS
HYPOGLYCEMIA
HYPERGLYCEMIA
Beta cell tumor (insulinoma) (uncommon but important)
Diabetes mellitus (cormton)
Extrapancreatic neoplasia
"Stress," aggression, excitement, fear (esp. cats) (common)
 Hepatocellular carcinoma, hepatoma
[auaeams (ptx dnsfs uos 'losf|6 auadoid) lepueidisod
Leiomyosarcoma, leiomyoma
Hyperadrenocorticism 
Hemangiosarcoma 
Acromegaly (cat)
Hepatic insufficiency (uncommon but important)
Destrus (bitch)
 Portocaval shunts 
 Pheochromocytoma (dog)
Chronic fibrosis, cirrhosis
Pancreatitis
Sepsis (important)
 Exocrine pancreatic neoplasia
Hypoadrenocorticism (uncommon but important)
 Renal insufficiency
Hypopituitarism
Head trauma
Idiopathic hypoglycemia
Drug therapy
 Neonatal hypoglycemia
Glucocorticoids
 Juvenile hypoglycemia (esp. toy breeds)
 Progestagens
"Hunting dog hypoglycemia"
Megestrol acetate
Renal failure (uncommon)
Thiazide diuretics
 Exocrine pancreatic neoplasia
 Parenteral nutrition solutions
Glycogen storage diseases (rare)
Dextrose-containing fluids (comimton)
Severe polycythemia
 Prolonged starvation
 Prolonged sample storage (common)
latogenic
Insulin therapy (common)
 Sulfonylurea therapy
 Ethanol 
 Ethylene glycol
 Artifact
 Portable blood glucose meters
Laboratory error
Causes of Hyperglycemia · Hyperglycemia results
other than insulin-requiring diabetes mellitus should be
from insulin deficiency, impairment of insulin's action in
sought Mild hyperglycemia can occur in some animals
peripheral tissues [i.e, decreased glucose use), increased
shortly after consumption of foods containing large
hepatic gluconeogenesis and glycogenolysis, or a combi-
amounts of monosaccharides, disaccharides, or xylitol; in
nation of these (see Box 8-5). Iatrogenic causes of hyper-
stressed cats and dogs; with administration of diabeto-
glycemia include IV infusion of dextrose-containing fluids
genic medications; in early stages of diabetes mellitus;
and parenteral nutritional solutions, and administration
and with disorders decreasing insulin's effectiveness (see
of diabetogenic drugs (eg. glucocorticoids, megestrol
Box 8-5). A diagnostic evaluation for disorders causing
acetate). Infusion of fluids containing as little as 2.5%
insulin ineffectiveness is indicated if mild hyperglycermia
dextrose may cause hyperglycemia, depending on infu-
[i.e., <l80 mg/dl) persists in the fasted, unstressed
sion rate and concurrent disorders interfering with carbo-
animal in  which diabetogenic medications have been
hydrate tolerance. Severe hyperglycemia (typically without
discontinued.
-nsand 'sie asss, un Auoo sino (enson
All hyperglycemic animals should be checked for
ably from epinephrine secretion. Many diseases also
cause carbohydrate intolerance and mild hyperglycemia.
primarily by interfering with insulin action in peripheral 
Persistence of diabetes mellitus depends, in part, on
tissues.
pathologic findings in the pancreatic islets, functional
Hyperglycemia between 130 and 180 mg/dl does not
status of beta cells, and reversibility of concurrent dia-
cause glucosuria, polyuria, or polydipsia. Hyperglycemia
betogenic
diseases.  Diabetogenic drugs (see Dnug
in this range is clinically silent and often an unsuspected
Therapy That May Alter Blood Glucose Concentration
finding. If the patient with mild hyperglycemia (i.e..
earlier in this section) should be stopped or adjusted;
<180 mg/dl) also has polyuria-polydipsia, a disorder
concurrent inflammatory, infectious,
hormonal,
Or
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
167
Is the patient showing signsconsistent withhypoglycemia?
Yes
No
√
Treatsymptomatically
Repeat determination using
and pursue diagnostics
bench-top methodology and
 separate serum from cells
If patient is a diabetic receiving
within 10 minutes
insulinreduce dsagethrwise
fordrug therapythatmayberesponsible
Hypoglycemia
Hypoglycemia
andcontinuelooking forcause
persists
gone
Observefor
signs of hypoglycemia
Ifhypoglycemiapersists,repeathistory andphysicalexamination
Neonate or immature
Large abdominal
None of
Apparent "hunting
Septicemia
toybreed
mass
these
dog hypoglycemia”
Maybe dueto
Paraneoplastic
CBCand
anything that
syndrome due to
chemistry
causes anorexia
overutilization
profile
or hypothermia
Na:K<.27:1
Noneof these
Increased bilirubin,
Degenerative
decreased albumin,and/or
WBC diferential
US,
increasedALT,SA
or toxic neutrophils
ACTH stimulation
immunoreactive insulin
test tolookfor
during hypoglycemia(fast
Septicemia
hypoadrenocorticism
patient if necessary),ACTH
Hepaticfunction
stimulation and hepatic
test
functiontests
Decreased
Midnormal to
Insulinlow normal
Decreased hepatic
Normal ACTH
cortisol after
increased
orlow
function
stimulation and
ACTH
insulin
hepaticfunction
±mass on
Review diagnostic
Hepatic insufficiency
tests and dog only
Hypoadrenocorticism
US
becomes hypoglycemic
evaluation,repeat
during exercise (not
insulin during
Insulinoma
hypoglycemia
fasting);insulin is low
normalorlow
Probable “hunting dog
hypoglycemia"
FGURE 8-5 Diagnostic approach to hypoglycemia in dogs and cats. ACTH, Adrenocorticotropic hormone; ALT, alanine amino-
transferase; CBC, complete blood count; SAP, serum alkaline phosphatase; US, ultrasound; WBC, white blood cell.
neoplastic disorders controlled or eliminated; diets
cats, the most common are obesity, chronic inflamma-
designed for treatment of diabetes initiated; and effects
tion
(especially
pancreatitis),
hyperadrenocorticism,
on blood glucose re-evaluated in animals with 
SUS-
acromegaly.
occult
hyperthyroidism.
 and infection
pected diabetes mellitus. Concurrent diabetogenic disor-
(Figure 8-6). Additional diagnostic tests (eg., plasma
ders are usually suggested from the history, physical
lipase immunoreactivity, low-dose dexamethasone sup-
examination, evaluation of routine clinical pathologic
pression test (LDDS), serum thyroxine concentration)
assessments [eg. CBC, serum biochemical panel, uri-
may be necessary. Problems with insulin therapy itself
nalysis)。 and ease of glycemic regulation with insulin
(e.g. poor absorption, Somogyi response, short or pro-
Concurrent
diabetogenic
disorders should
longed duration of insulin effect) should also be con-
 always be suspected when glycemic control is diffcult
sidered in the animal with poorly regulated diabetes.
to attain with insulin therapy. The most common disor-
Assessment of insulin therapy by measuring blood
ders interfering with glycemic regulation in dogs are
glucose concentrations at the time of and every 2 hours
obesity: chronic inflammation such as chronic pancre-
for 10 to 12 hours after insulin administration is the
atitis, gingivitis, and inflammatory bowel disease; hyper-
first diagnostic step in identifying problems with insulin
adrenocorticism; diestnus; and concurrent infection. In
therapy.
168
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
a new bottie of insulin and observing the client mix, measure, and administer insulin. If a diluent is being
used, one must ascertain that it is an acceptable diluent and not just unbuffered saline. If in doubt the 
veterinarian should treat the patient for 2-3 days to ensure that these factors are not responsible.
Gradually increase insulin dose up to 1.0 unit/kg twice daily. If appropriate
use of drugs that may antagonize insulin effects (e.g., steroids and others).
Next, measure blood glucose before insulin administration and every 2 hours for 12 hours to determine
whether blood glucose does not decrease, decreases marginally, or decreases but only transiently.
Blood glucose decreases
Little or no effect on blood glucose
significantly but only for a short time
(be sure that insulin was properly
山
administered prior to test)
Excessive insulin causes
鼻
hypoglycemia resulting in rebound
Measure fructosamine
hyperglycemia
Insulin effect is too short in this
 particular patient 
一
Indicates
Indicates
poor control
good control
If hypoglycemia is causing a
rebound, decrease dose 10%-25%
 and repeat blood glucose curve in 
 History, physical examination,
Stress-induced
7-14days
CBC, serum chemistry profile,
hyperglycemia
If no evidence of rebound, use a
urinalysis, and urine culture,
 longer-acting insulin
ultrasound, T4
Endocrinopathy
No apparent
Inflammatory disease
Cushing syndrome
abnormalities
Pancreatitis
Acromegaly
Infection
Diestrus
Gingivitis
Hyperthyroidism
Test for hyper-
Hypothyroidism
adrenocorticism
Resolve and
 reregulate diabetes
If possible, resolve and
If no evidence of
 reregulate diabetes 
hyperadrenocorticism
Measure serum progesterone
Check for anti-insulin antibodies
 Consider poor absorption of 
insulin from SQ
Consider hypoglycemia-induced
 rebound hyperglycemia
FGURE 8-6 Diagnostic approach to persistent or inappropriate hyperglycemia in diabetics treated with insulin. CBC, Complete
blood count; SQ, subcutaneous; T4, thyroxine.
INSUILIN
insulin-binding antibodies in animals with diabetes mel-
litus and insulin resistance.
Occasionally
Indicated · Measurement of serum
insulin concentration is performed to confirm an insulin-
Advantages · Measurement of S
serum insulin con-
secreting beta cell tumor of the pancreas, to assess beta
centration
 can establish a preoperative diagnosis of
cell function in animals with diabetes mellitus, and to
a beta cell tumor, which can be difficult to find at
 increase the clinician's index of suspicion for circulating
surgery.
Chapter &:Endocrine, Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
169
Disadvantages · Insulin assay must be validated in
animals with type l (insulin-dependent) diabetes melli-
dogs and cats. Many variables can affect serum insulin
tus have serum insulin concentrations less than l0 μU/
concentration. Interpretation must be done in conjunc-
ml. Markedly increased serum insulin concentration (i.e.,
tion with corresponding blood glucose concentration.
>400 μU/ml) in blood obtained more than 24 hours
after the last insulin injection in an insulin-treated dia-
Analysis · Insulin is measured in serum by radioim-
betic suggests insulin-binding antibodies. Serum insulin
munoassay (RIA) or chemiluminescent immunometric
 t l o  ss ai s u
assay. Insulin concentrations measured in plasma tend to
after the previous insulin injection in the diabetic without
be higher than corresponding values in serum. Fasting
antibodies causing interference with the insulin assay.
samples are preferred to minimize the stimulatory effects
Nondetectable serum insulin concentrations in an
of a meal on insulin secretion. Serum samples should be
insulin-treated diabetic, especially when measured 2 to 8
separated from cellular elements of blood and frozen
hours after insulin administration, also suggests insulin-
 before submission to the laboratory.
binding antibodies causing interference with the insulin
assay.
Normal Fasting Values ● 5 to 20 μU/ml.
Fasting serum insulin concentration greater than
 20 μU/ml in an untreated diabetic patient suggests type
INSULIN SECRETAGOGUE TESTING
 2 diabetes or diabetes induced by concurrent insulin
antagonistic disease.
Rarely Indicated ● Insulin secretagogue testing can aid
To convert from μU/ml to pmol/L, multiply by 7.18.
'sau saaqe 7 aa woy I ada sueaa u
help identify carbohydrate intolerance in animals with
Danger Values · None unless accompanied by hypo.
suggested preclinical diabetes mellitus, and possibly iden-
glycemia.
tify occult insulin-secreting tumors. The glucagon stimu-
lation test can identify hepatic glycogen storage disease.
Artifacts and Effect of Drugs on Insulin Concentra-
The most common insulin secretagogue tests are the IV
tion · Serum insulin concentration is increased for
glucose tolerance test (IVGTT), the IV glucagon stimula-
several hours after a meal. In addition, many drugs and
tion test (IVGST), and the IV arginine stimulation test.
disorders affecting blood glucose concentration also
affect serum insulin concentration. Insulin derived from
Advantages · None.
an insulin injection may be measured in blood samples
for up to 24 hours after the insulin injection. Chronic
Disadvantages · The tests are labor intensive, expen-
lating insulin-binding antibody formation, which can
2 diabetes mellitus, and not recommended for diagnosis
interfere with some RIAs and enzyme-linked immuno-
 of insulin-secreting tumor. Insulin secretagogue testing is
sorbent assays (ELISAs), causing spuriously increased
primarily indicated in a research setting. The reader is
[i.e., >400 μU/ml) or nondetectable values.
referred to the references for more information on per-
forming these tests.13,14,18, 26
Interpretation During Hypoglycemia · Confirmation
 of an insulin-secreting neoplasm requires documentation
of inappropriate insulin secretion during hypoglycemia.
FRUCTOSAMINE
If blood glucose concentration is less than 60 mg/dl
(preferably <50 mg/dl) and serum insulin concentration
Commonly Indicated · Measurement of serum fructos-
is increased (i.e, >20 μU/ml) in the same blood sample.
amine concentration is used to monitor glycemic control
an insulin-secreting neoplasm is likely. If serum insulin
in diabetic dogs and cats and occasionally to document
is in the high-normal range [i.e, 10 to 20 μU/ml), an
 persistent hyperglycemia and possible diabetes mellitus
insulin-secreting tumor remains possible. Insulin values
in animals with conflicting clinical signs and results of
in the low-normal range (i.e, 5 to 10 μU/ml) may be
blood and urine glucose tests, and persistent hypoglyce-
found with other causes of hypoglycemia, as well as
mia in insulin-treated diabetic animals and dogs with
insulin-secreting tumors. Careful assessment of history.
suspected beta cell tumor.
physical findings, clinical pathologic assessments, abdom-
inal ultrasound, and possibly repeated serum glucose and
Analysis ● Fructosamine is measured in serum by auto-
insulin values usually identifies the cause of hypoglyce-
mated colorimetric assay using the nitroblue tetrazolium
mia. A serum insulin concentration that is below the
chloride reduction method. Serum should be kept frozen
normal range (ie., <5 μU/ml) is inconsistent with an
until assayed for fructosamine.
insulin-secreting tumor.
Normal Values ● 225 to 375 μmol/L. Normal values may
Interpretation During Hyperglycemia · Serum insulin
 differ depending on the laboratory used.
concentration should be increased (i.e., >20 μU/ml)
during periods of hyperglycemia in normal animals.
Artifacts ● Serum fnuctosamine concentration may be
Documenting serum insulin concentration greater than
affected by hypoalbuminemia (decreased). hyperlipid-
20 μU/ml in newly diagnosed diabetics suggests residual
emia (mild decrease in dogs), azotemia (mild decrease in
beta cell function and either type 2 diabetes or diabetes
dogs), hyperthyroidism (decrease in cats), and storage at
induced by concurrent insulin antagonistic disease. Most
room temperature (decreased)
170
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Fructosamine
measured before and 3 to 4 weeks after changing insulin
Concentration · Any drugs that cause a persistent and
therapy to assess the effectiveness of the change If changes
prolonged increase (e.g., glucocorticoids) or decrease
(e.g. glipizide, glyburide) in blood glucose concentration
"T/loum os iseal ie Aq aseaoap Pinoys uonenuaouo
can increase or decrease senum fnuctosamine concentra-
If the senum fructosamine concentration is the same or
tions, respectively.
has increased, the change was ineffective in improving
glycemic control, another change in therapy should be
Interpretation in Diabetic Dogs and Cats · Fructos-
tried, and the serum fructosamine measured again 3 to
amines result from an irreversible, nonenzymatic,
4 weeks later.
insulin-independent binding of glucose to serum pro-
teins. The extent of glycosylation of serum proteins is
directly related to the blood glucose concentration; the
HYPERLIPIDEMLA
higher the average blood glucose concentration during
the preceding 2 to 3 weeks, the higher the serum fructos-
Hyperlipidemia is an increase in serum concentrations of
amine concentration, and vice versa. Serum fructosamine
cholesterol, triglycerides, or both. In the clinical setting.
concentrations increase when glycemic control of the
veterinarians typically use the term hypercholesterolemia
diabetic dog or cat worsens and decrease when glycemic
when there is an increase in serum cholesterol without
control improves. Serum fmuctosamine concentration is
lipemia or hypertriglyceridemia, and they use the term
not affected by acute increases in the blood glucose con-
 u a e si a m 
centration, as occurs with stress- or excitement-induced
and the presence of gross lipemia with or without concur-
hyperglycemia. Measurement of a single serum fructos-
rent hypercholesterolemia. In the fasted state, increased
amine concentration as part of the routine evaluation of
 serum cholesterol, triglycerides, or both is an abnormal
the insulin-treated diabetic dog or cat provides informa-
finding that represents either accelerated production or
tion on the status of glycemic control during the month
delayed degradation of lipoproteins. Lipoproteins func-
prior to the evaluation. Serum fnuctosamine concentra-
tion as a carrier system to transport water-insoluble
tions can be measured to clarify the effect of stress or
triglycerides and cholesterol through the aqueous envi-
excitement on blood glucose concentrations, to clarify
ronment of blood. Four major classes of lipoproteins are
discrepancies between the history and physical examina-
tion findings and results of serial blood glucose concen-
'(slan) suaodod Aisuap-mol (e) (siala) suaiod
trations, and to assess the effectiveness of changes in
and [4) high-density lipoproteins (HDLs). Chylomicrons
insulin therapy.
and VLDLs are predominantly involved in triglyceride
The normal reference range for serum fructosamine
metabolism, whereas HDLs and LDLs are primarily
involved in cholesterol metabolism. Chylomicrons are
normal blood glucose concentrations. Interpretation of
derived from dietary fat. Triglycerides produced from free
senum fructosamine in a diabetic dog or cat must take into
fatty acids by the liver are packaged into VLDL particles
consideration the fact that hyperglycemia is common,
and subsequently secreted into the circulation. LDLs
even in well-controlled diabetic animals. Most owners are
result from removal of the triglyceride core of VLDL by
happy with their pet's response to insulin treatment if
juanhasqns pue sanssi ul asedil uaioidodil lellauiopua
serum fructosamine concentrations can be kept between
removal of residual triglyceride in the remnant VLDL par-
350 and 450 μmol/L (reference range, 200 to 375 μmol/L).
ticle by hepatic lipase in the liver. LDLs function to trans-
Values greater than 5o0 μmol/L suggest inadequate
port cholesterol to tissues. HDLs are produced in the liver,
control of the diabetic state, and values greater than 600
and act to scavenge excess unesterifed cholesterol from
μmol/L indicate serious lack of glycemic control. Serum
cells and other lipoproteins and return it to the liver for
fructosamine concentrations in the lower half of the
excretion in bile. HDLs are the primary lipoprotein in the
normal reference range (i.e, <300 μmol/L) or below the
dog and cat.
normal reference range should raise concern for signifi-
Hyperlipidemia is often initially recognized by the
cant periods of hypoglycemia in the diabetic dog or cat
finding of gross lipemia [i.e, milky plasma or serum) in
Or remission of the diabetic state. Increased serum fruc-
a blood sample Postprandial hyperlipidemia is normal;
tosamine concentrations (i.e, >500 μmol/L) suggest poor
however, hyperlipidemia in a dog or cat that has been
control of glycemia and a need for insulin adjustments.
fasted 12 hours or longer is abnormal. Clear plasma or
However, increased senum fructosamine concentrations
serum does not rule out hypercholesterolemia in the
do not identify the underlying problem.
absence of hypertriglyceridemia (which does not cause
Evaluation of the change in serum fructosamine can
lipemia). Lipemia is visible when serum triglycerides are
be used to assess response to changes in insulin therapy
 greater than 200 mg/dl. Gross lipemia implies hypertri-
in fractious or stressed diabetic dogs and cats in which
glyceridemia and an increase in chylomicrons, VLDLs, or
reliability of blood glucose results are questionable.
both. Hyperlipidemia is also diagnosed after measure-
Because serum proteins have a relatively short half-life.
ment of serum cholesterol and triglyceride concen-
senum fructosamine concentration changes relatively
trations.
 Reference intervals  for  serum triglyceride
 aue e oi asuosa ul (sam  oi 7 'a) oi
concentration are typically 50 to 150 mg/dl for adult
glycemic control. This short period for change in serum
dogs and 20 to l10 mg/dl for adult cats. Reference inter-
fructosamine concentration is advantageous for detecting
vals for serum cholesterol concentration are typically 125
to 300 mg/dl for the adult dog and 95 to 130 mg/dl for
As such, serum fructosamine concentrations can
be
the adult cat. Hyperlipidemia should be suspected when
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
171
be gained by measuring serum cholesterol and triglycer-
BOX 8-6. CAUSES OF HYPerliPiDemiA IN DoGs
ide concentrations and performing the chylomicron test.
AND CATS
In the chylomicron test, the lipemic plasma or serum
sample is refrigerated at 4° C overnight (i.e., 12 hours)
POSTPRANDIAL HYPERLIPIDEMIA
and then assessed visually. Chylomicrons form a cream
SECONDARY HYPERLIPIDEMIA
layer at the top of the sample, whereas persistent lact-
Hypothyroidism (common and important)
escence of plasma or senum is caused by VLDLs.
 Diabetes mellitus (common and important)
Hyperadrenocorticism (common and important)
Pancreatitis
CHOLESTEROL
Cholestasis
Hepatic insufficiency (rare)
Occasionally Indicated · Measurement of serum cho-
Nephrotic syndrome (common and important)
lesterol concentration is indicated in dogs and cats with
hyperlipidemia and as a screening test for hypothyroid-
PRIMARY HYPERLIPIDEMIA
ism, hyperadrenocorticism, hepatic insufficiency and
Idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia (miniature schnauzers)
protein-losing enteropathy.  Hypercholesterolemia by
{common and imporant)
itself does not cause gross lipemia.
Idiopathic hyperchylomicronemia (cat)
Lipoprotein lipase deficiency (cat)
Analysis · Cholesterol is measured in serum or heparin-
Idiopathic hypercholesterolemia
ized plasma by spectrophotometric chromatographic.
automated direct, and enzymatic methods. Automated
DRUG-INDUCED HYPERLIPIDEMIA
 direct techniques may slightly overestimate serum choles-
Glucocorticoids
terol concentration.
Megestrol acetate (cat)
Normal Values ● Dogs, 125 to 300 mg/dl; ats, 95 to
130 mg/dl. Normal values may differ depending on the
serum concentrations of cholesterol, triglycerides, or both
laboratory used. To convert from mg/dl to mmol/L, mul-
exceed the reference interval.
tiply by 0.026.
 Hyperlipidemia may be idiopathic a primary defect
in lipoprotein metabolism, or a consequence of systemic
Danger Values · None.
disease (Box 8-6). Postprandial hyperlipidemia is the
most common cause of hyperlipidemia and should be
Artifacts + See Chapter l.
eliminated before one performs more costly tests. The
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Cholesterol
within 10 hours after eating. Postprandial plasma choles-
Concentration · l-Asparaginase azathioprine colchi-
terol concentration usually does not exceed the upper
cine cholestyramine, and oral aminoglycosides may
limit of the species-specific reference range.
cause hypocholesterolemia. Corticosteroids, methima-
For most animals, persistent hyperlipidemia is caused
zole phenytoin, prochlorperazine, thiazides, and pheno-
by an endocrine or metabolic disorder. The patient may
thiazines may cause hypercholesterolemia.
be presented because of signs related to the underlying
disorder (see Box 8-6) or signs caused by hyperlipidemia,
Causes of Hypocholesterolemia · Hypocholesterol-
Or it may be asymptomatic. Persistent hyperlipidemia is
emia primarily occurs with protein-losing enteropathy
an indication for further tests to eliminate potential sec-
(e.g. intestinal lymphangiectasia), hepatic insuffciency
ondary causes. History, physical examination, CBC, senum
(e.g, portocaval shunt and cirrhosis), selected malignan-
biochemistry panel, serum pancreatic lipase immunore-
cies, and severe malnutrition.
activity (see Chapter 9), thyroxine concentration, and
urinalysis make up the initial diagnostic approach to
Causes of Hypercholesterolemia · Diet or spontane-
hyperlipidemia (Figure 8-7). Additional diagnostic tests
-isalorady ase Ae (o-g xog aas] aseasi sno
(e.g, abdominal ultrasound, LDDS, serum free thyroxine
emia. Feeding a very-high-fat diet or sampling blood
and thyroid-stimulating hormone concentration) may be
shortly after eating may cause minor elevations in serum
indicated, depending on initial test results.
cholesterol concentration. The diagnostic approach to
Idiopathic hyperlipidemias include idiopathic hyper-
persistent hypercholesterolemia in the fasted animal is as
lipoproteinemia of miniature schnauzers, idiopathic
outlined for hyperlipidemia (see Figure 8-7). Primary dif-
hyperchylomicronemia, feline familial hyperlipidemia
ferentials are diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, hyperad-
caused by lipoprotein lipase deficiency, and idiopathic
renocorticism, and protein-losing disorders, most notably
involving the kidney.
emia is diagnosed after eliminating secondary causes of
lipidemias can be further characterized by lipoprotein
TRIGLYCERIDES
electrophoresis or combined ultracentrifugation and pre-
cipitation techniques. These techniques require special-
Occasionally Indicated · Occasionally, measurement
ized equipment and are not widely available commercially.
of serum triglyceride concentration is indicated in patients
An idea of the nature of lipoprotein alterations can also
with hyperlipidemia or hypercholesterolemia, especially
172
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Hyperlipidemia
Confirm that it is fasting sample (i.e., 12-hour)
Chylomicron test (overnight refrigeration of serum)
All of lipid found in 
Serum opalescence continues
"cream"layer
with or without cream layer
Patient is not fasting
 Physical examination, serum
 chemistry profile, ultrasound, and 
Idiopathic hyperchylomicronemia
serum T4, fT4, TSH values 
Other diseases that may
 Acute pancreatitis
No apparent reason for
 cause hyperlipidemia 
hyperlipidemia
 Diabetes mellitus (especially
Hyperlipidemia
Cholesterol, triglycerides
ketoacidosis)
 may be responsible
Hypothyroidism
 and perhaps lipoprotein
for causing pancreatitis,
electrophoresis
 Less common causes
 therefore consider
Hyperadrenocorticism
Nephrotic syndrome
Primary hyperlipidemia
Hepatic diseases
Treat
Hyperlipidemia
 Hyperlipidemia
resolves
persists
FGURE 8-7 Diagnostic approach to hyperlipidemia in the dog and cat. fT4, free thyroxine; T& thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-stimulating
hormone.
if clinical signs associated with hypertriglyceridemia
Artifacts ● Lipemia may interfere with several routine
are present (i.e, gastrointestinal signs, abdominal pain,
biochemistry tests (Box 8-7), depending upon the species
seizures, ataxia, weakness, behavioral changes, lipemia
evaluated (i.e., dog versus cat), analytical instrumenta-
retinalis,
and xanthomata). Gross lipemia implies
tion, laboratory methods, and severity of hypertriglyceri-
hypertriglyceridemia.
demia (see Chapter 1).
Analysis ● Triglycerides are measured in serum or EDTA
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Triglyceride
plasma by spectrophotometric or enzymatic methods.
Concentration · Ascorbic
acid,
L-asparaginase
PuE
Triglyceride values tend to be slightly less in plasma than
heparin may cause hypotriglyceridemia. Different ana-
in serum. Enzymatic methods may give slightly greater
bolic steroids have different effects. Estrogens, choles-
values than spectrophotometric methods. Point-of-care
tyramine phenobarbital, and bromide may cause
triglyceride meters used in humans may be suitable for
hypertriglyceridemia.16
identifying hypertriglyceridemia in dogs.17
Causes of Hypotriglyceridemia · Hypotriglyceridemia
Normal Values ● Dogs. 50 to 150 mg/dl; cats, 20 to
is not clearly associated with any disease.
110 mg/dl. Normal values may differ depending on the
laboratory used.
Causes
s of Hypertriglyceridemia · Hypertriglycerid-
emia may be idiopathic, develop as a primary defect in
Danger Values · Greater than l0o0 mg/dl (neurologic
lipoprotein metabolism, or be a consequence of an
 signs, seizures).
underlying systemic disease (see Box 8-6). Postprandial
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
173
BOX 8-7. EFFECT OF GROSS LIPEMIA ON CLINICAL CHEMISTRY ANALYTES* IN CANINE AND FELINE SERA
FALSE INCREASE IN VALUES
FALSE DECREASE IN VALUES
CANINE SERA
FELINE SERA
CANINE SERA
FELINE SERA
Total bilirubin
Total bilirubin 
Creatinine
Creatinine
Phosphorus
 Phosphorus
Total CO2
Total CO2
Akaline phosphate (SAP)t
Akaline phosphate (SAP})t
 Cholesterol
ALT
Glucoset
Glucoset
Urea nitrogen
Total proteint
 Total proteint
Lipase
 Aanine aminotransferase
[ALT)
*Analytes were measured using Coulter DACES (Coulter Diagnostics, Hialeah, FL).
tlnterference only occurs at very high concentrations of lipid.
tWhen measured using refractometer.
Adapted from Jacobs RM et al: Effects of bilirubinemia, hemolysis, and lipemia on clinical chemistry analytes in bovine, canine, equine, and
feline sera. Can Vet J 33:605, 1992.
hypertriglyceridemia is the most common cause of hyper-
Analysis · T concentration is measured in senum by RIA
lipidemia and should be eliminated before more costly
Or enzyme, chemiluminescent, particle-enhanced, turbi-
siul ul iaea eiapidiadah aasl paad aie sisa
dimetric, or dry chemistry immunoassay systems. Ta con-
chapter). The diagnostic approach for persistent hypertri-
centration in serum is stable for days at room temperature.
glyceridemia in the fasted animal is as outlined for hyper-
Hemolysis, freezing. and thawing does not affect serum
lipidemia (see Figure 8-7). Primary differentials are
T4 concentrations. Despite stability, serum samples should
diabetes mellitus, hypothyroidism, acute pancreatitis, and
be frozen and sent to the laboratory on cool packs. The
idiopathic hyperlipoproteinemia.
laboratory must use an assay validated for the species
being tested. When evaluating levothyroxine sodium
therapy. serum ideally should be obtained 4 to 6 hours
THYROXINE
after levothyroxine sodium administration for dogs on
twice-a-day therapy and before and 4 to 6 hours after
Commonly Indicated · Measurement of serum thyrox-
levothyroxine sodium administration for dogs on once-
ine (T4) concentration is performed to diagnose hypothy-
a-day therapy (see Chapter 18). A single serum sample
roidism and hyperthyroidism and to monitor sodium
can be obtained at any time when evaluating methima-
levothyroxine therapy for hypothyroidism and methima-
zole therapy in cats.35
zole therapy for hyperthyroidism. Clinical signs sugges-
tive of hypothyroidism include mental dullness, lethargy.
Normal Values · Dogs. 0.8 to 3.5 μg/dl; cats, 1.0 to
exercise intolerance or unwillingness to exercise gain in
4.0 μg/dl.
10 aadde ui aseaui suuodsao e inouim iuia
food intake, endocrine alopecia, seborrhea, pyoderma,
weakness, neurologic signs [e.g., facial nerve paralysis,
NOTE: Different laboratories have different normal ranges.
head tilt, ataxia, seizures), failure to cycle (bitch), and
To convert from μg/dl to nmol/L, multiply by 12.87.
failure to grow (i.e, cretinism). Clinical signs suggestive
of hyperthyroidism include weight loss (which may prog-
 Interpretation for hypothyroidism in dogs: A normal
haircoat changes (eg, patchy alopecia, matted hair. lack
serum T4 concentration establishes normal thyroid gland
of or excessive grooming behavior), polyuria, polydipsia,
function. The exception is a very small number (<1%) of
vomiting. diarrhea, and aggressive behavior. Hyperthy-
hypothyroid dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis that have
roidism should also be considered in an older cat with a
senum Ta autoantibodies that interfere with some RlAs
palpable cervical nodule.
used to measure T4.40 A serum T4 concentration less than
0.5 μg/dl in conjunction with appropriate clinical signs,
Advantages · Tests to measure serum T4 are readily
physical findings, and results of routine blood tests sup-
available, including point-of-care ELISAs!5; T4 is a stable
ports the diagnosis of hypothyroidism, especially if sys-
hormone and the primary hormone secreted by the
temic illness is not present. Additional diagnostic tests of
thyroid gland.
thyroid gland function are indicated if the serum T4 con-
centration is less than the reference range but clinical
Disadvantages ● A myriad of variables can affect serum
signs, physical examination findings. and results of
T4 concentration, resulting in misinterpretation.
routine blood work are not strongly supportive of the
174
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
disease; if severe systemic illness is present or if drugs
TABLE 8-1.VARIABLES THAT MAYAFFECT BASELINE
known to decrease serum T4 concentration are being
SERUM THYROID HORMONE FUNCTION
administered.
TEST RESULTSIN DOGS
Interpretation for hyperthyroidism in cats: A serum
T4 concentration greater than the reference range is diag-
Age
 Inversely proportional effect
nostic for hyperthyroidism, assuming appropriate clinical
Neonate (<3 mo)
Increased T4
signs and a thyroid nodule are present. A serum T4 con-
Aged (>6 yr)
Decreased T4
centration less than 2 μg/dl rules out hyperthyroidism,
Body size
 Inversely proportional efect 
Small (<10 kg)
Increased T4
rent severe nonthyroidal illness is present. Serum T4 con-
Large (>30 kg)
Decreased T4
centrations in the upper half of the reference range are
Breed 
identifed in some cats in the early stages of hyperthyroid-
Sight hounds (e.g..
T and free Tg lower than
ism. Hyperthyroidism should not be excluded on the
Greyhound)
basis of one “normal" T4 test result, especially in a cat
Nordic breeds (e.g..
for dogs; no difference for
Huskies)
TSH
the neck.
Other breeds (?)
Gender
No effect
Danger Values · None.
ep o awl
No effect
Weight gain/obesity
Increased
NOTE: The clinician must always consider breed of dog,
Weight loss/fasting 
Decreased Ta, no effect on
dinical signs, physical findings, clinical pathologic changes,
free Ta
effects of concurrent drugs and illness, and index of suspi-
 Strenuous exercise
Increased Ty, decreased TSH,
don when interpreting serum Tg results.
no effect on free T4
Estrus (estrogen)
No effect on T4 
 Pregnancy (progesterone)
Increased T4
Variables That Affect Serum T, Concentration + Vari-
Surgery/anesthesia
Decreased T
ables affecting serum Tq concentration can be divided into
Concurrent illness*
Decrease Tg and free T4;
physiologic, pharmacologic. and systemic illness (Tables
depending on illness, TSH
8-1 and 8-2). Serum T concentration is higher in young
may increase, decrease or
dogs (i.e., <l year of age) and decreases with advancing
not change
age.32 Smaller breeds have higher T4 concentrations than
Moderate/severe
No effect on T4, free Ts, or
large or giant breeds. Certain breeds [e.g, sight hounds
osteoarthritis
TSH
and Nordic breeds) have lower serum T4 values than other
s6n0
See Table 8-2
breeds. Estrus, pregnancy, and obesity increase serum T4
 Dietary iodine intake
If excessive, decreased T4
concentration, whereas hypoproteinemia may decrease
 and free T; increased TSH
senum T4 concentration. Anti-thyroid hormone antibod-
Thyroid hormone 
Increased or decreased T4;
ies may develop in dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis and
autoantibodies
no effect on free Ta or TSH 
cause spuriously increased or decreased serum T values.40
Ts. Thyroxine; TSH, thyroid-stimulating hormone.
The effect of anti-thyroid hormone antibodies on the
*There is a direct correlation between severity and systemic nature of
serum T4 value depends on the type of assay being used
illness and suppression of serum T4 and free T concentration.
by the laboratory. Drugs that have been documented to
From Nelson RW, Couto GC: Small animal internal medicine, ed 4,
alter serum Ta concentration in dogs are listed in Table
St. Louis, 2009, Elsevier.
8-2; the most clinically relevant are concurrent glucocor-
ticoid, phenobarbital, and sulfonamide administration.
Many nonthyroidal illnesses are associated with decreased
serum T4 concentration (Box 8-8). This phenomenon is
iatrogenic, resulting from bilateral thyroidectomy, exces-
called the euthyroid sick syndrome. The severity of illness
sive methimazole, or radioactive iodine (1s'1) therapy for
has a direct correlation with the severity of suppression
hyperthyroidism. Naturally occurring feline hypothyroid-
of senum T4 concentration.
ism is rare and is usually identifed in kittens. Congenital
hypothyroidism results in a cretin.
Causes of Decreased Serum T, Concentration · The
 Diagnosis of hypothyroidism must consider history.
primary disorder causing decreased serum T4 concentra-
physical fndings, clinical pathologic assessments, serum
tion is hypothyroidism, which must be differentiated
T4 concentration, and the clinician's index of suspicion
from all the variables listed earlier that can also suppress
for the disease. Fasting lipemia, hypercholesterolemia
senum T4 concentration (Box 8-9). In the dog, lympho-
and, less commonly. mild normocytic normochromic
cytic thyroiditis, idiopathic atrophy, or neoplastic destruc-
anemia (i.e, hematocrit 30% to 35%) are the most
tion of the thyroid gland
1may
cause
primary
common abnormalities identifed on routine clinical
hypothyroidism. Secondary hypothyroidism results from
pathologic assessments. Mild hypercalcemia may occur in
a deficiency of pituitary gland thyrotropin 
(thyroid-
some dogs with congenital hypothyroidism, and skeletal
stimulating hormone [TSH]) and may be caused by pitu-
survey radiographs may identify delayed epiphyseal ossi-
itary malformation, destruction, or suppression (eg..
fication, epiphyseal dysgenesis (i.e., irregularly formed.
glucocorticoid therapy). Feline hypothyroidism is usually
fragmented, or stippled epiphyseal centers). short broad
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
175
TABLE 8-2.DRUGS THAT MAY AFFECT BASELINE
SERUM THYROID HORMONE FUNCTION
BOX 8-8. cOmMON CAUSES OF THE "EUTHYRoID
TEST RESULTSIN DOGS
SICK SYNDROme"
Amiodarone
Increased T4; decreased T3
ACUTE DISEASES
 Aspirin 
Decreased T4, free Ts; no effect 
 Bacterial bronchopneumonia 
on TSH
Sepsis
Carprofen
Decreased T4, free Ta, and TSH
Distemper
Deracoxib
No effect on Tq, free Ty, or TSH
Autoimmune hemolytic anemia 
Etodolac
No effect on Ta, free Ta, or TSH
Systemic lupus erythematosus
 Meloxicam 
No effect on Ta, free Ta, or TSH
Intervertebral disk disease
Glucocorticoids
Decreased Ta and free T4;
 Polyradiculoneuritis
decrease or no effect on TSH
 Acute renal failure 
Clomipramine
Decreased Ty, free Ty; no effect
Acute hepatitis
on TSH
Acute pancreatitis
Furosemide
Decreased T4
Decreased Ta and free T4;
CHRONIC DISEASES
Methimazole
 increased TSH 
 Generalized demodicosis
Decreased Ty and free T4;
 Generalized bacterial furunculosis
Phenobarbital
 delayed increase in TSH
 Systemic mycoses
 Phenylbutazone
Decreased T4
Lymphosarcoma
 Potassium bromide
No effect on Ta, free Ta, or TSH
 Chronic renal failure
Progestagens
Decreased T4 
 Diabetes mellitus 
 Propranolol 
No effect on Tq, free Ty, or TSH 
 Congestive heart failure
Propylthiouracil
Decreased Ty and free T4;
Cardiomyopathy
increased TSH
 Chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis 
Stanazol
No effect on Tq or free T4 
 Gastrointestinal disturbances
Cephalexine
No effect on Tq, free T4, or TSH
Megaesophagus
Sulfonamides 
Decreased Ty and free T4;
 increased TSH
Data from Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Hypothyroidism. In Canine and
lpodate
Increased T4, decreased T3
feline endocrinology and reproduction, Philadelphia, 196, WB
Saunders.
T. 3,5,3-Triodothyronine; T4,thyroxine; TSH,thyroid-stimulating hormone.
From Nelson RW, Couto GC: Small animal internal medicine, ed 4,
St Louis, 2009, Elsevier.
BOX 8-9. CAUSEs OF ALTERED SERUm T: AND T4
VALUES IN DOGS AND CATS
skulls, shortened vertebral bodies, and decreased length
DECREASED SERUM THYROID HORMONE VALUES
of diaphyses of long bones.? Additional diagnostic tests,
Hypothyroidism (primary and secondary)
including baseline serum free thyroxine (fT4) and endog-
 Nonthyroidal illness (euthyroid sick syndrome) (see Box
[e ol asuodsan iesiu pue 'uoeiuauo Hsl snoa
8-81
therapy with levothyroxine sodium are usually required
Drugs (see Table 8-2)
to establish the diagnosis.
latrogenic
Monitoring serum concentrations during levothyrox-
 Post-thyroidectomy (bilateral)
ine sodium therapy allows the clinician to evaluate the
dose, frequency of administration, and adequacy of
INCREASED SERUM THYROID HORMONE VALUES
Hyperthyroidism
intestinal absorption of levothyroxine sodium (see
 Chapter 18). If the dose and dosing schedule are appro-
Drugs (see Table 8-2)
 priate the serum Ta concentration should be between 2.0
 Thyroid hormone autoantibodies
 Normal dog or cat
and 4.5 μg/dl. Senum TSH concentration should also be
in the normal range. Post-dosing senum T4 concentra-
latrogenic
tions measured at times other than 4 to 6 hours after
 Excess thyroid hormone supplementation
levothyroxine sodium administration should be inter-
preted with the realization that serum Ta may not be at
peak concentrations. When the post-pill serum T4 con-
centration is less than 2.0 μg/dl, the decision to adjust
indicated if clinical manifestations of hypothyroidism
therapy is based on the history, physical examination,
persist, the serum TSH concentration remains increased,
time of the blood test in relation to levothyroxine
or both, but is not necessarily indicated if the clinical
 sodium administration, and probability the dog con-
response to treatment is good and the serum TSH con-
sumed the medication. An increase in the dose or fre-
centration is in the reference range. The dose of levo-
quency of administration of levothyroxine sodium is
thyroxine sodium should be decreased whenever the
176
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
post-pill serum T4 concentration is greater than 5 μg/dl
and fT4 measured in the same blood sample. If the diag-
regardless of the presence of thyrotoxicosis.
nosis is still not established, a critical review of the case
is warranted, the serum T4 and fT4 tests can be repeated
Causes of Increased Serum T, Concentration · The
in 4 to 8 weeks, a radionuclide [technetium) thyroid scan
primary disorder causing increased serum T4 concentra-
can be performed if available, or a triodothyronine sup-
tion is hyperthyroidism (see Box 8-9). Spontaneous feline
 pression test completed.
hyperthyroidism is usually caused by multinodular ade-
nomatous goiter. Less common are thyroid adenomas
and malignant thyroid carcinomas. Functional thyroid
3,5,3'-TRIIODOTHYRONINE
saop ui uouooun ane usipioaunadaq susnen sioun
but, when present, may be adenoma or carcinoma.
 Indications ● Measurement of serum 3,5,3'-triodothy-
Oversupplementation of levothyroxine sodium to
ronine (Ts) concentration is done during the T; suppres-
dogs with hypothyroidism and spurious increase caused
sion test for hyperthyroidism in cats. Although theoretical
by antithyroid hormone antibody interference with RIAs
indications for the measurement of serum T; concentra-
for serum T measurement can also cause increased serum
tion are the same as those for senum T4. baseline serum
T4 concentrations. Oversupplementation is diagnosed by
T; concentration offers little additional diagnostic infor-
history: antithyroid hormone antibodies should be sus-
mation beyond that obtained with serum T4 concentra-
pected in dogs with clinical signs of hypothyroidism but
tion in identifying feline hyperthyroidism. It offers
increased serum T4 concentration. Senum T4 concentra-
minimal to no value in assessing canine thyroid gland
tion above the reference range also occurs in normal dogs;
 ui jo aoie a asnnaq ed un 'uu
5% of the normal population of dogs falls outside 2
comes from conversion of T4 to Ts in peripheral tissues.
standard deviations (SDs) from the mean or the 95%
confidence interval used to establish the normal range.
recommended for assessment of thyroid gland function.
Evaluation of serum TSH is useful in differentiating the
causes of increased serum T4 concentration in dogs.
Advantages · None.
History and physical examination are the basis for
suspecting hyperthyroidism. Results of a CBC are usually
Disadvantages · Measurement of serum T: concentra-
normal in hyperthyroid cats. The most common abnor-
tion is of questionable diagnostic usefulness; a myriad of
malities are a mild increase in the packed cell volume
variables can affect serum T; concentration.
(PCV) and mean corpuscular volume (MCV). Common
 serum biochemical abnormalities include an increase in
Analysis ● Same as for serum T4: point-of-care ELISAs
serum activities of ALT, alkaline phosphatase, and aspar-
are not available for T3.
tate aminotransferase; the increase is typically in the mild
to moderate range [i.e., 100 to 400 IU/L). One or more
Normal Values · Dogs. 0.5 to 1.8 ng/ml; cats, 0.4 to
of these hepatic enzymes is increased in approximately
1.6 ng/ml.
90% of hyperthyroid cats. Additional evaluation of the
liver should be considered if hepatic enzyme activities are
 NOTE: Diferent laboratories have different normal ranges.
 greater than 500 IU/L. Increased serum urea nitrogen and
Creatinine concentrations are identified in approximately
10% of hyperthyroid cats, findings that have important
implications from the standpoint of the initial treatment
Danger Values · None.
implemented.44 The urine specific gravity ranges from
Variables That Affect Serum T, Concentration ● The
urine specifc gravities greater than 1.035. Unfortunately.
variables are the same as for serum T4 concentration. The
documentation of a concentrated urine specific gravity is
 incidence of anti-T: antibodies is greater than anti-T4 anti-
not helpful in differentiating primary renal insuffciency
bodies in dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis.
from prerenal azotemia in hyperthyroid cats.33 ECG
abnormalities include tachycardia, increased R wave
Causes of Decreased Serum T, Concentration · Same
amplitude in lead II and, less commonly, right bundle
as for serum T4 concentration.
branch block, left anterior fascicular block, widened QRS
complexes, and atrial and ventricular arrhythmias. Tho-
Causes of Increased Serum T; Concentration · Same
racic radiographs may reveal cardiomegaly, pulmonary
as for senum T4 concentration; spurious increase as the
edema, or pleural effusion. ECG abnormalities depend
result of anti-thyroid hormone antibody interference
on the form of thyrotoxic cardiomyopathy. The reader is
with RIAs is more common with T; than T4.
referred to a text on ultrasonography for details of echo-
cardiographic abnormalities.
Measurement of baseline serum T4 concentration is
FREE THYROXINE
reliable in diagnosing hyperthyroidism in most cats
(Figure 8-8). Cats with mild or occult hyperthyroidism
Indications · Measurement of serum fT4 concentration
and hyperthyroid cats with significant nonthyroidal
is usually reserved for those dogs with suspected hypo-
illness can have serum Ta concentrations in the upper half
thyroidism and nondiagnostic serum T4 concentration,
of the reference range If the serum T4 test result is not
severe concurrent illness, or both, and cats with occult
definitive, measurement of senum T4 should be repeated
hyperthyroi dism.
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
177
Measure serum T4
Hyperthyroid
T4 increased >4 μg/dl
T4 <2.5 μg/dl
T4 2.5-4 μg/dl
Measure
 fT4 >4 ng/dl
Hyperthyroidism
Either
serum fT4
unlikely
(preferred)
- fT4 <4 ng/dl
Not
hyperthyroid
Repeat T4 determination
Perform
PerformT3
in 4-8 weeks
radionuclide scan 
suppression test
Hyperthyroidism ~ T4 >4 μg/dl
T4 2.5-4 μg/dl
T4 <1.5 μg/dl
T4 1.5-2.0 μg/dl
T4 >2.0 μg/dl
Pretreatment
Either 3- to 4-week
Not
Nondiagnostic
Hyperthyroid
diagnostics (CBC,
 trial therapy with
hyperthyroid
 serum chemistry
methimazole or T3
 profile, urinalysis,
suppression test or
ECG, and thoracic
measure fT4
radiographs);
concentration or perform
echocardiography
radionuclide scan 
and, if available,
 thyroid imaging
if surgery is planned
Treat
FGURE 8-8 Evaluation of cats with suspected hyperthyroidism based on history, clinical signs (i.e., weight loss, polyphagia,
polyuria-polydipsia, hyperactivity, cervical mass] or laboratory findings (i.e., increased serum alkaline phosphatase [SAPl, increased
serum phosphorus). CBC, Complete blood count; ECG, electrocardiogram; fT4, free thyroxine; T3, triiodothyronine; T4
thyroxine.
Advantages ● The test is readily available and provides
NOTE: Dfferent fT assays have different normal ranges.
a more accurate assessment of thyroid gland function
Dfferent laboratories have different normal ranges. To
than serum T4 concentration when measured by modified
convert from ng/dl to pmol/L, multiply by 12.87.
ing newer fT4 assays that do not utilize equilibrium dialy-
sis have not been published, although preliminary
Danger Values · None.
fndings suggest comparable results with ELISA assays and
assays that use two incubation temperatures to separate
Variables That Affect Serum fT, Concentration · Con-
free and protein-bound T4 before measuring fT4 by RIA.
current illness can suppress serum fT4 concentrations.
 The hormone is stable during handling and shipping.
although alterations in serum concentrations of fT4 are
more variable than with serum T4 and probably depend
Disadvantages ● Variables may affect serum fT4 concen-
in part on the pathophysiologic mechanisms involved in
tration, resulting in misinterpretation of results. In addi-
the illness. In general, serum fT4 concentrations tend to
tion, the test is relatively expensive.
be decreased in dogs with concurrent illness but to a
lesser extent than total T4 concentrations. However, fT4
Analysis · Serum fT4 is most commonly measured by
concentrations can be less than 0.5 ng/dl if severe illness 
RIA following separation of fT4 from protein-bound T4
is present. Drugs and hormones that suppress serum T4
using equilibrium dialysis, or by one- or two-step
can also suppress serum fT4 concentrations (see Table
immunoassays.
8-2). Unlike serum T4, circulating anti-thyroid hormone
 antibodies do not affect fTa results. The impact of many
Normal Values ·Dogs. 0.8 to 3.5 ng/dl; cats, 1.0 to
of the other variables known to affect serum T4 concentra-
4.0 ng/dl.
tions have not yet been reported for senum fT4. Until
178
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
clinical studies indicate otherwise, the clinician should
Normal Values · Dogs. less than 0.03 to 0.6 ng/ml;
assume that variables affecting serum Ta may have a
senior cats, less than 0.03 to 0.15 ng/ml.
similar effect on senum fT4 concentration.
Danger Values · None.
Causes of Decreased Serum fT, Concentration ·
Causes are the same as for serum T4 concentration. In the
Variables That Affect Serum TsH Concentration ·
author's laboratory, serum fT4 values less than 0.8 ng/dl
Many of the variables that decrease baseline thyroid
(especially <0.5 ng/dl) suggest hypothyroidism, assum-
hormone concentrations, most notably concurrent illness
ing that history, physical examination, and clinicopatho-
and dnugs. may also increase serum TsH concentrations
logic abnormalities are also consistent with the disorder.
in euthyroid dogs. potentially causing misdiagnosis of
 and severe concurrent illness is not present.
hypothyroidism if the clinician accepts the results out of
context (see Table 8-1 and 8-2). Serum TSH concentra-
Causes of Increased Serum fT, Concentration ·
tions may be normal or increased depending. in part, on
Causes are the same as for serum T4 concentration. Mea-
the effect of the concurrent illness or drug on fT4 concen-
surement of serum fT4 concentration provides a more
trations and on pituitary function. If pituitary function is
accurate assessment of thyroid gland function than serum
suppressed, TSH concentrations will be in the normal
T4 in some cats with occult hyperthyroidism.3 Because of
range or undetectable If pituitary response to changes in
cost, measurement of fT4 concentration is often reserved
fT4 concentration is not affected by the concurrent illness,
for cats with suspected hyperthyroidism where T4 values
or drugs, TSH concentrations will increase in response to
are borderline. Occasionally, concurrent illness causes an
a decrease in fT4. Serum TSH concentrations can easily
increase in serum fT4 concentration in cats (an increase
exceed 1.0 ng/ml in dogs with concurrent nonthyroidal
that can exceed the reference range). For this reason,
illness.
serum fT4 concentration should always be interpreted
in conjunction with senum T4 concentration measured
Causes of Increased Serum TSH Concentration · In
from the same blood sample. An increased serum fT4
dogs, increased serum TSH concentration is caused by
concentration  in  conjunction  with high-normal
or
primary hypothyroidism, euthyroid sick syndrome, and
increased serum Ta concentration is supportive of hyper-
drugs. Ideally, baseline endogenous TSH should be
thyroidism. An increased serum fT4 concentration in con-
increased and serum T4 and fT4 decreased in dogs with
junction with a low-normal or low serum T concentration
primary hypothyroidism. Unfortunately, serum TSH con-
is supportive of euthyroid sick syndrome rather than
centrations measured in hypothyroid dogs overlap with
hyperthyroidism.
those for euthyroid dogs with concurrent illness, and
TSH concentrations [i.e., <0.6 ng/ml). In most studies,
the sensitivity and specificity of the TSH assay have aver-
BASELINE ENDOGENOUS THYROID-
aged approximately 80%.37 Serum TSH concentration
STIMULATING HORMONE
should always be interpreted in conjunction with the
senum T4 or fT4 concentrations measured in the same
Indications ● Baseline serum TSH is measured to assess
blood sample and should never be used as the sole test
-oday paiains y so u uosuy pue pii
of thyroid gland function. Finding a low serum Ta or fT4
roidism and hyperthyroidism. Theoretically, measure-
concentration and a high TSH concentration in a blood
ment of TSH in conjunction with serum T4 concentration,
sample obtained from a dog with appropriate history and
fT4 concentration, or both should increase accuracy of
physical examination findings supports the diagnosis of
diagnosing dogs with suspected hypothyroidism.
. The
 primary hypothyroidism, and fnding normal serum T4.
diagnostic value of serum TSH for identifying occult
fT4. and TSH concentrations rules out hypothyroidism.
hyperthyroidism in cats remains to be determined.
Any other combination of serum T4. fT4, and TSH concen-
trations is diffcult to interpret, and reliance on the
Advantages ● The test is readily available, the hormone
history, physical examination findings, and serum fT4
is stable during handling and shipping. and testing may
concentration is recommended.
improve accuracy of assessing thyroid gland function
lauo jo juaanseam qiim uounluon ul pasn uau
Causes of Nondetectable Serum TSH Concentra-
thyroid hormones.
tion · Current TSH assays cannot differentiate between
normal and decreased senum TSH concentrations in
Disadvantages ● The test is of minimal diagnostic use-
dogs and cats. The lower limit of the reference range
fulness by itself: normal TSH concentrations are common
extends to an undetectable value. A nondetectable
in dogs with hypothyroidism, and increased TSH values
serum TSH concentration is of limited diagnostic value
except in dogs with increased serum T4 concentration
Or with drugs (e.g. phenobarbital). Current TSH assays
and possibly cats with occult hyperthyroidism. Hyper-
cannot identify low TSH values.
thyroidism should result in a nondetectable TSH con-
centration because of negative feedback inhibition of
Analysis · Serum TSH can be measured using immuno-
radiometric, chemiluminescent immunometric 
and
a blood sample obtained from a dog with an increased
enzyme immunometric assays.? The chemiluminescent
serum T concentration or a cat with suspected hyper-
immunometric assay has been validated in the cat.43
thyroidism is inconsistent with hyperthyroidism and
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
179
supports another reason for the increased serum T4
autoantibodies and should be evaluated in lieu of serum
concentration.
T4 in dogs suspected of having T4 autoantibodies. See
Appendix I for availability of measurerment of circulating
antibodies directed against T; and T4.
THYROGLOBULIN AUTOANTIBODIES
3,5,3'-TRIIODOTHYRONINE
Indications · Measurement of thyroglobulin (Tg) auto-
antibodies is done to identify lymphocytic thyroiditis in
SUPPRESSION TEST
dogs with hypothyroidism and possibly as a screening
test for lymphocytic thyroiditis in currently euthyroid
Indications · A T; suppression test is done to confirm
dogs intended for breeding. Tg autoantibodies occur in
hyperthyroidism in the cat with occult disease The T;
conjunction with T; and T4 autoantibodies (see next
HSI Aeinld jo ssauanisuodsai satenleaa jsan uoissaiddns
section on Thyroid Hormone Autoantibodies) and are
secretion to suppression by liothyronine sodium. Admin-
identifed in dogs with lymphocytic thyroiditis that are
istration of Ts to normal cats should suppress pituitary
not positive for T; and T4 autoantibodies, implying that
TSH secretion, decreasing the serum T4 concentration.
Tg autoantibody determination is a better screening test
Subsequent measurement of serum Ta is accurate because
for lymphocytic thyroiditis than T; and T4 autoantibod-
exogenous T; cannot be converted to T4. Cats with hyper-
ies. Presence of serum Tg autoantibodies implies thyroid
thyroidism experience autonomous secretion of thyroid
pathology but provides no information on the severity
hormone Administration of T; to hyperthyroid cats
Or progressive nature of the inflammatory response or
should have no suppressive effect.
the extent of thyroid gland involvement, nor is this test
 an indicator of thyroid gland function. Tg autoantibod-
Advantages · The test is readily available, relatively
ies should not be used alone in the diagnosis of hypo-
inexpensive and easy to interpret.
thyroidism. Dogs with confirmed hypothyroidism can be
negative and euthyroid dogs can be positive for Tg auto-
Disadvantages · It requires 3 days to complete, and
antibodies. Identification of Tg autoantibodies would
accuracy depends on the owner's ability to administer the
support hypothyroidism caused by lymphocytic thyroid-
drug seven times and on the cat swallowing the tablets.
pue shuuy ieisd 'suais ietu sey son aun jn s!
thyroid hormone test results consistent with the
Protocol ● Serum is obtained for determination of base-
disorder.
line serum T4 and T; concentration. Owners then admin-
Tg autoantibodies may be used as a prebreeding
ister liothyronine sodium beginning the following
screen for lymphocytic thyroiditis in breeding dogs. A
morning at a dose of 25 μg three times a day for 2 days.
positive Tg autoantibody test is considered suggestive of
On the morming of day 3, a seventh 25-μg dose is admin-
lymphocytic thyroiditis. However, the value of serum Tg
istered. Two to 4 hours later, a second blood sample
autoantibodies as a predictor for eventual development
is obtained for measurement of senum T4 and T;
 of hypothyroidism in dogs that have no clinical signs and
concentrations.
normal thyroid function test results remains to be clari-
-pisuos si isat apoqueone ai aasod e iuano pay
Interpretation · Normal cats have postpill serum T4
ered suggestive of lymphocytic thyroiditis and supports
concentrations less than 1.5 μg/dl. Hyperthyroid cats
retesting thyroid gland function in 3 to 6 months.
have postpill T4 concentrations greater than 2.0 μg/dl.
Values between 1.5 and 2.0 μg/dl are nondiagmostic. The
THYROID HORMONE
percentage of decrease in serum T4 concentration is not
reliable, although suppression greater than 50% below
AUTOANTIBODIES
baseline occurs in normal but not hyperthyroid cats.28
Serum T; results are used to determine whether the
Indications ● Measurement of thyroid hormone auto-
Owner successfully administered the thyroid medication
antibodies is done to explain unusual serum T4 or T;
to the cat Serum T; concentration should increase in all
values in dogs with suspected hypothyroidism, to identify
cats properly tested, regardless of status of thyroid gland
function. If serum Ta concentration fails to decline in a
and as a screening test for lymphocytic thyroiditis in cur-
cat in which serum T; concentration has not increased,
rently euthyroid dogs intended for breeding (see previous
problems with owner compliance are likely and test
section on Thyroglobulin Autoantibodies). Interpretation
results are discarded.
of positive test results is similar to the interpretation of
positive Tg autoantibody test results. Circulating thyroid
hormone antibodies may interfere with RIA techniques
THYROID-STIMULATING HORMONE
used to measure serum T4 and T; concentrations, causing
STIMULATION TEST
spurious, unreliable numbers.40 The type of interference
depends on the RIA; falsely low and falsely high results
Indication · The TSH stimulation test evaluates the
can occur. Fortunately, the prevalence of clinically rele-
thyroid gland's responsiveness to exogenous TSH admin-
vant concentrations ofthyroid hormone antibody causing
istration. The primary advantage of this test is differentia-
obvious spurious T4 values accounts for less than 1%
tion of hypothyroidism from the euthyroid sick syndrome
of assayed blood samples. Serum fT4 measured by an
in a dog with low baseline serum Ta and fT4
concentration.
180
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Advantages ● The test is easy to perform and usually
Assessment of history, physical findings, clinical patho-
accurate in differentiating hypothyroidism from other
logic assessment, and sometimes response to trial therapy
disorders decreasing serum T4 concentrations.
 pn a  o  aq 
function. Pre- and post-rhTSH serum T4 concentrations
Disadvantages · Only
 recombinant
human
TSH
above baseline in conjunction with a lack of response of
(rhTSH) is available and it is expensive. Results are unin-
the thyroid gland to TSH (see Figure 8-9) occur occasion-
terpretable in some dogs.
 ally in dogs with hypothyroidism and may reflect circulat-
ingthyroid hormone antibodies in a dog with lymphocytic
Protocol ● The current TSH stimulation protocol for
thyroiditis.
dogs is 75 μg of rhTSH per dog administered IV or intra-
muscularly (IM) and blood for serum Ta concentration
PITUITARY
obtained before and 6 hours after rhTSH administration.3
ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC
The remaining reconstituted rhTSH can be stored at 4° C
for 4 weeks and at -20° C for 8 weeks without loss of
HORMONE
biological activity.?
Occasionally Indicated · In dogs, pituitary ACTH con-
Interpretation · Interpretation is based on absolute
centration is determined to differentiate pituitary-
serum T4 values. In a euthyroid dog. serum T4 concentra-
dependent
 adrenal-dependent
 spontaneous
tion should be greater than or equal to 2.5 μg/dl 6 hours
hyperadrenocorticism and to differentiate primary versus
after rhTSH administration, and the 6-hour post-rhTSH
secondary hypoadrenocorticism. Similar indications exist
serum T4 concentration should be greater than or equal
for cats. Measurement of baseline endogenous ACTH con-
to 1.5 times the baseline serum T4 concentration. Dogs
centration is not used to diagnose hyperadrenocorticism
because of episodic secretion and overlapping values
serum Ta concentration less than 1.5μg/dl (Figure 8-9).25
between normal and pituitary-dependent hyperadreno-
Post-rhTSH serum T4 concentrations of 1.5 to 2.5 μg/dl
corticism (PDH).
sipiaiayoday aea u snoo ae pue ssoueipuou aie
 Or may represent thyroid gland suppression because of
Advantage · It is a reliable test to differentiate PDH
concurrent illness or drug therapy in an otherwise euthy-
from adrenocortical tumor (AT).
roid dog. Severe systemic illness can cause post-rhTSH
serum T4 concentrations  considered diagmostic
for
Disadvantages · ACTH is a fragile hormone, requiring
primary hypothyroidism (i.e., <1.5 μg/dl). Similarly. low
meticulous care in specimen handling (see later). In addi-
baseline serum T4 concentration with normal post-rhTSH
tion, the test is expensive and has limited availability, and
senum T4 concentration is also difficult to interpret.
plasma samples must remain frozen until assayed.
Protocol · Although blood for ACTH determination
o  a  a u  aq ai s
8-
the blood sample during the day probably does not affect
interpretation of results. However, blood for ACTH deter-
mination must be drawn prior to performing tests that
/6r)
6
evaluate the pituitary-adrenocortical axis [i.e, ACTH stim-
Thyroxine
ulation test, LDDS). ACTH is a labile protein and adheres
to glass. The blood sample must be placed in plastic or
4
silicone-coated EDTA tubes and immediately placed on
3
ice. Blood should be centrifuged immediately and plasma
2
frozen in plastic tubes. This entire procedure should take
Seru
less than l0 minutes. Samples must be shipped frozen
and must stay frozen until assayed for ACTH.
0-
Pre-TSH
Post-TSH
T4
T4
- r i q eid u  si  o i
miluminescent immunometric assay.34 The assay must be
FGURE 8-9 Interpretation of thyroid-stimulating hormone 
validated for the dog and cat.
(TSH) stimulation test in dogs. Post-TSH thyroxine (T4) values
that fall into the normal range usually indicate normal thyroid 
Normal Values ● Dogs, 10 to 70 pg/ml; cats, 10 to 60 pg/
gland function. Exceptions include high pre-TSH T, values with
 ml. Reference ranges may differ between laboratories. To
sanjea l HSl-aud mol pue (e aun) l HSl-isod ui aseauoui ou
convert from pg/ml to pmol/L, multiply by 0.220.
with normal response to TSH (ine c). Primary hypothyroidism
 Interpretation in dogs and cats with hyperadrenocor-
with anti-T antibodies (lines a and b) and secondary hypothy-
roidism or the suppressive effects of concurrent disease (line
ticism:
c) should be considered. Low pre-TSH and post-TSH Ta values
Kew abueu slsoubeipuou ayt u! sanjea p1 HSl-isod pue (p auy)
Less than 10 pg/ml: adrenal-dependent
be indicative of hypothyroidism or the suppressive effects of
hyperadrenocorticism
concurrent disease. (From Nelson RW, Couto CG: Essentials of
10 to 45 pg/ml: nondiagnostic
small animal internal medicine, St. Louis, 1992, Mosby-Year
Greater than 45 pg/ml: pituitary-dependent
Book, p 549.)
hyperadrenocorticism
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
181
and to monitor medical treatment of hyperadrenocorti-
cism. Findings suggestive of hyperadrenocorticism include
Less than 10 pg/ml: secondary hypoadrenocorticism
polydipsia, polyuria, polyphagia, endocrine alopecia.
10 to 45 pg/ml: nondiagnostic
panting, weakness, calcinosis cutis, epidermal and dermal
Greater than 45 pg/ml: primary hypoadrenocorticism
atrophy, conformational changes (eg., "potbellied
appearance"), insulin-resistant diabetes mellitus, hepa-
Danger Values · None.
tomegaly, stress leukogram, increased serum alkaline
phosphatase (SAP), hypercholesterolemia, persistent
Artifacts ● ACTH concentration may be falsely decreased
hyposthenuria, proteinuria, and recurring urinary tract
by storing plasma above freezing. sample thawing during
infection, especially in middle-aged to older patients.
transport to the laboratory, or using glass containers
Findings suggestive of hypoadrenocorticism include leth-
 during collection or storage.
argy. depression, anorexia, vomiting, weakness, weight
loss.
bradycardia,
hypovolemia, hyponatremia, and
V d S     A 
hyperkalemia, especially in young to middle-aged dogs
 concentration may be decreased by administration of glu-
and cats.
cocorticoids (e.g., dexamethasone). It may be increased
by insulin.
Advantages · The test is readily available including
 point-of-care ELISAs, and the hormone is stable Baseline
Causes of Altered Plasma ACTH Concentration ·
serum cortisol concentration may help rule out primary
Alterations in baseline endogenous ACTH concentration
hypoadrenocorticism.1
result from primary pituitary gland disorders or disorders
affecting blood cortisol concentration, with its negative
Disadvantages ● Baseline serum cortisol concentration
inhibitory effects on ACTH secretion ( Box 8-10). Pituitary
has no diagnostic significance when assessing a dog or cat
disorders include PDH, which is associated with increased
for hyperadrenocorticism or when assessing response to
ACTH secretion (Figure 8-10), and secondary hypoadre-
medical treatment of hyperadrenocorticism; interpreta-
nocorticism, which results from loss of function of the
tion is only valid after manipulation of the pituitary-
pituitary corticotroph cells and decreased ACTH secretion
adrenocortical axis with ACTH or dexamethasone.
(Figure 8-1l). Functional ATs of the zona fasciculata
have increased cortisol secretion, which inhibits pituitary
Analysis ● Serum cortisol is typically measured by RIA
ACTH secretion; plasma ACTH typically decreases to
or chemiluminescent immunoassays. Senum should be
undetectable concentrations [see Figure 8-10).3 A similar
harvested soon after collection and refrigerated or frozen
phenomenon occurs with excessive exogenous glucocor-
ticoid administration (i.e., iatrogenic hyperadrenocorti-
cism). Destruction of the zona fasciculata (eg., primary
hypoadrenocorticism) decreases blood cortisol concen-
340r
tration, thus increasing plasma ACTH concentrations (see
Figure 8-1l). Similar alterations in plasma ACTH concen-
300
tration occur in cats.
260
SERUM CORTISOL
220
/bd)
180
Commonly Indicated ● Serum cortisol is measured to
assess the pituitary adrenocortical axis in patients with
HI
140
suspected hyperadrenocorticism or hypoadrenocorticism.
AC
100F
BOX 8-10. CAUSES OF ALTERED ENDOGENOUS
60
PLAsmA ADRENOCORTICOTrOPIC
T
HORmONE (ACTH) CONCENTRATION
{20
IN DOGS
20
Normal
Dogs with
Dogs with
 Normal to Increased
Dogs
Functioning
Pituitary-
 Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
Adrenocortical
 Dependent
Primary hypoadrenocorticism
Tumors
Hyperadreno-
Atypical hypoadrenocorticism
corticism
Normal to Decreased
FGURE   8-10 Endogenous plasma adrenocorticotropic
 Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
hormone (ACTH) concentrations from clinically normal dogs,
latrogenic hyperadrenocorticism
dogs with adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (adreno-
Spontaneous secondary hypoadrenocorticism
cortical carcinomas or adenomas), and dogs with pituitary-
dependent hyperadrenocorticism. (From Feldman EC, Nelson
 Improper sample collection/storage
RW: Canine and feline endocrinology and reproduction,
Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.)
182
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
3700 r
BOX 8-11. CAUSES OF ALTERED RESTING PLASMA
CORTISOL CONCENTRATIONS IN DOGS
3300
AND CATS
2900
INCREASED
 Stress, fear, excitement, aggression
2500
 Severe or chronic illness 
2100
s6na
Cortisone, hydrocortisone, prednisone, and 
1700
prednisolone (due to cross-reaction with cortisol assay)
/6d)
1300
Anticonvulsants
HI
Hyperadrenocorticism 
900
 Pituitary-dependent 
Adrenal-dependent 
500
DECREASED
80
 Improper storage
60
 Progesterone-secreting adrenal tumor
40F
Hypoadrenocorticism 
Primary
20
Secondary (i.e., pituitary insufficiency)
Atypical (i.e., selective glucocorticoid deficiency)
Normal
Secondary
Primary
s6n.
 Dogs  Adrenal Insufficiency
Adrenal
Insufficiency
Progestagens
(Pituitary Failure)
 Megestrol acetate
-Hypoadrenocorticism-
 Acute critical illness 
FGURE
8-11 Endogenous
plasma
adrenocorticotropic
hormone (ACTH) concentrations in normal dogs, dogs with
secondary adrenal failure, and dogs with primary adrenal
failure.(From Feldman EC,Peterson ME: Hypoadrenocorti-
cism. Vet Clin North Am 14:761, 1984.)
progestagens such as megestrol acetate can decrease
serum cortisol concentration.
until assayed. If mailed, serum samples should be shipped
Causes of Hypercortisolemia ● The most clinically rel-
with cool packs. Repeated freezing and thawing or hemo-
 evant cause of hypercortisolemia is hyperadrenocorticism 
lysis of the sample does not alter cortisol concentrations.
(Box 8-ll). Additional causes include environmental
Fasting for up to 36 hours does not affect cortisol values.
factors that create “stress" or excitement, chronic illness
and a clinically detectable diurmal variation does not exist
(e.g., diabetes mellitus, renal failure, hepatic failure, con-
in the dog or cat.
gestive heart failure), and medications that contain glu-
cocorticoid preparations that cross-react with the cortisol
Normal Values · Dogs. 1.0 to 6.0 μg/dl; cats, 1.0 to
assay. For the latter to cause increased cortisol values.
 5.0 μg/dl. To convert from μg/dl to nmol/L, multiply by
medication must have been given within 12 to 24 hours
27.59.
 of blood sampling and still be present in blood. Once
glucocorticoid in the preparation has been metabolized,
Danger Values · None.
senum cortisol concentrations decrease because of the
negative inhibitory effects of exogenous glucocorticoid on
Artifacts Affecting Serum Cortisol Concentration *
pituitary ACTH secretion. This phenomenon [i.e., iatro-
Environment (eg
"stress,"
excitement) and chronic
 genic hyperadrenocorticism) creates signs of hyperadre-
disease may increase baseline serum cortisol concentra-
nocorticism, but the pituitary-adrenocortical axis 
is
tions. Exogenous glucocorticoid preparations containing
suppressed, resembling hypoadrenocorticism  (Figure
hydrocortisone, cortisone, prednisone, prednisolone, and
8-12; see Causes of Hypocortisolemia later).
 possibly methylprednisolone may cross-react with some
Hyperadrenocorticism occurs in dogs and rarely in
cortisol assays, causing spurious increases in measured
cats. A tentative diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism can be
cortisol values. Dexamethasone does not cross-react with
established based on history, physical examination, and
cortisol assays. Senum specimens may be stored overnight
routine clinical pathologic assessments (eg, CBC, senum
at 2° to 8° C. Freezing is preferred for long-term storage.
biochemical panel, urinalysis; see description under the
Commonly Indicated heading at the beginning of this
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Cortisol ·
section). Common abnormalities identified on clinical
Estrogen administration may increase serum cortisol.
pathologic
C assessments include a stress leukogram,
Chronic androgen or glucocorticoid administration and
increased SAP and ALT activities, hypercholesterolemia,
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
183
 previously listed tests are normal or inconclusive and the
35
dog has ambiguous clinical signs. The dexamethasone
suppression test, UCCR, and abdominal ultrasonography
30
are used to establish the diagnosis of hyperadrenocorti-
cism in cats. In the author's experience, the sensitivity of
25
the ACTH stimulation test has been less than 50% in cats
/6m)
with hyperadrenocorticism.
Cortisol
20
ing
Causes of Hypocortisolemia · The most clinically
 relevant cause of hypocortisolemia is primary hypoadre-
15
nocorticism (see Box 8-ll), caused by destruction of
the  adrenal  zona glomerulosa
Plasm
(mineralocorticoid-
10
Sp
producing zone) and zona fasciculata (glucocorticoid-
Controls
producing zone). Additional causes include iatrogenic
hyperadrenocorticism (see previous discussion of Causes
5
of Hypercortisolemia), secondary hypoadrenocorticism,
latrogenic Cushing's
 progesterone-secreting ATs, megestrol acetate therapy.
acute critical illness, and improper sample handling.4
Baseline
Post-Stimulation
Secondary hypoadrenocorticism (i.e., atypical hypo-
Plasma Cortiso!
Time
Plasma Cortiso!
adrenocorticism) results from a selective deficiency of
glucocorticoid secretion, which may result from inade-
FGURE 8-12 Mean plasma cortisol concentrations (±2 SD)
quate ACTH secretion as the result of pituitary disease Or
 determined before and 1 hour after the administration of syn-
thetic adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) in control dogs,
sey euoz aujo uouny jo sso Aieud e oy insa
dogs with spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism, and dogs with
lata; the latter is affiliated with an increased plasma ACTH
iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism. (From Feldman EC, Nelson
concentration.4
RW: Canine and feline endocrinology and reproduction, ed 2,
 Primary hypoadrenocorticism typically occurs in
Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.)
young adult dogs and rarely in cats. History, physical
examination, and routine clinical pathologic assessments
abnormalities may include mild, nonregenerative anemia,
and isosthenuria to hyposthenuria, proteinuria, and bac-
lack of a stress leukogram in a sick dog or cat, hyperkale-
teriuria. In cats with hyperadrenocorticism, hyperglyce-
mia, hyponatremia, hypochloremia, azotemia, hyper-
mia and hypercholesterolemia are the most consistent
phosphatemia, mild hypercalcemia (i.e., 12 to 14 mg/dl).
clinical pathologic findings. Additional abnormalities in
mild hypoglycemia (i.e, 45 to 60 mg/dl), and metabolic
pue asedil 'aseie as pasau ann siads yo
acidosis. Urine specific gravity can range from hypersthe-
insulin concentrations and decreased baseline serum T4.
nuric to isosthenuric (because of renal sodium wasting
fT4. Ts, and possibly TSH concentrations. Many dogs with
and loss of the renal medullary concentration gradient)
hyperadrenocorticism are misdiagnosed with primary
and so can mimic primary renal disease. Cardiac conduc-
hepatic  disease because 
of hepatomegaly.
increased
aa  d a si 
hepatic enzymes (especially SAP), increased serum bile
[i.e., >7 mEq/L). If present, these disturbances are readily
acid concentrations, and vacuolar hepatopathy.
identified on a lead II rhythm strip of an ECG and
Diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism and differentia-
may include dampened P wave, prolonged PR interval
tion between PDH and AT requires evaluation of serum
and QRS complex, spiked T wave, and ventricular
cortisol concentrations after manipulation of the pituitary-
arrhythmias.
adrenocortical axis with ACTH or dexamethasone ( Figure
Hallmark abnormalities identifed on clinical patho-
8-13). Baseline serum cortisol concentration has no diag-
nostic value for hyperadrenocorticism. Tests to confirm
hypochloremia.' The sodium:potassium ratio reflects
hyperadrenocorticism include the ACTH stimulation test
changes in these electrolytes. Values are often well below
and the LDDS test Tests to differentiate between PDH
27:1 in primary hypoadrenocorticism [normal ratios,
and AT include endogenous ACTH concentration, the
27: 1 to 40: 1). Normal serum electrolyte concentrations,
LDDS test, the high-dose dexamethasone suppression
however, do not rule out adrenal insuffciency. Serum
(HDDS) test, and abdominal ultrasonography. Diagnosis
electrolyte concentrations may be normal in early disease,
of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism is based on a history
in selective hypocortisolism, in hypoadrenal patients that
of glucocorticoid administration and ACTH stimulation
have recently received fluid therapy, and in secondary
test results. The reader is referred to appropriate headings
hypoadrenocorticism.
Furthermore,
other disorders
that follow for specific information on these tests.
(especially renal, gastrointestinal, and hepatic) can cause
 The most commonly used tests to diagnose hyperad-
serum electrolyte changes mimicking adrenal insuf-
renocorticism in dogs and to differentiate PDH from AT
ficiency. The reader should refer to Chapter 6 for
are the ACTH stimulation test, the LDDS test, and abdom-
other causes of hyponatremia, hypochloremia, and
inal ultrasonography. The urine cortisol : creatinine ratio
hyperkalemia.
(UCCR) can be assessed as part of the initial screen for
 Baseline serum cortisol concentration can be used to
hyperadrenocorticism or, more commonly, is assessed
rule out hypoadrenocorticism; serum cortisol concentra-
to further rule out hyperadrenocorticism if results of
tions greater than 2 μg/dl are inconsistent with the
184
History, physical examination, laboratory findings
Suggestive of iatrogenic
 Suggestive of spontaneous
hyperadrenocorticism 
hyperadrenocorticism
ACTH stimulation test
Deficient
Normal or
response
exaggerated response
latrogenic 
 Spontaneous disease
ACTH stimulation test or
hyperadreno-
orno primary
- low-dose dexamethasone
 corticism
adrenal disease
 suppression test
 Normal or marginally
Clearly abnormal
abnormal result
result
UCCR and low-dose
dexamethasonesuppression
or ACTH stimulation test
 Normal
Abnormal
response
response
If still suspect hyper-
adrenocorticism, repeat
If ultrasound not available,
tests in 2-4 months 
dohigh-dosedexamethasone
 suppression test
Abnormal
Normal
Suppression
No suppression
Probably not
 Pituitary-dependent
hyperadreno-
 Pituitary-dependent
corticism
hyperadrenocorticism
 or adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
Abdominal radiographs
and/or ultrasonography
￥
Adrenal mass
Asymmetric adrenal
Bilateral
 gland size; no
adrenomegaly
obvious mass
IT
Probable
Do one or both of the
PDH
adrenal
following to differentiate
neoplasia
 adrenal-dependent from
pituitary-dependent disease
Endogenous ACTH
High-dose dexamethasone
 concentration
suppression test
(if not yet done)
FGURE 8-13 Evaluation of patients with suspected hyperadrenocorticism based on history (polyuria-polydipsia, polyphagia,
panting, weakness), physical examination (truncal alopecia, potbelly, calcinosis cutis, hepatomegaly), or laboratory findings
Adrenocorticotropic hormone; PDH, pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism; UCCR, urine cortisol :creatinine ratio.
Chapter &:Endocrine, Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
185
and the test does not differentiate between primary
16
and secondary hypoadrenocorticism or between PDH
14
and AT.
12
Protocol ● The protocol for the ACTH-stimulation test
0/6)
differs between the dog and cat and with the type of
isol
10
ACTH used. When synthetic ACTH is used, blood for
Corti
8
cortisol assay is obtained before and l hour after intra-
NORMAL
muscular (IM) administration of 0.25 mg (250 μg) syn-
thetic ACTH (irrespective of weight [dogs]) and before, 30
6
Plasn
and 60 minutes after IM administration of 0.125 mg
4
[125 μg) synthetic ACTH (irrespective of weight [cats]).
2
When using synthetic ACTH, a lower dose [5 μg/kg IV or
Hypoadrenocorticism
IM) is also effective in dogs and the unused reconstituted
ACTH can be stored frozen at -20° C in plastic syringes
Baseline
Post-Stimufation
for 6 months with no adverse effects on bioactivity of the
Plasma Cortisof
Time
Plasma Cortiso!
ACTH. When ACTH gel is used, blood for cortisol assay
is obtained before and 2 hours after [dog) and before and
FGURE 8-14 Plasma cortisol concentrations before and after
1 and 2 hours after (cat) IM administration of 2.2 IU
exogenous adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulation
ACTH gel/kg body weight. The ACTH-stimulation test can
in normal dogs and in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. The
be performed any time during the day.
ranges are means ±2 SD. (From Feldman EC, Nelson RW:
Canine and feline endocrinology and reproduction, ed 2,
Philadelphia, 1996, WB Saunders.)
Artifacts  and   Drug
    
Results · Anything altering serum cortisol concentra-
tion can affect ACTH stimulation test results [see Artifacts
That May Alter Serum Cortisol Concentration earlier in
disease. Baseline serum cortisol concentrations less than
 this chapter). Anticonvulsant medications may spuriously
 2 μg/dl are identifed in many situations (e.g, illness-
increase ACTH stimulation test results.
induced relative adrenal insufficiency?) and do not
Interpretation of post-ACTH cortisol concentration
 confirm hypoadrenocorticism. Confirmation of hypoad-
in dogs:
renocorticism requires an ACTH stimulation test. Animals
with adrenal insufficiency have low or low-normal base-
Less than 2 μg/dl: hypoadrenocorticism
line senum cortisol concentration and minimal to no
Less than 6 μg/dl: suggestive of iatrogenic
increase in serum cortisol after the administration of
hyperadrenocorticism
ACTH (Figure 8-14). The ACTH stimulation test does not
6 to 18 pg/dl: normal
distinguish primary from secondary adrenal insufficiency.
18 to 24 mg/dl: suggestive of spontaneous
Concurrent electrolyte abnormalities imply primary
hyperadrenocorticism
hypoadrenocorticism, but normal electrolyte concentra-
Greater than 24 μg/dl: strongly suggestive of
tions do not differentiate early primary from secondary
spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism
insuffciency.4l Differentiation requires measurement of
baseline endogenous ACTH concentration or plasma
Interpretation of post-ACTH cortisol concentration
aldosterone concentrations during the ACTH stimulation
in cats:
test (see Plasma Aldosterone later in this chapter).
Less than 2 μg/dl: hypoadrenocorticism
Less than 5 μg/dl: suggestive of iatrogenic
ADRENOCORTICOTROPIC
hyperadrenocorticism
HORMONE STIMULATION TEST
5 to 15 pg/dl: normal
15 to 20 pg/dl: suggestive of spontaneous
Commonly Indicated · An ACTH-stimulation test is
hyperadrenocorticism
done to confrm hypoadrenocorticism and iatrogenic
Greater than 20 μig/dt: strongly suggestive of
hyperadrenocorticism, to screen for spontaneous hyper-
spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism
adrenocorticism, and to monitor mitotane (o.p'-DDD).
To convert μg/dl to nmol/L, multiply by 27.59.
trilostane, and ketoconazole therapy in dogs with PDH.
The ACTH stimulation test does not differentiate between
PDH and AT.
LOW-DOSE DEXAMETHASONE
SUPPRESSION TEST
Advantages ● The test is readily available and easy to
interpret.
Commonly Indicated ·An LDDS test is done to
screen for spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism and to dif-
Disadvantages · The test is expensive; false-positive
ferentiate between PDH and AT. This test does not iden-
and false-negative results are common when testing for
tify iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism, nor is it used to
spontaneous
 hyperadrenocorticism;
resultsmay
be
assess response to mitotane, trilostane, or ketoconazole
affected (i.e., exaggerated) by chronic illness and "stress":;
therapy.
186
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Advantages ● The test is readily available relatively inex-
pensive, and easy to interpret It often confirms hyperad-
8
renocorticism and identifes PDH at the same time
Disadvantages · Results can be affected by acute
6
"stress," excitement, aggression, fear, and concurrent
/6n)
 illness. In addition, other procedures must be avoided
cortisol
until test completion. False-positive and false-negative
test results can occur.
Protocol ● Ideally, this test should be started between
Plasr
8:00 and 9:00 AM after the patient has been hospitalized
 overnight. The patient should rest quietly in the cage
2
Except when walked outside or when blood is taken. In
the dog, a serum sample for cortisol analysis is obtained
immediately before and 4 and 8 hours after IV adminis-
Baseline
After Dexamethasone
tration of 0.0l mg dexamethasone/kg body weight. The
Plasma Cortisol
Suppression
same dose of dexamethasone is used in the cat, although
Time
Plasma Cortisol
blood samples are obtained immediately before and 4, 6.
and 8 hours after IV dexamethasone administration.
FIGURE 8-15 Mean plasma cortisol concentrations (±2 SD)
 Dexamethasone sodium phosphate or dexamethasone in
determined before and 8 hours after administration of a low
 polyethylene glycol can be used.
dexamethasone dose (0.01 mg/kg) intravenously (IV) in control
dogs () and in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism (A). The reader
Analysis and Artifacts · See Serum Cortisol earlier in
should note the slight overlap of values after dexamethasone.
this chapter.
(From Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and feline endocrinof-
ogy and reproduction, Philadelphia, 1987, WB Saunders.)
Artifacts and Drug Therapy That May Alter Results ·
Anything altering serum cortisol concentration can affect
LDDS test results (see Artifacts That May Alter Serum
Cortisol Concentration earlier in this chapter). Results
post-dexamethasone senum cortisol concentration less
may be affected by stress, fear, excitement, aggressive
behavior, concurrent anticonvulsant drugs. concurrent
dog with serum cortisol concentrations meeting one or
diagnostics, exogenous glucocorticoids, and nonadrenal
more of these three criteria usually has PDH. Failure to
disease; the more severe the nonadrenal disease, the
meet any of these criteria is consistent with lack of sup-
more likely the chance of obtaining false-positive test
pression. Lack of suppression is nonspecifc, consistent
results.
with
hyperadrenocorticism but  not distinguishing
 between pituitary and adrenal disease.
Interpretation · Evaluation of the 8-hour post-
This test is diffcult to interpret in cats. An occasional
dexamethasone serum cortisol concentration is used to
normal cat will "escape" the suppressive effects of 0.0l mg
dexamethasone/kg given IV and fall outside the normal
dogs have serum cortisol values less than l.0 μg/dl
8-hour post-dexamethasone reference range [i.e, 8-hour
post-dexamethasone serum cortisol > 1.4 μg/dl). A serum
concentrations greater than or equal to l.4 μg/dl at
cortisol concentration greater than 1.4 μg/dl at 4, 6, and
8 hours. In general, the higher the 8-hour post-
8 hours strongly suggests hyperadrenocorticism. The test
dexamethasone senum cortisol concentration is above
is inconclusive if either the 4- or 6-hour cortisol value is
1.4 μg/dl, the more supportive the test result is for hyper-
less than 1.4 μg/dl and the 8-hour value is greater than
adrenocorticism. Cortisol concentrations of 1.0 to 1.4 μg/
1. 4 μg/dl. These results suggest hyperadrenocorticism but
dl are suggestive of but not diagnostic for hyperadreno-
may also occur in normal cats that have escaped the sup-
corticism; the clinician must consider other information
pressive effects of dexamethasone The test should be
to establish the diagnosis.
repeated using 0.1 mg dexamethasone/kg
(see next
If the 8-hour post-dexamethasone cortisol value
 section on High-Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test).
Hsoddns
hyperadrenocorticism, the
4-hour
post-
 Because of potential for escape in normal cats, the LDDS
dexamethasone serum cortisol value may be useful in
test should never be the only test used to confirm diag-
distinguishing between PDH and AT. Low doses of dexa-
nosis of feline hyperadrenocorticism.
uas pue uoanas hioy aind ssaiddns auoseuiau
cortisol concentrations in approximately 60% of dogs
with PDH during the initial 2 to 6 hours of the test. Sup-
HIGH-DOSE DEXAMETHASONE
pression does not occur in dogs with AT, nor does it occur
si uoissandns 'Hdd yim ssop yo ot Aateixondde ui
SUPPRESSION TEST
defined as (l) a 4-hour post-dexamethasone senum corti-
sol concentration less than 1.4 μg/dl, (2) a 4-hour post-
Infrequently Indicated · An HDDS test is done to
dexamethasone serum cortisol concentration less than
distinguish PDH from AT in dogs with confirmed
50% of baseline concentration, and (3) an 8-hour
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
187
hyperadrenocorticism in cats. The need for this test has
declined because of the increasing availability of abdomi-
15
 nal ultrasonography to evaluate adrenal glands.
13
Protocol ● Ideally, this test should be started between
8:00 and 9:00 AM after the patient has been hospitalized
overnight. The patient should rest quietly in the cage
11
Except when walked outside or when blood is obtained.
(Ip/6r) 
 In dogs, a serum sample for cortisol analysis is obtained
9
immediately before and 8 hours after IV administration
Cortisol
of 0.1 mg dexamethasone/kg body weight. Obtaining a
4-hour post-dexamethasone blood sample is optional;
 in the author's experience, the 4-hour HDDS sampling
Plasma
Pituitary (25%)
q m nsn s go  Ao 1 aoui s
5
Adrenai(100%)
LDDS and HDDS.? The same dose of dexamethasone is
used in cats, although blood samples are obtained
Pituitary(75%
immediately before and 4, 6, and 8 hours after IV dexa-
3
methasone  administration.  Dexamethasone sodium
phosphate or dexamethasone in polyethylene glycol can
be used.
Interpretation · A higher dose of dexamethasone is
Baseline
8-Hour
uoainas Hoy Aieimid ssauddns oi iduane ue ul pasn
Cortisol
Sample
in dogs with PDH. Suppression is defined as a 4-hour or
 8-hour post-dexamethasone serum cortisol concentration
FGURE 8-16 Patterns of plasma cortisol responses during
less than l.4 μg/dl, and a 4-hour or 8-hour post-
high-dose (0.1 mg/kg) dexamethasone suppression testing in
dexamethasone serum cortisol concentration less than
dogs with pituitary-dependent or adrenal-dependent hyperad-
renocorticism. The reader should note that suppression is diag-
50% of baseline concentration. Any dog with hyperadre-
nostic of pituitary dependency. Lack of suppression occurs in
nocorticism and serum cortisol concentrations meeting
all adrenal tumor cases and in 25% of pituitary-dependent
one or more of these four criteria most likely has PDH.
Gases. (From Feldman EC, Nelson RW: Canine and feline endo-
auo is2al ie jaa Hd m sop jo 5 Aiateixndy
ginotogy
 and reproduction, Philadelphia, 1987, WB
of the four criteria for "suppression" on the HDDS test.
Saunders.)
Failure to meet any of these criteria is consistent with lack
of suppression. Among dogs with hyperadrenocorticism
in which suppression is not demonstrated are approxi-
sgop yo %0o1 isoue pue Had 4lm s3op jo %57 Aja1eu
with ATs (Figure 8-16).
Protocol · Ideally, the UCCR should be determined
The HDDS test is also used to diagnose feline hyper-
from free-catch urine samples obtained by the client in
adrenocorticism. In normal cats, the serum cortisol con-
the nonstressful home environment The stress associated
centrations should be less than 1.4 μg/dl at 4, 6, and 8
with driving the dog to the veterinary hospital and having
hours. Similar results occur in some cats with PDH.
the dog undergo a physical examination or diagnostic
Hyperadrenocorticism should be suspected if the 8-hour
tests before collecting urine can increase test results. Urine
serum cortisol concentration is greater than 1.4 μg/dl.
collected in the home environment should be refrigerated
The likelihood of this disease is increased further if the
until the sample can be brought to the clinic for determi-
4- and 6-hour serum cortisol concentrations are also
nation of cortisol and creatinine concentrations. The
greater than 1.4 μg/dl. Any post-dexamethasone serum
UCCR is determined by dividing urine cortisol concentra-
cortisol concentration less than 50% of the precortisol
tion (in μmol/L) by urine creatinine concentration (in
value supports PDH once hyperadrenocorticism
lis
μmol/L).
confirmed.
Interpretation · A normal UCCR is inconsistent with
hyperadrenocorticism. A UCCR greater than the reference
URINE CORTISOL:
range is consistent with hyperadrenocorticism and sup-
ports the performance of additional diagnostics (e.g..
CREATININE RATIO
LDDS test) to confirm the diagnosis, assuming history.
physical examination, and results of routine blood work
Indications ● The UCCR is an excellent initial screening
OSE
0support a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism.
test for hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. The UCCR
is
However, an increased UCCR does not, by itself, confirm
 increased in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, compared
a diagnosis of hyperadrenocorticism. The UCCR is often
with healthy dogs.? Normal UCCR test results can occur
shop ul pue ssauil ieuaipeuou qhim saop ul paseaou
in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism but are uncommon.
with clinical signs consistent with hyperadrenocorticism
Unfortunately, the specificity of the UCCR is low [20% in
but with a normal pituitary-adrenocortical axis (results
one study),38 and this test should not be used as the sole
that overlap with those obtained from dogs with hyper-
test to diagnose hyperadrenocorticism.
adrenocorticism). The UCCR is essentially used as a
188
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
screening test for normalcy. Additional tests for hyperad-
post-ACTH plasma aldosterone concentrations. Unfortu-
renocorticism are indicated when the UCCR is increased
nately, plasma aldosterone concentrations may be in the
or when the UCCR is normal but the clinical picture
lower end of the reference range in dogs with primary
hypoadrenocorticism and may be within or below the
 Interpretation of the UCCR in cats is similar to that
reference range in dogs with suspected atypical hypo-
in dogs [i.e., a normal ratio rules out hyperadrenocorti-
 adrenocorticism. Markedly increased baseline plasma
cism, whereas an increased ratio is consistent with, but
aldosterone concentrations suggest primary hyperaldo-
not definitive for, hyperadrenocorticism). UCCR test
results must be interpreted based on reference ranges
kalemia, hypernatremia, and systemic hypertension
established in cats.
Identification of an adrenal mass with abdominal ultra-
sound further supports the diagnosis.
PLASMA ALDOSTERONE
Indications · Plasma aldosterone is measured to (1)
INSULIN-LIKE GROWTH FACTOR-I
identify selective aldosterone deficiency in patients with
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and normal plasma cortisol
Indication · Measurement of insulin-like growth
responsiveness to ACTH; (2) distinguish primary adrenal
factor-I (IGF-I) concentration is done as a screening test
disease from secondary adrenal atrophy because of a pitu-
for acromegaly in diabetic cats with insulin resistance.
itary or hypothalamic deficiency in dogs with normal
Most of the growth-promoting effects of growth hormone
serum electrolytes and hypoadrenal ACTH stimulation
(GH) are mediated by IGF-I. The liver is a major site of
test results: (3) identify hyperaldosteronism; and (4)
IGF-I synthesis, and much of the circulating IGF-I is
assess hormonal function of an adrenal mass. Clinical
believed to be derived from the liver. IGF-I has an approx-
findings with hyperaldosteronism include lethargy, weak-
imately 50% homology of structure with proinsulin and
ness, hypokalemia, hypernatremia, hypertension, and
insulin, and the IGF-I cell membrane receptor resembles
adrenomegaly.
the insulin receptor in its structure. Secretion of IGF-I is
under direct control of GH. As such, serum IGF-I concen-
Analysis ● Aldosterone is measured in EDTA or heparin-
 trations are increased in acromegaly.
ized plasma, or in serum by RIA, or enzyme- or
chemiluminescence-based immunoassays.
Specimens
Analysis · IGF-I is measured in serum by RIA.
should be stored frozen. In the author's laboratory, serum
and heparinized plasma yield comparable results. Base-
Normal Values ● Cats, 5 to 70 nmol/L.
line plasma aldosterone concentration is usually diagnos-
tic for primary hyperaldosteronism. Identification of
Artifacts · Unknown.
aldosterone deficiency requires interpretation of plasma
aldosterone concentration after stimulation with ACTH
 Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum IGF-I ● Unknown.
(see ACTH Stimulation Test earlier in this chapter).
Timing of blood sampling is the same as for serum cor-
Role as a Diagnostic Test for Feline Acromeg-
tisol. For meaningful results, the aldosterone assay must
aly · Clinical suspicion for acromegaly is based on
be validated for use in each species to be tested and
identification of conformational alterations  (e.g
normal values established. See Appendix I for availability
of testing. Handling and shipping are as described for
organomegaly) and a stable or progressive increase in
cortisol.
body weight in a cat with insulin-resistant diabetes mel-
litus. Measurement of serum IGF-I concentration pro-
Normal Values ● Baseline in dogs: 5 to 345 pg/ml; post-
vides further evidence for the diagnosis of acromegaly.
ACTH stimulation: 70 to 760 pg/ml. Baseline in cats: 70
Concentrations are usually increased in acromegalic cats,
to 140 pg/ml. Reference ranges may differ between labo-
but values may be in the reference range in the early
ratories. To convert pg/ml to pmol/L, multiply by 2.77.
t paoad siuaansea peada s'aseas au jo saiis
to 6 months later will usually demonstrate an increase
Danger Values · None.
in serum IGF-I if acromegaly is present The increase in
serum IGF-I typically coincides with development and
Artifacts · Storage at 22° C for greater than or equal to
growth of the pituitary somatotropic adenoma. Increased
3 days or at 37° C for 1 day decreases measured plasma
serum IGF-I concentrations have been identifed in a
aldosterone concentration. High sodium intake may sup-
small number of poorly controlled diabetic cats where
press, whereas low sodium intake may increase serum
-a1daiul Aiesauooe Aq pasne jou sem palouuos 1ood
aldosterone concentrations.
tation of serum IGF-I test results should always take into
consideration the status of control of the diabetic state,
Interpretation · Measurement of plasma aldosterone is
the presence and severity of insulin resistance, and the
potentially useful for differentiating primary from sec-
index of suspicion for acromegaly based on review of
ondary hypoadrenocorticism and in the evaluation of
the history, physical examination, and results of routine
dogs with suspected glucocorticoid but not aldosterone
blood and urine tests and diagnostic imaging. Identify-
deficiency [i.e., atypical hypoadrenocorticism). Hypoal-
ing an increased serum IGF-I concentration in a poorly
dosteronism is documented by finding low baseline and
controlled diabetic cat with insulin resistance and
Chapter &:Endocrine,Metabolic,and Lipid Disorders
189
clinical features suggestive of acromegaly supports the
20. Marca MC, et al: Evaluation of canine serum thyrotropin
diagnosis and provides justification  for computed
(TSH) concentration: companison of three analytical proce-
tomography or magnetic resonance imaging of the pitu-
dures. J Vet Diag Invest 13:106, 2001.
itary gland.
21. Martin GL. et al: Pituitary-adrenal function in dogs with
acute critical illness. J Am Vet Med Assoc 233:87, 2008.
22. Meuten DJ. et al: Relationship of serum total calcium to
References and Suggested Readings
abumin and total protein in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
180:63, 1992.
1. Adler [A, et al: Abnormalities of serum electrolyte concentra-
23. Midkiff AM. et al: [diopathic hypercalcemia in cats. J Vet
tions in dogs with hypoadrenocorticism. J Vet Intern Med
Intern Med 14:619. 2000.
21:1168, 2007.
24. Mischke R, et al: The effect of the albumin concentation on
 2. Berg RIM, et al: Serum insulin-like growth factor-I concentra-
the relation between the concentration of ionized calcium
tion in cats with diabetes mellitus and acromegaly. J Vet
and total calcium in the blood of dogs. Berl Munch Tierarztl
Intern Med 21:892, 2007.
Wochenschr 103:199. 1996.
 3. Boretti FS, et al: Evaluation of recombinant human thyroid-
25. Nelson RW, et al: Serum free thyroxine concentration in
 stimulating hormone to test thyroid function in dogs sus-
healthy dogs. dogs with hypothyroidism., and euthyroid dogs
pected of having hypothyroidism. Am J Vet Res 67:2012.
with concurrent illness. J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:140l, 1991.
2006.
26. Nelson RW, et al: Transient clinical diabetes mellitus in cats:
4. Burkitt [M, et al: Relative adrenal insufficiency in dogs with
10 cases (1989-1991). J Am Vet Med Assoc 213:822. 1999.
sepsis. / Vet Intern Med 21:226, 2007.
27. Nomris CR, et al: Serum total and jonized magnesium con-
5. Cohen TA, et al: Evaluation of six portable blood glucose
u wnisauseu jo uogaxa euogerg hreuun pue suogengua
meters for measuring blood glucose concentration in dogs.
cats with diabetes mellitus and diabetic ketoacidosis. Am Vet
J Am Vet Med Assoc 235:276, 2009.
AMed Assoc 215:1455, 1999.
6. Davison LJ, et al: Anti-insulin antibodies in diabetic dogs
28. Peterson ME, et al: Thiodothyronine (T) suppression test: an
before and after treatment with different insulin prepara-
aid in the diagnosis of mild hyperthyroidism in cats. J Vet
tions. J Vet Intern Med 22:1317, 2008.
Intern Med 4:233, 1990.
7. De Roover K. et al: Effect of storage on reconstituted recom-
29. Peterson ME. et al: Measurement of serum total thyroxine.
 binant human thyroid-stimulating hormone (rhTSH) on
tiodothyronine, free thyroxine, and thyrotropin concentra-
thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) response testing in
tions for diagnosis of hypothyroidism in dogs. J Am Vet Med
euthyroid dogs. J Vet Intern Med 20:812. 2006.
Assoc 211:1396, 1997.
8. Feldman EC, Mack RE: Unine cortisol:creatinine ratio as a
30. Peterson ME, et al: Measurement of serum concentrations of
sCreening test for hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med
free thyroxine, total thyroxine and total triodothyronine in
Assoc 200:1637, 1992.
cats with hyperthyroidism and cats with nonthyroidal
 9. Feldman EC, et al: Use of low- and high-dose dexamethasone
disease. I Am Vet Med Assoc 218:529, 2001
tests for distinguishing pituitary-dependent from adrenal
 31. Ramsey [K, et al: Hyperparathyroidism in dogs with hyper-
tumor hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
adrenocorticism. J Small Anim Pract 46:531l, 2005.
209:772. 1996.
32.Reimers T,et al: ffects of age, sex, and body size on serum
10.E
 Feldman EC, et al: Pretreatment clinical and laboratory fnd-
concentrations of thyroid and adrenocortical hormones in
sasen oiz :wsipioinyeredradky Aewud yim saop ui sau!
dogs. Am J Vet Res 51:454, 1990.
{1987-2004]. I Am Vet Med Assoc 227:756. 2005.
33. Riensche MR. et al: An investigation of predictors of renal
11.E
 Flanders JA, et al: Adjustment of total serum calcium concen-
insuffciency following treatment of hyperthyroidism in cats.
tration for bindingto albumin and protein in cats: 29l cases
J Fel Med Surg 10:160. 2008.
{1986-1987]. I Am Vet Med Assoc 194:1609. 1989.
34.
. Rodriguez Peneiro Ml, et al: Accuracy of an adrenocorticotro-
12. Ham K. et al: Validation of a rapid parathyroid hormone
phic hormone (ACTH) inmunoluminometric assay for dif-
assay and intraoperative measurement of parathyroid
ferentiating ACTH-dependent from ACTH-independent
Kewid suurnoso k[eimeu uajuaq yim shop ui auowrou
 hyperadrenocorticism in dogs. I Vet Intern Med 23:850, 2009.
hyperparathyroidism. Vet Surg 38:122. 2009.
35. Rutland BE, et al: Optimal testing for thyroid hormone con-
13. Hoenig M. et al: [nfluence of glucose dosage on interpreta-
centration after treatment with methimazole in healthy and
tion of intravenous glucose tolerance tests in lean and obese
hyperthyroid cats. J Vet Intern Med 23:1025, 2009.
cats. J Vet Intern Med 16:529, 2002.
36. Saunders HM. Jezyk PK: The radiographic appearance of
14. [onut V, et al: Investigation of the effect of acepromazine on
canine congenital hypothyroidism: skeletal changes with
intravenous glucose tolerance tests in dogs. Am J Vet Res
delayed treatment. Vet Radiol Llirasound 32:171. 1991.
65:1124, 2004.
37. Scott-Moncrieff IC, et al: Comparison of serum concentra-
15. Kemppainen RJ. Birchfeld JR: Measurement of total thyrox-
-odky 'saop kun[eay u auouioy suge[mwgs-proikun yo suog
ine concentration in serum from dogs and cats by use of
thyroid dogs. and euthyroid dogs with concurent disease.
various methods. Am I Vet Res 67:259, 2006.
J Am Vet Med Assoc 212:387. 1998.
16. Kluger EK, et al: Serum tiglycenide concentation in
38. Smiley LE. Peterson ME:
Evaluation of a urine
dogs with epilepsy treated with phenobarbital or with
cortisol:creatinine ratio as a screening test for hyperadreno-
phenobarbital and bromide. I Am Vet Med Assoc 233:1270.
crticism in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 7:163, 1993.
2008.
39. Tebb AJ. et al: Canine hyperadrenocorticism: effects of trilo-
17. Kluger EK. et al: Evaluation of two portable meters for deter-
stane on parathyroid hormone, calcium, and phosphate con-
mination of blood tiglyceride concentration in dogs. Am J
centration. J Small Anim Pract 46:537, 2005.
Vet Res 71:203, 2010.
40. Thacker EL, Refsal KR, Bull RW: Prevalence of autoantibodies
18. Kitamura T et al: Acute insulin response to intravenous
to thyroglobulin, thyroxine. or triodothyronine and rela-
arginine in nonobese healthy cats. I Vet Intern Med 13:549.
tionship of autoantibodies and serum concentrations of
1999.
iodothyronines in dogs. Am J Vet Res 53:449. 1992.
19. Lennon EM, et al: llse of basal senum or plasma cortisol
41. Thompson AL, et al: Companison of classic hypoadrenocorti-
concentrations to ule out a diagnosis of hypoadrenocorti-
 sm with glucocorticoid-deficient hypoadrenocorticism in
cism in dogs: 123 cases (2000-2005). Am Vet Med AssoC
dogs: 46 cases (1985-2005). I Am Vet Med Assoc 230:1190.
231:413, 2007.
2007.
190
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
42. Toll J. et al: Prevalence and incidence of serum magnesium
44. Williams TL. et al: Survival and the development of azotemia
abnormalities in hospitalized cats. J Vet Intern Med 16:217.
after treatment of hyperthyroid cats.J Vet Intern Med 24:863.
2002.
2010.
43. Wakeling I. et al: Subclinical hyperthyroidism in cats: a spon-
45. Xenoulis PG. et al: [nvestigation of hypertriglycenidemia in
taneous model of subclinical toxic nodulargoiter in humans?
healthy Miniature Schnauzers. } Vet Intern Med 2l:1224,
Thyroid 17:1201, 2007.
2007.
Gastrointestinal
, Pancreatic
and Hepatic Disorders
Michael D. Willard and David C. Twedt
Some gastrointestinal (Gl) problems (e.g., vomiting. diar-
abdominal contractions associated with gagging are typi-
rhea, weight loss, anorexia, ictenus, hepatomegaly, abnor-
mal behavior associated with eating. abdominal pain)
that classically occur with vomiting. Regurgitation may
lano a uo san Ainel aiiissau Ai
follow seconds to hours after eating or drinking. Patients
hand, dysphagia, regurgitation, ptyalism, halitosis, con-
may regurgitate white foam (i.e., salivary secretions that
stipation, mucoid stools, hematochezia, and melena are
have been swallowed) and/or food. Regurgitated food
a s r  a e q 
material is undigested and sometimes has a tubular form
physical examination, radiology, ultrasonography, endos-
conforming to the shape of the esophageal lumen. Most
copy, laparotomy, and/or biopsy).
clients cannot reliably distinguish undigested from
digested food. Regurgitated material that has remained in
Alled, ieadde ue spoad au guol oy snseudosa au
DIFFERENTLATION OF
digested" because it is macerated, odoriferous, and mixed
with saliva. If blood is present, it is usually undigested
EXPECTORATION, REGURGITATION,
(i.e., bright red), whereas blood originating from the
AND VOMITING
stomach is usually partially digested by gastric acid and
Buusinsus aieau aueieadde spunana aao, e se
Whenever fluid, mucus, foam, food, or blood is expelled
it from the undigested form [unless the patient vomits
from the mouth, one must determine whether vomiting.
before the blood can be partially digested).
regurgitation, gagging, or expectoration is occurring. The
It is sometimes diffcult to differentiate vomiting
history sometimes allows differentiation.
 from regurgitation via history, and in some patients the
processes are concurrent. Vomiting may cause secondary
Expectoration
esophagitis and subsequent regurgitation, or a patient
with long-standing esophageal disease may develop
Expectoration is the coughing up of material from the
another concurrent disorder causing vomiting. It is there-
fore important to clarify the chronologic order of specific
mucus or red blood; bile and food are absent. The char-
signs. Finally, some patients with signs "classic" for regur-
acteristic sequence of coughing followed by oral expul-
gitation are vomiting instead. To aid in differentiation,
sion must be determined from the history or observation.
one may attempt to observe the act of expulsion by
Regurgitation and vomiting typically occur without
feeding the patient, although this is very unreliable
simultaneous coughing. although regurgitation is often
("watched" regurgitating patients often do not regurgi-
accompanied by tracheitis and aspiration pneumonia.
tate). Watching the patient eat occasionally helps if there
osses, Ae Buadxa si ieun hued e 'aamo
-ueqdono sisasns ieul eieeudsp leaguaieud snoiaqo si
 hard because of pharyngeal/laryngeal irritation that it
eiusp leasuieud um stuaed aos aseasp l
eventually vomits.
also have concurrent esophageal dysfunction. Contrast
radiographs and/or fluoroscopy of the pharynx and
Regurgitation
esophagus can usually differentiate vomiting from
regurgitation.
Regurgitation is due to oral, pharyngeal, or esophageal
 Regurgitation is usually best evaluated by history.
dysfunction and is typically characterized as a relatively
physical examination, plain and contrast radiographs.
passive expulsion of esophageal contents. Gagging is the
and/or esophagoscopy (Figure 9-1). Contrast radiographs
expulsion of oral or pharyngeal material and may be
should use barium instead of iodide contrast agents
associated with disorders causing dysphagia (i.e, difficult
unless esophageal rupture is suspected (e.g., finding air or
swallowing) or regurgitation. The relatively minor
fluid in the mediastinum on plain radiographs). The
191
192
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Mediastinal  Pneumothorax
Check for
 Congenital stricture or
Diverticulum (rare)
Vascular ring
agenesis
Lymphoma
Thymoma
mass
Biopsy
 Obstruction
 Check for
Extramural obstruction
Thyroid carcinoma
sophagealsphincter
Pleural
Diverticulum (rare)
fluid
Foreign object
%
(rare)
 Plain thoracic radiographs
Esophageal regurgitation
Acquired
Achalasia
 and check for primary
esophageal disease
(especially obstruction)
Foreign object
Remove object
esophagram
these
Contrast
Other
Congenital
?
Obvious, air-filled
megaesophagus
Cricopharyngeal
Either
antibodies to acetylcholine
 CBC, ACTH stimulation.
Trypanosomiasis (?)
Plain radiographs ± contrast esophagram
Acquired
Nonobstructing
 Esophageal
Esophagitis
neoplasia
 No esophageal
lesions
 Dysphagia (oral regurgitation)
 Dynamic contrast study
Pharyngeal
Myasthenia gravis
esophageal disease
Neuromuscular
disease
Nelrobatny
ook for
Oral
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
193
main purpose of a contrast esophagram is to distinguish
esophageal motility abnormalities from anatomic lesions
BOX 9-1. MAJOR CAUSES OF ACUTE VOMITING
(e.g.. obstruction, mass, inflammation, fistula). Some
IN dOGS AND CATS
dnugs (e.g. xylazine ketamine) can cause esophageal
Motion Sickness
hypomotility, making the radiographs potentially mis-
leading. Esophagoscopy is insensitive for diagnosing
Acute Gastritis-Enteritis (various viral or bacterial
esophageal muscular weakness but sensitive for finding
agents or toxins)
anatomic lesions, differentiating intramural from extra-
Parvoviral enteritis (dogs and cats)
mural obstruction, identifying esophagitis, and removing
Hemorrhagic gastroenteritis
Parasites
 ness should be evaluated for myopathies, neuropathies,
Gastrointestinal (Gl) Obstruction
and myasthenia gravis (generalized or localized to the
Foreign body (obstructing or linear)
esophagus). Occasionally, hypoadrenocorticism, hyper-
 Intussusception
kalemia, lead poisoning. 
Spirocerca lupi, and selected
central nervous system (CNS) disorders (eg., distemper,
Diet
hydrocephalus) may be responsible. Generalized or local.
Overeating
ized myopathies and neuropathies have several causes
 Poor-quality or spoiled food
(e.g., trauma, dermatomyositis, thymoma, botulism, tick
 Food to which patient is allergic or intolerant
paralysis, systemic lupus erythematosus,
 nutritional
factors, toxoplasmosis, trypanosomiasis). Dysautonomia
Acute Pancreatitis
Dccurs in dogs and cats, causing generalized dysfunction
latrogenic (Drugs)
 of the autonomic nervous system producing esophageal
Amoxicillin plus clavulanic acid
hypomotility. It is important to detect underlying disor-
 Chemotherapeutics (e.g., isplatin, cyclophosphamide,
ders so that one may treat the cause rather than just the
doxorubicin)
symptoms. It is also wise to evaluate patients with unex-
Chloramphenicol
pected esophageal foreign objects (e.g.. a relatively small
Digitalis
bolus of food) for partial obstructions (e.g., subclinical
Erythromycin
vascular ring anomaly, stricture).
Narcotics
 Nitrofurantoin
Vomiting
Tetracyclines (ncluding doxycycline)
 Theophylline
Vomiting is a reflex act originating in the CNS that can be
stimulated by various conditions. One must consider
Xylazine
 primary GI disease and non-GI disorders (eg., metabolic,
Intoxication
inflammatory, and toxic conditions) as causes of vomit-
Ethylene gycol
ing. Many vomiting patients have non-GI problems.
Mushroomis
Vomiting is classically characterized by prodromal
Organophosphates
nausea [i.e., salivation, licking of lips) followed by retch-
 Pesticides jncluding herbicides, fungicides, etc.)
ing or forceful abdominal contractions. Vomiting may
 Occur any time after eating or drinking (seconds to hours).
A patient may vomit food, water, fresh blood, or mucus
that is indistinguishable from regurgitated material. Bile,
partially digested blood [i.e.
"coffee grounds"). or
expelled material with a pH of 5 or less strongly suggests
Diet and Parasites
vomiting as opposed to regurgitation. Vomited duodenal
pue / on [enba io ueui iaieai Hd e aaey Ae suauo
Diet and parasites commonly cause acute and chronic
are usually positive for bile A urine dipstick with a pH
vomiting. hence, dietary change [to a bland or hypoal-
indicator is useful in making pH determinations. A
lergenic diet), fecal examination, and broad-spectrum
anthelmintic therapy (eg., fenbendazole, pyrantel) are
opposed to regurgitating.
reasonable initial choices in patients not suspected of
Vomiting patients are best divided into those with
having a clinically important disease. Continued vomit-
      ( ] )
ing is an indication for laboratory tests or imaging.
vomiting. The most common categories of causes for each
are listed in Boxes 9-1 and 9-2. Patients with acute vomit-
Obstruction
ing often spontaneously resolve if they are supported by
 Gastric or intestinal obstruction does not usually require
clinicopathologic testing for diagnosis. A complete blood
tion are indicated frst. Laboratory evaluation and/or
snui paneuassp sisdas isasns Aeu (a) iuno
imaging should be considered if the disease is severe or a
cular coagulation (DIC), or severe blood loss. Renal
serious disease (eg., obstruction) is suspected. If vomiting
function,
electrolyte and acid-base evaluations are
persists, is progressive, or is attended by other clinical
recommended before anesthesia. One cannot reliably
signs (e.g.. polyuria-polydipsia [pu-pd]. weight loss.
 predict changes in these parameters even when the site
icterus, painful abdomen, ascites, weakness, hemateme-
of obstruction is known. Persistent and profuse loss
sis), additional testing is indicated (Figure 9-2)
of gastric contents from any cause may produce
194
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
boX 9-2. mAJor cAuses of chronic voMitinc
Extra-alimentary Tract Disease
IN DOGS AND CATS
A serum chemistry profle should be obtained to help rule
out hepatic disease [alanine aminotransferase [ALT].
Gastrointestinal Obstruction
Foreign objects (common)
serum alkaline phosphatase [SAP], blood urea nitrogen
[BUN]. and albumin), hypoadrenocorticism (sodium
Intussusception
and potassium), hypercalcemia (calcium and albumin)
Neoplasia (gastric or intestinal)
uremia (creatinine BUN, and urinalysis), and diabetic
Pyloric stenosis (infrequent)
'a') gunon Aaa (siskleun pue asoong] sisopeoay
Gastric antral mucosal hyperplasia
<12 to 14 weeks of age) and very small (i.e., <3 kg)
Inflammatory infiltrates of the stomach or intestines (e.g..
patients should undergo blood glucose monitoring to
pythiosis, eosinophilic masses)
detect secondary hypoglycemia. More precise testing
Chronic partial gastric volvulus (uncomimron)
is occasionally required to diagnose these disorders
Hypomotility of stommach/intestines (physiologic
(e.g. serum bile acids for hepatic insufciency, adreno-
obstruction) (uncommon)
corticotropic hormone [ACTH] stimulation test for hypo-
Congenital structural abnormalities (rare)
adrenocorticism). Other tests to consider are senum
gastrin for gastrinoma, and serum thyroxine for feline
Abdominal Inflammation
 Pancreatitis (commton)
hyperthyroidism.
Chronic enteritis (dietary-responsive or antibiotic-
Pancreatitis
responsive) (common)
Acute pancreatitis occurs commonly. Predisposing causes
Gastrointestinal ulceration/erosion
in dogs include hyperlipidemia, fatty meals, or obesity.
Peritonitis (sterile or septic)
Pancreatitis can occur in any dog. but middle-aged obese
Inflammatory bowel disease
female dogs, schnauzers, and Yorkshire terriers seem to
 Chronic gastritis (infrequent)
be predisposed. Vomiting may or may not be associated
 Pharyngitis (caused by upper respiratory virus in cats)
with eating. abdominal pain, fasting hyperlipidemia,
[rare)
bloody diarrhea, and, rarely. diffuse subautaneous fat
Parasites (e.g., Physaloptera) (regionally important)
necrosis. On radiographic examination, a mass or indis-
tinctness due to localized peritonitis may be visible in the
Systemic (extra-alimentary tract diseases) (comtmion)
Hepatic disease/insufficiency (common)
cranial right abdominal quadrant. CBC, serum amylase.
and serum lipase activities are insensitive and nonspecific;
Hypoadrenocorticism (uncommon but important)
patients with pancreatitis can have almost any result on
Dabetic ketoacidosis (comtmon)
these tests. Increased ALT and SAP concentrations [as the
Uremia (common)
result of the proximity of the pancreas to the liver and
Hypercalcemia (important)
obstruction of the biliary duct) are common but insensi-
Cholecystitis 
tive and nonspecifc Mild to moderate hypocalcemia
Pyometra (common)
sometimes occurs. Abdominal ultrasonography can be
 Feline hyperthyroidism (comimton)
very specifc for canine pancreatitis, but its sensitivity
Central nervous system (CNS) disease (e.g., "limbic
depends upon operator skill and timing [i.e., ultrasound
epilepsy", tumor, encephalitis, or increased intracranial
findings can change dramatically in a matter of hours). If
pressure) (rare)
a pancreatic mass is discovered during surgery, it must be
Psychotic or behavioral dhanges (rare)
biopsied; chronic pancreatitis can be grossly indistingui-
shable from pancreatic neoplasia. The canine immuno-
reactive pancreatic lipase (spec cPL) (IDEXX, Westbrook,
ME)test is the most sensitive test for pancreatitis, but its
specificity for clinically important disease is still being
determined. Chronic pancreatitis may be presumptively
diagnosed if one finds exocrine pancreatic insuffciency
hypokalemic, hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis with
in a breed that is not affected by pancreatic acinar cell
aciduria. However, most patients with gastric vomiting are
atrophy.
not alkalotic Insignificant acid-base changes or metabolic
Pancreatitis is an important but difficult-to-diagnose
acidosis due to dehydration are probably more common.
disease in cats. Chronic pancreatitis in older cats some-
Intestinal obstruction may cause acidosis due to loss of
times occurs in conjunction with cholangiohepatitis and/
pancreatic bicarbonate, although some patients have a
or inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) (often referred to as
normal blood pH or a metabolic alkalosis if the obstruc-
a triaditis syndrome involving all three organs). Vomiting
tion is high in the duodenum.
is not as prominent in feline pancreatitis as it is in canine
Abdominal radiographs and ultrasound are the best
pancreatitis. Feline trypsin-like immunoreactivity (fTLI)
initial tests. In otherwise occult cases, contrast radio-
concentrations are increased in some patients. Abdomi-
 si q as m u e aq a s
nal ultrasonography is specific, but the sensitivity is
ferred over iodide compounds unless intestinal rupture is
uncertain. A pancreatic biopsy may be required for a
suspected. Barium leakage into the abdomen causes peri-
definitive diagnosis. The feline immunoreactive pancre-
tonitis and requires vigorous abdominal lavage at the
atic lipase (spec fPL) test appears to be useful in diagnos-
time of surgery (see Chapter 10).
ing pancreatitis. Feline pancreatitis occasionally is due to
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
195
 Laparotomy and biopsy
Abdominal mass
Initial testing and
acidosis and
Organ displacement
Chapter 10
 Abdominal
fluid
-
see
Figure 9-14
diagnosis
 History and physical examination
ON
Hepatomegaly
Microhepatia
Figure 9-8
Dynamic contrast study of
 gastric motility and emptying
 ±colonoscopy-ileoscopy
Gastroduodenoscopy
Ip/6 z<
 Resting serum cortisol 
No diagnosis
Do both
ACTH Stimulation
Ip/6 z>
test
Feline hyperthyroidism
Diabetic ketoacidosis
Hypercalcemia
 Hepatic disease
Pancreatitis
Uremia
196
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
toxoplasmosis or to feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) (see
Chapter 15).
BOX 9-3. DRUGS THAT mAY CAUSE ACUTE
PANCREATITIS
Gastritis, Enteritis, and Colitis
Chronic enteritis, colitis, or gastritis can cause various
Asparaginase
degrees of vomiting and may require mucosal biopsy for
Azathioprine
 Clomipramine
diagmosis. Abdominal ultrasound is potentially specific
and may delineate infltrative or inflammatory intestinal
Furosemide
patterns, but it is insensitive. If gastritis or enteritis is
N-methylglucamine
suspected or if the other major causes of chronic vomiting
 Metronidazole
have been ruled out, gastric and intestinal mucosal biop-
 Potassium bromide (unproven association)
sies via endoscopy or laparotomy may be helpful. Inflam-
 Salicylazosulfapyridine (Azulfidine)
matory bowel disease is an important cause of feline
Sulfonamides
chronic vomiting. Duodenitis is also a significant cause
Tetracycline 
of vomiting without diarrhea in dogs: therefore both
gastric and intestinal biopsies should be performed.
Thiazide diuretics
Finally, because l0% to 20% of patients with colitis
NOTE: These drugs do not reliably cause pancreatitis, and a history
vomit, it is sometimes helpful to perform endoscopy on
of administration of one of these drugs plus signs of pancreatitis
the upper and lower intestinal tracts in patients (espe-
cannot be assumed to be cause and effect. A patient with acute
cially cats) with chronic vomiting. It is critical that good-
pancreatitis that is receiving one of these drugs. however, should
quality mucosal tissue samples be taken and handled
undergo drug withdrawal, if possible.
properly to avoid artifacts, which can render them
nondiagnostic.
Hematemesis
Hematemesis is the vomiting of blood; it suggests GI
Causes of Hyperamylasemia · Decreased glomerular
ulceration/erosion, coagulopathy, or ingestion of blood.
fltration (i.e., azotemia) and pancreatitis are causes of
The vomitus may contain bright-red blood or digested
  sd  d 
blood that resembles coffee grounds. Administration of
normal to markedly increased values. Intestinal disease,
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory dnugs (especially concur-
ruptured intestines, and hepatic disease can increase
rently with corticosteroids) is a major reason for canine
serum amylase.
ulceration. Hepatic failure, mast cell tumor, shock, sub-
maximal exertion, and dexamethasone administration
Causes of Increased Fluid Amylase · When abdomi-
must also be considered. After these have been ruled out.
nal fluid amylase is greater than serum amylase concen-
endoscopy is indicated and allows diagnosis of ulceration
trations, pancreatic disease is possible Bowel rupture is
(especially because of a foreign object, inflammatory
also possible.
disease, or neoplasia). Depending upon the particulars
of the case, one may perform endoscopy or treat
symptomatically.
LIPASE
Abdominal Inflammation
Rare Indications · Used to diagnose pancreatitis, the
Septic or nonseptic peritonitis (or inflammation of any
test is not recommended.
abdominal organ) may cause vomiting. Abdominocente-
sis or abdominal lavage (see Chapter l0) may be needed,
Disadvantages ● The test has poor sensitivity and speci-
especially if physical examination or abdominal imaging
fcity. Duodenal foreign objects, chronic gastritis, and
 abdominal carcinomas sometimes cause increased serum
 roscopy or exploratory surgery for diagnosis.
lipase activity.
Drug Therapy That May Cause Hyperlipasemia ·
AMYLASE
Drugs causing pancreatitis and hyperlipasemia are the
same as for amylase (see Box 9-3) plus heparin. Cortico-
Rare Indications · Used to diagnose pancreatitis, this
steroids (dexamethasone) may increase senum lipase activ-
test is no longer recommended.
ity without histologic evidence of acute pancreatitis.
Disadvantages · The test has poor sensitivity and
Causes of Hypolipasemia · Not significant.
specificity.
Causes of Hyperlipasemia ● Causes of hyperlipasemia
Drug Therapy That May Cause Hyperamylasemia ·
are similar to the causes of hyperamylasemia. Renal dys-
Some drugs occasionally cause pancreatitis (Box 9-3) and
function increases serum lipase. Not all patients with
may cause hyperamylasemia. Corticosteroids sometimes
a pe as uas psnu aau sead an
increase serum amylase concentrations.
increase in serum lipase activity is not proportional to the
severity of the pancreatitis. Extremely increased lipase
Causes of Hypoamylasemia · Insignificant.
values are sometimes caused by pancreatic carcinomas.
Chapter 9:Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
197
CANINE IMMUNOREACTIVE
Drug Therapy That May Alter spec fPL · None known,
 but any drug that can cause pancreatitis may increase the
PANCREATIC LIPASE (SPEC CPL)
spec fPL.
Common Indications · Measurement of spec cPL is
Causes of Decreased Values · Uncertain, but EPI
indicated in patients with vomiting. abdominal pain,
might be a cause.
nonseptic inflammatory abdominal exudate, ictenus, or a
prior history of pancreatitis.
Causes
of Increased
d Values · Values greater than
5.4 μg/L are consistent with and suggestive of pancreatitis.
Advantages · The spec cPL is the most sensitive test for
pancreatitis. It only requires a senum sample and can
be run in house when using SNAP technology (IDEXX,
GASTRIN
Westbrook, ME).
Occasional Indications · Measurement of gastrin is
Disadvantages · Specificity for clinically important
indicated in cases of chronic vomiting, diarrhea, weight
pancreatic lesions (as opposed to pancreatic lesions that
loss, suspected gastrinoma, or gastric or duodenal ulcer-
are not causing clinical disease) is currently unknown.
ation of unknown cause. This test is usually not requested
until more common diseases have been ruled out.
Analysis · The spec cPL is measured in serum by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
Advantages · The test detects  otherwise  occult
gastrinomas.
Normal Values · Less than 200 μg/L is normal.
Disadvantages ● The sample requires careful handling
Artifacts · Uncertain.
[i.e., rapid harvesting of serum and freezing if analysis is
delayed).
Causes of Decreased Values · Exocrine pancreatic
insufciency (EPI) or isolated pancreatic lipase deficiency
Analysis ● Gastrin is measured in serum by radioim-
may decrease spec cPL. More overlap exists between
munoassay (RIA).
as ioy sisixa ueun la ym ssop pue sop ieu
trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLI) concentration. TLI is
Normal Values · Depends on laboratory (the assay must
the test of choice for EPl. Because the spec cPL test is so
be validated for the species). To convert pg/ml to ng/L,
sensitive a negative result strongly suggests that acute
multiply pg/ml x 1.0 = ng/L.
pancreatitis is not present, and the clinician should look
elsewhere for the cause of the vomiting.
Artifacts ● Gastrin may be falsely decreased by hormone
degradation as the result of sample storage for several
Causes of Increased Values · Values greater than
days at temperatures above freezing.
400 μg/L are consistent with and suggestive of pancreatic
inflammation or necrosis. It is currently unclear whether
Drug Therapy That May Increase Gastrin · Antacids.
all microscopic pancreatic lesions [i.e., inflammation,
including histamine2 (Hz) receptor antagonist drugs
necrosis) that are associated with a high spec cPL are
clinically important.
concentration.
Causes of Hypogastrinemia + Not significant.
FELINE IMMUNOREACTIVE
PANCREATIC LIPASE {SPEC FPL)
Causes of
Hypergastrinemia · Atrophic gastritis
(uncommon), antral G-cell hyperplasia (rare). short
Common Indications · Indications for measurement
bowel syndrome, hyperparathyroidism, gastric ulcers,
 of spec fPL are cats suspected of having pancreatitis and
gastric outlet obstruction, renal failure and gastrinoma
those with vague clinical signs (e.g., unexplained anorexia,
may cause hypergastrinemia; the last four are probably
abdominal discomfort, unexplained weight loss) that
the most common. If gastrinoma is suspected in a patient
remain undiagnosed despite testing.
that has a normal or equivocal senum gastrin concentra-
tion, secretin or calcium stimulation tests may be per-
Advantages · The spec fPL is the most sensitive test for
formed. A rise in the serum gastrin concentration after
feline pancreatitis.
giving either of these drugs suggests a gastrinoma.
Disadvantages · The spec fPL has uncertain specificity
for clinically important pancreatic disease.
ACUTE DIARRHEA
Analysis ● The spec fPL is measured in serum by ELISA.
Patients with diarrhea are best classifed into those with
acute (<2 to 3 weeks) versus those with chronic (>2
Normal Values · Less than 3.5 μg/L.
to 3 weeks) diarrhea. Acute diarrhea (Box 9-4) is
usually self-limiting. although some conditions may be
Artifacts · None known.
severe and cause mortality (e.g. acute hemorrhagic
198
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 9-1.DIFFERENTIATION OF CHRONIC SMALL
BOX 9-4. MAJOR CATEGORIES OF CAUSES OF
INTESTINAL DIARRHEA FROM CHRONIC
AcuTe DIARRHEa In DoGS AND CATS
LARGE INTESTINAL DIARRHEA
 Intestinal Parasites (common)
SMALL
Hookworms
INTESTINAL
LARGE INTESTINAL
Roundworms
DIARRHEA
DIARRHEA
Whipworms (primarily dogs)
Weightloss
Expected
 Uncommon except
Coccidia
(very
with severe
Giardia (sometimes difficult to diagnose)
important
disease (e.g..
Strongyloides
criterion)
histoplasmosis,
Tritrichononas (primarily @ats)
pythiosis, or
cancer)
Diet (common)
Polyphagia
Often present
Uncommon
 Poor-quality food/food poisoning
Vomiting
May occur
Occurs in 10%-20%
Sudden dietary change (especially young animals)
of patients
 Food intolerance/allergy
Volume of feces
May be normal 
May be normal or
Acute Viral or Bacterial Enteritis
or larger than
smaller than 
 Parvovirus (canine and feline) (comtmon)
 normal
 normal 
Coronavirus (canine and feline)
Frequency of
Normal to
Normal to markedly
Clostridium perringens (common)
defecation
sSlightly
 increased, may
increased
have many small
Campylobacteriosis (rare)
 defecations per
 Salmonellosis (rare)
bowel movement
Escherichia coli (suspected, but not proven)
Sate-gray feces
Rare
No
Intussusception
[steatorrhea)
Hematochezia
No
Sometimes
Intoxication
Garbage
Melena
Raré
No
Food poisoning
Mucoid stools 
Rare (unless
Often present
Heavy metal
ileum is
diseased)
Organophosphate
Tenesmus/
Rare
Sometimes
Hemorrhagic Gastroenteritis
dyschezia
gastroenteritis, parvoviral disease hookworms, intoxica-
performed, but establishing a cause-and-effect relation-
tion). History should explore the possibility of recent
ship between the organism and disease can be difficult.
dietary change and exposure to infectious agents. Diet.,
Not all patients with canine parvoviral diarrhea are
bacteria, viruses, and parasites are the major identifable
severely ill, diarrheic, febrile, or have identifiable leuko-
causes of acute diarrhea in dogs and cats. Because intes-
tinal parasites may contribute to any diarrheic state fecal
be missed if a CBC is not performed during that period.
examinations (direct and flotation) are typically
war-
Other diseases causing severe sepsis (i.e., perforating
ranted in diarrheic patients. Giardiasis may require special
linear foreign body with peritonitis or overwhelming sal-
diagnostic techniques (see Fecal Giardia Detection later in
 monellosis) can cause leukopenia indistinguishable from
this chapter). The need for diagnostics depends upon (1)
that of canine parvoviral enteritis. Routinely used vaccina-
the severity of the problerm [i.e, more severely ill patients
tion schedules do not necessarily guarantee protection
require more diagnostics), and (2) the likelihood that the
against canine parvovirus. In-house ELISA tests for parvo-
3q 01 lenuaiod sey ieul juage snooayul ue sey juaed
vinus performed on feces appear to be specific for parvo-
nosocomial or zoonotic.
viral antigen, but testing may be negative if done too early
Feeding bland or elimination diets may be diagnostic
 Or too late. Fecal shedding of viral particles may not occur
and therapeutic. Depressed, weak, and dehydrated
for l to 3 days after signs begin and decreases rapidly with
patients should undergo electrolyte and acid-base evalu-
time The test result should be strongly positive within 3
ations to aid in selecting fluid replacement therapy. All
days of the onset of clinical signs and remain positive for
patients less than 12 to 14 weeks of age and those that
several days. A recent vaccination may result in a weakly
 are emaciated or weighing less than 3 kg should undergo
positive fecal ELISA.
blood glucose monitoring to detect secondary hypoglyce-
mia. CBC is indicated in most febrile or severely depressed
patients so that sepsis or transmural inflammation can be
CHRONIC DIARRHEA
detected. Fecal cultures, ELISA, and/or polymerase chain
reaction (PCR) for Salmonella spp., Campylobacter jejuni,
Chronic diarrhea should frst be defined as either small
Yersinia enterocolitica, verotoxin-positive Escherichia coli,
intestinal or large intestinal in origin (Table 9-1). Occa-
aq a a us i sd u
 a s s pe ae ui
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
199
B
FIGURE 9-3 A, A canine rectal scraping showing a macrophage with numerous engulfed yeasts. These are Histoplasma capsula-
tum. B, A canine rectal scraping that shows inflammatory cells and spherical organisms with a clear halo. The organisms are
Prototheca. (Courtesy of Dr. Rck Cowell.)
involved. Patients with chronic diarrhea in which clinical
ileocolic valve; cecum; and ileum. If flexible endoscopy
disease is not severe are often treated with therapeutic
is unavailable abdominal ultrasonography may reveal
 trials before aggressive diagnostics are instituted. The spe-
lesions in areas not accessible with rigid endoscopy.
cifcs of the therapeutic trials are influenced by whether
the patient has large or small bowel disease Patients
Small Intestinal Disease
should usually have at least three fecal examinations at
48-hour intervals. If these tests are negative, it is still
Small intestinal disease has different parasites (e.g-
acceptable (depending upon the risk of parasites in the
Giardia), dietary problems (eg. lymphangiectasia), and
geographic location) to treat empirically for Giardia infec-
bacterial problems [i.e, so-called antibiotic-responsive
tion and whipworms before aggressive diagnostics are
enteropathy [ARE] or dysbiosis that may respond to a variety
begun. Giardiasis may be particularly diffcult to diagnose
of antibacterials) than large bowel disease. Chronic and
[(see Fecal Giardia Detection later in this chapter). Adverse
severe small intestinal diarrhea necessitates differentia-
food reactions (i.e., allergy. intolerance, fiber deficiency)
tion of maldigestion, protein-losing enteropathy (PLE).
commonly cause chronic diarrhea. Dietary intolerances
and malabsorptive disease without protein loss (Figure
are a reaction to a particular substance in the diet, whereas
9-4). Weight ioss and diarrhea are usually present, but
true food allergies are immunologic reactions to specific
some patients only have weight loss.
antigens. Dietary food trials are indicated in suspected
cases. There are antibiotic-responsive intestinal diseases 
Maldigestion
that are also treated empirically: however, the specifc
Maldigestion due to bile acid insufficiency caused by
therapy varies with whether the patient has large or small
 biliary obstruction is rare Intestinal lactase defciency is
bowel disease (see next section). Failing to respond to
uncommon, but a lactose-free diet may be tried in selected
empirical anthelmintic, dietary, and antibacterial therapy
patients (especially cats). EPI is the principal cause of
indicates the need for further diagnostics.
maldigestion but is rare in cats. Differentiation of EPI
from malabsorptive intestinal disease is important. EPI is
often overlooked in afficted dogs or may erroneously be
Large Intestinal Disease
diagnosed in patients without the malady. Clinical trials
Large intestinal disease has different parasites [i.e, Trichu-
asuau Aaa aie suoeiedaid azua peaued uisn
ris vulpis, Tritrichomonas fetus), dietary problems [i.e., fiber-
and nonspecific. Powdered enzyme is often superior to
responsive diarrhea). and bacterial problems 
(i.e.
tablet formulations, and some enzyme preparations are
sO-called clostridial colitis that responds best to tylosin or
clearly superior to others. Some dogs with EPI also require
amoxicillin) than small bowel disease Once parasitic.
a low-fat diet, antacid therapy (rare), or treatment for
dietary, and "clostridial colitis" are eliminated by diagnos-
concurrent ARE (common) before the enzyme replace-
tics and therapeutic trials, additional diagnostic steps,
such as rectal mucosal scrapings (not swabs) with cyto-
enzymes are administered. Up to 15% of dogs with EPI
logic examination (Figure 9-3) might be appropriate. Per-
never respond to therapy. Too often, failure of empirical
sistent large intestinal disease that fails to respond to
sisan Aessanauun oi speal Aeiaun iuaaneidan azu
these therapeutic trials or that is associated with hypoal-
[i.e., biopsy) because EPI was incorrectly eliminated. No
buminemia or obvious weight loss is usually an indica-
consistent hematologic or senum chemistry profile
tion for abdominal ultrasound followed by fine-needle
changes are seen. Undigested fats can often be found in
aspiration and/or colonoscopy-ileoscopy plus biopsy.
the feces; however, this is inconsistent. The fat absorption
Rigid colonoscopy of the descending colon is adequate
test yields many false results. The TLI assay is the standard
for diagnosis in most cases. Flexible endoscopy allows
test for EPl. It is important to note that the TLI tests are
access to the descending, transverse, and ascending colon;
species specific. Measurement of fecal proteolytic activity
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Multiple animals affected
Check diets
bactenaltoxins
Low-fat dliet,
s
Problem
persists
Proper enzyme
replacement 
 Abdominal ultrasound
 Major weight loss
laparotomy
Problem
resolves
 Small intestinal diarrhea 
 No changes
 antibiotic-responsive
 Trial elimination
antibiotics for
snid le
enteropathy
 CBC, serum chemistries 
 Not EPI
Protein-losing enteropathy
Gastroduodenoscopy and
 Abdominal ultrasound
Hypoalbuminemia
serum bile acids)
Normal-
ileoscopy
 an older patient
Gastrinoma
CBC,
Large intestinal diarrhea
Colonoscopy-ileoscopy
If trials fail orif
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
201
is often accurate for diagnosing EPl; however, it is more
si ll paieiqo aie as ya wo (g oi gz ''a) saes
cumbersome and has limited availability.
critical that the endoscopist be accomplished and trained
in obtaining high-quality tissue samples. Many endo-
Malabsorptive Disease
scopically obtained tissue samples are nondiagnostic
Without Protein Loss
because of the operator's lack of training.
 Once maldigestion has been eliminated, malabsorption
becomes the most likely diagmosis in diarrheic animals
Protein-Losing Enteropathy
with weight loss. One must then decide whether to
PLE is uncommon in cats but seen with some regularity
perform diagnostic therapeutic trials or diagnostic tests.
in dogs. PLEs are classically described as causing pan-
Patients that are emaciated, have serum albumin less than
2.1 g/dl, or are progressing rapidly should usually next
hyperglobulinemia (e.g., chronic skin disease, rickettsial
undergo abdominal ultrasonography and intestinal biop-
disease, heartworm disease) and some breeds (eg..
Aeiouos saun Adoosopua ea qeaaid sais
basenji dogs) may have only hypoalbuminemia because
shows lesions that cannot be diagnosed endoscopically
's a si  uq s 
or that can be aspirated with ultrasound guidance).
and even though much of this fraction is lost into the
Patients that are not critically ill may first receive carefully
intestines, the amount remaining in the blood keeps con-
designed therapeutic trials. Therapeutic trials may be
centrations in the normal range. If red blood cells (RBCs)
chosen more rationally with the aid of minimal labora-
are also being lost, iron defciency anemia may occur (see
tory data (e.g., biochemical profle, fecal examinations).
Chapter 3).
The two major therapeutic trials are (1) food trials for
PLE may be the result of various GI diseases (e.g..
dietary-responsive diease [(ie., elimination diets) and (2)
hookworms, chronic intussusception, fungal infections,
antibacterial trials for ARE or dysbiosis.
ulcers and erosions), but lymphangiectasia, alimentary
ARE (previously called “small intestinal bacterial
lymphosarcoma, ARE, and IBD seemingly are the most
overgrowth" or SIBO; now sometimes called dysbiosis)
common causes in adult dogs. Intestinal lymphangiecta-
may exist by itself or coexist with another GI malady. No
sia produces some of the lowest senum albumin concen-
consistent CBC or serum chemistry profle changes are
trations that occur in alimentary disease (e.g.. <l.0 g/dl).
seen in this syndrome. Fecal culture is not informative,
Hypocholesterolemia is common, and peripheral lym-
and ultrasound and intestinal biopsy are seldom diagnos-
phocyte counts occasionally are decreased. If hepatic
tic. A barium contrast study very rarely identifies a seg-
insuffciency and loss from the kidneys and skin have
mental lesion or partial obstruction responsible for
'i a aas e  a u
secondary ARE. Quantitated culture of duodenal or proxi-
PLE becomes the major differential diagnosis by process
mal jejunal fluid for aerobes and anaerobes is diffcult to
of elimination. If PLE is suspected in a patient that has
interpret, because clinically normal dogs may have as
another potential explanation for its hypoalbuminemia
many as or more bacteria than clinically affected dogs.
(e.g., renal protein loss, hepatic insufficiency, severe exu-
Serum cobalamin and folate concentrations are insensi-
dative skin disease), then measuring fecal alpha -protease
tive and nonspecific for ARE. Dogs with ARE usually
inhibitor concentrations may clarify whether or not exces-
respond within 3 to 4 weeks to appropriate antibacterial
sive GI protein loss is occurring. Alpha-protease is rela-
therapy (e.g., tetracycline, tylosin, metronidazole ± enro-
tively stable and resistant to GI degradation; consequently.
floxacin), usually combined with a high-quality elimina-
it can be measured in the feces. Intestinal biopsy is usually
tion diet unless irreversible mucosal changes or primary
the definitive test for determining the cause of PLE. Full-
underlying intestinal disease are present.
thickness biopsy may risk dehiscence if the serum albumin
Dietary intolerance is relatively common, and elimi-
level is less than 1.5 g/dl; serosal patch graft techniques
nation diets (eg., fish and potato, turkey and potato, tofu
decrease the risk of dehiscence. Gastroduodenoscopy-
and beans, hydrolyzed) are reasonable trials. At least
ileoscopy plus biopsy is relatively safe and often diagnos-
3 and preferably 4 weeks should be allotted for such
tic. Occasionally the intestinal lesion is inaccessible via
a dietary trial, during which time absolutely nothing
endoscopy. Although not recommended, dietary trial
else should be fed (including flavored treats or
with an ultra-low-fat diet may be substituted for biopsy
medications).
in patients suspected of having lymphangiectasia. Thera-
 If dietary, antibiotic, and repeated anthelmintic and
peutic trials with steroids without a definitive diagnosis
antiprotozoal therapies are ineffective ultrasonography
can be potentially dangerous (especially in dogs) and are
not recommended.
 Ultrasonography is done to look for lesions that can be
aspirated (thus avoiding the need for anesthesia and
biopsy) and to ensure that endoscopy can reach the
FECAL CHARACTER
lesion. In most patients, the stomach, duodenum, ileum,
and colon may be endoscopically sampled. Duodenal
Mucoid feces should be approached as a large intestinal
cytology is helpful in some disorders (e.g. eosinophilic
Or a distal small intestinal problem. In dogs and cats
enteritis, purulent enteritis, giardiasis, lymphoma). If
 i ss  o q sa   
laparotomy is performed, multiple representative full-
albuminemia, multiple fecal examinations, digital rectal
thickness specimens (e.g., stomach, duodenum, jejunum,
examination, and therapeutic trials [i.e., dietary, anti-
ileum, mesenteric lymph node) are indicated, because
bacterial and/or anthelmintic) are often the best initial
lesions can be spotty, even in severely affected patients. If
steps. If these are unsuccessful, then colonoscopy-
ileoscopy plus biopsy generally becomes the most useful
202
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
diagnostic tool. Hematochezia should also be consid-
Disadvantages · The test has uncertain sensitivity and
ered as a large bowel problem. Melena signifes swal-
specificity for C. perfringens-associated disease. Presence
lowed blood from any source, coagulopathy, or gastric
of toxin does not mean the patient has disease due to that
and upper intestinal bleeding. Therefore before perform-
toxin. Conversely, absence of toxin does not guarantee the
ing an exploratory laparotomy, one should consider all
patient is not diseased because of the bacteria producing
the possible causes of ingesting blood (eg. coughing up
the toxin. Animals may be toxin-positive and not have
blood from the respiratory tract, posterior nasal bleed-
diarrhea, and dogs with toxin-negative diarrhea may
ing). Ingestion of bismuth subsalicylate or liver can
respond to antibiotics. Old fecal samples might yield
cause feces to appear melenic. Diet and changes in intes-
false-positive results.
tinal bacterial flora influence fecal color but do not gen-
erally signify disease.
Analysis ● Fresh or frozen feces are used according to
the instructions on the test kit. Reverse passive latex agglu-
tination (RPLA) (i.e., PET-RPLA Toxin detection kit;
FECAL ENZYME-LINKED
OxoidLimited, Cambridge, UK) and ELISA (i.e., C. perfrin-
gens Enterotoxin Test: TechLab, Blacksburg, VA) methods
IMMUNOSORBENT ASSAY
are available for C. perfringens enterotoxin.
FOR PARVOVIRUS
Interpretation · Results from ELISA methodology
Occasional Indications · A fecal ELISA for parvovirus
appear to correlate better with disease than do results
is indicated in dogs suspected of having parvoviral enteri-
from RPLA methodology. Finding C. perfringens entero-
tis [especially those not displaying classic signs), or in
toxin in feces plus clinical signs consistent with clostridial
acute neutropenia of unknown cause The test can be used
diarrhea has been considered diagnostic However.
-aed auues Aa pasne euadoyna ued asoue oi sies ul
enterotoxin cannot be found in all patients responding to
vovirus 2a and 2b.
  s s   ue n 
negative toxin assay, one may repeat the test again at the
Advantages · The test is quick and available, and has
onset of recurrence of clinical signs or perform a thera-
good sensitivity and specifcity if done at the appropriate
peutic trial with amoxicillin or tylosin.
time [e.g., approximately 1 to 3 days after onset of clinical
Fecal spore counts do not correlate well with C.
signs).
of diarrhea. Examining fecal smears (see Fecal Micro-
Disadvantages · Dogs with parvoviral enteritis can
     a '  
presence of spores is not an acceptable screening
in the course of the disease.
procedure.
Analysis · Fresh feces are used according to kit instruc-
tions (see Chapter 15). The instructions must be carefully
FECAL ANALYSIS FOR
followed or false results might be obtained.
CLOSTRIDIUM DIFFICILE
Normal Values ● Dogs should be negative for fecal par-
voviral antigen.
Occasional Indications · The importance of C. diffcile
in small animal medicine is unknown. The test seems
Interpretation · A positive result supports canine par-
 most appropriate for suspected nosocomial or antibiotic-
voviral enteritis. Not all dogs affected with parvoviral
associated diarrheas.
enteritis have diarrhea and fever; some show only
anorexia, vomiting, or fever. Theoretically, if coproanti-
Advantages · The ELISA for C. diffcile antigen is very
body binds all of the antigen in the feces, a false-negative
sensitive and has excellent negative predictive value The
result may occur. If the test is performed too early in the
ELISA for C. diffcile toxin is thought to be specifc, but of
disease, it may yield negative results. With such dogs, one
umcertain sensitivity.
should repeat the test in 36 to 48 hours. Shedding of viral
 particles decreases after the frst week of disease, and a test
Disadvantages · Interpretation is not simply based
performed too late in the disease might yield negative
upon positive/negative test results. Presence of toxin does
results. Modifed-live vinus vaccination results in transient
not mean the patient has disease due to that toxin. Con-
fecal shedding and can give a weak positive fecal ELISA
versely, absence of toxin does not guarantee the patient
test result (5 to 15 days after vaccination).
is not diseased because of C. difcile. Animals may be
toxin-positive and not have diarrhea, and dogs with
FECAL ANALYSIS FOR CLOSTRIDIUM
antibacterials.
PERFRINGENS
Analysis · ELISA methodology is available to look for
Occasional Indications · Fecal analysis for C. perfrin-
C. diffcile toxin A [ImmunoCard Toxin A; Meridan Diag-
gens is occasionally indicated in dogs with acute, nosoco-
nostics, Cincinnati, OH).
mial diarrhea or chronic large bowel diarrhea ofunknown
cause.
Drug Therapy That May Alter Analysis · Unknown.
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
203
Interpretation · The best approach is to first check for
Disadvantages (Semiqualitative Analysis) · The test
the presence of bacteria using the ELISA for the bacterial
Occasionally produces misleading results.
antigen. If the test is negative, then it is very unlikely
that C. diffcile is present. If the ELISA for the bacterial
Analysis · The clinician performs a semiqualitative
antigen is positive then one should test for the toxin
analysis for undigested fats by mixing a drop of fresh feces
using an ELISA that detects both A and B toxin. Finding
with a drop of Sudan Ill, heating the slide to a boil, and
C. diffcile toxin A in feces of diarrheic patients seems
examining the smear microscopically. The clinician per-
suggestive of a cause-and-effect relationship. However,
forms analysis for digested fats by mixing one drop of
the importance of C. diffcile in canine and feline medi-
fresh feces, one drop of 36% acetic acid, and one drop of
jou Aua si adoad ioy aaey Aeu i ys Aue pue au
Sudan Il. This is put on a microscope slide, heated to
understood.
boiling. and examined while still warm. In both cases,
identifying orange droplets is a positive finding. It is
important that the patient has been eating a moderate- to
FECAL CULTURE
high-fat diet Feeding low-fat diets to malabsorptive dogs
may cause the test result to be negative.
Rare Indications · Fecal culture is rarely indicated for
dogs and cats with diarrhea (especially large bowel) that
Normal Values ● Semiqualitative: few Or no undigested
appears to be nosocomial, is potentially infectious (eg..
and digested fat globules per high-power field (hpf).
fever, leukocytosis, neutrophilic fecal cytology), or is sus-
pected of being due to a specific infectious agent [i.e.
Artifacts ● The semiqualitative analysis may have unex-
Salmonella spp., C. jejuni, verotoxin-positive E. coli, and Y.
plained false-negative and false-positive reactions. Admin-
mterocolitica). Nonculture techniques looking at DNA are
istration of barium sulfate, bismuth, psyllium fber,
probably more useful but are generally limited to research
mineral oil, or castor oil or feeding a low-fat diet may also
laboratories.
confuse semiqualitative analysis.
Disadvantages · The clinician must specify 
which
Causes of Increased Fecal Fat · Finding several orange
pathogen(s) to culture for and must provide the labora-
globules/hpf, if repeatable on several examinations, is
principally caused by malabsorption or maldigestion. It
transport media. Testing requires a microbiology labora-
is a reasonable screening test and helps distinguish EPI
tory familiar with the specifc enrichment and isolation
(positive for undigested fats) from malabsorption (posi-
techniques for each pathogen. Using culture swabs is not
tive for digested fats). Despite occasional false-positive
adequate for isolation of most enteric pathogens. Finally.
reactions, strongly positive results for undigested fecal fat
in a dog with signs consistent with maldigestion are an
for clinical signs.
indication for TLI. Fecal fat may not be detectable in some
dogs with EPI.
Analysis ● Fresh feces must be promptly submitted to
the laboratory, and the laboratory must know the specific
pathogen(s) sought To submit old feces or feces that have 
FECAL PROTEOLYTIC ACTIVITY
not been collected or handled properly or to request a
"general culture for pathogens" is generally a waste of
This test was used to detect maldigestion in animals with
time and money. It requires laboratories that are properly
chronic diarrhea or weight loss of unknown cause Theo-
equipped to culture for enteric pathogens. Culture for C.
y ieu suad aii ul lda asoue A il Aa
perfringens is not helpful diagnostically.
EPI secondary to obstruction of the pancreatic duct or
ducts. However, the radiograph film digestion test is
Interpretation · Any clinically normal animal may
useless and should never be used. The most reliable pro-
have any of the pathogens listed earlier cultured from its
cedure for measuring fecal proteolytic activity is diffcult
feces, although Y. enterocolitica is particularly uncommon
to perform and requires special handling of the feces; it
in the United States. Interpretation of the fecal culture
is described in prior editions. The TLI test is the test of
must consider the history, physical examination, labora-
choice for EPl.
tory data, and sometimes numbers of organisms [i.e..
number of bacterial colony-forming units per gram of
FECAL ALPHA-1 PROTEASE
feces) found.
INHIBITORACTIVITY
FECAL FAT
Infrequent Indications ● Hypoalbuminemia of uncer-
juauo ym saed e ul ald paiadsns io asne u
Rare Indications · Fecal fat testing may be used to
hepatic insufficiency or protein loss from the kidneys or
detect malabsorption or maldigestion in animals with
skin are indications for testing fecal alpha-l protease
diarrhea or unexplained weight loss.
inhibitor activity.
Advantages (Semiqualitative Analysis) · Fecal fat has
Advantages ● The test can defne the GI tract as the
minimal expense, availability, and reasonable accuracy as
source of protein loss. Alpha-l protease inhibitor is a
a screening test.
plasma protein. If it leaks into the intestinal lumen, it
204
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
resists GI degradation and hence can be measured in the
feces.
Disadvantages · The test has limited availability.
 The magnitude of alpha-l protease inhibitor in the
feces is variable and may not reflect the severity of
the disease.
Analysis ● Three l-g fecal samples from three different
 bowel movements are submitted in tubes provided by the
laboratory. It is critically important that three samples 
(preferably from different days or at least different bowel
movements) be submitted, that the feces be collected
promptly after defecation, and that the feces not be col-
lected by digitally removing them from the rectum.
Samples must be frozen while one awaits shipping and
must be shipped on a cold pack. Currently the only labo-
FIGURE 95 Cytology of a fecal smear showing large yeast
ratory offering this test is GI Laboratory, College of Vet-
bodies (i.e., Cyniclomtyces guttulatus).
erinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station,
TX 77843-4474.
Normal Values ● 0.23 to 5.67 μg/g feces. The clinician
must look at individual values and the mean of all three
values.
Interpretation · Fecal WBCs (specifically neutrophils)
can be observed with bacterial (eg, salmonellosis, cam-
Causes of Abnormmalities · Abnormally high values in
pylobacteriosis)  and inflammatory  mucosal  disease.
the feces indicate loss of serum proteins into the alimen-
Transmural colitides occasionally have increased fecal
tary tract and might indicate that PLE is the cause of
WBCs. Fecal WBCs can be an indication to biopsy colonic
hypoalbuminemia. Interpretation of the magnitude of
mucosa in patients with chronic colitis. Eosinophils may
the loss is as per the laboratory.
sometimes be seen with allergic or parasitic colitis.
Increased numbers of yeast or a uniform population of
bacteria may help identify the cause of diarrhea in a
FECAL MICROSCOPIC CYTOLOGY
patient, but the mere presence of an organism (e.g. Cyni-
clomyces guttulatus [Figure 9-5]) does not ensure that it is
Rare Indications ● Fecal microscopic cytology is rarely
causing disease.
indicated in cases of large or small intestinal diarrhea.
Advantages · The test is widely available and easy to
perform.
FECAL OCCULT BLOOD
Disadvantages · The test has poor sensitivity and vari-
Rare Indications · A fecal occult blood test may be
able specificity for different agents.
used to detect GI bleeding that is not grossly apparent.
Analysis ● Thin, air-dried, fresh fecal smears are stained
Disadvantages · See Artifacts.
with new methylene blue (NMB) or Wright stain and
examined using high-power and oil immersion micros-
Analysis · Fresh feces are smeared on a test pad. The
copy. Rectal and colonic mucosal scrapings obtained with
patient must have been on a meat-free diet for at least
a curette are also a means of examining mucosal cells.
3 days before the feces are obtained. Sensitivity varies
markedly between different assays.
Normal Values ● A mixed population of rod and cocci
bacteria, few bacterial spores or yeast, ocasional epithe-
Normal Values · See Artifacts.
lial cells and amorphous debris.
Artifacts · Fecal occult blood results may be falsely
Artifacts · Old fecal samples may alter results (white
jou Aew pooiq] sanay paxiuun gudues Aq paseaiap
blood cells [WBCs] do not remain identifable in feces for
be distributed homogeneously throughout the feces)
long time periods, and the bacterial population changes
and vitamin C supplermentation. Results may be falsely
and bacterial spores may increase). Fecal debris may
increased by diets containing fresh meats (i.e., hemoglo-
resemble degenerate WBCs
bin) or fresh uncooked vegetables (ie., peroxidases),
which cause a positive reaction.
      
Cytology · Administration of barium and psyllium fiber
Causes of Fecal Occult Blood · Bleeding into the
may make interpretation difficult, and antibiotics change
GI tract at any level and as the result of any cause
bacterial flora composition.
may result in fecal occult blood. GI blood loss of
205
volumes of 2 ml blood/30 kg body weight will give posi-
SERUM COBALAMIN
tive results.
AND SERUM FOLATE
Occasional Indications · Chronic small bowel diar-
FAT ABSORPTION TEST
rhea, unexplained weight loss, or uncertain but suspected
small intestinal disease are occasional indications for
Rare Indications ● A fat absorption test may be used to
serum cobalamin and folate testing. These tests are more
detect and distinguish maldigestion from malabsorption
important in the cat than in the dog.
in chronic small intestinal diarrhea or unexplained weight
loss. The test has many false-negative and false-positive 
Advantages · Only one serum sample is needed to
results and is not recommended.
measure both values.
Analysis · The test is described in prior editions.
Disadvantages · The test has poor sensitivity and
specificity for ARE and uncertain sensitivity and specific-
ity for other intestinal diseases or EPl. This test should
be an adjunct to other tests in patients with possible
TRYPSIN-LIKE IMMUNOREACTIVITY
intestinal disease. The test is specific for cobalamin
deficiency.
Common Indications · TLI testing is indicated in
patients with chronic small bowel diarrhea or unex-
Analysis · Cobalamin and folate are measured in serum
plained weight loss.
ale spoyiau alioq oN. Kesseounuul io Aesseoiq Aq
unreliable in dogs. Serum should be transported in a
covered tube.
EPI. The test only needs one serum sample that does not
require special or cumbersome handling procedures.
Normal Values · Depend on the laboratory. Normal
 a s    
Disadvantages · The test is species specific. Currently
laboratory must validate the assay for dogs and cats.
the only laboratory offering the fTLI test (for cats) is the
GI Laboratory, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M
Danger Values · None.
University, College Station, TX 77843-4474.
Artifacts · Cobalamin concentration may be falsely
Analysis · TLI is performed on serum using ELISA.
decreased by sample degradation caused by exposure of
serum to sunlight.
Normal Values ● Dogs, 5 to 35 μg/L; cats, 12 to 82 μg/L.
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Cobalamin
Danger Values · None.
Concentrations · Dietary content or vitamin supple-
mentation of cobalamin and folate can affect senum
Artifacts · Theoretically, EPI caused by an obstructed
concentrations. Drugs that affect intestinal bacterial con-
pancreatic duct instead of acinar cell atrophy would yield
centrations (i.e, antibacterials ) may alter values.
a normal or even increased senum TLI value.
Causes of Decreased Serum Cobalamin Concentra-
 sa o r    a 
tions · The major reasons for decreased serum cobala-
acute pancreatitis (see Box 9-3) might increase serum TLI.
min concentrations in dogs and cats are ileal disease
 Oral pancreatic enzyme supplementation does not affect
Or resection (rare), EPI, intestinal mucosal disease,
serum TLI concentrations.
and ARE ("dysbiosis"). In cats, hepatic disease and
hyperthyroidism might cause hypocobalaminemia. The
Causes of Decreased TLI · TLI is the test of choice for
major differentiation to be made is among EPI and
EPI. A serum TLI concentration less than 2.5 μg/L (dog)
intestinal disease; therefore decreased serum cobalamin
or 8 μg/L (cat) is generally considered diagnostic for EPI.
is an indication to measure serum TLl. Not all dogs
Subclinical canine EPI may be suspected by finding inter-
with EPI, mucosal disease, or ARE have decreased
mediate values (>2.5 μg/L and <5.0 μg/L). In such cases
serum cobalamin. Cats with EPI, severe small intestinal
repeated testing should be performed. Some dogs will
disease (eg. lymphoma. IBD). and some hepatic
later develop EPl, whereas others will not.
diseases (e.g. idiopathic hepatic lipidosis) can have
very low cobalamin concentrations. Finding a signif-
Causes of Increased TLI · Values greater than 50 μg/L
cantly
decreased
senum cobalamin  concentration
in dogs and greater than 100 μg/L in cats may occur with
can be an indication of small intestinal disease in
pancreatitis (the spec PL is better than TLI for this purpose
animals that were previously not suspected to have
in dogs and cats), renal failure, prerenal azotemia (may
such disease.
increase two times), and malnutrition. An increased fTLI
test is potentially consistent with pancreatitis. In dogs, TLI
Causes of Increased Serum Cobalamin Concentra-
seems to increase early in pancreatitis but then quickly
tions · Cobalamin concentration may be increased by
returns to reference ranges.
cobalamin supplementation.
206
Causes of Decreased Serum Folate · Severe mucosal
FECAL SMEAR (WET MOUNT}
disease of the proximal small intestine decreases serum
folate. Not all patients with such disease have decreased
FOR PARASITES
folate levels.
Common Indications · A fecal smear is used to screen
Causes of Increased Serum Folate · ARE, EPl, and
for parasites and parasitic ova; it is indicated in any
patient with diarrhea, melena, hematochezia, fecal
mucus, weight loss, or vomiting.
folate levels. The combination of low cobalamin plus
increased folate is consistent with ARE, but is insensitive
Advantages · The test is widely available, easy to
 and nonspecific.
perform, and inexpensive.
Disadvantages · A fecal smear requires fresh feces, and
C-REACTIVE PROTEIN {CRP}
is insensitive compared with concentration and molecu-
lar techniques.
Occasional Indications · CRP has been used in one
formula for determining a Canine IBD Activity Index
Analysis · A thin smear is made of very fresh (<5
(CIBDAI).
minutes old) feces, mixed with a drop of saline solution
Or water and coverslipped to prevent dehydration. It
Advantages · The test is very sensitive for detecting
should be examined immediately. If protozoa are visible
inflammation.
and better cytologic detail is desired, a drop of Lugol's
iodine or Dobell and O'Connor's iodine may be placed
Disadvantages · The test will detect inflammation
at the cormer of the coverslip.
almost anywhere in the body: it is nonspecific as far as
type or location or cause.
 NOTE: lodine kills protozoa, thus stopping motility.
Analysis ● CRP is measured on a sample of refrigerated
 or frozen fasting serum.
Normal Values ● No parasites Or Ova.
Normal Values ● Less than 7.6 mg/L
Artifacts · Cooling of the slide or dehydration inhibits
Artifacts · None known.
the motility of protozoa.
Drug Therapy That May Alter C-Reactive Protein *
Drug Therapy That May Alter Results + Orally admin-
Unknown.
istered compounds containing kaolin, pectin, barium
sulfate, bismuth, and other intestinally active compounds
 e   o 
(e.g., cathartics, enemas) may make it diffcult to find and
the body can increase the CRP The greatest utility in
identify parasites, ova, and cysts.
 e u  a rm aas ci si d 
patient after therapy (ie., whether therapy is associated
Parasites, Bacteria, and Ova That May Be Identi-
with an increase or decrease in CRP). Changes in the CRP
fied ● Giardia spp. (Figure 9-6A), Tritrichomonas spp. (see
can reveal resolving or worsening inflammation, even if
Figure 9-6A), Entamoeba histolytica, Balantidium coli, Stron-
 all values are normal.
gyloides stercoralis (Figure 9-6B). and Aelurostrongylus
abstrusus may be detected. Any ova may be found, but this 
test may be useful for detecting Spirocerca lupi and Trichuris
vulpis ova. With oil immersion, small motile bacterial
HYDROGEN BREATH TEST
spirochetes in conjunction with fecal WBCs suggest Cam-
pylobacter spp. as a possible cause.
Rare Indications ● The hydrogen breath test is rarely
indicated in cases of chronic small bowel diarrhea or
unexplained weight loss. The test detects hydrogen pro-
FECAL FLOTATION
duction as a by-product of bacterial fermentation of car-
Common Indications · Indications for a fecal flotation
ARE or carbohydrate malabsorption. It can only be done
test are as for a fecal smear.
in clinics/laboratories with specialized equipment and
experience The clinician should contact the laboratory
Advantages ● The test has reasonable sensitivity. high
for specifics.
 specificity, availability, and low cost.
Interpretation · Carbohydrate malabsorption and ARE
Analysis · Feces are well mixed with either a saturated
may increase expired hydrogen. The only source of hydro-
 sugar solution or a zinc sulfate solution (prepared by
gen is bacterial fermentation of carbohydrates. The sensi-
mixing 331 g ZnSO4 · 7 HzO in 1 L water to attain a
tivity and specifcity of this test for ARE in dogs are
specific gravity of 1.18 to 1.20 [as determined with a
unknown.
hydrometer]). This is the best fecal flotation technique for
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
207
B
has been stained to enhance internal structures. Note that the Tritrichomonas trophozoites are larger and have one large undulat-
ing membrane. B, A fecal smear stained with iodine showing larvae from Strongyloides stercoralis. The larvae of other strongylids
(e.g., hookworms) appears identical, so it is important to use only fresh feces when looking for S. stercoralis. (A and B courtesy
of Dr. Tom Crain, Texas A&M University.)
Giardia spp. because it does not distort the cysts. Ova and
cysts are allowed to rise to the surface and are retrieved
with a coverslip. Samples for Giardia detection should be
examined within 15 minutes to avoid distortion and lysis
of cysts. Centrifugation of the sample increases the sensi-
tivity of the procedure. Samples that will be sent to an
outside laboratory for analysis may be refrigerated (not
frozen) for 1 to 2 days or preserved by mixing 1 part feces
with 3 parts sodium acetate-acetic acid-formalin (pre-
pared by mixing 1.5 g sodium acetate + 2 ml glacial acetic
acid + 4 ml 40% formaldehyde solution +92.5 ml water).
Normal Values ● No ova Or oocysts present.
Artifacts · Diarrhea may decrease ova concentration
within a sample.
FIGURE 9-7 Ova of Heterobilharzia americana in a fecal
sedimentation. (Courtesy of Dr Tom Craig. Texas A&M
Parasite Ova and Cysts That May Be Identified · Ancy-
University.)
lostoma spp.. Toxocara spp., Toxascaris leonina, Trichuris
vulpis, Spirocerca lupi, Physaloptera rara [using dichromate
solution). Capillaria aerophilia, Capillaria plica, Onciolo
canis, Dioctophyme renale, Isospora spp., Giardia spp., Toxo-
plasma gondi, Cryptosporidium spp.Paragonimus kellicotti,
to 2 hours. The sediment is then examined microscopi-
and some tapeworms may be detected.
cally. When formalin and ethyl acetate are used, the
strained feces are centrifuged, the pellet is resuspended
in 9 ml of 5% formalin solution, 3 ml ethyl acetate is
FECAL SEDIMENTATION
added, and the mixture is shaken vigorously. This is
recentrifuged, the debris at the formalin and ethyl acetate
Rare Indications · Indications for fecal sedimentation
interface is discarded, and the sediment is then
testing are the same as for fecal smear and flotation, espe-
examined
cially if flukes are being considered. If feces contain exces-
sive fat, then formalin and ethyl acetate is probably better
Normal Values ·No ova.
than water for sedimentation.
Artifacts ● Same as discussed in the previous section on
Disadvantages · The test requires more time than a
Fecal Flotation.
direct fecal smear or fecal flotation.
Parasite Ova That May Be Identified·Fecal sedimen-
Analysis · Feces are mixed with the sedimentation
tation may detect all the ova that may be found by fecal
solution (e.g., water or saline), strained once or twice to
flotation, plus Alaria canis, Nanophyetus salmincola, and
 remove large debris, and allowed to settle for 30 minutes
Heterobilharzia americana (Figure 9-7).
208
FECAL GIARDIA DETECTION
Finally. feces may be preserved (approximately
200 mg in 3 to 5 ml of 70% isopropyl alcohol; be sure to
 avoid including litter) and mailed to a laboratory for PCR
Common Indications · Fecal testing for Giardia is indi-
analysis.
 a   s u 
weight loss, intermittent bilious vomiting. or when
Normal Values ·Negative.
Giardia is suspected clinically and multiple zinc sulfate
flotations using centrifugation are negative Techniques
include duodenal aspiration and cytology. fecal ELISA
FECAL CRYPTOSPORIDIUM
antigen test (e.g. ProSpecT Microplate ELISA Assay for
DETECTION
Giardia; Alexon, Lenexa, KS), and immunofluorescence
assay (IFA) (e.g.. MeriFluor Cryptosporidium/Giardia;
Rare Indications ● Fecal testing for Cryptosporidium may
Meridian Diagnostics, Cincinnati, OH) performed on
be indicated in patients with chronic diarrhea. Cats (espe-
feces.
cially with feline immunodeficiency virus [FIV] infection]
s u sia a i l a aq ae
Advantages · These tests are more sensitive than direct
but the prevalence of this disorder and its clinical signif-
smear or fecal flotation for diagnosing Giardia.
cance in dogs and cats is currently unknown.
 Disadvantages · Duodenal aspirate requires surgery or
 Disadvantages · Oocysts are small and may be diffcult
endoscopy.
to find.
Analysis · Fresh samples should be used for analysis
Analysis ● Fresh fecal samples should be sent to a refer-
with fecal ELISA and fecal IFA. The IFA is more
ral laboratory experienced in finding Cryptosporidium.
sensitive than the ELISA. Duodenal fluid aspirates
Special fecal flotation techniques, direct fecal smears
require fresh direct wet mount observation of motile
 stained with an acid-fast stain, or ELISA methodology
trophozoites.
[e.g, ProSpecT Cryptosporidium Microplate Assay: Alexon.
Lenexa, KS) can be used. The ELISA methodology appears
Normal Values · No trophozoites or fecal antigen
to be the most sensitive.
present.
Normal Values ·Negative.
FECAL TRITRICHOMONAS
FECAL HETEROBILHARZIA
DETECTION
DETECTION
Occasional  Indications · Fecal testing for Tritricho-
Occasional Indications · Fecal PCR testing for Hetero-
 monas is indicated for chronic large bowel diarrhea in cats,
  rm o   ad si 
especially exotic breeds such as Somalis, ocicats, and
hepatic disease or unexplained hypercalcemia from areas
Bengals.
where Heterobilharzia is endemic.
Advantages · Culture is more sensitive (approximately
Advantages ● The test is more sensitive than fecal sedi-
1000 organisms/50 mg of feces) than direct fecal exami-
mentation; it can detect 1 to 2 ova/g of feces.
nation, while PCR is the most sensitive test [approxi-
mately 10 organisms per 200 mg feces).
 Disadvantages · There is limited availability of testing.
The test is currently available at GI Laboratory, College
juaaip aaey sanbuual juaia - saenueapesi
of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University, College
sensitivities that the clinician must be aware of Feces
Station, TX 77843-4474.
should be fresh, not refrigerated. Old feces can give false-
negative results for direct examination and culture. Direct
Analysis · PCR is performed on feces.
fecal examination is relatively insensitive (<15%).
Artifacts · None known.
Analysis · Fresh fecal samples can be examined micro-
scopically (see Fecal Smear earlier in this chapter) (see
Drug Therapy That May Alter Test Results · None
Figure 9-6A). Feces (very fresh, approximately 0.05 g)
known.
can be cultured using commercially available pouches
designed for culturing Trichomonas foetus from cattle [i.e.
Interpretation · A positive result in an animal with
In Pouch TF; Biomed Diagnostics, White City. Oregon).
clinical signs consistent with heterobiliharziasis is an
This test is best done in the clinic without sending off the
indication to treat.
feces or the pouch. The inoculated pouch is incubated
upright in the dark at either 37° C or room temperature
for 2 or 12 days. respectively. It should be examined
HEPATIC ABNORMALITIES
microscopically at least every 48 hours.
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
209
Perhaps the most difficult aspect of dealing with hepatic
sensitive function tests. [NOTE: Cholestatic diseases also
disease is distinguishing primary hepatic disease (i.e., the
increase bile acids; therefore, bile acids are not a "pure"
liver is or will be the cause of the patient's illness) from
test of hepatic function.) However, if hepatic disease is
secondary hepatic disease [i.e, the liver disease is caused
strongly suspected and the serum bile acid concentrations
by the patient's nonhepatic illness). Primary hepatic
are not as high as anticipated, one should not hesitate to
s as      s
perform other tests to characterize the liver. If hepatic
(e.g., hepatomegaly, microhepatia, ictenus, ascites, hepatic
atrophy is likely, abdominal ultrasonography, advanced
encephalopathy) or associated with nonspecific signs
imaging (e.g., contrast portography, computed tomogra-
(e.g.,. depression, weight loss, anorexia, vomiting). The
phy, magnetic resonance imaging). hepatic biopsy, or a
latter are common presenting complaints of many dis-
combination of these might be considered.
eases, which is why serum biochemistry profiling is indi-
 Small livers with clearly rounded or blunt hepatic
cated in patients with chronic signs or evidence of
systemic disease There are no signs or laboratory abnor-
in serum ALT and SAP are often present, but some dogs
d  s    
with marked hepatic cirrhosis have normal hepatic
hepatic disease When screening for hepatic disease, one
enzymes. Serum albumin and BUN are more variable If
should request at least a CBC, serum ALT, SAP, total bili-
cirrhosis appears likely. a biopsy is often indicated. An
rubin, albumin, cholesterol, BUN, glucose, urinalysis, and
obviously nodular or “cobblestone" appearance is very
abdominal imaging. Hepatic function tests (i.e, senum
suggestive of cirrhosis; however, significant fibrosis can be
bile acids and/or blood ammonia) and ultrasound are
present without major gross changes, and some noncir-
rhotic diseases (e.g. hepatic collapse with nodular regen-
essary for definitive diagnosis except in patients with por-
eration, nodular hyperplasia) may grossly resemble
tovascular anomalies. Abnormalities in hepatic-specifc
cirrhosis. Acquired multiple shunts visible at laparoscopy
o aa dau a  hns  sa
aq u nq siso on ap ns aie Aoiede 1o
hepatic involvement secondary to nonhepatic disease
secondary to congenital hepatic AV fistula, veno-occlusive
(e.g glucocorticoid hepatopathy septicemia, IBD, pancre-
disease, portal vein obstruction, or infiltrative disease.
atitis). After identifying abnormalities in ALT, aspartate
aminotransferase (AST), SAP, or gamma-glutamyl trans-
Hepatomegaly: Enlarged Liver
peptidase (GGT), one should investigate first for a second-
ary hepatic disease because these are the most common
Focal or asymmetric hepatic enlargement generally neces-
causes of increased values. In such cases the liver usually
has reactive but reversible degenerative changes. Labora-
tory tests and ultrasound should be used for two main
cause of focal hepatomegaly. The magnitude of the
purposes: (1) to identify the presence of hepatic disease
enlargement is not prognostic.
'paeiui si asdoiq pneday ji auaap diay o () pue
 Generalized hepatomegaly necessitates careful clini-
copathologic evaluation. Hepatomegaly may be caused
Microhepatia: Small Liver
by primary or secondary hepatic disease. Diagnosis may
be confirmed with a history of exposure to certain toxins
A small liver suggests atrophy (i.e, congenital portosys-
(Boxes 9-5 and 9-6) or diagnosis of a systemic disease
temic shunt [PSS]. hepatic arteriovenous [AV] fistula].
(e.g. hyperadrenocorticism) known to affect the liver.
fbrosis and cirrhosis, or diffuse massive hepatic necrosis
Changes in ALT,SAP,hepatic function tests,and hepatic size,
(Figure 9-8). Hepatic atrophy tends to be characterized by
although suggestive of hepatic disease,are not diagnostic of
sharp borders as opposed to the rounded or blunted
specifc entities. This is true even in breeds with predisposi-
hepatic margins typically associated with fbrosis and cir-
tions to specific hepatic diseases (e.g., Doberman pin-
rhosis. Some patients with primary hepatic fibrosis severe
schers, Bedlington terriers). Changes in the SAP or ALT
enough to cause portal hypertension also have sharp
 may also be caused by primary nonhepatic disease (eg.
hepatic margins, however. Many patients with marked
hyperadrenocorticism, IBD, diabetes mellitus, heart
hepatic atrophy due to congenital PsS are relatively young
failure). A definitive diagnosis usually requires hepatic
[<3 to 4 years) and have had signs of hepatic disease since
biopsy. The clinician should first seek to rule out nonhe-
[or before) weaning. whereas most patients with cirrhosis
patic causes of secondary hepatic dysfunction. Hepatic
are middle-aged or older and clearly have late onset of
biopsy should be considered in patients with obviously
significant hepatic disease, thosethat do not have obvious
of microhepatia, but it is usually diagnosed in dogs less
nonhepatic causes (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, right heart
than 2 years of age. However, some dogs with congenital
failure). and those that have persistent (>l month)
PSS are first diagnosed when they are more than l0 years
changes in serum ALT consistent with chronic or progres-
old. Likewise, some dogs with acquired PSs due to cir-
sive hepatic disease or abnormal hepatic function tests
rhosis are diagnosed when less than 6 months old.
(see Figure 9-8). It is not always possible to accurately
Hepatic atrophy typically causes abnormalities in
distinguish primary hepatic from secondary hepatic
hepatic function tests (eg. serum bile acids, blood
disease before biopsy: therefore whenever hepatic biopsy
ammonia) but may yield normal or abnormal ALT, SAP
is performed via laparotomy or laparoscopy, the rest of
BUN, and serum albumin. A single normal or abnormal
the abdomen should be explored and other organs
hepatic function test result does not mean that other
sampled if they might be involved. Fine-needle aspirates
hepatic function tests will have similar results. Pre- and
with cytology are sometimes useful in detecting diffuse
postprandial serum bile acid concentrations are generally
hepatic infltrative disease and hepatic lipidosis (Figure
210
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
ultrasound
portal
± scintigraphy ±
vein obstruction
udebowot painduo2 '1 rsnouanouei4'Av sie2 pue sbop u! ezs io adeus 2eday paele otypeoidde 2usou6ela 86 3ansd
contrast
 fistula, 
Abdominal
 Microhepatia (small liver)
contr
found,
acquired disease
 Idiopathic atrophy
Probably
Cirrhosis
(Laparoscopy preferred)
Checkclotting
Hepatic biopsy
Patient does
Abcdominal palpation and ultrasonography, ± racliographs
 Symmetric change
severely ill
 Patient 
hyperadrenocorticism
ordenied
 Patient appears
cushingoid
Hepatomegaly
confirmed
drug and/or monitor
Tru-Cut biopsy if aspirate
severely ill
Focal enlargement 
 Check clotting
 not diagnostic)
biopsy
吊
Exposure to!
(Boxes 9-5 and
patient not
ontar
 Eliminate toxin or 
ON
 hepatic disease
>1 month)
 persistence
Patient g
worse
(e.g..
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
211
BOX 9-5. DRUGS THAT HAVE BEEN
BOX 9-6. DRUGS THAT HAVE BEEN
DOCumENTeD OR suSPEcTEd
DOCUmENTED OR SUSPECTED TO
TO CAUSE InCREAsED ALANiNE
CAUSE CHOLESTASIS OR HEPATIC
AMiNOTRaNSFERASE (AlT) LEvElS DUE
EnzYme InductIOn Resulting In
TO HEPATIC DISEASE
INCReaseD SeRum AlKaliNE
PHOSpHATASE (SaP) LEVELS
Acetaminophen (especially cats) (important)
 Amiodarone
 Anabolic steroids/androgens
L-Asparaginase
Asparaginase
Azathioprine
 Azathioprine
Barbiturates (important)
Barbiturates (important)
Carprofen (important)
Cephalosporins
 Clindamycin
Cyclophosphamide
Doxycycline
Dapsone
Dazepam
 Erythromycin estolate
 Erythromycin estolate
Estrogens
Glucocorticoids (dogs only) (important)
Glucocorticoids (dogs only) (important)
Griseofulvin
Gold salts
 lbuprofen
Griseofulvin
traconazole
Ibuprofen
Ketoconazole
 6-Mercaptopurine
 6-Mercaptopurine
 Methimazole 
Methimazole
 Methotrexate
 Methotrexate
 Nitrofurantoin
 Nitrofurantoin
 Phenobarbital (important)
Phenobarbital (important)
 Phenothiazines
Primidone (important)
 Primidone (inportant)
Salicylates
Progesterone
 Salicylazosulfapyridine
Salicylates
 Sulfonamides
Testosterone
Tetracycline 
Tetracyclines
Trimethoprim-sulfa drug (important)
Thiabend azole
 Trimethoprim-sulfa drug 
NOTE: These drugs do not reliably cause hepatic disease. In a
Vitamin A
patient with an increased ALT that is receiving one of these drugs.
the medication probably should be stopped,if possible, and the ALT
echecked 2to 4 weekslater. Those drugs that mostreliably increase
NOTE: Those drugs that most reliably increase SAP are marked
ALTare marked (mportant.The other drugs are less consistent but
(*mportant). The other drugs are less consistent.
may still cause severe hepatic disease. Almost any drug could cause
 an increased ALT in a particular patient.
9-9): however, fine-needle aspirates (even when guided
by ultrasound) often miss infiltrative processes. A nega-
tive cytologic finding from a fine-needle aspirate never
excludes infiltrative hepatic disease. Hepatic biopsy may
be done with ultrasound guidance, laparoscopy or lapa-
biopsies compared with ultrasound-guided core needle
 biopsies and is not as invasive as surgery.
Hepatic Encephalopathy
Abnormal behavior sometimes associated with eating.
may be caused by hepatic encephalopathy; however,
hypoglycemia, primary CNS disease, and epilepsy must
also be considered. Whenever possible glucose should be
FIGURE 9-9 Feline fatty liver. This binucleated hepatocyte was
measured on blood obtained during an episode Evalua-
stained with both a Sudan stain and new methylene blue to
tion of hepatic function is indicated in patients with
document the abundant fat in intracellular vacuoles and free
behavioral changes (which may be obvious or subtle).
outside the hepatocyte.
212
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
transient blindness, seizures, coma, or vague CNS abnor-
days if not exposed to bright light. Measurement of urine
malities. Congenital PSS and severe acquired hepatic
bilirubin is discussed in Chapter 7.
disease
(e.g. cirrhosis) may cause encephalopathy.
Hepatic
 function testing is mandatory because these
Normal Values · Dogs, less than 1.0 mg/dl; cats, less
diseases may not signifcantly change serum ALT, SAP
than 1.0 mg/dl (depends upon the laboratory).
albumin, BUN, glucose, or bilinubin concentrations.
Resting blood ammonia concentrations are very specific
Danger Values · Dogs, uncertain, but values greater than
for hepatic dysfunction, but they are not as sensitive as
20 mg/dl cause concern (i.e., kernictenus); cats, unknown.
senum bile acids. A patient in an episode of hepatic
encephalopathy may have increased or normal resting
Artifacts · Exposure to bright sunlight or fluorescent
blood ammonia concentrations. Ammonia tolerance
lighting can decrease bilinubin by 50% per hour (see
testing (ATT) and pre- and postprandial serum bile acid
Chapter 1).
concentrations appear to be the most sensitive and spe-
Drug Therapy That 
May
Alter Serum Biliru-
 sp q pasn aq ae un paseaa  u
deficiency may cause hepatic encephalopathy and hyper-
cause hepatic enzyme induction (e.g. phenobarbital).
ammonemia without affecting enzymes or bile acids, in
Increased bilirubin may be the result of drugs causing
  s a   si  
hemolytic anemia or acute hepatic necrosis or dysfunc-
samples is necessary for diagnosis.
tion (see Box 9-5).
lcterus
Causes of Hyperbilirubinemia · Hemolytic disease
and hepatobiliary disease are the two main causes (see
 Ictenus is detected at physical examination or when serum
Figure 9-10). A CBC should be determined in every icteric
 Or plasma is inspected at the laboratory. Hyperbilirubine-
 patient to help rule out hemolytic disease RBC numbers
mia always denotes hepatobiliary or hematopoietic
must decrease rapidly and significantly [i.e., packed cell
disease [Figure 9-10). Hepatic and hematopoietic diseases
volume [PCV] usually <20%) to cause clinical icterus.
are not always associated with icterus, and disease in
Very regenerative anemias may suggest that icterus is due
either system may be secondary to other disorders. The
to immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA). Reticu-
 presence or absence of icterus is not diagnostic or prog-
locytosis, hemoglobinemia, hemoglobinuria, erythrocytic
nostic. Sepsis, pancreatitis, and IBD sometimes cause sec-
autoagglutination, spherocytosis, positive Coombs test
results, splenomegaly, or hepatomegaly are often present.
icterus.
Chapter 3 includes further discussion of IMHA and other
regenerative anemias (e.g., Heinz body, zinc intoxication,
Babesia, Cytauxzoonosis, hemotrophic Mycoplasma). Bilinu-
TOTAL SERUM BILIRUBIN
binuria theoretically should be absent in hemolytic
disease but is typically present in IMHA because canine
Common Indications · Measurement of total serum
kidneys conjugate bilinubin. The clinician must not be
bilirubin is indicated in cases of icterus (on either physi-
misled by increases in ALT, because severe, acute hemo-
cal examination or inspection of nonhemolyzed serum or
lytic anemia may cause increased ALT (ostensibly caused
plasma), bilinubinuria (any amount in a cat or significant
by acute hepatic hypoxia).
amounts in a dog), or suspected hepatic disease that is
Severe hepatic disease (especially acute necrosis) is
not apparent on other tests. The sclera has detectable
sometimes accompanied by DIC and subsequent hemo-
lytic anemia. These cases may be diffcult to distinguish
from IMHA. However, anemia caused by DIC is usually
icterus when the serum bilinubin is greater than 3 to
not as regenerative as in IMHA; in addition, the pres-
ence of RBC fragments, thrombocytopenia, increased
fibrin degradation products (FDP), decreased antithrom-
bin Ill, prolonged clotting time, and abnormal hepatic
function tests usually allow differentiation, as do vom-
4 mg/dl, and the plasma is icteric when the serum biliru-
iting. abdominal pain. and encephalopathy when
bin is greater than 1.5 to 2 mg/dl.
present.
NOTE: lcterus is absent in many animals (especially dogs) with
 Dogs and cats often have relatively severe hepatic
hepatic disease. Serum bilirubin is not a sensitive test for
disease before icterus is observed; however, the magni-
hepatic disease.
tude of the total serum bilinubin is not prognostic or
Measurement of direct (conjugated) and indirect
diagnostic. Secondary hepatic disease [reactive disease or
(unconjugated) bilirubin fractions is not useful because
so-called bystander phenomenon as the result of septicemia,
hemolytic, hepatic, and biliary tract diseases have unpre-
toxemia, or inflammation) may cause icterus. Certain
dictable variation in the amount of each fraction.
bacterial endotoxins and acute phase inflammatory medi-
ators are thought to alter normal bilinubin metabolism
Analysis · Total bilinubin is measured in serum or hepa-
and cause increases in total bilirubin concentrations.
rinized plasma by spectrophotometric and dry reagent
 Most feline hepatic diseases eventually cause icterus)
methods. The latter require dilutions if the bilirubin is
the most common conditions include hepatic lipidosis,
greater than 7.5 mg/dl. Bilirubin is stable at 4° C for 7
cholangitis and cholangiohepatitis, hepatic lymphoma,
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
213
Disseminated intravascular coagulation
cell
FDP,
Hemolysis
Vasculitis
(especially pancreatitis
 Consider biopsy of other
Extrahepatic biliary
organs at same time
 tract obstruction
or mucocele)
Check clotting
profile,and urinalysis
ent
 iatrogenic
cause
ON
hemolytic
ultrasonography
No abnormalities
 Abdominal
becomesworse
CBC, serum chemistry p
 Persists or
No eviden
Abdominal hepatic
History of potentially
size or shape
Figure 9-8
Resolves
Significant anemia (PCV <20%)
Icterus due to hemolytic anemia
 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia
positive antiglobulin test
Heinz body anemia
Transfusion reaction
uOS SnIO
214
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
and FIP. Ictenus in cats is an indication for a CBC and
 Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum ALT · Any drug
serum biochemistry panel. Ictenus in cats that is not
causing hepatocellular damage (i.e. drug-induced
Ksdoiq peday e saneoipun alensn sisiomy aq pasne
because most of these cats have primary hepatic disease.
au pue sasni aieana on Aressaau si Asdoia
hepatopathy) may cause increased ALT. The list of all
specific treatment.
Common causes of nonhemolytic ictenus in dogs
include pancreatitis obstructing the bile duct gallbladder
mucoceles, cholecystitis, chronic hepatitis, hepatic lym-
drugs suspected to cause increased ALT is extensive and
phoma, acute hepatic necrosis, hepatic cirrhosis, and
includes many that are safe in the majority of patients. A
intrahepatic cholestasis. Ictenus in dogs is an indication
5
for a CBC and serum biochemistry panel (to include
 of selected drugs documented to cause increased ALT
at least ALT, SAP, BUN, cholesterol, and albumin). Ultra-
in human beings. dogs. and cats is given in Box 9-5.
Ad j auaap day oi paiu si Ardeouos
 Administration of one of these drugs does not automati-
hepatic disease or biliary tract obstruction exists.
If
cally explain an increased ALT, however.
 primary hepatic disease is diagnosed, hepatic biopsy is
NOTE: A patient can have an idiosyncratic reaction to almost
usually indicated. If pancreatitis is present, surgery is not
any drug, causing an increased ALT.
indicated unless a persistent bile duct obstruction neces-
sitates a biliary drainage procedure (eg. cholecystoduo-
Causes of Decreased ALT · Not significant.
denostomy or biliary tract stenting—both are very rarely
needed) or a pancreatic abscess is symptomatic despite
Causes of Increased ALT · Increase in ALT is princi-
percutaneous drainage. If coexisting extrahepatic disease
pally caused by hepatocellular damage from any cause
is found, it should be investigated.
(Box 9-7). RBCs and striated muscle cells contain small
amounts of ALT, and damage to these may cause relatively
minor increases [i.e, less than two to three times normal)
ALANINE AMINOTRANSFERASE
in serum ALT, as may exercise Dogs with muscular dys-
trophy may have major increases in ALT, but should also
ALT was formerly known as serum glutamic-pyruvic trans-
have increases in AST and creatine kinase (CK) values.
aminase (SGPT).
 Hepatocytes contain substantial amounts of ALT in
the cytosol, and major increases in serum ALT (i.e., three
Common Indications · Systemic disease including
weight loss, hepatomegaly, vomiting. diarrhea, ictenus,
the enzyme but do not always signify primary or irrevers-
ascites, depression, and anorexia, is an indication for
ible hepatic disease. Hepatic disease may have normal to
measurement of ALT; also, ALT is used as a screening
significantly increased serum ALT activity. The magnitude
procedure for hepatic disease in patients with undiag-
nosed illness. Most patients with known chronic hepatitis
should undergo periodic ALT determinations to monitor
the problem.
BOX 9-7.
 SELECTED CAUSES OF INCREASED
SERUm ALANINE AMINOTRANSFERASE
Advantages ● The serum ALT is specific for the liver.
LEvEls (>3 timEs NoRmAL)
Disadvantages · The test has lack of sensitivity (i.e..
DOGS
CATS
patients with significant hepatic disease such as cirrhosis
Hepatobiliary Disease
Hepatobiliary Disease
Cholangitis
Cholangitis
or hepatic neoplasia may have normal ALT) and cannot
 Cholangiohepatitis 
 Cholangiohepatitis 
distinguish among different hepatic diseases or determine
if there is secondary nonhepatic disease involvement.
Cirrhosis
 Feline infectious 
peritonitis (FIP)
Analysis · ALT is measured in serum [heparinized
as2asip abeios laddoy
Hepatic ymphoma
plasma in selected assays) by spectrophotometric and dry
 Hepatic malignancy
Cirrhosis
reagent methods. ALT is stable in separated serum for
Chronic hepatitis
Hepatic toxin
approximately 1 (at 22" C) to 7 (at 4° C) days.
Hepatic toxin 
Trauma
Pancreatitis 
- Aa A Ae aza   s jn
 Pancreatitis
Hyperthyroidism
edly among laboratories, depending on the technique
and the units used.
Other Disorders
Other Disorders
 Anoxia because of anemia/
 Anoxia because of
Y0O4S
Danger Values · Despite correlation between ALT and
anemia/shock
 active hepatic damage, no correlation exists between ALT
latrogenic (see Box 9-5)
latrogenic (see Box 9-5)
and hepatic function; hence, no danger values exist.
NOTE: Almost any disease affecting the liver can cause increased
ALT levels. The disorders listed are those that may be more likely
Artifacts + See Chapter 1.
to cause a significant increase. However, any of these diseases can
 exist with minor or no increase in ALT values.
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
215
Other laboratory tests to evaluate the liver
(SAP, albumin, cholesterol, BUN, urinalysis, CBC, and serum bile acids)
Breed with known
 No other laboratory or clinical evidence of
History, physical examination,
predilection for
hepatic disease or cause of increased ALT
radiographs, and/or laboratory
hepatic disease
 suggested by history (Box 9-5), physical
tests suggest hepatic disease
examination, or laboratory tests (e.g., drug
 therapy or trauma)
Look for extrahepatic disease that
may cause secondary hepatic
Withdraw potential hepatotoxins, stop trauma,
damage (e.g., hyperthyroidism,
resolve underlying problems, and 
sepsis,cardiac failure,intestinal
monitor ALT at 2-week intervals for
inflammation, etc.)
up to 6 weeks
Cannot find extra-
 Potential extrahepatic
ALT returns
ALT unchanged or
hepatic disease
cause found
 to normal
 increased or patient-
 worsening
人
ALT continues to be
Investigate this disease
Problem
increased, progressively
 and then recheck ALT
resolved
increases, or patient worsening
Check clotting 
Hepatic biopsy
(Laparoscopic biopsy preferred)
FIGURE 9-11 Diagnostic approach to alanine aminotransferase (AL7 greater than three times normal in dogs and cats. BUN, Blood urea
nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; SAP, serum alkaline phosphatase.
of the increase in ALT does not correlate with the serious-
tis that might be associated with increased hepatic copper
ness of the hepatic disease and is not a prognostic indica-
concentrations.
tor unless a specifc disease is being considered. The
serum ALT half-life is approximately l to 2 days or less.
and serum ALT is expected to decrease over l to 2 weeks
ASPARTATE AMINOTRANSFERASE
once active hepatic damage ceases. It is thought that ALT
remains elevated during hepatic regeneration.
AST was formerly known as serum glutamic-oxaloacetic
After increased serum ALT is identified, many factors
tmansaminase [SGOT).
must be considered (Figure 9-1l). If no other evidence of
disease is found, the increased ALT indicates the need for
Occasional Indications · Indications for AST are the
periodic monitoring because it may be the first detectable
same as for ALT.
sign of significant hepatic disease. If other abnormalities 
consistent with hepatic disease are found, the approach
 Disadvantages · Serum AST is not as specific for the
is like that in any other patient with hepatic disease.
liver as ALT.
Common causes of serum ALT more than three times
 normal include hepatic anoxia, poor hepatic perfusion.
Analysis · Measurement of AST is the same as for ALT.
spontaneous and surgical trauma (eg. hit by a car.
surgery). chronic hepatitis, cirrhosis, cholangitis and
 Drug Therapy That May Alter AST · Decreased AST
cholangiohepatitis, acute biliary obstruction, hepatic
may be caused by metronidazole therapy. Hepatotoxic
necrosis as the result of any cause acute pancreatitis,
dnugs may cause increased AST (see Box 9-5).
hepatic neoplasia, sepsis, and certain drugs. Sepsis, espe-
cially septicemia and toxemia, may secondarily damage
Causes of Decreased AST · None.
hepatocytes. Abdominal inflammation may do the same.
The pancreas is close to the liver, and inflammation in the
Causes of Increased AST · Like ALT, AST is present in
pancreas may cause mechanical damage to the liver. In
significant quantities in hepatocytes. Although ALT is
Doberman pinschers, Bedlington terriers, dalmatians,
 present in the cytosol, AST is present in the mitochondria.
West Highland white terriers, and Labrador retrievers, a
Increased serum ALT reflects cell membrane damage and
persistently increased serum ALT suggests chronic hepati-
leakage; significant AST increases tend to reflect more
serious hepatocyte damage because the mitochondria are
216
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
not damaged as readily as is the cell membrane. AST is,
however, present in significant quantities in many other
BOX 9-8. CAUSES OF INCREASED SERUM
tissues, including muscle and RBCs; therefore increased
ALKaLINE PHOSPHATASE LEVELS
AST is not as specific for hepatic injury as is increased ALT.
DOGS
 Exercise and intramuscular (IM) injections may increase
CATS
 Biliary Tract Abnormalities
 Biliary Tract
senum AST. The most common causes of increased AST
Abnormalities
include hepatic disease, muscle disease [inflammation or
Pancreatitis
Same as for dogs
necrosis). or hemolysis (spontaneous or artifactual).
Bile duct neoplasia
Increased AST is an indication to measure serum ALT to
determine whether the increased AST is from the liver
Cholelithiasis
Cholecystitis
(significant increases in both ALT and AST suggest that
AST increases are of hepatic origin). One may also
Gall badder mucocele
measure the hematocrit and observe the color of the
Ruptured gallbladder
plasma and senum on a centrifuged blood sample to
Hepatic Parenchymal Disease
Hepatic Parenchymal
check for hemolysis.
Disease
Cholangiohepatitis 
Cholangiohepatitis
Chronic hepatitis
Hepatic lipidosis
SERUM ALKALINE PHOSPHATASE
Copper storage disease
Hepatic lymphoma
Cirrhosis/fibrosis
 Feline infectious 
Common Indications · Systemic disease including
Hepatic neoplasia
peritonitis (FIP)
weight loss, hepatomegaly, vomiting, diarrhea, ascites,
Lymphoma
ictenus, depression, or anorexia, is an indication for mea-
 Hemangiosarcoma
surement of SAP; also, SAP is used as a screen for hepatic
disease and hyperadrenocorticism.
Hepatocellular carcinoma
 Metastatic carcinoma
Advantages ● SAP is useful in evaluating the liver for
Toxic hepatitis
cholestatic disease.
 Aflatoxin
Mushroom
Disadvantages · Measurement of SAP is affected by cor-
Sago palm
ticosteroids (endogenous and exogenous), bone lesions,
Drug induced
and osteoblastic activity in young growing dogs.
Other Disorders
Other Disorders
 Dabetes mellitus 
 Diabetes mellitus
Analysis · SAP is measured in serum or heparinized
 Endogenous steroids (from
Hyperthyroidism
 plasma by spectrophotometric methods. Different tech-
 physiologic stress or
niques [i.e., heat stability, phenylalanine, electrophoresis)
pathologic
have been used to distinguish SAP of bone origin from
hyperadrenocorticism)
SAP of hepatic origin. The diagnostic usefulness of this
 Chronic passive congestion
distinction is doubtful because dogs with various types of
from right heart failure
hepatic disease often have endogenous steroids released
 Daphragmatic hernia
due to the stress of illness.
Septicemia
Ehrlichiosis*
Normal Values · May vary markedly from laboratory to
Young dog with bone growth
laboratory. Immature dogs characteristically have SAP
(bone origin) activities up to twice those of sexually
Osteomyelitis*
mature dogs.
latrogenic (see Box 9-6)
latrogenic (see
Box 9-61*
    i  o s 
function; therefore no danger values exist.
NOTE: Almost any disease affecting the liver can cause increased
 SAP levels. The disorders listed are those that may be more likely
to cause a significant increase. However, any of these can exist with
Artifacts · See Chapter 1.
minor or no increase in SAP values.
*Rarely of importance.
Drug Therapy That May Increase SAP · Any drug that
causes hepatic enzyme induction or cholestasis (see Box
9-6) may increase SAP Glucocorticoids, primidone, and
barbiturates typically increase SAP in dogs. but other
dogs less than 6 to 8 months old. Bone disease (e.g..
drugs are less consistent. Although glucocorticoids can
osteosarcoma, osteomyelitis) may increase SAP (usually
cause marked SAP increases in dogs, cats are almost never
a minor increase).
affected.
Increased SAP is interpreted differently in dogs and
cats (Box 9-8). Cats have less hepatocellular SAP, which
Causes of Decreased SAP · Not significant.
is readily excreted by their kidneys. Therefore any
increase in feline SAP is considered important. Not all
Causes of Increased SAP · SAP of bone origin is com-
cats with hepatic disease have increased SAP. The major
 (heu san anun ue ssal das) paseaun au
causes of increased SAP in cats are hepatic lipidosis.
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
217
cholangitis and cholangiohepatitis, hyperthyroidism,
cats, GGT has slightly greater sensitivity and perhaps
and diabetes mellitus. SAP increases are generally more
greater specificity for hepatic disease (except hepatic lipi-
specifc than GGT in cats with hepatic lipidosis (cats
dosis). Therefore it is more frequently indicated in cats
with lipidosis classically have very high SAP with little
than in dogs. GGT is less influenced than SAP by second-
to no increase in GGT; however, this fnding is not
ary hepatic disease conditions or enzyme-inducing drugs.
consistent enough to allow a diagnosis). Hyperadreno-
The use of SAP and GGT together has a higher predictive
a a (  soas) 
value of hepatic disease.
increases SAP in cats. Increased SAP in a cat is an indi-
cation for senum thyroid hormone determination, uri-
Analysis · GGT is measured in serum, urine, and body
nalysis, blood glucose, and serum ALT measurement,
fluids by spectrophotometric methods. GGT is stable in
± hepatic function testing (e.g.. serum bile acids). If
serum at 4° C for at least 3 days and at 20° C for up to
hepatic disease is the apparent cause of the increased
1 year.
SAP, one must determine if hepatic biopsy is indicated
(see the discussion under Serum Bile Acids later in this
Normal Values and Danger Values ● Same as for SAP
chapter).
The major causes of SAP values more than three times
Artifacts · See Chapter 1
normal in dogs are hepatobiliary disease, endogenous
steroids (i.e., hyperadrenocorticism orstress), and therapy
Drug Therapy That May Affect GGT · The same drugs
with glucocorticoids or anticonvulsants. Hepatic disease
that may affect SAP may affect GGT.
with increased SAP usually has a cholestatic component;
however, this does not imply icterus or gross obstruction
Causes of Decreased GGT · Not significant.
of the biliary tract Intrahepatic cholestasis caused by
diffuse or focal compression of bile canaliculi may occur
Causes of Increased GGT · Causes are similar to those
in various hepatopathies, even those secondary to septi-
of increased SAP and tend to parallel the magnitude of
cemia, toxemia, and chronic stress-induced vacuolar [i.e.,
the rise in SAP, but bone lesions are not recognized to
   r 
increase GGT. It is induced by glucocorticoid therapy and
 necrosis can transiently increase SAP. Extrahepatic biliary
certain drugs, as is SAP In cats, GGT may increase more
tract obstruction and enzyme induction caused by endog-
than SAP, except in hepatic lipidosis (where classically the
enous or exogenous glucocorticoids or drug administra-
SAP is usually quite high, but GGT values show only a
tion may increase SAP more than l0 times normal. As
mild [or no] increase). GGT does not tend to increase
with ALT, the magnitude of the increase in SAP does not 
after acute hepatic necrosis, as does SAP Increased GGT
correlate with prognosis.
should be pursued as for increased SAP (see Figure 9-12).
 In dogs, it is important first to rule out young age.
aun aunonsqo seaued ssns aeu i pasarul
drug therapy, and hyperadrenocorticism to avoid per-
bile duct, as for SAP.
forming unnecessary diagnostics (Figure 9-12). Hyperad-
renocorticism can easily be confused with primary hepatic
Causes of Increased Urine GGT · Increased 24-hour
disease because it typically causes hepatomegaly, pu-pd,
urinary excretion of GGT can be caused by various neph-
increased ALT, and sometimes increased senum bile acids.
rotoxins (eg. gentamicin).
Ifa patient has signs ofhepatic failure (ie, icterus, hepatic
encephalopathy, hypoglycemia, weight loss, vomiting.
hypoalbuminemia, ascites, microhepatia), one generally
LACTATE DEHYDROGENASE
assumes that the increased SAP is due to primary hepatic
disease. If it is not obvious that the patient probably has
Rare Indications ● This test is not recommended.
primary hepatic disease and the patient has signs that
might be consistent with hyperadrenocorticism (eg
Disadvantages ● Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) has lack
pu-pd, cutaneous changes, potbelly), then adrenal gland
of specificity.
function testing may be appropriate. Ifthe SAP is increased 
but the ALT and serum bilinubin concentrations are
Causes of Increased LDH · LDH is found in many
normal, clinically important hepatic disease is unlikely. If
body tissues. Inexplicable increases of small to great mag-
the ALT is substantially increased (and especially if it is
nitude are not uncommon.
higher than the SAP). then primary hepatic disease is
much more likely. Ifa hepatic biopsy specimen is obtained
SERUM BILE ACIDS
-edoieday ieionoea , 'ssans, gusnes si ieu aseasip sia
thy is found.
Frequent Indications ·● Measurement of serum bile
acids (SBAs) is indicated in patients with suspected occult
hepatic disease, chronic weight loss, abnormal CNS signs,
GAMMA-GLUTAMYL
hepatomegaly, and microhepatia. SBAs are used routinely
TRANSPEPTIDASE
as a screening test for hepatic dysfunction (e.g., PSS).
Rare Indications · GGT is rarely indicated; the indica-
Advantages ● SBAs are easy to measure and few extra-
tions are similar to those for SAP. SAP appears to be more
hepatic factors affect it.
sensitive for hepatobiliary disease in dogs: however, in
218
SAP > 3X normal
ALT<2-3× normal
ALT > 2-3× normal
Serum bilirubin
increased
Probably insignificant 
ALT < SAP
ALT
川
SAP
See Figure 9-10
See Figure 9-11
<6-10 months of age
>6-10 months of age
and no signs of
 or signs consistent
hepatic disease
with hepatic disease
Not significant 
Administration of anti-
No use of drugs listed
Breed predisposed
convulsants, systemic
in Box 9-6
to hepatic disease
 or topical glucocorti-
coids or other drugs
listed in Box 9-6
CBC, chemistry panel, SBA
CBC,chemistry panel, SBA
Abdominal ultrasonography
Abdominal ultrasound
Stop drug therapy; if
not possible, use
smallest dose and
reevaluate SAP
in 1-3 months
If SAP persists or
 increases further:
Signs consistent
Apparent extra-
Moderate or severe
No signs/lab changes
with hyper-
 hepatic biliary
hepatic disease not due
 suggestive of primary
adrenocorticism
obstruction
to hyperadrenocorticism
hepatic disease
(e.g., icterus, vomiting.
weight loss, ascites,
Look for pancreatitis 
 encephalopathy, or
Look for extrahepatic 
Adrenal gland testing
 and biliary mucocele
microhepatica)
disease (e.g., neoplasia,
organ failure) and
monitor SAP
Possibly
Not
hyperadrenocorticism 
hyperadrenocorticism
See Chapter 8
SAP progressively
(hyperadrenocorticism)
increasing or >3X
 normal that persists 
for >1 month
Check clotting -
Hepatic biopsy
FGURE 9-12 Diagnostic approach to increased serum alkaline phosphatase (SAP) in dogs. ALT, Alanine aminotransferase;
CBC, complete blood count; SBA, serum bile acids.
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
219
Disadvantages · Measurement of SBAs does not reli-
values. With ARE, total measurable moieties may Or may
ably distinguish among different hepatobiliary diseases.
not decrease, but it is expected that unconjugated serum
Values may spontaneously change enough from day to
bile acid concentrations may increase.
day that it can be diffcult to use SBA concentrations to
determine if a change in hepatic function has occurred.
Causes of Increased SBA Concentration · SBA con-
centrations are increased because of hepatocellular
Analysis ● SBAs are measured in serum by either a direct
disease, cholestatic disease, hepatic microvascular dyspla-
enzymatic method that quantifes total serum 3-alpha-
sia, or PSS. When both fasting and 2-hour postprandial
hydroxylated bile acids or an RIA procedure that measures
SBA concentrations are determined, the sensitivity of
specific bile acids. It is important that a validated assay
these tests becomes greater than with other hepatic func-
for dogs and cats be used because some methods are not
tion tests except perhaps the ammonia tolerance test.
accurate. Values for enzymatic and RIA procedures cannot
Because of the ease of performing and the wide availabil-
be compared.
ity of the test, it has replaced other clinical hepatic func-
Maximum information is obtained by determining a
tion tests. SBAs offer no additional information in icteric
12-hour fasting preprandial and 2-hour postprandial SBA
 concentration. Dogs and cats should be fed canned food
In nonicteric patients suspected of having hepatic disease.
containing moderate fat content, causing the gallbladder
SBAs are a good screening test to support further diagnos-
to contract. Preprandial and postprandial SBA concentra-
tic evaluations. Not all patients with primary hepatic
tions together improve the sensitivity of the test, making
disease have increased SBA concentrations. The relative
it more sensitive than resting blood ammonia concentra-
increase in SBAs as well as the percent increase from pre-
tion. Ceruletide has been administered after taking the
prandial to postprandial values is not prognostic or diag-
fasting sample in an attempt to ensure gallbladder con-
nostic for a specific disease. Reported fasting SBAs that are
traction and have more consistent results. It has not
a sa ieiuiisod 1o l/ou o ue iaieae
demonstrated increased sensitivity and specificity when
than 25 μmol/L suggest primary hepatic disease, micro-
looking for Pss, but it might be more sensitive when
vascular dysplasia, or PSS and dictate further hepatic
looking for hepatic disease associated with respiratory
evaluation and possibly hepatic biopsy. If only fasted SBA
tract abnormalities.
values are determined and found to be normal, postpran-
dial measurements are indicated. Most animals with
Normal Values ● Because of different techniques and
chronic hepatitis, marked hepatic necrosis, cholestasis,
assays (μmol/L or μg/ml), normal values must be estab-
and hepatic neoplasia have abnormal values. SBAs are
lished for each laboratory.
usually not markedly altered by secondary hepatic disease
or with glucocorticoid or anticonvulsant therapy. Some
Danger Values ● None.
animals without histologic evidence of primary hepatic
disease will have markedly increased SBAs. It has been
Artifacts · Very increased serum dehydrogenase activi-
suggested that these animals might have undiagnosed
hepatic microvascular dysplasia, but that is uncertain.
technique. Severe lipemia (i.e., chylomicronemia) and
Increased SBAs are possibly the most sensitive bio-
hemolysis may falsely decrease SBA measurements, and
chemical indicator of congenital PSS, but the values will
 hypertriglyceridemia may falsely increase SBA concentra-
not distinguish between PSS and microvascular dysplasia.
tions when spectrophotometric techniques are used, but
Rare dogs with PsS can have normal resting and postpran-
they do not affect RIA. This test is not useful in icteric
dial SBA concentrations.
patients.
 Drug Therapy and Other Factors That May Alter SBA
Concentration ● Cholestyramine lowers serum concen-
URINARY BILE ACIDS
trations by binding to bile acids in the intestinal lumen,
preventing their reabsorption. Ursodeoxycholic acid [a
Occasional Indications · Measurement of urinary bile
-u va lio asu a Aan (ie a as
acids (UBAs) may be indicated when samples for fasting
centrations. Resection of the ileum (the principal site of
and postprandial SBA determinations are difficult to
bile acid reabsorption), severe ileal disease, or cholecys-
obtain.
tectomy may also cause SBAs to inaccurately reflect
hepatic function. Prolonged anorexia (>l to 2 days) may
Advantages · The client can bring a urine sample into
cause fasting SBA concentrations to be less than would be
the clinic instead of bringing the patient. Because the
found ifthe patient were eating normally. Intestinal hypo-
urine bile acids: creatinine ratio represents an average SBA
motility may cause the 2-hour postprandial sample to be
value over time, the urine bile acids: creatinine ratio is
a less sensitive indicator of hepatic disease because of
probably not substantially affected by transient variation
failure to deliver the bile acids to the ileum in a timely
in SBA concentrations and appears to be as or more spe-
fashion. Hepatic insufficiency does not decrease SBA
cific than a random single measurement of SBAs. Bilinu-
concentrations.
bin and glucose in the urine are unlikely to interfere with
test results. Treatment with ursodeoxycholic acid is not
Causes of Decreased SBA Concentration · Delayed
known to interfere with test results.
gastric emptying. rapid intestinal transit, malabsorption
disorders, and ileal resection may cause subnormal
220
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Disadvantages · The test may not be as sensitive as
 ammonia levels are normal. The ATT is not recommended
SBAs.
in cats.
Analysis · UBAs are measured in urine (approximately
Normal Values ● Resting blood ammonia: dogs, 45 to
5 ml) using enzymatic methodology: the UBA concentra-
120 μg/dl; cats, 30 to 100 μg/dl. ATT, ammonia at 30
tion is standardized for urine flow and concentration by
minutes: dogs, minimal change from normal values.
measuring concurrent urine creatinine concentration and
calculating the ratio (μmol of urine bile acids/mg of urine
edau) 1P/3n 0001 ue4 1alea1g 'ssoq ● sanqp io8u0q
creatinine).
encephalopathy may be imminent, although poor corre-
Normal Values ● Dog, less than 7.3 μmol/g cat, less than
blood ammonia concentrations); cats, unknown.
4.4 μmol/g.
Artifarts · Blood
1  ammonia concentration may be
Artifacts · Hematuria and hemoglobinuria may interfere
falsely increased by allowing the blood to stand, and by
strenuous exercise (see Chapter 1).
Drug Therapy That May Alter UBA Concentrations 
None known.
Drug Therapy That May Alter Ammonia · Decreased
 blood ammonia may be the result of intestinal antibacte-
Causes of Low UBAs · Not significant.
rial drugs. lactulose, Lactobacillus acidophilus cultures,
enemas, and diphenhydramine Increased blood
Causes of High UBAs · UBA
concentrations are
ammonia may be the result of valproic acid, asparaginase,
increased by the same factors as for SBA.
narcotics, diuretics causing hypokalemia or alkalosis.
hyperalimentation, ammonium salts, and high-protein
meals (including blood from spontaneous GI bleeding).
BLOOD AMMONLA AND AMMONLA
Causes of Hyperammonemia · Urea cycle disorders
TOLERANCE TESTING
(extremely rare) and hepatic insufficiency (especially con-
genital or acquired Pss) can cause hyperammonemia.
 Frequent Indications ● Indications for blood ammonia
Resting blood ammonia concentrations are probably less
 measurement are the same as for SBAs.
sensitive than SBAs in detecting hepatic dysfunction,
whereas the ATT is possibly as sensitive as preprandial
Advantages ● Blood ammonia test has good sensitivity
and postprandial SBAs in detecting PSS. A significantly
and specificity.
increased fasting blood ammonia concentration is spe-
cific for hepatic insuffciency and renders an ATT unneces-
 Disadvantages · There are specific procedural require-
sary. Clinical signs are not well correlated with blood
ments for submitting the samples, and there is a likeli-
ammonia concentrations. An abnormal ATT result or
hood of vomiting or CNS signs with ATT.
resting blood ammonia concentration in a patient with
hepatic disease is generally an indication for imaging
Analysis · Ammonia is measured in blood, serum.
(e.g, ultrasound, scintigraphy) ± hepatic biopsy. Rarely.
plasma (heparinized is recommended), CSF or urine by
blood ammonia is increased because of urinary tract
enzymatic selective electrode dry reagent, and resin
obstruction, especially if complicated by infection with
absorption methods. There does not appear to be any
urease-producing bacteria. Some young dogs (notably
advantage of arterial over venous blood. Blood must be
Scottish deerhounds in Great Britain) have elevated
drawn into an ice-chilled tube, which is stoppered tightly
resting blood ammonia values that spontaneously return
to normal as the dog ages. Therefore caution must be
taken to the in-house laboratory. Unless the test is well
used when diagnosing congenital PSS in at least some
established at the clinic, a control sample should be taken
breeds solely by evaluating the resting blood ammonia
at the same time using the same technique The test must
concentration.
be performed within 20 minutes, or the plasma must be
frozen at -20° C, which stabilizes the ammonia concen-
tration for at least 2 days. If an ATT is to be performed,
PROTEIN C
samples for ammonia determination should be taken
before and 30 or 45 minutes after administration of
Occasional Indications · Measurement of protein C
100 mg NH4Cl/kg of body weight. The NH4Cl may be
may help distinguish dogs with congenital PSS from
administered orally (20 to 50 ml of a 5% aqueous solu-
those with hepatic microvascular dysplasia. Protein C
tion), as a dry powder in gelatin capsules, or rectally
concentrations are low in dogs suffering from aflatoxin
(recommended) as a 5% solution.
poisoning.
Warning: Administration of NHCl to patients
with increased resting blood ammonia concentrations
Advantages · Sensitivity of protein C is less than
may cause encephalopathy. The clinician should not
SBAs for PSs, but the specificity is approximately
perform ATT if the patient is showing obvious encepha-
the same.
lopathic signs or is hyperammonemic. Lack of obvious
encephalopathic signs does not guarantee that blood
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
221
Disadvantages · There is limited availability of the test.
Protein C testing is currently available at Cornell Univer-
BOX 9-9. mAJOR CAUSEs 0F WEIGHt LOsS
sity Diagnostic Laboratory.
IN DOGS AND CATS
Lack of Calories (inadequate food or poor-quality food)
Analysis · Protein C is measured by chromogenic
assay performed on citrated plasma (serum gives falsely
Inability or Refusal to Eat
high values). Samples must be shipped refrigerated or
Dysphagia
frozen.
Oral lesion
Anorexia for any reason 
Normal Values ● 75% to 135%.
Regurgitation
 Pharyngeal or esophageal disease
Artifacts ● Hemolysis and lipemia may increase values
Vomiting (see Box 9-2)
Drug Therapy That May Alter Protein C · Unknown.
Maldigestion (EPI)
Causes of Low Protein C · Protein C is decreased by
Intestinal Malabsorption (does not always cause
altered hepatic function and coagulation abnormalities.
diarrhea)
pasoddo se ssd jo aasassns s! %oz ueui sal D uiaiod
Malassimilation (organ failure)
to microvascular dysplasia.
Hepatic failure
Cardiac failure
Causes of High Protein C · Protein C greater than 70%
 Dabetes mellitus
is suggestive of microvascular dysplasia as opposed to
Uremia
PSS. A protein C value that increased to 70% or greater
Cancer achexia syndrome
after corrective surgery for PsS suggests that portal blood
Hypoadrenocorticism
is being directed through the liver and not through the
shunt.
Excessive Use or Loss of Calories
Hyperthyroidism
 Excessive demand for calories because of environment or
HEPATIC MINERAL ANALYSIS
eertion
Lactation
Occasional Indications · Hepatic mineral analysis may
Muscle Wasting
be used to distinguish between patients in which copper
Myopathy
is the cause of the hepatic disease versus those in which
Neuropathy
it is the effect of the hepatic disease.
Advantages ● Hepatic mineral analysis is more specific
 and definitive than special stains for copper.
Weight loss has many causes (Box 9-9). Concurrent prob-
Disadvantages · Hepatic mineral analysis requires
lems with fewer potential causes [e.g., regurgitation, vom-
 50 mg of liver tissue for analysis.
iting, diarrhea, icterus) should be considered first If a
patient had a reasonable appetite when weight loss began,
Analysis · Measurement of hepatic minerals is done
major differential diagnoses are small intestinal disease,
by atomic absorption spectroscopy or atomic emission
maldigestion, hepatic disease, increased use of calories
spectroscopy.
(e.g, hyperthyroidism, lactation), increased loss of calo-
ries [eg. diabetes mellitus) or caloric-deficient diet. If no
Normal Values ● Less than 400 μg/g dry weight of liver.
other identifiable problems (other than weight loss or
aieipul si yoieas seaiss e 'pansind aq u (eixaioue
Artifacts · Measurement of hepatic minerals may be
(Figure 9-13). One should frst preclude as many causes
affected by an inadequate tissue sample or a contami-
as possible with the history and physical examination
 nated sample.
[i.e., lack of food, calorie-deficient food, inability to eat,
regurgitation, vomiting and diarrhea). Next, extensive
 Drug Therapy That May Alter Mineral Analysis ·
clinicopathologic screening is indicated. Imaging is con-
Unknown.
sidered an extension of the physical examination, and
abdominal ultrasound plus thoracic radiographs are
Interpretation · Secondary hepatic copper retention
appropriate. Thoracic radiographs may be very revealing.
from cholestasis may range from 400 to 1000 μg/g.
even if a patient does not have coughing or abnormal
lung sounds. Abdominal ultrasonography is particularly
from 750 μg/g and higher (often in the several
desirable and often more useful than radiographs, assum-
thousands).
ing the operator is accomplished. If laboratory or radio-
graphic abnormalities are not present or areunconvincing.
One may repeat the tests at l- to 3-week intervals, depend-
WEIGHT LOSS OR ANOREXIA
ing on the clinical condition of the patient, or immedi-
OF UNKNOWN CAUSE
ately proceed to function tests, biopsies, or both. Certain
222
antibiotic-responsiveenteropathy
 Therapeutic trial of
1
T suppression test (occult hyperthyroidism)
FIV positive
FeLV or
Chapter 15
Serum cobalamin/folate 
significant changes
Investigate (e.g., aspirate, biopsy)
 Significant hypo-
orticotropic
albuminemia
Chapter 12
instead if endoscopy not available)
(can doexploratory laparotomy
Lesions
Gastroduodenoscopy plus
andFIVincats)
radiographs, ultrasound
Further testing →
 No significant
changes
 No significant changes
Do either
Hyperglobulinemia,
leukopenia, and/or
abnomal wBCs
Rickettsial titers,
ANA, and/or bone
marrow evaluation
thrombocytopeni
Hypoadrenocorticism
 Significant
Hepatic failure
Renal failure
Hyperthyroidism
Myopathy
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
223
 appropriate therapy
(e.g.for pancreatitis)
'asedl 2eaisuad anjpeaiounww!'7d ads junos pooq aialdwo bao 'ie pue bop ay u! uied euopge otyreoidde ssoubea tl6 3ansu
 Rocky Mountain spotted fever
 Heavy metal intoxication
Gastric,
Vasculitis
rer
 Not acute abdomen
 No diagnosis
No diagnosis
 persists/worsens
 No diagnosis
and problem
Pyelonephritis
Pancreatitis
Hypercalcemia
Hepatitis
 See Chapter 10
History and physical examination
[.e.,
Abdominal
 Patient
is stable
 No abnomalities
found
abdominal ultrasonography
Patient
deteriorates
(including spinal exam)
Exploratory laparotomy
abdominal gas,
 intestinal obstruction
 gastric dilation,
 abdominal mass,
fluid,
base
Physical examination (
Abdominal radiographs, 
Free
Septic —
and/orlavage
Abdominal
fluid
 See Chapter 10
Nonseptic
224
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
hepatic and adrenal gland diseases may require such func-
common). which is caused by systemic or metabolic
tion tests. It is noteworthy that severe gastric or intestinal
disease.
disease may cause anorexia or severe weight loss without
 If necessary, one may elect a therapeutic trial to treat
vomiting or diarrhea, respectively.
for a suspected problem in a patient in whom a diagnosis
Gastroduodenoscopy and ileoscopy plus biopsy are
cannot be made. It is vital that one design such therapy
reasonable in patients with severe weight loss of unknown
so that it is safe and extremely likely to succeed if the
cause. Some cases with gastric neoplasia may present only
presumptive disease is present Then, if the trial fails, one
for anorexia and weight loss. Clinicians without access to
may rule out that disease and go on to treat for something
endoscopic equipment may consider exploratory lapa-
else To do this, the clinician must be sure that the dose
rotomy If surgery is performed, gastric, duodenal, jejunal,
and duration of the treatment are sufficient.
ileal, mesenteric lymph node, and hepatic biopsies are
-dde ssa ieu e ossaii ee ann
ance of the organs. In cats, the pancreas should also be
ABDOMINAL PAIN
biopsied.
Cancer cachexia can be particularly diffcult to diag-
nose. It is a poorly defined, multifaceted syndrome that
may involve loss of taste, malabsorption, increased
Almost any tumor can cause cancer cachexia, and no
History. physical examination, radiographs, and
consistent laboratory fndings exist The causative cancer
may be large or small, focal or diffuse; lymphomas and
carcinomas are probably the most common causes.
Anorexia of unknown cause is similar to weight loss
ultrasonography are the initial tools in diagnosing the
in being diffcult to evaluate if no other identifiable
cause of abdominal pain (Figure 9-14). Extra-abdominal
abnormalities are seen. The diagnostic approach is similar
diseases (eg.. spinal problems) and patients predisposed
to that for chronic weight loss (see Figure 9-13; Box 9-10).
to nonsurgical diseases (e.g-, pancreatitis) must be identi-
Anorexia can be divided into three categories: (1) inabil.
fied early.
ity to eat (due to oral, pharyngeal, or esophageal disease).
 In patients with severe, progressive, acute abdomen
A e m osse () eixu Ad ()
(severe unrelenting pain or shock or stupor in a deterio-
CNS disorder, and (3) secondary anorexia (the most
rating patient), surgery is often indicated as soon as fluid,
electrolyte, and acid-base status are acceptable for anes-
thesia. Imaging is critically important, but extensive labo-
u anu au Auapi o aaun si susan Ar
BOX 9-10. CATEGORIES OF DISEASES THAT
causes of acute abdomen (e.g., intestinal obstruction,
CAUSE ANOREXIA
gastric dilation and volvulus, peritonitis, organ ischemia,
tumor, sepsis, or bleeding) and usually only delays surgi-
Psychologic (especially cats)
cal resolution of disease. Abdominal exploration offers a
 Inability to Smell Food (Anosmia)
 good chance for defnitive diagnosis plus resolution of
Dysphagia
the disease process.
Systemic Inflammation
Etiologic agent (e.g., viral, bacterial, fungal, nickettsial,.
emergencies.
If a patient is not in severe pain and the disease is not
parasite]
progressing rapidly, one must differentiate between prob-
Immune-mediated disease
lems that ultimately necessitate surgery and those that
Neoplasia
usually do not (eg, pancreatitis, hepatitis, cholecystitis.
Necrosis
latrogenic (drugs)
heavy metal intoxication, Rocky Mountain spotted fever
Alimentary or Abdominal Disease Causing Nausea or
[RMSF]]. Abdominal ultrasonography is useful to examine
Pain
the liver, spleen, pancreas, kidneys, and prostate as well
 Gastritis/enteritis 
as to detect peritoneal fluid. If abdominal fluid is present,
 Neoplasia 
abdominocentesis or abdominal lavage with cytologic
analysis is indicated. If these procedures are not revealing
Toxins
Exogenous (various)
and the problem continues, exploratory surgery may be
necessary. Contrast radiographs are rarely useful because
Endogenous (e.g., primarily due to organ failure)
thorough abdominal exploration should diagnose almost
Endocrine Disease
anything they reveal; finding an abnormality on contrast
Hypoadrenocorticism
u ans y ueu ue sn ae si sue
Hyperthyroidism
rare situations the exhibited abdominal pain may be
referred from other causes such as pulmonary disease or
Central Nervous System (CNS) Disease
disk disease.
Primary
Secondary
Suggested Readings
Chapter 9: Gastrointestinal,Pancreatic,and Hepatic Disorders
225
Balkman CE, Center SA, Randolph JF et al: Evaluation of urine
trations in the identifcation of portosystemic shunting in
sulfated and nonsulfated bile acids as a diagnostic test for liver
dogs. I Vet Intern Med 20:13. 2006.
disease in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1368, 2003.
Gookin IL, Foster DM, Poore MF, et al: lse of a commercially
[epueidisod jo uoshedwos ey ratan 'g uuewaue[a 'n iaapig
available culture system for diagnosis of Tritrichomonas foetus
and ceruletide serum bile acid stimulation in dogs. J Vet Iniern
infection in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 222:1376. 2003.
Aed 22:873. 2008.
Hall E]. German AJ: Diseases of the small intestine. [n Ettinger
Cave NJ. et al: Evaluation of a routine diagnostic fecal panel for
SJ. Feldman EC, editors: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine.
dogs with diarrhea. I Am Vet Med Assoc 221:52, 2002.
ed 7, Philadelphia, 20l0, WB Saunders.
Chouicha N. Marks S: Evaluation of five enzyme immunoassays
Jergens AE. Schreiner CA, Frank DE, et al: A scoring index for
mmpared with the cytotoxicity assay for diagnosis of Clos-
disease activity in canine inflammatory bowel disease. J Vef
tridium difcile-associated diarrhea in dogs. J Vet Diagn Invest
Intern Med 17:291,2003.
18:182. 2006.
Kimmel SE. Washabau RJ. Drobatz KJ: [ncidence and prognostic
Cole TL, et al: Diagnostic comparison of needle and wedge biopsy
value of low plasma ionized calcium concentration in cats
specimens of the liver in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
with acute pancreatitis: 46 cases. J Am Vet Med Assoc 219:1105.
220:1483. 2002
2001.
Gerhardt A, et al: Comparison of the sensitivity of different diag-
Marks SL, et al: Genotypic and phenotypic charactenization of
nostic tests for pancreaitis in cats. J Vet Intern Med 15:329.
Clostridium perfringens and Clostridium difcile in diarrheic and
2001.
healthy dogs. / Vet Intern Med 16:533, 2002.
Geman AJ. Day MJ. Ruaux CG. et al: Companison of direct and
Mekaru S. Marks S. Felley A. et al: Comparison of direct immu-
indirect tests for small intestinal bacterial overgrowth and
nofluorescence immunoassays. and fecal flotation for detec-
antibiotic-responsive diarrhea in dogs. J Vet Intern Med 17:33.
tion of Cryptosporidium spp. and Giardia spp. in naturally
2003.
exposed cats in 4 northern Califomia animal shelters. J Vet
GerTitzen-Bruning MJ. Van Den Ingh SGAM. Rothuizen J: Diag-
Intern Med 21:959. 2007.
nostic value of fasting plasma ammonia and bile acid concen-
Ruland K, Fischer A. Hartmann K: Sensitivity and specificity of
fasting ammonia and senum bile acids in the diagnosis of
portosystemic shunts in dogs and cats. Vet Clin Pathol 39:57.
2010.
Stauffer S. Birkenheuer A. Levy M, et al: Evaluation of four DNA
extraction methods for the detection of Tritrichomonas foetus in
feline stool specimens by polymerase chain reaction. J Vet
Diagn Invest 20:639, 2008.
Steiner I. Newman S. Xenoulis P, et al: Sensitivity of serum
 markers for pancreatitis in dogs with macroscopic evidence of
pancreatitis. Vet Ther 9:263. 2008.
Toulza O, Center S. Brooks M, et al: Evaluation of plasma protein
C activity for detection of hepatobiliary disease and portosys-
temic shunting in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc 229:176l, 2006.
van Asten A, Allaart J, Grone A, et al: Application of PCR-based
detection of Clostridium perfringens cpb2 in fecal samples. Vet
Microbiol 129:215, 2008.
Webster CRL. Cooper JC: Diagnostic approach to hepatobili-
ary disease. [n Kirk RW. Bonagura ID. Twedt DC. editors:
Kirk's current veterinary therapy 14. Philadelphia. 2009.
Saunders.
Wilberg ME. Westermarck E: Subclinical exocnine pancreatic
insufficiency in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 220:1l83. 2002.
10
Fluid Accumulation Disorders
Sharon A. Center
DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
of sample collection to avoid collection of contaminating
and irrelevant tissues (cells)
 Effusions are commonly encountered in veterinary prac-
tice and often assist in determining a definitive diagnosis.
Abdominocentesis ● The abdomen is palpated imme-
The term effusion describes inappropriate accumulation
diately before abdominocentesis to avoid lacerating vis-
of fluid within a body "potential" or "third" space outside
ceral structures, and any available images are consulted.
of vascular or lymphatic conduits and visceral structures.
The urinary bladder should be emptied before the pro-
These are often disclosed on physical examination; for
cedure particularly when 14-gauge catheters are used. In
example, overhydrated skin turgor and thickened lip
patients with tense abdominal distention, the abdomen
folds, conjunctivae, tarsal webs, or scrotum may indicate
is punctured laterally to avoid gravitational ventral
localized edema or whole-body edema [i.e, anasarca);
midline seroma formation and adhesions associated
joint cavity distention indicates joint effusion often asso-
with ovariohysterectomy. If septic peritonitis is suspected
ciated with arthritis; dyspnea and/or tachypnea, muted
but unproven with routine abdominocentesis, a four-
lung sounds, or cough may indicate pleural effusion;
quadrant tap can be performed. Utrasonographic guid-
irregular femoral pulses, pulses alternans, and muted
ance is helpful for sampling loculated fluid or fluid
cardiac sounds concurrent with a jugular pulse may indi-
collecting in the abdominal gutters. Usually a 22- to
cate pericardial effusion; and slippery visceral surfaces or
20-gauge, 1-inch needle or Teflon catheter is attached to
a ballotable fluid wave may indicate abdominal effusion.
extension tubing. Mobility afforded by the extension
Unfortunately. some effusions evade detection until
tubing helps avoid visceral laceration should the patient
imaging studies (radiography, ultrasonography) disclose
move during the centesis procedure Alternatively, a but-
their presence. Furthermore, centripetal adiposity can be
terfly catheter set is used. If an abdominal effusion is
confused with abdominal effusion but is easily differen-
difficult to sample, a 14-gauge Teflon catheter is used to
tiated on ultrasound examination. Collection, physico-
puncture the abdomen, and a closed-ended polypropyl-
cytologic characterization, and chemical evaluation of
ene Tomcat catheter is inserted through its lumen. The
effusions are crucial for accurate categorization. Classif-
Teflon catheter provides a "sterile stent" through which
cation schemes incorporating these features direct differ-
the Tomcat catheter may be manipulated as the patient's
ential diagnoses considering the associated disease
position is altered. Local anesthesia (lidocaine block)
pathomechanisms.
may be needed in some patients to enable nonpainful
abdominocentesis.
FLUID COLLECTION TECHNIQUES
Abdominal Lavage · Sterile warmed physiologic saline
[20 ml/kg) is administered intraperitoneally over 5 to 10
Collection of Fluid · The site of fluid collection is pre-
minutes through extension tubing and a Teflon catheter.
pared as for aseptic surgery. A l-inch, 23- to 20-gauge
The abdomen is massaged or the animal moved about for
needle, over-the-needle Teflon catheter, or butterfly
several minutes to mix infused fluid with that trapped
needle-catheter is recommended. Fluid analysis usually
within omental recesses and abdominal gutters. Lavage
requires a minimum of 3 to 5 ml of fluid. If ultrasound
fluid is subsequently aspirated and analyzed. Dogs nor-
guidance is used, it is important to prevent sample con-
mally have less than 500 white blood cells (WBCs)/μl.
tamination with ultrasound gel that induces artifacts [i.e.
 Mild leukocytosis occurs after recent abdominal trauma
blue-appearing smudges on Diff-Quik or Wright-Giemsa-
Or surgery. Diagnostic guidelines for interpretation
stained preparations).Aspiration methods should relieve
of abdominal lavage fluid are listed in Box l0-1. latro-
negative pressure during needle withdrawal from the site
genic injury and bacterial contamination are possible
226
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
227
on the syringe so that advancement of the needle imme-
BOX 10-1. SUGGESTED GUIDELINES FOR
diately discloses effusion, thus avoiding inadvertent pul-
INTERPRETATION OF ABDOmINAL
Lavage effusion*
 monary puncture or laceration. Repeated centesis should
 be performed only after a local anesthetic block is applied
to the puncture site.
TURBIDITY
Clear:
No disease or abdominal
injury
Pericardiocentesis · Before pericardiocentesis, samples
Bloody:
latrogenic or hemorrhage
of blood are used to determine baseline packed cell
volume (PCV), total solids (TS) concentration, platelet
Chronic effusion:
count, and activated coagulation time (ACT). This proce-
serosanguineous
dure is best performed with the patient in sternal recum-
Blood darkens on
 Active hemorrhage:
acquire packed cell
bency and with local analgesia block. The site of thoracic
repeat centesis:
volume (PCV) for
 penetration is surgically prepared and blocked with local
relative change
anesthetic, and a small incision is made in the skin to
facilitate movement of the catheter through the dermis.
Turbid:
Cannot clearly read
newsprint through fluid:
The right side is preferred to avoid large coronary arteries
 cytology indicated
on the left side. However, echocardiography should assist 
PCV:
in determining the optimal site for pericardiocentesis.
5%
 Mild hemorrhage
Without access to echocardiography, the site selected cor-
>10%
Significant hemorrhage
responds to the palpable cardiac beat or just caudal to or
below the elbow at the level of the costochondral junc-
WBC count:
tion (fifth to sixth intercostal space). The catheter is
<500/μl
Normal dogs
usually passed through the fifth or sixth right intercostal
>1000/μl
Mild to moderate
space [i.e., the cardiac notch between lung lobes) after
infl ammation
Probable peritonitis:
local anesthetic is injected to the level of the pleura. A
>2000/μl
12- to 16-gauge, 4- to 6-inch over-the-needle Teflon cath-
cytology indicated 
eter is used with two or three extra holes aseptically
PANCREATIC
If >sera: pancreatic
snipped in the lateral aspect of the catheter approxi-
ENZYMES (lipase
 inflammation, injury.
mately 1.5 to 3.0 cm from the tip. Extension tubing and
 or amylase):
necrosis
If >sera: bile spillage or
-aie pue -a u Aressanau aie yodois Aem-air e
TOTAL BILIRUBIN:
sized dogs. An electrocardiogram (ECG) is simultane-
enteric rupture
ously recorded while the catheter is advanced; touching
CREATININE:
If >sera: urinary tract
the myocardium elicits premature ventricular beats.
rupture, urine spillage
Ultrasound guidance is routinely used for this procedure.
VEGETABLE
 Enteric rupture or sampled
Pleural effusion is usually present and frst encountered,
FIBERS:
enteric Iumen
MIXED BACTERIAL
typically a modifed transudate, amber to slightly red
 Enteric rupture, ruptured
in color. Entrance into the pericardium may require an
FLORA:
abscess, or sampled 
acute thrust associated with a “pop." after which the cath-
enteric lumen
eter is slipped over the needle into the pericardial sac.
*After instillation of 20 ml/kg and mixing throughout peritoneal
and the needle removed and discarded. Collection of a
hemorrhagic effusion is typical and necessitates immedi-
avity.
WBC, white blood cell.
ate differentiation of centesis fluid from peripheral blood
using comparisons between each fluid in PCV, platelet
count TS concentration, and supernatant color, and an
ACT on the fluid to confirm its inability to clot. These
assessments avoid inadvertent removal of large volumes
consequences of the lavage procedure, and dilutional
of intracardiac blood. Pericardial hemangiosarcomas
influences on collected fluid can create diagnostic confu-
may initiate a hemorrhagic effusion upon pericardiocen-
sion. The convenient availability of ultrasound in clinical
tesis that may be difficult to differentiate from iatrogenic
practice has reduced use of this technique by guiding
cardiac puncture. Ultrasonographic imaging may assist in
targeted fluid centesis.
resolving this conundnum.(
Complications  associated
with pericardiocentesis include ventricular premature
Thoracocentesis · Thoracocentesis  is usually
per-
contractions, laceration of the coronary artery. and
formed in the seventh or eight intercostal space at the
sudden death. After removal of pericardial fluid, the
level of the costochondral junction; however, relevant
patient should be monitored for arrhythmias and acute
imaging studies may better guide sample collection. The
recurrence of hemorrhagic tamponade (abrupt onset of
needle penetrates the middle of the intercostal space.
tachycardia,
. poor pulse quality. pulsus paradoxus,
avoiding the caudal rib margin where nerves and vessels
tachypnea).
are located. Harvesting fluid is optimal with the animal
standing or in sternal recumbency. A l-inch, 18- or
Collection of Edema Fluid · A 22- to 25-gauge needle
20-gauge butterfly catheter connected to a three-way stop-
is gently introduced into the affected tissue. Clear watery
cock and a 20-to 35-ml syringe are recommended. During
aq ues nq aa aq aisnuns suep uao pn
initial needle placement, negative pressure is maintained
assisted by gentle massage or aspiration. If lymphatic
228
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
B
E
FIGURE 10-1 Examples of effusions with different physical characteristics. A, A pure low-protein transudate. It is colorless, clear,
and transparent. B, A modified transudate that is red tinged and cloudy due to red blood cells (RBCs). It is nearly opaque.
C, Chylous effusion that is white and opaque. D, Septic exudate that is cream colored and opaque. E, Hemoabdomen fluid
that is dark red and opaque. Note that the supernatant in the microhematocrit tube is xanthochromic (yellow) due to RBC
breakdown.
cording is notable, direct puncture for lymph collection
of fluid are collected, cytology has first priority. Cultures
is possible.
can be taken from the needle hub with a microtip cul-
turette, or the needle and syringe can be washed with
culture broth. PCV, total protein, and appearance of
CHARACTERIZATION OF FLUD
microcentrifuged supernatant of bloody effusions should
be compared with peripheral blood. Physicochemical
Refer to Table 10-1.
and cytologic assessment of effusions usually permits
dlassification into one of several categories (see Table
Fluid Analysis · Collected fluids should be analyzed
10-1). The scheme presented divides effusions into tran-
immediately to permit characterization and to direct
sudates and exudates and then further subdivides each
further diagnostics [e.g., bacterial culture). Three- to 5-ml
major category.
aliquots of fluid should be stored in an ethylenediamine-
tetraacetic acid (EDTA; purple top) tube and a sterile clot
Physical Assessment of an Effusion · Color and tur-
tube for cytologic and physicochemical assessments,
bidity of the fluid should be recorded (Figure 10-1).
respectively. A separate sample for culture is stored in
Turbid fluids contain cells or lipids. Chylous effusions are
a sterile clot tube, a Culturette containing transport
usually white, pink, or opalescent with a turbid superna-
 medium, or broth culture medium. If only a few drops
tant A red-tinged or maroon fluid reflects red blood cells
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
229
Mily/white/pink
ping) (p.aisaloy 
(predominate
 Stain positive
Lymphocytes
Neutrophils 
Opaque
Variable
(es>
>1.018
>2.5
Raré
Dark yellow/gren
 (predominate in 
Brown/green
Macrophages
Neutrophils
 anbedo
acute)
>1.025
>5000
>3.0
+
No
SEPTIC EXUDATE
Purulent, creamy
Cloudy/flocculent 
Mesothelial cells
 May see bacteria
Neutrophils
bacteria)
>1.025
0000<
>3.0
Exudates
No
Serosanguineous 
(ateauabepuou)
± Neoplastic cells 
Macrophages
Neutrophils
chronic)
Cloudy
>1.025
>5000
>3.0
(erythrophagocytosis)
Neutrophils (variable,
HEPMSRHAGIC
Similar to blood
Macrophages
Bloody
anbedo
>1.025
>1000
>3.0
Transudates
(anelauabapuou)
Mesothelial cells 
MARISUDTE
Clear to cloudy
1.017-1.025
500-10,000
Lymphocytes
RBCs (few)
Serous 
2.5-5.0
(mesothelial cells, 
Mononuclear cells
ymphocytes,
macrophages)
Watery
<1.017
<1000
Total solids (g/dl)
Nucleated cells/μl
RBCs, Red blood cells.
Specific gravity 
Differential
Turbidity
Bacteria
Color
p!d!7
230
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
(RBCs) or free hemoglobin. Blood-tinged fluids must be
erythrophagocytosis can also develop in fluids during
centrifuged to determine their PCV relative to systemic
  (  e   s
PCV and to permit supermatant evaluation. RBCs often
contaminated samples lack platelets but have a xantho-
accumulate in effusions secondary to inflammation or
chromic (yellow-tinged) supernatant after centrifugation.
vascular congestion, where they cause a PCV less than or
Xanthochromia reflects presence of hemo-pigments (bili-
equal to 8%. If the PCV more closely resembles systermic
blood and the supernatant is clear, acute hemorrhage or
yellow effusions. Bile peritonitis is usually associated with
iatrogenic sample contamination is likely. Fluid PCV may
a brown-green or dark yellow-green effusion with large-
be artifactually lowered by hemolysis caused by very high
volume bile spillage, containing both free and engulfed
or low fluid tonicity. by freezing and thawing during
bilinubin crystals (Figure 10-3). Loculated bile peritonitis
sample storage, or consequent to high lipid concentra-
in the anterior abdomen (fluid entrapped in the
tions or trauma [i.e, forced sample injection into a Vacu-
tainer). Hemolysis should be suspected if a supernatant
the site of bile leakage and a modified transudate or exu-
is maroon colored. Erythrophagocytosis (ie.. R
RBCs
dative effusion within the remainder of the abdomen.
engulfed by macrophages) and macrophages containing
Septic effusions may emit a foul smell caused by anaero-
hemosiderin (ie., siderocytes) reflect blood contamina-
bic bacterial infection from bowel rupture.
tion of at least 24 hours (Figure 10-2). However,
Cell Counts and Cytology · Total and differential
nucleated cell counts are performed using anticoagulated,
noncentrifuged fluid. Total cell counts may be completed
using a hemocytometer and manual count or a flow
cytometry hematology
analyzer.
Very-small-volume
 samples may yield falsely low cel counts as a result of
anticoagulant dilution. Poor sample mixing. sample con-
tamination, prolonged storage and medical therapy may
each influence cell counts. Differential counts are best
performed from concentrated cellular components. This
can be simply done by sample centrifugation, smear
preparation, and Diff-Quik staining. Smears ofunconcen-
trated fluid allow estimation of cell numbers when cell
counts exceed l000/μul. At least six slides of collected fluid
should immediately be made, rapidly air-dried to pre-
 e un s ue ro lan ais
Wright stain such as Diff-Quik. If bacteria are visible.
FIGURE 10-2 Erythrophagocytosis, such as in this macro-
Gram stain is applied If the fluid appears relatively acel-
phage, or hemosiderin in phagocytes indicates the hemor-
rhage in a fluid was, at least in part, from a preexisting disease
lular, a portion should be centrifuged and smears made
(il.e., pathologic hemorrhage) rather than an artifact of collect-
 of the sediment as soon as possible Cytospin centrifuga-
ing the sample.
tion provides the best cellular morphology. The clinician
A
B
FIGURE 10-3A,Bilious efusion that is goldenbrown and smi-transparent.,Cytology of bilius effusion showing inflammatory
cells that have engulfed bile (brown material)l. (Courtesy of Dr. Mark Johnson.)
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
231
should remain alert for microorganism-contaminated
abdominal effusions associated with hypoalbuminemia
stains, post-sampling degeneration of neutrophils associ-
plus portal hypertension resulting from hepatic insuff-
 ated with prolonged storage in EDTA or saline, or cell
ciency, and with severe hypoalbuminemia associated with
changes induced by exposure to urine or bile. Estimation
sodium and water retention in protein-losing nephropa-
of total nucleated cell count in a noncentrifuged sample
am se '(ald) Ayedoiaiua gusoi-uaiod pue (Nld) Ay
can be done using the following formula and the stipula-
as with iatrogenic fluid overload or uroperitoneum from
tion that the objective used visualizes l to 10 nmucleated
a ruptured urinary bladder or ureter.
cells per field of view: [average number of nucleated cells
per microscopic field of view [count 10 areas]) × (objec-
Modified Transudates
tive power)2. For example, using a 40x objective, if 8 cells
are counted per field of view: 8 cells x 402 = 12,800 cells/
These are associated with a higher TS concentration than
ml. The total nucleated cell count in fluid from body
 pure transudates (generally 2.5 g/dl), a SG greater than
cavities of healthy dogs and cats is less than 3000 cells/
1.017. and moderate cellularity. Mesothelial cells are
ml (most are <10o0 cells/ml).
usually plentiful, and modifed transudates reflect transu-
dative vascular leakage from normal or noninflamed vas-
Determmining Fluid Protein Concentration · Protein
culature [increased capillary hydrostatic pressure or
concentration should be determined on supernatant of
lymphatic obstruction). Modifed transudates may be
centrifuged fluid. Protein concentration can be estimated
associated with neoplasia and many other disorders
using a handheld refractometer or biochemically. While
leading to transudative effusions, as well as uroperito-
a refractometer may underestimate protein in fluid when
neum from a ruptured urinary bladder or ureter.
 protein is less than 2.0 g/dl, one study developed conver-
sion values for estimating fluid protein concentration as
Hemorrhagic Effusions
low as 1.0 g/dl using a handheld refractometer (Table
10-2).25 In normal animals, protein content of body cavity
fluid is less than 2.5 g/dl.
resenting 10% to 25% of the systemic blood PCV, and
have a TS concentration greater than 3.0 g/dl (Figure
10-6). If chronic, the supermatant evidences hemolysis or
DISTINGUISHING DIFFERENT TYPES
xanthochromia, and cytologic inspection reveals erythro-
OF EFFUSIONS
phagocytosis, siderocytes, hematoidin (a yellow refractile
crystalline or amorphous pigment, free of iron, formed
Refer to Table 10-1.
from hematin), and lack of platelets. These effusions do
not clot. Platelets appear only when bleeding has
Transudates
Occurred 1 hour or less before sampling. Peracute or iat-
rogenic hemorrhage has no or only minor erythrophago-
 These effusions have a low protein concentration and cell
cytosis, an absence of siderocytes, a clear supermatant,
count, and are typically clear and colorless (Figures 10-4
and platelets, and it may clot. If an acute hemorrhagic
and 10-5).  Transudates reflect altered fluid dynamics
effusion is allowed to sit before slide preparation, eryth-
associated with reduced interstitial fluid resorption [into
rophagocytosis may occur in vitro, confusing the
m ainssad sieisoipay shouaa paseaul 'saeide
diagnosis.
concurrent hypoalbuminemia, or severe hypoalbumin-
emia alone.
Exudates
Exudates are characterized by high TS concentration
Pure Transudates
(ie., >3.0 g/dl), high SG (i.e., >l.025), and increased
These are poorly cellular (i.e, <l0o0 cells/μl), have TS
cellularity dominated by neutrophils and macrophages
concentrations less than 2.5 g/dl, and have a specifc
(i.e., >5000 cells/μl). These effusions are characterized
gravity (SG) less than 1.0l7. Classic examples include
as either septic or nonseptic and may be associated with
TABLE 10-2. CONVERSION FOR ESTIMaTING FlUID tOTAL PROTEIN USING A HANDHElD REFRACTOMETER
ACCORDING TO GEORGE AND O'NEILL (2001)
REFRACTIVE
SPECIFIC
BODYFLUID
REFRACTIVE
SPECIFIC
BODYFLUID
INDEX
GRAVITY
PROTEIN (g/dl)
INDEX
GRAVITY
PROTEIN (g/dl)
<1.3376
<1.013
<1.0
1.3389
1.017
1.8
1.3376
1.013
1.0
1.3391
1.017
1.9
1.3378
1.014
1.1
1.3393
1.018
2.0
1.3380
1.014
1.3
1.3395
1.018
2.1
1.3382
1.015
1.4
1.3397
1.019
2.2
1.3384
1.015
1.5
1.3399
1.019
2.3
1.3385
1.016
1.6
1.3401
1.020
2.4
1.3387
1.016
1.7
1.3402
1.020
2.5
neoplasia, volvulus,
Ruptured pyometra
intussusception,
 penetrating wound,
Bile peritonitis
s
foreign body)
 Pancreatitis
Abscess
Septic
L.e.
Carcinomatosis
Hypersensitivity
Nonseptic
Pancreatitis
Neoplasia
Steatitis
Rule out other causes of abdominal distention (i.e., obesity, aerophagia, gastric distention, bowel distention,
 Lymphatic disease
Other neoplasia
strangulation
Chylous
ldiopathic
Lymphoma
nflammati
 Mucosal bleeding time,
oun, pandn.
coagulopathy)
PT, APTT
fibrinogen
Are platelets present?
 Acute hemorrhage
Abdominocentesis (see Table 10-2)
Suspected abdominal effusion
Clear
Hemorrhagic
2
 Supernatant
Abdominalultrasonography
adiographs
±Contrast
±Exploratory laparotomy
 ±Cardiac evaluation
+Lymphangiogram
Coagulopathy
Chronic condition
 Parenchymai
 RBC breakdown
Xanthochromic
Schistocytes
 Acanthocytes
Trauma
Yes
±CT imaging 
6
 Troponin I
>1.1 = Portal hypertension)
hepatic cirrhosis  
BNP
Immuno-
(SA-EA Gradient
 Neoplasia Disease
Inflammation
 Chronic pure
 Splenic disease
Hepatoportal
hypertension
Transudate
Lymphatic
Neoplasia
FIP (rare)
transudate
Modified
Early
See Table 10-4
Hepatobiliary
Pancreatic
Perirenal
Prostatic
See Box
10-4
Transudate
力
Pure
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
233
Evaluate heart and nonhepatic
vasculature (ECG, thoracic 
Right-sided heart failure
Vena caval occlusion
 and 10-3
 Congenital defects
disease
10-3
Cardiac 
Boxes 10-2:
 Modified transucdate (usually)
 Serum albumin >1.5 g/dl
hepatic or cardiac
201 8
No evidence (
Prehepatic
ma
disease
See Chapter 9: Evaluate liver (serum bile acids, radiographs,
ultrasound, CT imaging, colorectal scintigraphy, measure
portal
portal pressure, contrast imaging procedure,
Extrahepatic portal thrombi
Hepatoportal fibrosis
fibrosis
 Hepatic disease 
Cirrhosis
Table
 Transudative abdominal effusions 
Evaluate abdominal
f
serum bile acids,
Lltrasonography.
Increased
Decreased
cholesterol
Cirrhosis
 See Chapter 12: urinalysis, urine P/C.
 serum bile acids, cholesterol
Serum albumin <1.5 g/dl
(may not show overt signs)
Pure transudate (usually)
 Evaluate Gl biopsies
No increased
serum bile acids.
 No pathologic
proteinuria,
10
enteropathy
Increased cholesterol
Nephrotic
syndrome
234
Hemoabdomen and hemothorax
History of trauma
No history of trauma
Acute bleeding
 Chronic bleeding
CBC (look for anemia, schistocytes, acanthocytes)
Coagulation study (look for prolonged PT, APTT, ACT;
Platelets
Erythrophagocyts
Rare erythrophagocytes
low fibrinogen, thrombocytopenia, prolonged mucosal
Siderocytes
No siderocytes
Defibrinated
bleeding time, decreased von Willebrand's factor)
Clear supernatant
No platelets
May clot
Xanthochromic
 supernatant
Coagulopathy
No coagulopathy
Post-traumatic hemorrhage
See Chapter 5
Look for mass or infiltrate
Treat symptomatically
in body cavity
as needed
Observe
Blood components
 Treat symptomatically
 Image body cavities:
Fresh frozen plasma
Exploratory surgery depending
Radiographs (look for
Whole blood
on vital signs, severity, persistence
traumatic lesions and
Cryoprecepitate
masses) Ulitrasound (look
if vWF deficiency
DDAVP:1-5 μg/kg
for mass such as
hemangiosarcoma, cavitated
Vit.K: 0.5-1 mg/kg
 neoplasm, vascular tumor)
CTImaging
If coagulopathy is unexplained or 
have thrombocytopenia secondary
to hemorrhage or have DIC...
Explore cavity
ifnecessary
FGURE 10-6 Diagnostic considerations in animals with hemoabdomen or hemothorax. ACT, Activated clotting time; APTT, acti-
sin; DiC, disseminated intravascular coagulation; PT, prothrombin time; Vit. K, vitamin K; vWF, von Willebrand factor.
inflammatory, necrotizing. infectious, or malignant disor-
Chylous Effusions
ders. Exudative effusions should be cultured aerobically
and anaerobically for bacteria ± fungi. Immediate
Chylous effusions usually have a TS concentration greater
cytologic inspection of effusions is important to
than 2.5 g/dl; a SG greater than 1.0l8; a predominant
recognize septic exudates, which prioritizes bacterial or
population of mononuclear cells (lymphocytes) or high
fungal culture submission. Evaluation of C-reactive
numbers of neutrophils, or both; and a high triglyceride
concentration relative to peripheral blood (see Figure
ating exudative from transudative effusions; a cutoff
10-4 and Table 10-1). The fluid:serum triglyceride ratio
value of 4 μg/ml had a sensitivity of 100% and a specific-
is greater than 2 or 3:1 and commonly exceeds 10:1.
ity of 94%.41
Effusion cholesterol concentration is less than in peri-
pheral blood. When centrifuged, chylous effusions have
Bilious Effusions
lactescent or opalescent supernatants with a buoyant
triglyceride-rich chylomicron layer accumulating at the
Bilious effusions contain intracellular and extracellular
fluid surface when the sample is refrigerated. A qualitative
bilirubin crystals (yellow, golden, or brownish debris that
test for high triglyceride content involves incubation of
3i1 i-0i ae as as io aa1 iadde e
the suspect effusion pretreated with 1 to 2 drops of 1 N
numbers of neutrophils are typical, and these may
be
sodium hydroxide and an equal volume of ether. Ether-
highly segmented. Reactive mesothelial cells are common.
soluble triglycerides rise to the top of the tube and are
If septic, bacteria may be visible within phagocytic cells
discriminated as a white band. Alternatively, a wet mount
 or free in the effusion fluid. Comparing bilinubin concen-
 of fluid may be stained with oil red O or Sudan black and
tration in the effusion to that in peripheral blood dis-
subsequently evaluated for fat droplets (i.e., chylomi-
closes a 5- to l0-fold higher concentration in the effusion.
crons) (Figure 10-7). Chylous effusions reflect disruption
All effusions in jaundiced animals are yellow colored
of thoracic duct or smaller lymphatics, obstruction
owing to the solubility and dispersal of bilirubin
from neoplastic infiltrates within lymphatics or draining
pigments.
lymph nodes (eg., lymphoma, thymoma), mediastinal
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
235
FIGURE 10-7 A simple, cheap test for chylomicrons in thoracic
fluid is to stain the smear with fat stain (e.g., Sudan stain or oil
red O) to demonstrate neutral fat droplets in the phagocytes
FIGURE 10-8 Cytology of abdominal effusion showing reac-
and free in the fluid, plus a drop of new methylene blue to
tive mesothelial cells. These cells have peripheral cytoplasmic
blebs resembling a "brush border" and very prominent nucle-
stain the nuclei.
oli and are found in rafts, closely mimicking carcinoma cells.
inflammation or neoplasia, lymphatic occlusion by dia-
effusion in dogs with associated effusions usually con-
phragmatic or peritoneopericardial hernia, lung lobe
taining large numbers of foamy macrophages, reactive
torsion, congenital malformations (e.g, lymphangiecta-
and quiescent mesothelial cells, erythrophagocytes, xan-
sia), cardiac disorders [including heartworm disease), or
thochromic supernatant and an absence of platelets
idiopathic disease (likely congenital malformations).
Diagnosis in patients lacking a history of trauma may
Being vascular tumors, hemangiosarcomas are usually
require a lymphangiogram (using radiography or com-
accompanied by circulating acanthocytes and schisto-
puted tomography [CT]) and eventual surgical explora-
cytes (see Chapters 2 and 3). Hemangiosarcomas often
tion of the appropriate body cavity after priming the
produce hemorrhagic effusions lacking cytologic evi-
lymphatics with a small high-fat meal (cream ingestion)
dence of neoplasia, as these cells do not exfoliate easily.
that elucidates the location of lymphatics.
When observed, hemangiosarcoma cells are large spindle-
shaped to polyhedral cells, with a round to oval nucleus
Pseudochylous Effusions
having one or more
prominent nucleoli, a dark-
blue cytoplasm (modified Wright-Giemsa staining), and
Pseudochylous effusions as described historically in vet-
many small, discrete nonstaining vacuoles (Figure 10-9).
erinary literature are either extremely rare or nonexistent.
Carcinomatosis [ie., miliary tumors implanted on peri-
Such effusions grossly resermble chylous effusions but
toneal or pleural surfaces) frequently cause body cavity
have high cholesterol and low triglyceride concentrations
effusion.
Radiography(
discloses ill-defined
serosal
relative to peripheral blood. Effusions associated with
le Aydeouosn Aq pauyuo pm yim sui
dense populations of neoplastic cels may appear
"chylous" on gross inspection but fail to demonstrate
other diagnostic features of chyle.
Malignant Effusions
Malignant effusions are usually characterized as modified
transudates or exudates, are often blood tinged and xan-
thochromic and are definitively diagnosed by finding
neoplastic cells. However, it is important to recognized
that effusions secondary to tumors may or may not
contain malignant cells. Caution: Reactive mesothelial
cells may be misinterpreted as malignant (e.g., binucle-
ated cells, signet ring-shaped cells similar to carcinoma
 e r 'o si ea t 's
sized nucleus and nucleoli) (Figure 10-8). Immunocyto-
chemical staining assists in differentiation of cell origin
nant cell population remains uncertain. Differentiating
mesothelioma cells from reactive mesothelial cells is
FIGURE 10-9 Cytology of a hemangiosarcoma. Many of the
 problematic, requiring tissue biopsy for defnitive diag-
cells are spindloid and contain numerous small punctate cyto-
nosis. Hemangiosarcomas commonly cause malignant
plasmic vacuoles. (Courtesy of Dr. Mark Johnson.)
236
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
can assist in fluid sample collection. These effusions have
concentration which is influenced by serum protein con-
a high SG and a large amount of protein and may be
centration as well as portal pressure This ratio is not
hemorrhagic. Cytology may disclose neoplastic cells, but
affected by diuresis, paracentesis, or type of hepatic
in some cases reactive mesothelial cells and carcinoma
disease causing portal hypertension, and has a higher
cells may be indistinguishable, requiring immunohisto-
utility than traditional effusion classification schemes for
chemical differentiation.
differential diagnosis of the cause of effusion in human
patients.42 The utility of the SA-EA gradient has also been
Eosinophilic Effusions
examined in dogs.38 Noteworthy is that detection of
portal hypertension with the SA-EA gradient is not
 Eosinophilic effusions contain greater than 10% eosino-
synonymous with a diagnosis of hepatic failure, as there
Pao se payisse os ianne i 's
are numerous disorders (Figure 10-10; see also Figure
transudates and the remainder as nonseptic exudates.
10-4) that can lead to prehepatic, hepatic (presinusoidal,
Eosinophilic effusions cannot be predicted from circu-
sinusoidal, post-sinusoidal), or post-hepatic portal
lating eosinophil counts. Canine eosinophilic pleural
hypertension. Considerable overlap of SA-EA gradients
effusions may be associated with heartworm disease,
has been shown in humans and animals for different
disseminated eosinophilic granulomatosis, systemic mas-
disorders. In the absence of liver-related causes, malig-
tocytosis, interstitial pneumonia, lymphoma, hemangio-
nancy is the second most important cause of an increased
sarcoma, and carcinoma. In cats, eosinophilic effusions
SA-EA gradient and portal hypertension. Differential
may be associated with lymphosarcoma, systemic masto-
diagnosis of causes of abdominal effusion is best done
cytosis, and hypereosinophilic syndrome. Pulmonary
considering collective physical findings and diagnostic
infltrates are commonly detected by radiography.
In
features (Table 10-3).
some animals with pulmonary disease pneumothorax
Abdominal modified transudates are often associated
precedes development of the eosinophilic pleural effu-
with increased venous (capillary) hydrostatic pressure
sion. Animals with multifocal eosinophilic hepatic granu-
(see Figure 10-5) and an SA-EA greater than 1.1. Concur-
lomas my develop a transudative or eosinophilic
rent hepatomegaly suggests impaired blood flow at the
abdominal effusion.
level of the hepatic venules, vena cava craniad to the
diaphragm, pericardium, right atrium, or pulmonary arte-
rial bed (Box 10-2; see Table 10-3, and Figure 10-10). The
SPECIFIC BODY CAVITY EFFUSIONS:
clinician should look for jugular pulse, pulsus paradoxus,
hepatojugular reflex, poor femoral pulse quality muffled
DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS
cardiac sounds, exercise intolerance, and physiologically
Abdominal Effusions
inappropriate tachycardia, which might indicate pericar-
dial tamponade or pericardial restriction. The hepato-
Diagnostic considerations in animals with suspected
jugular reflex is elicited by applying gentle abdominal
 abdominal effusion encompass a wide spectrum of disor-
compression to the liver or cranial abdomen for 10 to 15
ders [see Figure 10-4). Pure transudates are typically asso-
seconds (increases venous return to the heart) and observ-
ciated with severe hypoalbuminemia (see Chapter 12; see
ing jugular vein distention or pulsation (indicating
also Figure l0-5) and are usually caused by PLN, PLE,
reduced right heart function or filling). Hepatomegaly
hepatic failure, protein loss from exudative cutaneous
caused by venous congestion may be difficult to palpate
lesions, repeated body cavity lavage, or repeated large-
 because of abdominal distention due to ascites or second-
volume or therapeutic abdominocentesis of a large-
ary to patient conformation (deep-chested dog).
volume effusion. Anorexia and emaciation alone do not
Thoracic radiographs evaluate shape and size of
produce hypoalbuminemia severe enough to elicit edema
cardiac and pericardial silhouettes; the tortuosity and
Or effusion. Important rule outs include causes of patho-
flling of the pulmonary arterial bed; and the shape, dis-
logic proteinuria (see Chapter 7) and hepatic insuff-
tention, and position of the vena cava, an important
ciency (see the discussion of bile acids in Chapter 9).
capacitance vessel. If cardiomegaly is present, echocardio-
Because PLE may occur without signs of enteric disease,
 graphic evaluations differentiate cardiac from pericardial
enteric biopsy may be needed for diagnosis. Adjunctive
disease. A vascular interrogation using abdominal ultra-
scrutiny of the serum cholesterol concentration 
[see
sonography (color flow Doppler) may reveal distended
Chapter 8) is helpful in differentiating the cause of a
hepatic veins and an exaggerated flow pattern because
 pure transudate associated with hypoalbuminemia: PLE
of cardiac outflow obstruction, abdominal masses [i.e..
and hepatic failure usually cause hypocholesterolemia,
neoplasia, granuloma), or obstructed portal flow (e.g.
whereas PLN usually causes hypercholesterolermia. The
thrombi causing a luminal flling defect). Central venous
contribution of portal hypertension as an important
 pressure (CVP) values greater than 8 cm HzO are sugges-
pathomechanism of abdominal effusion can be dis-
tive, and values greater than or equal to 14 cm HzO are
cerned by calculating the serum albumin-effusion
diagnostic of right-sided cardiac dysfunction, filling. or
albumin (SA-EA) gradient, defned by the serum albumin
impaired flow of blood into the lungs (e.g., pulmonary
concentration minus the ascitic fluid albumin concentra-
hypertension, thromboembolism). CVP may be normal
tion. Finding an SA-EA value greater than 1.1 indicates
in dogs with cor triatriatum dexter (abnormal congenital
 Occlusive webbing within the right atrium) which causes
role in that patient's effusion. The gradient correlates
 abdominal effusion secondary to passive congestion.
directly with only a single physiologic variable (portal
Assessment of CVP is not commonly done because it is
pressure) as compared to the ascites fluid total protein
subject to many mechanical variables that invalidate its
Chapter 10:Fluid Accumulation Disorders
237
HEART
SPLEEN
POST-HEPATIC
PRE-HEPATIC
HEPATIC
SINUSOIDAL
Capillarization
Collagenization
Regenerative nodules
POST-SINUSOIDAL
PRE-SINUSOIDAL
Zone 3Disease
Zone 1 Disease
Periacinar
Periportal fibrosis
Hepaticvenule
Portal vein occlusion
INTESTINES
Outflow obstruction
Budd-Chiari syndrome
FIGURE 10-10 Diagram of blood flow through the liver identifying the sites of pre-hepatic, post-hepatic, and hepatic causes of
ascites, as well as pre-sinusoidal, sinusoidal, and post-sinusoidal causes.
interpretation e.g., catheter end position variability:
granulomas) may also produce modifed transudates.
kinking or folding of the catheter and catheter occlusion)
these are usually detected by ultrasonography.
 and because advanced imaging modalities allow better
Effusions can be suspected on the basis of radio-
assessment of potential disease mechanisms. Further-
graphic images demonstrating lack of distinct visceral
more, it may lead to iatrogenic hemorrhage in patients
margins. However, ultrasonography is more accurate for
with coagulopathies (eg, hepatic insufficiency, rodenti-
fluid detection. Radiographic images made after abdomi-
cide toxicity, vasculitis, thrombocytopenia).
nal fluid evacuation (drainage) allow appraisal of hepatic
 Modified transudates associated with chronic hepatic
size detection of a mass effect or altered visceral
 disease can develop before severe hypoalbuminemia con-
 positions. Visceral margins will remain ill defned because
cordant with onset of presinusoidal, sinusoidal, or post-
of retention of small fluid volumes. After large-volume
sinusoidal portal hypertension (see Box 10-2). Pooling of
paracentesis, most effusions reaccumulate within hours
albumin in the abdominal effusion is one factor contrib-
to
days,
s0 radiographic studies must be done
uting to onset of systemic hypoalbuminemia in these
immediately.
patients. Abdominal ultrasonography usually discloses
Finding an exudative effusion mandates a search
 one or more of the following features: microhepatia.
for infection, necrosis, or malignancy. Identification of
irregular lobe margins, altered parenchymal echogenicity.
phagocytized organisms [neutrophils or macrophages) is
distended extrahepatic portal vasculature and/or retro-
definitive for sepsis but may require careful, tedious
 grade portal blood flow, splenic congestion, or tortuous
inspection of several cytology slides. Finding plant fibers.
portosystemic shunts (caudal to the kidneys, adjacent to 
[euopqe ue un eioy iesa, paxi e io 'shqap oaiua
the splenic vasculature) (see Table 10-3). Modifed tran-
effusion suggest loss of enteric integrity or gut rupture.
 sudates may also reflect fibrosis in the porta hepatis, neo-
 Degenerate WBCs (Figure 10-1l; see Chapter 16) suggest
plasia occluding (strangulating) portal vasculature, or
infection, although some organisms do not alter neutro-
portal venous thromboembolism (detected by color flow
phil morphology (eg., Actinomyces). Degenerate changes
Doppler examination). An SA-EA gradient greater than
in WBCs also may result from specimen handling [i.e.,
1.1. develops in all of these disorders (see Figure 10-5).
(uoieda1d 1eas Aooi aogaq Buol oon aeios
Splenic infarction, thromboembolism, or torsion
Recent abdominal trauma (eg. exploratory laparotomy)
may produce an abdominal effusion characterized as a
causes mild, transient, fluid accumulation characterized
modified transudate or exudate. Part or all of the spleen
 may appear large on ultrasonography, and color flow
Finding and identifying infecting organisms can
uoisnyad paiiedul asosip Aeu uoneaouaiul iaiddod
be diffcult, especially when bacterial numbers are low
(e.g.,. vascular thrombi, impaired venous or arterial flow).
or bacteria are within granulomas or loculated within
Splenic and other abdominal masses (i.e., neoplasia,
abscesses. Certain organisms are notoriously diffcult to
238
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 1O-3.CHARACTERISTICS OF DIFFERENT TYPES OF PORTAL HYPERTENSION
 Prehepatic Portal
Post-hepatic Portal Hypertension
Hepatic Portal Hypertension 
Hypertension
CARDIAC/
PERICARDIAL
DIAGNOSTIC
(FILLING/PUMP
CVC
NUMEROUS
INTRAHEPATIC
NUMEROUS
FEATURE
FAILURE)
OCCLUSION
CAUSES
AV FISTULA
CAUSES
Serum
>1.1
>1.1
>1.1
>1.1
>1.1
Albumin:Effusion
Albumin
CVP
个
Normal
 Normal
 Normal
Normal
ECG
Abnormal
 Normal 
 Normal 
 Normal
Normal 
Radiography:
Cardiac silhouette
↑/normal
Normal
Normal
 Normal
Normal
Caudal vena caval
个
↓, normal,
 Normal
 Normal
Normal 
size
mass lesion
Liver Size
个
Normal, variable, ↓
↑ individual lobe 
Normal 
Ultrasonography
Liver pattern
Hypoechoic/
Hypoechoic/
Variable
 Anechoic foci 
Normal 
normal
normal
Size: Doppler
confirms flow
Hepatic vein
Distended 
Distended 
 Normal 
 Normal
Normal 
Portal vein
 Prominent 
 Prominent
Variable
 Segmentally larger
Normal 
CBC:
PCV
↑/normal
↑ /normal
Variable
↓/normal
Variable
MCV
Normal
 Normal
个
↑
↓ with shunting/
normal
Poikilocytes
Rare
Raré
Common 
Common
Variable
Schistocytes,
↑ if vascular
↑ if vascular
Rare
Rare
Raré
acanthocytes 
lesions
lesions
 Chemistry Profile:
 Abumin
 Normal
 Normal 
↓/normal
↓/normal
Liver enzymes
↑ALP, ↑ ALT,
↑ ALP, ↑ ALT,
Variable
Variable
Variable
↑AST
↑AST
Glucose
 Normal
Normal
Normal/↓
↑
Normal
Serum Bile Acids:
 Normal
 Normal 
↑ postprandial
 ↑ postprandial
↑ if shunting
Ascites:
Common
Common
Chronic disease
Common
Variable
 Pure transudate
Uncommon
Uncommon
Common
 Possible
Possible
Modified 
Common
Common
Rare
Possible
Possible
transud ate
ALP, Alkaline phosphatase; ALT, alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate transaminase; AV, arteriovenous; CBC, complete blood count; CVC, caudal vena
cava; CVP, central venous pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram; MCV, mean corpuscular volume; PCV, packed cell volume.
find (e.g., Nocardia and Actinomyces). Therefore all exuda-
sepsis should be given intravenous antimicrobials before
tive effusions should be cultured aerobically and anaero-
surgery and intraoperatively: a combination of metroni-
bically for bacteria (see Chapter 15). Samples should be
dazole enrofloxacin, and ticarcillin is recommended.
immediately submitted in sterile clot tubes or transferred
 Positive culture results should be reconciled with the anti-
odsuei ui saldues jl 'wmpau jodsuei anedoidde c
Pinous Aau 'pamqns Aiaeipauui aq iouuen wnia
Animals with abdominal contamination secondary 
to
be refrigerated to slow bacterial growth to avoid medium
surgery or iatrogenic infections (e.g. contamination
substrate use and microbe death. Finding irrefutable evi-
during paracentesis) should have antibiotic therapy tai-
dence of an infectious organism may indicate a need for
lored to results of culture and sensitivity; these cases have
emergency exploratory surgery. However, animals with
higher risk for resistant nosocomial pathogens. Infections
epaedaqaer seau isuuns
with fungal agents may also underlie exudative effusions.
risk by surgical exploration that will have no direct sur-
Fungal cultures should be considered in animals with
vival benefit (aside from tissue biopsy and culture).
 body cavity effusions characterized as granulomatous and
Animals with obstructive biliary disorders associated with
 in animals with unexplained effusions within geographic
Chapter 10:Fluid Accumulation Disorders
239
BOX 10-2. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSTIC CONSIDERATIONS FOR ABDOMINAL EFFUSIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
PORtAL HYPERTeNSION
POST-SINUSOIDAL/
HEPATIC/SINUSOIDAL
PRESINUSOIDAL/
POST-HEPATIC
IMPAIRED SINUSOIDAL/PORTAL FLOW
PREHEPATIC
 PORTAL HYPERTENSION
PORTAL HYPERTENSION
PORTAL HYPERTENSION
Right-Sided Cardiac Disturbance:
Cirrhosis:
Prehepatic Portal Vein Occlusion:
 Cardiormyopathy
Regenerative nodules
Portal vein thrombosis
 Tricuspid insufficiency
 Collagenization of sinusoids
 Portal vein stenosis:
 Dirofilariasis
 Parenchymal collapse
 Pulmonary thromboembolism 
 Chronic diffuse hepatitis 
 Congenital
 Intracardiac neoplasia 
 Chronic cholangiohepatitis
 Congenital portal atresia
Atrial, valvular, mural, infiltrative
 Postnecrotic fibrosis
Extraluminal portal vein occlusion:
Cor triatriatum dextor
 Breed-specific hepatopathies
 Neoplasia
Pericardial Disease:
Drug-related hepatopathies
Lymph nodes
 Pericardial tamponade:
 Biliary Cirrhosis:
Abscess
 Atrial hemangiosarcoma
Severe peribiliary fibrosis
Granuloma
Coagulopathy
 Bridging filbrosis—-acquired, congenital:
 Peritonitis 
Trauma
Chronic cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis 
 Benign pericardial effusion
 Chronic major bile duct obstruction
 Infectious
 Malformations: associated with increased
extracellular matrix deposition
 Restrictive pericarditis
 Feline polycystic liver disease = ductal 
 plate malformation
Constrictive pericarditis
 Juvenile hepatic fibrosis = ductal plate
 malformation
Obstructed Caudal Vena Cava/
 Miscellaneous Causes:
 Hepatic Vein:
 Congenital "kinked" vena cava 
 Noncirrhotic portal hypertension
 Post-traumatic vena caval stenosis
 Congenital portal atresia 
Vena caval syndrome (dirofilariasis)
 Portal/sinusoidal disseminated neoplasia
Vena caval/hepatic vein thrombosis
 Portal/sinusoidal thromboembolism
Diaphragmatic hernia: vascular
 Daphragmatic hernia: liver entrapment 
entrapment
Hepatic amyloidosis
Portal Blood Flow (arterialization of
 portal vasculature):
Hepatic artery/portal vein fistula:
Congenital
Traumatic
Neoplastic
 Splanchnic
 Microanastomosis (cirrhosis): intrahepatic
 sinusoidal shunting
regions where endemic fungi are recognized (eg., South-
considered. Although clinical presentations are quite vari-
west United States for Coccidioides; regions where blasto-
able, most cats with FIP are chronically ill with systemic
mycosis or histoplasmosis are common).
signs, hyperglobulinemia (i.e., ≥5 g/dl), and a high-
Exudates without cytologic evidence of sepsis neces-
 protein abdominal effusion (i.e., >3.5 g/dl). Evaluation
sitate review of history for trauma and possible urinary.
of the effusion by protein electrophoresis may assist
biliary, or cyst rupture (Table 10-4; see also Figure 10-4).
in achieving a diagnosis; one study demonstrated that
Neutrophilic abdominal effusion can persist for weeks
finding greater than 32% gamma globulins in effusions
after blunt abdominal trauma or surgery. Radiography
with a total protein greater than 3.5 g/dl had a 100%
 of bony structures sometimes reveals evidence of injury.
 positive predictive value for FIP in a suspect population
If trauma is considered unlikely, physical assessments
 of cats.47 Estimation of acute phase proteins also may be
should be made looking for other evidence of inflamma-
helpful. Concentrations of αl-acid glycoprotein (AGP)
tion. In cats, feline infectious peritonitis (FIP) must be
greater than 1.5 g/L in plasma, sera, or effusion from cats
240
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
FIGURE 10-11 A, Two neutrophils in this canine abdominal fluid contained rod-shaped bacteria. Note that the neutrophils do not
look degenerate even though the exudate was septic. One should not consider the lysed neutrophil with bacteria to be degener-
ate. B, The degenerate neutrophils in this thoracic fluid have karyolytic (swollen) nuclei as evidence of degeneration caused by
the bacterial sepsis about them. The branching filamentous bacterium was Actinomyces. C, The gram-positive, branching, beaded
organisms were Actinomyces. Gram-negative organisms are dificult to find on Gram-stained smears of exudate. Many gram-
negative rods are illustrated here, but typically only one bacterium is found per several microscope fields in exudates and, if pale,
a rare red bacteria would be easily hidden among red-staining leukocytes or debris.
as ao u umous aam dd iy, o snouuos yi
preparations or examination of centrifuged fluid sedi-
to help distinguish FIP-affected cats from cats with similar
ment increases the likelihood of finding malignant cells.
Sometimes neoplastic cells are only found using sediment
raised AGP values. The total nucleated cell count in body
Jo (sades [-os< 'ga) sawon aiel oy paa
cavity effusions from cats with FIP is highly variable.
effusion. It is important to remember that "reactive"
ranging from 1000 to 30,000 cells/μL Cytology reveals
mesothelial cells resemble carcinoma cells and may be
 nondegenerative neutrophils as the predominant cell type
erroneously classifed without immunocytochemical or
and numerous macrophages and variable numbers of
immunohistochemical investigations. Ultrasonography
lymphocytes and plasma cells. Inconsistencies in signs
can aid in aspiration of mass lesions for cytologic evalu-
and clinical pathologic findings in FIP-affected cats (see
ation that may yield a more diagnostic population of cells
Chapter 15) makes conclusive diagnosis impossible in
for definitive identification.
cats with atypical features (eg. long-term survival, modi-
Chylous abdominal effusions usually suggest intes-
fied transudative effusions) without immunocytochemis-
tinal lymphangiectasia; lymphoproliferative disease of
try or immunohistochemistry using anti-Coronavirus
the gut, mesenteric lymphatics, or lymph nodes; intra-
antibody. Serologic polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
abdominal neoplasia "strangulating" the mesenteric root;
detection of Coronavinus antigen or its antibody does not
Or idiopathic disease (these may be malformations).
provide a definitive diagnosis. Other considerations
Rarely, vitamin E-responsive steatitis or biliary cirrhosis
regarding abdominal effusions are summarized in Figure
has accompanied feline chyloabdomen (see Figure 10-4).
10-4.
While small lymphocytes are the initial cell type associ-
 Neoplasia becomes an important differential for
ated with chylous effusions, neutrophilic inflammation
modifed transudates or exudates after eliminating other
becomes established with chronicity. Repeated large-
causes. Neoplastic cells are sometimes identified cytologi-
volume removal of chylous effusions depletes systemic
cally: however, there often are too few or no exfoliated
protein concentrations [i.e, chyle contains 1 to 6 g
neoplastic cells in small-volume samples. Use of cytospin
Aew jeu saioy sgueis sudnsip iaqny '(ip/uiaiond
Chapter 10:Fluid Accumulation Disorders
241
TABLE 10-4.CHARACTERISTICS,CAUSES,AND DIAGNOSIS OF CHEMICAL PERITONITIS
 BILE PERITONITIS
UROABDOMEN
PANCREATITIS
RUPTURED "CYSTS"
Appearance
Golden brown-green,
Light to dark yellow ±
White, yellow,
Clear to turbid, pale to
 serosanguineous,
serosanguineous,
serosanguineous,
yellow, colorless 
turbid
clear (some acute),
 P!qunt
turbid (chronic)
Causes
Blunt abdominal
Trauma: avulsed
 Pancreatitis
Perirenal cysts
tauma
ureter or bladder,
Polycystic renal/hepatic
Necrotizing.
ruptured bladder
disease
cholecystitis
Urolithiasis
Pancreatic cysts
 Cholelithiasis 
Paraprostatic/prostatic
Cysts
Clinical features
Vague abdominal pain
 Dehydration
Anorexia
Vary with underlying
Lethargy
Azotemia
Vomiting
tissue involved and
Pale or acholic feces 
Anuria/oliguria
Abdominal pain
severity of lesion 
Increased hepatic
Abdominal distention
Lethargy
enzymes
Hyponatremia
Fever
 Jaundice (chronicity)
Hyperkalemia
Jaundice
Septic peritonitis
Hyperphosphatemia
Increased: hepatic
Gallbtadder: may be
Metabolic acidosis
enzymes/TLI/PLI
 difficult to visualize 
cholesterol/
on ultrasonography
bilirubin
Cardiac arrhythmias
Pleural effusion
Acute renal failure 
Definitive diagnosis
Free and phagocytized
Intravenous urogram
Macrophages
Ultrasonography
bilirubin crystals
Retrograde
 contain refractile 
Tissue biopsy
Fluid bilirubin > serum
ureterocystography.
lipid inclusions
Cyst aspiration + fluid
bilirubin.
ultrasound or CT
Fluid lipase/
analysis/cytology
May require
imaging
amylase/TLI/PLI
utrasound-directed
Fluid creatinine >
greater than
fluid aspiration, CT
serum creatinine
 serum lipase/
irmaging, or (rarely)
amylase/TLI/PLI
hepatobiliary
scintigraphy
CT, computed tomography: PLl, pancreatic lipase (species specific); TLI, trypsin-like immunoreactivity.
augment further fluid accumulation. Secondary infections
platelet count and a coagulation profile, becomes essen-
are rare in animals with chylous effusions because chyle
tial. PCV reveals whether the erythron mass is reduced.
imparts a bacteriostatic influence. Animals with chylo-
However, in acute severe hemorrhage, change in PCV
abdomen should be evaluated for pleural effusion,
is contingent on fluid redistribution and whether
a
lymphadenopathy. and metastatic neoplasia by thoracic
regenerative RBC response [increased reticulocytes, broad
radiography. Ultrasonography may reveal mesenteric root 
RBC distribution width [RDW]) has been realized (3 to
masses or mesenteric lymphadenopathy.
5 days after blood loss). Schistocytes and acanthocytes
Hemoabdomen may be associated with trauma (eg.
(see Chapters 2 and 3) suggest microangiopathic damage
ruptured spleen or hepatic parenchyma; avulsed renal
reflecting vascular neoplasia (e.g., hemangiosarcoma) or
pedicle or mesenteric vessels), vascular neoplasia (eg..
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC). Scanning
hemangiosarcoma, other vascular tumors, or tumors with
a blood smear should detect thrombocytopenia severe
necrotic centers such as hepatomas and hepatocellular
enough to cause hemorrhage (i.e, fewer than 3 plate-
carcinomas), increased hepatic fragility as occurs in feline
lets/400x field of view, see Chapter 5). Severe acute
hepatic amyloidosis, or coagulopathies (see Chapter 5;
hemorrhage not caused by thrombocytopenia initially
see also Figure 10-6). Physical examination usually reveals
increases the platelet count. An ACT and buccal mucosal
 abrasions or pain in traumatized animals, with follow-up
bleeding time (BMBT) (see Chapter 5) detect many
radiographs sometimes disclosing broken bones. Inspec-
hemostatic defects; BMBT is only pursued in animals with
tion for signs of bleeding or coagulopathy should include
an adequate platelet count (>l0o,0o0/μul). Samples for
detection of petechiae (eg. fundic examination, mucous
effusion characterization should be obtained before ini-
membranes), rectal and fecal examination looking for
tiating fuid or blood replacement therapy. Thoracic
melena or hematochezia, palpation for hemarthrosis (i.e.,
radiographs may reveal pleural fluid, lymphadenopathy
swollen, painful joints), and urinalysis looking for hema-
(e.g. sternal lymph node), or frank metastasis. Utraso-
turia. Without history or physical findings suggesting
nography may discover vascular tumors, usually associ-
trauma, a complete blood count (CBC), including a
ated with hepatic or splenic hematomas, and may disclose
242
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
the site of active bleeding. Animals with persistent
area of leakage for best assessment owing to the propen-
abdominal hemorrhage may require blood component
sity for omental encapsulation of the most diagnostic
therapy (whole blood, fresh frozen plasma, or cryoglobin
fluid [i.e, bile particulates, bacteria).
if severe von Willebrand factor [vWF] deficiency is sus-
Uroabdomen occurs when urine leaks and pools
pected) in addition to empirical vitamin K, treatment
within the peritoneal cavity. Affected animals may appear
(0.5 to 1.5 mg/kg subcutaneously [SC] or intramuscularly
to void normally if the rent reflects a single ruptured
[IM], 3 doses q8hr) and synthetic vasopressin (1 to 5 μg/
ureter or when bladder avulsion surrounded by a fibrous
kg SC or intravenously [IV] diluted), followed by explor-
tract provides a voiding conduit. Avulsion of a ureter at
atory laparotomy if hemostatic risks can be attenuated.
the renal pedicle may cause retroperitoneal effusion.
 Bilious effusions caused by gallbladder or common
 Trauma is the major cause of urinary system leakage, but
bile duct rupture may derive from blunt abdominal
cystocentesis, traumatic diagnostic cystoscopy, or neopla-
trauma, necrotizing cholecystitis or choledochitis, chole-
sia may also be causal factors. The degree of azotemia
lithiasis, or gallbladder mucocele (progresses to gallblad-
 yo ar pue s ua ada saa
der ischemic necrosis). Biliary tree leakage may be
leakage into the abdomen. If virtually all urine accumu-
immediate or delayed after blunt or surgical injury (see
lates in the abdomen, rapid-onset azotemia and hyperka-
Table 10-4). Affected animals may be asymptomatic or
lemia are expected. Most patients develop a vaguely
symptomatic Symptomatic patients demonstrate variable
painful abdomen, lethargy, fever, and dehydration. Some
low-grade abdominal pain, lethargy, fever, and jaundice
animals develop pathologic arrhythmias associated with
associated with a mild to modest abdominal effusion and
electrolyte aberrations [i.e., severe hyperkalemia and aci-
may have concurrent bacterial contamination. Patients
dosis). Markedly increased blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
with aseptic bile peritonitis may be asymptomatic with
andcreatinine(
concentrations,
hyperphosphatemia.
the exception of jaundice and equivocal cranial abdomi-
hyponatremia, hyperkalemia, and metabolic acidosis are
nal discomfort. Clinical signs may correlate with the
expected. The effusion is slightly turbid, blood tinged,
extent/severity of bile leakage (e.g, experimentally. the
and yellow. Fluid creatinine concentration is markedly
lethal dose of sterile bile injected intraperitoneally into
higher relative to peripheral blood, whereas there may be
dogs ranged from 20 to 30 ml/kg body weight). Pale or
no substantial difference between fluid and serum urea
acholic feces indicate deviation of bile from the intestines
nitrogen concentrations. The small size of the urea mol-
(extrahepatic bile duct obstruction or severe small bile
ecule allows rapid systemic dispersal in body water, negat-
duct "ductopenia" as develops in cats with immune-
ing its diagnostic utility in uroabdomen. Ultrasonography
mediated cholangiohepatitis). Serum alkaline phospha-
or an IV urogram (followed by a retrograde urethral cys-
() s - ) a
togram as necessary) usually locates the damaged area.
alanine aminotransferase (ALT), and aspartate amino-
Diagnosis may be more descriptive if contrast studies use
transferase (AST) activities and total bilinubin concentra-
CT. Urinary drainage and abdominal lavage rapidly
tions are invariably increased. Appearance and severity of
correct electrolyte and acid-base derangements if surgical
jaundice depend on underlying cause and severity and
intervention is delayed.
chronicity of bile leakage Bile induces a chemical perito-
Pancreatitis sometimes causes diffuse peritonitis
nitis associated with cytokine release and alterations in
and copious effusion. Clinical pathologic changes are dis-
fluid transport across peritoneal membranes. Cell mem-
cussed in Chapter 9; ultrasonography provides important
branes exposed to high concentrations of bile acids (func-
diagnostic information, such as altered pancreatic echo-
tionally acting as detergents that disrupt cell membranes),
genicity, marginal irregularity, altered duct morphology
bilirubin, and lysolecithin develop leaky gap junctions
(distention), associated distal bile duct obstruction, focal
permitting translocation of enteric bacteria and endo-
pain on imaging probe pressure application, focal ileus
toxin, leading to endotoxemia and/or septic peritonitis.
(duodenal corrugation, amotility), and peripancreatic fat
Focal bile peritonitis may be restricted by omental adhe-
Assie aie suisnga (uoegodes) auaouaady
sions to biliary structures. These present as pericholecystic
turbid and sometimes have a lipid surface interface after
effusions or effusions within the porta hepatis on ultra-
refrigeration and centrifugation. Inflammation is charac-
sonography. Cautious targeted aspiration using a spinal
terized by large numbers of neutrophils and macro-
needle and ultrasonographic guidance may successfully
phages; the latter often contain many small to large, clear
collect diagnostic fluid in these cases. A ruptured gallblad-
Or refractile vacuoles (engulfed lipid). Pancreatic enzyme
der may be indicated by its sudden absence on ultrasound
activity in effusion may be markedly higher than in the
evaluation. In some cases, ultrasound imaging can iden-
peripheral blood (i.e, lipase or amylase). This suggests
tify the location of bile leakage [i.e., focal fluid accumu-
enzyme leakage from pancreatic ducts.
lation, hyperechoic foc, adhesions, loss of normal
-ud 'sau 'aai ari un suisal os, pdny 
gallbladder wall layering). Focal ileus of small intestine
 creas, or prostate occasionally cause transudative abdomi-
or colon may be identified adjacent to a site of biliary
nal effusions (see Figure l0-4). Fluid within large cysts
rupture reflecting chemical peritonitis. Bile peritonitis is
is sometimes misidentified as free abdominal effusion
  si    
 before leakage. Cystic fluid is evaluated for underlying
phils and macrophages and the presence of free and
malignancy or infection but often is characterized as a
phagocytized bile (see Figure 10-3). The fluid specimen is
transudate. Polycystic hepatic or renal disease with well-
often turbid with a golden-brown or golden-green color.
developed cysts is more common in cats [ie, Persians,
A higher bilirubin concentration relative to peripheral
Himalayans) than dogs. Cystadenomatous malforma-
blood is found. Fluid samples for accurate diagnosis of
tions in cats usually cannot be drained owing to
bile peritonitis should be collected from the immediate
their multicompartmented structure These may cause
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
243
effusions when located adjacent to or within the porta
hepatitis due to pressure imposed on vasculature Peri-
BOX 10-3. DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF
renal pseudocysts are more common in cats, especially
PERICARDIAL EFFUSIONS
older males. Although rare, pancreatic cysts may be
Idiopathic Pericarditis (-20% of cases)
benign, may represent postpancreatitis abscessation or
formation of a pseudocyst, or may be the result of malig-
Neoplasia (-70%-80% of cases)
nancy (ie., pancreatic adenocarcinoma). In intact male
Mass Lesion Location and Differential Diagnosis:
dogs. paraprostatic or prostatic cysts may be large and
Rght atrium (most common):
may become infected. If a perirectal cyst is identifed,
Hemangiosarcoma (~88%; ~25%-30% have splenic
position of the urinary bladder should be confrmed
neoplasm also!
[decompressed by voluntary voiding or catheterization).
 Neuroendocrine
Thereafter cystic fluid should be aspirated and analyzed
 Thyroid adenocarcinoma
for creatinine. Ultrasound-guided cyst aspiration and
 Mesothelioma
sampling of suspected abdominal effusion are the least
Lymphoma (primary & multicentric)
invasive and most cost-effective methods of determining
Sarcoma
whether resection or drainage of cysts is needed. Exami-
Heart base (second most common):
nation of cystic fluid relative to any abdominal effusion
 Neuroendocrine (~40%]
is important to identify infection or neoplasia or other
biochemical components that might incite chemical
Thyroid adenocarcinoma 
peritonitis.
Mesothelioma
Hemangiosarcoma
 Pleural Effusions
 Pericardial mass
 Rght ventricular mass
 The general approach to differential diagnosis of pleural
 Cranial mediastinal mass 
effusion is similar to that described for abdominal effu-
Left atrial mass
sions (Figure 10-12). However, the pleura is not as readily
accessible by exploratory surgery and is less easily visual-
Infiltrative Disease
ized by ultrasonography. Animals with pleural effusion
Lymphosarcoma
often have rapid, shallow breathing with accentuated
 Pyogranulomatous inflammation:
abdominal effort. Radiographs should include right and
Coccidioides, Histoplasma
left lateral and ventrodorsal views. Radiographically.
pleural fluid is characterized as either free [will move
Congenital
 Peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia
-awuou) paiensdmua io (uuosodan juaed uodn
 Pericardial cyst
able with positional change).
Pure transudates are less common in the pleural
Miscellaneous
space than in the abdomen (Figure 10-13). These effu-
Rght-sided heart failure 
sions signal severe hypoalbuminemia and thoracic vascu-
 Left atrial rupture: idiopathic (mitral valve insufficiency)
lar hypertension. Pure transudates also occur in animals 
Rght atrial rupture: traumatic
 Overhydrated with crystalloid fluids; this is most common
 Anticoagulant rodenticide toxicosis
in overweight animals where calculations are erroneously
Uremic pericarditis
based on gross body weight. Overhydration causing
 Bacterial or fungal infection 
pleural and pulmonary fluid retention is most symptom-
atic in patients with incipient cardiac disease (eg., asymp-
Constrictive pericarditis 
tomatic cardiomyopathy).
 Modifed transudates are the most common type of
 pleural effusion (see Figure 10-13). Obstructive effusions
can be serous to serosanguineous, have a SG ranging from
1.015 to 1.040, and have a TS concentration greater than
hemangiosarcoma cause pleural effusion associated with
Or equal to 2.5 g/dl. Cellularity is usually mixed with
pericardial tamponade in dogs (Box 10-3). Occasionally.
RBCs, lymphocytes, and fewer neutrophils, eosinophils.
animals with a cranial mediastinal mass and associated
macrophages, and mesothelial cells; with chronicity these
pleural effusion demonstrate features of cranial vena cava
progressively appear more inflammatory. Physical exami-
syndrome (ie., submandibular edema; jugular engorge-
lun areud e sussns saea assp au uou
ment and pulses; injection of the conjunctival blood
lying disease (e.g., gallop rhythm, cardiac murmur, loss
vessels indicating impaired cranial venous return, lym-
of normal compression of the anterior chest in cats with
phatic return, or both). Thymomas, thymic cysts, lym-
an enlarged heart or mediastinal mass). A history of
phoma, invasive thyroid adenocarcinoma, and bilateral
pue uapqe aui jo ssauua, ann e sni eunn
jugular thrombosis are the most common causes of this
auscultation of borborygmi within thethorax suggest dia-
syndrome.
phragmatic hernia. Dogs with right-sided cardiac failure
Thoracic radiography should be performed before
usually develop ascites, whereas cats with cardiac failure
thoracocentesis to minimize the possibility of iatrogenic
 often develop focal pulmonary infiltrates and/or pleural
lung laceration, to identify cardiomegaly (suggesting car-
effusion. Benign or neoplastic pericardial effusion,
diomyopathy or pericardial effusion), and to detect
constrictive or restrictive pericarditis, and right atrial
gas entrapped within visceral structures (diaphragmatic
Figure 10-14
See
laceration
Granulomatous disease
/ena cava compression
Lymphatic disease
irofilariasis
Lymphangiosarcoma
Thymic cysts
(e.g., Afghans)
Inflammation 
Idiopathic
Neoplasia
Lymphoma
Thymoma
Chylous
 Acute bleeding
(i.e., iarogenic.
coagulopathy)
 fibrinogen
Are platelets present?
Acute hemorrhage
Clear 
Defibrinated
(i.e., not acute)
Hemorrhagic
 Supernatant
Hemangiosarcoma
 Thoracocentesis (see Table 10-1)
 Suspected thoracic effusion
Yes
Xanthochromic
加
Schistocytes
Acanthocytes
Coagulopathy
Trauma
Eosinophilic effusion
 Serosal: metastatic
Hypersensitivity
m
Modified
ransudate
Neoplasia
Neoplasia
/oo < sllo peeenn
 Congestive heart failure
±Thoracic ultrasonography
Lung lobe torsion
 Thoracic radiographs
±Echocardiography
Infiltrative masses
Heart base mass
Chemodectoma
See Box 10-3
±CT imaging
syndrome
Pericardial
 See Figure 10-5 and Chapter 12
Vascular hypertension
 If bi-cavity effusion,
transudate
latrogenic
Pure
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
245
 sterile, immune- mediated)
 α, acid glycoprotein
immunohistochemistry
See Figure 10-12
(tissue, cytology)
Diaphragmatic
No diagnosis 
hernia
 No distinguishing
Thoracic radiograph
 abnomality
 Abnormal heart 
Echocardiogram
Cardiac disease
Aeuond o
artery shadow
BNP
 Modified transudate (usually)
 Serum albumin >1.5 g/dl
 Physical examination
 Noncompressible
Aydebouosen
 cranial chest
12
 Cranial
mass
Right-sided heart failure
±Angiography, CT imaging
 Transudative thoracic effusions
Cranial vena cava syndrome
Hepatojugular reflex
Pulsus paradoxus
Arrhythmia
Mesothelioma
No clot
Fuid analysis including
 Pericardiocentesis
Aoloo pue Hd
Serum albumin <1.5 g/dl
 Pure transudate (usually)
Troponin
Yes
Hemangiosarcoma
010
246
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
hernia) or an abscess. Removing effusion followed by
radiography may permit identifcation of masses and con-
mas pose a great diagnostic challenge and commonly
solidated lung lobes or diaphragmatic incontinuity. Tho-
require tissue biopsy for definitive diagnosis.
racic ultrasonography is enhanced by thoracic effusions,
Hemorrhagic pleural effusion (see Figure 10-6) is
and ultrasound-guided aspiration of masses may provide
usually caused by trauma or neoplasia. With trauma,
a definitive diagnosis. Most animals require sedation
 -osuos Aeuound 'saime qu leaai Aeu sydegoipei
before needle-targeted thoracic sampling of lesions
dation, or pneumothorax. Nontraumatic hemorrhagic
pleural effusions usually result from bleeding neoplasia;
Thoracic exudates (Figure 10-14) necessitate careful
however, coagulopathy also must be considered (e.g..
examination for infectious agents. A variety of bacterial
minor trauma can cause substantial bleeding in dogs
organisms may be identified in septic pleural effusions.
with severe von Willebrand's disease or vitamin K deple-
Actinomyces and Nocardia are often found in dogs, particu-
tion from warfarin-like rodenticides; see Chapter 5).
larly in geographic locales where foxtail grass awns occur.
Other nontraumatic causes of hemothorax include lung
Multiple bacterial species are commonly found in feline
lobe torsion, pulmonary abscessation, pulmonary infarc-
pyothorax. Septic exudates typically are turbid, cream
tion, dirofilariasis, and (rarely in the United States)
colored, seropunulent or brown tinged and contain
degenerate WBCs. Exudates associated with pure Actino-
orrhagic pleural effusion derived from disseminated pul-
myces infection may have minimal or no WBC degenera-
tion; dual infections with Nocardia are common, and
mixed populations of both organisms may be found in
impose high risk for tension pneumothorax and worsen-
thick or thin red-brown exudates containing degenerate
ing hemorrhage.
WBCs and "sulfur granules." Inclusion of colored or
Chylous effusions are more common in the thorax
than in the abdomen (see Figure 10-12). These may be
smears improves identification of Actinomyces and Nocar-
idiopathic or associated with underlying disease as
dia organisms. These are presumptively identifed when
described previously. Some breeds (e.g., Afghan hounds)
beaded, branching flaments (see Figure 10-1l) are found.
a emad su io Asuad leuau eaey ae
Most Nocardia spp. stain acid fast with a modified acid-
sions. Thoracic ultrasonography or postdrainage radiog-
fast stain, whereas Actinomyces spp. do not. While both
raphy can assist in identifying underlying conditions.
organisms produce exudates containing sulfur granules,
Contrast lymphangiography performed by cannulating
only Actinomyces produces these within tissues. In animals
 mesenteric lymphatics or the thoracic duct may elucidate
with pyothorax, thoracic radiography may disclose pul-
the site of chyle leakage An alternative strategy is to feed
monary parenchymal involvement When effusions are
a high-fat (ie., cream) small meal shortly before surgical
 managed with chest tube insertion, pleural fluid persists
exploration to fill lymphatics with grossly identifiable
as long as the tube is retained. This necessitates sequential
chyle.
cytologic evaluation of pleural fluid to estimate treatment
response and to guide propriety of tube removal.
Bicavity Effusions
Nonseptic exudates with a hemorrhagic component
are associated with lung lobe torsion (suggested by radio-
The list of differentials includes several diseases [Box
graphic evidence of a malpositioned main stem bron-
10-4). Tumors and cardiac disease are particularly
chus, persistent air within a twisted bronchus, and usually
common causes.
prolific fluid production). Bronchoscopy may grossly
visualize a twisted bronchus. Ultrasonography may
Pericardial Effusions
confirm lung lobe torsion by interrogation of lung lobe
perfusion. Nonseptic exudates also are associated with
The pericardial cavity is a potential space between the
idiopathic pleuritis, infectious pneumonia (e.g., Myco-
parietal and visceral layers of the serous pericardium nor-
plasma pneumonia), and various tumors. FIP can cause a
mally containing from 1 to 15 ml of plasma ultrafiltrate.
 pyogranulomatous pleural effusion that is light yellow
and viscous, with a high protein concentration. A back-
ral pressure, vacillating by ±4 mm Hg with ventilation.45
ground of proteinaceous material (homogeneous pink
Accumulation of fluid within the pericardial sac exceed-
background on Wright-Giemsa stains) is common on
 ing its flexible capacitance impairs right atrial/ventricular
cytologic evaluation.
filling pressures (normally 4 to 8 mm Hg) causing cardiac
Thoracic neoplasia often induces pleural effusion
tamponade This compromises venous return, ventricular
associated with exuberant mesothelial cell exfoliation.
flling, stroke volume, and cardiac output. Initially. a
The most common neoplasm causing pleural effusion in
-nsea ieiaqduad pue aei jeaq ul aseau Aroiesuado
-oqdual 'ssop ul euoydul ieuseipau si se pue ssop
lar resistance moderates systemic effects of cardiac tam-
cytes are the predominate cell population and these may
 ponade, maintaining normal blood pressure and cardiac
lack obvious malignant characteristics. Aspiration of
output However, as fluid accumulates and intrapericar-
mediastinal masses or lymph nodes or other more acces-
dial pressure increases, impaired left atrial and ventricu-
sible enlarged nodes may be diagnostic. In cats, exfoliated
larf
 filling lead to left-sided cardiac dysfunction and
lymphoblasts are common. It is important to differentiate
cardiogenic shock secondary to a marked fall in cardiac
e ay Aeu iauoy a se 'euoudu uay seuouau
output and peripheral blood pressure. The volume of
better prognosis. Differentiation of thymoma from lym-
pericardial fluid provoking symptomatic tamponade
 phoma may require tissue sampling. Malignant or benign
varies with speed of accumulation, underlying cause, and
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
247
Funozoa
600
Cultures
 No bacteria seen and
pyogranulomatous
=
sisoubep on
thoracotomy
No diagnosis
Fuid electrophoresis
Cats only
Plasma
Isolated lung mass 
Fluid
Aspiration biopsy
Mesothelioma
Toma
many eosinophils present
No bacteria seen and
Lymphoma
Carcinoma
Veoplasia
Mast cell
Abdominal viscera
Cytologic evaluation
Thoracic exudate
in chest
Pulmon
 Thoracic radiographs
 no bacteria cultured 
力
Isolated mass 
ranulomatous
 FIGURE 10-14 Diagnostic considerations i
Do both
 Surgery
Lung lobe
 sulfer granules
Ifpositive...
Culture
 from chest tube
 Bacteria or
Contamination
 pneumonia
Lung abscess
Culture
 pneumonia
Infectious
Perforated
Bacterial
248
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
best detected with the patient laterally recumbent. This
BOX 10-4. CONDITIONS ASSOCIATED WITH
represents an exaggerated change in arterial pressure
BICAVITY EFFUSIONS
during respiration: fall in pressure during inspiration and
Cardiovascular Conditions
 stronger pulse during expiration that coordinate with
exaggerated right atrial and ventricular flling during
Idiopathic hemorrhagic pericardial effusion 
inspiration and reduced stroke volume from reduced left
 Constrictive pericardial disease
ventricular volume.
Biventricular cardiac failure:
 Pericardial effusion is usually associated with pericar-
Congestive cardiomyopathy
 dial irritation and inflammation, neoplasia causing hem-
 Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy
orrhage, or central venous congestion. Animals with
Idiopathic pulmonary hypertension
Right ventricular thromboembolism 
amounts of pericardial fluid that can lead to diagnostic
Caudal vena cava thromboembolism
confusion in delineating the cause of clinical signs. Peri-
 Congenital obstruction: caudal vena cava
cardial effusion is associated with a severe globoid or
round enlargement of the cardiac silhouette with the size
Pancreatitis
increasing with the volume of accumulated effusion
Bile Peritonitis
s -i s   i 
End-Stage Hepatic Disease
and size with rapid onset). The caudal vena cava, an
Feline Infectious Peritonitis
important capacitance vessel, is usually large on the
 Neoplastic Conditions
lateral thoracic radiograph reflecting hepatic congestion
 Rght atrial fibroma
and hepatomegaly due to passive congestion. Pleural
 Metastatic adenocarcinoma
effusion and evidence of metastatic disease may be appar-
Lymphoma
ent. Edges of the cardiac silhouette may appear unusually
Hemangiosarcoma
"sharp" due to decreased motion artifact associated with
 Mesothelioma
the diminished cardiac contraction.4 Abdominal radio-
 Cholangiocellular carcinoma 
graphs may disclose hepatomegaly or reduced abdominal
detail due to ascites derived from severe passive conges-
 Chemodectoma
tion (right-sided congestive heart failure) caused by peri-
 Prostatic adenocarcinoma 
cardial tamponade Sinus tachycardia is a common
Diffuse carcinomatosis
electrophysiologic finding along with low-voltage QRS
complexes (50% of dogs with pericardial effusion). Elec-
trical alternans (cyclic change in R-wave amplitude)
reflects motion of the heart suspended in the pericardial
sac Finding a normal ECG does not dismiss pericardial
effusion from considered differential diagmoses. The gold
total accumulated volume. Rapid accumulation of
standard for diagnosing pericardial effusion is echocar-
volumes as small as 25 to l00 ml can abnuptly cause
diography: efusion in the pericardial sac is obvious and
tamponade, whereas slower accumulations can generate
can be identifed by entry-level ultrasound operators.
a umj saop paaq-ai ut se aie se saun
Fluid volumes as small as 10 to 15 ml can be detected
most commonly affected) before onset of clinical signs.
using ultrasonography. Diastolic collapse of the right
Dogs with chronic pericardial effusion eventually dem-
 atrium or ventricle is a classic feature.4 Mass lesions may
onstrate clinical signs consistent with right-sided heart
be identified but often require an operator with special-
failure: lethargy, exercise intolerance, tachypnea, weight
ized training. A cavitated mass associated with the right
loss, and abdominal distention. Signs are progressive in
atrium is highly consistent with hemangiosarcoma, the
development concordant with fluid accumulation that
 most common neoplasm in large-breed dogs associated
exceeds compliance of the pericardial sac. Dogs with
with pericardial tamponade linked with a hemorrhagic/
acute symptomatic pericardial effusion present with
xanthochromic
effusion. Small
1hemangiosarcomas
acute collapse, syncope or weakness precipitated by
located beyond the echocardiographic "window" may
physical exertion and require emergency pericardiocente-
remain undetected.
sis. The clinician should look for jugular pulse, pulsus
Pericardial effusions characterized as pure trans-
paradoxus. hepatojugular reflex, poor femoral pulse
udates may reflect severe hypoalbuminemia. Modified
quality, muffled cardiac sounds, exercise intolerance, and
transudates are found with idiopathic pericarditis, right-
sided heart failure, pericardial cysts (congenital malfor-
pericardial tamponade or restrictive pericardial disease.
mations), uremic pericarditis, and syndromes associated
Hepatojugular reflex is elicited by applying gentle
with vascular leakage. Exudates are found with FIP and
 abdominal compression to liver or cranial abdomen for
aiei st siiead indas 'sieiad ieuny io ieaiea
10 to 15 seconds (increases venous return to the heart)
sse18 Buneiaiu ol Aiepuosas pajodan uaaq sey inq
and observing jugular vein distention or pulsation [indi-
 awns. Apparent chylopericardium also is rare but may
cating reduced right heart function or flling). Hepato-
develop secondary to mediastinal venous hypertension
megaly caused by venous congestion may be diffcult to
derived from cardiomyopathy. Trauma, neoplasia, coag-
palpate because of abdominal distention due to ascites
ulopathy or rare spontaneous let atrial rupture can
formation or secondary to patient conformation (deep-
cause hemopericardium. Pericardial tamponade is most
chested dog). The unique finding of pulsus paradoxus is
common in dogs and is most often associated with a
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
249
hemorrhagic effusion. However, it also may be associ-
Joint Effusions
ated with a modifed transudate or exudate. A benign
os Aianexde u paaia st uoisna ieipiead
The joint capsule is constructed of three layers: an outer-
of dogs. In the remainder the most common diagnosis
most fibrous layer providing joint stability and flexibility.
is neoplasia with right atrial hemangiosarcoma most
a subsynovium that serves as the source of joint fluid, and
common (approximately 60% to 75% of neoplastic
an inner synovial lining comprising two cell types: type
causes) followed by chemodectoma (approximately 10%
A synoviocytes (macrophage-like cells) and type B syn-
of neoplastic causes), mesothelioma (approximately 5%
oviocytes (fbroblast-like cells that produce hyaluronic
of neoplastic causes), and rarely metastatic adenocarci-
acid). Synoviocytes modify synovial fluid, provide viscous
noma. Idiopathic pericarditis is associated with exten-
hyaluronic acid for joint lubrication, remove large mol-
sive fibrosis and a mixed inflammatory response having
ecules [ie, plasma proteins), and participate in mainte-
greatest intensity at the cardiac surface. Perivascular lym-
nance of articular cartilage Synovial fluid, a plasma
phoplasmacytic aggregates are found at the pleural
ultrafltrate enriched with viscous hyaluronic acid impor-
surface and within fbrosed pericardium.13 It is notable
tant for joint mobility, nourishes articular cartilage
that some cases of idiopathic pericarditis resolve after a
 and functions as a boundary lubricant for periarticular
single pericardiocentesis.
tissues.β2 Synovial effusions reflect cartilage injury second-
 Cytologic differentiation of benign from malignant
a 'n ' il aa on ae
pericardial effusion remains problematic. Irrespective of
mediated mechanisms, and infection. On injury.
the defnitive diagnosis, hemorrhagic effusions are most
chondrocytes and synoviocytes release cytokines that
common. One study of 50 dogs with pericardial effusion
induce vasodilation of subsynovial capillaries leading to
confirmed that cytologic characterizations could not reli-
enhanced vascular permeability and extravasation of
ably distinguish between neoplasia and other underlying
protein and inflammatory cells into the joint space.
causes.4 Use of fluid pH to differentiate benign from
Inflammation is fostered by accumulated leukocytes and
neoplastic pericardial effusion in dogs remains controver-
release of degradative enzymes and mediators from mul-
sial. Determining pH requires availability of an accurate
tiple cell types. Number and cellular composition of leu-
 portable pH meter and prompt analysis of sample super-
kocytes infiltrating the synovium and migrating into
natant as a bedside test In humans, inflammatory peri-
synovial fluid determine characteristics of a joint effusion
cardial effusions have a significantly lower mean pH than
and clinical features of associated arthritis. Generally.
noninflammatory disorders. In dogs, idiopathic effusion
arthropathies are considered inflammatory or degenera-
tends to have a lower pH compared to neoplastic effu-
tive, exudative or transudative, septic or nonseptic, hem-
sions, but there is broad overlap that thwarts clinical
orrhagic or nonhemorrhagic, and erosive or nonerosive,
utility of pH as a diagnostic parameter. Measurement of
and are cytologically classifed similar to other body
cavity effusions with additional assessment of joint fluid
ing idiopathic and neoplastic causes of pericardial effu-
viscosity.
sion. Dogs with effusion secondary to neoplasia had a
 Joint fluid should be analyzed in patients with
median value of 2.77 (range 0.09 to 47.18) ng/dl, con-
ciated with degenerative joint disease. Because joint pain
that had a median cTnI value of 0.05 (range 0.03 to 0.09)
may be subtle, joints should be carefully palpated for
ng/dl. Notably. there was overlap in values between
mobility, swelling, and discomfort. Atraumatic arthrocen-
groups that compromises use of cTnl as a stand-alone
tesis requires familiarity with the anatomic landmarks of
diagnostic parameter.
the involved joint. Synovial fluid analysis distinguishes
Radiographs, ultrasonography, and CT imaging
noninflammatory from inflammatory conditions, but
coupled with thoracoscopy or exploratory surgery are
interpretation of findings must be integrated with realiza-
usually needed to differentiate benign from malignant
tion that many immune-mediated and systemic inflam-
disease. Pericardial biopsy performed during laparoscopic
matory conditions also involve joints. Thus, joint
pericardectomy is the least invasive yet reliable method
of tissue retrieval for definitive diagnosis. While this pro-
thy. Examination and bacterial culture of joint fluid may
cedure may provoke lethal hemorrhage upon sampling of
be helpful in animals with fever of unknown origin asso-
a highly vascular tumor, it remediates pericardial effusion
ciated with sepsis or immune-mediated disorders. Assess-
by creating a pericardial window (fluid drains into the
ment of joint fluid and interpretation of changes in
pleural space). Most cats with pericardial disease have
appearance and cytology follow recommendations made
cardiac disease (ie, cardiomyopathy, valve abnormali-
for other body fluids with additional assessment of fluid
ties), neoplasia (i.e., lymphoma, metastatic carcinomas),
viscosity (Figure 10-15).
chronic renal disease (uremic pericarditis), coagulopa-
thies, or more rarely, bacterial infection or restrictive peri-
Volume
carditis. Intrapericardial cysts are a rare cause of pericardial
Very small amounts of fluid are available from most
effusion and tamponade These are associated with a sero-
normal joints; therefore collecting relatively large volumes
sanguineous modifed transudate or exudate in dogs:
of synovial fluid suggests effusion. Arthrocentesis in
diagnosis is achieved by echocardiography. These lesions
healthy animals commonly yields less than 0. 1 to 0.25 ml.
reflect entrapped omentum or falciform ligament in
Joint disease can be accompanied by an increase
01
the pericardial structure during embryonic development
decrease in synovial fluid volume Increased volume of
and usually are asymptomatic unless associated with
synovial fluid is usually detected during physical exami-
effusion.
nation as joint distention in acute and inflammatory
250
 Arthrocentesis and
 cytologic evaluation (see Table 10-5)
<3000 WBC/μl
 Erythrophagocytosis
>3000 WBC/μl
Xanthochromia
>3000 WBC/μl or
90%Mononuclear
<15% Neutrophils
cannot perform
cells
>15% Neutrophils
10% Neutrophils
Firm mucin clot
 Mucin clot variable
Slight ↓ mucin clot
Viscosity variable
±↓Viscosity
↓Mucin clot test
√Viscosity
Normal viscosity
Joint hemorrhage
 Degenerative joint 
disease
Normal
 Accidentally aspirate
Nondegenerative
 Either degenerative
Degenerative
Trauma
hygroma
neutrophils and
 neutrophils or
joint disease
Coagulopathy
no bacteria
bacteria
Secondary to other
causes of joint
inflammation
Culture fluid and
Culture fluid and
 radiograph joint 
proceed as if
 culture is positive,
even if culture
is negative
Culture negative -
Culture positive
 Septic arthritis
Erosive joint lesions
Nonerosive
 Rheumatoid arthritis
joint lesions
 Single joint
Multiple joints or
affected
organs affected
Rheumatoid factor
ANA, rickettsial titers,
borrelial titer, FeLV,
Inspect for
Determine source of
FIV
penetration
 infection, repeat
Search for systemic
physical
disease
examination (esp.
for heart murmur)
Therapeutic trial
(e.g., doxycycline for
Blood culture
Borrelia and rickettsial
Urine culture
infections; corticosteroids for
Echocardiogram
immune-mediated disease)
Thoracic/abdominal
imaging
FGURE 10-15 Diagnostic considerations in animals with joint effusion. ANA, Antinuclear antibodies; FeLV, feline leukemia virus;
FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus; WBC, white blood cells.
joint conditions, whereas chronic and noninflammatory
in a sterile plain tube [for culture and mucin clot test).
disorders produce joint enlargement due to soft tissue
 Fluid samples for cell counts and cytologic smears can be
swelling or thickness despite normal to reduced joint
stored for 24 hours in a refrigerator, but cytologic smears
fluid volume. When arthrocentesis is performed to evalu-
should be promptly made. Homogeneously red or red-
ate fever or unexplained lameness in an animal without
tinged fluid implicates joint hemorrhage associated with
swollen joints, at least two or three joints should be
trauma, inflammation, or bleeding. Fluid containing
sampled (carpal and tarsal usually preferred) because of
"streaks" of blood or bleeding only at the end of centesis
expected low fluid yield.
indicates hemorrhage subsequent to arthrocentesis, plate-
lets should be seen cytologically. Xanthochromia (yellow-
Gross Appearance
orange fluid discoloration) indicates prior hemorrhage
Normal synovial fluid is clear, colorless, viscous, and free
and hemoglobin breakdown. White or light yellow fluid
of flocculent debris. It does not clot, although it does
Or sediment indicates increased nucleated cell counts
demonstrate sol-gel reversibility on agitation (thixotro-
associated with inflammation, sepsis, or neoplasia (rare).
 pism).17.32 Volume is noted subjectively. If greater than
 Increased fluid turbidity reflects suspended particulates,
0.25 ml is collected from a single joint, an aliquot should
including RBCs, WBCs, infectious agents, fibrin, neoplas-
be placed in a pediatric EDTA tube [to avoid clotting) and
tic cells (rare), and crystals (rare)
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
251
Viscosity
Total Protein
Viscosity of synovial fluid should be grossly assessed at
 Total protein of synovial fluid is best measured using a
the time of collection because this reflects the amount
quantitative biochemical method; however, refractometry
and polymerization of hyaluronic acid and joint lubrica-
is also used. A normal reference range of 1.5 to 3.0 g/dl
tion. Decreased viscosity reflects reduced hyaluronic acid
is reported.32 An increased total protein concentration
production associated with synovial membrane damage,
reflects inflammation and/or exudation of plasma pro-
dilution (plasma or fluid), degradation (by WBCs or bac-
teins. However, excessive EDTA relative to joint fluid can
teria), intra-articular injection of drugs, or joint lavage.
falsely increase synovial fluid protein concentrations esti-
Crude estimation of viscosity is done by visual observa-
mated by refractometry.
tion: a drop of fluid suspended between thumb and
Fluid Analysis
opposing fnger or suspended from a needle should form
a strand at least l inch long before breakage. A more
Culture nucleated cell counts, differential cell counts,
qualitative assessment is done using the mucin clot test
and estimation of fluid viscosity are recommended (Table
ea  ud e u a p ieus um pnu
10-5; see also Figure 10-15). Viscosity is reduced in most
rinized Vacutainer. This test is invalid in EDTA-preserved
types of joint effusion. If only small amounts of fluid are
samples. A mixture of synovial fluid and 2.5% glacial
obtained (eg., drops), smears to determine relative cel
acetic acid (l part fluid:4 parts acid) is combined in a test
lularity and the predominant cell type have first priority.
tube, mixed well, and the precipitate semiquantitatively
 Determination ofthe total nucleated cell count/μl of fluid
graded: good = tight ropy clot with clear solution, fair =
is a useful characteristic that helps differentiate inflamma-
soft clot with turbid solution, poor = friable clot with
tory from noninflammatory arthropathies. Sequential
cloudy solution, and very poor = flocculent material in a
arthrocentesis has been proposed for assessment of
cloudy solution.7 When only a few drops of fluid are col-
response to therapy, although repetitious sampling of a
lected, hyaluronic acid content (hence viscosity) can also
joint can lead to an increase in mononuclear cell count.
be estimated crudely based on the density of the back-
Total Nucieated Cell Count
 ground staining observed microscopically.32 Normal vis-
cosity is associated with a homogeneous pink, fine to
Normal canine stifle joint fluid contains less than 3000
coarsely granular background staining and numerous
nucleated cells/μl, with less than 10% to 12% neutrophils
apparent crescents or folds of this material on cytology
[frequently <5%) in the absence of hemorrhage.2 Mono-
smears (Figure 10-16). Fluid viscosity is reduced in most
nuclear cells account for the remainder of nucleated cells,
types of joint effusion.
comprising 60% to 97% of the total nucleated cell count.
RBC quantifcation provides little useful information.
pH
Total nucleated cell counts can be determined by manual
pH of synovial fluid can be determined using narrow-
methods using a hemocytometer or by electronic cell
range pH paper immediately after collection (plain tube
-e y u an pe  m sin
sample); normal pH ranges from 7.2 to 7.4. Experimental
uronidase to eliminate problems associated with fluid
work shows a drop in pH shortly after onset of joint sepsis 
viscosity (pipetting, dilution, acid precipitation of hyal-
(to 6.9), but this has not been evaluated for diagnostic
uronic acid) and interactions with normal diluting fluids.
accuracy in clinical patients.
-uadsns asepiuounleAy lu/n-os1 e jo sdoup oml ol auo
sion added to a small aliquot of synovial fluid diminishes
viscosity within a few minutes but increases the rate of
cell sedimentation, requiring careful mixing before
sample evaluations. Hyaluronidase treatment also invali-
dates the mucin clot test Finding greater than 3000
WBCs/μl or that greater than 15% of cells are neutrophils
indicates inflammation.
Cytologic Features
Cytologic interpretation of joint fluid is hampered by
fluid viscosity, which causes cell aggregation and prepa-
ration of thick smears in which many nucleated cells
appear pyknotic (small, darkly stained, diffcult to recog-
nize morphology). As a result, neutrophils may not be
distinguishable from lymphocytes. The edge of the
smear may be the only location where cell morphology
may be distinguishable [area that dried quickly. thin
 specimen). Because RBCs are rare in normal joint fluid,
their presence reflects joint trauma or hemorrhage asso-
+4*
ciated with inflammation, or they are secondary to
FIGURE 10-16 Cytology of joint fluid from a dog. Note the
arthrocentesis. Iatrogenic hemorrhage will display plate-
pink-staining granular background, which represents the mucin
lets. The chronic presence of RBCs in synovial fluid
in the joint fluid. This is a normal finding. (Courtesy of Dr. Mark 
results in erythrophagocytosis and accumulation of
Johnson.)
hemoglobin degradation pigrments (blue/black granules
252
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
lood contamination
 aspiration; platelets 
Straw colored
NORMAL
-10%
None
None
Ma
 NPNANMACTIOUS
01 1ubs age
aleea ing Auen
Many but variable
Few to moderate 
/ to moderate
to moderate
None to mild 
Inflammatory Joint Disease
ragocytes
Reduced 
：
Friablé 
Mey
Few
INFECTIOUASION
Turbid to purulent
Few to moderate
Few to moderate
40,000-250,000
 be present
May be present 
bloody
Moderate
bacteria
Reduced
Friable
Few
Many Erythrophagocytosis
Normal to slightly friable 
Bloody, xanthochromic
Moderate if chronic
 contamination 
HEMARTHROSIS
Reduced
Moderate
patelets
Variable
Turbid
Noninflammatory Joint Disease
.2
None
NVOPLASTIC JOINT
Normal to reduced 
aeapoi oi p
Few to moderate
LE, Lupus erythematosus; RBCs, red blood cells; WBCs, white blood cells.
Normal firm 
Few to many
turbidity
Variable
Moderate
Absent
Variable
Ma
None
DEGENERATVYE
Light yellow
Normal firm 
Few(<20%)
Normal 
Absent
None
Mucin Clot Test
Microorganisms
Neoplastic cells
CYTOLOGY:
Synoviocytes
Macrophages
Neutrophils
Lymphocytes
Turbidity
Viscosity
WBCs/μl
RBCs
Others
Color
Chapter 10: Fluid Accumulation Disorders
253
in macrophages). Neutrophils, lymphocytes, monocytes,
cell counts) ranging in color from yellow to orange. Septic
 and macrophages may be identified in joint fluid from
joint effusion may appear yellowish-green reflecting large
both normal and diseased joints. Normal joint fluid has
numbers of degenerating neutrophils. Such fluid has
 one to three nucleated cells per high-power feld (400x)
reduced viscosity secondary to enzymatic degradation
where each nucleated cell represents approximately 1000
of hyaluronic acid and glycoproteins, a mucin clot test
cells/μl; less than l0% of cells are neutrophils and these
ranging from poor to very poor, and diminished back-
have a normal cytologic appearance. The remaining cells
ground staining on cytology preparations.
(90%) consist of small lymphocytes, monocytes, macro-
phages, and a few synoviocytes. Phagocytosed cytoplas-
Immune-Mediated Arthropathies
mic debris is common in joint fluid from animals with
Immune-mediated arthropathies are more common than
degenerative joint disease and resolving or chronic
infectious arthropathies in dogs and cats. Presence or
inflammation. Infectious agents, including bacteria,
absence of radiographic erosive lesions assists in subclas-
fungi, and protozoa, are sometimes found within mac-
sifying these disorders (see Figure 10-15). Erosive lesions
should be followed up with submission of a rheumatoid
cells in different disorders include multinucleated giant
factor (RF) titer in dogs. Rheumatoid factor is an antibody
cells osteoclasts, ragocytes, and lupus erythematosus
against the Fc portion of immunoglobulin G (IgG)
(LE) cells. Multinucleated giant cells are rarely observed
and requires species-specifc antisera. Synovial fluids
but represent fusion macrophages: these have multiple
from animals with immune-mediated arthritis have an
round to oval nuclei in a gray granular cytoplasm and
increased total nucleated cell count with a neutrophilic
may demonstrate phagocytosed debris or organisms.
or mixed inflammatory cell response. Ragocytes are
Osteoclasts are 5 to l0 times the size of a neutrophil
common, whereas LE cells are rarely observed. Foamy
and have an irregular cell margin, abundant fne granu-
 macrophages are common and contain cell debris, RBCs.
lar light blue-gray cytoplasm, as well as several round
and disintegrating nuclei. Disintegrating cellular compo-
nuclei that contain singular nucleoli; these indicate car-
nents can also be identified in the background. Finding
tilage damage with exposure of bone.’2 Ragocytes are
LE cells and ragocytes supports a diagnosis of SLE-
neutrophils containing small, round, purple, variably
associated immune-mediated arthropathy. Owing
to
sized cytoplasmic granules; these are common in joint
cyclic activity of immune-mediated arthritis, associated
fluid from animals with inflammatory and immune-
joint effusions are widely variable lending confusion to
mediated arthritis. Cytoplasmic granules are thought to
initial diagnosis and during sequential assessments by
represent phagocytosed droplets of immune com-
arthrocentesis. Repeated arthrocentesis for disease moni-
plexes.2 While these may be confused with phagocy-
toring may increase mononuclear cell counts. Similar
tosed coccoid bacteria, they are differentiated on the
confusion exists in assessment of canine rheumatoid
basis of granule size variability. LE cells found in patients
arthritis, an erosive immune-mediated disorder, because
with immune-mediated joint disease (eg, systemic
affected animals may present with either a predominantly
lupus erythematosus [SLE], rheumatoid arthritis]
are
neutrophilic or mononuclear joint inflammation. Lym-
phagocytes containing engulfed degenerate nucleopro-
tein with a homogeneous pink appearance that fills the
athy found in some dogs with anterior cruciate rupture
cytoplasmic compartment. Tart cells may be confused
and degenerative joint disease, is histologically character-
with LE cells; these are neutrophils that display phagocy-
ized by synovial hyperplasia and nodular aggregates of
tized nuclear material that retains the color and texture
lymphocytes. Joint fluid from affected individuals is char-
of normal chromatin. Tart cells can be seen in joint fluid
acterized by a moderately increased cell count (5000 to
associated with any inflammatory arthropathy.
20,000/μl) with predominance of neutrophils or small
Inflammatory Arthropathies
lymphocytes.
Inflammatory arthropathies share common characteris-
Infectious Arthropathies
tics of suppurative synovial inflammation (see Figure
While most canine polyarthritis is nonspecifically immune
10-15). Both infections and immune-mediated disorders
mediated, it may reflect response to infection. Sepsis is
generate similar pathologic responses that involve com-
suggested by degenerative neutrophils and is confirmed
plement activation, vascular fluid leakage, inflammatory
by observing or culturing an infectious agent Neutrophils
mediator release, and increased synovial fluid causing
are not reliably degenerative in septic joint effusion.
joint capsule distention and pain. Increased total protein,
Perusal of a cytologic preparation should focus initially
fibrin, and coagulation proteins may cause joint fluid to
 on clumps of cells and cells on the smear margin. While
clot on collection if it is not promptly placed in an EDTA
phagocytosed bacteria confrm septic arthritis, bacteria
tube. While highest cell counts are encountered with
are only observed in approximately 50% of culture-
septic effusions, there is broad overlap in neutrophil
 positive fluid samples. Because joint sepsis and immune-
counts among dogs with septic and immune-mediated
 mediated arthritis can produce similar total nucleated cell
arthritis. Neutrophilic inflammation may also be seen in
counts and distribution, bacterial cultures are important
joints affected by degenerative arthritis with as many as
for identifying sepsis. If minimal amounts of fluid are
12,000 cells/μl and up to a 56% distribution of neutro-
aspirated, the syringe and needle can be rinsed with
phils. Neutrophil morphology may be well preserved in
broth-enrichment medium and this rinse material cul-
septic and nonseptic inflammatory arthritis, and identif-
tured. Synovial fluid preincubated in blood culture
cation of infectious agents may be diffcult Inflammatory
medium for 24 hours may be more sensitive for detection
 spn ieus piqn ym paeiosse aie sape
of infectious agents (i.e., liquid blood culture medium is
254
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
thought to prevent sample coagulation, dilutes bacterial
growth inhibitors, inactivates or dilutes antibiotics, and
curtails in vitro leukocyte phagocytosis of bacteria). If
anaerobicbacteria are suspected, the sample must be pro-
tected from room air by prompt collection into anaerobic
transport medium. If mycoplasma are suspected, special-
ized culture medium is necessary. In chronic low-grade
infections, culturing synovial tissue biopsies may be more
productive than joint fluid cultures. In cases in which
cultures are negative but infection is still considered
likely, blood and urine cultures may yield an infectious
agent Sudden detection of a cardiac murmur may herald
the onset of infectious endocarditis and should be
explored with echocardiography. Many dogs with septic
joints have minimal or no degenerative neutrophils or
negative cultures due to concurrent antibiotic therapy.
FIGURE 10-17 This canine synovial fluid smear has one large
Some infectious agents may not cause degenerative neu-
lupus erythematosus (LE) cell at the far left, which is a neutro-
trophil changes and are not cytologically detectable (eg..
phil containing a large round violet LE body that is composed
mycoplasma, rickettsia, L-form bacteria, viruses [calicivi-
of nuclear proteins from a dead lysed cell bound to antinuclear
nus in cats, postvaccinal arthritides]). A pyogranuloma-
antibodies. Many other neutrophils have multiple, smaller
tous response is usually associated with fungal and
inclusions that are probably antigen-antibody complexes, and
bacterial L-form infections (L-forms are bacteria lacking
these white blood cells are called ragocytes. Both are indica-
tive of immune-mediated joint disease.
cell walls). Ehrlichia morulae are only found in very small
numbers of neutrophils (1%) in synovial fluid during
the acute stages of infection. Protozoa (eg. Leishmania).
it is associated with severe subchondral bone destruction,
fungal hyphae [i.e.,Aspergillus), or yeast forms (eg, Blas-
joint instability, and deformity. Feet, carpi, and tarsi are
tomyces) of fungi causing systemic infections also may be
severely and symmetrically affected.
observed in synovial fluid macrophages. Feline polyarthri-
Noninflammatory/Degenerative
tis [i.e., chronic progressive polyarthritis) is statistically
linked with feline syncytium-forming virus (FeSFV) and
Arthropathies
feline leukemia vinus (FeLV) infections. Viral-induced
The most common cause of noninflammatory joint
arthritis may present either as a mild or marked mono-
disease is degenerative arthritis secondary to trauma or
nuclear effusion, as observed in feline calicivinus or as a
joint instability. Other causes include hemarthrosis, neo-
suppurative response Omphalophlebitis may be the
plasia, genetic or developmental disorders, dietary or
 source of infection in neonatal animals. Serologic testing
nutritional deficiencies or excesses, and miscellaneous
for borreliosis [i.e., Lyme disease) may help diagnose
inflammatory arthritis of unknown cause (see Chapter
arthritides [i.e., degenerative joint disease traumatic joint
15). Response to therapy may be the most compelling
injury, hemarthrosis, neoplastic joint conditions) are
basis for diagnosing Lyme disease or rickettsial polyar-
often characterized by low-grade synovial mononuclear
thropathies. However, administration of doxycycline for
inflammation. Fluid analysis may be normal or show
 aau aoiui-ue ue sy ose sae asa
only minor changes: mild vasodilation may slightly
may modulate joint pain and effusion in the absence of
increase fluid volume and total protein content, causing
infection.
mild dilution or no change in hyaluronic acid and fluid
viscosity, and a normal or fair mucin clot test. Color of
Exudative Joint Disease
joint fluid in these conditions varies from clear and light
Exudative joint disease without evidence of sepsis is cat-
yellow to bloody or xanthochromic, reflecting intra-
egorized as erosive or nonerosive based on radiographs
articular hemorrhage Total nucleated cell counts may be
(see Figure 10-15). Rheumatoid arthritis is classically con-
sidered erosive. Nonerosive arthritides are more diffcult
5000 cells/μl. Cytologic features include a predominance
to definitively diagnose and categorize SLE and arthritis
of monocular cells and a normal to slightly increased
associated with a variety of underlying diseases are most
number of neutrophils; total and differential cell counts
common. Ragocytes, LE cells, or both indicate immune-
must be reconciled with blood contamination. Mono-
mediated disease (Figure 10-17). Submission of sera for
nuclear cells may appear enlarged and have an abundant
antinuclear antibody (ANA) and RF titers (see Chapter
foamy vacuolated cytoplasm consistent with phagocytic
12), blood for an LE cell prep. and synovial biopsies for
activity. Traumatic or coagulopathic hemarthrosis often
histologic evaluation may implicate immuno-destructive
processes. Chronic, progressive feline polyarthritis usually
macrophages. Cartilage fragments, chondrocytes, and
occurs in males and has two forms. A periosteal-
 osteoclasts may indicate severe cartilage damage. Diagno-
proliferative form is most prevalent, primarily affecting
 sis of degenerative osteoarthritis is made by reconciling
young adult cats causing tenosynovitis followed by non-
physical findings, radiographic images, and synovial fluid
deforming periarticular periosteal proliferation and sub-
analyses. Bony changes evident radiographically indicate
chondral bone erosions. A deforming or rheumatoid-like
 an advanced lesion associated with irreversible cartilage
arthritis form has an insidious onset in older cats where
damage.
Chapter 10:Fluid Accumulation Disorders
255
Edema and Anasarca
BoX 10-5. CONDITIoNS ASSOCIATeD WItH
Edema is defined as a clinically evident increase in inter-
ANASARCA
 stitial fluid volume Anasarca refers to gross, generalized
latrogenic Overhydration
edema. Ascites refers to effusion in the abdominal cavity
Excessive fluid volume calculated or administered
and hydrothorax to fluid accumulated in the pleural
Huid administration based on whole body weight in
cavity. Depending on cause and etiopathogenesis, edema
morbid obesity leads to overhydration (esp. cats)
may be localized or generalized. Forces maintaining
homeostatic balance of fluid distribution between the
Congestive Heart Failure
intravascular plasma volume and the interstitial fluid
Failure of sodium restriction
space are referred to as Starling's forces. Finding edema
If coupled with crystalloid fluid administration at normal
 or anasarca signals imbalance of Starling's forces favoring
 maintenance rate
fluid distribution into the interstitial compartment: (1)
Increased body sodium and water retention driven by:
reduced colloid oncotic pressure [i.e., decreased plasma
 Increased ADH elaboration
proteins), (2) altered hydrostatic pressure [(i.e, opposing
 Increased renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activity
 pressures within the interstitium and vasculature) favor-
ing interstitial fluid accumulation, (3) reduced vascular
Acute Renal Failure
 Anuria coupled with fluid administration
integrity [i.e., leakiness of veins, arteries, capillaries, lym-
phatics), and/or (4) increased pathophysiologic signals
Hepatic Failure
conserving systemic water and sodium (e.g., enhanced
Hypoalbuminemia
angiotensin-converting enzyme activity aldosterone and
 Portal hypertension
antidiuretic hormone [ADH] elaboration, systemic 0r
Increased body sodium and water retention driven by:
splanchnic hypotension). To determine the cause
of
Increased ADH elaboration
regionalized or local edema, consideration must be given
Increased renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system activity
to local anatomy of vasculature and soft tissues and the
 presence of local inflammatory, structural, or neoplastic
 Nephrotic Syndrome
conditions. A large number of disease processes can par-
Hypoalbuminemia
ticipate in edema formation and development of anasarca
 Increased body sodium and water retention driven by:
(Figures 10-18 and 10-19).
Increased ADH elaboration
Severe hypoalbuminemia leads to edema when TS
 Increased renin-angiotensin-aldosterone systerm activity
-uon shouaa seaiaum '/ o'I ueu ssal si uoenuauo
gestion, lymphedema, or inflammation generates edema
Vasculitis
 Increased vascular permeability: multiple causes
fluid while TS concentration is greater than 2.5 g/dl. In
the latter circumstance, total and differential cell counts 
Immune-mediated (e.g., systemic lupus erythematosus) 
may distinguish inflammatory (e.g., vasculitis) from non-
Infectious diseases (e.g., rickettsial infections)
inflammatory causes.
Hypersensitivity reactions
 Regional edema is usually caused by inflammation or
vascular or lymphatic obstructions (see Figure 10-18).
ADH, Antidiuretic hormone.
-jdse apou qdual ioy uoesipul ue sl Aqedouapeydur]
rates for cytology and culture Congenital or acquired
arteriovenous [AV) fistulae are rare but may cause local-
ized edema. These may be detected on the basis of a
common causes (Box 10-5). Iatrogenic overhydration
palpable or auscultable fremitus or bruit, ultrasonogra-
does not typically induce marked generalized edema
phy, or CT angiography. Acquired lymphatic insuffciency
unless another underlying factor (e.g.. hypoalbuminemia,
after trauma, surgery, or regional infections commonly
anuria/oliguria) coexists, an inappropriately large volume
causes regional edema. Lymphangiograms are usually not
of fluids has been administered, or a concurrent disease
indicated in acute disorders with a plausible short-term
condition or dnug therapy has stimulated ADH release.
duration. A fine-needle aspiration of involved tissues or
latrogenic fluid overload imparts generalized edema
regional lymph nodes and aspiration of edema fluid may
associated with an obvious change in skin turgor (e.g..
help distinguish the underlying cause Lymphatic cording
jelly-like consistency): morbidly obese patients have
is occasionally palpated in
animals with lymphatic
the highest risk when calculation of maintenance fluid
obstruction or inflammation; lymph fluid can be easily
requirements is based on gross body weight. Overhydra-
aspirated from such prominent lymphatics. Congenital
tion typically resolves within 48 hours of discontinuing
malformation or degenerative lymphatic disorders may
fluid administration, although animals demonstrating
cause lymphedema in young animals; lymph nodes are
cough or tachypnea may benefit from short-term furose-
sometimes atrophied or absent. Limb edema and tail
mide administration. Animals with a normal serum
edema are most commonly recognized. Affected animals
albumin concentration that are highly sensitive to iatro-
develop overtly swollen appendages (single or multiple)
genic fluid overload may have incipient cardiac disease
but lack significant physical disability.
(e.g, high-output cardiac failure associated with severe
Generalized edema or anasarca is usually dependent,
anemia, chronic valvular insufficiency). anuric/oliguric
affecting distal extremities or the brisket [see F
Figure
renal failure, or disease processes or drug therapies stimu-
10-19). Overhydration, right-sided congestive heart
lating excessive ADH release (syndrome of inappropriate
failure, and marked hypoalbuminemia are the most
antidiuretic hormone secretion [SIADH]].
256
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Lymphedema
appear congenital?
See Figure 10-5 
 No diagnosis
History does it
 Protein <1 g/dl
Hypoproteinemia
 Other areas affected
Skin biopsy
Analyze edema fluid
Ultrasonography
 Bruit, fremitis,
 soft fluctu ant
AV fistula
2
masses
color flow
Arteriogram
Doppler
Venous congestion
Protein >4 g/dl 
Examine cytology
nflammation
+
Mass/enlarged
lymph nodes,
 of fluid
inflammation
and culture
Biopsy
Infection
Lymphadenopathy
 Regional or local edema
Mass
Biopsy
Check serum albumin
No reason found 
 ewapa qul pajid jo alus 
 Not present
Biopsy skin
%
Present
Cardiac
failure
bandage
latrogenic
Cranial edema only 
 angiogram
ultrasound,
lesion
Thoracic
 cava syndrome
2
 Cranial vena
mass or invasive
cervicallesion
mediastinal
Granuloma
Anterior
Chapter 10:Fluid Accumulation Disorders
257
ECG,
<1 g protein/dl
See Figure 10-5
 s    i    i i saie i e 
(cytology and protein)
Analyze edema fluid
>4 g protein/dl 
 Normal serum albumin
Venous
See Figure 10-10
Right-sided
nsodxa np m
Repeat physical and
these
JdD
None
 Anasarca
n
Renal or postrenal
Pathologic
azotemia
Hypoalbuminemia
Occultcardliomyopathy
apeuodwel l
See Figure 10-10
High output cardliac
hypoalbuminemia)
ECG, thoracic
failure(anemia)
heart failure
Overhydration
<2.5 g/dl 
Ip/6 G<
Seruma
Consider furosemide 
 Discontinue fluid
 electrocardiogram.
latrogenic
therapy and
observe
258
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
 Serum albumin must be less than or equal to l.5 g/
7. Boon D: Synovial fluid analysis: a guide for small-animal
dl to cause anasarca. This also may generate a pure tran-
practitioners. Vet Med 92:443, 1997.
sudative body cavity effusion. Patients with generalized
8. Bowers R: Discussion on Miles RM & [eck HS: experimental
edema associated with vasculitis usually demonstrate
bile peritonitis. Surgery 34:445, 1953.
9. Braun IP. Guelf JF. Pages IP: Companison of four methods
-aad 'a'] uaisas ueio aos u aeuoay rensaad
for determination of total protein concentrations in pleural
chial hemorrhages, microhematuria, retinal hemor-
and peritoneal fluid from dogs. Am J Vet Res 62:294. 2001.
rhages) or microangiopathic effects [i.e., schistocytes,
10. Center SA: Pathophysiology of liver disease: normal and
acanthocytes). Total body water retention secondary to
abnormal function. [n Guilford WG, et al. editors: Strom-
SIADH (see Chapter 6) usually coexists with another dis-
beck's small animal gastroenterology. Philadelphia. 1996. WB
order that overshadows its presence SIADH is also
Saunders.
induced by several drug therapies. With hypoalbumin-
 11. Center SA, et al: Proteins invoked by vitamin K absence and
emia, fluid retention is aggravated by sodium and water
Clotting times in clinically ill cats. J Vet Intern Med 14:292.
retention driven by the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone
2000.
12. Davis MJ, Denton J. Freemont AJ: Companison of serial syno-
system, as occurs in severe renal, hepatic, or cardiac
vial fluid cytology in rheumatoid arthritis: delineation of
disease. Systemic hypertension often reflects abnormal
subgroups with prognostic implications. Ann Rheum Dis
activity of this system. History, physical examination,
47:559. 1988.
serum albumin determination, thoracic radiographs,
13. Day MJ. Martin MWS: [mmunohistochemical characteriza-
cardiac evaluations (i.e., ECG, echocardiography), sys-
ton of the lesions of canine idiopathic penicarditis. / Small
temic blood pressure, CVP determination (not routinely
Anim Pract 43:382. 2002.
used), urinalysis, abdominal ultrasonography. and CT
14. de Laforcade A. Rozanski E. Freeman L, et al: Biochemical
imaging assist in identifying the cause of anasarca (see
analysis of penicardial fluid and whole blood in dogs. / Vet
Figure 10-19). Finding a jugular pulse or abnormal hepa-
Intern Med 19:833, 2005.
tojugular reflex suggests intrathoracic disease within the
15. Duthie W. Eckersall PD, Addie DD, et al: Value of αl-acid
gycoprotein in the diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis.
cranial mediastinum or involving the heart or pericar-
Vet Rec 141:299. 1997.
dium. If an underlying cause is not found, physical exami-
16. Edwards NJ: The diagnostic value of penicardial fluid pH
nation and laboratory data are reviewed looking for
determination. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 32:63. 1996.
evidence of vasculitis (i.e, petechiation, microvascular
17. Fernandez F Grindem C, Lipowitz A. et al: Synovial fluid
lesions on fundic examination, microscopic hematuria.
analysis: preparation of smears for cytologic examination
schistocytes on blood smear). Skin biopsies may be per-
of canine synovial fluid. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 19:727.
formed in areas of bruising or cutaneous lesions to inves-
1983.
tigate vasculitis; both affected and unaffected tissue and
18. Fine DM, Tobias AH. [acob KA: lse of pericardial fluid pH
marginal interfaces should be sampled. Collecting edema
to distinguish between idiopathic and neoplastic effusions.
J Vet Intern Med 17:525, 2003.
-dui day Aeu juauos uanond sii suzaleue pue pin
19. Forrester SD, Fossum TW: Pleural efusions: pathophysiology
cate inflammatory causes.
and diagnostic considerations. Compend Contin Educ 10:121.
1988.
Scrotal Effusions
20. Fossum TW, et al: Chylothorax in cats: 37 cases (1969-1989).
J Am Vet Med Assoc 198:672. 1991.
Scrotal effusion usually develops when abdominal fluid
 21. Fossum TW, et al: Lymphedema: dlinical signs. diagnosis. and
enters the scrotum via the inguinal rings. Severe orchitis
treatment. J Am Vet Med Assoc 6:312, 1992.
or testicular torsion may also be responsible and can be
22. Fossum TW, Birchard SJ. Jacobs RM: Chylothoraxin 34 dogs.
identified by ultrasonography and aspiration cytology.
I Am Vet Med Assoc 188:1315. 1986.
Because scrotal edema may be caused by vasculitis (eg..
 23. Fossum TW. Jacobs RM, Birchard SJ: Evaluation of cholesterol
and tiglyceride concentrations in differentiating chylous and
Rocky Mountain spotted fever), evaluation for systemic
nonchylous pleural efusions in dogs and cats. / Am Vet Med
infection is important. If effusion is localized to the
Assoc 188:49, 1986.
scrotum, scrotal ablation and castration may be diagnos-
 24. Freeman K. Todhunter R. Lust G, et al: Cytology of polychrome-
tic and therapeutic.
stained equine synovial fluid. Acta Cytol 35:512. 1991.
25. Ceorge [A. O'Neill SL: Comparison of refractometer and
 biuret method of total protein measurement in body cavity
References and Suggested Readings
fluids. Vet Clin Pathol 30:16, 2001.
 26. Gibson N, Cammichael S. Li A, et al: Value of direct smears of
1. Alleman AR: Abdominal, thoracic and pericardial effusions.
synovial fluid in the diagnosis of canine joint disease. Vet Rec
Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 33:89, 2003.
144:463. 1999.
2. Aronson MG, et al: Clinical and pathologic features of
27. Gores BR, et al: Chylous ascites in cats: nine cases (1978-
thymoma in 15 dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 184:1355, 1984.
1993). J Am Vet Med Assoc 205:1161, 1994.
 3. Atlola M, Lumsden J, Rooke F: A comparison of manual and
yim saop ul sish[eue pimy [eiaouks id inasseA 'a uy '87
electronic counting for total nucleated cell counts on syno-
Cranial cruciate ligament rupture. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
vial fluid from canine stifle joints. Can / Vet Res 50:282, 1986.
28:277. 1992.
4. Berg R. Wingfield W: Pericardial effusion in the dog: a review
of 42 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 20:72l, 1984.
cardiectomy in 13 dogs. J Vet Intern Med 13:529. 1999.
5. Berg Rl. Sykes JE, Kass PH, et al: Effect of repeated arthrocen-
 30. Kolata RJ: Diagnostic abdominal paracentesis and lavage:
tesis on cytologic analysis of synovial fluid in dogs. J Vet
experimental and clinical evaluations in the dog. / Am Vt
Intern Med 23:814, 2009.
Med A5soc 168:697, 1976.
6. Bolton GR, Ettinger Sl: Penipheral edema. [n Ettinger SJ.
 31. Lozano MD, et al: [mmunocytochemistry in the differential
editor: Textbook of veterinary internal medicine, ed 3. Philadel-
diagnosis of serous effusions. Cancer Cytopathol 93:68.
phia, 1989, WB Saunders.
2001.
Chapter 10:Fluid Acumulation Disorders
259
32. MacWilliams PS, Pniednichs KR: Laboratory evaluation and
42. Runyon BA, Montano AA, et al: The serum-ascites albumin
interpretation of synovial fluid. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim
gadient is superior to the exudates-transudate concept in the
Pract 33:158, 2003.
dfferential diagnosis of ascites. Ann Intern Med 117:215.
33. Marchevsky A, Read R: Bacterial septic arthnitis in 19 dogs.
1992.
Aust Vet I 77:233. 1999.
43. Rush JE. Keene BW. Fox PR: Penicardial disease in the cat: a
34. Martin MWS. Green MJ, Stafford-Johnson MJ. et al: [dio-
Jetrospective evaluation of 66 cases. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
pathic pernicarditis in dogs: no evidence for an immune medi-
26:39, 1990.
ated etiology. J Small Anim Pract 47:387. 2006.
44. Shaw SP. Rush JE: Canine pericardial effusion: diagnosis.
35.
Miles RM, Jeck HS: Expenimental bile pernitonitis. Surgery
treatment, and prognosis. Compend Contin Educ Small Anim
34:445. 1953.
Pract 29:405, 2007.
36. Montgomery R, Long l., Milton J. et al: Comparison of aerobic
45. Shaw SP, Rush [E: Canine pericardial effusion: pathophysiol-
culturette, synovial membrane biopsy. and blood culture
cgy and cause.Compend Contin Educ Vet 29:400. 2007.
medium in detection of canine bacterial arthnitis. Vet Surg
46. Shaw P, Rozanski EA. Rush JE: Cardiac troponins I and Tin
18:300, 1989.
dogs with pericardial effusion. J Vet Intern Med 18:322, 2004.
37. O'Brien P]. Lumsden [H: The cytologic examination of body
47. Shelly SM, Scarlett-Kranz I. Blue [T: Protein electrophoresis
cavity fluids. Semin Vet Med Surg 3:140. 1988.
 on effusions from cats as a diagnostic test for feline infectious 
38. Para MD. Papasouliotis K. Ceron J: Concentrations of
penitonitis. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:495. 1988.
C-reactive protein in effusion in dogs. Vet Rec 158:753, 2006.
48. Sisson D. Thomas WP, Ruehl WW, et al: Diagnostic value of
39. Parry BW: Synovial fluid. [n Cowell RL, Tyler RD, Meinkoth
pericardial fluid analysis in the dog. J Am Vet Med Assoc
[H. editors: Diagnostic cyiology and hematology of the dog and
184:51. 1984.
cat, ed 2. St. Louis, 1999, Mosby. pp 104.
49. Steyn PF Witum TE: Radiographic, epidemiologic. and clini-
40. Pedersen NC. Pool RR. O'Brien T: Feline chronic progressive
 cal aspects of simultaneous pleural and peritoneal effusions
polyarthritis. Am / Vet Res 41:522, 1980.
in dogs and cats: 48 cases (1982-1991). I Am Vet Med Assoc
41.[
Pembleton-Corbett JR. Center SA, Schermerhorn T, et al:
202:307, 1993.
Serum-effusion albumin gradient in dogs with transudative
50.
Suess RP, et al: Constrictive pleunitis in cats with chylothorax:
abdominal effusion. J Vet Intern Med 14:613, 2000.
10 cases {1983-1991]. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 30:70. 1994.
Respiratory and Cardiac
Disorders
Ned F. Kuehn and Sonya G. Gordon
pattern of breathing exhibited depends on the relative
RESPIRATORY PROBLEMS
amount of pathologic change in affected tissues. For
Dyspnea
example, a dog with severe pulmonary edema may have
obstructive (airway fluid) and restrictive (interstitial fluid)
 Dyspnea (also called respiratory distress) is an inappro-
disease.
priate degree of breathing effort based on respiratory rate.
Patients with disorders such as flail chest occasionally
rhythm, and character. Dyspnea is a common sign associ-
have paradoxical movements [i.e, a section of the chest
ated with a wide variety of respiratory and nonrespiratory
wall collapsing during inspiration and expanding during
disorders. Physical examination is the first step in diagno-
expiration). Pulmonary vascular diseases can be associ-
sis. Patients with obstructive respiratory diseases have a
ated with either inspiratory or mixed inspiratory and expi-
breathing pattern characterized by increased depth, rate.
ratory dyspnea.
and effort. Dynamic obstruction (e.g., laryngeal paralysis)
Common causes of dyspnea are listed in Box 1l-1.
cranial to the thoracic inlet [i.e., the upper airway) causes
Useful Tests
increased inspiratory effort. Dynamic obstruction (eg..
collapsing trachea) caudal to the thoracic inlet [ie., lower
After the site of an abnormal breathing pattern has been
airway) causes increased expiratory effort. Fixed obstruc-
localized by physical examination, tracheal and thoracic
tions (eg.. tracheal tumor) often are associated with
radiographs are typically the most useful next diagnostic
increased inspiratory and expiratory effort. Nasal cavity
step (Figure ll-1).
obstruction only causes an obstructive breathing pattern
if the animal does not breathe through the mouth.
Auscultation of wheezes suggests obstruction, but
NOTE: Although a collapsed trachea can be diagnosed
wheezes are not always found in obstructed patients.
radiographically, it cannot be ruled out by such, even if
Monophonic wheezes [i.e, single tone) may be noted
inspiratory and expiratory films are made. Fluoroscopy or
au yslqeisa ot papeeu aq Aew Adossououoigoaupea 
with an elongated soft palate. Alternatively, wheezes can
have multiple tones (i.e., polyphonic wheezes), as heard
diagnosis.
in asthmatic cats.
Dyspnea due to extra-respiratory causes (e.g.. severe
 anemia, severe metabolic acidosis) can have what appears
Transtracheal aspiration (TTA), bronchoalveolar
to be an obstructive breathing pattern with an increased
lavage (BAL), or transthoracic fine-needle aspiration (see
intensity of normal lung sounds (i.e., bronchovesicular
subsequent sections) may follow if radiography suggests
sounds) but without wheezes.
the need for cytologic analysis or culture of the lower
Diseases limiting ability of the lungs to expand cause
airway, especially if coughing is present. Pharyngoscopy.
a restrictive breathing pattern characterized by an
nasopharyngoscopy and laryngoscopy are useful
in
increased rate but a normal to decreased depth with or
patients with upper airway obstruction. Tracheobron-
without increased inspiratory effort Auscultation may
choscopy is useful in tracheal and bronchial disorders,
 e    s 
especially for diagnosing obstructive disease such as col-
absence of lung sounds with certain restrictive lung dis-
lapsed trachea, and it is mandatory in most pharyngeal
eases (eg., pneumothorax, hydrothorax). It may be dif
and laryngeal abnormalities (see Figure ll-1). Pleural
ficult to auscultatepulmonary parenchymal abnormalities.
effusion is always an indication for fluid analysis (see
especially in small patients with low tidal volumes. Tho-
Chapter 10). If diroflariasis is suspected, a Knott's test,
racic radiographs of these patients can reveal substantial
filter test, or Diroflaria immitis antigen (or antibody in
pulmonary parenchymal disease despite apparently
cats) test is indicated (see Chapter 15). Although they
normal lung sounds. Distinction between obstructive and
rarely provide a diagnosis, fecal flotation and Baermann's
restrictive breathing patterns is not always clear; the
fecal analysis are inexpensive and noninvasive and can
260
BoX 11-1. causEs Of DYspNEA (RespiRaTorY DIsTress)
RESPIRATORY DISORDERS
 Lower airways and pulmonary parenchyma
Obstructive Disease
 Bronchial disease
Extrathoracic disease
Chronic bronchitis (dogs)
Nasal (only if patient does not breathe through mouth)
 Bronchial asthma (cats)
 Stenotic nares 
 Pulmonary edema
 Neoplasia 
 Pneumonia (viral, bacterial, fungal)
Chronic inflammatory rhinitis
Aspiration pneumonia
Fungal granuloma 
 Parasitic pneumonitis 
Foreign body
Hypersensitivity (allergic) lung disease 
 Chondromesenchymal hamartoma (cats)
Eosinophilic bronchopneumopathy
 Pulmonary hemorrhage
Epistaxis (blood clots)
Neoplasia
Nasopharynx
Restrictive Disease
Foreign body
Pulmonary disorders
Neoplasia
Pulmonary fibrosis 
Nasopharyngeal polyps
 Pulmonary edema
Nasopharyngeal stenosis
 Interstitial pneumonia
Nasopharyngeal turbinates
Pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia
Pharynx
Pleural space or body wall disorders
 Eongated/edematous soft palate
Pneumothorax
 Pharyngeal edema
 Pleural effusion 
 Foreign body
Hernia 
Neoplasia
 Pleuroperitoneal 
Pharyngeal polyps (cats)
 Pericardioperitoneal
Larynx
 Cranial displacement of diaphragm
Laryngeal paralysis
 Abdominal mass or masses 
Laryngeal edema 
 Abdominal effusion
Laryngeal collapse
Gastric dilation
Laryngospasm
Trauma
Everted laryngeal saccules
Rib fracture or fractures
Foreign body
Hail chest 
Neoplasia
 Neoplasia 
Trachea
Mediastinum 
 Cervical tracheal collapse 
Thoracic wall
Foreign body
Obesity
Neoplasia
Stenosis
NONRESPIRATORY DISORDERS
 Extraluminal compression
Vascular disease
Dirofilariasis
Traumatic rupture 
 Pulmonary embolism
 Intrathoracic disease
Cardiac disease
Trachea
Hematologic
Thoracic tracheal collapse
Anemia (severe; not true dyspnea)
Foreign body
Methemoglobinemia 
Neoplasia
Metabolic
 Stenosis
Acidosis (not true dyspnea)
 Extraluminal compression (tumor or granuloma)
Shock
Parasitic (Oslerus osleri)
Heat stroke
 Principal bronchi
 Neurologic and neuromuscular disease (not true dyspnea) 
 Bronchial collapse
Central nervous system (CNS)
Foreign body
Neoplasia
Head trauma
 CNS inflammatory disease
 Stenosis
Neoplasia
 Extraluminal compression (tumor, granuloma, hilar
lymphadenopathy, left atrial enlargement)
 Neuromuscular diseases involving muscles of respiration
 Parasitic (Oslerus osleri) 
Myasthenia gravis
Polymyopathy
 Neuropathy
Polyradiculoneuropathy
262
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Neurologic examination
Consider fecal,
thoracotomy
Neurologic
Tachypnea usually present
Aresklemv eESnE
radiographs
Central
disease
viscera in thorax
thoracocentesis,
If not hernia,
fluid analysis,
culture
If no diagnosis consider
Cervical and thoracic radiographs
Total CO2, bicarbonate,
evaluation, ECG,
ultrasonography
orthoracotomy
barenchymal
Metabolic
orbronchoaly
vascular disease
obstructive orrestrictive disease
Pulmonary
Iexpiratory effort.
1l
Pulmonary
Considerheartworm
bronchoalveolar
Observation,Palpation,Auscultation,±Percussion
function testing
expiratory.Consider fluoroscopy
Radiographs: inspiratory and
Consider
lavage
Increased expiratory effort:
Brushor tissuebiopsy
restrictive disease
CBC
ntensityofabnormal
Histopathology
obstructiveor
Major breathing effort
Bronchoscopy
(szaaum) spunos
Proceed
as above
Lower airway
Baemann
Consider
Cytology
aspiration
OBSTRUCTIVEDISEASE
Cervical trachea
Tracheoscopy
Brush ortissue
Histopathology
Cough
biopsy.
Pharynx, larynx
Pharyngoscopy,
laryngoscopy
ogy, culture,
radiographs
ncreased inspiratory effort:
Attempt localizationby
Upper airway
pharyngoscopy
Nasal cavity
available
Naso-
Biopsy
Chapter 1l:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
263
definitively diagnose respiratory parasites. Serologic
carefully questioned to differentiate cough from gagging.
testing for systemic mycoses (except histoplasmosis) may
because many owners confuse gagging with coughing.
be useful in dogs (see Chapter i5). Tests for detecting
Gagging (not that after a coughing stint) would suggest
Histoplasma and Blastomyces antigens in the urine are now
nasopharyngeal or nonrespiratory disorders (i.e, oropha-
available (http://www.miravistalabs.com) and might be
ryngeal, esophageal, or gastrointestinal disease). Differen-
better than serology.
tiation of a productive cough (eg. bronchopneumonia)
A complete blood count (CBC) is useful but rarely
from a nonproductive cough (eg., viral tracheobronchi-
diagnostic. Allergic or parasitic disease occasionally
tis) and identification of abnormal breathing patterns
causes eosinophilia in a dog, but this is inconsistent in
(see Box ll-1 and Figure ll-1) are also helpful. Tracheal
cats. Dyspnea due to severe anemia may also be found.
and thoracic radiographs are essential in patients with
Senum chemistry profle and arterial blood gas analysis
chronic cough, hemoptysis, or cardiovascular disease but
are less cost-effective in most of these patients unless the
are less useful in acute infectious tracheobronchial dis-
eases unless secondary pneumonia is suspected. Radio-
(e.g., severe metabolic acidosis). Percutaneous fine-needle
 graphs can be used to diagnose but not reliably rule out
a collapsed trachea. Fluoroscopy may be required to rule
infltrative disease (e.g., blastomycosis, histoplasmosis.
in or out tracheal collapse and is often needed for evalu-
carcinoma, lymphoma), especially if BAL and aspiration
ation of extent of tracheal collapse if present TTA or BAL
of more superficial structures (e.g., lymph nodes) are non-
(especially if combined with bronchoscopy) is often diag-
diagnostic. Guiding the needle with radiography, ultra-
nostic of allergic disease, parasitic infections, or bacterial
sonography. or fluoroscopy may increase the chance of
infections and supports a clinical diagnosis of certain
diagnosis with aspiration of mass lesions. Fine-needle
chronic bronchial diseases (e.g. chronic bronchitis).
 aspiration carries some risk of pneumothorax or hemo-
Bronchoscopy is often needed to diagnose foreign body
thorax, however.
Or obstructive disease. A CBC is seldom helpful unless
marked eosinophilia (e.g. allergic or parasitic disease) is
Coughing, Including Hemoptysis
 present. Fecal flotation and Baermann's fecal analysis are
rarely revealing but are indicated because they are easy
Common causes of coughing in dogs and cats are listed
and cost-effective. Arterial blood gas analysis is rarely
in Box ll-2. History is used first to eliminate self-limiting.
diagnostic or cost-effective in coughing patients without
contagious, infectious diseases. The owner should be
dyspnea.
BoX 11-2. CAUSES oF CoUGHING IN DOGs AND CATS
 Nasal Cavity/Sinus Disease with Postnasal Drip
Pulmonary Parenchymal Disease
See Box 11-3
Trauma
 Alergy (pulmonary infltrates with eosinophillia)
 Pharynx/Larynx
Trauma
Infection
 Foreign body
Viral (see Box 11-3)
Infection (bacterial or viral)
Bacterial
Neoplasia
Fungal (Blastontyces dermatitidis, Histoplasma
Laryngeal paralysis (congenital or acquired)
@psulatum, Coccidioides inmitis, Cryptococcus
 Eversion of laryngeal saccules
neoformans, Aspergillus spp.!)
Laryngeal collapse 
Protozoal (Toxoplasma gondil, Pneuntocystis cariniil]
 Granulomatous laryngitis
Parasitic (Fiaroides hirthi, Filaroides miksi, Dirofilaria
immitis, Angiostrongylus vasorum, Paragoninus
 Eosinophilic granuloma
kellicotti)
Trachea/Lower Airway
Degenerative disease (emphysema)
Traumia
Neoplasia (primary or metastatic)
 Foreign body
Noninfectious granulomatous disorders (eosinophilic 
Allergy (allergic bronchitis/asthma) 
pulmonary granulomatosis, pulmonary lymphomatoid
Infection
granulomatosis)
Viral (see Box 11-3)
Cardiovascular Disease
Bacterial (Bordetella bronchiseptica)
Pulmonary edema
Parasitic (Filaroides spp., Oslerus osleri, Capillaria
Left atrial enlargement causing bronchial compression
aerophilia)
Thromboembolism (dirofilariasis, hyperadrenocorticism,
Anomalies (collapse, hypoplasia, primary ciliary dyskinesia,
protein-losing nephropathy, neoplasia, cardiac disease!
 segmental stenosis, extraluminal compression [left
Mediastinal Disease (causing airway compression)
atrium, tumor]!
Lymphosarcoma (especially cats)
 Neoplasia (osteochondral dysplasia [osteochondroma]]
Degenerative disease (bronchiectasis)
264
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
negative and should not be relied on for a diagnosis (see
BOX 11-3. CAUSEs 0F NASAL DIsCHARGE,
Chapter 15). Direct examination of the nasal cavity
SNEEZING, AND EPISTAXIS IN DOGS
(dorsal and ventral meatus) can be performed with rigid
AND CATS
or flexible scopes (see under Rhinoscopy). The nasophar-
ynx and posterior portion of the nasal cavity can be visu-
Structural/Functional Anomalies
alized with a dental mirror and penlight or more efficiently
Cleft palate
with a flexible endoscope. Endoscopy of the anterior
Oronasal fistula
portion of the nasal cavity in small dogs and cats is
 Cricopharyngeal achalasia/asynchrony
limited by the endoscope's diameter. Nasal lavage is rarely
 Esophageal weakness
diagnostic. Bacterial culture is not routinely recom-
mended; interpretation is diffcult because of the large
Allergic/lmmunologic
Allergic rhinitis
normal bacterial population of the nasal cavity (see
Lymphoplasmacytic rhinitis
Chapter l5). Fungal culture for aspergillosis can have
both false-positive and false-negative results (see Chapter
Bleeding Disorders
15). Cultures for fungi are generally more reliable if per-
Factor deficiency (congenital and acquired)
formed on nasal biopsy specimens rather than nasal
Thrombocytopenia (infectious and immune mediated)
cavity swabs. Nasal biopsy samples can be obtained with
Vessel wall (trauma and vasculitis)
alligator-type clamshell instruments, with uterine or
 Foreign bodies/trauma
colonic biopsy forceps, or bone curettes [described later).
If these procedures are not diagnostic and the condition
Infections
persists, exploratory rhinotomy should be considered
Vral: distemper, parainfluenza, adenovirus type 2 (dogs);
providing nasal CT or MRI has also been performed.
herpesvirus, calicivirus (cats)
 Bacterial: including dental disease, chronic feline
rhinosinusitis, Bordetella bronchiseptica (dog)
NASAL RADIOGRAPHY
Fungal: Aspergillus spp., Penicilliumn spp., Cryptococcus
neoformans, Rhinosporidium seeberi; other
opportunistic fungi are rare (e.g., Trichosporon)
Common Indications ● Nasal radiography is indicated
for chronic nasal discharge, epistaxis, severe acute undi-
Rckettsial: Ehrlichia canis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever
agnosed sneezing. facial deformity, nasal obstruction, or
 Parasitic: Pneunonyssoides caninum, Linguatula serrata,
Capillaria aerophila, Syngamus ierei, Cuterebra spp.
pawing at the face or nose (see Box ll-3).
Other: Chlamydia spp., Mycoplasma spp.
Advantages · Nasal radiography is noninvasive. Neo-
Neoplasia/Polyps
plasia and aspergillosis often cause bone lysis, which is
Carcinomas, sarcomas, lymphoma, transmissible venereal
seldom present in other disorders.
tumor
Polyp (nasopharyngeal in cats)
Disadvantages · General anesthesia is required, and
Chondromesenchymal hamartoma (cats)
excessive fluid (e.g. nasal hemorrhage, exudate) may
obscure soft tissue abnormalities. In addition, the proce-
dure provides low resolution of fine detail (except
occasionally for high-detail dental films in cats and
small dogs).
 Readers are referred to a radiology text for additional
Nasal Discharge, Sneezing.
information.20 CT and MRI are preferred imaging modali-
and Epistaxis
ties and provide superior detail for evaluating the nasal
cavity.
Nasal discharge and sneezing may bethe result of primary
nasal cavity disease or secondary to bronchopulmonary
disease (e.g., pneumonia). Epistaxis may be the result of
COMPUTED TOMOGRAPHY
a primary nasal problem (e.g., neoplasia) or a systemic
problem (eg., coagulopathy). Common causes of these
Common Indications · CT has the same indications as
problems are listed in Box 11-3.
nasal radiography. It is essential for planning radiation
When epistaxis occurs, evaluation for coagulopathy
therapy for nasal tumors and highly recommended before
should be the initial diagnostic step (see Chapter 5). Radi-
topical clotrimazole therapy for nasal aspergillosis to
ography, but preferably computed tomography (CT) or
ensure that the cribriform plate has not been eroded. MRI
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the nasal cavity. is
can be used instead of CT. It gives more soft tissue detail
usually performed next (Figure ll-2): however, these
than CT, but CT is typically suffcient, quicker, and less
studies may not be diagnostic in acute disease. If a mass
expensive.
lesion or bone lysis is identified, biopsy via the naris is
indicated. Rhinoscopy to look for foreign objects is done
Advantages ● CT requires less anesthetic time and pro-
following diagnostic imaging studies and can be per-
vides much more detail than even well-positioned nasal
formed while a patient is anesthetized for imaging. Direct
examination may reveal adult Pneumonyssoides caninum.
of disease, finding
 "caverns" where aspergillosis has
Serologic testing for nasal aspergillosis can be falsely
caused destruction and loss of turbinate stnuctures, and
Chapter ll:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
265
Review history (contagious infectious diseases, anticoagulants)
Repeat physical examination (including oral cavity)
→ Serous, mucopurulent, or
Hemorrhage
serosanguineous discharge
Rule out coagulopathies
Nasal radiographs
(see Chapter 5)
(±CT or MRI preferred)
If no coagulopathy
Fluid/soft tissue
No fluid/soft tissue
opacity, ± lysis
opacity
present
Fine-needle aspiration
CBC
I lysis, nasal bone
Nasal lavage
biopsy or core biopsy
Cranial and caudal rhinoscopy
va naris
Fungal serology (Aspergilfus spp.,
Rhinoscopy
Cryptococcus spp.)
Core or mucosal biopsy
↑
If not diagnostic, consider CT, MRI,
exploratory rhinotomy
FIGURE 11-2 Approach to nasal discharge and epistaxis in dogs and cats. CBC, Complete blood count; CT, computed tomog-
raphy; MRi, magnetic resonance imaging.
it is far superior at fnding tumors. CT readily detects
Procedure · Imaging should be performed first. Next,
involvement of the orbital region, frontal sinuses, cal-
posterior rhinoscopy is performed by placing a flexible
varium, and cribriform plate in both aspergillosis and
scope into the posterior pharynx and retroflexing it to
tumors.
look above the soft palate. If a flexible scope is not avail-
able, one may retract the soft palate with an ovariectomy
Disadvantages · The need for specialized equipment
hook and visualize the area with a dental mirror and
and the slightly greater cost compared with radiographs
nasopharyngeal illuminator. Anterior rhinoscopy is then
are the major drawbacks. Occasionally, contrast media are
performed, preferably with a rigid arthroscope or cysto-
needed to distinguish between nonenhancing soft tissue
scope, or a small-diameter flexible bronchoscope or ure-
density due to nasal discharge and enhancing density due
teroscope. If these are not available an otoscope or nasal
to tumor or inflammation. Readers are referred to a radi-
speculum will allow some visualization of the rostral
ology text for additional information.
nares. Tissue or brush biopsies can be obtained for cyto-
logic analysis, histopathologic examination, or culture.
RHINOSCOPY
 Analysis and Interpretation · See Nasal Biopsy.
Occasional Indications · Rhinoscopy is generally per-
formed for the same reasons as nasal imaging.
NASAL LAVAGE
Advantages · Rhinoscopy is relatively noninvasive, may
Occasional Indications · Nasal lavage can be per-
be done after nasal imaging during the same anesthetic
formed for the same reasons as nasal radiography.
 procedure, and may provide defnitive diagnosis. It is
especially useful for diagnosing nasal aspergillosis.
Advantages ● It is less invasive and produces fewer com-
plications than core biopsy.
Disadvantages · Anesthesia is required. If an otoscope
cone is used, only the rostral nares can be visualized. Even
Disadvantage ● It is seldom diagnostic.
with a fiberscope arthroscope, or cystoscope, overall visu-
alization is limited, necessitating a careful, methodical
Procedure · Under general anesthesia with endotra-
examination that does not always allow diagnosis.
cheal intubation, the nasopharynx is packed off with
Copious nasal discharge or hemorrhage will obstruct
 gauze sponges and the nasal cavity is vigorously lavaged
visualization of nasal structures. In small dogs, rhinos-
with lactated Ringer's solution via a soft rubber tube
copy is diffcult unless an arthroscope is available Care
(Rob-Nel catheter; Sherwood Medical, St. Louis, MO).
must be taken to avoid causing hemorrhage which can
The fluid is recovered in a dish placed at the nares.
obscure the field of view.
A foreign body may occasionally be dislodged and
266
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
recovered from the naris or gauze sponges in the
submitted. A portion of the biopsy specimen can be
nasopharynx.
submitted for fungal or bacterial culture if indicated
(see Chapter 15). Impression smears can be made for
Analysis · Recovered fluid is centrifuged, and the sedi-
cytologic examination, and the remaining tissue can be
ment is stained and examined. A Wright-type (Giemsa)
submitted for histopathologic evaluation. Bleeding from
or Gram stain is preferred when looking for organisms
the naris after biopsy is expected but usually subsides
(e.g., Cryptococcus spp.). If lavaged material appears to be
within 30 minutes. Occasionally, bleeding is profuse,
an exudate, it can be cultured for fungi. Bacterial culture
prolonged, or both, in which case the affected area
is rarely useful. Direct examination of lavage fluid may
reveal adult or larval P caninum.
dipped in dilute (1: 10,000) epinephrine solution while
the animal is maintained under anesthesia until bleed-
Interpretation · In allergic rhinitis, many eosinophils
ing stops. Alternatively, nasal tampons [Merocel Stan-
may be visible (see Nasal Biopsy for additional interpreta-
dard Nasal Dressing with drawstring: Medtronic Xomed,
tion of nasal specimens).
Jacksonville, FL) may be used. In extreme cases, ligation
of the ipsilateral internal carotid artery can be life
saving.
NASAL BIOPSY
Interpretation of Impression Cytology
Common Indications · Indications are the same as for
nasal lavage. Nasal biopsy is performed to further charac-
Infection
terize the nature of nasal disease present, with or without
Because both healthy and diseased nasal cavity contain
radiographic evidence of masses or bone lysis. The proce-
various bacteria (see Chapter 15), identification of bacte-
dure may also be performed to obtain tissue for culture
ria is rarely helpful. Aspergillus spp. and Penicilium spp.
if indicated.
can occasionally be recovered from nasal cavities of
normal animals, as well as from patients with other dis-
Advantage · Tissue can be obtained for histopathologic
orders (e.g., neoplasia); therefore a cytologic diagnosis of
evaluation (and culture if indicated). Diseases other than
aspergillosis or penicilliosis must be confirmed by direct
neoplasia or fungal rhinitis that may be diagnosed by this
visualization of fungal plaques or occasionally based on
method are (l) various idiopathic inflammatory dis-
characteristic diagnostic imaging changes seen with CT.
eases,8.14 and (2) primary ciliary dyskinesia (i.e, immotile
Finding Cryptococcus spp. in a cat with chronic nasal dis-
cilia syndrome), although the latter requires electron
charge is usually diagnostic (Figure ll-3); however, Cryp-
microscopy to be definitive.
tococcus spp. occasionally are cultured from nasal washings
of normal dogs and cats.
Disadvantages · The procedure often causes bleeding.
Neoplasia
which may be profuse Although unlikely, penetration of
the cribriform plate is possible if the endoscopist is not
The most common canine nasal tumors are adenocarci-
careful.
nomas and carcinomas (Figure ll-4), although round cell
tumors (ie, transmissible venereal tumor, mast cell
Procedure ● If the animal's coagulation status is ques-
tumor, lymphosarcoma) occasionally occur. The most
tionable, a platelet count, mucosal bleeding time, acti-
common feline nasal tumors are lymphosarcoma and
vated cloting time, or prothrombin time (PT) and partial
carcinomas. Other malignant mesenchymal tissue tumors
thromboplastin time (PTT) should be performed (see
(e.g, fbrosarcoma, osteosarcoma) may occur but are less
[eauag iapun paoad sl Asdoia lesen (s iandeyo
anesthesia with endotracheal intubation. The head should
be positioned so that the nose points downward. The
nasopharynx can be packed off as for nasal lavage. The
biopsy instrument can be either small clamshell forceps
for smaller patients or uterine or colonic biopsy forceps.
or bone curettes, for larger patients. Direct biopsy of
lesions may also be accomplished during rhinoscopy
using biopsy forceps suitable for the scope. The distance
from the naris to the medial canthus of the eye is marked
on the biopsy forceps because this approximates the dis-
tance to the cribriform plate. The biopsy instrument is
advanced with the jaws open slightly in advance of reach-
ing the affected tissue; the jaws are then closed once
the area of interest is penetrated, and the biopsy instnu-
ment with tissue is withdrawn. Caution: The biopsy instru-
ment must not be advanced beyond the level of the
medial canthus because of potential cribriform plate
perforation.
-udondde iaqo iol uneuoy ul paxy aie suaunads
FIGURE 11-3 Cryptococcus neoformans from an aspiration
ate fixative if electron microscopy is desired)
PuE
from a nasal biopsy specimen.
Chapter 1l:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
267
EXPLORATORY RHINOTOMY
Occasional Indications · Exploratory rhinotomy can
be performed on patients with sneezing, nasal discharge.
 Or epistaxis when the cause has not been determined by
any of the previously discussed procedures.* If available;
CT should be performed before rhinotomy.
Advantages ● It allows excellent visualization, biopsy.
and culture of the nasal cavity, as well as identification of
foreign bodies.
Disadvantage · It is an invasive, painful procedure.
Procedure ● Readers are referred to a surgical text for a
procedure description. Impression smears for cytologic
examination are made from tissue samples. Tissue is cul-
tured for fungi and fixed in formalin to be submitted for
histopathologic evaluation.
FIGURE 11-4 Carcinoma cell from a fine-needle aspiration
(FNA) smear of a nasal tumor. Note the huge and variably sized
SEROLOGY/ANTIGEN DETECTION
nucleoli (black arrows). The cell on the left has a nucleolus
FOR NASAL FUNGAL DISORDERS
larger than a red blood cell (RBC) (red arrow). One cell has two
nuclei, another has three nuclei.
Occasional Indications · Tests for antibodies against
select fungi or their antigens is sometimes done for
patients with chronic, undiagnosed nasal discharge that
may be the result of aspergillosis or cryptococcosis [and
rarely other fungi; see Chapter 15).
exfoliative and more diffcult to diagnose cytologically
(see the discussion of cytologic evaluation of neoplastic
cells in Chapter 16).
OTHER TESTS FOR PATIENTS
WITH EPISTAXIS
Hemorrhage
 In nasal hemorrhage. proportions of erythrocytes and leu-
Occasional Indications · Coagulation tests for epi-
kocytes are approximately equivalent to those in whole
staxis are important in patients with undiagnosed nasal
blood.
cavity hemorrhage, especially before surgery or aggressive
biopsy (see Chapter 5). Chronic unilateral nasal hemor-
rhage without systemic signs of hemorrhage is usually
NASAL FINE-NEEDLE
caused by primary nasal disease; coagulation tests are
ASPIRATION BIOPSY
recommended but not mandated. Acute bilateral hemor-
'uos jaaieid pue saun uoeinteos saneiissanau aeu
Occasional Indications · Nasal fine-needle aspiration
however. Mucosal bleeding time is also appropriate.
biopsy is performed if the patient has nasal bone destruc-
Severe hypertension can also cause epistaxis; therefore
tion that permits a needle to be introduced into the
repeated measurement of systemic blood pressure is
appropriate in these cases.
the naris.
Advantages ● Anesthesia is not required, and the proce-
LARYNGEAL, NASOPHARYNGEAL,
dure is minimally invasive.
AND PHARYNGEAL EXAMINATION
Disadvantage ● Some tumors (eg. mesenchymal) are
Occasional Indications · Nasopharyngeal, laryngeal,
poorly exfoliative.
and pharyngeal examination is important for patients
with stridor or gagging suggestive of an upper airway
Procedure · The area of bone lysis is identified by pal-
obstructive
r  (e.g. nasopharyngeal  polyp.
pation or by nasal imaging studies. A 22- or 23-gauge
laryngeal paralysis, tumor, nasopharyngeal stenosis) or
needle is inserted through the lytic area of bone and
foreign body.7. 16
aspiration is performed. Specimens are submitted for
cytologic examination.
Advantage · It permits definitive diagnosis and treat-
 ment if polyps, laryngeal paralysis, pharyngeal or laryn-
Interpretation ● See Interpretation of Impression Cytol-
 geal tumors, nasopharyngeal stenosis, or foreign bodies
 Ogy under Nasal Biopsy, earlier in chapter.
are present.
268
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Disadvantage · It requires appropriate anesthesia.
making respiratory distress worse and anesthesia-
associated problems.
Procedure ● Under a light plane of anesthesia (i.e., the
patient is spontaneously breathing). movement of the
Procedure · Dogs often tolerate TTA without sedation,
laryngeal cartilages is observed. If the patient is not
but tranquilizers (e.g.. acepromazine) can be used. For
breathing spontaneously or is taking very shallow breaths,
cats, sedation (e.g. 1 to 2 mg ketamine/kg intravenously
one may administer doxapram in order to stimulate res-
[IV] is routine; oxygen should be available if respiratory
piration. The cormiculate processes of the arytenoid carti-
distress occurs. The patient is restrained in sternal recum-
lages and vocal folds normally should abduct with
bency. After clipping and surgical preparation of the
inspiration and passively adduct with expiration. With
skin over the larynx, a bleb of lidocaine is injected over
laryngeal paralysis, these structures do not abduct
the cricothyroid membrane. A through-the-needle type of
with inspiration but remain in a partially adducted posi-
catheter (Intracath; Deseret Medical Inc, Sandy, UT) (20
tion or collapse [i.e., adduct) on forceful inspiration. The
gauge for cats and small dogs, 16 gauge for medium-sized
oropharynx is examined by pulling the tongue forward.
and large dogs) is inserted through the cricothyroid mem-
The nasopharynx is examined as described for posterior
brane and advanced to approximately the level of the
rhinoscopy.
main stem bronchi. Alternatively, a sterile 3.5-French
14-gauge needle in large dogs. In anesthetized animals,
TRACHEAL AND THORACIC
the catheter can be inserted through a sterile endotracheal
RADIOGRAPHY/FLUOROSCOPY
tube (recommended for cats if anesthesia is tolerated).
Depending on the animal's size, 0.5 to 1.0 ml/kg of
Common Indications ● Tracheal and thoracic radiogra-
sterile lactated Ringer's solution (0.9% saline is accept-
phy and fluoroscopy are important as early diagnostics
able but causes more cellular distortion) is injected
for patients with chronic or severe cough or other bron-
into the catheter. After the animal coughs, aspiration is
chopulmonary disease.
performed. Chest coupage after fluid instillation may
improve recovery of debris from the airways. Usually only
Advantages ● These procedures are noninvasive and
a small amount of injected material is recovered. If a low-
often localize problems.
pressure (i.e., <5 mm Hg) suction pump is available.
yield is higher. Using the suction pump method, material
Disadvantage · They are rarely of value in acute inflam-
can be aspirated into a suction trap (Dee Lee suction
matory disorders (e.g., viral tracheobronchitis) or throm-
catheter; American Hospital Supply. McGraw Park, IL).
boembolism not caused by diroflariasis.
Multiple aliquots of lactated Ringer's solution can be
injected until a sample is obtained. Aliquots of aspirate
Procedure and Interpretation ● The reader is referred
may be submitted for cytologic analysis and aerobic,
to a radiology text for additional information. Evaluation
anaerobic, or fungal aulture. The use of "roll prepara-
of both right and left lateral views improves visualization
tions" of the cellular pellet of spun samples is advised
of pulmonary masses.
because cellular disruption often results if unspun fluid
samples cannot reach the laboratory within 1 hour of
collection. To make a roll preparation, the wooden end
TRANSTRACHEAL/TRACHEAL
of a cotton-tipped applicator stick is used to gently roll
ASPIRATION
cells from the pellet onto clean glass slides. The decision
to culture is based on cytologic findings (see the following
Common Indications · Indications for tracheal aspira-
text under Interpretation).
tion (TA) and transtracheal aspiration (TTA) are generally
 For TA, the patient is anesthetized (e.g., propofol) and
the same as for thoracic radiographs.
intubated. A urinary catheter is passed through the endo-
tracheal tube to the level of the intrathoracic trachea Or
Advantages ● TTA is relatively noninvasive, yet samples
bifurcation, and a wash is performed as described for TTA.
the tracheobronchial tree without anesthesia. TA is rela-
tively noninvasive but does require approximately 2 to 3
Interpretation · Occasional  ciliated  columnar
minutes of anesthesia. Therefore TA is more commonly
cuboidal epithelial cells, occasional undifferentiated mac-
rophages with few or no vacuoles, rare neutrophils, and
hard to safely penetrate the trachea with a needle.
small amounts of mucus are normal. Some normal epi-
thelial cells may appear smudged or lack cilia because of
Disadvantages · Complications are uncommon with
trauma during sample preparation. TTA aspirates from
TTA and can include subcutaneous (SC) emphysema
animals with bronchopulmonary disease may be classi-
originating at the site of needle penetration, esophageal
fied as mucopurulent inflammation, nonpurulent inflam-
perforation, hemorrhage and lower airway catheter stylet
mation, neoplastic, or hemorrhagic (see Chapter 16).
trauma. Samples may not accurately reflect lower airway
or lung disease [e.g., bronchiolitis, interstitial pneumo-
Mucopurulent Inflammation ● This aspirate is a mixture
nia). TTA is contraindicated in patients with severe respi-
of neutrophils [see the discussion of neutrophilic inflam-
ratory distress because restraint can worsen the distress
 mation in Chapter 16) and abundant mucus, often plus
and cause death. Severe coagulopathy is a relative con-
a few macrophages (Figure ll-5). In mucopunulent
traindication. Possible complications with TA include
inflammation, the mucoid material may stain basophilic
Chapter ll:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
269
FIGURE 11-5 Mucopurulent inflammation from a transtracheal
aspirate of a dog with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
associated with collapsed trachea. Note the large numbers of
nondegenerate neutrophils and abundant mucus.
(blue) or become eosinophilic (pink) as the inflamma-
FIGURE 11-7 Ciliated columnar epithelial cell from a tracheal
tion becomes more severe. A thorough search for bacteria
washing. There are numerous rod-shaped bacteria ji.e., Borde-
(especially intracellular) should be made if degenerate
tella bronchiseptica) attached to the apical end of these cells
neutrophils are seen (Figure ll-6). Causes of mucopuru-
{arrows).
lent inflammation include bacterial, fungal, viral, myco-
plasmal, and protozoal infection, as well as chronic
bronchitis, tumors, foreign bodies, and aspiration. Occa-
Chapter 16), eosinophils (see the discussion of eosino-
sionally, bacteria (e.g. Bordetella bronchiseptica) can be
philic inflammation in Chapter l6), or both than is
found attached to ciliated columnar epithelial cells 
found in mucopunulent exudates. Nonpurulent exudates
(Figure 1ll-7).
may contain a predominance of eosinophils or macro-
A portion of the TTA sample should be placed in a
phages or a mixture of eosinophils, macrophages., and
culture transport medium (see Chapter i5) before
neutrophils. Eosinophilic inflammation (Figure ll-8)
cytologic evaluation. If mucopurulent inflammation is
suggests hypersensitivity caused by inhaled allergens.
found, this portion should be submitted for culture (see
parasites, or eosinophilic pulmonary granulomatosis.
Chapter 15).
Parasitic causes include D. immitis, Capillaria aerophilia
(Figure ll-9),. Paragonimus kellicotti (Figure ll-10), Aelu-
Nonpurulent Inflammation ● This aspirate includes a
rostrongylus abstrusus (Figure ll-ll),. Oslerus osleri, Filaroi-
higher percentage of macrophages (see the discussion of
des spp., or migrating parasites such as Toxocara spp. or
granulomatous and pyogranulomatous inflammation in
Ancylostoma spp. Small numbers of mast cells are common
FIGURE 11-6 Septic inflammation in a transtracheal aspiration
FIGURE 11-8 Eosinophilic inflammation in a transtracheal
[TTA) specimen from a dog with bacterial pneumonia. Note
aspiration (TTA) specimen from a dog.
the large number of degenerate neutrophils, some containing
intracellular bacteria.
270
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
FGURE 11-9 Capillaria aerophiia egg in a fecal specimen
FIGURE 11-11 Aelurostrongylus abstrusus larvae from a Baer-
from a dog with chronic cough. (Courtesy of Dr. Tom Craig,
mann's fecal examination. (Courtesy of Dr. Tom Craig. Texas
A&M University.)
Texas A&M University.)
in eosinophilic inflammation. A predominance of dif-
common than metastatic tumors. Because of their inter-
ferentiated macrophages [i.e., larger macrophages with
stitial location, cells from metastatic pulmonary tumors
abundant cytoplasm and numerous cytoplasmic vacu-
are rare in TTA specimens.
oles) suggests subacute to chronic disease, such as granu-
 Aspirated material from the oral cavity is suggested
[esund pidl io jguny Aq pasnes ejuounaud snoieuol
by squamous epithelial cells (which may be coated with
organisms are rarely recovered because they tend to be
bacteria) or certain large bacteria such as Simonsiella spp.
 interstitial instead of in the airways.
(Figure 1ll-12).
Lymphocytes may be visible in acute viral tracheo-
Other Cells in Transtracheal Aspirates ·Reactive epithelial
bronchitis, and lymphocytes plus plasma cells may be
cells may be found with any inflammatory process, espe-
visible in chronic, progressive, septic bronchopneumoni-
cially in cats. The cytoplasm is more basophilic (blue)
tis; sterile bronchopneumonitis; or pulmonary lymphoid
than normal epithelial cells, and nuclei have fine chroma-
granulomatosis.
tin and visible nucleoli. Cells may be single or clustered.
Ova of C. aerophilia [see Figure ll-9) P kellicotti (see
Goblet cells are occasionally visible in inflammatory
Figure ll-10) and Filaroides hirthi occasionally are found,
disease. They contain granules of intracellular mucus and
as are larvae of O. osleri, Crenosoma vulpis, A. abstrusus
often occur in conjunction with abundant extracellular
(Figure ll-ll), Toxocara canis, T cati, and Strongyloides
mucus.
stercoralis, as well as microfilariae of D. immitis.
Neoplastic cells are occasionally recovered from
 Anthracotic pigment appears as dense black granules
animals with primary lung tumors, particularly adenocar-
shop u supuy ieiuapoun ue si pue saseudae uuim
cinomas. Primary lung tumors, however, are much less
in industrial areas.
AGURE 11-10 Paragonimus kellicotti egg in a fecal specimen
from a cat with chronic cough. (Courtesy of Dr. Tom Craig.
FIGURE 11-12 Simonsiella spp. (arrows) and other bacteria in
Texas A&M University.)
Chapter 1l:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
271
BRONCHOALVEOLAR LAVAGE
is the alveolar macrophage: however, large numbers of
 ui s aq u ( n ] sooa
Common Indications ● Indications for BAL are gener-
normal cats. Other cell types and infectious organisms
ally the same as for TTA.
(e.g.. yeast, fungal hyphae, bacteria) may be present.
depending on the patient's disease Interpretation is
Procedure · BAL is an invasive technique, requires
similar to that described for TTA.
general anesthesia, and causes temporary respiratory
Because of inevitable oral contamination of instru-
compromise. Although not technically diffcult practice
ments used for BAL procedures, BAL specimens are not
is required to acquire confidence and skill in performing
useful for accurate bacteriologic culture {unless steriliza-
BAL The procedure can be performed through an endo-
tion of the scope and associated equiprment is feasible).
tracheal tube; however, endoscopic BAL is recommended
Specimens for culture are ideally collected by TTA or with
because of improved site selectivity for collection of speci-
a guarded swab.
mens and enhanced retrieval of lavage fluid.
Animals undergoing BAL should receive atropine as
a preanesthetic and be anesthetized with ketamine/
TRACHEOBRONCHOSCOPY
acepromazine or ketamine/diazepam IV, with isoflurane
tank induction (cats), or with other IV short-acting (eg..
Occasional Indications · Tracheobronchoscopy is pri-
propofol) anesthetic agents (dogs). Additional anesthetic
marily performed in patients with persistent undiagnosed
can be given IV if needed to maintain anesthesia. BAL may
coughing. hemoptysis, or a suspected obstructive lesion;
be performed directly through a sterile endotracheal tube
whenever direct visualization of larger airways is required
(4 mm internal diameter) in cats and very small dogs. The
to look for obstruction or collapse; or to selectively
endotracheal tube is placed rostral to the carina, and the
sample an area of the tracheobronchial tree It is the
cuff is inflated. Oxygen (100% O2) is administered for 1
 procedure of choice to diagnose collapsed trachea if radi-
to 2 minutes before lavage. After preoxygenation, the
ography or fluoroscopy has not established the diagnosis.
patient is placed in lateral recumbency with the most
Flexible bronchoscopes are preferred.
affected side down and a syringe is attached to the endo-
tracheal tube Three aliquots [5 ml/kg) of warm, sterile
Advantages ● It provides direct visualization of major
lactated Ringer's solution (0.9% saline is acceptable but
airways and allows biopsy of specific sites. This is the
causes more cellular distortion) are gently infused into
technique of choice to diagnose O. osleri infection. Cyto-
the lung and immediately retrieved with gentle suction.
Ansn ae Asdo ysq  pauiqo suaads oo
Elevating the patient's hindquarters improves retrieval of
superior to those obtained by TTA. Pulmonary biopsy can
BAL fluid. Each aliquot is kept in a separate syringe for
be performed via a transbronchial biopsy.
analysis. After the procedure, O2 (100%) is administered
continuously until the animal is fully awake and breath-
Disadvantages · It requires general anesthesia; pulmo-
ing is no longer suppressed.
nary biopsy has the potential risk of tracheal rupture
 If an endoscope is used, an endotracheal tube is not
(especially in cats), pneumomediastinum, pneumotho-
necessary. Rather, the endoscope can be passed into the
rax, and pulmonary hemorrhage If oxygen is being insuf.
trachea while O2 is delivered through the endoscopic
flated through the biopsy channel, care must be taken to
biopsy channel (be careful to avoid barotrauma) or
avoid barotrauma.
through an adapter adjacent to the endoscope In larger
dogs, the endoscope can be passed through an endotra-
Procedure ● The endoscope is passed either through an
cheal tube and O and inhalant anesthesia administered
endotracheal tube [large dog) or directly into the trachea
around the endoscope with a T-adapter. The distal end of
(small dog or cat). A thorough systematic examination is
the endoscope is "wedged" in a main stem bronchus
made of all accessible parts of the tracheobronchial tree.
Or airway of interest. Three aliquots [ie., 2 ml/kg) of
warmed, sterile lactated Ringer's solution are flushed
Interpretation ● In collapse of the trachea, main stem
through the endoscopic biopsy channel and immediately
bronchus, or bronchi, severity of the lesion is assessed.
retrieved as previously described. Pre- and post-BAL oxy-
Other lesions are visualized and may be sampled by
genation is performed as previously described.
either brush or endoscopic forceps. Specimens obtained
 BAL fluid often appears foamy because of pulmonary
may be submitted for bacteriologic culture or for cyto-
surfactant recovered by the BAL procedure. Unspun BAL
logic and histopathologic examination.
specimens should be transferred immediately to the labo-
ratory for analysis. If rapid transport of BAL fluid to the
laboratory is impossible, cytologic specimens should be
prepared immediately by cytocentrifugation or roll prepa-
FECAL EXAMINATION
rations (Cytocentrifuge Il; Shandon Southern Instru-
ments, Sewickley, PA). Roll preparations are made from
Occasional Indications · Fecal examination can be
the cell pellet resulting from centrifugation. The wooden
or
Aua on pasn st yos roieoidde paddn-uoo e jo pua
dyspnea, particularly if unexplained eosinophilia
is
roll cells from the pellet onto clean glass slides. These
present or if radiographic signs suggest pulmonary
consistently produce excellent cytologic specimens.
parasitism.
The cellular character of BAL preparations is vastly
different from TTA specimens. The predominant celltype
Advantage · It is noninvasive.
272
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Disadvantage · Ova of some pulmonary parasites (eg..
Becton-Dickinson, Rutherford, NJ) with stylet removed
F. hirthi) are not reliably recovered.
and a 12-ml syringe are used. After clipping and surgical
preparation of the skin, the needle is attached to the
Procedure · Fecal flotation is performed using zinc
syringe and inserted into the pulmonary parenchyma,
sulfate solution or other flotation media (see Chapter 9).
and aspiration is performed. The procedure should be
done quickly, actual aspiration not taking more than a
Interpretation · Ova of C. aerophilia (see Figure ll-9).
few seconds. Very little material is usually aspirated, and
F hirthi, Eucoleus boehmi, and P kellicotti (see Figure ll-10)
what is present typically remains in the needle hub. The
may be detected.
needle should be removed from the syringe, air intro-
duced into the syringe the needle reattached, and the
aspirated material quickly "blown" onto a clean glass
BAERMANN'S FUNNEL APPARATUS
slide Another clean slide is used to prepare a horizontal
"pull-apart" specimen for cytologic examination. Pulmo-
Occasional Indications · A Baermann's funnel appara-
nary aspiration should be performed early in the day so
tus can be used for the same reasons as fecal flotation for
that the patient can be monitored for dyspnea caused by
respiratory parasites.
pneumothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage, or hemoptysis.
Ultrasonography is generally not useful for evaluating
Advantage · It is noninvasive.
the pulmonary parenchyma. If a mass lesion is present,
however, ultrasonographic or fluoroscopic guidance may
Disadvantages ● It is inconvenient and cumbersome;
help in needle placement.
some parasites (eg. O. osleri) shed larvae erratically.
Larger lung tissue specimens for histopathologic
examination can be obtained with a similar technique
Procedure · Fresh feces are placed on cheesecloth in a
using a modified Menghini's aspiration biopsy needle
[auuny e] sneiedde suueaeg au un uaui pue iauieis
[Modified Menghini Biopsy needle; Becton-Dickinson) or
with a clamped rubber tube at the stem end). Water is
Bard Monopty biopsy needle (C.R Bard, Inc., Murray
added to the funnel to cover the feces, which are then
Hill, NJ).' Complications are similar to those for pulmo-
broken up into small pieces. After a few hours, a small
nary aspiration biopsy.
aliquot of water is drained through the rubber tube and
examined microscopically for larvae.
Interpretation · Fine-needle aspiration biopsy speci-
mens are examined cytologically and classifed as inflam-
Interpretation · Larvae of Filaroides milksi, F hirthi, O.
matory, neoplastic or hemorrhagic (see Chapter 16)
osleri, C. vulpis, A. abstrusus [see Figure ll-1l) and S. ster-
Larger specimens are submitted for histopathologic
coralis may be identified, but a negative test result does
examination.
not eliminate these parasites. The method of choice to
diagnose O. osleri infection is bronchoscopy.
Inflammatory ● Neutrophils, monocytes, or eosinophils
predominate. Abundant erythrocytes are common. In
fungal pneumonia, especially if caused by blastomycosis
PULMONARY ASPIRATION BIOPSY
(Figure 1ll-13) or histoplasmosis (see Figure 9-3A), free
Or engulfed yeasts may be visible. The number of eosino-
 Occasional Indications · Pulmonary aspiration biopsy
phils can be increased in aspirates from animals with
is primarily used in patients with masses or diffuse infil-
pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophilia, as well as other
trative disease, and to procure material for culture.
hypersensitivities and parasitism.
Advantage · It samples pulmonary parenchyma without
thoracotomy.
 Disadvantages · Possible complications include pneu-
mothorax, pulmonary hemorrhage, hemoptysis, and (if
the myocardium is inadvertently penetrated) cardiac
 arrhythmias, any of which may rarely cause death.
Contraindications · It is contraindicated in uncooper-
ative patients and those with thrombocytopenia, bleeding
disorders, severe uncontrolled coughing. and pulmonary
bullae or cysts.
Procedure · Coagulation status should be screened
(see Chapter 5) with platelet count and mucosal bleed-
ing time For diffuse pulmonary disease the recom-
mended aspiration site is between the seventh and ninth
intercostal spaces, two thirds of the distance from the
FIGURE 11-13 Blastonyces dermatitidis in a fine-needle pul-
costochondral junction  to  the  vertebral bodies.
A
pue ssol lybiam ylim bop e woy uawipads uoejidse Aeuow
25-gauge hypodermic or spinal needle (Spinal needle;
respiratory distress.
Chapter l:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
273
Neoplastic · Neoplastic cells occasionally are visible.
evolving area of research and current interpretive criteria
Malignant epithelial cells tend to appear in clusters (eg..
provided by the diagnostic laboratory (IDEXX) should
rafts), and inflammatory cells may be present.
be used when interpreting test results in individual
patients.
Hemorrhagic · Hemorrhage frequently occurs and is
usually iatrogenic.
   s o  
m (sie u h/od 0z) sop seodse u h/owd
Parasitic · Adult F hinthi organisms are rarely recovered.
known acquired heart disease are considered indicative of
risk for developing heart failure. In dogs and cats with
clinical signs suggestive of heart failure, levels greater than
1800 pmol/L and 270 pmol/L, respectively, support that
SEROLOGY/ANTIGEN TESTS FOR
current clinical signs are related to heart disease and
PULMONARY DISEASES
should be considered an indication for additional cardiac
testing (eg., thoracic radiographs, echocardiogram).
In histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, and
coccidioidomycosis, fnding organisms (yeast forms) is
Artifacts · False positives are possible; they are more
diagnostic Pulmonary disease caused by these organisms
common if inappropriate populations are tested (e.g.-
is usually interstitial, and TTA rarely demonstrates the
all dogs).
organism. Serology for antibodies or antigen tests [i.e..
coccidioidomycosis, blastomycosis, cryptococcosis, histo-
  o st  a  si
plasmosis) may establish a tentative diagnosis when TTA,
failure therapy can result in a reduction in NT-proBNP
BAL, and pulmonary aspiration biopsy do not (see char-
level, but it will not normalize.
acteristics of individual tests in Chapter 15). Serologic
testing for Toxoplasma gondif is rarely indicated in patients
Causes of Decreased Serum NT-proBNP · Unknown.
with pulmonary disease.
Causes of Increased Serum NT-proBNP · Occult and
AMINO-TERMINAL PRO-B-TYPE
symptomatic acquired and congenital heart disease, pul-
monary hypertension, and severe arrhythmias can cause
NATRIURETIC PEPTIDE
increased NT-proBNP; false positives can occur.
(NT-proBNP)
Indications · Current indications are based on avail-
CARDIAC TROPONIN 1 (cTnI)
able data, but this is an evolving area and indications are
likely to change significantly in the near future This test
Indications ● Cardiac Troponin I cTnl is a marker of
should be used in conjunction with other appropriate
significant myocyte injury and has been demonstrated to
tests which it does not replace; however, NT-proBNP may
be elevated in veterinary patients with both primary
improve both accuracy and confidence when used appro-
cardiac disease and systemic diseases known to cause
priately. Evaluation of NT-proBNP may be useful in
cardiac damage. Thus it may be useful to identify patients
screening for cardiac disease in selected asymptomatic
at increased risk of significant cardiac damage and eleva-
populations of cats and dogs, including Dobermans,
tions should be cause for concern and additional (more
boxers, cats with murmurs or gallops or arrhythmias, and
specific) diagnostic testing.
purebred cats with a high risk of cardiomyopathy. Evalu-
ation my help differentiate if clinical signs suggestive of
Advantages ● It is a simple blood test, relatively inex-
heart failure (e.g. dyspnea, tachypnea, orthopnea, exer-
pensive, and readily available at many laboratories.
Cise intolerance, weakness, collapse/syncope) are related
to heart disease versus other noncardiac etiologies in both
Analysis · Typically analysis utilizes an immunoassay
cats and dogs. More recently, data suggest that trends in
and is performed on serum. However, it is best to check
asymptomatic dogs with chronic valve disease may help
with the laboratory to which the sample is being sub-
identify dogs at increased risk of developing heart failure.
mitted, since there could be some variation in sample
submission. In addition, the assay must be validated at
Advantages · NT-proBNP is a simple blood test, and
each lab and reference ranges established for both cats
relatively inexpensive.
and dogs.
Analysis ● Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA)
Normal Values ● In general, values above 0.2 ng/ml are
testing is done on EDTA plasma that is submitted in a
associated with reduced survival time in dogs and cats.
protease tube supplied by the laboratory (IDEXX). The
However, specific reference ranges from the laboratory
blood sample must be spun and plasma put in the pro-
that runs the assay should be used.
tease tube within l hour. Once in the protease tube, the
sample is stable.
Danger Values ● In general, higher values are considered
to reflect more severe cardiac damage. Elevations in cTnI
Normal Values ● Based on current available data, normal
are greater with ischemia (approximately 10-fold increase)
values for cats are typically less than 50 pmol/L and for
versus myocarditis (5-fold increase) and may be lower in
dogs are less than 800 pmol/L. However, this is an
other acquired cardiac diseases.
274
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Artifacts ● An elevated cTnI is suggestive of myocardial
Artifacts · Improper sample storage before analysis can
damage but does not diagnose a specifc cause Elevated
decrease the Pao2, while failing to remove air bubbles can
cTnI should be considered an indication for additional
increase the Pao2 (see Chapter 6).
cardiac diagnostic tests. A negative test does not rule out
all cardiac diseases.
Drug Treatment That May Alter Values · Excessive
heparin decreases both pH and Paoz, whereas citrate.
Drugs That May Alter Results · Appropriate cardiac
oxalate, Or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)
 therapy may result in reductions in cTnl.
may decrease pH (see Chapter 6). Any drugs altering
control of respiratory drive (eg., anesthetic agents) may
Causes of Decreased cTnl · None recognized.
alter PaO2
Causes of Increased cTnI · Dogs: gastric dilation and
volvulus, pyometra, cardiac contusion, babesiosis.
Partial Pressure of Oxygen
acquired and congenital heart disease, arrhythmogenic
right ventricular cardiomyopathy in the boxer, infarction,
Although measurement of Paoz helps evaluate the degree
cardiac and noncardiac dyspnea, pericardial effusion, age.
of respiratory dysfunction, it is only one factor affecting
Cats: hyperthyroidism, cardiomyopathy.
O, delivery to tissues. Other parameters, such as cardiac
output, blood pressure, regional blood flow, position of
the hemoglobin dissociation curve, and hemoglobin con-
centration, are also important (Box ll-4). Paoz in atmo-
ARTERIAL BLOOD GASES
spheric air at sea level may range between 149 and
159 mm Hg (19.7% to 20.8%), depending on humidity.
Alveolar ventilation refers to ability of inspired air to enter
The corresponding Pao in alveolar air (104 mm Hg or
and leave alveoli. Ventilatory failure refers to inadequate
13.6%) is lower because of increased Pacoz and HO
 airflow into and out of alveoli and results in an inability
respiratory gases.
to maintain carbon dioxide (COz) homeostasis in the
body. Respiratory failure refers to failure of ventilation,
Causes of Hypoxemia · Causes include inadequate
perfusion, or diffusion.
 Oxygen in inspired air, alveolar hypoventilation, impaired
diffusion, ventilation/perfusion mismatching. and vas-
Rare Indications · Measurement of arterial blood gases
cular shunting (see Box ll-4). Characterization and
-aaid Aend o aime yim said ui a aq u
evaluation of hypoxemia and accompanying Pcoz and
chymal disease causing respiratory insuffciency or venti-
HCO; changes are discussed later under Diagnostic Eval-
latory failure of any cause.
uation of Blood Gases.
Advantages · It quantitates the degree of respiratory
impairment, evaluates compensatory changes, and moni-
tors response to treatment.
Disadvantages · It does not allow the clinician to
BoX 11-4, CausEs 0f HYpoxeMIa IN Dogs
determine focal versus disseminated respiratory disease,
AND CATS
to diagnose, or to prognosticate. In addition, it requires
arterial puncture and prompt submission of the
Inadequate Oxygen in Inspired Air
specimen.
High altitude
 Failure of oxygen source during anesthesia
Sample Procurement ● See Chapter 6.
Aveolar Hypoventilation (associated with
Analysis · An arterial blood sample is necessary for
increased Paco2)
evaluation of the respiratory system. Use of venous blood
Depression/arrest of respiratory center
gas analysis for determination of acid-base status is dis-
Fail ure of muscles of respiration
cussed in Chapter 6; venous O tension (Pvoz) is dis-
Third-space disease (pneumothorax, pleural effusion, flail 
cussed in the next section.
dhest, diaphragmatic hernia)
 Airway obstruction
Normal Arterial Values ● See Table 6-1.
Impaired Diffusion
Danger Values · Arterial partial pressure of oxygen
Interstitial pulmonary disease (pneumonia, edema,
neoplasia, embolism!
(Paoz) less than 60 mm Hg: arterial partial pressure of
Ainway disease
carbon dioxide (Paco2) greater than 70 mm Hg.
Vascular Shunting
Rght-to-left cardiac shunts (tetralogy of Fallot, right-to-
left shunting from patent ductus arteriosus or
NOTE: Danger values depend on duration of the problem
ventricular or atrial septal defect!
(chronicity allows compensatory mechanisms, enabling tol-
Intrapulmonary arteriovenous shunts
erance of greater abnormalities).
Chapter 1l:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
275
TABLE 11-1.ASSESSMENT OFVENTILATIONBASEDONBLOOD GAS ANALYSIS
Decreased Paco2 (Hyperventilation):
pH↓↓↓
pH normal
pH↑
pH个
HCO↓
HCO←
HCO↓
HCO; normal
 Partially compensated
Compensated metabolic
Chronic hyperventilation
Acute hyperventilation
metabolic acidosis
acidosis
(partially compensated
(uncompensated respiratory
respiratory alkalosis]
alkalosis)
Normal Paco2:
pH↓-↓↓
pH↑-↑↑
↑-O5H
HCO-↑
 Uncompensated metabolic
Uncompensated metabolic
alkalosis
acidosis
Increased Paco, (Hypoventilation):
pH↓-↓
pH normal
PH↑
HCO; normal
HCO↑
HCO-↑
 Acute ventilatory failure
 Chronic ventilatory failure 
 Partially compensated
(uncompensated respiratory
(compensated respiratory
metabolic alkalosis 
acidosis)
acidosis)
Explanation of pH (dogs): pH normal: 7.36 to 7.44; pH ↑: 7.45 to 7.50: pH ↑↑: >7.50: pH ↓: 7.30 to 7.35; pH ↓↓: <7.30. No attempt is made to quan-
titate HCO; changes.
Partial Pressure of Carbon Dioxide
abnormality. A brief overview of the three steps is given
next. For additional information, readers are referred to
Pacoz in alveolar air at sea level is 40 mm Hg (5.3%),
DiBartola.511
whereas that of atmospheric air is only 0.3 mm Hg
Step 1: Evaluation of
(0.3%). An increase or decrease in Paco, is caused by a
decrease or increase in ventilation, respectively (Table
the Ventilatory Status
1l-1). Because increased Paco, decreases pH, the condi-
The clinician should evaluate Pacoz, Ventilation is classi-
tion is also known as respiratory acidosis. The reverse
fied as acceptable [i.e, normal Pacoz), hyperventilation
Occurs with a decrease in PacOz [ie., respiratory
(i.e., decreased Pacoz), or hypoventilation [i.e, increased
alkalosis).
Pacoz). From Table ll-1, the abnormality can be assessed
as respiratory or metabolic in origin. For additional infor-
Causes of Hypercapnia (Hypercarbia) · See Chapter 6.
mation, see Boxes 6-8 and 6-10 and the discussions
of respiratory acidosis and respiratory alkalosis in
Causes of Hypocapnia (Hypocarbia) · See Chapter 6.
Chapter 6.
Compensatory Responses to Alterations in Blood
Step 2: Assessment of
Gases · Decreased Pao is associated with either
the' Hypoxemic State
increased or decreased Paco,. In dogs, predictable changes
Decreased Pao, confirms arterial hypoxemia and suggests
in HCO; are associated with alterations in PacO2, and
tissue hypoxia (see Box ll-4).
similar changes may occur in cats (see Table 6-2).
Step 3: Assessment of the Tissue
Oxygen State
Diagnostic Evaluation of Blood Gases
Normal tissue oxygenation requires perfusion by ade-
First, the clinician should decide if the abnormality is
quately oxygenated blood. Therefore this step involves
significant. Minor elevations in Pao, are not an indication
assessment of cardiac status, peripheral perfusion, and
for additional evaluation other than characterization of
blood O, transport (see later).
the underlying disorder In patients breathing an enriched
O2 mixture, a Paoz less than approximately five times the
PARTIAL PRESSURE OF OXYGEN
inspired Oz concentration is an indication for additional
diagnostics. If the change is significant, one should first
IN VENOUS BLOOD
characterize the abnormality as a primary or secondary.
compensated or uncompensated disorder and then seek
Occasional Indications ● Measurement of Pvo, helps
to determine the underlying cause (see Table ll-l). A
evaluate adequacy of O, delivery to tissues and monitor
three-step process is recommended to characterize the
cardiac output.
276
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Analysis and Interpretation · If pulmonary edema is
Procedure · Skin over the right 5th to llth intercostal
present, PaOz should be measured. If Paoz is greater than
spaces (or elsewhere if effusion is localized) is clipped
65 mm Hg. partial pressure of oxygen in venous blood
and prepared surgically. The needle of a butterfly-type
(Pvo2) will reflect cardiac output. The sample should be
 r  s a u pas s 
taken from the jugular vein. Occlusion of the vein for
space at approximately the level of the costochondral
longer than 5 to 10 seconds artifactually decreases Pvo2-
junction, and fluid is aspirated into a syringe. A three-way
Normal Pvoz is greater than 40 mm Hg. Precautions for
stopcock can be attached to the syringe if the procedure
obtaining and storing the blood sample before analysis
is to be both therapeutic and diagnostic. Fluid analysis is
are the same as for arterial blood gases.
described in Chapter 10. Masses may also be aspirated for
If PvO2 is less than 30 mm Hg.
.Odelivery to
cytologic evaluation, ideally with fluoroscopic or ultraso-
the tissues is inadequate. Cardiac output, O saturation,
nographic guidance. When fluid has been analyzed (see
hemoglobin concentration, and peripheral arteriovenous
Chapter l0), it may be useful to aspirate as much fluid as
shunts should be considered as causes of low Pvoz and
possible and radiograph (or re-radiograph) the thorax to
evaluated as described previously. In patients with cardiac
look for structures (eg., mediastinal masses) not previ-
disease, a Pvoz cannot be correlated to a specifc cardiac
ously evident.
-aoidui iayau road ul saseaioap io saseainui inq 'sndino
0l aaleian (alaaoadsar) indino peipie suuasiom no su!
Interpretation · See Chapter 10.
the initial value.
THORACOSCOPY/THORACOTOMY
PULSE OXIMETRY
Rare Indications · Thoracotomy and thoracoscopy
Occasional Indications · Pulse oximetry evaluates
 can be performed to look for a foreign body (eg. grass
pulse rate and hemoglobin saturation in arterial blood
awn) in patients with nocardiosis or actinomycosis
(Saoz). Measurement of Sao, is nearly as informative as
or to look for infiltrative disease (eg., mesothelioma)
Paoz, because each is a measure of ability of the lungs to
causing chronic or progressive pleural effusion. Thora-
deliver oxygen to the blood. Pulse oximetry is valuable as
cotomy is also used for lobectomy or biopsy (lung or
an ongoing monitor to detect hypoxemia, especially
masses) in patients with infltrative disease that cannot
during anesthesia.
be diagnosed with other tests. Thoracoscopy has the
advantage of less morbidity and shorter postoperative
Procedure · A pulse oximeter electrode is attached to
recovery times compared with thoracotomy: however,
the patient (e.g. tongue, lips, ear). Arterial blood gas
-jexa ue qbnoioql se 1oy molle jou saop Adoososeioy
measurements can be made to verify accuracy of the pulse
 nation as thoracotomy. In general, imaging (i.e., radio-
oximeter.
graphs or CT) should be done before thoracotomy or
thoracoscopy.
Interpretation ● Reasonable pulmonary and cardiovas-
cular functions are required to achieve accurate measure-
ments of pulse rate and hemoglobin saturation. Peripheral
References and Suggested Readings
vasoconstriction may result in a poor reading of pulse rate
but has value in identifying hypoxemia. Relationships
1. Bauer TG: Lung biopsy. Vet Clin North Am 30(6):12. 2000.
2. DeBerry JD, et al: Corelation between fine-needle aspiration
between Paoz and Saoz with respect to hypoxemia are as
cytopathology and histopathology of the lung in dogs and
follows: normal, SaO2 greater than 90 mm Hg and PaO2
cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:327. 2002.
greater than 80 mm Hg: severe hypoxemia, Sao less than
3. Degner DA: Surgical considerations of nasal discharge. Clin
90 mm Hg and Paoz less than 60 mm Hg: very severe
Tech Small Anim Pract 21(2}:64, 2006.
hypoxemia, Saoz less than 75 mm Hg and Pao less than
4. Dehard S, et al: Comparison of bronchoalveolar lavage cyto-
40 mm Hg. SaOz would be expected to be normal with
spins and smears in dogs and cats. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc
anemia but reduced with methemoglobinemia or severe
44:285, 2008.
cardiopulmonary disease. It is critical to interpret the SaO2
5. DiBartola SP: [ntroduction to acid-base disorders. [n
in view of the patient's respiratory status and not blindly
DiBartola SP, editor: Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base disorders in
small animal practice, ed 4, St. Louis. 201l, Saunders Elsevier.
believe the numbers; it is easy to have erroneously low
 Sao because of poor placement of the probe.
Ch 9.
6. Eie M, Sabo M: Basics in canine and feline rhinoscopy. Clin
Tech Small Anim Pract 21(2):60, 2006.
 7. Hunt GB. Foster SF: Nasopharyngeal disorders. In Bonagura
THORACOCENTESIS
[D. editor: Current veterinary therapy XIV. St. Louis. 2009.
Saunders Elsevier.
Occasional Indications ● Thoracocentesis is performed
8. Johnson LR: Rhinitis in the cat. [n Bonagura ID, editor:
 On patients with pleural effusions or mass lesions of the
Current veterinary therapy XIV. St. Louis. 2009. Saunders
Elsevier.
pleural cavity or mediastinum.
9. Johnson LR. Drazenovich TL: Flexible bronchoscopy and
bronchoalveolar lavage in 68 cats (2001 -2006). J Vet Intern
Advantage · It is relatively noninvasive.
Med 21:219, 2007.
10. Johnson LR, Kass PH: Effect of sample collection methodol-
Disadvantages ● It has the potential to produce pneu-
cgy on nasal culture results in cats. I Fel Med Surg ll:645.
mothorax, hemothorax, or cardiac arrhythmias.
2009.
Chapter 1l:Respiratory and Cardiac Disorders
277
11. Johnson RA, DeMorais HA: Respiratory acid-base disorders.
17. Noris CR. et al: Thoracic radiography. bronchoalveolar
[n DiBartola SP, editor: Fluid, electrolyte and acid-base disorders
-edojsy [ewkupuaied Areuow[nd pue Koo[oujedojh aseae[
in small animal practice, ed 4, St. Louis. 20ll, Saunders
thology: a comparison of diagnostic results in ll cats. J Am
Elsevier, Ch 1l.
Anim Hosp Assoc 38:337, 2002.
12. Kogan DA. et al: Clinical, cinicopathologic and radio-
18. Nonris CR, et al: Companison of results of thoracic radiogra-
gaphic findings in dogs with aspiration pneumonia: 88 cases
 phy. cytologic evaluation of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid.
{2004-2006). J Am Vet Med Assoc 233:1742, 2008.
and histologic evaluation of lung specimens in dogs with
13. Kuehn NF: Nasal computed tomography. Clin Tech Small
Iespiratory tract disease: 16 cases (1996-2000). J Am Vet Med
Anim Pract 21(2):55, 2006.
Assoc 218:145, 2001.
14. Kuehn NF: Rhinitis in the dog. [n Bonagura ID. editor:
19. Pomrantz IS, et al: Comparison of serologic evaluation via
Current veterinary therapy XIV. St. Louis. 2009. Saunders
loj anssn jo armmo [eauny pue uorsngpounwt (as rese
Elsevier.
dagnosis of nasal aspergillosis in dogs. J Am Vet Med Assoc
15. Lefebvre J. Kuehn NE Wortinger A: Computed tomography
230:1319, 2007
as an aid in the diagnosis of chronic nasal disease in dogs.
20. Pownder S, Rose M, Crawford I: Radiographic techniques
J Small Animal Pract 46:280, 2005.
of the nasal cavity and sinuses. Clin Tech Small Anim Pract
16. MacPhail CM, Monnet E: Laryngeal diseases. In Bonagura [D.
21{2):46, 2006.
editor: Current Veterinary Therapy XIV, St. Louis. 2009. Saun-
21.
 Schmiedt C: Small animal exploratory thoracoscopy. Vet Clin
ders Elsevier.
North Am 39:953. 2009.
12
Immunologic and Plasma
Protein Disorders
Mark C. Johnson
Artifacts · Falsely increased values (refractometer) can
SERUM TOTAL PROTEIN
AND ALBUMIN
significant hypernatremia and hyperchloremia. Hyper-
bilirubinemia is historically listed as a cause for falsely
Commonly Indicated · Indicated in most ill patients.
increased serum total protein, but this likely occurs only
but especially those with known or suspected anemia,
with marked elevations.'5 Likewise, hemolysis interferes
edema, ascites, trauma, coagulopathies, diarrhea, weight
with visual interpretation of total protein reading but
loss, and hepatic or renal disease.
does not directly interfere with measurement.°
Advantages · Test is technically easy to perform.
NOTE: Certain methodologies that measure human
Disadvantages · Changes are often nonspecific and
albumin give falsely low values for canine albumin.
 additional testing is required to establish cause of altered
 protein concentrations.
Drug Therapy That May Alter Protein Values · Hor-
Analysis · Total protein can be estimated in fluid, serum,
monal changes generally have a slight effect on serum
Or plasma (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA] or
proteins, even though physical changes [e.g., body weight,
heparinized) by refractometry. Temperature-controlled
muscle mass) may be marked. Hyperproteinemia may be
refractometers calibrated for total protein are preferable
caused by anabolic steroids, progesterone, insulin, and
to those that read only total solids (see comments under
thyroid hormones in people, but a similar effect is not
Artifacts). Total protein and albumin can be measured
expected in dogs and cats. Prolonged, high-dose cortico-
in serum, urine, or fluid by spectrophotometric or dry
reagent methods. Serum globulin concentration is calcu-
buminemia in normal dogs, but values return to normal
lated by subtracting the serum albumin from the serum
total protein.
emia may be due to estrogens; hypoalbuminemia may be
due to anticonvulsants, acetaminophen, estrogens, and
Normal Values · Listed in Table 12-1.
various antineoplastic agents in people. Anticonvulsants
and antineoplastic dnug administration in dogs and cats
NOTE: Lower values are normal for perinates and very
are not expected to cause similar changes by themselves
without associated underlying causes (e.g.. hepatic
(pooyiinpe lun aseauou! Aenpeib senjeA 'slewjue bunor
higher values in Table 12-1 are average normal values for
cirrhosis).
adults. Both albumin and globulin tend to decline with
advancing old age.
Causes of Alteration in Plasma and Serum Protein ·
Senum total protein concentration is a direct reflection of
cumulative serum albumin and globulin values. There-
Danger Values ● Albumin less than or equal to 1.0 g/dl
fore the value only gives an overview of the general state
can be associated with major fluid shifts, but animals with
of protein homeostasis.
concurrent increased portal hypertension can be at risk
for abdominal effusion formation at higher values [i.e.
Causes of Hyperalbuminemia · Only clinically rele-
vant cause is dehydration.
also have decreased antithrombin III (AT IIl) activity (see
under Causes of Hypoalbuminemia), thus also putting
Causes of Hypoalbuminemia · The frst consideration
them at risk for thromboembolism of pulmonic, mesen-
is typically to concurrently determine the serum globulin
teric, or portal vasculature
concentration and determine if it is also similarly
278
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
279
TABLE 12-1. NoRMAL SERUm ToTAL PRoTEiN AND
Hemodilution rarely causes hypoalbuminemia but can
AlBUmIN VALUES (g/dl)
Occur due to intravenous fluid overload or plasma expand-
ers (eg. hetastarch), diseases causing edema (e.g.. con-
DOGS
CATS
 gestive heart failure), and rarely from excess antidiuretic
Plasma total protein
hormone [ADH) secretion. Hemodilution usually causes
6.0-7.8
6.0-7.5
mild decreases (albumin 2.1 to 2.4 g/dl), whereas PLE
 Serum total protein 
5.5-7.5
5.5-7.8
can cause moderate (1.5 to 2.0 g/dl) to severe (<1.5 g/dl)
 Serum albumin*
2.5-4.0
2.5-4.0
hypoalbuminemia.
*Serum globulin
 Decreased albumin plus normal to increased globu
lins can be referred to as selective hypoalbuminemia.
concentration.
The most common and clinically significant causes are
decreased albumin production from chronic hepatic
decreased (nonselective), or only albumin is decreased
-doudau tusoi-uaoid ay ssol paseau uaynsu
(selective). If both are decreased (i.e., panhypoprotein-
athy (PLN), or sequestration in a body cavity due to major
emia), nonselective causes for hypoproteinemia such as
efusion (see Box 12-1). Chronic hepatic insuffciency can
hemorrhage, exudation from severe skin lesions, protein-
produce marked hypoalbuminemia (<l.0 g/dl) if the
Alsn aie uonouay pue (ala) Ayedoaua guso
liver is severely affected. Causes for hepatic insuffciency
 more likely (Box 12-1). Overt bleeding should be appar-
are numerous and can be congenital (eg. congenital por-
ent, but gastrointestinal hemorrhage can be diffcult to
tosystemic shunt) or acquired (eg, cirrhosis, neoplasia)
determine if it is relatively mild and chronic. GI hemor-
(see Chapter 9). Hypoalbuminemia from PLN can be
rhage can be due to many types of gastrointestinal dis-
substantial (e.g. <2.0 g/dl, even <l.5 g/dl). If renal
eases (see Chapter 9), including PLE,but other nonspecifc
protein loss is detected, urinalysis ± urine protein: creati-
 disorders such as hypoadrenocortiism are also of consid-
nine ratio (see Chapter 7) are typically indicated to
eration. Causes of PLE are numerous and are discussed in
confirm presence and severity of albuminuria. Causes for
Chapter 9. Although both serum albumin and globulin
PLN are discussed in Chapter 7.
are often decreased in PLE, globulin concentrations
may be normal to increased in some cases (especially
those with other concurrent diseases such as heartworm
NOTE: PLN of very severe magnitude can sometimes cause
concomitant hypoglobulinemia.
infection, ehrlichiosis, or chronic skin disorders).
Sequestration of albumin may occur in pleural or
 BOX 12-1. CAUsEs 0F HYpOALbumiNemIA
 peritoneal cavities or subcutaneous (SC) tissues. Patients
IN DOGS AND CATS
lower their serum albumin concentration via sequestra-
Decreased Production
tion. Alternatively, sequestration can be secondary to
 Chronic hepatic insufficiency*
increased hydrostatic pressure (eg., portal hypertension.
 Inadequate protein intaket.t
right-sided cardiac failure). Immune-mediated or infec-
 Maldigestiont
tious vasculopathies (e.g., endotoxemia and bacteremia.
 Malabsorptiont
ehrlichiosis, Rocky Mountain spotted fever [RMSF]) also
allow albumin loss from the vascular compartment.
 Hypergammaglobulinemia
Hypoalbuminemia as the result of sequestration or vas-
 Sequestration
culopathy is usually mild.
Body cavity effusion'
Severe malnutrition, malabsorption, or maldigestion
Vasculopathy
leading to poor protein intake can be associated with
Increased Loss
hypoalbuminemia. Likewise, hyperglobulinemia from
 Protein-losing nephropathy (PLN) because of glomerular
inflammation can cause mild hypoalbuminemia due to
disease*
down-regulation of albumin production to offset the
 Gastrointestinal: protein-losing enteropathy (PLE)*2
increased globulin levels or because albumin is a negative
Exudates from cutaneous lesions2
acute phase protein that decreases during inflammation.
Hemorrhage2
Signifcant hypoalbuminemia (i.e, albumin < 2.1 g/dl)
should not be attributed solely to decreased nutrition or
Hemodilution2
down-regulation of albumin production until hepatic
insufficiency and protein-losing disorders have been
*Most common and important causes of serum albumin s2.0 g/dl.
Other causes rarely, if ever, cause serum albumin s2.0 g/dl.
eliminated by definitive tests (not just history and physi-
tDoubtful importance as a sole cause of serum albumin s2.0 g/dl.
cal examination), because starvation and down-regulation
Probably more important as a contributing factor when there is
rarely cause serum albumin concentrations less than
another problem that results in hypoalbuminemia.
tCan be important in very young animals or animals fed diets that
2.1 g/dl, except perhaps in very young animals.
are extremely restricted in protein for prolonged periods.
Basic diagnostic approach to hypoalbuminemic
'lmportant selective causes.
patients is outlined in Figure 12-1. Clinical pathology
Amportant nonselective causes.
testing should include a complete blood count (CBC).
cdlinical chemistry. and urinalysis on animals with
280
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Physical examination
If severely exudative lesion is found, this may
be the cause; however, proceed with next tests
in case additional disease is present
CBC,chemistry profile,urinalysis,urine
protein:creatinine ratio (Chapter 7), and
 hepatic function tests (Chapter 9)
Urine protein:creatinine
 Abnormal hepatic
Profuse diarrhea
Evidence of PLN
ratio >1.0 in absence of 
function test(s) ±
OR
or hepatic insufficiency
significant hematuria, pyuria,
increased hepatic
 No evidence of PLN
AND
hypertension, or
enzymes ± decreased BUN
 or hepatic insufficiency
History, imaging
hyperadrenocorticism
± hypercholesterolemia
suggestive of PLE
+ hypercholesterolemia
Probable PLN
Probable hepatic
Probable PLE
insufficiency
Chapter 7
Chapter 9
Chapter 9
 Fecal alpha-1 protease inhibitor
Chapter 9
FGURE 12-1 Diagnostic evaluation of hypoalbuminemia in dogs and cats when the serum albumin is less than or equal to
2.0 g/dl. BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; PLE, protein-losing enteropathy; PLN, protein-losing
nephropathy.
physical exam findings suggestive of hypoalbuminemia.
 suggest that more than hypoalbuminemia is causing the
Senum bile acids and blood ammonia are indicated if
effusion).
hepatic insufficiency is suspected (see Chapter 9). If pro-
Next,
 recognizing certain patterns on diagnostic
teinuria is found without pyuria or hematuria and hypo-
samples can be suggestive of different disease processes.
albuminemia is present, a urine protein:creatinine ratio
Hypercholesterolemia plus hypoalbuminemia suggests
(see Chapter 7) should be performed. Pyuria and hema-
PLN. Significant proteinuria without pyuria and hematu-
turia can cause proteinuria, making it impossible to deter-
ria indicates a diagnostic workup for PLN (see Chapter
mine if there is glomerular loss: therefore follow-up
7). Hypocholesterolemia plus hypoalbuminemia is sug-
urinalysis following resolution of pyuria or hematuria is
gestive of hepatic insuffciency or PLE. Hypoalbuminemia
indicated. An attempt should be made to categorize the
associated with hepatomegaly: microhepatia; neurologic
degree of hypoalbuminemia (2.1 to 2.4 g/dl, mild; 1.5 to
signs; icterus; decreased blood urea nitrogen (BUN) with
2.0 g/dl, moderate; <1.5 g/dl, marked) in order to estab-
Or without increased alanine aminotransferase (ALT).
lish initial differential diagnoses. However, definitive
senum alkaline phosphatase (SAP), or both; or abnormal
hepatic function test results (eg., serum bile acids) indi-
not occur until additional testing has been performed,
cates a diagnostic workup for hepatic insufficiency (see
because mild hypoalbuminemia can be observed in some
Chapter 9).
cases of PLE and PLN and early hepatic insuffciency
 Initial approach in hypoalbuminemic patients begins
with clinicalevaluation.Severe cutaneous exudative
 NOTE: ALT and SAP may be normal in many patients with 
lesions may be diagnosed by physical examination, but
 severe hepatic disease, and decreased mean corpuscular
the possibility of renal, hepatic, and alimentary disease
volume (McV) (see Chapter 2) is sometimes present in dogs
should still be investigated. Subcutaneous edema and
with congenital portosystemic shunts.
body cavity effusions associated with hypoalbuminemia
are usually transudates. Hypoalbuminemia associated
with PLN or PLE, chronic hepatic insuffciency, and
A congenital portosystemic shunt is more likely in young
immune-mediated or infectious vasculitis may cause
animals; however, congenital shunts can be diagnosed in
body cavity effusion, primarily transudates. However, one
animals more than l0 years old. Acquired hepatic disease
should always evaluate fluid accumulations to be sure
is more common in adults and requires hepatic biopsy
that they are in fact transudates as opposed to unexpected
for diagnosis; however, some dogs less than l year old
Asus pinom yum) sanepnxa io sanepnsuen payou
have  severe  acquired  hepatic  disease  with  acquired
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
281
shunting. Hypoalbuminemia with normal hepatic func-
Disadvantages · Additional testing is required for these
tion tests and absence of proteinuria or cutaneous lesions
proteins, and some require specialized testing procedures.
allows one to diagnose PLE by exclusion (see Chapter 9),
Results of testing may not provide any more useful infor-
 even if feces are normal. Ifthe patient has renal or hepatic
mation as to the health status of the animal compared to
disease and PLE is still a concern, then measurement of
total protein, albumin, and globulins.
fecal alpha-protease inhibitor concentrations (Chapter
9) may allow diagnosis of PLE by inclusion. Intestinal
Analysis ● Most acute phase protein assays can be per-
biopsy may then provide a definitive diagnosis of which
formed with serum samples with the exception of fibrino-
intestinal disease is causing PLE. Endoscopic biopsies are
gen, which requires plasma. Methodologies of the various
safer than surgical biopsy, but it is critical that excellent-
assays include heat precipitation (fbrinogen), immuno-
quality tissue samples be obtained; many endoscopically
assays, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA),
obtained samples are poor quality and nondiagnostic. If
and spectrophotometry.
exploratory laparotomy is performed, hepatic biopsy
should generally be performed along with intestinal biop-
Normal Values · Normal reference intervals for fibrino-
sies. It is important to obtain biopsy specimens at several
gen in dogs and cats are generally accepted as approxi-
sites along the small intestine even when no apparent
mately 100 to 300 mg/dl but are slightly variable
 gross lesions are found.
depending on the methodology used to measure fbrino-
gen. Normal values on other acute phase proteins are
Causes of Altered Globulins · Changes in globulin
variable depending on published data, so it is important
levels are most often attributed to alterations in immu-
to use reference intervals established at each laboratory
noglobulin values. Nonselective causes for hypoglo-
 performing the analysis.?
bulinemia are similar to nonselective causes for
 hypoalbuminemia (see previous discussion of Causes of
Danger Values · Alterations in values reflect only a
Hypoalbuminemia). True selective hypoglobulinemia
change in health status (i.e, values increase with inflam-
[i.e., normal or increased albumin) occasionally occurs in
mation and dehydration or decrease with consumption
dogs and cats from congenital or acquired immunodefi-
or loss of protein); therefore there are no danger values.
ciencies. However, neonatal immunodefciency patients
are likely to succumb to this disorder early in life, and
Artifacts · Hemolysis and lipemia can interfere with
definitive diagnosis is often not established. Acquired
certain testing methodologies. Heat precipitation methods
immunodeficiencies are often secondary to chemother-
for fbrinogen are not as accurate as instrument-based
apy or radiation therapy or directly from neoplastic trans-
formation of lymphocytes (i.e, lymphoproliferative
values of some acute phase proteins such as fbrinogen.
Laboratory or sampling error can cause spurious results.
cient Hyperglobulinemia can be either nonselective [i.e..
albumin elevated concurrently) from dehydration or
Causes of Increased Acute Phase Proteins · Some
selective due to three main processes, (1) acute phase
acute phase proteins increase with associated inflamma-
protein increase (usually only induces mild elevation in
tion and are appropriately termed positive acute phase
globulins),(2) increased immunoglobulins from general-
proteins. Hyperfbrinogenemia is one of the best indica-
ized antigenic stimulation with chronic inflammation, or
tors of acute inflammation in large animal species, but
(3) paraproteinemia (abnormal immunoglobulin pro-
has traditionally not been utilized in small animal medi-
duction in blood) from a lymphoproliferative disorder
cine This concept may change because of more accurate
[see following discussions).
methods for fibrinogen analysis being employed by refer-
ence laboratories.Regardless, elevated levels of fbrinogen
are frequently seen in infectious disease (e.g., bacterial,
ACUTE PHASE PROTEINS
viral, protozoal, fungal), trauma, neoplasia, and necrosis.
C-reactive protein is increased in pregnant dogs. glucocor-
Occasionally Indicated · Acute phase protein analysis
ticoid therapy increases haptoglobin in dogs, and pheno-
is performed in certain clinical situations where more
barbital treatment in dogs can cause elevated ol-acid
specific information regarding inflammation or coagula-
glycoprotein.8-10.15
tion is needed. Collectively, acute phase proteins are part
 of the o and β globulins measured in protein electropho-
NOTE: Care must be utilized in excluding inflammation in
resis (see Protein Electrophoresis later) and, in conjunc-
animals with normal or low values of acute phase proteins
tion with gamma globulins, compose the globulin
because these proteins can decrease with hepatic insuff-
fraction of the total protein analysis. Acute phase proteins
dency (similar to albumin), may be lost in generalized
typically include fibrinogen, haptoglobin, C-reactive
protein-losing disorders (PLE), or may be consumed in
protein (see Chapter 9). complement (C3a), serum
Gses of coagulopathies.
amyloid A, αl-acid glycoprotein, O-antiprotease, trans-
ferrin, Q-macroglobulin, and ceruloplasmin.
Causes of Decreased Acute Phase Proteins · Acute
Advantages · Some acute phase proteins (e.g.. fbrino-
phase proteins can decrease in patients as well and
 gen) can be measured rapidly and provide specific infor-
are often referred to as negative acute phase proteins
mation regarding coagulation and inflammatory status of
when the decrease is associated with inflammation.
the animal.
Albumin (see previous discussion on Causes of
282
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Hypoalbuminemia)  and  transferrin  are considered
detected by heat precipitation. Positive results for Bence
the classic negative acute phase proteins. However, other
Jones proteins by an acid precipitation screening test
should be confirmed by concentrated urine electrophore-
can be associated with decreases in acute phase proteins
sis or immunoelectrophoresis because of the possibility
that are not a result of the protein representing a negative
of false-positive results.
acute phase protein. Hepatic insufficiency, if severe
enough, can lead to decreased production levels of most
Analysis ● Serum or urine may be analyzed, and it may
acute phase proteins, similar to albumin. Fibrinogen,
be refrigerated or frozen.
while most frequently considered a positive acute phase
 protein related to inflammation (see previous discussion
on Causes of Increased Acute Phase Proteins), is equally
ELECTROPHORESIS
clinically relevant in patients with decreased values.
Primary consideration   with  hypofbrinogenemia
is
Analysis · The cellulose acetate technique is the method
consumptive coagulopathy, such as disseminated intra-
of choice. Interpretation of electrophoretograms is based
vascular coagulation (DIC). While not present in every
 On densitometric measurements of intensity of staining
case [in some instances fibrinogen is normal or increased).
 of protein bands on cellulose acetate strips. Serum sepa-
hypofibrinogenemia in  conjunction  with  significant
rates into four fractions: (1) albumin, (2) alpha (α) glob-
thrombocytopenia, decreased AT Ill, schistocytes, high
ulins, (3) beta (β) globulins, and (4) gamma (Y)globulins
D-dimer, and prolongation of activated partial thrombo-
(Table 12-2). Canine and feline 0- and β- globulins are
plastin time (aPTT) or prothrombin time (PT) is highly
usually divided into two subfractions each: O1, O2: β1. β2.
suggestive of DIC (see Chapter 5). Rare reports of
Gamma globulins are usually listed as having one frac-
inherited or congenital hypofbrinogenemia in dogs are
tion composed primarily of immunoglobulin G (lgG).
documented.15
 pue l suoeyqns isll op sasuaiajai iapio yanoue
Important: Immunoglobulin M (IgM) and immunoglobu-
lin A (IlgA) antibodies will often appear in the βz region
PROTEIN ELECTROPHORESIS
Or "bridge" the β2-to-y region on electrophoresis. Normal-
appearing electrophoretograms from dogs and cats are
Occasionally  Indicated · Protein electrophoresis is
presented in Figures 12-2 and 12-3.
performed when hyperglobulinemia is not caused by
dehydration or known antigenic stimulation but is high
Artifacts · Albumin concentration is usually underesti-
enough to make monoclonal gammopathy from a lym-
mated by electrophoresis compared with a chemical
phoproliferative disorder a reasonable possibility. Electro-
suspected humoral immunodeficiencies.
Advantages ● Protein electrophoresis is a useful screen-
ing test to differentiate monoclonal gammopathies from
other causes of hyperglobulinemia.
Disadvantages · A specific diagnosis is seldom obtained
from electrophoresis.
Although a specific diagnosis is seldom obtained,
electrophoretic patterns can be valuable when interpreted
with clinical signs and other laboratory data. Two general
types of electrophoresis are utilized, protein electropho-
resis and immunoelectrophoresis. Protein electrophoresis
is quantitative, can be performed on blood and urine, and
is usually the frst step in determining if a monoclonal
gammopathy is present. Immunoelectrophoresis is quali-
tative, identifying specific classes of immunoglobulins
A
1α
2
1β2
present in a monoclonal gammopathy. Immunoelectro-
Fraction
g/dL
 g/dL range
phoresis is the method of choice to detect urinary and
Albumin
3.4
3.0
4.5
serum Bence Jones protein, a monoclonal protein equiva-
Alpha 1
0.3-
0.5
1.6
lent to immunoglobulin light chains that occasionally
Alpha 2
1.0-
1.3
2.7
occurs in multiple myeloma and macroglobulinemia.
Beta 1
0.4-
0.9
2.3
Protein electrophoresis performed on a concentrated
Beta 2
1.0
urine sample occasionally detects an isolated monoclonal
Gamma
0.5
peak in urine (eg., Bence Jones protein). Finding a urine
Total
6.5
5.6
7.9
electrophoresis pattern mimicking that of serum indicates
a glomerular lesion substantial enough to allow leakage
FGURE 12-2 Electrophoretogram of normal canine sera.
of serum proteins including the serum monoclonal heavy
A,Albumin; 1 α 2,alpha and alpha2globulins; 1 β 2, beta and
chain peak; therefore, it is not evidence of Bence Jones
beta2globulins; Y gamma globulins. (Courtesy of Susan Fielder,
light chains. Canine Bence Jones proteinuria is only rarely
TVMDL.)
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
283
Breitschwerdt et al. (1987)
Kaneko (1980)*
DOGS
MEAN
UMITS
MEAN
UMITS
Total protein (g/dl)
6.84 ± 0.66
(6.0-7.6)
6.10 ± 0.52
(5.4-7.1)
 Abumint
3.20 ± 0.34
(2.72-3.67)
2.91 ± 0.11
(2.6-3.3)
 α1-globulin
0.33 ± 0.11
(0.25-0.60)
20'0 F 02'0
(0.2-0.5)
 α2-globulin
1.13 ± 0.25
(0.72-1.40)
0.62 ± 0.21
(0.3-1.1)
β-globulin 
0.74 ± 0.10
(0.63-0.89)
0.82 ± 0.23
(0.7-1.3)
β2-globulin
0.79 ± 0.14
(0.59-0.96)
68'0 F 68'0
(0.6-1.4)
-globulin
0.64 ± 0.15
(0.49-0.83)
Y-globulin
0.80 ± 0.25
(0.5-1.3)
V2-globulin
0.70 ± 0.14
(0.4-0.9)
A: G ratio
0.89 ± 0.10
(0.79-1.02)
0.83 ± 0.16
(0.59-1.11)
Turnwald and Barta (1989)
Kaneko (1980)*
CATS
MEAN
UMITS
MEAN
UMITS
Total protein (g/dl)
7.66 ± 0.10
7.3-7.8)
6.60 ± 0.70
(5.4-7.8)
 Albumint
3.41 ± 0.18
(2.82-4.18)
2.70 ± 0.17
(2.1-3.9)
 α1-globulin
0.47 ± 0.03
(0.30-0.64)
0.70 ± 0.02
(0.2-1.1)
 α2-globulin 
0.55 ± 0.04
(0.41-0.68)
0.70 ± 0.02
(0.4-0.9)
β1-globulin
0.91 ± 0.06
(0.77-1.25)
0.70 ± 0.03
(0.3-0.9]
β2-globulin
0.40 ± 0.02
(0.35-0.47)
0.70 ± 0.02
(0.6-1.0)
Y-globulin
1.92 ± 0.12
(1.39-2.22)
Y-globulin
1.60 ± 0.77
(0.30-2.50)
Y2-globulin
1.70 ± 0.36
(1.40-1.90)
A:G ratio
0.80 ± 0.11
(0.63-1.15)
0.71 ± 0.20
(0.45-1.19)
*Numbers do not add up to the total protein values and A:G ratios as given in the table.
tConcentration of albumin is usually underestimated by electrophoresis compared with a chemical determination. Therefore, the A:G ratio is usually
uoeuwjatap aanoydoaa Aq ueyt uoeujwatap lesiwayo Aq jaybiy
Data from Breitschwerdt D, et al: Monoclonal gammopathy associated with naturally occurring canine ehrlichiosis, J Vet Int Med, 1:2, 1987; Kaneko
J:Serum proteins and the dysproteinemias.InKaneko JJ,editor:Clinical biochemistry of domestic animals,ed 3,SanDiego1980,Academic Press;
Turnwald GH, Barta O: Immunologic and plasma protein disorders. In Wilard MD, Tvedten H, Turnwald GH: Small animal clinical diagnosis by labora-
tory methods, Philadelphia, 1989, WB Saunder5.
determination. Therefore albumin:globulin ratio (A:G)
NOTE: Normal values for puppies differ substantially from
is usually higher by chemical determinations than by elec-
those for adults. Age-matched controls are recommended
trophoretic determination.
when submitting samples for immunoglobulin quantitation
sanjea 1npe ui uonejuea jeaib jo asnesaq sbop bunor woy
among different antibody classes. It is likely that breed-
IMMUNOELECTROPHORESIS
specific variations also occur.
Analysis · After electrophoresis in agar gel, polyclonal
Artifacts·Electrophoretic bands with high-intensity
antiserum to specific proteins [including immunoglobu-
staining (eg., albumin) are underestimated, and bands of
lins) is added to a trough parallel with the separated
low-intensity staining are overestimated. Immunoglobu-
serum proteins. Reagents are allowed to diffuse. To obtain
lins migrate in βz- and Y-globulin regions; therefore.
quantitation  of individual  immunoglobulins,  radial
immunoglobulin concentrations determined by RID are
immunodiffusion (RID), electroimmunodiffusion (i.e.,
electrophoresis. This discrepancy can increase when
formed; these procedures can also be used to quantitate
immunoglobulin subclasses.
some myelomas, canine ehrlichiosis, feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP), and other chronic infections, especially
Normal Values ● Values vary among laboratories and
if IgM or IgA is the primary antibody.
the different techniques for quantitating individual
immunoglobulins (see Table 12-2). Immunoglobulins
Causes
f
Altered
Electrophoretic
Patterns *
migrate in the β2 and y regions of electrophoresis.
Diagnostic evaluation of patients with abnormal ele-
Average concentrations of immunoglobulin classes are
ctrophoretograms is discussed next under Causes of
listed in Table 12-3.
Hyperglobulinemia.
284
A
C
2
1B2
A
1α
2
1β2
Fraction
g/dL
 g/dL range
 Fraction
g/dL
 g/dL range
Albumin
3.5
3.2
4.7
Albumin
2.6-
3.0
4.5
Apha 1
0.3
0.2
1.1
Alpha 1
0.2
0.2
0.5
 Alpha 2
0.6
0.4
0.9
Alpha 2
1.0
0.3
1.1
Beta 1
0.4
0.3
0.9
Beta 1
0.4-
0.7
1.3
Beta 2
0.6
0.6
1.0
Beta 2
1.3
0.6
1.4
Gamma
1.2-
1.8
4.5
Gamma
4.3+
0.9
2.3
Total
6.5
6.5
8.9
Total
9.8+
5.6
7.9
FGURE 12-3 Eectrophoretogram of normal feline sera.
FGURE 12-4 日ectrophoretogram of a dog with suspected
A,Albumin; 1 α 2, alpha and alpha2globulins; 1 β 2, beta and
systemic fungal disease showing a polyclonal gammopathy.
beta2 globulins; Y gamma globulins. (Courtesy of Susan Fielder,
A,Albumin;α2,alpha andalphaglobulins;β2,betaand
TVMDL.)
beta2globulins;  gamma globulins.(Courtesy of Susan Fielder,
TVMDL.)
Causes of Hyperglobulinemia · Polyclonal hyperglob-
12-6). Increases in feline globulins are commonly in the
ulinemias (i.e., polyclonal gammopathies) have a broad-
Y region but can bridge in the β region as well.
based peak encompassing β and regions (sometimes α)
Monoclonal  hyperglobulinemias or  monoclonal
and suggest persistent antigenic stimulation and inflam-
paseq-moeu pue liel e aey Alleiauae sanuedoeg
mation secondary to infectious diseases [chronic bacte-
electrophoretic peak (i.e., "spike") in the β or  region,
rial, viral, fungal, protozoal, rickettsial, or parasitic
normally no wider than the albumin peak. Rare cases of
disorders), neoplasia, or immune-mediated disease
monoclonal gammopathies with biclonal peaks occur.?
(Figure 12-4 and Box 12-2). The most common causes in
Monoclonal immunoglobulin elevations are also called
dogs are cutaneous parasitism, pyoderma, diroflariasis.
paraproteins or M proteins and are usually due 
to
and ehrlichiosis. depending on geographic location
lymphocyte and plasma cell neoplasia (e.g., multiple
(Figure 12-5; see also Box 12-2). In cats, the most common
myeloma, macroglobulinemia, lymphosarcoma; see Box
cause of severe polyclonal gammopathy is FIP (Figure
12-2). Monoclonal or oligoclonal spikes are occasionally
TABLE 12-3. SERUm IMmUNOGLOBULIN CONCENTRATIONS IN DOGS AND CATs
Mean Concentration (mg/dl)
ADULT
ADULT
PUPPY (2 weeks)
PUPPY (2 months)
MONGREL DOG
PUREBREED DOG
ADULT CAT
lgA
Undetected 
30
79
83
ND
lgG
56
143
1445
925
2400
lgM
73
118
45
156
ND
ND, Not done.
Data from Reynolds HY, Johnson JS: Quantitation of canine immunoglobulins. J Immunol 105:698, 1970; Heddle RJ, Rowley D: Dog immunoglobulins:
immunochemical characterization of dog serum, saliva, colostrum, milk and small bowel fluid. Immunology 29:185, 1975; Schultz RD, Adams LS:
Immunologic methods for the detection of humoral and cellular immunity. Vet Clin North Am 8:721, 1978; Reimann KA, et al: Immunologic profiles
of cats with persistent naturall acquired feline leukemia virus infection. Am J Vet Res 47:1935, 1986.
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
285
BOX 12-2. CAUSES OF HYPERGLOBULINEMIA IN DOGS AND CATS
POLYCLONAL
Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), including
Infections
glomerulonephritis, immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
Bacterial*t
(IMHA) and thrombocytopenia (IMT), and polyarthritis*
Brucellosis
IMHA, IMT (not because of SLE)*
Pyoderma
Pemphigus complex, bullous pemphigoid*
 Bacterial endocarditis
Rheumatoid arthritis*
Viral
Neoplasiat.t
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)t
 Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV)
MONOCLONAL
Infection
 Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
Ehrlichiosistt
Fungal*,t
 Leishmaniasist.t
Systemic fungal infections (e.g., blastomycosis,
FIP (rare)
histoplasmosis, coccidioidomycosis)
Idiopathictt
Rckettsialt.t
Ehrlichiosis
Benign monoclonal gammopathy
 Parasitic
Dirofilariasis*+t
Multiple myelomat
Demodicosis
Macroglobulinemia
Scabies
Lymphosarcoma 
Extramedullary plasmacytoma (rare)
 Immune-Mediated Disease
Infections (immune complex)
Miscellaneous
Dirofilariasis*.t
Cutaneous amyloidosis
Feline cholangitis/cholangiohepatitis
Plasmacytic gastroenterocolitis*
Pyometra 
“(ip/6 s o+ t) PI!W
tModerate (5 to 6 g/dl).
(P/6 g<] ajaAas+
(xat u! e!waunqojbodAH jo sasne) aas) sanjea uynqoj6 6uissasse uaym pajapisuos ag Pinoys abe jo ypaH3 :3lON
caused by infectious (eg, ehrlichiosis, leishmaniasis)
skin disease, parasites, and systemic or localized infec-
(Figure 12-7) or idiopathic disorders, but they are likely
 tious diseases. Mild hyperglobulinemia is also associated
to be of polyclonal origin with similar but closely related
with immune-mediated disease and nonlymphocytic
immunoglobulin types [i.e, IgG, and IgG2).′ Multiple
neoplasia but rarely requires extensive evaluation. Specifc
myeloma and ehrlichiosis can both have monoclonal
diagnostic evaluation for these processes is generally per-
electrophoretic patterns and bone marrow plasmacytosis,
formed in lieu of protein electrophoresis. Important: More
making differentiation between the two disorders based
than one cause for hyperglobulinemia is possible in some
on the presence of these two abnormalities difficult. In
instances (especially infectious).
ehrlichiosis or leishmaniasis, however, the electrophoretic
In dogs with hyperglobulinemia and severe pruritic
pattern is often but not always a monoclonal or oligoclo-
dermatitis, diagnostic evaluation may involve only a
nal pattern superimposed on or arising within a broader-
physical examination to identify fleas and ticks or skin
based globulin peak (see Figure 12-7).7 In such cases.
scrapings to detect mites. Demodex canis mites are usually
examination of the stained electrophoretogram bands
detected easily, whereas Sarcoptes scabiei are often difficult 
shows a clearly restricted monoclonal band with sharper
to find. For canine heartworm disease ELISA antigen
edges within a paler, broader background band.
In
testing is the preferred screening procedure In areas
contrast, monoclonal spikes associated with neoplastic
endemic for ehrlichiosis or RMSF, serologic tests are indi-
disorders are frequently accompanied by normal to
cated (see Chapter 15), particularly if the patient has
decreased  nonparaprotein  globulin  fractions.
often
anemia, thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, or a combina-
reflecting impaired production of other immunoglobu-
tion thereof. Testing for other infectious disorders (e.g..
lins (Figure 12-8).
brucellosis, blastomycosis, histoplasmosis, coccidioido-
 A suggested diagnostic approach to hyperglobulin-
mycosis) is dictated by geographic location and other
emia is outlined in Figure 12-9. An initial attempt should
physical, laboratory, or radiographic abnormalities. If
be made to assess degree of hyperglobulinemia and cor-
joint pain, stiff gait, or increased joint fluid volume
relate the significance of change with physical exam find-
accompanies hyperglobulinemia, then radiographs and
ings and suspected clinical diagnosis. Mild to moderate
joint fluid analysis (see Chapter l0) are indicated. Rheu-
elevations of globulins are commonly associated with
286
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
FGURE 12-6 Eectrophoretograms of feline sera. Top, Poly-
FGURE 12-5 Electrophoretograms of different canine sera.
donal gammopathy (ie., feline infectious peritonitis [FIP];
Top, Monoclonal gammopathy (i.e., ehrlichiosis); middle,
bottom,normal.A,Albumin;α2,alphaandalpha2globulins;
polyclonal gammopathy (i.e., blastomycosis, ehrlichiosis, diro-
1 β 2, beta1 and beta2 globulins; Y gamma globulins.
flariasis); bottom, normal. A, Albumin; 1 α 2, alphai and
alpha2 globulins; 1 β 2, beta1 and beta2 globulins; Y gamma
globulins.
and have no confirmed diagnosis. In these patients, serum
 protein electrophoresis should be performed especially if
any signs of hyperviscosity are present (see Serum Viscos-
testing, rickettsial titers, or a borreliosis titer (or a combi-
ity later) to differentiate monoclonal from polyclonal
nation of these tests) may be helpful if the joint fluid is
a nonseptic exudate.
ous causes, most commonly chronic infectious diseases,
Hyperglobulinemia in cats can also be attributed to
nonlymphoid neoplasia, and immune-mediated disor-
a variety of infectious processes, including skin disease.
ders (see earlier in this section). If the cause of polyclonal
parasites, and fungal infection (e.g., histoplasmosis, cryp-
gammopathy is unknown, thoracic and abdominal
tococcosis), but FIP is generally the most likely cause. FIP
imaging. serologic testing. and/or biopsy of any masses
titers are generally not useful. Body cavity effusions from
or lesions may be indicated.
pue sanlea uianond ieion yaiy aney on puan dlld yiim sie
Monoclonal gammopathies are usually caused by
variable nucleated cell counts. Some advocate evaluating
lymphoproliferative disorders (eg., plasma cell neopla-
effusion fluid: serum Y-globulin ratios in cats when FIP is
sia, B-cell lymphosarcoma). Evaluation of patients with
suspected, but caution must be taken to not overestimate
monoclonal gammopathy may include skeletal radio-
the value of this ratio (see Chapter 15). Confirmatory
 graphs, serum and urine immunoelectrophoresis, and
testing for FIP can be performed on affected tissue biop-
bone marrow biopsy with cytologic and histologic evalu-
sies, usually liver, using an immunohistochemical stain
 ation. Diagnosis of multiple myeloma in dogs requires
for FIP virus. Other causes for hyperglobulinemia in cats
finding at least two of the following: lytic skeletal lesions,
are diroflariasis (less common than in dogs) and chronic
bone marrow plasmacytosis, Bence Jones proteinuria, or
feline leukemia vinus (FeLV) and feline immunodef-
a monoclonal spike on serum protein electrophoresis
ciency virus (FIV) infections (globulin values vary in the
due to the presence of a paraprotein. Skeletal lesions
latter two diseases).
are uncommon in feline multiple myeloma. In areas
 In a clinical setting, serum protein electrophoresis is
endemic for ehrlichiosis, an Ehrlichia canis titer should be
generally reserved for patients with substantial hyper-
performed in dogs with a monoclonal gammopathy.
IIl Ajaeudoiddeul ieadde ieu (ip/8 s<) ejuaunqo[g
Ehrlichiosis commonly causes proteinuria and bone
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
287
A
1
2
1
β2
1α2
 1β2
Fraction
g/dL
 g/dL range
Fraction
g/dL
 g/dL range
Albumin
2.3-
3.0
4.5
Albumin
2.6-
3.0
4.5
Alpha 1
0.2
0.2
0.5
Alpha 1
0.2
0.2
0.5
 Alpha 2
0.6
0.3
1.1
Alpha 2
0.3
0.3
1.1
Beta 1
0.5-
0.7
1.3
Beta 1
0.3-
0.7
1.3
Beta 2
2.1+
0.6
1.4
Beta 2
0.4-
0.6
1.4
Gamma
8.8+
0.9
2.3
Gamma
4.0+
0.9
2.3
Total
14.6+
5.6
7.9
Total
6.5
5.6
7.9
FIGURE 12-7 Eectrophoretogram of dog with ehrlichiosis 
FGURE 12-8 Eectrophoretogram of dog with plasma cell
showing a monoclonal gammopathy.Note the high and narrow
Ttyeloma showing a monoclonal gammopathy. Note the high
peak in theregion arising within a broader peak located in
and narrow peak in the yregion and the normal α and βpeaks.
the β2 region. A, Albumin; 1 α 2, alpha and alpha2 globulins;
A, Albumin; 1 α 2, alphai and alpha2 globulins; 1 β 2, betai and
1β2,beta, and betaglobulins;gama globulins.Coutesy
beta2globulins; Y gamma globulins. (Courtesy of Susan Fielder,
of Susan Fielder, TVMDL.)
TVMDL.)
marrow plasmacytosis, closely resembling multiple
Immunoglobulin production may actually increase to
myeloma. FIP rarely causes monoclonal spikes. If a
 offset loss of oncotic pressure from hypoalbuminemia.15
monoclonal gammopathy is found in a patient with mul-
Acquired immunodeficiencies are often attributed to
chemotherapy or radiation therapy or other compounds
sis or quantitation of immunoglobulins by RID (or rocket
(e.g. toxins, drugs). These immunodeficiencies can be
permanent or transient depending on the cause. Congeni-
immunoglobulin composing the paraprotein. These tests
tal combined or selective immunodefciencies occur but
-yap unqogounm uaandeieduou paap osie ue
are rarely diagnosed, probably because immunodeficient
ciencies, which are occasionally present in patients with
'ssop ul suoayut oi qunns Aipdei sua n saddnd
lymphoproliferative disorders or immune deficiencies
these infections are usually due to distemper or parvovi-
(see Causes of Hypoglobulinemia next).
rus and occur in the postnatal period after maternal
immunity wanes. Immunodeficiency should be suspected
Causes of Hypoglobulinemia · As with hypoalbumin-
when more than one pup in a properly cared for litter
emia, causes for hypoglobulinemia are divided into non-
dies of infection in the first 2 to 6 months of life. It is
selective and selective disorders. The most common
important to remember that newborn animals are physi-
causes are nonselective hypoglobulinemias due to exter-
nal blood loss and PLE (see Causes for Hypoalbumin-
protein concentrations 60% to 80% of adult values, and
emia earlier). Nonselective hypoglobulinemia should not
are technically immuno-incompetent without maternal
be seen with PLN unless near-complete loss of glomerular
antibodies. Severe combined immunodeficiencies are
integrity occurs. Selective causes are much less common
noted in Jack Russell terriers, basset hounds, and Cardi-
and are usually attributed
1 to  immunodeficiencies
gan Welsh corgis: selective IgM and IgA deficiencies are
(acquired or congenital), neonatal status, and hepatic
seen in Doberman pinschers and German shepherds,
respectively. 15 Selective IgG and IgA deficiency is described
linemia due to hepatic insuffciency is often not recog.
in weimaraners.4 CBC, senum chemistry profle, serum
nized clinically because it is associated with the reduced
protein electrophoresis, and immunoelectrophoresis are
production of the α- and β- globulins (e.g., fbrinogen,
typical initial tests performed on puppies with suspected
transferin,haptoglobin, lipoproteins) and not immuno-
immunodeficiencies. Immunoglobulin quantitation by
globulins, which compose most of the globulin fraction.
RID or rocket electrophoresis is recommended for
288
Physical examination
Signs of
None of these
Severe
Signs of heart-
Cats with ascites
Jaint pain or
hyperviscosity
dermatitis
wormdisease
or pleural effusion
effusion
↑
↑
↑
CBC,urinalysis,
Check for fleas,
Checkformicro-
CheckforFIP
Arthrocentesis
and ELISAtest
mites, ticks, and
filaria or D.
(Chapter 15)
(Chapter 10)
Check viscosity
forheartworm
pyoderma
immitisantigen
andempyema
antigen
None of
Anemia, thrombo-
Microfilaremia
Proteinuria
these
cytopenia, and/or
orpositivefor
↑
leukopenia
D.immitis antigen
Check for Bence Jones
V
个
proteins(Chapter7);
Checkfor
Dirofilariasis
searchformuitiplemyeloma
ehrlichiosis and/or
immune-mediated causes
↑
Serum protein electrophoresis
Monoclonal gammopathy
Polyclonal gammopathy
Lymphocyte/plasma cell neoplasia
Chronic inflammation/infection
Idiopathicbenigngammopathy
Dirofilariasis
Ehrlichiosis
Ehrlichiosis
Immune-mediated disease
Radiographic survey of skeleton
Neoplasia
Bonemarrow/lyticbone biopsy
↑
Biopsy any masses
Thoracicradiographs
Ehrlichiatiter
个
If no evidence of dirafilariasis,proceed
If not due to ehrlichiosis:do
immunoelectrophoresisof serum and
Testingasneded forFIP,FIV,FeLV,hrlichiosis,RockyMountain
K
urine and/orradial immunodiffusion.
spotted fever,brucellosis,dirofilariasis,rheumatoid arthritis,and
Rarely due to FIP,leishmaniasis,
systemic lupus erythematosus
cutaneous amyloidosis,chronic
Biopsyoflymphnodes,leenjointcapsule,rotherrgan
pyoderma,plasmacytic
Culture of blood,urine,or tissue
enterocolitis,orextramedullary
Radiographsof chest or abdomen:ultrasonography
plasmacytoma
If no diagnosis and patient is worsening:
considerexploratorylaparotomy andbiopsy
FGURE 12-9 Diagnostic evaluation of moderate to severe hyperglobulinemia (globulin ≥ 5.0 g/dl) in dogs and cats. CBC, Com-
plete blood count; ELiSA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; FiP, feline infectious peritonitis;
FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus.
confirmation and characterization of the type of immu-
enteropathy) or be asymptomatic. Serum electrophoresis
noglobulin deficiency present.
in cases of selective or partial immunoglobulin def-
Immunoglobulin quantitation techniques are more
precise than qualitative methods (i.e, i
immunoelectro-
elevations
in globulins.
Immunoelectrophoresis
of
phoresis). Selective (single class or subclass) and partial
normal canine serum may show a low or absent stain-
immunoglobulin
deficiencies
may not be
readily
able IgA precipitation band because of the relatively low
detectable via serum electrophoresis and immunoelec-
 concentration of IgA or as the result of quality assurance
trophoresis, and all immunoglobulin classes (and IgG
problems involving antisera or technique When selective
subclasses when available) should be quantitated when
IgA deficiency is suspected, the best diagnostic test is
a humoral immunodefciency is suspected. Humoral
quantitative RID or rocket electrophoresis IgA deficiency
immunodeficiency
is usually
detectedbyfinding
is sometimes accompanied by elevated concentrations
decreased IgG and IgA and normal to decreased IgM con-
of IgM or IgG. A complement measurement and evalua-
centrations. Selective IgA deficiency and transient hypo-
tions of lymphocyte and phagocyte functions may also
gammaglobulinemia occur in dogs.  Patients 
with
be indicated for patients with suspected congenital
selective IgA deficiency may show chronic problems
immunodeficiency
 (see  Miscellaneous  Immunologic-
involving mucosal immunity (eg., antibiotic-responsive 
Based Tests near end of chapter).
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
289
NOTE: In patients with paraproteinemias (e.g, multiple
Causes of Serum Hyperviscosity · A relative viscosity
myeloma, macroglobulinemia, B-cell lymphosarcoma)
greater than or equal to 4 is abnormal in people and
immunoglobulins of non-neoplastic origin are usually
probably abnormal for dogs. Because of the relatively
depressed.
large size of IgM, it has the greatest potential to cause
        
dimer) and very high concentrations of IgG can also cause
is almost invariably caused by lymphoproliferative disor-
The relationship between chronic inflammatory
ders (e.g., multiple myeloma, macroglobulinemia, lym-
enteropathies (eg.. lymphocytic plasmacytic enteritis)
phosarcoma; see Box 12-2). Hyperviscosity syndrome
and serum IgA deficiency is unclear at this time. It is likely 
rarely occurs in gammopathies (monoclonal or poly-
that deficiency of local secretory IgA is not always reflected
donal) caused by ehrlichiosis or other insidious
by serum IgA concentrations. In addition, low concentra-
diseases.
tions of serum IgA have been associated with canine aller-
 The diagnostic approach is described in Figure 12-9
gic and parasitic disorders, with return to normal after
under Monoclonal Gammopathy. Because lymphosar-
successful therapy. This finding suggests that those disease
coma and plasma cell myeloma are the major causes of
processes may lead to down-regulation of IgA as an
serum hyperviscosity, aspiration of bone marrow, enlarged
immunomodulation event, and low IgA probably has no
lymph nodes, splenic or liver lesions, or other masses is
causative role in the underlying chronic inflammatory
often indicated. If results are equivocal, biopsy and his-
bowel disease Breed-specifc normal ranges for immuno-
topathologic evaluation of bone marrow or involved
globulins may provide a clearer picture of the role of
tissues are indicated.
selective IgA deficiency in chronic enteropathies.
CRYOPRECIPITATION
SERUM VISCOSITY
Cryoglobulins are usually monoclonal or complexed
Mol ie jag io aediaid aiqisiaaai jeu sunqoioun
patients with monoclonal gammopathies, hyperglobulin-
temperatures but dissolve when heated. Cryoglobulins
emia with signs of hyperviscosity [i.e, poor tissue perfu-
are rarely found in canine multiple myeloma and
sion, dilated retinal vessels, retinal hemorrhage or retinal
macroglobulinemia.
detachment, renal disease, central nervous system [CNS]
dysfunction, bleeding problems), and established plasma
Rarely Indicated · Testing for cryoglobulins is indi-
hyperviscosity where continual monitoring is needed.
cated with paraproteins that precipitate or gel when
Hyperviscosity may be suspected based on finding high
blood or serum is refrigerated at 4° C.
serum protein (usually >l0 g/dl) or on physical charac-
teristics of serum (i.e, viscous or syrup-like). Polycythe-
mia (packed cell volume [PCV] > 60%) can also cause
NOTE: Cryoglobulins are not cold agglutinins (ie., anti-
increased blood viscosity and should be eliminated as
bodies binding antigen reversibly at temperatures < 37° C).
a possibility in patients showing clinical signs of
hyperviscosity.
Advantage · Detection of cryoglobulins is important,
Advantages · The test is simple and diagnostically
because failing to detect them may cause false-negative
significant.
  s u Pia si a o si
hyperviscosity.
Ostwald viscosimeter or a 0.1-ml capillary pipette Time
for a given volume of serum to flow from the pipette is
Analysis · The clinician should contact a reference lab
compared with that for the same volume of water.
about assaying for cryoglobulins.
Normal Values ● Relative viscosity. 1.4 to l.8. (Relative
Causes of Cryoglobulinemia · Macroglobulinemia or
viscosity = flow time of serum [seconds] divided by flow
multiple myeloma of IgM and IgA classes may cause
time of water [seconds].)
canine  cryoglobulinemia.
. Finding cryoglobulinemia
indicates diagnostic evaluation for ]
 lymphocyte and
Artifacts · Volume depletion due to dehydration
plasma cell neoplasia as described for monoclonal
causing increased senum protein concentration may
gammopathies.
increase serum viscosity but is unlikely to be clinically
significant. Markedly increased blood viscosity can inter-
fere with tests using flow-through devices (eg. hematol-
ANTINUCLEARANTIBODY
ogy autoanalyzers).
Occasionally Indicated · Abnormalities suggestive of
Drug Therapy That May Alter Serum Viscosity · Any
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), such as symmetric
drug causing volume depletion can increase serum
dermatitis principally distributed on the head and mucous
viscosity.
membranes,
hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia.
290
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Normal Values · Values vary among laboratories owing
BOX 12-3. CAUSES OF INCREASED ANTINUCLEAF
to different substrates, controls, and procedures used.
ANTIBODY TItER IN DOGS AND CATS
Accuracy requires procedural consistency and experience.
Fetal and newborn sera do not stain nuclei. Most veteri-
Systemic Lupus Erythematosus (SLE) (titer most
consistently elevated in this disease)*
nary laboratories use tissue culture monolayers of human
epithelial-2 (HEp-2) cells as substrate, which allows
Skin Disorders
improved discernment of fluorescent patterns of staining
 Pemphigus erythematosus (seldom pemphigus vulgaris)t
and more standardized procedural consistency. When this
Discoid lupus
test method was used in a comparative study involving
Generalized demodicosis
ll12 canine serum samples, a significant positive titer was
 Hea bite hypersensitivity
established at a screening dilution of 1:25 for greater
 Plasma cell pododermatitis
than 95% specificity, whereas a minimum significant
Hematologic Disorders
ANA titer of 1 : 100 was established as the corresponding
Immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
significant titer using rat liver sections, which identified
the identical group of ANA-positive dogs at the same
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT)
specificity of greater than 95%. A recent study in dogs
Cardiopulmonary Disorders
using the flow cytometric microsphere assayil showed
Bacterial endocarditis 
that ANA titers of less than l: 160 were considered exclu-
 Dirofilariasis
sionary for SLE when one or fewer clinical signs or abnor-
Other Disorders
mal laboratory results for SLE were present, and titers
Cholangiohepatitis
greater than or equal to 1: 160 were considered diagnostic
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV)
for SLE when more than two clinical signs or abnormal
 Feline infectious peritonitis (FIP)
laboratory results (see Causes of Increased Antinuclear
 Rheumatoid arthritis
Antibody Titer, later) were present. Sixty-one percent
Lymphocytic thyroiditis
of the dogs in this study with SLE had titers greater than
or equal to 1: 640, indicating a good correlation between
Various neoplasms
high titers and the presence of SLE. However, small
 Ulcerative autoimmune stomatitist
numbers of dogs without SLE also had titers of greater
*Moderate to high titers.
than 1:160.14
tModerate titers.
NOTE: ANA titer, if positive, in disorders without * or 十 is likely to
Drug Therapy That May Alter Antinuclear Antibody
be low.
Titer · Anything decreasing antibody synthesis (e.g..
cytotoxic drugs, chronic or high-dose corticosteroid
therapy) can decrease titers. Positive ANA titers have been
attributed to treatment with griseofulvin, hydralazine.
procainamide, sulfonamides, and tetracyclines. Positive
nonseptic polyarthritis, myositis, proteinuria, or fever of
ANA titers can occur in cats treated with propylthiouracil
unknown origin, are indications for measurement of
or methimazole Some of these cats develop drug-induced
ANA. Less common are neuromuscular, cardiac, or pul-
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia (IMHA)
puE
monary abnormalities. The test can be used to monitor
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (IMT).
patients being treated for SLE.
Artifacts · Improper reagent preparation, storage, or
Advantages · The test is simple and indicative of
application; inadequate controls.
immune-mediated disease when positive with a relatively
high titer in conjunction with compatible clinical
Causes of Increased Antinuclear Antibody Titer · A
abnormalities.
matory, and neoplastic disorders. A partial list of diseases
Disadvantages · ANA is not a disease-specific test (i.e.,
(in addition to SLE) is given in Box 12-3. Normal dogs
many diseases besides SLE may be associated with a low
and cats can also have detectable ANA; however, these
or occasionally high titer; Box 12-3).
tend to be low titers. Positive titers obtained in disorders
Other than SLE are generally not markedly elevated; there-
Analysis · ANA is measured in serum by indirect immu-
fore it is important to consider values established by the
nofluorescence testing (IT). The result should be reported
laboratory for low, moderate, and high titers. Equally
p susne unas suaed e jo unp sauu au se
important is consideration of other clinical and clinico-
nite staining of nuclei. Several patterns of nuclear fluores-
pathologic changes consistent with a diagnosis of SLE.
cence are recognized: homogeneous (diffuse), rim
 It is imperative in patients with suspected SLE to
(peripheral), speckled (fine or large speckles), and nucle-
evaluate clinical presentation and results of laboratory
olar. Other tests are being developed for the diagnosis of
data, including ANA. Clinical signs which indicate testing
SLE, such as flow cytometry using a microsphere assay to
for SLE include polyarthritis, skin or oral cavity lesions,
detect antihistone antibody (histone is a nuclear protein
polymyositis, generalize immune-mediated disease and
cited more commonly as an antigen associated with SLE
(particularly in cats) neurologic disturbances. Abnormal
formation). but thus far have not proven more effective
laboratory results include thrombocytopenia, leukope-
in replacing IIT.11
nia, proteinuria, and hemolytic anemia.14 It is suggested
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
291
that at least one of these laboratory abnormalities be
 present prior to testing for SLE.14
A positive ANA titer is the most important criterion
for diagnosis of SLE, providing established clinical criteria
are met and exclusionary diagnoses are not made (eg..
FeLV or FIP infection, cholangiohepatitis, rickettsial or
systermic parasitic diseases). No well-established patterns
of ANA fluorescence in cats and dogs distinguish SLE
from non-SLE immune-mediated diseases or other condi-
tions associated with positive ANA titers [see Box 12-3).
Although ANA titers are frequently higher in SLE than in
other disorders, there can be overlap, especially when no
inclusion criteria are considered. 14 Likewise, magnitude of
titer does not parallel severity of disease high titers are
not always indicative of SLE, and elevated but lower titers 
do not exclude a diagnosis of SLE. Periodic ANA titers
FIGURE 12-10 Canine lupus arthritis. This canine synovial fluid
may be useful in monitoring a lupus patient's response
smear has one large lupus erythematosus (LE) cell in the far
to therapy.
left, which is a neutrophil containing a large round violet LE
A positive ANA titer can be an indication for perform-
body that is composed of nuclear proteins from a dead lysed
ing additional tests to distinguish SLE from non-SLE
cell bound to antinuclear antibodies. Many other neutrophils
disease: dermatitis favoring mucocutaneous junctions is
 an indication for biopsy, histopathologic examination,
antigen complexes, and these white blood cells are called
ragocytes. Both are indicative of immune-mediated joint
and immunohistochemical or direct immunofluorescent
disease.
testing (see Miscellaneous Immunologic-Based Tests later
in chapter);: hemolytic anemia is an indication for an
antiglobulin [i.e., Coombs) test (see Chapter 3) and tests
for hemoparasites; and swollen, painful joints are an indi-
cation for arthrocentesis, fluid analysis (see Chapter 10).
Causes of Positive Lupus Erythematosus Cell Prepa-
and RF test [see later discussion).
rations · Ideally a minimum of three to four LE cells on
a slide is necessary for a diagnosis of SLE. The test should
be performed at least three times before results are con-
LUPUS ERYTHEMATOSUS TEST
sidered negative The test is specific for SLE but insensi-
tive. Negative results are common in SLE patients that are
Occasionally Indicated · A lupus erythematosus (LE)
ANA positive Such patients may lack the particular auto-
shoiaand aas) ais paioadsns yo saseo ul paieoipun si isat
antibodies to histone-DNA involved in LE cell formation
section on Antinuclear Antibody).
but have other types of ANA detectable by immunofluo-
rescence. Positive test results may rarely be obtained in
Advantages · The test is specific; it does not require
other diseases [eg., osteochondritis dissecans, nonimmu-
aim aro si araiar pe saei oas-saas
nologic joint disease, neoplasia, DIC). If a positive LE cell
available.
preparation is obtained, an ANA titer and tests to obtain
other evidence of SLE are indicated (as described earlier
Disadvantages · The test is time-consuming and much
under Antinuclear Antibody). An ANA titer is the pre-
less sensitive than the ANA test; it requires a very fresh
ferred screening test for SLE.
blood sample.
Analysis · Depending on the laboratory, heparinized or
ANTIGLOBULIN (COOMBS} TEST
clotted blood is used. Formation of LE cells in vivo is rarely
demonstrated in routinely stained bone marrow smears
See Chapter 3.
or in joint fluid from patients with polyarthritis (Figure
12-10), but it is highly suggestive of SLE when present. A
laboratory experienced in performing and interpreting LE
TESTS FOR IMMUNE-MEDIATED
 cell tests is necessary.
THROMBOCYTOPENLA
Artifacts · LE cells must be differentiated from "tart"
Dogs and cats showing marked thrombocytopenia
cells, which are neutrophils that have phagocytized intact
(<50,0o0/μul) may have IMT. This is typically a diagnosis
nuclei. The LE cell test is complement-dependent, and
of exclusion because no widely available in-house test
low concentrations of complement, excessive heparin, or
allows a definitive diagnosis of IMT. Bone marrow exami-
failure to use freshly drawn blood may cause false-
nations in patients with IMT often exhibit megakaryocytic
negative results.
hyperplasia, which would strongly support a clinical diag-
nosis of IMT.12 However, IMT cannot be excluded in a
Drug  Therapy  Causing  False-Negative H
Results *
differential diagnosis if bone marrow examination reveals
Steroid therapy alters test results. The LE celltest is more
megakaryocytic
hypoplasia,
because
the immune-
sensitive to effects of steroids than is an ANA titer.
mediated process can also target megakaryocytes.
292
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Measurements of platelet-associated antibodies by
laboratories perform the Rose-Waaler test by preabsorb-
flow cytometry and immunoradiometric assay for detec-
ing all test sera with sheep RBCs. In this case a titer of less 
tion of platelet-associated immunoglobulins are exam-
than 1: 16 is expected in normal dogs.
ples of specific tests used for the potential diagnosis of
IMT.13,16 However, both IMT and non-immune-mediated
Artifacts · Serum submitted for RF testing should not
diseases (e.g., infectious, neoplastic, inflammatory) can
be frozen because RF activity (especially IgM) may be
have platelet-associated antibodies present, so detection
destroyed, causing false-negative results. Canine RF tends
of antiplatelet antibodies does not definitively make a
to self-associate, forming multimeric complexes that
diagnosis of IMT.5 Likewise, these tests generally require
significantly lower detectable titers. Wide, sometimes
blood samples to be handled in a very specific fashion
negative, fluctuations in RF titer occur over time; these
 and require specialized laboratories.
fluctuations do not appear to correlate with disease sever-
ity. False-positive results may occur in the Rose-Waaler test
if a patient's serum has antibodies against sheep RBCs
RHEUMATOID FACTOR TEST
and appropriate controls or absorption of these antibod-
ies is not performed.
 Rarely Indicated ● An RF test is indicated in dogs, par-
ticularly small breeds, suspected of having rheumatoid
Causes of an Increased Rheumatoid Factor Titer ·
arthritis (RA) because of lameness, heat, swelling. or
 Because RF is an antibody against Fc fragments of immu-
 rd a s  no ud
noglobulin molecules that become exposed only after
Crepitation,jointlaxityanderosive synovial changesmay
antibody binds to antigen, any disease with long-standing
be detected in chronic cases. Nonspecific signs include
immune complexes can eventually induce RF formation.
anorexia, fever, depression, and reluctance to move and
 In the Rose-Waaler test, a differential titer of greater than
may precede clinically or radiographically detectable evi-
Or equal to 1: 8 is positive for RE? Between 40% and 75%
dence of joint disease.
of dogs with RA have a positive RF test result Hence, a
negative result does not eliminate RF The RF test is rarely
Disadvantages · The test is insensitive [i.e, many false-
positive in normal dogs and occasionally positive in some
negative results) and not highly specifc for RA in dogs
patients with SLE, because RF may be a part of the SLE
because of relatively low titers.
complex. Incidence of RF in other arthropathies and sys-
temic diseases has not been adequately studied via the
Analysis · Serum is submitted refrigerated, but it is
Rose-Waaler method, but other methods have shown RF
always advisable to contact the reference lab to determine
in titers comparable with those of patients with RA in
how to ship samples properly. The Rose-Waaler test
these arthropathies. Therefore, a positive RF test result
(adapted from the human test for RF) is traditionally
should never be the sole criterion for a diagnosis of
considered the gold standard test for canine RF, although
canine RA (important).
turbidimetric nephelometric, and ELISA assays are newer
RA is a progressive, erosive, immune-mediated poly-
tests used by human laboratories for human RFs.' Canine
arthritis that must be differentiated from other types of
RFs are autoantibodies targeting the Fc portion of IgG but
joint diseases, preferably before joint destruction occurs.
may also be mixed complexes of IgG, IgA, and IgM.
Unfortunately no test for canine RF is highly reliable in
Factors are detected by incubating rabbit IgG-sensitized
making this distinction. Other routine tests indicated in
sheep red blood cells (RBCs) with serial dilutions of the
making the diagnosis include joint radiographs and syno-
patient's serum (the rabbit Rose-Waaler test). If RF is
vial fluid analysis. Septic polyarthritis often causes erosive
present, agglutination occurs. Because canine sera often
lesions, especially involving larger joints, plus evidence of
contain naturally occurring antibodies to sheep RBCs, a
sepsis on routine blood and synovial fluid examinations
control must be used with unsensitized sheep RBCs. If
(see Chapter 10), including culture. In contrast, RA typi-
agglutination to an equal or higher dilution appears in
cally causes erosive lesions of smaller peripheral joints
the control, natural antibodies must be absorbed from
 before progressing to larger joints. Radiographic lesions
the sera before testing for RF Latex agglutination tests for
may be lacking or inconclusive early in the course of RA.
canine RF are not recommended because results are
 Furthermore, no distinguishing cytologic features can reli-
 poorly reproducible and lack specificity. Latex agglutina-
ably differentiate among RA, SLE, and other types of
tion titers may differ substantially from Rose-Waaler
immune-mediated joint disease that have similar joint
titers. The ELISA test is able to detect all classes of immu-
fluid cytology. Histopathologic examination of synovium
noglobulin and is considered an acceptable altermative to
from affected joints is the most reliable means of diagnos-
the Rose-Waaler test.
ing canine RA.
Histopathologic examination of synovium allows an
Results ● For the Rose-Waaler test in normal animals.
isse buoel siuaed un Adeiayl pue sisoei a
the differential titer {i.e., difference between titers at
radiographic changes. An ANA titer helps distinguish SLE
which agglutination of unsensitized versus sensitized
from RA; but it is occasionally positive in RA. Finding
sheep RBCs occurs) should be less than eight.2 A titer
both types of autoantibodies may represent the rare, com-
against sensitized RBCs not corrected for the actual
bined occurrence of both SLE and RA [i.e, a so-called
titer of natural antibodies to sheep RBCs can be mislead-
ainu jo auiade a aaa n (apus dea
ing because some normal animals have higher titers
autoantibodies in a patient with RA or SLE. In either case.
of naturally occurring antibodies to sheep RBCs. Some
clinical criteria are required for diagnosis.
Chapter 12: Immunologic and Plasma Protein Disorders
293
Miscellaneous Immunologic-Based Tests ● Numerous im-
References and Suggested Readings
munologic-based tests are available in select laboratories.
These include immunostaining of tissues, indirect immu-
1. Andrysikova R, Kudlackova H, Toman M: Standardisation of
nofluorescent testing, tests for cellular immunity, phago-
ELISA for rheumatoid factor IgM detection in canine serum.
Acta Vet Brno 78:129, 2009.
cyte function assays, enumeration of proportions of T and
2. Barta O: Rose-Waaler test. [n Barta O, editor: Veterinary clinical
B lymphocytes, and evaluation of lymphocyte functions
immunology laboratory. Blacksburg. VA. 1993. BARLAB.
in vitro.
3. Ceron II, Eckersall PD, Martinez-Subiela S: Acute phase pro-
teins in dogs and cats: curent and future perspectives. J Vet
Occasionally Indicated · In general, tests are per-
Clin Pathol34:85.2005.
formed on samples where an immunologic-based disease
4. Day MJ. et al: Low serum immunoglobulin concentrations
is suspected ora specific categorization of neoplasia (e.g.-
in related Weimaraner dogs. J Small Anim Pract 38:31l.
T-cell or B-cell lymphosarcoma) is needed for both defini-
1997.
tive diagmosis and/or treatment considerations. The clini-
 5. Dircks BH. Schuberth HJ. Mischke R: llnderlying diseases
and clinicopathologic vaniables of thrombocytopenic dogs
cian should consider performing immunostaining
or
with and without platelet-bound antibodies detected by use
indirect immunofluorescent testing on skin lesions from
of a flow cytometic assay: 83 cases (2004). J Am Vet Med
mucocutaneous lesions where immune-mediated dis-
Assoc 235:960, 2009.
eases such as pemphigus vulgaris or foliaceus, discoid
6. George [W: The usefulness and limitations of hand-held
lupus erythematosus, bullous pemphigoid, and the like
 jefractometers in veterinary laboratory medicine: an histori-
are suspected. Similar testing on tissues with immune-
cal and technical review. J Vet Clin Pathol 30:20l. 2001.
 mediated diseases targeting basement membranes (e.g..
7. Giraudel [M. Pages IP, Guelf JF: Monoclonal gammopathies
renal glomerular disease) can be performed. One should
in the dog: a retrospective study of 18 cases (1986) and lit-
also consider performing tests for cellular immunity.
erature review. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 38:135. 2002.
 8. Hojo T, et al: Enzyme and plasma protein induction by mul.
phagocyte function assays, proportions of T and B lym-
tple oral administrations of phenobarbital at a therapeutic
phocytes, or lymphocyte function assays on animals with
dosage in dogs. / Vet Pharmacol 25:121, 2002.
recurrent infections and suspicion of an immunodef-
9. Kuribayashi T, et al: Detemination of serum C-reactive
ciency or white blood cell disorder (eg.. leukocyte
pue sase snoiea jo saop a[beaq kun[eay u! (dao) uanond
adhesion defciency). Immunohistochemistry or immu-
pregnant beagle dogs. Exp Anim 52:387. 2003.
 nocytochemistry should be considered to differentiate
10. Martinez-Subiela S. Ginel P], Ceron JI: Effects of glucocorti-
types of tumor (e.g., histiocytic sarcoma versus anaplastic
coid treatments on serum acute phase proteins in dogs. Vet
carcinoma) or specifcally categorize a tumor (e.g., B-cell
Rec 154:814, 2004.
lymphosarcoma versus a T-cell lymphosarcoma).
 ll. Paul S, et al: Development and evaluation of a flow cytom-
etry microsphere assay to detect anti-histone antibody in
dogs. Vet Immunol Immurnopathol 107:315, 2005.
Advantages · Results of tests can give specific causes of
12. Putsche [C, Kohn B: Primary immune-mediated thrombocy-
diseases where histopathology or routine diagnostic
topenia in 30 dogs (1997). J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 44:250.
testing may only suggest a cause In some instances, test
2008.
results may alter therapeutic regimens to treat a specific
13. Scott MA, et al: Development of a sensitive immunoradio-
type of disease or cancer, such as with a T- or B-cell
metnic assay for detection of platelet surface-associated
lymphosarcoma.
immunoglobulins in thrombocytopenic dogs. Am J Vet Res
63:124. 2002
Disadvantages · Positive or negative test results may
14. Smee NM, Harkin KR, Wilkerson MJ: Measurements of serum
not entirely exclude or include certain diseases due to
antinuclear antibody titer in dogs with and without systemic
lupus erythematosus: 120 cases (1997). J Am Vet Med Assoc
variability of disease and testing measures. Collecting
230:1180, 2007.
specimens for these highly specialized tests needs to be
15. Stockham SL, Scott MA: Proteins. [n Fundamentals of veteri-
performed carefully and with knowledge of how to prop-
nary clinical pathology. ed 2. Ames. [A. 2008. Blackwell
o u sans ar s pe u a
Publishing.
immunosuppressive dnugs or corticosteroids or high
16. Wilkerson MJ. et al: Platelet size platelet surface-associated
levels of endogenous corticosteroids (e.g, hyperadreno-
[gG. and reticulated platelets in dogs with immune-mediated
corticism) can lead to false-negative testing for some
thrombocytopenia. Vet Clin Pathol 30:141. 2001.
immune-mediated disorders.
13
Reproductive Disorders
Cheri A. Johnson
GENERAL DIAGNOSTIC APPROACH
should be palpated. The prostate is palpated rectally and
transabdominally. Physical examination of the female
Clinicopathologic testing of the reproductive system is
includes inspection and palpation of mammary glands
often indicated in normal animals for the purposes of
and vulva. The uterus is palpated transabdominally. In
optimizing reproductive performance and in animals
 bitches of adequate size, the posterior vagina is palpated
with urogenital disorders. The most important diagnostic
with a gloved finger; rectal palpation may also be helpful.
will direct the reminder of the evaluation. The history for
all females should include questions regarding changes
VAGINAL CYTOLOGY
in the mammary conformation and mammary secretions.
as well as changes in the appearance of the extermal geni-
Many reproductive disorders cause abnormal vaginal
talia and the presence of vulvar discharge, and whether
cytologic fndings, even when no vulvar discharge is
the changes are cyclic in nature. The history should also
present. When a discharge is present, one must first dif-
investigate changes in behavior, such as maternal behav-
a    le  u 
ior, sexual activity, excessive licking of genitalia, Or
cause. The first step is vaginal cytology. The morphologic
a saeu suaiq o suaned aeun u sasu
characteristics and numbers of vaginal epithelial cells, red
history of estrous cycles should include the dates of the
blood cells (RBCs), white blood cells (WBCs), and bacte-
onset of each cycle, physical and behavioral characteristics
ria are noted, as is the presence of other elements (e.g..
of the female during each cycle, duration of each estrous
neoplastic cells, mucus, debris, uteroverdin, endometrial
period, and breeding dates and method of insemination
cells, macrophages). The effects of estrogen on vaginal
(natural or artificial). The stud's reproductive perfor-
epithelial cells are useful indicators in animals suspected
mance with other bitches before and after breeding the
of having ovarian remnants or hyperestrogenism, and for
bitch in question is important. Dates and methods of
breeding animals to monitor the stages of the estrous
pregnancy examination and any signs of abortion should
cycle, to determine breeding and whelping management,
be noted. If pregnancy occurred, was parturition normal?
to investigate abnormal estrous cycles, and to investigate
What were gestation length and litter size?
possible “mismating.
 For all males, history should investigate changes in
 Using a speculum, a saline-moistened cotton-tipped
the appearance of external genitalia, preputial discharge.
swab is inserted into the vagina beyond the urethral
excessive licking of genitalia, and changes in urinary pat-
orifice, or saline is flushed into and aspirated from the
terms. For breeding males, history should include libido.
vagina with a pipette, being careful to avoid the clitoral
mating ability, number of females bred, conception rate.
fossa and skin when obtaining the sample Next, the
breeding methods [i.e., natural or artificial insemination,
swabs are gently rolled onto slides, or drops of the saline
frequency of use, how insemination dates are chosen).
aspirate are placed on slides. Slides are then fixed and
and reproductive performance of bitches before and after
stained. Modifed Wright-Giemsa stain (Diff-Quik), new
being bred to the male in question. Reproductive history
methylene blue (NMB), Wright-Giemsa stain, Wright
should include methods used to screen for infectious dis-
stain, and trichrome stain are commonly used, but many
eases affecting reproduction (e.g. Brucella canis in dogs
others are acceptable A minimum of 100 epithelial cells
and viral rhinotracheitis in cats) (see Chapter 15), medi-
 are examined and tabulated.
cations known to affect reproductive function (eg.. glu-
cocorticoids), familial association with infertility, and
Hemorrhage
stressful activities such as racing or being shown.
Physical examination of male reproductive tract
RBCs are common in normal and abnormal vulvar dis-
includes inspection of the penis and preputial and scrotal
charges (Box 13-1): their significance is determined
skin. Both testes, epididymides, and spermatic cords
by accompanying cells. Superficial (cornified) vaginal
294
Chapter 13: Reproductive Disorders
295
Purulent or Septic Discharge
BoX 13-1. CaUSEs oF HEmoRRHaGIC VULvAR
DISCHARGE IN THE BITCH AND QUEEN
 Jl 'ssaond Aoneuueyu Aue Aueduoe ue Bupaaa
the WBC:RBC ratio is more suggestive of an exudate
With Mainly Superficial (Mature) Epithelial Cells
than of peripheral blood, an infammatory disease
(estrogen influence)
 Normal estrus; or late proestrus or early diestrus (most
should be sought. WBCs suggest inflammation, but they
common)
are normally found in large numbers during the frst 1
Ovarian remnant (common)
to 2 days of diestrus and in lesser numbers in normal
lochia. Septic (ie., bacteria seen) or punulent vulvar
 Ovarian pathologic condition (i.e., cystic folicles,
discharges may originate from vulva, vestibule, vagina.
functional ovarian tumor]
Or uterus. The source of a septic/purulent exudate
Exogenous estrogen
determines prognosis and must be identified. Vaginos-
Without Superficial (Mature) Epithelial Cells (no
copy is a reasonable next step. Hyperemia, edema, or
estrogen influence)
Normal lochia, early postpartum (most common)
mucosal lesions should be obvious with vestibulitis or
vaginitis. These would not exclude concurrent uterine
 Subinvoluted placental sites, late postpartum (young,
pathology (Figure 13-1). If endoscopy suggests a uterine
 primiparous bitches)
and/or cervical source of discharge or if endometrial cells
Vaginal laceration
are found during cytologic evaluation, uterine involve-
 Neoplasia of vagina or uterus (most common cause in old
ment is probable and abdominal ultrasonography is
bitches)
indicated.
 Uterine torsion
 Knowing the stage of the estrous cycle is essential for
laprosip buspeea 
d ren a sna d an u
(diestrus), a septic or punulent discharge can occur
because of pyometra, pregnancy with concurrent uterine
infection, or impending abortion. If the discharge occurs
epithelial cells with RBCs are expected during normal pro-
after parturition, postabortion, or otherwise during anes-
estrus and estrus but may also occur because of exogenous
trus, metritis or uterine stump granuloma/abscess should
estrogens or ovarian pathology such as follicular cysts or
be considered.
ovarian remnants. RBCs mixed with mucus are found
in lochia, the normal postpartum vaginal discharge
Neoplastic Cells
When cytology reveals peripheral blood with occasional
intermediate and parabasal epithelial cells, causes of
Transmissible venereal tumors (TVTs) and transitional
hemorrhage should be sought These include subinvolu-
cell carcinomas (TCCs) exfoliate readily. Animals with
tion of placental sites, vaginal laceration, uterine and
TVTs usually are presented because of a mass. When TCC
vaginal neoplasia, uterine torsion, and coagulopathies.
involves the urethral papilla, neoplastic cells may be
found on vaginal cytology. Fine-needle aspiration of
order characterized by a bloody discharge persisting for
-ads ueIqo ol Aem laqloue si sasse ieaIna pue ieugea
longer than 8 to 12 weeks. It usually occurs in otherwise
mens. If cytology does not allow definitive diagnosis
healthy primiparous bitches; blood loss is rarely signif-
of neoplasia, histopathologic assessment of an incisional
cant Diagnosis is based on history, physical, and cyto-
or excisional biopsy should. Additional diagnostic tests
 au aq u siia suuy o
a
for staging and treatment planning are dictated by
histopathologic assessment of placental sites, but such is
tumor type.
rarely necessary. Vaginal lacerations are relatively uncom-
mon but may occur from breeding trauma, dystocia.
Mucus
obstetric procedures, or vaginoscopy. If vaginal laceration
is suspected, endoscopy is indicated.
 This is the predominate component of lochia. Mucoid
Leiomyoma is the most common uterine and vaginal
discharge may also occur during normal late pregnancy
tumor in small animals, and hemorrhagic vulvar dis-
and possibly in scant amounts during the nonpregnant,
charge, with or without a palpable mass, is the most
luteal phase [i.e., diestrus). Further testing of these other-
common sign. Leiomyomas do not readily exfoliate;
' ess an si se ae a
therefore neoplastic cells are rarely found cytologically.
mucometra, and androgens can also cause mucoid dis-
 Uterine torsion occurs almost exclusively in periparturi-
charge. Conversely, a scanty mucoid vulvar discharge is
ent females. Abdominal pain and unrelenting straining
apparently normal in some otherwise healthy bitches
are the prominent findings, and a hemorrhagic discharge
[Box 13-2)
is common. Abdominal ultrasound is indicated. Vulvar
bleeding is rarely the only clinical sign of a coagulopathy.
Uteroverdin
If a bleeding disorder is suspected, a hemostatic profle
(see Chapter 5) is indicated.
This dark-green blood pigment is normal in the canine
placenta. Its presence in vulvar discharge indicates sepa-
 NOTE: Bloody vulvar discharge, even when associated with
ration of at least one placenta. This is normal during
stage Il of labor when accompanied by delivery of
 attraction of male dogs, does not always represent proes-
 puppies, but at all other times it indicates a placental
trus or estrus (see Box 13-1).
problem.
296
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
WBCon cytologicanalysis
Endometrial cells also?
No
Yes
Vagina inflamed?
Luteal phase(diestrus)?
Yes
No
No
No
Yes
Vaginitis
First 1-2 days of
Postpartum?
Cystic endometrial
lutealphase?
Postabortion?
hyperplasia
（±uterine
disease)
Anestrus?
Pyometra
Yes
Pregnant with con-
current infection
Normal
Metritis due to
Abortion
retained placenta
or retained fetus
Uterine stump
granuloma/abscess
FIGURE 13-1 Diagnostic considerations for purulent or septic vaginal cytology. WBC, White blood cells.
TABLE 13-1. VAGINAL CYTOLOGIC FINDINGS DURING THE ESTROUS CYCLE
PROESTRUS
ESTRUS
DIESTRUS
ANESTRUS
Parabasal
Occasional
X
Intermediate
+
Raré
+
Occasional 
Superficial- intermediate 
Occasional
+
土
Raré
Superficial
Rare
%06
Rare
RBCS
+
WBCS
Kep s
RBCs, Red blood cells; WBCs, white blood cells.
Vaginal Epithelial Cells
there is a gradual increase in numbers of cornified epithe-
lial cells and a decrease in WBCs. During estrus, superfi-
Estrogen causes proliferation and cornification of vaginal
cial (cornified) cells predominate, eventually accounting
epithelium. Therefore vaginal cytology can be used to
for greater than 90% of the exfoliated epithelial cells.
monitor estrous cycle, especially the follicular phase of
RBCs and extracellular bacteria are often present (Table
 proestnus and estrus when ovarian follicles are producing
13-1). WBCs are absent during estrus unless concurrent
estrogen (Figure 13-2). During proestrus, parabasal, inter-
inflammation exists.
 mediate, and some superficial cells are exfoliated. RBCs.
Diestrus [luteal phase) is marked by an abrupt
WBCs, and bacteria are present. As estrogen increases.
change: parabasal and intermediate cells outnumber the
superficial cells. Sheets of epithelial cells are often noted
at the onset of diestrus. WBCs almost always return at this
time RBCs and bacteria are often present. Thus it is often
BoX 13-2. causEs 0F mucoId vulvaR
impossible to base differentiation of late proestrus from
DISCHARGE
early diestrus on a single vaginal smear. Fewer cells are
exfoliated during anestrus; therefore the preparations are
Normal (most common cause in intact bitches)
relatively acellular. Parabasal and intermediate epithelial
Lochia
cells. with or without a few WBCs and bacteria, are
Late pregnancy
present during anestrus (see Table 13-1). Similar changes
Luteal phase (diestrus)
occur during the feline estrous cycle, except that RBCs and
Androgenic stirmulation 
WBCs are uncommon.
 Endogenous (intersex)
 Exogenous (mibolerone, testosterone)
Canine Breeding and Whelping
Cervicitis
Management
Mucometra 
 Determining stages of the estrous cycle helps determine
Idiopathic (?) (most common cause in spayed bitches)
 optimal breeding dates to maximize conception and litter
size and to predict whelping dates more accurately. When
Chapter 13:Reproductive Disorders
297
BoX 13-3. CANINE bREEDING MANAGEMENT
1. Choose only healthy, Brucella canis-negative, normal
animals for breeding.
 2. Identify the first day of estrus.
a. Begin early (day 3) in season (proestrus).
b. Check the bitch every other day by behavioral
(tease with experienced stud) and/or vaginal
Cytology examination.
A
 3. And/or use ovulation timing according to serum
progesterone or LH (see text).
4. At least 2 breedings, 48 hours apart, are 
recommended
 5. Pregnancy examination is indicated 20 to 30 days
later.
a. lf pregnant, discuss pregnancy and parturition 
management.
 b. If not pregnant, determine serum progesterone to
 assess ovulation and luteal function.
B
Mismating
Vaginal cytology may help determine whether a bitch has
recently been bred, because sperm heads (not intact
sperm) are detected in vaginal smears from 68% and 50%
of bitches bred 24 and 48 hours earlier, respectively.
Absence of sperm does not rule out recent copulation.
Estradiol cypionate (ECP) is NOT recommended to
develop pyometra. ECP may also cause mild to fatal bone
marrow suppression.
MAMMARY GLANDS
The most common cause of mammary gland enlargement
and secretion is lactation, but mastitis, hyperplasia, and
neoplasia are also common.
 FIGURE 13-2 Typical cells visible in vaginal cytology prepara-
Mastitis
tion. A, Superficial (cornified) anuclear squamous cells with
bacteria. B, Intermediate cells. C, Six parabasal cells (smaller
A bacterial infection of one or more lactating mammary
cells to the bottom and the left) and three intermediate cells
glands, mastitis is most common in postpartum bitches.
[arger cells to the right). (Courtesy of Dr.Harold Tvedten.)
It is rare in queens and in bitches experiencing false
pregnancy. Diagnosis is based on a history of recent par-
turition and finding fever, lethargy and warm, swollen,
using vaginal cytology as the only laboratory aid to breed-
painful glands with purulent milk. If milk is not visibly
ing management, maximal conception rates and litter size
abnormal, cytology of milk or a mammary aspirate shows
are obtained when normal bitches are bred on the frst
purulent inflammation, which is often septic Galactosta-
day of estrus and again 3 or more days later. Although it 
sis (i.e., accumulation and stasis of milk) also causes
 may not change conception rates or litter size, breeding
warm, swollen, painful glands, but the dam is healthy, no
 every other day is also acceptable (Box 13-3). Normal
bacterial infection is seen, and milk is cytologically
 a e sz i  s  
normal. Galactostasis is most common during weaning.
breeding date. When gestation length is calculated from
the first day of cytologic diestrus, 93% of bitches whelp
Mammary Hyperplasia
57 days after day one of diestnus. Calculating gestation
length from cytologic diestrus instead of breeding dates
Mammary hyperplasia (i.e., fibroadenomatous change.
 is helpful for recognizing prolonged gestation or prema-
fibroadenoma)  is characterized by  rapid abnormal
ture delivery.
mammary growth during diestrus or pregnancy in cycling
298
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
queens. It has also been reported in neutered queens and
individuals may have up to 2 ml of this fraction. The
toms treated with progestins. If history confirms proges-
second fraction is sperm-rich; volume is from 0.5 to
terone stimulation, mammary hyperplasia is suspected. If
5 ml. The third and largest fraction is prostatic fluid.
 One is in doubt, biopsy is indicated to distinguish it from
Normal prostatic fluid is clear and easily differentiated
neoplasia.
from milky sperm-rich fraction. For routine semen evalu-
ation, clinicians should collect only enough prostatic
Mammary Neoplasia
fluid to ensure that the entire sperm-rich portion has
been obtained.
 Mammary neoplasia is common in middle-aged to older
female dogs and cats. It is characterized by mammary
Color
 mass(es), often with abnormal secretions from the nipple.
Fine-needle aspiration of the mass is easy: however, cyto-
Color is evaluated by direct visualization. Normal
logic findings must be interpreted cautiously (see Chapter
canine semen is usually the color of skim milk. An
16) and are often nondiagnostic. Excisional biopsy and a
abnormally colored sample should be closely examined
histopathologic assessment best indicate type and degree
for foreign matter; contaminants may decrease sperm
of malignancy.
viability. A yellow appearance may represent urine con-
tamination. Blood colors the sample pink or red and
is usually of prostatic origin or from penile abrasions.
SEMEN EVALUATION
The latter is identifed by prompt visual inspection of
the penis.
Semen evaluation is indicated whenever there is a possi-
Inflammatory cells may cause samples to appear floc-
bility of male infertility (Figure 13-3);: it is also routine
culated or yellow-green. These cells can originate any-
in prebreeding examinations. Cytology of ejaculates is
where in the urinary or reproductive tracts. Preputial
also used to evaluate prostatic, testicular, and epididymal
contamination is common. When leukospermia occurs,
diseases.
the source should be sought and the sample cultured for
bacteria and Mycoplasma spp. Dogs should be tested for
Technique
Brucella canis infection (see Chapter 15).
Semen is collected by manual stimulation of the dog's
Concentration
penis. Care should be taken when handling the semen
sample. All equipment should be clean and free of con-
The concentration of the sperm is affected by the rela-
taminants (eg., water, excessive lubricant) that may affect
tively large volume of the sperm-free prostatic fluid.
sperm viability. Samples should be protected from tem-
Therefore number of spermatozoa is reported as the total
 perature shock. Dog semen can be handled at room tem-
sperm per ejaculate, not sperm per milliliter. An easy way
perature for approximately 15 minutes without adverse
to count spermatozoa is using a hemocytometer (see
effect. Nevertheless, samples should be processed
Chapter 2). Either the RBC or the WBC and platelet
promptly. Slides and coverslips should be maintained at
Unopette may be used for canine semen. The RBC pipette
37° C. The semen sample is evaluated for volume and
dilutes the sample l:200. The WBC and platelet pipette
color, as well as concentration, motility, and morphology
 dilutes the sample 1: 100. Dilution may be unnecessary
of spermatozoa (Table 13-2).
for oligospermic samples. Values of 250 x 10° to 2000 x
10° sperm per ejaculate are normal. Breed variation is
Volume
considerable because sperm production is directly related
to testicle size.
Canine semen is comprised of three fractions that
are ejaculated continuously. The first fraction is clear
prostatic fluid; volume is usually several drops. Some
Motility
A drop of semen is placed on a warm slide (37"C),
covered with a warm coverslip. and allowed to sit on the
TABLE 13-2.(
CHARACTERISTICS OF NORMAL
slide warmer for 15 to 30 seconds. It is then examined
CANINE SEMEN
microscopically for progressive motility. Spermatozoa
FRACTION
should move in a rapid, steady, forward manner across
VOLUME
COLOR
the feld. One hundred sperm are examined, and the
Pre-sperm
Drops (rarely
Clear
percentage having progressive motility is estimated.
saop anq paadixa si Arou sz ot zuaiad Aruas
several ml)
0.5-5.0 ml
Cloudy white,
with good fertility usually have greater than 80%. Wave
Sperm-rich
opalescent
patterns (e.g.. as seen in bull semen) are rare in canine
 Prostatic fluid 
1-20 ml 
Clear
semen because the sperm concentration is too low.
Total sperm/ 
250 x 10° to 2000 x 106
Exposure to heat or cold, excessive lubricant water,
ejaculate
urine, inflammatory cells, and the like can diminish per-
Motility
≥80% progressively motile
centage and vigor of motility. This commonly occurs
Morphology
with chilled and frozen thawed semen used for artificial
<25% abnormal
insemination.
Chapter 13:Reproductive Disorders
299
lesion
matingability
Normal
 Improper breeding
previous infertility
 management 
Recovered from
Yes
Normal semen
10
Dog i
norm
s
 preference 
Normal libido?
Behavioral
territorial
estrus
Hyperadreno-
No
Metabolic
corticism
Geriatric
Pain
motility, or numbers of sperm 
 Brucea canistest, and semen evaluation
 Abnormal morphology.
oi anp luao
 Poor ejaculation 
Repeat evaluation
culture semen
Norma
History, physical examination
 Prepubertal
Long sexual
inactivity
 Reevaluation
Abnormal
 aspirate
Testicular biopsy
testosterone
Sperm not
produced
corticism
LH, FSH, or 
Testicular
profile
AH
Azoospermia
vas deferens
epididymitis
 Sperm not
ejaculated
Retrograde
ejaculation
Bilateral
rostatic
disease
66
 Spem-rich
fraction not
collected
Y
 canis serology
over 2 months
 Blood culture
Leukospermia
 appropriately
 Reevaluation
 orchitis/
 Fine-needle 
anaerobe
aspiration
300
Morphology
several times over at least 2 months. A dog's age, breed
(testicle size), and frequency of use must be considered
 Phase-contrast light microscopy is ideal for evaluating
-sesun, io Aiopeysnes, aldues e gupunouoid aioyaq
sperm morphology but has limited availability. Several
stains may be used to evaluate morphologic characteris-
of fertility: a male must also have normal libido and
tics of sperm. Unfortunately, some stains cause morpho-
mating ability (see Figure 13-3). Likewise, presence of
logic defects in canine sperm. These defects may reflect
inappropriate osmolality or pH. Common morphology
unless azoospermia or complete necrospermia (i.e., dead
stains contain eosin-nigrosin and typically do not stain
spermatozoa) is found.
cells other than spermatozoa. Samples may also be
stained with NMB or Wright stain. At least 100 (prefera-
Se payissel pue pauuexa ane eozoieuads (ooz Aq
being normal or abnormal. If a spermatozoon has more
PROSTATE
than one abnormality, it is classifed according to the
most severe abnormality. Abnormalities affecting size
Prostatic disease (eg., benign prostatic hyperplasia, bac-
and shape of the sperm head, acrosome, and midpiece
terial prostatitis, prostatic abscess, prostatic and para-
and proximal droplets are usually considered most
prostatic cysts, prostatic neoplasia) is common in older
severe. Loose or detached heads that are otherwise
male dogs. History and physical examination (especially
normal and bent tails are considered less severe; however.
rectal palpation) often localize the problem to the
they are often the first abnormalities noticed after testic-
prostate, but additional tests are necessary to determine
ular insult. Dogs with good fertility usually have less
the cause. Prostatic fluid is the third and largest
than 20% to 25% abnormal sperm. Abnormalities result-
fraction of canine ejaculates; therefore evaluation of
ing from improper sample handling should disappear
ejaculated prostatic fluid has been advocated for diag-
in subsequent, properly handled samples. One of the
nosis of prostatic disease Prostatic massage, fine-needle
most common iatrogenic changes in canine semen is
aspiration, and biopsy of the prostate can also be
bent tails.
performed.
 During the morphologic examination, presence of
Ejaculate characteristics correlate well with histopath-
 other cell types or foreign matter should be recorded. If
ologic examination of biopsy specimens from dogs with
excessive numbers of cells other than spermatozoa (eg..
benign prostatic hyperplasia and prostatitis. Hemorrhage
WBCs) are found, their source should be investigated.
shop oy uauas ul Aeouqe juanbay isou au si
These cells are most easily evaluated when stains such as
with prostatic hyperplasia, whereas inflammation is the
Wright are used. Crystals are a common type of foreign
most frequent abnormality from dogs with chronic bacte-
matter. They may be found in samples contaminated with
rial prostatitis. Because prostatic fluid normally refluxes
urine or talc.
into the urinary bladder, urinary tract infection and pros-
tatitis frequently coexist.
Seminal Alkaline Phosphatase
 Percutaneous fine-needle prostatic aspiration and
biopsy, especially with ultrasonographic guidance, are
-piida auue aui aa panpoid si aseieydsoud aueii
excellent methods of obtaining material for microbio-
mis and is found in high concentrations [i.e., >l0oo IU/L)
logic and cytologic evaluation. Biochemical evaluation of
in normal ejaculates. Determination of seminal plasma
canine prostatic fluid has not been helpful in differentiat-
alkaline phosphatase helps evaluate azoospermic semen
ing various prostatic diseases. Serum and seminal
samples. The sample is centrifuged as for serum (eg..
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and prostatic acid phos-
3000 rpm for 10 minutes), and the supernatant seminal
phatase are often unchanged in dogs with prostatic
plasma is harvested. Concentration of alkaline phospha-
disease. In dogs with benign prostatic hyperplasia, canine
tase in seminal plasma is then determined in the
prostate-specifc esterase (CPsE) is increased relative to
same manner as for serum alkaline phosphatase (see
normal dogs, but it is increased with other prostatic dis-
low
eases as well
seminal alkaline phosphatase [i.e., <300 IU/L) there is
either bilateral obstruction from the epididymides, or the
sperm-rich fraction was not actually ejaculated. If the
 sample has high alkaline phosphatase but no spermato-
TESTES AND EPIDIDYMIDES
zoa, testicular failure or obstruction from the testes to the
epididymides exists. Azoospermic animals with seminal
The most important diagnostic procedure for evaluation
alkaline phosphatase in the midrange require additional
of the testes and epididymides is physical examination,
testing.
but ultrasound, fine-needle aspiration, and semen evalu-
ation are also useful. Fine-needle testicular aspiration is
easily performed using a 25-gauge needle and is especially
Interpretation of Semen Evaluation
helpful in evaluating focal lesions. It may also be per-
Semen samples do not reflect testicular or epididymal
formed to demonstrate the presence or absence of sper-
function on the day the sample is collected. Spermatogen-
 matogenesis, but histopathology is necessary to assessthe
esis requires approximately 60 days in dogs. To help
entire spermatogenic cycle. Aspiration of epididymides
establish a prognosis or resolve doubt about causes of an
causes more discomfort and may result in spermatic gran-
unsatisfactory sample the dog should be reevaluated
uloma formation.
Chapter 13:ReproductiveDisorders
301
ENDOCRINE EVALUATION
concentrations greater than 8 ng/ml (25 nmol/L) indi-
cate that ovulation has occurred.
Luteinizing hormone (LH), estradiol, progesterone, and
 In a bitch, luteal function normally lasts longer than
testosterone assays are offered by several commercial vet-
60 days after estrus, whether or not pregnancy occurs. In
erinary diagnostic laboratories. Normal ranges vary con-
a queen that ovulated but did not become pregnant,
siderably from laboratory to laboratory. In-house tests for
luteal function persists for approximately 40 days. Low
LH, progesterone, and relaxin are also available.
concentrations of progesterone during this time [i.e.,
expected diestrus) indicate failure to ovulate or failure to
maintain normal luteal function (Figure 13-4). During
Luteinizing Hormone
expected anestrous phase of the cycle, fnding serum con-
Serum concentrations of LH are used to predict ovula-
centrations greater than 2 ng/ml may indicate that ovarian
tion [i.e, "ovulation timing") and to determine presence
tissue is still present in a previously spayed animal, or that
or absence (i.e, already been spayed or neutered) of
luteal cysts or progesterone-producing granulosa cell
gonads. Serial determination of LH beginning during
tumors are present.
Serum progesterone concentrations greater  than
Because duration of the LH surge averages about 24
Aueuaid uiejuieu c Aiessanau aie (1/jouu 9) [uu/u 7
hours, daily measurements are made. Ovulation is
in bitches. Parturition begins within 24 hours of proges-
expected approximately 2 days after the LH surge and
terone dropping below 2 ng/ml. Progesterone concentra-
canine oocyte maturation is completed about 2 to 3
tions can help predict parturition and manage dystocia.
days later. Therefore first insemination is timed for
Parturition is expected 65 ± 1 days after the preovulatory
about 4 to 6 days after the LH surge to optimize concep-
rise [i.e., LH surge) and within 24 hours ofthe prepartum
tion and litter size in dogs.
decline to less than 2 ng/ml. Monitoring serum proges-
Following gonadectomy.
. serum LH and follicle-
terone helps determine the efficacy of abortifacients and
stimulating hormone (FsH) concentrations are chroni-
treatment of luteal cysts with prostaglandins. In both situ-
cally elevated because negative feedback from gonadal sex
ations, progesterone must be less than 2 ng/ml to ensure
hormones is gone. Conversely, when gonadal tissue is
treatment success.
present, LH will be low except during the preovulatory
LH surge Measuring serum LH is useful for determining
if a female has already been spayed, for determining if
NOTE: Serum separator tubes must NOT be used for pro-
there is ovarian remnant left after spay, and for differen-
gesterone assays because results will be significantly lower.
tiating a castrated male from one with cryptorchidism.
Serum or plasma can be used. Clinicians should check with
Finding low LH indicates presence of gonadal tissue or.
the laboratory.
much less likely, exogenous estrogen or androgen. Finding
high LH indicates one of two things: either there is no
Testosterone
 gonadal tissue, or the female is in heat and about to
ovulate [i.e, the LH surge). The latter can be confirmed
Serum testosterone can be measured to evaluate sus-
by physical examination for signs of heat by vaginal
pected cryptorchid or intersex animals and to evaluate
cytology for evidence of cornified epithelial cells (i.e..
the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. Serum testos-
estrogen). by finding serum progesterone greater than
terone concentrations fluctuate greatly within and among
2 ng/ml (6 nmol/L), or by measuring LH days later when
individuals. Pulses of testosterone secretion occur about
an LH surge would have subsided. Interpretation of FSH
every 30 to 90 minutes, depending on the species. Deter-
is easier because serum concentrations are consistently
mination of testosterone on a single, random occasion
higher in spayed than in intact bitches. At present there
has limited diagnostic value. For example, normal, fertile
 is no commercially available FSH assay.
male cats may intermittently have undetectable amounts.
On the other hand, finding high concentrations would
Progesterone
indicate presence of testicular tissue Typically, testoster-
one is determined before and after administration of
Measurement of serum progesterone concentration is
human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) or gonadotropin-
used to predict and confrm ovulation, assess remnant
releasing hormone (GnRH);: substantial increase in tes-
ovarian tissue, monitor luteal function, and predict par-
tosterone signifies functional testicular tissue. A widely
turition. Progesterone concentrations can be used for
accepted protocol for hCG or GnRH stimulation testing
ovulation timing in bitches because transition of proges-
in dogs and cats has not been established. Therefore,
terone concentration from anestrus levels of less than
consultation with the laboratory performing the assay
1 ng/ml to greater than 2 ng/ml (6 nmol/L) coincides
for the dose of hCG or GnRH, frequency of sampling.
with the LH surge. Unlike the need for daily LH determi-
and interpretation of results is recommended (see
si siep e ot z Aaaa auoiansaaid suunseau suou
Appendix I).
usually adequate. Breeding can be timed using progester-
'0 (uaa Aioenaod e se "a') HT ylm sI hl se auo
breeding can betimed according to postovulation proges-
Estradiol
terone concentrations. Pregnancy rates have been best
Evaluation of serum concentrations of estradiol is usually
not necessary in dogs and cats because common condi-
centrations are greater than 8 ng/ml (25 nmol/L) up
tions associated with pathologic production of estradiol
to 19 to 26 ng/ml (60 to 80 nmol/L). Progesterone
are easily evaluated by other methods. The most common
302
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
(<24 months old)
Hypothyroiclism (?)
Previous ovario-
 hysterectomy
Glucocorticoid
excess
wnes Guuns
 Examine external
abnormalities
Hypothalamic-
testosterone
 Serum LH/FSH
 dysgenesis
Laparoscopy
 pituitary
genitalia
Intersex
Ovarian
WS
 every 1-2 weeks
Vaginal cytology
ON
ju/6u g>
Look for
Serum
jw/6u g<
 Is she cycling?
interestrual interval
pseudopregnant
xogenous drugs 
hypothyroid (?)
inadequate light
(queen)
"split heat"
Abnormal
follicles, ovarian neoplasia,
Prolonged estrus (>40
days) due to cystic
Abnormal "estrus"
Vaglnalanomaly.
es
Geriatric
obse
stimulation (queen)
 management 
Cystic follicles
unknown
breeding 
 next cycle
Ovulation
w/bu Z>
Yes
diestrus
progesterone (serum)
First check for
ON
Next check
jw/bu z<
frozen semen
Infertile male,
poor semen
quality, or
oviduct
semen 
uterus
vagina
death
Chapter 13:Reproductive Disorders
303
causes of hyperestrogenism are estrogen-producing tes-
commonly associated with mastitis, metritis, and pros-
ticular tumors in male dogs. and ovarian remnant syn-
tatic abscesses. The leukogram of animals with pyometra
drome and follicular ovarian cysts in female dogs
varies, although leukocytosis with a left shift is expected.
and cats.
Profound leukocytosis [i.e., 100,000 to 200,000/μl) with
The most common signs of hyperestrogenism in male
a left shift may occur because of a closed-cervix pyometra.
dogs are alopecia, hyperpigmentation, lichenifcation,
Conversely, leukopenia with a degenerative let shift may
gynecomastia, and pendulous prepuce. Testicular tumors
occur in animals with severe sepsis as the result of pyo-
are best identifed by palpation, ultrasound examination,
metra or prostatic abscess.
or both. Ovarian remnant syndrome is usually character-
ized by resumption of estrous cycles and estrous behavior
Urinalysis
after ovariohysterectomy. Some bitches with ovarian rem-
nants do not begin cycling but instead show dermatologic
Concomitant urinary tract infection and bacterial prosta-
changes similar to those in males with hyperestrogenism.
titis in males and vestibulovaginitis in females is fairly
Finding cormification of vaginal epithelial cells coincident
common. Even in the absence of infection, some bitches
 a  si i  rn  
diagnostic Cystic folicles can cause persistent estrus or
pollakiuria) that could be mistaken for urinary tract
 abnormally frequent estrous cycles. Ovarian ultrasonog-
disease. For animals with urinary tract signs, and in those
raphy should be diagnostic. The effects of estrogen on the
with persistent vaginal or preputial discharge, urinalysis
preputial epithelium are similar to those on the vaginal
and culture are indicated. Obtaining urine samples by
epithelium.
cystocentesis is ideal to minimize contamination from
the genital tract Because of normal reflux of prostatic
Relaxin
fluid into the bladder, urine from sexually intact male
dogs will contain protein-rich seminal fluid, which can
Measurement of serum relaxin can be used to diagnose
cause positive reactions for protein and false-positive
pregnancy in bitches and queens. It is usually detectable
reactions for heme on urine chemistry tests, whether or
between 20 and 28 days after breeding but sometimes
not spermatozoa are found in the urine sediment.
not until day 3l. The test is very specific because relaxin
Suggested Readings
result indicates pregnancy. False-positive results have not 
Ball R. Birchard S. May L, et al: Ovarian remnant syndrome in
been reported; however, relaxin may remain positive for
dogs and cats: 21 cases (2000-2007). I Am Vet Med Assoc
a few days after parturition or abortion because of remain-
ing placental tissue A sudden disappearance of relaxin
236:548, 2010.
Dorfmann M, Barsanti I: Diseases of the canine prostate gland.
from blood (i.e, suddenly a negative result) would indi-
Compend Cont Educ 17:791, 1995.
cate that spontaneous abortion occurred. False-negative
England GCW. Russo M: Breeding management of the bitch. [n
results occur when the test is performed too early during
Bonagura D,Twedt DC,editors: Kirk’s current veterinary therapy
 gestation. It is also possible that a small litter size could
XIV. St. Louis, 2009, Saunders/Elsevier pp 974.
yield a false-negative result.
Gorlinger S. Galac S. Kooistra HS. et al: Hypoluteoidism in a
bitch. Theriogenology 64:213. 2005.
Gorlinger S. Kooista HS. van den Brock A. et al: Treatment of
ANCILLARY TESTS
fbroadenomatous hyperplasia in cats with aglepristone. J Vet
Intern Med 16:710, 2002.
Johnson CA: Reproductive system disorders. [n Nelson RW.
Karyotyping may be performed on animals suspected of
Couto CG, editors: Small animal internal medicine, ed 4, St.
having intersex conditions or abnormal gonadal develop-
Louis. 2009. Mosby pp 885.
ment Fine-needle aspirates are easily obtained from
Lofstedt RM, VanLeeuwen [A: Evaluation of a commercially avail-
testes, epididymides, prostate and vaginal lesions. Biopsy
able luteinizing hormone test to for its ability to distinguish
specimens can be obtained from any part of the reproduc-
between ovaniectomized and sexually intact bitches. / Am Vet 
tive tract, although gonadal biopsy might have deleteri-
Med Assoc 220:1331, 2002.
ous effects on remaining normal tissue.
Olson PN, Mulnix [A. Nett TM: Concentration of luteinizing
hormone and follicle-stimulating hormone in the serum of
sexually intact and neutered dogs. Am J Vet Res 53:762. 1992.
Complete Blood Count
Prober LG, Johnson CA, Olivier NB, et al: Effect of semen in urine
specimens on urine protein concentration determined by
The packed cell volume (PCV) of pregnant bitches and
means of dipstick analysis. Am J Vet Res 71:288, 2010.
queens declines after about day 20 of gestation and con-
Purswell Bl: llse of vaginal cytology and vaginal cultures for
tinues to decline until parturition, when PCVs of 30.6%
breeding management and diagnosis of reproductive tract
± 0.8% can be expected in bitches. Pregnant animals
disease. In Bonagura ID, Twedt DC, editors: Kirk's current vet-
may have mild, mature neutrophilia. Dogs are very sensi-
erinary therapy XIV. St. Louis. 2009. Saunders/Elsevier, pp 980.
tive to toxic effects of estrogens on bone marrow stem
Root Kustritz MV: Vaginitis. In Bonagura ID. Twedt DC, editors:
cells. Thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, anemia, or a com-
Kirk's current veterinary therapy XIV. St. Louis. 2009. Saunders/
bination thereof can occur because of pharmacologic
Elsevier. pp 1010.
doses of estrogens and estrogen-producing tumors (see
Scebra LR. Gniffn B: Evaluation of a commercially available
luteinizing hormone test to distinguish between ovariecto-
Chapter 3).
mized and sexually intact queens. [n: Proceedings of the 2IST
Neutrophilic leukocytosis with a left shift, variable
AnnualAmerican Collge ofVeterinary InternalMedicineForum,
degrees of neutrophil toxicity, and monocytosis are
Charlotte, NC, 2003, abstract 214.
14
Neurologic Disorders
 Jonathan M. Levine and Gwendolyn J. Levine
Diagnosis of neurologic disease has continued to evolve
,snoiodms, ane jeul asoul aianeudoidde poeiaiul iou op
in human and veterinary medicine, in large part due to
only respond to noxious stimuli; and "comatose" animals
   ra  i se
are unresponsive even to deep nociceptive testing. Abnor-
pathology. Magmetic resonance imaging (MRI) allows cli-
mal mentation is consistent with prosencephalic or
nicians to obtain better data concerning structural nature
caudal brainstem localization.
of central nervous system (CNS) disturbances and has
Neurologic gait disturbances typically reflect a com-
been demonstrated to provide prognostic information
bination of paresis (weakness) and ataxia (incoordina-
independent of physical assessment in canine disk her-
tion). Paresis can be characterized as either upper motor
niation and fbrocartilagenous embolism (FCE). Condi-
neuron (UMN) or lower motor neuron (LMN). Stride
tions such as ischemic territorial infarct which were
length is elongated in domestic species with UMN paresis
believed to be uncommon in dogs prior to the advent of
and shortened in those with LMN paresis. Animals with
MRI are increasingly recognized. Molecular testing for
caudal brainstem or Cl-C5 lesions will have UMN paresis
exercise-induced collapse and degenerative myelopathy
in all limbs. Those animals with C6-T2 lesions will have
has better defined the etiopathogenesis of these diseases.
LMN paresis in the thoracic limbs and UMN paresis in
 Biomarkers may be a source of additional prognostic data
the pelvic limbs. Animals with paresis limited to the
and targeted therapies for CNS neoplasia or spinal cord
pelvic limbs may have either T3-L3 (UMN) or L4-S3
injury. Despite these remarkable advances.
physical
(LMN) lesions. Generalized neuromuscular disease 
examination-based neuroanatomic localization is still
results in LMN signs in all limbs.
the starting point in the diagnostic approach to veterinary
Ataxia can be categorized as general proprioceptive
neurologic disease.
(GP), vestibular, or cerebellar. Animals with GP ataxia
cross over the limbs or scuff the dorsum of the paw. The
presence of GP ataxia indicates a disturbance within the
NEUROANATOMIC LOCALIZATION
caudal brainstem, spinal cord, or generalized neuromus-
cular system (likely peripheral nerve). Vestibular ataxia is
In veterinary medicine nervous system disturbances
associated with a broad-based gait, often accompanied by
[lesions) are localized based on physical assessments.
leaning and head tilt toward the side of least vestibular
Classic localization regions include: forebrain (prosen-
tone Animals with vestibular ataxia may have a caudal
cephalon), caudal brainstem (midbrain, pons,
.or
brainstem, peripheral vestibular apparatus, or cerebellar
medulla), cerebellum, peripheral vestibular apparatus,
localization. Cerebellar ataxia consists of overflexion at
spinal cord (C1-C5, C6-T2, T3-L3, L4-S3 segments), and
the distal limb joints with dysmetria and hypermetria.
 general neuromuscular system. In some instances mul-
It is seen with diseases that affect the cortex of the
tiple regions can be simultaneously affected (multifocal
cerebellum.
disease), or clinical signs may reflect involvement of
 Postural reactions are evocative tests that assess motor
large expanses of the nervous system (diffuse disease).
strength and proprioception. Knuckling and hopping are
Components of a neurologic examination include
the two most frequently used postural reactions in small
assessment of mentation, gait, postural reactions, spinal
animals. Delay or absence does not localize the lesion but
reflexes, cranial nerves, nociception, and paraspinal
simply implies an abnormality in the LMN, UMN, or
structures.
GP systems. The limbs affected combined with other
Descriptors of alertness in companion animals
elements of the neurologic examination allow for
include: normal, obtunded, demented, stuporous, or
localization.
comatose. "Obtunded" implies an animal that interacts
Spinal reflexes are used along with gait analysis to
determine whether UMN or LMN paresis is occurring in
stimulation to do so. Animals described as "demented"
a particular limb. Animals with LMN paresis often have
Chapter 14: Neurologic Disorders
305
depressed or absent reflexes whereas those with UMN
DIFFERENTLAL DIAGNOSES
paresis will have preserved or increased reflexes. Presence
of a crossed extensor reflex implies UMN loss ipsilateral
Differential diagnosis lists are based on neuroanatomic
to the limb that extends out. Thoracic limb flexor with-
localization, signalment, as well as onset, progression,
drawal (C6-T2 spinal cord segments), pelvic limb flexor
and duration of clinical sigms (Tables 14-l and 14-2).
withdrawal (L6-S2 spinal cord segments), patellar reflex
Neoplastic diseases, disk herniation, and idiopathic epi-
(L4-L6 spinal cord segments), and cranial tibial reflex
lepsy all have age and breed predilections. Vascular
(L6-Sl spinal cord segments) are believed to be most reli-
diseases of the CNS usually have a rapid onset and
able, although objective data to support this contention
are nonprogressive, whereas CNS degenerative diseases
are lacking.
are insidious in their onset and clinical course Appro-
Cranial nerve assessment is essential to localizing
priate neuroanatomic localization coupled with a strong
lesions within the cranial vault Cranial nerve II
is
differential list will allow clinicians to formulate a
associated with prosencephalon and mediates visual
diagnostic plan.
pathways. Cranial nerves Ill and IV are associated with
 midbrain and are important in coordinating extraocular
movement and pupillary constriction. Cranial nerve V is
NEUROIMAGING
muscles; nuclei are located in the pons. Cranial nerves
Vertebral Column Indications · Radiography, myelog-
VI through Xll have cell bodies located in the medulla;
raphy, computed tomography (CT), and MRI can be used
these nerves coordinate eye movements, balance and
to assess the vertebral column. Radiography is probably
swallowing.
best viewed as a cost-effective means of screening for overt
 Paraspinal palpation and nociceptive assessment are
structural diseases (eg., fracture, luxation, discospondyli-
reserved for the end of the examination because they
tis, large lytic bony tumor). Diagnostic accuracy of radio-
can be painful. Assessment of nociception is essential in
graphs for disk herniation, cervical spondylomyelopathy.
animals with spinal cord disease or those with severe
or intraparenchymal spinal cord disease is poor. Myelog-
intracranial signs. Dogs with thoracolumbar disk hernia-
raphy shares many of the disadvantages of radiography in
tion that have intact deep nociception have an 86% to
that the spinal cord cannot be directly visualized and
96% chance of voluntary ambulation after surgery.
images are available for review in a limited number of
whereas dogs with absent deep nociception have approxi-
planes; myelography is also associated with adverse
mately a 50% to 60% chance of voluntary ambulation
patient events (e.g.. seizure, post-myelogram myelopathy.
post-surgery. Paraspinal palpation must be performed
death). CT is the best means to evaluate bony pathology
carefully and is used to detect zones of hyperesthesia.
and is the study of choice to define vertebral fracture or
Diseases that affect bones or ligaments of the vertebral
luxation. Like myelography, soft tissue detail is not ideal;
column, regional soft tissues, meninges, intervertebral
therefore visualization of intraparenchymal spinal cord
disk, nerve root, or dorsal horn of the spinal cord may
lesions or nonmineralized disk hermiation may be chal-
result in paraspinal hyperesthesia.
lenging. MRI has revolutionized diagnosis of vertebral
Neurologic examination can be confounded by
column diseases. Signal patterns may indicate certain
disease in other body systems. For example animals
pathologic processes (eg. hemorrhage edema). can be
specific for certain etiologies, and may provide data relat-
paneioosse uid on anp kiaedondde uoean lenmisod
ing to outcome. For example, each L2 vertebral length of
with weight bearing. Orthopedic disease can limit joint
T2-weighted hyperintensity within the spinal cord of dogs
range of motion, which can falsely reduce flexor with-
with thoracolumbar disk hermiation lowers the probabil-
drawal reflexes. Finally, systemic illness such as meta-
ity of walking by 1.9-fold.14
bolic derangement or cardiac disease can mimic paresis
and ataxia seen with structural lesions in the nervous
Intracranial Indications · MRI is the study of choice
system. Therefore neurologic examination data need
for nontraumatic intracranial disease. Preliminary studies
to be considered in light of all available clinical
indicate it is reasonably capable of distinguishing neo-
findings.
plastic from inflammatory etiologies. It is believed to
 In the coming years, neurologic examination-derived
have superior sensitivity for detecting ischemic territorial
head trauma and spinal cord injury scales are likely to
infarcts compared to CT, especially when modern
play an increasing role in veterinary medicine Scales
sequences such as diffusion-weighted imaging are used.
facilitate health-care professional communication, objec-
MRI is the ideal method for diagnosis of congenital dis-
tive accounting of clinical progress, and prediction of
eases (eg. Chiari-like malformation). In the years to
recovery. The modifed Glasgow Coma Scale has been
come, diffusion tensor imaging. MRI tractography, MRI
used in dogs with head trauma and is predictive of
texturing, and functional imaging will likely continue to
48-hour outcome.23 In dogs with disk-associated spinal
advance MRI-based diagnostics.
cord injury, the modified Frankel Scale, Texas Spinal Cord
Injury Scale, and 14-point pelvic limb motor score are
valid means to qualify lesions severity, correlate to MRI
ELECTRODLAGNOSTICS
markers of injury, and are easily performed.13 The authors
 strongly encourage clinicians to make standard and
"Electrodiagnostics" refers to a group of techniques that
appropriate use of these systems to facilitate better care
measure spontaneous and evoked activity arising from
delivery.
muscles, nerves, and CNS structures. Electromyography
908
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE14-1.(
COMmON NEUROLOGIC DISEASES IN DOGS, LISTED bY NEUROANATOMIC LOCALIZATION AND
ETIOLOGICCATEGORY
GENERALIZED
CAUDAL
PERIPHERAL
NEUROMUSCULAR
FOREBRAIN
BRAINSTEM
VESTIBULAR
CEREBELLUM
SPINAL CORD
DISEASE
Degenerative
Leukodystrophy
LeukodystrophyN/A
Abiotrophy
DM
AydousAp enosn 
 Storage disease 
 Storage disease 
NAD
Disk herniation
 Breed-specific
Cognitive
 Storage disease
LS disease
dysfunction
Malformative
Hydrocephalus 
Quadrigeminal
N/A
 Quadrigeminal 
CSM
N/A
Chiari-like 
15/6
15/6
A-A subluxation
malformation
Chiari-like
 Chiari-like
Arachnoid cyst
malformation
malformation
Syringomyelia
Dandy-Walker
Dandy-Walker
Kyphosis
malformation
malformation
Scoliosis
Spina bifida
Metabolic
Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism 
Hypothyroidism
N/A
N/A
Hypothyroidism 
Eectrolytes
Diabetes mellitus 
Hypoglycemia
Hyperthyroidism
Cushing syndrome 
Addison disease
Neoplastic
Meningioma
Meningioma
Adenocarcinoma
Meningioma
Meningioma
Paraneoplastic
Glioma
Glioma
 Squamous cell
Glioma
NST
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
Grcinoma
Lymphoma 
Lymphoma
Ependymoma
Ependymoma 
Ependymoma
Ependymoma
CPP
CPP
CPP
Glioma
Metastatic
Metastatic
Medulloblastoma 
Nephroblastoma
Metastatic
Metastatic
 Nutritional
Thiamine
Thiamine
N/A
 Thiamine 
Cobalamin
N/A
deficiency
deficiency
deficiency
deficiency
Idiopathic
Idiopathic 
IVD
epilepsy
Inflammatory
Viral
Viral
 Bacterial
Viral
Viral
Viral
Protozoal
 Protozoal
Protozoal
 Protozoal
Protozoal
Rickettsial
Rickettsial
 Rickettsial 
Rickettsial 
Rickettsial 
Fungal
 Fungal 
Fungal 
Fungal
Idiopathic
Nematode
Nematode
Nematode
Nematode
polyradiculopathy
Bacterial 
Bacterial 
Bacterial 
Bacterial 
Idiopathic
 polymyositis 
Granulomatous
Granulomatous
Granulomatous
Granulomatous
Myasthenia gravis
ME
ME
ME
ME
Necrotizing ME
 Necrotizing ME
Necrotizing ME
SRM
MUE
MUE
MUE
MUE
Toxin
Strychnine
Metronidazole
Chlorhexidine
 5-Fluorouracil
Vincristine
 Metaldehyde 
 Loop diuretics
 Marijuana
Cisplatin 
Lead
 Botulism 
 Bromethalin
Tick paralysis
Coral snake bite
Vascular
Ischemic infarct
Ischemic infarct
N/A
Ischemic infarct
FCE
N/A
Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage
A-A, Atlanto-axial; CPP, choroid plexus papilloma; CSM, cervical spondylomyelopathy; DM, degenerative myelopathy: FCE, fibrocartilagenous embolism; IVD,
idiopathic vestibular disease; LS, lumbosacral; ME, meningoencephalitis; MUE, meningoencephalitis of unknown etiology: N/A, not applicable; NAD, neuraxonal
dystrophy; NST, nerve sheath tumor; SRM, steroid-responsive meningoencephalitis.
Chapter 14: Neurologic Disorders
307
TABLE 142.COMMON NEUROLOGIC DISEASES IN CATS,LISTED BY NEUROANATOMIC LOCALIZATION AND
ETIOLOGIC CATEGORY
GENERALIZED
CAUDAL
PERIPHERAL
SPINAL
NEUROMUSCULAR
FOREBRAIN
BRAINSTEM 
VESTIBULAR
CEREBELLUM
CORD
DISEASE
Degenerative
Leukodystrophy
Leukodystrophy
N/A
 Abiotrophy
Disk
Aydosp enosn
herniation
Storage disease
Storage disease
NAD
Breed-specific
Storage
disease
Malformative
Hydrocephalus 
N/A
Hypoplasia
 Syringomyelia
N/A
Kyphosis
Scoliosis
Spina bifida
Metabolic
Eectrolytes
N/A
N/A
N/A
N/A
Hypothyroidism
Hypoglycemia
 Diabetes mellitus 
Hyperthyroidism 
 Cushing syndrome
Addison disease
Neoplastic 
Meningioma
Meningioma
 Adenocarcinoma
Meningioma
Meningioma
Paraneoplastic
Glioma
Glioma
Squamous cell
Glioma
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
Lymphoma
carcinoma
Lymphoma
Ependymoma
 Ependymoma
Ependymoma
Ependymoma 
Glioma
 Metastatic
 Metastatic 
Metastatic
Metastatic
Nutritional
 Thiamine 
Thiamine 
N/A
 Thiamine 
Cobalamin
N/A
deficiency
deficiency
deficiency
deficiency
Idiopathic
Idiopathic
IVD
epilepsy
Inflammatory
FeLY
FIP
Bacterial 
FIP
FeLY
FIV
FIP
Rabies
Rabies
FIP
Rabies
FIV
Toxoplasma
Rabies
Toxoplasma
Rabies
ebuny
Fungal
Idiopathic
 Nematode
Nematode
Fungal
polyradiculopathy
Fungal 
Bacterial 
Bacterial 
 Nematode 
Idiopathic
polymyositis
Nematode 
 Bacterial 
Myasthenia gravis
Bacterial 
Trauma
Toxin
 Strychnine 
Metronidazole
Chlorhexidine
5-Fluorouracil
Vincristine
 Metaldehyde
Loop diuretics 
Marijuana
Cisplatin 
Lead
 Botulism 
Tick paralysis
 Bromethalin 
Coral snake bite 
Vascular
Ischemic infarct 
Ischemic infarct
N/A
Ischemic
FCE
N/A
 infarct 
Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage
Hemorrhage
FCE, Fibrocartilagenous embolism; FeLV, feline leukemia virus; FIP, feline infectious peritonitis virus; FIV, feline immunodeficiency virus; IVD, idiopathic vestibu-
lar; N/A, not applicable; NAD, neuraxonal dystrophy.
(EmG), motor nerve conduction (MNC), and sensory
 evaluate the CNS. In modern veterinary practices, EEG is
nerve conduction (SNC) are commonly performed
typically used to aid in seizure detection and as a means
studies to evaluate the peripheral nervous system (PNS).
to qualify cerebrocortical activity in animals suspected of
Somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEPs), motor evoked
brain death. BAER can determine integrity of auditory
potentials (MEPs), electroencephalograms (EEGs), and
pathways in animals suspected of deafness or severe
brainstem auditory evoked responses (BAERs) are used to
caudal brainstem injury.
808
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Electrodiagnostics [ie., EMG, MNC, SNC) are critical
25 kg or cats; 2.5 inches for dogs > 25 kg) is then inserted
in the evaluation of animals with PNS disease. Presence
through soft tissues underlying the CSF acquisition land-
 of abnormal spontaneous activity on EMG is usually asso-
mark. Traditionally, the bevel of the needle is directed
ciated with axonal or muscle pathology, as opposed to
cranially, as this may increase CSF flow rate. In small
junctional diseases such as myasthenia gravis. Slowing of
dogs or cats, the skin may need to be penetrated dis-
MNC velocity may suggest a myelin disorder or loss
cretely from underlying soft tissues. The needle is
of large-diameter axons, whereas reduction in compound
advanced parallel to the table at an angle to match the
motor unit action potential amplitude may indicate
mandible (often slightly caudally directed). Typically a
myopathy, axonopathy, or junctional disease By combin-
decrease in resistance is felt after the needle penetrates
ing results from EMG, MNC, sensory studies, repetitive
the interarcuate ligament and dura, which indicates the
nerve stimulation, and other studies, a clinician trained
CMC has been entered. This decrease in resistance is not
in electrophysiology can identify which regions of the
always appreciated, and frequent removal of the needle
PNS may have abnormalities. Electrophysiology cannot
stylet or advancing the needle without the stylet to check
definitively diagnose etiology: further diagnostics such as
for CSF can be helpful.
serology and biopsy are required.
 Collection of CsF at the LC requires positioning the
dog in lateral recumbency and flexing the lumbar verte-
bral column by flexing the pelvic limbs toward the ventral
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID ANALYSIS
 abdomen. The cranial wings of the ilium are located at
the level of L6. Typically, a 22-gauge spinal needle [2.5 to
Common Indications · Cerebrospinal fuid (CSF) is
6 inches, dependent on dog size) is inserted parallel to
 one of the only means to assess cellular responses to
the L6 spinous process to enter the L5-L6 interarcuate
nervous system disease. Routine collection is suggested
space. The needle is usually inserted until it contacts the
in animals with CNS signs or radiculopathy. In animals
ventral floor of the vertebral canal.
with intracranial CNS disease, collection is usually per-
Most clinicians prefer CMC to LC collection, as it is
formed after neuroimaging (see "Contraindications").
easier to perform, is less frequently contaminated with
CSF should always be acquired prior to myelography to
blood, allows for larger volumes of CsF to be obtained,
prevent delivery of intrathecal iodinated contrast in
and is often easier to interpret in the setting of CNS
animals with primary CNS inflammation and to avoid
 disease because data concerning expected characteristics
post-myelographic pleocytosis from hindering CSF
are more abundant. Theoretically LC CSF may be prefer-
interpretation.
able for focal disease caudal to the CMC.
Contraindications · High intracranial pressure may
CSF Handling · When the CMC or LC is entered, CSF
increase risk of brain herniation following CSF acquisi-
is collected by allowing it to flow freely from the needle
tion. Animals with intracranial disease should always
 hub. Direct aspiration of CSF from the needle hub under
receive advanced imaging prior to CSF withdrawal.
pressure is not recommended, and aspiration from the
Imaging that supports brain herniation, midline shift, or
hub using a 25-gauge needle and 3-ml syringe is rarely
mass effect serves as a relative or strict contraindication
needed. Usually. l ml of CSF (10 to 15 drops) is
for collection, depending on severity of changes. The site
obtained per 5 kg of animal body weight. If a lab that
of CSF acquisition has not been clearly shown to alter risk
can process the sample is nearby. it should be collected
of brain herniation across species. Bleeding diathesis, ver-
into a red-top tube Storage of red-top collected CSF at
tebral instability, and regional soft tissue infection can
4° C for 24 to 48 hours can be attempted without
increase risk of post-CSF acquisition adverse events.
changes in differential count if 1 drop of autologous
senum is added per 9 drops of CSF; when serum is
Procedure for CSF Collection ● CSF can be acquired
added to CSF, protein concentration will be altered so a
from cerebellomedullary cistern  (CMC) or lumbar
separate aliquot of CSF should be withheld for this
cistern (LC) under general anesthesia. Collection from
purpose.? Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) tubes
the CMC is performed by placing the animal in lateral
are requested by some labs to preserve cell architecture;
recumbency (the side of recumbency should match the
EDTA falsely increases the protein concentration and
handedness of the clinician performing the procedure)
dilutes cell concentration.
on a level, secure table The animal's head and neck are
brought to the edge of the table, and the neck is flexed
Analysis · CSF Appearance · Normal CSF is colorless
approximately 90 degrees. Holding the head parallel to
and clear. CSF turbidity is seen with red blood cell
the tabletop is crucial for proper insertion of the collec-
(RBC) counts greater than 400/μl or nucleated cell counts
tion needle and recognition of landmarks. The most
[NCCs) greater than 200/μul.' A swirl of blood in
commonly used technique for identifying the site of
the collection needle hub strongly suggests iatrogenic
needle insertion relies on identifying the intersection of
hemorrhage although in some instances CsF with iatro-
two lines, which we will call "x" and "y" The "x" line
genic blood contamination will emerge from the needle
nuns from the occipital protuberance to the spinous
with a homogeneous pink color. Hemorrhage in the
process of the axis and defines the horizon. The "y" line
CSF due to CNS disease is uncommon; when it happens,
runs between the cranial edges of the right and left wings
RBC destruction begins within 1 to 4 hours.'2 Xantho-
of the atlas. Prior to needle insertion, the area surround-
chromia (yellowing of the CsF) is a consequence of
ing the CSF acquisition site is clipped and sterilely
hemoglobin breakdown secondary to endogenous RBC
prepped. A 22-gauge spinal needle [1.5 inches for dogs <
destruction. Microscopic evidence of erythrophagocytosis
Chapter 14: Neurologic Disorders
309
or hemosiderophages also suggests previous hemorrhage
occurs due to a wide variety of inflammatory, neoplastic,
within the CNS or subarachnoid space.
and compressive diseases (see Table 14-3)." Eosinophilic
CSF is uncommon and associated with idiopathic inflam-
CSF Protein Concentration ● Normal CSF has a very low
 mation, larval migrans, and mycotic disease.2
protein concentration, with a reference range that varies
based on acquisition site and processing laboratory. At
CSF Biomarkers · Biomarkers are molecules located
the authors' institution, reference ranges for CMC and LC
within the body that have prognostic, predictive, or diag-
CSF protein concentration are less than 25 mg/dl and less
nostic value. For canine intervertebral disk herniation,
than 35 mg/dl, respectively, for small animals. Increased
elevated NCC, protein concentration, and creatine kinase
CSF protein concentration is a common but nonspecific
(CK) activity have been associated with injury severity
fnding (Table 14-3). Protein may be elevated because of
and ambulatory outcome.34 Matrix metalloproteinase-9
 blood-brain barrier disruption, blood contamination, or
s nu  pe aq e s sa
intrathecal production of immunoglobulins. Elevated
Dogs with steroid-responsive meningitis frequently have
protein with normal total NCC is termed albuminocyto-
elevated CSF immunoglobulin A (IgA) concentration,
logic dissociation and is believed to be most common
although the specificity and sensitivity of this finding
with etiologies that are noninflammatory. The Pandy test
remain unclear.? In the coming years, developments in
is a qualitative assessment for the presence of intrathe-
the area of biomarkers seem likely to assist veterinarians
cally produced globulins.
in care delivery and prediction of outcome.
CSF Red Blood Cell Count · Red blood cells are not
ANTIBODY-BASED INFECTIOUS
found in normal CSF; their presence is usually the result
of blood contamination. Endogenous CSF hemorrhage
DISEASE TESTING
may occur due to inflammatory diseases that allow for
RBC diapedesis or from vascular disruption. Erythropha-
Occasional Indications · Detection of antibodies to
gocytosis, hemosiderophages, and xanthochromia suggest
various infectious agents has been a long-standing com-
subacute, previous CSF hemorrhage Disk herniation,
 plement to neuroimaging and CSF analysis. Testing is
FCE, neoplasia, and CNS inflammation are common eti-
ologies associated with this finding.
or PNS disease Despite most clinicians' familiarity with
Significant iatrogenic CsF hemorrhage can impair the
antibody-based infectious disease tests, results can be
interpretation of CSF However, RBC counts less than 500
pue asod, 'sas Au ul landau on suua
cells/μl do not alter NCC or total protein.25 In some
"negative" titers must be viewed cautiously. First, anti-
reports, RBC counts up to 15,000 cells/μl were not associ-
bodies within CSF or serum may be present due to past
ated with NCC elevated beyond reference range.
32
 exposure to an agent Rates of exposure and prevalence
of disease become essential aids in titer interpretation.
CSF Nucleated Cell Count ·"Pleocytosis" refers to
For example, when exposure without disease is common
increased CSF NCC beyond reference range (typically
(e.g. toxoplasmosis), then titer positivity may not be
>5 NC/μl for CMC and LC CSF). Pleocytosis may be
compelling. Likewise, if the prevalence of a disease is
mild (greater than reference value but <25 cells/μul).
very low in a region, then positive predictive value of a
moderate (26 to 100 cells/μl). or marked (>100
titer decreases. Secondly, antibody isotype may aid in
cells/μl).1 Etiologies that result in CSF pleocytosis are
determining whether active infection is present. Immu-
varied. Severity of pleocytosis, predominant cell type.
noglobulin M (IgM) is classically associated with recent
and results of other data (e.g., neuroimaging) must be
infection, whereas time is required to switch to immu-
used together to render a clinical diagnosis. For example,
noglobulin G (IgG). Third, presence of antibodies in
dogs with granulomatous meningoencephalitis have a
CSF may be the result of blood contamination or non-
 median NCC of 250 cells/μl, usually have lymphocyte
specific leakage across the blood-brain barrier. Finding a
or mononuclear cell predominance, and often have
second antibody in the blood and CSF to an agent that
signal changes on brain MRI.20 In contrast dogs with
uncommonly affects the CNS (e.g., parvovirus), may be
steroid-responsive meningitis have a median NCC of
a strategy to determine whether antibodies are present
1775 cells/μl, often have neutrophilic predominance,
in the CsF due to blood contamination or leakage.
 and usually have normal MRI.2
Fourth, serial antibody titers can be helpful in determin-
ing exposure versus active disease. Rising titers and
CSF Cytology · Normal CSF has few cells, which are a
isotype switching are supportive of an ongoing immune
mixture of large mononuclear cells and lymphocytes.
response. Finally, numerical titer itself can be informa-
Greater than 25% neutrophils in a CSF sample with
tive as exceedingly high values are more likely to be clin-
normal total NCC should be regarded as abnormal. The
ically relevant.
cytologic appearance of CSF is usually classifed as neu-
 Infectious disease titers are typically best used when
trophil predominant (>70%). large mononuclear pre-
signalment, history, imaging. and CsF point to infectious
dominant (>70%). lymphocyte predominant (>70%),
CNS disease as a reasonable differential diagnosis.21
mixed cell (no one cell type >70%), and eosinophilic
Knowledge of regionally prevalent infectious CNS dis-
(>10% to 20%).18 Neutrophilic CSF is seen with some
eases must be used to select appropriate tests. Molecular
forms of infectious CNS disease, steroid-responsive men-
ingitis, meningioma, and acute CNS injuries.? Large
sents an additional means to gather data concerning
mononuclear, lymphocytic, and mixed cell pleocytosis
infectious etiologies.
310
SMALL AN1MAL CLIN1CAL D1ACNOS1S BY
METHODS
 Cordy and Hollid ay?
Radaelli and Platt24
Boettcher et al.4
Foley et al. 1o
Wagner et al. 31
Levine et al.1s
Lowrie et al. 17
REFERENCE
&Pod!l!
Neutrophilic(9/13)
eanuouow paxi
Lymphocytic(15/29)
Mononuclear (6/29)
Lymphocytic (8/12)
Lymphocytic (12/12)
Neutrophilic(36/36)
Neutrophilic(12/20)
Mononuclear (8/12)
Monocytic (2/13)
Neutrophiic(1/2)
Lymphocytic (4/8)
Lymphocytic
CYTOLOGY
NC/μl (RANGE)
18-10,850
TABLE 14-3. CEREBROSPINAL FlUId CHARACTeRISTICs IN NERvoUS SYSTEm DISEASEs OF DoGs AND CAts
0-<1000
6-9720
25-2500
131
164-777 (mean,
'ueipaw) 0601-9
7-1333 (median,
4-136 (mean,
12-46 (median,
58-228 (mean,
337)
1221
17-480
21)
66]
6
% ABNORMAL
93% (13/14)
89% (17/19)
93% (27/29)
50% (11/22)
86% (12/14)
100% (12/12)
100% (36/36)
100% (20/20)
CM
14
5
1B
10
19
2
2
14
12
3
2
Noninfectious Inflammation-Dog
 Bacterial encephalitis*t
Canine distemper*
Protozoa—Dog
DISEASE
GME*
NME*
FIP+
FIP*
NME*
SRM
SRM
Chapter 14:Neurologic Disorders
311
Mikszewski et al.19
Windsor et al. 3
Thomson et al. 28 
Windsor et al.3
Dickenson et al.?
De Risio et al.&
Levine et al.16 
Bohn et al.s
Coates et al.é
Bohn et al.5
Garosil1
Lymphocytic (11/26)
Lymphocytic (78/190)
Neutrophilic (60/190)
Neutrophilic (8/26)
Neutrophilic (12/17)
Neutrophilic (10/15)
Mixed cll 4/17)
Neutrophilic 4/6)
-ymphocytic(2/9)
Lymphocytic (1/2)
(Z/l) Jeapnuouon
Mixed cell (2/6)
Mixed cell (6/9)
Mononuclear 
Neutrophilic 
0-11 (mean, 2)
0-495 (median,
 2/10 abnormal 
6-184
B-0
26-210 (mean,
6/10 abnormal 
Median, 21
26-1953
50-239
191
13-31
rease
61% (190/312) NC
 contaminated)
82% (85/104)
incr
44% (11/25)
49% (28/57)
44% (14/32)
84% (43/51)
83% (20/24)
0% (2 blood
26% (9/35)
12% (4/33)
80% (8/10)
increase
80% (4/5)
L (26), CM(6)
CM(4), L(1)
L
CM
CM
111
2
12
5
3
5
33
5
忆
15
10
 Degenerative Myelopathy—-Dog*
Vertebral Instability/Malformation
Disk Herniation—Dog
 CNS Neoplasia—anyt
Thoracolumbar*
Thoracolumbar*
Thoracolumbar
Ischemic Infarct
Neoplasia—Dog
 FCEM-Dogt
FCEM—Cat
Brain—Dog+
Cervical*
Cervical*
Vascular
312
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Analysis and Interpretation of Specific Tests · See
Interpretation · Dermatan sulfate a glycosaminogly-
Chapter 15.
can, can be present in increased concentration in the
urine of dogs with mucopolysaccharidosis.
INFECTIOUS DISEASE POLYMERASE
CHAIN REACTION
ACETYLCHOLINE RECEPTOR
ANTIBODY
Occasional Indications · PCR-based technology allows
for detection of genomic RNA or DNA associated with
Common Indications · Acquired myasthenia gravis
various infectious organisms. Putative advantages of PCR
(MG) is an autoimmune disease resulting in neuromus-
over antibody-based testing are (l) the organismal
 A s 'sim pue s un u e
genome should be specifc for infection, and (2) sensitiv-
 generalized neuromuscular weakness or can present with
ity may be high as few genomic copies are required for
focal disease (eg. esophageal, ocular, or laryngeal weak-
detection.2l Despite these advantages, there are concerns
ness in the absence of limb paresis). Clinical signs result
that in some instances PCR may have low sensitivity for
from development of autoantibodies that target nicotinic
detecting CNS infection; this may be especially true in
acetylcholine receptors.
cases where blood is the tissue assayed and the organism
of interest has a transient blood-borme phase. Cerebrospi-
Analysis · Acetylcholine receptor antibodies can be
nal fluid may be the ideal sample for PCR-based tech-
detected in the serum via radioimmunoassay, available
niques to detect infectious encephalitis, although transient
at the University of California at San Diego [http://
 infections or those limited to deeply buried CNS paren-
vetneuromuscular.ucsd.edu/). There are no special han-
chyma may be challenging to detect via assessment of
dling requirements.
CSF To the authors' knowledge data are not currently
available concerning sensitivity or specificity of CSF PCR
 Interpretation ● The test is 98% accurate for diagnosing
for identifying infectious encephalitides in dogs and cats.
acquired myasthenia gravis in dogs.27 False-negative
Also, with the variety of PCR techniques available, includ-
results are most common in animals receiving glucocor-
ing degenerate PCR and multiplexed PCR, comparisons
ticoids at the time of sampling.
regarding sensitivity and specificity would be diffcult.
In humans, CSF PCR has dramatically enhanced the
detection of infectious encephalitis. In some diseases
CREATINE KINASE
sensitivity and specificity are both greater than 95%, and
early, accurate results have enhanced rapid delivery of
Frequent Indications · CK is an enzyme associated
therapeutics.21
with muscle energy metabolism and is released into
Currently, the authors use CSF PCR when sample size
 blood as a consequence of myocyte injury.
permits. In some cases, use of degenerate PCR techniques,
which can screen whole families of infectious organisms.
Artifacts · Restraint associated with blood acquisition
has resulted in diagnosis where traditional techniques
and recumbency can cause mild elevations in CK (usually
(e.g., histopathology, titers) have been misleading. Fluids
<100o IU/L). Activity of CK can rapidly decrease in blood
such as blood and urine can be assessed by PCR if the
products stored at room temperature and may even
biology of suspected diseases indicates the presence of
decrease in frozen aliquots, so it is imperative to process
 Organisms to be likely.
samples rapidly.
Analysis and Interpretation · See Chapter 15.
Analysis ● The test is performed on serum or plasma.
Interpretation · The half-life of canine CK is 2 to 3
URINE ORGANIC ACIDS AND
hours. Significant elevations in CK activity suggest pres-
GLYCOSAMINOGLYCANS
ence of disease that results in muscle disruption (e.g.-
immune-mediated polymyositis, infectious polymyositis,
Rare Indications · Excessive concentrations of organic
muscular dystrophy). Trauma, shock, and seizures can
acids or glycosaminoglycans can be found in urine of
lead to profound myonecrosis and thus may also result
animals with inborn errors of metabolism or overload of
in marked increases in CK. Results of CK should be cor-
normal systems by exogenous metabolites. Screening for
related with clinical examination, electrophysiology. and
urinary organic acids is useful in the diagnosis of meth-
muscle biopsy.
ylmalonic aciduria, a disease that has been reported to
aiim siey 'siop asanien ul iodns pue sainzias asne
 D-lactic aciduria and various mitochondrial diseases may
DYNAMIN-1 GENE
also have altered urine organic acid profiles.
Occasional  Indications · Exercise-induced collapse
Analysis · Analysis is performed upon urine. If urine
(EIC) is a common disease affecting active Labrador
cannot be shipped to the laboratory immediately, it must 
retrievers. After l0 to 15 minutes of strenuous exercise
be frozen at -20° C. When shipped, it must be shipped
that results in hyperthermia, dogs may begin to exhibit
overnight on ice. One should contact the laboratory for
ataxia, paresis, leaning, falling, and limb flaccidity. Gen-
specifics on shipping.
eralized seizures and spasticity occur less commonly:
Chapter 14: Neurologic Disorders
313
death is a rare event following EIC. Typically, dogs will
[1) ceroid lipofuscinosis, which may result in confusion,
recover normal function within 45 minutes of a collapse
behavioral change, and blindness in juvenile or adult
event. Recently, a mutation in the dynamin-l gene that
dogs: (2) pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency, a mitochon-
results in amino acid substitution within dynamin protein
drial myopathy associated with exercise intolerance: (3)
was found to be highly associated with EIC. The dynamin
phosphofructokinase deficiency, which results in hemo-
protein normally functions to regulate endocytic vesicle
formation and is temperature sensitive in some species
saccharidosis Vl, which results in bone malformation and
when mutated.
spinal cord compression in neonatal cats.
Analysis · The test is performed upon EDTA blood,
Analysis ● See Appendix I for what samples are required,
semen, or dew claws (puppies). Semen and dew claws
shipping requirements, and where to send the samples.
should be stored frozen until they are ready to ship.
Samples should be sent with frozen ice packs to arrive in
1 to 5 days. Testing is commercially available through the
LACTIC ACID
University of Minnesota Diagnostic Laboratory (http://
www. cvm.umn.edu/vdl)
 Infrequent Indications · Suspected metabolic myopa-
thies, especially in Labrador retrievers; evaluation of met-
Interpretation · Ninety-seven percent of dogs with EIC
abolic acidosis; evaluating perfusion in patients being
were homozygous for the mutation, whereas only 9% of
treated for shock; helping determine prognosis for criti-
unaffected dogs were homozygous.22
cally ill animals (eg. dogs with gastric dilatation/
volvulus).
SUPEROXIDE DISMUTASE
Disadvantage · Sample handling is very important.
{SOD] GENE
Analysis · Lactate is assayed in lithium heparin plasma
Rare Indications ● Degenerative myelopathy (DM) is a
or from blood collected in iodoacetate tubes. Fluoride
disease affecting older dogs that are often medium to
tubes may be similar. Analysis may be performed with
large breeds; German shepherds, boxers, and Pembroke
standard laboratory analyzers or with  point-of-care
Welsh corgis are believed to be commonly affected. Dogs
instruments.
usually have slowly progressive signs reflecting involve-
ment of the T3-L3 spinal cord without paraspinal hyper-
Normal Values ● 2 to 13 mg/dl (0.22 to 1.44 mmol/L)
esthesia. Etiopathogenesis of DM is still unknown, but
recent data suggest an association between mutation of
Danger Values · Values greater than 6.0 mmol/L are
the superoxide dismutase-l gene (SOD1) and clinical
associated with a poor prognosis (see following).
IaOs pey semle a yim sop 'jodai auo ul p'suis
mutations, but mutations were also quite common in
Artifacts ● Venous stasis (eg, prolonged holding off of
many unaffected animals (in some breeds, upward of
the vein), struggling during venipuncture, and a recent
70% of animals studied).
meal may significantly increase blood lactate levels.
Analysis · EDTA blood, semen, or tissue (eg.. liver,
higher values than samples taken from jugular veins. The
muscle, kidney, spleen) may be tested. Five to 10 ml of
plasma should be quickly separated from the RBCs or the
EDTA blood is kept refrigerated until mailed to the lab,
blood stored at 4°C for less than 2 hours before plasma
but it cannot be kept for more than l week before being
is harvested. If the blood sample is allowed to sit at room
mailed. It should be sent with a cool pack. Semen [1
temperature the lactate concentration progressively
straw) and tissue (approximately 1-inch cube) should be
increases. If iodoacetate tubes are used, blood can be held
frozen and shipped with a frozen cool pack. The Ortho-
at room temperature for up to 2 hours before harvesting
pedic Foundation for Animals (www.offa.org) currently
plasma. Harvested plasma should be refrigerated or
 processes samples for SOD gene testing.
frozen. Oxaloacetate anticoagulant may cause artifacts.
Aspirin, epinephrine, and phenobarbital may alter blood
Interpretation · The high rate of mutation carriage in
lactate levels.
unaffected dogs makes SOD1 testing of limited value in
confirming DM, although it may have a role as an exclu-
Causes of Increased Lactic Acid · One reason for mea-
sionary assay. MRI of the vertebral column suggesting an
suring lactic acid levels in dogs is to look for metabolic
absence of spinal cord compression or intraparenchymal
myopathies in Labrador retrievers. The first blood sample
change along with CSF lacking pleocytosis remain the
Aa pasiiaxa si gop ayl uau isau ie gop aul ym uaye1 si
cormerstones of diagnosing DM in vivo.
walking it briskly for 10 to 15 minutes, and another blood
sample is taken. A marked increase above the normal
range after minor exercise suggests this disorder. Another
OTHER GENETIC TESTS
 ( a l si aa  si uo
Rare Indications · Genetic tests are now available for
Dogs with gastric dilatation/volvulus that have blood
a multitude of uncommon and rare nervous system dis-
lactate concentrations greater than 6.0 mmol/L have a
orders affecting small domestic species. These include
worse prognosis and are more likely to have gastric wall
314
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
necrosis. Persistent increased lactic acid concentrations in
16. Levine [M, Ruaux CG, Bergman RL. et al: Matrix metallo-
animals being treated for shock indicates that adequate
 proteinase-9 activity in the cerebrospinal fluid and serum
 perfusion is probably not being achieved and appears to
of dogs with acute spinal cord trauma from intervertebral
be associated with a poorer prognosis.
disk disease. Am J Vet Res 67:283, 2006.
17. Lowrie M, Penderis J. McLoughlin M, et al: Steroid responsive
meningitis-artenitis: a prospective study of potential disease
markers. prednisolone treatment, and long-term outcome in
References and Suggested Readings
20 dogs (2006-2008). I Vet Int Med 23:862. 2009.
18. Meinkoth [H. Crystal MA: Cerebrospinal fluid analysis. [n
1. Awano T. Johnson GS, Wade CM, et al: Genome-wide asso-
Cowell RL. Tyler RD, Meinkoth JH, editors: Diagnostic cytology
 ciation analysis reveals a SODl mutation in canine degenera-
and hematology of the dog and cat, ed 2. St. Louis, 1999, Mosby.
tive myelopathy that resembles amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
19. Mikszewski JS. Van Winkle TJ. Troxel MT: Fibrocartilaginous
Proc Nafl Acad Sci L S A 106:2794, 2009.
embolic myelopathy in five cats. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc
2. Bathen-Noethen A. Carlson R, Menzel D, et al: Concentra-
42:226, 2006.
tions of acute-phase proteins in dogs with steroid responsive
 20. Munana KR, Luttgen Pl: Prognostic factors for dogs with
meningitis-arteritis. J Vet Intern Med 22:1149, 2008.
granulomatous meningoencephalomyelitis: 42 cases (1982-
3. Bienzle D, McDonnell JI, Stanton [B: Analysis of cerebrospi-
1996). I Am Vet Med Assoc 212:1902, 1998.
 nal fluid from dogs and cats after 24 and 48 hours of storage.
 21. Nghiem P Schatzberg S: Conventional and molecular diag-
J Am Vet Med Assoc 216:176l, 2000.
nostics for the acute neurological patient. J Vet Emerg Crit
4. Boettcher IC. Steinberg T. Matiasek K. et al: llse of
Care 20:46. 2009
anti-coronavinus antibody testing of cerebrospinal fluid
 22. Patterson EE, Minor KM, Tchernatynskaia AV, et al: A canine
for diagnosis of feline infectious peritonitis involving the
DNMl mutation is highly associated with the syndrome of
central nervous system in cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 230:199.
exercise-induced collapse. Nat Genet 40:1235. 2008.
2007.
23. Patt SR. Radaelli ST. McDonnell JI: The prognostic value of
 5. Bohn AA, Wills TB, West CL, et al: Cerebrospinal fluid analy-
the modifed Glasgow Coma Scale in head trauma in dogs.
sis and magnetic resonance imaging in the diagnosis of neu-
J Vet Intern Med 15:58l, 2001.
Jologic disease in dogs: a retrospective study. Vet Clin Pathol
 24. Radaelli ST. Platt SR: Bacterial meningoencephalomyelitis in
35:315, 2006.
dogs: a retrospective study of 23 cases {1990-1999). J Vet Int
6. Coates [R, March PA, Oglesbee M, et al: Clinical characteriza-
Med 16:159, 2008.
tion of a familial degenerative myelopathy in Pembroke
25. Rand JS. Parent J. Jacobs R, Percy D: Reference intervals for
Welsh Corgi dogs. I Vet Intern Med 2l:1323. 2007.
feline cerebrospinal fluid: cell counts and cytologic features.
7. Cordy DR, Holliday TA: A necrotizing meningoencephalitis
Am J Vet Res 51:1044, 1990.
Of pug dogs. Vet Pathol 26:191, 1989.
 26. Shell WE, Kjekshus [K, Sobel BE: Quantitative assessment of
8. De Risio L, Adams V, Dennis R, et al: Magnetic resonance
the extent of myocardial infarction in the conscious dog by
imaging findings and clinical associations in 52 dogs with
 means of analysis of senial changes in serum creatine phos-
suspected ischemic myelopathy. } Vet Intern Med 2l:1290.
phokinase activity. I Clin Invest 50:2614, 1971.
2007.
27. Shelton GD: Myasthenia gravis and disorders of neuromus-
9. Dickinson PJ. Sturges BK, Kass PH, LeCouteur RA: Character-
mlar transmission. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
 istics of cisternal cerebrospinal fluid associated with intracra-
32:189, 2002.
nial meningiomas in dogs: 56 cases (1985-2004]. I Am Vet
 28. Thomson CE. Kornegay IN. Stevens [B: Canine intervertebral 
Med Assoc 228:564.2006.
disc disease: changes in the cerebrospinal fluid. J Small Anim
10. Foley IE. Lapointe JM. Koblik P, et al: Diagnostic features of
Pract 30:685. 1989.
linical neurologic feline infectious penitonitis. J Vet Intern
 29. Tipold A: Diagnosis of inflammatory and infectious diseases
Med 12:415, 1998.
 kpns aaoadsoiai e shop ui wuajsis snoaiau [enuan aun jo
l1. Garosi L McConnell JF Platt SR, et al: Results of diagnostic
J Vet Intern Med 9:304. 1995.
jnvestigations and long-term outcome of 33 dogs with brain
30. Vandevelde M, Spano [S: Cerebrospinal fluid cytology in
infarction (2000-2004). J Vet Int Med 19:725. 2005.
canine neurologic disease. Am J Vet Res 38:1827, 1977.
12. Jamison EM. Lumsden [H: Cerebrospinal fluid analysis in the
31. Wagner SO. Podell M. Fenner WR: Generalized tremors in
dog: methodology and interpretation. J Vet Intern Med 3:122.
dogs: 24 cases (1984-1995). J Am Vet Med Assoc 21l:731.
1988.
1997.
13. Levine G]. Levine [M, Budke CM, et al: Descniption and
32. Wilson [W. Stevens JB: Effects of blood contamination on
repeatability of a newly developed spinal cord injury scale
cerebrospinal fluid analysis. J Am Vet Med Assoc 17l:256.
for dogs. Prev Vet Med 89:12l, 2009.
1977.
14. Levine JM. Fosgate GT, Chen AV, et al: Magnetic resonance
33. Windsor RC, Vernau KM, Sturges BK, et al: Lumbar cerebro-
u! juawiiedut sbo oinau ym pajeposse su puy su beu!
 spinal fluid in dogs with type I intervertebral disc herniation.
dogs with acute thoracic and lumbar intervertebral disk her-
J Vet Intern Med 22:954, 2008.
niation. J Vet Intern Med 23:1220, 2009.
34. Witsberger TH. Levine [M, Slater MR. et al: Cerebrospinal
15. Levine [M. Fosgate GT, Porter B, et al: Epidemiclogy of nec-
fluid biomarkers and neurologic outcome in dogs with acute
rotizing meningoencephalitis in Pug dogs. J Vet Intern Med
intervertebral disk herniation. [n Proceedings of the American
22:961, 2008.
College of Veterinary Surgery Washington, DC, 2009.
Microbiology and
15
Infectious Disease
Michael R. Lappin
pigolois Aq Apaip payuapi aq Au sjuase snoayul
analysis, histopathologic evaluation, culture, viral isola-
determination of whether other animals or people in the
tion, antigen detection, or nucleic acid amplification tech-
environment are affected can aid in ranking infectious
niques. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assays are the
diseases on a differential diagnoses list.
most commonly used nucleic acid amplification tech-
Physical examination findings may suggest an infec-
niques in small animal infectious diseases. Detection of
tious cause. Infectious agents can induce fever. Lymphad-
antibodies against infectious agents provides indirect evi-
enomegaly as a result of reactive lymphoid hyperplasia
dence of prior exposure or current infection. This chapter
can be infectious in origin. Hepatosplenomegaly can be
describes methods for obtaining specimens, outlines cur-
caused by immunologic stimulation induced by chronic
rently used testing procedures for some of the more
intracellular infections (eg, ehrlichiosis, brucellosis).
common infectious diseases, and discusses interpretation
Endogenous uveitis commonly occurs after infections by
of results from the various procedures and tests.*
feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV), feline infectious
peritonitis (FIP) vinus, toxoplasmosis, and systemic
mycoses. Mucopurulent discharges can suggest primary or
WHEN TO SUSPECT BACTERIAL/
secondary bacterial infections. Certain infectious diseases
cause specifc abnormalities such as dendritic ulcers
FUNGAL/RICKETTSIAL
(feline herpesvinus 1), chorea myoclonus (canine distem-
VIRAL AGENTS
per vinus), or testicular swelling plus pain (canine
brucellosis).
Infectious diseases should be on the differential list for
 Finally, clinicopathologic abnormalities can suggest
most problems, especially those with fever or other signs
disease caused by infectious agents. Neutrophilic leuko-
of inflammation. History, physical examination findings.
cytosis, particularly if a left shift or degenerative neutro-
and routine clinical pathologictesting are seldom pathog-
phils (see Chapter 4) are also present, is consistent with
nomonic for an infectious cause, but they help the clini-
an infectious cause of disease Gram-negative sepsis is
cian rank differential diagnoses and develop a logical
suggested by leukopenia with a degenerative left shift.
diagnostic plan.
Monocytosis or lymphocytosis can be induced by persis-
History can increase the degree of suspicion for
tent infection with a number of intracellular agents that
infectious disease. Exposure to other infected animals or
result in persistent infection. Examples include ehrlichio-
sis, toxoplasmosis, and bartonellosis. Polyclonal (e.g..
transmission, such as those inducing respiratory disease
multiple infectious causes) or monoclonal (eg, usually
(eg., feline herpesvirus l, canine bordetellosis) or gas-
induced by neoplasia, rarely associated with canine
troenteritis (e.g. canine and feline giardiasis, canine and 
ehrlichiosis) gammopathies may suggest chronic immune
feline parvovinus infection). Potential exposure to vectors 
stimulation. Neutrophils in aqueous humor, cerebrospi-
(e.g., mosquitoes for dirofilariasis; ticks for Lyme bor-
nal fluid (CsF), synovial fluid, or urine may indicate
reliosis [Ixodes spp.]. ehrlichiosis [Rhipicephalus sanguin-
inflammation induced by infectious agents.
eus]. Rickettsia rickettsii [Rocky Mountain spotted fever;
Dermacentor spp.]. and Babesia canis [R. sanguineus]] or
appropriate travel history (eg., coccidioidomycosis in
CYTOLOGY
the Southwest: blastomycosis in the Misssippi, Mis-
souri, and Ohio River valleys) can also suggest infectious
Common Indications · Cytologic examination of exu
dates, blood film, tissue imprint, aspiration biopsy, or wet
mount of hair is indicated when bacterial and fungal
*See Table l5-l at the end of this chapter for product
diseases (and occasionally rickettsial and viral diseases)
specifications.
are suspected.
315
316
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Advantages ● Cytology is inexpensive and readily avail-
able and may allow rapid confirmation and identification
of an infectious agent. It assists in establishing normal
flora and contaminants versus infection (eg., interpreta-
tion of relative numbers of bacteria and yeasts in the ear
canal). Cytologic examination also permits visualization
of relative numbers of organisms at the time of collection
(culture results may be misleading in terms of fast- or
slow-growing bacteria).
Disadvantages · Infectious agents cannot always be
found (eg., ehrlichiosis, haemoplasmosis, infections with
numbers of organism that are below sensitivity level of
cytology). Sometimes a presumptive cytologic diagnosis
must be confirmed by other methods (e.g. histopathol-
ogy, culture, PCR assay), and cytology is of limited value
FIGURE 15-1 Smear of diarrheic feces with spore-forming bac-
in detecting viral inclusions except in brief viremic stages 
teria indicating C. perfringens. The spores have clear spaces
of canine distemper.
outlined by a dark wall. (From Nelson RW, Couto CG: Small 
Animal Internal Medicine, ed 4. Esevier, Inc., St. Louis, 2009.)
Specimen Procurement and Analysis
Morulae of Ehrlichia spp. are rare in the cytoplasm of
See Chapter 16 for discussion of cytologic techniques and
mononuclear cells (Ehrlichia canis), neutrophils (Ehrlichia
cytologic conclusions.
ewingi; Anaplasma phagocytophila [previously E. equi]]. or
platelets (Ehrlichia platys). Mycoplasma haemofelis [cats
Bacterial Diseases
only), "Candidatus M. haemominutum" (cats only). "Can-
Discharges from animals with suspected bacterial disease
didatus M. turicensis" (cats only). M. haemocanis [dogs
should be placed on a microscope slide, air dried, fxed,
only). "Candidatus M. haematoparvum" (dogs only).
and stained with both Gram and Romanowsky-type
Cytauxzoon felis (cats only). and Babesia spp. sometimes
stains (see Chapter l6). The examination is started on
will be identifed cytologically on the surface or within
low power (l0x magnification), with oil immersion
canine or feline erythrocytes.
(100x) used for inspection of bacterial morphologic fea-
tures [ie, rods, cocci) and Gram stain characteristics
Cutaneous Parasitic Diseases
[(i.e., Gram-positive [blue] or Gram-negative [pink]). The
For demonstration of Cheyletiella spp., a piece of transpar-
primary disadvantage of Gram staining is that Gram-
ent adhesive tape is gently pressed against areas with
negative bacteria may be difficult to find because back-
cnusts or dandnuff and then placed on a microscope slide.
ground material stains pink. It is easier to fnd bacteria
Next the hair is clipped, mineral oil is placed on the skin
(dark-blue stain) and easier to study morphologic
 and on a microscope slide, and the skin is scraped using
detail of other cells (i.e., inflammatory cells) using
a blunt no. l0 scalpel blade For skin scrapings to look
Romanowsky-type stains. Gram staining may be vari-
for Demodex spp., the skin should be immobilized and
able; organisms in body fluids may stain differently
mites expressed from follicles by pinching and scraping
from those grown on a blood agar plate. Gram stain
the extruded material. For scrapings to look for Sarcoptes
demonstrates the gram-positive, branching flaments of
spp. or Cheyletiella spp., the scraping is continued more
Actinomyces spp. and Nocardia spp. (see Figure l0-1l).
superficially (inducing a mild capillary ooze) over a larger
Acid-fast stains can be used for Mycobacterium spp. and
surface area. After transfer of the scraping, the microscope
to help differentiate Nocardia spp. (acid-fast) from Acti-
slide field is scanned at l0x for mites.
nomyces spp.
Some bacteria have characteristic morphologic fea-
Fungal Diseases
tures. Large rod-form bacteria containing spores found on
For identification of dermatophytes, hairs are plucked
fecal cytology of dogs or cats with diarrhea suggest Clos-
from the periphery of a lesion, placed on a microscope
tridiurm perfringens (Figure 15-1). Bipolar-staining. gram-
slide and covered with 10% to 20% potassium hydroxide
negative coccobacilli found in aspirates of inflamed
to clear debris. The slide is then heated (not boiled) and
cervical lymph nodes from cats in the Southwest or
examined under the 10x or 40x objective to search for
West suggest Yersinia pestis. Short spirochetes found
hyphae, spores, conidia, budding yeasts, and fungus-
on fecal cytology of animals with diarrhea suggest but do
induced damage (eg., swollen or broken hair shafts). The
not prove campylobacteriosis. Spirochetes found on
40x objective is used to identify arthrospores [dense
cytology of gastric mucosa of vomiting animals suggest
aggregates of spherical structures that may cover the hair
helicobacteriosis.
shaft [Figure 15-2]). Failure to find arthrospores does not
 To demonstrate inclusion bodies in acute feline
nule out dermatomycosis. Culture is more sensitive for
chlamydial conjunctivitis, conjunctival scrapings are
diagnosis of dermatophytosis (see Fungal Culture)
obtained with a flat spatula, smeared on a slide, stained
Romanowsky-type stains (e.g.,. Wright) are used
with Romanowsky-type stains, and examined for intracy-
in preference to wet mount preparations and ink
toplasmic aggregations of Chlamydophila felis (previously
when looking for fungi other than dermatophytes (see
Chlamydia).
Chapter 16). Romanowsky-type stains are also useful in
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
317
been resistant to medications. Remember: Skin and
mucosal surfaces have a resident microflora (Box 15-2);
therefore care must be taken to avoid contamination.
Advantages · Culture and antimicrobial susceptibility
usually allows the most effective treatment to be
administered.
Disadvantages ● Culture requires time for agents to
grow; also, some organisms are fastidious or have special
culture requirements. Other disadvantages are the expense
and the ease of contaminating or making inactivate
cultures, rendering results worthless.
Bacterial Culture
FIGURE 15-2 Canine ringworm skin scraping. One normal hair
shaft is at the upper left. The swollen, fragmented hair shaft
Specimen Procurement
in the center is full of small, round Microsporum canis
Body Cavities · The site of skin puncture should be
arthrospores.
prepared as for blood culture [see discussion in Cardio-
but fluid cannot be aspirated, lavage (see Chapter 10) is
identifying yeasts such as Blastomyces dermatitidis, Histo-
indicated. Because mixed infections are common and
plasmacapsulatum,porothrischenckiCoccidioidesmmits,
pure anaerobic infections may occur, aerobic and anaero-
or Cryptococcus spp. (see Figure ll-3) in exudates, CSF
bic cultures should be performed.
lymph node aspiration cytology, or transtracheal aspira-
tion cytology.
Cardiovascular System · Blood cultures are indicated
in suspected bacterial endocarditis or septicemia. A large
Viral Diseases
vein prepared surgically with sequential iodine and
Canine distemper vinus inclusions in lymphocytes, neu-
alcohol scrubs is used for three blood culture specimens
trophils, or erythrocytes (Figure 15-3) are diagnostic of
obtained during a febrile episode over a 24-hour period
 infection but are only present transiently, so false-negative
in dogs with suspected endocarditis. Culture of fewer than
results are common. Feline herpesvinus 1 (FHV-1) infec-
three specimens significantly decreases the chance of
tion transiently results in intranuclear inclusion bodies in
 positive results. At least 5 ml of blood is placed directly
epithelial cells of the conjunctiva. Rarely, FIP-inducing
into a transport medium that will support the growth
strains of coronavirus result in transient intracytoplasmic
of aerobic and anaerobic bacteria, and it is incubated at
inclusions in circulating neutrophils.
20° C for 24 hours. Clotted blood or blood containing
ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) or citrate are
unacceptable because this decreases isolation of organ-
CULTURE AND ANTIMICROBIAL
isms (Bartonella spp. are exceptions; they can be cultured
SUSCEPTIBILITY
from EDTA tubes; see Bartonellosis sections). If a patient
is critically ill and sepsis is suspected, three cultures
Common Indications · Culture and antimicrobial sus-
should be obtained over l to 3 hours before antimicrobial
ceptibility are indicated in most suspected bacterial dis-
therapy is instituted. Because the urinary system is a
eases (Box 15-1), especially when clinical syndromes have
common portal of entry for bacteria into the body, urine
A
B
FIGURE 15-3 Canine distemper. A, The rounded viral inclusion bodies vary in color from gray to reddish. The most obvious inclu-
sion body is above the dark blue, smaller Howell-Jolly body. B, There is a large, gray viral inclusion body in the cytoplasm of the
neutrophil at about 7 o'clock at the cell margin.
318
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
BoX 15-1. BAcTeRIA CommoNlY IsoLAted From vARIouS SItes In InFectIous DisoRDers
IN DOGS AND CATS
Integument
Genitourinary Tract
Pyoderma
E. coli
Staphylococcus pseudinternedius
Proteus spp.
Proteus spp.
Kebsiella spp.
Pseudomonas spp.
5. aureus/intermedius
Escherichia coli (usually secondary to staphylococci)
Eyes
Ears
Conjunctiva and Cornea
Malassezia sop.
 5. aureus (coagulase positive and negative)
Pseudomonas spp.
Streptococcus spp.
 5. aureus/intermredius
5. epidermidis
Proteus spp.
E. coli
Proteus spp.
Respiratory System
Bacillus spp.
Pneumonia
Pseudomonas spp.
Cardiovascular System
E. coli
Aerobes
Kebsiella spp.
5. aureus
Pasteurella spp.
Beta-hemolytic streptococci
Bordetella spp.
E. coli
Staphylococcus spp.
Kebsiella spp.
Streptococcus spp.
Pseudomonas spp.
Mycoplasma spp.
Proteus spp.
Salmonella spp.
Pleural Cavity
Nocardia spp.
Anaerobes
Actinomtyces spp.
Bacteroides spp.
Pasteurella spp.
Fusobacterium spp.
Anaerobes
Clostridium spp.
 Gastrointestinal Tract
Intestine
Salmonella spp.
Campylobacter spp.
Clostridium perfringens
E. coli
Data compiled from Greene CE, editor: Clinical microbiology and infectious diseases of the dog and cat Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
is often cultured in patients when the source of septice-
Eye ● Conjunctival culture should be performed before
 mia or bacterial endocarditis is unknown.
topical anesthesia or application of fluorescein stain by
rolling a moistened sterile swab over the conjunctiva.
Central Nervous System · Bacterial infection of the
 Ocular paracentesis is necessary for intraocular culture.
central nervous system (CNS) is uncommon. Even when
infection occurs, low numbers of organisms make cytol-
Gastrointestinal Tract · Primary bacterial gastroenteri-
Ogy and culture low-yield procedures. If increased
tis occasionally occurs. Salmonella spp., Campylobacter
numbers of neutrophils andincreased protein are detected
sDp., C. perfringens, and Escherichia coli are agents that can
in CSF (see Chapter 14), however, aerobic and anaerobic
be involved. These organisms can also be isolated from
bacterial culture and antimicrobial susceptibility testing
normal animals, however. Salmonella spp. and Campylo-
are indicated. CSF samples should be placed in transport
bacter spp. can cause small or mixed bowel diarrhea; C.
media and delivered to the laboratory as soon as possible.
perfringens is usually associated with large bowel diarrhea.
Aerobic and anaerobic bacterial culture should be
Approximately 2 to 3 g of fresh feces should be submitted
performed when bacterial infection of the CNS is
to the laboratory for optimal results. If delayed transport
suspected.
 of feces to the laboratory is expected, the clinician should
Chapter 15:Microbiology and Infectious Disease
319
BoX 15-2. NORmAL bACTeRIAL FlORA AT VARIOUS SItes IN DoGs AND CATS
INTEGUMENT
GASTROINTESTINAL TRACT
Skin
Oral Cavity and Feces
Aerobes
Aerobic
Micrococcus spp.
Gram-positive
Staphylococcus spp.
Streptococcus spp.
Streptococcus spp.
 Staphylococcus spp.
Granm-negative rods, including Pasteurella spp.
Bacillus spp.
Diphtheroids
Corynebacterium spp.
Anaerobes
 Gram-negative
Clostridium spp.
Enterobacteriaceae (especially E. coli, Enterobacter
Spp., Proteus spp, and Kebsiella spp.)
Ears
Pseudomonas spp.
Aerobes
Neisseria spp.
Staphylococcus spp.
Moraxella spp.
Corynebacterium spp.
 Streptococcus spp.
Anaerobic
Coliforms
Gram-positive
Clostridium spp.
Bacillus spp.
Lactobacillus spp.
Yeast
Malassezia sop.
 Propionibacterium spp.
Bifdobacterium spp.
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
Gram-negative
Nasal Cavity, Pharynx
Bacteroides spp.
 Aerobes
Fusobacterium spp.
Staphylococcus spp.
Veillonella spp.
 Streptococcus spp.
Other
Neisseria spp.
Spirochetes
Corynebacterium spp.
Mycoplasma spp.
Escherichia coli
Yeasts
Lactobacillus spop.
GENITOURINARY TRACT
Proteus spp.
Distal Urethra and Prepuce
Anaerobes
Clostridium spp.
Gram-positive
5. aureus
Bifidobacterium spp.
Propionibacterium spp.
5. epidermidis
 Streptococcus spp.
Fusobacterium sop.
Mycoplasma spp.
Bacteroides spp.
'dds snoeg
Trachea
Corynebacterium sop.
 Streptococcus spp.
 Staphylococcus spp.
Gram-negative
Flavobacterium spp.
Pasteurella spp.
Haemophilus spp.
Kebsiella spp.
Moraxella spp.
Corynebacterium spp.
Pasteurella spp.
Klebsiella spp.
Cornea and Conjunctiva
Aerobes
 Staphylococcus spp. (coagulase positive and negative)
 Nonhemolytic, alpha- and beta-hemolytic streptococci
Bacillus spp.
Pseudomonas spp.
E. coli
Corynebacterium spp.
Neisseria spp.
Moraxella spp.
Data compiled from Greene CE, editor: Clinical microbiology and infectious diseases of the dog and cat Philadelphia, 1998, WB Saunders.
320
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Dogs or cats with suppurative arthritis (with or
Because these organisms have special culture require-
without cytologic visualization of bacteria) should have
ments, the laboratory must be notified of the suspected
the synovial fluid cultured for aerobes and Mycoplasma
pathogen. A positive culture for C. perfringens does
sPp. (see Chapter 10). Likelihood of positive culture
 not prove it was the cause of disease because not all C.
results increases if the synovial fluid contains degenera-
perfringens produce enterotoxin. Conversely, not all
tive neutrophils. L-form bacteria usually cannot be grown
enterotoxin-positive animals have diarrhea. Thus culture
from joint fluid via routine culture techniques. Synovial
or PCR for C. perfringens should be combined with
biopsy for culture plus histopathologic evaluation for
enterotoxin measurement (See Chapter 9).
L-form bacteria is more sensitive than only culture of
fluid. Borrelia burgdorferi is almost never isolated by
Genitourinary Tract · Urine obtained by cystocentesis
routine culture from joints of dogs with Lyme disease.
is preferred for urine culture If a patient is severely throm-
Use of PCR assays on synovial fluid to amplify DNA of
bocytopenic [<50,000/ul), or if cystocentesis cannot be
Mycoplasma spp.,B.burgdorferi,A.phagocytophilum, and
performed, catheterization or a midstream-voided sample
Ehrlichia spp. may prove to be an effective way of docu-
is acceptable (quantitative culture is needed). Isolation of
menting the presence of the organisms in the joints of
bacteria should always be assessed concurrently with the
affected animals, but objective data are lacking.
urine sediment. Rarely, diffcult-to-diagnose urinary tract
 In osteomyelitis, culture of fistulous tracts is less sen-
infections require maceration and culture of a bladder
sitive than culture of affected bone. Culture for infectious
wall biopsy specimen. Calculi should be crushed with a
myositis is seldom performed unless suspicion for an
sterile mortar and pestle and cultured. Culture for Myco-
anaerobic infection (eg. Clostridium spp.) is based on
plasma spp. or Candida spp. should be considered if
foul odor, subcutaneous (SC) emphysema, or empyema.
pyuria is identifed in the absence of calculi, masses, and
The clinician can better evaluate for other infectious
aerobic bacteria. Leptospire spp. infection should also be
myopathies (e.g. toxoplasmosis, leptospirosis) using
considered in these canine patients.
serologic testing or PCR assays.
 Culture of the third fraction of an ejaculate (preferred)
 or prostatic massage is recommended for prostatic aulture
Respiratory System ● Lower airway specimens are best
Culture of the second fraction of an ejaculate is recom-
obtained by transtracheal aspiration or bronchoalveolar
mended for testicular culture Culture of prostatic or tes-
lavage during bronchoscopy. Fine-needle pulmonary
ticular material retrieved by aspiration or biopsy can also
aspiration biopsy can be used but carries more risk [see
be performed. Prostatic massage and closed prostatic aspi-
Chapter ll). Bacteria can be isolated from the trachea in
ration or biopsy should be avoided in dogs with suspected
 a  aa s  a a
prostatic abscesses. Obtaining distal urethral specimens for
transient; common isolates are listed in Box 15-2. Because
quantitative culture before and after ejaculation may help
many organisms isolated from normal dogs have also
avoid confusion caused by urethral contamination. Anaer-
been associated with lower respiratory tract inflamma-
obic culture of urine or prostatic fluid is rarely useful.
tion, all transtracheal aspiration samples should be evalu-
ated by culture, antimicrobial susceptibility, and cytology.
Integument and Ear · In superficial pyoderma, hair is
With cytology, the clinician should look for squamous
clipped from the surrounding area, but disinfection is not
cells coated with bacteria (which indicate oropharyngeal
attempted. A pustule is ruptured with a sterile fine-gauge
contamination) (see Figure ll-12). Bacteria should not
needle, and a swab of pus is cultured. In deep pyoderma.
be considered significant unless accompanied by neutro-
hair surrounding the lesion is clipped and the area is
philic inflammation. Mycoplasma spp. have been isolated
disinfected with an antiseptic The lesion is squeezed to
in pure culture from lower airways of patients with clini-
express exudate, which is collected on a swab. Gloves
cal signs of respiratory disease.18.71 Culture for Mycoplasma
should be worn.
 spp. should be performed on all transtracheal aspiration
 For culture of ears, a sterile otoscope cone is inserted
samples; these samples need to be transported to the
to the level of the horizontal canal and the ear is swabbed
laboratory in Amies medium or modified Stuart bacterial
through the cone. When middle-ear infection is sus-
transport medium. Mycoplasma spp. culture should be
pected, the animal is anesthetized and material for culture
specifically requested. Amplification of Mycoplasma spp.
is retrieved by myringotomy by penetration of the tympa-
DNA from airway secretions by PCR assay can also be
num with a sterile CSF needle placed through a sterile
used to document infection.
otoscope cone.
as e yn qems e ssd q no sdo a 10
Musculoskeletal System · No normal flora exists in
otoscope cone (see Chapter ll). The clinician can best
musculoskeletal tissues. Dogs with radiographic evidence
obtain pharyngeal specimens using a guarded swab taken
of discospondylitis should be evaluated for Brucella canis
during pharyngoscopy Nasal and pharyngeal cultures can
and Bartonella spp. infections [see Diagnostic Tests for
be difficult to interpret because of extensive normal flora
Select Bacterial Infections). Intervertebral joints can be
in the nasal cavity and nasopharynx (see Box 15-2).
cultured after fluoroscopically guided aspiration or when
decompressive spinal surgery is required. Most cases of
Specimen Transport
po peards snouaoieay lae donaaap spuodsoss
For aerobic culture, no special transport medium is
bacteria from an extravertebral source Blood and urine
 required if the swab remains moist and can be inoculated
-apuodsossip yim siuaed uay paimino aiuomo ane
onto the culture medium within 3 hours. Swabs contain-
litis; Staphylococcus spp. are commonly involved.
ing liquid or gel transport media are frequently used,
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
321
however. Routine cultures can be safely stored in trans-
a disk containing a fixed amount of antibiotic The
port media at room temperature for up to 4 hours. After
 procedure is qualitative and allocates organisms to the
this time, overgrowth is a potential problem because of
sensitive (susceptible), intermediate (indeterminate), or
various growth rates of different organisms. Refrigerated,
resistant category.
routine specimens can be stored in transport media for at
least 2 days. Tissue samples can be refrigerated for up to
Advantages ● Advantages of the disk diffusion test are
2 days. Fluids (eg. urine) can be safely stored at room
its simplicity and suitability for most routine cultures,
temperature for 1 to 2 hours, refrigerated for 24 hours,
that it can be performed in the office, and its applicability
and refrigerated in transport media for 72 hours.44 Quan-
for rapidly growing organisms (eg. Enterobacteriaceae,
titative culture is not accurate for fluids stored in transport
Staphylococcus aureus).
media because of artifactual dilution.
For anaerobic culture, fluid should be aspirated into
Disadvantages · This test is not suitable for slow-
a syringe the needle capped with a rubber stopper, and
growing organisms and anaerobes. In addition, there
the sample inoculated onto culture medium within 10
-sy Aood yo aiadaosns duiaid ul aeineu si
minutes of collection. Transport media that support the
ing antibiotics (eg., polymyxins), and factors that influ-
growth of anaerobic bacteria are available but are not
ence the test (eg. pH and thickness of the medium,
ideal for all fastidious organisms. With these limitations,
concentration of organisms, incubation time) must be
 samples can be refrigerated for 2 days in an appropriate
aq sainpasoid iadoid ieu aaeiadui s! l pazpiepueis
transport medium.
followed to avoid errors in diagnosis.
Analysis · Blood agar plates grow most routine bacte-
Artifarts · Artifacts result from improper sample col-
rial pathogens. A biplate containing blood agar and
lection (i.e., wrong sample, contamination). improper
MacConkey agar is frequently used. The common anaer-
sample transport, failure to notify the laboratory of sus-
obic culture medium is thioglycolate. The decision to
 pected pathogens (e.g., Salmonella spp., anaerobic bacte-
perform in-office testing instead of using a commercial
ria, Campylobacter spp., Mycoplasma spp.), recentantibiotic
laboratory is based on case load, available equipment,
treatment and culture for a secondary rather than a slow-
and expertise.
growing primary pathogen (i.e, insuffcient duration of
culture). Failure to grow fastidious anaerobes may be
Sensitivity Testing · Sensitivity testing gives an in vitro
caused by short, seemingly insignificant exposure to
estimation of suitability of a given concentration of an
oxygen or failure to use prereduced culture media.
antimicrobial agent. Two techniques are used: (1) the
dilution test and (2) the disk diffusion test.
Interpretation · Recognizing normal flora (see Box
 a   assau si (
Dilution Test ● This test is quantitative and determines
identification is expected in 18 to 24 hours, and antibiotic
the least amount of antimicrobial agent needed to prevent
sensitivity is reported in 36 to 48 hours. Most aerobic and
growth of a microorganism (minimum inhibitory con-
facultative organisms are identified within 5 days; identi-
centration [MIC]). Quantitative susceptibility testing is
fication of anaerobic organisms or Mycoplasma spp. may
indicated when antimicrobial dosing schedules need to
require an additional 2 to 3 days.
be monitored closely (e.g. gentamicin) or when disk
 Bacterial pathogens commonly isolated from various
test results are inapplicable, equivocal, or unreliable (eg..
body systems are listed in Box 15-2. The overlap between 
slow-growing organisms, confrmation of susceptibility to
resident and pathogenic organisms should be noted.
polymyxins, confirmation of susceptibility or resistance
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius is the major pathogen
to given doses of aminoglycosides). Other indications
isolated from the skin of dogs with pyoderma. Gram-
include anaerobes and testing for synergism or antago-
negative organisms are likely to be contaminants in
nism between antimicrobials.
superfcial pyoderma and secondary to S. pseudintermedius
in deep pyoderma.
Advantages · The dilution test may be effective even
Primary bacterial rhinitis is rare in dogs and cats but
though disk diffusion techniques suggest otherwise (eg.
can result from infection with Bordetella bronchiseptica,
antibiotics concentrated in urine).
Mycoplasma spp., and Chlamydophila felis (cats).Primary
bacterial pneumonia can result from B. bronchiseptica or
Disadvantages · Disadvantages of the dilution
test
Mycoplasma spp., whereas other organisms are usually
include expense, inability to perform the test in the office,
secondary to viral infections or aspiration.
and need to determine if required concentrations of a
Bacterial growth from urine obtained by cystocente-
certain antibiotic are feasible. Ideally, blood concentra-
sis is significant because the bladder is normally sterile.
tions of drugs should be more than 4 times the MIC and
Urine cultures, however, are best interpreted in conjunc-
urine concentrations 10 to 20 times the MIC. MIC sensi-
tion with a urinalysis. If growth occurs despite absence
tivity for topically administered antimicrobials is sel dom
of significant pyuria (see Chapter 7), sample contami-
determined because these methods are based on blood or
nation, improper sample transport, or diseases causing
urine concentrations.
immune suppression (e.g., hyperadrenocorticism, diabe-
tes mellitus, FIV infection) must be considered.
.In
Pasn Aaim iso aui si siu · isa uoin 
 quantitative culture of urine obtained by catheterization
method in clinical practice (i.e., Kirby-Bauer technique).
or midstream voiding. greater than or equal to 100,000
A zone of inhibition of bacterial growth is noted around
colonies/ml is significant Lower concentrations may
322
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
be significant in chronic infections or in females. In
these assays prove previous exposure to a Bartonella spp..
samples of prostatic fluid obtained by ejaculation, infec-
but as serologic cross-reaction occurs between B. henselae,
tion is diagnosed if the specimen contains greater than
B. clarridgeaie, and B. koehlerae, assays based on B. henselae
Or equal to 100 times more bacteria than the urethral
antigens cannot differentiate between the agents. Current
sample.34 Culture of prostatic aspirates may be more
Bartonella spp. infection is proven by culture or PCR assay
accurate.
results. Results of some PCR assays or genetic sequencing
 Blood cultures can be diffcult to interpret. False-
can be used to identify the species of Bartonella involved
positive results are caused by contamination with normal
cutaneous microflora, including Corynebacterium spp.,
one Bartonella spp. concurrently. Detection of local anti-
Bacillus spp., coagulase-negative staphylococci, anaerobic
 body production by the eye and documentation of Bar-
diphtheroids, streptococci, and Clostridium spp. Isolation
tonella spp. DNA in aqueous humor has been used to
of the same organism from two or more cultures strongly
doaument uveitis as a result of bartonellosis.5l (See
 Appendix I for laboratories for infectious diseases.)
culture is less certain unless it is a pathogenic bacterium
Up to 93% of healthy cats exposed to C. felis can be
unlikely to be a contaminant.
seropositive, and so antibody tests results alone cannot
CSF and synovial fluid are normally sterile; any
 be used to prove clinical bartonellosis. 7 Between 3% and
 growth in an aseptically obtained sample is significant.
15% of seronegative cats are bacteremic, and so antibody
test results cannot be used to exclude Bartonella spp. infec-
Fungal Culture
tion from the differential list. Positive blood culture or
PCR results prove current infection but do not document
Specimen Procurement
clinical illness. Repeated bacteremia has been detected in
For dermatophyte culture, hair is clipped from the lesion
 experimentally inoculated and naturally infected cats;
periphery: hair shafts are plucked with forceps and
therefore a single negative blood culture or PCR result
cultured on dermatophyte test medium (DTM) or
does not exclude infection.47 Because of these findings, it
Derm Duet.
is currently recommended to combine serologic test
 SC and deep fungal infections are best diagnosed by
results with those of blood culture or PCR assay results
cytologic or histopathologic evaluation, with or without
when evaluating clinically ill cats for bartonellosis. (See
serology. If organisms cannot be identified, cutaneous
Appendix I for laboratories for infectious diseases.) If test
lesions can be cultured, but these are rarely useful owing
results are positive and there is no better explanation for
to overgrowth by resident bacteria and fungi. The lesion
the cause of illness, treatment may be indicated. To date,
is prepared as for dermatophytes, and a swab is cultured
there has been no proven clinical benefit to following
onto Sabouraud and Mycose medium.
Bartonella spp. assay results after positive response to
Systemic and SC fungi may require 2 weeks' cultiva-
therapy.
tion on Sabouraud medium for growth to occur.
 Because serologic test results do not accurately cor-
relate with presence of bacteremia and individual culture
or PCR assay results can be falsely negative there is no
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR SELECT
indication for testing healthy cats for Bartonella spp. infec-
tion.14.46 The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
BACTERIAL INFECTIONS
recommends maintaining flea control and avoiding bites
and scratches to avoid bartonellosis.45 Healthy cats used
Bartonellosis, Feline (Bartonella
henselae, B. clarridgeaie, B. koehlerae)
for blood donors should be seronegative and culture or
PCR negative and should be maintained on flea control
Occasional Indications ● To date most cats with clini-
products.81
cal bartonellosis have been infected with Bartonella hense-
lae. However, B. clarridgeaie, B. koehlerae, and B. quintana
have been identified in some clinically illcats.1arton-
Bartonellosis, Canine (Bartonella
vinsonii and Bartonelfa henselae)
ella henselae, B. clarridgeaie, and B. koehlerae are transmit-
ted among cats by Ctenocephalides felis and so cats with a
Occasional Indications · Dogs from endemic areas or
history of flea infestation are more likely to be infected.20
Most cats exposed to Bartonella spp. maintain subclinical
carditis, endocarditis.
. granulomatous lymphadenitis,
infections; however, fever, uveitis, lymphadenopathy.
cutaneous vascular disease hemolytic anemia, polyarthri-
endocarditis, myocarditis, hematuria, and hyperglobulin-
tis, idiopathic effusions, granulomatous meningoenceph-
emia have been documented convincingly in experimen-
alitis, granulomatous rhinitis, or thrombocytopenia
tally infected or naturally exposed cats. Results have been
should be considered for Bartonella vinsoni testing.12,13
equivocal for a link between Bartonella spp. infection and
The full spectrum of B. henselae-associated illnesses in
gingivitis or stomatitis.23 Bartonella testing may be indi-
dogs has not been determined but appears to be similar
cated in cats with one or more of these clinical syndromes
 rural dogs with fleas or ticks are most likely to be exposed
to Bartonella spp.
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
antibodies are detected by immunofluorescent antibody
 Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
assay (IFA), enzyme-linked immunosorbent
assay
antibodies against R vinsonii and B. henselae are most
(ELISA), and Western blot immunoassay 13.42 Results of
commonly detected by IFA. Infection can be documented
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
323
by culture or PCR assay result. (See Appendix I for labo-
Laboratories for Infectious Disease); however, clinical
ratories for infectious diseases.)
utility of this assay has not been documented.56
Serologic cross-reactivity between B. vinsoni and B.
Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of the
henselae is variable; therefore individual assays for both
Organism by culture, histopathologic evaluation of tissue,
agents are indicated. Antibodies can be detected in dogs 
or PCR assay. Presumptive diagnoses of clinical Lyme
with and without clinical signs. Seronegative test results 
disease in dogs can be based on appropriate clinical, his-
make clinical illness caused by B. vinsonii or B. henselae
toric, and laboratory evidence of disease combined with
less likely. However, many infected dogs have been falsely
positive serologic testing and response to therapy.
negative for Bartonella spp. antibodies. Thus the current
recommendation is to combine serologic test results with
Brucellosis (Brucella canis)
 PCR assay or culture. Bartonella spp. are more difficult to
amplify or culture from dog blood than cat blood. The
Occasional Indications · Dogs with reproductive tract
gold standard test for documentation of Bartonella spp.
abnormalities, lymphadenomegaly, hyperglobulinemia,
infection is the combination of culture on BAPGM media
discospondylitis, or uveitis should be suspected of having
with PCR assay (Galaxy Diagnostic, Inc) .2559 (See Appen-
dix I: Select Laboratories for Infectious Disease.)
canis.
As in cats, no test result proves clinical bartonellosis 
in dogs, but if test results are positive and there is no
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
better explanation for the cause of illness, treatment may
antibodies are most commonly detected in serum by
be indicated.
rapid slide agglutination test (RSAT), tube agglutination
test (TAT), agar gel immunodiffusion (AGID), and
Borreliosis (Lyme Disease)
ELISA.16.79
 The RSAT and TAT are screening procedures; an RSAT
(Borrelia burgdorferi)
for point-of-care use is commercially available Both
Occasional Indications · Dogs from areas endemic for
assays should be performed with 2-mercaptoethanol
Ixodes ticks or with an appropriate travel history and
(2-ME) to eliminate heterologous IgM agglutinins respon-
fever, lameness, glomerulonephritis, or nonseptic, sup-
sible for most false-positive reactions. False-positive
purative polyarthritis should be suspected of having Lyme
reactions in the 2-ME TAT may be the result of auto-
 disease (borreliosis) and screened for antibodies against
agglutination in hemolyzed samples. AGID can be per-
B. burgdorferi.10,22.58
formed using cell wall antigens or cytoplasmic antigens.
AGID performed with cytoplasmic antigens is the most
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
specific antibody assay: AGID performed with cell wall
antibodies are detected in serum by IFA, ELISA, and
antigens is the most sensitive. Because of nonspecific pre-
Western immunoblot The organism can be documented
cipitin reactions, positive results in AGID with cell wall
in tissues by culture, histologic techniques, or PCR assay
antigens are diffcult to interpret.
result. (See Appendix I: Select Laboratories for Infectious 
Minimal time between infection and a positive test
Disease.)
result varies with the test, but most infected dogs are
Serum antibodies are generally used to screen for
ZI 0 g yaam A i Pue  a- a ui aido
exposure to B. burgdorferi in dogs. Immunoglobulin M
after infection. 2-ME TAT titers from different laboratories
(IgM) and immunoglobulin G (IgG) antibodies against
cannot be meaningfully compared; however, a titer of
B. burgdorferi can be detected in canine serum. Titers
1:50 to l:l00 is generally suspicious, whereas a titer
considered significant vary by laboratory and assay. Both
greater than or equal to l:200 usually correlates with
antibody classes can persist in senum for months after
isolation of B. canis from blood culture.1 After cessation
exposure. Depending on the assay used, cross-reactivity
of bacteremia, 2-ME TAT titers rapidly decrease to less
with B. burgdorferi antigens used in IFA and ELISA can
than 1:200 within a few weeks and remain low [1:25 to
occur with other spirochetes; thus a positive titer does not 
1:50) for 6 months or longer. In AGID, antibodies to
always document exposure to B. burgdorferi. B. burgdorferi
external antigens persist for a few weeks, whereas anti-
vaccines induce antibodies that are detected by some IFA
bodies to internal (i.e., cytoplasmic) antigens persist up
and ELISA. Western immunoblot can be used to differen-
to 12 months after cessation of bacteremia. Although
tiate vaccine-induced antibodies from antibodies result-
these animals are abacteremic, B. canis can be isolated
ing from natural infection. Antibodies against the C6
from selected organs (eg. epididymis, prostate).
peptide of B. burgdorferi are rarely induced by vaccination;
When the 2-ME RSAT or TAT is used as a screening
point-of-care assays using this peptide are commercially
test and results are positive, a tentative diagnosis of bnu-
available.5s Because B. burgdorferi migrates through the
cellosis is made; positive blood culture or AGID should
tissues, most dogs with borreliosis are positive for anti-
be used to confrm results. If blood culture or AGID is
negative, brucellosis is unlikely. If 2-ME RSAT or TAT
develop the same antibody responses as clinically illdogs.
results are negative in a dog strongly suspected of having
however. Because of these factors, interpretation of posi-
brucellosis, the test should be repeated in 4 weeks to
tive serum antibody titers is difficult. Serum antibodies
preclude the possibility of early infection.
against B. burgdorferi only document exposure
to
Definitive diagnosis requires isolation of R canis,
B. burgdorferi (or a similar antigen), not clinical disease.
although this is not always achieved. Although blood
 An assay to quantify antibodies against the C6 peptide
culture is ideal, it is inconvenient and expensive. Culture
is commercially available (see Appendix I: Select
of urine or an ejaculate may also be performed in males.
324
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Growth usually occurs within 7 days, but cultures should
or oral ulceration, particularly if tick exposure, rabbit
be held for 3 to 4 weeks before being discarded. At least
ingestion, or potential for human infection is confirmed.
three cultures from specimens obtained several days apart
Tularemia is a direct zoonosis from clinically ill cats to
are recommended.
people.
Leptospirosis (Leptospira spp.)
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Clinicians
Occasional Indications · Serologic testing for antibod-
tination (MA) assay.32.60 (See Appendix I: Select Laborato-
ies against Leptospira spp. should be considered in dogs
ries for Infectious Disease.)
with undiagnosed fever, ecchymoses, vomiting, diarrhea,
Time between acquisition of infection and a positive
muscle pain, uveitis, coughing, dyspnea, renal pain,
titer is not known. In dogs, titers of 1:140 to 1: 160 are
thrombocytopenia, renal failure (particularly acute), or
commonly detected in acute infections. In cats with tula-
increased activities of hepatic enzymes.7780 The most
-oa oz: I un at a aie s v 'a
ment of a positive titer or a fourfold increase in titer
canicola,L.icterohaemorrhagiae,L.grippotyphosa,L
between acute and convalescent sera [2 weeks later) is
bratislava,L.autumnalis,and L pomona.
presumptive evidence of infection. Definitive diagnosis
is obtained by isolation of the bacterium in a culture
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
Aq anss un uonyi Aq no uaas poona e jo
antibodies are detected in serum by the microscopic
immunofluorescence.
agglutination test (MAT),. ELISA (IgM, IgG). and micro-
scopic microcapsular agglutination test (MCAT). Most
diagnostic laboratories use MAT. The primary disadvan-
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR
tage of serologic testing is that it is diffcult to determine
whether positive titers are caused by active infection, pre-
FUNGAL INFECTIONS
vious infection, or vaccination. In addition, when results
Aspergillosis (Aspergillus fumigatus)
from different laboratories are compared, results com-
monly vary.
Occasional Indications ● Dogs and cats with nasal or
A laboratory that assesses for antibodies against mul-
pulmonary disease can be serologically screened for anti-
tiple serovars and participates in The Intermational Lepto-
bodies against Aspergillus fumigatus; cats are affected less
spirosis Society proficiency program should be used.76
u paiandaiu Aleaua aie sinsay shop ueun Auanba
Antibodies are detected by MAT days to weeks after infec-
tion. Acutely infected dogs are often MAT negative; dogs
culture.
with suggestive clinical signs of disease but negative MAT
results should be retested in 7 to 14 days; development
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · AGID, coun-
of a positive titer confirms recent infection. A fourfold
terimmunoelectrophoresis (CIEP), and ELISA have been
increase in antibody titer also can confrm recent infec-
used to detect circulating antibodies against A. fumigatus
tion. Vaccination can induce positive MAT titers. Because
in senum.2 Presence of serum antibodies can represent
of the presence of cross-reactive antibodies, one cannot
either exposure or infection, and some dogs with nasal
 assume that the serovar inducing the highest titer during
 soe as n aau s ae sisase
acute infection is the serovar causing infection. The com-
 one recent study of dogs with and without nasal aspergil-
bination of increasing antibody titers with appropriate
losis, the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative
dlinical pathologic abnormalities and clinical fndings
predictive values for serum anti-Aspergillus antibody
 suggests clinical leptospirosis.
results were 67%. 98%. 93%. and 84%. respectively.70
Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of the
Owing to persistence of titers in some treated dogs [i.e.
organism by urine dark-feld microscopy, phase-contrast
12 months), monitoring titers to assess therapeutic
microscopy, culture, or PCR assay. Examination of urine
 response is not recommended. Dogs or cats infected with
for leptospires is a low-yield procedure. Demonstration
Penicillium spp. will be seronegative if assessed only in
of spirochetes by histopathologic evaluation of renal
assays using A. fumigatus antigens.
tissue leads to a presumptive diagnosis, which may be
Radiographic demonstration of nasal  turbinate
confirmed by tissue culture. Culture or PCR assay can be
destruction suggests aspergillosis or nasal neoplasia.
 of most benefit early in the course of infection when MAT
Cytologic analysis (see Figure 16-18) and culture of
results are negative. The organism is in high levels in
canine nasal exudate alone are not diagnostic because
blood for the first 10 days of infection and then is highest
fungal elements may be nondetectable in affected dogs
in urine.3 Repeated culture may be needed because of
whereas they may be found in noninfected dogs [includ-
intermittent shedding. Administration of antimicrobial
ing dogs with nasal tumors). The organism is sometimes
therapy can result in false-negative results.
diffcult to culture from an aspergilloma (fungal ball).
Nasal lavage is a low-yield procedure for demonstration
of the organism; nasal biopsy is suggested (see Chapter
Tularemia (Rabbit Fever)
(Franciselfa tularensis)
11 ). Definitive diagnosis should be based on three factors:
(1) histopathologic evidence of tissue invasion, (2) an
Rare Indications · Testing for tularemia [(ie., rabbit
aspergilloma combined with serologic and culture evi-
fever) should be considered in animals from endemic
dence of infection, or (3) serologic and radiographic evi-
areas developing fever, lymphadenomegaly, weight loss.
dence of infection (i.e, bone lysis). In rare cases with
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
325
disseminated disease, cytologic evaluation of aspirates of
affected tissue may be useful. If the organism cannot be
demonstrated by biopsy samples obtained through the
nares, positive serologic test results may support explor-
atory surgery.
Blastomycosis (Blastomyces
dermatitidis)
Occasional Indications · Dogs from endemic areas
with fever, weight loss, pulmonary interstitial disease,
lymphadenomegaly, uveitis and blindness, ulcerative or
draining skin lesions, undiagnosed prostatic or testicular
disease, intracranial disease osteomyelitis, or (rarely)
renal disease can be serologically screened for antibodies
against Blastomyces dermatitidis and B. dermatitidis anti-
gens if the organism is not demonstrated by cytology
(see Figure 1l1-13), histopathology, or culture.5275 In
endemic areas, screening for antibodies against B. derma-
titidis should be considered in cats with pulmonary
interstitial disease, intracranial disease, lymphadeno-
megaly, ulcerative or draining skin lesions, or uveitis and
blindness.
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
antibodies are most commonly detected in serum by
FIGURE 15-4 Cytology of lymph node with a C. immitis spherule.
AGID. Blastomyces antigens in urine and blood of dogs
Note that the larger spherule contains numerous endospores.
have been measured using the MVista Blastomyces antigen
EIA (miravistalabs.com).74  Because subclinical canine
infections are unusual, positive serum antibody test
results are considered significant False-negative results
organism is not demonstrated by cytology (Figure 15-4),
 Occur in animals with peracute infection or with advanced
histopathology, or culture.34 Feline disease is rare but has
cases overwhelming the immune system. In dogs. the
been associated with nodular or ulcerative skin lesions.
sensitivities of antigen testing of urine, antigen testing of
pulmonary interstitial disease, osteomyelitis, uveitis, and
senum, and AGID serum antibody testing were 93.5%.
CNS disease.s An antigen test has been evaluated for use
87.0%, and 17.4%, respectively.72 Thus dogs with a high
with samples from humans but has not been validated
index of suspicion for blastomycosis that are negative for
for use with samples from dogs or cats.
serum antibodies should be screened for urine or serum 
antigens. Many cats with blastomycosis are serum anti-
Analysis, Artifarts, and Interpretation · Circulating
body negative Whether serum or urine antigen testing
antibodies are detected in serum by complement fixation
will aid in the diagnosis of blastomycosis in cats remains
(CF), AGID, ELISA, latex agglutination (LA), and tube
to be determined.
precipitin (TP) tests. TP detects IgM antibodies; CF and
Definitive diagnosis requires identifcation of the
AGID detect IgG antibodies.34 False-negative results in TP
yeast by cytology, histopathology, or fungal culture.
Occur in early infections (<2 weeks), chronic infection,
Impression smears from skin lesions and aspirates from
rapidly progressive acute infection, and primary cutane-
enlarged lymph nodes frequently reveal organisms; recov-
ous coccidioidomycosis. False-positive results in the CF
ery of organisms from transtracheal aspiration, pulmo-
test are caused by anticomplementary serum, which may
'uaisisuos sal si aun no 'sades Asdoiq uoneidse Aeu
be caused by bacterial contaminants or immune com-
Culture requires 10 to 14 days and is of lower yield than
plexes. Finally, cross-reactions in patients with histoplas-
cytology or biopsy. Diffuse nodular interstitial pulmonary
mosis and blastomycosis may occur with all tests. After
disease and hilar lymphadenomegaly are common radio-
resolution of disease, CF titers decrease over weeks but
graphic fndings. Positive serologic results combined with
remain positive at a low titer (e.g. I: 32) for months.
appropriate clinical signs and radiographic abnormalities
Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of the
allow presumptive diagnosis.
organism on smears, aspirates, histopathologic evalua-
tion, or culture The organism is often difficult to demon-
Coccidioidomycosis
strate. Wet mount examination of unstained or stained
(Coccidioides immitis)
(periodic acid-Schiff) smears or aspirates is more suitable
than dry mounts, which may distort the sphenules.
Occasional Indications · Dogs from endemic areas
Common thoracic radiographic findings are mixed inter-
with pulmonary interstitial disease, fever of undeter-
stitial, bronchial, and alveolar pulmonary patterms and
mined origin, hilar lymphadenomegaly, osteomyelitis.
hilar lymphadenomegaly. Positive serologic test results
uveitis, pericarditis, and nodular or ulcerative skin lesions
and characteristic radiographic changes allow tentative
can be screened for antibodies against C. immitis if the
diagnosis.
326
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Cryptococcosis (Cryptococcus
questionable clinical usefulness because titers persist
neoformans)
longer than l year after resolution of disease in some
animals, and both false-positive and false-negative results 
Occasional Indications · Cats and rarely dogs with
Occur. Antibody testing is even less rewarding in cats.
umdiagnosed respiratory (especially nasal). CNS, eye
 Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of the
(especially uveal tract), and skin (especially nodular or
' sdo (a a aas)  q s
ulcerative lesions) infections can be screened for Crypto-
 or PCR assay. An enzyme immunoassay test used to detect
coccus neoformans and C gatti antigens if the organism
histoplasma antigen in the urine of people has not been
validated for use with samples from dogs and cats. The
culture.26.61
Organism is more diffcult to demonstrate than B. derma-
titidis; however, cytologic examination of rectal scrapings
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Measure-
in dogs with colonic histoplasmosis is often diagnostic.
ment of antibodies against C. neoformans or C. gattii is
 Fine-needle aspiration of other organs may demonstrate
not clinically useful. Cryptococcal antigen is detected
the organism. In most cats with systermic histoplasmosis,
in serum,
. aqueous humor or CSF using
latex
the organism is identified on bone marrow cytology
agglutination,
Thoracic radiographs are indicated if pulmonary histo-
Negative serum LA titers may occur in early disease
plasmosis is suspected; a nodular interstitial pattern is
or1
uncommonly in chronic low-grade infections, in
expected. Culture of H. capsulatum is of lower yield than
chemotherapy-induced remission, or in nondisseminated
biopsy.
disease. Specificity of the serum LA is high. A titer of
 aa as si d in as u Iii u iai
titers are commonly detected. In some animals, decreases
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR SELECT
in serum titer parallel response to therapy.*l Positive titers
occur in some animals after apparently successful clinical
PROTOZOAL INFECTIONS
responses, suggesting persistent low-grade infection or
Babesiosis (B. canis vogeli and B.
false-positive results.27.42 Cryptococcal encephalitis may
gibsoni in Dogs in the United States)
cause a positive CSF LA titer despite a negative serum LA.
 Defnitive diagnosis is based on cytologic, histopath-
Rare Indications · Babesia canis vogeli and B. gibsoni
ologic, or culture demonstration of the organism or a
infect dogs in the United States, and diagnostic tests can
positive LA test result. Cytology is commonly positive [see
be performed in dogs from endemic areas or in those with
Figure ll-3) because there are usually numerous yeasts
' y  in i l e ue
found in affected tissues [i.e, nasal and cutaneous lesions.
icterus, splenomegaly (i.e., acute babesiosis), or intermit-
aqueous and vitreous humor).
tent fever and weight loss [i.e., chronic babesiosis).
Although babesiosis can cause anemia in cats, species
infecting cats are not found in the United States. Exposure
NOTE: The organism can occasionally be recovered from
to R. sanguineus ticks (B. canis) or pit bull terriers (B.
 nasal washings of normal animals.
gibsoni) are risk factors for exposure to the two agents in
dogs.6
CSF may contain the yeast, but concentration tech-
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
niques [i.e., cytocentrifugation) should be used. Routine
 antibodies are detected in serum by IFA. (See Appendix I:
cytology stains (eg., Wright) are adequate to demonstrate
Select Laboratories for Infectious Disease.) In most labo-
the organism. Large numbers of organisms are usually
ratories, titers greater than l: 40 are considered positive.
visible despite little or no inflammation. Culture is
 Experimentally infected dogs develop detectable IgG titers 
seldom necessary. Serologic testing is used if the yeast
 ae s e 
False-negative
cannot be demonstrated cytologically or to monitor
results can occur in immature dogs, in peracute cases, or
0l pasn uaaq sey Aesse od b luaean ol asuodsa
in dogs with concurrent immunosuppression. Antibodies
amplify the organism DNA from tissue but has not been
against B. gibsoni and B. canis may or may not cross-react,
assessed extensively to date.45
depending on the antigen source used by a particular
laboratory, and so specifc IFA should be used for both
Histoplasmosis (Histoplasma
Organisms. DNA of B. canis and B. gibsoni can be amplified
by PCR assay, and positive results indicate current infec-
capsulatum)
tion.617 However, both antibodies and DNA can be
Rare Indications · Animals with weight loss, pulmo-
detected in dogs that are healthy and those that are clini-
nary interstitial disease, uveal disease, diarrhea, or lymph-
cally ill. Antibody titer magnitude does not correlate to
adenomegaly can be serologically screened for antibodies
the presence or absence of disease. A titer of greater than
against Histoplasma capsulatum if the organism is not dem-
1:320 was suggested for B. gibsoni, but not all infected
onstrated by cytology, histopathology, or culture.31
dogs achieve a titer of this magnitude.7 It is important to
determine which species are involved in a case because
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Primarily.
response to treatment varies. Duration of positive titers
AGID is used to detect circulating antibodies in serum.
after resolution of disease is unknown. In untreated
Presence of serum antibodies confirms exposure but not
experimentally infected dogs, titers remained high for at
dlinical illness because of infection. AGID
has
least 6 months. Untreated, seropositive dogs should be
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
327
infection, not clinical disease However, if antibodies are
detected in an animal with appropriate clinical signs of
disease, treatment may be indicated in an attempt to slow
progression.
 Definitive diagnosis is based on demonstration of the
organism in tissues. The organism can be differentiated
from T gondii structurally, by immunohistochemistry, and
by PCR assay. N. caninum oocysts are found in the feces
of some dogs.64
Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondin)
Occasional Indications · Healthy Cats · T gondi-
specifc antibodies form in senum, aqueous humor, and
CSF of healthy and diseased cats or dogs. Antibodies do
not directly correlate with clinical toxoplasmosis. No
FIGURE 15-5 Blood smear of a dog with B. gibsoni. B. gibsoni
when a seropositive cat previously shed oocysts. A sero-
appear as small dots as opposed to the dassic "tear drop"
positive cat is less likely than a seronegative cat to shed
shape characteristic of B. canis.
the organism if re-exposed.
Clinically ll Dogs and Cats ● Serologic tests for toxoplas-
considered carriers of the infection. Treatment is indi-
mosis should be considered in cats with uveitis, fever,
cated only for seropositive, clinically ill dogs.
muscle disease, ictenus, pancreatitis, apparent inflamma-
 Definitive diagnosis requires demonstration of the
 tory bowel disease failing to respond to immunosuppres-
organism in blood smears stained with Romanowsky-
sive therapy. CNS disease, and respiratory disease.
type preparations (e.g. Wright and Giemsa) (Figure 15-5)
Serologic tests for toxoplasmosis should be considered in
or PCR assay. Organisms are best found in blood (particu-
dogs with fever, muscle disease, CNS disease, and respira-
'a) ais Adei e  (sa ae u a
tory disease. Dogs develop clinical toxoplasmosis less
ventral surface of ear or toenail).
commonly than cats.
NOTE: Shape of the organism may be distorted in old 
blood.
T gondi can be detected with multiple technicques, includ-
ing ELISA, IFA, Western blot immunoassay, Sabin-
Feldman dye test, and various agglutination tests.24.48
In chronic disease or asymptomatic carriers, demon-
(Table 15-1; See Appendix I: Select Laboratories for Infec-
stration of organisms is unreliable and a tentative
tious Disease.)
diagnosis is based on clinical signs and a positive titer.
ELISA, IFA, and Western blot immunoassay can be
Dogs with babesiosis are often Coombs positive (see
adapted to detect various antibody classes: IgM and IgG
Chapter 3).
are those usually assessed. T gondii-specifc IgM is detect-
Neosporosis (Neospora caninum)
cally ill cats 2 to 4 weeks after experimental induction
of toxoplasmosis; these titers generally are negative less
Rare Indications · Serology for Neospora caninum can
than 16 weeks after infection. Detectable IgM titers were
be performed in dogs with clinical evidence of poly-
 present in the serum of 93.3% of cats in a study of clinical
radiculomyositis, including progressive ascending rigid
toxoplasmosis; IgG titers were detected in 60%.4 IgM
paralysis, dysphagia, muscle atrophy, and (rarely) myo-
titers persist in some clinically ill cats for greater than 16
cardial dysfunction or pneumonia.24
weeks; these cats are frequently co-infected with FIV or
have ocular toxoplasmosis. After repeat inoculation with
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
T gondi, primary inoculation with the Petaluma isolate
antibodies are detected in serum by IFA. (See Appendix I:
of FIV, and administration of glucocorticoids, some cats
Select Laboratories for Infectious Disease.) A presumptive
with chronic toxoplasmosis experience short-term recur-
diagnosis of neosporosis can be made by combining
rence of detectable IgM titers.48 Healthy and clinically ill
appropriate clinical signs of disease and positive serology
dogs occasionally develop detectable IgM titers. Kinetics
Or presence of antibodies in CSF with the exclusion of
of postinfection IgM titers in dogs is unknown.
other causes inducing similar clinical syndromes, in par-
 After experimental induction of infection in subclini-
ticular, Toxoplasma gondi. IgG antibody titers greater than
cally ill cats, T. gondi-specifc IgG can be detected by
or equal to 1:200 have been detected in most dogs with
ELISA in serum from most cats by 4 weeks. Positive IgG
clinical neosporosis; minimal serologic cross-reactivity
exists with T gondii at titers greater than or equal to l : 50.
Single high IgG titers have been suggested to indicate
Because the organism is a tissue protozoan, seropositivity
recent or active infection. The author, however, has dem-
may correlate with permanent infection.(
Circulating
onstrated IgG antibody titers greater than 1:16,384 in
antibodies against Neospora caninum only document
subclinically ill cats 5 years after experimental induction
328
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
of toxoplasmosis. A positive IgG antibody titer in a single
base an antemortem diagnosis of clinical toxoplasmosis
senum sample only documents exposure, not recent or
on these tests alone Antemortem diagnosis of clinical
active disease. Demonstration of an increasing IgG titer
toxoplasmosis can be tentatively based on the combina-
can document recent or active disease. Unfortunately, the
tion of the following:
aul ol iail al aasod aiqeiaiap isiy au uoy ueds a
● Demonstration of serologic evidence of infection
Ba s  n z Ax si  l x
· Clinical signs of disease referable to toxoplasmosis
u  p  mm m  e
·Exclusion of other common causes
titer. Many cats with clinical toxoplasmosis have chronic
 Positive response to appropriate treatment
low-grade signs, and they are not tested until their IgG
T gondii was detected by PCR in aqueous humor of
antibody titers have reached maximal values. In humans
18.6% of cats with uveitis. The organism also can be
with reactivation of chronic toxoplasmosis, IgG titers only
 detected transiently in aqueous humor and blood of
rarely increase; cats appear to be the same.
healthy, experimentally inoculated cats, however, making
Several agglutination tests have been evaluated using
the positive predictive value of the PCR for clinical disease
cat senum. An LA and an indirect hemagglutination assay
less than 100%.48
(IHA) are commercially available These assays are not
species specific and potentially detect all classes of serum
Trypanosomiasis (Chagas Disease)
immunoglobulins directed against T gondii. Unfortu-
(Trypanosoma cruzi)
nately. LA and IHA rarely detect antibody in feline sera
when positive for only IgM by ELISA. Modified agglutina-
Rare Indications · Serologic testing for antibodies
tion using formalin-fixed tachyzoites is the most sensitive
against Trypanosoma cruzi should be considered in dogs
procedure for detection of T gondii antibodies in cat sera.
from endemic areas and those with generalized lymphad-
but it is generally unavailable commercially.
enomegaly, neurologic signs, or myocardial dysfunction
(especially second- or third-degree heart block or ven-
Agueous Humor and CSF Antibody Measurement · Local
tricular tachycardia).
production of T. gondii-specific IgG in CSF and aqueous
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · IFA, direct
ill cats and in cats and dogs with clinical disease because
hemagglutination, and CF usually detect circulating anti-
of toxoplasmosis.
-oeioqel ioalas i xipuaddy aas) teias auues ui saipog
 Local IgM production has only been detected in CSF
ries for Infectious Disease.)
and aqueous humor of animals with clinical disease.
Dogs are generally seropositive 3 weeks after infec-
Most cats with uveitis and production of T gondii-specific
'usiueaio aul oi ansodxa siuanop ain aaisod y 'uon
-ulupe ol papuodsai aaeq iounq shoanbe ul saipoque
not clinical disease. Positive titers vary by assay. Definitive
istration ofanti-Toxoplasma drugs, suggestingthat aqueous
diagnosis requires demonstration of the organism on
humor antibody testing aids in diagnosis of clinical
 blood smear, lymph node impression, or buffy coat and
Ocular feline toxoplasmosis. (See Appendix I: Select Labo-
plasma interface smear. T. cruzi is occasionally found in
ratories for Infectious Disease.)
peripheral blood without demonstrable organisms 
in
tissue. A standard workup for myocardial disease, includ-
Fecal Examination ● Fecal oocysts can be demonstrated
ing chest radiographs, electrocardiogram, electrolytes,
using flotation techniques with various solutions with
and echocardiography (if available), is indicated Alterna-
specific gravities from 1.15 to 1.18. Sugar solution cen-
tively, T. cruzi amastigotes can be demonstrated in tissues.
trifugation is probably the optimal technique. Oocysts of
PCR can be used to amplify organism DNA.
T gondii are 10 to 12 μm in diameter, approximately one-
eighth the size of Toxocara cati eggs. Focusing on only one
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR SELECT
plane of the microscope slide or coverslip can result in
oocysts being overlooked. The oocysts cannot be distin-
RICKETTSIAL INFECTIONS
guished grossly from Hammondia hammondi or Besnoitia
Canine Granulocytotropic Anaplasmosis
darlingi (nonpathogenic coccidians infecting cats). Sponu-
(Anaplasma phagocytophilum)
lated oocysts isolated from feces can be inoculated into
mice or tissue cultures for definitive identification.
Indications ● Dogs living in Ixodes spp. endemic areas
Because oocyst shedding has rarely been documented in
cats with subfatal, clinical toxoplasmosis, the diagnostic
antibodies against Anaplasma phagocytophilum (previously
usefulness of fecal examination is limited. Cats with clini-
Ehrlichia equi or for A. phagocytophilum DNA in blood by
cal signs referable to T gondii should undergo fecal evalu-
PCR assay.63,6.72 The role this organism plays in chronic
ation, however, because of potential zoonotic risk.
disease syndromes in dogs is unknown.
Interpretation ● Exposure to T gondi is suggested by
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Antibodies
HSO io rouny snoanbe 'unuas ul saipoqnue supuy
against A. phagocytophilum in senum can be measured
Recent or active toxoplasmosis is suggested by fnding an
by IFA or commercially available ELISA (SNAP 4Dx, Table
IgM titer greater than 1 : 64 or a fourfold or greater increase
15-1, IDEXX Corporation, Westbrook, ME). The antibod-
in IgG titer, or documenting local antibody production in
ies have only variable cross-reactivity with other Anaplasma
aqueous humor or CSF Because T gondi-specific anti-
spp. Ehrlichia spp., or Neoricketsia spp. and so positive test
bodies can also be detected in the serum, CsF and
results likely indicate exposure to A. phagocytophilum.
 aqueous humor of healthy, infected animals, one cannot
Infected dogs can be seronegative when clinical signs of
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
329
disease firstoccur and can be immediately assessed by PCR
 o siae s g 'so i Ai u shs ae5
assay or have repeat serology performed in approximately
-osse Auoos isou si jeun dnog siu ul siueio a
2 weeks to evaluate for seroconversion. Altermately, both
ated with clinical illness. Serologic testing or PCR assay
assays can be performed at the same time. Antibiotic
for E. canis is indicated for dogs from endemic areas or
therapy can lead to falsely negative PCR assay results. A.
phagocytophilum DNA and antibodies can be detected in
anemia, leukopenia, hyperglobulinemia, proteinuria,
both healthy and clinically ill dogs, and so positive test 
polyarthritis, fever, uveitis, lymphadenomegaly, hepato-
results do not document clinical illness. Morulae are only
splenomegaly, or inflammatory CNS disease, particularly
rarely documented cytologically in clinical specimens.
if the animal has a history of exposure to Rhipicephalus
ticks.
Feline Granulocytotropic Anaplasmosis
(Anaplasma phagocytophilum)
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
antibodies against E. canis are detected in senum by IFA
Indications · Cats living in Ixodes spp. endemic areas
or ELISA; they do not cross-react with Rickettsia rickettsii
with fever, mild thrombocytopenia or clinical evidence of
 or Anaplasma platys (see Canine Thrombocytotropic Ana-
polyarthritis should be evaluated for A. phagocytophilum
plasmosis later). Serologic cross-reactivity between 
E.
DNA in blood by PCR assay.&50 Antibodies can be detected
canis antibodies and those against A. phagocytophilum
in serum by IFA, but a standardized test is not available.
(previously Ehrlichia equi; see Canine Granulocytotropic
(See Appendix I: Select Laboratories for Infectious
Anaplasmosis earlier), E. chaffeensis, E. ewingii (see Canine
Disease.)
Granulocytotropic Ehrlichiosis earlier), and Neorickettsia
risticii (previously E. ristici) is variable. Multiple serologic
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · DNA of A.
tests are needed to exclude all of the Ehrlichia spp., Ana-
phagocytophilum has been amplified from several cats with
pasma spp., and Neoricketsia spp. from the differential
clinical signs of anaplasmosis.50 Some of the cats were
list Thus PCR assays are often combined with serologic
seronegative when first assayed but had seroconverted
tests. In addition, PCR assay results may be positive before
when assayed at a later date. Whether the point-of-care
seroconversion in some dogs.
assay used to detect A. phagocytophilum antibodies in
In experimentally infected dogs, antibodies against 
canine serum is valid for use with cat serum is unknown.
E. canis can be detected as early as 7 days and are almost
Antibiotic therapy can lead to falsely negative PCR assay
always present by 28 days after inoculation. Antibody
results. A. phagocytophilum DNA and antibodies can be
titers continue to increase for weeks to months after
detected in both healthy and clinically ill cats, and so
inoculation in untreated, experimentally infected dogs.
positive test results do not document clinical illness.
E. canis titers of less than l:80 are suspect and should
Morulae are only rarely documented cytologically in clin-
be rechecked in approximately 14 to 21 days: a titer of
ical specimens. Untreated healthy cats can be PCR posi-
1:80 or higher is diagnostic Initial positive results in a
tive for weeks after tick exposure.
recently marketed point-of-care test occur at approxi-
mately 1:l00. Positive titers revert to negative 3 to 9
Canine Granulocytotropic Ehrlichiosis
months after resolution of infection; persistence of titers
for greater than or equal to 9 months suggests a carrier
(Ehrlichia ewingii)
state. However, positive antibody titers have been
Indications · Dogs living in the Midwest United States
detected for months after apparently successful therapy
with evidence of fever or clinical evidence of polyarthri-
in some naturally infected dogs. Clinically ill, seroposi-
tis should be evaluated for Ehrlichia ewingi DNA in
tive dogs should be treated a minimum of 28 days and
blood by PCR assay5766 Specific antibodies can be
until
 clinical   and   laboratory  abnormalities  have
detected in senum, but a standardized test is not cur-
resolved.6 Whether to treat healthy, seropositive dogs is
rently available.68
controversial; the issues involved in this decision were
recently reviewed.40.66
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation ● There is vari-
The clinician can make a defnitive diagnosis of E.
able cross-reactivity between E. canis antigens and E.
canis infection by demonstrating morulae (i.e., clusters of
wingii antigens, and so serologic tests for E. canis will not
the organism) in mononuclear cells, culture, or PCR
always be positive when the infecting agent is E. ewingi.
assay. Morulae are rarely found on routine blood smear
PCR assays that amplify the DNA of E. ewingii are avail-
sq sop aun ssalun Aoo uoendse moeu auoq 10
able and should be performed on blood from dogs with
shnsai aesse ad pue Aaono passanddnsounuu uaan
suspected acute infection. Antibiotic therapy can lead to
ea uaaq ay ieul sop ul aaneaau Aiasiey aq ue
falsely negative PCR assay results. Healthy dogs can be
Ehrlichia spp. can be isolated by tissue culture of heparin-
PCR positive for E. ewingii DNA in blood.
ized infected canine blood or bone marrow aspiration
samples, but culture is of limited availability, expensive,
and of low yield. Ehrlichia spp. can be detected in whole
Canine Monocytotropic Ehrlichiosis
(Ehrlichia canis, E. chaffeensis,
blood by PCR,65 which has potential benefit for use in
Neorickettsia risticin)
monitoring treatment. (See Appendix I: Select Laborato-
ries for Infectious Disease) The Consensus Statement on
Common Indications · Ehrlichia canis, E. chaffeensis,
Ehrlichial Disease of Small Animals from the Infectious
 and Neoricketsia risticii all infect monocytes of dogs and
Disease Study Group of the American College of Veteri-
can be associated with clinical illness." Based on PCR
nary Internal Medicine (ACVIM)° states the following:
330
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
[f PCR is used to monitor treatment, the PCR assay should
Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever
be repeated after antimicrobial therapy has been discontin-
ued for 2 weeks. [f PCR results are positive an additional 4
(Rickettsia rickettsii)
weeks of treatment should be given with the PCR assay
Occasional Indications · Serologic testing for Rickettsia
repeated after antimicrobial therapy has been discontinued
for 2 weeks. [f PCR results are positive after 2 treatment
rickettsi antibodies (Rocky Mountain spotted fever
cycles, use of an alternate antiehrlichial drug should be con-
im io seare prapua woy shop ioy paieipui sl (lasa]
sidered. [f PCR results are negative the test should be
an appropriate travel history and acute onset of fever,
 rechecked in 2 months; if still negative therapeutic elimina-
lymphadenomegaly, petechiae, neurologic signs, stiff gait,
tion is likely. However, the organism may be sequestered in
peripheral edema, dyspnea, or scleral congestion. History
Other tissues like the spleen.
of tick exposure is inconsistent. Exposed dogs either
develop acute disease with approximately a 14-day clini-
cal course or are subclinically infected. The primary tick
Feline Monocytotropic Ehrlichiosis
vectors are active from spring to fall in most ofthe United
(Ehrlichia spp.)
 States; therefore RMSF should only be considered a prin-
cipal differential diagnosis for clinically ill dogs during
Rare  Indications · Cats  witht
thrombocytopenia,
this time span. The majority of cases are diagnosed in
anemia, leukopenia, hyperglobulinemia, proteinuria,
 Southeastern states.
polyarthritis, fever, or lymphadenomegaly should be
evaluated for Ehrlichia spp. DNA in blood by PCR assay
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Antibodies
if no other obvious cause exists.2.1.6 To date, E. canis is
against R. rickettsi in canine serum can be measured by
the monocytotropic strain amplified from naturally
IFA, ELISA, and LA. ELISA or IFA can detect IgM and IgG
exposed cats. Antibodies can be detected in serum by
 antibodies against RMSF. LA is not antibody class-specific.
IFA, but a standardized test is not available. (See Appen-
Aiias se lam se 'siai apoe asod ioy so
dix I: Select Laboratories for Infectious Disease; ProtaTek
and sensitivity, vary by assay.3 Antibodies against the
Reference Laboratories.)
nonpathogenic spotted fever group Rickettsia (R. belli, R.
montana, R. rhipicephali) cross-react with R. rickettsi anti-
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation • While serum
gens. In dogs with clinical illness because of RMSF, IgM
antibodies against E. canis have been detected in the
antibody titers are generally positive. Because IgM has
serum of some cats, a number of cats with E. canis DNA
short duration in serum, false-negative results may occur
 amplified from blood were seronegative.16? Thus while
with IgM testing. False-positive results are most common
IFA testing is available for E. canis antibodies in feline
in the IgM ELISA. Positive IgG titers are detectable 20 to
serum, it should be combined with PCR assay Antibodies
25 days after infection. Serum samples with IgG titers
against E.canis can be detected in serum from healthy cats
greater than or equal to l:64 are generally considered
and therefore cannot be used alone to make a definitive
positive If IgG or IgM antibodies are not detected in a
diagnosis of ehrlichiosis.76 A tentative diagnosis of feline
patient with clinical and laboratory evidence of RMSF, a
ehrlichiosis is based on the combination of clinical sigmns,
convalescent IgG titer 2 to 3 weeks later is recommended.
positive serologic or PCR assay results, exclusion of other
Timing of the second titer is not critical because IgG anti-
known causes, and response to tetracyclines.
body titers do not decrease for at least 3 to 5 months after
infection. Documentation of seroconversion or a fourfold
Canine Thrombocytotropic
increase in IgG titer is consistent with recent infection.
Anaplasmosis (Anaplasma platys)
A presumptive diagnosis of canine RMSF can be
based on the combination of appropriate clinical, his-
Occasional Indications ● Testing for Anaplasma platys
toric, and clinicopathologic evidence of disease; serologic
 infection is indicated for dogs from endemic areas or with
test results; exclusion of other causes of the clinical abnor-
appropriate travel history and thrombocytopenia or
malities; and response to anti-rickettsial drugs. Documen-
endogenous uveitis. 57,66
tation of seroconversion or an increasing titer 2 to 3 weeks
after initial serologic testing suggests recent infection.
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
Diagnostic criteria used in one recent study included a
IgG antibodies against A. platys are detected in serum by
fourfold rise in antibody titer or a single titer of greater
IFA. Antibodies against A. platys react with A. phagocyto-
than or equal to l: 1024 if the initial titer was submitted
philum antigen used in a commercially available kit.1
1 week or more after initial onset of clinical abnormali-
Experimentally infected dogs become antibody positive
ties.?? Positive serum antibody test results alone do not
13 to 19 days after infection.2 Infected dogs can be sero-
 prove RMSF because subclinical infection is common. In
negative when clinical signs of disease first occur and can
addition, positive serum antibody tests do not document
be immediately assessed by PCR assay or have repeat
infection by R. rickettsii because infection with nonpatho-
 Bupeai-sson annpui suase dnois iaaay panods yiuaa
for seroconversion. Alternately, both assays can be per-
antibodies.
formed at the same time Antibiotic therapy can lead to
 Demonstration of R. richettsii by inoculating affected
falsely negative PCR assay results. A. platys DNA and anti-
tissues or blood into susceptible laboratory animals
bodies can be detected in both healthy and clinically ill
or by documenting the organism in endothelial cells
dogs, and so positive test results do not document clinical
using direct fluorescent antibody staining leads to a defin-
illness. Morulae are only rarely documented cytologically
itive diagnosis of RMSF, but these techniques are not
in clinical specimens.
clinically practical. PCR can be used to document the
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
331
presence of rickettsial agents in blood, other fluids, or
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Determining
tissues and willikely be clinically useful in the future.
serum antibodies to feline or canine parvoviruses or coro-
DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR SELECT
results do not correlate with clinical disease. A point-of-
care assay for detection of canine parvovinus antibodies is
VIRAL INFECTIONS
available Vaccinated dogs seropositive in this assay prob-
Canine Distemper
ably do not need to be boosted.
Detecting fecal shedding of canine parvovinus viral
Rare Indications · Dogs with appropriate signs of CNS
iee s pue is un saoe aa ue asas
hemagglutination, fecal LA, or ELISA can be used to
canine distemper virus.
confirm current infection. In-office ELISA for canine par-
vovirus in feces seems to accurately detect fecal shedding
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · The clinician
of parvovirus in acute cases (see Chapter 9). The specifc-
can measure CSF and serum IgG antibodies against canine
ity of the assays is good, but they cannot differentiate
distemper virus by serum virus neutralization, IFA, or
vaccine strains of parvovinus and vinulent strains. False-
ELISA. ELISA can be used to measure serum IgM antibod-
negative reactions can occur. These assays also detect
ies. CSF antibodies to distemper virus are increased in
feline parvovinus.' Vinus isolation, electron microscopy, or
se Aleogoioqiedoistu pasougeip Auanbasqns saop aos
molecular assays can be used to document coronavinuses
having distemper encephalitis. False-positive results can
in feces, but results do not correlate with the presence of
Occur in CSF samples contaminated with blood. Concur-
illness.
rent measurement of serum antibody concentrations can
 be helpful; if CSF concentrations are greater than serum
Feline Infectious Peritonitis (FIP)
concentrations, the antibody in CSF had to be produced
locally and suggests CNS distemper. Detection of serum
Rare Indications · FIP is an appropriate differential
IgG antibodies is of minimal diagnostic value because a
diagnosis in cats with fever; uveitis; retinal hemorrhage;
positive titer could develop secondary to vaccination or
nonseptic abdominal or pleural exudates or modified
 previous exposure. A fourfold increase in serum IgG titer 
transudates; anemia; hyperglobulinemia:; and renal,
Over a 3- to 4-week period suggests recent infection. Detec-
hepatic, or neurologic abnormalities. Results of currently
tion of circulating IgM antibodies is consistent with recent 
available serum or blood tests cannot be used alone to
infection but not clinical disease. A point-of-care assay for
definitively diagnose FIP.
detection of canine distemper antibodies is available. Vac-
op Aiqeqoid Aesse siul u aailisodouas aie jeul saop pateun
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Circulating
not need to be boosted. A presumptive diagnosis of dis-
antibodies against coronavinuses can be detected by IFA
temper encephalitis can be made with increased CSF
and ELISA in feline serum. Antibody to coronavirus indi-
protein and leukocytes (lymphocytes predominating)
cates prior exposure to either enteric coronaviruses or
plus a positive CSF antibody titer in a sample not contami-
FIP-inducing coronaviruses. A positive titer does not diag-
nated with peripheral blood. Definitive diagnosis of
canine distemper infection requires demonstration of
taining bovine serum occasionally cause false-positive
viral inclusions by cytologic examination (see Figure
results. Cats with FIP can rarely have negative results
15-3A and B), direct fluorescent antibody staining of
because of rapidly progressive disease with a delayed rise
cytologic or histopathologic specimens, histopathologic
in titer, disappearance of antibody in terminal stages of
evaluation, or reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) docu-
the disease, or immune complex formation. A positive
mentation of distemper viral RNA in peripheral blood,
leo e iaqlaum inipad jou saop iainl Apoqlue smuiaeuoio
CSF or conjunctival scrapings. (Table 15-1; See Appendix
will ever develop FIP.
I: Select Laboratories for Infectious Disease.) Positive
 Titer magnitude cannot distinguish between exposure
RT-PCR test results can be induced by modifed live vac-
 to enteric coronavinuses or FIP-inducing strains. Rarely.
cination. Viral inclusions can rarely be found in erythro-
 positive titers can be induced by vaccination for corona-
cytes, leukocytes, and leukocyte precursors of infected
virus. Kittens can be seropositive because of colostrum-
dogs. Inclusions are generally present for only 2 to 9 days
derived antibodies until 9 weeks of age. If adult cats in
after infection and therefore often are not present when
the environment infect kittens, antibodies can be detected
clinical signs occur. Inclusions may be easier to fnd in
again 8 to 14 weeks later.
smears made from buffy coats or bone marrow aspirates
Current coronavinus infections can be detected by
than those made from peripheral blood. Viral particles
fecal virus isolation, electron microscopy of feces, or
can be detected by immunofluorescence in cells from the
RT-PCR of feces. However, positive test results do not
tonsils, respiratory tree, urinary tract, conjunctival scrap-
indicate FIP because antibody-positive, healthy cats can
 ings, and CSF for 5 to 2l days after infection.
pass coronaviruses. Definitive diagnosis of FIP requires
histopathologic evaluation of tissues. Lesions visible by
light microscopy are generally pathognomonic, but
Enteric Viruses
immunohistochemistry can be used to confrm coronavi-
Indications · Viral enteritis induced by parvoviruses,
rus particles. RT-PCR can amplify coronavirus RNA from
coronaviruses, and other viruses should be suspected in
effusions, tissues, and blood and usually correlates with
the presence of FIP. Amplifcation of coronavirus by PCR
neutropenia is present (i.e., parvovinuses).
in effusions and tissues predicts FIP, but detection in
332
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
blood does not.15.37 Hyperproteinemia and polyclonal
neoplastic, reproductive, immunologic or hematologic
gammopathy (detected by electrophoresis; see Chapter
disease, as well as in clinically normal cats exposed to
12) can occur, particularly in the noneffusive form.
FeLV-positive cats.53
Monoclonal gammopathy rarely occurs. Classic nonsep-
tic pyogranulomatous exudate or modified transudate
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Viral antigen
  n      
(p27) is detected by IFA in neutrophils and platelets
Chapter l0) is commonly used for presumptive diagno-
from blood or bone marrow, or in blood, plasma,
sis. Electrophoresis can also be performed on body fluids.
senum, saliva, or tears by ELISA. Nucleic amplification
A gamma globulin fraction greater than or equal to 32%
assays can also be used to assess the stage of infec-
is highly suggestive of FIP, whereas an albumin:globulin
tion.41.78 When evaluating for antigen, testing of serum
ratio in body fluid greater than 0.8l probably rules out
 or blood gives the best results; tears and saliva should
FIP73 In another study an albumin:globulin ratio of
not be tested. Several point-of-care ELISA tests are avail-
0.5 had a positive predictive value of 89% and an
able in the United States. Other assays are also available
albumin:globulin ratio of 1.0 had a negative predictive
in other countries.32 Antibody titers to FeLV envelope
value of 91%.38
antigens (neutralizing antibody) and against vinus-
transformed tumor cells (feline oncogenic cell mem-
Feline Immunodeficiency Virus (FIV)
brane antigen, or FOCMA, antibody) are available in
 some laboratories, but the prognostic signifcance of the
Common Indications · Cats with chronic weight loss,
results is currently unknown; therefore the tests are not
fever, rhinitis, conjunctivitis, gingivitis, dermatitis, diar-
used clinically.
rhea, uveitis, recurrent abscessation, clinical toxoplasmo-
FeLV infection has four major outcomes.53 Cats with
sis, any chronic infectious disease, chronic renal failure.
inappropriate immune responses develop progressive
10
lymphadenomegaly should be evaluated for FIV
infection and usually develop FeLV-associated diseases.
infection.
Cats with regressive infection can be transiently positive
for p27 antigen in blood or serum but ultimately become
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · gG antibod-
negative. Abortive exposure occurs in cats with good
ies are detected in serum by ELISA, IFA, and Western blot
immune responses and infection never occurs. Rarely.
focal infection of tissues such as the spleen, lymph nodes,
available depending on the country.3" Western blot
small intestine, or mammary glands can occur. Cats with
immunoassay is performed in some commercial labora-
regressive infection, abortive exposure, or focal infection
tories. In the United States, one in-office ELISA is avail-
rarely become ill.
able to detect FIV antibodies and feline leukemia virus
 ELISA test results generally become positive within
(FeLV) antigen combined. This assay is available with and
30 days of exposure to FeLV and can revert to negative in
without Diroflaria immitis antigen assay. Seroconversion
cats that develop regressive infection. Cats suspected to
occurs 5 to 9 weeks after inoculation in experimentally
have regressive infection can be isolated from other cats
infected cats. Seropositive cats are probably infected with
 and retested by ELISA in several weeks or be tested by IFA
FIV for life False-positive reactions can occur in the ELISA
or PCR assay. Positive IFA test results prove the bone
but are thought to be rare. Positive ELISA results should
marrow has been infected and has 99% correlation with
be confrmed via Western blot immunoassay or IFA, par-
virus isolation. These cats generally develop progressive
ticularly in healthy cats unlikely to have been exposed to
infection. False-negative IFA reactions may occur when
FIV. Detection of circulating antibodies only confirms
leukopenia or thrombocytopenia prevents evaluation of
infection, not clinical illness. Kittens can have detectable
an adequate number of cells. False-positive reactions
colostrum-derived antibodies until 12 to 14 weeks.
rarely occur from nonspecific staining of eosinophils.
Because many clinical syndromes associated with FIV
A positive IFA indicates that the cat is viremic and
infection are caused by opportunistic infections, further
contagious.
diagnostic procedures may determine treatable causes.
Virtually all IFA-positive cats are ELISA-positive.
For example, many FIV-seropositive cats with endogenous
Finding an IFA-positive but ELISA-negative cat suggests
uveitis are co-infected by T gondii.
technique-related artifact A negative ELISA result is
Virus isolation and RT-PCR are available in some
approximately 100% correlated with negative IFA and an
laboratories and can be used to confirm infection. A
inability to isolate FeLV. Cats that are ELISA-positive but
recently marketed FIV vaccine induces serum antibodies
IFA-negative are called discordant. Discordant results are
that are indistinguishable from antibodies induced by
usually caused by false-positive ELISA results, false-
negative IFA results, or early stages of regressive infections.
antibody tests.54 The ability of virus isolation or RT-PCR
Use of PCR assays to detect viral RNA or cell-associated
to accurately differentiate naturally exposed and vacci-
DNA (provinus) can be performed on blood, bone
nated cats is currently unknown and varies between
marrow, or tissues and be used to evaluate cases with
laboratories.21
discordant ELISA and IFA results.
Some cats with focal infection localized to bone
Feline Leukemia Virus (FeLV)
marrow have positive bone marrow IFA results. The most
reliable means of identifying focal FeLV infections is vinus
Common Indications ● Because of diverse manifesta-
isolation or PCR assay. A cat with focal infection may
tions of FeLV infection, testing is indicated in all clinically
become viremic after extreme stress or administration of
ill cats, especially those with evidence of infectious.
glucocorticoids.
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
333
DIAGNOSIS OF DIROFILARIASIS
in dogs or cats with clinical signs, laboratory abnormali-
ties, or thoracic radiographic changes consistent with
{DIROFILARIA IMMITIS]
dirofilariasis. The test can also be used to assess efficacy
Cytology (Knott's Test or Filter Test)
Of adulticide treatment.
Common Indications · Cytologic evaluation for micro-
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · ELISA can
filaria is indicated in dogs with signs consistent with
detect circulating heartworm antigen in serum; several
heartworm disease [right-sided heart disease, coughing.
kits are commercially available. There is greater sensitivity
dyspnea, eosinophilia, polyclonal hyperglobulinemia.
when compared with microfilaria detection. In dogs, D.
protein-losing nephropathy [PLN]). in dogs about to
immitis antigen tests may be positive as early as 5 to 6
begin prophylactic therapy (with diethylcarbamazine,
months and are usually positive 6 to 7 months after infec-
ivermectin, or milbemycin), and rarely in cats with signs
tion. False-negative results usually occur in early stages of
consistent with heartworm disease [i.e., dyspnea, cardio-
ael suonau xas-aus un ino Ae pue uoau
megaly, unexplained vomiting).
only) or in dogs or cats with low worm burdens (<3 to
5 worms). Retesting in 2 to 3 months should be per-
Analysis, Artifacts, and Interpretation · Cytologic
formed to detect dogs in which results were negative in
testing for Diroflaria immitis is very specific (microfilaria
early stages of infection. After successful adulticide treat-
morphology differentiates D. immitis microfilaria from
ment, test results become negative in approximately 12
those of Dipetalonema reconditum). quick, and inexpen-
weeks. In experimental infections, cats testing positive did
sive; all concentration techniques (Knott's and filter tests)
so about & months after infection. However, single-sex or
are much more sensitive than examination of fresh blood
low worm burden infections can lead to false-negative
smears and are reasonably sensitive in dogs that have not
results. Therefore a positive antigen test result is specific
been treated with filaricidal drugs. Up to 40% of dogs
for infection, but a negative result does not rule out diro-
have spontaneous occult diroflariasis and must be diag-
filariasis. In cats, the combination of serum antigen test
nosed by serologic testing and radiographic examination.
results with serum antibody test results is more sensitive
All cytology tests have poor sensitivity in cats. Thus.
than performing either test alone (see Heartworm Anti-
microflaria techniques should no longer be used as
body Titer, next).74
stand-alone diagnostic tests and should only be used con-
concurrently with antigen tests.*t A positive test result
Heartworm Antibody Titer (Feline)
diagnoses heartworm disease, except in juveniles less than
4 months of age that could have received the microflaria
Rare Indications ● A heartworm antibody titer should
by transplacental transfer.
be obtained in cats with coughing, unexplained vomiting.
syncope, or radiographic evidence of heartworm disease.
Heartworm Adult Antigen Titer
Analysis,
Artifacts, and Interpretation · Several
Common Indications ·A heartworm antigen titer
ELISAs detect antibodies to D. immitis in feline sera. The
should be included in annual screening of dogs to evalu-
assays are more sensitive than microfilaria demonstration
ate for exposure to D. immitis, and should be performed
techniques. The assays are very specifc; no cross-reactivity
exists with D. reconditum. The positive predictive value for
heartworm disease is less than l00%. however, because
circulating antibodies can be present in cats that have
*www.heartwormsociety.org/veteninary-resources/canine-
ceared the infection naturally. False-negative antibody
guidelines.htm]#3
test results also occur; therefore senum antibody and
twww.heartwomsociety.org/veterinary-resources/
antigen tests should be performed in concert in cats with
feline-guidelines.htm]#Diagnostic%20Testing
suspected dirofilariasis.74
TABLE 15-1.SELECTDIAGNOSTIC TESTS FORUSEIN THE VETERINARYPRACTICE
PRODUCT
COMPANY
LOCATION
HEARTWORM TESTS
Witness FHw feline heartworm 
Synbiotics Corporation 
San Diego, CA
antibody test
 ASSURE/FH feline heartworm
Synbiotics Corporation 
San Diego, CA
antibody test
Solo Step FH test cassettes
Heska Corporation
Loveland, CO
heartworm antibody test
Witness Hw heartworm antigen test
Synbiotics Corporation
San Diego, CA
DiroCHEK Hw heartworm antigen
Synbiotics Corporation 
San Diego, CA
test
Continued
334
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 15-1. SELECT DIAGNOSTIC TESTS FOR USE IN THE VETERINARY PRACTICE-CONT'D
PRODUCT
COMPANY
LOCATION
 SNAP heartworm antigen test
IDEXX Corporation
Westbrook,ME
 PetChek heartworm PF antigen test
IDEXX Corporation 
Westbrook, ME
 Solo Step CH test cassettes
Heska Corporation
Loveland, CO
 heartworm antigen test
 Solo Step CH test strips heartworm 
Heska Corporation
Loveland, CO
antigen test
FeLV/FIV TESTS
 SNAP FIV antibody/FeLV antigen
IDEXX Corporation
Westbrook, ME
combo
 SNAP FeLV antigen test 
IDEXX Corporation
Westbrook, ME
ASSURE/FeLV feline leukemia virus
Synbiotics Corporation
 San Diego, CA 
antigen test 
 ViraCHEK/FeLV feline leukemia virus 
 Synbiotics Corporation
San Dego, CA
antigen test
Witness FeLV feline leukemia virus
Synbiotics Corporation
San Diego, CA
antigen test
 DISTEMPER VIRUS/PARVOVIRUS TESTS
TiterCHEK CDV/CPV
Synbiotics Corporation
San Diego, CA
 ASSURE/Parvo canine parvovirus
Synbiotics Corporation
San Diego, CA
antigen test
 Witness CPV canine parvovirus
Synbiotics Corporation
San Diego, CA
antigen test 
SNAP Parvo antigen test
IDEXX Corporation
Westbrook, ME
TiterCHEK CDV/CPV
Synbiotics Corporation 
San Diego, CA
OTHER TESTS
SNAP 3Dx and SNAP 4Dx
IDEXX Laboratories
WWestbrook, ME
Toxotest-MT
Tanabe USA, Inc.
San Diego, CA
TPM-Test (for Toxoplasmosis)
Wampole Laboratories
Princeton, NJ
 CALAS Cryptococcal Antigen Latex
 Meridian BioScience Inc.
Cincinnati, OH 
Agglutination test 
D-Tech CB (for Brucellosis)
Synbiotics Corporation
San Dego, CA
 SPECIMEN HANDLING MATERIALS
 DTM Plate
Hardy Diagnostics
Santa Maria, CA
Derm Duet
Bacti-Lab
 Mountain View, CA
BDL Culture Swab, Collection and 
 Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems
 Franklin Lakes, NJ
Transport System
BBL CultureSwab Plus
Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems
 Franklin Lakes, NJ
Trypticase Soy Broth
Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems
Franklin Lakes, NJ
References and Suggested Readings
6. Birkenheuer Al. Corea MT, Levy MG, Breitschwerdt EB: Geo-
gaphic distribution of babesiosis among dogs in the llnited
1. Abd-Eldaim M, Beall M. Kennedy M: Detection of feline
States and association with dog bites: 150 cases (2000-
panleukopenia virus using a commercial ELISA for canine
2003). 1 Am Vet Med Assoc 227:942, 2005.
parvovinus. Vet Ther 10:El, 2009.
7. Birkenheuer AJ. Levy MG. Savary KC. et al: Babesia gibsoni
2.Addie DD, Jarrett O: A study of naturally occurring
infections in dogs from North Carolina. I Am Anim Hosp
feline coronavinus infections in kittens. Vet Rec 130:133.
Assoc 35:125, 1999.
1992.
8. Bjoersdorf A, Svendenius L, Owens [H, Massung RF: Feline
 3. Barr MC: FIV, FeLV, and FIPV: interpretation and misinterpre-
ganulocytic ehrlichiosis-a report of a new clinical entity
tation of serological test results. Semin Vet Med Surg {Small
and characterization of the new infectious agent. J Small
Anim) 11:144. 1996.
Anim Pract 40:20. 1999.
4. Barr SC: Amenican trypanosomiasis. [n Greene CE, editor:
9. Bouloy RP. Lappin MR, Holland CH, et al: Clinical ehrlichio-
Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, St. Louis. 2006.
sis in a cat. I Am Vet Med Assoc 204:1475. 1994.
Saunders Elseviel. p 676.
10. Bowman D, Little SE. Lorentzen L, et al: Prevalence and
5. Bartsch RC, Greene RT: Post-therapy antibody titers in dogs
geographicdistibutin f Diroflaria mmitis Borrelia burdor
with ehrlichiosis: follow-up study on 68 patients treated pri-
feri,Ehrlichia canis,and Anaplasma phagocyiophilumin dogsin
marily with tetracycline and/or doxycycline. J Vet Intern Med
the United States: results of a national clinic-based serologic
10:271, 1996.
survey. Vet Parasitol 160:138, 2009.
Chapter 15: Microbiology and Infectious Disease
335
ll. Breitschwert EB, Abrams-Ogg AC. Lappin MR, et al: Molecu-
30. Goodman RA. Breitschwerdt EB: Clinicopathological fnd-
lar evidence supporting Ehrlichia canis-like infection in cats.
ings in dogs seroreactive to Bartonella henselae antigens. Am
J Vet Intern Med 16:642, 2002.
I Vet Res 66:2060, 2005.
12. Breitschwerdt EB, Atkins CE, Brown TT, et al: Bartonella vinso-
31. Greene CE: Histoplasmosis. In Greene CE, editor: Infectious
nii subsp. berkhoffri and related members of the alpha subdivi-
diseases of the dog and cat. ed 3. St. Louis. 2006. Saunders
sion of the Proteobactenia in dogs with cardiac arrhythmias.
Esevier pp 577.
endocarditis, or myocarditis. J Clin Microbiol 37:3618, 1999.
32. Greene CE, DeBey B: Tularemia. [n Greene CE, editor: Infec-
13. Breitschwerdt EB. Maggi RG. Chomel BB. Lappin MR: Bar-
tious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3. St. Louis. 2006, Saunders
tonellosis: an emerging infectious disease of zoonotic impor-
Esevier p 446.
tance to animals and human beings. J Vet Emerg Crit Care
33. Greene CE. Marks MA. Lappin MR, et al: Comparison of latex
{San Antonio) 20:8, 2010.
agglutination, indirect immunofluorescent antibody. and
14. Brunt I. Guptill L, Kordick DL, et al: Association of Feline
enzyme immunoassay methods for serodiagnosis of Rocky
 Practitioners 2006 Panel report on diagnosis, treatment, and
Mountain spotted fever in dogs. Am J Vet Res 54:20, 1993.
prevention of Barionella spp. infections.} Feline Med Surg
34. Greene RT: Coccidioidomycosis. [n Greene CE, editor: Infec-
8:213, 2006.
tious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3, St. Louis, 2006. Saunders 
15. Can-Sahna K, Soydal Ataseven V, Pinar D, Oquzo lu TC: The
Elsevier p 598.
detection of feline coronaviruses in blood samples from cats
35. Greene RT, Troy GC: Coccidioidomycosis in 48 cats: a
by mRNA RT-PCR.J Feline Med Surg 9:369, 2007.
retrospective study (1984-1993). } Vet Intern Med 9:86.
16. Carmichael LE, Shin SI: Canine brucellosis: a diagnostician's
1995.
dilemma. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) 1l:16l. 1996.
36. Greenlee J. Alt DP, Bolin CA, et al: Experimental canine
17. Carret C, Walas F Carcy B. et al: Babesia canis canis, Babesia
leptospirosis caused by Lepiospira interrogans serovars pomona
canis vogeli Babesia canis rossi: differentiation of the three
and bratislava. Am / Vet Res 2005;66:1816.
wsjydrowkjod yaual juawsery uogsynsal e kq sapadsqns
37. Gunn-Moore DA, Gnuffydd-Jones TH, Harbour DA: Detec-
analysis on amplifed small subunit ibosomal RNA genes.
tion of feline coronavinuses by culture and reverse
J Eukaryot Microbiol 46:298. 1999.
tanscriptase-polymerase chain reaction of blood samples
18. Chandler [C. Lappin MR: Mycoplasmal respiratory infections
fom healthy cats and cats with clinical feline infectious peri-
in small animals: 17 cases (1988-1999). J Am Anim Hosp
tonitis. Vet Microbiol 62:193, 1998.
Assoc 38:111, 2002.
38. Hartmann K. Binder C, Hirschberger J. et al: Comparison of
19. Chandrashekar R, Mainville CA, Beall MJ, et al: Performance
different tests to diagnose feline infectious penitonitis. J Vet
 of a commercially available in-clinic ELISA for the detection
Intern Med 17:78l, 2003.
of antibodies against Anaplasma phagocyiophilum, Ehrlichia
39. Hartmann K. Griessmayr P, Schulz B, et al: Quality of differ-
canisand Borrelia burgdorferiand Diroflaria immitis antigen
ent in-clinic test systems for feline immunodeficiency virus
in dogs. Am J Vet Res 7l:1443, 2010.
and feline leukaemia virus infection. J Feline Med Surg 9:439.
 20. Chomel BB, Kasten RW, Floyd-Hawkins K, et al: Experimental
2007.
transmission of Bartonella henselae by the cat flea. J Clin
40. Hegarty BC, de Paiva Diniz PP. Bradley IM. et al: Clinical
Microbiol 34:1952, 1996.
 jelevance of annual screening using a commercial enzyme-
21.(
Crawford PC, Slater MR, Levy IK: Accuracy of polymerase
linked immunosorbent assay (SNAP 3Dx) for canine
chain reaction assays for diagnosis of feline immunodef-
ehrlichiosis. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 45:118, 2009.
ciency vinus infection in cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 226:1503.
41. Hofmann-Lehmann R. Cattori V. Tandon R. et al: How
2005.
 molecular methods change our views of FeLV infection and
 22. Dambach DM, Smith CA, Lewis RN, Van Winkle TI: Morpho-
vaccination. Vet Immunol Immunopathol 123:ll9, 2008.
logic. immunohistochemical. and ultrastructural character-
42. Jacobs GJ, Medleau L. Calvent C. Brown J: Cryptococcal infec-
ization of a distinctive renal lesion in dogs putatively
ton in cats: factors influencing treatment outcome. and
associated with Borrelia burgdorferi infection: 49 cases (1987-
results of sequential serum antigen titers in 35 cats. J Vet
1992]. Vet Pathol 34:85. 1997.
Intern Med 11:1. 1997.
23. Dowers KL, Hawley IR, Brewer MM, et al: Association of
43. Jensen WA. Fall MZ. Rooney J. et al: Rapid identifcation and
 Bartonella species. feline calicivinus, and feline herpesvinus 1
dfferentiation of Bartonella species using a single-step PCR
infection with gingivostomatitis in cats. J Feline Med Surg
assay. J Clin Microbiol 38:1717, 2000.
12:314, 2010.
44. Jones RL: Laboratory diagnosis of bactenial infections. [n
24. Dubey IP. Lappin MR: Toxoplasmosis and neosporosis. [n
Greene CE, editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3.
Greene CE. editor: Infectious diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3.
St. Louis. 2006, Saunders Elsevier. p 267.
St. Louis. 2006. Saunders Elsevier. pp 754.
45. Kano R. Fujino Y, Takamoto N, et al: PCR detection of the
25. Duncan AW. Maggi RG. Breitschwerdt EB: A combined
Cryptococcus neoformans CAPS9 gene from a biopsy specimen
approach for the enhanced detection and isolation of Barton-
fom a case of feline cryptococcosis. J Vet Diagn Invest 13:439.
ella species in dog blood samples: pre-ennichment liquid
2001.
culture followed by PCR and subculture onto agar plates.
46. Kaplan JE. Benson C. Holmes KK, et al: Guidelines for
I Microbiol Methods 69:273, 2007.
prevention and treatment of opportunistic infections in
26. Duncan C, Stephen C, Campbell I: Clinical characteristics
HIV-infected adults and adolescents. MMWR Recomm Rep
and predictors of mortality for Cryptococcus gatti infection in
58{RR-04}:1, 2009.
dogs and cats of southwestern Bnitish Columbia. Can Vet J
47. Kordick DL. Breitschwerdt EB: Relapsing bacteremia follow-
47:993. 2006.
ing blood transmission of Barionella henselae in cats. Am J Vet
27. Fatland B, Greene RT. Lappin MR: Clinical and serologic
Res 58:492. 1997.
findings in 52 cats with cryptococcosis. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 48. Lappin MR: Feline toxoplasmosis: interpretation of diag
209:1110, 1996.
nostic test results. Semin Vet Med Surg (Small Anim) ll:154.
28. French TW. Harvey [W: Serologic diagnosis of infectious
1996.
cyclic thrombocytopenia in dogs using an indirect fluores-
49. Lappin MR. Breitschwerdt E. Brewer M. et al: Prevalence of
cent antibody test. Am J Vet Res 44:2407, 1983.
Bartonella species DNA in the blood of cats with and without
29. Gasser AM, Birkenheuer AJ, Breitschwerdt EB: Canine Rocky
fever. J Feline Med Surg 1l:141, 2009.
Mountain spotted fever. a retrospective study of 30 cases.
50. Lappin MR. Breitschwerdt EB. Jensen WA. et al: Molecular
} Am Anim Hosp Assoc 37:41,200l.
and serological evidence of Anaplasma phagocytophilum
336
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
infection of cats in North America. J Am Vet Med Assoc
67. Nutter FB. Dubey IP. Levine IF et al: Seroprevalences of anti-
225:893. 2004.
bodies against Bartonella henselae and Toxoplasma gondi and
51. Lappin MR. Kordick DL. Breitschwerdt EB: Barionella spp.
fecal shedding of Cryptosporidium spp. Giardia spp. and Toxo-
antibodies and DNA in aqueous humor of cats. J Felinz Med
cara cati in feral and pet domestic cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
Surg 2:61. 2000.
225:1394, 2004.
 52. Legendre AM: Blastomycosis. [n Greene CE, editor: Infectious
68. OConnor TP, Saucier JM. Daniluk D, et al: Evaluation of
diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3. St. Louis. 2006. Saunders
peptide- and recombinant protein-based assays for detection
Elsevier. p 569.
of anti-Ehrlichia ewingii antibodies in experimentally and
 53. Levy I. Crawford C, Hartmann K, et al: 2008 American Asso-
naturally infected dogs. Am J Vet Res 7l:1195. 2010.
ciation of Feline Practitioners' feline retrovinus management
69. Peavy GM, Holland CH, Dutta SK, et al: Suspected ehrlichial
guidelines.JFeline Med Surg 10:300,2008.
infection in five cats from a household. J Am Vet Med Assoc
 54. Levy JK, Crawford PC. Slater MR: Effect of vaccination against 
210:231, 1997.
feline immunodeficiency virus on results of serologic testing
70. Pomrantz IS. Johnson LR, Nelson RW, Wisner ER: Compari-
in cats. I Am Vet Med Assoc 225:1558, 2004.
son of serologic evaluation via agar gel immunodiffusion
 55. Levy S. et al: lltility of an in-office C6 ELISA test kit for
 and fungal culture of tissue for diagnosis of nasal aspergil-
 determination of infection status of dogs naturally exposed
losis in dogs. I Am Vet Med Assoc 230:1319, 2007.
to Borrelia burgdorferi. Vet Ther 3:308, 2002.
71. Randolph IF, Moise NS. Scarlett [M, et al: Prevalence of myco-
56. Levy SA, O'Connor TP, Hanscom [L, et al: Quantitative mea-
plasmal and ureaplasmal recovery from tracheobronchial
surement of C6 antibody following antibiotic treatment of
 lavages and prevalence of mycoplasmal recovery from pha-
Borrelia burgdorferi antibody-positive nonclinical dogs. Clin
ryngeal swab specimens in dogs with or without pulmonary
Vaccine Immunol 15:1l5. 2008.
diseases. Am I Vet Res 54:387, 1993.
 57. Little SE: Ehrlichiosis and anaplasmosis in dogs and cats. Vet
72. Scorpio DG. Dumler IS. Barat NC, et al: Comparative strain
Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 40:1121, 2010.
analysis of Anaplasma phagocytophilum infection and clinical
 58. Littman MP Goldstein RE. Labato MA, et al: ACVIM small
outcomes in a canine model of granulocytic anaplasmosis.
 sp usas uis ss ee
Vector Borne Zoonotic Dis 1l:223, 2011.
nosis. treatment, and prevention. J Vet Intern Med 20:422.
73. Shelly SM, Scarlett-Kranz J. Blue IT: Protein electrophoresis
2006.
 On effusions from cats as a diagnostic test for feline infectious
 59. Maggi RG. Duncan AW. Breitschwerdt EB: Novel chemically
peritonitis. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 24:495, 1998.
modifed liquid medium that will support the growth of
 74. Snyder PS, Levy IK, Salute ME, et al: Performance of serologic
seven Bartonella species. J Clin Microbiol 43:2651, 2005.
tests used to detect heartwomm infection in cats. J Am Vet Med
60. Magnarelli L, Levy S. Koski R: Detection of antibodies to
Assoc 216:693, 2000.
Francisella fularensis in cats. Res Vet Sci 82:22, 2007.
 75. Spector D, Legendre AM. Wheat J, et al: Antigen and antibody
6l. Malik R. et al: Cryptococcosis. [n Greene CE, editor: Infectious
testing for the diagnosis of blastomycosis in dogs. J Vet Intern
diseases of the dog and cat, ed 3. St. Louis. 2006. Saunders
Med 22:839. 2008.
Elsevier. p 584.
76. Stubbs Cl. Holland CJ. Reif JS, et al: Peline ehrlichiosis: lit-
62. Matthews KG. Sharp NIH: Canine nasal aspergillosis/
erature review and serologic survey. Comp Cont Ed Pract Vet
penicilliosis. [n Greene CE. editor: Infectious diseases of
22:307. 2000.
the dog and cat. ed 3. St. Louis. 2006. Saunders Elsevier.
77. Sykes JE. Hartmann K. Lunn KF, et al: 20l0 ACVIM small
D 612.
 -da 'sisousep sisordsonda uo juaaneis snsuasuon (ewee
 63. Mazepa AW, Kidd LB, Young KM. Trepanier LA: Clinical pre-
demiology treatment, and prevention. I Vet Inien Med 25:1.
sentation of 26 Anaplasma phagocytophilum-seropositive dogs
2011.
residing in an endemic area. I Am Anim Hosp Assoc 46:405.
78. Torres AN. Mathiason CK. Hoover EA: Re-examination of
2010.
feline leukemia virus: host relationships using real-time PCR.
64. McAllister MM. Dubey IP. Lindsay DS. et al: Dogs are
Virology 332:272. 2005.
definitive hosts of Neospora caninum. Int J Parasitol 28:1473.
79. Wanke MM: Canine brucellosis. Anim Reprod Sci 82-83:195.
1998.
2004.
65. McBride W, Corstvet RE, Gaunt SD, et al: PCR detection of
 80. Ward MP, Glickman LT, Guptill LF: Prevalence of and risk
acute Ehrlichia canisinfection in dogs. J Vet Diagn Invest 8:441.
factors for leptospirosis among dogs in the llnited States and
1996.
Canada: 677 cases (1970-1998). /Am Vet Med Assoc 220:53.
 66. Neer TM. Breitschwerdt EB. Greene RT. Lappin MR: Consen-
2002.
 sus statement on ehrlichial disease of small animals from the
 81. Wardrop KJ. Reine N, Birkenheuer A, et al: Canine and feline
[nfectious Disease Study Group of the ACVIM. J Vet Intern.
blood donor screening for infectious disease. J Vet Intern Med
Med 16:309, 2002.
19:135, 2005.
or Neoplastic Masses
Harold Tvedten
ROLE OF CYTOLOGY IN DLAGNOSIS
tumor cells into normal tissue, and this is seldom docu-
mented with cytology. Although cytology gives a defini-
Cytologic evaluation of most lesions has become a very
tive diagnosis in many cases (e.g. infectious diseases.
common part of diagnosis. Minimal equipment is needed,
 o  '  n is
making cytology possible in any practice A nearly imme-
gives only a general diagnosis in other cases [eg. epithe
diate cytologic conclusion eliminates waiting one or more
lial mass with prominent cytologic evidence of malig
days for a histologic diagnosis. Cytologic diagnosis gives
nancy). Most neoplasms require histologic evaluation for
a cellular or morphologic interpretation to abnormal
a definitive diagnosis and best estimate of malignancy.
structures identified by ultrasound or other diagnostic
Radical action (e.g., euthanasia) should await confrmed
imaging. Fine-needle aspirates are minimally invasive and
diagnosis.
minimally stressful for patients. Cytology may save the
Of 147 skin tumors, only 105 (71%) cytologic diag-
expense of anesthesia and surgery. This chapter discusses
noses agreed with histologic diagnoses.7 Exceptions exist
cytologic evaluation of masses. Cytologic analysis of fluid,
in which cytology is as diagnostic as (or more diagnostic
vaginal secretions, semen, urine sediment, respiratory
than) histology (eg. individual cell detail of leukemias
tract material, and specifc organs is described in other 
appropriate chapters.
correct in 60 of 64 round cell tumors and occasionally
Cytology can alter or eliminate surgery. Obviously
more diagnostic than histology.d Cytologic and histologic
benign masses, such as lipomas and epidermal inclusion
diagnoses agreed on all of the following tumors: 37 mast
cysts, need not be removed immediately. When they are
cell tumors, ll melanomas, 2 histiocytomas, and 1 cuta-
removed, a close resection [i.e., "shelling it out") is ade-
neous lymphoma.? Accurate cytologic diagnoses were also
quate, whereas wide excision is indicated for potentially
made for squamous cell carcinomas, lipomas, and metas-
malignant neoplasms. Any cytologic evidence of malig-
tasis to lymph nodes.
nancy (e.g. possible carcinoma or sarcoma) dictates a
search for metastasis before surgical removal of the
mass. Evidence of metastasis is a contraindication for
surgical removal. Diagnosis of a systemic neoplasm such
CYTOLOGIC TECHNIQUES
than surgery. Neoplasms that are too vascular or invasive
Sample Collection and Slide Preparation
Proper sample collection and slide preparation are abso-
histopathology. If a specifc tumor diagnosis is made,
lutely necessary and are a common limiting factor in
 specific treatment may be started early. Cytologic diag-
cytologic diagnosis. Cytologic diagnosis requires an ade-
nosis should be considered a tentative diagnosis
of
quate number of cells with good morphology that repre-
neoplasms and histologic diagnosis should be used for
sent the mass. A fine-needle aspirate (FNA) should be
more specifc classification of the type of neoplasm and
obtained from an area ofthe mass that reflects the primary
degree of malignancy. Some lesions, such as granulomas
problem. The site being sampled determines what mate-
and granulation tissue, often look malignant on
rial is collected (Figure 16-1). An impression smear from
cytology.
the surface over a mass often has only exudate, bacteria.
Cytology has limitations. Histopathology is usually
and necrotic or reactive cells that do not reflect the
more diagnostic and defnitive, because more informa-
primary mass. Similarly, a wash over the mass (eg., nasal
tion [i.e, tissue architecture) is available from a histologic
flush, bronchoalveolar lavage [BAL]) often collects only
section than from a variable number of cells on a cyto-
exudates and reactive cells on the surface. Pus (septic
logic smear. Malignancy of certain types of neoplasms
exudate) may be misleading and suggest the mass is an
(e.g.. canine mammary tumor, perianal gland tumor) is
abscess. FNA samples of deeper tissue are more likely to
best identified by histologic evidence of invasion of
be diagnostic.
337
338
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
Ueer
Sepie au
Necrolic surlace
HE
Top view
NC
Side view
Thin area
Thick area
Top view
FIGURE 16-1 Sampling sites from a mass. Different cell popu-
lations are retrieved from different sites. Cells from the prolif-
erative mass (hatched area) are representative and diagnostic.
Samples from the surface may be only necrotic material or
septic exudate. Immature-appearing hyperplastic epithelial
cells (HE) from the edge of an ucer may mimic a carcinoma.
Side view
Material from a necrotic center (NC) may resemble only debris.
Cells from the boundary (C) may be filbroblasts from the
capsule or a local inflammatory response. Mature fat or blood
Overlapping cells
Lysed cells
may be collected from adjacent normal tissue.
FIGURE 16-2 Cell morphology in three dimensions. The cel
on the upper right is in the thick part of a smear, so it fails to
spread out over a large surface area. It appears smaller (shorter
diameter] and darker from the top compared with the cell on
NOTE: Impression smears of ulcerated surfaces of masses
the upper left, which has soread out in a thin area of a smear,
are usually diagnostically worthless and only reflect second-
allowing proper evaluation. The epithelial cell (fower left) has
ary inflammation and infection.
a neutrophil dimpled into its surface. The neutrophil appears
to be in the cell when viewed from above. The partially lysed
cell (fower right) has a swollen, enlarged nucleus and nucleolus,
which may appear malignant instead of only damaged.
Epithelial cells at the edge of ulcers appear anaplastic,
because they are actively proliferating to cover the ulcer
(e.g.. corneal ulcers can cytologically resemble a squa-
mous cell carcinoma). Ulcerated surfaces often have
the drop into thin monolayer extensions (so-called "star-
secondary inflammatory and septic changes. Malignant-
fish design").
appearing cells from deep under a surface are much more
Cells in a thin area [monolayer of cells) spread out
likely to truly indicate that the mass is malignant. Soft
flatly and expose a large surface area to view {Figure
centers of a mass may be necrotic or hemorrhagic so a
16-2). If the smear is thick, cells are supported more
smaller frm mass or a more viable-appearing area at the
upright on the slide and have a smaller diameter. Cells in
edge of a mass may be more diagnostic.
thick areas are taller (thicker) and thus stain darker, often
 An FNA need obtain only one or a few small drops
too dark to see any detail. Protein-rich fluid, necrotic
of fluid to streak out similar to a blood smear. Too much
 debris, or ultrasound gel surrounding cells interferes with
aspiration can cause bleeding and hemodilution of the
diay Aeu uoeiedad ysenbs e 'shosia si piny il guuieis
sample FNA means using a 22- to 20-gauge needle.
to get a thin smear. A drop of fluid is placed between two
Vacuum may be applied to a 5- to 10-ml syringe after the
slides; while the drop spreads to its maximum diameter.
needle has penetrated the mass, and the vacuum should
the slides are slid apart while the two surfaces are in
be maintained while one passes the needle tip back and
contact with each other. This creates a smear on each
forth through the mass: then the vacuum should be
slide Lymphoid cells and cells from necrotic centers are
released and the needle withdrawn. Cells in the needle
very fragile and easily lysed beyond recognition. Use of a
then need to be gently placed on a smear and not shot
coverslip for a squash preparation or blood smear-type
out of the needle as a spray onto the slide. Small droplets
 smear often causes less damage to cells.
of fluid dry too quickly to streak out into a monolayer.
A nonaspirate (capillary) technique is easier to
They remain as thick drops with poor cell morphology.
perform and yields less bloody samples of equal or greater
The needle should be removed from the syringe and the
cellularity, especially from highly vascular tissues (e.g..
syringe filled with air. The needle is reapplied, and a drop
liver aspirates).? The technique described here is a modi-
of fluid is gently expressed on a glass slide The drop is
fication of the nonaspiration technique used by Dr. Rick
  e  r e  o   
Cowell while at Oklahoma State University. Air [i.e.,
another slide. The needle can also be used to draw out
 5 ml) is aspirated into a 10-ml syringe and a 22-gauge
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
339
needle is attached. The syringe is held at the base of the
marked "Hand Cancel." Therefore, slide containers that
needle to allow for better control, and the mass is stabi-
are too large (e.g., rectangular plastic box) to ft through
lized with the operator's free hand. The needle is intro-
the post offce's automatic stamp canceling machine
duced into the mass and rapidly moved back and forth
should be used for mailing.
along the same tract five or six times. Negative pressure
[(i.e., aspiration) is not applied. The cells are collected by
NOTE: Postal office automated machines often crush slides 
shearing and capillary action. The needle is withdrawn
mailed in thin, flat containers. Use containers too large to
from the mass, and collected cells are quickly but gently
 fit in such machines.
expelled onto a clean glass slide by depressing the plunger.
The collected material is then spread out as discussed
earlier. A common error is the "shotgun spray" in which
 Smears are routinely air-dried for Wright-type stains
the small volume of fluid in the needle is sprayed on to
and new methylene blue [NMB) staining. Alcohol fixa-
the glass as small droplets (like the pattern of shotgun
tion is required for Papanicolaou's (Pap's) or Sano's stain,
shot hitting a target). These small thick drops dry too
which few cytologists use. Air-drying smears slowly in a
quickly to be drawn out into thin smears. Instead, the
moist environment may cause cell distortion. A hair dryer
operator should touch the end of the needle to the glass
may be used to speed drying if the problem persists. The
and gently express the contents out as one drop that is
dryer should be held far enough away from the smears to
then quickly and gently spread it out as a thin smear.
avoid “cooking" cells. There is no need to "flame" smears
Generally, only one smear can be made from each collec-
for cytology of neoplasia, which requires optimal mor-
tion attempt. Therefore three or four collections from
phology. However, flaming slides from waxy ear swabs or
different sites should be taken. An alternative is a
colonies from blood agar plates for Gram staining is
"packing" technique where only a needle (without syringe
helpful. Smears should not be stored in refrigerators
attached) is passed through a mass to pack the needle
or with exposure to dust, molds, pollen, and flies. Flies
with cells with no aspiration.
eat unstained cells. One should handle slides only on
uoissand 'paaouan Alins si sse e jo ed jl
the sides of the glass, because squamous cells from
smears of representative areas of the mass for cytology
fingerprints can contaminate smears and interfere with
should be made before placing the biopsy in formalin.
interpretation.
 One should use a freshly cut surface and blot off excessive
 Smears exposed to formalin often have excessive blue
 blood and protein-rich fluids. The operator should touch
staining with Wright stain. Tissue samples used for
the surface to a glass slide without twisting or rubbing
impression smears should not have been placed in for-
motion. But if no cells are found on those smears or the
malin before the slides were made. Formalin should not
mass feels hard, then cells should be aggressively scraped
be stored near the stains or smears. Formalin should not 
off from the surface with a blade and those cells streaked
be submitted in the same package with cytologic smears.
 Onto a slide. Fibrous masses usually do not release cells 
where the fumes may act on unstained cells. Heparin
easily and may need to be scraped with a scalpel to obtain
anticoagulant also causes a blue discoloration of Wright-
enough cells for diagnosis. The moist material on the
stained cells.
blade is streaked on glass slides.
 Patient identification and other information must be
noted on the slide. An adequate description is needed
NOTE: Formalin causes poor cell staining, so cytology
for a cytologist, who has not seen the animal or lesion,
sides and formalin-fixed histopathology samples should be
to interpret the results and provide a useful answer to
mailed in separate packages.
the veterinarian submitting the sample The description
should include the site and a description of the lesion
(e.g.."packing technique from an enlarged liver" or "FNA
Stains
of a skin tumor near the anus"). Such description is pref-
 erable to a common request of "What kind of cells are
A modifed Wright-type stain and NMB are usually ade-
present?" without describing what lesion in what part of
quate for diagnosis. The "quick" stains used today may
the animal was sampled. A specifc question allows a
be called "Wright stains" but are really not Wright or
 specific answer. If one or more sites were sampled, one
Giemsa (i.e, true Romanowsky's) stains. Quick stains
should note how each slide relates to the sites sampled.
such as Diff-Quik and Hemacolor have blue and red
 Dates are needed if samples were taken at different times.
dyes to give staining characteristics similar to classic
 Slides should be labeled with lead pencil on a frosted
Romanowsky's stains. The blue dyes stain acidic structures
end-type slide. Printer-generated paper labels for marking
such as nucleic acids [deoxyribonucleic acid [DNA] and
test tubes cause problems on cytology slides. When the
ribonucleic acid [RNA] in nuclei blue to purple. Red dyes
slide is stained, the paper label may also be so darkly
stain basic structures such as proteins (e.g. hemoglobin
 stained that no word is legible. Computer labels are to0
a ui Hd u s ao  n (saa u
large for the slide to fit on the microscope stage and have
water or the sample can affect staining characteristics. A
glue on them. When the excessive paper is removed, glue
quick stain such as Diff-Quik can be adjusted to color
remains so the slides stick to the microscope stage, pre-
cells on the smears more blue or red or darker. The blue
venting that slide or subsequent slides from being
and red dyes are in separate jars; by increasing or decreas-
movable Thin two-slide cardboard boxes mailed to a
ing the number of times one dips the slide in a color, the
cytologist often arrive with crushed glass slides, because
intensity of blue or red is increased or decreased. Diff-
the envelope is machine cancelled even when they are
Quik stains distemper inclusion bodies beter on blood
340
FIGURE 16-3 Nuclear detail, including size and shape of
FIGURE 16-4 In this septic exudate there are two neutrophils
nucleoli and chromatin, are wellillustrated by new methylene
with distinctly blue intracellular bacteria. Wright (Giemsa)-type
blue staining. Note the prominent nucleoli in this sarcoma
stains are optimal for finding bacteria in cytologic samples
cytology. The cells also demonstrate the dassic spindle form
and are preferred for routine use. These neutrophils appear
of mesenchymal cells.
nondegenerate, though the one with bacteria on the left
is damaged. One should interpret whether neutrophils are
degenerative or not, based on how the intact neutrophils
appear. Ignore damaged cells.
luum, paseq-iaiem ,'suieis iuum, aos ueul sieas
stains" may fail to stain granules in mast cells and baso-
phils. Ear swab smears should be stained in separate
Use of both Wright and NMB stains for the same lesion
U sis aun asiaq sqes iea Auo ioy siel guiis
works well, because different characteristics of the cells
quickly be contaminated with yeast, which are transferred
are illustrated by different stains.
to smears from other patients.
Other stains may be used. Sudan stain is useful for
NMB is a monochrome stain with variably intense
diagnosis of fatty liver, chylothorax (Figure 16-6), aspira-
blue staining. A "wet mount" is made by placing a drop
y 'sewomuee pid io '(z-gl anbu) eiuownaud uon
of NMB on an air-dried smear and applying a coverslip.
 drop of Sudan stain (or other neutral fat stain) is drawn
To prevent retention of an air bubble over part of the 
 over a smear to stain the cells and background selectively
smear (usually the most diagnostic area), the coverslip
for lipid. Excess stain is poured off and then the smear is
should be used to gently pull the drop of NmB over the
counter-stained with a drop of NMB to show adequate
cells to moisten them before slowly applying the cover-
cell detail. NMB stains the nucleus and other cell struc-
slip. Staining is immediate. NMB stains nuclear material
tures blue, and the Sudan stains neutral fat red.
well and demonstrates distinct chromatin patterns ( Figure 
Veterinarians sometimes request that their cytologic
16-3). This nuclear detail is very useful in evaluating
samples are Gram stained because different antibiotics
malignant criteria. The transparent nature of NMB is a
are used for gram-positive versus gram-negative bacteria.
major advantage, because one can see through thicker
However, Gram staining is absolutely not recommended
tissue fragments that would be too darkly stained with a
for cytologic smears. Gram staining is inconsistent for
Wright stain. The microscope can be focused through
bacteria in exudate In thick smears the bacteria may not
different depths of tissue fragments to judge individual
cell detail and architectural patterns in three dimensions.
Tissue fragments are often the most diagnostic material
on smears from neoplasms but stain too darkly to evalu-
ate with a Wright stain. The fragments are like tiny biopsy
sections that allow evaluation of how cells were oriented
in the mass. These architectural patterns help identify the
tissue type. One can evaluate adjacent cells for true vari-
ability suggesting malignancy, compared with the vari-
ability of isolated cells on a smear that may have come
from different areas or cell types in the mass.
In summary, NMB is excellent for nuclear detail, thick
tissue fragments, and most fungi. Wright stain is excellent
for inflammatory lesions, because the stained appearance
of leukocytes [white blood cells [wBCs]) is similar to that
in blood smears and bacteria consistently have a charac-
teristic dull blue color (Figure 16-4). Although a Wright
stain is not as good as NMB for nuclear detail, it is accept-
FIGURE 16-5 A Wright-type stain is excellent for identifying
able for evaluating tissue cells for criteria of malignancy
buippng Auew sey oioud s!yl 'sqems 1ea ui ejlapeg pue isear
and excellent for bacteria and most fungi (Figure l6-5).
yeast (Malassezia).
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
341
FIGURE 16-6 The presence of neutral fat droplets in vacuoles,
FIGURE 16-8 This Gram stain of a septic exudates shows the
in macrophages, and free in the background is well demon-
gram-positive, flamentous, beaded and branching Actinomy-
strated by a combination of Sudan stain counter-stained with
ces well, but the hundreds of gram-negative rods are not well
new methylene blue. This is a simple and dheap test for
seen. The frequency of bacteria in cytologic samples is often
chylothorax.
quite low, so finding an occasional gram-negative bacterium in
a red background is difficult.
decolorize, creating a false impression that the bacteria
preferred for finding bacteria on cytologic smears. Wright-
are gram positive. In thin smears, bacteria may decolorize
Giemsa stains allow easier detection and definition of size
too much, suggesting they are gram negative. Gram stain-
and shape In general, coccoid bacteria are likely gram-
ing is not sensitive for screening cytologic smears for
positive Staphylococcus and Streptococcus. Gram staining is
gram-negative (i.e., red) bacteria in low numbers in a red,
best restricted to bacteriology laboratories where smears
proteinaceous background (Figure 16-8). Wright-Giemsa-
 s s pe ss u si ae
type stains consistently stain bacteria blue and are greatly
daily on bacteria where the final classification is deter-
mined daily. Gram stain differentiates gram-negative
from gram-positive bacteria well on uniformly thin
smears from cultures on blood agar plates. Acid-fast stain
uncommon (see Figure 16-8). Mycobacteria are unique
in that they do not stain at all with Wright-Giemsa stains
because of their waxy coat (Figure l6-9).
Pap's stain is often used in human medicine [cervical
swabs) and rarely in veterinary practice Pap's stain has
FIGURE 16-7 Three macrophages from an impression smear
of lung with aspiration pneumonia contain several vacuoles of
neutral fat, which is stained bright red with Sudan stain. The
FIGURE 16-9 Mycobacterium does not take up any stain, and
smear was counter-stained with new methylene blue to show
so appears as a clear bacillus that is negatively stained by color
nuclear and cell details. The vacuoles were clear and distinct
to material around it. This lymph node aspirate from a dog has
on Giemsa-stained smears. Aspirated lipids are difficult to
two large macrophages flled with clear rods. Clear, unstained
remove from the lungs and are evidence of aspiration-type
aayl punoubyoeq ayt ui pint yei-uiaioud ay ui ose ae spou
pneumonia.
are also about five lymphocytes and a neutrophil.
342
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
advantages; however, this author usually was able to make
desk, setting it down hard) should be avoided. This can
a diagnosis with NMB and Wright-stained smears and
knock the prism out of alignment and cause a double
write out the report before the technologists could finish
image.
staining smears with Pap's stain. Therefore we ceased
The condenser must be in the proper position for
using Pap's staining. Specific malignant criteria have been
optimal detail (e.g., for finding small bacteria). The con-
established for cells stained with these stains. Pap's stain
denser is near the optimal setting [i.e., Kohler illumina-
is a transparent stain that permits evaluation of thick
tion), if it is close beneath the glass slide on the stage.
tissue fragments and fine evaluation of nuclear character-
More specifically, several simple steps should be per-
istics. Smears need to be immediately fixed in alcohol
formed daily. While at a high magnification (eg. 40x
before Pap's staining.
objective), one should focus on the cells on a smear.
The feld diaphragm at the bottom of the microscope is
completely closed, and the condenser is moved slightly
Microscopes
up or down until the circle of light in the field has
sharp edges. The condenser should be then left at this
A good-quality, well-maintained microscope is needed for
optimal height. One should then center the circle of
cytology. An ergonomic binocular microscope is more
light to the center of the feld and reopen the feld dia-
comfortable for long viewing periods. Four objectives are
phragm fully so that no shadow appears in the field.
recommended: a 4x and a 10x objective are used for scan-
The diaphragm in the condenser can be adjusted to
ning a smear and quickly finding likely diagnostic areas,
optimize contrast but, more simply, it should be fully
which are then examined with 50x oil and 100x oil objec-
open for most users. High-quality oil objectives avail-
tives for fine details. A properly equipped, good-quality
able today, function well with the condenser diaphragm
e u sas a ae l q aisaxa s as
fully open. A common error is closing the aperture dia-
clinic and should last a lifetime. The microscope cost per
phragm in the condenser too much, causing too much
each slide is examined below.
contrast This is usually done [incorrectly) to reduce
A 50x oil plan achromat objective {i.e, 40x to 60x
oil) pays for itself ($350 to $1000) by the time it saves
is to use a neutral-density flter, a dimmer bulb, or a
to examine a slide. Magnification is sufficient for most
more controllable light source rather than to cause
detail, and more cells can be seen in a shorter time "Plan"
Aq pauieqo aq Aeui iseuos paaoidul leiap lias iood
means the whole field of view is in focus. Having more
slightly closing the aperture diaphragm in the con-
cells in the larger feld of view allows better comparison
denser, but this should be left to experienced microsco-
of variations among cells and easier identifcation. Ach-
pists using photomicroscopy.
romat corrects spherical aberration for l color. Apochro-
When morphologic detail is not needed and the goal
pue aaisuadxa aou si inq siios f on e ioy saos ie
is only to easily find objects such as parasite ova in a fecal
not needed for diagnosis. A 50x oil objective avoids the
exam, urinary casts in urine sediment, or platelets in a
need to coverslip smears.
hemocytometer, the condenser is moved to the lowest
Wright-stained cells observed with most 40x high-dry
position that still provides adequate illumination. This
objectives appear fuzzy, because the cells are surrounded
position gives clear structures more contrast and they are
by air. Using mounting media with a coverslip or oil
easier to find.
eliminates the air-cell interface and allows good cellular
Some common problems with microscopy include
detail with a high-dry lens. Adding a drop of oil is
placing the slide upside down on the stage In this case
one can focus on cells at medium magnification [i.e, 10x,
moy huauead ssal pue anos oi Assa aie sieas
 40x) but not with the l00x oil objective, because cells are
High-dry 45x objectives are easily contaminated with oil
on the underside of the slide. If the coverslip or mounting
on smears and the convex lens is difficult to clear of oil.
medium is too thick, one also cannot focus at high mag-
A microscope with only oil objectives avoids this problem
nifications. If the fine focus will not turn any farther in
and loss of time.
the direction needed, one should adjust the coarse adjust-
Oil should be removed from lenses at the end of a
ment past the plane of focus needed, and then turn the
work period, because oil can penetrate behind some
fine focus knob in the opposite direction to regain focus-
lenses to render them useless or dry to become a hard
ing ability If the cells look refractile and have poor detail.,
coating on the lens. Immersion oil is not removed by
the lighting is probably wrong. In this case one should
alcohol but is removed by gasoline or xylene, which
 adjust the microscope to Kohler illumination. If cells are
should be used instead of alcohol for routine cleaning.
in focus with the 100x objective but not the high-dry 45x
Kimwipes are lint-free tissues that are satisfactory for
objective, the 45x objective is likely contaminated with
cleaning microscope objectives not used for photomi-
oil and must be cleaned.
croscopy. Kimwipes absorb oil better than does lens
paper and thus clean more effectively. Concave lenses
require a cotton-tipped swab moistened with gasoline
to clean the recessed area. Final polishing of the objec-
CYTOLOGIC CONCLUSIONS
tive lens should be with lens paper. One should clean
flters, light sources, stage, and condenser as needed.
The usual composition of a mass is a proliferation of
Complete covering of the microscope prevents accumu-
tissue cells, an accumulation of inflammatory cells, or
lation of dust in places hard to clean. Sharp vibrations
 both. Miscellaneous masses include hematomas, cysts, or
(eg.. dragging the microscope along the surface of a
focal areas of necrosis. A general approach to cytologic
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
343
Representative sample
Inflammatory cells
Mixture of
Tissue cells
leukocytes and 
 tissue cells
Inflammation
 Inflamed tissue mass
Proliferative mass
Malignant
 Neutrophils
Neutrophils
Macrophages
Cell type
criteria
and
Epithelial
Benign
macrophages
Mesenchymal
Unsure
Round cell
Malignant
Pyogranulomatous
Look for
Look for
bacteria
large structures
Conclusion
Fungi
Carcinoma
Higher bacteria
Sarcoma
Degenerate
Foreign bodies
Other
neutrophils
 Look longer for bacteria
pattern or both. Inflammatory samples are examined for likely causative organisms. Degenerative dhanges in neutrophils stimulate
a longer search for bacteria. Proliferative patterns are evaluated for cell type and evidence of malignancy. Summary statements 
2 lot auaia jo asueieg ay iandiaui uayn 'sllan sanss buiealoid pue slleo Aoneweui yiog ae aiayt H 'apew uayl ane
primary inflammatory lesion or if evidence on the smears indicates a primary proliferative mass (neoplasia) with secondary inflam-
mation. The cytologist should summarize in the report how confident he or she was in the final conclusion. No diagnosis is 100%.
interpretation of a case is simplifed in Figure 16-10. More
Or metastatic carcinoma was present. Other examples
complete description of many cytologic diagnoses is
include inadvertently sampling the liver while obtaining
available.1l
"thoracic" aspirates and having the needle pass all the
way through a small mass and to only aspirate subcuta-
Slide Reading Approach
neous (SC) fat. One may contaminate a cystocentesis
Most American veterinarians have ample microscopy, his-
ing the intestine. Correct conclusions often require intu-
tology, and pathology training, so most can learn to make
ition and experience.
many cytologic diagnoses as long as they recognize their
1. Establish that a sufficient number of intact, properly
limitations and continue to learn from their cases. Cyto-
 stained cells are present and properly represent the
logic evaluation may be performed on excised masses and
ma ss.
then the descriptions and conclusions may be compared
2. Scan smears at low power to determine variation in
with histopathology reports. Cytologic evaluation is a
distribution and content. Look for large structures
visual task, so one should obtain one or more cytologic
(eg, fungus, bacterial colony, parasite eggs. or
larvae).
 3. Begin fne evaluation of cells in a thin area with
mal mass is necessary for consistent conclusions.
A
intact cells of good staining quality.
summary of steps follows, and details are provided in
 4. Determine whether the cell population is primarily
later discussions.
 inflammatory. If so, attempt to identify the etiologic
One should first determine if the cytologic speci-
agent.
men likely represents the lesion. Adjacent structures
 5. Determine whether enough tissue cells of one
may be sampled inadvertently. For example a common
Kioeuueyuuou e aeipui ot juasaid ane ada
error is to aspirate the salivary gland instead of the
proliferative tissue mass.
submandibular lymph node
The salivary gland has
6.
. With proliferative tissue masses [eg, neoplasia or
normal, mature acinar and ductal structures with foamy
hyperplasia), determine cell types (connective tissue,
epithelial cells. The conclusion should be that the
epithelial, round cell) present and amount of
sample was not representative, not that an adenoma
 evidence indicating malignancy.
344
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
The initial effort should be to screen smears grossly for
 NOTE: Inflammation is much more commonly diagnosed
those areas most likely to be diagnostic Smears that likely
by cytology than neoplasia.
be stained with NMB or other semi-transparent stain.
Smears that stain dark blue are the most cell-rich smears
and are most likely diagnostic. The intense blue color is
because they have the most nuclei. Hemodiluted smears
Neutrophilic Inflammation
with few nucleated cells appear orange [like a blood
Neutrophilic infiltrates (eg., exudation, suppuration,
J aue pani usns 'ueis sum yim (aeas
 abscess formation, purulent inflammation) are so fre-
diagnosis.
quently seen that they are almost synonymous with
Too often one goes too quickly to the l0ox oil
inflammation. Neutrophils are the most motile WBCs
objective and stays at that power until fatigued. The
and the first to infltrate an area or exude out on a surface.
scanning objectives (4x, l0x) must be used frst, and
Some call neutrophilic inflammation "acute inflamma-
often, to locate productive areas of the smear, which are
tion," even though neutrophils may be prominent in
then evaluated with an oil objective power (50x, 100x).
chronic but active inflammation. Therefore the term acute
Promising areas are thin and have intact, well-stained
may refer to a cell type (e.g.. predominance of neutro-
individualized cells. Cells poorly stained with Wright
phils) and not always to a time interval. Pus is protein-
stain have an altered, pale diffuse, blue color. The color
aceous fluid with many neutrophils and cell debris.
 and streaked-out appearance of necrotic, lysed cells indi-
Aspiration readily collects this fluid material; therefore
cates an area to avoid. Diagnostic structures (e.g., bacte-
 many neutrophils are often present on smears. Other cells 
rial and fungal colonies) may be rare and isolated, so
in an inflammatory mass may not exfoliate as easily
one should invest one's time to scan smears and not
(especially fibroblasts) if scarring and fibrosis are present.
waste time at high magnification in a few areas. Simi-
Neutrophils are associated with bacterial infections and
larly, tissue fragments that have the valuable architec-
some yeast infections (e.g., Candida), but nonseptic causes
tural patterns are irregularly distributed and found by
include immune-mediated processes (e.g.. lupus polyar-
scanning. Tissue paricles appear as dark granules often
thritis) and chemical irritation (eg., pancreatitis. bile
at the feathered edge.
peritonitis). A neutrophil migrating between stratified
An accurate and complete description makes conclu-
squamous epithelial cells may indent into the surface of
sions easier. Performing a differential count of cells with
a squamous cell and appear as if it is within the squamous 
a hematology differential counter forces the cytologist to
cell when it exfoliates (see Figure l6-2).
classify each and every cel and not be biased by promi-
nent cells such as eosinophils, plasma cells, andlarge cells
Bacterial Sepsis · Neutrophilic inflammation  indi-
that seem more numerous than small cells such as lym-
cates a search for bacteria. The best place to search is in
 phocytes. One should not expect to identify all cells. It is 
cytoplasm of neutrophils (see Figure 16-4). The neutro-
common to have a few unidentified cells (i.e., fibroblasts.
phil's cytoplasm is usually clear and free of granular
monoblasts, lymphoblasts) in inflammatory masses, and
debris. Macrophages often contain phagocytized cell
these few cells may look immature and have cytologic
debris that can mimic bacteria. Bacteria are more promi-
characteristics of malignancy. If they are few, they may be
 nent in the clear neutrophilic cytoplasm, and the phago-
accepted as reactive cells secondary to inflammation.
cytic vacuole may help outline the organism. Bacteria
Recall that a confident cytologic report of a malignant
have uniform shapes and sizes, in contrast with granular
neoplasm often leads the veterinarian to kill the patient
debris. Formation of uniform pairs, tetrads, and chains
without further testing that may give a better diagnosis.
identifes stnuctures as bacteria. Rods are more confi-
No cytologist likes killing dogs and cats.
dently identifed as bacteria than cocci. Wright stain pre-
cipitate is coccoid in appearance and may mimic coccoid
Inflammatory Masses
bacteria. However, the irregular size of the precipitate, a
more purple color, and a refractile appearance will dif-
Inflammation is diagmosed much more frequently and
ferentiate stain precipitate from bacteria. Bacteria have a
easier with cytology than is neoplasia. Cytologic diagno-
more dull blue color (see Figure l6-4). Stain precipitate
may be on neutrophils, suggesting phagocytosis, but will
cells. The number of cells suffcient for diagnosis varies
also be elsewhere on the glass slide including where no
with the sample. A rare plasma cell and phagocytic mac-
 sample was applied.
rophage aspirated from inside the eye indicates inflam-
The description of bacteria should include number,
mation, whereas thousands of neutrophils are found in
location (e.g., free in the smear, phagocytized by neutro-
pus. In hemodiluted samples, one considers the number
 a  ae s pa ua r 's
and type of WBC usually found in blood. Blood has about
pure or mixed population is present. These observations
a 500:l ratio of red blood cells (RBCs) to WBCs, with
permit certain conclusions. For example, a pure popula-
mainly neutrophils and lymphocytes. More WBCs (eg..
tion of small cocci in chains within neutrophils from an
20: 1 or l:20 ratio) or the presence of a WBC not found
abscessed lymph node suggests an infection (eg., Strepto-
in blood (e.g. plasma cells, phagocytic macrophages) is
coccus), whereas a mixed population of variably sized,
used with hemodiluted samples to diagnose inflamma-
large rods and even cocci in neutrophils in abdominal
tion (e.g. hepatic cytology). Based on predominant WBC
fluid suggests a ruptured gut. Beaded flamentous organ-
type, different terms are used and different causes are
isms indicate higher bacteria (eg. Actinomyces) (Figure
suspected.
16-ll; see also Figure 16-8).
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
345
FIGURE 16-11 Septic exudate in thoracic fluid illustrates
degenerative neutrophils and Actinomyces. Degenerative neu-
ing" into the background, and often suggest a bacterial effect.
Actinomyces is a long, thin, flamentous, "beaded" bacteria
that branches and also divides into the small rod-shaped "diph-
theroidal" forms in the background.
FIGURE 16-12 Bordatella bronchiseptica are attached to cilia
of two respiratory epithelial cells in a BAL from a dog. There
are very many small rods in this photo. Bacteria need not only
be inside neutrophils to indicate pathogenicity. Note also the
mature, cylindrical shape of the epithelial cells with nuclei
NOTE: Bacterial infection is best shown by finding intracel-
located at the base of the cells. (Courtesy of a digital case from
lular bacteria in neutrophils combined with neutrophilic
Dr. Mike Scott.)
inflammation. However, extracellular bacteria in fresh
samples with neutrophilic inflammation also likely indicate
 infection. lnfection is not ruled out by a lack of bacteria in
cytologic samples with neutrophilic inflammation, because 
Degenerative Neutrophils · How long should one
bacterial numbers may be below detectable levels of a
microscopic examination,  especially during  antibiotic
search for bacteria in a sample with neutrophilic inflam-
mation? Bacteria may be in low concentrations in
teatment.
chronic infections. with antibiotic therapy. and in
some samples such as joint fluid and cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF). Five to l0 minutes is a reasonable time limit
Phagocytosis of bacteria by neutrophils is a better
unless something suggests searching longer. For example.
indication that there was bacterial infection than are free
one should search for bacteria longer than usual if
bacteria. But even free bacteria combined with neutro-
neutrophils appear degenerate Bacterial toxins often
philic inflammation support probable infection, espe-
cause rapid neutrophil death (karyolysis). Degenerative
cially if in a fresh sample. Bacteria or fungi free in the
changes in neutrophils suggest but do not prove sepsis.
background may have been bacterial or fungal conta-
Some bacteria seem less toxic to neutrophils, however,
mination in the stain or with older samples. Contamina-
and bacteria may be found in nondegenerate neutrophils
tion is especially likely in samples that were moist (eg..
(see Figure 16-4).
e anoyaq shep io sinou ioy paions pue (ysem ieauoen
 Morphologically degenerate neutrophils are charac-
smear was made Bacteria or fungi in a sample without
terized by swelling of the nucleus (karyolysis) and cyto-
an inflammatory response are usually contamination,
plasm. Karyolysis appears as a wider, more irregularly
with some exceptions [eg., ear swabs, diabetes, Cushing
shaped, lighter-staining nucleus lacking the dark, dis-
disease).
tinctly granular chromatin pattern and thin lobulated
Bacteria on stratifed squamous epithelial cells are
shape of viable nuclei (see Figure l6-ll). Severely degen-
usually normal flora from a body surface. A normal flora
erate neutrophils may barely resemble neutrophils as they
of the oropharyngeal area of dogs is Simonsiella. Finding
swell and lyse into “globs" of nuclear debris. Degenerative
this characteristic, huge flat multicellular form (called
changes caused by bacteria must be differentiated from
trichrome) of 12 to 20 bacterial cells indicates at least part
swelling due to sample storage, trauma to fragile cells
 of the sample came from the mouth or pharynx. Finding
during streaking of the smear, or nonbacterial toxic effects
 Simonsiella and a mixture of other bacteria on squames
(e.g, urine). Inexperienced cytologists tend to over-
indicates that one cannot trust finding bacteria in another
identify degenerative neutrophil changes by examining
 area of a transtracheal wash or BAL as indication of infec-
damaged cells (see Figure l6-4). One should evaluate
tion of the lower respiratory tract. Bordatella bronchiseptica
only intact undamaged cells. If the neutrophils with
has a predilection for cilia of respiratory epithelial cells.
intact cell boundaries appear nondegenerate, lysed neu-
so finding small rods on cilia suggests Bordatella infection
trophils on the slide are probably artifactually broken
(Figure 16-12).
rather than degenerate from bacterial toxins.
346
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
FIGURE 16-13 Chlamydia psittaci may be detected on con-
FIGURE 16-14 Pathologic bleeding (due to preexisting
junctival swabs of cats with acute infections. This epithelial cell
disease)is differentiated from artifactual bleeding due to
has a somewhat triangular reticulate body to the right of the
-oyoa siebuu q ua aes
nucleus containing many elementary bodies. There is a second
sis] or blood pigments (hemosiderin or hematoidin) in macro-
smaller reticulate body further to the right and probably a
basophilic initial body in the upper left of the cell. Chlamydia
(especially at the bottom of the cell) and moderate dark
are often located near the nucleus while Mycoplasma are found
pigment (hemosiderin) indicating pathologic hemorrhage.
more often at the edges of the cells. There are also strands of
DNA from damaged nuclei crossing the photo. (Courtesy of
Dr. Anna Hillstrom.)
RBCs and is evidence of pathologic bleeding. Pathologic
 bleeding can be due to primary or pure bleeding (e.g..
hematoma), but bleeding often accompanies inflamma-
Nondegenerate neutrophils resemble normal neutro-
tion and neoplasia as a secondary problem. Blood is
phils in fresh blood smears [i.e, clear cytoplasm; a dark,
present in most cytologic samples, and one should deter-
thin, lobulated nucleus). A lack of bacterial toxins permits
mine if it is artifact of collection or evidence of pre-
cells to live longer. Old neutrophils become hyperseg-
existing disease.
mented and are evidence of a nontoxic environment
Nondegenerate neutrophils die slowly of old age and
Granulomatous and Pyogranulomatous
develop pyknotic or karyorrhectic nuclei. Pyknosis (one
Inflammation
very dark, homogeneous nucleus) and karyorrhexis (vari-
When the inflammatory population is mainly macro-
ably sized dark, homogeneous, round fragments of nuclear
phages (granulomatous) or a mixture of neutrophils and
material) are evidence for nondegenerate neutrophils.
macrophages (pyogranulomatous), one should consider
Necrosis · Necrosis is a common pathologic
a causative agent larger than bacteria (e.g., fungus, foreign
change Necrosis occurs with inflammation and neoplasia
body). Fungi. higher bacteria, foreign bodies, and cell
and may be the only change seen on a cytologic sample.
debris are predominantly phagocytized by macrophages.
 Necrosis is suggested by numerous lysed cells but is best 
If an agent is not found, only a morphologic conclusion
proven by phagocytosis of cellular debris inside macro-
of pyogranulomatous or granulomatous inflammation is
phages. Necrotic nuclear material is viscous. Long streaks
commonly reached. Neutrophils exfoliate more easily
of viscous, purple, nuclear debris are often misidentifed
than do macrophages and therefore are more numerous
as mucus or fungal hyphae (Figure 16-13). The streaks
often extend back to a damaged nucleus of the same color
sections. Similarly, joint fluid cytology in immune-
and texture. Hyphae, in contrast, have parallel cell walls
and a different dull blue color. Granular necrotic debris
neutrophils), while a synovial biopsy may report a lym-
should not be misidentified as bacteria or yeast. Choles-
phocytic plasmacytic synovitits. Both are correct,
but
terol crystals reflect breakdown of certain lipids and
reflect cell types found in different areas of the body.
appear like panes of glass (i.e., clear rectangular crystals).
  s a, e ra are sies a
materials beside them that are stained.
NOTE: Granulomatous inflammation (i.e., >50% macro-
phages) suggests the cause was large structures such as
Pathologic Bleeding · Blood pigments (eg. hemosid-
foreign bodies, necrotic debris, fungi, and certain types of
erin and hematoidin) or erythrophagocytosis (Figure
bacteria that stimulate macrophage proliferation rather
 than pus formation.
16-14) found in macrophages proves local breakdown of
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
347
poorly cellular samples, so histopathology should be
used instead. Because fibroblasts exfoliate poorly, one
should use plasma cells as a cytologic indicator of chro-
nicity. It takes days to weeks for plasma cells to proliferate
in an inflammatory lesion.
Eosinophilic Inflammation
Inflammation is usually classified by the most numerous
type of WBC. Because eosinophils are normally rare, they
-ndod Auu ue yo e on oz paaxa Auo pau
lation to indicate eosinophilic inflammation as at least
part of the classifcation. Eosinophilic granuloma complex
in cats and Siberian husky dogs is diagnosed when smears
from a typical lesion in the expected area indicate eosino-
 philic inflammation with a variable component of mac-
FIGURE 16-15 Granulomatous inflammation at the site of an
rophages, plasma cells and mastcells. In cats, eosinophilic
injection. There is abundant debris in the background and,
plaque and linear granuloma usually have eosinophilic
jo Asaunoy) sabeydouoeu Aq pazoobeud Ajueuodui anou
infltrates and fbroblasts, whereas eosinophilic ulcers
Dr. Rick Cowell.)
may not. Parasites and allergic reactions are usually the
first rule outs, but causes include a wide variety of various
infectious, inflammatory. and neoplastic diseases and
Phagocytized material in macrophages often indi-
syndromes (see Eosinophilia, Chapter 4).
cates the diagnosis. Injection-site reactions usually have
high numbers of macrophages containing amorphous
Lymphocytic Inflammation or Hyperplasia
debris (Figure 16-15). Macrophages from necrotic lesions
Focal lymphoid hyperplasia may appear as a small mass
 u s r  s anu u
or elevation of a mucosal surface consisting of mainly
nized hematomas, macrophages contain phagocytized
small lymphocytes and a variable number of plasma cells.
RBCs and RBC breakdown products (e.g., hemosiderin,
These occur in the nasopharyngeal area, vagina, and intes-
hematoidin) (see Figure l6-14). In steatitis, smears
tine, where one might not expect a lymph node or focal
contain oil droplets or, rarely, yellow fat crystals. Yeast and
lymphoid tissue Lymphoid hyperplasia may be focal
hyphae usually stain blue with NMB and Wright stain,
(e.g. focal lymphoid hyperplasia in vagina, spleen, or
intestine) or diffuse (eg. lymphocytic rhinitis). Diffuse
by darker background material. To confrm the presence
submucosal or subsynovial lymphocyte proliferation is
 of an unstained organism, one should try another stain.
more often called inflammation, especially if mixed with
Mycobacteria do not stain and appear as clear slits [i.e.,
proliferation of other types of leukocytes.
rod-shaped ghosts) in macrophages (see Figure 16-9).
 ara e ns ss aie
Selected Causative Agents
 may be numerous, such as fat droplets in aspiration pneu-
monia, and found in most macrophages (see Figure
Descriptions of several organisms follow. One or more
16-7), but more often the diagnostic structures are few in
cytology atlases and microbiology texts should be avail-
number and easy to miss. Scanning of the smears is criti-
able near the microscope."l Granulomatous or pyogranu-
cal to find large, abnormal structures such as burdock
lomatous inflammation suggests larger organisms, but
awns (golden-brown, linear, barbed plant material) in
the type of inflammation is not a major differentiating
samples from a lingual foreign-body granuloma. Simi-
feature of various agents. Diagnosis by microscopic iden-
jo eaie auo u ods e se ieadde Aeu Auoo euny e e
tification is emphasized here. Culture of the organisms
 one smear. One can improve the chances of having fungal
and immunologic testing are more specifc methods dis-
or bacterial colonies in smears if they were initially
cussed in Chapter 15. Many organisms have distinct geo-
detected by gross inspection of aspirated fluid or a flush.
graphic distributions (eg., salmon disease in Washington,
Off-colored white, yellow, or green flecks found in a fresh
Oregon, and northern Califormia). Anatomic location of
sample should be collected and included in smears.
the infection (eg. Cryptococcosis in feline nasal cavity)
also aids in diagnosis.
Chronic Inflammation
Dimensions of organisms are often given in microm-
Chronic inflammatory lesions that lack the abundance of
eters (μm). Some photomicroscopes allow precise mea-
macrophages described in the preceding granulomatous
surement of structures. A micrometer may be inserted in
category have a mixture of inflammatory cells, including
the microscope's eyepiece. The micrometer's units may be
plasma cells, lymphocytes, macrophages, neutrophils.
calibrated for each objective with the grid of a hemocy-
and occasional fibroblasts. This pattern is expected, for
tometer. RBCs and WBCs on the smear are more likely
jo saseis ianel u! ,'sewoinueig, y!l auue ut 'aduexa
available and may also be used to estimate size. Canine
healing of an inflammatory lesion (e.g, an old abscess).
erythrocytes are about 7 μm, and feline erythrocytes are
or in a chronic low-grade inflammatory disease (e.g., pro-
about 6 μm. The approximate diameters of leukocytes on
liferative synovitis). Smears from very fibrous lesions are
blood smears are as follows: neutrophils, 14 μm; eosino-
often poorly cellular and might be mistaken for a poor
phils, 16 μmr small lymphocytes, 6 to 10 μmr: large lym-
aspirate. Repeat cytologic sampling yields often similarly
phocytes, 12 to 15 μm; blast-transformed lymphocytes.
348
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Histoplasma
Sporothrix
Prototheca
Erythrocyte
2 × 4 μm
3-10 μm
3-20 μm
6-7 μm
Small lymphocyte
6-10 μm
 Neutrophil
12-15 μm
Rhinosporidium
 endospore
 Plasma cell
2-10 μm
Cryptococcus
variablesize
5-20μm
Lymphoblast
15-25 μm
Blastomyces
8-20 μm
Coccidioides
Macrophage
20-80 μm
20-40μm
FIGURE 16-17 Comparative morphology of selected yeast
FIGURE 16-16 Cell sizes. Certain cells on smears (especially
and spherical organisms. These are drawn to scale except for
erythrocytes) may be used as micrometers to judge the size of
Coccidiodes. Size is useful for differentiation. Shape of organ-
infectious agents, and nuclei of cells in question. Cells in the
isms and budding of yeast aid in identification.
figure are drawn to scale. Erythrocytes are less subject to size
changes due to thickness of the smear than are neutrophils
Thus for example, the size of nuclei in lymphoma cases are
often described as how many times larger in diameter the
lymphoma cell nucleus was than an erythrocyte.
Aspergillus is characterized by uniformly thick septate
hyphae (Figure 16-18). Streaks of nuclear debris, protein
that has been rolled up into cylindrical forms, fbers.
 and lint may mimic hyphae. Altemaria is a common
contaminant in the air, dust, and smears (Figure 16-19).
15 to 25 μm; monocytes, 14 to 20 μm and macrophages,
It has golden septate
hyphae(which
may stain
20 to 40 μm (Figure 16-16). Depending on the thickness
green with Wright-Giemsa) and diagnostic club-shaped
of the smear, cells vary in diameter (see Figure 16-2),. so
macroconidia.
 these values are only approximate.
Small pathogenic fungi (eg.. Histoplasma, Sporo-
ae jny aie saam 'saee ui aie 
 NOTE: One should judge the size of organisms by compar-
 ing them to the size of erythrocytes or neutrophils.
Fungal Characteristics
Yeast are characterized by the formation of buds on uni-
formly sized, round to oval structures (see Figure l6-5).
Sphenules such as Coccidioides, 
Rhinosporidium,
and
Prototheca form endospores. The organisms are differenti-
ated by size, appearance of buds or endospores, shape.
capsule and location in the body (Figure 16-17). Other
structures may mimic yeast such as fat droplets in
urine, especially when two adjacent droplets resemble
budding. Unlike yeast, (
oil droplets are of various
 sizes, are refractile and are not stained with Wright stain.
Similar droplets can be ultrasound gel (red droplets) or
FIGURE 16-18 Canine nasal mycosis illustrates a colony of
medications.
Aspergillus that has uniformly thick septate hyphae. These
Fungal hyphae have two parallel cell walls
PUE5
spaau auo pue 'aldwes ayl ui jaqwnu ui maj aq Aew sajuoion
form branches. Hyphae are 3 to 20 μm thick, may have
to screen the smear for an odd-colored structure that may
distinct septa, and may form spores or fnuiting bodies.
easily be considered debris.
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
349
FIGURE 16-20 Canine histoplasmosis is identified by small
(2- to 4-μm) oval, budding yeast with distinct cell walls in mac-
rophages. This macrophage was a bone marrow aspirate.
strains of Cryptococcus lack a capsule The yeast itself
FIGURE 16-19 Aternaria contamination in a BAL sample is
shown by finding large green septate hyphae and the typical
usually stains clear to eosinophilic Budding is from a
club-shaped macroconidia of Alternaria that are subdivided
narrow base in contrast with Blastomyces, which has
into internal chambers. Alternaria is a comrmon contaminate of
broad-based buds. Cells vary from 8 to 20 μm in diam-
cytologic samples.
eter. Rhinosporidium seeberi occurs rarely in the nose of
dogs and produces endospores (2 to 5 μm) that may be
confused with cryptococcosis. Cryptococcus yeast is well
demonstrated on smears stained with Wright or NMB.
usually not phagocytized. Contaminant fungi are found
India ink preparations are messy and unnecessary. Inflam-
anywhere on a slide, including areas away from tissue
mation may be absent, and the lesion just a glistening
imprints or fluid smears. If a colony of fungi is found,
mass of yeast.
one should check the stain for fungal contamination by
Rhinosporidiosis
applying the stain to a blank slide.
R. seeberi infects the nasal cavity of dogs with the forma-
Histoplasmosis
tion of recurrent non-neoplastic polyps. The huge trophic
Histoplasma capsulatum in cats is most consistently found
stages [i.e., 60 to 120 μm) and sporangia [i.e., 100
Ue sl sissleue ieas poola t'saleidse moe auoq u
to 300 μm) are diagnostic on histologic sections and
insensitive diagnostic test but yeast may be found in
occasionally visible on cytologic specimens. The smaller
phagocytes in any body fluid. Buffy coat smears concen-
2- to l0-μum endospores from ruptured sporangia are
trate WBCs for examination. Histoplasma may be diag-
qdukl pagielua jo Aolouiedoisty 1o Agoloio Aq pasou
nodes, liver, or other organs [e.g., colonic scrapings). The
small (i.e., 2- to 5-μm) yeast are in macrophages and
occasionally in neutrophils. A phagocyte may contain a
aq Aeu Buppng (oz-91 ainau) iseak Aueu col maj
observed.
Sporotrichosis
 Sporothrix schencki is abundant in samples of draining.
ulcerated feline lesions, but the yeast is diffcult to find in
canine lesions. In cats, the yeast is very pleomorphic with
round, oval, and fusiform [i.e, classically described as
cigar-shaped) 3- to 10-qμm forms (Figure 16-21) in mac-
rophages and neutrophils, and free in the background.
Warning: People acquire sporotrichosis from animals
more easily than they do other mycoses.
Cryptococcosis
FIGURE 16-21 Feline sporotrichosis is identified by pleomor-
Cryptococcus neoformans may be found in various tissues.
phic "cigar"-shaped yeast with distinct cell walls in macro-
A nasal mass in cats is a classic presentation. This yeast is
phages. This sample was from an infected wound in a cat after
best identified by the variably thick gelatinous capsule
surgically removing the claws with inadequately sterilized
that often doubles the size of the cell (Figure 16-22). Rare
equipment.
350
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
cultures are highly infectious; therefore, the microbiolo-
gist should be warmed if C. immitis is possible.
Blastomycosis
(approximately 20 μum in diameter) infecting lungs or
other tissues in dogs and occasionally cats (see Figure
16-17). With Wright stain, the yeast cells are dark blue
and are often collapsed and wrinkled from the alcohol
dehydration during staining, but they appear more typical
with NMB stain. Because the yeasts are large they are
often pushed to the end of the smears and are best found
by scanning the slides.
Candidiasis
Candida albicans is usually a normal flora. It may be an
overgrowth on a surface [i.e, thrush, moniliasis) but
rarely is a systemic infection or is disseminated. It is a
typical thin-walled budding yeast about 2 to 6 μm in
diameter. It is unique from other yeasts in the formation
 of pseudohyphae (3 to 4 μm thick), which look like short
FIGURE 16-22 Feline throat mass with a large colony of Cryp-
septate hyphae in cultures and occasionally in tissue
tococcus. The yeast (8 to 20 μm) characteristically have a large
samples.
clear @apsule or halo and form narrow-based buds.
Malassezia
Malassezia (Pityrosporum) (see Figure l6-5) is a small
budding yeast similar to Candida. It is commonly found
commonly visible on cytologic preparations (Figure
in ear swabs of dogs with chronic otitis that have been
16-23). The spherical endospores lack both budding
nonresponsive to antibiotic therapy. Diagnosis of chronic
and the characteristic clear capsule associated with
yeast otitis should occur routinely in private practice.
Cryptococcus.
Karen Moriello (Dermatologist, University of Wisconsin)
suggests using a stainless steel "flat, round-ended micro
Coccidioidomycosis
spatula" to harvest yeast from between the toes of dogs
Coccidioides immitis is usually recovered from pulmonary
that persistently lick their paws. The spatula is designed
 or disseminated lesions in dogs and rarely from cats. It is
for transferring small amounts of chemical to weighing
characterized by large size and internal endospores.
scales (and may be purchased from chemical distribu-
Spherical sporangia range from 10 to greater than 100 μm
tors). It is effective, easily cleaned and not traumatic in
in diameter (see Figure 16-17). Endospores [2 to 5 μm in
skin scrapings. Tape preparations are also effective in col-
diameter) are usually in bigger spherules. Coccidioides
lecting yeast. Malassezia in cats may be smaller and resem-
organisms tend to be surrounded by inflammatory
ble a large bacterial coccus. A separate staining system
phagocytes on smears." Arthrospores formed in fungal
should be used for ear swabs to avoid finding yeast con-
taminating other cytologic samples.
Protothecosis
Prototheca is a rarely disseminated canine infection. Signs
are related to lesions in the skin, eyes, and intestine. The
Alensn] 1anaeip ui wun oz ol e aie aele [eao on puno
just smaller than a neutrophil), have a clear cell wall, and
may have two or more endospores (Figure l6-17 and
Figure 16-24). Cytologic and histologic diagnosis can be
further confirmed by culture and immunofluorescent
tests on tissues.
Aspergillosis
Aspergillus spp. is the most common fungus associated
with canine nasal infections (see Chapter ll). It is critical
to scan many smears to fnd a fungal colony, because
most of the sample is exudate with secondary bacterial
sepsis. Finding a septic exudate may suggest a bacterial
FIGURE 16-23 Besides the neutrophils, blood, and epithelial
cause and terminate the search before the primary
cells in this nasal mass cytology from a dog, there is a reddish
problem is found. Fluid from a nasal flush should be
endospore of Rhinosporidium just to the ight of center. (Cour-
grossly examined for a green [Aspergillus fumigatus) or
tesy of Dr. Rick Cowell.)
brown (Aspergillus niger) mass (ie, the fungal colony).
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
351
FIGURE 16-24 Canine rectal scraping has inflammation, but
FIGURE 16-25 Canine skin scraping with one normal hair shaft
also Prototheca, which are the spherical organisms with a
and another swollen hair shaft (center) destroyed by a prolif-
clear halo.
eration of arthrospores of Microsporum canis.
Any odd-colored clump is placed on a smear to improve
(see Figure 16-19). Altermaria is rarely pathogenic. Docu-
the probability of diagnosis. Fungal colonies are found by
 menting that it has invaded deeper tissues indicates infec-
 scanning the smear. A colony resembles a clump of debris.
tion and not just surface contamination.
but should be examined with high magnification. Colo-
nies are a mass of septate, branching hyphae of compara-
Dermatophytes
bly uniform thickness [i.e, 3 to 4 μm) (see Figure 16-18)-
Dermatomycosis may be identifed by finding swollen
Uniformly thick hyphae are good evidence of aspergil-
abnormal hair shafts filled with arthrospores (Figures
losis. The center of an Aspergillus colony may not stain,
16-25 and 16-26), or septate hyphae on squames or hair
thus requiring examination of its perimeter. The large
shafts, or the rectangular arthrospores as hyphae breaks
[i.e., 300-μum) branching conidiophore with 2.5- to 3-μm
into arthrospores (see Chapter 15).
spherical conidia is most diagnostic but most often seen
in fungal colonies grown on agar. Occasional cases may
Higher Bacteria
 only have the small, clear, bluish spherical spores that
Actinomyces, Nocardia, and Dermatophilus are higher bac-
may have a thin, clear halo. See the earlier discussion on
teria. They branch but are much thinner [width of 0.5 to
hyphae under Fungal Characteristics to differentiate non-
1.0 μm) than fungal hyphae. Fungal hyphae, in contrast,
pathogenic forms such as Alternaria.
have two distinct cell walls separated by obvious space
Mycetoma
Cutaneous fungal granulomas have a confusing array
of names [e.g., eumycotic mycetomas, maduromycosis,
chromoblastomycosis) and are caused by a wide variety
of fungi [eg. Drechslera, Allescheria, Madurella, Cladospo-
rium, Fonsecaea). Expectation for cytologic diagnosis is
limited to identifying granulomatous or pyogranuloma-
tous inflammation with one or more fungal forms (i.e.,
hyphae, sphenules). Shape, size, and color of fungi on an
unstained slide should be recorded, but it is unlikely the
type of fungus will be recognized by morphology. Fungal
culture is used for specific causative diagnosis.
Mucormycosis
Mucor and similar relatively nonpathogenic fungi may be
found in gastric ulcers or other tissues. The hyphae are
nonseptate, branching, and wider (i.e., 15 to 20 μm) than
Aq payuap! st snguny jo adai 'dds sniodsy jo aso
culture.
Alternaria
Alternaria is a ubiquitous contaminant found in various
microscopic preparations that must not be confused with
FIGURE 16-26 This skin scraping had a dermatophyte infec-
truly pathogenic fungi. Altermaria organisms have large.
tion on a squame in which the septate hyphae of Trichophyton
golden-brown septate hyphae and characteristic club-
 shaped conidia with longitudinal and transverse septae
There was also a Staphylococcus infection.
352
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
FIGURE 16-28 Pyogranulomatous inflammation with red
bacilli (acid fast stain positive rods) in a neutrophil at the
bottorm. Mycobacterium was cultured from this subcutaneous
lesion in a cat.
FIGURE 16-27 Dermatophilus congolensis is a higher bacteria
with zoospores that divide into vertical and horizontal rows
(railroad track pattern). The structures also branch. The bacte-
stain, and negatively stained rods appear as clear slits or
Uiss jo saisepun woy sieaws uoissaidwi uo uaas aq Aew e
"ghosts" in macrophages (see Figure 16-9).
scabs that had been moistened with saline and stained with a
Notify the histopathologist, because samples for
Wright or Giemsa stain.
identifying mycobacteria require special processing.
Organisms tend to localize in clear lipid droplets in the
center of granulomas, and they are lost during alcohol
 and xylene steps if routine slide preparation is performed.
Frozen sections retain the organisms so they can be dis-
(see Figure l6-18). Actinomyces has long filaments that
played in the section. Culture is required to differentiate
occasionally branch and have a beaded appearance on
feline leprosy from atypical mycobacteriosis. One should
Wright stain (i.e., variable staining intensity along the fila-
advise the microbiologist to use media for atypical myco-
ments) (see Figure 16-8 and Figure 16-1l). Actinomyces
au    os  
and Nocardia are pleomorphic organisms that may seem
to be repeated.
to be a mixed bacterial infection with branching filamen-
tous forms and smaller rod-shaped diphtheroidal forms.
Actinomyces viscosus was cultured from ll consecutive
NOTE: The pathologist should be advised of the possibility
ou, aues go sas iu m ss ur
of Mycobacterium infection, because special processing of
diosis" without identifying one case with Nocardia. Colo-
histopathologic samples improves the dhance of finding the
nies in exudate appear grossly as white to yellow (called
 organisms.
"sulfur granules") and should be collected for making the
smear.
Dermatophilus congolensis causes cutaneous infections
Saimon Disease
in dogs less frequently than in other species. One can
identify it by soaking skin crusts in saline and then
Neorickettsia helminthoeca may be identified in macro-
rubbing the underside of the crusts on glass slides. On
phages from lymph nodes of infected dogs. A moderate
Wright stain, characteristic railroad track-like patterns of
to large number of coccoid to rod-shaped bodies (0.3 μm
parallel and longitudinal rows of zoospores (0.5 t0
in diameter) are spread through the cytoplasm of macro-
1.0 μm) (Figure 16-27) forming variably thick branching
phages and may form monulae. Macchiavello's stain is
structures are found on squamous cells.
excellent for rickettsiae, but Wright-type stains are suit-
able. Trematode eggs are in a dog's feces l week after
Mycobacteriosis
infested fish are eaten.
Mycobacteriumlepraemurium,
Mycobacterium fortuitum,
Mycobacterium bovis, and some other species cause cutane-
Ehrlichiosis
&'saop ul Auanbany ssal pue sies ui sasseu os io sno
Finding an Ehrlichia canis monula (i.e, raspberry-like
Feline leprosy [M. lepraemurium) lesions occur anywhere
cluster of tiny bodies) in circulating WBCs, cytologic
 On a cat: atypical mycobacteriosis tends to cause fistulous
smears of lung, or synovial fluid is diagnostic but is rare
tracts on the ventral abdomen. The organisms are dem-
except in highly endemic areas such as Brazil. (See E. canis
 onstrated by impression smears of the granulomas or
diagnosis discussion in Chapters 5 and 15.) Canine
smears of the draining tracts stained with acid-fast stains
granulocytic“
"ehrlichiosis" is now called Anaplasma
(Figure 16-28). Mycobacteria do not stain with Wright
phagocytophilum.
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
353
FIGURE 16-29 Toxoplasma gondii tachyzoites are cescent
FIGURE 16-30 Leishmania is a common infection in Southern
shaped (i.e., 2 to 4 μm x 4 to 7 μm), with a nucleus at one end.
Europe. This macrophage from an enlarged canine lymph node
Three neutrophils (lower center) contain one to three tachyzo-
contains about 15 protozoa that are oval and contain a nucleus
ites each in this photo of an impression smear of lung of a cat
and a rod-shaped kinetoplast.
with toxoplasmosis.
Toxoplasmosis
intraerythrocytic stage (50% of cases) or finding large
pue saseydonseu ui punoy Alaiei s! ipuos musnidoxoi
macrophages containing schizonts of developing Cytaux-
neural, ocular, or muscle tissue. The actively dividing
zoon organisms in lung. liver, spleen, lymph node, Or
forms [i.e., tachyzoites) are crescent shaped [i.e, 2 to
bone marrow aspirates or impression smears.
a) ua auo ie snanu e m (u  on  x w 
16-29). The shape may not be discerned when several are
Parasitic Infestations
packed in a cell, but it becomes apparent when freed
from a ruptured cell. Smaller bradyzoites in stable tissue
Adult parasites or various life stages found in cytologic
cysts remain infective for a long time. Neospora caninum
 samples should be identified as well as possible but may
tachyzoites look the same. Similar protozoa to consider
need to be sent to a parasitologist for final classifcation.
are Sarcocystis and Leishmania. Active Toxoplasma infection
 Ectoparasites and endoparasites include too large a group
is diagnosed serologically (see Chapter 15). Small (i.e.,
to address in this chapter. Some parasites found in the
10- to 12-μm) coccidial oocysts of Toxoplasma are briefly
lower respiratory tract and respiratory cytology of dogs
[i.e., 2 weeks) shed in feces by cats after ingestion of
and/or cats include Crenosoma vulpis, Oslerus (Filaroides)
infected meat This suggests the enteric infection but is
osleri, Filaroides hirthi, Paragonimus kellicotti, and Capillaria
too transient for consistent diagnosis. Other coccidial
derophila. If an eosinophilic inflammatory response sug-
OOcysts are usually larger (i.e., 20 to 40 μum).
 gests a parasitic cause, all cytologic samples should be
screened at low magnification for parasites. Figure 16-31
Leishmania
illustrates the characteristic copulatory organ of a male
Leishmania may be found in macrophages in bone marrow.
parasite. Baermann's fecal analysis may be used to iden-
lymph nodes, or splenic aspirates of dogs with visceral
tify larvae. Oslerus osleri forms submucosal nodules, which
Leishmania infection (Figure 16-30). The oval protozoa
may be seen by bronchoscopy. When these are sampled
have a round nucleus and characteristically a rod-shaped
for cytology. the coiled frst-stage larvae may be found
kinetoplast Infected dogs often come from countries
(Figure 16-32). Screening magnification can be used to
around the Mediterranean (eg. Greece, Spain). PCR
find the larvae or ova.
testing is specific and sensitive [see Chapter 15). Trypano-
soma cruzi is a protozoa which also has a nucleus and rod-
Ocular Cytology
shaped kinetoplast It looks similar to Leishmania but
rounder in cell shape and a larger, rounder kinetoplast.
Conjunctival swabs often identify the primary inflamma
tory reaction in the conjunctiva and may identify an
Cytauxzoonosis
organism. Besides common bacterial infections, fungal
Cytauxzoon felis is a tick-transmitted, highly fatal proto-
infections such as Aspergilus may be found in necrotic
zoal disease of domestic cats. Cytauxzoonosis is diag-
lesions treated with antibiotics. Primary infections include
nosed antemortem by finding the small signet-ring
Chlamydia psittaci. C. psittaci may initially have basophilic
354
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
FIGURE 16-31 Crenosoma vulpus is a common lungworm of
foxes and causes eosinophilic bronchitis in dogs. The golden
rod-shaped structure is the copulatory organ of a parasite
found in a canine lung washing. Crenosona vulpus should be
considered in dogs with eosinophilic inflammation of their
lungs.
FIGURE 16-33 Mycoplasma appear as rounded, pleomorphic
bacteria on conjunctival epithelial cells because they lack a cell
wall and thus firm structure.
 initial bodies, which appear as small to medium, round 
cells in contrast to Chlamydia, which is more often peri-
 bluish bodies in the cytoplasm; these can seem somewhat
nuclear in location.
nonspecific, like debris. A reticulate body flled with
coccoid Chlamydia elementary bodies is less likely con-
Proliferative Masses (Neoplasia)
fused for debris (see Figure 16-13). Mycoplasma bacteria
lack a cell wall and appear as round to pleomorphic, dull
Cytology of neoplasms is more diffcult than cytology of
blue organisms on conjunctival epithelial cells (Figure
inflammatory and infectious lesions. The decisions based
16-33). Mycoplasma is seen more at the edge of epithelial
on the cytology result can be devastating for the patient.
Therefore the veterinarian making the treatment decision
needs to know how much to trust the sample and how
much to trust the opinion of the cytologist interpreting
the sample A cytology report should describe the sample
well enough to indicate if it was adequate for a diagnosis.
The report needs to describe the evidence for the conclu-
sion well enough to indicate how much weight should be
placed on the cytologic conclusion.
Initial Decisions
The two major initial conclusions are: (l) the smears
represent the structure, and (2) the structure is com-
posed of a proliferation of noninflammatory tissue cells
of one type. The minimum number of cells needed to
permit a firm conclusion is subjective, but for a
mammary neoplasm cytology study, more than 100 cells
per slide were considered necessary for evaluation.
When a small number of tissue cells are present, the risk
is increased that they do not represent the mass. This is
especially so when the sample is diluted with blood,
exudate, or other fluid. Diagnosis is often made difficult
by concurrent inflammation, fibrosis, and necrosis. The
higher the percentage and total number of inflammatory
FIGURE 16-32 Oslerus (Filaroides) osleriappeared as "bubbles
cells in the population, the lower is one's confidence
under the tracheal mucosa of a dog. Several of these large
that the mass is not primarily inflammatory. Diagnosis
coiled first-stage larvae (four in this photo) were easily found
of neoplasia also requires identifying the cell type
at screening magnification. The neutrophils in the background 
and determining the strength of cytologic evidence of
 can be used for size comparison.
malignancy.
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
355
Cell Typing
cormers. Epithelial cells may form layers, so an epithelial
cell may be identified in a pocket formed by an adjacent
Shape of the cells, their association with other cells [espe
epithelial cell (the way one hand fits in the palm of
ae sameay suseo pue (suauey anss u An
s u a si ui s anss 
used to indicate the cell type of origin. Classification of
tures such as bands or acini with lumina (glandular
 origin) or papillary structures [i.e., fngerlike epithelial
usual and reasonable goal. Cells are classifed as epithe-
projections with a central core of connective tissue
lial, mesenchymal (i.e, connective tissue, spindle cell), or
stroma). Glandular tumors are called adenomas or ade-
round cells. Enough information (e.g., site of collection)
nocarcinomas. Tissue architecture is best shown with
plus cell morphology may be sufficient to be certain the
semi-transparent stains such as NMB. Well-differentiated
cells are of one specifc type such as perianal gland cells
epithelial cells may retain squamous, polyhedral, cuboi-
from a mass by the anus. However, if cytology can iden-
dal, or columnar shapes and cilia. Secretory material
tify, for example, that a mass is epithelial in type and has
such as mucus, granules, or vacuoles suggests glandular
strong criteria of malignancy allowing a reasonably firm
epithelium.
conclusion of a carcinoma, this should be an acceptable
nn  sae u a s
cytologic result. Histopathology should be used for more
confuse cytologists. Epitheloid macrophages can bind
specific classifcation of type and malignancy of most
together and lack phagocytic vacuoles, and therefore
neoplasms, while cytology should be considered a tenta-
appear like epithelial cells. A common error is to mis-
tive diagnosis. Description of cytologic features of neopla-
diagnose a granuloma as a carcinoma on cytology or
sia in this chapter will be an overview. For detailed
histopathology. Synovial cells, endothelial cells, and
descriptions of tumor types, the reader should refer to a
melanocytes may also mimic epithelial cells. Mesothe-
reference text.1
lium (and synovium) forms a surface like epithelial
Epithelial cells are best indicated by distinct, tight,
tissue. Mesothelial cells often form epithelial-type papil-
cell-to-cell junctions (Figures 16-34 and 16-35; see also
lae, which are mesothelial cell-lined, fingerlike projec-
Figure 16-12). Epithelial cells form surfaces with tight cell
tions formed during irritation of a surface (e.g, villous
junctions that persist to a variable degree on smears. Epi-
proliferation in Actinomyces pleuritis or hemopericar-
thelial cells line a basement membrane and so often form
dium). The frequently anaplastic appearance of reactive
cell clusters with a uniform edge [along the basement
mesothelial cels, especially after swelling in the fluid, has
-elpe guaidaiu yo snone aq pinous auo (aueiqa
cent, crowded cells on a thick part of the smear as having
oma in pleural, pericardial, and peritoneal fluids. No
epithelial junctions where the cells simply flatten along
edges of contact Instead, one should look for distinct
tive and often swollen mesothelial cells in fluids and
linear junctions, complete with formation of angles and
neoplastic epithelial cells or neoplastic mesothelial cells
(Figure 16-36). One should not waste time and money
sending these types of fluids to an "expert," expecting
to get an accurate answer. No veterinarian should kill a
Epithelial
dog or cat based only on a fluid cytology diagnosis of
Benign
Carcinoma
Mesenchymal
Benign
Sarcoma
FIGURE 16-35 Canine mammary tumor aspirate smear shows
FIGURE 16-34 Benign and malignant examples of epithelial
a typical epithelial cell pattern. There are distinct and angular
and mesenchymal cells. The reader should note the tight inter-
cell-cell junctions that appear as white lines between cells.
cellular junctions of the two dusters of three epithelial cells
Additionally, the cells look auboidal and are in rows, giving
(top). The two pairs of individualized cells (bottom) have the
distinct evidence that the cells are epithelial. The tumor was
elongated spindle or stellate shapes of mesenchymal cells.
malignant, but the nuclei in this field are fairly uniform, about
Nuclei of malignant cells shown on the right are larger, more
two times an RBC in diameter, and have one or two medium-
variable, and have more irregular nucleoli and dhromatin.
sized nucleoli.
356
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
FIGURE 16-37 Canine perivascular wall tumor (hemangioperi-
FIGURE 16-36 Mesothelial cells in fluids (abdominal, thoracic,
cytoma) aspirate. These mesenchymal cells have indistinct,
pericardial) are often activated (reactive) and have large nuclei
wispy cell margins and round to oval nuclei.
with anisokaryosis and variable numbers of nuclei, large nucle-
oli, and mitoses. They are often swollen, which makes the cells,
nuclei, and nucleoli look larger. No cytologist can consistently
differentiate reactive from malignant cells in many fluid prepa-
Hemosiderin may be mistaken for melanin but is usually
rations. These dhanges are often misinterpreted to indicate
larger and may be mixed with green or yellow pigment
carcinoma or mesothelioma. This mesothelial cell has a pink
that is more easily recognized as hemosiderin or accom-
fringe to indicate it is a mesothelial cell. It contains a micro-
panies erythrophagocytosis. Osseous cells sometimes
nucleus indicating an abnormal mitotic division of chromo-
somes. There was no malignant tumor in the pericardial sac of 
have prominent pink cytoplasmic granules. Columnar
this dog.
epithelial cells may mimic spindle cells, because the point
where the base of the cell pulled away from its attachment
to the basement membrane often pulls out to a thin,
 pointed tail. The other end of the columnar cell has a flat
carcinoma or mesothelioma, without other confrming
surface with cilia to indicate its true type.
evidence such as histopathology. Certain neoplasms (eg..
Four tumors classically placed in the round cell cat-
lymphoma) can be diagnosed consistently in fluid cytol-
egory are (1) lymphoma and other hematopoietic cell
ogy, but not carcinoma, in which the cells are similar to
neoplasms, (2) mast cell tumor, (3) transmissible vene-
 reactive mesothelial cells.
real tumor, and (4) canine histiocytoma (Figure 16-39).
Most veterinarians should be able to recognize mast cell
NOTE: No cytologist can consistently differentiate very
reactive and swollen mesothelial cells in peritoneal, pleural,
or pericardial fluid from neoplastic cells (e.g., carcinoma,
mesothelioma). It is a waste of time and money to send
fluid cytology smears with this type of large anaplastic cell
to a cytologist for a diagnosis that cannot be accurately
made. No dog or cat should be killed based on only a fluid 
cytology report.
Cells are classifed as mesenchymal (eg.. fbrous,
osseous, muscle, or neural connective tissue) mainly by
an elongated shape forming tail-like or conic extensions
(see Figure 16-34). Two tails are found on spindle-shaped
cells (see Figure 16-3). Stellate-shaped cells have three or
more tails. Nuclei tend to be more oval than with epithe-
lial cells. Mesenchymal cells tend to have more indistinct
"wispy" cell margins that fade into the background
(Figure 16-37). Matrix produced by the mesechymal cells
(eg., osteoid, cartilage, collagen strands) may be found
FIGURE 16-38 Canine dhondrosarcoma has an abundant red
among cells (Figure 16-38).
matrix of cartilage in the background. Various shades of blue
 Cytoplasmic structures suggest the specifc cell type.
to purple are possible with cartilage. Note also the chondro-
 Melanocytes usually have a fne golden-brown to black
cyte at the bottom is a round cell and not spindle shaped. The
pigment. Melanin granules may be rod shaped in
rule of thumb differentiating mesenchymal and "round" cell
melanocytes or round and larger in melanophages.
tumors is a good basic rule, but exceptions are common.
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
357
Lymphosarcoma
Mast cell tumor
15-25 mm
10-35 mm
Small lymphocyte
for comparison
6-10 mm
FIGURE 16-41 This canine malignant mast cell tumor should
be compared to Fgure 16-40. Malignant mast cells may have
few to no granules and not clearly resemble mast cells. Mast
cells in this photo have obvious αriteria of malignancy, such as
large and variably sized nuclei, variable numbers of nucleoli,
and a mitotic figure.
Histiocytoma
 Transmissible
12-26 mm
venereal tumor
14-30 mm
Malignant Criteria
FIGURE 16-39 Classic round cell tumors. Cell dharacteristics
Cytologic diagnosis of neoplasia requires an estimate of
of the four dassic round cell tumors are illustrated with a small
malignancy. The type of malignant criteria present in the
lymphocyte for size comparison. See text for descriptions.
sample and strength of those observations (i.e, small,
moderate, great) are listed in the description ofthe sample
tumors (at least the well-differentiated type) by cytology
and summarized in the conclusion—for example,
"epi-
(Figures 16-40 and 16-41). Other neoplasms, including
thelial proliferation with strong cytologic evidence of
poorly differentiated tumors (e.g., malignant melanoma).
malignancy." Calling the conclusion an "impression" or
may have mainly round cells (see Figure 16-37). "Malig-
"interpretation" indicates to the veterinarian submitting
nant large round cell neoplasm" is a descriptive and
the sample that cytology provides a less specific tumor
adequate cytologic diagnosis.
-ads uo suoeinoads soiouedoisty saop ueul sisouee
aq Aeu Aoueuieu Aall pue useldoau jo adai sy
NOTE: Round cell neoplasms include not only the classic
made under "Comments."
four (lymphoma, mast cell tumor, transmissible venereal
Grading systems attempt to convert subjective obser-
tumor, and cutaneous histiocytoma) but also anaplastic
vations into quantitative measures. A scoring system for
melanoma, pasmacytoma, anaplastic carcinoma, 
PLE
 malignancy of canine mammary neoplasm was reported.
others. Many neoplasms may appear as only discrete,
One point was given for the presence of each of 10 cyto-
round cells on cytologic smears.
logic criteria that had been previously been shown to
correlate significantly with histopathologic conclusions
of malignancy. A score of 0 to 3 was benign, 4 to 7 was
required several malignant criteria, and many samples
had inconclusive evidence for malignancy. This system
had few false-malignant diagnoses [i.e, high positive pre-
dictive value), but the sensitivity in identifying malig-
nancy was only 17% to 25% (i.e, low negative predictive
value). One should not expect to count malignant criteria
until a simple threshold number is reached. Even
with rigid definitions of each malignant criterion, the
mammary neoplasm scoring system had a wide inconclu-
sive range The number of malignant criteria noted in
each case varies, because cytologists vary in what they see.
A nucleus that appears large to one observer may seem
normal to another. People also vary in thoroughness. Use
FIGURE 16-40 Canine mast cell tumor diagnosis is usually
of a numbering system is weakened if equal weight is
straightforward, because an aspirate usually has a large number
given when a few cells barely have the change, compared
of mast cells. Mast cells in this example are well differentiated,
with when most cells have great alterations. No single
round cellsfilled with purple granules. Eosinophils are expected
feature or group of features always proves malignancy.
and support the diagnosis.
and the conclusion is a subjective impression. Computer
358
DNA is in the clumped chromatin (heterochromatin).
Thus immature nuclei appear lighter staining due to
a greater area of euchromatin. Active nuclei have fine
chromatin (i.e., small granules of heterochromatin) and
increased clear space between chromatin (i.e, euchroma-
tin area). A resting nucleus appears dark and has con-
densed chromatin (i.e., more heterochromatin). A resting
nucleus is smaller and has more even chromatin distribu-
tion. Chromatin distribution, size, and shape may be
strong evidence of malignancy. It includes irregular para-
separating the chromatin granules. This plus variation in
size of heterochromatin clumps gives a coarse, irregular
chromatin pattern. Variation in chromatin and nucleoli
is better evaluated with a stain such as NMB, Sano's tri-
chrome, or Pap's stain than the Wright-type stains that
give indistinct nuclear detail (see Figure 16-3).
Malignant cells often have prominent nucleolar varia-
tion, such as excessive variation in the number of nucleoli
[i.e., varying from one to five or more), large nucleolar
size (may be larger than an RBC), variation in nucleolar
FIGURE 16-42 Large size of nuclei and nucleoli are strong
shape [i.e., jagged, sharply pointed, irregular nucleoli).
and variation in size of nucleoli even within the same
evidence of malignancy. The three nucleoli in the nucleus of
this hemangiosarcoma cell are as large as or larger than a
nucleus (see Figure 16-42). Nucleolar variability is strong
single erythrocyte and vary in size. The nucleus is about four
evidence of malignancy and easily recognized on NMB-
neutrophils in diameter. These dhanges may be exaggerated
stained smears. Benign cells have more consistent
by swelling of the cell.
numbers (e.g., one to three) of small- to moderate-sized
round or indistinct nucleoli without irregular angular
shapes.
Mitoses are often more plentiful in malignant neo-
diagnostic programs similarly never succeeded in replac-
plasms, and truly atypical mitotic figures are strong evi-
ing the human mind.
dence of malignancy. However, mitoses are often given
 Different types of neoplasms have different criteria
excessive weight as malignant criteria and normal mitoses
for diagnosis of malignancy. Cytologic criteria of malig-
are often incorrectly classified as atypical. Mitoses are
  si  ar rm a a 
routinely found in non-neoplastic macrophages.
be malignant, but there are exceptions. With canine
Abnormal mitotic shapes can be classified into a few
mammary tumors, it is histological evidence of invasive-
types (Figure 16-43). Some of these are well identified by
ness of tumor cells that is the criterion that most closely
 routine cytology or histology, while some require tech-
correlates to biological tendency of the neoplasm to
niques of cell biologists.12 One should note that normal
metastasize. With canine thyroid tumors, most are bio-
mitoses (e.g.. metaphase) can be seen parallel or perpen-
logically malignant, but there may be little cytologic evi-
dicular to the spindle apparatus; thus the plate of chro-
dence of maligmancy on the smears. Thus interpretation
mosomes may appear as a circle (parallel) in a row
varies with tumor type.
(perpendicular). Normal mitoses are often incorrectly
Malignancy is best indicated by nuclear variability
classified as atypical. Spindle multipolarity indicates that
(Figure 16-42; see also Figures 16-2 and 16-41). Variation
there were more than two poles (centrioles). Tripolar
in nuclear size [i.e, anisokaryosis) and very large nuclear
asymmetry is common (Figure 16-44). Chromosome
size are obvious even on poor-quality smears. Greater
lagging [i.e., one or chromosomes separated from main
deviations from normal (eg, greater increases in nuclear
cluster of chromosomes in the mitotic figure) is also easy
size and anisokaryosis) indicate greater risk for malig.
to recognize on routine cytologic samples [see Figure
nancy. Anaplasia means becoming more undifferentiated
16-44). Polar asymmetry indicates a division of chromo-
and immature. Anaplastic cells tend to have large nuclei
somes as seen in anaphase. This is indicated by an unequal
and minimal cytoplasm, resulting in a high nuclear :cyto-
number of chromosomes in each side of a cell, but
plasmic (N: C) ratio. Bizarre nuclear shape variation, such
caution is suggested, because as a cell collapses on a glass
as with pseudopods and marked convolutions, is strong
 slide uneven separation of chromosomes may be only an
evidence of malignancy. Multinucleation in cells not nor-
artifact. Errors in mitosis with uneven division of chro-
mally multinucleated occurs in malignant and reactive
mosomes may be seen at interphase as micronuclei (see
cells. Molding of a nucleus around the nucleus of an
Figure 16-36). Anaphase bridging is not commonly
adjacent cell is evidence that the cells grew next to each
detected by cytology.
 other rather than a strong criterion of malignancy.
The appearance of the cytoplasm can indicate that the
Malignant chromatin patterns are characterized by
cell is well differentiated if granules, cilia, or other cell
variability in size, shape, and distribution of chromatin
shapes [i.e, columnar) show maturity (see Figure 16-12).
 granules. The active proliferation of DNA occurs in the
But cytoplasmic changes are weak indicators of malig-
dlear area of the nucleus (euchromatin), while inactive
aond aae saieui usedo ouosea y ueu
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
359
malignant changes. Nuclei and nucleoli swell with cell
damage and degeneration (see Figures 16-2 and 16-42).
and the larger nuclear size, light nuclear color, and nucle-
olar prominence make the damaged cell appear malig-
nant. One should not evaluate cells with broken
cytoplasmic boundaries or with partial leakage of nuclear
material out of the nucleus! Even apparently intact cells
may be swollen and degenerating. The best indication of
Multipolar mitosis
Polar asymmetry
 cell death is chromatin that has lost its granular, stippled
appearance on a Wright stain and appears streaked or
smudged. The degeneration is less obvious on NMB-
stained cells, so it is easier to mistake the degeneration
for malignancy. Cells degenerate quickly in certain fluids
such as unbuffered saline and urine. Cells collected
directly from bronchial brushings. for example, have
much better cell detail than do cells collected with a
Anaphase bridging
 Anaphase bridging
saline flush. Cells degenerate within minutes in regular
chromosome type
chromatid type
saline which is acidic [i.e, pH 6) and lacks inorganic ions 
and glucose for cellular metabolism. Hanks' balanced salt
solution (HBSS) preserves cell morphology and is a better
fluid to retrieve cells when cellular detail is critical (e.g..
neoplastic diagnosis). The cost of HBSS prevents its
routine use in veterinary medicine. Mediocre cellular
detail is adequate for evaluation of exudates and sepsis
Chromosome lagging
Acentric fragment lagging
but not for diagnosis of neoplasms. To prevent excessive
FIGURE 16-43 Correct, consistent dassification of atypical
cell degeneration, one should make direct smears as
mitoses is aided by a lassification suggested by Gisselsson.12
quickly as possible and avoid prolonged cell storage in
fluids. Adding protein, such as 5% to 10% bovine serum
albumin solution, or several drops of senum or plasma to
a fluid (eg, BAL) before centrifugation (e.g, cytocentri-
 synthesis and abundant RNA. A large nucleolus also indi-
fuge) minimizes cell degeneration.
cates active RNA synthesis and thus protein synthesis.
Protein synthesis is often high in malignant cells but also
in active non-neoplastic cells (eg., hyperplasia, reactive
NOTE: Degenerative dhanges in cells from necrotic areas,
change). Normal hepatocytes, for example, have large
in old samples, or during cell processing mimic malignant
nucleoli reflecting active production of messenger RNA
dhanges. Debris may also resemble infectious agents.
(mRNA) and protein synthesis. Malignancy of a mast
cell tumor may be suggested by variability in the number.
size, and distribution of cytoplasmic granules
(see
Selected Cytologic Diagnoses
Figures 16-40 and 16-41). Degenerative changes mimic
Mammary Neoplasms
The most specific evidence of biologic malignancy of
canine mammary tumors is histologic evidence of inva-
sion of tumor cells into normal tissues. About half of
canine mammary tumors may look malignant based on
cellular changes and are called carcinomas by many
, e     i
[about one quarter of all mammary tumors) will have
metastasis and are biologically malignant. Histologic
tumor invasion is the criterion that identifies those truly
likely to metastasize Cytologic evaluation of marmmary
masses still is requested to plan surgical removal despite
inability to demonstrate invasiveness. Draining lymph
nodes should be checked cytologically for metastasis.
Infiltration of epithelial cells into lymph nodes smears
gives convincing proof of malignancy and metastasis.
whereas canine mammary tumor cytology gives more
equivocal proof of malignancy.
FIGURE 16-44 The atypical mitosis on the left shows two
Ten cytologic criteria were significantly correlated
types of atypia. It is a multipolar (tripolar in this case) mitosis
  i  o io sil 
with three plates of chromosomes. There are also four lagging
worth describing this study because the criteria of malig-
chromosomes (center right of cell) separate from the main
nancy hold true for cytology of neoplasia in general.
plates of chromosomes.
Cytologic evaluation was performed on modifed Sano's
360
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
trichrome stain of smears fixed in 95% ethanol while still
unnecessary. The smears may lack cells or have a variable
wet. The malignant criteria were (1) variable nuclear size,
number of adipocytes singly or in tissue fragments. Adi-
(2) giant nuclei (more than twice normal),. (3) distortion
pocytes are large cels with a small dark nucleus on one
of nuclear or cytoplasmic membranes, (4) high N: C ratio
edge. The thin cell membrane may appear wrinkled as
(i.e., >1:2), (5) irregular chromatin shapes, (6) variable
- s is i  le  ys s
chromatin size, (7) parachromatin clearing (i.e, a discrete
cellular lipid. Mature fat has the same appearance as a
pale area in a more dense chromatin pattern), (8) variable
lipoma. Lipomas may be traumatized, hemorrhagic.
nucleolar number (i.e., >3), (9) abnormal nucleolar
fibrotic or inflamed. Infiltration by macrophages, other
shape, and (1o) macronucleoli (more than two times
inflammatory cells, and fbrosis may confuse diagnosis.
normal). Abnormal nucleolar shape was defned as "not
 Infltrative lipoma has mature-appearing adipocytes, but
round or oval." Nuclear membrane distortion was inden-
these appear aggressive in infltration of muscle or other
tation of nuclear shape by a cytoplasmic organelle, such
tissues. This infltration of adipocytes is better appreciated
as a vacuole, in contrast with nuclear molding, which was
with histopathology, but fat cells tightly bound to muscle
the molding of a nucleus about another cell's nucleus
fibers may be found in cytologic samples.
without cell crowding.
Mast Cell Neoplasms
Abnormal mitotic figures (eg, spindle multipolarity.
tripolar) always denoted malignancy but were rare.
Well-differentiated mast cell neoplasms are consistently
Neither nuclear molding. irregularly thick nuclear
well identified by veterinarians. Aspirates usually have a
margins, cellularity of the smear, poor intercellular cohe-
moderate to large population of typical mast cells with a
sion, nor multinucleation allowed differentiation between
variable number of eosinophils from a canine tumor. The
benign and malignant neoplasms. Fine-needle aspirates
round, distinctly granular cells of more differentiated
 of mammary tumors were more cellular and had better
tumors are easily identified on Wright stain (see Figures
tissue architecture than impression smears, scrapings. or
16-40 and 16-41). Some water-based, modified Wright
nipple secretions. Spindle cells on smears did not differ-
stains may fail to stain mast cell granules. Alcohol-based
 entiate simple from complex or mixed tumors. In another
stains color mast cell and basophil granules better. Focal
survey, only 8 of 19 histologically confirmed mammary
dermatitis with mast cell hyperplasia occurs; therefore
carcinomas were identifed as such by fine-needle
small numbers of mast cells are not diagnostic for mast
cytology.?
cell tumors.
Histologic grading of canine cutaneous mast cell
tumors has prognostic value. Classification is from grade
NOTE: Mammary tumor cytology is insensitive and may be 
1 (i.e, well-differentiated, round monomorphic cells
misleading; therefore histopathology should be required
 for determination of malignancy.
with no mitotic activity and round nuclei with
-UO
densed chromatin) to grade 2 (ie., intermediate) to
grade 3 (high grade malignancy). Grade 3 has pleomor-
phic cells with irregularly shaped cells, more open [more
Perianal Gland Tumor
euchromatin] nuclei with one or more prominent nucle-
Cells of perianal gland tumors (i.e., hepatoid tumor)
oli, binucleation, frequent mitotic figures, and cytoplas-
ars r e  s a 
mic granules that were indistinct, fine, or not obvious).
and abundant cytoplasm. Round nuclei have one or two
Differentiation between grades 1 and 2 is indistinct, and
prominent nucleoli. The cytoplasm has characteristic
histopathologists tend toward classifcation as grade 2.
granularity with Wright stain. Cell morphology and
Cytologically, cutaneous mast cell tumors are subclassi-
obtaining them from a mass near the anus allows a con-
fied by degree of differentiation. Some nuclear criteria of
sistently correct tumor type diagnosis. Cytologic appear-
malignancy may be hard to identify on Wright-stained
ance may not reflect biological malignancy. because
cytologic smears, because the nuclei may be obscured by
benign-appearing cells may be found at metastatic sites
granules and often stain poorly owing to the mast cells
(e.g., lung). Metastasis is fortunately rare, but cytologic
heparin content NMB is better for nuclear detail. Cyto-
diagnosis should not include a conclusion of adenoma
plasmic characteristics of maligmancy in dogs include
versus carcinoma.
variation in the size density, and prominence of the
granules. Malignant cells have fewer and finer granules
(see Figure 16-41). Granules may polarize to one end of
NOTE: Malignancy of perianal gland neoplasms like canine
malignant cells. Anaplastic cells are larger (ie., 12 to
mammary tumors) is best determined by histologic evi-
ae ay '(ui oz ot on leu a jo psui u se
dence of vascular invasion. Cytology consistently identifies
nuclei, prominent nucleoli, more euchromatin (more
the tumor as of the perianal gland (i.e., hepatoid) but may
 not identify the degree of malignancy.
open nucleus), mitotic fgures, and binucleation." Ana-
plastic, large, poorly granular mast cells with nuclear cri-
teria of malignancy clearly indicate malignancy. but
some well-differentiated mast cell tumors have meta-
Lipoma
static potential. All mast cell tumors should be regarded
Lipoma diagnosis by cytology is rapid and simple, and so
as potentially malignant. Free collagen bundles and large
should be routinely done by veterinarians. Diagnosis
immature mesenchymal cells are often seen in mast cell
 does not require an experienced cytologist. Smears grossly
tumor cytology samples and are evidence of necrobiosis
have clear droplets of lipid that do not dry prior to
and part of mast cell tumors and not a concurrent
staining. Staining with Sudan's or another fat stain is
sarcoma.
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
361
Solitary feline cutaneous mast cell tumors without
but this does not indicate the lump is a melanoma.
splenic involvement are usually benign. Survival in a
Furunculosis looks very similar due to rupture of hair
small survey of 14 cats did not correlate with a grading
follicles and release of keratin into the dermis.
adai-ssosy ul s'sop ul pasn ieu ot ieuis uass
cutaneous mast cell tumors in young Siamese cats, gran-
ules may be difficult to find (see discussion of mastocy-
NOTE: An epidermal inclusion cyst is a common skin mass
temia in Chapter 4). Anaplastic mast cell tumors do occur
easily diagnosed by finding large numbers of anuclear
in cats and can have metastasis.
squames and often cholesterol aystals in aspirates. These 
 often have strong pyogranulomatous inflammation when
Histiocytoma
 they rupture.
Canine histiocytoma cytologic diagnosis may be difficult
and uncertain. Cells may exfoliate poorly, and secondary
inflammation may occur. Cells are not-so-unique round
Hematoma and Seroma
cells with round nuclei with a moderate amount of fairly
clear cytoplasm. Many other cell types will look the same.
Hematomas are fluctuant subcutaneous masses contain-
Cells are 12 to 26 μm and have distinct cell boundaries.
ing fluid with a variable amount of blood in variable
 They occasionally have indented nuclei without apparent
states of degeneration. Seroma is similar to a hematoma
nucleoli.° Chromatin is fine, and mitotic activity is vari-
but has more fluid than blood. Evidence for both is aspi-
able. Cytoplasm on Wright stain is pale blue. The N:C
ration of a variably bloody fluid with evidence of eryth-
ratio varies and is usually l: 1. Human pathologists unfa-
rophagocytosis or hemosiderin-laden macrophages (see
miliar with this benign tumor often consider it malig.
Figure 16-14). Blood pigments are granular or crystalline
nant Having a history of a dome-shaped (button-shaped
pigments that have various colors (ie, blue green,
tumor), hairless skin tumor in a young dog helps the
black, gold, yellow). Artifactual bleeding due to sample
diagnosis. Lymphoma other histiocytic tumors and even
collection is common, but fresh blood often includes
focal mononuclear cell dermatitis may be confused with
platelets.
a canine cutaneous histiocytoma, so caution is advised if
Hepatic Cytology
the patient is older than 5 years, though older dogs may
have histiocytoma. Cutaneous canine plasmacytoma
Hepatocytes normally have abundant granular cytoplasm
is a round cell tumor of older dogs. Seeing cells with
and a round nucleus with a prominent nucleolus. Binu-
double nuclei and eccentrically placed nuclei suggests
cleation (i.e., diploid) is normal in a minority of hepato-
plasmacytoma.
cytes. Increased numbers of binucleated hepatocytes may
suggest hyperplasia. Common alterations include vacuo-
Transmissible Venereal Tumor
Transmissible venereal tumor is a round cell tumor with
pathy). inflammation  (e.g..  lymphocytic  plasmacytic
discrete cells that may show moderate to marked varia-
hepatitis), cholestasis, and neoplasia. Cytology may iden-
tion in cell size The round cells are 14 to 30 μum in
tify these processes, though histopathology better identi-
diameter. Round to oval nuclei have a prominent nucleo-
fies the presence location, and amount of inflammation
lus and linear, cordlike chromatin. The cytoplasm is a
(i.e., cholangiohepatitis). When well-outlined, variably
pale hyaline blue with distinct vacuoles. Mitotic activity
sized hepatocytic vacuoles are visible, fatty change is
is common. Location of the mass on the body (i.e..
expected. Neutral fat in the vacuoles can be proven using
genital area, mouth), plus the patient being from an
Sudan's stain. Canine glucocorticoid hepatopathy has
endemic area, supports the diagnosis.
accumulation of glycogen and not fat. Glycogen accumu-
Follicle or Epidermal Inciusion Cyst
of distinct vacuoles. Cholestasis is indicated by swollen,
Epidermal inclusion (follicle) cysts are common skin
green bile canaliculi between hepatocytes. The dark
lumps in dogs and should be diagnosed frequently by
blue-green granular pigment commonly seen within
cytologists. Contents ofthe cyst mainly consist of an accu-
hepatocytes is lipofuscin (old age) pigment and of no
mulation of squames in a cystic hair follicle Diagnosis is
diagnostic significance Light blue-green, refractile gran-
made by finding large numbers of squames (often in large
ules suggest copper accumulation, which occurs in the
accumulations) and keratinized debris on aspiration
breed-associated copper hepatopathies and secondary to
smears. Squames are very mature thin, non-nucleated
cholestasis (Figure 16-45).
cells from the surface of stratified squamous epithelium.
Inflammation may be diffcult to prove cytologically.
(Note: Occasional squames are common contaminants
because the number of leukocytes in the liver in hepatitis
on smears, mainly from fingerprints.) Other debris,
Or cholangiohepatitis is often few. There is usually blood
including cholesterol crystals, may be present in the cysts.
[ood on puan aeu siudonau pue 'aeiidse seday e yim
os suei  s ueia pue anu uao ss a
in some capillary beds. If only a few neutrophils or lym-
a strong pyogranulomatous inflammatory response is
 phocytes are on a hemodiluted smear, it is hard to deter-
also typical. Rupture and inflammation often cause a
mine whether leukocytes are from peripheral blood
rapid increase in size of a skin lump. which may alarm
contamination or a mild inflammatory infiltrate (e.g..
the owners, and inflammation irritates the dog. The
cholangiohepatitis). The capillary collection (not aspira-
 primary lesion is shown to be a follicular cyst by finding
tion) technique or packing technique described earlier are
 moderate numbers of squames often surrounded by mac-
rophages. Epithelial cells can contain abundant melanin,
hemodilution, so the presence of leukocytes better reflects
362
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
[i.e., 0% to 3%) except in some commonly reactive nodes
(e.g. mesenteric, submandibular). There are obviously
more than three types of lymphoid cells in a lymph node.
but this three-cell lymphoid cell (lymphoblast, plasma
cell, lymphocyte) Diff quickly and consistently describes
the maturity and diversity of the lymphoid cells. "Lym-
e lian e si uouyap ad-oioieaq siui ut ,isiqoyd
looks larger and clearly more immature than the lympho-
cytes. A prominent nucleolus (or nucleoli) clearly identi-
fies a hematopoietic cell as a blast. Lymphoblasts are as
large as or larger than neutrophils. Nuclei are larger (>1.5
times an erythrocyte in diameter) and have finer, smaller
chromatin granules, more euchromatin, and thus a
lighter, more open-appearing nucleus. In contrast, small
lymphocytes are just larger than an erythrocyte but
smaller than a neutrophil. The lymphocyte nucleus has
coarser and darker chromatin (more heterochromatin)
FIGURE 16-45 Canine copper hepatopathy is indicated by the
and no visible nucleolus (see Figure l6-l6). Medium-
refractile, light blue-green granules in hepatocytes. The focus
sized lymphocytes are grouped with small lymphocytes
of the photo is on the granules and not hepatocyte nuclei.
as well-differentiated (resting) cells if they have a mature.
There are also several swollen biliary canaliculi that look like
coarse chromatin pattern and no visible nucleolus. With
green tubes with small cylinders or droplets of inspissated,
reactive lymph nodes and some types of lymphoma, there
green bile between hepatocytes.
is a predominance of more medium-sized lymphoid cells
or no clear division among small, medium, and large
cells. Neutrophils are fewer than 5%, with only occasional
 macrophages, mast cells, and eosinophils.
a hepatitis. Leukocytes and collagen found within hepatic
Lymph node cytology is routinely used for diagnosis
tissue fragments also support infammation. Because
of lymphoma (i.e, lymphosarcoma [LSA]) (see Chapter
plasma cells and vacuolated macrophages are not found
4). Complete lymphoma diagnosis should include
in peripheral blood (and do not contaminate a sample
ayl ul eoqdukl yo sad oe ol 5i Aynuapi oi spoqau
dog.'3 For the following discussion, a greatly simplified
inflammation than are neutrophils and lymphocytes.
system where lymphoid cells are divided into lympho-
Extramedullary hematopoiesis is indicated by nucleated
 cytes, plasma cells, and lymphoblasts is used. A predomi-
RBCs and mega karyocytes. Neoplasia is diagnosed by pre-
nance of lymphoblasts or monomorphic population of
viously described criteria though hepatoma samples may
one type of lymphoid cell is the major diagnostic criterion
have mainly hepatocytes without cytologic criteria of
of lymphoma. Lymphoblasts greater than 50% of cells is
malignancy.
a common criterion for diagnosis of lymphoma. Confi-
dence in a diagnosis of lymphoma increases with the
Lymph Node Cytology and Lymphoma
percentage of large immature lymphoid cells and how
Aspiration cytology is the preferred test to evaluate
distinctly the cells appear clearly immature on the smear.
enlarged lymph nodes. Cytology may provide evidence of
The most common lymphoma'3 is the diffuse large B-cell
metastasis and other disorders even in normal-sized
lymphoma, which is easy to diagnose on cytology or
nodes. Because lymphoid cells are fragile and large lymph
histology. It has a predominance of large pleomorphic
nodes are often necrotic, many smears are not diagnostic
because inadequate numbers of intact cells are present.
nucleoli. There are frequent mitoses and many tingible
Very gentle smearing techniques such as using a coverslip
body macrophages, indicating rapid cell proliferation
or drawing out fluid in the "starfish" method must be
and death.
learned to make diagnostic smears. A differential lym-
Fewer than 50% lymphoblasts do not exclude other
phoid cell count should be performed in a thin area with
forms of lymphoma. Several forms of lymphoma have
good cell morphologic detail. This forces the cytologist to
small to medium lymphoid cells that lack prominent
identify each cell and therefore not risk reporting a con-
nucleoli and that are more difficult to diagnose cytologi-
dusion if at least loo intact cells can be not identified.
cally. Some examples are pleomorphic small T-cell lym-
Other areas and smears should be examined to ensure
phoma, mycosis fungoides, pleomorphic medium to
that the differential count is representative. It is typical
large T-cell lymphoma, and chronic lymphocytic leuke-
that lymphoid cells in some areas or smears may be
mia." Immunophenotyping aids in classification and
prognosis of lymphomas. A prominent population of
smears or areas lymphocytes stain more typically and may
lymphoid cells of one type may suggest neoplasia. Atypi-
appear normal. A representative differential lymphoid
-sisu e nou si u u iao ooqd [
cell count (Diff) allows various conclusions and descrip-
tent or sensitive indicator of lymphoma. When present,
tion of different patterns.
features such as bizarre nuclear and cytoplasmic shapes
Lymphoid cells in a normal lymph node are about
(e.g. "hand mirror cells" with cytoplasmic pseudopods)
2% to 15% lymphoblasts and 60% to 90% small- to
or unusual chromatin patterns add to one's confidence in
medium-sized lymphocytes. Plasma cells are infrequent
a diagnosis of lymphoma.
Chapter 16: Cytology of Inflammatory or Neoplastic Masses
363
The reader should note that the term "lymphoblast"
pyogranulomatous, eosinophilic). Myeloid leukemia infl-
in the previous description refers to a large. immature
tration occurs rarely, and the diagnosis is based on
lymphoid cell more along hematologic classification of
 maturity of the WBCs. Chronic granulocytic leukemia is
hematologic blast cells. In the updated Kiel cassification
of lymphoblastic lymphoma, cells classified as lympho-
the blood is accompanied by a lymph node aspirate
blasts do not have a prominent nucleolus.1 Thus lympho-
that looks like bone marrow with mixed granulopoiesis
blast refers to another cell type (and type of lymphoma)
with mature neutrophils but extension back to progran-
to those specializing in lymphoma diagmosis.
ulocytes and myeloblasts.
Frequent necrosis in lymph nodes with lymphoma
 Metastatic neoplasia is diagnosed if adequate numbers
can cause aspiration of mainly loose necrotic debris. A
 of malignant-appearing nonlymphoid cells are present. A
thick background of excessive cell debris on aspirate and
few large anaplastic cells can occur in non-neoplastic
impression smears interferes with staining. One may find
reactive nodes; unless cells are very distinctive (eg.
only a small percentage of intact and well-stained cells
forming definite epithelial patterns), a confident diagno-
around the thin perimeter of the smear. Lysed cells (i.e.,
sis requires many cells (e.g., 50 to 100). Occasional mast
"naked" nuclei) and partially lysed normal cells have
cells are normal in lymph nodes, and lymph nodes may
swelling of the nucleus and nucleolus. This creates a
have mast cell hyperplasia. Hence many mast cells or very
larger, lighter-stained nucleus with a prominent nucleolus
atypical mast cells must be found to diagnose mast cell
resembling a lymphoblast l
Failure to ignore these
neoplasia. Macrophages with hemosiderin mimic mela-
damaged cells leads to an erroneously high percentage of
nocytes, so one should be careful diagnosing metastatic
lymphoblasts and perhaps an incorrect conclusion of
melanoma. Inflamed lymph nodes may be fibrotic; there-
lymphoma. One should not look at damaged cells.
fore one must accept a few fibroblasts without diagnosing
Repeated aspiration and very careful streaking methods
sarcoma. In contrast, only a few cells may indicate metas-
may be required to obtain a diagnostic sample.
tasis if they are foreign to the lymph node, such as strati
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL) is discussed in
fied squamous epithelial cells, perianal gland cells, and
Chapter 4 as a hematologic diagnosis. Cytologic diagno-
mucin-secreting epithelial cells.
sis of CLL is difficult because there is a predominance of
lymphocytes with mature chromatin patterns. A promi-
nent lymphocytosis in the blood aids diagnosis. CLL
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 should be considered as a cause of lymphadenopathy if
a monotonous lymphoid population of small to medium-
The author would like to thank Dr. Rick Cowell for his
sized lymphocytes is present. The lymphocytes in some
contributions to this chapter in previous editions.
types of CLL have moderate to abundant cytoplasm and
are very consistent in appearance. CLL and small cell
 lymphoma may be diagnosed by additional methods.
References and Suggested Readings
Classification of lymph nodes as reactive and hyper-
plastic means essentially the same thing. Both are a
1. Allen SW. Prasse KW, Mahaffey EA: Cytologic differentiation
benign, expected response to some irritant in their drain-
of benign from malignant canine mammary tumors. Vet
age field (e.g. Demodex). A hyperplastic lymph node has
Pathol 23:649, 1986.
an increased number of lymphoid cells in normal per-
2. Baker R, Lumsden JH: Color aflas of cytology of the dog and cat.
St. Louis, 2000, Mosby.
centages, but the node is larger in size, owing to an immu-
3. Buerger RG. Scott DW: Cutaneous mast cell neoplasia in cats:
nologic stimulus. If there is some hemorrhage with
14 cases {1975-1985). I Am Vet Med Assoc 190:1440, 1987.
hemosiderin-laden macrophages or a slight increase in
4. Cinkenbeard KD, Cowell RL, Tyler RD: Disseminated histo-
neutrophils and eosinophils, or lymphoblasts, the diag-
plasmosis in cats: 12 cases (1981-1986). J Am Vet Med Assoc
nosis tends to be reactive lymph node and not just
190:144, 1987.
hyperplasia.
5.Cowell RL. Tyler RD. Meinkoth [H: Diagnostic cytology and
Highly reactive lymph nodes may have an increased
hematology of the dog and cat, ed 2. St. Louis. 1999. Mosby.
percentage (e.g., 15% to 30%) of lymphoblasts (and large
6. Duncan JR. Prasse KW: Cytology of canine cutaneous round
to medium lymphoid cells), or some lymphoblasts may
cell tumors. Vet Pathol 16:673, 1979.
7. Griffiths GL, Lumsden [H, Valli VEO: Fine-needle aspiration
be so large that it might suggest lymphoma. Heterogene-
cytology and histologic corelation in canine tumors. Vet Clin
ity of the lymphoid population with variation in size and
Pathol 13:13. 1984.
maturity of lymphoid cells and often abundant plasma
 8. Gross TL, Connelly MR: Nontuberculous mycobacterial skin
cells, however, still indicates more likely a reactive node
infections in two dogs. Vet Pathol 20:117. 1983.
instead of lymphoma.
9. Menard M, Papageorges M: Technique forultrasound-guided
Greater than 10% neutrophils, 5% macrophages
fine-needle biopsies. Wt Radiol Lltrasound 36:137, 1995.
 Or greater than 3% to 5% eosinophils indicates lymph-
10. Perman V. Alsaker RD. Riss PC: Cytology of the dog and
adenitis. Macrophages may appear in small aggregates
cat. South Bend. [n. 1979. American Animal Hospital
and contain material such as hemosiderin. These are
Association.
11.
Raskin RE. Meyer DJ: Aflas of canine and feline cyiology. ed 2.
minimal numbers and much greater numbers of neutro-
St. Louis, 2010, Elsevier.
phils and macrophages will be present in an abscessed
12. Tvedten H: Atypical mitoses: morphology and classification.
lymph node or systemic granulomatous disease. The
Vet Clin Pathol 38:418, 2009.
predominant type of WBC determines the classifica-
13.Valli VE: Veterinary comparative hemaiopathology. Ames. [a.
tion of inflammation (i.e, neutrophilic, granulomatous.
2007, Blackwell Publishing.
17
Laboratory Diagnostic
Toxicology
Gary Osweiler and Paula Martin Imerman
examination should be completed to determine potential
PRINCIPLES OF TOXICOLOGIC
exposure to toxicants. Telephone instructions should
DIAGNOSIS
include having the owners collect any potential baits,
vomitus, or other suspect materials for possible chemical
Toxicologic diagnosis is based on four principal types of
 analysis.
evidence: an accurate and thorough history, evaluation
of clinical signs and physical examination, prudent use of
clinical pathology laboratory tests and/or gross/histologic
CLINICAL LABORATORY TESTS
evaluation of lesions, and appropriate use of specifc toxi-
cologic tests. Each of these is inportant, and a diagnosis
After clinical data are obtained from history and physical
is almost never obtained from only one of these four
examination, laboratory testing is used to identify and
pillars of diagnosis. This chapter will focus on appropriate
as go ii saa sro ai
laboratory testing.
toxicants (e.g., basophilic stippling and nucleated red
Choosing appropriate specimens and laboratory tests
blood cells [RBCs] without reticulocytosis suggest lead
almost always requires attention to a thorough history of
toxicosis; high serum osmolality, hypocalcemia, and an
actual or potential exposures. This requires effective ques-
increased anion gap are consistent with ethylene glycol
tioning of owners or caretakers, some knowledge of the
[EG] toxicosis). Table 17-7 summarizes clinical laboratory
animal environment and care, and a reasonable account
tests that may be altered by specific toxicoses. Several
of the time course of a potential toxicosis. Important
clinical laboratory parameters may be altered by some
historic findings include changes in location or in food
toxicants, although others may cause no significant
source, recent chemical applications (e.g., spraying for
changes.
insects, fertilizing a lawn, changing radiator coolant),
A major use of the toxicology laboratory is to deter-
administration of medications, whether the animal is free
mine the presence and possibly the amount of a specific
to roam, and distance to public or commercial areas.
toxicant. Two levels of toxicant testing are suggested by
In most cases of acute poisoning. a combination of
various authorities. The first is clinical evaluation (as in
history and clinical findings must be used to initiate life
the previous paragraph). These include blood gases, elec-
support and effective detoxification of the animal. One
trolytes, glucose, blood urea nitrogen (BUN), creatinine,
can rarely wait for results of a laboratory chemical test.
ei pue sod uue ss uuny ned
Prompt clinical laboratory testing (complete blood count
function. The second level is specific dnug or toxicant
[CBC], senum clinical chemistry, blood gas analysis, elec-
assays.° After clinical laboratory evaluation, clinicians
trolytes, and urinalysis) can quickly detect disturbances
may utilize some form of "screening" test for rapid turn-
in major metabolic pathways or specific organ damage.
around to suggest potential toxicant groups. Depending
Such information can also be correlated with known
On results of screening procedures, a specific confirmatory
 laboratory effects from specific toxicants.
instrumental or immunologic procedure may be chosen
To assist with clinical observations and help deter-
to support the initial diagnosis. These are often most
show probable toxicoses associated with different organ
need for forensic evidence (as in suspected malicious
systems and clinical signs (eg. seizures, hepatic failure,
poisoning). Quantification of a positive test may be
important for interpretation of some toxicoses, but not
monic signs. While many signs of poisoning (eg., vomit-
for others. For example, any amount of strychnine in
ing, seizures) are also caused by infectious, metabolic,
stomach contents is considered diagnostic of a toxicosis
and endocrine diseases, knowledge of high-risk toxicol-
while other toxicant diagnoses depend on quantitation
Ogy differentials is the first step in working through
(e.g. lead) above a threshold to establish toxicosis.
Text contimued or p.373
364
Chapter 17: Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
365
TABle 17-1. COMmoN toXICANTs OF tHE NERvOUs SYSTEm bY MAJOR EFFEct(S)
TOXICANT
 COMMON SOURCES
ADDITIONAL SIGNS
EXCITATION
Aminopyridine
Bird control baits.
Tremors, ataxia, may be hyperexcitable.
Caffeine, other
Chocolate, coffee, tea; stimulant
Excitement, exaggerated refexes, hyperreflexia; cardiac
methylxanthine
or anti-drowsiness pills sold 
arrhythmia, hyperpnea, vomiting. Alkaloids detectable in 
alkaloids
OTC.
Gl contents, blood, or urine.
Cyanide
Cyanogenic plants (apple, peach,
 Excitement, agitation, seizures progressing to ataxia,
cherry seeds); fumigants;
weakness, and collapse; also salivation, hyperpnea, pink
rodenticides (rarely); industrial
mucous membranes. Very rapid course. Test stomach
chemicals.
 contents, blood for cyanide, or liver and muscle from
dead animals.
Lead
 Paint (pre-1970) or specialty 
Intermittent vomiting and behavioral changes; tremors,
paints, lead objects (drapery
 ataxia, seizures, altered vision, anorexia.
weights, fishing sinkers).
Metaldehyde
 Snail and slug baits; solid fuels
 Continuous tremors, occasional seizures; incoordination 
sold OTC.
 and cerebellar ataxia; nystagmus, salivation also
prominent.
 Pyrethrins,
Active ingredients in insecticides 
Tremors, hyperexcitability, excitement, occasional seizures;
pyrethroids
for pets and homes.
 sometimes alternate with depression.
Strychnine
Mole and gopher baits, usually
Acute onset of hyperesthesia, hyperreflexia progressing to
less than 0.05% for below-
tetanic seizures exacerbated by external stimuli; rapid 
ground use.
shallow respirations, tachycardia.
Tremorgenic
Penitrem A on moldy walnuts,
Tremors, ataxia, and hypermetria are characteristic and
mtycotoxins
other nut products; less
may be continuous; exacerbated by exercise or stress.
commonly, spoiled dairy
Test stomach contents or suspect materials for penitrem 
products.
A or other tremorgens. Available laboratory testing is
limited.
Zinc phosphide
Used as altermative to
 Excitement, stimulation, and seizures; may include tremors
 anticoagulants; sold OTC in 
 some states. Bait has mild garlic
Vomiting, colic often accompany the neurologic signs.
or acetylene odor.
DEPRESSION OR COMA
Alcohols
 Beverages, disinfectants, brewery
Depression, disorientation early, followed by coma,
'sanpisal 
respiratory depression, acidosis, cardiac arrest. Alcohol
residues appear in blood and urine.
Barbiturates
Access to tablets or capsules;
Depression, loss of reflexes, hypothermia, hypotension,
 occasionally in meat from
coma, respiratory failure. Barbiturates in blood or urine
animals euthanatized with 
of living animals; liver or kidney of dead animals.
barbiturates.
 Bromethalin
Relatively new rodenticide, often
Signs may include posterior ataxia and weakness,
used as an alternative to
sometimes vomiting resulting from cerebral edema.
anticoagulant rodenticides.
 Available laboratory testing is limited.
Citrus oils
Citrus extracts used in insecticides
Depression, ataxia, coma, and pronounced hypothermia.
and repellents (e.g., Dlimonene).
Citrus extracts are conjugated in the liver and excreted
 Most hazardous to cats.
in urine. Few laboratories offer routine testing for these
'spnpo.d
Carbon monoxide
See Table 17-5.
See Table 17-5
Ethylene glycol
Automobile radiator antifreeze 
 Profound depression early is due to alcohol-like inebriation;
 solutions. Also used to prevent 
later signs of depression are due to severe metabolic
freezing in water pipes of vacant
acidosis.
houses or mobile homes.
Hydrocarbons
 Petroleum distillates and pine oil
Generally there is initial depression and ataxia similar to
(aliphatic and
 compounds; most available in
 ethanol intoxication. High dosage leads to vomiting.
aromatic)
paint thinners, mineral spirits,
possible liver and/or kidney damage, severe depression,
cleaning solutions; exposed by
coma, respiratory depression, and death.
spilling on skin, footpads, or by
inhalation of fumes.
Contimed
366
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABle 17-1. CommON toXICANTs oF tHE NErvoUs SYSTem bY MAJoR EFFecT(S)-cONt'd
TOXICANT
 COMMON SOURCES
ADDITIONAL SIGNS
SIGNSOFPARASYMPATHETICSTIMULATION
Blue-green algae
Blue-green algae (Anabaena spp.
In addition to sudden death (neuromuscular paralysis)
and Microcystis spp.) are most
and hepatotoxicity, blue-green algae may inhibit 
prevalent in lakes and farm
holinesterase, causing signs of salivation, vomiting,
ponds during late summer.
tremors, and dyspnea. Cholinesterase inhibitor resting 
requires whole blood sample. Water samples for
blue-green algae should be submitted fresh and fixed
(addition of 1 part formalin/9 parts water).
Ivermectin,
Anthelmintics, ectoparasite 
Ataxia, hyperesthesia, salivation, vomiting, bradycardia,
milbemycin,
control, both small animal 
recumbence. See MDR1 gene general description in text.
moxidectin
and large animal (higher 
concentration products).
sp!o!do
Prescription or recreational drugs.
Miosis, salivation, arrhythmia, vomiting, defecation,
urination. Urine samples may test positive.
Organophosphate
Home and garden pest control;
Salivation, lacrimation, miosis vomiting, diarrhea,
and carbamate
limited use for small animal 
bradycardia, dyspnea, urination, ataxia and muscle
insecticides
ectoparasite control.
weakness. Whole blood sample for confirmation of
dholinesterase inhibition.
Nicotine
Tobacco products, specialty
Initial signs are due to early depolarization (tremors,
insecticides (e.g., nicotine 
excitement, lacrimation, vomiting], followed by paresis,
sulfate). Also used occasionally
ataxia, and complete collapse with death from respiratory
 in capture guns.
paralysis. Nicotine alkaloid is readily detected in stomach
contents, blood, or urine.
 SIGNS OF PARASYMPATHOLYTIC AGENTS
Amphetamines
Prescription or recreational drugs,
 Mydriasis, tachycardia, but lack other predominant effects
including methamphetamine.
of anticholinergics.
Atropine
Plant, Atropa belladonna, may be
Causes dry mucous membranes, mydriasis, tachypnea,
 grown as ornamental in gardens.
 tachycardia, hyperthermia, disorientation, visual
dysfunction, Gl stasis. Readily detected in blood and/or
urine.
Ephedra/ma huang
Herbal product for weight loss,
Mydriasis, tremors, seizures, hyperthermia, salivation,
decongestant, recreational.
death.
Scopolamine
Hyoscyamus niger and Datura spp.
Signs and effects are similar to those with atropine (above).
 are common plant sources. Also
available as pharmaceutical.
SSRls (selective
 Prescription drugs. Veterinary
Mydriasis, autonomic instability, tremors, seizures,
serotonin reuptake 
use for urine spraying, lick 
bradycardia, vomiting, diarrhea, colic.
inhibitors)
 granuloma, separation anxiety.
ATAXIA, INCOORDINATION, WEAKNESS, OR PARALYSIS
 Aminoglycoside
Kanamycin, neomycin,
Effects are due to post-synaptic receptor blockade of
antibiotics
 streptomycin, gentamicin.
neuromuscular junctions, results in paresis, paralysis, and 
death from respiratory failure. Testing of blood and/or
urine may establish exposure.
Botulismi
Clostridium botulinum growth
Lower motor neuron paralysis results in muscle weakness,
 in decaying organic matter,
dificult deglutition, progressive paresis and paralysis,
especially with high protein
mydriasis, dysphagia. Suspect material from stomach
content.
contents may be cultured or injected in mice as a
bioassay, followed by protection tests with antitoxin.
Cholinesterase
See Signs of parasympathetic
Test for confirmation of cholinesterase inhibitors as
inhibitors
stimulation.
described above for organophosphate and carbamate
insecticides in Signs of parasympathetic stimulation.
vermectin,
See Signs of parasympathetic
milbemycin
stimulation.
Mycotoxins,
Moldy refrigerator foods (e.g..
Vomiting, diarrhea, agitation, tremors, hyperthermia,
tremorgenic
cream cheese, walnuts, peanuts,
tachycardia, pigmenturia from rhabdomyolysis.
high-protein products).
MODIFICATION OF BEHAVIOR
 Atropine/
See Signs of parasympatholytic
 Behavioral effects of disorientation and possible loss
scopolamine
agents.
 of vision appear secondary to overdose of atropine.
 Diagnosis of atropine overdose is described in Signs of
parasympatholytic agents.
Ethanol
See Depression or coma.
See Sgns of depression or coma.
Chapter 17:Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
367
TABLe 17-1. cOMmoN toXICANTs OF tHE NErvoUs SYSTEm bY MAJOR EFFECT(S)-cONt'd
TOXICANT
 COMMON SOURCES
ADDITIONAL SIGNS
Lead
See Excitation.
Lead exposure may cause changes in mental abilities,
lost recognition of familiar persons, belligerence, and
hysteria.
Lysergic acid
Sources are some plant forms
May be profound behavioral changes ranging from
diethylamide
(morning glory seeds, ergotized 
excitement and hallucinations to deep depression.
{LSD)
grains) or illicit street drugs.
Analysis of vomitus or stools may help to establish
exposure.
 Marijuana
Illicit street drugs, prepared from
Behavioral changes may include depression, excitement, 
leaves or seeds of Cannabis 
hallucinations with barking at unknown stimuli;
sativa. Sometimes prepared in
nystagmus, vomiting, and diarrhea. Diagnosis by.
foods such as brownies.
recognition of suspect material and/or testing of blood 
or urine for cannabis alkaloids.
GI, Gastrointestinal; OTC, over-the-counter.
TABLE 17-2.TOXICANTS OF THE DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
TOXICANT
COMMON SOURCES
COMMENTS
 DIRECT IRRITANTS
Very nonspecific. Expect acute onset, potential oropharyngeal
lesions, gagging, colic, emesis and/or diarrhea (possibly
hemorrhagic); bloat or flatulence.
Acids, alkalis,
Batteries, cleaners and bleaches,
Salivation, dysphagia, acute glossopharyngeal swelling, cough,
aldehydes
disinfectants.
 nasal discharge. Laboratory testing of suspect materials may
establish source, but animal testing for these substances is 
usually not practical or helpful.
 Petroleum 
 Solvents, paint thinners, furniture
Coughing, vomiting, choking. Possible sequel is aspiration 
distillates
 deaners, gasoline, kerosene.
pneumonia and central nervous system depression. Agents are
difficult to detect in blood or tissues by laboratory tests.
Volatile oils
Turpentine, gum spirits, pine oil,
 Acute gastroenteritis with vomiting and possibly diarrhea.
eucalyptus oil, pennyroyal oil,
 Systemic effects can include seizures, delirium, depression,
emon oil.
and coma.
Gastroenteritis,
 Aflatoxin, aspirin, NSAIDs.
hemorrhagic
 gastric ulcers, platelet dysfunction, and/or renal damage.
GASTROENTERITIS,HYPEREMIC/NECROTIC
Amanita phalloides
Wild, toxic mushroom. Most
Acute clinical signs are hemorrhagic gastroenteritis with vomiting
(death cap,
 prominent in eastern or 
and bloody diarrhea, hepatosis after a latent period of 12-24 
death angel)
western seacoast regions.
hours. Available laboratory testing is limited.
Arsenic, antirmony.
Older insecticides or herbicides,
Acute vomiting, followed by moderate to severe diarrhea
bismuth
including ant baits; old paint 
changing from watery to necrotizing and hemorrhagic within
pigment. Most uses of arsenic
24-48 hours. Hypotension, shock and renal tubular damage
 are restricted or canceled.
are additional effects. Analysis of urine or gastrointestinal
Antimony may be present in
Aaupiy pue lann aunsodxa ysqisa ot diay ues suaon 
@ustic pastes.
 concentrations from postmortem specimens can be helpful.
Iron
Accidental access to dietary iron
 Acute gastroenteritis, shock, vascular collapse and death, liver
 supplements.
damage 1-2 days later. Test for liver function, assay total
 serum iron and total iron-binding capacity.
Staphylococcus
 Spoiled foods, especially egg and
 Severe vomiting and diarrhea may develop after short latent 
toxins
 high-protein products left at 
period (<3 hr). Cultures may identify the potential bacterium 
room temperature.
but alone are not confirmatory.
GASTROENTERITIS, NONHEMORRHAGIC
Digitalis glycosides 
Accidental access to prescription 
Cardiac signs may be preceded or accompanied by colic and 
medicines; plant sources 
vomiting.
 including foxglove, oleander.
Lead
See Table 17-1.
Vomiting is intermittent.
368
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABlE 17-3. tOXICANts oF THE HePATOBIlIARY SYsTeM
TOXICANT
COMMON SOURCES
COMMENTS
Acetaminophen
Over-the-counter pain killer and 
Initial signs of vomiting, cyanosis, and facial edema
 anti-inflammatory drug.
are followed by icterus, depression, and mild 
methemoglobinemia.
Amanita phalloides
 Wild mushroom, most common in
Acute vomiting is followed in 1-2 days by liver failure.
East or West coast areas.
Blue-green algae
Algal forms, commonly
Acute gastroenteritis, vomiting, and hemorrhagic diarrhea.
concentrated by low water and
 Water fixed in formalin 1: 10 can be examined for
prevailing winds.
presence of blue-green algae. Frozen samples are used 
for toxic activity by mouse bioassay.
Iron
Dietary supplement pills.
See Table 17-2.
Petroleum
Solvent in paints, paint thinners,
2ibogouneu jo subis peui Auedwosoe Kew abewep lan 
distillates
paint strippers; fuels including 
dystunction.
 gasoline, kerosene.
Sago palm
Toxic plant outdoors in tropical 
Icterus, severe liver damage, secondary signs from liver
dlimates, indoors as potted
failure. Often fatal if left untreated.
plant.
TABLE 17-4.TOXICANTS OF THE CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
TOXICANT
COMMON SOURCES
COMMENTS
Albuterol
Inhalers, decongestant.
Arrhythmias, tachycardia.
Alpha-adrenergic agents
Xylazine (often iatrogenic), detomidine,
Arrhythmias, bradycardia, hypotension,
romifidine for veterinary use.
AV block, vomiting, occasional apnea.
Hyperglycemia is common.
Amphetamines,
 Prescription of recreational drugs.
Tachycardia. Accompanied by seizures,
methamphetamine 
tachypnea, mydriasis.
Azalea
Ornamental shrub.
 Arrhythmias, often preceded by vomiting
and gastroenteritis.
 Baclofen
 Human prescription drug. Skeletal muscle
Arrhythmias, bradycardia in severe overdose.
relaxant.
Other signs are vomiting, ataxia, salivation,
hypothermia.
Calcium channel blockers
Human and veterinary cardiovascular
Bradycardia, arrhythmia, hypotension,
prescription.
vomiting, weakness.
Cardioactive glycosides
Digoxin and related prescription drugs;
Vomiting, colic, diarrhea, followed by
foxglove, oleander, Bufo spp. toads.
weakness, bradycardia, and arrhythmia.
 Cholecalciferol
Yitamin supplements, rodenticides. High
Hypercalcemia, azotemia, bradycardia,
dosages cause signs in 12-36 hr.
 arrhythmias, dystrophic calcification.
Cocaine
Illegal street drug.
Tachycardia and arrhythmias. Test plasma or
urine.
lonophores
 Poultry coccidiostats; ruminant feed
Trembling, weakness, stiffness, recumbency.
supplements. Dangerous to dogs.
cardiovascular insufficiency. Analysis of 
stomach contents; cardiac muscle biopsy
for diagnosis.
Pimobendan
Veterinary prescription for congestive
Large overdose causes arrhythmias,
heart failure—-usually accidental
hypotension, tachycardia, vomiting.
overdose.
diarrhea.
Yew bushes
Ornamental evergreen shrubs with
Sudden death several hours after ingestion;
 strap-like, two-ranked, dark-green
nervousness, trembling, bradycardia and 
leaves.
arrhythmia. Test for yew alkaloids in
stomach.
AV, Atrioventricular.
Chapter 17:Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
369
TABLE 17-5. TOXICANTS OF THE BLOOD AND BONE MARROW
TOXICANT
COMMON SOURCES
COMMENTS
ANEMIA, HEMOLYTIC
Methionine
Urinary acidifier (given to dogs to
Heinz body anemia, also methemoglobinemia
decrease brown spots in lawn).
in cats; abdominal pain, agitation,
hyperactivity. CBC, chemistry panel for low 
BUN, hypoglycemia.
Mothballs,naphtha
Home care product; exposure possible by
Heinz body anemia. Confirm with hematology
 oral or inhalation routes.
examination.
 Onions, garlic
Accidental access to large amounts in
Acute signs are typical of hermolytic crisis.
"uoisabui ioeup Aq Jo spooy pa.edaid 
Phenothiazine anthelmintics
Older, little-used anthelmintics.
Acute hemolytic crisis may occur.
 Phenothiazine in urine becomes oxidized to
a red color. Phenothiazine can be detected
in blood or urine, but routine testing is not 
offered by many laboratories.
 Propylene glycol
 Component of many consumer products.
Heinz body anemia (cats). Also depression,
 Aternative antifreeze.
weakness, hypotension, acidosis.
Zinc
Zinc metal objects, galvanized food or
Vomiting and diarrhea in combination with 
water containers, zinc ointments, 
 pale mucous membranes and icterus.
 pennies minted after 1983.
METHEMOGLOBIN
 Acetaminophen
 OTC analgesic and anti-inflammatory.
Hepatotoxicosis is prominent. Blood
See Table 17-3.
may display dark-brown color due to
methemoglobinemia.
Aniline dyes
 Shoe polish, inks, paints. More prominent
See Nitrites, below.
in older products.
Chlorates
 Soil/contact herbicide or soil sterilant.
See Nitrites, below.
 Used where prolonged suppression of 
plant growth is desired. Accidental
ingestion of granules may occur.
Nitrites
Lawn fertiizers, explosives, meat-curing 
Methemoglobinemia, cyanosis,
agents, contaminated well water.
weakness, depression, hyperpnea. See
Acetaminophen in text for analysis of 
methemoglobin.
CARBOXYHEMOGLOBIN
Carbon monoxide
 Poorly vented heaters, automobile 
Depression, weakness, somnolence, coma,
exhaust.
and death. Mucous membranes are bright 
pink and blood is cherry-red to pink.
APLASTIC ANEMIA AND THROMBOCYTOPENIA
Benzene
Gasoline and industrial or commercial
 Causes initial central nervous system signs
 products as a solvent. Small animals 
 of tremors, ataxia. Cardiac fibrillation may
 could be at risk by inhalation exposure.
occur at high acute exposures. Prolonged 
exposures usually cause pancytopenia.
Serum iron is increased and fetal
hemoglobin may be increased. Anemia is 
macrocytic with relatively few reticulocytes
that are generally immature.
Estrogens
Used to correct mismating, treat prostatic
Lethargy, weakness, pale mucous 
hyperplasia, induce abortion, or reduce
membranes, petechial hemorrhages, 
urinary incontinence.
hematuria, melena. Pancytopenia, reduced
reticulocyte count.
COAGULOPATHY
 Anticoagulant rodenticides
 OTC baits for rodent control in homes
 Dermal and mucosal petechiae and
and business.
ecchymoses, hemoptysis, epistaxis, melena,
pale mucous membranes, weakness, 
dyspnea, subcutaneous hematoma, muffled 
heart and lung sounds, depression, and 
death.
BUN, Blood urea nitrogen; CBC, complete blood count; OTC, over-the-counter.
370
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DIACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 17-6. TOXICANTS OF THE KIDNEYS
TOXICANTS
COMMON SOURCES
COMMENTS
 Aminoglycoside antibiotics
Primarily kanamycin, neomycin, and
Usually occurs with extended treatment. Initial
gentamicin.
 findings are polydipsia/polyuria followed by
vomiting and azotemia.
 Ethylene glycol 
 Autormobile radiator antifreeze fluids.
Initial signs are in central nervous system 
with ataxia and depression, followed by
metabolic acidosis, oxalate nephrosis, and
azotemia.
 Fungal toxins
Ochratoxin or citrinin in refrigerated 
Signs are polydipsia, polyuria from renal 
table foods (cream cheese, nuts).
 tubular nephrosis.
Grapes/raisins
 Accidental access to large amounts by
 Anorexia, lethargy, vomiting and diarrhea.
's6op
Confirm with renal function tests and 
hypercalcemia/hyperphosphatemia.
 Halogenated 
Solvents in commercial products,
Initial signs may include inebriation,
hydrocarbons
paints, cleaning agents.
incoordination, and depression followed in
1-3 days by toxic tubular nephrosis. Clinical
 laboratory findings reflect acute tubular 
injury.
Metals
Many metals and metalloids are
 Effects and signs are typical of tubular
 potent tubular toxicants.
nephrosis. Samples for analysis of metals
should include blood, urine, kidney, and 
liver.
 Nonsteroidal anti-
Ibuprofen, naproxen, usually.
 Renal damage and clinical laboratory findings
 inflammatory agents 
accidental or owner administered.
are similar to those for the aminoglycoside
antibiotics. See Table 17-1.
 Plants (non-oxalate)
Easter lily (lilium spp.l, daylily
Cats appear most at risk to these plants. The
(Hemerocallis spp.).
lies have a potent tubular toxicant. Suspect
animals should be tested for renal function.
 No toxicant analyses currently available.
Vitamin D3
Vitamin supplements and vitamin D3
Signs after latent period of 18-24 hr; progress
(cholecalciferol)-based rodenticides.
over 1-3 days to polyuria, polydipsia, renal
pain on palpation.
TABLE 17-7. ClINICAL LABORATORY TESTS THAT MAY BE ALTERED BY TOXICOSES
LABORATORY PARAMETER
TOXICANT(S)
EFFECT ON VALUES
 Aanine aminotransferase
Acetaminophen, aflatoxin, benzimidazole
 Moderate to massive increase depending
anthelmintics, halogenated hydrocarbons
on dosage and toxicant.
(e.g., halothane, chloroform) hydrocarbon
solvents, iron, melaleuca oil, mushrooms
(Amanita spp.], phosphides, sago palm,
xylitol, zinc
Ammonia
Ammonium-based fertilizers
Increased.
Toxic liver injury
Increase associated with signs of hepatic
encephalopathy.
Anemia, nonregenerative
Cadmium, lead, zinc
Varies in severity; lead usually mild anemia,
 zinc often is clinically important.
Cancer chemotherapy (e.g., 5-fluorouracil
 Dosage dependent: 5-fluorouracil patients
 ointments for skin cancer] 
 may die acutely before anemia develops.
Phenylbutazone
 Chloramphenicol 
More likely in cats than dogs.
Estrogen therapy
Usually only at high dosage over extended
time period. Ferrets may be unusually 
sensitive.
 Anemia, regenerative
Acetaminophen, aspirin, copper, methionine,
Heinz bodies indicate oxidant injury from 
mothballs (naphtha), onions/garlic,
toxicants listed.
phenols, propylene glycol
Chapter 17:Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
371
TABLE 17-7. CliNICAl LaBoRAToRY TesTs THAT MAY BE AlTeRED BY ToXICOSEs-cONT'd
LABORATORY PARAMETER
TOXICANT(S)
EFFECT ON VALUES
Azotemia
 Calcium supplements
Also decreased GFR, nephrolithiasis.
Methionine
Also elevated serum ammonia and lipase.
Mothballs
Also hyperbilirubinemia and acidosis.
NSAIDs, veterinary
Also anemia, oliguria, hypoalbuminemia.
Paintballs
Also lactic acidosis and hypovolemia.
nenbe.led
Also oliguria.
Sago palm
Also hypoalbuminemia and hypoglycemia.
Salt
Also acidosis and hypernatremia.
Zinc
Increased urinary hemoglobin and bilirubin.
 Basophilic stippling
Lead
 Accompanied by nucleated red cells. Mild 
 anemia of low clinical significance.
 Bile acids
 Acetaminophen, aflatoxins, corticosteroids,
Early onset of mild to moderate increase,
diethylcarbamazine, 5-fluorouracil, sago
 often preceding other parameters of liver
palm, thiacetarsamide (Caparsolate)
injury.
Bilirubin
 Acetaminophen, aflatoxins, thiacetarsamide
Increased.
(Caparsolate)
Blood pH
Acidosis
Alcohols, aspirin, bread dough,
Acidosis, usually resulting from metabolic
cholecalciferol, essential oils, ethylene 
 disturbance or less commonly from acidic
glycol, grapes/raisins, hops, iron,
 nature of the toxicant.
metaldehyde, methionine, oxalates,
paintballs, phenol/pine oils, phosphides,
propylene glycol
Alkalosis
Calcium supplements, diuretics, foreign 
bodies, phenols/pine oil,
Calcium, serum
Calcipotriene, cholecalciferol rodenticide,
Ihcreased.
 diuretics, grapes/raisins, hops, xylitol 
Ethylene glycol, fluorides, hydrofluoric acid,
Decreased.
oxalates, phosphate enemas, rhubarb,
soaps
Casts,renal
 Aminoglycoside antibiotics, arsenic (cats),
 Renal epithelial damage as sequel to renal 
 cadmium, lilies (most species), nonsteroidal
tubule toxicosis.
anti-inflammatory drugs
Chloride, serum
Ammonium chloride
 Mechanisms of elevation include loss 
 of concentrating ability, laboratory
 interference.
Amphotericin
Bromides
Watch for potential laboratory error.
Lithium
 Cholinesterase in RBCS
Blue-green algae, hydrofluoric acid,
ivermectin, organophosphate/carbamate
insecticides, phosphides
 Coagulation factors
 Anticoagulants for human cardiovascular
Prolonged PT and aPTT associated with
disease ("blood thinners"); coumarin-
Ioss of factors Il, Vill, IX, X.
based rodenticides (e.g., warfarin,
brodifacoum, bromadiolone) 
Creatine kinase
lonophores (e.g., monensin, lasalocid,
Increased.
salinomycin)
Crystalluria
Oxalate-containing plants (e.g.,rhubarb,
Oxalate crystals in urine sediment.
oxalis)
 Ethylene glycol metabolites 
Oxalate crystals appear in urine, also from 
-Ssdonau je Aaupiy jo sheawis uossaidu!
 Melamine/cyanuric acid in contaminated
 Outbreak reported in 2007. Usually 
commercial foods.
 accompanied by advancing signs of renal
failure.
Gamma-glutamyl
 Barbiturates, glucocorticoids
Moderate increase.
asepidadsue.
Contimed
372
SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL D1ACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
TABLE 17-7. CliNICAL LaBORATORY TesTs THAT MAY BE AlTeRED BY toXICoSEs-cONt'D
LABORATORY PARAMETER
TOXICANT(S)
EFFECT ON VALUES
Glucose
Abuterol, alcohols/aldehydes, alpha2-
Increased.
 adrenergic agonists (detomidine, 
Causes of hyperglycemia are varied,
dexmedetomidine, xylazine), amitraz
primarily related to blocking of TCA cycle
insecticide, calcium channel blockers,
 or sympathetic stimulation of glucose 
ephedra/ma huang,iron, pyrethrins/
release.
 sodium monofluoroacetate (compound 
1080)
Hemoglobinuria
Acetaminophen, brown recluse spider
Eevated, mild to severe. Often a result 
venom, chlorate herbicides, copper, 
 of strong RBC oxidant and hemolytic
crotalid snake (pit viper) venom, mothballs,
properties of the toxicant.
onions/garlic, propylene glycol (cats), Zinc 
(metallic)
Icterus, serum
Acetaminophen, aflatoxin, benzodiazepines,
Aso reflected at lower concentrations as
 blue-green algae, club drugs, mothballs,
hyperbilirubinemia in clinical laboratory 
mushrooms, phosphides, sago palm,
profile.
veterinary NSAIDs, xylitol, zinc
Leukocyte count
Benzene
Neutropenia with likely left shift.
 Chloramphenicol 
 Chemical neutropenia and/or pancytopenia
Estrogens (dog)
is generally due to inhibition or 
 Phenylbutazone 
destruction of stem cells after prolonged
usé.
Magnesium, serum 
Gentamicin
Decreased, secondary to nephrosis or
hypercalcemia.
Vitamin D-induced hypercalcemia
 Methemoglobin
Acetaminophen, benzocaine, chlorate 
MetHb increased more than 40% causes
herbicides, copper, meat curing salts 
dlinical signs. MetHb may be metabolized 
(nitrites), methionine, nitrites, onions/ 
rapidly or change after collection; contact 
 garlic, phenols, smoke inhalation 
laboratory for instructions on preservation
and shipping.
Osmolarity
Aspirin, ethanol, ethylene glycol, phosphate
Hyperosmolarity and high osmolar gap.
enema
Porphyrinuria
 Hexachlorobenzene, lead 
 Moderate increase from inhibition of 
porphyrin synthesis pathway.
 Pancytopenia 
Benzene derivatives, cancer chemotherapy.
chloramphenicol, 5-fluorouracil, thallium 
 Phosphate, serum
Cestrum diurnum (night blooming
Increased due to vitamin D effect.
 jessamine), cholecalciferol rodenticides
Xylitol
 Xylitol is reported to cause
either hyperphosphatemia or
hypophosphatemia.
 Phosphate, serum
Abuterol
Decreased.
 Potassium, serum
Angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors,
Increased.
calcium channel blockers, digitalis 
 glycosides, diuretics, grapes/raisins,
 matches/fireworks, NSAIDs
 Potassium, serum
Albuterol
Decreased.
Albuterol also may cause decreased serum 
phosphate and serum magnesium,
elevated lactate, and secondary
hyperglycemia resulting from sympathetic
stimul ation.
 Sodium, serum
Aspirin, chocolate/caffeine, dehydration,
Increased.
excess salt intake, grapes/raisins, paintballs
Thrombocyte count
 Aflatoxin, cephalosporins, crotalid (pit viper)
Decreased.
 snakes, estrogens, 5-fluorouracil, IFE
therapy, NSAiDs, phenols, sago palm,
xylitol, zinc
aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; GFR, glomerular filtration rate; IFE, intravenous fat emulsion; MetHb, methemoglobin; NSAIDs, nonste-
roidal anti-inflammatory drugs; PT, prothrombin time; RBC, red blood cell; TCA, tricarboxylic acid.
Chapter 17: Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
373
Quantification of toxicants is greatly influenced by
Unless otherwise indicated, freezing of samples for toxi-
passage of time and the half-life of that specific toxicant.
cologic analyses is the best means of preservation. For
Thus if specific confrmatory tests are anticipated, early
unusual analyses, or if in doubt about specimens needed,
collection of vomitus, feces, blood, and urine may be the
clinicians should consult a toxicologist or call the labora-
key to a good chemical laboratory confirmation.
tory for information.
Applicable ULS. Postal Service (USPS) rules regarding
OBTAINING AND SHIPPING
biologic, infectious, and toxic materials should be fol-
lowed. This generally means protective bagging around
SPECIMENS
the entire submission and use of United Nations-
approved packaging materials (usually indicated in cata-
 Blood or plasma is the major vehicle for body transport
logs for packaging materials; see also U.s. Department of
of toxicants. Whole blood should be collected in anti-
Energy. Offce of Environmental Management, at http://
cOagulant (ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid [EDTA] or
www.em.doe.gov/Transportation/PMC_PackagingSpecs.
heparin unless otherwise specifed). Vomitus or feces may
aspx). If sample integrity and chain of custody are impor-
provide evidence of recent oral exposure, biliary excre-
tant (eg. insurance claims, litigation), the clinician
tion, or both. Many organic toxicants are excreted in urine
ao ea xqus a iesp
by direct secretion from renal tubule transport systems.
Hair may document chronic accumulation of a toxicant
lope to the outside of the sealed box, and, if possible,
(especially for metals or sulfur-containing compounds),
ship it directly to a specific receiving person who has
showing prior exposure even when gastrointestinal and
been notified in advance. USPS regulations and recom-
Organ concentrations are no longer elevated or detectable.
mendations for biological specimens with potential
However, hairvalues must be carefully interpreted because
toxic or infectious contaminants are extensive and beyond
assay may be influenced by external contamination rather
the scope of this chapter. They can be found currently at
than systemic accumulation. Baits and other environmen-
http://pe.usps.com/text/pub52/pub52c3_021.htm. Veter-
tal samples may establish a source of poison or probable
inary hospitals submitting specimens routinely through
route of exposure Environmental samples include food,
the USPS or via commercial carriers should be aware of
water, suspected toxic plants, baits, pesticides, household
current practices and regulations; it may be helpful to
products, medications, and solvents. Empty containers
e ul saaroida oml io auo ol Arqisuodsai siui ubisse
 may also be useful.
When animals die, clinicians should recommend a
thorough necropsy and collect appropriate specimens to
examine for lesions and analyze for toxicants. Stomach
SELECTING AN ANALYTICAL
contents may contain plants, foreign objects, abnormal
LABORATORY
colors (eg.. marker dyes associated with pesticides),
tablets, or capsules. Specimens of appropriate organs and
 In selecting and using an analytical laboratory or referral
tissues should be (l) saved fresh by freezing and (2)
laboratory, certain criteria should be considered. First, the
placed in l0% neutral buffered formalin for microscopic
laboratory should be accredited or certifed by an external
examination. Specimens should include brain, liver.
 group that audits and approves procedures and method-
kidney, cardiac muscle, stomach and intestines,
lung.
ologies. Specimen and sample tracking within a labora-
urine, feces, and any other tissues appearing abnormal.
tory information management system (LIMS) is essential
Many toxicoses can be presumptively diagnosed by a
to maintaining clear records of receipt, storage, and analy-
characteristic lesion or lesions (e.g., coumarin anticoagu-
sis. Procedures for sample tracking must maintain an
lants cause coagulopathy. usually with hemothorax;
unmistakable connection between the analytical data and
EG toxicosis is routinely diagnosed at postmortem by
the sample obtained. This is especially true for legal
microscopic examination of renal impression smears or
samples, which may involve "chain of custody" where the
routine hematoxylin and eosin [H&E] histopathology]. If 
data from the laboratory must be able to stand up in
there is contention of liability or malicious poisoning. it
court. Analysis of specimens should be done using stan-
may be well to request submission of the entire animal
dard operating procedures (SOPs) that have been vali-
to a laboratory with qualified veterinary pathologists.
dated in-house or from the literature or both. For good
Gross and especially microscopic lesions are often
quality control, performing the method should involve
valuable procedures to eliminate certain toxicoses or to
an internal standard, a control sample, or a spiked sample.
suggest others, and this information is usually relatively
An intermal standard is a compound added to the sample
cost-effective.
that is similar in nature to the compound of interest.
Appropriate samples free from contamination (eg.-
A contml sample is a sample that contains the compound
environmental agents, medications, preservatives) and
of interest in the same or similar matrix as that which is
sealed individually in glass or plastic containers can be
being analyzed. A spiked sample is when two samples are
submitted for chemical assay. Although standard evacu-
weighed and to one is added the compound of interest
ated blood or senum tubes are adequate for most body
s0 a recovery from the matrix can be determined. Analyti-
fluids, some trace elements (eg. zinc) require special
cal instruments used in the procedure must be validated
trace element tubes (i.e, Vacutainer, royal-blue cap).
to be operating within the control limits to obtain verif-
Clinicians should never use preservatives unless labora-
able data for reporting. Good documentation and main-
tory instructions specifically recommend them. Serum
tenance of records must be kept to assure the validity of
should be separated from the clots before shipping.
the data.
374
SMALL AN1MAL CLINICAL D1ACNOS1S BY LABORATORY METHODS
 Finally, it is important that a toxicologist or specialist
denote how the sample is introduced. GC-MS uses a gas
be able to consult the client, review the case and make
chromatograph and fragments the compound, giving a
appropriate test suggestions after analyzing all the data.
characteristic pattern specific to the compound. LC-MS
Below is a brief review of techniques used in an ana-
uses HPLC to introduce the sample and detects the whole
lytical toxicology laboratory for investigation and identi-
mass of the compound. For further confirmation of the
fication of compounds of interest They are intended to
compound, one can do liquid chromatography-tandem
help the clinician understand some information about
mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in which the compound
techniques used in a modern analytical laboratory.
mass is detected and then hit with a specific collision
energy and fragmented into daughter ions, which form
Thin-Layer Chromatography
from the compound. These techniques are used for
confirmation of the compound and may be justified in a
-das ci aniuat e st (l) Aeoo aei-u
legal case.
rate compounds most typically using normal phase
(silica) or reverse phase (silica modifed to contain a C18
Atomic Absorption Spectroscopy
arm). In using TLC, the sample is spotted on the plate
(stationary phase) along with standards and placed in a
Atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) is a technique
tank with the developing solvent (mobile phase). The
used to quantify a specifc metal element in a sample.
solvent moves up the plate by capillary action and the
There are two types: flame AAS and graphite furnace AAS
compounds are separated. Depending on the compound,
      
the plate can be observed by ultraviolet (UV) light or fluo-
one element at a time. In flame AAS, the sample is aspi-
rescence, or sprayed to form chromophores visibly. This
rated into the flame, where the element of interest is
technique is mainly used for screening, although quanti-
absorbed and detected to be quantifed. In GF-AAS, the
fication can be done using densitometry when the com-
sample is placed in the graphite furnace and heated to
pound of interest is well separated from the matrix. TLC
a a a n s r a
is relatively versatile and inexpensive, but less specific
which can be absorbed and detected to be quantified.
than many instrumental methods.
Inductively Coupled Plasma
Gas Chromatography
Emission Spectroscopy
Gas chromatography (GC) is a technique used for the
 Inductively coupled plasma emission spectroscopy (ICP-
analysis and quantification of volatile compounds. Com-
ES) is a technique used for analyzing metals and minerals.
pue qdeigoieuoiyp seg aql cluo paisaul aie spunod
The sample is aspirated into the plasma, which excites the
flash evaporated onto the column. This can be done using
atoms, which then emit characteristic electromagnetic
a packed or capillary column. The column is the station-
radiation the wavelength of which can be measured.
ary phase and the gas is the mobile phase. The com-
Using this technique, one can measure many elements
pounds are separated on the column by how they interact
at once.
with these phases; heat also moves the compounds along
the column. After leaving the column, the compounds
Inductively Coupled Plasma
can be detected by various detectors. Some of these detec-
Mass Spectrometry
tors commonly used include the flame ionization detec-
tor (FID), the thermoselective detector (TSD) or flame
Inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS)
photometric detector (FPD), and the electron capture
pue sleau sansau ieql Aauoads sseu jo adAl e si
detector (ECD).
nonmetals. Similar to ICP-ES, the sample is aspirated into
the plasma, but the technique is more sensitive (parts per
High-Pressure Liquid Chromatography
billion [ppb] to parts per trillion [ppt]) since one is mea-
suring the actual mass of the elements. This technique can
High-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC) is a tech-
be used for confirmation and speciation of elements and
nique used for separating and quantifying mainly non-
may be justified in a legal case.
volatile compounds. Compounds are injected onto a
column and the mobile phase is pumped into the column
under high pressure to separate the compounds. The
DIAGNOSIS OF SPECIFIC
compounds are detected typically using UV or fluores-
TOXICANTS BY LABORATORY
cence In some cases compounds can be derivatized to
absorb in the UV or fluoresce.
ANALYSIS
Mass Spectrometry
 Chemical analysis is the final and most important confir-
matory procedure for toxicoses when a chemically con-
aian ie ue si (s) s s
frmed diagnosis is needed. Specific selected common
-ed pasieu yo oei aieup-ol-sse aul sanseau ieu
toxicants are addressed in the next section. In addition,
cles. This is used in measuring the masses of particles
a differential list of toxins is provided for selected organ
from a compound. There are two general types: gas
systems, along with common sources for each toxicant
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) and liquid
and comments about distinguishing clinical or laboratory
saeu au ((s-ol) Aauopads sse-Aydeaoiewo
features of the toxicant (see Tables 17-l to 17-6). Refer
Chapter 17: Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
375
also to Table 17-7. which compares specific clinical
failure, icterus, hypoproteinemia, coagulation failure and
laboratory changes associated with common veterinary
weight loss are indications to suspect aflatoxin poisoning.
toxicants.
Aflatoxins are potent hepatotoxins formed by Aspergillus
   ds s oe s
Acetaminophen
caused large-scale contamination of pet foods when moldy
grain has been used in pet foods. Clinical laboratory
Indications · Intoxication with acetaminophen (ACM)
changes suggestive of aflatoxicosis include hypoprotein-
is likely in any cat with a history of ACM administration
emia, coagulation dysfunction and hepatic insuffciency
(especially if dyspnea or cyanosis is present). One 325-mg
or failure. Hepatic enzymes [alanine aminotransferase
tablet may be toxic to cats.
[ALT]. sorbitol dehydrogenase [SDH]. and gamma-
aa pue aseaui ae (o] aseasue tein
Sample Collection · Plasma (from EDTA or heparin-
vated serum bile acids are a sensitive indicator of hepatic
preserved blood) or senum and urine are the preferred
 aflatoxicosis. Abdominal ultrasound and hepatic biopsy
antemortem samples. Blood concentrations usually peak
have been used to detect patterms of hepatic aflatoxicosis,
4 to 6 hours after ingestion. Samples should be refriger-
typically centrilobular necrosis and hemorrhage.
 ated if analyzed within 24 hours or frozen if longer delays
are expected. A blood smear should be examined for
Sample Collection · Suspect pet foods should be
Heinz bodies. Antemortem whole blood can be tested for
sampled from several bags and the lot number of each
methemoglobin. Methemoglobin is unstable and must
bag recorded. Store the food in a cool dry place, or for
be tested within 4 hours or stabilized by hemolysis of the
longer holding. freeze it to preserve the status at time of
whole blood with an equal amount of sterile water. The
sampling. Urinary metabolites of aflatoxin are indicative
clinician should contact the laboratory in advance for
of recent exposure, and residues of aflatoxin metabolites
recommendations for handling and submitting samples
such as aflatoxin Ml can be found in tissues (liver and
for methemoglobin analysis. Toxic concentrations in
kidney) of animals that diet because of aflatoxin
tissues have not been established.
poisoning.
-jdAl esid io unas ul pannsam si oy ● sisaery
Analysis · A range of analytical procedures on feed are
cally using HPLC. If the test is available, blood glutathi-
available from enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
 One values are depressed. Moderate [i.e, 10% to 50%) to
(ELISA) kits and/or lateral flow rapid tests that could be
marked (i.e., >50%) numbers of large Heinz bodies are
run in a clinical laboratory to more sophisticated and
expected in intoxicated cats. In normal cats, up to l0% of
quantitative assays by TLC, HPLC, or LC-MS/MS when
RBCs may contain small Heinz bodies (see Chapter 3).
quantification and confirmation of contaminated food is
Hemoglobinuria or hematuria may be present; methemo-
warranted.
globin concentration is increased.
Normal Values ● Aflatoxins are regulated by the U.S.
Normal Values · Data for animals are scarce, but ACM
Food and Dnug Administration, and grain values above
nss iou op Aial on uen ssl san
20 ppb are not permitted in interstate commerce.
toxicosis.
Danger Values · Aflatoxin concentrations greater than
Danger Values ● Not established in cats:; human ACM
60 ng/g (ppb) have been associated with aflatoxicosis in
values  greater
than
300 μg/ml
are
indicative of
dogs. Serious subacute toxicosis is more likely when food
hepatopathy.
concentrations are above 200 ppb.
Artifarts · Other agents producing methemoglobin-
Artifacts · Not all aflatoxins are of equal toxicity, and
 emia or hemoglobinuria (eg, aniline dyes, copper salts.
 detection of total aflatoxins by some tests may nonspecif-
nitrites, onions; see Table 17-5) can mimic ACM's effects.
cally overestimate the true level of the most toxic metabo-
lite, aflatoxin B.
Causes · ACM toxicosis is most common in cats; dogs
are less commonly poisoned and more likely than cats to
Causes · Aspergillus fungi [A. flavus, A. parasiticus, and A.
have prominent liver toxicosis. Exposure is usually due to
nomius) may contaminate grains during their formation
persons not familiar with ACM toxicosis to cats. Other
or grow in improperly stored grains at moisture levels
causes of Heinz bodies and methemoglobinemia should
above 14%. Mostat risk are corn, cottonseed, and peanuts;
be eliminated (see Table 17-5 and Chapter 3). Evidence
corm is a common constituent of many pet foods.
of methemoglobinemia, moderate to marked numbers of
large Heinz bodies, or both accompanied by positive test
Albuterol
results for ACM or its metabolites support a diagnosis of
ACM toxicosis.
 Indications · Aaute onset of apprehension, agitation,
and cardiac arrhythmia combined with tachypnea and
Aflatoxins
collapse are indications of albuterol poisoning. Effects
are due to excessive betaz agonist activity, and there is
Indications ● Dogs have been most commonly affected.
 profound hypokalemia as a result of Na*,K*-ATPase acti-
Acute signs of vomiting. hemorrhage and hepatic failure
vation, and hyperglycemia in response to sympathetic
 Or a subacute response that includes progressing hepatic
stimulation.
376
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Sample Collection ·● Blood collection for glucose and
(e.g, strychnine), any amount supports a diagnosis of
serum electrolytes is indicated when albuterol exposure
toxicosis.
or typical clinical signs occur.
 Danger Values ● Analysis confirms exposure, but toxic
Analysis · A routine electrolyte panel including serum
 concentrations are not well established for most common
potassium, phosphonus, magnesium, lactate, AST and
alkaloids.
glucose is recommended. In addition, monitoring of
blood pressure and electrocardiogram is warranted based
Artifacts · Many plant compounds and drugs contain
on presenting signs and potential for serious hypokale-
nontoxic heterocyclic nitrogen compounds that react as
 mia. Albuterol can be measured in plasma, serum, or liver
alkaloids. Simple spot tests depending on colorimetric
by HPLC or LC-MS.
 reactions measuring only a general alkaloidal reaction
can incorrectly implicate toxicosis because of a false-
Danger Values · Marked hypokalemia and probably
positive test result. A minimum of TLC after appropriate
solvent extraction is recommended and followed, if nec-
aspartate aminotransferase (AST), blood lactate,
and
essary.  by
an altermative confirmatory instrumental
blood glucose are indicators of albuterol toxicosis.
procedure.
Artifacts · Many toxic agents can affect blood glucose
Causes ● Poisoning with alkaloids needs to be differen-
and senum potassium (see Table 17-7). The acute betaz
tiated from other poisons (see Tables 17-l and 17-2),
agonist signs coupled with hyperglycemia and hypo-
other causes of CNS excitation, and other causes of vomit-
kalemia would suggest albuterol as a valid differential
ing (see Chapter 9). Diagnosis is usually confirmed by a
diagnosis.
combination of history and clinical signs in conjunction
with demonstration of the alkaloid in stomach contents
Causes · Albuterol is most commonly encountered
or body fluids.
-qu ansiue pazinssard aund pue mau sop uam
ers that are normally used by humans or used off-label in
veterinary patients.
Amitraz
Alkaloids
Indications · Intoxication with amitraz should be con-
sidered in patients with vomiting, depression, ataxia, fre-
Indications · Intoxications with alkaloids should be
quent defecation, or diarrhea, as well as in animals with
considered in patients with central nervous system (CNS)
intentional use or misuse or accidental exposure to
excitation, including seizures (see Table 17-1), with or
amitraz via dips, tick collars, or some livestock sprays.
without vomiting. and possible exposure to alkaloids.
 Advanced systemic signs can include bradycardia, hypo-
High-risk alkaloid poisons include 4-aminopyridine
tension, and convulsions. Hypoglycemia is a characteris-
(Avitrol), amphetamines, caffeine, cocaine, theobromine,
tic clinical laboratory change.
nicotine, and strychnine Some of these have been used
as malicious poisons, and theobromine is the major toxic
Sample Collection · Blood is not a good sample
 alkaloid in chocolate products.
because it has low amiraz concentrations, but urinary
metabolites may allow diagnosis. Amitraz on hair or in
Sample Collection · After absorption, alkaloids may be
vomitus can be analyzed when exposure is uncertain.
concentrated in the liver and eventually excreted in urine
Samples of vomitus, liver, kidney, skin, hair, brain, or
Plasma values may be low compared with urine values.
lungs can be used in postmortem cases.
unless death occurred very rapidly before excretion in urine
[i.e,<1 hour). Preferred samples are vomitus orurine from
Analysis · Samples are typically analyzed by GC using
live animals and any suspect baits (eg., bird toxicants
a nitrogen-phosphonus detector to quantitate amitraz.
[4-aminopyridine]]. Blood or plasma may contain signifi-
HPLC may also be used, but a more extensive cleanup
cant levels of some alkaloids (e.g.. the methylxanthines
procedure may be needed to remove interferences.
[caffeine, theobromine]). Some alkaloids [e.g. strychnine)
are diffault to detect in antemortem blood. Postmortem
Normal Values · Amitraz is not expected in normal
samples should include liver, kidney, and urine Refrigera-
tissues.
tion is adequate for preservation of alkaloids.
Danger Values · Not established.
Analysis · Alkaloidal compounds of toxicologic impor-
tance to small animals include 4-aminopyridine, amphet-
Causes ● Usual causes of amitraz intoxication are sub-
amines, atropine caffeine and other methylxanthines,
 stantial therapeutic overdose or inadvertent exposure of
cocaine and strychnine. Screening analyses may be per-
a species (eg.. cats) for which amitraz is not recom-
formed by TLC. Quantitation is best performed by HPLC,
mended. Other toxins (see Table 17-2) and other causes
GC, GC-MS, or LC-MS.
of vomiting and diarrhea need to be eliminated (see
jo asoui on iis ieadde ues suais ieu a iandeu
Normal Values · For the alkaloids listed previously.
organophosphate or carbamate toxicosis; these may
normal values are not expected; their presence in the body
need to be ruled out by appropriate testing (e.g..
indicates exposure to an exogenous source For some
acetylcholinesterase).
Chapter 17: Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
377
Anticoagulant Rodenticides
intravascular coagulation (see Table 17-5 and Chapter 5).
Significant concentrations of anticoagulant rodenticides
Indications ● Hemorrhage, prolonged activated coagu-
in conjunction with elevated ACT, PT, and aPTT with or
lation time (ACT), prolonged prothrombin time (PT) or
without PIVKA, clinically confirms a diagnosis. Because
prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT)
most current rodenticides use the second-generation
(or both), or a combination thereof suggests intoxication
group. the clinician should assume that residues are
with vitamin K-responsive anticoagulant rodenticides
present in urine for several weeks.
(see Table 17-5). Abnormal results for proteins induced
by vitamin K activity (PIVKA) have also been used to
Aspirin
detect impaired coagulation from vitamin K antagonists.
Indications ● Intoxication with aspirin should be con-
Sample Collection · Whole blood (in EDTA
Aor
sidered in patients with vomiting, fever, and laboratory
heparin), serum, or urine may be used for chemical analy-
findings consistent with metabolic acidosis (see Chapter
sis of coumarin-based rodenticides. The clinician should
6). Cats are at greater risk than dogs. History of recent
use a small-gauge needle for blood collection to mini-
administration of aspirin to cats, especially if dose is
mize hemorrhage from the venipuncture site Stomach
excessive [i.e, >75 mg/kg for more than 7 days), suggests
contents or vomitus may contain little or no anticoagu-
aspirin toxicosis.
lant, because clinical signs occur after a 1l- to 2-day latent
period. Postmortem samples should include liver and
Sample Collection · EDTA blood is analyzed for
kidney.
thrombocytopenia and Heinz bodies while plasma is
analyzed for serum salicylate concentration. For tests per-
Analysis · Anticoagulant rodenticides of toxicologic
formed within 24 hours, refrigeration is adequate preser-
importance to small animals include warfarin, pindone.
vation. Plasma held longer than 24 hours for salicylate
and chlorophacinone (frst generation) and bromadio-
analysis should be frozen. Salicylate metabolites may be
lone, diphacenone, 
 difethialone and brodifacoum
present in liver and kidney, but toxic concentrations are
[second generation). Analytical techniques can range
not established.
from initial screening with TLC to quantification with
HPLC with UV or fluorescence detection using suspect
Analysis ● A qualitative presumptive urine test involves
baits, blood, senum, or urine from poisoned animals.
adding a few drops of 10% ferric chloride to 1 ml of urine.
In addition, LC-MS/MS can be used if available. Baits
In the presence of salicylates, a purple color will form.
commonly contain 0.05% active ingredient Blood
HPLC, GC, GC-MS, or LC-MS/MS allows more definitive
concentration may be very low (ppb range) when
and quantitative testing of urine or plasma.
highly potent rodenticides are used (eg. bromadiolone,
diphacenone). Liver and kidney from poisoned animals
Normal Values ● Normal values are not well established
may contain both parent compound and hydroxylated
in animals; expected human therapeutic plasma concen-
metabolites.
trations are less than 50 mg/dl.
Hydroxylated metabolites are excreted in the urine
and may be present for l to 2 days after exposure ceases
Danger Values ● Serum or plasma salicylate concentra-
or for much longer (several weeks) if second-generation
tions indicate exposure, but toxic thresholds are not well
anticoagulants are involved. Brodifacoum residues may
established in animals. Human toxic blood concentration
persist in tissues for up to 120 days.? Indirect evidence of
is 50 to l00 mg/dl; fatal intoxication in a cat has been
vitamin K antagonism can be gained by clinical labora-
associated with a blood concentration of 60 mg/dl.
tory testing for nonfunctional vitamin K-dependent
coagulation factors (PIVKA), but confrmatory diagnosis
is most certain when the rodenticide or its metabolites
are detected.
of aspirin administration and vomiting. Diagnosis can be
confirmed by plasma salicylate determination.
Normal Values · Anticoagulant rodenticides are not
expected in blood or tissues; values less than 1l ng/ml
Blue-Green Algae
[1 ppb) are not associated with clinical signs of toxicosis.
Indications ● Sudden onset of neurologic signs or acute
Danger Values ● Serum or plasma concentrations vary
vomiting followed by delayed hepatic damage or hepatic
widely depending on initial dose and duration of expo-
failure are consistent with blue-green algae poisoning
sure and may range from 1 to 10 ng/ml during toxicosis
from Microcystis aeruginosa. The toxicant microcystin is a
by brodifacoum. The liver appears to concentrate brodi-
facoum as much as looo-fold over plasma or senum.
leading to acute hepatic necrosis. In dogs, acetaminophen
Diphacinone and bromadiolone concentrations at nec-
poisoning. acute aflatoxicosis, iron toxicosis, sago palm
ropsy may be less than I part per million (ppm) in blood
(cycad palm), and xylitol poisoning are valid differential
 or liver of clinically poisoned dogs.
diagnoses.
Causes ● In a patient with a bleeding problem, toxicity
Sample Collection · Potentially dangerous water can
must be differentiated from other causes of factor def-
be examined for Microcystis spp. algae by microscopic
ciencies, as well as thrombocytopenia and disseminated
identification. Analysis for microcystin toxin testing is
378
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
offered at the California Animal Health and Food Safety
concentrations greater than 20% are associated with
Laboratories at Davis, California (http://cahfs.ucdavis.
depression and respiratory effects. Blood COHb above
edu) and Auburn University CyanoPros, (http://www.
 50% indicates serious to acute poisoning that requires
cyanopros. com).
immediate attention.
Analysis · Microcystin toxins can be analyzed by ELISA
Artifacts · Hemoglobin saturation analysis may be
kit, but LC-MS/MS is the method of choice; some of these
inaccurate when CO poisoning occurs. Pulse oximetry
toxins even require liquid chromatography-triple mass
overestimates the amount of saturated hemoglobin
spectrometry (LC-MS/MS/MS).
because the procedure does not discriminate between
COHb and oxyhemoglobin. Thus direct measurement of
Normal Values · Normal serum hepatic enzymes and
COHb is important if CO poisoning is suspected.
electrolytes suggest no effect from microcystin.
Causes ● CO is a threat to pets from automobile exhaust
Danger Values ● Increased serum concentrations of alka-
in enclosed spaces, exhaust leakage during transport,
line phosphatase [ALP), AST, ALT, and bilirubin, as well
defective space heaters in kennels, and acute exposure to
as hyperkalemia and hypoglycemia are characteristic
smoke during fres. CO itself is colorless, odorless, and
serum chemistry changes in poisoned dogs. Presence of
very close to the density of air.
- ris r as rn isns u s
[ee juaod siul on ansodxa yuos ue ssop jo siual
toxin.
Copper
Histopathology ● Hepatic lesions of hepatocyte swelling.
Indications ● Assay of hepatic tissue for copper is indi-
enlarged liver, and microscopic evidence of centrilobular
cated when chronic or progressive hepatic damage occurs
hepatic necrosis occur in animals that die from microcys-
resulting in chronic hepatic failure sometimes leading to
tin poisoning.
cirrhosis (see Chapter 9).
Artifacts · None reported.
Essential Oils
Causes · Microcystis spp. most commonly are called
blue-green algae and some species of that genus produce
Indications · Cats are more susceptible to essential oils
[ i ' s   i e
than are dogs. Initial signs of poisoning can include acute
blooms occur on nitrogen- and phosphorus-enriched
hepatic failure, ataxia, tremors, hypothermia, and coma.
lakes and ponds during hot summers and/or at low water
 Exposure is often from spills or other direct contact of the
levels. Concentration of the dying algal bloom can lead
oils with skin.
to microcystin exposure, primarily in dogs that swim in
Or drink contaminated water.
Sample Collection · Blood and serum for determina-
tion of hepatic function and coagulation profle is recom-
mended. Endoscopy can be helpful in evaluation of
Carbon Monoxide
 gastrointestinal (Gi) damage if ingestion is the route of
exposure.
Indications ● Animals with signs of lethargy. decreased
mentation, or sudden onset of somnolence and depres-
Analysis · Routine methods for clinical chemistry and
 sion may have exposure to carbon monoxide (CO). Physi-
coagulation profle are appropriate for evaluation of
cal findings can include decreased reflexes, tachycardia,
hepatic function and coagulopathy. Assays for essential
and tachypnea. Residual neurotoxicity can occur follow-
oils in serum or plasma are not commonly available, but
 ing prolonged CO exposure.
if offered, would generally be by capillary GC with FID
detection or capillary GC-MS.
Sample Collection · Routine sampling of blood
and senum is adequate for the range of clinical labo-
Danger Values · The ALP, AST, ALT creatine kinase
ratory
y examinations important to CO poisoning
(CK). total bilinubin, and coagulation profile are
diagnosis.
elevated.
Analysis ● Whole blood can be analyzed by microdiffu-
Artifacts · None reported, but the pattern of enzyme
sion method or head-space GC.
changes and coagulation profle are similar to those of
 other hepatotoxic agents.
Danger Values ● Normal venous color of blood is accom-
d  s  a u a pd
Causes · A wide variety of essential oils are extracted
Blood with elevated carboxyhemoglobin (COHb)
is
from plants and used in a variety of products, from
colored red to pink as a result of the pigment properties
aromas and flavors to medications and insecticides. Some
of COHb. Whole unclotted blood can be tested for
 essential oils are considered hazardous to animals, includ-
CO exposure by measuring COHb in blood. The assay
 ing bitter almond, melaleuca/tea tree oil, pennyroyal oil.
is offered at some veterinary diagnostic laboratories
 and wormwood. Their use in homes results in inadvertent
and at many human hospital laboratories. COHb
exposure of dogs and cats.
Chapter 17: Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
379
Ethylene Glycol
CNS signs are transient and may be missed. Unless EG
sisuaid 'uau jo sinoy um pain si Aixn
Indications · Intoxication with ethylene glycol (EG)
is poor.
 should be considered in patients with known or sus-
pected ingestion of EG. Ataxia, depression, and vomiting
Grapes/Raisins
are consistent with EG intoxication; seizures may occur.
Cats are more susceptible than dogs on a body weight
Indications ● Acute onset of vomiting and depression.
basis.
followed by oliguric or anuric renal failure with hyperka-
lemia and metabolic acidosis are the major features of
Sample Collection · Samples collected in whole blood
grape/raisin toxicosis. Thus far, only dogs have been con-
[in EDTA or heparin), serum or plasma, and urine are
firmed susceptible to this toxicosis. Major differentials
required initially. Electrolytes, acid-base status, osmolal-
[nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug [NSAID] toxicosis,
ity. and anion gap should be determined promptly (see
aminoglycoside poisoning, EG ingestion, and vitamin D;
Chapter 6). Blood samples taken within 6 hours of inges-
[cholecalciferol] poisoning) require prompt determina-
tion are most likely to be positive for EG. After that acid
tion of the true cause to best support life-saving therapy.
intermediates are expected (e.g.. glycolic acid). Kidney
should be obtained at postmortem for histopathologic
Sample Collection · Presence of grapes or raisins in
detection of oxalate crystals; kidney and urine may be
vomitus should suggest potential poisoning. Since the
saved for possible analysis of EG or acidic metabolites.
toxic principle is unknown, eliminating the leading dif-
ferential diagnoses is the only route for diagnostic
Analysis · EG in serum orblood has been detectedusing
confrmation.
a commercial test kit [REACT Ethylene Glycol Test Kit;
PRN Pharmacal Inc, Pensacola, FL). Results are best if
Analysis ● No assays are available for the toxic principle.
-isod snoy 9e on th ueun ssal paoad si sisieue
which is unknown. Diagnosis is supported by appropriate
ingestion. Availability of rapid tests for EG has been vari-
clinical chemistry results.
able in recent years, due to lack of specificity or potential
nonspecifcity of the assay. Urine if available, contains EG
Normal Values ● Electrolyte values within normal limits.
early (i.e., <6 hours post-ingestion), followed by oxalates
lack of azotemia, and normal urine output and specific
 and calcium oxalate crystals, which can be viewed by light
jou si sisonit usieiadei ieu suoeui aie Aa
microscopy using polarized light Calcium oxalate crystal-
occurring.
luria (see Figure 7-7) appears 3 to 6 hours post-ingestion
and, although not infallible, is useful for diagnosis. Serum
Danger Values ● Elevations in BUN, creatinine, ALP, ALT.
calcium may be depressed after 4 hours because of
 and amylase and lipase are accompanied by hyperkale-
complexing with oxalate metabolites of EG. Osmolality.
mia, hyperphosphatemia, hypercalcemia, isosthenuria,
osmolal gap. and anion gap are usually increased, but
proteinuria, and glucosuria.
these may be affected by other alcohols or by metabolic
acidosis; severe metabolic acidosis is expected (see Chapter
Artifacts · Other renal toxicants can have similar pat-
6). EG is best analyzed by GC or GC-MS. Besides serum
terns of clinical chemistry changes.
and urine, kidney is also a good specimen for analysis.
Causes · Vitus spp. (grapes or raisins) contain unknown
Normal Values · Trace amounts of EG or oxalate
toxins that cause acute renal failure associated with
crystals.
hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, hyperkalemia, and
increased hepatic enzymes.
IP/3 0s 01 07 ue4l 1a1ea1 san1a 5a ● s2na 1o0g
indicate exposure; toxic concentrations vary widely.
Iron
depending on initial dose and time since exposure. High
 anion gap and a severe metabolic acidosis suggest serious
Indications · Iron toxicosis presents in four clinical
EG toxicosis.
stages. Stage 1 (0 to 6 hours post-ingestion) is primarily
a GI syndrome with vomiting diarrhea, colic, and GI
Artifacts ● Ethanol or methanol may also abnormally
hemorrhage Stage 2 (6 to 24 hours) is a period of reduced
increase serum osmolality but should not cause oxalate
clinical signs and apparent recovery, but is followed by
crystals or high EG concentrations. EG kits cross-react
stage 3. persisting up to 4 days with return of vomiting.
with propylene glycol, formalin, glycerol, excessive serum
diarrhea, GI hemorrhage. hypovolemia, and acidosis.
lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and some drugs (e.g. pen-
If the animal survives this stage, stage 4 may develop with
tobarbital, diazepam).
Gl scarring and stricture as a result of severe Gl mucosal
damage.
uoy paieiuaap aq ol spaau Aipixol Da ● sasneo
toxic (see Tables 17-1 and 17-6) and other causes of acute
Sample Collection · Blood or serum.
CNS depression, metabolic acidosis, and oliguric renal
failure. Rapid progression (i.e, 1 to 3 days) from CNS
Analysis · Testingforirontoxicosis canuse flameAAS, GF-
signs to oliguric renal failure with calcium oxalate crystals
AAS, ICP-ES, or ICP-MS. Total serum iron and total iron-
and metabolic acidosis with increased anion gap (see
binding capacity (TIBC) are compared to assess if iron
Chapter 6) allow a presumptive diagnosis of EG toxicity.
transport capabilities have been exceeded (Chapter 3).
380
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Normal Values ● Normal serum iron in dogs ranges from
Danger Values ● Blood lead values greater than 0.3 ppm
95 to 125 μg/dL. Normal TIBC for dogs is 3 to 4 times
 suggest excessive exposure, and greater than 0.4 ppm are
the senum iron concentration,
. and 450 μg/dl is the
usually considered confirmatory of toxicosis. Hepatic or
normal upper limit (Chapter 3).
renal lead values greater than 10 ppm support a diagnosis
of lead toxicosis.
Danger Values · When total serum iron exceeds the
TIBC, this indication of free iron suggests the oxidative
Artifacts · Some laboratories that use organic chelate
effects of unbound iron will exert toxic and oxidant effects
extraction of lead rather than acid digestion prefer hepa-
on the GI tract and liver.
rinized whole blood. Above a minimum value, lead con-
centrations are not well correlated with severity of clinical
Artifacts · Hemolyzed serum may result in an errone-
signs but are a reflection of body burden. Values as little
a ui sie i o aie aa aa y so
as 50% of the danger values [i.e., 0.15 ppm) could indi-
GF-AAS procedure for serum iron, but total iron in serum
cate toxicosis if other parameters [i.e, clinical signs, baso-
may be higher after hemolysis because GF-AAS will detect
philic stippling. nucleated RBCs, elevated urinary or
heme iron that has escaped from hemolyzed red cells.
plasma porphyrins) are consistent with toxicosis.
Causes · In small animals, primarily dogs, iron toxico-
Causes · Basophilic stippling is neither sensitive nor
sis often results from inadvertent ingestion of large
specific for lead poisoning. When basophilic stippling is
numbers of iron supplement tablets. Results are a combi-
found in conjunction with nucleated RBCs and absence
nation of severe GI damage. hepatic damage, shock, and
of reticulocytosis, a lead assay is indicated. Lead poison-
 potential GI scarring in survivors.
ing must be differentiated from toxic (see Table 17-1) and
other causes of CNS stimulation. Poisoning is most
Lead
common in young dogs (i.e, <l year) with access to old
housing, peeling paint, and lead objects. Blood lead con-
Indications · Lead poisoning should be considered in
centrations establish exposure and usually correlate with
dogs with periodic episodes of vomiting. with or without
toxicosis but not degree of severity. To detect prolonged
mild anemia and basophilic stippling, and cats with
low-level exposure with a relatively low blood lead con-
centration, the clinician should collect a 24-hour urine
animals also experience seizures and behavioral changes
sample, then inject calcium disodium EDTA (75 mg/kg
(e.g.,. hysteria, depression) and occasionally ataxia and
intramuscularly [IMm]). and obtain a second 24-hour
facial tremors.
urine sample during the 24-hour period following EDTA.
Lead-poisoned animals should demonstrate greater than
Sample Collection · Whole blood collected in EDTA or
10-fold increase in urine lead.
heparin is the preferred antemortem sample and can be
used to make blood smears looking for basophilic stip-
MDR1 Gene Mutation
pling and nucleated RBCs, to test for porphyrins (plasma ),
or for analysis for lead (lead is primarily in erythrocytes).
Indications · Certain toxicants and a number of drugs
Lead is stable in blood for long periods, but the sample
used in veterinary medicine can be unusually toxic to
should be refrigerated to preserve RBC integrity. Urine
specific breeds of dogs. Susceptibility is influenced by the
ue ra (aiaaa are sudod) diay aq e
MDR1 gene that encodes P-glycoprotein, a drug transport
kidney are recommended for postmortem analysis.
pump that limits drug absorption across the blood-brain
Recently one or more rapid and simple blood lead assays
barrier. Herding breeds of dogs are especially susceptible.
have become available for emergency use, providing a
(u tw o5<) ys yy ie sao pue asa
positive result when the blood lead is above a clinically
include Australian shepherds (standard and minis).
significant value. The Lead Care II system is an instrument
collies, long-haired whippets, all of which have a muta-
of minimal cost ($2,000-$3,000) that can be used for
tion in the MDR1 gene that impairs the normal capacity
blood lead analysis; it was recently compared to GF-AAS
to limit dnug absorption and distribution and excretion.
and shown to give comparable results for diagnosis
Other breeds at lower risk are border collies, English shep-
although for precise lead concentration GF-AAS is still the
herds, German shepherds, McNabs, Old English sheep-
 gold standard.
dogs. Shetland sheepdogs, and silken windhounds. Drugs
affected by the mutation include acepromazine, butor-
Analysis · Blood lead is usually detected by GF-AAS.
phanol, doxorubicin, erythromycin, ivermectin, loper-
ICP-ES, or ICP-MS; in tissues one can also use flame
amide, milbemycin, moxidectin, rifampin, selamectin,
AAS.
vinblastine and vincristine.
Normal Values · Less than 0.05 ppm in whole blood or
Information · Contact the laboratory at www.vetmed.
less than 3 ppm in liver or kidney is considered nontoxic
wsu.edu/vcpl or by phone (509-335-3745).
is not well established in small animals. Normal human 
Sample Collection · The laboratory requires 2 ml of
protoporphyrin values are less than 50 mg/dl. If samples
blood in an EDTA tube along with a submission form;
are submitted for analysis, the clinician should include
this should be sent by overnight service on ice. A cheek
specimens from a normal, unexposed animal for
brush sample is also offered. The clinician should contact
comparison.
the laboratory or check the online instructions.
Chapter 17: Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
381
Analysis · Samples should be submitted to: Veterinary
Sample Collection ● Whole blood and serum are useful
Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory, PO Box 609 (ULS.
for CBC, clinical chemistry profle, and urinalysis. Daily
Mail) or 17 VTH (FedEx or UPS), Pullman, WA 99163-
monitoring of packed cell volume is recommended.
0609: Ph0ne: 509-335-3745; FAX: 509-335-6309.
Analysis · Analysis is typically done by HPLC.
Danger Values · The laboratory can provide interpreta-
tion of testing.
Danger Values · Decreased packed cell volume (PCV).
thrombocytopenia, azotemia, oliguria or anuria, and
Artifacts · Contact the laboratory for any questions
gastric or intestinal bleeding are all causes for concern
about test results.
that renal or GI damage are continuing. NSAID values for
 poisoned dogs are not well established, but serum ibu-
profen concentrations of dogs with toxicosis may be
Metaldehyde
greater than 100 μg/ml in dogs. Drug concentrations can
drop rapidly in the first 48 hours of effective therapy.
Common Indications · Intoxication with metaldehyde
should be considered in patients with acute onset of sali-
Artifacts · None reported.
vation, tremors, ataxia, seizures, nystagmus, and vomiting
siany Pos io shieq leus ol ainsodxa yim uoounluos u
Causes · NSAIDs are prostaglandin inhibitors, resulting
[i.e., solid blocks used for camp stoves, also known as
in a beneficial effect defined by reduction of inflamma-
"canned heat").
tion. However, adverse effects from prolonged use or over-
dosage can result in impaired blood flow to kidneys and
Sample Collection · Samples can be collected in whole
GI tract and compromised gastric bicarbonate buffer
blood, senum, and urine and should be kept frozen until
secretion. Progressive renal failure and gastric ulceration
analysis. Postmortem samples [i.e, gastric contents,
can result.
urine) establish exposure; toxic concentrations are not
established.
Organophosphate and
Carbamate Insecticides
Analysis ● A quick test for metaldehyde is to place the
bait in a test tube and warm it slowly. Metaldehyde pres-
Indications · Intoxications  with
organophosphates
 ents sublimes, then forms a substantial "snowfall" of crys-
(OPs) or carbamate should be considered in patients with
tals. Metaldehyde is metabolized to acetaldehyde, which
muscarinic signs [i.e, salivation, gastrointestinal hyper-
can be detected by GC or GC-MS in serum or urine during
motility, miosis), nicotinic signs (i.e, muscle tremors,
acute poisoning. Acetaldehyde produces metabolic acido-
weakness), and CNS excitation or depression, especially
sis [see Chapter 6).
if previously treated with OP or carbamate compounds.
Normal Values · Metaldehyde is not expected in blood
Sample Collection · For acetylcholinesterase (AChE)
of normal animals.
determination, the clinician should collect whole blood
in EDTA or heparin. Samples should be refrigerated, not
Danger Values · Not documented.
frozen. AChE is stable for at least 3 days when refriger-
ated; freezing may destroy or reduce the activity. Early
Artifacts · Acetaldehyde is also a metabolite of ethanol.
sampling is important for carbamates because AChE may
Acetaldehyde may form during analytical procedures
spontaneously reverse as soon as I to 3 hours after expo-
unless blood proteins are precipitated before analysis.
sure Sampling time is less critical with OP compounds,
because they bind strongly after a period of time [known
Causes ● Metaldehyde toxicosis is somewhat seasonal
as aging). Because blood may not contain adequate OP
 and geographically influenced. Mild, moist climates (eg.
or carbamate residues to evaluate diagnosis, the clinician
West Coast, southeastern United States) are expected
should collect urine, vomitus, hair, and potential baits or
regions of metaldehyde exposure. Careful history corre-
sprays for analysis as well. Fur or hair may be submitted
lated with clinical signs and detectable metaldehyde may
if exposure is by dips or spraying. For dead animals, the
allow a presumptive diagnosis. Metaldehyde must be dif-
dlinician should submit the whole brain or at least
ferentiated from toxic (see Table 17-1) and other causes
the caudate nucleus (below the anterior ventral wall of
 of CNS excitation.
the lateral ventricles). Caution: Some OP and carbamate
insecticides are highly toxic; clinicians and attending staff
should avoid self-exposure by wearing gloves or other
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory Drugs
protective clothing as well as a mask and eye protection
when examining or bathing poisoned animals.
Indications ● A history of probable NSAID overtreat-
ment or prolonged therapy suggests a need to evaluate
Analysis · Direct chemical analysis of OP or carbamate
potential adverse effects. A known massive ingestion, 0r
compounds is performed on baits, pesticides, stomach
contents, and liver by GC with TSD or FPD, or GC-MS for
(often hemorrhagic), diarrhea, melena, and/or advancing
OPs. Some carbamates can be analyzed by GC but have
renal impairment with oliguria or anuria should be cause
a tendency to break down. HPLC or LC-MS is a better
for evaluating NSAID intake and effects.
technique. Serum pseudocholinesterase determination is
382
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
not used in veterinary medicine. Although residues of
Normal Values ● Pyrethrins/pyrethroids are not expected
OPs and carbamates may be present in blood or tissues.
in tissues of normal animals.
very low values and rapid metabolism often hinder detec.
tion. Most OPs and carbamates are rapidly metabolized
Danger Values ● Not well documented. Presence of
and may be undetectable in blood or tissues within
pyrethrins/pyrethroids indicates exposure, which must be
minutes to hours after exposure. Determination of AChE
correlated with history and clinical evidence. Concentra-
activity is commonly used to detect activity of OP com-
tions of several hundred ppm could be present in the
pounds. Several laboratory methods are used.
stomach or on hair and only indicate exposure, whereas
more than l00 ppb in brain could suggest toxicosis.
Normal Values · Different methods of analysis for AChE
are used. The clinician should ask the laboratory for a
Causes ● Because of the safety of these products with
range of normal values and to determine the percentage
normal use, pyrethrin or pyrethroid toxicosis is more
of inhibition. Treatment for parasites with OP com-
pounds may reduce AChE by up to 50% within the first
are in cats. Analyses for other toxicants [eg, OPs, carba-
1 to 7 days after treatment.
 mates) are used to help rule them out and establish expo.
sure to pyrethrins.
Danger Values · If whole-blood AChE is depressed by
more than 50%, excessive OP exposure is indicated. Sig-
Sago Palm (Cycas spp.)
nificant OP or carbamate concentrations vary with the
agent suspected. Usually, greater than 50% inhibition
Indications ● Afected dogs develop hepatic necrosis
of AChE signifies overexposure, and greater than 75%
within a few days post-ingestion; early signs prior to
to 80% inhibition supports a tentative diagnosis of
hepatic damage include vomiting and diarrhea. Neuro-
toxicosis.
logic signs ranging from ataxia to seizures can appear
secondary to severe hepatic disease. This is a serious toxi-
Artifacts · AChE values are highly variable Blood values
cosis that can be fatal if not treated promptly.
may be elevated by hepatic disease In OP poisoning.
cholinesterase depression is persistent; in carbamate toxi-
Sample Collection · Routine sampling of blood and
cosis, cholinesterase values quickly return to normal.
serum is adequate for the range of clinical laboratory
Causes · Typical clinical signs, depression of cholines-
terase, and detection of pesticide are usually adequate for
Analysis · Routine assays for the toxic principle(s) of
diagnosis. Other toxins (see Tables 17-l and 17-2) and
sago palm are not generally available. Diagnosis is sup-
other causes of CNS excitation or depression, vomiting.
ported by clinical chemistry assays as described.
and diarrhea (see Chapter 9) need to be considered. The
triad of muscarinic, nicotinic, and CNS sigms is similar to
Danger Values · Characteristic changes reflect hepatic
 pyrethrin intoxication (discussed next).
function and altered hematologic values. There may be
Pyrethrin and Pyrethroid Insecticides
decreased total protein, thrombocytopenia, and increased
ACT, PT, and partial thromboplastin time (PTT). Increases
Indications · Intoxication with pyrethrin and pyre-
in ALT, AST, ALP, bilirubin, and bile acids reflect serious
throid insecticide should be considered in animals with
hepatic disease. Azotemia may occur as well as hypoalbu-
tremors, salivation, vomiting, or CNS excitation or depres-
minemia and hypoglycemia.
sion after application of dips or sprays. Toxicosis is rare
unless oral or respiratory exposure has taken place.
Artifacts · Artifacts in testing are not known, but the
clinicallaboratory changes may occur with other common
Sample Collection · Antemortem animal samples are
and severe hepatotoxins.
not useful because of analytical difficulties and interpreta-
tion. Baits or sprays can be analyzed for comparison with
Causes ● Sago palm or cycad palm (Cycas spp.) is a rela-
the stated label concentration. Hair or fur may be used to
tively common ormamental plant in subtropical climates
establish exposure Analysis of gastric contents confrms
(e.g. Florida) or where grown indoors as a container
oral exposure, and brain pyrethrins/pyrethroids may
houseplant All parts of the plant are toxic, with greatest
occur after exposure, but concentrations are not corre-
toxicant concentration in the seeds. Consumption by
lated with severity of response. Refrigeration or freezing
dogs is most likely, and effects result from hepatic toxico-
is adequate preservation.
sis with related secondary signs. The toxins are glycosides
known as cycasin and methylazomethanol.
Analysis ● Analysis is accomplished by GC-ECD of con-
centrated sources such as sprays, dips, hair or fur, or
Vitamin D/Cholecalciferol
stomach contents. Tissues from exposed animals usually
contain very low concentrations. Analysis of brain has
Indications · Intoxication with vitamin D should be
been used to confrm exposure, but quantifcation corre-
lating with toxicosis is not reliable. AChE is not inhibited
vitamin D; (i.e., cholecalciferol). Common trade names
by pyrethrins, so AChE determination can help eliminate
include Quintox, Rampage, and Ortho Rat-B-Gone Baits
OP toxicosis.
usually contain 0.075% cholecalciferol. Clinical signs
Chapter 17: Laboratory Diagnostic Toxicology
383
occur after a l- to 2-day latent period and include
later, approximately 12 hours to 72 hours after xylitol
anorexia, lethargy weakness, and vomiting. Similar signs
consumption. Signs of hepatic damage are expected,
 of renal failure and hypercalcemia in dogs are caused by
including vomiting. diarrhea, melena, ictenus, hemor-
excess consumption of grapes or raisins.
rhage and possibly hepatic encephalopathy.
Sample Collection · Because of the lag period between
Sample Collection · Routine sampling of blood and
consumption and onset of clinical signs, time of collec-
serum is adequate for the range of clinical laboratory
tion of stomach contents is critical to interpretation
examinations important to xylitol diagnosis.
(see Analysis). Serum or plasma (EDTA or heparin anti-
coagulant) can be analyzed. The sample should be refrig-
Analysis ● Xylitol can be analyzed in serum or urine by
erated before analysis and frozen if analysis will be
GC or GC-MS but must be derivatized.
delayed more than 24 hours. Marked hypercalcemia [i.e.
>14 mg/dl; see Chapter 8) is highly suggestive of toxico-
Danger Values ● CBC, clinical chemistry profle, clotting
sis, and testing for hypercalcemia is easier than analysis
function, and hepatic morphology by abdominal ultra-
for cholecalciferol or its metabolites. At postmortem,
sound and hepatic biopsy are the principal tests that may
 liver and kidney should be collected for potential analy-
be altered. Marked hypoglycemia occurs in the frst 12
sis of vitamin D metabolites. In addition, renal calcium
hours; later changes include neutrophilic leukocytosis,
concentration is elevated 10 to 20 times normal and may
thrombocytopenia, increased PCV, and elevated ALT, AST,
be a useful postmortem sample to support vitamin D
ALP, and bilirubin. Low serum potassium, variable serum
toxicosis.
phosphate, and hypercalcemia are common. Coagulation
parameters are elevated and fbrin degradation products
Analysis · Baits can be tested for vitamin Ds. Gastric
are elevated. Hepatic biopsy reveals microscopic degen-
contents or vomitus may contain small amounts (i.e.,
erative and necrotic changes.
<0.0l%) of cholecalciferol. Because of the latent
period, the stomach has often emptied the toxic material
Artifacts · Diagnosis is based on clinical laboratory
by the time clinical effects occur. Although liver and
tests, and results can be similar to those with other causes
kidney contain vitamin D metabolites (e.g. 1.25-
of severe acute hepatic disease or toxicosis.
dihydroxycholecalciferol).  testing  is specialized and
mainly performed by HPLC or LC-MS/MS and not rou-
        o 
tinely offered by clinical laboratories. Histopathologic
fuits and vegetables. It is also used as an alternative
examination with special stains for calcium may also aid
sweetener/sugar substitute in chewing gum and candy as
in detection of renal or vascular calcification. Postmortem 
well as in some baked food products. Dogs readily ingest
analysis reveals elevated renal calcium values.
foods sweetened with xylitol, and the excess amount from
high ingestion causes hypoglycemia as a result of insulin
Normal Values · Serum 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
secretion and hepatic necrosis by a currently unconfirmed
values less than 30 pg/ml are considered normal. Normal
mechanism. Additional effects are likely secondary to
canine renal calcium values are 50 to 200 ppm on a wet
severe hepatic damage or necrosis.
weight basis.
Zinc
Danger Values ·Serum 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol
values greater than 30 pg/ml indicate potential toxicosis.
Indications · Intoxication with zinc should be con-
and values greater than 50 pg/ml are toxic. Postmortem
sidered in patients with acute vomiting. hematuria.
hemoglobinuria.
icterus, renal failure and hepatic
less than 80o0 ppm support a diagnosis of cholecalciferol
failure. Radiography showing radiopaque objects (e.g..
toxicosis. Values above 8000 ppm indicate potential EG
pennies) in the gastrointestinal tract is an indication
toxicosis.
for further testing. For dogs being treated with dietary
zinc to aid in treatment/prevention of copper hepato-
Artifacts · Hyperactivity of parathyroid function or
toxicosis, measuring serum zinc may be a useful way
to monitor the zinc status.
coma) can produce serum calcium values similar to those
of cholecalciferol toxicosis (see Box 8-1).
Sample Collection · Either whole blood (i.e, EDTA.
heparin anticoagulant) or serum may be used for analysis.
Causes ● A tentative diagnosis can be established from
The clinician should consult a laboratory to determine
history, clinical signs, hypercalcemia, and azotemia.
preferred specimens. Trace element-free tubes are pre-
Other common causes of hypercalcemia are discussed in
ferred (i.e., Vacutainer, royal-blue stopper). Refrigeration
Chapter 8.
is adequate preservation. Postmortem samples include
liver and kidney.
Xylitol
Analysis · Zinc analysis is performed by flame AAS.
B m uaq a si a o s
GF-AAS, ICP-ES, or ICP-MS.
and are followed quickly (<l hour post-ingestion) by
hypoglycemia that is manifest as depression, ataxia, weak-
Normal Values ● Less than 2.0 mg/ml in serum. Normal
ness, and tremors or seizures. Hepatic damage occurs
hepatic zinc is 30 to 70 ppm (wet weight basis).
384
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Danger Values · During toxicosis, serum zinc may range
References and Suggested Readings
from 3 to 10 μg/ml (ppm). Hepatic and renal zinc con-
Piiia cn Pixisl udd ooz ue aea su
1. Duvall MD, et al: Case studies of second-generation antico-
 increase over normal) are likely during toxicosis.
agulant rodenticide toxicities in nontarget species. J Vet Diagn
Invest 1:66. 1989.
ueyemiadns, e jo uogsaui ueunh wg ssery 'vy uondn 7
Artifacts ● Plastic syringes with rubber grommets may
rodenticide resulting in a prolonged anticoagulant effect.
contain zinc and contaminate a sample.
JAMA 252:3004, 1984.
3. Osweiler GD, Brutlag AE, Hovda LR. Lee J. editors: The fve
Causes · Most reported cases are from ingestion of zinc-
minute veterinary consult clinical companion: small animal toxicol-
containing objects (eg., pennies). Other causes of hemo-
ogy. Ames, [a. 2010, Wiley-Blackwell.
lytic anemia (see Chapter 3), renal failure (see Chapter
4. Peterson ME, Talcott PA, editors: Small animal toxicology. ed 2.
7). and vomiting (see Table 17-2 and Chapter 9) need to
St. Louis, 2006. Saunders Elsevier.
be eliminated. Radiography is indicated in dogs with
5. Spee B. Arends B. Van Wees AM, et al: Functional conse-
quences of RNA interference targeting COMMDI in a canine
vague signs of vomiting, hepatic or renal disease and
hemolytic anemia. Vomiting, laboratory indicators of
hepatic cell line in relation to copper toxicosis. Anim Genet
38:168. 2007.
hepatic damage (eg., increased ALP and ALT), azotemia.
6. Wu AB, McKay C, Broussard LA, et al: National Academy of
and intravascular hemolysis (especially if an intragastric
Clinical Biochemistry laboratory medicine practice guidelines:
metal density is observed on abdominal radiographs) are
recommendations for the use of laboratory tests to support
highly suggestive of zinc toxicosis.
 poisoned patients who present to the emergency department.
Clin Chem 49:357. 2003.
18
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
Dawn Merton Boothe
Fixed dosing regimens provided on dnug labels are
difficult-to-detect clinical end point of drug therapy
designed to generate plasma drug concentrations (PDCs)
(e.g. immunomodulators); (2) the end point, if mani-
within a therapeutic range (Figure l8-l). PDCs are
fested, puts the patient at risk (e.g. anticonvulsant
intended to remain above a minimum effective concen-
therapy); (3) the therapeutic index is narrow, indicating
tration (Cmin) to avoid therapeutic failure while remaining
little difference exists between effective and toxic PDCs
below the maximum concentration (Cmax) and minimiz-
(e.g, digoxin, theophylline); (4) marked interindividual
ing side effects. Fixed dosing regimens are based on
pharmacokinetic variability exists, making it diffcult to
pharmacokinetic studies conducted in a small sample
predict PDCs (eg.. phenobarbital. cyclosporine): (5)
population of normal adults. These regimens, however,
pharmacokinetics are nonlinear, leading to a rapid accu-
are generally administered to unhealthy animals for
mulation to potentially toxic concentrations or to a rapid
which drug absorption, distribution, metabolism, or
excretion (or a combination of these) have been altered
(e.g. phenobarbital [in cats]); (6) drug interactions may
by physiologic factors (eg. age gender), pathologic fact-
potentiate toxicity (eg. cyclosporine and macrolides,
ors [leading to renal or hepatic impairment), or pharma-
enrofloxacin-induced  theophylline  toxicity.  chloram-
cologic factors (eg., drug interactions). Furthur, many
phenicol- or imidazole-induced phenobarbital toxicity):
drugs used in animals are human drugs based on anec-
and (7) there is a need to identify owner noncompliance
dotal doses. As a result, PDC may be higher or lower than
or poorly compounded dnugs as a cause of therapeutic
failure or adverse dnug reaction, or when overdose may
have occurred.
and adjustment of doses using therapeutic drug monitor-
ing (TDM) can optimize drug efficacy and safety. Drugs
ANALYSIS AND LABORATORY
include several anticonvulsants [e.g., selected benzodiaz-
AVAILABILITY
epines, phenobarbital, primidone, levetiracetam, potas-
sium bromide, zonisamide gabapentin); antimicrobials
Generally, PDCs are measured with assays involving spe.
(eg, aminoglycosides: gentamicin, amikacin); cardio-
cific binding of antibodies to the drug of interest.
active drugs (e.g. digoxin, procainamide, lidocaine);
Antibody-based methods are easily automated and are
theophylline; thyroid hormones (for thyroid supplemen-
usually more rapid and cost-effective than chromato-
tation); and immunomodulators (eg., cyclosporine)
 graphic and spectrophotometric assays, the latter being
(Table l8-1].
necessary for a limited number of drugs. Although auto-
mated assays are also available for bromide, the gold
chloride method remains the accepted standard for vali-
INDICATIONS
dation purposes, and a variety of assays can be used to
accurately measure PDCs of most drugs. It is imperative
"Start-up. checkup, and what's up" is a helpful mnemonic
that each assay is validated for use in the species of
for indications. TDM is indicated to establish the patient's
ane Aroieioqel aun Aq paneaua sinsau ieul pue isana
therapeutic range once response has been realized or fails
accurate and reproducible.
to be realized despite dose increases beyond that recom-
 TDM is offered at most veterinary colleges and many
mended ("start-up"); in order to be assured that concen-
diagnostic laboratories in the United States. However, the
trations have not changed in response to patient, drug.
range of services offered and methods of analysis used
diet, or disease factors ("checkup"); and in response to
vary widely. Before one submits samples to a particular
clinical signs indicative of toxicity or therapeutic failure
laboratory, information should be sought regarding pro-
Ae wai uaum suoeis syas uas (dn speum,)
cedures for sample handling. delivery, and quality assur-
be particularly useful are [l) there is a poorly defined or
ance practices. When submitting samples to facilities
385
386
Toxic
1000
Peak
atior
Therapeutic
range
6nup
Trough
100
Subtherapeutic
2
4
6
Time (t,2)
FIGURE 18-1 Plasma drug concentrations (PDCs) after multiple administrations of a drug with a half-life (t/2) that is shorter than
the dosing interval. In this example, the dose is administered every four half-lives. Because most (94%) of each dose is eliminated
before the next dose, PDCs fluctuate markedly and a "steady state" is never really acheived. Both toxic and subtherapeutic drug
 concentrations can occur during a single dosing interval; both peak and trough samples should be collected for such drugs.
usually serving human patients, one must be cautious not
IMPLEMENTING THERAPEUTIC
to confuse recommended therapeutic ranges in humans
DRUG MONITORING
with those in animals (e.g. clorazepate, bromide, pro-
cainamide). Among the more critical considerations is
Handling Procedures and Decisions
the availability
/of recommendations by a clinical
pharmacologist.
In general, serum is monitored; however, most methods
can measure drug concentrations in plasma. Cyclosporine
should be measured in whole blood. Other deviations
ARTIFACTS
from these generalities may occur and should be checked
prior to drawing and submitting the sample. If samples
Assuming proper quality assurance practices are used,
are to be assayed immediately, special handling proce-
false assay results arising from errors related to drug anal-
dures [e.g., refrigeration, freezing) often are not necessary.
ysis are rare. A notable exception may be for drugs that
Before TDM is conducted, several decisions should be
are metabolized. If the drug is a prodnug (e.g.. cloraz-
addressed. Three of these are (1) when TDM should be
epate) or the metabolites are active (eg., diazepam), then
initiated, (2) the number of samples to be collected, and
the assay ideally measures all active compounds. If the
[3) the timing of sample collection. Because of variability
metabolites are inactive or only weakly active, the assay
among laboratories, the laboratory of submission should
should be specific for the parent compound only (e.g..
be contacted regarding sample submission.
phenobarbital) or the therapeutic range of the assay
should reflect the metabolites. Thus the therapeutic range
Steady State
 of a drug may vary depending on the assay performed.
Erroneous PDC data are more likely to be caused by inap-
When therapy is initiated, repeated and regular adminis-
propriate sample collection. Senum separator tubes
tration of successive doses may result in accumulation of
should be avoided because silicon gel in the tubes can
drug. The longer the half-life compared with the dosing
bind to and remove drug from the sample, leading to
interval, the greater the amount of drug accumulation.
falsely decreased values. Other examples of artifacts
Eventually the amount of drug eliminated during each
caused by collection tubes include binding of aminogly-
dosing interval equals the amount administered with
cosides to glass tubes and binding of digoxin to red stop-
each dose At this time, steady-state equilibrium has been
pers. Hemolysis of blood samples and lipemia should be
reached; peak [i.e., the highest blood concentration of the
avoided, but their impact often is negligible Validation
drug) and trough (i.e., the lowest blood concentration of
procedures of automated methods, in general, should
the drug) blood concentrations remain constant across
determine the expected impact of lipemia or hemolysis
multiple dosing intervals as long as neither the dose nor
on accuracy.
 interval is changed. Ideally, TDM and clinical response to
Chapter 18:
Therapeutic
Drug
Mornitoring
387
I elimination drug half-lives between peak and trough sample collec-
Comtimued
Efficacy: BNDs
BND
BND
Toxicity: 2-5 hrs
1 hr (plastic 
only)
2-4 hr
2-5 hr
2 hr7
2hr
P5!
limited
entrations
if toxicity
TABle 18-1. therapeutIc DrUg moNitorinG DATa FoR DrUGs moNItoReD In Normal, HealThY, SmAll ANimals 
2-3 months 
ceptable
Aep I>
sep8
sAep
sAep
Kep I>
40 hr
Kep
Aep
alap
增
山
predicted
Busop
PUE
6uisop
LF
hed
24 days
1-2 hr
:Kde
上
川川
those
L B
4 8
49
3
32
3
Jno
ance; for
toxicity
perianal fistulae: 100-600 ng/ml; for inflammatory bowel
auc
led
those
the
ifically
PUE
rict
>ads
THERAPEUTIC RANGE*
unoy-
12-hr trough aboves
ect
6.8
100-200 ng/ml 3
jwybu 0'2-6'0
AUCO
0
|/6 001-0
50-100 μg/ml 
0.9-2.0 ng/ml 
2-25 μg/ml1
6
6
the
2
4-Z
Uewny
ation
PEO
lopo
82
SJnz
P
12-24
12-24
J
with
2
QERS
卫
82
2
2
2
12
Benzodiazepines
ranges
6uel
Values in this table
Cyclosporine 
Gabapentin
s6nJp
Amikacin
Bromidé
uixoba
DRUG 
Aspirin
herape
SUON
A州
388
SMALL ANIMAL
LABORATORYMETHODS
, establish your own normal ranges. Overlap
SAMPETION
TROUGH
BND
BND
BND
BND
BND
BND
SAMPECTION
PEAK
2-4 hr7
2-4 hr
2-4 hr
1-2 hr?
2 hr?
4-5 hr
2 hr
 may be indicated in dogs. Halflife may be much longer (>150 hours) in some dogs.
<1 day (15 hr)
Up to 14 days
14-16 days
14-16 days
48-72 hr11
Aep I>
KepI>
<24 hrl1
29 hr
40 hr
0.9-1.3 hr
32-75 hr
5-6 hr (D)
12-15 (D)
3-4 hr
6.1 hr 
2.9 hr 
5.7 hr
4 6'1
Jaf
SUOI
ntrati
Adejau 6np o idepe 
plasma
 THERAPEUTIC RANGE*
Based on phenobarbital 
51 WsIp
0.8-1.5 ng/ml (D)j10
1.5-3.5 μg/dl (D)
1.5-5.0 μg/dl (C)12
(35-180 μmol/L)
0.5-1.5 μg/ml
5.0-8.0 μg/ml 
p14/6r 05-57
10-20 μg/ml 
10-20 μg/ml
10-40 μg/ml13
 one sample may be sufficient.
品
05
12-24
12-24
8-12
忆
忆
12-24
12-24
忆
忆
2
12
12
2
12
2
Levetiracetam
Phenobarbital
Procainamide
 Theophylline 
Gentamicin 
Primidone
Zonisamide
DRUG 
6o0
(6op)
(bop)
123
Dog
123
Chapter 18: Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
389
10-
Loading dose
ax
concentration
Peak
Trough
Cmin
6nup
 plasma (
87% steady state at 3 tuy
160
T << t, (accumulation)
1
2
Time (t,)
FIGURE 18-2 Plasma drug concentrations (PDCs) after multiple administrations of a drug with a half-life (t12) that is longer than 
the dosing interval. In this example, the dose is given approximately twice every drug halflife. Because little of each dose is elimi-
nated during the dosing interval, little fluctuation occurs and a single sample can be collected for monitoring. To rapidly achieve
a pharmacologic effect, a loading dose might be given. A steady-state equililbrium will still occur, however, and PDCs may increase
or decrease if the maintenance dose does not maintain what the loading dose achieved.
therapy should be implemented at steady state to assess
jueaalau si aleis Apeais 'sinol t ol Zl [eaiaui suiso
maximum response. Time taken for steady state to be
because the drug does not accumulate with repeated
reached depends only on the rate of dnug elimination
dosing. As such, TDM can be initiated immediately (i.e..
(i.e., drug elimination half-life), irrespective of dose or
after the frst dose or the first few days after a dosing
interval. With multiple dosing of dnugs that accumulate,
change).
PDC reaches 5o% of steady-state concentrations at one
half-life (t1/2). 75% by two half-lives, 87.5% at three half-
lives, and so forth (Figure 18-2). Generally. TDM should
Loading Dose
not be implemented until three to five half-lives have
elapsed since initiation of dnug therapy at the same dosing
When the clinical situation necessitates immediate attain-
regimen. For example, for phenobarbital with a tuyz of 72
ment of therapeutic drug concentrations [e.g., a seizuring
hours, TDM should not be implemented until approxi-
patient being treated with bromide),. PDC predicted at
o iadse Aue jl eian yo uui ae s si aiai
steady state can be achieved more rapidly by administra-
the dosing regimen is changed, the same time period [i.e.
tion of a single loading dose followed by recommended
five half-lives) must elapse for steady-state plasma con-
maintenance doses (see Figure 18-2). Loading doses are
centrations to be re-established. An exception might be
based on the volume of tissue that dilutes the drug: bio-
made for bromide, for which a sample might be taken at
availability of the dnug also affects loading dose for those
one half-life [i.e, 3 weeks) after a dose is begun to pro-
drugs not administered intravenously (IV). Despite the
actively assess a dosing regimen: at one half-life, drug
fact that predicted steady-state PDCs have been achieved
concentrations should approximate the steady-state con-
by loading. PDCs are not yet at steady state and will not
centration. Times taken to achieve steady state [as well as
be until equilibrium has been reached at three to five
 other pharmacokinetic and dosing information) are listed
half-lives of the dnug at maintenance dose in the patient.
in Table 18-1. However, these times are based on average
PDC achieved after loading may increase or decrease if
half-lives determined from sample populations. Some
the maintenance dose is more or less, respectively, than
drugs (eg., zonisamide, cyclosporine) have half-lives that
that eliminated during each dosing interval. For bromide
vary dramatically between individuals. Drug interactions
in particular, TDM should occur within 1 to 3 days after
may cause similar variations. Time to steady state of a
loading to confirm that targeted concentrations (ie., pre-
drug in an individual patient can be determined by mea-
dicted steady-state concentrations) have been achieved
suring the half-life of a drug in that patient [i.e., by col-
and again one dnug half-life later [i.e., 3 to 4 weeks for
lecting both a peak and trough sample).
bromide) to ensure that the maintenance dose is main-
For drugs with very short ti/2 values compared with
taining PDC achieved with loading. Although use of a
the dosing interval (e.g. gentamicin ty2 =0.9 to 1.3 hours:
loading dose decreases the time taken for maximum
390
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
response to occur (by avoiding slow accumulation to
  o s ad a i a
steady state), hazards of adverse reactions are much
4 hours after oral administration, although dnugs that are
 greater. Thus loading doses are not advised for drugs char-
absorbed slowly take longer to achieve peak PDC (e.g..
acterized by a narrow therapeutic index and that tend to
5 hours for phenobarbital). For intramuscular (IM) and
cause undesirable adverse reactions (e.g., digoxin).
subcutaneous (SC) administrations, absorption occurs
more rapidly (i.e, 30 to 60 minutes). Absorption times
Number of Samples
are not relevant to IV-administered drugs, but distribution
may take 1 to 2 hours. Thus peak PDCs are generally
The relationship between drug half-life and dosing inter-
measured 1 to 2 hours after parenteral drug administra-
val [as well as the intent of monitoring) determines the
tion. Peak and trough samples are generally collected
number of samples to be collected. If the dosing interval
during a single dosing interval. A less ideal method is
is longer than dnug half-life (e.g, diazepam, levetirace-
collection of a trough sample, dosing of the patient, fol-
tam, gabapentin, most antibiotics, cyclosporine).
.the
lowed by collection of a peak sample.
PDC fluctuates widely during each dosing interval (see
Figure 18-1). Assuming that both effcacy and safety are
of interest, one should collect two samples to coincide
MODIFYING DOSE REGIMENS
with peak and trough concentrations. For dnugs with a
long half-life compared with dosing interval, dnug con-
 Precise adjustment of dose regimens requires generation
centrations do not change much during each dosing inter-
of a pharmacokinetic profle and calculation of pharma-
val, and a single sample generally reflects PDC throughout
cokinetic parameters, such as clearance values and
the dosing interval. The need for one or two samples
volumes of distribution, which can be determined only
varies for some drugs. For digoxin, collection of both a
 after IV administration of drug unless bioavailability of
peak and trough sample might be considered because of
the drug is known in the patient If this degree of sophis-
the narrow therapeutic index of this dnug and marked
tication is necesary, a specialist in clinical pharmacology
variability in half-life that can occur in patients receiving
should be consulted. A modified profile can be generated
cardiovascular drugs. A single trough sample is often suf-
from data collected with two (peak and trough) samples.
ficient for phenobarbital; however, because elimination
For situations in which precise dose adjustment is not
half-lives of less than 24 hours have been measured, clini-
essential and the patient is at steady state, a relatively
cians should collect both a peak and trough sample in
simple approach is to use the direct proportionality
patients in which seizure control is diffiault. Although
between dose and PDC. For example, if the dose is
cyclosporine has a short half-life.
recommendations
doubled, the resulting PDC will also be doubled. Con-
extrapolated from humans may be based on either a peak
versely, if the dose is halved, the resulting PDC will be
or trough sample, or both.
halved. The following dose adjustment equation describes
this relationship:
Timing of Sample Collection
 Old dose x Target PDC
New dose=
Timing for single sample collection depends on the
Measured PDC
intent of TDM. If effcacy is of concern and only one
sampling time is indicated, assessment of trough con-
With the therapeutic ranges listed in Table 18-1 and
centrations is recommended because this concentration
PDC results derived from TDM, a new adjusted dose can
is always the lowest during the dosing interval and thus
be calculated that will achieve a desired target PDC. For
can consistently be compared with subsequent TDM. In
example, if the measured peak PDC after administration
contrast, peak concentrations do not occur consistently
of 8 mg/kg of zonisamide to a dog is 23 μg/ml and a
at the same time and are difficult to predict, particularly
decision is made to increase the dose to achieve a target
with orally administered drugs. One can easily deter-
peak PDC of 35 ng/ml, the new dose can be estimated as
mine the trough concentration by collecting the sample
follows:
immediately before administration of the next dose.
Ideally, trough PDC will not drop below recommended
8 mg/kg ×35 μg/ml
New dose =
Cmin. For drugs with a short half-life compared with the
23 μg/ml
dosing interval (e.g., the aminoglycosides) and for which
= 12 mg/kg
both a peak and trough sample will be submitted, col-
lection of a trough sample may result in nondetectable
concentrations. Collection of the second sample at two
 Increasing the dose for drugs with a short half-life
to three half-lives (rather than a true trough sample)
may result in PDCs that are both too high and too low
after dosing would be more prudent for such drugs, but
during a dosing interval. The decision to modify the dose
only if a peak sample also is collected such that half-life
versus interval should take into account client conve-
can be calculated and a trough concentration predicted.
nience and desired fluctuation in PDC during the dosing
For toxicity, a single peak sample should be determined.
interval. Dosing interval also can be changed proportion-
Timing of samples used to determine peak concentra-
ately, although calculation of elimination half-life pro-
tions is more difficult to estimate because these samples
vides a more accurate method on which changes in
should only be collected when drug absorption and dis-
 dosing interval can be based. Elimination half-life of a
tribution are complete. In particular, oral absorption of
drug can be calculated as tu/2 = 0.693/kel, where ke is the
 drugs is variable and is influenced by feeding (fasting is
slope of the line drawn between the two TDM points
Chapter 18: Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
391
(peak or C, t2: and trough, C2, t): ka = In [C/C2] divided
Cmin concentrations should be less than 2 μg/ml. Because
by tz - t. The natural log (ln) for concentrations must be
elimination half-life of aminoglycosides is short (i.e., 1 to
used because drug elimination is first-order. A clinical
3 hours), trough concentrations should be collected at 4
pharmacologist can be consulted for assistance in design
to 6 hours after peak concentration rather than true
of a dosing regimen.
trough (ie, "before next dose" [BND]) because concen-
Clinicians should never base decisions to modify a
trations are not likely to be detectable just before the
dosing regimen solely on PDCs and their relationship to
next dose.
the therapeutic range The therapeutic ranges that accom-
pany TDM results are not the same as “normals" that
Artifacts · Aminoglycosides are bound to glass. Samples
accompany clinical laboratory tests. A therapeutic range
intended for TDM should not be collected in glass tubes
reflects the Cmin and Cmx between which a large percent-
age (e.g., 95%) of the target population responds to drug
upon collection.
therapy. Some animals, however, respond outside the
therapeutic range (below Cmin Or above Cmax). whereas
Dosing Modification · Doses can be proportionately
other animals may become “toxic" within the therapeutic
increased or decreased based on Cmsx Intervals should
range Clinical response always must be considered when
be prolonged in increments of one drug half-life if
doses are adjusted. This is particularly important for
Cmin is above recommended trough concentration (see
drugs with effective therapeutic and toxic PDC ranges
Table 18-1).
that overlap (e.g., digoxin, thyroid hormones). Whenever
doses are changed, TDM should be continued to confirm
Benzodiazepines (Diazepam,
that target PDCs for the patient have been achieved.
Clorazepate)
While TDM will determine if the patient has achieved
a desired therapeutic range, it cannot be used to deter-
Indications ● TDM is indicated to assure PDCs do not
mine therapeutic success. When PDCs are within recom-
drop below Cmin in patients receiving the drug for long-
mended therapeutic ranges but the animal fails to respond
term seizure control. Diazepam is generally the drug mea-
satisfactorily or has responded but a decrease in dose is
sured in cats and clorazepate in dogs. Because each is
desired, minor, "stair-step" adjustments in dose are rec-
metabolized to active metabolites, both parent drug and
ommended. The size of each increment depends on the
metabolites are monitored.
siaed e jl up au jo ayes pue auei pnadeia
response to dnug is insuffcient, doses are increased pro-
Sample Collection · The elimination half-life of the
portionately to the desired increase in PDC until either
benzodiazepines is short, and PDCs fluctuate significantly
desired response is achieved or maximum limit of the
during an 8-hour or 12-hour dosing interval. Two samples
range is reached and risk of adverse effects precludes
are recommended (see Table 18-1).
further increase in dose. For example, phenobarbital
(therapeutic range: 15 to 45 μg/ml) might be increased
Dosing Modification ● The interval shouldbe decreased
by 5-μg/ml and bromide (therapeutic range: l.0 to
if magnitude of PDC fluctuation during dosing interval is
3.5 mg/ml) by 0.5-mg/ml increments. Doses for each
unacceptable. The dose should be changed proportion-
dnug are increased by about 25% to achieve incremental
ately as indicated by PDCs. Both dose and interval may
increase. Likewise, if PDCs are close to or exceed the
be modified simultaneously
maximum of the range (raising concerns that side effects
Or toxicity could result), stepwise decreases can be used
Bromide
to establish minimum effective concentration necessary
to control clinical signs while avoiding toxicity (eg., anti-
Indications · TDM is indicated in any epileptic patient
convulsant therapy). For each dose change response
receiving the drug. Regardless of the salt used, bromide is 
should not be evaluated until a new steady state has been
the active ingredient measured.
reached.
Sample Collection · The half-life of bromide is very
long compared with dosing interval; hence, single
THERAPEUTIC MONITORING
samples are indicated for TDM. Trough concentrations
are recommended, although any time during the dosing
OF SELECTED DRUGS
interval is acceptable Concentrations should be mea-
Aminoglycosides (Amikacin, Gentamicin)
sured at baseline steady state, at 3- to 6- or 12-month
intervals, and any time the animal has a seizure. Proactive
Indications · TDM is used to monitor aminoglycoside
monitoring should occur after a loading dose [to deter-
PDCs in life-threatening, serious, or chronic infections
mine what the loading dose achieved) and again at 3
caused by susceptible bacteria.
weeks post-load (to assure the maintenance dose is main-
taining concentrations). If a loading dose is not adminis-
Sample Collection ● Generally, both Cmx (to verify eff-
tered, proactive monitoring might occur 3 weeks into
cacy) and Cmin (to verify safety) are indicated. Current
therapy with the maintenance dose. Proactive monitoring
dosing recommendations are for 24-hour dosing inter-
(at one half-life) should also be implemented in patients
vals. Ideally, Cmax should be 8 to 10 times the minimum
for which chloride intake or clearance might change. A
inhibitory concentration of the dnug for the infecting
clinical pharmacologist is strongly recommended for
Organism (based on culture and susceptibility data).
consultation when monitoring bromide.
392
 SMALL ANlMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
Artifacts ● An automated method has been validated for
 an inadequate response or those in which disposition of
bromide assay by some laboratories; the gold chloride
digoxin is likely to be abnormal because of changes in
method remains the accepted standard technique.
renal and hepatic function induced by either disease or
 Bromide can cause chloride concentrations to be artifac-
 drug therapy. If toxicity is of concern, a single peak sample
tually increased.
may be suffcient Absorption and distribution of digoxin
can vary with product used and patient, and it can take
Cyclosporine
up to 8 hours. Peak concentrations at 3 to 5 hours are
recommended (see Table 18-1). The half-life of digoxin
Indications · TDM is indicated in patients undergoing
also varies, being as short as 12 hours in some animals
organ transplantation and those being treated for
 despite a 36-hour half-life reported in normal animals. If
immune-mediated diseases and selected chronic inflam-
a single sample is to be collected to evaluate efficacy.
matory and allergic diseases (eg. asthma, inflammatory
a trough sample should be collected. Because cardiac
bowel disease, perianal fistulae). Although the dnug is
disease can cause marked disposition changes, TDM
Burean uooul 'se pue siop u Aiaisuaxa pasn
should be implemented before and after response to
aq oi sieadde auodsoa anil si satuei inadea
afterload therapy. diuretic therapy, or both because dis-
better tolerated in dogs or cats compared to humans: a
Ol spuodsai aseasip ayi se asueyp ot Aiayl s! uoisod
toxic concentration has not been well established nor
therapy.
 have therapeutic ranges necessary to mount an appropri-
ate response Monitoring to assure concentrations are not
Artifacts · Red stoppers on collection tubes may bind
'sauen paisans ueny uim aie io yai Aiaaa
dnug, decreasing concentrations.
establishing the patient's therapeutic range once response
has occurred, and assuring concentrations are maintained
 Dosing Modifcation · If a single sample has been
is reasonable and recommended. Cyclosporine is subject
collected, the dose of digoxin should be changed pro-
to many drug interactions including those involving
portionately. If both peak and trough samples are col-
P-glycoprotein and dnug-metabolizing enzymes.
As
lected, a pharmacokinetic profile (see earlier) should be
such, preventative monitoring should be implemented
 generated for the patient and an interval appropriate
in patients receiving other drugs that might interact
and convenient should be established along with a
with cyclosporine. Because human generic products vary
new dose.
widely in animals, monitoring should be implemented
each time a product is changed. Because different methods
Gabapentin
yield different results, the laboratory should be called for
therapeutic ranges specific for that laboratory. Using cor-
 Indications ● TDM is indicated in any animal receiving
rection factors to adjust results obtained by one method
gabapentin for seizure control; treatment for analgesia
to those that would have been obtained by another
also might be considered.
 method are less useful than having therapeutic ranges
established for each laboratory's assay.
Sample Collection · The half-life of gabapentin is suf-
ficiently short that PDC may fluctuate markedly during a
Sample Collection ● In critical patients, both peak and
dosing interval. Both peak and trough samples are rec-
trough concentrations should be collected (see Table
ommended at baseline and in the event of therapeutic
18-1). For most conditions, recommendations are based
failure. For efficacy and to assure concentrations remain
On trough (but not mid-interval) samples. Because the
above Cmin during a dosing interval, a true trough is
drug distributes to red blood cells (RBCs), whole blood
recommended for single samples. Neither a peak nor
generally should be collected. In critical patients, moni-
a
mid-interval sample can 
 predict concentrations
toring might occur weekly to every 3 weeks during induc-
throughout a dosing interval. If the patient remains
tion and then monthly to every 3 to 6 months thereafter.
seizure-free, a single trough sample is suffcient at 6-t0
In the case of potential dnug interactions, monitoring
12-month intervals. However, if the patient has a "break-
both peak and trough such that half-life can be calculated
through" seizure, both peak and trough samples are
should occur just before and 1 to 2 weeks after the inter-
recommended.
acting drug is begun or discontinued.
Dosing Modification ● The dose of gabapentin may be
Dosing Modification ● When dosing at 12-hour inter.
changed proportionately. However, a shortening of the
vals, the dose generally should be modified. If an animal
 dosing interval may be indicated in patients with a short
is a poor responder and is being dosed at 24-hour inter-
half-life.
vals, a 12-hour dosing interval should be considered.
Levetiracetam
Digoxin
 Indications ● TDM is indicated in any animal receiving
Indications ● TDM is indicated in patients suspected of
levetiracetam for seizure control.
Sample Collection · The half-life of levetiracetam is
Sample Collection · Both a peak and trough sample
markedly variable, but it is very short in most animals
may be necessary to design the safest and most effective
receiving the regular-release product. PDC may fluctuate
m s u a nd si s ui s
markedly during a dosing interval. Both peak and trough
Chapter18:TherapeuticDrug Monitoring
393
samples are recommended at baseline and in the event of
Theophylline
therapeutic failure. For efficacy and to assure concentra-
tions remain above Cmin during a dosing interval, a true
Indications ● TDM is indicated in patients receiving the
trough is recommended for single samples. Neither a
drug as a bronchodilator that have not experienced suf-
peak nor a mid-interval sample can predict concentra-
ficient response and those suspected of reacting adversely
tions throughout a dosing interval. If slow-release product
to theophylline
is administered, a peak and trough are recommended as
therapy is begun to establish proper dosing interval. If the
Sample Collection ● The half-life of regular theophyl-
patient remains seizure-free, a single trough sample is
line is short enough that it is best to collect both peak
suffcient at 6- to 12-month intervals. However, if the
and trough samples (see Table 18-1). For effcacy, a single
patient has a "breakthrough" seizure both peak and
trough sample is acceptable. For safety (i.e., detection of
trough samples are recommended.
adverse reactions), a single peak sample can be collected.
For slow-release preparations, absorption is slow enough
Dosing Modification · The dose of levetiracetam may
that a single trough sample is suffcient.
 be changed proportionately. However, a shortening of the
 dosing interval may be indicated in patients with a short
Dosing Modifcation ● The dose of theophylline can be
half-life.
changed proportionately. Intervals can be modified if
both peak and trough data are available.
Phenobarbital and Primidone
 Indications ▪ TDM is indicated in any animal receiving
Thyroid Hormones
either of these drugs for seizure control. Primidone is
Indications · TDM is indicated in any animal receiving
converted to phenobarbital, which is measured rather
ym siewue ao (sop insn) uoeamaddns piol
than primidone. Disposition of both dnugs varies mark-
hyperthyroidism that are being medically managed
edly among animals. In addition, both drugs cause induc-
(usually cats). Because thyroxine (T4) is the circulating
hormone of interest [triodothyronine [Ts] being located 
variabilityFinally sideffects [i.grgginess,heattx
primarily intracellularly), it is generally the hormone
icity) of the drug are of suffcient concern that samples
measured. The majority of hormone is bound to proteins
should be monitored for safety.
and thus is pharmacologically inactive; therefore free T4
(fT4) may be the preferred hormone to be tested. Equilib-
Sample Collection · The half-life of phenobarbital can
rium dialysis is the most accurate method to measure fT4.
be short enough to necessitate both peak and trough
samples, or it can be long enough to allow only a trough
Sample Collection ● Although concentrations of hor-
sample collection. A trough sample is recommended at
lou Aeu Apoq aul Kipidei ateis Apeais aaatuoe Aeu sauou
baseline and, in anticipation of induction, 1 to 3 months
equilibrate immediately.  Physiologic equilibrium 
to
later (see Table l8-1). If the patient remains seizure-
thyroid hormones may take 4 to 6 weeks, and monitoring
free, a single trough sample is sufficient at 6- to 12-month
should not take place until equilibrium is likely to have
intervals. However, if the patient has a “break-
Occurred (see Table 18-1). Likewise, response to drugs
through"5
 seizure, both peak and trough samples may be
intended to control hyperthyroidism may take 3 to
indicated.
4 weeks.
Dosing Modification · The dose of phenobarbital can
       o 
be changed proportionately.
species of interest are preferred.
Procainamide
Dosing Modification · Doses should be altered pro-
portionately.
Indications · Although not routine 
procainamide
could be monitored in patients responding inadequately
Zonisamide
to long-term control of cardiac arrhythmias.
Indications · TDM is indicated in any animal receiving
zonisamide for seizure control.
NOTE: Efficacy of procainamide in people reflects an active
Sample Collection · Half-life of zonisamide varies
metabolite that is minimally formed in dogs. Recom-
from as little as 15 hours to as many a 150 hours in dogs.
 mended concentrations reflect both procainamide and its
However, for most animals, half-life is suffciently long
acetylated metabolite.
that PDCs do not fluctuate markedly during a dosing
interval. A single trough sample should be sufficient for
monitoring in most patients. For patients at risk for life.
Sample Collection · Because half-life of procainamide
threatening seizures or in patients who do not respond
is suffciently short and the potential of adverse dnug
well, or in patients also receiving phenobarbital, both a
interactions suffciently great, both peak and trough
 peak and trough sample might be recommended at base-
samples should be collcted (see Table 18-1). A single
line and in the event of therapeutic failure. If the patient
 trough sample can also be used to verify efficacy.
remains seizure-free, a single trough sample is sufficient at
394
 SMALL ANIMAL CLINICAL DlACNOSIS BY LABORATORY METHODS
6- to 12-month intervals. Therapeutic rangeforzonisamide
Suggested Readings
has yet to be established in dogs but may exceed maximum 
 recommended concentration in humans. Zonisamide at
Boothe DM: Principles of drug therapy. [n Small animal clinical
high PDC may suppress thyroid hormone synthesis, and
pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 2. St. Louis. 20ll, Elsevier.
Boothe DM: Factors affecing drug disposition. [n Small animal
thyroid monitoring may be indicated.
clinical pharmacology and therapeutics. ed 2. St. Louis. 2011.
Elsevier.
Dosing Modification · The dose of zonisamide may be
Boothe DM: Therapeutic drug monitoring. [n Small animal clinical
changed proportionately.
pharmacology and therapeutics, ed 2, St. Louis. 20ll. Elsevier.
Appendix I:
Listing of Selected Referral and
Commerical Laboratories
Harold Tvedten and Michael D. Willard
LISTING OF SELECTED REFERRAL
Full-Service Laboratories as per the
AND COMMERCIAL LABORATORIES
American Association of Veterinary
Laboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD)
Appendix I in previous editions included contact infor-
http://www.avld.org
mation for various laboratories and details on sub-
The website above provides a listing of laboratories
mission procedures, prices, etc In the current edition
accredited by the AAVLD including contact information
we list website addresses for laboratories that have
for many diagnostic laboratories in the United States and
information on their websites about sample preparation,
Canada. These are usually full-service laboratories with
submission procedures and restrictions, prices,
etc.
endocrinology, microbiology, toxicology, clinical pathol-
 The advantage of contacting the appropriate websites is
Ogy, nutritional, and other types of testing. These labora-
that, unlike a book, information is updated frequently.
tories have websites that may be accessed to see how to
However, the URLs for laboratory websites will change
prepare samples for testing and current prices.
from time to time; the reader must be prepared to
Listing of National Animal Health
use various search engines if the web address changes.
Laboratories
The reader can also try the shorter company address
if the longer address does not work. This listing is
http://eden.lsu.edu/Topics/AgDisasters/BSE/Pages/
not complete nor does it endorse any or all of the labo-
NationalAnimalHealth LaboratoryNetwork.aspx
ratories or indicate that they provide better service than
Centers for Disease Control
laboratories not listed. The current listing is simply to
and Prevention (CDC)
provide some practical information for veterinarians
trying to obtain specialized testing. Because most of the
http://www.cdc.gov/
readers and authors are from North America, this list
 The CDC provides information on infectious disease
includes mainly laboratories in the United States and
threats for animals and people and often is the source of
Canada.
specific diagnosis of new or unusual infectious agents.
SELECTED STATE DIAGNOSTIC LABORATORIES IN THE UNITED STATES AND CANADA
United States
Alabama
http://abs.alabama.gov/
Arizona
http://microvet.arizona.edu/
California
http://cahfs.ucdavis.edu/
Colorado
http://www.dlab.colostate.edu/
Connecticut
http://cvmdl.uconn.edu/
Horida
http://www.doacs.state.fl.us/ai/labs/labs_main.shtml
Georgia
http://www.vet.uga.edu/dlab/
Hawaii
http://hawall.gov/hdoa/ai/vlab
Illinois
http://vetmed .illinois.edu/vdl/
Continued
395
396
AppendixI:Listing of Selected Referral and Commerical Laboratories
 Indiana 
http://www.addl.purdue.edu/
lowa
http://vetmed.iastate.edu/diagnostic-lab 
Kansas
http://www.vet.k-state.edu/depts/dmp/service/index.htm
http://www.vet.ksu.edu/depts/dmp/service/index.htm
Kentucky
http://www.ca.uky.edu/gluck/ServLDDC.asp
Louisiana
http://addl.lsu.edu/
Maine
http://www.umaine.edu/vetlab/
 Maryland
http://www.mda.state.md.us/animal_health/regional_animal_health_offices.php
Michigan
http://animalhealth.msu.edu/
Minnesota
http://www.ydl.umn.edu/
Mississippi
http://www.mbah.state.ms.us/links/index.html
Missouri
http://mda.mo.gov/animals/health/diagnosticlabs.php
Montana
http://iv.mt.gov/ab/default.mcpx
Nebraska
http://nvdls.unl.edu/
 New Hampshire
http://www.colsa.unh.edw/facilities/new-hampshire-veterinary-diagnostic-laboratory
 New Jersey
http://www.state.nj.us/agriculture/divisions/ah/prog/lab.html 
 New Mexico
http://128.123.206.6/animal-and -plant-protection/veterinary-diagnostic-services
New York
http://ahdc.vet.cornell.edu/
 North Carolina
http://www.ncagr.gov/vet/ncvdl/
North Dakota
http://www.vdl.ndsu.edu/
Ohio
http://www.agri.ohio.gov/addl/
Oklahoma
http://www.cvm.okstate.edu/ind ex.php?option=com_content&view=category&layout
=blog&id=17&ltemid=158
http://www.cvhs.okstate.edu/ind ex.php?option=com_content&view=section&id=
4&ltemid=64
Oregon
http://oregonstate.edu/vetmed/diagnostic
Pennsylvania
http://www.padls.org/
South Carolina
http://www.clemson.edu/public//ph/lab/
South Dakota
http://www.sdstate.edu/vs/adrdl/index.cfm
 Tennessee
http://www.tennessee.gov/agriculture/regulatory/kord.html
Texas
http://tymdl.tamu.edu/
Utah
http://www.usu.edu/uvdl/
Washington
http://www.vetmed.wsu.edw/depts_waddl/
Wisconsin
http://www.wvd.wisc.edu/
Wyoming
http://wyovet.uwyo.edu/
Canada
British Columbia
http://www.agf.gov.bc.ca/ahc/index.htm
Guelph
http://www.labservices.uoguelph.ca/units/ahl/
Antech Diagnostics
Marshfield Laboratories
http://www.antechdiagnostics.com/
https://www.marshfieldlabs.org/veterinary/
IDEXX Diagnostics 
Heska Laboratories
http://www.idexx.com/
http://heska.com/
AppendixI:Listingof SelectedReferral and CommericalLaboratories
397
SELECTED LABORATORIES FOR INFECTIOUS DISEASES
Tick-Borne Infectious Agents
Vector Borne Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, College
http://www.cym.ncsu.edu/vhc/csds/ticklab.html
of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State 
University
 Arthropod borne and Infectious Diseases Laboratory.
http://www.cvmbs.colostate.edw/cvmbs/aidl.htm 
Colorado State University
Serologic/Molecular Tests for Various Pathogens
Auburn University
http://www.vetmed.auburn.edu/molecular-diagnostics/assays
Trypanosoma cruzi Titer
Texas Veterinary Medical Diagnostic Laboratory, Texas 
http://tymdl.tamu.edu/
A&M University
 Fungal Antigens
 MiraVista Diagnostics
http://www.miravistalabs.com/
Coccidioidomycosis Titer
Coccidioidomycosis Serology Laboratory, University of
http://www.ucdmc.ucdavis.edu/medmicro/cocci.html
California at Davis 
Tularemia Titer
 National Veterinary Services Laboratory, U.S.
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/lab_info_services/
 Department of Agriculture, Ames, lowa
downloads/AmesDiagnosticTestingCatalog.pdf
http://www.aphis.usda.gov/animal_health/lab_info_services/
Serology for Pythiosis
This website is not for a laboratory; it is for Dr.
http://www.vetmed.lsu.edu/vcs/
Grooters, who runs the lab.
showfacultybio.asp?facultylD=20
Various Serologic Tests
ARUP Laboratories (C 6 peptide antibodies)
http://www.aruplab.com/guides/ug/tests/0051044.jsp
 National Veterinary Laboratory, Inc
http://www.natvetlab.com/
 Galaxy Diagnostic,Inc
http://www.galaxydx.com/web/
 Protatek Reference Laboratory
http://www.protatek.com/reflab.html
http://www.protatek.com/
SELEcTeD LABORATORIES FOR ENDOCRINE TEStS*
Endocrine Diagnostic Service, Auburn University
http://www.vetmed.auburn.edu/
 endocrine-diagnostics
Animal Health Diagnostic Center Endocrinology Laboratory, Cornell
http://ahdc.vet.cornell.edu/sects/Endo/
 University
Animal Health Diagnostic Laboratory, Michigan State University
http://www.animalhealth.msu.edu/
 College of Veterinary Medicine Diagnostic Services, University of
http://www.vet.utk.edu/diagnostic/
Tennessee
Veterinary Diagnostic Laboratory: Endocrinology Laboratory.
http://www.vdl.umn.edu
University of Minnesota 
*This list is derived from (http://www.compendo.org/testing.html).
SELECTED URINARY STONE ANALYSIS LABORATORIES
Department of Medicine and Epidemiology, School of Veterinary
http://www.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/usal/index.cfm
Medicine, University of California at Davis
 Minnesota Urolith Center, Department of Small Animal Clinical
http://www.cvm.umn.edu/depts/
Sciences, University of Minnesota
 minnesotaurolithcenter/home.html
398
Appendix I:Listing of Selected Referral and Commerical Laboratories
SELECTED LABORATORIES FOR VARIOUS SPECIALIZED TEStS
Hemostasis Testing
Coagulation Section-Animal Health Diagnostic Center,
http://ahdc.vet.cornell.edu/sects/Coag/staff/
 Cornell University
contact.ctm
Taurine Quantitation
Amino Acid Laboratory, Department of Molecular
http://www.vetmed.ucdavis.edu/vMB/aal/index.cfm
 Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
California at Davis 
Carnitine Quantitation
 School of Medicine, University of California at San Diego
http://vetneuromuscular.ucsd.edu/index.html
Myasthenia Gravis (Acetylcholine Receptor Antibody)
Comparative Neuromuscular Laboratory, University of 
http://vetneuromuscular.ucsd.edu/
 California at San Diego
Metabolic Screening/Genetic Screening
http://research.vet.upenn.edu/Default.
MDR-1 Gene Testing
Veterinary Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory, Washington
http://www.vetmed.wsu.edu/depts-vcpl/test.aspx
State University
ListiNG Of oTheR AvAIlaBle tests
Canine Genetic Diseases
Therapeutic Drug Monitoring
American Kennel Club 
 Clinical Pharmacology Laboratory, Auburn University.
http://www.akcchf.org/search/search.jsp (must search
Auburn, Alabama
uder "tests for genetic diseases") 
http://www.vetmed.auburn.edu/clinical-pharmacology-lab
Blood Typing
Cardiac Disease
Veterinary Hospital of University of Pennsylvania
NT-proBNP (IDEXX Diagnostics)
http://research.vet.upenn.edu/Default.aspx?alias=research.
http://www.idexx.com/
vet.upenn.edw/penngen
SELECTeD REsOURCEs FOR TOXICOLOGIC TEstS
Selected Laboratories
California
http://cahfs.ucd avis.edu/
Eurofins Laboratory
http://www.eurofinsus.com/
Animal Health Diagnostic Laboratory, Michigan State University
http://www.animalhealth.msu.edu/
Online Sources of Help for Intoxications 
 ASPCA Animal Poison Control Hotline 
http://www.aspca.org/pet-care/poison-control/
 Pet Poison Hotline
http://www.petpoisonhelpline.com
Adverse Drug Effect Reporting
http://www.fda.gov/AnimalVeterinary/SafetyHealth/ReportaProblem/ucm055305.htm
Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/
ppendix
Listing of Selected Reference Values
Harold Tvedten
LISTING OF SELECTED
reticulocytes, and some reference values vary distinctly
among instrument types. The Sysmex XT-2000iv detects
REFERENCE VALUES
n ig as) oi e a un si ao
 and the LaserCyte detects fewer reticulocytes.
 Selected reference values are provided here for general
 References for automated hematology results for dogs
guidance in interpretation of laboratory results. Refer-
and cats from the Siemens Advia 120 are provided in the
ences to literature values or other sources for the informa-
first two tables based on modified literature results from
tion are given in respective tables. It is essential to have
Moritz et al.,' but these will vary from results of other
reference values established locally for the instruments and
instruments. Note that differential leukocyte counts from
methods used locally in order to have optimal interpretation of
automated instruments do not enumerate nonsegmented
results from those instruments. It is diffiault to find 120
 neutrophils; thus a manual differential leukocyte count is
"normal" and representative dogs and cats each time a
required to demonstrate a left shift. Neither the Advia
new instrument is purchased, but at least 20 animals
2120, Sysmex XT-2000iV, LaserCyte, nor Cell-Dyn instru-
should be used to compare a new method's results to
ments correctly detect basophils in the dog and cat;
well-established reference values, which used at least 120
therefore no automated results for basophils are listed.
normal animals.
vary with instruments, methods, and even different
tion and white blood cell (wBC) count are considered
batches of reagents purchased at different times.
somewhat “universal," but there are definite differences
in results from different types of instruments—and even
within a type and model of instrument—related to cali-
Reference
bration of the instrument and which software version is
1. Moritz A, Fickenscher Y, Meyer K, et al: Canine and feline
being used. For example, different hematology instru-
hematology reference values for the Advia 120 hematology
ments use different stains and methods for determining
system. Vet Clin Pathol 33:32. 2004.
XT-2000IV INSTrUmENtS
Advia 120
Sysmex XT-2000iv
2.5th_97.5th
2.5th_97.5th
PARAMETER*
UNIT
MEAN
PERCENTILES
MEAN
PERCENTILES
RBC
1012/L
7.56
5.68-9.08
6.3
5.1-7.6
Hb
TP/6
17.07
13.77-20.38
15.8
12.4-19.2
HCT
L/L
0.52
0.42-0.62
0.43
0.35-0.52
MCV
fL
69
63-75
66
60-71
MCH
P9
23
20-25
24
22-26
MCHC
TP/6
32.9
31.6-34.4
36.6
34.4-38.1
CHCM
7P/6
31.3
29.7-32.8
RDW
%
12.6
12.0-13.2
16.2
13.2-19.1
WBC
10°/L
10.55
5.84-20.26
11.0
5.6-20.4
LUC
%
1.0
0.6-1.7
Contiued
399
400
Appendix If:Listing of Selected Reference Values
CANINEAUTOMATEDHEMATOLOGYREFERENCEVALUESFORADVIA12OANDSYSMEX
XT-2000IV INSTRUMENTS-CONT'D
Advia120
Sysmex XT-2000iv
2.5th_97.5th
2.5th-97.5th 
PARAMETER*
UNIT
MEAN
PERCENTILES
MEAN
PERCENTILES
Total
10°/L
6.22
4.27-9.06
6.6
2.9-13.6
neutrophils 
Lymphocytes
10°/L
3.08
2.04-4.66
2.6
1.1-5.3
Monocytes
10°/L
0.51
0.24-2.04
0.7
0.4-1.6
 Eosinophils
10°/L
0.35
0.10-1.20
0.9
0.1-3.1
LUC
10°/L
0.11
0.03-0.58
Reticulocytes
%
0.65
0.14-1.48
0.89
0.3-2.4
Reticulocytes
10°/L
48.8
10.9-111
58.2
19.4-150
PLT
10°/L
338
173-486
316
108-562
MPY
fL
11.5
8.6-14.4
10.6
9.1-12.7
*From Moritz A, Fickenscher Y, Meyer K, Failing K, Weiss DJ: Canine and feline hematology reference values for the Advia 120 hematology system.
Vet Clin Pathol 33:32, 2004.
FELINE HEMATOLOGY REFERENCE VALUES WITH ADVIA 12O HEMATOLOGY ANALYZER
2.5th-97.5th
PARAMETER*
UNIT
DISTRIBUTION
MEAN
PERCENTILES
RBC
1012/L
Log-normal
8.13
5.9-11.2
Hb
7P/6
Gaussian
11.71
8.2-15.3
HCT
L/L
Other
0.38
0.24-0.46
MCV
fL
Gaussian
45.97
37-55
MCHC
7P/6
Other
31.17
26.2-35.9
RDW
%
Other 
16.46
13.8-21.1
WBC
10°/L
 Log-normal 
11.99
7.73-18.6
Total neutrophils 
10℃/L
Gaussian
7.83
3.1-12.5
Lymphocytes
10℃/L
 Log-normal
3.13
1.3-7.5
 Monocytes
10°/L
Log-normal
0.37
0.1-1.1
Eosinophils
10°/L
Log-normal 
0.36
0.1-2.2
LUC
10°/L
Log-normal
0.04
0-0.4
 Reticulocytes
%
Log-normal 
0.23
0.0-1.2
Reticulocytes
10/L
Log-normal
18.56
4.94
PLT
10/L
Other
281.34
42-630
MPV
Log-normal
15.02
10-26
*From Moritz A, Fickenscher Y, Meyer K, Failing K, Weiss DJ: Canine and feline hematology reference values for the Advia 120 hematology system.
Vet Clin Pathol 33:32, 2004.
HEMOSTASIS REFERENCE vALUES
TEST
UNITS
CANINE
FELINE
HEMOSTASIS
 Platelets*
x10²/μl
166-575
230-680
PT*
spuonas
5.1-7.9
8.4-10.8
aPTT*
seconds
8.6-12.9
13.7-30.2
Fbrinogen
IP/6山
100-245
110-370
FDP
μg/ml
<10
<10
*Coagulation tests were performed with Fibrometer System at Michigan State University's Veterinary Clinical Center laboratory, 1999. Feline values
are from Killingsworth C: Screening coagulation tests in the cat. Vet Clin Pathol 14:19, 1985.
CHEMISTRY REFERENCE VALUES
TEST
UNITS
CANINE
FELINE
 Arterial blood gas
pH
7.36-7.44
7.36-7.44
PcO2
6H wW
36-44
28-32
Po2
mm Hg
90-100
90-100
TcO2
mEq/L
25-27
21-23
HCO;
mEq/L
24-26
20-22
Venous blood gas
pH
7.34-7.46
7.33-7.41
PcO2
mm Hg
32-49
34-38
Po2
6H wW
24-48
35-45
TcO2
mEq/L
21-31
27-31
HCO,
mEq/L
20-29
22-24
A: G ratio (calculated)
0.89-2.68
0.80-1.68
Abumin
IP/6
3.2-4.7
3.0-4.6
ALP (alkaline phosphatase)
IU/L
0610
481
ALT (SGPT)
IU/L
10-94
23-109
Ammonia (resting)
IP/6r1 
25-92
30-100
Amylase
IU/L
371-1503
531-1660
AST (SGOT)
IU/L
10-62
14-41
Bile acid (fasting)
μmol/L
0.0-15.3
0.0-7.6
Bile acid (2 hour)
μmol/L
0.0-20.3
0.0-10.9
Bilirubin-total
IP/6L
0.1-0.6
0.1-0.7
BSP
%S-0
%S-0
BUN
IP/6u
7-32
18-41
Calcium 
IP/6山
9.0-11.9
8.4-11.5
 Cholesterol
IP/6
116-317
64-229
CK
IU/L
51-529
91-326
Creatinine
IP/6u
0.5-1.4
0.7-2.2
 Electrolyte profile
(eN) wn!pos
mEq/L
146-156
153-162
Potassium (K)
mEq/L
3.9-5.5
3.6-5.8
Chloride (Cl)
mEq/L
113-123
119-132
TcO2
mEq/L
16.9-26.9
12.5-24.5
Anion gap
9-22
10-27
GGT
IU/L
1-6 
1-3
 Globulin
IP/6
1.5-3.5
2.1-4.0
Glucose
IP/6山
53-117
57-131
LDH
IU/L
42-130
63-193
Lipase
U/L
90-527
Lipase
Sigma-Tietz units
0.1-1.3
0.1-0.4
 Magnesium
IP/6山
1.36-2.09
1.38-2.36
Osmolality—serum
Calculated
mOsm/Kg
302-325
319-371
Determined
mOsm/Kg
293-321
290-320
Osmolality—urine
mOsm
200-2000
200-2000
Phosphorus
IP/6山
1.9-7.9
2.9-8.3
SDH
IU/L
5.433.3
0.4-10
 Total protein 
IP,6
5.3-7.6
5.5-7.7
 Triglyceride 
IP/6山
10-500
10-500
Uric acid 
IP/6山
C-1
0-1
Serum iron (Abbott)
IP/6r1
61-255
34-122
 Iron profile*
 Total iron 
μg/dl
84-233*
68-215
UIBC
IP/61
142-393
105-205
TIBC
IP,6r1 
284-572
十
 Saturation
20-59
+
Reference values were from Michigan State University's Veterinary Clinical Center laboratory, 1999.
*From Harvey JV, French TW, Meyer DJ: Chronic iron deficiency anemia in dogs. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 18:946, 1982.
fValues not directly determined.
402
Appendix I: Listing of Selected Reference Values
SELECTEDFACTORS TO CONVERT COMMONLY USED UNITS TO THEINTERNATIONAL SYSTEMOFUNITS
SUBSTANCE
COMMON UNIt
X
CONVERSIONFACTOR
INTERNATIONAL UNIT
Albumin (proteins)
IP/6
10
9/L
Ammonia
IP/6r1
0.587
μmol/L
Bicarbonate
mEq/L
1
mmol/L
 Bile acids 
μg/ml
2.45
μmol/L
 Bilirubin 
IP/6u
17.1
μmol/L
Calcium
IP/bu
0.25
mmol/L 
Total CO2
mEq/L
1
mmol/L
PcO2
6HWW
0.133
kPa*
 Cholesterol
IP/bu
0.026
mmol/L 
 Chloride 
mEq/L
1
mmol/L
 Creatinine
IP/6山
88.4
μmol/L
Folate
ng/ml
2.27
nmol/L 
Glucose
IP/6山
0.0555
mmol/L 
 Insulin 
μIU/ml
0.0417
μg/L
Iron
IP/61
0.179
μmol/L
 Magnesium 
IP/bu
0.411
mmol/L 
Po2
6H 山山
0.133
kPa*
Phosphate
IP/6山
0.323
mmol/L
Potassium
mEq/L
1
mmol/L
wnipos
mEq/L
1
mmol/L
 Urea nitrogen
IP/6u
0.357
mmol/L 
Xylose
IP/6L
0.067
mmol/L
Enzymes
IU/L
0.017
μkat/Lt
Amylase
 Somogyi units/dl
1.85
IU/L
ALT (SGPT)
 Karmen units/ml 
0.48
IU/L
Lipase
 Cherry-Crandall units/ml 
278
IU/L
Blood cells
Cells/μl
1,000,000
Cells/L
*kPa, kilopascal.
U/L (i.e., 1 μmol/min).
Reported as 109cells/L.
Modified from Kaneko J: Clinical biochemistry of domestic animals, ed 3, New York, 1980, Academic Press, pp 785-791; Lehmann HP, Henry JB: Sl
units. In Henry JB, editor: Clinical diagnosis and management by laboratory methods, ed 17, Philadelphia, 1984, WB Saunders, pp 1428-1450.
A
Acetylcholine receptor antibody. 312
Acute acidosis. 114
AAVLD. See American Association of
Acid-base disorders, ll2. See also
Acute diarrhea, 197-198
Veterinary Laboratory Diagnosticians
electrolyte and acid-base disorders:
Acute leukemia. 33-34, 84f
(AAVLD)
felectrolyte and acid-base disorders
Acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). 28.
Abdominal effusions, 236-243
metabolic, 124
83-85. 84f
albumin in. 237
mixed. 124-125
Acute myeloid leukemia (AMI),. 83b.
causes of. 236-237
primary. 122t
87-88
chylous, 240-241
respiratory, 124
Acute phase proteins, 281-282
cystic fluid and, 242-243
Acid-fast bacteria, 352f
advantages of 281
cytology of, 235f
Acid urine 133. 142-143
analysis of, 281
diagnosis of, 236. 239b
Acidosis
artifacts for, 281
eosinophilic, 236
See also specific types of
causes of increased/decreased, 281-282
exudate.237
acetylated metabolite, cause of.
disadvantages of. 281
fecal flora in, 237
121-122. 124
estimation of, 239-240
free, 242-243
acute, 114
indications of. 281-282
jaundice associated with, 242
dilutional, 125
inflammation, for documentation of.
neutrophilic. 239-240
hyperchloremic. 124-125
31-32
portal hypertension and, risks of, 236.
inorganic. 114
types of, 32b
239b. 278
lactic 122. 125
Adenosine, 22-23
suspected, 232f, 236
metabolic. 122. 122b
Adenosine diphosphate (ADP). 95
transudative. 233f. 236-237. 242-243
nomochloremic, 125
ADH. See antidiuretic hormone (ADH}
Abdominal fluid, 150-151, 224
renal tubular, 122. 133
ADP. See adenosine diphosphate (ADP)
Abdominal inflammation, 194b. 196,
respiratory. 122-123. 123b
Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH}
214-215
uremic. 125
endogenous plasma. 18lb. 18lf-182f
Abdominal lavage
Acids
pituitary. 180-181
for abdominal fluid, 224
amino, 312-313
simulation test on, 127-129, 165, 185
for abdominal inflammation, 196
 ethylenediaminetetraacetic, 15b. 29b
synthetic 183f
for fluid collection. 226-227
urinary bile, 219-220
Advia 2120, 20f-21f, 23f, 399t-400t
t6I %aains suunp
wine 0rganic. 312
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus, 270f
Abdominal lavage effusion. 227b. 242
ACM. See acetaminophen (ACM)
Aflatoxins, 375
Abdominal lavage fluid, 226-227
Acquired hemostatic disease, 106
Agar gel immunodiffusion (AG[D).
Abdominal pain. 223f. 224
Acquired myeloperoxidase deficiency. 80f
283-289. 323
Abdominocentesis, 226
Acquired neutrophil dysfunction, 80
Age-matched controls. 283b
Absolute differential leukocyte counts.
Acquired primary hemostasis, 107-108
AGID. See agar gel immunodiffusion
64
anaplasma phagocytophilum and, 108
(AGID)
Absolute nucleated red blood cells. 18
drug-associated platelet dysfunction
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT), 214-215.
Absolute polycythemia. 61 -62
and. 108
280. 280b
Absoption, atomic. 374
ehrlichiosis and, 107
Alaskan malamutes
Absorption test. 205
hemolytic uremic syndrome and. 108
autosomal dominant factor Vll
Abyssinian feline, hemolytic anemia in.
hyperthemmia and, 108
 defciencies in, 109
55
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia
 dwafism associated with, 55
Acanthocytes. 31
and, 107
pulmonary infiltrates with eosinophil's
Acetaldehyde, 381
retroviral disease and, 108
associated with. 40
Acetaminophen (ACM),. 375
Acquired secondary hemostasis., 109
Albendazole, 59
calcium concentation and altered, 157
Acquired vascualr wall diseases, 106-107
Albumin, 278-281, 278b. 279t
Heinz body anemia, cause of. 52-53
 acquired hemostatic disease, 106
in abdominal effusions, 237
hypoalbuminemia due to. 278
 heartworm disease, 106
advantages of. 278
methemoglobinemia, cause of. 53
leishmaniasis, 106
altering 278
toxicity of. 375
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 106
analysis of, 278
Acetylated metabolite, 393b
thrombocytosis. 106-107
artifacts for, 278
acidosis, cause of, 12l-122. 124
Acromegaly. feline, 188-189
concentration of, 134b
hypokalemia, cause of 112
ACT. See activated coagulation time (ACT)
disadvantages of. 278
renal chloride retention, cause of.
ACTH. See adrenocorticotropic hormone
gobulins, causes of, 281
119-120
{ACTH
 hyperalbuminemia and, causes of.
unine Ph, cause of increased, 133
Actinomyces.345f
278
Activated coagulation time (ACT).
hypoalbuminemia and, causes of.
100-101, 101f
278-281
Page numbers followed by f indicate
Activated partial thromboplastin time
indications for, 278-281
figures; t, tables; b, boxes.
(aPTT). 101, 101b, 101f
Albuterol, 375-376
403
404
Index
Aldosterone, 188
Anemia {Continued)
Artifacts {Continued)
Algae blue-green, 377-378
iron defciency. 30f. 57-58. 58t
 calouli analysis, 153
Alkaline phosphatase, 21 6b
macrocytic hypochromic. 20f-21f. 46
canine immunoreactive pancreatic
Alkaline unine, 133
macrocytic normochromic, 46
lipase (SPEC CPL), 197
Alkaloids, 376
microcytic hypochromic. 20f-21f. 46
cholesterol concentrations, 171
Alkalosis, 123-124
mild, 39b
creatinine concentration, 150
metabolic. 123, 123b
moderate, 39b
crystalluria in urine, 142
respiratory. 123-124. 123b
morphologic classification of, 45-46
cylindruria in urine, 142
ALL. See acute lymphoblastic leukemia
nonregenerative, 32b, 55-60. 55b. 60b
fecal fat, 203
(ALL}
nonregenerative immune-mediated
fecal flotation, 207
All nucleated cells (ANC), 84f
hemolytic, 56b
fecal microscopic cytology. 204
 Alpha-1 protease inhibitor, 203-204
nomochromic, 20f-21f
fecal occult blood test, 204
αl-acid glycoprotein, 32b
nomocytic normochromic. 46, 46b
fecal sedimentation, 207
Alpha-naphthyl butyrate esterase, 82t
 peracute hemolytic. 48b
fecal smear for parasites, 206
ALT. See alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
red blood cells in, 43f
feline immunoreactive pancreatic
Alternaria conidia, 349f. 351
regenerative, 45b-46b, 46-55. 52b
lipase, 197
Alveolar ventilation, 274
 renal disease and. 56
fructosamine concentration. 169
Amanita phalloides.367t-368t
secondary. 55-56
gmma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 217
American Association of Veterinary
severe nonregenerative, 56-58
gastrin,197
[aboratory Diagnosticians (AAVLD).
severity of. 38b
gucose concentration in urine, 136
395
sideroblastic, 57
hematunia in urine, 139
AMl. See acute myeloid leukemia (AM[}
statistics for, 38b
 hepatic mineral analysis. 221
Amikacin. See aminoglycosides
types of, 20f-21f, 39b
heterobilharzia.208
Amino acids, 312-313
Anion gap. 124-125
immunoelectrophoresis. 283
Amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic
Anisocytosis. 45
insulin concentration, 169 
peptide (NT-proBNP). 273
Anorexia, 221-224, 224b
insulin-like growth factor-[
Aminoglycosides, 391
Anti-inflammatory drugs, nonsteroidal.
concentration, 188
 hypocholesterolemia, cause of. 171
381
johexol cearance, 152
hypomagnesemia, cause of. 163
Antibodies
 ketone concentration in unine, 137
oral, 171
acetylcholine receptor, 312
leukocytes in urine. 140
renal failure, cause of, 126
antinuclear. 289-291, 290b
 low-dose dexamethasone suppression
Amitraz toxicosis, 129. 376
heartworm.333
test, 186
Ammonia, 220
Antibody-based infectious disease testing.
lupus erythematosus test, 291
Ammonia tolerance test (ATT). 219-220
309 -312
magnesium concentration. 163
Ammonium chlonide, 112. 133
Anticoagulant rodenticides. 377
 ocoult blood in unine, 137
Ammonium urate, 143. 143t
Antidiuretic hormone (ADH), 144f
 parathyroid hormone concentration.
Amphotericin B, 112. 150. 163
Antidiuretic hormone response testing.
157.164
Amylase, 196
145-146
pH of urine, 133
ANA. See antinuclear antibody (ANA)
Antigen test, 267, 273
 phosphorus concentration. 162
Analyses. See also specific types of
Antigens. heartwom adult, 333
pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone
blood gas. 12l-124
Antiglobulin (Coombs) test, 291-292
 concentration, 181
of blood smears. 23-31
Antimicrobial susceptibility. 317-322
 plasma aldosterone 188
calculi. 153
Antinucear antibody (ANA). 289-291.
protein C, 220
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF),. 308-309
290b
protein in urine, 134
fecal, 202-203
Anunia, 147f
pyuria in urine, 140
fluid, 251
Anunia-oliguria. 146
rheumatoid factor test, 292
 hepatic mineral, 221
Aplasia, 33. 56-57
serum alkaline phosphatase. 216
urinary stone 397b
Aplastic anemia. 58
 serum bile acids concentration, 219
 Analytical laboratory errors. 5
APTT. See activated partial
 senum chloride concentration, 119
Anaplasma phagocyiophilium.77f
thromboplastin time (aPTT)
 serum cobalamin concentation, 205
 Anaplasma phagocytophilum. 108
Arterial blood gases, 274-275
 serum cortisol concentration, 182
Anasarca. 255-258, 255b
partial pressure of carbon dioxide and.
serum potassium concentration, 112
Anasarco, 257f
275
 serum sodium concentration, 1l6-117
ANC. See all nucleated cells (ANC)
 partial pressure of oxygen and. 274
serum total protein and albumin, 278
Ancillary tests, 303
Arthropathis
serum viscosity. 289
Anemia. 14b. See aiso specific types of
immune-mediated. 253
therapeutic dnugs monitoring of. 386
aplastic, 58, 58b
infectious. 253-254
 total carbon dioxide for acid-base
blood loss, 41f, 47-48
inflammatory. 253
evaluation, 124
complement-fixing immune-mediated,
noninflammatory/degenerative 254
total serum bilirubin. 212
48b
Artifacts
tansporting bacterial culture, 321
diagnosis of. 40b
acute phase proteins, 281
tiglyceride concentration, 172
eythroid regeneration in, 39t
 antinuclear antibody. 290
typsin-like immunoreactivity test.
Heinz body. 30f. 48b. 52-53, 52b
arterial blood gases. 274
205
hemolytic. 48-55. 52b. 54b
bacteniunia in unine, 140-141
urinary bile acids concentration, 219
hepatic diseaseand. 56
 bilinubinuria in unine, 137
urine culture. 153
hypochromic. 46b
blood ammonia and ammonia
wrine protein:urine creatinine ratio of
immune-mediated hemolytic, 29b, 30f.
tolerance testing. 220
urine. 136
48-52. 56b
 blood gas analysis, 121
water deprivation testing. 145
 inflammatory disease and, 56b. 56t,
blood glucose concentration, 165
Artifactual bleeding. 346f
58t
c-reactive protein, 206
Ascites, 237f
index
405
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST).
Basophilic stippling, 45
Blood smears
215-216
Benzodiazepines. 391
acute phase proteins, 31-32
Aspergillosis, 324325, 348f, 350-351
Bicavity effusions, 246
analysis of 23-31
Aspergillusfigatu324-325348f
Bicytopenia. 58-60
for B. gibsoni, 327f
350-351
aplastic anemia, 58
blood, color of, 32
Aspiration
 bone marrow necrosis/inflammation,
canine. platelet numbers for. 105f
bone marrow. 34-35. 34b. 72-73
58
collection methods for, 24-25
fine-needle, 267f
drug-induced hematologic dyscrasia.
erythrocyte, 28-31
fine-needle pulmonary. 272f
59
example. 25f
nasal fine-needle, 267
ehrlichiosis. 59-60
Jeukocytes. 26-28
tracheal, 268-270
estrogen toxicity, 59
Mycoplasma haemofelis on. 44f
transtracheal, 268-270, 269f-270f
 feline immunodeficiency vinus. 60
plasma protein. 31
Aspiration pneumonia, 341f
feline leukemia virus. 60
platelets, 25-26
Aspinin, 377
leukemia's, 60
platelets, estimation using. 25b
AST. See aspartate aminotransferase (AST}
macrophage proliferative disorders, 60
spherocytes in, 29b
Atomic absorption, 374
myelodysplastic syndromes. 60
spherocytes on. 50f
ATT. See ammonia tolerance test (ATT)
myelofbrosis.59
Wnight's-stained, 29f
 Atypical cells. 32b
parvovinus, 60
Blood transfusion, 36f 60
Atypical mitoses, 359f
phenylbutazone toxicity. 59
Blood typing. 36. 36f. 60
Autoagglutination. 29-30, 30b
sulfadiazine toxicity. 59
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN). 148-150
Automated differential leukocyte counts.
Bicytopenias, 32b
Blood vessels, 97
63-64
Bilious effusions, 230f. 234
Blue-green algae. 377-378
Automated hematology cell counters.
Bilinubin, 212-214
BMBT. See buccal mucosal bleeding time
18-22
Bilinubinuria in urine. 137
(BMBT}
impedance counters, 18-19
Biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid. 309
Body cavities, 317
laser light scatter cell counters, 19-22
Biman cat neutrophil granulation
Body cavity effusions, 236-258
quantitative buffy coat VetAutoread.
anomaly. 79. 79f
Bone marrow
22
Bitch. See canines
acute leukemia, examination for.
Autosomal dominant factor VlI
Blast cells. 33b
33-34
deficiences. 109
 Blast-transformed lymphocytes. 74
aspirate of, 34-35, 34b, 72-73
Autosomal recessive dysplasia. 24f
Blastomyces dermatitidis. 153. 272f. 325.
blast cells in, 33b
Azotemia, 146-148. 148t, 150b
350
cell types in, 35t
nonoligunic renal., 149f
Blastomycosis. 153. 325. 350
complete evaluation of. 34b
postrenal, 148t
Bleeding time (BT)
core biopsy of 34-35, 34b, 72-73
prerenal, 148t
buccal mucosal, 100. 100b
examination of, 32-34, 32b-33b
renal.148t
capillary. 100, 100b
histopathology of. 34
Azotemia-uremia. 146-148
Blood ammonia, 220
inflammation of. 58
Blood banks, 36
myeloblasts in. 66b
B
Blood/bleeding
necrosis of, 58
Babesia canis vogeli 326-327
artifactual, 346f
pluripotent stem cells in, 65f
Babesia canis. 54f
atypical cells in, 32b
smears 0n, 34-36
Babesia gibsoni. 54f. 326-327
blast cells in, 33b
smears on, evaluation of, 34-36
Babesia Spp. 48b. 53-54
color of, 32
toxicants of, 369t
Babesiosis, 326-327
pathologic 346. 346f
Bordatella bronchiseptica,345f
Bacteria
samples of, submission of 15
Borrelia burgdorferi,323
acid-fast, 352f
toxicants of, 369t
BoTeliosis, 323
flora, nomal, 319b
Blood cells
Bromide 391-392
higher. 351-352
dysplastic conditions of, 80-90
Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL), 271 
identifying. 206
neoplastic conditions of. 80-90
Brucella canis, 323-324
intracellular, 340f. 345b
Blood gas analysis. 12l-124
Bnucellosis., 323-324
spore-forming 316f
acidosis and. 122-123
BT. See bleeding time (BT)
types of, 318b
alkalosis and, 123-124
Buccal mucosal bleeding time ( BMBT).
Bactenial culture, 317-322
ventilation based on, 275t
100.100b
Bactenial diseases, 315-316
Blood glucose
BUN. See blood urea nitrogen (BUN)
Bactenial infections., 345b
altered, causes of, 166b
bartonellosis. 322-323
concentration of 165-167
C
boTeliosis, 323
hyperglycemia and, 166-167
C-reactive protein (CRP). 32b. 206
bnucellosis, 323-324
hypoglycemia and, 165
Calcium concentration, 157
diagnostic tests for, 322-324
Blood loss, 47-48
Calcium oxalate monohydrate crystals,
leptospirosis, 324
 Blood loss anemia, 4lf. 47-48
143f
tularemia. 324
external blood loss and, 47-48
Calculi. 153
Bactenial sepsis. 344-345
internal blood loss and. 48
Candidiasis, 350
Bacteniunia. 140-14l, 141f
 red blood cells in, 41f
Canines
Baermann's fecal examination, 270f
reticulocyte in. 41f, 43b. 43f
adhesion protein defciency of. 79
Baermann's funnel apparatus. 272
 Blood parasites, 53-54
bartonellosis in, 322-323
BAL. See bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL}
Babesia Spp. 53-54
basophil in, 76f
Bartonellosis, 322-323
Cytauxzoon felis. 54
breeding of, 296-297. 297b
 Baseline serum thyroid hormone.
hemoplasmas. 53
chondrosarcoma in, 356f
174t-175t
mycoplasma haemocanis.53
copper hepatopathy in, 362f
Basophilia. 76
Blood samples, 96-97
distemper of 317f, 331
406
Index
Canines (Continued)
Cellular morphology. 35
Complete blood count (CBC). 12-15.
eosinophilia in, 76f
Cellularity. 35
303. See also quantitation techniques
ganulocytotropic anaplasmosis in.
Centers for Disease Control and
for CBC
328-329
Prevention (CDC). 395
 hematologic tests for, abnormalities in.
ganulocytotropic ehrlichiosis in, 329
Central nervous system. 318
12b, 13-15
Heinz body anemia in. 52
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
Computed tomography (CT). 264-265
histoplasmosis in, 349f
analysis, 308-309
Concentrations
 immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
 antibody measurement in aqueous
aldosterone, 188
in, 49-51
humor. 328
calcium, 157
 immunoreactive pancreatic lipase in.
biomarkers in, 309
cholesterol, 171
197
60
creatinine 150-151
upus arthriis in. 291f
nucleated cell count in, 309
free thyroxine, 176-178
 mast cell tumor in, 357f
protein concentration of. 309
fructosamine, 169-170
monocytotropic ehrlichiosis in.
red blood cell count in, 309
hemoglobin, 16. 45-46
329-330
Chagas disease, 328
insulin, 168-169
 nasal mycosis in, 348f
Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS). 78
insulin-like growth factor-l, 188-189
neutrophils in, 77f
Chemistry analyzers. 9t. 10
magnesium. 163-164
Pelger-Huet eosinophil in, 78f
Chlamydia psittaci, 346f
parathyroid hormone, 164
perivascular walltumor in, 356f
Chloride, ammonium, 1l2, 133
phosphonus, 161-163
ningwom in. 317f
Cholecalciferol, 382-383
plasma cortisol. 183f. 185f-187f
semen in, 298t
Cholesterol concentration. 171
plasma drug, 386f, 389f
sera in. 286f
Chromatin, 340f
progesterone. 301
synovial fluid smear in, 254f
ydee
protein,309
thrombocytotropic anaplasmosis in.
gas for, 374
of semen, 298
OEE
high-pressure liquid for, 374
senum bile acids. 217-219
Capillaria aerophilia egg. 270f
thin-layer for, 374
senum chloride, 119-120
Capillary bleeding time (CBT). 100, 100b
Chronic diarhea. 198-201
 senum cobalamin, 205-206
Captopril, 59
Chronic granulomatous disease, 79
senum cortisol, 18l-185
Carbamate insecticides. 38l -382
Chronic hepatic disease, 56
senum folate, 206
Carbon dioxide, partial pressure of. 275
Chronic inflammation, 347
senum potassium, 1l2-115
Carbon monoxide, 378
Chronic lymphocytic leukemia. 85-86
serum sodium. 115-118
Carcinoma cell, 267f
Chronic renal disease, 56
3.5.3'-triodothyronine, 176
Cardiac disorders. See respiratory and
CHS. See Chediak-Higashi syndrome
thyroxine, 173-176
cardiac disorders
(CHS)
tiglyceride, 171-173
Cardiac troponin I (cTnt). 273-274
Chylous abdominal effusions, 240-241
uinary bile acids, 219-220
Cardiovascular system, 317-318. 368t
Chylous effusions, 234-235
uobilinogen urine 137b
CBC. See complete blood count (CBC)
Ciliated columnar epithelial cell, 269f
Concomitant hypoglobulinemia. 279b
CBT. See capillary bleeding time (CBT)
Girculating neutrophil pool (CNP). 66t
Congenital dyserythropoiesis syndromes.
CDC. See Centers for Disease Control and
Clinical laboratory tests, 364-373
25
Prevention (CDC)
Congenital myelodysplasia. 81
Cell tumors, 357f
Clostridium defcile, 202-203
Coombs test, 291-292
Cell typing from proliferative masses.
Clostridium perfringens,202
Copper. 378
355-357
CN P See circulating neutrophil pool
Copper toxicity, 54
Cells. See also specific types of
(CNP)
Corrected reticulocyte percentage (CRP).
all nucleated. 84f
Coagulation
43
atypical. 32b
activated coagulation time for.
Corrected white blood cell count, 18
blast, 33b
100-101
Corticosteroid treatment and stress. 70-71
bone marrow pluripotent stem. 65f
activated partial thromboplastin time
Cough. 263. 263b. 270f
carcinoma, 267f
for, 101
Counts
characteristics of, 357f
D-dimer for, 102
 absolute differential leukocyte. 64
dliated columnar epithelial, 269f
disseminated intravascular, 102-106.
automated differential leukocyte,
 dysplastic conditions of blood, 80-90
104t
63-64
epithelial, 338f, 355f
 hemostasis testing of. 100-102
complete blood (See complete blood
erythroid. 45
prothrombin time for. 101
count (CBC})
ghost, 49f
specific factor analysis of. 102
 mucleated cell, 309
goblet, 270
thrombin time for, 101-102
platelet, 99f
hematopoietic stem., 33b
thromboelastography for. 102
relative differential leukocyte, 64
immature hematopoietic, 83f
Coagulation cascade 96f. 101f
total cell, 16-18
inflammatory, 199f
Coagulation time, 100-101. 101f
Creatine kinase, 312
mesenchymal, 355f
Coagulopathy. 93f
Creatinine, 151
mesothelial, 356b. 356f
Coccidioides immitis. 325.350
Creatinine clearance, 151
mophology of. 15b. 338f
Coccidioidomycosis. 325.350
Creatinine concentration, 150-151
neoplastic, 80-90. 141-142, 270, 273,
Cold hemagglutinin disease. 51-52
in abdominal fluid. 151
295. 356b
Colitis. 196
bun. 148t
reactive epithelial, 270
Collection tubes, 6b
causes of. 151
sizes of. 348f
Color of semen, 298
drugs altering. 151
 squamous epithelial, 270
Color of urine, 132
indications for, 150-151
in urine, 141-142
Commercial laboratories, 395
senum. 148t
wrothelial, 141-142
Commercially available chemistry
Creosoma vulpus,354f
vaginal epithelial, 296
 analyzers, comparison of. 9t
Crossmatching, 36
index
407
CRP. See c-reactive protein (CRP):
Cytology slides. 339b
Diseases {Continued)
Cytoplasm, 27f, 352f
 inherited vascualr wall, 106
(CRP)
Cytoplasmic inclusions, 77-79
Jarge intestinal. 199
Cryoglobulinemia. 289
lysosomal storage, 79
Cryoglobulins, 289b
D
neurologic. 306t-307t
Cryoprecipitation. 289
D-dimer, 102
 nontraumatic intracranial, 305
Cryptococcosis. 266f. 326. 350f
Dacryocyte. 31
pulmonary. 273
Cryptococcus neoformans, 266f. 326. 350f
Deficiences
retroviral, 108
Cryptosporidium.208
 acquired myeloperoxidase. 80f
salmon, 352
Crystalluria in urine, 142-143
 autosomal dominant factor Vll. 109
small intestinal, 199-201
Crystals, calcium oxalate monohydrate.
jron, 46b
systemic fungal. 284f
143f
myeloperoxidase, 79-80
von willebrand. 95f. 105-106, 105b.
CSF See cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
phosphofructokinase, 48b. 48f. 55
106t
CT. See computed tomogaphy (CT)
pyruvate kinase, 54
Disk diffusion test, 321
CTnl. See cardiac troponin I (cTnt}
Degenerative arthropathis. 254
Disorders. See aiso specific types of
Culture
Degenerative neutrophils, 345-346. 345f
acid-base, 112
bactenial, 317-322
Dermatophilus congolensis, 352f
erythrocyte, 38-41, 45-60
fungal, 322
Dermatophytes, 351
hemostasis, 102-109
transporting bacterial, 320-322
Dexamethasone, 70t
leukocyte function. 79-80
uine. 152-153
Diabetes, 170
macrophage proliferative, 60
Culture susceptibility. 317-322
Diagnostic laboratonies, 395b-396b
metabolic acid-base, 124
Cutaneous parasitic diseases. 316
Diarrhea
mixed acid-base, 124-125
Cycas spp.. 382
acute, 197-198, 198b
primary acid-base 122t
Cyclic hematopoiesis. 73
chronic 198-201, 200f
proliferative. 60
Cyclosporine. 392
large intestinal, chronic. 198t
protein-losing. 281b
Cylindnuria in urine, 142
 small intestinal, chronic, 198t
 respiratory acid-base, 124
Cystic fluid, 242-243
Diarrheic feces, smear of, 316f 
 Disseminated intravascular coagulation
Cysts
Diazepam, 391
(DIC). 102-106. 104t
epidemal inclusion. 36l, 361b
 DIC. See disseminated intravascular
Distemper, 30f
follicle inclusion, 361
coagulation (D[C}
Dobemman Pinschers. 79
identifying. 207
Diet, 193
Dosages, modifcation of, 390-391
Cytauxzoon felis.54
Diff. See differential leukocyte counts
Drug-associated platelet dysfunction. 108
Cytauxzoonosis, 353
(Diff}
Drug-induced hematologic dyscrasia. 59
Cytochemical stains., 82t. 84f
Differential leukocyte counts (Diff). 26b.
Drug screening using urine. 153
Cytogram. platelet, 23f
63-64
Drugs. See also specific types of
Cytology. 333.337,359-363
absolute, 64
nephrotoxic,134b
of abdominal effusions, 235f
automated. 63-64
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory. 381
of cerebrospinal fluid. 309
relative. 64
therapeutic. 387t-388t
diagnostic approach to. 343f
Digestive system, 367t
Dwarfism, 55
epidemal inclusion cyst, 361
Digoxin,392
Dynamin-1 gene, 312-313
follicle inclusion cyst, 361
Dilution test, 321
Dyscrasia. dnug-induced hematologic. 59
hematoma, 361
Dilutional acidosis, 125
Dysplasia. 22b, 24f
hepatic. 361-362
Diphosphate, 95
Dysplastic conditions of blood cells.
hepatic cytology. 361-362
Direct Coombs test, 49
80-90
histiocytoma,361
Diroflariasis, 333
Dyspnea, 260-263
impression, 266-267
causes of. 261b
inflammation, diagnosis by. 344b
 heartworm adult antigen titer. 333
diagnostic approach to. 262f
of inflammatory masses. 344-347
heartworm antibody titer. 333
tests for. 260-263
lipoma. 360
Diseases. See also specific types of
Dysuna. 129, 130f
lymph node, 325f, 362-363
acquired hemostatic. 106
lymphoma. 362-363
acquired vascualr wall, 106-107
E
mammary neoplasms, 359-360
 antibody-based infectious. 309-312
Ear, 320
mast cell neoplasms, 360-361
bactenial, 315-316
Eccentrocytes. 52. 52f
for microbiology and infectious
 chronic granulomatous, 79
Echinospherocytes, 50f
disease, 315-317
chronic hepatic, 56
Edema. 255-258. 256f
ooular, 353-354
chronic renal, 56
Edema fluid. 227-228
ocular cytology, 353-354
cold hemagglutinin, 51-52
EDTA. See ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid
parasite infestations. 353
cutaneous parasitic, 316
{EDTA}
perianal gland tumor, 360
extra-alimentary tract, 194
Effusions, 231-236. See also specific types
proliferative masses (neoplasia).
exudative joint, 254
354-359
fungal. 315-317
abdominal, 236-243
 purulent vaginal, 296f
fuviral, 317
abdominal lavage. 227b. 242
esults of, 342-363
genetic. 78-79
bicavity. 246. 248b
selected, 359-363
granulomatous.78f
bilicus, 230f, 234
selected causative agents for. 347-353
heartworm. 106
body cavity. 236-258
seroma. 361
hemostasis. 106
characteristics of, 228f. 229t
stains for. 25
hepatic (See hepatic disease)
chylous, 228f. 234-235
techniques for, 337-342
hepatobiliary. 137b
chylous abdominal, 240-241
 transmissible veneral tumor, 361
infectious, 397b
eosinophilic, 236
vaginal, 294-297
inflammatory anemia of. 55-56
eosinophilic abdominal, 236
408
Index
Effusions {Continued)
 Endocrine metabolic. and lipid disorders 
Essential oils. 378
exudate abdominal, 237
{Continued)
Estradiol, 301 -303
eudates, 231-234
thyroid-stimulating hormone
Estrogen toxicity. 59. 59f
free abdominal, 242-243
concentration, 178-179
Estrous cycle 296t
hemorrhagic. 231
thyroid-stimulating hormone
Estnus., 295b
joint, 249-254
stimulation test, 179-180
Ethylene glycol. 379
malignant. 235-236
thyroxine concentration, 173-176
Ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA}.
 modifed transudates, 231
triglyceride concentration, 171-173
15b. 29b
 neutrophilic abdominal, 239-240
uine cortisol:creatinine ratio, 187-188
Euthyroid sick syndrome 175b
pericardial, 243b, 246-249
Endocrine system
Exercise, 71
plewral. 243-246
estradiol, 301-303
Exogenous adrenocorticotropic hormone.
pseudochylous. 235
evaluation of, 301-303
185f
 pure transudates, 231
luteinizing hormone, 301
Expectoration, 191
scrotal, 258
 progesterone concentration, 301
Exploratory rhinotomy. 267
suspected abdominal, 232f, 236
relaxin, 303
External blood loss, 47-48
thoracic. 244f
testosterone, 301
 Extra-alimentary tract disease, 194
transudates. 231
Endocrine tests, 397b
Extranodal, 87
transudative abdominal, 233f.
Endogenous plasma adrenocorticotropic
Exudate abdominal effusions. 237
236-237. 242-243
hormone, 18lb. 18lf-182f
Exudates
Effusions bilious, 234
Enlarged liver. 209 -211
septic. 341f
Ehlers-Danlos syndrome. 106
Entenic vinuses, 331
thoracic, 247f
Ehrlichia canis, 59b
Entenitis. 196
Exudates effusions, 231-234
Ehrlichiosis, 59-60. 107, 287f 352
Eosinopenia. 74
Exudative joint disease, 254
Electrodiagnostics. 305-308
Eosinophilia. 74-76
Eye. 318
Electrolyte and acid-base disorders
Eosinophilic abdominal effusions. 236
serum chlonide concentration, ll9-120
Eosinophilic effusions. 236
F
 senum potassium concentration.
Eosinophilic inflammation, 269f, 347
 Familial nonspherocytic. 55
 112-115
Eosinophils, 40. 76f
 Familial vasculopathy. 106
serum sodium concentration, 115-118
Epidermal inclusion cyst. 36l. 361b
Fat, 341f
urinary fractional excretion of
Epididymides, 300
Fat absorption test, 205
potassium. 115
 Epinephnine-induced leukocytosis. 71b 
Fat stain, 235f
urinary fractional excretion of sodium.
Epinephrine release after exercise. 71
Fecal smear for parasites, 206
118-119
Epistaxis, 264, 267
bacteria in, identifying, 206
Electrophoresis. 282-283. 283t
Epithelial cells, 338f, 355f
cytology of, 204f
Elliptocyte. 31
ciliated columnar., 269f
ova, identifying. 206
Elliptocytosis, 55
reactive, 270
parasites in, identifying. 206
Emorhaic vulvar discharge. 295b
squamous, 270
Fecal testing
Encephalopathy, 211-212
vaginal, 296
for Crypiosporidium. 208
 Endocrine, metabolic, and lipid disorders
ErTOTS
for Giardia,208
adrenocoticotropic hormone
analytical laboratory. 5
for Heterobilharzia. 208
simulation test, 185
laboratory testing. 5
for Tritrichomonas. 208
blood glucose concentration, 165-167
preanalytical laboratory. 4
Feces
cholesterol concentrations, 171
Erythrocyte, 29f. 348f
 alpha-l protease inhibitor activity in.
free thyroxine concentration, 176-178
estimating. 28
203-204
fructosamine concentration, 169-170
indices for, 18
analysis of 202-203
 high-dose dexamethasone suppression
morphology of. 28-31
Baermann's examination of, 270f
test, 186-187
in regenerative anemia. 21f
culture for, 203
 hyperlipidemia concentrations.
Erythrocyte disorders
diarrheic, smear of. 316f
170-171
anemia, 38-41, 45-60
 enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
insulin concentration, 168-169 
 blood transfusions for, 60
for parvovinus in, 202
insulin-like growth factor-[
blood typing for. 60
examination of, 271-272
concentration, 188-189
erythroid cells. regeneration of, 41-45
fat in, 203
insulin secretagogue testing. 169
polycythemia, 60-62
flora in abdominal effusions in, 237
 low-dose dexamethasone suppression
Erythrocyte volume, 45-46
flotation of, 206-207
test, 185-186
Erythroid cells
matter in, 201 -202
 magnesium concentration. 163-164
anisocytosis for. 45
microscopic cytology of. 204
 parathyroid hormone concentration.
basophilic stippling for. 45
Ocoult blood in, 204-205
164
hemoglobin distribution width for. 45
proteolytic activity in, 203
phosphorus concentration, 161-163
Howell-jolly bodies for, 45
sedimentation of, 207
pituitary adrenocorticotropic hormone
macrocytosis for, 44-45
specimen in, 270f
concentration, 180-181
maturation of, 35
Felectrolyte and acid-base disorders
plasma aldosterone, 188
nucleated red blood cells for. 45
anion gap. 124-125
senum cortisol concentration, 18l-185
polychromasia for, 44
blood gas analysis. 12l-124
3.5,3'-triodothyronine concentration.
red blood cell distribution width for. 45
osmolality. 120-121
176
regeneration of, 41-45
csmolol gap. 120-121
3.5.3'-tiodothyronine suppression
reticulocytes for, 41-43
serum chloride concentration, 120
test, 179
sideroblasts for, 45
total carbon dioxide for acid-base
thyroglobulin (Tg) autoantibodies.
siderocytes for, 45
valuation, 124
179
Erythrophagocytosis. 230f
 Feline immunoreactive pancreatic lipase 
thyroid hormone autoantibodies, 179
Erythropoiesis. 43b. 46b
(SPEC FPL). 197
Index
409
Felines
Fungal infections. diagnostic tests for
Gastrointestinal, pancreatic, and hepatic
Abyssinian, hemolytic anemia in, 55
{Continued)
disorders {Continued)
acromegaly in. 188-189
cyptococcosis, 326
weight loss, unknown causes of.
amyloidosis in, 136b
histoplasmosis. 326
221-224
bartonellosis in, 322
 Funnel apparatus. Baermann's. 272
Gastrointestinal tract, 318-320
basophil in, 77f
 Fuviral diseases, 317
GC. See gas (GC)
eosinophilia in, 75f
General laboratories, 396b
fatty liver of, 211f
G
Genes
 ganulocytotropic anaplasmosis in.
Gabapentin. 392
dynamin-1, 312-313
329
Gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT).
MDR1, 380-381
Heinz body anemia in, 52-53
217
superoxide dismutase (SOD). 313
hemoglobin in. 52b
Gas (GC)
Genetic diseases, 78-79
immune-mediated hemolytic anemia
anion, 124-125
Genetic tests, 313
in, 51
artenial blood, 274-275
Genitourinary tract, bacterial culture in.
immunodefciency vinus in, 58, 60, 73.
for chromatography. 374
320
332
osmolol, 120-121
Gentamicin. See aminoglycosides
infectious peritonitis in, 331-332
Gastrin, 197
GFR. See glomerular fltration rate (GFR)
leukemia vinus in, 58, 60, 73. 332
Gastnitis. 196
GGT. See gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase
monocytotropic ehrlichiosis in, 330
Gastrointestinal. pancreatic and hepatic
(GGT)
platelet counts in, 22-23, 22b
disorders
Ghost cells. 49f
jeticulocytes for erythroid cells in.
abdominal pain, 224
Giardia, 208, 211b
regeneration of, 44
alanine aminotransferase, 214-215
Globulins, 278, 281
sera in, 286f
amylase, 196
Glomenular filtration rate (GFR), 151-152
sporotrichosis in. 349f
anorexia, unknown causes of, 221-224
Glucocorticoids. 71b
Female infertility. 302f
aspartate aminotransferase, 215-216
Glucose. See blood glucose
Fibrinogen. 32b
 blood ammonia and ammonia
Glucose concentration in unine, 136-137
Fibrinolysis, 96, 103f
tolerance testing. 220
Glucosuria. 136-137. 136t
Filaroides osleri, 354f
C-reactive protein, 206
Glycol, ethylene, 379
Fine-needle aspiration {FNA). 267f
canine immunoreactive pancreatic
Glycoprotein, αl-acid, 32b
Fine-needle pulmonary aspiration. 272f
lipase, 197
Glycosaminoglycans. 312
Flora, 319b
diarrhea, 197-201
Goblet cells, 270
 Fluid accumulation disorders
expectoration. 191
Gram stain, 341f
anasarca, 255-258
fat absorption test, 205
Granular lymphocytic leukemia. 86
diagnostic approaches to. 226
fecal alpha-l protease inhibitor activity.
Granulocytes. 71t
edema, 255-258
203-204
Granulomatous disease. 78f
effusions, 231-236
fecal analysis. 202-203
Granulomatous inflammation, 346-347.
fluid, 226-231
fecal culture, 203
346b. 347f
Fluid total protein, 231t
fecal enzyme-linked immunosorbent
Grapes. 379
Fluids. See also specific types of
 assay for parvovinus, 202
abdominal. 150-151, 224
fecal fat, 203
H
abdominal lavage of. 226-227
fecal flotation, 206-207
H-J. See Howell-Jolly (H-J) bodies
analysis of, 228-231
fecal matter, 201 -202
Haptoglobin, 32b
cerebrospinal (See cerebrospinal fluid
fecal microscopic cytology. 204
HDDs. See high-dose dexamethasone
(CSF))
fecal occult blood test, 204-205
(HDDS) suppression test
charactenization of, 228-231
fecal proteolytic activity. 203
H DW. See hemoglobin distibution width
collection of, techniques for, 226-228
fecal sedimentation, 207
(HDW)
cystic. 242-243
fecal smear for parasites, 206
 Heartworm adult antigen, 333
edema, 227-228
fecal testing. 208
Heartworm antibody. 333
hemoabdomen, 228f
feline immunoreactive pancreatic
Heartworm disease, 106
of joint effusions in, analysis of, 251
lipase, 197
Heinz bodies, 29f, 49f 52b
thoracic, 345f
gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, 217
Heinz body anemia. 30f. 52-53 
Plucrcscopy 260b. 268
gastrin,197
acetaminophen, cause of. 52-53
FNA. See fine-needle aspiration (FNA)
hepatic disease, 208-212
canine, 52
 Follicle inclusion cyst, 361
 hepatic mineral analysis, 221
eccentrocytes and. 52
Fomalin, 339b
hydrogen breath test, 206
feline 52-53
 Formalin-fixed histopathology samples.
lactate dehydrogenase, 217
Hemabdomen, 234f
339b
lipase, 196
Hemangiopericytom. 356f
Francisella tularensis.324
protein C, 220-221
Hemangiosarcoma, 235f
Free abdominal effusions. 242-243
regurgitation, 191-193
Hematemesis. 196
Pree thyroxine (fTa) concentration.
serum alkaline phosphatase, 216-217
Hematologic dyscrasia. 59
176-178
 senum bile acids concentration,
Hematologic tests. 13-15. 25
 Fructosamine concentration, 169-170
217-219
Hematology celcounters. 18-22
Fungal charactenistics. 348-349
 serum cobalamin concentration.
Hematoma. 361
Fungal culture. 322
205-206
Hematopoiesis. 34b. 73
Pungal diseases. 315-317
senum folate concentration, 206
Hematopoietic cells. 83f
 Fungal infections. diagnostic tests for.
total serum bilinubin, 212-214
Hematopoietic neoplasia. 83t
324-326
trypsin-like immunoreactivity test, 205
Hematopoietic stem cells, 33b
aspergillosis, 324-325
urinary bile acids concentration.
Hematuria
blastomycosis, 325
219220
persistent, 138f
cccidioidomycosis, 325
vomiting 193-196
in unine, 139-140
410
Index
Hemoabdomen fluid, 228f
Hemostasis testing (Continued)
Hyperchloremia, 119b. 120
Hemocytometer. 17-18
of capillary bleeding time, 100
Hyperchloremic acidosis, 124-125
cell count using. 16b
of coagulation, 100-102
Hypercholesterolemia. 171
conversion factors for, 18t
goals of. 92-94
Hypercortisolemia, 182-183
dimensions of, 17f
of platelets. 97-100
Hypergastrinemia, 197
Hemoglobin concentration, 16. 45-46
Hemostatic screening. 93t
Hyperglobulinemia, 284-287, 285b.
Hemoglobin distribution width (H DW).
Hemothorax, 234f
288f
45
Hepatic cytology. 361-362
Hyperglycemia, 166-167, 168f 169
Hemoglobin (Hgb) histogram. 20f-21f
Hepatic disease
Hyperkalemia. 1l13-115
Hemoglobinunia. 48b. 48f. 139f
alanine aminotransferase and, 2llb
Hyperlipasemia. 196
Hemolysis. 4-5, 32b
chronic. 56
Hyperlipidemia, 170-171, 171b. 172f
in acute phase proteins. 32
hepatic encephalopathy. 21l -212
Hypermagnesemia. 164
intravascular, 48b, 48f
hepatomegaly. 209 -211
Hypernatremia. ll8. 118b
lipemia and, 5
ictenus, 212
Hyperosmolality
Hemolytic anemia, 48-55
microhepatia, 209
plasma, 121
 in Abyssinian feline, 55
symptoms of, 208-212
serum. 121
blood parasites and, 53-54
Hepatic disorders. See gastrointestinal.
Hyperparathyroidism, 159f
copper toxicity and, 54
pancreatic, and hepatic disorders
Hyperphosphatemia. 162
familial nonspherocytic. 55
Hepatic encephalopathy, 21l -212
Hyperplasia. 33, 347
Heinz body anemia. 52-53
Hepatic mineral analysis, 221
Hyperproteinemia, 14b, 32b
 hereditary elliptocytosis and, 55
advantages of. 221
Hypertension, 239b
hypophosphatemia and, 54
analysis of, 221
Hyperthermia, 108
immune-mediated, 29b, 30f. 48-52,
artifacts for. 221
Hyperthyroidism. 177f
56b
disadvantages of. 221
Hypertriglyceridemia, 172-173
 methemoglobinemia. 53
indications for, 221
Hyperviscosity, 289
 nonregenerative immune-mediated, 56.
interpreting. 221
Hypoadrenocorticism, 56
56b
Hepatic shape/size. 210f
Hypoalbuminemia, 278-281
 osmotic fragility and, 55
Hepatobiliary disease 137b
Hypoamylasemia. 196
phosphofructokinase deficiency and.
Hepatomegaly. 209 -211
Hypocalcemia, 160-161
55
Hepatozoon canis. 77f
Hypochloremia, 120
pyruvate kinase deficiency and. 54
Hereditary elliptocytosis. 55
Hypocholesterolemia. 171
in Somali feline, 55
Heterobitharzia. 208
Hypochromic anemia, 20f-2lf 46
stomatocytosis and. 55
Hgb. See hemoglobin (Hgb) histogram
Hypocortisolemia, 183-185
zinc toxicity and. 54
High-dose dexamethasone (HDDS).
Hypogastrinemia, 197
Hemolytic uremic syndrome, 108
186-187
Hypoglcbulinemia, 287-289
Hemophilia A, 106t
High-pressure liquid (HPLC). 374
Hypoglycemia, 165, 169
Hemoplasmas, 53
Higher bacteria, 351-352
Hypokalemia., 113
Hemoptysis. 263
Histiocytic neoplasms, 89-90
Hypolipasemia, 196
Hemorhages. 267, 273, 294-295
Histiocyic sarcoma, 89
Hypomagnesemia. 163-164
Hemorhagic effusions, 231
Histiocytoma. 361
Hyponatremia, 117-118, 117b
Hemosiderin, 35
Histograms
Hyponatremic. 1l8b
Hemostasis
hemoglcbin, 20f-21f
Hypophosphatemia. 54. 162-163
acquired primary. 107-108
platelet,23f
Hypoplasia. 33
acquired secondary. 109
platelet-erythrocyte, 19b. 19f
Hyposegmentation, 77-79
coagulation system and, objectives of.
platelet volume, 23f
Hyposthenuric urine, 144f
95-96
Histoplasma capsulatum. 199f. 326. 349
Hypothyroidism, 56
disorders of, diagnosis of, 92-94
Histoplasmosis, 326. 349
Hypotonic fluid losses, 118b
fbninolysis and, 96
Hormones
Hypotriglyceridemia. 172
 inherited primary. 107
adrenocorticotropic. 18lb. 18lf-182f
Hypoxemia. 274,274b
inherited secondary. 109
antidiuretic 144f
Hypoxemic states. 275
nomal, 94-96
baseline serum thyroid, 174t-175t 
nomal, components of. 94-96
endogenous plasma
1
primary. 94-95
 adrenocorticotropic, 181b.
[ctenus, 32, 32b, 212, 212b
 reference values for, 400t
181f-182f
[diosyncratic reaction, 214b
secondary. 108-109
exogenous adrenocorticotropic. 185f
[GF-[. See insulin-like growth factor-[
Hemostasis disease, 106
luteinizing. 301
{IGF-l) concentration
Hemostasis disorders. 102-109
pituitary adrenocorticotropic 180-181
 [MHA. See immune-mediated hemolytic
 disseminated intravascular coagulation.
synthetic adrenocorticotropic. 183f
anemia {IMHA}
102-106
[mmature hematopoietic cells. 83f
of primary hemostasis. 107-108
thyroid-stimulating. 178-180. 180f
[mmune-mediated arthropathis. 253
of secondary hemostasis. 108-109
Howell-Jolly (H-J) bodies, 45, 317f 
[mmune-mediated hemolytic anemia
thrombocytopenia. 104-105
HPLC. See high-pressure liquid (HPLC)
{IMHA]. 29b, 30f, 48-52. 56b
 of vascular endothelium. 106-108
for chromatography
autoaggluination of. 51f
von Willebrand disease, 105-106
Hydrogen breath test. 206
canine. 49-51
Hemostasis testing, 94b. 94f, 94t, 96-102.
Hyperadrenocorticism. 184f
canine, diagnosis of 50b
97t
Hyperalbuminemia, 278
cold hemagglutinin disease associated
blood samples for, 96-97
Hyperammonemia, 220
with, 51-52
 of blood vessels, evaluation of. 97
Hyperamylasemia, 196
direct Coombs test for identifying. 49
of buccal mucosal bleeding time
Hyperbillirubinemia, 212-214, 213f
feline, 51
(BMBT}. 100
Hypercalcemia. 32b. 157-160. 159f
spherocytes and, 50f
index
411
[mmune-mediated thrombocytopenia
[nflammation (Continued)
K
{ITP), 107, 291-292
toxic neutrophils and. 70
Ketone concentration in urine, 137
[mmunochemistry. 84f
[Inflammatory arthropathis. 253
Ketonuria. 137
[mmunodiffusion, 283-289, 323
[nflammatory cells. 199f
Kidneys. toxicants of. 370t
[mmunoelectrophoresis, 283-289
[nflammatory diseases. 55-56
[mmunoglobulin, 284t. 289b
[nflammatory masses. 344-347
L
 [mmunologic and plasma protein
 chronic inflammation, 347
Laboratories
disorders
cytologic diagnosis results for.
commercial, 395
acute phase proteins. 281-282
344-347
diagnostic, 395b-396b
antiglobulin test for, 291-292
eosinophilic inflammation, 347
general, 396b
antinuclear antibody, 289-291
granulomatous inflammation,
human, laboratory testing in, 1. 8
cyoprecipitation, 289
346-347
refeal, 395
electrophoresis for. 282-283
hyperplasia. 347
Laboratory testing errOrs
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
lymphocytic inflammation, 347
analytical eors. 5
tests for, 291-292
 neutrophilic inflammation, 344-346
preanalytical eTors, 4
immuncelectrophoresis for, 283-289
 pyogranulomatous inflammation.
sources of. 4-5
lupus erythematosus test for, 291
346-347
Laboratory testing results
protein electrophoresis for. 282
[nherited primary hemostasis, 107
[ntemational System of llnits for
rheumatoid factor test for., 292-293
[nhenited secondary hemostasis, 109
companing. 4
serum total protein and albumin.
[nhenited vascualr wall disease, 106
interpretation of. 1-3. 1b 
278-281
 Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, 106
"normal," 1b
serum viscosity, 289
familial vasculopathy. 106
normal statistics for, 1-3
[mmunologic-based tests. 293
[nhenited vascular endothelium, 106
reference values for, 3-4
[mpedance counters. 18-19
[nhibitors. alpha-1 protease. 203-204
skepticism about. 1b
[mpression cytology. 266-267
[norganic acidosis. 114
Laboratory testing/tests
hemorrhage. 267
[nsecticides
cinical, 364-373
infection,266
carbamate, 381-382
endocrine. 397b
neoplasia. 266-267
Organophosphate, 381-382
human laboratonies for. 1. 8
 [mpression smear, 341f
pyrethrin, 382
in-dinic 1, 7-10
[n-clinic chemisty analyzers. 10
pyrethroid. 382
for infectious diseases, 397b
[n-clinic laboratory testing 1. 7-10
[nsulin concentration, 168-169
 point-of-care, chemistry analyzers role
[ncusions, 77-79
[nsulin-like growth factor-[ (IGF-[}
in, 8-10
[ncontinence, 129-13l, 131t
concentration. 188-189
profile vs. individual test for, cost-
[ndividual test vs. profile. 6
[nsulin secretagogue testing. 169
effectiveness of. 6
 [nductively coupled plasma emission.
 [ntegumentary system. bactenial culture
II 'pue [onuos ktenb
374
in,320
selecting 94f
[nfections, 266. See also specific types of
[nternal blood loss, 48
toxicoses altered by. 370t-372t
Babesia, 48b
[nternational System of llnits. 4, 402t 
for urinary stone analysis. 397b
bactenial, 345b
[ntracellular bacteria, 340f. 345b 
veterinary referral laboratories for. 1.
diagnostic tests for. 328-331
[ntravasoular coagulation. 102-106. 104t
7-8
fungal, 324-326
[ntravasoular hemolysis. 48b. 48f
[actate dehydrogenase {LDH). 217
protozoal, 326-328
[ntrinsic pathway defect. 101f
[actic acidosis, 122. 125
ecurrent. 80
[odine. 206b
[arge intestinal disease, 199
uinary tract, 142t
[ohexol clearance. 15l-152
[aryngeal examination, 267-268
viral, 331-332
[ron defciency. 46b
[aser light scatter cell counters. 19-22
[nfectious arthropathis. 253-254
 [ron defciency anemia. 30f. 57-58. 58t
Lavage. See also specific types of
[nfectious disease polymerase chain
canine, 58f
bronchoalveolar, 271
reaction, 312
 charactenistics of. 58b
nasal, 265-266
[nfectious diseases. 397b. See al50
jron profiles in. 56t
LDDS. See low-dose dexamethasone
microbiology and infectious disease
[rons, 379-380
(LDDS) suppression test
[nfertility. 299f, 302f
[TP. See immune-mediated
LDH. See lactate dehydrogenase (LDH)
[nflammation, 67-70, 272. See αiso
thrombocytopenia (ITP)
LE. See lupus erythematosus (LE)
specific types of
Lead, 380
abdominal, 194b. 196. 214-215
Left shift. 26
acute phase proteins for documentation
Jaundice, 242
degenerative, 70b
of, 31-32
Joint effusions. 249-254
inflammation and, 67-68
of bone marrow, 58
analysis of, 252t
sevenity of. 68b
chronic, 347
arthropathis and, 253-254
Leishmania, 353. 353f
eosinophilic, 269f. 347
cytologic features of, 251-253
Leishmaniasis, 106
ganulomatous. 346-347,346b.347f
cytology of, 251f
Leptospira spp.324
left shift and, 67-68
diagnostic approach to. 250f
Leptospirosis, 324
leukogram changes in. 68
exudative joint disease and, 254
Leukemia. 60, 81-83
mucopurulent, 268-269. 269f
fluid analysis of. 251
acute, 33-34, 84f
 myeloid hyperplasia of bone maTow
gross appearance of, 250
acute lymphoblastic. 28. 83-85. 84f
with, 69
pH of. 251
acute myeloid, 83b, 87-88
neutrophilic. 344-346
total nucleated cell count of. 251
blast cells in, 33b
nonpurulent, 269-270
total protein of, 251
chronic lymphocytic. 85-86
prognosis of, 69 -70
viscosity of, 251
classification schemes for, 82-83
pyogranulomatous, 346-347
volume of, 249-250
diagnostic testing for. 82
septic, 269f
granular lymphocytic, 86
412
Index
Leukemia (Continued)
Lymphocytes
Microbiology and infectious disease
 laboratory indicators of. 81
blast-transformed. 74
(Continued)
leukocytes morphology of. 28
granular. 86
 Rickettsial infections, diagnostic tests
lymphoblastic, 28.83-85,84f
inflammation of. 347
for, 328-331
ymphocytic, 85-86
reactive, 28, 28b. 74
 Rickettsial viral agents. 315
myeloid. 84f
Lymphocytic leukemia, 85-86
viral infections, diagnostic tests for.
Leukemoid reaction, 70b
Lymphocytosis, 73-74
331-332
Leukocyte counts, 63-64
Lymphoid neoplasia
 Microcytic hypochromic anemia, 20f-21f.
Leukocyte disorders
 lymphoid neoplasms. 85-87
46
basophilia, 76
myeloid neoplasms, 87-89
Microhematocrit. 15-16, 15b
concepts of. 63-66
precursor, 85
 Microhematocrit tubes, 16f. 32b
cytoplasmic inclusions. 77-79
Lymphoid neoplasms. 83b. 85-87. 85b
Microhepatia. 209
 dysplastic and neoplastic conditions of
Lymphomas. 32b. 348f. 362-363
 Microscopes. cytologic diagnosis
blood cells, 80-90
Lymphopenia, 74
techniques for. 342
eosinopenia, 74
Lysosomal storage diseases, 79
Microsporum canis, 317f, 351f
eosinophilia, 74-76
 Mineral analysis. hepatic, 221
leukemia, 81-83
M
Mismating. 297
leukocyte function disorders. 79-80
 Macrocytic hypochromic anemia. 20f-2lf.
Mitoses, 359f
leukopenia. 71-73
46
Mitoxantrone, 59
lymphocytosis.73-74
Macrocytic nomochromic anemia, 46
 Mixed acid-base disorders, 124-125
lymphoid neoplasia. 83-87
Macrocytosis. 44-45
Modifed transudates effusions, 231
ymphopenia.74
 Macrophage proliferative disorders. 60
 Monoclonal gammopathy, 32b.
monocytopenia, 73
Macrophages. 199f, 341f
286f287f
monocytosis. 73
Magnesium concentraion. 163-164
Monocytes. 78f
neutropenia. 71-73
Magnesium, 163b
Monocytopenia, 73
neutrophilic leukocytosis, 66-71
 Malabsorption disease without protein
Monocytosis. 73
muclear hyposegmentation. 77-79
loss, 201
 Morphologic classification of anemia.
Leukocyte function disorders. 79-80
Malassezia, 350
45-46
acquired neutrophil dysfunction. 80
Maldigestion, 199-201
by erythrocyte volume. 45-46
 canine adhesion protein deficiency. 79
Male infertility, 299f 
by hemoglobin concentration, 45-46
 chronic granulomatous disease, in
Malignancy. 358f. 360b
by regenerative response, 46
Doberman Pinschers. 79 
Malignant effusions, 235-236
Motility of semen, 298
myeloperoxidase deficiency. 79 -80
Masses. See specific types of
 MPV. See mean platelet volume (MPV)
 jecurrent infections, in Weimaraners, 80
 Mature lymphoid neoplasms. 85-87
MSUl. See Michigan State University
Leukocytes
extranodal, 87
(MSU}
absolute 64b. 64f
lymphocytic. granular. 86
Mucoid vulvar discharge 296b
aggregation of. 26
lymphocytic leukemia from. 85-86
 Mucopunulent inflammation, 268-269.
differential count of. 26
lymphoma from, 86-87
269f
estimating, 26
nodal, 86-87
Mucormycosis,351
mophology of. 26-28
 plasma cell neoplasms from. 86
Mucus. 295
peripheral blood in. 66b
MCV. See mean coipuscular volume (MCV)
Multipolar mitoses. 359f
production of, 64-66
MDRl gene mutation. 380-381
 Musculoskeletal system. bacterial culture
relative, 64f
MDS. See myelodysplastic syndromes
in, 320
with resolving inflammation, 68f
(MDS)
Mycetoma.351
in urine, 140
 Mean corpuscular volume (MCV). 280b
Mycobacteria, 352f
Leukocytosis. 67b. 67f. 71b
Mean platelet volume (MPV). 23f
Mycobacteriosis, 352
Leukogram. 63
Mesenchymal cells, 355f
Mycobacterium, 341f, 352b
Leukopenia, 70b. 71-73
Mesothelial cells, 356b, 356f
Mycoplasma, 354f
 cyclic hematopoiesis and. 73
Metabolic acid-base disorders, 124
Mycoplasma haemocanis.53
 feline immunodefciency vinus
Metabolic acidosis, 122. 122b
Myoplasma haemofelis.44f
infections as cause of. 73
Metabolic alkalosis. 123, 123b
Mycoplasma sp.. 53b
feline leukemia vinus as cause of. 73
 Metabolic disorders. See endocrine.
Mycosis fungoides. 87
parvovirus entenitis associated with. 73
 metabolic and lipid disorders
Myeloblasts, 66b
Levetiracetam, 392-393
Metaldehyde. 381
Myelodysplasia
Lipase, 196
Methemoglobin. 53b
congenital, 81
Lipemia, 5. 32b
Methemoglobinemia, 52b. 53
foms of, 80t
in acute phase proteins. 32
Michigan State lniversity (MSU). 14t
non-neoplastic. 80-81
goss, effects of. 173b
 Microbiology and infectious disease
Myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS). 33.
Lipid disorders. See endocrine. metabolic.
 bactenial diseases, 315
33b. 57. 57b. 60. 60b. 87
and lipid disorders 
bacterial infections. diagnostic tests foT.
Myelofibrosis, 59
Lipoma. 360
322-324
Myeloid hyperplasia of bone marow. 69
Liver, toxicants of, 368t
qulture and antimicrobial susceptibility.
Myeloid leukemia. 83b, 84f, 87-88
Loading dose, 389-390
317-322
Myeloid neoplasms. 85b. 87-89. 87b
Localization, 304-305
cytology for., 315-317
acute myeloid leukemia, 87-88
Low-dose dexamethasone (LDDS).
dirofilaniasis, diagnosis of, 333
myelodysplastic syndromes. 87
185-186
fungal diseases. 315
myeloproliferative neoplasms. 88-89
[upus erythematosus (LE), 254f, 291
fungal infections, diagnostic tests for.
Myeloid:erythroid ratio. 35
Luteinizing hormone. 301
324-326
Myeloma. 287f
Lyme disease, 323
 protozoal infections, diagnostic tests 
 Myeloperoxidase deficiency. 79-80. 80f
Lymph node cytology. 325f, 362-363
for, 326-328
Myeloproliferative neoplasms. 88-89
index
413
N
Neutrophil cytoplasm, 27f
O
Nasal biopsy. 266-267
Neutrophil dysfunction. acquired. 80
Obstructions. gastric or intestinal.
Nasal discharge, 264
Neutrophil toxicity. 70b
193-194
Nasal fine-needle aspiration biopsy. 267
Neutrophilia
Ocoult blood in unine, 137-139
 Nasal function disorders
causes of, 67b
analysis of, 137-139
antigen detection for. 267
evaluation of, 67f
artifacts for, 137
serology for. 267
with left shift, 67b
positive, causes of. 138-139
Nasal lavage. 265-266
 Neutrophilic abdominal effusions. 
Ocular cytology. 353-354
 Nasal radiography, 264
239-240
Oils, essential, 378
Nasal washings. 326b
Neutrophilic inflammation, 344-346
Oligunia, 147f
Nasopharyngeal examination, 267-268
bactenial sepsis and, 344-345
Onion toxicity. 49f, 52f
National Animal Health Laboratories.
 degenerative neutrophils and.
Oral aminoglycosides, 171
395
345-346
Organophosphate insecticides, 381-382
NCC. See nucleated cell (NCC) count
 pathologic bleeding and, 346
Oslerus osleri, 354f
Necrosis of bone marow. 58
Neutrophilic leukocytosis
Osmolality, 120-121
 Negative staining 352f
coiticosteroid treatment and stress as
Osmolol gap. 120-121
Neoplasia, 266-267, 354-359
cause of, 70-71
Osmotic fragility, 55
bone marrow examination for, 33
differential diagnosis of. 66-67
Ova.206. 207f
hematopoietic. 83t
epinephrine release after exercise as
Oxygen, partial pressure of. 274
inflammation. diagnosis by. 344b
cause of. 71
ymphoid (See lymphoid neoplasia)
 inflammation and. 67-70
P
 Neoplasms
Neutrophils. 65f, 78f, 240f, 338f 340f.
Packed cell volume {PCV),. 43f
histiocytic. 89-90
348b. 348f
anemia, for evaluation of, 31b
ymphoid. 83b, 85-87, 85b
circulation of, 66
increasing. 47b
mature lymphoid. 85-87
degenerative 345-346. 345f
polycythemia, for evaluation of. 31b
myeloid, 85b, 87-89. 87b
into tissues, emigration of, 66
protein disorders. for evaluation of.
myeloproliferative, 88-89
toxic. 26-28
31b
plasma cell, 86
Neutrophils. toxic, 26-28
PaCO2. See partial pressure of carbon
precursor lymphoid. 85
New methylene blue (NMB). 29f
dioxide {PaCO)
mund cell, 357b
Nitrituria in unine, 140
Pain, abdominal, 223f, 224
Neoplastic cells, 141-142, 270, 273. 295.
NMB. Seε new methylene blue (NMB)
Pancreatic disorders. See gastrointestinal.
356b
Nodal., 86-87
pancreatic, and hepatic disorders
 Neoplastic conditions of blood cells.
Non-neoplastic myelodysplasia. 80-81
Pancreatitis, 194-196. 196b
80-90
Non-inflammatory arthropathis, 254
Pancytopenia. 32b, 58-60
Neospora caninum. 327
Non-oliguric renal azotemia. 149f
aplastic anemia, 58
Neosporosis, 327
Non-purulent inflammation, 269-270
bone mairow necrosis/inflammation.
Nephropathy. protein-losing. 20l, 279.
Non-regenerative anemia, 32b. 55-60
58
279b
bicytopenia, 58-60
dug-induced hematologic dyscrasia. 59
Nephrotoxic dnugs. 134b
diagnostic approach to. 55
ehrlichiosis, 59-60
Nervous system. 310t-311t. 365t-367t
pancytopenia. 58-60
estrogen toxicity. 59
 Neuroanatomic localization, 304-305
secondary anemia's, 55-56
feline immunodefciency vinus. 60
severe 56-58
feline leukemia vinus. 60
Neurologic diseases, 306t-307t
Non-regenerative immune-mediated
leukemia's, 60
Neurologic disorders
hemolytic anemia (NR[MHA), 56b
 macrophage proliferative disorders, 60
acetylcholine receptor antibody. 312
 Non-spherocytic. familial. 55
myelodysplastic syndromes. 60
 antibody-based infectious disease
 Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
myelofbrosis, 59
testing. 309-312
381
parvovinus. 60
cerebrospinal fluid analysis. 308-309
 Non-traumatic intracranial disease, 305
phenylbutazone toxicity. 59
Teatine kinase, 312
Nomal canine sera, 282f
sulfadiazine toxicity. 59
differential diagnosis for. 305
Nomal hemostasis, components of.
PaO2. See partial pressure of oxygen
dynamin-1 gene, 312-313
94-96
{PaO)
electrodiagnostics for. 305-308
vascular endothelium. 94-96
Paragonimus kellicotti egg. 270f
genetic tests for. 313
vascular wall, 94-96
Paraproteinemias. 289b
"Nomal" laboratory testing results. 1b
Parasite infestations, 353
infectious disease polymerase chain
Nomochloremic acidosis, 125 
Parasite ova. identifying. 207
reaction, 312
Nomochromic anemia, 20f-21f 46
Parasites. 53-54, 193. 206. 273
neuroanatomic localization for.
Nomocytic nomochromic anemia, 46
Parathyroid hormone (PTH)
304-305
NRBCs. See nucleated red blood cells 
concentration, 164
neuroimaging for, 305
(NRBCs)
advantages of. 164
superoxide dismutase gene. 313
NR[MHA. See nonregenerative immune-
analysis of 156-157. 164
wine organic acids. 312
 mediated hemolytic anemia
artifacts for, 157. 164
Neutral fat, 341f
(NR[MHA)
causes of. 164
Neutropenia. 71-73
NT-proBNP. See amino-terminal
disadvantages of. 164
bone marrow aspirate as cause of.
pro-B-type natiuretic peptide
drug therapies altering. 157
72-73
(NT-proBNP)
drug treatments altering. 164
bone marrow core biopsy as cause of.
Nuclear hyposegmentation. 77-79
hypercalcemia and. causes of 157-160
72-73
Nuceated cell (NCC) count, 309
hypocalcemia and, causes of. 160-161
causes of, 72t
Nucleated red blood cells (NRBCs). 45
indications for. 156-161, 164
parvovirus enteritis associated with, 73
Nucei, 348f, 358f
 Partial pressure of carbon dioxide
persistent, 32b
Nucleoli, 340f, 358f
{PaCO). 275
414
Index
Partial pressure of oxygen (PaO). 274
Platelet histogram. 23f
Prothrombin time (PT). 101. 10lb. 101f.
Partial pressure of oxygen in venous
Platelet volume histogram. 23f
108f
blood {PVO). 275-276
Platelets
Prototheca. 351f
Parvovinus, 60
counting. 97-98
Protothecosis,350
Parvovinus entenitis, 73
estimating. 25
Protozoa, 206b
Pathologic bleeding 346, 346f
function of, testing. 100
Protozoal infections, diagnostic tests for.
PCV. See packed cell volume (PCV)
hemostasis testing of. 100
326-328
PDCs. See plasma drug concentrations
morphology of. 25-26. 98-99
babesiosis, 326-327
(PDCs)
Platelet Function Analyzer (PFA-100)
neosporosis. 327
Pelger-Huet anomaly (PHA). 77-78
of 100
toxoplasmosis. 327-328
Penanal gland tumor, 360
PLE. See protein-losing disorders {PLE)
typanosomiasis. 328
Penicardial effusions., 246-249
Pleural effusions. 243-246 
Pseudochylous effusions, 235
Penicardiocentesis, 227
Pneumonia aspiration, 341f
PT. See prothrombin time (PT)
Penitonitis, 241t
Poikilocytosis, 31
PTH. See parathyroid hormone (PTH)
Persistent hematuria. 138f
Point-of-care chemistry analyzers, 8-10
 concentration
Persistent neutropenia, 32b
Polychromasia, 28-29. 28b. 44
PU-PD. See polyunia-polydipsia (PU-PD)
Persistent thrombocytopenia. 32b
[ulyclonal gammopathy. 286f
Pulmonary aspiration biopsy. 272-273
PFA-100. See Platelet Function Analyzer
Polycythemia, 60-62. 61b
Pulmonary diseases, 273
{PFA-100}
absolute, 6l-62
 Pulmonary infltrates with eosinophil's
PFK. See phosphofructokinase (PFK)
primary absclute. 61 -62
(P[E}. 40
deficiency
relative, 61
Pulse oximetry. 276
Hd
secondary absolute. 62
Pure red cell aplasia (PRCA). 56-57. 56b
acid urine and, causes of, 133
unexplained. 32b
Pure transudates effusions., 231
 alkaline urine and, causes of. 133
[olyuria-polydipsia {Pl]-PD). 126-129,
Punulent discharge. 295
analysis of. 133
144f
Purulent vaginal cytology. 296f
artifacts for, 133
Portal hypertension. 236. 239b. 278
PVO. See partial pressure of oxygen in
Ee1 suane saderau snp
[ortosystemic shunts. 56t
venous blood (PVO)
of joint effusions. 251
[ostrenal azotemia. 148t
Pyogranulomatous inflammation.
of urine, 133
Potassium, 115
346-347
PHA. See Pelger-Huet anomaly (PHA)
PRCA. See pure red cell aplasia (PRCA)
Pyothorax, 27f
Phagocytes. 352f
Preanalytical laboratory erors. 4
Pyrethnin insecticides. 382
Phagocytophilum, 108
causes of, 4b
Pyrethroid insecticides, 382
Pharyngeal examination, 267-268
hemolysis, 4-5
Pyruvate kinase {PK) deficiency. 54
Phenobarbital, 59. 393
 Precursor lymphoid neoplasms. 85
Pyuna in urine, 140
Phenothiazine. 59
Prerenal azotemia. 148t 
analysis of. 140
Phenylbutazone toxicity. 59
Primary absolute polycythemia. 61-62
artifacts for, 140
Phosphatase alkaline 216b
Pimary acid-base disorders. 122t 
causes of, 140
Phosphofructokinase (PFK) deficiency.
Primary hemostasis
48b. 48f. 55
acquired, 107-108
Q
Phosphonus, 152. 162b
inherited, 107
QBC V. See quantitative buffy coat
Phosphonus concentration, 16l-163
platelets and. 94-95
VetAutoread (QBC V)
 PIE. See pulmonary infiltrates with
Pimidone 393
QC. See quality control (QC)
eosinophil's (P[E)
Procainamide, 393, 393b
Quality control (QC). 11
Pituitary adrenocoiticotropic hormone
Proestnus, 295b
Quantitation techniques for CBC. 15-23
(ACTH}. 180-181
Profle vs. individual test, 6
 absolute nucleated red blood cell
PK. See pyruvate kinase (PK) deficiency
Progesterone concentration. 301
count. 18
Plasma aldosterone, 188
Proliferative disorders, macrophage. 60
automated hematology cell counters.
 Plasma cell myeloma, 287f
Proliferative masses., 354-359
18-22
 Plasma cell neoplasms. 86
cell typing from. 355-357
 blood samples, submission of. 15
 Plasma cortisol concentrations. 183f.
initial decisions for, 354
coTected white blood cell count, 18
185f-187f
malignant criteria for, 357-359
erythrocyte indices, 18
Plasma drug concentrations (PDCs).
Prostate, 300
feline platelet counts, 22-23
386f. 389f
Protein C, 220-221
hemoglobin concentration. 16
 Plasma hyperosmolality. 121
Protein concentration, 309
microhematocrit, 15-16
Plasma protein, 31
Protein electrophoresis, 282, 283t
total cell counts. 16-18
anemia, for evaluation of. 31b
Protein in unine. 133-134
 Quantitative buffy coat VetAutoread
 polycythemia, for evaluation of. 31b
analysis of. 133-134
(QBC V), 22, 22b, 24f
protein disorders. for evaluation of.
artifacts for, 134
31b
causes of 134
R
 Plasma protein disorders. See
Protein-losing disorders (PLE). 281b
Rabbit fever, 324
immunologic and plasma protein
Protein-losing nephropathy (PLN). 201 .
Radiography. 264. 268
disorders
279. 279b
Raisins, 379
 Platelet aggregates, 98b 
Proteins
RBCs. See red blood cells (RBCs)
Platelet count, 99f
acute phase, 281-282
RDW. See red blood cell distibution
Platelet cytogram. 23f
C-reactive, 32b, 206
width (RDW)
Platelet dysfunction, drug-associated. 108
fluid total, 231t
Reactive epithelial cells. 270
Platelet dysplasia. 22b
plasma. 31
Reactive lymphocytes, 28. 74
Platelet-erythrocyte histograms, 19b. 19f
senum total, 278-28l, 279t
Receiver operating characteristic (ROC)
Platelet function. 107t
Proteinuria. 133-134, 134b. 135f
curves, 2f
Platelet Function Analyzer (PFA-100). 100
Protheca, 199f
Recurrent infections, in Weimaraners, 80
rdex
415
Red blood cell distribution width (RDW).
 Respiratory and cardiac disorders
S
45
{Continued)
Sago palm, 382
Red blood cells {RBCs)
nasal radiography for, 264
Salmon disease, 352
absolute nucleated. 18
nasopharyngeal examination for.
Sample collections. 5-6. 338f
in cerebrospinal fluid, 309
267-268
blood, 96-97
cytogram for, 20f-21f
partial pressure of oxygen in venous
cytologic diagnosis techniques for.
fragmentation of. 3l. 31b
blood, 275-276
337-339
mass in, 16b
pharyngeal examination for, 267-268
fomalin-fxed histopathology. 339b
measurement of 16b 
 pulmonary aspiration biopsy for.
quantity of, 390
morphologic changes in, 28b. 29f
272-273
timing of. 390
mucleated, 45
pulmonary diseases, 273
SAP. See serum alkaline phosphatase
volume histogram for, 20f-21f
pulse oximetry for, 276
(SAP}
Reference values, 399. 401t
rhinoscopy for, 265
Sarcoma, histiocytic, 89
age-based, 48b
sneezing. 264
SBAs. See senum bile acids (SBAs)
interpretation of laboratory testing
thoracic fluoroscopy for. 268
 concentration
results using. 1b
thoracic radiography for, 268
Scrotal effusions, 258
for laboratory testing results. 3-4
thoracocentesis for, 276
Secondary absolute polycythemia. 62
Referral laboratories, 395
thoracoscopy for, 276
Secondary anemia, 55-56
Regenerative anemia, 46-55
thoracotomy for, 276
chronic hepatic disease, anemia of.
blood loss anemia, 47-48
tracheal fluoroscopy for. 268
56
hemolytic anemia. 48-55
tracheal radiography for, 268
chronic renal disease, anemia of. 56
mucleated red blood cells (NRBCs) in.
trachecbronchoscopy for. 271
hypoadrenocorticism, 56
45b
 tanstracheal/tracheal aspiration for.
hypothyroidism. 56
Regenerative response, 46
268-270
inflammatory diseases. anemia of.
Regurgitation, 191-193, 192f
Respiratory distress. 272f. See also
55-56
Relative differential leukocyte counts, 64
dyspnea
Secondary hemostasis, 108-109
Relative polycythemia. 61
Respiratory system. 320
Secondary myelodysplastic syndrome, 81.
Relaxin, 303
Resting plasma cortisol, 182b
81f
Renal azotemia. 148t, 149f
Reticulocyte index (RI). 43
Selected causative agents. 347-353
Renal chloride retention, 119-120
Reticulocytes. 29f
altemaria, 351
Renal failure 126. 129, 129b
 absolute number of. 41b 
aspergillosis, 350-351
Renal tubular acidosis, 122. 133
aggregate, 44b
blastomycosis, 350
Reproductive disorders. See also semen
calculation of 43b
candidiasis.350
ancillary tests for. 303
for erythroid cells, regeneration of.
coccidioidomycosis. 350
diagnostic approaches to. 294
41-43
cyiauxzoonosis.353
endocrine system, evaluation of.
feline, 42f
dermatophytes, 351
301-303
guidelines for. 41t
ehrlichiosis,352
@pididymides. 300
interpreting. 42b
fungal charactenistics of. 348-349
mammary glands. enlargement of.
punctate. 44b
higher bactenia. 351-352
297-298
histoplasmosis. 349
prostate, 300
Reticulocytosis. 46b
Leishmania,353
seminal alkaline phosphatase. 300
Retroviral disease, 108
malassezia, 350
testes. 300
Rheumatoid factor test, 292-293
mucormycosis, 351
vaginal cytology for. 294-297
Rhinoscopy. 265
mycetoma.351
Respiratory acid-base disorders, 124
Rhinosporidiosis, 349-350
mycobacteriosis.352
Respiratory acidosis. 122-123. 123b
Rhinosporidium. 350f
protothecosis, 350
Respiratory alkalosis. 123-124, 123b
Rl. See reticulocyte index {R[}
rhinosporidiosis.349-350
 Respiratory and cardiac disorders 
Rickettsia rickettsi, 106, 330-331
salmon disease, 352
amino-terminal pro-B-type natriuretic
Rickettsial infections., diagnostic tests for.
sporotrichosis, 349
peptide, 273
328-331
toxoplasmosis，353
artenial blood gases, 274-275
canine granulocytotropic anaplasmosis.
Semen
Baermann's funnel apparatus for. 272
328-329
color of, 298
bronchoalveolar lavage. 271
 canine granulocytotropic ehrlichiosis.
concentration of. 298
cardiac troponin I, 273-274
329
evaluation of, 298-300
cmputed tomography for. 264-265
 canine monocytotropic ehrlichiosis.
morphology of. 300
coughing. 263
329330
motility of. 298
dyspnea, 260-263
canine thrombocytotropic
volume of. 298
qpistaxis, 264, 267
 anaplasmosis, 330
Seminal alkaline phosphatase, 300
exploratory rhinotomy for. 267
feline granulocytotropic anaplasmosis.
Sensitivity testing. 321
fecal examination for. 271-272
329
Sepsis, 344-345
hemoptysis. 263
 feline monocytotropic ehrlichiosis. 330
Septic discharge. 295
 impression cytology for. interpretation
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 330-331
Septic exudates, 228f. 340f-341f. 345f
of, 266-267
Rickettsial viral agents. 315
Septic inflammation, 269f
laryngeal examination for. 267-268
ROC. See receiver operating charactenistic
Septic vaginal cytology. 296f
nasal biopsy for. 266-267
(ROC) curves
Sera, nomal canine, 282f
nasal discharge. 264
Rocky Mountain spotted fever, 106.
Serology test, 267. 273
 nasal fine-needle aspiration biopsy for.
330-331
Seroma. 361
267
Rodenticides, anticoagulant, 377
Serum alkaline phosphatase (SAP). 211b.
 nasal function disorders, 267
Rouleaux fomation, 30b
216-217, 218f, 280, 280b
nasal lavage for 265-266
Round cell neoplasms. 357b
Senum amyloid A, 32b
416
Index
 Serum bile acids (SBAs) concentration.
Specimens {Continued)
Tests/testing (Continued)
217-219
procurement of, 316-317
genetic,313
 Serum chlonide concentration, 1l9-120
in respiratory system. 320
hematologic 13-15. 25
Serum cobalamin concentration.
for toxicologic diagnosis. 373
hemostasis, 96-102
205-206
Spectroscopy for toxicologic diagnosis.
hemostatic, 94b. 94f. 94t, 97t
Senum cortisol concentration, 18l-185
374
high-dose dexamethasone suppression,
Serum folate concentration, 206
Sphenical organisms, 199f. 348f
186-187
Serum hyperosmolality. 121
Spherocytes, 29
hydrogen breath, 206
Serum hyperviscosity. 289
Spore-forming bactenia. 316f
immunologic-based. 293
Serum potassium concentration. ll2-115
individual s. profile. 6
Serum separator tubes. 301b
Squamous epithelial cells. 270
insulin secretagogue. 169
Serum sodium concentration, 1l5-118
Stains
Jow-dose dexamethasone suppression,
Serum total protein, 278-28l, 279t
cytochemical, 82t. 84f
185-186
gobulins, causes of 281
cytologic diagnosis techniques for.
profle vs. individual, 6
 hyperalbuminemia and, causes of, 278
339-342
rheumatoid factor, 292-293
hypoalbuminemia and, causes of.
for cytology. 25
sensitivity. 321
278281
fat, 235f
serology. 267,273
Serum viscosity. 289
Gram, 341f
specialized, laboratonies for. 398b
Severe nonregenerative anemia. 56-58
for hematologic tests, 25
stat tests for laboratory, 6-7
congenital dyserythropoiesis
negative, 352f
3.5.3'-tiodothyronine suppression.
syndromes. 57
Wright-type. 340f
179
 feline immunodefciency vinus
Stat tests for laboratory testing. 6-7
infection. 58
Steady state equilibrium. 386-389
urine infectious disease. 153
feline leukemia. 58
Stem cells. hematopoietic. 33b
Tg. See thyroglobulin (Tg) autoantibodies 
 hemolytic anemia. nonregenerative
Somatocytosis. 55
Theophylline, 393
immune-mediated, 56
Stress, coticosteroid treatment and.
Therapeutic drugs. monitoring of.
iron defciency anemia. 57-58
70-71
387t-388t
myelodysplastic syndromes. 57
Sulfadiazine toxicity. 59
aminoglycosides, 391
pure red cell aplasia. 56-57
Superoxide dismutase (SOD) gene, 313
analysis of. 385-386
sideroblastic anemia. 57
Surgery. abdominal lavage duning. 194
artifacts for, 386
Severe thrombocytopenia, 98b
Susceptibility, antimicrobial, 317-322
 benzodiazepines, 391
 Sibenian huskies, 40
Suspected abdominal effusions, 232f. 236
bromide, 391-392
Sideroblastic anemia. 57
Syndromes. See also specific types of
cyclosporine, 392
Sideroblasts, 45
Chediak-Higashi, 78
decisions for, 386
Siderocytes. 45
congenital dyserythropoiesis. 57
digoxin, 392
Simonsiella spp.. 270f
Ehlers-Danlos. 106 
dosages, modifcation of 390-391
Slides, 337-339. 343-344
euthyroid sick, 175b
gbapentin,392
 Small intestinal disease, 199-201
hemolytic uremic. 108
handling procedures for, 386
uranoid ynounm aseasp uogdrosge e
myelodysplastic. 33, 33b, 60. 60b
implementation of. 386-390
loss from, 201
secondary myelodysplastic. 8l. 81f
indications for. 385
maldigestion from, 199-201
Synthetic adrenocorticotropic hormone.
Jaboratory availability fof, 385-386
 protein-losing enteropathy from, 201
183f
levetiracetam, 392-393
Small liver, 209
Sysmex XT-2000[V instruments.
loading dose and. 389-390
 Smears. See also specific types of
399t-400t
 phenobarbital, 393
bone marrow. 34-36
Systemic fungal disease. 284f
primidone, 393
fecal, 206
procainamide, 393
impression. 341f
T
 samples collections and, 390
Sneezing, 264, 264b
T4. See thyroxine (Ta) concentration
steady state equilibnum for. 386-389
SOD. See superoxide dismutase (SOD)
Tachypnea. 123b. 262f
theophylline. 393
gene
TBNP See total blood neutrophil pool
thyroid hormones. 393
Sodium, 118-119
(TBNP}
zonisamide. 393-394
Somali feline, hemolytic anemia in, 55
TCO,. See total carbon dioxide for
Thiacetarsemide, 59
SPEC FPL. See feline immunoreactive
acid-base evaluation (TCO,)
Thin-layer (TLC) for chromatography. 374
pancreatic lipase (SPEC FPL}
TEG.See thromboelastography (TEG)
Thoracic exudates. 247f
Specialized tests, 398b
Testes, 300
Thoracic fluid, 345f
Specifc gavity of urine 132-133
Testosterone, 301
Thoracic fluoroscopy. 268
Specimens
Tests/testing
Thoracic radiography, 268
analysis of, 316-317
absorption, 205
Thoracocentesis. 227, 276
for bacterial culture, procurement of.
ammonia tolerance 219-220
Thoracoscopy. 276
317-320
ancillary. 303
Thoracotomy. 276
in body cavities, 317
antibody-based infectious disease.
3,5,3'-triodothyronine concentration.
 in cardiovascular system, 317-318
309-312
176
in central nervous system. 318
antigen, 267.273
3.5.3'-triodothyronine suppression test.
in ear, 320
antiglobulin, 291-292
179
 jn eye, 318
linical laboratory, 364-373
Thrombin time (TT). 101-102, 101f
for fungal culture. procurement of. 322
dilution, 321
Thrombocytopenia. 93f. 104-105. 105b
in gastointestinal tract, 318-320
direct Coombs. 49
immune-mediated, 107. 291 -292
in genitourinary tract. 320
disk diffusion, 321
persistent. 32b
in integumentary system. 320
fat absorption, 205
severe, 98b
in musculoskeletal system, 320
fecal (See fecal testing)
Thrombocytosis. 32b. 106-107
index
417
Thromboelastography (TEG). 102. 103f
Toxicologic diagnosis {Continued)
Urinary disorders (Continued)
Thyroglobulin (Tg) autoanibodies. 179
mass spectrometry for. 374
gomerular filtration rate, measurement 
Thyroid hormones, 393
principles of, 364
of. 151-152
autoantibodies in, 179
selection of, 373-374
incontinence 129-131
baseline serum, 174t-175t
specimens for, 373
iohexol cearance 15l-152
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH)
spectroscopy for, 374
phosphonus, 152
stimulation, 178-180. 180f
of toxicants. 374-384
polyuria-polydipsia, 126-129
Thyroxine (T4) concentration. 173-176
Toxicologic tests. 398b
urinalysis. 131-143
Tissue oxygen state, assessment of. 275
Toxoplasma gondi. 327-328. 353. 353f
wrine creatinine, 151
TLC. See thin-layer (TLC) for
Toxoplasmosis, 327-328, 353
wrine culture, 152-153
chromatography
Tracheal aspiration, 268-270
wrine drug screening. 153
TLI. See trypsin-like immunoreactivity
Tracheal flucroscopy. 268
urine fractional excretion. 151
(TLI} test
Tracheal radiography. 268
urine infectious disease testing. 153
Total blood neutrophil pool (TBNP). 66t
Tracheal washing. 269f
water deprivation testing. 144-145
Total carbon dioxide for acid-base
Trachecbronchoscopy. 260b. 271
Urinary fractional excretion. 115. 1l8-119
evaluation (TCOz). 124
Tranquilizers, 59
lrinary stone analysis. 397b
Total cell counts. 16-18
Transfusion of blood, 36f. 60
Urinary tract infections. 142t
Total nuceated cell count of joint 
 Transmissible veneral tumor. 361
Urine
effusions, 251
Transporting bacterial culture, 320-322
acid, 133. 142-143
Total protein, 251
Transtracheal aspiration (TTA). 268-270,
alkaline, 133
fluid, 231t
269f270f
bacteriuria in, 140-141
serum. 278-281. 279t
Transudates, 228f, 233f, 245f
bilinbinuria in, 137
Total senum bilinubin, 212-214
Transudates effusions, 231
cells in, 141-142
Toxic neutrophils. 26-28
modifed, 231
color of. 132
 characteristics of, 27b
pure, 231
Crystalluria in, 142-143
in feline. 27t
Transudative abdominal effusions, 233f.
crystals in, 143t
 inflammation and. 70
236-237. 242-243
cylindruria in. 142
pyothorax and, 27f
Trichophyion mentagrophyies.351f
dilute, 140b
Toxicity. 374-384
Tiglyceride concentration. 17l-173
discolored, causes of, 132t
acetaminophen, 375
Trimeprazine tartrate. 59
gucose concentration in, 136-137
of acetaminophen, 375
Tritrichomonas trophozoites, 207f. 208
hematunia in. 139-140
aflatoxins, 375
Trypanosoma cruzi, 328
hyposthenuric. 144f
albuterol, 375-376
Trypanosomiasis. 328
ketone concentration in, 137
alkaloids. 376
Trypsin-like immunoreactivity (TLl) test.
leukocytes in. 140
amitraz, 129, 376
205
nitritunia in, 140
anticoagulant rodenticides, 377
TSH. See thyroid-stimulating hormone
ocoult blood in, 137-139
aspirin, 377
(TSH) stimulation
pH of, 133
blue-green algae. 377-378
TT. See thrombin time (TT)
protein in, 133-134
carbamate insecticides, 381-382
TTA. See transtracheal aspiration (TTA)
pyuria in. 140
carbon monoxide. 378
Tularemia, 324
specifc gravity of. 132-133. 132b
cholecalciferol. 382-383
Tumors
urbidity of. 132
copper, 54, 378
cell, 357f
wrine protein:urine creatinine ratio of.
essential oils, 378
perianal gland, 360
135-136
estrogen. 59. 59f
 transmissible veneral, 361
wrobilinogen in, 137
ethylene glycol. 379
Turbidity of unine, 132
Urine cortisol:creatinine ratio (uCCR).
gapes, 379
187-188
irons., 379-380
U
lUrine creatinine, 151
of kidneys, 370t
UBAs. See uninary bile acids (llBAs)
lrine culture, 152-153
lead. 380
concentration
lrine drug screening. 153
of liver, 368t
UCCR. See urine cortisol:creatinine ratio
lUrine fractional excretion, 151
MDRl gene mutation. 380-381
(UCCR)
lrine GGT, increased, 217
metaldehyde, 381
Unexplained hypercalcemia. 32b
lUrine infectious disease testing, 153
neutrophil, 70b
Unexplained polycythemia, 32b
Urine 0rganic acids, 312
 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
UPC ratio. See urine protein:urine
lrine Ph, 133
381
creatinine ratio (UPC ratio)
 lUrine protein:urine creatinine ratio {lPC
onion, 49f. 52f
of urine
jatio} of urine. 135-136
Organophosphate insecticides, 381-382
lremic acidosis, 125
lrine specifc gravity. 150b 
pyrethrin insecticides. 382
UJninalysis, 131-143. 303
lrobilinogen unine concentration, 137.
pyrethroid insecticides. 382
lUninary bile acids (UBAs) concentration.
137b
raisins, 379
219220
lrothelial cells in urine 14l-142
sago palm, 382
Uninary disorders. See also urine
lteroverdin, 295
spectroscopy for, 374
 antidiuretic hormone response testing.
sulfadiazine, 59
145-146
A
vitamin D, 382-383
anuria-oliguria, 146
Vacuoles,341f
vitamin K antagonist, 108f. 109
azotemia-uremia, 146-148
Vaginal cytology. 294-297
xylitol, 383
blood urea nitrogen, 148-150
for canine breeding. 296-297
zinc. 48b. 54, 383-384
calculi, 153
for hemorhages. 294-295
Toxicologic diagnosis
Creatinine clearance, 151
for mucus, 295
chromatography. 374
 Creatinine concentration, 150-151
for neoplastic cells, 295
dinical laboratory tests for. 364-373
dysunia, 129
for purulent discharge, 295
418
Index
Vaginal cytology (Continued)
Viscosity
Von willebrand disease (vWD),. 95f.
for septic discharge. 295
 of joint effusions, 251
105-106. 105b. 106t
for uteroverdin, 295
senum, 289
VWD. See von Willebrand disease
for vaginal epithelial cells. 296
Vitamin D, 382-383
(vWD)
for whelping management. 296-297
Vtamin K antagonist toxicity. 108f. 109
Vaginal epithelial cells. 296
Volume
M
Vascualr wall disease, 106-107
erythrocyte. 45-46
Water deprivation. 144-145. 144f
acquired, 106-107
of joint effusions, 249-250
WBCs. See white blood cells (WBCs)
inherited, 106
 mean copuscular. 280b
Weight loss, 221-224, 221b. 222f 272f
Vascular endothelium, 94-96. 106-108
mean platelet, 23f
Weimaraners, 80
Vascular wall, 94-96
packed cell. 43f
Wet mount for parasites. See fecal smear
Vasculopathy. familial, 106
of semen, 298
for parasites
Venous blood, 275-276
Vomiting. causes of. 193-196
Whelping management, 296-297
Ventilatory status, 275
abdominal inflammation, 196
White blood cells (WBCs), 18
Vertebral column, neuroimaging of.
acute. causes of. 193b
Wright-type stain. 340f
305
chronic. 194b. 195f
Veterinary referral laboratories for
colitis, 196
X
laboratory testing. 1. 7-8
diet. 193
Xylitol, 383
Viper bite. 48b
entenitis. 196
Viral infections, diagnostic tests for.
extra-alimentary tract disease, 194
Y
331-332
gastritis. 196
Yeast. 199f. 340f
canine distemper. 331
hematemesis. 196
 enteric vinuses, 331
obstructions. gastric or intestinal.
Z
 feline immunodeficiency virus, 332
193-194
Zinc.383-384
feline infectious penitonitis. 331-332
pancreatitis. 194-196
Zinc toxicity. 48b. 54
feline leukemia vinus, 332
parasites. 193
Zonisamide 393-394