third edition
COLOR ATLAS of
VETERINARY
HISTOLOGY
WILLIAM J.BACHA.JR.AND LINDA M.BACHA
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
COLOR ATLAS OP
VETERINARY
HISTOLOGY
Third Edition
COMPANION CD-ROM
This book is accompanied by a companion CD providing the more than 900
photographs digitally in an atlas interface with zoom capabiliy. There are 
also interactive multiple choice study questions available for each chapter.
Note on access
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic Formats and by print-on-demand.
Some material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included
in e-books or in print-on-demand. If this book refers to medlia such as a CD or DVD
that is not incluced in the version you purchased, please check for the material ct
http:/booksupport. wiley.com. For more information about Wiley products, visit www.
wiley.com
COLOR ATLAS OF
VETERINARY
HISTOLOGY
Third Edition
William J. Bacha, Jr., PhD
 Professor Emeritus 
 Deparment of Biology
 Rutgers University
Camden College of Arts and Sciences 
Camden, New Jersey
Linda M. Bacha, MS, VMD
 Assistant Professor of Biology
 Deparment of Biology
Camden County College
 Blackwood, New Jersey
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sons, Inic., Publication
This edition first published 2012 @ 2012 by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.
First and Second editions @ 1990 and 2000, Lippencott Williams & Wilkins
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the rmerger of Wiley's global
Scientific, Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered offce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atriurm, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex,
PO19 8SQ, UK
Editoriat ofces: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atriurm, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services, and for information about how
to apply for permission to reuse the copyright rmaterial in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use
of specific clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly
to the Copyright Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those
organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by CCC, a separate systerm of
payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are
ISBN-13: 978-0-4709-5851-3/2012.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks.
All brand names and product narmes used in this book are trade narmes, service marks,
tradermarks, or registered tradermarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated
with any product or vendor mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide
accurate and authoritative information in regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the
sional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services of a competent professional
should be sought.
Library of Congress Catatoging-in-Publication Data
Bacha, William J.
Color atlas of veterinary histology / William J. Bacha Jr., Linda M. Bacha. - 3rd ed.
p.;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN-13: 978-0-470-95851-3 (hard cover : alk. paper)
ISBN-10: 0-470-95851-0 (hard cover : alk. paper)
1. Veterinary histology-Atlases. I. Bacha, Linda M. I. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Animals, Domestic-anatomy & histology-Atlases.
2. Anatomy, Veterinary-Atlases. SF 757.3]
SF757.3.B33 2011
636.089'1018-dc23
2011020601
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/11 pt Sabon by Toppan Best-set Prermedia Limited
Disclaimer
The publisher and the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties,
including without limitation warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be
created or extended by sales or promotional materials. The advice and strategies contained
herein may not be suitable for every situation. This work is sold with the understanding that
the publisher is not engaged in rendering legal, accounting, or other professional services. If
 professional assistance is required, the services of a competent professional person should be
fact that an organization or website is referred to in this work as a citation and/or a potential
source of further information does not mean that the author or the publisher endorses the
Further, readers should be aware that Internet websites listed in this work may have changed or
disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read.
12011
TO OUR PARENTS
ANNA and BILL
LOLA and CHIP
PREFACE
TO THE THIRD EDITION
t is our hope that students and research
by Aunt Lila and Uncle Jack McKean and
ers will continue to find this atlas a
Lola and Chip Wood. Thanks to Jessie
useful resource. In this edition, we have
Bacha for proofreading our work, and to
expanded many of the beginning chapters
Tristan Bacha for keeping busy while we
that introduce the basic types of tissues to
  ae e a 
provide the user with a stronger founda-
suggestions
from
Professor
Nancy
tion in histology. The glossary has been
Gartland and the students at the University
expanded, and other extras have been
 Of Pennsylvania School of Veterinary
included that we hope will be valuable.
Medicine, and from reviewers and users
 Once again, many thanks to all of those
of the previous edition. Finally, thanks to
who have made the first and second
Nancy
Turner,
Erica Judisch,
Tracy
 edition of our atlas possible! We were able
Petersen, Erin Magnani, and all of the
 to prepare our page layouts for the third
other people at Wiley-Blackwell for their
edition thanks to the scanner given to us
role in the production of this edition.
vili
PREFACE
TO THE SECOND EDITION
e wish to thank those who have
hundred others. Four of the original black
used the first edition for their
and white line drawings have also been
 suggestions. We believe the incor-
redrawn. Also, a glossary of nearly 750
 poration of many of these recommenda-
words has been added.
tions will make this edition even more
The style, format, and purpose of this
helpful to the user.
edition remain essentially  unchanged
To this end, we have updated the mate-
from the first edition. We continue to view
rial for the second edition by scanning all
the atlas as a useful, benchside reference
of the original kodachromes and relabel-
for those interested in understanding and
ing the art. We have added thirteen new
interpreting
histologic  and   cytologic
 photographs and have enlarged over one
 preparations.
!A
PREFACE
TO THE FIRST EDITION
lthough we have written this atlas
All photomicrographs and drawings are
primarily to fulfill a need of the
original. Some drawings were done free-
student of veterinary medicine, we
hand, while others were made with the aid
believe that clinicians, private practitio-
of a camera lucida. Light microscopy and
 ners, and researchers will find it a useful
colored photomicrographs have been used
reference for normal tissues and organs.
exclusively. We have chosen color rather
Currently, students rely heavily, if not
than black and white because of its corre-
exclusively, on atlases of human histology
spondence to stained preparations. With
 for guidance in the laboratory. There are,
the exception of the few histologic prepa-
 of course, similarities between organs and
rations loaned to us by generous donors or
tissues of domestic animals and those
purchased from a dealer, slides were pre-
of humans. There are also differences,
pared by the authors. Fresh organ samples
however, and these are rarely encountered
were obtained from a slaughterhouse or
in atlases dealing specifically with human
from animals that were euthanized for
histology.
various reasons. With the exception of
 Our aim has been to compare the his-
 smear preparations (blood, bone marrow,
tologic structure of organs in a variety of
 and vaginal), mesenteric spreads, ground
 domestic animals. We have used represen-
bone, and a single plastic section, slides
tative examples in instances where tissues
were prepared using the paraffin method.
and organs from different animals share a
All slides were stained with hematoxylin
common structure. Wherever differences
and
tosin
unless
otherwise
noted.
exist, we have tried to provide examples
 Magnifications of photomicrographs are
that are characteristic of a particular
total magnifications (enlargement of pho-
group of animals. Our selection of animals
tograph x objective 
× projector
lens).
includes the dog, cat, horse, cow, sheep,
Throughout the atlas, hollow structures,
goat, pig, and chicken because they are
for example, blood vessels, kidney tubules,
most frequently referenced in veterinary
and alveoli, are usually identified by label-
school curricula.
ing the lumen of the structure.
IX
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
FROM THE FIRST EDITION
elp is often just around the corner.
ment. We would also like to express
Dr. Henry Stempen, whose office
appreciation to the following individuals
was down the hall from ours at
from the University of Pennsylvania
Rutgers University in Camden, New Jersey,
School  of  Veterinary
/Medicine: Mr.
stopped by one day and volunteered his
Richard Aucamp and Mrs. Kathy Aucamp,
artistic talents. We'd like to thank him for
who provided us with specimens, slides,
his excellent pen and ink drawings of
advice, and assistance in a variety of other
various animal parts, which are somewhat
ways; Dr. Mark Haskins for kindly making
removed from the fungi he usually draws.
available fresh canine and feline material;
Our gratitude also to Ms. Kathleen Carr
Dr. John Fyfe and Dr. Vicki Meyers-
for her secretarial services. Special thanks
Wallen for supplying us with canine
are extended to Dr. Edward Zambraski,
vaginal smears; Dr. and Mrs. Loren Evans
Ms. Kathleen O'Hagan, and Ms.
. Gail
and Dr. David McDevitt for lending us
Thomas of Cook" College,
Rutgers
reference material; Dr. Peter Hand and
 University, for making fresh porcine mate-
Ms. Graziella Mann for providing mate-
rial available to us, and to Dr. Barry Jesse
rial on the nervous system; and Dr. Helen
and Dr. James Harner for supplying us 
Acland, Dr. Linda Bachin, Mr. James
with sheep parts.
Bruce, Dr. Sherrill Davison, Ms. Dawn
Without the unqualified use of the facili-
Dowling, Dr. Robert Dyer, Dr. Robert
ties and equipment of the Biology
Eckroade, Dr.
George
Farnbach, Dr.
Department of Rutgers, our tissue process-
David Freeman, Dr. Wendy Freeman, Dr.
ing and photomicrography could not have
Alan Kelly, Mr. Joseph McGrane, and
been accomplished. Our special thanks to
Dr. Mary Sommer for their time and con-
the department for this courtesy.
sideration in helping us to obtain tissue
This book would never have had a
specimens.
beginning were it not for the generosity of
We are grateful to Dr. Carol Jacobson
Dr. Leon Weiss, Department of Animal
 and the Department of Anatomy of the
Biology, University of Pennsylvania School
Iowa State University College of Veterinary
of Veterinary Medicine, who invited us to
Medicine for providing valuable slide
teach in the veterinary histology labora-
 preparations and text material.
tory and kindly allowed us access to the
Our gratitude is also extended to Hill's
slide collection and facilities of the depart-
Pet
Products,
Topeka, Kansas, and
Pitman-Moore, Inc., Washington Cross-
Company Inc., Cherry Hill, New Jersey,
 ing, New Jersey, for their generous finan-
for their courteous service and helpful
cial assistance.
advice.
Many thanks also to: Dr. Caroline
We
arei
indebted to Mr. William J.
Czarnecki of the University of Minnesota,
Bacha, Sr., for building a super light box
College of Veterinary Medicine, for pro-
for us, and to Mr. Thomas H. Wood, Jr.,
viding copies of her informative labora-
for providing black and white prints of
tory guide; Dr. Deborah Ganster,
Dr.
our photomicrographs, which saved us
James Lawhead, Dr. Virginia Pierce, Dr.
countless hours of drudgery in the dark-
Maria Salvaggio, Dr. Barbara Strock, and
room. Thanks to Barbara Frasco, Esq.,
Dr. Cindi Ward for assisting us in obtain-
for her helpful advice. Our hats are off
ing tissue samples;, Mr. Jeff Bringhurst,
also to Snuff, Chew, Chapter Seat, Angel,
Bringhurst
 Brothers, Tansboro,
New
Clyde, and all the other animals for their
 Jersey, for allowing us access to fresh large
participation.
animal
material;
the
 Longenecker
We also wish to extend our gratitude to
Hatchery, Elizabethtown, Pennsylvania,
all at Lippincott Williams & Wilkins
for  providing_ chicken
1 specimens;
Ms.
whose efforts helped bring this second
Susan Ulrich, Cornell University Press, for
edition into being. We are especially grate-
lending us a difficult-to-obtain reference;
ful to Carroll C. Cann and Jennifer D.
the helpful people at Optical Apparatus
Weir for their professional advice, cour-
Company
Inc., Ardmore, Pennsylvania,
tesy, and assistance.
 for supplies and for assistance with equip-
ment for the microscope; and Mr. Charles
William J. Bacha, Jr.
 Behl and Mr. James Durso of Webb and
Linda M. Bacha
CONTENTS
General Principles of Histology
+
2 Epithelium
LL
 3 Connective Tissue Proper and Embryonic Connective Tissue
19
4 Cartilage
27
 5 Bone Tissue
31
6 Blood
41
7 Bone Marrow
53
8 Muscle Tissue
57
9 Nervous System
65
10 Cardiovascular System
77
11 Lymphatic System
89
 12 Integument
105
13 Digestive System
139
14 Urinary System
183
15 Respiratory System
195
16 Endocrine System
211
17 Male Reproductive System
225
18 Female Reproductive System
243
19 The Eye
267
20 The Ear
283
Glossary
291
Bibliography
309
Index
311
xii
COLOR ATLAS OF
VETERINARY
HISTOLOGY
Third Edition
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF
HISTOLOGY
PREPARATION OF HISTOLOGIC SECTIONS
histologic section is a thin slice of tissue, varying, usually, from 0.5 to 10 or more
micrometers (μ) thick. In preparing such a section, a piece of tissue is either infl-
n  m   si p  n   e m pn
called a microtome. Sections obtained from tissue infiltrated with plastic can be as thin
as 0.5 μ and show superior detail. Excellent preparations as thin as 2 or 3μ also can be
made from tissue infltrated with paraffin-based embedding media. Sections are affixed
to microscope slides and colored with one or more stains to increase the visibility of
various cellular and intercellular components.
Schematically, Figure 1.1 outlines various steps involved in producing a stained
histologic slide using the paraffin procedure. After being removed from an animal, a
tissue or organ is cut into pieces. These pieces are placed into a fixative such as buffered
formalin or Bouin's, which, ideally, preserves normal morphology and facilitates further
processing. After fixation, the specimen is dehydrated by transferring it through a series
of alcohols of increasing concentrations to 100% alcohol. Next, it is placed into a sub-
stance such as xylene or xylene substitute, which is miscible with both 100% alcohol
and paraffin. This intermediate step (called clearing) is essential before infltrating the
dehydrated tissue with paraffin because alcohol and paraffin do not mix. During infltra-
tion, melted paraffin completely replaces the xylene. This procedure is done in an oven
at a temperature just above the melting point of the paraffin. When infiltration is com-
plete, the specimen is transferred to an embedding mold of fresh paraffin, which is
allowed to harden. Then the mold is removed and excess paraffin is trimmed away.
The block of paraffin is then secured to the microtome and oriented appropriately
with respect to the knife. With each revolution of the microtome handle, the specimen
moves through the blade and a section of the desired thickness is produced. Each suc-
cessive section adheres to the preceding one, forming a continuous ribbon. Subsequently,
one or more sections are carefully separated from the ribbon and transferred to the
3
9. Coverslipping
8.Staining
1. Removing Organ
Sample
8060
6. Transferring Sections to Slide
2. Cutting Small Pieces
5. Straightening Sections
on Waterbath
Fix
3. Preparing Specimens
合
for Sectioning
Dehydrate
公
Clear
公
Embed
4.Sectioningwith Microtome
Mold with Specimen
Paraffin Block
Trimmed
in Melted Paraffin
Removed from Mold
Block
Figure 1.1. The various steps involved in producing α histologic slide using the paraffin method.
CHAPTER 1
surface of warm water in a waterbath. This softens the
ric and its appearance is affected by the direction of the
paraffin and flattens the section, eliminating wrinkles. The
cut.
flattened section is floated onto a slide, which is then
The three-dimensional structure of organs and their
placed on a warming table. As the preparation dries, the
components also must be considered when examining a
section adheres to the surface of the slide.
histologic preparation. Cells are three-dimensional objects 
Next, the paraffin is removed with xylene or another
 differing in size and shape. For example, some are long
appropriate solvent and the specimen is rehydrated. It is
 and thin, some cuboidal, and others ovoid. They may have
then stained, dehydrated, cleared (made transparent) with
a random or specific arrangement within an organ. How
xylene, covered with a resinous mounting medium, and
they appear depends on their shape as well as how they
topped with a cover-slip.
were cut. Imagine how the spindle-shaped and tall colum-
Various stains are available to the histologist.
 nar cells shown in Figure 1.2A would look if sectioned in
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) is a frequently used com-
various planes. Note that the nucleus may or may not be
bination of stains. Hematoxylin imparts a purple color to
included in a particular cut through a cell.
substances, but must be linked to a metallic salt called a
The  histologist  examines  multicellular
structures
mordant before it can function effectively. This combina-
having a wide variety of shapes. Some are hollow, some
tion, called a lake, carries a positive charge and behaves as
branch repeatedly, some open onto surfaces, etc. Figure
a basic (cationic) stain. The lake combines electrostatically
1.2, B and C, and Figure 1.3 show a variety of three-
with negatively charged radicals such as phosphate groups
dimensional structures and how they would appear if cut
of nucleoproteins. Substances that become colored by a
at different levels. Examine these carefully. They will help
basic stain are said to be basophilic. Methylene blue, tolu-
you to understand situations you will encounter on actual
idine blue, and basic fuchsin are basic stains. Unlike hema-
slides.
toxylin, these stains have molecules that carry a positive
charge of their own and do not require a mordant. Acidic
(anionic) stains carry a negative charge and color cell or
tissue components that bear positive charges. Eosin is an
HELPFUL HINTS
 acid stain. It imparts an orange or red color to acidophilic
substances. Other commonly used acid stains are orange
 Be sure that the lenses of your microscope are clean before
G, phloxine, and aniline blue.
 you begin examining slides. Use a piece of lens paper or a
 In addition to the widely used H&E staining proce-
soft, clean cloth such as an old (but clean) linen handker-
dure, numerous other stain combinations and techniques
chief. If the lenses have been coated with oil or another
are available. Some are especially useful for identifying
substance, remove it using lens tissue moistened sparingly
certain tissue elements. For example, trichrome proce dures
with a glass cleaner such as Windex. Slides also should be
such as Mallory's and Masson's specifically stain collage-
 cle aned using a soft, lint-free cloth or tissue moistened with
nous fibers within connective tissue. Orcein and Weigerts
glass cleaner.
resorcin fuchsin are stains used to color elastic fibers, pro-
 Every microscope should have a pointer in the ocular.
viding a means of distinguishing them from other fibrous
This is usually supplied by the manufacturer, but can be
elements. Reticular fbers and nervous tissue components
made from a short piece of hair. The latter is cemented into
such as neurons, myelin, and cells of the neuroglia can be 
place inside the ocular with a dab of quick-drying glue or
stained by procedures employing the use of silver. There
 nail polish. Without a pointer, it is not possible to accu-
rately indicate an object in the microscope feld for another
procedures that make possible the localization of various
observer.
carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins found in tissue. Lastly,
Before beginning a session at the microscope, make
stains such as Wright's and Giemsa's (Romanovsky stains)
sure that the fine-adjustment knob is near the middle of its
are available for differentiating the various cells found in
range of rotation. If you do not, you may find that the
blood and bone marrow.
knob is at the limit of its excursion when you are busily
making observations. At that point, you must stop every-
thing and correct it.
It is also a good habit to examine your slide with the
INTERPRETING SECTIONS
unaided eye before placing it on the stage of your micro-
scope. By doing so you will gain information about the
One must know the gross structure of an organ before a
 gross aspects of the specimen and be more likely to center
histologic section from it can be comprehended. It is also
it properly over the light source. Centering is especially
helpful to know how the section was cut, that is, whether
important for small specimens that might otherwise be
it was a cross section (x.s.), a longitudinal section (l.s.), or
difficult to locate. Also, make sure that you put the slide
an oblique slice through the organ. Was the cut made
 on the stage with the cover glass uppermost. If the slide is
through the entire organ or only through a portion of it?
upside down, you will not be able to focus on it with the
Frequently, prepared slides are labeled indicating the par-
high-power lenses. Do not snicker. We have seen this
 ticular orientation of the section. This is not important in
happen often in the teaching laboratory!
an asymmetric organ such as the spleen or liver because
It is always a good idea to start your observations
their appearance would be unaffected by the direction of
using the lowest power objective available on your micro-
the cut. Conversely, the small intestine is radially symmet-
scope. This is usually the 4x lens. The field of view will be
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF HISTOLOGY
5
1
Figure 1.2. A. Slices, indicated by numbered planes, taken through two different types of cells would
the latter be seen. B and C. Planes of section taken from different levels in four separate multicellular
objects are illustrated. Note how the appearance of sections varies with the level of the cut.
CHAPTER 1
lol
Tolol
5
6
H!ITEMPER
Figure 1.3. The prime numbers illustrate sections resulting from transverse (4), oblique [1], and longitu-
dinal (2, 3, 5, 6) cuts made through a plate of cells bearing hollow projections (above plare) and invagi-
nations (below plare). Plane 3 differs from the others because it passes only through the cellular wall of
α projection, and not the lumen; therefore, section 3' appears as a plate of cells rather than a hollow
struchure. You should also be aware that structures may often appear unrelated to a surface or cnother
object, when in fact they are. Compare planes 5 and 6 with sections 5' and 6', where continuity of the
invagination with the surface is evident only in 6 and 6'. While not apparent from a single section, such
continuity would be evident if an uninterrupted series of sections through the entire invagination were
made and examined.
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF HISTOLOGY
large, enabling you to locate regions of special interest
there will be a loss of resolution and increase in contrast.
more easily. When you locate something you wish to
This increase in contrast is often confused with sharpness
examine at a higher magnification, center the object in
 or high resolution; this is a common error in microscopy.
the middle of the feld of view. Then, when you change
All of the above adjustments (except for centering the light
to a stronger lens, the object should be somewhere in the
source) must be made each time a different objective is
field.
used.
 Binocular microscopes often have at least one ocular 
 If your microscope lacks a field diaphragm, you will
that can be adjusted to accommodate your vision. It is
not be able to obtain Kohler illumination. You can still
important that you adjust this properly if you want to have
acquire good and useful lighting, however. Place a speci-
 a comfortable, headache-free session at the microscope.
men on the stage, open the aperture diaphragm fully, and
Assuming that your microscope is of the binocular type
adjust the light intensity with the rheostat so that it is
and that it has at least one adjustable ocular, you should
comfortable for your eyes. Be sure that the condenser is
first bring the specimen into focus with the ocular that is
raised to its highest position, or close to it, when you do
not adjustable by using the fine-adjustment knob. When
this. Now, remove an ocular and look at the back aperture
you have done this, focus the other eye using the adjustable
of the objective. Close the aperture diaphragm fully and
ocular. Use of this procedure will ensure a proper focus for
then open it until it is about 75% of being fully open. This
 both eyes and prevent eye strain.
 f ssd is   radod iond 1m
should need more or less illumination, make adjustments
only with the rheostat or neutral density flter; do not use
the aperture diaphragm.
Yikes! After you turn on the microscope, you do
 To get the most from a specimen, you must avoid
not see any light as you look through the
oculars! Before you replace the bulb, try the
being a passive microscopist, that is, one who finds an
following:
object and then stares at it admiringly without making
further adjustments of the focus. Get into the habit of
 Check the light control lever or knob to make sure the light
focusing continuously with the fine adjustment as you
intensity is not set too low or turned down to zero.
peruse a slide, because even though a tissue section may
Check that the objective lens is clicked fully into position.
Make sure that the plug is fitted properly into the electricol
be only a few micrometers thick, the depth of feld of the.
outlet and that the outlet is working.
higher power objectives may be less than the thickness of
the specimen. Therefore, if you do not focus repeatedly as
you examine a preparation, you will certainly miss seeing
structural detail that might be important to your work.
Bright, even lighting is absolutely essential to effective
You might like to return to a particular location on
microscopy. The best way to achieve this is to use Kohler
 your slide preparation at a future time. Remembering land-
illumination. This can be obtained with any microscope
marks in the vicinity of the object of interest will aid you
that is equipped with both a condenser aperture diaphragm
in locating the object later. A more expedient way of relo-
(the one in the condenser) and a field diaphragm (the one
cating structures is by using verniers, which are mounted
in the light source). If you have such an instrument, proceed
on both the X and Y axes of the mechanical stage. A
as follows:
vernier consists of two parallel, graduated, sliding scales,
one long and one short. The smaller scale is 9 millimeters
1. Center the light source, using the directions you
(mm) long and is divided into 10 subdivisions (0 to 10).
received with the microscope.
The larger scale is several centimeters (cm) long and is
 2. Open both the field and aperture diaphragms fully.
graduated in millimeters, for example, 0 to 80 or 100 to
 3. Raise the condenser to its uppermost position.
160. To relocate an object on a slide, you must first center
 4. Place a specimen on the stage and focus on it using
it in the microscope field. Once this has been done, you
the 10 x objective.
establish its location by reading each of the verniers (X and
 5. Close the field diaphragm so that its leaves are clearly
Y). For example, the O point on the small scale of the
imaged in the field of view.
vernier on the X axis might be located somewhere between
6. Center the image of the diaphragm by manipulating
lines 42 and 43 on the larger scale (Figure 1.4). To deter-
the condenser centering screws, then open the feld
mine its specific location, find the line on the small scale
diaphragm until its leaves disappear just beyond the
that coincides exactly with a line on the longer scale. Then
edge of the field of view.
count, on the smaller scale, the number of spaces between
 7. Remove an ocular and, while looking into the back
0 and the point of coincidence. This number is your
aperture of the objective, close the aperture dia-
decimal point. In the example given (Figure 1.4), the
phragm completely and then open it until it is about
75% of being fully open.
You now have Kohler illumination. If you want to
40
50
60
increase or decrease the light intensity, use the rheostat or
neutral-density flters, but do not adjust the condenser
aperture diaphragm or field diaphragm. If the aperture
10
diaphragm is open to excess, the image will lack some
contrast and be flooded with light. If it is closed too far,
Figure 1.4. Small and large vemier scales
8
CHAPTER 1
decimal is 0.6 and you should read 42.6 as the vernier
ARTIFACTS
value. Do the same for the other vernier (Y) and record
the numbers for both. In the future, if you want to return
 Folds, knife marks, stain precipitate, spaces (where none
to the same location, simply secure the slide to the mechan-
belong), shrinkage, and air bubbles are examples of
ical stage and move the stage controls until the verniers are
common imperfections seen in slide preparations. They
 adjusted to the numbers you previously recorded. These
were introduced during processing and are called artifacts.
manipulations will have returned the slide to its former
Figures 1.5 through 1.9 are examples of such artifacts.
 position, and the object you are looking for should be
somewhere within the microscope feld.
 By knowing the approximate diameter of a red blood
cell in a section, you can estimate the size of other tissue
components. Therefore, it is useful to know that in tissue
Troubleshooting a blurred or cloudy image:
sections prepared by the paraffin method the average size
●IF an image is cloudy or blurry, the oculars and/or objective
of erythrocytes for each of the following animals is as
lenses may need to be cleaned. To determine if an ocular
follows:
needs to be cleaned, tum it as you look through the micro-
Goat: 2.4μ diameter (smallest erythrocytes of the
scope. A dirty mark or smear will rotate iF the ocular is not
clean.
domestic mammals)
● IF the image is still blurred, clean the objective lenses.
Dog: 4.9μ diameter (largest erythrocytes of the domes-
·Make sure the slide is resting on the stage properly and is
tic mammals)
right side up! Sometimes an image cannot be focused
Chicken: 9.4μ long
clearly because the slide is on the stage upside down!
Each average value is based on a total of 20 to 30 cells
 Are you using the oil immersion lens without a drop of oil
that were measured from five different slide preparations
on the slide?
● Be sure that the light source is not parially blocked by
of tissues embedded in Paraplast X-TRA (Monoject
 something, such as the electric cord or a filter holder below
Scientific, Division of Sherwood Medical, St. Louis, MO
the stage.
63103).
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF HISTOLOGY
Figure 1.5
x 62.5
Figure 1.9
X62.5
KEY
1. Dermis
4. Knife mark
 2 Epidermis
 5. Separation artifact
 3. Fold 
 6. Stain precipitate
Fgure 1.5. Stain Precipitate, Cartilage, Dog. Occasionally, solu-
tions accumulate precipitate that may stick to the surface of tissue
sections during the staining procedure.
Figure l.6. Separation (Space) Artifact, Skin, Dog. Tissves moy
processing, resulting in separations within otherwise intact fissue.
Figure 1.6
X 62.5
Figure 1.7. Crackling Artifact, Thymus, Horse. Highly cellular
tissves, for example, thymus, liver, pancreas, and spleen, offen
show numerous tiny cracks throughout. Also note that this speci-
men is not in sharp focus.
Figure l .8. Knife Marks and Folds, Esophogus, Horse (Masson's).
Knife marks (scratches] in the tissue section may be caused by
defects in the microtome knife or by accumulations of debris on
the knife edge.Folds occur when the tissue sections Fail to spread
properly on the surface of the slide.
Figure 1.9. Fold, Aorta, Pig. In a tissue section, Folds are raised 
creas that frequently overlap. Note that portions of this picture
are not in sharp focus.
Figure 1.7
X 62.5
Figure 1.8
X25
10
CHAPTER 1
2
EPITHELIUM
 pithelium is one of the four main types of tissue in the body along with connective 
tissue, muscle tissue, and nervous tissue.
GENERAL FEATURES
Epithelium is a ubiquitous tissue that covers surfaces, lines cavities, and forms glands of
the body. It is comprised entirely of cells separated only by a thin layer of intercellular
substance that helps hold them together. The cells are supported by a thin extracellular
basement membrane that separates them from the underlying connective tissue.
The free (apical) surfaces of epithelial cell may possess cilia (motile processes),
microvilli (short finger-like projections of the cell membrane), or stereocilia (long
microvilli).
When the epithelium consists of a single layer of cells, it is called a simple epithelium.
 If it is formed from two or more layers of cells it is said to be a stratified epithelium.
The individual cells of either type of epithelium may be squamous, cuboidal, or columnar.
  e   e s     s  d 
mately as tall as they are wide, and columnar cells are rectangular cells that are taller
than they are wide.
SIMPLE EPITHELIAL TISSUE
Simple epithelia, formed by a single layer of cells, are found in many different locations
throughout an animal's body. They line the heart; blood and lymphatic vessels;, and
11
pleural, pericardial, and abdominal cavities; and they form
the secretory units of many glands. They also line the
Summary of Types of Epithelial Tissue
stomach, intestines, and portions of the respiratory system.
Simple Epithelium
Types of simple epithelia, simple squamous, simple cuboi-
Simple squamous
dal, and simple columnar, are named according to the
Simple cuboidal
shape of the cells. Pseudostratifed columnar is a special
Simple columnar
form of simple epithelium. Although it appears in profle
Pseudostratified columnar
Stratied Epithelium
to be multilayered, it is not. Its apparent stratification is
Stratified squamous
an illusion that results because the nuclei of cells of differ-
Nonkeratinized
ent heights occur at different levels. All of its cells, though,
Keratinized
are in contact with the basement membrane and not
Stratified cuboidal
layered on top of each other.
 Stratified columnar
Transitional
STRATIFIED EPITHELIAL TISSUE
Stratified epithelia consist of two or more layers of cells.
with only the bottommost layer in contact with the base-
ment membrane. Each additional layer is added on top of
the previous one and does not contact the basement mem-
Word Roots
brane. The total number of layers can vary from two to a
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
dozen or more. Classification of stratified epithelia depends
upon the shape of the cells in the outermost (surface) layer
Column
A pillar
 A cofumnar cell is tall and slender like α 
of the epithelium. If the outermost layer is squamous, the
pillar.
epithelium is stratifed squamous, if it is cuboidal, the
Epi
Upon or
Epithefial tisue covers surfaces and lines
epithelium is stratifed cuboidal; if it is columnar, the epi-
over
cavities and is above deeper tissues. The
thelium is stratifed columnar. Stratified epithelia can be
term epithelium is a noun, and 
epithelial is an adjective. For example,
found in such places as the mouth, esophagus, larynx,
one can speck of a simple squamous
epidermis, vagina, and anal canal. Transitional epithelium
epithelium,or imple squamous epithelial
 is the term applied to a special category of stratified epi-
tissue. Plural = epithelia.
Psevdo
False
Pseuclostratified epithelium appears to be
thelium found only in the urinary system. The shape of its
cells changes with the amount of fuid pressure applied
 stratified, but it is not.
against them. For example, its surface cells have a domed
Sqvam
A scale
Squamous cells, being thin and flat,
resemble scales that cover the body of a Fish.
shape when the urinary bladder is empty but become flat-
 Strat
A layer
tened as the bladder fills with urine.
 A stratified epithelium is layered.
12
CHAPTER 2
ooooobooaoo
~
Simple Squamous
Squamous cell
Stratified Squamous,
nonkeratinized
ooooobaoo
二
Simple Cuboidal
Cuboidal cell
Bistratified Cuboidal
YoJo0d
 Simple Columnar
Columnar cell
Stratified Columnar
Pseudostratified Columnar
VoYovO
Transitional,
Transitional,
unstretched
stretched
Figure 2.1. Types of Epithelia.
EPITHELIUM
13
6
8
Figure 2.5
×250
KEY
1.
Blood vessel, lumen
 7. Lymphatic vessel, lumen
8. Smooth muscle cell, nucleus
 3. Connective tissue
 9. Squamous cell, nucleus 
 4. Cuboidal cell, nucleus 
10. Tubule, lumen
5. Fibroblast, nucleus
11. Urinary space 
6. Hepatocytes
9
Figure 2.2. Simple Squamous Epithelium of Blood Vessels and
Lymphatic Vessels, Submucosa of the Stomach, Pig. Blood
vessels and lymphatic vessels (and the heart] are lined by a simple
squamous epithelium that is specifically called an endothelium in
and generally only the nucleus is visible. Characteristically, the
buncheuchhosningessl hisotd
nuclei appear round.
9
Figure 2.3. Simple Squamous Epithelium, Kidney, Sheep. The
outer layer of Bowman's capsule of a renal corpuscle is called
Figure2.2
×180
the parietal layer.It is Formed by a single layer of squamous cells.
A magnified example of the parietal layer of Bowman's capsule
is shown in Figure 2.4. Tubules lined by a simple cuboidal epi-
 thelium are evident.
Figure 2.4. Simple Squamous Epithelium, Kidney, Sheep. The
Hat nuclei of the squamous cells of the parietal layer of Bowman's
capsule are visible, Forming the outer lining of the urinary space
of the renal corpuscle.
hgure 2.5. Simple Squamous Epithelium, Mesothelium, Liver,
Cat. The surface of the liver is covered by a single layer of squa-
mous cells.Mesothelium is a specic term For the epithelium of
10
the serous membranes of the body, namely the peritoneum,
pleura, and pericardium.
Helpful Hint
Figure2.3
×125
 The nuclei of a squamous epithelium will not always appear
regularly spaced. When a layer of squamous cells of an organ 
is sectioned, the slice may or may not pass through the nucleus
of each cell, resulting in uneven spacing.
 Profile View, as seen in a
histologic section 
1.0
Surface View, sirmple squamous epithelium
Figure 2.4
×250
KEY
1. Cuboidal cell, nucleus 
 3. Tubule, lumen 
2. Squamous cell, nucleus
3
Figure
2.6. Simpe
Cuboidal
Epithelium,
Kidney:.
Cow
{Trichrome). The lining. of the tubules shown here consists of α
single layer of cuboidal cells.
Figure 2.7. Simple Cuboidal and Simple Squamous Epithelium,
Medulla of Kidney, Sheep. The boundaries between the cuboidal
3
cells are not distinet in the tubules lined by simple cuboidal epi-
thelium in this image.To determine the shape of the cells, imagine
drawing lines between the nuclei of adjacent cells to approximate
their borders. Note the simple squamous epithelium that lines the
Figure2.6
× 250
capillaries and the thin segments of the loop of Henle.
Helpful Hints
Aowi no os 'sanss!l jo sady snoa Aq pauoy ao sunio
Feel overwhelmed when you begin to look at a histologic
section of an organ to study epithelial tissue.
● Remember that epithelial tissue is Found lining a cavity or 
covering a surface, so begin to examine an organ at low
magnification and look for epithelium to be bordering the 
white space of a cavity or surface.
 Epithelial tissve is formed by cells that are close together,
with litle or no extracellular matrix. Look For closely
arranged basophilic nuclei of the epithelial cells to help
3
locate an epithelium.
● The shape of nuclei of the cells willhelp you name the type
2
of epithelium. The nuclei of squamous cells are typically Hat
[sometimes round if the cells are bunched up, as in those
lining a contracted vessel] and the cytoplasm is usually not
visible. The nuclei are round in cuboidal cells and typically
elongated in columnar cells.
Figure 2.7
X 360
EPITHELIUM
15
17
2
Figure 2.8
X62.5
Figure 2.12
×250
15
KEY
15
1. Basement membrane 
10. Lymphocyte
2 Cilia
11.Mucus precursor region
 3. Collagenous fiber 
12. Pseudostratified columnar epithelium
 4. Columnar cell, nucleus
13. Simple columnar epithelium
5. Gastric gland
14. Smooth muscle tissue 
6.
Gastric pit, lumen
15. Stomach, lumen
7.
Goblet cell
16. Striated border
13
n ununlar g
17. Trachea, lumen
9. Lamina propria
18. Similar area magnified in Figure 2.9
Figure 2.8. Simple Columnar Epithelium, Pyloric Stomach, Cat.
This low power view shows the location of the simple columnar
epithelium that lines the lumen of the stomach and invaginates to
Form gastric pits. Figure 2.9 is a magnified view of the epithelium
of the stomach similar to the area outlined by the rectangle in this
X250
image.
Figure2.9
Figure 2.9. Simple Columnar Epithelium, Pyloric Stomach, Dog.
The columnar cells that line the lumen of the stomach and the
gastric pits have apical cup-shaped regions that contain mucus
typical of columnar cells.
Figure 2.10. Simple Columnar Epithelium, Jejunum, Dog. The
16
10
4
jejunum is lined by a simple columnar epithelium. A striated
8
border that consists of numerous microvilli is evident. Goblet cells
and migrating lymphocytes are present among the columnar cells.
In the upper part of this image, the simple columnar epithelium
was cut obliquely, making it appear atypical.
Figure 2.1l1. Ciliated Pseudostratified Columnar E
Epithelium,
Trachea, Sheep. A pseudostratified columnar epithelium is formed
by a single layer of cells of different sizes whose nuclei are at
different levels, so that the epitheliums appear stratified. However,
it is a simple epithelium because all of ihe epithelial cells contact
Figure 2.10
X250
the ba sement membrane, although this relationship is not visible.
Figure 2.12. Ciliated Pseudostratified Columnar Epithelium,
17
Trachea, Cow. Goblet cells are evident in this example of a
 pseudostratified columnar epithelium.
For additional examples of simple epithelia; see
these figures:
Simple squamous: 8.2, 10.1 to 10.10 (showing endothe-
lium of blood vessels), 14.9, 14.10
Simple cuboidal: 9.9, 16.15, 17.10, 18.21, 18.30
Simple columnar: 13.83, 13.88, 13.115, 13.139, 18.23
Pseudostratified columnar: 15.3, 15.4, 15.14, 15.15,
15.17, 15.40, 17.10, 18.85
Figure 2.11
×250
1
10
Figure 2.17
×250
Figure 2.13
X125
KEY
1. Bistratified cuboidal epithelium 
 7. Lymphatic vessel, lumen 
2. Collagenous fiber
8. Pharynx, lumen
12
3. Dermis
 2. Separation artifact
 4. Esophagus, lumen 
10. Smooth muscle tissue 
 5. Keratinized cells
11.
Squamous cell, nucleus
6. Lamina propria
12. Stratified squamous epithelium
11
Figure 2.13. Stratified Squamous Epithelium, Nonkeratinized,
Epiglottis, Goat. Only cells of the basal layer of a stratified epi-
1
thelium contact the basement membrane. In α nonkeratinized 
epithelium, the nuclei of the cells are visible throughout the epi-
thelium, even those of the most superficial cel. Note the simple
squamous epithelium that lines the lymphatic vessel in the underly-
ing connective tissue.
Figure 2.14
× 125
Figure 2.14. Stratified Squamous Epithelium, Nonkeratinized,
Esophagus, Cat. A nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium 
is visible lining the collapsed lumen of the esophagus.
Figure 2.15. Stratified Squamous Epithelium, Keratinized, Skin
of Scrotum, Sheep. The superficial layer of the keratinized strati-
fied squamous epithelium is Formed by dead, keratinized cells that
appear as thn strandswihoutvisiblenucli sparated romn
cnother. Compare the keratinized cells here with the superficial
cells in the nonkeratinized epithelium in Figures 2.13 and 2.14.
Figure 2.16. Stratified  Squamous 
Epithelium, Keratinized,
Watle, Pig. The wattle is covered by a keratinized stratified
squamous epithelium.
Figure 2. 17. Bistratified Cuboidal Epithelium, Esophagus, Dog.
This duct of an esophageal gland is lined by a bistratilied cuboi-
Figure 2.15
x 125
dal epithelium.
Helpful Hints:
· The cells of a stratified epithelium will be different shapes
at different levels. The specific type of stratified epithelium
12
is named according to the shape of the most superficial
(apical or surface) cells. For example, the surface cells of
a sratified squcmous epithelium care Hat.
● The basal layers of a stratied squamous epithelium look
darker (especially noticeable ct lower
magnification]
because the deeper cells cre smaller with less cytoplasm
 and, therefore, their dark basophilic nudlei are closely
packed.
Figure 2.16
×250
EPITHELIUM
17
5
Figure 2.18
<250
Figure 2.22
×125
10
KEY
 1. Bistratified columnar epithelium
 7. Squamous cell, nucleus
2 Capillary, lumen
8. Stratified columnar epithelium 
 3. Collagenous Fibers
9. Transitional epithelium
 4. Columnar cell, nucleus 
10. Urethra, lumen 
5. Duct, lumen
11. Urinary bladder, lumen 
6. Smooth muscle tissue
Figure 2.18. Bistratified Columnar Epithelium, Duct of Carpal
Gland, Pig. This duct is lined by a bistratified columnar epithe-
lium.Note thecolumnar-shaped apiccl cells(the cells borcering
the lumen] with elongated nuclei. A simple squamous epithelium
lines the longitudinal section ofa capillery that is visible in this
feld.
X250
Fgure 2.19. Stratified Columnar Epithelium, Urethra, Goat. This
portion of the urethra is lined by a stratified columnar epithelium.
The surface cells of this stratified epithelium are columnar.
Figure 2.20. Transitional Epithelium, Unstretched, Urinary
Bladder, Pig. A transitional epithelium lines the lumen of the
bladder as well as other parts of the urinary system.Surface cells
of the transitional epithelium are either balloon-shaped or broadly
cuboidal when not under tension.
Figure 2.21. Transitional  Epithelium, L
 Unstretched, Urinary
Bladder, Cat. Note the large rounded surface cells in this
unstretched transitional epithelium.
Figure 2.22. TransitionalEpithelium, Stretched, Urinary Bladder,
Cat. Surface cells of this epithelium are Hattened and elongated
when the bladder is stretched with urine.
Figure 2.20
x 125
For additional examples of stratified epithelid;
1
see these figures:
Bistratified cuboidal: 12.58
Bistratified columnar: 12.58
Stratified squamous, nonkeratinized: 15.9, 15.47,
19.15 
Stratified
'snowpnbs
keratinized: 12.3, 12.14,
12.16, 12.24
Transitional: 14.20, 14.24, 14.26
Figure 2.21
× 125
18
CHAPTER 2
CONNECTIVE TISSUE PROPER
AND EMBRYONIC
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
f the four main types of tissues (epithelial, connective, muscle, and nervous),
connective tissue is the most abundant and includes numerous varieties.
 Embryonic connective tissue, connective tissue proper, and the special kinds of
 connective tissue are distinguished from one another by the types and numbers of cells
 present and the nature of the extracellular matrix. Certain cells, such as fibroblasts, are
common in connective tissue proper and may also be present in some of the special types
of connective tissue. Other cells are unique to one kind, such as osteocytes in bone,
chondrocytes in cartilage, and erythrocytes in blood. The matrix is semifluid in connec-
tive tissue proper; it is gel-like in cartilage, hard in bone, and fluid in blood.
Embryonic connective tissue and connective tissue proper are presented in this
chapter. The special types of connective tissue, cartilage, bone, blood, and bone marrow,
wilf be covered in subsequent chapters.
COMPONENTS OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE PROPER AND
EMBRYONIC CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Connective tissue binds together and supports other tissues. It is a composite of various
cells and fibers in an amorphous ground substance. The latter two components comprise
the extracellular matrix, which typically predominates over the cellular elements.
Extracellular Matrix
Ground Substance
The ground substance, composed largely of glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans,
forms a well-hydrated gel that fills the spaces between cells, fbers, and vessels of
19
connective tissue. It acts as a reservoir for interstitial fluid,
TYPES OF CONNECTIVE TISSUE PROPER
providing a medium through which oxygen, nutrients, and
metabolic by-products diffuse to and from cells of various
The categories of connective tissue proper are classified
tissues and the vascular system.
according to the arrangement and proportions of their
cellular and extracellular components: loose, dense, reticu-
lar, elastic, and adipose tissue.
Fibers
 Collagenous, reticular, and elastic fbers occur in connec-
In loose (areolar) connective tissue, the ground sub-
tive tissue. Collagenous fbers, comprised of the fbrous
stance predominates. It contains many scattered cells of
protein collagen, are generally the most abundant. They
various types, vessels, and a loose network of fine collag-
are strong and flexible, yet able to resist stretch. They may
enous, reticular, and elastic fbers. Loose connective tissue
is widespread throughout the body. It surrounds vessels
be fine or coarse, and they are characteristically unbranched
and somewhat wavy. In tissues stained with H&E, they
 and nerves, and it is found in serous membranes such as
appear pink and shiny.
mesenteries, the lamina propria of mucous membranes,
 Reticular fbers are also formed from the protein
subcutaneous tissue, the papillary (superficial) layer of the
dermis, and various other places.
collagen. They are delicate, branching fbers that possess
a coat of glycoproteins and proteoglycans. They are argyr-
In contrast to loose connective tissue, dense connective
ophilic (silver-loving) and can be stained with silver to
tissue (often called fibrous tissue) is comprised principally
distinguish them from other fibers of the connective
of thick, collagenous fibers. It contains fewer cells than
tissue. They may also be selectively stained with Schiff's
loose connective tissue, most of which are fbroblasts. In
dense irregular connective tissue, the collagenous fibers
reagent.
Elastic fbers, formed from the protein elastin, range
course in all directions, forming a compact three-
dimensional meshwork. Dense irregular connective tissue
in diameter from fine to coarse and ordinarily cannot easily
be distinguished from collagenous fibers without the use
occurs in such places as the reticular (deep) layer of the
dermis, submucosa of the digestive tract of some species,
of special stains such as orcein or Weigert's resorcin fuchsin.
and capsules of organs. Dense regular connective tissue is
In some H&E preparations, however, they become colored
characterized by closely packed, parallel bundles of col-
more intensely by eosin than the collagenous fibers.
lagenous fbers. Tendons, ligaments, and aponeuroses are
formed by dense regular connective tissue.
Cells
 It is helpful to know that there are no sharp lines of
distinction between loose and dense irregular connective
The types and numbers of cells vary with the specific type
tissue, or between dense irregular and regular connective
of connective tissue. Fibroblasts are generally the most
tissue. Therefore, it is not always possible to classify these
numerous of the cells found in connective tissue proper.
types of connective tissues with great precision.
They are responsible for the formation of fibers and ground
Reticular tissue is comprised of numerous reticular
substance. Macrophages (histiocytes), derivatives of mono-
cytes of the blood, are also common. They are phagocytic
 Of structures such as the spleen, lymph node, liver, kidney,
cells that can be recognized, sometimes, by the presence of
and bone marrow.
debris in their cytoplasm, which gives them a dirty appear-
ance. Other migrants from the blood that are found in
connective tissue are neutrophils, eosinophils, and lympho-
cytes. Plasma cells, adipocytes, mast cells, and globular
leukocytes also occur in varying numbers in connective
tissue.
Types of Connective Tissue
various ways; we will Follow this Format:
TYPES OF EMBRYONIC
Embryonic Connective Tissue
CONNECTIVE TISSUE
Mesenchyme
MUcous
Mesenchyme tissue is found in the embryo. It consists of
Connective Tissue Proper
a loose arrangement of pale, star-shaped (stellate) cells
Loose (Areolar)
Dense
with interconnecting cytoplasmic processes. The mesen-
chyme cells are embedded in a jelly-like, amorphous,
Reticular
Elastic
 ground substance that accumulates fine fibers as develop-
Adipose
ment progresses.
Carilage
Mucous connective tissue, another type of embryonic
Bone
connective tissue, surrounds the vessels of the umbilical
Blood
cord. It also occurs in limited regions in adult animals, e.g..
Bone Marrow
the dermis of the comb and wattle of the chicken. It is com-
The term "connective tissve" vsed alone typically refers to the
prised of fbroblasts and loosely arranged, fine, collagenous
 general types, namely loose and dense.
fibers in an abundant, amorphous ground substance.
20
CHAPTER 3
Elastic tissue is characterized by numerous regularly
Word Roots
 or irregularly arranged elastic fibers. It is exemplified by
the ligamentum nuchae of grazing animals and by the
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
vocal ligame nts.
Adipo
Fcat
 Adipose tissue is also called fat tissue.
Adipose tissue consists of groups of adipocytes (also
Areola
A litle
 There are numerous spaces flled with
called adipose cells or fat cells) within the loose connective
open
ground substance between the cells and
space
Fibers of lose, or areolar, connective tissue.
tissue of such places as mesenteries, subcutis, and sheaths
 of vessels and nerves.
Fibro
A fiber
Fibroblcsts produce fibers and ground 
 substance of connective tissue.
Phage
Eat
Macrophages, whose name means "big 
eaters," are important phagocytic cells.
Rete
A net or
The reticular Fibers of reticular isue cre
nehwork
arranged in a crisscrossing, netlike 
arrangement.
CONNECTIVE TISSUE PROPER AND EMBRYONIC CONNECTIVE TISSUE
21
0
Figure 3.1
X 250
Figure 3.5
× 625
KEY
 1. Amorphous ground substance
7. Fibroblast nucleus
2 Collagenous fiber
8. Lymphocyte
3. Elastic fiber
9. Mast cell
 4. Eosinophil
10. Mesenchyme cell
5. Epithelium, lip
11. Neutrophil
 6. Erythrocytes in capillary
12. Plasma cell 
2
Figure 3.1. Mesenchyme,72-Hour Embryo, Chicken. Mesen-
chyme consists of stellate cells. Their processes touch, forming α
three-dimensional latficework. The cells are surrounded by an
 amorphous ground substance.
Figure 3.2. Mucous Connective Tissue, Umbilical Cord, Cow.
Figure 3.2
× 125
Mucous connective fissue consists of a loose framework of fibro-
Mucous connective tissue of the umbilical cord is often called
Wharton's jelly.
Figure 3.3. Loose Connective Tissue, Mesentery, Cat (LeukoStat
and orcein). The loose crrangement of the connective fissue cells
cnd ibers in this whole mount preparation is evident. Fine,
branching elastic fibers appear blue-gray. The thicker, collage-
 nous ibers stain pale pink. Note the mast cell illed with purple
 granules.
Figure 3.4. Plasma Cells, Loose Connective Tissue, Laming
Propria, Jejunum, Dog. Plasma cells are common constituents of
the lamina propria of the gastrointestinal tract. They are charac-
heterochromatin. A lightly stained area adjacent to the usually
Figure 3.3
X250
eccentric nucleus marks the location of the Golgi apparatus.
Figure 3.5. Mast Cells, Loose Connective Tissue, lip, Cat
[Toluidine Blue}. The granules of mast cells are metachromatic
and are colored purple by toluidine blue.
11
12
8
Figure 3.4
× 625
22
CHAPTER 3
Figure 3.6
× 520
For other labeled examples of cells of
KEY
connective tissue; see these figures:
1. Collgenous fiber
5. Lymphocyte
2. Eosinophil
6. Mast cell
Eosinophils: 13.102, 13.105
3. Fibroblast nucleus
7. Plasma cell
Fibroblasts: 8.5, 8.6
4. Globular leukocyte
Lymphocytes: 11.4, 11.31, 11.32
Macrophages: 10.4
Mast cells: 10.2
Plasma cells: 10.2
Figure 3.6. Loose Connective Tissue, Lamina Propria, Duodenum,
Cow. A loose meshwork of fibers of the connective tissue
and various cells are contained in an amorphous, ground
substance.
CONNECTIVE TISSUE PROPER AND EMBRYONIC CONNECTIVE TISSUE
23
igure3.
×250
Figure 3.10
x 62.5
KEY
1. Adipocyte
7. Fibroblast nucleus 
 2 Arteriole
 8. Loose connective tissue
 3. Collagenous fiber 
9. Macrophage
4.Dense irregulr connecive tissue
10. Tendon, I.s.
5. Eosinophil
11. Tendon, x.s.
 6. Epithelium, planum 
6
Figure 3.7. Macrophages, Loose Connective Tissue, Colon, Pig.
Wandering macrophages are characterized by their oval shape.
The cytoplasm of these cells often contains ingested particles and
appears dirty. Eosinophils of the pig contain oval or bilobed
nuclei.
Figure 3.8. Loose and Dense lrregular Connective Tissue,
Dermis, Planum Nasolabiale, Cow. Note that the loose connec-
five fissue of the papillary layer of the dermis contains iner bers
and more cells than the dense irregular connective tissue of the 
reticular layer.
Figure 3.9. Dense lrregukar Connective Tissue, Dermis, Horse.
Note the coarse, interwoven, collagenous fibers.
Figure 3.10. Dense Regular Connective Tissue, Tendon, X.s. and
I.s., Nose, Pig. In tendons and ligaments, collagenous fibers are
arranged in parallel order. Fibroblasts are located between the
ibers.
Helpful Hints
To
Distinguish Between
 Loose and
Dense
Connective Tissue (CT):
● The main characteristics of loose CT, when contrasted with
Figure 3.8
X180
dense CT, are that loose CT has:
1] more cells, and α great variety of cell types 
 2)]  fewer and thinner collagenous fibers 
 The main characteristics of dense CT, when contra sted with
loose CT, are that dense CT has:
1 1  fewer cells, most of which are fibroblasts.
 2)_more numerous and thicker collagenous ibers 
 What about the amount of space? In loose CT the
components have more space between them, and in dense
CT the cells and fibers are more closely packed together.
However, the amount of space may be deceiving in histo-
logic preparations, because separation arifacd (artificial
spacej may result due to shrinkage of the specimen that 
occurs during processing.
 Remember that, although elastic and reticular fibers are
present in many preparations of connective tissue, typically
 special strains are required to distinguish them.
Figure 3.9
X62.5
Figure 3.11
×125
Figure 3.15
× 62.5
KEY
1. Adipocyte
 5. Reticular fiber
2. Elastic fiber
6. Tendon, x.s.
3. Fibroblast nucleus 
7.Tendon sheath,iner
4. Lymphocyte
 8. Tendon sheath, outer
Figure 3.11. Tendon and Tendon Sheath, x.s., Dog. The tendon
sheath is actually made up of two sheaths. The inner sheath
cttaches to the surface of the tendon. The outer sheath forms a
tube around the tendon and attaches to peripheral structures. The
space between the two shecths is flled with synovial Auid in living
tissue. The space is not lined by an epithelium, but rather by cof
lagenous fibers and cells of the connective tissue of the sheaths.
igure3.12
X 62.5
Figure 3.12. Elastic Tissue, Ligamentum Nuchae, l.s., Sheep.
This section shows the parall arrangement of the elastic fibers
within the ligament.
Figure 3.13. Elastic Tissue, ligamentum Nuchae, X.s., Sheep
[orcein]. Orcein selectively stains elastic fibers red.
Figure 3.l4. Reticular Tissue, Lymph. Node, Cow (Silver).
Networks of reticular ibers have been blackened by silver.
Figure 3.15. Adipose Tissue, Soft Palate, Cow. Lipid content of
each adipocyte (unilocular) was removed during processing.
leaving an empty cavity surrounded by a thin rim of cytoplasm.
Nuclei occur at the periphery of adipocytes. It is sometimes dif-
licult to distinguish their nuclei from those of other cells of the
connective tissue. See Figure 1 2. 1 03 for an example of multilocu-
igure 3.13
<62.5
lar adipocytes.
For other labeled examples; see these figures:
Adipose fissue: 10.28, 10.40, 10.41, 13.72, 13.111,
13.113
Dense irregular connective tissue: 8.6
Dense regular connective tissue: 8.12
Collagenous fibers: 2.11, 2.12, 2.13, 2.17, 2.18, 8.5,
8.6, 8.13, 12.25. There are also numerous olher unlabelled
examples of collagenous fibers hroughout the allas.
Elastic fibers: 4.5, 4.6, 10.13, 10.14, 10.26, 10.27,
12.25, 15.12, 15.14, 15.18, 15.48
Mucous connective tissue: 12.90, 12.9l, 12.93,
12.94
Reticular fibers: 1l.24, 13.173, 14.19
Figure 3.14
× 250
CONNECTIVE TISSUE PROPER AND EMBRYONIC CONNECTIVE TISSUE
25
CARTILAGE
GENERAL FEATURES
 j sd seq a ae aru s a  ai peads e si 
tilage: hyaline cartilage, elastic cartilage, and fbrocartilage (fbrous cartilage).
 Each consists of cells called chondrocytes embedded in extracellular matrix. The
cartilage matrix, formed by amorphous ground substance and fbers, is frm but
flexible.
 Chondrocytes are often distorted in histologic specimens because they shrink during
slide preparation, revealing spaces that the cells occupy, called lacunae.
The matrix of hyaline and elastic cartilage is avascular and usually invested by a
perichondrium whose inner layer is chondrogenic, containing cells with the capacity to
become chondroblasts. Its outer portion, the outer fbrous layer, is dense irregular con-
nective tissue.
TYPES OF CARTILAGE
Hyaline cartilage, the most common type of cartilage, forms large parts of the developing
vertebrate skeleton. It is also found in epiphyseal discs, articular cartilages, the trachea,
bronchi, and elsewhere. The matrix of hyaline cartilage contains collagenous fibers that
are not discernible with routine stains. It is separable into pale and darkly stained areas
called interterritorial matrix and territorial matrix, respectively. The higher concentration
of sulfated glycosaminoglycans in the latter is responsible for the darker staining.
Isogenous groups, small clusters of two or four chondrocytes occupying the same lacuna,
may be observed. They are the result of cell division of chondrocytes.
Elastic cartilage is similar in structure to hyaline cartilage. Its name derives from the
presence of numerous elastic fbers embedded in the matrix. Among other places, it is
found in the epiglottis, parts of the larynx, and the pinna.
27
 Fibrocartilage (fbrous cartilage) is a combination of
Word Roots
hyaline cartilage and dense connective tissue (fibrous 
tissue). Linear groupings of chondrocytes, embedded in a
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
small amount of cartilage matrix, are situated between 
Chondro
Cartilage
 Chondrocytes are cells in cartilage.
bundles of collagenous fibers of dense connective tissue.
Hya!
Glassy
Fresh hyaline cartilage has α shiny, glassy
  sid s n  e 
appearance.
discs, the pubic symphysis, and cardiac skeleton, as well
Lacuna
A space or
 Chondrocytes occupy spaces in the matrix
 as within some tendons close to their attachment to bone.
cavity
 called facunce.
Peri
Around
surrounds hyaline and elastic carilage.
28
CHAPTER 4
-8
8
15
Figure 4.5
× 250
lqure
X 62.5
KEY
1. Chondrocyte
 9. Perichondrium
2. Dermis
10. Perichondrium, chondrogenic layer
3. Elastic cartilage
11. Perichondrium, ibrous layer
4. Elastic fiber
12. Pseudostratified columnar epithelium
10
5. Glands
13. Separation artifact 
 6. Intererritorial matrix
14. Territoricl matrix
7. Isogenous group
15. Trachea, lumen
14-
8.Lacuna
16. Area shown in Figure 4.5
6
10
Figure 4.1. Hyaline Carilage, Trachea, Cat. Hyaline cartiloge
supports the wll of the trachea. Numerous chondrocytes in
lacunae are evident in the cartilage. The perichondrium that sur-
rounds the cartilage consists of an outer fibrous layer and an
8
6
collagenous ibers and ibroblasts. The chondrogenic layer con-
心
tains precursors of chondrocytes that secrete carilage matrix.
Figure 4.2. Hyaline Cartilage, Trachea, Cow. The chondrocytes
Figure 4.2
×125
have dark basophilic nuclei surrounded by hazy cytoplasm.Those
ct the periphery of the cartilage are smaller and Hattened; the
more central chondrocytes are larger. Numerous isogenous
14
spaces bordering the chondrocytes, are surrounded by dark ter-
ritorial matrix. The paler interterritorial matrix is more distant from
the lacunae. The collagenous fibers in the matrix of hyaline car-
filage are not apparent with routine stains.
Figure 4.3. Hyaline Cartilage, Bronchus, Cat. Note the same 
Fecatures as in Figure 4.2.
Figure 4.4. Elastic Cartilage, Pinna, Dog (Weigert's). The pinna 
[auricle) ofthe ecr consists of elastic cartilage covered by skin.The
rectangle outlines the approximate area magniied in Figure 4.5.
Figure 4.5. Elastic Cartilage, Pinna, Dog (Weigert's). Numerous
darkly stained elastic fibers are distinct in the matrix of the elastic
Figure 4.3
x 125
cartilage. Because the chondrocytes are quite distorted in this
preparation, more of each lacuna is visible. When cartilage is
sectioned, the slice may not pass through each chondrocyte, only
the space around it, so that lacunae sometimes look empty.
3
Helpful Hints
● To hind hyaline or elastic cartilage at low power, look for
masses that have a somewhat bubbly appearance due to
the numerous scattered white spaces, the lacunae, around
the chondrocytes.
· Sometimes the cartilage matrix does not stain intensely, and
may appear almost white.
●To distinguish between hyaline carfilage and elastic carti-
lage, look For bers in the matrix. The elastic fibers can be
seen in elastic cartilage. Collagenous fibers are present but
not discernible in hyaline cartilage.
Figure 4.4
X 62.5
CARTILAGE
29
Figure 4.9
× 125
KEY
1. Cartilage matrix
4. Elastic fiber
2 Chondrocyte
5. Lacuna
3. Collgenous Fiber
Figure 4.6. Elastic Cartilage, Epiglottis, Dog. In this preparation
of elastic cartilage stained with H&E, the elastic ibers visible
throughout the matrix are shiny and pink.
Figure
4.7. Fibrocartilage;
 Intervertebral 
Disc，
Horse.
Fibrocartilage is a combination of dense (fibrous) connective
tissue and hyaline cartilage. Small chondrocytes in lacunae are
arranged in rows and framed by a hazy rim of pale blue cartilage
Figure 4.6
×360
matrix. Lacunae appear as small white halos around the chon-
drocytes. Collagenous fibers of the dense connective fissue cre
visible between rows of chondrocytes.
Figure 4.8. Fibrocartilage, Intervertebral Disc, Horse. Note the
same features as described above in this magnified view of
ibrocartilage.
Figure 4.9. Fibrocartilage, Claw, Chicken. The numbers cnd
arrangements of collogenous hibers cnd chondrocytes vary in
ibrocartilage. Here, rows of chondrocytes in lacunae are ran-
domly scattered among large bundles of collagenous ibers ori-
ented in various directions.
For additional examples of cartilage; see these
figures:
Figure 4.7
×125
Hyaline cartilage: 15.16, 15.20 to 15.22, 15.43, 19.26,
19.27
Elastic cartilage: 15.7, 15.8, 15.10
Fibrocartilage: 10.35, 17.48
Figure 4.8
×250
30
CHAPTER 4
5
BONE TISSUE
bone, for example the temporal bone or humerus, is an organ, as it is formed by
several types of tissues, including bone tissue, bone marrow, dense connective
tissue, and others. Periosteum is dense connective tissue found on the outer sur-
faces of bones (except where articular cartilage is present), while epithelial cells of the
endosteum line the bone surfaces of the marrow (medullary) cavity on the inside.
BONE MATRIX
Bone tissue is a living, dynamic connective tissue. It is admirably suited for its function
as a skeletal substance because of its high tensile strength and relatively light weight. Its
hardness and strength are provided by a matrix consisting of an amorphous ground
substance, collagenous fibers that provide some flexibility, and crystals of hydroxyapa-
tites (salts of calcium and phosphate) that make it hard.
CELLS OF BONE TISSUE
Cells of bone tissue are derivatives of osteoprogenitor (osteogenic) stem cells that arise
 from cells in the embryonic mesenchyme and have the capacity to divide and give rise
to osteoblasts.
 Osteoblasts are basophilic cells found on the surface of bone where they deposit the
organic components (ground substance and fbers) of bone matrix. The unmineralized
matrix, osteoid, subsequently becomes mineralized. Bone matrix is typically deposited
as multiple layers, or lamellae.
As osteoblasts become surrounded by bone matrix, they mature into flat cells called
31
the matrix called a lacuna that contains tissue fluid, as do
 Osteoblasts directly deposit bone matrix in or beneath a
canaliculi, which are tiny channels in the matrix that
membrane. The membrane is either mesenchymal, as in the
contain the processes of the osteocytes. The networks of
 development of a flat bone of the skull, or periosteal, as in
interconnected lacunae and canaliculi are associated with
 growth in diameter of a long bone.
blood vessels, and this relationship allows the diffusion of
During endochondral (intracartilaginous) ossification,
nutrients and wastes between the blood and osteocytes,
 bone tissue replaces hyaline cartilage. An important aspect
which are otherwise enclosed in hard bone matrix.
of the growth in length of long bones is the persistence of
Osteocytes function to maintain the integrity of the matrix.
functional epiphyseal discs. These plates of hyaline carti-
Osteoclasts are large, multinucleated cells that border
lage located at the junction of the epiphysis and diaphysis
 bone surfaces. They resorb bone matrix as necessary during
 permit the process of endochondral ossification to con-
the processes of bone development, remodeling, and repair.
tinue until full growth of the bone is achieved, at which
time the discs become completely replaced by bone and no
further lengthening is possible.
The structure of bone is unrelated to its mode of
TYPES OF BONE
development; that is, the lamellae formed by intramembra-
There are two types of bone, spongy (cancellous) bone and
nous ossification have the same basic makeup as those that
result from endochondral bone formation. Mature bone,
compact (dense or lamellar) bone, distinguished by the
amount of space (containing loose connective tissue and
however, contains fewer osteocytes than the immature
blood vessels) that is present. In general, compact bone has
bone it replaces. The woven form of the latter contains
 numerous osteocytes and an organic matrix of interlacing
more bone matrix than space; spongy bone possesses more
 collagenous fibers. Its matrix has a bluish cast in prepara-
space than bone matrix. Flat bones of the skull are formed
tions stained with hematoxylin and eosin. In contrast, the
of spongy bone situated between two layers of compact
bone. In long bones, compact bone forms the outer shells
matrix of mature bone is uniformly acidophilic.
Bone matrix undergoes remarkable transformations in
of the diaphysis and epiphysis, while spongy bone occurs
in the interior of the epiphysis and the endosteal surface
size and shape during development. This process of bone
of portions of the diaphysis.
remodeling is especially well exemplified during the forma-
 Spongy bone is formed by an interconnected mesh-
tion of the skull and long bones. In both instances, trans-
work of small pieces called spicules or trabeculae. It is
formations in shape and increases in size are accomplished
called spongy bone because of the numerous medullary
through the processes of bone deposition and bone
spaces between the delicate three-dimensional latticework
resorption.
of bony spicules.
Compact bone is formed by densely packed layers of
bone matrix with osteocytes sandwiched between the
layers. In the diaphysis of a long bone, lamellae encircle
the inner and outer circumference of the bone as circum-
ferential lamellae; other lamellae, called concentric lamel-
lae, form ring-like layers arranged as cylinders called
Haversian systems (osteons). Osteons are oriented parallel
to the long axis of a bone and in the center of each one is
a longitudinal Haversian canal (central canal), which con-
tains blood vessels and nerves. The central canal is encir-
Word Roots
cled by the concentric lamellae with osteocytes in lacunae.
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
Volkmann's canals (perforating canals) are channels that
Cancel!
 Latticework 
 A latticework of bits of bone characterize
contain blood vessels and nerves, which connect with
spongy, or conceffous, bone.
vessels and nerves of the periosteum, central canals, and
Clast
Break
 Osteoclasts breck down, or resorb, bone
the medullary cavity.
matrix.
Endo
Within,
In endochondra bone formation, bone
inner
Forms within a hyaline cartilage model.
BONE FORMATION
Intra
Within,
Intramembranous bone formation occurs
inside
within a membrane, such as mesenchyme.
Bone tissue develops either by intramembranous or endo-
Os, osteo
A bone
 Osteoblasts produce unmineralized bone
chondral ossification. In intramembranous ossification,
matrix.
32
CHAPTER 5
KEY
1. Bone matrix
6. Osteoblast
2. Howship's lacuna 
7. Osteoclast
3. Immature bone
8.Osteocyte
4.Lacuna
9. Osteoid
5. Mature bone
10. Separation artifac
Figure 5.1. Intramembranous 
Ossification,
Spongy
Bone, Decakified,
Intramembranous ossification begins in centers
of ossification in the embryo, where osteoblasts
deposit bone matrix directly within mesen-
chyme, producing tiny spicules of bone matrix
that interconnect with each other to form a lat-
ticework of spongy bone. Osteocytes, derived
from osteoblasts that become surrounded by
bone matrix, can be seen in the Forming spic-
ules. Because bone matrix is deposited without
α preformed cartilage model during intramem-
branous ossfication, the connected spicules of
bone lack cores of calcified carilage.
Figure5.1
X90
Figure 5.2. Intramembranous 
Ossification;
Decakified,
Nose；.
Dog
[Masson's) . Osteoclasts are multinucleated giant
cells present on the surfaces of bone_where
resorption is occurring. Depressions that form as
Howship's lacunae. The spaces between the
surface of the bone matrix and the cells that
border it are separation artifacts.
Figure
5.3. Immature
Bone;
Phalanx,
-4
10
Decakified, Fetus, Horse. There are more osteo-
    i n n d s
8
mature bone. Typically, immature bone shows
basophilia. Both characteristics are evident in
the micrograph. Note the rather even acido-
philia of the matrix of the more mature bone.
Figure5.2
x250
Newly deposited unmineralized bone matrix,
osteoid, abuts the surface of the mineralized
bone matrix.
6
Figure 5.3
90
BONE TISSUE
33
KEY
Area shown in Figure 5.6
6. Marrow cavity
2
Bone matrix
 7. Periosteal bud
3. Calcified cartilage matrix
 8. Periosteal collar
4. Hyaline cartilage
9. Periosteum
5. Hypertrophied chondrocyte
Figure 5.4
Figure 5.4. Hyaline Carilage Model, Developing Long Bone.
Endochondral bone formationinthe embryobegins withamodel
of hyaline cartilage.
in the center ofthe cartilage model. The area ofthe primary center
that is outlined (1) is shown in Figure 5.6. A bony periosteal collar
8
around the mid part of the hyaline cartilage model by osteoblasts
that formed from cells of the perichondrium, gnd the perichon-
drium is now the periosteum. Blood vessels of a periosteal bud
have invaded the primary center of ossification, introducing cells
that form the bone marrow and give rise to osteoblasts.
Figure 5.6. Primary Center of Ossification, Phalanx, l.s.
Figure 5.5
Decakified, Fetus, Horse. This section was taken from the central
region of a developing phalanx and shows early endochondral
ossfication.The primary center of ossiication in the middle of the
hyaline cartilage model is characterized by the presence of chon-
drocytes that hypertrophy (enlarge) as the carilage matrix cround
them becomes reduced. The reduced cartilage matrix consists of
finy pieces with various shapes that become calcified.
The
enlarged chondrocytes die, leaving spaces that merge and ill with
bone marrow. Osteoblasts introduced by blood vessels of the
periosteal bud deposit bone matrix (pink) on the meshwork of
calcified cartilage matrix (lavender).
Figure 5.6
X 45
34
CHAPTER 5
：
KEY
1. Area shown in Figure 5.8
9. Hypertrophied chondrocyte
2.Area shown in Figure 5.9
10. Marrow cavity
 3. Area shown in Figure 5.10
11. Periosteal collar
4. Blood vessel
12.Periosteum
m
5. Bone marrow
13. Zone of hyperrophy
6. Bony spicule in diaphysis
14. Zone of multiplication
7. Chondrocyte in lacuna
15. Zone of reserve cartilage
8. Hyaline carilage in epiphysis
12
10
11
Figure 5.7. Developing Long Bone, Il.s. This sketch depicts the
stage in development of a long bone in which the hyaline carti-
lage of the diaphysis has been replaced by bony spicules and
6
bone marrow. The epiphyses are still hyaline cartilage. The crea
5.8.
8
Figure 5.8. Developing Long Bone, I.s., Decakified, Dog. In this
developing long bone, the epiphyses are still formed of hyaline
Figure 5.7
ossification is indicated by the presence of blood vessels within
the cartilage. Chondrocytes close to the epiphyses have become
organized, so that the zones of endochondral ossification cre
present. Areas similar to those outlined by the rectangles in this
image are shown in detail in Figures 5.9 and 5.10.
Figure 5.9. Developing Long Bone, I.s., Decakified, Dog. This
magnified view of an area similar to that indicated (2) in Figure
5.8 shows some of the zones of endochondral ossification. The
zone of reserve cartilage consists of small chondrocytes. Small,
somewhat Hattened chondrocytes arranged in stacks mark the
zone of multiplication (zone of cell division or proliferation], in
which chondrocytes multiply, enabling continued growth of the
cartilage. In the zone of hypertrophy, chondrocytes gradually
enlarge and the matrix between them becomes reduced.
Figure 5.8
× 12.5
15
3
100
Figure 5.9
×180
BONE TISSUE
35
Figure 5.10
×180
KEY
Bone matrix
8. Osteoclast
2
Bony spicule in diaphysis
9.Osteocyte
3.
Caleified carilage matrix
10. Sinusoid
4.
Hypertrophied chondrocyte
11. Zone of calcification
5. Marrow cavity
12. Zone of hypertrophy
6.Megakaryocyte
13. Zone of ossification
7. Osteoblast
Figure 5.10. Developing Long Bone, I.s., Decakified, Dog. This
is α magnified view of an area (3) similar to that outined in Figure 
eventually die, leaving spaces that merge and become occupied
by bone marrow. In the zone of calcification, strands of cartilage
matrix persist between hypertrophied chondrocytes and become
calcified. Osteoblasts from the marrow cavity deposit bone matrix
(pink) on the remnants of calcified cartilage matrix (lavender to
purple) in the zone of ossification. Megakaryocytes, which
36
CHAPTER 5
KEY
13
1. Area shown in Figure 5.12
9. Periosteum
2. Articular cartilage
10. Spongy bone, diaphysis
心
3. Bone matrix 
11.
Spongy bone, epiphysis
4. Calcified cartilage matrix
12. Zone of calcification
10
 5. Epiphyseal disc
13. Zone of hyperrophy
6. Marrow cavity
14. Zone of multiplication
 7. Osteoblast 
15. Zone of ossification
8.Osteocyte
16. Zone of reserve carilage
9
Figure 5.11. Epiphyseal Disc, Developing Long Bone, l.s. In the
stage of a developing long bone represented in this sketch, most
of thehyoline ccrtilge oftheepiphyses has beenreplaced by
spongy bone fissue, and hyaline cartilage remains only on the
crticular surfaces and in the epiphyseal disc (epiphyseal plate).
Figure 5.11
The epiphyseal disclies between the spongy bone of the epiphysis
cnd the diaphysis. The area outlined by the rectangle approxi-
mates that shown in Figure 5.12.
Figure 5.12. Epiphyseal Disc, Humerus, I.s., Decalcified, Cat.
This image of the crea outlined in Figure 5.1ll shows the carti-
laginous epiphysecldisc(epiphyseallate}beweenthe pongy
bone of the epiphysis and the diaphysis. Detail of this epiphysecl
disc is portrayed in Figure 5.13.
Figure 5.13. Epiphyseal Disc, Humerus, I.s., Decalcified, Cat.
The various zones of endochondral bone formation can be identi-
fied. Small, scattered cartilage cells comprise the zone of reserve
(resting) crtilage. They proliferate, Forming rows that constitute
the zone of multiplication (zone of proliferation). The choncdro-
cytes then enlarge (zone of hypertrophy) and the remaining car-
tilage matrix between the hypertrophied chondrocytes becomes
impregnatedwihcalciumsalsonefcalication]Ostlst
deposit bone matrix (pink) gnto the calcified cartilage matrix
Figure5.12
x25
(lavender] in the zone of ossification.
16
16
16
14
14
14
1
工
13
3
2
2
15
5
Figure 5.13
× 130
BONE TISSUE
37
6
Figure 5.14
X62.5
Figure 5.18
× 125
KEY
1.Bone marrow
10. Osteoblast
2Bone matrix
11. Osteoclast
3.Calcified cartilage matrix
12.Osteocyte
4. Canaliculi
13. Sinusoid
 5. Haversian canal (Central canal)
14. Volkmann's canal (Perforating
6. Haversian system (Osteon]
canal}
 7. Inner circumferential kmellae
15. Zone of calcification
8. Interstitial system
16. Zone of hypertrophy
9. Lacuna
17. Zone of multiplication
18. Zone of ossification
Figure
 5.14. Endochondral
Ossification,
Phalanx;
L.s.F
Decakified, Dog. The zones of calcification and ossification are 
distinct in this preparation. Calcified cartilage matrix stains an
intense purple, while bone matrix is strongly eosinophilic.
Figure5.15
X 62.5
Figure 5.15. Endochondral Ossification, Epiphysis of Radius,
Decakified, Dog. Numerous spicules of bone (pink) with cores of
calcified cartilage matrix (lavender) are depicted.
Fgure 5. 16. CompactGround Bone, Femur, X.s., Cat(Unstained).
A Haversian canal surrounded by concentric bony lamellae con-
stitutes α Haversian system (osteon].
. Lacunae  with canaliculi
(weblike, fine, dark lines) are occupied by osteocytes and their
processes, respectively, in living tissue. Volkmann's canals (per-
oratingcanclsinnecircmerentillmellendpatsd
Haversian systems, called interstitial systems, are presenf.
Figure 5.17. Compact Ground Long Bone, X.s., Cat (Unstained).
Spider-web-like channels, canaliculi, can be seen radiating from
the lacunae.
8
Figure 5.18. Compact Bone, Humerus, X.s., Decalcified, Chicken.
In decalcified bone, hydroxyapatites have been removed, leaving
Figure 5.16
x 125
the collagenous portion of the matrix. Blood vessels, osteocytes,
and other tissue elements are also left intact.Compare the appear-
ance of the compact bone in this decalcified preparation to the
dried ground compact bone in Figure 5.16.
Helpful Hints
· Ground sections of bone are prepared by removing as
much soft tissue and organic matter as possible, and allow-
ing the bone to dry. Thin slices of dried bone are cut with
a saw, and then ground until thin enough to study with α
light microscope. Typically, they are unstained. Only inor-
ganic matrix remains; structures such as lacunae and
canals that were occupied by organic matter (cells and
other sof tissves) will appear as black or translucent spaces.
· To make out details of ground compact bone, such as the
canaliculi, try increasing the contrast by closing the iris
diaphragm of the microscope.
Figure 5.17
x 280
38
CHAPTER 5
Figure 5.19
X125
Figure 5.23
×280
KEY
1. Artery
8. Osteocyte
2. Endosteum
9. Osteogenic layer, periosteum
 3. Fibrous layer, periosteum
10. Periosteum
4. Haversian (centrall canal
11. Sharpey's fibers
5. Marrow cavity
12. Tendon
6.Megakaryocyte
13. Vein
7.Nerve
14. Volkmann's (perforating) canal
Figure 5.19. Compact Bone, X.s., Jaw, Decakified, Dog. Blood
vessels and nerves are evident in this cross section of a Haversian
canal (central canal], as is the communication of the Haversian
canal with a Volkmann's canal (perforating canal).
Figure 5.20
× 62.5
Figure 5.20. Compact Bone, Rib, I.s., Decakified, Cat. Portions
of Haversian canals are oriented parallel to the long axis of the
bone. The collagenous ibers of a tendon extend into the bone as
Sharpey's ibers. The lorge cells in the bone marrow are
megakaryocytes.
Figure 5.21. Compact Bone, Rib, I.s., Decakified, Cat. Flat cells
of the endosteum line the marrow cavity.
Figure 5.22. Periosteum of Femur, l.s., Decalkified, Cat. The
periosteum paralles the bone of the diaphysis.
Figure 5.23. Periosteum of Femur, ls., Decakified, Cat. A mag-
nied view of the periosteum seen in Figure 5.22. The osteogenic
layer of the periosteum abuts the bone and is more cellular than
the outer fibrous layer of the periosteum.
Figure 5.21
X625
Figure 5.22
X70
BONE TISSUE
39
KEY
1. Articulating surface, P2
6. Fibrous capsule
 2 Articulating surface, P3
7. Joint cavity.
 3. Bone matrix
 8. Sharpey's Fibers
4. Cartilage
 9. Synovial fold of synovial membrane
5. Extensor tendon
10. Tendon
1
Figure 5.24. Sharpey's Fibers, Phalanx, l.s., Decakified, Fetus,
Collagenous fibers of a tendon_ become
embedded within the bonematrix,where theyare called Sharpeys
fibers.
Figure 5.25. Sharpey's Fibers, Phalanx, I.s., Decakified, Fetus,
Figure 5.24
X62.5
Sheep (Mallory's). Same as Figure 5.24, but magnification has
been increased to show the relationship between the bone matrix
and the collagenous fibers of the tendon.
Fgure 5.26. Distal Interphalangeal Joint, l.s., Fetus, Horse. The
mid-dorsal aspect of this developing synovial joint is shown. The
joint capsule is comprised of a ibrous portion and a well-
vascularized, synovial membrane. The latter lines the joint cavity,
except for the articulating surfaces. Synovial Folds project into the
cavity. The outer, more fibrous portion of the capsule is continuous
8
with the future periosteum of the phalanges and blends dorsally
with the extensor tendon.The tendon is atfached to the developing
extensor process of P3. Note that the phalanges have not yet
begun to ossify. Alter ossification, a layer of hyaline cartilage will
persist on the arficular surfaces.
Figure 5.25
× 125
Figure 5.26
×25
40
CHAPTER 5
BLOOD
lood is a special type of connective tissue comprised of formed elements in a fluid
matrix. Plasma is the fluid portion, called serum when depleted of fibrinogen. The
formed elements include erythrocytes (red blood cells), leukocytes (white blood
cells), and platelets (thrombocytes in birds).
Blood cells and platelets are usually examined in stained blood smears (blood flms).
To make such a preparation, a drop of blood is spread thinly on a glass slide, dried, and
stained with a Romanovsky-type stain such as Giemsa or Wright's. One end of the flm is
usually much thinner than the other end. Details of cell morphology are more visible in the
thin film, where the cells are more flattened and less crowded. Blood smears should be
scanned with the high-dry objective. With practice, most cells can be differentiated at this
 magnification. Oil immersion should be reserved for studying specific cells in more detail.
MAMMALS
Erythrocytes
Mature erythrocytes are small, anucleate cells uniquely adapted to transport oxygen and
carbon dioxide. They are acidophilic and acquire an orange to red color with Romanovsky
stains.
 The average diameter of erythrocytes in a dried smear varies with the species. The
erythrocytes of the dog are largest (7.0μ), while those of the goat are the smallest (4.1 μ).
Red blood cells from the same animal are all approximately the same size except in the
cow, where variation in the size of the erythrocytes (anisocytosis) is not unusual. In most
species the cells are disc-shaped, although in young goats they may also be angulated.
Central pallor, resulting from the erythrocyte's biconcave shape, is best defined in
the erythrocyte of the dog, but may be seen in other domestic mammals. Red blood cells
41
sometimes adhere to each other, forming an arrangement
Granulocytes
resembling a stack of coins, called a rouleau. This com-
 Neutrophils are the predominant leukocytes in the dog.
monly occurs in the horse and cat. It is rare in ruminants.
cat, and horse. The dark-staining nucleus of the mature
Crenated erythrocytes, characterized by pointed cell
cell contains very densely packed chromatin. It is long and
margins, are observed most often in pigs.
narrow and may be monolobed or segmented. The nucleus
is sometimes coiled, as in the cat, and more often in the
white) blood cells. These include the freshness of the blood
pig. When segmented, the lobes may be separated by slight
sample, the use of an anticoagulant, how quickly the smear
indentations or thin strands of nucleoplasm. The nuclear
was dried, and the thickness of the smear. The occurrence
q  n  r rede a a
of central pallor, rouleaux, and crenation varies not only
clumps of chromatin. In the horse, the chromatin is so
with the species, but also with each smear and within dif-
 heavily clumped that the nucleus appears very jagged.
ferent regions of the same smear.
The pale gray cytoplasm of the neutrophil contains
pink, dustlike, s
 specific granules that may be difficult to
resolve with the light microscope. The granules are small-
 est in the dog, so that the cytoplasm appears nongranular
Leukocytes
 u ad iso si u un Aa p
sheep and goat. In these animals, larger, more darkly
Leukocytes are basic cellular components of the immune
stained granules occur among the finer pink granules.
system. They are nucleated cells that are larger and less
 Band forms of the neutrophil (and other granulocytes)
numerous than erythrocytes. They are classified as either
 may be encountered in a smear of peripheral blood. The
granulocytes (neutrophils, eosinophils, and basophils) or
nucleus of these cells looks like a curved or U-shaped band.
agranulocytes (lymphocytes and monocytes), depending
 A band cell can be distinguished from a mature granulo-
on the presence or absence of specific cytoplasmic granules.
cyte by the relatively smooth, rather than ragged, contour
Leukocytes tend to accumulate along the edges of a blood
of the nucleus. Also, the chromatin of a band cell is less
smear, so that examples of them, although often distorted,
dd ue d sade su a pue pasu
 can be found more readily in these regions.
than in the mature granulocyte
The nucleus of the eosinophil, although similar to that
of the neutrophil, tends to be less dense and have fewer
Agranulocytes
lobes. In the pig the nucleus is commonly oval or kidney.
Lymphocytes are the predominant leukocytes in ruminants
shaped rather than segmented. C-shaped, monolobed
  s oi g  as  a s  sd 
nuclei are common in ruminants.
sometimes classified as small, medium, and large. Most of
The cytoplasm of the eosinophil stains pale blue or
the lymphocytes in carnivores, horses, and pigs are small.
 gray. Specific granules stain various shades of orange, pink,
 Larger cells occur more often in ruminants.
or red with eosin. The granules of the eosinophil of the
 Small lymphocytes have a relatively large, dense, often
dog, unlike those of other domestic mammals, are highly
eccentric nucleus that is round and may be slightly indented.
variable in size and do not usually fill the cell. Occasionally,
In the cat the nucleus is sometimes deeply indented like a
small, clear vacuoles also occur in the cytoplasm. In the
kidney. The nucleus tends to be oval in the pig. Some of
 cat the granules are rod-shaped. Large, round to oblong
the lymphocytes of ruminants are binucleate.
granules are a striking feature of the eosinophil of the
Only a thin rim of cytoplasm may be visible in the
horse. They usually fill the cytoplasm and cause the cell
small lymphocyte. The cytoplasm is basophilic and may
membrane to bulge, so that the eosinophil resembles a
 oi e ( rd  r e mos
raspberry. In the pig, sheep, and goat the granules are
nucleus. At times, nonspecific azurophilic granules may
small, round to oval, and numerous, often distorting the
be seen in the cytoplasm of both small and large
cell membrane. In cows, the granules are round and
lymphocytes.
intensely stained.
 A large lymphocyte has a less dense nucleus and paler,
Only a small percentage (0.5% to 3%) of the leuko-
 more abundant cytoplasm than a small lymphocyte. The
cytes of domestic mammals are basophils. Hence, baso-
nucleus may be round, oval, or kidney-shaped.
phils are not often found in blood smears. The basophil
Monocytes are the largest of the leukocytes (15 to 20 μ
nucleus may be irregular, bilobed, or highly segmented.
in diameter). The nuclear chromatin tends to be diffuse,
The granules of basophils vary in size, number, and stain-
appearing lacy or sometimes patchy. The shape of the
ing intensity. They are often fairly large, round to oval, and
nucleus is highly variable and may be oval, irregular,
stain reddish purple to dark purple. The granules are a
kidney-shaped, or horseshoe-shaped. In the horse the
dumbbell or coccoid shape in the pig. The basophil of the
cat is much different from that of the other domestic
nucleus may appear amoeboid and sometimes has a three-
mammals. Its granules are small and lightly stained (dull
 pronged or cloverleaf configuration.
gray to lavender) in a lavender cytoplasm.
 The cytoplasm is generally pale gray-blue and may
 Because the nuclei of the granulocytes exhibit many
contain dustlike, azurophilic granules. It often contains
forms, the cells also are called polymorphonuclear leuko-
vacuoles, which give it a foamy appearance. In ruminants
 cytes (polymorphs, PMNs). These terms, however, are
the cytoplasm can be more basophilic and either granular
sometimes
used specifically  as synonyms for the
 or mottled in appearance.
neutrophil.
42
CHAPTER 6
Platelets
The basophils of the chicken are much more numerous
than in mammals. Their specific granules are deeply baso-
Platelets play an important role in hemostasis. Although
philic, and the nucleus is usually unlobed and pale.
they are also referred to as thrombocytes, they are not cells
in mammals. They are membrane-bound fragments of
cytoplasm from large cells called megakaryocytes found in
Thrombocytes
the bone marrow and sometimes the lymph nodes and
spleen. Platelets are small and possess central granules.
Thrombocytes are nucleated cells, related in function to
They occur singly or in clusters in smears of peripheral
the platelets of mammals. They are smaller and less elon-
blood.
nucleus. The pale, dull blue cytoplasm is characterized by
one or more small magenta granules and vacuoles.
CHICKEN
Erythrocytes
Mature erythrocytes of the chicken are very different from
Word Roots
those of domestic mammals. They are large, elongated, flat
cells with an oval nucleus. In dried blood smears from
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
White Leghorn chickens, they range from approximately
Cren
Notch
Crenated erythrocytes have a margin
9 to 12 μ long and 6 to 8μ wide. Their size varies with the
that is scalloped or notched.
breed and the sex of the bird. The nucleus contains small,
Erythro
Red
Red blood cells are called erythrocytes.
 uniformly distributed clumps of chromatin. The cytoplasm
Leuko
White
Leukocytes are white blood cells.
stains a pale orange to pink color.
Phil
Love
The cytoplcasmic granules of
eosinophils are colored by eosin.
Role!
A roll
Erythrocytes that Form rouleux become
Leukocytes
roll of paper.
Agranulocytes
Lymphocytes are the most numerous of the leukocytes in
the chicken. Their size varies from small to large, as in
mammals. The cytoplasm is slightly basophilic and may
appear granular or homogeneous. The nucleus is round,
sometimes slightly indented, and is usually centrally
Formed Elements of Blood
 located. The chromatin occurs in coarse clumps, except in
 the larger lymphocytes where it is finer.
Mammals (covered in this atlas)
 Monocytes are usually larger than lymphocytes and
Erythrocytes
Leukocytes
their nuclear chromatin tends to be more diffuse. Vacuoles
Agranulocytes
are often seen in the cytoplasm.
Lymphocytes
Monocytes
Granulocytes
Granulocytes
Neutrophils
Heterophils are the most abundant of the granulocytes.
Both heterophils and eosinophils have acidophilic, specific
Eosinophils
Basophils
 granules. The granules of the heterophil are rod-shaped or
 Platelets
spindle-shaped. Their centers sometimes contain a distinc-
Chicken
tive, ruby red, spherical granule. During staining there
Erythrocytes
may be partial or complete dissolution of the rods, leaving
Leukocytes
only the more stable, central granule. The granules of the
Agranulocytes
eosinophil are round and pink. The eosinophil's cytoplasm
Lymphocytes
is pale blue, in contrast to the clear cytoplasm of the het-
Monocytes
erophil. In both of these granulocytes the nucleus is poly-
Granulocytes
Heterophils
morphic. In the eosinophil, the nucleus generally has fewer
Eosinophils
lobes and also exhibits dense blocks of chromatin clearly
Basophils
separated by lighter areas. This contrasts with the less
Thrombocytes
distinctly clumped chromatin of the heterophil.
BLOOD
43
4
9
Figure 6.1
x312
Figure 6.5
x780
KEY
1. Basophil
7.Monocyte
 2 Endothelial cell, nucleus 
8. Neutrophil
3. Eosinophil
9. Plasma
4. Erythrocyte
10. Platelet
5. Leukocyte
 11. Smudged eosinophil
6. Lymphocyte
12. Stcin precipitate
Figure 6.l. Blood Cells in Histologic Section, Artery, Cat.
Biconcave, disc-shaped erythrocytes, leukocytes, and plasma
(pale pink) are within the lumen of an artery.
Figure 6.2. Blood, Dog (Giemsa). Monocyte. The cytoplasm of
the monocyte is typically vacuolated. The nucleus is frequently
oval or U-shaped. Central pallor of the erythrocytes in this prepa-
ration is evident.
Figure 6.2
×780
Figure 6.3. Blood, Dog (Giemsa). Lymphocyte and neutrophil.
The cytoplasm of the small lymphocyte is very sparse and the
nuclear chromatin is condensed. The mature neutrophil has a
polymorphic nucleus. The pale cytoplasm, barely discernible, is
dharacteristic of the neutrophil of the dog.
6
Figure 6.4. Blood, Dog (Giemsa). Basophil and neutrophil. The
basophil has a polymorphic nucleus and coarse dark, basophilic 
 granules of various sizes.
Figure 6.5. Blood, Dog (Giemsa). Eosinophils. In the eosinophil
8
occur in the cytoplasm. The eosinophil on the right is partially
smudged.
10
Helpful Hints for Observing Blood Smears
Figure 6.3
x780
●First, locus the specimen at low power, which may be a
challenge because blood-formed elements cre so small.
You will mostly notice numerous tiny eosinophilic "dots,"
which will be the erythrocytes. Change to medium power
and locate the basophilic nuclei of ihe leukocytes. Then
place the leukocyte you want to study in the center of the
hield and magnify it Further.
· Examine the parts of the smear where the cells are evenly
spread apart from one another; avoid parts of the smear
where the cells are crowded together or distorted.
·Leukocytes tend to be dragged along the edges of the slide
when the smear is made, so you may ind that they are
more concentrated along the periphery of the smear.
● Don't try to identify every single leukocyte. Sometimes the
cells become distorted or broken open when the smear is
made, and the indistinct cell that results is referred to as α 
"smudged cell."
Figure 6.4
x780
44
CHAPTER 6
6
Figure 6.6
×312
Figure 6.11
×780
KEY
1.
 Basophil
Figure 6.7
×780
6. Neutrophil
2. Eosinophil
7.Platelet
3.Erythrocyte
8. Rouleau
4. Lymphocyte
9. Smudged cell 
5.Monocyte
Figure 6.6. Blood, Cat (Giemsa). Eosinophil, neutrophil, lympho-
cyte, monocyte and platelets. In the cat, platelets may be elon-
 gated, or cigar-shaped, as in this preparation.
Figure 6.7. Blood, Cat (Giemsa). Two monocytes. Erythrocytes
cre stacked in rouleaux.
Figure 6.8. Buffy Coat, Cat (Giemsa). One eosinophil, neutro-
phil,basophil, and platelets. A buffy coat is the layer above the
packed erythrocytes of a centrifuged blood sample that contains
x780
mainly leukocytes and platelets. Eosinophils of the cat have pink,
Figure 6.8
rod-shaped granules. The cytoplasm of the basophil contains
numerous smalround,lavender ranules thataretightlypacked
and may be difficult to resolve. Distinct red granules are scattered
among the lavender granules. The nucleus of the neutrophil in the
6
cat is often coiled, and the cytoplasm is slightly blue-gray with
very hine granules that are dificult to see. Platelets vary greatly
in size in fhe cat.
Figure 6.9. Blood, Cat (Giemsa). A basophil and platelets. The
nuclei of basophils are remarkably long in the cat.
Figure 6.10. Blood, Cat (Giemsa). An eosinophil, α neutrophil,
and platelets.
Figure 6.l1. Buffy Coat, Cat (Giemsa). Three eosinophils, one
neutrophil, one basophil, three lymphocytes, and platelets.
Figure 6.9
x780 Figure 6.10
x780
BLOOD
45
Figure 6.12
×250
Figure 6.18
x780
KEY
1. Basophil
5.Monocyte
2
 Eosinophil
6. Neutrophil
3.Erythrocyte
7. Platelet
4. Lymphocyte
Figure 6.12. Blood, Horse (Giemsa). Eosinophil, monocyte, two
neutrophils, and lymphocyte. In the neutrophil of the horse, the
 nucleus often appears very jagged.
+
Figure 6.13. Blood, Horse (Giemsa). Eosinophil. The eosinophil 
of the horse has characteristic, large, round granules. The surface
plasma membrane, giving the cell a raspberry-like appearance.
Figure 6.13
x780
Figure 6.14
x780
Figure 6.14. Blood, Horse (Giemsa). Eosinophil. Note the rou-
leaux (stacks of erythrocytes], which are common in the horse.
Figure 6.15. Blood, Horse (Giemsa). Neutrophil and lymphocyte.
Figure 6.16. Blood, Horse (Giemsa). Monocyte. A typical mono-
cyte with pale cytoplasm and linearly arranged chromatin.
5
Figure 6.17. Blood, Horse (Giemsa). Three neutrophils and one 
monocyte.
Figure 6.18. Buffy Coat, Horse (Giemsa). Basophil and neutro-
phil. Granules of the basophil are purple and vary in size and
shapeThe nucleus of theneutrophil has a characteristic,joged
contour.
Figure 6.15
×780 Figure 6.16
x780
Figure 6.17
x780
46
CHAPTER 6
6
5
Figure 6.19
x780
Figure 6.23
x780
KEY
6
1. Basophil
7. Monocyte
2. Basophil granules 
8. Neutrophil
3. Eosinophil
9. Platelet
4. Erythrocyte
10. Rouleau
5
 5. Erythrocyte, crenated
11. Smudged cell 
6. Lymphocyte
Figure 6.19. Blood, Pig (Giemsa). Two lymphocytes and d
monocyte.
Figure 6.20. Blood, Pig (Giemsa). Two lymphocytes, one neutro-
10
phil, and two eosinophils. The eosinophil of the pig contains
Figure 6.20
x780
numerous pink, round granules that ill the cytoplasm. The nucleus
of the eosinophil is not highly segmented. It varies from oval to
deeply indented. Note the coiled appearance of the nucleus of
the neutrophil, a common feature in pigs and cats. Crenated
Rouleaux also are evident in this feld.
Figure 6.21. Blood, Pig (Giemsa). Two lymphocytes and an
eosinophil. In pigs, the nucleus of eosinophils varies from oval,
as shown in this image, to deeply indented.
Figure 6.22. Blood, Pig (Giemsa). Eosinophil, basophil, lympho-
cre dumbbell or coccoid in shape.Some of the granules have
Figure 6.23. Blood, 
Pig
(Giemsa).
Basophil  and  two
Figure 6.21
x780
Iymphocytes.
Figure 6.22
×780
BLOOD
47
Figure 6.29
x780
KEY
 Eosinophil
4.Monocyte
2
Erythrocyte
5. Neutrophil
3. Lymphocyte
5
Figure 6.24. Blood, Cow (Giemsa). Lymphocyte, monocyte, and
neutrophil. The ends of the elongated nucleus of the monocyte are
 partly overlapped, making it appear ringlike at irst glance.
Figure 6.24
x780
Figure 6.25. Blood, Cow (Giemsa). Eosinophil. The red granules
of the eosinophil are small, round, and intensely stained in the 
cow. The nucleus may be lobed, but is usually C-shaped.
Figure 6.26. Blood,
Cow  (Giemsa).
Eosinophil  and
Iymphocyte.
Figure 6.27. Blood, Cow (Giemsa). Neutrophil
phocyte of the cow often shows a deeply incented nucleus. The
cytoplasm is granular and vacuolated.
Figure 6.29. Blood, Cow (Giemsa). An eosinophil and two
Iymphocytes.
3
Figure 6.25
×780 Figure 6.26
x780
Figure 6.27
x780 Figure 6.28
x780
48
CHAPTER 6
5
Figure 6.30
x780
Figure 6.31
x780
Figure 6.36
×780
KEY
5. Lymphocyte,binucleate
2. Eosinophil
6. Monocyte
6
3. Erythrocyte
 7. Neutrophil
4. Lymphocyte
8. Platelet
6
Figure 6.30. Blood, Sheep (Giemsa). Lymphocyte with azuro-
philic granules.
Figure 6.31. Blood, Sheep (Giemsa). Binucleate lymphocyte.
 Some of the lymphocytes of ruminants have two nuclei.
8
Figure 6.32. Blood, Sheep (Giemsa). Monocyte. The nucleus of
x780 Figure 6.33
the monocytes of ruminants may be oval or indented, or have a
Figure 6.32
x780
three-pronged configuration. The cytoplasm is gray-blue and
vacuolated and may contain granules.
Figure 6.33. Blood, Sheep (Giemsa). Monocyte. This monocyte
has a three-pronged nucleus. Our observations have revecled
that some monocytes with similar nuclei also occur in cows and
goats.
Figure 6.34. Blood, Sheep (Giemsa). Lymphocyte and neutro-
phil. The cytoplasm of the neutrophil of sheep and goats contains
numerous small and a few large, pink granules. A perinuclear
halo is commonly seen around the periphery of the nucleus of
Iymphocytes.
Figure 6.35. Blood, Sheep (Giemsa). Neutrophil.
Figure 6.36. Blood, Sheep (Giemsa). Eosinophil. The eosinophil
Figure 6.34
x780
of the sheep contains pink, densely packed, oval granules that
cre uniform in size.
Figure 6.35
x780
BLOOD
49
5
Figure 6.42
x780
KEY
 Eosinophil
5.Monocyte
2Erythrocyte
6. Neutrophil
3. Lymphocyte
7. Platelet
 4. Lymphocyte, binucleate 
Figure 6.37. Blood, Goat (Giemsa). Two lymphocytes and a
neutrophil. The chromatin of the lymphocytes is in the Form of
closely apposed clumps. Fine granules cre present in the cyto-
plasm of the neutrophil but are difficult to see.
Figure 6.37
x780
Figure 6.38. Buffy Coat, Goat (Giemsa). Lymphocyte and
 neutrophil.
Figure 6.39. Buffy Coat, Goat (Giemsa). Eosinophil. The small,
round, acidophilic granules of the eosinophil of the goat almost
fill the cytoplasm.
Figure 6.40. Buffy Coat, Goat (Giemsa). Two lymphocytes. Some
lymphocytes of the cow, sheep, and goat are binucleate, as is
Figure 6.41. Buffy Coat, Goat (Giemsa). Monocyte. The cyto-
plasm of the monocyte is blue and contains vacuoles that are often
seen in clusters.
Figure 6.42. Buffy Coat, Goat (Giemsa). Monocyte and lympho-
 cytes. The nucleus of this monocyte appears amoeboid or three-
Figure 6.38
×780
Figure 6.39
x780
 pronged, as occurs in ruminants.
Figure 6.40
×780 Figure 6.41
x780
50
CHAPTER 6
KEY
1. Eosinophil
5.Lymphocyte
2.Erythrocyte
6. Monocyte
3. Granulocyte
7.Thrombocyte
 4. Heterophil
8. Vacuole
Figure 6.43. Blood Cells in Histologic Section,. Chicken.
Elongated, nucleated red blood cells and a Few granulocytes cre
shown in the lumen of a blood vessel.
Figure 6.44. Blood, Chicken (Wright-Giemsa). Erythrocytes, leu-
kocytes, and thrombocytes.
Figure 6.45. Blood, Chicken (Wright-Giemsa). Erythrocytes and 
Figure 6.43
×312
thrombocytes. An oval, coarsely granular nucleus and a vacuo-
lated cytoplasm with one or more magenta granules characterize
the thrombocyte.
Figure 6.46. Blood, Chicken (Wright-Giemsa). Eosinophil, two
lymphocytes, and a heterophil. The heterophil has numerous rod-
®
shaped granules. Some of these may show a ruby-red, spherical
granule at the center. The nuclear chromatin is cocrse and densely
packed. In contrast, the eosinophil has Fewer round, pink granules
in a pale blue cytoplasm. The nuclear chromatin is blocklike; the
blocks are distinctly separated from each other.
Figure 6.44
x312
Figure 6.45
×780
5
Figure 6.46
x780
BLOOD
51
KEY
 Basophil
4. Immature erythrocyte
2. Eosinophil
5. Monocyte
3. Heterophil
6.Smudged heterophil
Figure 6.47. Blood, Chicken (Wright-Giemsa). Basophil, hetero-
phil, monocyte, and immature erythrocyte. The basophil is char-
acterized by large numbers of medium-size basophilic granules.
Unlike thergranulocytes,thenucleusof thiscellisusuallyot
lobed.The cyfoplasm of the immature erythrocyte is more baso-
philic and the nucleus is less condensed than in a mature
erythrocyte.
Figure 6.48. Blood, Chicken (Wright-Giemsa). Eosinophil and
Figure 6.47
x780
smudged heterophil. The rod-shaped granules of the heterophil
and the round granules of the eosinophil are clearly visible.
Figure 6.49. Blood, Chicken (Wright-Giemsa). Monocyte and
heterophil. Many of the rod-shaped granules of the heterophil
have a ruby red, spherical granule at their center. This is a
common characteristic of the heterophil. The monocyte has α
pale, basophilic, and vacuolated cytoplasm.
Figure 6.48
x780
Figure 6.49
x780
52
CHAPTER 6
7
BONEMARROW
MAMMALS
ed bone marrow is highly cellular and is specialized to produce blood cells and
platelets. Along with the spleen and liver, it plays a role in hematopoiesis during
prenatal development. At the time of birth it is the principal source of blood
cells and is found throughout the entire skeleton of the animal. In the adult, red marrow
is mostly limited to the sternum, ribs, vertebrae, skull, ilia, and the ends of long
bones. Yellow marrow, rich in adipose tissue, occupies the remainder of the skeleton of
an adult.
 Red marrow consists of extravascular hematopoietic tissue and vascular sinusoids.
 The hematopoietic tissue is rich in blood cells in various stages of formation. It also
contains cells of the connective tissue and is supported by a reticular meshwork.
 Pluripotent stem cells provide a source of unipotent stem cells committed to the forma-
tion of either erythrocytes, granulocytes, agranulocytes, or megakaryocytes. Generally,
immature (early) cells of the bone marrow are relatively large, and they have a euchro-
matic nucleus with nucleoli. As they divide and mature, the cells become smaller, the
nucleus becomes more heterochromatic, and the nucleoli disappear. Older cells predomi-
nate over the immature forms.
 o n s i a   ss n jo sd 
specific mature blood cell, comprises a cell series (cell line). Most of the cells seen in
 preparations of the bone marrow belong to either the erythroid (red blood cell) series
or granulocytic (myeloid; white blood cell) series. The cells of these series are presented
in this chapter.
Erythroid Series
The proerythrocyte (rubriblast, proerythroblast) is a large, round cell with a basophilic
cytoplasm. The nucleus is large, with finely granular chromatin and a few nucleoli. This
53
 cell undergoes several divisions, giving rise to basophilic
Other Cells in Bone Marrow
erythroblasts (prorubricytes). These cells are round with
round nuclei. They are the earliest cells of the erythroid
 Megakaryocytes are situated in the extravascular compart-
series that can be readily identified in smears. The baso-
ment, close to sinusoids, into which they release platelets.
 philic erythroblast is somewhat smaller than its precursor
They are very large cells with a polymorphic nucleus and
and has a deeply basophilic cytoplasm. The nuclear chro-
a grainy cytoplasm, and they are often seen in preparations
matin is more coarsely clumped, and no nucleoli are visible.
of the bone marrow together with a variety of other cells
Basophilic erythroblasts give rise to polychromatophilic
such as plasma cells, adipocytes, and cells in mitosis.
erythroblasts (rubricytes), 
which are smaller cells. The
Osteoblasts and osteoclasts, which are closely associated
chromatin is more condensed, appearing as blocks sepa-
with the surface of the bone lining the marrow cavity, may
rated by light streaks, similar to the chromatin of a plasma
also be encountered in smear preparations of marrow.
cell. The cytoplasm is mottled with pink and blue areas.
As hemoglobin synthesis continues and ribosomes dimin-
ish, the cytoplasm becomes more pink and less blue.
CHICKEN
Mitotic division usually ceases in the late polychromato-
philic erythroblast stage. Orthochromatophilic erythro-
The organization of bone marrow of the chicken is differ-
blasts (normoblasts, metarubricytes) are characterized by
ent from that of mammals. Erythropoiesis takes place
a round, highly condensed, and deeply stained nucleus.
within the vascular sinusoids, rather than in the extravas-
Their cytoplasm is distinctly eosinophilic, but may show
cular tissue. The immature red blood cells (large cells with
slight tinges of blue. Eventually, the nucleus is extruded,
a basophilic cytoplasm) are found adjacent to the endothe-
leaving an anucleate reticulocyte that matures into an
lium of a sinusoid. As division and maturation of these
erythrocyte.
cells progress, the older ones move inward. Thus, mature
erythrocytes (with an eosinophilic cytoplasm) accumulate
in the center of the vessel. As in mammals, cells of the
granulocytic series (heterophils, eosinophils, and baso-
Granulocytic Series
phils) develop in the extravascular spaces of the marrow.
Myeloblasts are large _granulocytic cells with a grainy,
basophilic cytoplasm. The round to oval nucleus contains
Word Roots
finely dispersed chromatin. Nucleoli may be present. These
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
cells give rise to the promyelocyte, the earliest stage in the
Hemato
Blood 
Hematopoiesis is the formation of
development of a granulocyte that can be readily distin-
Poieses
Make or
blood.
guished in smears. This cell contains a relatively large
produce
nucleus with nucleoli and chromatin that is beginning to
Mega
Large or great
 Megakaryocytes are very large cells
clump. The cytoplasm contains nonspecific azurophilic
Kary
The nucleus
with a large nucleus.
(magenta) granules. Promyelocytes divide and give rise to
Meta
After
 Metamyelocytes form from myelocytes.
myelocytes. The myelocyte is smaller and has an oval,
Myelo
Marrow
The myeloicd series of cells consists of
 often eccentric, nucleus with more condensed chromatin.
various stages of cells that form
Specific granules, characteristic of neutrophils, eosinophils,
 granulocytes in bone marrow.
or basophils, are apparent in the cytoplasm. Late myelo-
Poly
Many
The cytoplasm of polychromatophilic
cytes lose the capacity to divide. They are known as
Chromato
Color
erythroblasts is motled with pink and
metamyelocytes when the nucleus becomes indented and
blue colors.
Pro
Before
more condensed. With further modification the nucleus
 Promyelocytes give rise to myelocytes.
becomes more elongated in the band-cell stage before
Rete
A network
 Depending on the stcin used, some
eventually assuming the shape found in the mature
reticulocytes show a network of blue
Fibers of precipitated RNA.
granulocyte.
54
CHAPTER 7
16
Figure 7.1
x 312
Figure 7.5
x 780
KEY
 Azurophilic debris
9. Megakaryocyte
2. Basophilic erythroblast 
10. Mitotic figure
3. Basophilic myelocyte
11. Neutrophilic band cell
4. Eosinophilic band cell
12. Orthochromatophilic erythroblast
5. Eosinophilic myelocyte
13. Osteoblast
6.Erythrocyte
14. Osteoclast
7. Erythroid cell, late
15. Plasma cell
8. Granulocytic cell, early
16. Smudged cell nucleus
Figure 7.l. Megakaryocyte, Bone Marrow, Cat (Giemsa). The
megakaryocyte is a large cell with a polymorphic nucleus and
grainy cytoplasm. Blood platelets cre derived from fragments of
the cytoplasm. Forces generated during the Formation of the
Figure7.2
312
 smear appear to have separated a segment of the nucleus.
Figure 7.2. Osteoclast, Bone Marrow, Cat (Giemsa). The osteo-
clast is a large, multinucleate cell formed from Fused macro-
phages. Azurophilic bone debris can be seen in the cytoplasm of
this specimen.
13
Figure 7.3. Osteoblasts, BoneMarrow, Cat (Giemsa). Osteoblasts
basophilic cytoplasm. A perinuclear clear zone, representing the 
 site of the Golgi apparatus, may be visible. In smears these cells
often occur in clusters.
Figure 7.4. Bone Marrow, Cat (Giemsa). A variety of different
cells of the bone marrow can be idenfified at this magnification.
Figure7.3
X312
Figure 7.5. Bone Marrow, Cat (Giemsa). Basophilic and eosino-
philic myelocytes are represented in this field.
Erythroid (Red Blood Cell) Series
 Proerythrocyte = rubriblast, proerythroblast
Basophilic erythroblast = prorubricyte
Polychromatophilic erythroblast = rubricyte
Orthochromatophillic erythroblast = normoblast or 
5
metarubricyte
 Reticulocyte = polychromatophil
Granulocytic (Myeloid; white Blood Cell) Series
Myeloblast
 Promyelocyte = progranulocyte 
Myelocyte
Metamyelocyte
Band cell
Figure 7.4
× 312
BONE MARROW
55
Figure 7.6
x 780
Figure 7.10
x 780
KEY
1.
Basophilic band cell
 9. Neutrophil
2
 Basophilic erythroblast 
10. Neutrophilic band cell
3. Basophilic myelocyte
11. Neutrophilic metamyelocyte
Endothelial cell, nucleus
12. Neutrophilic metamyelocyte, late
5.
 Eosinophil
13.
Orthochromatophilic erythroblast
 Erythrocyte, early
14. Polychromatophilic erythroblast 
7. Erythrocyte, mature
15. Promyelocyte
8. Heterophil
16. Reticulocyte
Figure 7.6. Bone Marrow, Cat (Wright-Giemsa). A basophilic
roblast are evident.
Figure 7.7
× 780
Fgure 7.7. Bone Marrow, Cat (Wright-Giemsa).
Various
myeloid developmental stages are shown in this field.
14
Figure 7.8. Bone Marrow, Cat (Wright-Giemsa).
Various ery-
 throid developmental stages are shown in this field.
Figure 7.9. Bone Marrow, Cat (Wright-Giemsa). The largest cell
seen in this field is a promyelocyte. Note the presence of numer-
ous magenta, azurophilic granules in its cytoplasm.
Fgure 7.10. Bone Marrow, Plastic Section, Chicken (Giemsa).
Intravascular developmental stages of erythrocytes are shown. In
the extravascular compartment, heterophils cand eosinophils can
be distinguished.
13
Figure 7.8
× 780
13
10
12
5
Figure 7.9
x 780
56
CHAPTER 7
●
MUSCLE TISSUE
GENERAL FEATURES
The cytoplasm of muscle cells, specifically called the sarcoplasm, contains a unique
substructure of threadlike myoflaments (formed mainly of the proteins actin and
 myosin) that provides the cells with the ability to contract. Shortening occurs when
the myofilaments slide past one another, resulting in movements that may be voluntary
(such as moving bones of the skeleton, the tongue, and the eyes) or involuntary (such
as contraction of the chambers of the heart, constriction of blood vessels and bronchioles,
 Or peristalsis of the digestive tract).
Muscle cells of each of the three types of muscle tissue (smooth, skeletal, and cardiac)
are elongated and, therefore, are also referred to as muscle fbers. This term can be
misleading because the cells are true cellular units, not connective tissue fbers. Muscle
cells are typically arranged parallel to one another in sheets or bundles. The endomysium
is a layer of loose connective tissue, with numerous fine fbers and capillaries, which
encloses and surrounds individual muscle cells.
TYPES OF MUSCLE TISSUE
Smooth muscle tissue is comprised of cells that are involuntary and lack sriations. It
Occurs, for example, in the digestive tract, blood vessels, urinary bladder, bronchi, bron-
chioles, and the capsules of some organs.
The name “smooth" is derived from the fact that the cells lack cross-striations, so
that the cytoplasm looks uniform rather than striped. The cells are relatively small com-
pared to skeletal and cardiac muscle cells. They are spindle-shaped (fusiform) and have
an elongated nucleus located about midway between the tapered ends of the cell.
Skeletal muscle tissue consists of cells with cross-striations that are under voluntary
control. It mainly forms muscles that attach to and move the skeleton (hence the name
57
"skeletal"), but it is also found in organs such as the
 and from the heart, including the aorta, pulmonary artery,
tongue, pharynx, anal canal, and muscles that move the
pulmonary vein, and vena cava. Cross-striations result
eyes. Cross-striations result from the precise registration of
from the precise registration of sarcomeric bands, as in
the A, I, H, and M bands of the myofibrils within the cells.
skeletal muscle tissue. A single, centrally located nucleus
 Skeletal muscle cells can be exceptionally long (up to
 occurs in most cardiac muscle cells. Occasionally, however,
many centimeters), and they are cylindrical and multinu-
a cell with two nuclei may be seen. Unlike skeletal or
cleated. Their nuclei are located peripherally, immediately
smooth muscle cells, cardiac muscle cells branch and anas-
below the sarcolemma (the specific term for the cell mem-
tomose with one another. Intercalated discs, composed of
brane of a muscle celly.
 desmosomes and gap junctions, join cardiac muscle cells
 Skeletal muscle cells, surrounded by endomysium, are
end to end and increase the speed of conduction of
 grouped into bundles called fascicles. Each fascicle, in turn,
impulses, enabling them to contract as a unit within the
is surrounded by a perimysium of loose connective tissue.
wall of a heart chamber.
To form a muscle, a sheath of dense connective tissue, the
Some cells of cardiac muscle tissue are modified and
 epimysium, encloses and binds numerous fascicles.
function as a conducting system that helps to coordinate
Cardiac muscle tissue consists of cells that are striated
the heartbeat. These modified cells are the functional ele-
and involuntary. It forms the myocardium of the heart and
ments of the sinoatrial node, atrioventricular node, and
occurs in the walls of the major vessels that carry blood to
Purkinje fbers.
Word Roots
Main Histologic Features
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
Smooth
Skeletal
Cardiac Muscle
Cala
Insert
 Intercalated disks join the ends of adjacent 
Muscle Cells
Muscle Cells
Cells
 cardiac muscle cells.
The heart
● Nonstriated 
· Striated
· Striated 
Cardio
 The wall of the heart contains cardicc muscle
· Spindle-shaped
'pajobuol ·
tissue.
cylinder-shaped
branching
Endo
Within,
The encdomysium is connective tissue situated
· One central
· Multinucleated,
· One central nucleus
inner
between individual muscle cells within c
 nucleus per cell
peripheral
[occasionally two)
Fascicle.
nuclei
per cell
Fasci
A bundle
 Skeletal musce cel are arranged in bundles
called fascicles.
Myo
Muscle
 The myocardium is the middle, muscular
lkyer of the wall of the heart.
Mys
Muscle
The endomysium is loose connective tissue
between muscle cells within a muscle fascicle.
Peri
Around
 Perimysium is connective tissue that surrounds
 group of skeletal muscle cellsto Form a
Fascicle.
 Striat
 Streaked 
 muscle cells that are striarecd appear streaked
or striped.
58
CHAPTER 8
KEY
1. Area shown in Figure 8.2
6. Serosa
2. Ileum, lumen 
7. Simple squmous cel,nucleus
3.Muscularis externa,inner
8. Smooth muscle cell, nucleus, I.s.
arcular layer
9. Smooth muscle cell, nucleus, x.s.
 4. Muscularis externa, outer
10.Smooth muscle cell, sarcoplasm
longitudinal layer
11. Villus
 5. Separation artifact
Figure 8.1. Smooth Muscle Tissue, llum, X.s., Cat. The muscu-
laris externa of the small intestine consists of two layers of smooth
muscle tissue arranged at right angles to one another, namely the
inner circular layer and outer longitudinal layer.An area similar
6
to the one outlined within a rectangle in this image is shown in
detail in Figure 8.2.
Figure 8.1
x25
Figure 8.2. Smooth Muscle Tissue, lleum, X.s., Cat. In this cross
section, the smooth muscle cells of the inner circular layer of the
muscularis externa, which are oriented circularly_ relative to the
10
lumen of the organ, have been cut longitudinally. The muscle cells
of the outer longitudinal layer, which parallel the long axis of the
squamous epithelium, the mesothelium, of the serosa that covers
the ileum.
Figure 8.3. Smooth Muscle Tissue, Muscularis Externa, Jejunum,
X.s., Sheep. This is a magnified view of the layers of the muscu-
lkaris externa showing smooth muscle fissue in x.s. and I.s. Smooth
muscle cells each have a single, elongated nucleus sometimes
referred to as cigar-shaped. This shape is apparent in cell that
have been sectioned longitudinally. In a group of smooth muscle
cells, the cells are oriented in the same direction and fitted closely
together with tapered ends of some cells positioned between mid
11
portions of other cells. Thus, their nuclei appecr staggered in
smooth muscle tissue sectioned longitudinally and, because of the
snug arrangement of the cells, their boundaries are often not
discernable.
The appearance of smooth muscle cells in cross section
varies, depending on where they were transected along their
length. If a cell was sliced through its mid region, its basophilic
nucleus is visible and appears round. If the cell was cut closer to
α tapered end, only eosinophilic cytoplasm, not the nucleus, is
 present cand the cell appears smaller in diameter.
7
fissue throughout the atlas. See these figures for some addi-
7
tional examples: 10.6 to 10.19; 13.95, 13.96, 13.98, 13.99,
14.24, 14.32.
Figure 8.2
×180
1
9
Figure 8.3
X250
MUSCLE TISSUE
59
KEY
1. Arteriole, lumen 
8. Muscularis mucosce
2
Artery, lumen
9. Nerve ascicle,unmyelinatd
3.Collagenous fiber
10. Simple columnar epithelium
4.
Connective tissue
11. Smooth muscle cell, nucleus, I.s.
 5. Crypt of Llieberkuhn (intestinal
12. Smooth muscle cell, nucleus,
gland)
XS.
 Dense irregular connective tissue  13. Smooth muscle cell, sarcoplasm 
 7. Fibroblast, nucleus
14. Venule
3
Figure 8.4. Smooth Muscle Tissue, Coronary Artery, X.s., Pig.
The smooth muscle tissue in the tunica media of this blood vessel
is contracted, as evidenced by the twisted appearance of the
nuclei of the smooth muscle cells. Due to the crrangement of
myoilaments and the presence of additional elements in the 
scircoplasm of smooth muscle cells, the cells coil and bunch up αs
they shorten.
Figure 8.4
×125
Figure 8.5. Smooth Muscle Tissue, Urinary Blodder, Pig. The
13
spindle-shape of individual smooth muscle cellsin longifudinal
section and their variable appearance in cross section are par-
ficularly evident here. An arteriole, with smooth muscle cells in its
13
wall, is present.
Fgure 8.6. Smooth Muscle Tissue and Dense Irregular
Connective Tissue, Duodenum, Cat. Loyers of smooth muscle
3
tissue, cut longitudinally and transversely, of the muscularis
mucosa can be distinguished from the dense irregular connective
fissue of the submucosa. The collagenous fibers of the connective
os a  o yd   p s a a
the muscle cells. The elongated, pale nuclei of the smooth muscle
cells in longitudinal section are aligned in the same direction. The
dark nuclei of fibroblasts of the connective tissue are more irregu-
karly arranged.
Figure 8.5
x250
Helpful Hints
 Students often encounter difficulty in distinguishing smooth
muscle tissue from loose or dense connective tissue in H&E
preparations. It is helpful to know that:
● Although collagenous ibers of connective tissue and the
cytoplasm of muscle cells and are both eosinophilic, col-
lagenous fibers are a brighter pink and distinctly shiny,
whereas smooth muscle tissue tends to present an overall
duller, slightly bluish pink color. Focusing up and down
with the ine adjustment will help enhance these diferences,
especially the reHectivity of the collagenous ibers.
The nuclei of the smoothmuscle cells appear tobe more
orderly in their arrangement (in the same direction] than
those of the cells in the loose or dense irregular connective
fissue.
Figure 8.6
×180
Figure 8.7. Skeletal Muscle Tissue, x.s.
and ls., Tongue, Cat. The tongue is
highly muscular, with bundles of skeletal
muscle cells oriented perpendicular to
one another.For thisreason,the tongue
serves as α vseful specimen to observe
skeletal muscle tissue in both longitudi-
nal and cross sections. Figure 8.8 is a
magnified view of skeletal muscle tissue
of a tongue.
Figure 8.8. Skeletal Muscle Tissue, x.s.
and I.s., Tongue, Horse. Skeletal muscle
cells arelorge and long and possess
11
numerous, peripheral nuclei. Some of
the nuclei that are near the skeletal
muscle cells belong to cells of the endo-
mysium and perimysium.In skeletal
muscle cells cut longitudinally, cross-
striations are evident as thin light and
dark stripes perpendicular to the long
cxis of the cell. When cut transversely,
the cells appear round to polygonal,
and myolibrils are visible as dots packed
igure 8.7
×90
in the cytoplasm. If a skeletal muscle cell
is sectioned near its surface, its nuclei
 appear to be more central located.
9
91
10
Figure 8.8
x180
KEY
Helpful Hints
1. Capillary, x.s.
7. Skeletal muscle cell, I.s.
2 Connective tissue
8. Skeletal muscle cell, nucleus
●Cross-striations are perpendicular to the long axis of a cell,
3.Endomysium
9. Skeletal muscle cell, nucleus,
4. Myofibrils, x.s., in sarcoplasm 
superficial cut
and they are only visible when skeletal and cardiac muscle
5. Perimysium
a ango jio apsn pis oi
cells are sectioned longitudinally. Even then they are not
6. Separation articact
11. Skeletal muscle cell, x.s.
appcrent in some histologic preparations.
12. Stratified squamous epithelium 
Parall, rod-shaped myohibrils that run the length of the
 pi  o s ss ss
tous or stringy look, not to be confused with the
striations.
 Skeletal muscle cells are too long to be viewed in their
entirety from end to end in a microscope field, so that only
α porfion of each cell is seen in longitudinal section.
MUSCLE TISSUE
61
Figure 8.9
× 1300
KEY
Figure 8.9. Skeletal Muscle Tissue, I.s., Lip, Dog (Masson's).
Individual myofibrils that have rayed apart at the cut ends
1. A band 
5. Muscle cell, I.s.
o
these two skeletal muscle cells in longitudinal section are distinct.
2 Endomysium
6. Myofibrils
3. H band
7. Z line
The light and dark bands of the myofibrils line up with those of
4. I band
other myofibrils within each cell, so that each entfire cell appecrs
cross-striated.
62
CHAPTER 8
19
4
Figure 8.14
× 125
Figure 8.10
×250
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
 9. Myofibrils, x.s., in scarcoplasm 
2.Bifurcation
10. Separation artifact
3. Capillary, x.s.
4. Cardiac muscle cell,nucleus, I.s. 12. Skeletal muscle cell, nucleus 
5. Collagenous fiber
13. Skeletal muscle cell, oblique section 
4
6. Dense regular connective tissue
14. Skeletal muscle cell, x.s.
7. Endomysium
15. Smooth muscle cell, nucleus
8. Intercalated disk
16. Smooth muscle cell, sarcoplasm 
Figure 8.10. Skeletal Muscle Tissue, X.s., Tongue, Horse. In
cross section, the skeletal muscle cells are round to polygonal.
Myoibrils are packed in the cytoplasm and peripheral nuclei are
evident. Separation artifact between skeletal muscle cells makes
the individual cells more distinct and reveals the capillaries and 
Figure 8.11
X625
loose connective tissue of the endomysium.
Figure 8.ll. Skeletal Muscle Tissue, X.s., Tongue, Horse.
Myofibrils are eosinophilic rod-like structures that extend the
length of the muscle cell and are Formed by myofilaments. In
skeletal muscle cells that are cut in cross section, their myofibrils
are also cut in cross section and appear as numerous dot-like
3
structures packed in the scarcoplasm. They are especially evident 
in this preparation.
3
Figure 8.12. Skeletal Muscle and Tendon, Oblique Cut, Tongue,
Horse. The collagenous fibers of the dense regular connective
tfissue of a tendon can be seen associated with skeletal muscle
cells.
Figure 8.13. Skeletal and Smooth Muscle Tissue, S
Sheep
10
(Masson's). The spindle shape of the individual smooth muscle
cells cut longitudinally is evident. Cross-striations of portions of
Figure 8.12
X62.5
skeletal muscle cells in longitudinal section cre also visible. With
the connective tissue stain used to color this preparation, collag-
enous fibers are blue/green while the cytoplasm of the muscle
16
cells is magenta (purplish red).
Figure 8.14. Cardiac Muscle Tissue, l.s., Heart, Cat. Branching
[bifurcation} of the cardiac muscle cells is visible and endomysium
is discernible where separation artifact has occurred.
For more examples; see these Figures:
Skeletal muscle tissue: 10.1, 12.13, 13.22, 15.42
Both smooth and skeletal
I muscle tissue: 10.8,
13.36, 13.42, 19.32
Cardiac muscle fissue: 10.36
Figure 8.13
X250
MUSCLE TISSUE
63
KEY
1. Capillary, x.s.
5.Endomysium
2. Cardiac muscle
6. Fibroblast, nucleus
cell, nucleus, I.s.
7. Intercalated disk 
3. Cardiac muscle 
8. Myofibrils, x.s.,.
cell, nucleus, x.s.
in sarcoplasm
4. Cardiac muscle
 9. Separation artifact 
cell, x.s.
Figure 8.15. Cardiac Muscle Tissue, l.s.,
Heart, Cat. Branching and cross-striations
are apparentinthis prepcration.Intercalated
lines perpendicular to the long axis of the
cells and are thicker than cros-striations.
(lntercalated discs cre not always apparent
in H&E preparations.) Nuclei of cardiac
muscle cells are centrally located. Nuclei of
cells of the endomysium between cardiac
muscle cells are also visible.
Figure 8.15
X360
Figure 8.16. Cardiac Muscle Tissue, X.s.,
Heart, Pig. Separation artifact exposes the
boundaries of the cardiac muscle cells cut
in cross section and the location of the
endomysium between them. In  many
cardiac muscle cells, their centrally located
nucleus is visible; in others it was not
included in the plane of the section. Cross
sections vary in shape and diameter,
depending on the plane of section through
 the branching cells.
Figure 8.17. Cardiac Muscle Tissue, X.s.,
Heart, Pig. In cardiac muscle cells, the myo-
"clear" cytoplasm free of myoibrils.
Figure 8.16
× 180
Figure 8.17
X625
64
CHAPTER 8
NERVOUS SYSTEM
ne can hardly examine a histologic preparation of any sort without finding some
evidence of nervous tissue, for example, sections through myelinated or unmy-
 elinated nerves, isolated neurons, encapsulated nerve endings, or perhaps a nerve 
plexus.
Nervous tissue consists of various sizes and kinds of neurons (nerve cells) and their
supporting elements, and it is basically similar in all domestic animals. Neurons each
have a cell body (soma) that contains a nucleus with a prominent central nucleolus. The
nucleus is surrounded by cytoplasm speckled with Nissl granules, which are clumps of
called dendrites, which receive stimuli, and axons, which ge nerate and conduct impulses.
 Multipolar neurons, such as motor neurons and interneurons, have numerous dendrites
and a single axon. Bipolar neurons, such as in the retina and other special sense organs,
have a single axon and a single dendrite that extend from the cell body. Unipolar neurons
(pseudounipolar neurons) are sensory neurons that have one short process that arises
from the cell body and bifurcates.
 In the central nervous system, which includes the brain and spinal cord, there is a
structural framework provided by neuroglial cells. The four types of neuroglia are astro-
cytes, oligodendrocytes, microglia, and ependymal cells; each has a unique structure and
performs various functions. Additionally, the meninges (the pia mater, arachnoid mater,
and dura mater) are formed of connective tissue and surround the brain and spinal cord,
 providing support and protection.
 In the peripheral nervous system, which includes cranial nerves, spinal nerves,
and ganglia, neurons are supported by connective tissue and special cells. For
example, bundles of axons are fastened together by both loose and dense irregular
connective tissue, forming peripheral nerves, and the axons of neurons are supported
by Schwann cells (neurolemmocytes). Clusters of cell bodies of neurons of the periph-
eral nervous system, along with supportive satellite cells and connective tissue, form
ganglia.
65
The myelin sheath of myelinated axons in the periph-
tures, and is formed mostly of the cell bodies of neurons,
 eral nervous system is formed by Schwann cells that encir-
dendrites, and neuroglia.
cle an axon along its length, separated by small gaps ( nodes
 Selected examples of nervous system elements as they
of Ranvier). The cell membrane of each Schwann cell
typically appear in histologic preparations of various kinds
layers around the axon many times, forming white, lipid-
are presented in this chapter. Additionally, sections through
rich myelin.
portions of the brain, brain stem, and spinal cord have
Myelin is formed by oligodendrocytes in the central
been included. The organs of special sense, the eye and ear,
nervous system. White matter in the CNS consists mainly
are treated in separate chapters.
of myelinated axons. Gray matter lacks myelinated struc-
Word Roots
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
Dendr
Tree
 Dendrites branch like a tree.
Gangli
A knot or
Cell bodies of neurons in the peripheral
a swelling
nervous system form clusters called ganglia.
Glia
Glue
Neuroglia are cells that provide α
supportive role.
Lemma
Sheath
Schwan cel, also called neurolemmocytes,
envelop cxons like a sheath.
Menin
A
The meninges are membranes associated
membrane
with the brain and spinal cord.
Nevro
Nerve
 Nerve cells, also called neurons, are cells of
nervous tissue.
66
CHAPTER 9
10
6
Figure 9.1
×25
Figure 9.5
X 62.5
KEY
1. Blood vessel
9.Periosteum
2. Bone, skull
10.Pia mater
3. Dendrite
11. Purkinje cell
4. Dura mater
12. Pyramidal cell
 5. Granular layer
13.
6. Mesothelium
14.
Subarachnoid space
7. Molecukar layer
15. White matter
 8. Outer granukar layer
Figure 9.1. Cerebellum, Sheep. The molecular and granular
layers of the gray matter and Purkinje cells are shown. The white 
matter lies deep to the gray matter.
Figure 9.2. Cerebellum, Sheep. Portions of the dendritic tree of
Figure9.2
X125
the multipolar Purkinje cells are visible.
10
Figure 9.3. Cerebral Cortex, Dog. Outer portions of cerebral
cortex with numerous blood vessels.
Figure 9.4. Cerebral Cortex, Pyramidal Cells, Dog. Magnified
view of cells of the pyramidal layer.
Figure 9.5. Dura Mater, Goat. The dura remains attached to the
skull when the latter is separated from the brain. It is a cense
fibroelastic layer lined by a mesothelium. The dura merges with
the periosteum of the skull.
Figure 9.3
X 62.5
Figure 9.4
X250
NERVOUS SYSTEM
67
Figure 9.6
× 260
KEY
Figure 9.6. Meninges, Cerebellum, Sheep (Mallory's). The
4. Molecular layer
arachnoid mater, subarachnoid space, and pia mater are shown.
1.Arachnoid mater
The subarachnoid space is illed with cerebrospinal Auid, which
2 Cerebrospinal fluid
5.Pia mater
 3. Collagenous Fiber
6.Small artery
is stained purple. Wisps of collagenous fibers (blue} can be seen
within the subarachnoid space. These connect the arachnoid layer
with the pia.
68
CHAPTER 9
4
Figure9.7
x 125
Figure 9.11
× 125
KEY
1. Astrocyte, cel body 
10. Medulla
2. Astrocyte, process
11. Molecular layer
3. Brain sand
12. Neuron
4. Capillary
13. Perivascular space
5. Cerebellum, vermis 
14. Pia mater
6. Choroid plexus
15. Purkinje cell
7. Epithelium
16. Venule
8. Fourth ventricle
17. Villus, x.s.
9. Granular layer
Figure 9.7. Cerebellum, Dog. Portion of α sulcus containing α
venule. The perivascular space surrounding the vessel is continu-
10
ous with the subarachnoid space and separates the vessel from
the pia mater on either side.
Figure 9.8
× 12.5
Figure 9.8. Choroid Plexus, Cat (Cresyl Violet). Portion of the
fourth ventrical with choroid plexus in the roof of the medulla.
Figure 9.9. Choroid Plexus, Dog. The simple cuboidal epithelium
and large, thin-walled capillaries are major constituents of the
villi of the choroid plexus.
8
lar material called brain sand can be Found dispersed through
various parts of the brain, including the hypothalamus, cerebel-
lum, and pineal gland.
Figure 9.1l. Fibrous Astrocytes, Medulla, Cat (Golgi). These
8
branching.
Figure 9.9
×125
Figure 9.10
X 62.5
NERVOUS SYSTEM
69
Figure 9.12
igure9.13
x 26
KEY
Figure 9.12. Spinal Cord, Cervical, x.s., Sheep. The area out-
lined by the rectangle is shown in Figure 9.13.
1. Area shown in Figure 9.13
4. Multipolar neuron, cell body
2 Central canal
5.White matter
 3. Gray matter, ventral horn 
Figure 9.13. Spinal Cord, Cervical, x.s., Sheep (Masson's). The
central canal, gray matter, and white matter are shown. The cell
bodies of multipolar neurons reside in the gray matter.
70
CHAPTER 9
gure9.14
X125
Figure 9.17
X 62.5
KEY
 Axon hillock
6. Nerve fibers
2. Central canal
7. Neuron cell body
3. Cilia
8. Nissl granules
4. Dendrite
 9. Nucleolus 
5. Gray matter
10. Nucleus
Figure 9.14. Central Canal, Spinal Cord, x.s., Sheep. Tall epen-
dymal cells, some of which are ciliated, line the central canal.
Figure 9.15. Mulhipolar Neurons, Spinal Cord, Sheep. The axon 
hillock of two neurons can be seen.Niss granules are absent
 from the hillock region, but extend into the dendrites.
Figure 9.15
x 125
Figure 9.16. Mulipolar Neurons, Spinal Cord, Cow. Two mul-
tipolar neurons are shown in this smear preparation.Note promi-
nent nucleoli and Nissl granules.
Figure 9.17. Dorsal Root Ganglion, Dog (luxol Fast Blue/
Cresylecht Violety. Portion of a dorsal root ganglion showing
neurons and nerve fibers. (Photomicrograph of a histologic section
borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State
University.)
Figure 9.16
×180
Figure 9.18
X250
Figure 9.22
<12.5
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
8. Neuron cell body
2.Epineurium
9. Nissl granules
 3. Muscularis externa, inner circular
10. Perineurium
 4. Muscularis externa, outer longitudinal
11. Plexus
5.Muscularis mucosae
12. Satellite cell
6.Nerve
13. Submucosa
7. Nerve fiber
Figure 9.18. Dorsal Root Ganglion, Dog (luxol Fast Blue/
Cresylecht Violet). Flattened satellite cells envelop the round
neuron cell bodies of the unipolar neurons. (Photograph of α
histologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 9.19
x 125
Figure 9.19. Parasympathetic Ganglion, Pulmonary Artery,
Dog. A ganglion and associated nerve located in the adventitia
of the artery.
parasympathetic plexuses cre located in the submucosa of the
digestive tract. Note the characteristic large "owl's eye" nucleus
of the neurons.
Figure 9.21. Auerbach's Plexus, Jejunum, l.s., Dog. These para-
sympathetic plexuses are located between the inner circular and
outer longitudinal layers of the muscularis externa of the digestive 
tract.
higure 9.22. Nerve, Myelinated, x.s., Pig (Masson's). The nerve
shown is comprised of many Fascicles bounded by a connective
fissve sheath, the epineurium. Each fascicle is surrounded by α
perineurium and contains numerous axons. A magnified view of
Figure 9.20
X125
a nerve Fascicle in this preparation is shown in Figure 9.23.
igure 9.21
X 62.5
72
CHAPTER 9
Figure 9.23
× 260
Figure 9.23. Nerve Fascicle (portion), Myelinated, x.s., Pig
KEY
(Masson's). Magnified view of one of the nerve Fascicles shown
1. Axon
 4. Perineurium 
2Endoneurium
5.Spaceartifact
rium are visible around individual myelinated axons.
NERVOUS SYSTEM
73
Figure 9.27
Figure 9.24
X250
Figure 9.28
X 625
KEY
1. Axon
 5. Nerve fibers, I.s.
2. Blood vessel
6. Nerve fibers, x.s.
 3. Groove in plasma membrane 
7. Perineurium
Figure 9.25
× 250
of Schwann cell
8. Schwann cell, nucleus 
 4. Myelin sheath
Figure 9.24. Nerve, Myelinated, Thoracic Wall, Cat. Myelin
sheaths (pink) often_ present a scalloped or vacuolated appear-
ance, an arifact of processing. Axons in this preparation are
气
round, oval, or shriveled and either blue-gray or purple.
Fgure 9.25. Axons, Myelinated, Medulla, Horse (Hagguist).
Axons (blue) with myelin sheaths (pink) are seen in longitudinal
sections and cross sections.
Figure 9.26. Nerve Fascicles, Unmyelinated, Ureter, Pig. Note
the wavy appearance of the ibers that have been cut longitudi-
nally. See Figures 9.27 and 9.28 For comments on the relation-
ship of unmyelinated axons to Schwann cells.
Figure 9.27. Schwann Cell  With
1 Unmyelinated  Axons.
Unmyelinated axons of the peripheral nervous system are envel-
oped by Schwann cells. A Schwann cell may have 20 or more
 grooves in its surface, each groove containing one or more axons.
Figure 9.28. Nerve Fascicle
[portion), Unmyelinated, Left
Ventricle, Pig. Each Schwann cel enwraps several unmyelinated
axons within grooves (which appear as vesicles in cross section)
of its plasma membrane. Axons can be seen illing some of the
grooves, while in other grooves the axons have shrunken from
the plasma membrane of the Schwann cell. Unmyelinated axons
For other examples of labeled unmyelinated nerve fas-
cicles, see Figures 8.4, 10.13, 10.23, 10.38, 10.39, 13.95,
15.39, 15.40.
Figure 9.26
× 180
16
Figure9.29
×25
Figure 9.33
x 12.5
KEY
Arteriovenous shunt
 9. Multipolar neurons 
2. Capsule 
10. Nerve
3. Central canal
11. Nuclear bag fiber
4. Fluid-filled space
12. Nuclear chain fiber
10
 5. Glycogen body
13. Outer core
6. Gray matter
14. Pancreas
7. Inner core
15. Skeletal muscle cell, x.s.
8. Mesenteric blood vessel
16. White matter
Figure 9.29. Pacinian Corpuscle, Wholemount, Mesentery, Cat
(Carmine). Two Pacinian corpuscles (one on the right somewhat
cistorted are shown. Each is surrounded by a capsule of connec-
tive tissue within which are located concentric laminae of Hattened
cells that Form the core. A nerve ending courses through the center
X 62.5
of the corpusle.The closelypacked innercorecels surround the
Figure9.30
nerve. The peripheral laminae form a looser, outer core.
Figure 9.30. Pacinian Corpuscle, x.s., 
Pancreas, Cat. The
Pacinian corpuscle is frequently seen in the pancreas of carni-
vores. See Figure 9.29 For description.
Figure 9.31. Small Encapsulkted Nerve Endings, Dermis,
Planum, Cow. Numerous encapsulated sensory nerve endings
 occur in the dermis of the planum near the epithelium.
Figure 9.32. Neuromuscular Spindle, X.s., Thoracic Muscle, Cat.
A neuromuscular spindle is a proprioceptor located within α
muscle. It consists of sensory and motor nerve endings and intra-
usal ibers,which are narrow,modified skeletal muscle cells.
Nuclear chain fibers are intrafusal fibers with a single row of
nuclei, whereas nuclecr bag ibers cre intrafusal ibers that
Figure 9.31
x 125
contain many closely packed nuclei.A capsule endloses the Huid
flled space that surrounds the intrafusal ibers.
Figure 9.33. Glycogen Body. Lumbosacral Enlargement, Spinal
Cord, x.s., Chicken. The glycogen body is found only in birds. It
consists of polyhedral, vesicular cells, each containing α central
mass of glycogen and α peripherally displaced nucleus.
2
Figure 9.32
X250
NERVOUS SYSTEM
75
Figure9.34
62.5
Figure 9.38
X 62.5
KEY
1.Axon
10.
Muscle [moves feather)
2Bone
11.
Gray matter
15
3. Capsule of Herbst corpuscle
12. Mulfipolar neuron
Cell of glycogen body
13. Nerve
5. Central canal
14. Sharpey's Fibers
6.Core
15. Space artifact
11
7. Dermis
16. Unipolar neuron
8. Dorsal root ganglion
17. Ventral root
9. Epidermis
18.White matter
Figure 9.34. Glycogen Body, Lumbosacral Enlargement, Spinal
Cord, x.s., Chicken. Cells of the glycogen body in detail. See
Figure 9.33 for description.
ure 9.35
X 12.5
Fgure 9.35. Dorsal Root Ganglion, Lumbosacral Enlargement,
Spinal Cord, x.s., Chicken. Portions of the spinal cord, ventral
root of a spinal nerve, dorsal root ganglion, and vertebra.
hgure 9.36. Dorsal Root Ganglion, Lumbosacral Enlargement,
neurons and myelinated axons are shown.
Figure 9.37. Herbst Corpuscle, Upper Beak, x.s., Chicken. These
encapsulated nerve endings occur frequently in the skin of the
bird.They are similar to Pacinian corpuscles of mammals cand
consist of an outer capsule of connective tissue, α laminated core,
 and an axial sensory nerve ending.
Fgure 9.38. Herbst Corpuscle, Skin, Neck, Chicken. The Herbst
Figure 9.36
X62.5
sausage-sha ped.
Figure 9.37
x 125
76
CHAPTER 9
10
CARDIOVASCULARSYSTEM
The heart pumps blood and conveys it to the tissues and organs through blood
vessels. Fluid that escapes from the blood is returned to the venous system by
lymphatic vessels.
BLOOD VESSELS
Vessels of the cardiovascular system are lined by an endothelium, which is typically a
single layer of squamous cells. The smallest of the blood vessels, capillaries, are tiny
endothelial tubes. They are easily overlooked in histologic sections, especially if they are
compressed or collapsed.
The walls of arteries and veins are arranged into concentric layers: the inner tunica
intima, middle tunica media, and outer tunica adventitia. The composition and thickness
of these layers vary with the size and type of vessel. The tunica media is not always
present.
 Small arteries can be defined, arbitrarily, as possessing up to eight or nine layers of
smooth muscle cells in the tunica media. The smallest of these vessels is usually termed
an arteriole. Its wall is comprised of an endothelium (tunica intima), one or two layers
of circularly arranged smooth muscle cells (tunica media), and a bit of surrounding loose
connective tissue (tunica adventitia). Some of the larger small arteries have an internal
elastic membrane (a sheet-like membrane forming the outer surface of the tunica intima).
Small arteries are accompanied by small veins. The smallest veins are called venules.
These are similar to arterioles, but have relatively thin walls and lack a tunica media of
smooth muscle. An internal elastic membrane is not found in small veins.
As the diameter of a vessel increases, the tunics become larger and more elaborate.
For example, the tunica intima of a medium artery contains connective tissue interspersed
between the endothelium and internal elastic membrane. The thick tunica media, with
77
varying proportions of smooth muscle and elastic fibers,
HEART
 comprises the bulk of the wall. The connective tissue of
the tunica adventitia contains collagenous and elastic
The heart is a muscular organ whose wall is composed of
fbers, small blood vessels (vasa vasorum), and nerves. A
an endocardium, myocardium, and epicardium. The thick-
medium vein, in contrast, has less smooth muscle and
ness and composition of the wall vary, being thickest in the
fewer elastic fibers in the tunica media and possesses a
ventricles and thinnest in the atria. The middle layer of
thicker tunica adventitia.
cardiac muscle, the myocardium, predominates. Valves of
 s ss n  de a 
connective tissue covered by an endothelium are extensions
have an obvious, rippled, internal elastic membrane.
of the endocardium. Regions of the heart, including the base
Conversely, accompanying veins are larger in diameter
of the aorta and pulmonary trunk, as well as the atrioven-
with an irregular or collapsed lumen and thinner walls,
tricular orifices and septum, are supported by the cardiac
and, except for some of the largest, they have no internal
skeleton. This cardiac skeleton may be in the form of dense
elastic membrane. The lumens of blood vessels in tissue
irregular connective tissue, fbrocartilage, hyaline cartilage,
sections often  contain  blood 
1 cells, plasma, or
both.
 or bone, and varies with age and among individuals.
Although it can be difficult to distinguish between veins
A small amount of fluid occurs in the pericardial cavity
and lymphatic vessels, the latter have thinner walls than
between the epicardium (visceral pericardium) and the
veins of similar size and normally do not contain erythro-
parietal pericardium.
cytes. Valves may occur in both veins and lymphatic
vessels.
There are several variations from the "typical" blood
vessels: The tunica adventitia of large veins adjacent to the
Word Roots
heart contains cardiac, rather than smooth, muscle. Some
 arteries have smooth muscle in the tunica intima, as well
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
as the tunica media. Smooth muscle may be oriented either
Adventicius
Coming fom abroad,
The tunica adventitia of
longitudinally or circularly. The tunica adventitia of arter-
Foreign; the outermost
a blood vessel is the
ies may be either abundant or scant.
covering, derived
outermost layer that
 The arteries of arteriovenous anastomoses lack an
rom connective
blends with surrounding
tissue, of a body part
structures.
internal
 elastic membrane, 
but possess
epithelioid
Cardio
 The heart 
 The endocardium is the 
(epithelial-like)  longitudinally  arranged  smooth  muscle
Endo
Within
innermost layer of the
cells. Special structures, the aortic and carotid bodies, are
wall of the heart.
 closely associated with the tunica adventitia of their respec-
Intima
Innermost
 The innemmost lkyer of
tive arteries.
the wall of a blood vessel
Many special vessels unique to certain organs such as
is the tunica intima.
the sinusoids of the liver, postcapillary venules of lymph
Tunica
A covering, cloak 
The tunica media forms
nodes, and helicine arteries of the penis are presented else-
Media
Middle
the middle coat, or layer,
where with their appropriate organ systems.
of a typical blood vessel.
78
CHAPTER 10
11
Figure 10.1
×250
Figure 10.5
×250
KEY
1. Arteriole, x.s.
9. Plasma cell
2. Capillary, I.s.
10. Skeletal muscle cell, x.s.
3. Capillary, x.s.
11. Small artery, x.s.
4. Endothelicl cell, nucleus
12. Small vein
5. Endothelial cell, surface cut
13. Smooth muscle cell, nucleus
6. Erythrocytes
14. Uterine gland
7. Macrophage
15. Venule
8. Mast cell
Figure 10.1. Capillaries, X.s. and l.s.,Diaphragm, Dog. Extensive 
capillary networks occur around muscle cells.
Figure 10.2. Capillary, I.s., Lamina Propria, Duodenum, Sheep.
Erythrocytes are lined up in the lumen of this capillary.
Figure 10.2
X625
Figure 10.3. Arterioles and Venules, Eyelid, Pig. Small blood
vessels of various sizes are present in the dermis.
Figure 10.4. Arterioles, X.s., Endometrium, Uterus, Dog. The
smallest of the arterioles shown have only one layer of smooth
muscle in their walls.
Figure 10.5. Venule, l.s., Connective Tissue, Epiglotis, Goat.
The wall of the venule consists of an endothelium surrounded by
α small amount of connective tissue.
For other labeled examples of capillaries, see Figures 2. 18,
8.8, 8.10, 8.11, 8.16, 8.17, 9.7, 12.31, and 14.26
Figure 10.3
x 125
Figure 10.4
x250
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
6
Figure 10.6
× 125
Figure 10.10
× 250
-
KEY
1. Arteriole
8. Small vein, collapsed, x.s.
 2. Endothelial cell, nucleus
 9. Sweat gland 
3. Erythrocytes
10. Tunica adventitia
4. Internal elastic membrane
11. Tunica media
5. Plasma
12. Valve
6. Skeletal muscle
13. Venule
7. Small artery, x.s.
Figure 10.6. Arterioles and Venule, l.s., Submucosa, Esophagus,
Cat. The circular arrangement of the smooth muscle of the tunica 
media can be seen in the region where the arterioles have been 
 aut tangentially.
Figure 10.7. Small Artery and Vein, X.s., Eyelid, Pig. These
Figure 10.7
× 125
vessels are surrounded by portions of sweat glands in the dermis.
Veins such as the one shown often have an irregular or collapsed
lumen.
Figure 10.8. Small Artery, l.s., Esophagus, Pig.
Fgure 10.9. Small Vein with Valve, l.s., Nose, Sheep. Valves
are thin Haps of connective tissue covered on both sides by an
endothelium.
Figure 10.10. Small Artery, X.s., with Branch, Subcutis, Dog.
Figure 10.8
X125
Figure 10.9
× 125
80
CHAPTER 10
9
1
Figure10.1
X 62.5
Figure 10.15
x 62.5
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
7. Nerve Fascicle, unmyelinated
2. Artery
8.Pancreas
2
3. Elastic fiber
9. Tunica adventitia
4. Erythrocytes
10. Tunica intima, endothelium
5. External elastic membrane
11. Tunica media
6. Internal elastic membrane
12. Vein
Figure 10.1l. Small Artery, Vein, and Nerve, X.s., Pancreas,
Cat. Note that both of the vessels have a sparse adventitia.
Figure 10.12. Artery and Vein, X.s., Watfle, Rooster. Note the
especially thick tunica media of the crtery.
Fgure 10.13. Medium Artery, X.s., Lymph Node, Pig. The rich
pink color of the elastic fibers contrasts with the paler pink of the
Figure 10.12
x 125
collagenous fibers and smooth muscle.
10
Figure 10.14. Medium Artery, X.s., Lymph Node, Pig (Orcein).
Elastic fibers are stained reddish brown with orcein.
Figure 10.15. Medium Vein, l.s., Lymph Node, Pig. This vein
accompanied the artery in Figures 10.13 and 10.14.
Summary of the Layers of the Wall of a Typical
Medium Artery:
Tunica Intima (Tunica Interna)
Endothelium: A simple squamous epithelium
Small amount of connective tissue
Internal elastic membrane 
Tunica Media: Circularly arranged smooth muscle cells;
some elastic and collagenous fibers
igure 10.13
X62.5
Tunica Adventitia (Tunica Externa): A layer of connective
fissue that blends with surrounding structures
Helpful Hints
How to Distinguish Between a Typical Medium Artery and
Medium Vein:
Artery
· Tends to be more round in cross section 
· Has an internal elastic membrane 
· Has a thicker tunica media 
Vein
· Tends to be larger in diameter and have a collapsed,
irregular lumen 
· Does not have an internal elastic membrane
· Has a thicker tunica adventitia 
igure 10.14
x 62.5
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
81
Figure10.16
<62.5
Figure 10.20
×25
KEY
1.
Adipose tissue
5. Tunica adventitia
 2 External elastic membrane
6. Tunica intima, endothelium 
 3. Intemal elastic membrane 
7. Tunica media
 4. Nerve Fascicle, unmyelinated 
8. Valve
Figure 10.16. Medium Vein, ls., Lymph Node, Pig (Orcein).
Elastic fibers are stained reddish brown with orcein.
Figure 10.17. Medium Artery, X.s.,.
Lymph Node,
Cat.
Longitudinally oriented smooth muscle is present in the tunica 
intima between the endothelium and internal elastic membrane.
Figure 10.18. Renal Artery, Near Aorta, x.s., Pig. Note both an
inner and outer layer of smooth muscle in the tunica media. The 
Figure10.17
X125
 inner layer is arranged longitudinally.
Figure 10.19. Portal Vein, X.s., Dog. Note the bundles of longi-
tudinally arranged smooth muscle in the tunica adventitia, α
characteristic of large veins.
Fgure 10.20. Vein with Valves, X.s., Lip, Pig. Portions of two
leaHets of a valve extend into the lumen of this vein.
Figure 10.18
X62.5
6
Figure 10.19
X 62.5
82
CHAPTER 10
Figure 10.21
12.5
Figure 10.25
× 12.5
KEY
1. Anastomotic artery
6. Tunica adventitia
2. Aorta, lumen
7. Tunica intima
3. Epithelioid cells
8. Tunica intima, endothelium 
4. Nerve Fascicle, unmyelinated 
9. Tunica media
 5. Pulmonary artery, lumen 
Figure 10.21. Umbilical Artery (Right) and Vein (Lef), x.s.,
Horse (Masson's)., The tunica media of the umbilical artery is
thicker than that of the umbilical vein.
Figure 10.22. Umbilical Artery, X.s., Horse (Masson's). The
umbilical artery lacks an internal elastic membrane. The innermost 
smooth muscle cells of the tunica media are epithelioid (epithelial-
like) and oriented longitudinally.
Figure 10.22
X 62.5
Figure 10.23. Glomus, Nose, Pig. The highly convoluted anas-
tomoticartery,surrounding connectivefissue,and nervesForming
this organized arteriovenous anastomosis can be seen.
Figure 10.24. Arteriovenous Anastomosis, X.s., lip, Pig.
Longitudinally directed cells of smooth muscle of the tunica media
are characteristically epithelioid (epithelial-like) in an anastomotic
crtery. These arteries lack an internal elastic membrane and have
a small lumen.
Figure 10.25. Aorta (Leff) and Pulmonary Artery (Right), x.s,
Pig (Orcein}. This preparation was stained with orcein to highlight
elastic tissue (red-brown).
igure10.23
125
Figure 10.24
x250
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
83
Figure 10.26
x 62.5
Figure 10.30
×25
KEY
1.Adipose tissue
6. Myocardium 
2. Cardiac muscle
7. Smooth muscle
 3. Collagenous fibers
 8. Tunica intima, endothelium
  s
9. Tunica media 
5.Endocardium
10. Vasa vasorum
Figure 10.26. Aorta, x.s., Dog (Orcein). This specimen was
stained with orcein to emphasize elastic tissue (red-brown).
Figure 10.27. Pulmonary Artery, X.s., Sheep. Portion of the
tunica intima and tunica media. Smooth muscle of the tunica
media is oriented in various directions. Wavy, pink elastic ibers
occur among the smooth muscle.
Figure 10.27
×62.5
Figure 10.28. Vena Cava, x.s., Dog. This section was taken from
α region near the heart. The tunica adventitia consists largely of
cardiac muscle and adipose tissue.
Figure 10.29. Right Auricle, Pig (Orcein). The section was stained
with orcein to show the distribution of elastic fibers {red-brown).
Figure 10.30. Right Auricle, Pig (Mallory's). This preparation
shows the distribution of smooth muscle in the endocardium.
Figure 10.28
X62.5
Figure 10.29
×25
84
CHAPTER 10
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
7. Pulmonary artery, lumen
2. Aorta, lumen
8. Tunica adventitia
 3. Atrium, myocardium
 9. Tunica intima, endothelium 
4.Cardiac skeleton, cartilaginous
10. Tunica media
s s
11. Valve
 6. Mesenchyme-like tissue
Figure 10.31. Pulmonic (Semilunar) Valve, x.s., Dog. Pulmonic
valves are located in the pulmonary artery near the heart. The 
 section shows a portion of the fibrous cardiac skeleton.
Figure 10.32. Pulmonic (Semilunar) Valve, X.s., Dog (Masson's).
 Portions of two adjacent pulmonic valves are visible. The connec-
tive tissue of the valves and the tunica media of the pulmonary
artery blend with the ibrous cardiac skeleton.A cushion of
Figure 10.31
x 12.5
mesenchyme-like connective fissue lies adiacent to the cardiac
skeleton.
Figure 10.33. Pulmonic (Semilunar) Valve, X.s., Dog. The valve
consists of a core of dense irregular connective tissue sandwiched
between two layers of endothelium.
Figure 10.34. Pulmonic (Semilunar) Valve, X.s., Dog. A portion
of the atrial wall, pulmonary artery, aorta, and cardiac skeleton 
(cartilaginous and fibrous) are visible.
Figure 10.32
×25
Figure 10.33
X 62.5
2
Figure 10.34
× 12.5
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
85
Figure 10.35
x 125
Figure 10.38
X125
KEY
1.
Adipose fissue
8. Parenchyma cells
2Arteriole
9. Pericardial cavity.
3. Chondrocyte
10. Pericardium, parietal
11. Pericardium, visceral
 5. Myofibrils
12. Purkinje cell, I.s.
6. Nerve Fascicle, unmyelinated 
13. Purkinje cell, x.s.
7. Neuron cell body
Figure 10.35. Cardiac Skeleton, Dog. The cartilaginous portion 
of the cardiac skeleton of the dog is Formed from fibrocartilage
containing numerous scattered chondrocytes.
Fgure 10.36. Purkinje Cells, x.s. and I.s., Left Ventricle, Goat.
Myofibrils are limited to the periphery of these lorge, modified
cardiac muscle cells.
Figure 10.37. Visceral and Parietal Pericardium, Cat. The peri-
cardium consists of a mesothelium (simple squamous epithelium]
and underlying connective tissue. The mesothelium of the visceral
pericardium (epicardium) covers the surface of the heart. The
remainder of the pericardial cavity is lined by the mesothelium of
the parietal pericardium.
Figure l0.38. Aoric Body, Pig. The cortic body is located
between the pulmonary artery and aorta.lt is a small,encapsu-
kated structure containing blood vessels, nerves, and two types of
parenchyma cells (see Figure 10.39).
Figure 10.36
<180
Figure 10.37
62.5
86
CHAPTER 10
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
9. Nerve Fascicle, unmyelinated
2. Arteriole
10. Plasma
3. Artery
11. Type I cell
4. Cecum, wall 
12. Type Il cell
13. Valve
5. Endothelium
6. Erythrocytes
14. Vein
7. Lymph
15. Venule
8. Lymphatic vessel
Figure 10.39. Aortic Body, Pig. Two types of parenchyma cells
ccn be cistinguished in the coric body. The type I (glomus) cell
has a round nucleus and a granular cytoplasm. The fype Il (sus-
  si  oa s  n 
Il cells and connective tissue.
Figure 10.39
× 250
Cecal Tonsil, Chicken. Lymphatic vessels have a large lumen and
a relatively thin wall. Valves may be present.
Figure 10.41. lymphatic Vessel with Valve, Lymph Node, Pig.
The valves of lymphatic vessels consist of a connective tissue core
 surrounded on each side by an endothelium.
14
10
Figure 10.42. Large Lymphatic Vessel, Submucosa, Cecum,
Horse. The wall of the lymphatic vessel consists of an endothelium
surrounded by α small amount of connective tissue. The latter
blends with the connective fissue of the submucosa.
Figure10.40
X 62.5
3
igure10.4
62.5
Figure 10.42
X 62.5
CARDIOVASCULAR SYSTEM
87
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
ymphatic tissue consists predominantly of lymphocytes. These and a variable
d se ss  sd   s e s ean 
because of the presence of numerous small lymphocytes, each with a basophilic nucleus
 and little cytoplasm.
MAMMALS
Types of Lymphatic Tissue
Diffuse lymphatic tissue is characterized by a moderate concentration of scattered lym-
phocytes. A round, oval, or irregularly circumscribed aggregation of mostly small,
densely packed lymphocytes is called a lymphatic nodule. A nodule may contain a central
pale area, the germinal center. Because the majority of cells of the germinal center are
larger lymphocytes with more cytoplasm and lightly staining nuclei, this region appears
pale in contrast to the dense corona (marginal zone, peripheral zone) of small lympho-
cytes. Diffuse lymphatic tissue and lymphatic nodules are compone nts of most lymphatic
 organs. They also appear in the connective tissue of the digestive, respiratory, urinary,
and reproductive organs, among other locations.
Aggregations of lymphatic nodules form Peyer's patches in the lamina propria and
submucosa of the small intestine, particularly the ileum.
Tonsils
Tonsils are collections of lymphatic nodules and diffuse lymphatic tissue. They occur in
the connective tissue below the epithelium in specific regions of the tongue, pharynx,
and larynx.
68
 Follicular tonsils are characterized by deep invagina-
muscle are oriented perpendicular to each other, while in
tions of the surface epithelium called crypts. A crypt
carnivores, pigs, sheep, and goats, the muscle fibers are
together with its associated lymphatic tissue is a tonsillar
interwoven. The capsule is thickest in the horse and cow
follicle. Collectively, several follicles form the tonsil.
Examples of tonsils with crypts include the following:
interior of the spleen from the capsule. They tend to be
lingual tonsils of the horse, pig, and cow; tubal tonsils of
 especially large in cows and sheep.
the pig; paraepiglottic tonsils of the pig, sheep, and goat;
The parenchyma of the spleen is divisible into the
palatine tonsils of the horse, pig, and ruminant. In the
white and red pulp. Dense accumulations of lymphocytes,
palatine tonsils of ruminants the crypts lead into a common
arranged around central arteries, form the periarterial lym-
sinus, which then opens onto the surface.
phatic sheaths (PALS). These, along with lymphatic
Tonsils without crypts have a smooth, somewhat
nodules, comprise the white pulp. White pulp appears
folded, or bulging surface, but lack deep invaginations of
 purple in H&E preparations because of the high concen-
the epithelium. Examples of these are the tubal tonsils of
tration of numerous small lymphocytes. Red pulp, because
ruminants, the paraepiglottic tonsil of the cat, and the
of the large numbers of erythrocytes it contains in its
palatine tonsils of carnivores.
reticular meshwork and blood vessels, is stained red in
Salivary glands associated with tonsils are typically
H&E preparations.
mucous glands except those in carnivores, where they are
The splenic artery enters the hilus of the spleen and
mixed (mucous and serous combined).
branches into trabecular arteries. When these enter the
parenchyma of the spleen and become surrounded by
Lymph Nodes and Hemal Nodes
white pulp, they are called central arteries (not necessarily
located in the center of the PALS). On leaving the white
A lymph node is organized into a cortex and medulla. The
pulp, the central artery branches into a group of pulp arter-
cortex consists of lymphatic nodules surrounded by diffuse
ies. These, in turn, branch into two or three arterioles,
lymphatic tissue. Extensions of the latter tissue into the
which terminate in two or more capillaries. Commonly,
medulla are called medullary cords. Lymphocytes, other
the pulp arteries and their branches are called a penicillus
leukocytes, macrophages, and plasma cells can be found
because, collectively, they resemble the bristles of an artist's
in the medullary cords.
brush. A portion of the capillaries of the penicillus becomes
A capsule of connective tissue, with some smooth
surrounded by concentric layers of macrophages contained
 muscle and elastic fbers, covers the lymph node. Parts of
in a reticular framework. These cellular and fbrous thick-
the capsule extend inward as trabeculae. Afferent lym-
enings are called ellipsoids (pericapillary macrophage
phatic vessels penetrate the capsule to join the subcapsular
sheaths). The term sheathed capillary is used by some
sinus. Cortical sinuses connect the subcapsular sinus to
authors for the combined unit consisting of the capillary
medullary sinuses. The latter lead to efferent lymphatic
and the ellipsoid. Ellipsoids are especially abundant in the
vessels at the hilus. The various sinuses are less cellular
marginal zone, the region between the red and white pulp.
than the parenchyma and appear pale by comparison.
They are very large and numerous in pigs. The capillaries
They are lined by a discontinuous endothelium and are
of the ellipsoids continue as terminal arterial capillaries.
spanned by a webwork of cytoplasmic processes of reticu-
Arterial capillaries may join venous sinuses or pulp veins
lar cells. They contain some free cells such as lymphocytes
(closed circulation), or they may empty directly into the
and macrophages.
spaces of the reticular meshwork of the red pulp (open
 Blood vessels enter and leave the node mostly from the
circulation).
region of the hilus. Unique blood vessels called postcapil-
The spleen of the dog is a sinusal spleen. The red pulp
lary venules are found in the deep cortex. They are lined
contains typical venous (splenic, vascular) sinuses. These
by elongated cells that appear cuboidal when cut in cross
are wide channels lined by elongated, longitudinally ori-
 section. Lymphocytes migrate between these cells.
ented endothelial cells. The spleens of the cat, horse, pig.
The amount or arrangement of cortical and medullary
and ruminant are classifed as nonsinusal, having poorly
tissue can vary from that of the "typical" lymph node. The
developed or no sinuses. Wisps of smooth muscle in the
lymph node of the pig, for example, is characteristically
red pulp are most numerous in pigs and ruminants.
atypical with the location of the cortical and medullary
tissue, as well as the flow of lymph, being reversed.
Thymus
Hemal nodes occur along blood vessels of ruminants.
They are characterized by blood-filled sinuses between cel-
 The thymus gland is covered by a thin capsule of connec-
lular cords. Connective tissue and some smooth muscle
tive tissue that projects inward as septa, partially dividing
form the capsule and trabeculae (which are sparse). Hemal
the organ into lobules. The parenchyma of each lobule is
 nodes lack lymphatic vessels. Hemolymph nodes, in con-
organized into a cortex of mostly small, densely packed
trast to hemal nodes, possess lymphatic vessels. Their
lymphocytes and a medulla with fewer and larger lympho-
sinuses receive a mixture of blood and lymph.
cytes. The medulla is continuous between lobules. The
thymus lacks lymphatic nodules and is supported by a
unique cytoreticulum of stellate, epithelial reticular cells
Spleen
and only a few reticular fibers.
The spleen has a capsule that is rich in smooth muscle and
Hassall's (thymic) corpuscles occur in the medulla of
elastic fibers. In horses and cows two or three layers of
each lobule. They are concentric whorls of acidophilic and
90
CHAPTER 11
flattened reticular cells that may become swollen, keratin-
Thymus
ized, and calcified centrally. They are found exclusively in
the thymus gland.
As in mammals, the thymus is arranged into incompletely
As an animal ages, much of the thymus becomes
separated lobules of cortical and medullary tissue. Typical
replaced by adipose tissue.
Hassall's corpuscles, similar to those found in mammals,
are seen infrequently. Instead, diffuse forms of Hassall's
corpuscles, called reticular structures, are abundant in the
medulla. These are pale, irregular masses of reticular cells
CHICKEN
with vesicles that contain acidophilic material and degen-
erating cells. Myoid cells, characterized by a fibrous cyto-
Lymph nodes do not occur in the chicken. However, diffuse
plasm, also occur in the medulla.
lymphatic tissue and lymphatic nodules are widespread.
Bursa of Fabricius
Spleen
The bursa of Fabricius is a saclike dorsal diverticulum of
The spleen of the chicken is covered by a muscular capsule,
the proctodeum that is unique to birds. It is characterized
but trabeculae are absent. Areas of red and white pulp are
by tall, thick mucosal folds (plicae) filled with numerous
less distinct than in the mammalian spleen. White pulp is
 polyhedral follicles. Each follicle, composed of lymphatic
diffusely scattered throughout the spleen and is composed
tissue, is divided into a cortex and medulla. A layer of
primarily of small lymphocytes. It contains sheathed arter-
undifferentiated epithelial cells occupies the periphery of
ies and, occasionally, lymphatic nodules. Red pulp
is
the medulla, which is separated from the cortex by a capil-
formed from venous sinuses and anastomosing cords of
lary layer. The bursa is lined by a pseudostratified colum-
reticular cells, macrophages, lymphocytes, and red blood
nar epithelium, except at the apex of each follicle, which
cells.
is covered by an epithelial tuft of simple columnar cells.
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
91
000010
igure 11.1
×25
Figure 11.5
KEY
1. Corona
7. Mucosa
 2. Diffuse ymphatic tissue
8. Muscukaris externa
3. Germinal center
 9. Reticukar cell
 4. Lymphatic nodule
10.Submucosa
5. Lymphocyte, large
11. Villus
6. Lymphocyte, small 
1
x12.5
Fgure 1l.1. Lymphatic Nodules and Diffuse Lymphatic Tissue,
Pyloric Stomach, Cat. Dense aggregations of lymphocytes form
lymphatic nodules in the lamina propria.
Fgure 1l.2. Lymphatic Nodules and Diffuse Lymphatic Tissue,
Colon, x.s., Pig. The mucosa and submucosa contain diffuse
lymphatic tissue and large lymphatic nodules with germinal
centers. Lymphatic nodules are especially numerous in the diges-
five tract of the pig.
Figure 1 l.3. Lymphatic Nodule, Colon, Pig. Cell ofthe germinal
center and corona. Many small lymphocytes occur in the periph-
eral corona; Fewer and larger cells cre seen in the germinal
center.
Figure 1ll.4. Lymphatic Nodule, Colon, Pig. Detail of cell of the
germinal center and corona. Smallymphocytes are characterized
by a heterochromatic nucleus and scant cytoplasm.
igure11.3
x250
Figure ll.5. Peyer's Patch, lleum, X.s., Cat. A Peyer's patch is
 an aggregation of lymphatic nodules in the lamina propria and
submucosa of the small intestine.
Figure 11.4
x250
92
CHAPTER 11
x12.5
Figure 11.10
x125
2
KEY
1. Diffuse lymphatic tissue 
9. Serous demilune
2. Epiglottis
10. Skeletal muscle
3. Fossa semilunar fold 
11. Stratified squamous epithelium,
4. Lymphatic nodule
 semilunar fold 
 5. Mucous acinus
12. Stratified squomous epithelium, tonsil
6. Muscularis externa 
13. Submucosa
7. Salivary glands
14. Vestibular fold 
8. Serous acinus
15. Villus
14.
Figure ll.6. Peyer's Patch, lleum, X.s., Dog. Eight lymphatic
Figure 11.7
x12.5
nodules of a porfion of a Peyer's patch are visible in this section.
Figure ll.7. Paraepiglotfic Tonsil, Larynx, l.s., Cat. In the cat
an accumulation of lymphatic tissue in the lateral wall of the
larynx, between the epiglottis and the vestibular Fold, Forms a
tonsil without crypts.
Figure 11.8. Palatine Tonsil, Dog. In the dog the entire tonsil lies
within a Ffossa (a small hollow) and is covered in part by a semi-
lunar fold. The palatine tonsils of carnivores lack crypts.
Figure ll.9. Palatine Tonsil, Dog. A portion of a tonsil and
12
semilunar Fold.
Figure 11.10. Palatine Tonsil, Dog. Mixed salivary glands are
associated with the wall of the tonsils in carnivores. In other
species only mucous gloands are present.
Figure 11.8
11
3
12
Figure 11.9
x12.5
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
93
11
10
Figure 11.11
1
Figure 11.15
x12.5
KEY
1. Capsule
8. Medullary cord 
2 Cortical sinus
9. Medullary sinus
3. Crypt
10. Salivary glands, mucous
4. Deep cortex
11. Stratified squamous epithelium
 5. Diffuse lymphatic tissue 
12. Subcapsular sinus 
 6. Leukocyte infltration 
13. Trabecula 
 7. Lymphatic nodule
Figure l1.1 1. Palatine Tonsil, Horse. The palatine tonsils of non-
carnivores have crypts (surface invaginations lined by stratified
x12.5
squamous epitheliumj.
Figure 11.12. Palatine Tonsil, Horse. Note that the continvity of
each crypt with the surface is not always evident.
Figure ll.13. Palafine Tonsil, Horse. Lymphocytes and other
leukocytes have iniltrated and partly obliterated the epithelial
lining of this crypt.
Fgure 11.14. Lymph Node, Cow. The lymph node is surrounded
2
by a capsule. Trabeculae project inward from the capsule. The
cortex contains sinuses, difuse lymphatic tissue, and lymphatic
nodules. The medulla is composed of medullary cords and sinuses.
Figure 1l.15. Lymph Node, Dog. This histologic section of α
lymph node at low magnification shows the same features as the
drawing in Figure 11.14.
Figure 11.13
X125
Figure 11.14
94
CHAPTER 11
10
igure 11.16
x12.5
Figure 11.20
x12.5
KEY
1. Capsule 
6. Lymphatic nodule
2. Cartilage plate, bronchus 
7. Medulla, lymph node
3. Cortex, lymph node 
8. Medullary cord 
4. Cortical tissue
9. Medullary sinus
 5. Diffuse lymphatic tisue
10. Primary bronchus, lumen
Figure 1l.16. Tracheobronchial Lymph Node, Dog. This lymph
node is adjacent to the wall of a primary bronchus near the
tracheal bifurcation.
Figure 11.17. Lymph Node, Horse. The arrangement of cortical
Figure 11.17
x12.5
of mammals. In the example shown the distribution of cortical and
medullary components is the reverse of that commonly expected.
Figure 11.18. Lymph Node, Horse. Not only is the arrangement
of cortical and medullary components reversed in this section, but
the proportion of the medullary tissue is much greater than usual.
Figure 11.19. Lymph Node, Pig. The lymph nodes of pigs con-
sistently show an atypical pattern. In this section cortical tissue is
predominantly central, while medullary tissue occurs both super-
hcially and internally.
Figure 11.20. Lymph Node, Cow. The lymph node of the cow is
often characterized by the presence of large lymphatic nodules.
Figure 11.18
x12.5
Figure 11.19
x12.5
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
95
Figure11.21
X62.5
Figure 11.25
x125
KEY
1. Capsule
5. Reticular fiber
 2. Cortical sinus
6. Smooth muscle
 3. Diffuse lymphatic tissue
 7. Subcapsular sinus 
 4. Lymphatic nodule 
8. Trabecula 
Figure 1l.21. Cortex, Lymph Node, Horse. The subcapsular
sinus below the capsule contfinues as corical sinuses that parallel
the trabeculae through the cortex.
Figure 1l.22. Cortex, Lymph Node, Cow (Masson's). The inner
portion of the capsule contains smooth muscle (pink).
Fgure ll.23. Cortex, Lymph Node, Cow. The trabecula con-
X125
tains smooth muscle.
Figure 11.24. Cortex, Lymph Node, Cow (Silver). A network of
Fine, branching reticular fibers provides α supportive ramework
For the diffuse and nodular lymphatic tissue.
Figure 11.25. Cortex, Lymph Node, Sheep (Mallory's). Continvity
of the subcapsular sinus with the cortical sinus is evident.
x125
11.24
×125
96
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.26
×250
Figure 11.30
x125
KEY
1. Diffuse lymphatic tisue
 8. Multinucleate giant cell 
2. Endothelial cell, nucleus
9. Postcapillary venule, I.s.
 3. Lymphocyte
10. Postcapillary venule, x.s.
4. Macrophage
11. Reticular cell
5. Mast cell
12. Smooth muscle
6. Medullary cord
13. Trabecula
 7. Medullary sinus 
Figure 1l.26. Cortex, Lymph Node, Sheep (Mallory's). Smooth
 muscle cells (pink) among collagenous ibers (blue) of the capsule.
Figure l1.27. Deep Cortex, Lymph Node, Dog. Postcapillary
Figure 11.27
×250
venules, I.s. cnd x.s. These vessels are lined by elongated cells
that appecr cuboidal in cross section. Lymphocytes migrate 
between the endothelial cells of the postcapillary venules.
Figure 1l.28. Cortex, Lymph Node, Horse. Multinucleate giant
cells, derived from the coalescence of macrophages, are some-
 times found in lymph nodes.
Figure 1l.29. Medulla, Lymph Node, Cow. In this preparation
reticular cels, endothelial cells, and macrophages contain numer-
ous pigment granules.
Figure 1l.30. Medula, Lymph Node, Sheep. Smooth muscle is
distributed throughout the medullary sinuses.
igure 11.28
×125
Figure 11.29
x250
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
16
Figure 11.31
X250
Figure 11.34
x250
KEY
Adipose tissue
8. Lymphocyte
2. Capsule
9. Macrophage with erythrocytes
 3. Diffuse lymphatic tissue
10. Medullary cord
 4. Endothelial cell, nucleus
 11. Medullary sinus
5. Erythrocytes
12.Megakaryocyte
6. Granulocyte
13. Reticular cell
7. Lymphatic nodule
14. Subcapsular sinus 
门
Figure ll.31. Medulla, Lymph Node, Dog. Cellular medullary
cords surround mecullry sinuses that are lined incompletely by
endothelial cells. A megakaryocyte is present in a medullary cord.
Figure 1ll.32. Medulla, Lymph Node, Dog. Macrophages con-
taining phagocytized erythrocytes are evident in the medullary
sinuses.
Figure 11.33. Hemal Node, Sheep. The general organization is
much like that of a lymph node, but the sinuses are filled with
blood. Lymphatic nodules are scarce, and trabeculae of connec-
five tissue cre not apparent.
Figure 1l.34. Hemal Node, Sheep. The subcapsular (marginal)
sinus is illed with blood. Reticular cells of the sinus contain
phagocytized material.
Figure 11.32
x360
Figure 11.33
x25
Figure 11.35
Figure 11.39
x62.5
KEY
8
1. Capsule 
7. Mesothelium
 2 Central artery
8. Red pulp
3. Ellipsoid 
9. Trabecula
 4. Endothelial cell
10. Venous sinus
 5. Lymphatic nodule
11. White pulp
6. Marginal zone
Figure 1l.35. Spleen, Dog. This drawing is of a small portion of
the spleen.
Figure 1l.36. Spleen, Dog. The parenchyma of the spleen is
sheaths and lymphafic nodules). Trabeculae extend inward from
Figure 11.36
X12.5
the capsule and are seen throughout the red pulp.
Figure 1l.37. Spleen, Dog. Note the smooth muscle in the
capsule and trabeculae. The spleen of the dog is α sinusal spleen,
containing venous sinuses. See Figure l1.38.
Figure 11.38. Spleen, Dog. Venous sinuses are lined by longi-
tudinally oriented, elongated endothelial cells. The nucleimay or
may not be apparent in cross sections of such lining cells.
Eryihrocytes ill the sinuses and the spaces of the red pulp.
Figure ll.39. Spleen, Dog. Ellipsoids can be seen in the mar-
ginal zone between the periarterial lymphatic sheath (white pulp)
and the red pulp. They are also present in the red pulp.
Figure11.37
<62.5
10
11
Figure 11.38
x250
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
66
Figure 11.40
X125
Figure 11.41
25
Figure 11.44
x62.5
KEY
1. Capillary lumen
7. Pericrtericl ymphatic sheath
2. Capsule
8. Red pulp
3. Central artery
 4. Elastic fiber
10. Smooth muscle
 5. Ellipsoid
11. Trabecula
6. Marginal zone
Figure 11.40. Spleen, Pig (Orcein). The capsule and trabeculae
are rich in elastic fibers (red-brown).
Figure l1.41. Spleen, Pig (Mallory's). Ellipsoids cre abundant
in the pig. They are especially numerous in the vicinity of the
X62.5
marginal zone of a periarterial lymphatic sheath. See Figure 
11.44 for details of ellipsoids.
Figure ll.42. Capsule, Spleen, Horse. The capsule of the spleen
of the horse and cow contains layers of smooth muscle oriented
ct right angles to each other, rather than being interwoven as in
carnivores, pigs, sheep, and goats. In this preparation there are
three distinct layers of muscle. Compare with Figures ll.37,
11.43, and 11.45.
10
Figure 1l.43. Capsule, Spleen, Cow. The capsule contains two
thick layers of smooth muscle oriented at right angles to each
other.
Figure 11.44. Spleen, Pig. Ellipsoids are especially abundant in
88
the spleen of the pig.Each consists of macrophages and reticulcr
fibers that surround a capillary.
Figure 11.43
X62.5
100
CHAPTER 11
KEY
1. Capsule
 7. Septum
2. Cortex
8. Serosa
3. Elastic fiber
 9. Smooth muscle
4. Lymphatic vessel
10. Trabecula 
 5. Medulla 
11. White pulp
 6. Red pulp
Figure ll.45. Capsule, Spleen, Sheep. In sheep the bulk of the
capsule contains many interwoven smooth muscle cells. The
smooth muscle in the capsule of the spleen of carnivores (Figure
11.37], pigs, and goats has a similar arrangement. In the horse
(Figure 11.42) and cow (Figure ll.43) the muscle cels are
crranged in layers instead. Elastic ibers can be observed as Faint
X62.5
pink spirals.
Figure 1l.46. Spleen, Sheep. Note the thick trabecula.
Characteristically, the spleens of cows and sheep have thick tra-
beculae. Compare with Figure 1l .41.
Figure 1l.47. Red Pulp, Spleen, Sheep. Wisps of smooth muscle
cre scattered throughout the red pulp.
Figure 1l.48. Thymus, Puppy. A thin capsule of connective tissue
fissue septa, consist of an outer, dark cortex and an inner, pale
10
medulla. The medulla is continuous between adjacent lobules.
Figure11.46
×25
Figure11.47
x125
Figure 11.48
x12.5
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
101
260
KEY
1. Cortex
3. Medulla
 2 Hassall s corpuscle
Figure 1 1.49. Thymus, Puppy. Portion ofthe medulla and cortex.
The cortex consists predominantly of small lymphocytes. The lym-
phocytes of the medulla are larger and less abundant. The
medulla contains concentrically arranged, swollen, and keratin-
ized reticular cell that Form Hassalls corpuscles, which are char-
acteristic of the thymus.
102
CHAPTER 11
Figure 11.50
x12.5
9
Figure 11.51
x12.5
Figure 11.54
x360
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
9. Muscularis externa
2 Blood vessel
10. Red pulp
3. Connective tissue
11. Reticular cell
 4. Crypt of Lieberkuhn (intestinal
12. Sheathed artery, lumen 
gland]
13. Smooth muscle of capsule
5.Erythrocyte
14. Thymic tissue
6. Granulocyte
15. Villus
 7. Lymphatic nodule
16. White pulp
8. Mesothelium
Figure11.52
×25
Figure 11.50. Thymus, Cat (Old). In older animals, functional
thymic fissue is largely supplantecd by adipose fissue.
Figure 1l.51. Cecal Tonsil, x.s., Chicken. The accumulation of
diffuse and nodular lymphatic tissue in the lamina propria and
3
submucosa near the opening of each cecum is called the cecal
tonsil.
Figure 11.52. Spleen, Chicken. Red pulp (pink) intermingles with
white pulp (purple). The white pulp contains a Few lymphatic
nodules. Trabeculae of connective tissue are absent.
Figure 1l.53. Capsule, Spleen, Chicken. Layers of smooth
muscle make up a substantial part of the capsule.
Figure 11.54. Spleen, Chicken. Sheathed arteries, X.s., in white
ns s  dnd  p  sss as 
Figure 11.53
x250
rounded by reticular cells.
LYMPHATIC SYSTEM
103
Figure 11.55
x12.5
Figure 11.59
x250
KEY
1. Bursa of Fabricius, lumen
8. Muscularis
 2 Capillary layer
9. Myoid cell
3. Cortex
10. Pseudostratified epithelium 
 4. Epithelial tuf 
11. Reticular structure
 5. Follicle
12. Septum
6. Lamina propria
 13. Undifferentiated epithelial cell
7. Medulla
14. Vesicle
Figure 1l.55. Thymus, Chicken. The thymus of the chicken is
similar to that of mammals.The pale areas throughout the medul-
lary regions of the lobules are called reticular struchures (Figure
11.561.
Figure11.56
x250
Fgure ll.56. Medulla, Thymus,.
Chicken.  Myoid cells, cut
obliquely, are characterized by a ibrous cytoplasm and periph-
eral nuclei. The pale-staining reticular structure in this section is
considered a diffuse form of a Hassall's corpuscle. It consists of
difuse groups of reticular cells and scattered vesicles.The vesicles
 may contain eosinophilic material or degenerating cells.
10
Figure ll.57. Bursa of Fabricius, Chicken. Portions of the long
mucosal folds (plicae) proiect into the lumen of the bursa.
Numerous Folliles, each composed of a cortex and medulla, ill
 the lamina propria of each fold.
Figure ll.58. Bursa of Fabricius, Chicken. Where the apex of
α Follicle contacts the epithelium, tall, pale columnar cells with
apical nuclei Form cn epithelial tuf. Elsewhere, mucosal folds are 
 covered by a pseudostratihied columnar epithelium.
Figure 11.57
x12.5
Fgure ll.59. Bursa of Fabricius, Chicken. A portion of a follicle.
The darkly stained cortex is composed mostly of many small
10
lymphocytes. The paler medulla contains Fewer cells of various
sizes. A layer of undifferentiated epithelial cells, which are cuboi-
dal with an acidophilic cytoplasm, occupies the periphery of the
medulla. A capillary network separates the cortex cnd the
medulla.
Figure 11.58
x125
104
CHAPTER 11
12
INTEGUMENT
he integument includes the skin and its derivatives. Skin consists of two layers, an 
epidermis and dermis, joined to underlying structures such as muscle and bone by
the subcutis (subcutaneous tissue). Sweat, sebaceous, and mammary glands, as
well as hair and feather follicles, are epidermal structures that are located in the dermis
and subcutis. The highly keratinized claws and hooves of mammals, and the beak, claws,
 and scales of fowl are also skin derivatives.
MAMMALS
Skin
Epidermis
The epidermis of thick skin is a keratinized, stratifed, squamous epithelium. The stra-
tum basale is a single layer of cuboidal to columnar cells that lies on a basement mem-
brane adjacent to the dermis. These cells give rise to the stratum spinosum, a layer of
variable thickness whose polygonal cells become squamous toward the surface. Cells
of the stratum granulosum contain basophilic keratohyalin granules in their cytoplasm.
The stratum lucidum is a thin, pale, eosinophilic, translucent layer. It is limited to
regions where the epidermis is very thick, such as the digital pads of carnivores. In
structures composed of hard keratin (rather than soft keratin), such as hooves and
claws, both the stratum granulosum and stratum lucidum are absent. The most super-
ficial layer of skin, the stratum corneum, is composed of dead, keratinized squamous
cells that slough from the surface. Cell division within the stratum basale and stratum
spinosum allows continued growth of the epidermis.
The epidermis of thin skin is composed of relatively few cells, but the number varies
with the location. Thin skin lacks a stratum lucidum, and a stratum granulosum is not
always evident.
105
Dermis
their connective-tissue sheaths. In horses, pigs, and rumi-
The dermis consists of loose and dense irregular connec-
nants, the sinus is trabeculated throughout its length. In
tive tissue containing blood vessels, lymphatic vessels,
carnivores, the upper region is nontrabeculated, forming
and nerves. The superficial, loose connective tissue of
an annular sinus.
the dermis, the papillary layer (superficial layer), forms
projections called dermal papillae that interdigitate with
Glands and Other Epidermal Deriviatives
the epidermis and serve to anchor the two layers. Dermal
papillae are especially prominent in thick skin. The deep
The short ducts of sebaceous glands usually empty into
layer of dense irregular connective tissue is called the re-
hair follicles, although they may also empty directly onto
ticular layer (deep layer) of the dermis.
the skin surface. Basal (stem) cells of sebaceous glands
divide and give rise to vacuolated secretory cells that
synthesize lipid. The innermost, mature secretory cells
Epidermal Derivatives
die and break apart, forming an oily product called se-
 bum. This form of product release is called holocrine se-
Hairs and Hair Follicles
cretion.
Hairs are associated with regions of the body covered by
 Sweat glands may be winding (serpentine) or highly
thin skin. They arise from germinal (matrix) cells of the
coiled, and may be either tubular or saclike. They empty
hair bulb at the base of the hair follicle. Multiplication of
their secretion through a duct, either into a hair follicle or
germinal cells results in growth of the hair. Near its ori-
 onto the skin surface. The epithelium of the secretory
gin, a hair consists of a central medulla of cuboidal cells,
 portion of the gland varies from flattened to columnar.
a cortex of flattened cells oriented parallel to the long axis
Contractile myoepithelial cells surround the secretory cells
of the hair, and an outer cuticle consisting of scalelike
and the initial portion of their ducts.
cells that partially overlap so their free edges are directed
Traditionafly, sweat glands have been classified as
upward toward the surface of the skin. The cells of the
either merocrine (secretory product released by exocytosis)
hair become keratinized as they are pushed toward the
 or apocrine (secretory product released when small pieces
surface from the region of the hair bulb. Within the hair
of cytoplasm containing the product are pinched off the
the medulla may become reduced distally, and it is absent
free surface of the cell). Recent evidence, however, has
entirely in wool hairs.
suggested that this may not be true and that all sweat
Hair follicles are set obliquely in the dermis or subcu-
glands use the merocrine (eccrine) form of release.
tis, although in sheep they tend to be vertical. A vascular
Special regions in the skin of various species have
dermal papilla projects into the hair bulb. Melanocytes,
numerous, well-developed glands. The carpal glands of
located close to the dermal papilla among matrix cells,
pigs consist of masses of merocrine sweat glands. Numerous
have cytoplasmic processes that provide pigment to the
apocrine sweat glands characterize the mental organ of
hair cells. The germinal cells of the matrix, in addition to
pigs and the interdigital and inguinal pouches of sheep.
forming new hair cells, give rise to the inner root sheath
The submental organ of cats, the supracaudal gland of
of the follicle. The cuticle of the inner root sheath is com-
carnivores, the infraorbital pouch of sheep, and the scent
posed of overlapping, scalelike cells similar to those of the
(horn) glands of goats contain many large sebaceous
cuticle of the hair, but their free edges are directed down-
glands.
ward so that the hair and inner-root sheath interlock. The
The skin of the nose of horses is thin with fine hairs,
inner root sheath becomes keratinized and tapers distally,
sebaceous and sweat glands, and occasional sinus hairs.
ending close to the opening of sebaceous glands into the
The planum of the nose of the other domestic mammals is
follicle. The peripheral external root sheath represents a
covered by a thick, highly keratinized epidermis. The
downward continuation of the epidermis. A connective
planum nasale of carnivores is devoid of glands and hairs.
tissue (dermal) sheath surrounds the follicle and abuts the
In cats, the epidermis forms numerous small bumps, while
basement (glassy) membrane of the external root sheath.
that of the dog is rather flat with surface grooves. The
It blends with the rest of the dermal connective tissue. An
 planum rostrale of the pig contains numerous merocrine
arrector pili muscle (smooth muscle) inserts on the connec-
sweat glands and sparse hairs. The planum nasolabiale of
tive tissue sheath of the follicle and originates from the
the cow and the planum nasale of sheep and goats are
superficial layer of the dermis.
hairless and contain compound acinar glands that produce
 Single (simple) hair follicles are evenly distributed in
a serous secretion.
the skin of horses and ruminants and occur in groups of
Xa e Aq paaao are sop pue sieo jo sped pei
three in pigs. Most of the follicles in carnivores are com-
thick epidermis that is smooth in the dog and roughened
pound follicles. Each compound follicle is formed from a
by conical papillae in the cat. Coiled merocrine sweat
single primary follicle and several secondary follicles. The
glands occur in the dermis and the digital cushion of the
follicles unite at the level of the openings of the sebaceous
pads.
glands, forming a common follicle, which extends from the
 Lobules of mammary glands are situated in the sub-
point of union to the skin surface. The hairs that are pro-
cutis and consist of tubuloacinar glands and intralobular
duced exit as a group to the surface through the common
ducts. When a mammary gland is active, secretory tissue
follicular opening. Sinus (tactile) hairs are limited to the
is prominent, and intralobular and interlobular connective
face region. They are produced by large follicles that are
tissue is reduced. When a gland is inactive, only the duct
well innervated and that contain blood-filled sinuses within
system is evident. Cellular thickenings at the termination
106
CHAPTER 12
of intralobular ducts represent gland remnants or gland
and floplume. A contour feather has a central shaft that
precursors in the inactive gland. Interlobular ducts, with a
is divisible into a hollow calamus (quill) and a rachis. A
bistratified cuboidal to columnar lining, drain the lobules
vane extends laterally from each side of the rachis and is
and lead to the lactiferous ducts and lactiferous sinuses at
composed of barbs and barbules with interlocking hook-
the base of the teat. The teat sinus, with a bistratified
lets. Down feathers are soft and fluffy. Their barbules lack
columnar to cuboidal lining, leads to the teat canal that
hooklets. Filoplumes are small, hairlike feathers.
 opens onto the tip of the teat. The teat canal is lined by a
Feathers are situated in tubelike follicles oriented
stratified squamous epithelium that is continuous with the
obliquely in the dermis or subcutis. The follicle wall of a
skin. Single teat sinuses and canals pass through the teats
developing feather is lined by a stratum corneum and
 of ruminants, while the teats of carnivores, horses, and pigs
 underlying stratum germinativum surrounded by a layer
contain multiple teat sinuses and canals, each opening
of connective tissue. The epidermal collar, a thick ring of
separately onto the surface. The skin surface of the teat of
epidermal cells at the base of the follicle, gives rise to the
cows and pigs lacks sebaceous glands, sweat glands, and
feather. It surrounds the dermal (feather) papilla, which
hairs. Chestnuts and ergots are epidermal thickenings char-
gives rise to a well-vascularized, mesenchyme-like feather
acteristic of the horse. The claws of carnivores, hooves of
pulp that is present during growth of the feather. A
ungulates, and horns of ruminants are highly specialized
network of feather muscles, each composed of one to
 derivatives of the skin composed of hard keratin.
several bundles of smooth muscle, attaches the follicles to
each other. No muscles are associated with the follicles of
floplumes.
CHICKEN
Wattles and combs are appendages of the skin whose
dermis contains an extensive, superficial network of sinus
Skin
capillaries and abundant mucous connective tissue. The
sinus capillaries are responsible for the striking red color
The epidermis of the chicken is generally thinner than
of the appendages.
that of mammals. It is composed of an inner stratum ger-
Digital pads are covered by a thick stratum corneum
minativum and an outer stratum corneum. The stratum
and contain a cushion of adipose tissue in their subcutis.
germinativum includes a basal layer, an intermediate lay-
Scales, claws, and beaks are keratinized derivatives of the
er of one to several layers of polygonal cells, and a thin
skin.
transitional layer of flat vacuolated cells just below the
The uropygial (preen) gland is a bilobed holocrine
stratum corneum.
 gland located in the dorsal base of the tail. It produces an
The dermis of feathered skin lacks papillae and is
oily secretion. Simple tubular glands radiate outward from
nonglandular Mutlilocular as well as unilocular adipo-
the lumen of each lobe like the bristles of a bottle brush.
cytes occur in the subcutis.
Each tubule is divided into a sebaceous zone and a glyco-
gen zone, named according to their histochemical staining
properties. The glycogen zone is continuous with the lumen
Epidermal Derivatives
of the lobe. Each lobe is drained by a primary duct that
The epidermally derived feathers may be classified into
 passes through the isthmus to the papilla (nipple) to open
three main types in the adult chicken: contour, down,
onto the surface.
Word Roots
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
Arrect
Steep, upright
When the crrector pii contracts, it
Pill
Hair
 causes hairs to stand upright.
o o
Horn
The stratum corneum is Formed by
Kerato
keratinized cells.
Cutis
Skin
The subcutis is a layer of loose
Sub
Under or
connective tissue below the skin.
below
Derm
Skin
The cermis is a lkyer of the skin.
Epi
Above, over
 The epicdermis is above the dermis.
Papilla
Nipple
The papillary layer of the dermis
has nipple-like projections called
dermal papillce.
Stratum
A layer
The stratum basale is the deepest
 lyer of the epidermis.
INTEGUMENT
107
KEY
1. Dermmal papilla
8.Stratum corneum
2 Dermis
9. Stratum granulosum
 3. Epidermal peg 
10. Stratum lucidum
 4. Epithelium, hairy skin 
11. Stratum spinosum
 5. Epithelium, planum 
12. Subcutis
 6. Hair follicle
13. Surface groove
 7. Stratum basale
14. Sweat gland 
Figure 12.1. Planum Nasale and Hairy S
Junction of the hairless planum nascle (thick skin) and the hairy
portion (thin skin) of the nose. No glands are associated with the
planum of carnivores. There are surface grooves in the planum
of the dog.
Figure 12.1
x12.5
Figure 12.2. Planum Nasale and Hairy Skin, Nose, Cat. No
hairs or glands are associated with the planum of carnivores. The
surface of the planum bears numerous small, raised tubercles that
cre characteristic of the cat.
Figure 12.3. Epithelium, Planum Nasale, Cat. Portions of the
small tubercles tfypical of the cat's planum.All layers of the epi-
dermis are evident. Note how the papillae of the dermis interdigi-
 tate with the epidermal pegs.
igure 12.2
x12.5
10
Figure 12.3
108
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.4
26
KEY
1. Dermis
6.Sebaceous gland
2. Epidermis
7. Sinus hair follicle
3. Hair follicle
8. Stratum basale
4. Intercellular bridges
9. Stratum spinosum
5. Melanocyte
10. Sweat gland
Figure 12.4. Nose, Horse. Numerous small sebaceous glands,
sweat glands, ine hairs, and the follicle of a sinus hair are
evident. The epidermis is heavily pigmented.
Figure 12.5. Nose, Horse. A melanocyte with numerous pigment
granules is located in the deep portion of the epidermis.
Surrounding cells have phagocytized melanin granules produced
Figure 12.5
X625
by melanocytes. The granules are aggregated like a cap just
obove the nucleus of some of the cells of the stratum spinosum.
INTEGUMENT
109
igure12.
x12.5
Figure 12.9
X62.5
KEY
 1. Dermal papilla
 7. Nasolabial gland 
2 Dermis
8. Stratum basale 
3. Duct
 9. Stratum corneum 
4. Epidermis 
10. Stratum spinosum
 5. Merocrine sweat gland
11. Surface groove
6. Myoepithelial cell, nucleus 
Figure 12.6. Planum Rostrale, Pig. The very thick epidermis of
the snout of the pig has low, wide elevations and an especially
thick stratum corneum. Long dermal papillae project into the
epidermis. Numerous merocrine sweat glands occur in the sub-
cutis.Hairs, which are sparse on the planum of the pig,are not
Figure 12.7
X250
shown.
1.1
Figure 12.7. Planum Rostrale, Pig. Detail of the merocrine sweat
glands. Secretory cells are either columnar or cuboidal and are
surrouncled by myoepithelial cells.
Figure 12.8. Planum Nasolabiale, Cow. The surface of the
planum of the cow is hairless and marked by grooves. Long
dermal papillae project into the thick epidermis. Glands are
abundant in the subcutis of the planum of ruminants.
Figure 12.9. Planum Nasolabiale, Cow. The tissve was cut par-
allel to the surface of the planum, so that cross sections of dermal
papillae appear in the stratum spinosum. Each papilla is sur-
rounded by cells of the stratum basale and each contains several
blood vessels.
Figure 12.8
×18
Figure 12.13
×125
KEY
1. Demmis, papillary layer
7. Keratinocyte nucleus
2. Demis, reticular layer
8. Merocrine sweat gland
3. Digital cushion
9. Pacinian corpuscle
4. Duct of sweat gland
10. Secretory acinus
5. Intercelluar bridges
11. Skeletal muscle
6. Intralobular duct
Figure 12.10. Planum Nasolabiale, Cow. During tissue process-
ing, the keratinocytes of the stratum spinosum shrink cway from
each other, but remain attached at multiple sites where desmo-
cytoplasmic connections between adiacent cells. Some ecrly
workers called these “intercellular bridges" because they were
thought to represent cytoplasmic connections between cells.
Others thought the artifacts resembled spines, hence the name 
 stratum spinosum.
Figure12.10
x360
Figure 12.1l. Planum Nasolabiale, Cow. The planum of the
cow, sheep, and goat contains many tubuloacinar serous glands.
Branches of an intralobular duct can be seen entering secretory
acini.
Figure 12.12. Digital Pad, Dog. The digital pad is hairless cnd
conical projections in the dog. Compare with Figure 12.14.
Figure 12.13. Digital Pad, Dog. Coiled merocrine sweat glands
and pacinian corpuscles among skeletal muscle and loose con-
nective tissue of the digital pad.
Figure 12.11
x250
Figure 12.12
x25
INTEGUMENT
111
Figure 12.14
X52
KEY
1. Demis, papillary layer
6. Stratum basale
2. Demmis, reticular layer
7. Stratum corneum
 3. Digital cushion 
8. Stratum granulosum 
4. Duct of sweat gland
 9. Stratum lucidum 
5. Epidermis
10. Stratum spinosum
Figure 12.14. Digital Pad, Cat. The surface of the digital pad of
the cat is smooth, lacking the conical papillae that are typical of
the dog (Figure 1 2.1 2). Portions of the excretory ducts of sweat 
glands spiral through the stratied squamous epithelium.
Figure 12.15. Digital Pad, Cat. Detail of the epidermis and
dermis shown in Figure 12.14. All hive layers of the epidermis 
Figure 12.15
× 250
are evident.
112
CHAPTER 12
5
Figure 12.16
X260
KEY
1. Dermis
4. Stratum corneum
2. Hair, x.s.
5.Stratum granulosum
 3. Stratum basale
 6. Stratum spinosum
Figure 12.16. Skin, Mid-ventral Abdomen, Dog. The epidermis
is thin and consists of Four layers. Note that only a Few layers of
cells comprise the stratum spinosum. The stratum corneum is also
relatively thin, and the keratinized cells have loosened and sepa-
rated from the surface.
Summary of the Composition of the Skin and Subcutis
skin:
A.
Epidermis: A keratinized, stratified squamous epithelium
1.
Stratum basale: A single layer of cuboidal to columnar cells that lies on the basement membrane.
2.
Stratum spinosum: A layer of variable thickness Formed of polygonal cells that become Hattened toward the surface.
3.
4.
Stratum lucidum: Thin, pale, translucent layer present in regions where the epidermis is very thick.
5.S
Stratum corneum: Outermost layer; composed of dead, keratinized squamous cells.
B. Dermis: Connective tissue below the epidermis formed of two layers
'adad poap 'supaloid sanpus sapida a ot daap snl anss apuo asol aol ioyadns olldod l
that interdigitate with the epidermis.
2. Reticular (deep) layer: Dense, irregular connective tissue.
Subcutis (Hypodermis; Superficial Fascia)
·A layer of loose connective tissue, offen rich in adipose tissue, below the skin.
 Joins the dermis of the skin to underlying structures, such as muscle and bone.
INTEGUMENT
113
5
Figure 12.17
x52
KEY
. Arrector pili muscle
8. Sebaceous gland 
 2 Common follicukr opening
 9. Skeletal muscle 
3. Demmis, deep
10. Stratum basale 
 4. Demmis, superficial
11. Stratum corneum
 5. Epidermis 
12. Stratum spinosum cell, nucleus
6. Hair
13. Subcutis
7. Hair bulb
Figure 12.17. Skin, Back, Cat. Two compound follicles are visible
in the dermisIncrnivoresthehairs ofcompound follicesmerge
at the level ofthe sebaceous glands and share a common Folliular
opening to the surface. Bits of hairs are evident in the Follicles as
Figure12.18
×125
shiny, yellow-brown structures. The crrector pill muscles of the
skin of the back are especially well developed in cats and dogs.
A space artifact separafes the subcutis from the underlying skeletal
muscle.
Figure 12.18. Skin, Caudal Abdomen, Cat. The epidermis is
extremely thin. Cells of the stratum spinosum are sparse, cnd
those of the stratumgranulosum are visible only as occasional
dark granular areas just beneath the stratum corneum.Hairs are
visible within the compound Follicles.
Figure 12.19. Skin, Back, Cat (Masson's). Portions of an arrector
pill muscle, sebaceous gland, and a hair within a Follicle.
A
Figure 12.19
x125
114
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.20
X52
KEY
1. Dermis
 5. Hair follicle
 2. Epidermis
 6. Sebaceous gland 
3. Hair
7. Sweat gland 
4. Hair bub
Figure 12.20. Skin, Neck, Horse. Simple hair Follicles occur in
the skin of noncarnivores.
INTEGUMENT
115
福
6
8
11
3
9
Figure 12.21
X360
KEY
 1. Connective tissue sheath
 7. Inner root sheath
2 Cortex, hair
8. Medulla, hair
3. Cuticle, hair
9. Outer root sheath
 4. Cuticle, inner root sheath
10. Pyknotic nucleus
 5. Demmal papilla 
11. Sweat gland 
6. Dermis
Figure 12.21. Skin, Neck, Horse. Mid-region of a longitudinal
section of a hair Follicle. Large, clear cells of the medulla of the
hair have round nuclei that become pyknotic as they progress
distally from the hair bulb. The pigment-laden cortex of the hair
is Formed from closely packed elongated cells that have become
keratinized. Scalelike, keratinized cells of the cuticle of the hair
partially overlap so that their free edges point upward. They
interlock with cells of the cuticle of the inner root sheath, whose
free edges are directed downward.
Figure 12.22. Skin, Neck, Horse. A dermal papilla projects into
the hair bulb at the base of the follicle. Cells of the cortex of the
hair are nearly obscured by pigment granules provided by mela-
nocytes of the' bulb.
Figure 12.22
×125
116
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.23
x12.5
Figure 12.24
<250
Figure 12.27
x36
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
 9. Hair 
 2. Collagenous fiber 
10. Hair bulb
3. Dartos muscle
11. Sebaceous gland 
4. Dermis
12. Stratum basale 
 5. Dermis, deep layer
13. Stratum corneum
 6. Dermis, superficial layer
14. Stratum granulosum
7. Elastic fiber
15. Stratum spinosum
 8. Epidermis 
16. Sweat gland
Figure 12.23. Skin, Dorsal Neck, Pig. Note the extremely thick 
×62.5
dermis. Sweat glands cnd adipose tissue are seen in the
subcutis.
Figure 12.24. Skin, Dorsal Neck, Pig. The epidermis and part
of the dermis are shown in detail.
Figure 12.25. Skin, Dorsal Neck, Pig (Orcein). The dermis of the
skin contains numerous branching elastic fibers. The fibers of the
supericial layer are ine, while those of the deep layer are coarse.
Figure 12.26. Skin, Back, Sheep. Various portions of numerous 
hair follicles are embedded in the thick superficial layer of the
dermis.The hair Follicles of sheep tend tobe arrangedvertically,
rather than diagonally, in the dermis. Compare with Figures
12.17 and 12.20.
Figure 12.27. Scrotum, Goat. The epidermis of the scrotum is
remarkably thin. Portfions of two simple hair follicles are located
in the dermis. Bundles of smooth muscle among fibroelastic tissue
Figure 12.26
x12.5
in the dermis comprise the tunica dartos.
INTEGUMENT
117
5
12
8
Figure12.28
x125
Figure 12.32
X250
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
11. Epidermmis, outer surface
2 Blood vessel
12. Hair follicle
3. Capillary
13. Inner root sheath
4. Connective tissue sheath
14. Medulla, hair 
5. Cortex, hair
15. Outer root sheath
6. Dermis, superficial layer
16. Primary hair
7. Duct of sweat gland 
17. Sebaceous gland 
8. Elastic cartilage
18. Smooth muscle 
9. Epidermis
19. Venule
10. Epidermis, inner surface
Figure 12.28. Scrotum, Goat. The thin epidermis and α portion
Figure 12.29
x12.5
of a hair follicle are shown in detail.
Figure 12.29. Pinna (Auricle), External Ear, Dog. A plate of
elastic cartilage is covered by the skin of the outer fconvex] and
inner (concave) surfaces of the pinna. Hair Follicles cre more 
numerous in the skin of the outer surface.
Figure 12.30. Pinna, External Ear, Dog. Clusters of compound
levels of the dermis. The cells of the cortex and medulla of the
hairs are evident in the deepest portions of the Follicles. More
supericially, the cells become keratinized and appear shiny pink
(medulla) and yellow (cortex). Several hairs have merged to share
 common Fllicle wall near the epidermis.
Figure 12.3 1. Pinna, External Ear, Dog. Detail of follicles, shown
in cross section, from the deep region of the dermis, similar to
Figure 12.30
X62.5
those in Figure 12.30.
Figure 12.32. Skin, Back, Sheep. A wool hair, shown in cross 
section, lacks a medulla.
Figure 12.31
250
118
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.35
X125
KEY
1.
 Annular sinus
 8. Hair bulb
2.Connectivetissu hth
9. Inner root sheath
3.Connective tissue sheath, outer
10. Merkel's cell
4. Endothelial cell, nucleus
11.
Quter root sheath
5. Epidermis
12.
Sebaceous gland
6. Erythrocytes
13. Sinus pad
7. Hair
14. Trabecula
Figure 12.33. Sinus Hair Follicle, l.s., Nose, Cow. The entire
length of the blood-filled sinus is crossed by numerous trabeculae
in sinus hair Follicles of ruminants, horses, and pigs.
Figure 12.34. Sinus Hair Follicle, Oblique Section, Nose, Dog.
The large sinus hair Follicle contains a blood-illed sinus, lined by
an endothelium, between the inner and outer layers of the con-
×18
nective tissue sheath. In carnivores only the lower region of the
sinus is spanned by a network of trabeculae of connective tissue.
into which protrudes a thickening of the inner connective fissue
sheath called the sinus pad.
Figure 12.35. Sinus Hair Follicle, Nose, Dog. Detail of Figure
12.34.Portion of the sinus pad, annular sinus, and trabeculated
sinus. Note the Merkel's cells, associated with tactile stimulation,
 in the external (outer] root sheath.
Figure 12.34
X36
Figure 12.36
X125
Figure 12.40
x125
KEY
1. Capillary
9. Outer root sheath
2. Duct
10. Pyknotic nucleus
 3. Follicular folds 
11. Sebaceous gland 
 4. Gland cells, surface cut 
12. Secretory portion, sweat gland
5. Hair
13. Stem cell
6. Hair follicle
14. Sweat gland, I.s.
 7. Inner root sheath
15. Sweat gland, x.s.
 8. Myoepithelial cell, nucleus 
16. Vacuolated cell
Figure 12.36. Sebaceous Gland and Hair Follicle, l.s., Llip,
Sheep.The inner root sheath forms Follicular (circular) Folds below
the entrance of sebaceous glands into the Follicle.
Figure 12.37
X62.5
Figure 12.37. Nose, Dog. Longitudinal sections of two serpentine
 sWeat glands. Their tubular sructure is evident.
Figure 12.38. Sebaceous Gland and Sweat Gland, Nose, Dog.
The secretory portion of a sweat gland, lined by cuboidal fo
columnar cells, is continuous with the bistratified, Hattened cells
of its duct. The cell types Found in the holocrine sebaceous gland
are evident: small, Hat, peripheral stem cels; maturing, round
with pyknotic nuclei.
2
Figure 12.39. Sweat Gland, Skin, Horse {Trichrome). Cross and
oblique sections of a coiled sweat gland in the dermis are lined
by cuboidal to columnar cells and surrounded by myoepithelial
cells. The solid sheet of several cells represents a surface cut
through the wall of the gland.
Figure 12.38
×250
Figure 12.40. Sweat Gland and Duct, Teat, Sheep. Low colum-
ncr secretory cells with apical blebs end abruptly where the duct
epithelium begins. Both the secretory cells and the initial segment
of the duct are surrounded by myoepithelial cells. The cytoplasm
of the myoepithelial cells appears as α pink, sometimes rippled
band.
2
Figure 12.39
x250
120
CHAPTER 12
3
Figure 12.41
x125
Figure 12.45
X25
KEY
1. Basement membrane 
8. Hair follicle
2. Clar cell
9. Myoepithelial cell,cytoplasm
3. Dark cell
10. Myoepithelial cell, nucleus, I s.
4.Dermis
11. Myoepithelial cell, nucleus, x.s.
 5. Duct of sweat gland
12. Sebaceous gland 
6. Epidermis
13. Secretory cell,nucleus
7. Hair bulb
14. Sweat gland
Figure 12.41. Sweat Gland, Teat, Sheep. The secretory cells of
13
sweat glands vary from squamous to tall columnar. They cre
squamous in this preparation, but are columnar in Figure 1 2.40.
Note that oneof thesecretoryporionsis cut fngentially,revel
ing the elongated shape of the myoepithelial cells.
Figure12.42
X250
Figure 12.42. Sweat Gland, Teat, Sheep (Silver and Eosin). The
basement membrane of a sweat gland is blackened with silver.
 Myoepithelial cells occur between fthe Hattened secretory cells and
 the ba sement membrane.
Figure 12.43. Carpal Gland, Pig. Lobules of merocrine sweat 
glands occur in the subcutaneous tissue on the medial side of the 
carpus of the pig.
Figure 12.44. Carpal Gland, Pig. Dark and clear cells of the
secretory units of these merocrine sweat glands are surrounded
by myoepithelial cells.
sebaceous glands occupy the wall of the infraorbital pouch of
sheep. Some apocrine sweat glands lie deep to the sebaceous
Figure 12.43
x12.5
glands.
Figure 12.44
×250
INTEGUMENT
121
Figure 12.46
x25
Figure 12.50
×25
KEY
1. Corpora amylacea
8. Intralobular connective tissue
2. Epidermis
 9. Intralobular duct
3. Gland 
10. Lobule
 4. Glandular epithelium 
11. Lymphatic vessel 
5. Hair follicle
12. Sebaceous gland 
6. Interlobular connective tissue
13. Secretory unit
 7. Interlobular duct 
14. Sweat gland
Figure 12.46. Inguinal Pouch, Sheep. The skin of the inguinal
pouch of sheep contains a Few hairs, sebaceous glands,and an
abundance of apocrine sweat glands.
x12.5
Figure 12.47. Mammary Gland, Inactive, Cat. Lobules of glan-
Figure 12.47
dularfissue and ducts are surrounded by fibroelastic subcutane
ous tissue. The overlying skin contains a Few hairs. Large lymphatic
vessels lie deep to the parenchyma.
Figure 12.48. Mammary Gland, Inactive, Cow. Abundant inter-
lobular connective tissue and components of the duct system cre
evident in an inactive gland. Interlobular ducts branch into the
6
lobules as intralobular ducts.
Figure 12.49. Mammary Gland, Inactive, Cow. Lobules cre
of intralobular ducts represent remnants or precursors of glandu-
lar epithelium. When these are cut in cross section, they cannot
always be distinguished from ducts.
Figure 12.50. Mammary Gland, Active, Cow. In the active
X25
gland, secretory parenchyma is well developed and connective
fissue is reduced. Compare with Figure 12.48. The lumens of the
secretory glands and ducts are filled with secretion (deep pink).
Figure 12.49
X125
122
CHAPTER 12
X125
Figure 12.55
x12.5
KEY
1. Connective tissue 
 7. Secretory cell, nucleus
2. Corpora amylacea
8. Secretory unit
3. Epidermis
 9. Smooth muscle
4. Intralobukar connective tissue
10. Sweat gland 
 5. Myoepithelial cell, nucleus
11. Teat sinus
6. Secretion
Figure 12.51. Mammary Gland, Active, Cow. A portion of a
lobule containing numerous tubuloacinar secretory units. Some of
the alveoli contain round concretions of casein and cellular debris
called corpora amylacec.
x250
Figure 12.52. Mammary Gland, Active, Cow. Many secretory
cells have basally displaced nuclei and indistinct lateral cell
borders. These cells appear pale because their cytoplasmic lipids
have been extracted. Sloughed cells, whose dark nuclei are visible 
in the lumens, are part of the secretory product. Some of the Hat
nuclei surrounding the alveoli belong to myoepithelial cells.
Figure 12.53. Teat, x.s., Dog. A portion of the teat shows numer-
ous sinuses among intermingling bundles of smooth muscle and
fibroelastic connective tissue. Nonruminants have multiple teat
sinuses and teat canals. Some glands and hairs are associated
with the skin of the teat of carnivores, horses, sheep, and goats.
Figure 12.54. Teat Sinus, X.s.,
Detail of α teat sinus of
3
composed of small secretory units, are associated with the wall
of the sinus.
Figure 12.53
x12.5
Figure 12.55. Teat Sinus, x.s., Cat. This cross section through α
teat reveals five teat sinuses. Some of these contain a secretion
that is stained pink.
Figure 12.54
x62.5
INTEGUMENT
123
Figure12.56
<125
Figure 12.59
X25
KEY
 1. Bistratified columnar epithelium 
8. Hair follicle
 2. Bistratified cuboidal epithelium 
 9. Lamina propria 
 3. Blood vessel
10. Lymphatic vessel
4. Collagenous band 
11. Sebaceous gland
5. Elastic fibers
12. Smooth muscle 
6. Epidermis
13. Sweat gland
7. Epithelium
14. Teat sinus
Figure 12.56. Teat Sinus, X.s., Horse (Orcein). A band of col-
logenous fibers lies between the epithelium and the underlying
fibroelastic connective tissue.
Figure 12.57
x12.5
Figure 12.57. Teat Sinus, X.s., Cow. The mucosa of the teat sinus
developed,
longitudinally oriented blood vessels (cut in x.s.),
bundles of smooth muscle, ibroelastic fissue, cand lymphatic
vessels. The outer layer, the skin surface, is not shown.
Figure 12.58. Teat Sinus, x.s., Cow. The teat sinus is lined by α
bistratified cuboidal to columnar epithelium.
Figure 12.59. Teat Sinus, X.s., Sheep, Male. The skin of the teat
contains hairs, sebaceous glands, and sweat glands, except in
the cow and pig. Compare with Figure 12.63.
Figure 12.58
×180
KEY
1. Bistratified columnar epithelium 
 7. Lamina propria
 2. Bistratified cuboidal epithelium 
 8. Smooth muscle
3. Blood vessel
9. Stratied squcamous epithelium
4. Dermis
10. Stratum basale
5. Epidermis
11.Stratum corneum
 6. Epithelium 
12. Stratum spinosum
Figure 12.60. Teat Sinus and Canal, Junction, X.s., Horse.
Patches of the bistratified epithelium (columnar and cuboidall of
the teat sinus intermingle with the stratiied squamous epithelium 
of the teat canal.
X62.5
Figure 12.61. Teat Canal, x.s., Cow {Trichrome). The keratinized
stratified squamous lining ofthe teat canal is encircled by a papil-
lated layer (green) of connective tissue and bundles of smooth
muscle (pale yellow).
Figure 12.62. Teat Canal, x.s., Cow (Trichrome). Detail of the
thick, keratinized, stratihied squamous epithelium and the sur-
rounding connective tissue and smooth muscle shown in Figure
12.61.
Figure 12.63. Skin Surface, Teat, x.s., Cow (Trichrome). The skin
surface of the teat of the cow and pig is hairless.
Figure 12.61
x12.5
igure12.62
X62.5
Figure 12.63
×25
INTEGUMENT
125
10
Figure 12.64
×26
KEY
1. Clkw fold
 7. Limiting furrow
2 Dermis
8. Merocrine sweat gland
 3. Digital pad 
 9. Middle phalanx 
 4. Distal phalanx 
10. Sole 
 5. Epidermis, digital pad
11. Wall
6. Laminae
Figure 12.64. Developing Claw, I.s., Fetus, Dog. The claw of
and a ventral sole of hard keratin that cover the distal phalanx.
10
The claw Fold is the skin that covers the wall at the base of the
claw. Endochondral bone formation has begun in the phalanges
Figure 12.65
x12.5
of this specimen.
Figure 12.65. Sole of Claw and Digital Pad, Dog. The limiting 
Uurrow separates the digital pad from the sole of the claw.
11
Figure 12.66. Apex of Claw, I.s., Dog. The dermis of the wall
bears laminae (lamellae) at the apex of the claw.
10
Figure 12.66
x12.5
126
CHAPTER 12
KEY
1. Demal papilla 
6. Stratum basale
2. Dermis
7. Stratum corneum
3. Hair follicle 
 8. Stratum granulosum
 4. Hom tubule
 9. Stratum spinosum
 5. Intertubular horn
Figure 12.67. Horn, Cow. Horns of ruminants are composed of
bone of the cornual process covered by a dermis and epidermis.
The epidermis with a thick stratum corneum of hard keratin (horn)
and a portion ofthe underlying papillated dermis cre shown here.
(Photograph of a histologic section borrowed from the College of
Figure 12.67
X12.5
Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 12.68. Chestmut, Horse. Junction of the hairy skin and
dhestnut. Chestmuts (and ergots} of horses cre keratinized thicken-
ings of the epidermis composed of horn tubules (tubular horn]
and intertubular horn. Horn tubules arise from the cells of the
stratum basale that cover the apex and sides of dermal papillae.
Intertubular (interpapillary) horn arises from the cells of the
stratum basale that are located between the bases of the dermal
papillae. Only α small portion of the very thick stratum corneum 
of ithe chestnut is shown.
Figure 12.69. Chestnut, Horse. Detail of a portion of the
epidermis.
Figure 12.70. Chesinut, Horse. The section was cut parallel to
the surface of the chestnut at the level of the stratum corneum.
Horm tubules appear in cross section between intertubular horn.
Figure 12.68
x12.5
Figure12.69
X62.5
Figure 12.70
×125
INTEGUMENT
127
THE EQUINE HOOF
widens at the heels to form the bulbs. The perioplic dermis
is characterized by the presence of fine, short, papillae (1
The equine hoof is the keratinized portion of the epider-
to 2 mm).
mis that covers the distal end of the digit. The various
 The germinal cells of the coronary epidermis form
regions of the hoof are depicted in Figures 12.71 and
horn tubules (tubular horn) and intertubular horn that
12.72. The perioplic, coronary, and laminar regions com-
extend from the coronary region to the ground surface,
prise the wall (the portion of the hoof that is visible when
forming the bulk of the wall of the hoof, the stratum
the digit is on the ground). The wall turns in ventrally at
medium. The horn tubules are orientated at an angle to
an acute angle to form the bars. The sole, which forms
the ground. They parallel the external surface of the hoof.
most of the ventral surface of the hoof, is attached to the
 The coronary dermis is marked by long dermal papillae (4
 bars and the adjacent, inner border of the wall. The frog.
to 6 mm).
a caudal, edge-shaped mass, lies between the bars. The
 The laminar epidermis of the wall is in the form of
apex of the frog merges with the sole cranially. The bulbs
laminae (lamellae) that are arranged parallel to the horn
are the convex protuberances located above and behind
tubules of the stratum medium. They extend from the deep
the frog.
edge of the coronary region to the sole. Each primary
 The keratinized tissue comprising the hoof is in the
lamina bears numerous secondary laminae (not present in
form of tubular, intertubular, and laminar horn (Figures
the hooves of pigs and ruminants) that project at right
12.75, 12.76, 12.79, and 12.80). The underlying, living
angles along its length. The primary epidermal laminae are
layers of the epidermis include the stratum spinosum,
keratinized and fused with the inner portion of the stratum
whose cells are undergoing keratinization, and the stratum
 medium of the wall. The secondary epidermal laminae
basale. The stratum basale borders on the dermis (corium),
consist of a core of cells of the stratum spinosum bordered
which is rich in blood vessels and nerves. The dermis may
by cells of the stratum basale. The epidermal laminae form
be papillated or laminated, depending on whether
the
the stratum internum of the wall of the hoof. They inter-
overlying epidermis contains tubular or laminated horn,
digitate with primary and secondary dermal laminae of the
respectively. The dermis blends with underlying structures
laminar dermis. This extensive interdigitation serves to
such as the subcutaneous cushions and the periosteum of
suspend the third phalanx from the hoof. At the ground
the third phalanx.
surface, the junction of the epidermal laminae of the wall
 The perioplic epidermis forms a band of soft, nonpig-
(unpigmented) with the sole is called the white line.
mented tubular horn. It merges with the epidermis of the
The tubular and intertubular horns of the bulbs, sole,
skin above and extends downward as a thin, glossy, flaky
and frog are softer than that of the wall of the hoof. The
layer of keratin that forms the outer coating of the wall of
 dermis of these regions, like that of the periople and coro-
the hoof, called the stratum tectorium (stratum externum).
nary region, is papillated. The epidermis and dermis of the
This layer is well developed in young animals, but tends
bars are laminated, being continuous with the laminar
to be worn away in older horses. The perioplic epidermis
region of the wall.
128
CHAPTER 12
Periople
Epidermal laminae
Coronary region
Sole
White line .
Bar
Bulb
Frog
Periople
Coronary region
Figure 1 2.71. Hoof, Horse. The various regions ofthe hoofare shown. The inner surface ofthe periople and
coronary region and that of the sole, frog, and bulbs are stippled in the drawing. In the intact toe, dermal
papillae extend into the Funnel- shaped depressions whose openings are represented by the stipples.
Sole
Frog
Laminae of wall
Bar
Bulb
White line-
Stratum medium,
deepunpigmented layer
Figure 12.72. Sole, Hoof, Horse. The sole forms most of the ventral surface of the hoof. It is bordered
by the bars, the apex of the frog, and the inner border of the wall of the hoof.
INTEGUMENT
129
Figure 12.73
x12.5
Figure 12.77
×25
KEY
1. Bone, P3
10.Hairllice, developing
 2. Cartilage, developing P3
11. Hom tubule
3. Coronary dermis
12. Hom tubule, cortex
4. Coronary epidermis
13. Hom tubule, medulla
5. Demal papilla 
14. Intertubular horn 
6. Demmis, sole
15. Laminar dermis
 7. Dermis, wall
16. Perioplic dermis 
8. Epidemmis, sole
17. Perioplic epidermis
 9. Epidermis, wall
Figure 12.73. Developing Hoof, l.s., Fetus, Horse. The regions
that Form the three layers of the hoof wall are apparent: the
Figure 12.74
x25
perioplic, coronary, and laminar regions.
Figure 12.74. Developing Hoof, Coronary Region, l.s., Fetus,
Horse. Portion of coronary epidermis and coronary dermis, later
in cevelopment than in Figure 12.73, showing tubular and inter-
tubular horn.The medulla and cortex of the horn tubules are
Formed from the cells of the stratum basale that cover the fip and
13
the sides of dermal papillae, respectively. Intertubular hom is
Formed by cells of the stratum basale that are located between
the bases of the dermal papillae. (Photograph of a histologic
section borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa 
State University.)
Figure 12.75. Developing Hoof, Coronary Region, l.s., Fetus,
13
Horse. Detail of Figure 1 2.74, showing two hom tubules in lon-
gifudinal section. (Photograph of a histologic section borrowed
from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 12.75
x125
Figure 12.76. Hoof, Coronary Region, x.s., Horse. Dermal
papilae and horn tubules of tubular horn. (Photograph of a
histologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.1
Figure 12.77. Developing Hoof, Wall and Sole, x.s., Fetus,
Horse. The dermis of the wall is laminated, while that of the sole
is papillated.
5
Figure 12.76
x12.5
130
CHAPTER 12
KEY
1. Basal cell
 6. Epidermal lamina, primary
2. Blood vessel
 7. Epidermal lamina, secondary
3. Bone, P3
 8. Hom tubule
4. Demmal lamina, primary
 9. Laminar dermis 
 5. Demmal lamina, secondary
10. Stratum medium
Figure 12.78. Developing Hoof, Wall, x.s., Fetus, Horse. Detoil
of Figure 12.77. The epidermal laminae, at this fime, consist
0]
mal laminae have begun to Form secondary laminae.The primary
and secondary dermal lamince are extensions of the laminar
dermis.
Figure 12.78
x125
Figure 12.79. Hoof, Laminar Region, x.s., Horse. Hom tubules
of the stratum medium are seen in cross section. Primary and
secondary epidermal laminae of the stratum internum interdigitate 
with the laminar dermis, which anchors the third phalanx to the
wall of the hoof. Epidermal laminae, which are long ridges,
appear Featherlike in cross section. (Photograph of a histologic
section borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa
State University.)
Figure 12.80. Hoof, Laminar Region, X.s., Horse. Primary epi-
dermal laminae of the stratum internum, continuous with the
stratum medium, bear secondary epidermal laminae. These inter-
digitate with primary and secondary dermal laminae. The second-
ary epidermal laminae and the dermal laminae comprise the
sensitive laminae. Nuclei of the basal cels appear αs small dark
spots along the periphery of secondary epidermal laminae.
(Photograph of a histologic section borrowed from the College of
Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 12.79
X12.5
6
Figure 12.80
X90
INTEGUMENT
131
Figure 12.81
×25
Figure 12.85
x250
KEY
1. Axial blood vessel
10. Feather muscle
 2 Barbs, pigmented 
11. Feather pulp
3. Corneous cells
12. Feather sheath
4. Corneous connecdtion
13. Horn tubule
 5. Dermal papilla 
14. Intertubukar horn
6. Dermis
15. Melanocyte
 7. Epidermal collar 
16. Stack of nuclei
8. Epidermis
17. Stratum corneum
 9. Feather follicle 
18. Stratum germinativum
Figure 12.81. Hoof, Sole, Oblique Section, Horse. Dermal papil-
Figure 12.82
x125
lae and horn tubules of the sole are shown. (Photograph of a
histologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.
Figure 12.82. Skin, Neck, Chicken. The epidermis of Feathered
skin is very thin and composed of a stratum germinativum and
stratum corneum.The layersof the stratumgerminativum are
evident in Figure 12.92. Nuclei of the epidermoal cells are often
organized into stacks perpendicular to the surface. Abundant
small blood vessels appecr in the superficial region of the dermis.
Figure 12.83. Feather Follicle, Skin, Neck, Chicken. Oblique
section through the basal region of a Follicle with a developing
Feather. An epidermal collar surrounds the dermal papilla. The
upper portion of the dermal papilla blends with the Feather pulp.
Figure 12.84. Skin, Chicken. Oblique sections of developing
Figure 12.83
X62.5
 contour Feathers.
Figure 12.85. Skin, Chicken. Oblique section of a developing
contour feather. Melanocytes lie among cells of the barb. Barbule
cells, beginning with the outermost ones, receive pigment from
the processes of the melanocytes.
6
Figure 12.84
x25
132
CHAPTER 12
KEY
1. Air space
 7. Feather pulp
2. Barbules 
8. Feather sheath
3. Calamus (quill
 9. Stratum comeum, follicle 
4. Cells of barb stem
10. Stratum comeum, skin
5. Dermis
11. Stratum gemminativum, flidle 
6. Feather muscle
12. Stratum geminativum, skin
Figure 12.86. Skin, Chicken. Longitudinal section of a contour
Feather showing several developing barbs, later in development
than in Figure 12.85. The pale, cuboidal cells at the base of each
barb form the stem of the barb.
Figure 12.87. Skin, Chicken. Portion of contour Feather Follicle,
Figure 12.86
x125
x.s., at level of calamus (quill. Note that feather pulp has been 
replaced by an air space.
Figure 12.88. Skin, Chicken. Cross section of a contour feather
 showing numerous barbs.
Figure 12.87
×125
1+
Figure 12.88
X90
INTEGUMENT
133
Figure 12.92
X250
KEY
1. Basal layer
10. Follice, contour feather
 2 Calamus (quillj
11. Follicle, filoplume feather
 3. Demmis, central layer
12. Intermediate layer
13. Mucous connective tissue
 5. Elastic tendon
14. Sinus capillary
6. Endothelial cell, nucleus
15. Stratum corneum
7. Epidermis
16. Stratum germinativum, skin 
8. Erythrocyte 
17. Transitional layer
9. Feather muscle
0
Figure 12.89. Skin, Eyelid, Chicken. Feather follicles, X.s. The
Figure 12.89
x90
Follicle wall of the finy filoplume feather is relatively thick. A
leather muscle attaches to the sheath of connective tissue of the
Follicle of a contour Feather by an elastic tendon.
3
Figure 12.90. Watfle, x.s., Rooster. Numerous sinus capillaries
in the superficial layer of the dermis impart a red color to the
wattle (and comb) when filled with blood. Mucous connective
fissue of the intermediate layer of the dermis surrounds the central
layer of dense connective tissue.
Figure 12.91. Comb, Rooster. The point of a comb is similar in
of ithe central layer of the dermis arise from the periosteum of the
skull and carry vessels and nerves to the extremifies of the comb.
These vessels of the comb are shown in Figure I2.92.
Figure 12.92. Comb, Rooster. Portion of epidermis and superfi-
Figure 12.90
x12.5
cial dermis. The stratum corneum and layers of the stratum ger-
minativum (basal, intermediate, and transitional  layers)
are
evident. The lower ends of the cells of the basal layer bulge into
4
the dermis, so that the epidermal-dermal boundary is uneven.
Numerous anastomosing, blood-illed sinus capillaries in the
-oa up-id Aq paull ano sp ay jo a joyadns
thelial cells.
3
Figure 12.91
x12.5
134
CHAPTER 12
9
21
4
20
Figure 12.93
X90
Figure 12.97
x25
KEY
1.Adipose tissue
12. Merkel's cell
2 Blood Vessel
13. Mucous connective tissue
3. Bone
14. Oral cavity
7
4. Dermal papilla
15. Palatine ridge
 5. Dermis, central layer 
16. Periosteum
11
6. Dermis, intermediate layer
17. Sinus capillary
 7. Dermis, superficicl layer
18. Sinus capillaries
8. Epidermal peg
19. Stack of nuclei
9. Epidermis
 20. Stratum corneum
10. Fibroblast
 21. Stratum germinativum
 11. Herbst corpuscle
22. Tomial edge
Figure 12.93. Comb, Hen. The comb of a laying hen, compared
Figure12.94
X12.5
with that of a rooster, contains less mucous connective tissue and
more dense connective tissue in the intermediate layer, as well as
20
Fewer and smaller sinus capillaries in the superficial layer of the
dermis (Figure 12.94).
Figure 12.94. Comb, Hen. Detail of the epidermis and a portion
of the dermis in Figure 12.93.Fewer and smaller sinus capillaries
are in the superficial layer of the cermis of the comb of the laying
25
hen as compared with that of the rooster. Note the arrangemenf
of the nuclei of epidermal cells into stacks.
Figure 12.95. Comb, Hen. Numerous Merkel's cells are located
along the inner surface of the epidermis. These cells are associ-
cted with tactile nerve endings.
Figure 12.96. Upper Beak, x.s., Chicken. One side of the upper
beak is shown. The bone of the premaxilla is covered by a peri-
Figure12.95
x12.5
osteum, dermis, and epidermis with a thick layer of hard keratin.
The dermis of the lateral surface of the upper beck often contains
Herbst corpuscles; one corpuscle is shown here. See Figure 9.35
For detail of this corpuscle. Dermal papillae of the lateral surface
diminish medially. The lower beak slips inside the upper beak
-11
between the palatine ridge and the stratum comeum of the medial
5
surhace.
20
21
Figure 12.97. Upper Beak, x.s., Chicken. Detail of dermis and
epicermis of the tomial edge of Figure 1 2.96. Cells of the stratum
20
basale vary in height and width, so that intermittent groups of
14
tall, slender cells Form epidermal pegs between which project
dermal papillae.
22
Figure 12.96
x250
INTEGUMENT
135
Figure 12.98
x25
Figure 12.102
×25
KEY
1. Adipose tissue, subcutis
5. Stratum corneum
2. Dermis
6. Stratum germinativum
3. Keratin, hard
7. Sulcus
 4. Keratin, soft 
Figure 12.98. Spur, Hen. The spur cap consists of an extremely
thick stratum comeum of hard keratin.
Figure 12.99. Scutes, l.s., Anterior Metatarsus, Chicken. Scutes
are large scales that are covered by hard keratin. Their region of
overlap, shown here, Forms a sulcus lined by soft keratin.
Figure 12.100. Scutes, l.s., Anterior Metatarsus, Chicken. The
Figure 12.99
x250
region of overlap of two scutes shows the transition from the hard
keratin to the deeper-staining, soft keratin of the sulcus.
Figure 12.101. Reticukate Scale, X.s., Digit, Chicken. The hard
keratin of the stratum corneum covers the outer surface and lines 
the sulci of these small scales from the lateral metatarsus.
Figure 12.102. Digital Pad, Chicken. A thick keratinized epithe-
lium, α dermis, and a thick cushion of adipose tissue in the
subcutis characterize the digital pad.
Figure12.100
X12.5
Figure 12.101
X62.5
136
CHAPTER 12
Figure 12.103
x12.5
Figure 12.107
x250
12
KEY
13
1. Bone, distal phalanx
8. Multilocular fat cell, nucleus
2 Capsule of connective tissue
9. Sebaceous zone
3. Dermis
10. Stratum germinativum
10
 4. Dorsal plate, claw
11. Tendon 
5. Footpad
12. Unguinal scale, dorsal surface
6. Glycogen zone
 13. Unguinal scale, ventral surface
7. Lobe, lumen 
14. Ventral plate, claw
Figure
12.103. Mulilocular Fat, Digital Pad, (
Chicken.
Multilocular acipocytes, containing numerous lipid vacuoles and
11
α central nucleus, are common in the subcutis of the chicken.
Figure 12.104
×62.5
Figure 12.104. Claw, l.s., Chicken. The doted line indicates the
approximate location of the drawing (cross section of the claw
shown in Figure 12.105.
Figure 12.105. Claw, Base, X.s., Chicken. The region of the base
of the claw indicated with a dotted line in Figure 1 2.104 is rep-
ump s ui us ss ui psl
Figure 12.106. Claw, Base, X.s., Chicken. Compare this photo
micrograph with Figures 12.104 and 12.105. The free edge of
10
the dorsal, unguinal scale (scute type) overlaps the base of the
claw, so that a cross section reveals a dorsal and ventral surface
of the scale. The soff keratin of the ventral surface of the scale
abuts the dorsal plate of hard keratin of the base of the claw. The
dorsal plate curves ventrally over the bone of the distal phalanx.
11
Figure 12.107. Uropygial Gland, I.s., Chicken. A portion of one
lobe of this bilobed holocrine gland shows branched tubular
Figure 12.105
x25
glands surrounded by a capsule of connective tissue.Each tubular
2
gland is composed of a peripheral, sebaceous zone and an inner,
glycogen zone. The later communicates with the lumen of
The lobe.
Figure 12.106
x12.5
INTEGUMENT
137
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
 8. Intemmediate cell 
2. Basal cell, nucleus
9. Isthmus 
3. Central layer
10. Lobe, lumen 
4. Epidermis
11. Primary duct
 5. Feather follicle
12. Sebaceous zone
6. Gland, lumen
13. Smooth muscle 
7. Glycogen zone
11
10
Figure 12.108. Uropygial Gland, I.s., Chicken. The lumen of α
lobe communicates with a primary duct, which passes through
the isthmus toward the papilla of the gland.
re 12.108
x12.5
Figure 12.109. Uropygial Gland, l.s., Chicken. The two primary
ducts pass through the papilla (nipple). Their openings (not
shown] onto the surface are surrounded by feathers.
Figure 12.1l0. Sebaceous Zone, Uropygial Gland, Chicken.
Portions of tubular glands are shown in cross section. The basal
layer of the glandular epithelium is represented by the oval toHat
nuclei of the small basal cells. A single layer of acidophilic and
central (transitional) layer accumulate lipid, hypertrophy, and
degenerate toward the luminal surface.
Figure 12.lll. Glycogen Zone, Uropygial Gkand, Chicken.
Portions of tubular glands are shown in cross section. Intermediate
cells, with an acidophilic and grainy cytoplasm, Form a thick layer
in the glycogen zone. The pale cells of the central layer are less
numerous. Compare with Figure 12.110.
Figure 12.109
x12.5
8
Figure12.110
x250
6
Figure 12.111
x250
138
CHAPTER 12
13
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
MAMMALS
he digestive tract extends from the mouth to the anus. Generally, its wall is com-
 posed of an outer serosa (or an adventitia), muscularis externa, submucosa, and
inner mucosa. The mucosa consists of an inner epithelium, a middle lamina
 propria, and an outer muscularis mucosae. A muscularis mucosae is absent from the
mouth, pharynx, portions of the esophagus, and the rumen. The mouth lacks a submu-
cosa and muscularis externa.
From the lips through the nonglandular stomach, the epithelium of the mucosa is
stratified squamous. Among other places the epithelium is keratinized on the dental pad,
surface of the tongue, hard palate, cheek, and the nonglandular stomach of ruminants,
horses, and pigs. The epithelium of the mucosa in the glandular stomach, the small
intestine, and most of the large intestine is simple columnar; in the anal canal it is strati-
fied squamous.
 From the mouth through the esophagus, the mucosa is moistened by the secretions
(mucous or serous) of various glands, including the major salivary glands. Surface
mucous cells and mucous neck cells of the stomach, and goblet cells of the small and
large intestines also contribute lubricating secretions.
Tongue
 The tongue has various small outgrowths, papillae, located primarily on its upper
surface. These vary considerably in size and appearance. Some (fliform) have threadlike
projections or bear spines. Some are cushion-shaped (circumvallate, fungiform), while
others (foliate) take the form of a succession of folds. Taste buds occur in the epithelium
of circumvallate, foliate, and fungiform papillae.
139
Oropharynx
readily visible on gross examination of the mucosa and are
distinguishable histologically. The stomach of the cat has
The oropharynx is lined by a stratified squamous epithe-
a thick layer of connective tissue between the base of the
lium and contains mucous glands, except in carnivores,
glands and the muscularis mucosae, called the stratum
where the glands are mixed. A muscularis externa of skel-
compactum. This may be capped by a layer of fibroblasts,
etal muscle is surrounded by an adventitia.
the stratum granulosum. The combination of these cells
and the stratum compactum is called the lamina subglan-
dularis. The latter may be absent in dogs. A submucosa,
Esophagus
muscularis externa of smooth muscle, and serosa complete
the wall of the stomach.
Throughout most of its length, the esophagus is surrounded
externally by an adventitia. The muscularis externa varies
in composition. In the dog it is composed of skeletal muscle
throughout its length, except in the vicinity of the stomach,
Intestines
where skeletal muscle is replaced by smooth muscle. In
The intestines of mammals consist of a small intestine
ruminants the entire muscularis externa is comprised of
(duodenum, jejunum, and ileum) and a large intestine
skeletal muscle. In the horse and cat a switch from skeletal
(cecum, colon, rectum, and anal canal). In both the small
to smooth muscle occurs in the caudal third of the esopha-
and large intestine, the epithelium is simple columnar with
gus, whereas in the pig the change occurs just cranial to
a striated border. Goblet cells occur among the columnar
the diaphragm.
cells. The former increase in number from anterior to
The mucosa of the esophagus is lined by stratified
 posterior, with the greatest number occurring in the large
Squamous epithelium. The longitudinally arranged smooth
intestine.
muscle of the esophageal muscularis mucosae varies in
amount from anterior to posterior It is in the form of
isolated bundles anteriorly and a continuous sheet poste-
Small Intestine
riorly in the cat, horse, and ruminant. In the dog and pig
Villi are confined to the small intestine in mammals. They
it is absent anteriorly and appears as a continuous sheet
are short and thick in ruminants but long and slender in
posteriorly.
carnivores. At the bases of the villi are invaginations of the
Mucous or mixed glands occur in the submucosa of
epithelium, the crypts of Lieberkihn (intestinal glands).
the esophagus. In the cat, horse, and ruminant, glands
Replacement of the mucosal epithelium occurs by cell divi-
occur only at the junction of the pharynx and esophagus.
sion, primarily within the crypts. A muscularis mucosae,
 In the pig, they occur anteriorly, diminish in the mid-
consisting of two layers of smooth muscle, separates the
region, and are sparse caudally. In the dog, they occupy
crypts from the underlying submucosa. The latter is formed
the entire length of the esophagus and extend into the
from loose connective tissue in the horse, ruminant, and
stomach for a short distance.
pig. In contrast, it is composed of moderately dense con-
nective tissue in carnivores. A lamina subglandularis may
be present in the intestine of carnivores. The remainder of
Stomach
the wall of the intestine is comprised of a muscularis
externa of smooth muscle and a serosa.
The horse, ruminant, and pig have a nonglandular fore-
Compound, tubuloacinar Brinner's glands (duodenal
stomach and a glandular stomach. In ruminants, the fore-
glands, submucosal glands) are mucous glands occurring
stomach is divisible into a rumen, reticulum, and omasum.
within the submucosa and often within the lamina propria
The glandular stomach of ruminants is the abomasum. The
of the duodenum. In carnivores, sheep, and goats, they are
cat and dog have a glandular stomach, but lack a fore-
limited to the initial or mid-region of the duodenum; in
stomach. In all of these animals the glandular stomach
horses, pigs, and cows, they extend into the jejunum.
consists of cardiac, fundic, and pyloric gland regions. The
s  de 
d au q le u s aaea si uoa pue sepes
as
short distance. Aggregations of lymphatic nodules,
The epithelium of the glandular stomach invaginates
Peyer's patches, are present in the lamina propria and
into the lamina propria, forming tubular structures called
submucosa of the small intestine, especially the ileum.
gastric pits (foveolae). Depressions of the mucosa known
as gastric furrows are also present.
Various tubular glands empty into the bottom of the
Large Intestine
gastric pits. Mucous glands with occasional parietal cells
The mucosa of the large intestine presents a flat surface.
are the principal type found in the cardiac gland region. In
Villi are absent. Crypts are longer than in the small intes-
the fundic gland region, glands are constructed mostly of
tine. Flat bands, taenia coli, consisting of longitudinally
parietal and chief cell, which secrete hydrochloric acid
arranged smooth muscle and elastic fbers, occur in the
 and pepsinogen, respectively. The glands of the pyloric
colon of horses and pigs. Similar structures, taenia ceci,
 ym ad s a jo a are an p
occur in the cecum. The rectum terminates at the anal
spersed parietal cells.
canal, which is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium.
 In carnivores, the mucosa of the fundic gland region
The epithelium is nonkeratinized in the anterior portion of
is separated into an adoral, narrow, and thin light zone,
the canal and keratinized in the posterior portion, which
and an aboral, wide, and thick dark zone. These zones are
is continuous with the hairy skin. Tubuloacinar anal glands
140
CHAPTER 13
Occur in the submucosa and muscularis of the anal canal
(pancreatic islets), are scattered among the secretory units.
in carnivores and pigs. Circumanal glands occur in the
Tubuloacinar units drain into long, narrow intercalated
subcutis around the anus of the dog. The upper portion of
ducts, which are lined by elongated cells that present a
these glands is sebaceous, whereas the lower portion is
cuboidal
appearance
when
 sectioned   transversely.
 nonsebaceous. The cells of the latter resemble hepatocytes.
Intercalated ducts communicate directly with interlobular
Accordingly, the nonsebaceous region is often called a
 ducts. Striated (secretory) ducts are not present. Unlike
hepatoid gland.
salivary glands, myoepithelial cells are lacking around the
Paired anal sacs occur lateral to and below the anus
secretory units. Pacinian corpuscles are commonly found
of carnivores. Each is lined by a keratinized, stratified
within the connective tissue of the pancreas of dogs and
squamous epithelium and is located between the inner
cats.
smooth muscle of the internal anal sphincter and the outer
skeletal muscle of the external anal sphincter. The excre-
tory duct of each gland opens into the keratinized portion
of the anal canal. Glands of the anal sac are apocrine
CHICKEN
tubular in the dog. In the cat, both apocrine tubular glands
 In the chicken, the salivary glands are all of the mucous
and sebaceous glands surround the anal sac.
variety. They are located in the roof and floor of the oral
cavity, tongue, and pharynx. Taste buds are present but
Liver
s   e  P a  
glands at the base of the tongue and the pharynx.
The liver is a large, lobed gland. Each lobe is covered by
a mesothelium, beneath which is a thin connective tissue
layer, the capsule of Glisson. Each lobe is divided into
Esophagus
numerous classic lobules. These consist of sinusoids and
 of plates of parenchyma cells, hepatocytes, radially orga-
The esophagus has the usual seven layers. It is lined by a
thick, nonkeratinized, stratifed squamous epithelium. The
nized about a central vein. Lobules are indistinctly sepa-
rated from one another in all animals except the pig, in
muscularis externa is composed of smooth muscle along
which an abundance of connective tissue between lobules
the entire length of the esophagus. Mucous glands occur
clearly identifies their boundaries. Portal tracts (areas)
in the lamina propria, but are lacking throughout most of
the crop, which is a caudal diverticulum located approxi-
occur at the interstices of three or more lobules. Each tract
mately two-thirds of the way down the esophagus. The
contains one or more branches of a portal vein, hepatic
crop has a structure identical to the rest of the esophagus,
artery, bile ductule, and lymphatic vessel. These various
 components are supported by a framework of connective
but it lacks mucous glands.
tissue.
 Bile, secreted by hepatocytes, enters tiny bile canaliculi
Stomach
from which it flows into the canals of Hering, located close
to each portal tract. The canals unite with the bile ductule
The stomach of the chicken consists of a glandular pro-
of a portal tract. Bile ductules lead into bile ducts. The
ventriculus and a muscular ventriculus (gizzard). The
epithelium of bile ductules is simple cuboidal, whereas that
mucosa of the proventriculus is thrown into folds (plicae).
of the bile ducts is simple columnar. Goblet cells occur in
Depressions between the folds are called sulci. The epithe-
the largest bile ducts.
lium is simple columnar except at the base of the sulci,
where it is cuboidal. The wall of the proventriculus consists
of large, compound, tubular glands. The secretory cells,
Gallbladder
which are cuboidal to low columnar, produce both pep-
The gallbladder is a storage depot for bile. Its mucosa is
sinogen and hydrochloric acid, thus combining the func-
thrown into numerous folds when the bladder is con-
tion of mammalian chief and parietal cells. Each gland
tracted. When it is distended, they mostly disappear. The
opens to the lumen of the stomach through a conical
simple columnar epithelial lining has a striated border.
papilla.
Goblet cells have been reported in the epithelium of the
 The ventriculus is a highly muscular grinding organ.
cow. They have also been observed in the goat. Mucous,
It is lined by an epithelium that invaginates into the lamina
serous, or mixed glands are often seen in the wall of the
 propria, forming elongated pits, each of which bears ter-
gallbladder of ruminants. The smooth muscle of the mus-
minal tubular gastric glands. Cells of the latter secrete a
cularis is arranged circularly (mostly oblique, according to
thick, horny material. Although keratin-like, this sub-
some) for the most part. The gallbladder is absent in the
stance, usually called keratinoid, is not chemically equiva-
horse.
lent to keratin. It forms the tough inner lining, about 1 mm
thick, of the ventriculus.
Pancreas
Intestine
 The pancreas consists of numerous tubuloacinar secretory
units, which form the exocrine component of the organ.
The intestine of the chicken is similar in structure through-
Clusters of epithelial cells, the endocrine islets of Langerhans
out its length. It consists of a duodenum, jejunum, ileum,
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
141
and large intestine. A pair of blind, elongated ceca join the
in the chicken. In contrast, those of mammals are one cell
intestine at the junction of the ileum and large intestine.
wide.
The terminal end of the large intestine joins the coprodeum
of the cloaca. Villi are present throughout the small and
large intestines. They are longest in the duodenum, but 
Gallbladder
gradually shorten and thicken caudally. In the coprodeum,
The gallbladder of the chicken is similar to that of the
they are stumpy and rounded. Villi also are present in the
ceca, becoming flattened toward the blind end. Crypts of
 mammal. The mucosa is lined by a simple columnar epi-
Lieberkihn (intestinal glands) are short and open between
thelium and is strongly folded into villuslike projections
the villi, as in mammals. Although the wall of the intestine
when contracted.
of the chicken is similar to that of the mammal, the abse nce
of duodenal glands and an extremely thin submucosa in
the chicken are notable differences.
Pancreas
The pancreas of the chicken resembles that of the mammal.
The exocrine portion is tubuloacinar. Lobulation is indis-
Liver
tinct because of the lack of interlobular connective tissue.
As in mammals, the liver is covered by a mesothelium
Islets of Langerhans are abundant. Two types of islets,
beneath which is a layer of connective tissue, Glisson's 
alpha and beta, can be easily recognized. Columnar alpha
capsule. Lobes of the liver are subdivided into numerous
cells characterize the alpha islet. Polygonal beta cells are
lobules indistinctly separated from one another. The radi-
 the principal cells of the beta islets. Alpha islets produce
ating plates of hepatocytes in each lobule are two cells wide
glucagon, whereas beta islets form insulin.
Word Roots
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
Circum
Around
 Circumanaf glands occur in the subcutis
around the anus of the dog.
Fili
A thread
Filiform papillce of the tongue have
hreadlike, keratinized projections.
Gast
Stomach
The epithelium of the glandular stomach
 invaginates, forming goastric pits.
Hepat
Liver
Lobules of the liver contcin plates of
hepatocytes.
Lamina
A thin plate,
The lcamina subgkandularis is a layer
sheet, layer 
below the glands in the lamina propria.
Villi
 Shaggy hairs
 Numerous tiny fingerlike projections, the
vilf, project into the lumen of the small
intestine, giving it a shaggy appearance.
142
CHAPTER 13
19
2
Figure 13.1
x25
Figure 13.5
x12.5
KEY
1. Alveolar bone
11. Mucous acinus
2 Connective tissue, papilla of 
12. Outer enamel epithelium 
3. Dental lamina 
13. Sebaceous gland
 4. Dental papilla 
14. Serous acinus
 5. Dental sac 
15. Serous demilune
6. Duct
16. Skeletal muscle 
7. Hair follicle
17. Stelate reticulum
 8. Inner enamel epithelium 
18. Stratified squamous epithelium,
9. Intralobular duct
keratinized
10. Labial gland
19. Stratum granulosum 
Figure 13.1. Lip, Sheep. The section was taken through the junc-
Figure13.2
X25
tion of the hairy and nonhairy portions of the lip. The stratum
p,
but disappears at the junction with the nonhairy portion of
the lip. Portions of hair follicles are present.
Figure 13.2. Lip, Sheep. Oral surface of the lip with mixed labial
glands among the skeletal muscle.
Figure 13.3. Lip, Sheep. Mixed labial glands within the skeletal
musculature.
Figure 13.4. Cheek, Sheep. The mucous membrane of the cheek
of ruminants is characterized by numerous, conical papillae. The
apex and lateral surfaces of the papillae are highly keratinized.
Figure 13.5. Developing Permanent Tooth, Dog. The ectoder-
mally derived enamel organ has dilferentiated into the outer nd
Figure 13.3
×125
inner enamel epithelium and the stellate reticulum. The dental
papilla, derived from mesenchyme, is in contact with the inner 
enamel epithelium.
igure13.
X12.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
143
KEY
1. Alveolar bone
12. Epithelium, fee gingiva
 2 Ameloblasts 
13. Fiber bundle 
 3. Attachment epithelium 
14. Lamina propria
4. Blood vessel 
15. Odontoblasts
5. Cementum
16. Outer enamel epithelium 
9
6. Dental papilla 
17. Precementum
7. Dental pulp
18. Predentin
6
8. Dental sac
19. Space artifact
9. Dentin
15
20. Stellate reticulum
10. Enamel
 21. Stratum intermedium
11. Enamel space
X12.5
Figure 13.6. Developing Permanent Tooth, Dog. Dentin and
Figure 13.6
enamel formation has begun (Figure 13.7).
Figure 13.7. Dentinoenamel Junction, Developing Permanent
2
Tooth, Dog. Odontoblasts cover the surface of the mesenchymal
dental papilla. These cells produce predentin (uncalcified dentin).
The pale layer of predentin abuts the recently calcified denfin. The
enamel organ consists of tall, columnar ameloblasts that produce
211
enamel; α stratum intermedium; and the stellate reticulum.
Figure 13.8. Root of Tooth, x.s., and Periodontal Ligament,
6
Dog. The periodontal ligament consists of bundles of collagenous
ibers, blood and lymphatic vessels, nerves, and cells (mostly
10
20
ibroblasts. The iber bundles extend between, and anchorto, the
cementum of the tooth and the alveolar bone. The ends of the
18
fibers that are embedded in either cementum or bone are called
Figure 13.7
×125
Figure 13.9. Upper Deciduous Tooth, Decakified, and Gingiva,
.S.,
Dog. The enamel space identifies the location of enamel
before if was lost during decalcification. The attachment (junc-
tionall epithelium of the gingiva is nonkeratinized stratified squa-
mous and lacks papillae of connective fissue.It abuts the enamel
region and is confinuous with the papillated, keratinized stratifed
squamous epithelium of the free gingiva.
Figure 13.8
62.5
14
5
12
Figure 13.9
x25
144
CHAPTER 13
Figure13.10
x12.5
Figure 13.14
×12.5
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
8. Pakatine bone
2. Connective tissue, papill of
9. Stratified squamous epithelium,
 3. Hom tubule-like structure
keratinized
4. Lamina propria 
10. Stratum basale
 5. Loose connective fissue
11. Stratum corneum
 6. Mixed gland 
12. Stratum spinosum
 7. Mucous gland
13.Submucosa
Figure 13.10. Dental Pad, Cow. The dental pad of ruminants is
dlistinguished by its thick stratum corneum and well-developed
 papillae of connective tissue.
Figure13.11
X62.5
Figure 13.11. Epithelium, Dental Pad, Sheep. The section shows
a thick stratum corneum cand underlying stratum spinosum. A
horn, a tubulelike structure, extends through the stratum corneum.
Figure 13.12. Hard Palate, Caudal, Dog (Masson's). All domes-
tic mammals, except the pig, have glands (mucous or mixed) in
the submucosa of the caudal portion of the hard palate.
.The
αanial portion lacks glands in all of the domestic mammals.
Figure 13.13. Hard Palate, Pig. Large irregular patches of pale,
loose connective tissue are scatftered throughout the submucosa.
Figure 13.14. Soft Palate, Cow. Mucous glands and adipose
tissue occupy portions of the lamina propria and submucosa. The
epithelium is stratified squamous and keratinized.
Figure 13.12
x25
6
Figure 13.13
X25
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
145
Figure13.17
X25
Figure 13.18
x250
KEY
Figure 13.15
x52
 1. Connective tissue, papilla of
 7. Skeletal muscle
2 Connective tissue, papilla of cudal!
 8. Small papill 
3. Connective tissue, papilla of (rostrall
9. Spine
4. Filiform papilla, projection of
10. Stratum spinosum
 5. Fungiform papilla, core 
11. Supporting cell, nucleus 
 6. Sensory cell, nucleus 
12. Taste pore
Fgure 13.15. Filiform Papilla, Tongue, Cat. The iliform papilla
of carnivores contains several small, rostral connective fissue papil-
lce and α large, caudal connective fissue papilla. A large, keratin-
ized spine is associated with the caudal papilla.
Fgure 13.16. Fliform Papillae, Tongue, Horse. In horses cnd
pigs,delicate,redlkertiizd prctions extend m
upper surfaces of the filiform papillce. The papillae of connective
fissue are long, but are not subdivided.
Figure 13.16
x25
Fgure 13.17. Fungiform and Filiform Papillae, Tongue, Goat.
This section is from the fip of the tongue. The Fungiform papilla is
moundlike in section with a broad core of connective tissue con-
taining numerous nerves. Portions of keratinized prqjections of
fliform papille appear on either side.In ruminants, the connec-
five tissue of iliform papillae is subdivided into several small
papillae.
Fgure 13.18. Taste Bud, Fungiform Papilla, Tongue, Horse. The
taste bud is embedded within the keratinized stratified squamous
cre visible within the bud. The nucleus and cytoplasm of the
sensory cells are slightly darker than those of the supporting cells.
146
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.19
52
KEY
1. Connective tissue, core of
 4. Lingual salivary gland 
 2. Connective tissue, papille of
 5. Stratified squcmous epithelium
3. Duct
6. Taste buds
Figure 13.19. Circumvallate Papilla, Tongue, Goat. This lorge
papilla lies within a depression of the lingual epithelium. Taste
buds occur within the epithelium of the papilla Facing the cavity
of the depression, but are usually absent from the upper surface
of the papilla.
 DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
147
Figure 13.20
x25
Figure 13.23
x25
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
 9. Muscle, longitudinal 
 2 Core of connective tissue
10. Muscle, transverse
 3. Filiform papilla, epithelium of
11. Muscle, vertical
 4. Interlobular connective tissue
12. Serous gland 
 5. Interlobular duct
13. Skeletal muscle
6. Intralobular duct
 14. Stratified squamous epithelium,
7. Lobule
keratinized
 8. Mucous gland 
15. Space artifact
13
Figure 13.20. Conical Papilla, Tongue, Goat. This highly keratin-
ized papilla is located on the upper surface of the tongue.
igure 13.21
x25
Fgure 13.21. lingual Salivary Glands, Horse. Both mucous and
serous glands occur between the skeletal muscle bundles of the
tongue.
Fgure 13.22. Musculature, Tongue, ls., Cat. The vertical, hori-
zontal, cnd transverse arrangement of the lingual skeletal muscu-
kature can be seen below the mucosal papillae.
Fgure 13.23. Parotid Gland, Horse. Portions of several lobules
10
are shown. Lobules are often delineated by space artifacts. See
Figure 13.24 for detail of α lobule.
Figure 13.22
x36
Figure13.24
x250
Figure 13.28
x250
KEY
1. Basal striations
5. Secretory unit
 2. Intercalated duct
6. Serous acinus
 3. Interlobular connective tissue
 7. Serous demilune
 4. Mucous acinus
8. Striated duct
Figure 13.24. Parotid Gland, Horse. Serous acini, intercalated
ducts, and striated (secretory) ducts are present.The latter show
clearly defined basal striations.
Figure 13.25. Parotid Gland, Dog. Serous acini and intralobular
ducts are shown.
Figure13.25
x125
Figure 13.26. Parotid Gland, Cow. The secretory vnits are lined
by. pale, gcidophilic cells with large nuclei. The cells vary in
height, giving the luminal surface α scalloped appearance. This 
Feature is unique to the cow.
Figure 13.27. Submandibular Gland, Dog. Mucous acini (some
with serous demilunes] cand serous acini characterize the
 parenchyma.
Figure 13.28. Submandibular Gland, Sheep. Intercalated ducts
branching from a striated duct.
Figure13.26
x250
Figure13.27
X125
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
149
KEY
1. Intercalated duct
 5. Serous demilune
2 Interlobular connective tissue
6. Striated duct
 3. Mucous acinus
7. Tubular mucous unit
4. Serous acinus
Figure 13.29. Submandibular Gland, Sheep (Mallory's). The
junction between a mucous acinus and an intercalated duct is
illustrated.
hgure 13.30. Sublingual Gland, Dog. In the cot, dog, cnd
horse, the sublingual gland contains mucous secretory units,
serous acini, and serous demilunes. Long tubular mucous units
 are a characteristic Feature of the gland in the dog.
Figure 13.29
x250
Figure 13.30
×130
150
CHAPTER 13
3
Figure13.31
×125
Figure 13.33
x12.5
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
8. Interlobular connective tissue
2. Blood vessel
9. Mixed glands
 3. Coat of connective tissue
10. Mucous acinus
4. Duct
11. Serous demilune
5. Epithelium
12. Skeletal muscle 
 6. Goblet cells
13. Stratied squcmous epithelium
 7. Intercalated duct 
14. Striated duct
Figure 13.31. Sublingual Gland, Pig. In the pig and ruminant,
mucous tubuloacinar secretory units predominate. Serous demi-
lunes are sparse.
Figure 13.32. Interlobular Duct, Sublingual Gland, Pig. This
large interlobular duct is lined by a columnar epithelium.
. The
katter
  oo  o srd n s si
epithelium.
Figure 13.33. Oropharynx, Dog. The section shows mixed
glands among the skeletal muscle and within the submucosa.
Mixed glands are shown in detail in Figure 1l.10.
Figure 13.32
90
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
151
KEY
1. Blood vessel
7. Muscularis externa, inner circular 
2. Duct
8. Muscularis externa, outer longitudinal
3. Elastic fibers
9. Muscularis mucosae
 4. Lamina propria
10. Stratified squamous epithelium 
 5. Mixed glands 
11. Submucosa
 6. Mucous glands
10
Figure 13.34. Oropharynx, Dog (Orcein}. A thick band of con-
nective fissue, containing numerous elastic ibers, parallels the
mucosa.
Figure 13.34
X62.5
Figure 13.35. Esophagus, Mid-region, X.s., Dog. The glands of
the dog's esophagus are predominantly mucous. They are located
in the submucosa throughout the length of the esophagus of the
dog. The muscularis externa is skeletol muscle, except very near
the stomach (Figure 13.36).
Figure 13.35
X52
152
CHAPTER 13
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
9. Muscularis externa, outer longitudinal
2. Adventitia
10. Muscularis extema, outer oblique 
3. Duct
11. Muscularis mucosae
4. Esophagus, lumen
12. Skeletal muscle
 5. Lamina propria 
13. Smooth muscle
 6. Mixed glands
14. Stratified squamous epithelium 
7. Mucous glands
15. Stratified squamous epithelium, keratinized
8. Muscularis externa,
16.Submucosa
inner circular
Figure 13.36
X62.5
Figure 13.36. Esophagus, Near Stomach, I.s., Dog. The muscu-
laris externa of the dog's esophagus is composed of skeletal
muscle, except in the region caudal to the diaphragm, where the
14
musculature is mixed.
Figure 13.37. Esophagus, Cranial, l.s., Cat. A Few mixed glands
cre present in the submucosa. In the cat, horse, and ruminant,
esophageal glands occur only near the junction of the esophagus
cnd pharynx. The stratied squamous lining of the esophagus of
camivores is typically nonkerafinized. In the cat and hors,
the muscularis externa is skeletal muscle throughout much of the
esophagus. The transition from skeletal to smooth occurs in the
caudal one-fifh to one-third of the esophagus in these animals.
Figure 13.38. Esophagus, Cranial, x.s., Horse. The papillated
stratified squamous epithelium shows a distinct keratinized layer.
The epithelium is also keratinized in pigs and ruminants. A sparse
×25
muscularis mucosae is present in the cranial esophagus in the
Figure13.37
horse, cat, and ruminant. The muscularis externa consists of skel-
etal muscle in this region.
15
Figure 13.39. Esophagus, Cranial, l.s., Pig. The stratified squa-
mous epithelium is also keratinized in horses and ruminants. Note
the abundance of mucous glands in the submucosa. In the cranial
portion of the esophagus, a muscularis mucosae is absent in the
pig and dog. The muscularis externa consists of skeletal muscle
in this region.
Figure 13.38
x12.5
Figure 13.39
x12.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
153
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
 9. Muscularis externa, outer
2. Adventitia
oblique
3. Connective tissue, papilla of
10. Muscularis mucosce
4. Esophagus, lumen
11. Serosa
 5. Lamina propria
12. Skeletal muscle
6. Mucous gland
13. Smooth muscle
7. Muscularis externa, inner
 14. Stratified squamous epithelium
11
5
circular
15. Submucosa
8. Muscularis extema, outer
longitudinal
Figure 13.40. Esophagus, Mid-region, l.s., Pig. Note the
Figure 13.40
×12.5
decrease in glandular fissue and the presence of a muscularis
mucosce. Compare with Figure 13.39. The muscularis externa 
consists of skeletal muscle in' this region.
4
Fgure 13.41. Esophagus, Caudal, x.s., Pig. The region of the
pig' sophagusjust cranil tthediaphragm showsthe presence
14
of smooth and skeletal muscle in the muscularis externa, α lack
of glands, and a thick muscularis mucosae.
Fgure 13.42. Esophagus, Caudal, x.s., Pig. Detail of Figure
13.41 shows the smooth and skeletal musculature of the muscu-
karis externa.
Figure 13.43. Esophagus, Mid-Region, X.s., Sheep. The muscu-
laris mucosae is less developed than in the pig (see Figure I 3.40).
Figure 13.41
x12.5
Summary of typical layers of the wall of organs
 of the digestive tract
A. Mucosa
1.
 Epithelium: Simple columnar or stratified squamous
2.
Lamina propria: Loose connective tissue
3. Muscularis mucosae: Smooth muscle tissue
B.
 Submucosa: Loose or dense connective tissue
C.
Muscularis externa: Skeletal and/or smooth muscle
tissue; varies with the organ, part of the organ, and type 
12
of animal
 D. Serosa: An epithelium (called α mesothelium) and under-
lying connective tissue, OR Advenfifia: A layer of connec-
five tissue that lacks an epithelium and blends with
surrounding connective tissue
Figure 13.42
X62.5
5
15
Figure 13.43
X62.5
154
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.44
Figure 13.48
KEY
1. Arteriole
6. Lymphatic vessel
2. Capillary
7. Muscularis externa
3. Connective tissue,
8. Stomach contents
band of
 9. Stratified squamous epithelium, keratinized
4. Keratinized cells
10. Submucosa
 5. Lamina propria
Figure 13.44. Rumen, Sheep. The mucosa of the rumen is dif-
Figure 13.45. Rumen, Cow. A part of the wall from the lumen
to the beginning of the muscularis externa (smooth muscle). A
complete short papilla and a portion of a long papill are
Figure 13.45
x25
indluded.Note the submucosa entering the long papilla.A mus-
cularis mucosae is not present in this part of the Forestomach.
Figure 13.46. Rumen, Sheep. Section shows two cuts through
adiacent long papille. These papille cre Hat, paddlelike, struc-
tures (Figure 13.44). The boftom one in the photograph was cut
parallel fo the Hat surface, and the top one was cut perpendicular
to the Hat surface. A dense, more darkly stained band of connec-
tive tissue mimics a muscularis mucosae.
Figure 13.47. Rumen, Sheep. Section illustrates the vacuolated,
keratinized celsofthe stratified squamous epithelium ofa papilla.
Numerous capillaries abut the epithelium.
Figure 13.48. Reticulum, Sheep. The mucosa of the reticulum is
L
extended into intersecting Folds that subdivide the surface into
distinct compartments, suggesting a honeycomb. Conical papillce
project from the crests of the Folds and from the mucosa of the
Figure 13.46
x12.5
com partments.
Figure 13.47
x125
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
155
Figure 13.49
25
Figure 13.53
×25
KEY
5
1. Conical papilla 
5.Muscularis mucosae
 2. Connective tissue, band of 6. Stratified squamous epithelium,
 3. Lamina propria 
keratinized
4. Muscularis externa
7. Submucosa
Figure 13.49. Reticulum, Cow. Short folds and the base of a long
Fold are visible. A muscularis mucosae occurs in the upper
segment of the long Fold. This is a characteristic Feature of the
reticulum. Sides and crests of long folds have conical papillae
with keratinized tips.
igure 13.50
x12.5
Figure 13.50. Reticulum, Sheep. Section shows α long fold cut
in a plane parll to its at surface.The apparent gaps are the
resulf ofundulations in the Fold.Conical papillae are evident
along the crest of the fold.
Figure 13.51. Reticulum, Goat (Masson's). The section is through
the region of intersection of three long Folds. The muscularis
mucosce passes from one Fold to another at the intersection.Two
conical papillae, with keratinized tips, project from the sides of
two of the folds.
Figure 13.52. Omasum, Sheep. Laminae (folds) of different sizes
extend from the wall of the omasum, somewhat like the pages of
α book. The mucosal surfaces of the laminae are studded with
numerous conical papillae.
Figure 13.53. Omasum, Sheep. Small folds such as the one
shown contain a lamina propria and muscularis mucosae, but
Figure 13.51
×25
lack an extension of smooth muscle from the muscularis externa.
Figure 13.52
156
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.54
X62.5
Figure 13.58
X62.5
KEY
1. Cardiac gland region 
9. Muscularis mucosae
6
2. Cardiac glands 
10. Papilla 
3. Columnar epithelium,
11. Smooth muscle of muscularis externa
stomach
12. Stratified squamous epithelium,
4. Elastic fiber
esophagus
 5. Fundic gland region 
13. Stratified squamous epithelium,
6. Lamina propria
keratinized
7. Lymphatic vessel
14. Vein
8. Mixed glands
Figure 13.54. Omasum, Sheep. The base of a long fold is
shown. In addition to the muscularis mucosae, smooth muscle
Figure 13.55
X25
from the muscularis externa projects into the center of the fold.
Figure 13.55. Omasum, Sheep. Portions of two long folds are
shown. Numerous small papillae cover the surface of the folds.
Figure 13.56. Omasum, Goat (Orcein). The lamina propria of α
portion of a small papilla contains an extensive network of elastic
libers.
Figure 13.57. Junchion, Esophagus and Cardiac Gland Region
of Stomach, Dog. Numerous glands, predominantly mucous with
a Few serous demilunes, occupy the submucosa of the esophagus
and extend into the cardiac gland region of the stomach of dogs.
Figure 13.58. Junchion, Esophagus and Cardiac Gland Region
of Stomach, Dog. Detail of Figure 13.57. The stratified squamous
epithelium of the esophagus ends abruptly where the columnar
Figure 13.56
x125
epithelium of the stomach begins.
2
Figure 13.57
x12.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
157
9
Figure13.59
×12.5
Figure 13.63
x250
KEY
4
1. Cardiac glands 
9. Lamina propria
 2 Cardiac sphincter
10. Lymphatic nodule
3. Chief cell
 11. Muscularis mucosae
 4. Connective tissue, papilla of
12. Parietal cell
 5. Esophageal glands 
13. Simple columnar epithelium 
6.Fundic gland region
14. Stratied squamous epithelium,
 7. Fundic glands 
keratinized
13
8. Gastric pit
15. Submucosa
Figure 13.59. Junction of Esophagus and Stomach, Dog. Section
passes through the cardiac sphincter.
Figure 13.60
x25
Figure 13.60. Margo Plicatus, Horse. At the margo plicctus, the
keratinized stratified squamous epithelium of the Forestomach
ends, and the simple columnar epithelium of the cardiac gland
region of the stomach begins.
Fgure 13.61. Cardiac Gland Region, Stomach, Pig. Numerous
lymphatic nodules characterize the mucosa of the cardiac gland
region of the pig's stomach.
Figure 13.62. Light Zone, Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Dog.
The light zone of the carnivore's fundic stomach has a thinner
mucosa than the more aboral dark zone. The gastric pits of the 
light zone are comparatively deep, extending, in some cases, to
a depth equivalent to half the thickness of the mucosa. Compare
with Figure 13.65. Note that smooth muscle (arrows) of the mus-
cularis mucosae of the stomach extends into the lamina propria.
Figure 13.61
×25
Figure 13.63. Light Zone, Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Dog.
Chief and parietal cells form the walls of the fundic glands. The
glands are shown in cross section.
5
3
Figure 13.62
X62.5
158
CHAPTER 13
5
Figure 13.64
x12.5
Figure 13.68
×250
KEY
1. Chief cells
9. Muscularis mucosae
 2. Fundic gland, lumen 
10. Parietal cells
3. Fundic glands
11. Serosa
4. Gastric pit
12. Smooth muscle
 5. Lamina propria
13. Stratum compactum
6.Mucosa
14. Stratum granulosum
 7. Mucous neck cells
15. Submucosa
8. Muscularis externa 
16. Surface mucous cells
Figure 13.64. Dark Zone, Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Dog.
A portion of the stomach wall, including the base of a fold, is
shown.
Figure 13.65
X62.5
Figure 13.65. Dark Zone, Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Dog.
The mucosa of the dark zone of the fundic stomach of carnivores
is thicker than that of the light zone. The gastric pits are compara-
tivelyshallow,extendingnoFartherintothemucosa thanone-third
16
of its thickness. Compare with Figure 13.62.
Figure 13.66. Dark Zone, Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Dog
(PAS). The surface mucous cells lining the lumen, cells of the
gastric pits and the mucous neck cells of the glands, both contain
complex carbohydrates and are PAS positive (magenta stain).
Figure 13.67. Lamina Subglandularis, Fundic Gland Region,
3
Stomach, Cat (Old). A thick layer of connective tissue, the stratum
compactum, and an overlying layer of fibroblasts, the stratum
granulosum,together Formtheamina subglandularis structure
 s  p s s 
the lamina subglandularis protects the stomach from punctures by
Figure 13.66
X62.5
sharp objects.
Figure 13.68. Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Cat. The fundic
glands have been cut longitudinally. They are Formed largely from
parietal and chief cells.
13
4.
Figure 13.67
X62.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
159
1
13.69
X12.5
Figure 13.73
X62.5
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
8.Mucosa
 2 Cardiac glands
9. Mucous precursor
 3. Chief cells
10. Muscularis externa 
 4. Epithelial cells, surface cut 
11. Muscularis mucosae
5. Fundic glands
12. Parietal cells
6. Gastric pit 
13. Simple columncr epithelium
 7. Lamina propria
14. Submucosa
Fgure 13.69. Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Horse. Note the
thick mucosa and submucosa.
hgure 13.70. Junction of the Cardiac and Fundic Gland
Figure 13.70
x62.5
Regions, Stomach, Horse. The mucous glands of the cardiac
gland region are distinct from the parietal and chief cells of the
Uundic gland region of the stomach.
Figure 13.71. Fundic Gland Region, Stomach, Horse. The pres-
ence of surface mucous cells is a unique feature of the epithelium
of the glandular stomach.Mucigen,the precursor of mucus, fills
much of the apical portion of these cells in living tissue.
Figure 13.72. Fundic Gland Region, Abomasum, Sheep. The
submucosa shows extensive infiltration by adipose tissue.
Figure 13.73. Fundic Gland Region, Abomasum, Goat. Parietal
and chief cells of the glands are evident.Note the deep gastric
pits.
Figure13.71
x125
Figure 13.72
x25
160
CHAPTER 13
16
Figure 13.74
x250
Figure 13.78
62.5
KEY
1. Chief cell 
10. Parietal cell 
2. Gastric pit
11. Pyloric gland
3. Globular leukocyte
12. Serosa
16
 4. Lamina propria 
13. Simple columnar epithelium 
 5. Lamina subglandularis 
14. Simple columnar epithelium, oblique
 6. Lymphocytes
section
7. Mucous precursor
15. Submucosa
8. Muscularis externa
16. Surface mucous cells
9. Muscularis mucosae
Figure 13.74. Fundic Gland Region, Abomasum, Cow. Parietal
and chief cells of the fundic glands.
Figure 13.75
X62.5
Figure 13.75. Mucosa, Pyloric Gland Region, Stomach, Dog
6
(PAS). The content of the surface mucous cel and that of the
secretory units of the pyloric glands are PAS positive (magenta
16
color).
Figure 13.76. Surface Mucous Cells, Pyloric Gland Region,
Stomach, Dog. Columnar cell lining the gastric pits and border-
ing the gastric lumen show typical cup-shaped concentrations of
mucous precursor (mucigen] in their apical ends. The epithelium 
contains many migrating lymphocytes.
Figure 13.77. Pyloric Gland Region, Stomach, Cat. Note the
4
deep gastric pits. Some extend halfway through the thickness of
the mucosa.
Figure 13.78. Mucosa, Pyloric Gland Region, Stomach, Cat.
Figure 13.76
X125
Note the presenceof deepgastric pits.Some extend toabouthalf
the depth of the mucosa.
-12
Figure 13.77
x25
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
161
13
Figure 13.79
×250
Figure 13.80
X25
Figure 13.82
x36
KEY
Junction, pyloric gland region and duodenum
1. Arteriole
8. Muscularis mucosae
 2. Brunner's gland 
 9. Pyloric gland 
3. Crypt of Lieberkuhn 
10. Stratum compactum
4. Gastric furrow
 11. Stratum granulosum
 5. Gastric pit 
12. Submucosa
 6. Lamina propria
13. Villus of duodenum
 7. Muscularis externa 
Figure 13.79. Pyloric Gland Region, Stomach, Cat. Basal ends
of pyloric glands and the stratum granulosum and stratum com-
 pachum of the lamina subglandularis are present in this section.
Figure 13.80. Pyloric Gland Region, Abomasum, Goat. Gastric
Furrows and gastric pits can be seen.
Figure 13.81. Junction, Pyloric Gland Region and Duodenum,
I.s., Dog. Brunner's glands are located primarily in the submucosa 
of the duodenum.They also extend a short' distance into the
pyloric gland region of the stomach. They occasionally break
ihrough the muscularis mucosae and extend into the lamina
propria.
Figure 13.82. Junction, Pyloric Gland Region and Duodenum,
I.s, Dog. Gastric pits and mucous glands of the pyloric gland
region of the stomach can be seen. Brunner's glands (mucous)
6
occur below the interrupted muscularis mucosae. See Figure
13.83 for detail of the epithelium.
Figure 13.81
162
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.83
260
KEY
1. Central lacteal
 5. Lymphocytes 
2 Goblet cell
6. Striated border
3. Intestinal absorptive cells
7. Surface mucous cells, stomach
 4. Lamina propria
Figure 13.83. Junction, Pyloric Gland Region and Duodenum
Dog. Note the change in the epithelium when it passes from the
stomach to the duodenum. Typical columnar surface mucous cells
of the pyloric gland region of the stomach contrast with the
columnar absorptive cells and goblet cells of the duodenum.
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
163
KEY
1. Artifact
7. Muscularis mucosce
 2 Brunner's gland 
 8. Secretory unit 
 3. Crypt of Llieberkuhn
9. Serosa 
4. Duct
10. Submucosa
 5. Goblet cell
11. Villus
6. Muscularis externa
Figure 13.84. Brinner's Gland, Duodenum, l.s., Dog. Detail of
mucous secretory units.The latter,in the dog,are lined bytll
columnar cells and have large lumens. Compare with Figure
13.90.
Figure 13.85. Duodenum, X.s., Cat. A segment of the wall of the
Figure 13.84
X125
duodenum is shown. The intestinal villi of carnivores tend to be
longer than those of noncarnivores. Note the shrinkage artifact
ct the apical ends of the villi.
Figure 13.86. Duodenum, Proximal, x.s., Cat (Masson's). Ducts
【+
of Brunner's glands penetrate the muscularis mucosae. Brunner's
glands are marked off into distinct lobules in the cat.
Figure 13.87. Duodenum, X.s., Cat (Masson's). The submucosa 
in the cat and dog is a moderately dense irregular connective
11
tissue. In other domestic mammals, it is α loose connective tissue.
Synonyms
 Brunner's gland = duodenal gland; submucosal gland Crypt 
of Lieberkuhn = intestinal gland; intestinal crypt
Figure 13.85
X25
3
Figure13.86
X62.5
Figure 13.87
x125
164
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.88
x250
Figure 13.92
x125
KEY
1. Adipose cell
8. Mucous gland
 2. Adipose tissue
9. Muscukaris externa
3. Crypt of Lieberkihn 
10. Paneth cell
4. Globular leukocyte
11. Secretory unit
 5. Lamina propria 
12. Serous gland 
6. Lymphocyte
13. Striated border
7.Mucosa
14.Submucosa
Figure 13.88. Epithelium of Villus, Duodenum, Cat. Lymphocytes
can be seen migrating through the simple columnar epithelium.
Note the presence of several globular leukocytes.
x250
Figure 13.89. Duodenum, Horse. Paneth cells are visible in the
basal portions of the crypts of Lieberkuhn in the small intestine of
the horse.
Figure 13.90. Duodenum, Horse. In the horse, Brunner's glands
have both mucous and serous components. Note that the lumens
of the secretory units are small. Compare with Figure 13.84.
Figure 13.91. Duodenum, Pig. Brunner's glands ill the entire
submucosa.
Figure 13.92. Duodenum, Pig. In the pig the lumens of the secre-
tory units of Brunner's glands are very small.
Figure 13.90
X125
Figure 13.91
x25
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
165
.
Figure 13.93
×12.5
Figure 13.97
x125
KEY
1. Brünner's gland
6. Muscukaris mucosae
 2. Crypt of Llieberkuhn 
7. Nerve Fascicle, unmyelinated
3. Mucosa
8. Secretory unit 
 4. Muscularis externa, inner circular 
9. Serosa
5. Muscularis externa, outer
10. Submucosa
longitudinal
Figure 13.93. Duodenum, ls., Cow. Brunner's glands gre
present throughoutmuchof the submucosa ofanintestinalFold
(plica).
Figure 13.94. Duodenum, Cow. Detail of Brunner's gland. In the
Figure13.94
x125
cow, some gland cells have an acidophilic cytoplasm. The lumens
of secretory units are large.
Figure 13.95. Duodenum, X.s., Sheep. The muscularis externa 
gitudinal layer of smooth muscle. Compare the appearance of the
muscle layers seen in this cross section with that of the longitudinal
9
 section of the intestine in Figure 13.96.
Figure 13.96. Duodenum, l.s., Sheep. This section is through the
muscularis externa. Compare the appearance of the muscle layers
in this preparation with ihat in Figure 13.95.
Figure 13.97. Duodenum, Goat. Portions of the mucosa and
submucosa. The lumens of the secretory units of Brunner's glands
are large in the goat.
Figure 13.95
x125
Figure 13.96
x125
166
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.98
X62.5
Figure 13.102
x250
KEY
1. Auerbach's plexus 
10. Meissner's plexus
2. Central lacteal, x.s.
11. Muscularis externa, inner circular
3. Columnar epithelium 
12. Muscularis externa, outer longitudinal
4. Crypt of Lieberkuhn 
13. Muscularis mucosae 
 5. Eosinophil
14. Nuclei of epithelium cut obliquely
 6. Globular leukocyte 
15. Stratum compactum 
7. Goblet cell
16. Submucosa
 8. Intestinal lumen 
17. Villus
9. Lamina propria
Figure 13.98. Jejunum, X.s., Dog. A Meissner's plexus is present
in the periphery of the submucosa. An Auerbach's plexus is
Figure 13.99
×125
wedged between the inner circular and outer longitudinal layers
of the muscularis externa.
Figure 13.99. Jejunum, Dog. A well-developed sratum compac-
tum is present between the lamina propria and muscularis
mucosae of the small intestine in some cats and dogs.
Figure 13.100. Jejunum, x.s., Cat. Slender villi and well-defined
aypts of Lieberkuhn are evident.
Figure 13.101. Jejunum, Cat. Transverse sections of villi. Central
lacteals are evident in two of them. Migrating lymphocytes are
16
visible within the epithelium.
Figure 13.102. Jejunum, Cat. Globular leukocytes cre present 
among the columnar cel lining α crypt of Lieberkuhn. Numerous
 eosinophils are scattered through the lamina propria.
Figure 13.100
X25
8
Synonyms
 Auerbach's plexus = myenteric plexus
 Meissner's plexus = submucosal plexus 
Figure 13.101
×125
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
167
Figure 13.103
x12.5
Figure 13.107
X62.5
KEY
1. Crypt of Lieberkühn
8. Muscukaris externa, inner circular
 2 Eosinophil
 9. Muscularis externa, outer longitudinal
3. Goblet cell
10. Muscularis mucosae
 4. Lamina propria
11. Serosa
 5. Lymphatic nodule
12. Submucosa
 6. Mitotic figure
13. Villus
7.Mucosa
Figure 13.103. Jejunum, I.s., Horse. All layers of the wall are
included in this section. The villi cre shorter than those of
carnivores.
Figure 13.104
×25
Figure 13.104. lleum, X.s., Cat. A portion of the wall from the
lumen to the serosa is shown. The epithelium of the villi contain
numerous goblet cells.
Figure 13.105. lleum, Dog. Mitotic figures can be seen in the
crypts.
Figure 13.106. Cecum, Tip, Dog. Large lymphatic nodules cre
present in the submucosa.
Fgure 13.107. Cecum, Dog. Numerous goblet cells in the lining
of the crypts of Lieberkuhn are characteristic of the organ. The
epithelial cells bordering the lumen in this preparation have
undergone some autolysis and look tattered.
igure 13.105
X250
Figure 13.106
x12.5
168
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.108
x250
Figure 13.112
x12.5
KEY
1. Adipose fissue
 9. Muscularis externa, inner circular
2. Cecal band
10. Muscularis mucosae
3. Crypt of Lieberkuhn
11. Serosa
4. Goblet cell
12. Small artery
 5. Lamina propria
13. Striated border
6. Lymphatic nodule
14. Submucosa
7. Mucosa
15. Taenia coli
8. Muscle band
16. Vein 
in cross section. A striated border is present on the columnar cells.
Goblet cells are numerous.
X12.5
Figure 13.l09. Cecal Band, x.s., Horse. A cecal band consists
of an admixture of smooth muscle (thickened outer longitudinal
layer of the muscularis externa) and elastic fibers. Elasfic hibers
cre predominant in the bands of both the cecum and the ventral
large colon of the horse. Compare with Figure 13.112.
Figure 13.ll0. Cecum, Horse. Veins with bands of smooth
16
muscle in their walls are common in the submucosa throughout
the digestive tract of the horse. Similar vessels are shown at low
magnihication in Figure 13.109.
Figure 13.1ll. Cecum, Cow. In the large intestine of ruminants,
abundant in the submucosa.
Figure 13.1 12. Taenia Coli, Small Colon, X.s., Horse. The taenia
Figure13.110
X62.5
coli cre thickenings of the outer longitudingl layer of the muscu-
laris externa. In contrast to the bands of the cecum and ventral
large colon, where elastic ibers are predominant, smooth muscle 
predominates in the bands of the small colon and dorsal large
colon. Compare with Figure 13.109.
Figure 13.111
x25
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
169
德色
Figure 13.113
x12.5
Figure 13.117
KEY
1. Adipose tissue 
 11. Lamina propria
2 Anal canal
12. Mucosa
 3. Anal glands
13. Muscularis extema, inner circular
4. Anal sac
1 4. Muscularis extema, outer longitudinal
 5. Circumanal glands
15. Muscularis mucosae
6. Crypt of lieberkihn 
16. Rectum 
7. Epidermis 
17. Striated border
 8. Extemal anal sphincter 
18. Submucosa
9. Glands of anal sac 
19. Taenia coli
10. Goblet cell
Figure 13.114
x25
Figure 13.1l3. Taenia Coli, Colon, X.s., Pig. The muscular
tcenia coli is Formed from the outer longitudinal layer of the
muscularis externa. The submucosa is infiltrated with Fat.
Figure 13.1l4. Spiral Colon. x.s., Goat. The mucosa contains
both tortuous and straight crypts of Lieberkuhn. The muscularis
externa shows an abrupt thickening of its inner circular layer and
 outer longitudinal layer.
Figure 13.115. Spiral Colon, X.s., Goat. The columnar epithelial
17
cells have a distinct striated border.
Figure 13.1l6. Rectum, X.s., Cat. The epithelium of the rectum
presents a Aat, uniform surface.
Figure 13.117. Rectoanal Junction, l.s., Dog. Note that the anal
glands mark the junction farrow) of the rectum and anal canal.
Figure 13.115
x250
Figure 13.116
X62.5
170
CHAPTER 13
x12.5
Figure 13.122
X62.5
KEY
1. Anal gland
 7. Keratinized epithelium of anal sac
2. Apocrine tubular gland 
8. Mucosa
3. Circumanal gland 
 9. Muscularis extema, inner circular
 4. Crypt of Lieberkihn 
10. Sebaceous gland 
 5. Debris in anal sac 
11. Stratified squamous epithelium 
6. External anal sphincter
Figure 13.118. Rectoanal Junction, l.s., Dog. Note the change
between the stratified squgmous epithelium of the anal canal and
the crypts of Lieberkuhn of the rectal mucosa. Note also that anal
glands are located in the submucosa and are scatered among
Figure 13.119
x125
the smooth muscle of the internal anal sphincter (inner circular
layer of the muscularis externaj. See Figure 13.l17 for
orientation.
Figure 13.119. Anal Glands, Dog. Section is through the secre-
tory units of an anal gland.
Figure 13.120. Glands of the Anal Sac, Dog. A small portion of
the wall of an anal sac and the secretory units of some of the
glands of the anal sac are shown. See Figure 13.ll7 for
location.
Figure 13.121. Anal Sac, Cat. About one-half of the wall of an
anal sac is shown.
Figure 13.122. Glands of the Anal Sac, Cat. Portions of these
glands are shown adiacent to the skeletal muscle of the external
anal sphincter. The presence of sebaceous glands in this location
Figure13.120
<62.5
is α characteristic of the cat.
Figure 13.121
x12.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
171
Figure 13.123
X125
Figure 13.127
X62.5
KEY
1. Circumanal gland, nonsebaceous  7. Lamina propria 
 2 Circumanal gland, sebaceous 
8. Sebaceous gland
3. Crypt of Lieberkuhn
9. Simple columnar epithelium
4. Goblet cell
10. Skeletal muscle 
5. Hair follicle
 11. Stratified squamous epithelium
6. Keratinized epidermis
12. Stratum granulosum
Figure 13.123. Anal Canal, Ll.s., Dog. Junction of the keratinized
6
and nonkeratinized regions of the anal canal. The stratum granu-
losum of the keratinized region stops abruptly at the junction.
Figure13.124
x25
Figure 13.124. Circumanal Glands, Dog. Numerous nonseba-
ceous portions of circumanal glands are present subcutaneously
among the skeletal muscle of the anal sphincter. These nonseba-
ceous portions cre often called hepatoid glands because their cells
 resemble hepatocytes.
Figure 13.125. Circumanal Gland, Dog. Detail of a part of one
of the glands. The lower, nonsebaceous portion of these glands
is more acidophilic than the upper, sebaceous portion.
Figure 13.126. Rectoanal Junction, l.s., Horse. The stratified
squamous epithelium of the anal canal contrasts with the rectal
mucosa.
between the stratified squamous epithelium of the anal canal and
the simple columnar epithelium of the rectal mucosa 
IS
Figure 13.125
×125
apparent.
5
Figure 13.126
X25
172
CHAPTER 13
12
Figure 13.128
<25
<125
Figure 13.132
×900
KEY
1. Bile canaliculus, l.s.
 8. Lobule, portion of 
2. Bile cancliculus, x.s.
9. Lymphatic vessel 
3. Bile ductule
10. Nucleus of hepatocyte
11
4. Central vein, I.s.
 11. Portal vein, branch
 5. Central vein, x.s.
12. Serosa
6. Hepatic arery, branch 
13. Sinusoid
7. Hepatocyte
Figure 13.128. Liver, Cat. Transverse and longitudinal sections
Figure13.130
×125
through the central veins of two classic lobules.
Figure 13.129. Liver, Cat. Transverse section through α classic
lobule. Sinusoids empty into the central vein. Hepatocytes radiate
as hepatic plates from the central vein.
Figure 13.130. Liver, Cat. The portal tract in this section includes
 branch of the hepatic portal vein and hepatic artery, bile
ductule,and lymphatic vessel.
Figure 13.131. Liver, Horse. A portal tract is at the intersection
of three classic lobules. Branches of the portal vein can be seen
extending between the lobules.
Figure 13.132. Liver, Cat (Masson's). Sections through various
bile canaliculi are evident in this section.
Figure 13.131
X62.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
173
Figure 13.133
x250
Figure 13.137
×250
KEY
1. Bile duct
7.Hepatocyte
 2. Binucleate hepatocyte 
8. Kupffer cell
3. Capsule of Glisson
 9. Mesothelium 
4. Central vein
10. Portal tract
 5. Connectiv tissue, partition of
11. Portal vein, branch
6. Goblet cell
12. Sinusoid
Figure 13.133. Liver, Horse. A sinusoid joins with a branch of
 the portal vein.
Figure 13.134. Liver, Horse. Section is through mesothelial cells
and connective fissue of the capsule of Glisson surrounding the
x250
liver. Together, the mesothelial cells and the capsule of Glisson
Figure 13.134
comprise the serosa.
Figure 13.135. Liver, Pig. Classic lobules are clearly separated
from one another by parfifions of connective tissue in the pig.
Figure 13.136. Liver, Pig. Particulate-laden Kupffer cells within
sinusoids of a classic lobule are evident in this section. Binucleate
hepatocytes also can be seen.
Fgure 13.137. Liver, Goat. A large bile duct with columnar
epithelium and goblet cells.
Figure 13.135
X25
Figure 13.136
x250
174
CHAPTER 13
3
Figure 13.141
<250
125
Figure 13.138
X36
KEY
1. Adventitia
8. Liver
2 Dark cell
9. Mucosa
3. Epithelium
10. Mucous acinus 
13
 4. Gallbladder, lumen
11. Muscularis
5. Goblet cell
12. Serous acinus
6. Lamina propria
13. Striated border
 7. Light cell
Figure 13. 138. Gallbladder, Dog. A portion of the wall showing 
the highly folded mucosa.
Figure 13.139. Galbladder, Dog. Epithelial lining with light and
x250
dark columnar cells.
iqure13.139
Figure 13.140. Gallbladder and Liver, Pig (Masson's). Section
shows a portion of the liver and gallbladder.
Figure 13.141. Gallbladder, Goat. Portion of a mucosal fold
showing goblet cells in the epithelium.
Figure 13.142. Gallbladder, Goat. Mixed glands occur within
the wall of the gallbladder of ruminants.
Figure 13.140
x25
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
175
16
15
Figure 13.143
x125
Figure 13.147
x250
KEY
1. A cells
9. Dark cell
3
2. Acinar cells
10. Goblet cell
3. Acinus
11. Intercalated duct, I.s.
4. Anastomotic artery
12. Intercalated duct, x.s.
5. B cells
13. Interlobular duct
6. Capillary
14. Islet of Langerhans
7. Centroacinar cell
15. Light cell
8. Connective tissue, septum of
16. Muscularis
Figure 13.143. Cystic Duct, Pig. The epithelium is composed of
light cells, dark cells, and goblet cells.
hgure 13.144. Pancreas, Horse. The organ is divided into
lobules by septa of connective fissue. Most of the pancreas is
Formed from exocrine acinar cells. Islets of Langerhans are scat
Figure 13.144
×25
 tered through the exocrine region of the gland.
acinar cells, interlobular ducts, and intercalated (intralobular]
ducts.
3
Figure 13.146. Pancreas, Horse. An islet of Langerhans with
some surrounding exocrine acini. In the horse, the darker A cells
cre located in the center of the islet, while the lighter B cells are 
positioned in the periphery. Compare with Figure 13.150. Note 
the numerous capillaries among cords of islet cells.
Figure 13.147. Pancreas, Dog. Detail of acini and intercalated
ducts. Note acidophilic apical regions and basophilic basal
13
regions of the acinar cells.
Figure 13.145
x125
Synonyms
A cell = alpha cell
B cell = beta cell
Islet of Langerhans = pancreatic islet
Figure 13.146
×250
176
CHAPTER 13
Figure 13.148
x125
Figure 13.152
x62.5
KEY
1. A cell
 7. Hyaline cartilage
2. Acinus
8. Intercalated duct
3. B cells
9. Islet of Langerhans
4. Centroacinar cell 
10. Salivary gland
5. Duct
11. Stratified squamous epithelium
6. Goblet cell
12. Taste bud
Figure 13.148. Pancreas, Pig. An interlobular duct with goblet
cells interspersed among the epithelial cells of the duct.
Figure 13.149. Pancreas, Cow (Masson's). An intercalated duct
enters an acinus.
Figure 13.149
x250
Figure 13.150. Pancreas, 9
Sheep (Masson's). In. ruminants,
darkly stained A cells are located at the periphery of the isletsof
Langerhans, while light-staining B cells are centrally located.
Compare with Figure 13.146.
Figure 13.151. Tongue, Tip, l.s., Chicken. The upper surface of
the tongue is covered by a thick stratified squamous epithelium,
which is keratinized near the tip. The stratified squamous epithe-
lium of the lower surface is thinner and also keratinized rostrally.
The tongue is supported by hyaline cartilage rostrally. The ducts
of salivary glands (mucous) open at the lower surface.
Figure 13.152. Taste Bud, Tongue, Base, Chicken. A taste bud
(characteristically large and scarce in the chicken] can be seen
closely associated with the duct of a salivary gland.For detail of
Figure 13.150
×250
the taste bud, see Figure 13.153.
Figure 13.151
x12.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
177
10
Figure 13.153
x250
Figure 13.157
X62.5
KEY
1. Gland
10. Proventriculus, lumen
 2. Intercellukar space
11. Secondary duct
 3. Lamina propria
12. Serosa 
 4. Mucous gland 
13. Stratified squamous epithelium 
 5. Muscularis externa
14. Submucosa
 6. Muscularis mucosae
15. Sulcus
7. Plica
16. Taste bud cell
8. Pore
17. Tertiary duct
9. Primary duct
Figure 13.153. Taste Bud, Chicken. Detail of the taste bud seen
in Figure 13.152. Its cells stain lightly with eosin. Numerous
Figure 13.154
spaces ocur between cels. A taste bud pore is visible.
×25
Figure 13.154. Esophagus, x.s., Chicken. The esophagus islined 
by a thick nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium. Mucous
glands occur in the lamina propria. The submucosa is sparse.
Figure 13.155. Crop, Chicken. The crop is a diverticulum of the
esophagus. Unlike the latter, it lacks mucous glands, except close
to its junction with the esophagus.
Fgure 13.156. Proventriculus {
(Glandular Stomach),  X.s.,
Chicken. The submucosa contains lobules of compound tubular
glands that are arranged around a central, secondary duct. A
primary duct, which drains several lobules, opens through a
raised mucosal papilla.
Figure 13.157. Proventriculus, X.s., Chicken. A magnified view
ofFigure 13.156 shows that the mucosa ofthe papilla is arranged
Figure 13.155
x25
into Folds (plicae) covered by columnar cells, and depressions
[sulei]   lined  by
/.shorter  cells. A primary. duct,
lined
by columnar cells, joins the lumen of the proventriculus.
10
Figure 13.156
×12.5
178
CHAPTER 13
6
12
Figure 13.158
x250
Figure 13.161
x250
13
KEY
1. Basal cell
8. Muscularis externa
2. Chief cell
 9. Secondary duct
3. Gastric gland 
10. Submucosa
4. Gastric pit
11. Surface epithelium
5. Gland cell
12. Tertiary duct
 6. Keratinoid 
13. Ventriculus, lumen 
7. Lamina propria
Figure 13.158. Proventriculus, x.s.,
Chicken. A tertiary duct
branching from the secondary duct leads into a glandular unit.
The glandular epithelial cells vary from simple cuboidal to low
columnar and contain a grainy secretory material. These cells
 secrete both pepsinogen and HCl.
Figure 13.159. Ventriculus (Gizzard), Chicken. The pink, thick
layer of keratinoid that lines the ventriculus is produced by
branched tubular gastric glands in the lamina propria. The sub-
mucosa and a portion of the smooth muscle layers of a thick
muscularis externa are shown.
Figure 13.160. Ventticulus, Chicken. Keratinoid lines the
mucosal surface and ills the lumen of the gastric pits and glands.
The cells of the surface epithelium are low to tall columnar. The
cells decrease in height as they extend into the gastric pits.
Flattened cells (chief cells) line the upper cand mid-regions of the
tubular gastric glands seen in this micrograph. Branching of some
of the glands is evident.
Figure 13.161. Ventriculus, Chicken. The Aattened chief cells
lining the mid-portion of the gastric glands become cuboidal to
low columnar in the Fundus of the glcand. A Few large basal cells
with pale nuclei and pale cytoplasm occur in the fundus of the
glands.
Figure 13.159
X36
11
Figure 13.160
×125
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
179
x12.5
Figure 13.165
X62.5
Figure 13.163
X25
Figure 13.166
×25
KEY
1. Crypt of Llieberkuhn
5. Serosa
 2 Lymphatic tissue
6. Submucosa
3. Muscularis externa
7. Villus
4. Muscularis mucosae
Chicken.
Lymphatic tissue
(diffuse and nodular) in the duodenum close to the stomach.
Figure 13.163. Duodenum, X.s., Chicken (Mallory's). The serosa
is thick. The submucosa is characteristically sparse.
Figure 13.164. Ileum, X.s., Chicken. Villi are long and slender
with numerous goblet cells. The submucosa is thin.
Figure 13.165. Cecum, Tip, l.s., Chicken. In the tip of the cecum,
villi are short and broad. Compare Figure 11.51 of the cecal
tonsil.
Fgure 13.166. Large Intestine, X.s., Chicken. Villi are present 
in the chicken's large intestine.
Figure 13.164
x36
KEY
1. Cloacal lip, dorsal
 9. Simple columnar epithelium 
2. Cloacal lip, ventral
10. Skeletal muscle
3. Coprodeum
11. Smooth muscle
4. Crypt of Llieberkuhn 
12. Stratied squamous epithelium
 5. Herbst corpuscle
13. Tubular gland
6. Lymphatic nodule
14. Urodeum
7. Lymphoglandular ridge
15. Villus
8. Proctodeum
Figure 13.167. Cloaca, I.s., Chicken. The cloaca is subdivided
into three regions: the coprodeum, urodeum, and proctodeum.
11
14
Figure 13.167
and genital ducts terminate in the yrodeum. The terminal procto-
deum opens to the exterior through the cloacal lips.
Figure 13.168. Coprodeum, Cloaca, Chicken. The mucosa of the
coprodeum is thrown into short, Hat villi. Shallow crypts of
Lieberkuhn open at their bases. Simple columnar epithelium
covers their surface.
Figure 13.169. Cloaca, I.s., Chicken. Branched tubular glands
(modified crypts) Form a part of the lymphoglandular ridge of
Jolly locatedin the dorsal proctodeum.The epithelium of the ridge
consists of tall columnar cells. A portion of the stratified squamous
epithelium of the inner surface of the ventral cloacallip can be
seen.
Figure 13.170. Cloaca, l.s., Chicken. A large Herbst corpuscle
lies beneath the stratified squamous epithelium of the cloacal lip.
These corpuscles typically occur close to the latter's point of junc-
igure 13.168
X62.5
ture with the simple columnar epithelium of the proctodeum.
×62.5
12
Figure 13.170
X62.5
DIGESTIVE SYSTEM
181
Figure 13.174
x125
Figure 13.175
x250
KEY
Figure13.171
X36
1. A cells
6. Erythrocytes
2. Acinus
7.Hepatocyte
3. B cells
8. Lobule, margin of
4. Capillary
9. Reticular fibers
5.Central vein
10. Sinusoid
Figure 13.17l. Liver, Chicken. Central veins of several lobules
are evident. One lobule is indicated by a dashed line.
Figure 13.172. Liver, Chicken. Sinusoids can be seen entering a
central vein. Radiating plates of hepatocytes are two cells thick in
the chicken.
Figure 13.173. Liver, Chicken (Silver). The wall of a central vein
and surrounding plates of hepatocytes (whose cellular Features
250
reticular ibers that have been blackened with silver.
Figure 13.174. Pancreas, Chicken. Numerous portions of tubu-
loacinar serous glands surround an alpha islet of Langerhans.
Alpha islets contain columnar A cells cnd are larger than beta
islets. Erythrocytes in capillaries can be seen between cords of
islet cells.
Figure 13.175. Pancreas, Chicken. Beta islets contain polygonal
B cells and are smaller than alpha islets.
Figure 13.173
×250
14
URINARY SYSTEM
MAMMALS
he urinary system of mammals is comprised of the paired kidneys, renal pelvises,
ureters, urinary bladder, and urethra.
Kidneys
The kidneys are highly vascularized, compound tubular glands that function to maintain
the composition of body fluids at a constant level and remove excretory wastes. Each
kidney is surrounded by a capsule of connective tissue, which may contain a distinct
layer of smooth muscle in its deepest portion, as in the cow, sheep, and goat. Both the
cortex and medullary regions of the kidney are formed principally of numerous closely
packed, uriniferous tubules. The spaces between tubules are mainly occupied by an
extensive capillary network. The cortex and medulla are arranged into one or more
 pyramidal configurations called renal pyramids; the apex of each pyramid is called a
renal papilla. In the cortex, groups of radially arranged tubules form the pars radiata
(cortical ray or medullary rays), consisting of collecting tubules and straight portions of
nephrons. The pars convoluta (cortical labyrinth) are located between the rays and
consist of renal corpuscles and numerous proximal and distal convoluted tubules. The
proximal convoluted tubules are longer than the distal convoluted tubules and comprise
the major portion of the cortex. Proximal convoluted tubules are distinguished by the
brush borders of their epithelial cells and the somewhat scalloped appearance of the
apical surface of their cells when the latter are seen in profle. Distal convoluted tubules
have a smooth internal surface, and their cells lack a brush border.
 Filtrate processed by the nephrons is passed to collecting tubules, which open either
directly or indirectly via calyces into the renal pelvis through papillary ducts at the tip
of a renal papilla. The epithelial cells of the collecting tubules are pale and vary from
183
cuboidal near the distal tubules to columnar close to the
 A lamina propria and submucosa are present. Usually,
there is a thin muscularis mucosae between these layers.
pared with the cells of the proximal and distal convoluted
The muscularis, external to the submucosa, is composed
tubules. As they progress toward the renal papilla, the col-
 of an outer and inner longitudinal and a thick middle
lecting tubules become wider. The terminal portion of these
circular layer. The inner and outer longitudinal layers may
tubules is lined by a columnar or pseudostratified epithe-
be incomplete in some areas. Much of the bladder (body
lium and is called the papillary duct.
and apex) is covered by a serosa. An adventitia of loose
 Each renal corpuscle consists of a Bowman's capsule
connective tissue is present at the neck of the bladder.
and glomerulus. The outer layer of Bowman's capsule is
the parietal layer, a simple squamous layer. The inner layer
is the visceral layer. It is formed of highly branched podo-
CHICKEN
cytes that surround the capillary loops of the glomerulus.
In most histologic preparations made for light microscopy.
The urinary system of the chicken consists of large, elon-
it is not possible to distinguish podocytes from the adjacent
uado pue aup yoea uep saan sup paned paes
endothelial cells of the capillary loops. The cavity between
into the urodeum of the cloaca. There is no renal pelvis or
the visceral and parietal layers is the urinary space. The
urinary bladder in the bird.
latter is continuous with the lumen of a proximal convo-
luted tubule at the urinary pole of each corpuscle. At the
Kidney.
opposite, vascular pole, an afferent arteriole and efferent
arteriole unite with the capillaries of the glomerulus.
A
Each kidney of the chicken is partitioned into a cranial,
portion of the distal convoluted tubule is positioned
middle, and caudal subdivision. Each subdivision is com-
between the afferent and efferent arterioles. The macula
prised of lobules. A lobule consists of a large cortical and
densa of the juxtaglomerular apparatus forms a part of the
a smaller medullary component. All of the lobules that
wall of the distal convoluted tubule in this region. Each
drain into a single branch of the ureter constitute a lobe.
macula is composed of closely grouped epithelial cells and
There are two types of nephrons. The cortical (reptil-
is easily identified by the tightly packed nuclei of these cells.
ian) type is more numerous and lacks a loop of Henle. It
Juxtaglomerular cells are modified cells of smooth muscle
is located entirely within the cortex. The other is the less
in the walls of afferent arterioles close to the glomerulus.
numerous medullary (mammalian) type. It has a loop of
They have an epithelioid appearance when seen in cross
Henle (also called a medullary loop), which extends into
section.
the medulla. Cortical nephrons are arranged radially around
 The medulla of each kidney is formed from collecting
central (intralobular) veins of the cortex. Their renal cor-
tubules, thick and thin segments of the loops of Henle, and
puscles lie approximately midway between the intralobular
of
vein and a peripheral interlobular vein. The cortical nephron
 Henle's loop are continuations of the proximal convoluted
has a smaller renal corpuscle than the medullary nephron.
tubules and are located close to the corticomedullary junc-
The large renal corpuscles of medullary nephrons lie close
tion. They are straight tubules whose cells are lined by a
to the medulla. Other than size, there is no structural
brush border. Each thick descending tubule joins abruptly
difference between small and large renal corpuscles. Each
with a thin segment whose wall is formed from flattened
glomerulus contains a compact mass of mesangial cells
cells with round, bulging nuclei. The straight, thick ascend-
(small cells with large nuclei) at its center. The mass appears
ing portion of each loop resembles the distal convoluted
basophilic because of the relatively high concentration of
tubule with which it is continuous.
or oval nuclei, covers the surface of the glomerular capil-
laries, forming the visceral layer of Bowman's capsule.
Ureters, Urinary Bladder, and Urethra
The parietal layer of Bowman's capsule consists of a simple
The walls of the renal pelvis, ureter, urinary bladder, and
squamous epithelium. Juxtaglomerular cells and a macula
urethra include a mucosa, muscularis of smooth muscle,
densa are associated with the renal corpuscle at its vascular
and adventitia. A submucosa may be present. The lining
pole.
of the mucosa is almost exclusively transitional epithelium.
Generally, cortical tissue located between renal cor-
The hilus region, between the capsule of the kidney and
puscles and interlobular veins consists mainly of proximal
the outer wall of the renal pelvis, contains loose connective
convoluted tubules, and that located between renal cor-
tissue and adipose tissue.
puscles and intralobular veins is comprised of distal con-
 The mucosa of the ureter presents a folded appear-
voluted tubules. Cells of proximal convoluted tubules are
ance. Its transitional epithelium is separated from the mus-
low columnar and have a well-developed brush border.
 cularis by a lamina propria. Tubuloalveolar mucous glands
 Distal convoluted tubules are shorter than proximal con-
occur in the lamina propria of the first several centimeters
voluted tubules. Their cuboidal cells lack a brush border,
of the ureter of the horse. A submucosa is lacking in the
but the apex may form a projecting bleb of clear cytoplasm
ureter.
The muscularis consists of inner longitudinal,
that fills much of the lumen. In cortical nephrons a short
middle circular, and outer longitudinal layers. An adventi-
intermediate tubule (which is without a brush border, and
tia of loose connective tissue surrounds the muscularis.
which is about half the diameter of a distal convoluted
The transitional epithelial cells of the urinary bladder
tubule) connects proximal convoluted tubules to distal
 become flattened when the bladder is distended with urine.
convoluted tubules. In medullary nephrons long or short
184
CHAPTER 14
Henle's (medullary) loops connect proximal convoluted
lining epithelium of the smallest collcting ducts is simple
tubules to distal convoluted tubules. The thin segment of
cuboidal. It gradually becomes simple columnar and finally
a medullary loop forms only a part of the descending limb.
changes to pseudostratified columnar in the proximity of
Hence, thin segments are less numerous than either thick
the ureteral branch.
descending or thick ascending portions of the loop. The
diameter of a thin segment is about one-half that of a thick
segment. The cells of the thin segment are cuboidal and do
Ureter
not stain as intensely as the cuboidal cells of the thick seg-
The ureter of the chicken is a muscular duct about 2 mm
ments. Apical cytoplasmic blebs of the cells of the thick
in diameter. Its wall consists of a mucosa, muscularis, and
segments project into the lumen. Collecting tubules occur
in the more peripheral parts of the cortex. They are lined
columnar epithelium. The majority of cells are tall with a
by pale cells with cuboidal to low columnar shape and are
 lesser number of cuboidal cells lying close to the basement
intermediate in size between proximal convoluted and
membrane. The apices of the columnar cells contain
distal convoluted tubules. Collecting tubules join distal
 numerous vacuoles flled with mucus. Beneath the epithe-
convoluted tubules to perilobular collecting ducts. The
lium is a thick layer of loose connective tissue containing
latter unite with those of other lobules to form medullary
varying amounts of diffuse lymphatic tissue and, some-
tracts, each of which is surrounded by a thin capsule of
times, a lymphatic nodule. The muscularis consists of an
connective tissue. Tracts group together to form a medul-
       
lary cone. Each cone terminates in a single branch of the
muscle. A third outer longitudinal layer is present near the
ureter. Cones and tracts contain thin and thick segments
 cloaca. The adventitia consists of a layer of loose connec-
of medullary loops, in addition to collecting ducts. The
tive tissue.
Word Roots
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
Convoive
Rolled together,
The proximal convoluted tubule is
coiled up
highly coiled.
Glomer
A ball of yarn,
The glomerulus of a renal corpuscle
α ball 
is fommed of loops of capillaries
resembling a ball of yarn.
Juxta
Near
Juxtaglomerular cells are close to the
gomerulus.
Macu!
Spot, spotted 
cells of the macula densa give it a
spotted appearance.
Mes
 Middle
Mescangial cells are evident in the
Angi
Vessel
center of the glomerular capillaries of
Neph
Kidney
The dog has about 400,000
 nephrons per kidney.
Ren
Kidney
Renal corpuscles are in the cortex of
the kidney.
Ure
Urine
The ureters and urethra convey urine.
URINARY SYSTEM
185
Figure 14.1
x18
X36
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
4. Pars convoluta
2. Capsule 
 5. Pars radiata 
 3. Medulla 
 6. Renal corpuscle
Figure 14.1. Cortex and Portion of Medulla, Kidney, Dog. Renal
corpuscles are limited to the cortex.
Figure 14.2. Cortex, Kidney, Dog (Masson's). Pars radiata alter-
nate with the pars convoluta.
Regions of the kidney and their major
components:
A. Cortex of the Kidney
1. Pars convoluta (cortical labyrinth): Renal corpus-
cles, proximal and distal convoluted tubules, peritubu-
lar capillaries, portions of collecting tubules
2. Pars radiata (medullary rays): Collecting tubules
and portions of the loops of Henle
B. Medulla: Collecting tubules, thick and thin segments of
the loops of Henle, and vasa recta 
186
CHAPTER 14
KEY
1. Bowman's capsule, parietal layer
7. Macula densa
 2. Capsule of kidney
 8. Nucleus of podocyte 
3. Collecting tubule
 9. Proximal convoluted tubule
4. Connective tissue
10. Smooth muscle tissue
 5. Distal convoluted tubule 
11. Subcapsular vein
1
 6. Fat vacuole
12. Urinary space
Figure 14.3. Capsule and Superficial Cortex, Kidney, Cat. The
capsule of the kicdney consists entirely of connective tissue in the
cat.
Figure 14.4. Capsule, Kidney, Sheep. The inner portion of the
Figure 14.3
X 125
capsule of the kidney of ruminants contains a distinct layer of
smooth muscle. Smooth muscle is also present in the capsule of
the dog, horse, and pig.
Figure 14.5. Renal Corpuscle, Kidney, Puppy. In young animals,
the podocytes of the visceral layer of Bowman's capsule have
round to oval nuclei.
Figure 14.6. Renal Corpuscle, Kidney, Cat. Cells of the proximal 
convoluted tubules of the cat contain numerous Fat vacuoles. A
macula densa, consisting of closely packed cells, Forms a portion
of the wall of the distal convoluted tubule adiacent to the vascular
pole of the renal corpuscle.
 Synonyms
Figure 14.4
× 250
Bowman's capsule = glomerular capsule
Parietal layer of Bowman's capsule = capsular epithelium
Urinary space = capsular space 
Visceral layer of Bowman's capsule = glomerular epithelium
121
5
Figure 14.5
Figure 14.6
x250
URINARY SYSTEM
187
KEY
1. Afferent arteriole
 6. Juxtaglomerular cells 
2 Bowman's capsule, parietcl
7. Macula densa
layer
8. Proximal convoluted tubule
3. Brush border
9. Urinary space
 4. Collecting tubule
 5. Distal convoluted tubule
Figure 14.7. Cortex, Kidney, Horse. Porfions of three renal cor-
8
puscles, each with an accompanying macula densa, gre present.
in the horse, the macula densa commonly consists of a stratihed
layer of cells.
Figure 14.8. Cortex, Kidney, Horse. 
A collecting tubule with
9
clearly deined cells and a smooth lining can be contrasted with
proximal convoluted tubules whose cells possess a brush border
of microvilli.
Figure 14.7
x125
Figure 14.9. Cortex, Kidney, Pig. The junction of a proximal
convoluted tubule with the Bowman's capsule of a renal corpuscle
is shown.
Fgure 14.10. Afferent Arteriole, Kidney, Pig. An afferent carte-
riole, with juxtaglomerular cells, is entering α glomerulus. The
juxtaglomerular cell are epithelioid. Note that a macula densa 
borders the alfferent arteriole.
Summary of histologic features of the nephron
and collecting tubule
8
Nephron
4
A. Renal corpuscle 
1. Bowman's capsule
a.
 Parietal layer: Simple squamous epithelium 
b. Urinary space: The cavity between the parietol
and visceral layers
Figure 14.8
C.
Visceral layer: Formed of podocytes, which
x250
are cells with numerous processes that surround
capillaries of the glomerulus; usually it is difficult
to distinguish between podocytes and the endo-
thelicl cells of the glomerular capillaries
9
2. Glomerulus: A tuft of capillaries within the
8
 Bowman's capsule
B.
 Proximal convoluted tubule: Lined by, plump
simple cuboidal cells that have brush borders of micro-
villi, which give the lumen α somewhat scalloped
convoluted tubules are longer than distal convoluted
tubules and therefore more obvious in sections through
the cortex
C. Loop of Henle
1. Thick descending portion: Lined by cells that 
8
resemble the proximal convoluted tubule with which
it is continuous
Figure 14.9
x250
2. Thin segment: Formed of α single layer of squa-
mous cells wih round, bulging nuclei
3. Thick ascending portion: Epithelial cells resem-
ble the distal convoluted tubule with which it is
continuous
D. Distal convoluted tubule: Lined by simple cuboi-
dal cells smaller than those of the proximal convoluted
tubule and without a brush border, so that the lumen
has α smoother internal surface; cell boundaries are 
indistinct
Collecting tubule: Epithelial cells vary rom simple
cuboidal to simple columnar; cell boundaries between the 
6
cells are evident
Papillary duct: Terminal portion of the collecting tubule
：
lined by simple columnar or pseudostratified epithelium
8
5
Figure 14.10
x250
Figure 14.11
×250
Figure 14.15
x250
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
 9. Proximal convoluted tubule
 2. Afferent arteriole
10. Renal papilla 
 3. Cavity of renal pelvis
11. Thick cscending, Henle's loop
 4. Collecting tubule
12. Thick descending, Henle's loop
 5. Collecting tubule, surface cut
13. Thin segment, Henle's loop
11
2
 6. Efferent arteriole
14. Urinary space
®
7. Macula densa
15. Vasa recta
8. Papillary duct
Figure 14.ll. Afferent and Efferent Arterioles, Kidney, Pig.
Junction of a glomerulus with an afferent arteriole. A macula 
densa parallels the afferent arteriole.
Figure14.12
x250
Figure 14.12. Pars Radiata, l.s., Cortex, Kidney, Horse. The
component tubules of a medullary ray include collecting tubules
as well as thick descending and thick ascending porions of the
loop of Henle.
Figure 14.13. Renal Papilla, Kidney, Dog. Papillary ducts open
 onto the tip of a renal papilla.
Figure 14.14. Medulla, Kidney, Dog. Nuclei of the cells lining
1
the thin segment of Henle's loop are rounced; those of endothelial
cells of the vasa recta are Hatfened and more darkly stained.
Figure 14.15. Medul, Kidney, Horse. Various porions of uri-
niferous tubules appear in transverse section.
Figure 14.13
x12.5
15
5
4
Figure 14.14
x250
URINARY SYSTEM
189
×180
Figure 14.17
X90
KEY
1. Cavity of renal pelvis
4. Thick ascending, Henle's loop
 2. Collecting tubule
 5. Thin segment, Henle's loop
3. Papillary duct
6. Vasa recta
Figure 14.16. Medulla, Kidney, Cow [Trichrome). Longitudinal
sections of vasa rectae and portions of uriniferous tubules. The
vasa rectae are filled with red blood cells (stained orange).
Figure 14.17. Renal Papilla, Kidney, Goat. Papillary ducts near
the tip of a renal papilla are lined by transitional epithelium.
190
CHAPTER 14
KEY
1. Adventitia
 7. Papillary duct
2. Collecting tubule
8. Reticular fiber
3. Erythrocytes
9. Thin segment, Henle's loop
4. Lamina propria
10. Transitional epithelium
 5. Mucous connective tissue
11. Vasa recta
 6. Muscularis
Figure 14.18. Medulla, Kidney, Goat. A papillary duct, I.s.,
some distance away from the apex of the papilla, is lined by
columnar cells. A thin segment of Henle's loop parallels the ducf.
tubules are encircled by reticular fibers (stained black). The ibers
Figure 14.18
x250
provide α supportive ramework For other portions of the urinifer-
ous tubules as well.
Figure 14.20. Urachus, Umbilical Cord, Cow. The vrachus
(allantoic stalk) is lined by a transitional epithelium. A portion of
the lining is shown.
Figure 14.21. Ureter, X.s., Cat (Masson's). The middle circular
layer of smooth muscle of the muscularis is most evident. Inner
and outer longitudinal layers cre present but sparse in this section.
8
Figure 14.19
×250
10
Figure 14.20
x125
Figure 14.21
X62.5
URINARY SYSTEM
191
Figure 14.22
x25
Figure 14.26
x250
KEY
1. Capillary
5.Muscularis mucosae
 2 Lamina propria
6. Submucosa
 3. Mucous gland 
 7. Transitional epithelium
4. Muscularis
Figure 14.22. Ureter, X.s., Horse (Masson's). The proximol 
(anterior) portion of the horse's ureter contains tubuloalveolar
mucous glands.
Figure 14.23. Ureter, X.s., Horse. Distally (posteriorly), the
horse's ureter lacks mucous glands. The muscularis consists of an
igure 14.23
x12.5
inner longitudinal,middle circular, and outer longitudinal layer
of smooth muscle.
Figure 14.24. Urinary Bladder, Pig. The mucosa to a portion of
the muscularis is shown. Scattered muscle cells of the muscularis
 mucosae are located adjacent to the lamina propria.
Figure 14.25. Urinary Bkdder, Cow. The bladder contains a
muscularis mucosae between the lamina propria and submucosa.
Only a portion of the thick muscularis is shown.
Figure 14.26. Urinary Bladder, Goat. Numerous capillaries are
located beneath the transitional epitheliallining of the bladder of
ruminants.
Figure 14.24
x125
Figure 14.25
12.5
192
CHAPTER 14
Figure 14.29
x125
KEY
1.Cortex
 5. Proximal convoluted tubule
 2. Distal convoluted tubule
6. Renal corpuscle, large
 3. Intralobular vein
 7. Renal corpuscle, small
4. Medullary cone
Figure 14.27. Kidney, Chicken. Cortical parenchyma and
portion of amedullary cone are shown.An intralobular vein and
both corical (small and medullary (large) renal corpuscles are 
apparent.
Figure 14.28. Kidney, Chicken. A portion of a medullary cone
is surrounded by cortical lobules. The intralobular veins of two
 cortical lobules are clearly represented.
X36
Figure 14.29. Cortex, Kidney, Chicken. An intralobular vein is
surrounded by cortical tissue. Distal convoluted tubules are located 
mainly in the region of the intralobular vein.
Figure 14.28
X36
URINARY SYSTEM
193
Figure 14.30
X360
Figure 14.32
×90
KEY
1. Bowman's capsule, parietal layer 9. Muscularis, outer layer 
 2. Collecting duct
 10. Nucleus of podocyte 
 3. Collecting tubule
11. Proximal convoluted tubule
 4. Distal convoluted tubule
12. Pseudostratified epithelium
5. Erythrocytes
13. Serosa
 6. Lymphatic tissue
14. Thick ascending, Henle's loop
 7. Mesangial cells
15. Thin segment, Henle's loop 
8. Muscularis, inner layer
16. Urinary space
2
Figure 14.30. Cortex, Kidney, Chicken. In the chicken, the vis-
ceral layer of Bowman's capsule is composed of podocytes that
have large round or oval nuclei. The center of the glomerulus
Figure 14.31
x250
contains a compact mass of mesangial cells.
Fgure 14.31. Medulary Cone, Kidney, Chicken. Various por-
  ao a  sn snan jo s
lining the thick ascending portions of Henle's loop show charac-
teristic clear cytoplasmic blebs. A small porion of the cortex
containing a proximal convoluted tubule canbe seen on theupper
right side.
Figure 14.32. Ureter, X.s., Chicken. The lamina propria is infl-
trated with lymphocytes. Outer circular and inner longitudinal
layers of the muscularis are distinguishable. The epithelium is
pseudostratfified columnar.
194
CHAPTER 14
15
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
MAMMALS
Air flows from the nostrils through a system of passages to the respiratory surfaces of
the lungs. As it progresses, it becomes warmed, humidifed, and cleansed of some of its 
particulate matter. Dust, which finds its way to the alveoli, is ultimately consumed by
ssd-ne  po si no a ses-- a ai nd sd
system are the nasal cavity, pharynx, larynx, trachea, bronchi, and the various smaller
subdivisions of the bronchial tree leading to the alveoli.
Nasal Cavity
Air from the naris enters the vestibule, the frst part of the nasal cavity. The vestibule is
lined by a stratified squamous epithelium, which is continuous with the skin externally
and with the respiratory portion of the nasal cavity internally. In the horse, hairy skin
continues into the vestibule. A lamina propria and underlying submucosa support the
vestibular epithelium.
The respiratory portion of the nasal cavity is lined by a ciliated, pseudostratified
columnar epithelium with goblet cells. The lamina propria contains tubuloalveolar
glands. The latter are mainly serous, but mucous and mixed glands do occur. Glands are
The olfactory epithelium (pseudostratified colummar) is composed of olfactory (sensory),
supporting, and basal cells. Bowman's glands, tubular and mucoserous, occur within the lamina
 propria. They open to the surface through ducts lined by cuboidal or fattened cells. A submucosa
lies below the lamina propria.
195
Pharynx
in histologic sections, the mucosa of large bronchi has few
folds. Folds increase as the bronchi decrease in diameter.
The nasopharynx and oropharynx are subdivisions of the
The smallest bronchi give rise to suborders of bronchioles.
pharynx. The former is lined by a ciliated, pseudostratified
The smallest of the latter, the terminal bronchioles, branch into
columnar epithelium with goblet cells, whereas the latter is
two or more respiratory bronchioles, which divide into alveolar
covered by a stratifed squamous epithelium. The lamina
ducts that, in turm, empty into alveolar sacs.
 propria contains tubular mixed glands in the nasopharynx and
Bronchioles lack cartilage and glands. Glands, however,
mucous glands in the oropharynx. In carmivores, the glands of
may extend into bronchioles from bronchi in cats. Spirally or
the oropharynx are mixed. A network of elastic fibers separates
obliquely arranged smooth muscle forms part of the wall of a
the mucosa from an underlying sheet of skeletal muscle consist-
bronchiole. The amount of smooth muscle is proportional to
ing of circularly and longitudinally arranged cells. The muscu-
the size of the bronchiole. Large bronchioles are lined by cili-
lature is separated from an adventitia of loose connective tissue
ated columnar cells, whereas the smallest (terminal) bronchi-
by a layer of connective tissue containing elastic networks.
oles are lined proximally by ciliated cuboidal cells and, distally,
by nonciliated cells. The mucosa of the bronchioles is folded,
umless the lungs were infated at the time when the tissue was
Larynx
processed.
 Respiratory bronchioles branch from the ends of terminal
The larynx is lined in part by a stratifed squamous epithelium
bronchioles. They are lined by a cuboidal epithelium, which
and partly by a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium.
becomes fattened distally, and their wall contains some smooth
Numerous elastic fbers are present in the lamina propria.
muscle. Alveoli are scattered within the epithelium. Respiratory
Glands (serous, mucous, and mixed) occur in the lamina propria
bronchioles are best developed in the cat and dog.
and submucosa, but are lacking in the vocal and vestibular
Alveolar ducts branch from respiratory bronchioles. Their
folds. Hyaline and elastic cartilage provide support for the
thin walls are constructed entirely of alveoli. The lip of each
laryngeal wall. The elastic cartilage of the epiglottis may be
alveolus of an alveolar duct contains smooth muscle arranged
partially or completely replaced by adipose tissue, as in carmi-
circumferentially. The presence of the muscle gives the lip of
vores. Skeletal muscles are an integral part of the laryngeal
the alveolus a knoblike appearance when histologic sections
structure.
occur at right angles to the long axis of the muscle cells.
Ultimately, each alveolar duct branches into three or more
alveolar sacs. No smooth muscle is present in the sacs.
Trachea
Therefore, the alveoli, which form the walls of the sacs, do not
have lips with knoblike expansions as do those of the alveolar
The trachea is lined by a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar
ducts.
epithelium with goblet cells. A lamina propria and submucosa
 Alveoli are lined mainly by exceedingly thin squamous
lie below the epithelium, but are not clearly demarcated from
epithelial cells (type I alveolar cells) and fewer type II alveolar
one another. Glands, mostly mixed, occur in the deeper layers
cells, which produce surfactant. Alveoli are separated from one
of the lamina propria and within the submucosa. Rings of
another by a thin, highly vascularized layer of fine collagenous
hyaline cartilage, which are incomplete dorsally, support the
and elastic fbers. This layer, together with the squamous cells
tracheal wall. A layer of smooth muscle, the trachealis muscle,
lining the adjacent alveoli, forms an alveolar septum.
is located dorsally in the trachea. It is positioned intermal to the
 gap in the tracheal cartilages in the horse, pig, and ruminants.
It lies extermal to the gap in the cat and dog. An adventitia of
connective tissue completes the wall of the trachea.
CHICKEN
The nostrils, nasal cavity, pharynx, trachea, syrinx, bronchi,
Bronchial Tree and the Lungs
air capillaries, and air sacs comprise the respiratory system
of the bird.
The trachea bifurcates into bronchi, which enter the lungs,
where they branch extensively. The lungs are covered by a
visceral pleura, which is thick in large mammals and thinner in
Nasal Cavity
carmivores. Connective tissue and some smooth muscle form a
part of the visceral pleura. The interior of the lungs contains a
The skin enters the nostrils to the first part of the nasal cavity,
framework of connective tissue, rich in elastic fibers, which
the vestibule, which is lined by a modified, keratinized, strati-
supports the bronchial tree and divides the lungs into lobules.
fied squamous epithelium. It is characterized by epithelial cells
The interlobular connective tissue is sparse in carmivores.
that are organized into columns, giving the surface a wavy
A ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium with
appearance. The respiratory region of the nasal cavity is lined
goblet cells lines the bronchi. The epithelium becomes reduced
by a ciliated, pseudostratifed columnar epithelium. Mucous
in height as the caliber of the bronchi diminishes. The lamina
glands occur within the respiratory epithelium. The olfactory
 propria is surrounded by a layer of obliquely arranged smooth
epithelium is pseudostratified columnar. It is located in the
muscle. The connective tissue extermal to the musculature con-
upper portions of the respiratory regions. Its structure, like that
tains mixed glands and plates of hyaline cartilage. In the cat,
Suoddns pue iosuas jeseq jo pasoduos si 'sheuueur jo
the bronchial cartilages may contain elastic fibers. When seen
cells. Bowman's glands are present.
196
CHAPTER 15
Pharynx
Primary bronchi are lined by a ciliated pseudostratified
columnar epithelium with mucous glands and goblet cells.
The pharynx is lined by a stratified squamous epithelium. A
Extrapulmonary primary bronchi have C-shaped cartilages,
dense lamina propria and less dense submucosa lie below the
while the walls of intrapulmonary primary bronchi contain
epithelium. Salivary glands (mucous) occur within the lamina
cartilaginous plates, which become scarce distally. Bundles of
propria or submucosa. Bundles of skeletal muscle occur below
smooth muscle, mainly circular, occur below the lamina propria.
the floor of the pharynx.
 Numerous elastic fbers are found throughout the connective
tissue of the bronchi.
Secondary bronchi are lined by a ciliated, columnar epi-
Larynx, Trachea, and Syrinx
thelium with mucous cells. There is a lamina propria and a
At the anterior end of the trachea is a cranial larynx, which is
well-developed muscularis.
reinforced by a cartilaginous ring. A caudal larynx (syrinx) is
 Parabronchi are lined by a cuboidal epithelium. A thin layer
located at the posterior end of the trachea. The trachea is sup-
of connective tissue lies below the epithelium. Bundles of smooth
 ported by overlapping, complete cartilaginous rings. It is lined
muscle cells lie below the connective tissue layer. The inner
by a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium containing
wall of each tertiary bronchus is pierced by numerous openings,
numerous, simple alveolar mucous glands. In the posterior
each of which leads into a cavity called an atrium (air vesicle).
portion of the trachea, the glands are replaced by goblet cells.
A lamina propria and submucosa are present. Each consists of
capillaries, lined by squamous cells, open into atria. Their simple
dense connective tissue. The submucosa is rich in elastic
squamous lining is a respiratory surface and is analogous to
the lining epithelium of the alveoli of the mammalian lung.
fibers.
The syrinx, or voice box, is located in the thoracic cavity
Numerous vascular capillaries surround the air capillaries and
at the point of tracheal bifurcation into two bronchi. Intemal
 are separated from the latter by a basement membrane.
and extermal tympanic membranes, located in the region of the
tracheal bifurcation, characterize the wall of the syrinx.
Intersyringeal cartilages and a bony wedge, the pessulus,
Air Sacs
 provide support in the region of the syrinx.
Air sacs are paired or unpaired, thin-walled structures occurring
in the cervical, clavicular, thoracic, and abdominal regions of
Bronchi and Air Capillaries
the body. They connect to the lungs by bronchi. Many of the
hollow bones of the fowl contain extensions of the air sacs.
Each  extrapulmonary  primary bronchus
sentersalung
Among others, these bones include the stermum, humerus,
as an intrapulmonary primary bronchus (mesobronchus).
 pelvic girdle, and most of the thoracic and cervical vertebrae.
Secondary bronchi stem from the primary bronchi and branch
The air sacs are lined by squamous, ciliated cuboidal, and cili-
 into numerous parabronchi (tertiary bronchi) within the lung.
 ated columnar cells. The epithelium is supported by a thin layer
The latter anastomose with each other. Tiny, respiratory air
of connective tissue consisting of collagenous and elastic fibers.
capillaries form extensive networks interconnecting the tertiary
sea ui adid pou op pue pazeinosa food ane soes au
bronchi.
exchange.
Word Roots
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
Alveo!
A cavity;
 The bronchial tree of mammals ends in tiny.
pit, socket
thin walled outpocketingscalled alveoi.
Bronch
Windpipe
The bronchi and bronchioles conduct air.
Olfact
 Smell 
OHfactory cells of the olfactory epithelium
play a role in the sense of smell.
Trache
Windpipe
 Air from the larynx is conveyed to bronchi
by the trocheo.
Viscera
The organs
The viscerarl pleura covers the lungs.
of the body
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
197
5
6
×12.5
Figure 15.4
x125
KEY
1. Basal cells
 8. Olfactory cells, nuclei
2 Bone
 9. Pseudostratified epithelium 
 3. Bowman's gland 
10. Sensory hairs 
 4. Cartilage
11. Serous gland
 5. Cavernous vein 
12. Stratified squcmous epithelium
6. Goblet cell 
13. Supporting cells, nuclei
 7. Nasal cavity
Figure 15.1. Nasal Cavity, Vestibule, Dog. This portion of the
vestibule is supported byhyaline cartiloge cnd lined bya stratihed
squamous epithelium. Numerous cavernous veins occur through-
out the connective tissue of the mucosa. In addition, there cre
Figure 15.2
<12.5
tubular serous glands within the connective tissue.
Figure 15.2. Portion of Nasal Concha, Dog. The scroll-like nasal
conchae cre supported by spongy bone and are covered by a
mucous membrane with'a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar 
epithelium.
Figure 15.3. Olfactory Epithelium, Nasal Cavity, Dog (Masson's).
This thick, pseudostratified columnar epithelium is composed of
three types of cells. Basal cells are located at the level of the
basement membrane. The nuclei of olfactory cells Form a broad
band in the central portion of the epithelium. The nuclei of sup-
porting cells are pale and Form the uppermost level of nuclei. The
10
apices of olfactory cells bear sensory hairs.
Figure 15.4. Respiratory Epithelium, Nasal Concha, Dog. The
ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium with goblet cells
and underlying, vascular, loose connective tissue and bone are
shown.
13
Figure 15.3
×180
Figure 15.5
x250
Figure 15.9
x250
11
Figure 15.6
X62.5
Figure 15.10
X12.5
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
9. Serous acinus
 2. Arytenoid cartilage
10. Skeletal muscle
3. Duct
11. Stratified squcmous epithelium,
 4. Elastic cartilage
nonkeratinized
5.Intercalated duct
12. Striated duct
 6. Lamina propria
13.Submucosa
7. Mixed gland
14. Taste bud 
8. Pseudostratified epithelium
Figure 15.5. Lateral Nasal Gland, Dog (Masson's). This serous
 gland is located in the maxillary sinus in carnivores.
Figure 15.6. Nasopharynx, Dog. This portion of the pharynx is
Figure 15.7
X25
lined by a ciliated, pseudostratied columnar epithelium with
goblet cells. Mixed glands are present. The muscularis consists of
skeletal muscle.
13
Figure 15.7. Epiglottis, Dog. The supporting elastic cartilage of
the epiglottis is heavily infiltrated in its mid-region by adipose 
tissue in carnivores.
Figure 15.8. Epiglotis, l.s., Sheep. Blocklike chunks of elastic
cartilage, withouf infiltrating adipose fissue, are found in the 
epiglofis of the sheep and goat.
Figure 15.9. Epiglottis, Sheep. Occasionally, taste buds cre
Found in the epithelium of the laryngeal surface of the epiglottis.
Figure 15.10. Glois, X.s., Goat. The glottis is supported by the
arytenoid cartilages (elastic) and is lined by a nonkeratinized
Figure15.8
x12.5
stratified squamous epithelium.
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
199
14
1
4
x12.5
Figure 15.15
X62.5
14
KEY
1. Adipose tissue
10. Plasma cell
2. Arytenoid cartilage
11. Pseudostratified epithelium
3. Elastic Fibers
12. Serous gland
4. Esophagus
13. Skeletal muscle
5. Goblet cell
14. Stratified squamous epithelium
6. Hyaline carilage
15. Submucosa
 7. Lamina propria
16. Trachea
 8. Mixed gland 
17. Trachealis muscle
9. Muscularis externa
18. Vocal ligament 
Figure 15.11. Vocal Fold, l.s., Cat. Junction of the vocal fold with
the arytenoid cartilage.
Figure 15.12
x25
Figure 15.12. Vocal Fold, Goat (Orcein). The vocal fold consists
of α Fold of the mucous membrane. The vocal Fold encloses the
8
vocal ligament, which is a band of elastic fibers.
Figure 15.13. Trachea and Esophagus, X.s., Cat. Note that the
trachealis muscle (smooth) lies external to the gap in the C-shaped
cartilage in carnivores.
6
Figure 15.14. Trachea, x.s., Cat. The trachea is lined by α cili-
ated, pseudostratified columncr epithelium with goblet cells. The
lamina propria contains α band of longitudinally oriented elastic
fibers.
Figure 15.15. Trached, X.s., Horse. A thick band of longitudi-
nally arranged elastic fibers extends from the lamina propria into
the submucosa.
Figure 15.13
X12.5
Figure 15.14
x250
200
CHAPTER 15
10
10
Figure 15.16
x25
Figure 15.20
x25
KEY
1. Adipose fissue
 7. Mixed glands
 2. Elastic fibers 
8. Muscularis
 3. Fibroelastic membrane
9. Perichondrium
4. Goblet cell
10. Pseudostratified epithelium
 5. Hyaline cartilage
11. Tracheal glands 
 6. Lamina propria 
12. Trachealis muscle
Figure 15.16. Trachea, X.s., Cow. In noncarnivores, the trachea-
lis muscle attaches to the perichondrium on the inside of the
very rich in elastic fibers.
x250
Figure 15.17. Trachea, X.s., Cow. The trachea is lined by a cili-
Figure15.17
oted, pseudostratihed columnar epithelium with goblet cells.
Figure 15.18. Trachea, X.s., Sheep (Orcein}. A fibroelastic mem-
brane surrounds the C-shaped tracheal cartilage and also spans
the gap in the cartilage.
S
Figure 15.19. Trachea, X.s., Goat (Orcein). Numerous elastic
fibers occur below the epithelium.Elastic fibers are also present
where the trachealis muscle joins with the perichondrium.
Figure 15.20. Primary B
Bronchus, Extrapulmonary, X.s., Dog
(Mallory's). Plates of hyaline carilage support the wall of the
bronchus. Smooth muscle bundles of the muscularis occur between
the plates and internal to them.
igure 15.18
x12.5
X25
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
201
Figure 15.21
X25
Figure 15.25
x250
KEY
1. Alveolus
 7. Lamina propria
1
2 Bronchiole
8. Lymphatic nodule
 3. Columnar epithelium, ciliated
 9. Mixed gland 
4. Elastic band
10. Muscularis
5. Goblet cell
11. Pseudostratified epithelium
6. Hyaline cartilage
12. Serous gland
Fgure 15.2l. Bronchus, X.s., Cow (Masson's).
Figure 15.22. Bronchus, X.s., Cow. Detail of the wall of a bron-
dhus. Numerous lymphocytes are present below the epithelium.
62.5
Figure 15.23. Small Bronchus, X.s., and Bronchioles, Cat.
Bronchioles lack cartilaginous plates and possess a simple
epithelium.
Figure 15.24. large Bronchiole, X.s., Cat. In cats, submucosal
serous glands extend from bronchi into the bronchioles.
Figure 15.25. Large Bronchiole, X.s., Cat. Detail of a portion of
the bronchiole shown in Figure 15.24.
igure15.23
25
Figure 15.24
X62.5
202
CHAPTER 15
igure 15.26
X125
Figure 15.30
x125
KEY
1. Alveolar duct
6.Elastic fibers
2Alveolar sac
7. Macrophage
3. Alveolus
8. Muscularis
4. Bronchiole
9. Respiratory bronchiole
5. Cuboidal epithelium
10. Smooth muscle 
Figure 15.26. Bronchioles, Pig (Orcein}. The fissues of the lung 
are heavily infiltrated with elastic fibers.
Figure 15.27. Respiratory Bronchiole, X.s., Cat. Respiratory
bronchioles are lined by a cuboidal epithelium and have alveoli
in their walls.
Figure 15.27
x125
Figure 15.28. Respiratory Bronchiole, I.s., Sheep. Note the
cuboidal epithelium, alveoli, and the small amount of smooth
10
muscle tissue in the wall of the respiratory bronchiole.
Figure 15.29. Alveolar Ducts and Alveolar Sacs, Sheep. An
alveolar duct is characterized by the presence of smooth muscle
arranged circumferentially in the lips of the alveoli that form its
wall. Conversely, the alveoli of alveolar sacs lack smooth muscle.
Figure 15.30. Alveolar Duct, x.s., Sheep. Detail of an alveolar
duct. The smooth muscle associated with the entrance of the
alveoli that form the wall of the duct is evident.
x125
Figure 15.29
X62.5
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
203
11
Figure 15.34
x12.5
KEY
1. Alveolar septum
7. Macrophage
2 Alveolus
8. Mesothelium
 3. Bronchiole
9. Septum
4. Bronchus
10. Type Il alveolar cell
 5. Elastic band
11. Visceral pleura
5
6. Erythrocyte in capillary
0]
hgure 15.31. Alveoli, Cat. Detail of alveolar septa.
Fgure 15.32. Visceral Pleura, Dog. The visceral pleura of car-
nivores is relatively thin.
11
Figure 15.33. Visceral Pleura, Horse. The visceral pleura of
domestic mammals, except carnivores, is thick. Incomplete septa 
extend inward from the visceral pleura in the horse.
Figure 15.31
×360
Fgure 15.34. Visceral Pleura, Pig. Lungs are highly lobulated in
the pig and ruminants. Unlike those of the horse, the septa are
complete.
X250
Figure 15.33
×25
Figure 15.35
X62.5
Figure 15.39
×125
KEY
1. Alveolus
 9. Parietal pleura
2. Basal cells
10. Pseudostratified epithelium 
3. Epidermis
11. Pulmonary vein
 4. Intercostal muscle 
12. Pyknotic nucleus
 5. Lamina propria 
13. Septum 
6. Mucous gland 
14. Smooth muscle 
7. Nerve, unmyelinated 
15. Turbinate cartilage
8. Neuromuscular spindle
16. Vestibular epithelium
Figure 15.35. Parietal Pleura, Cat. Parietal pleura and intercos-
tal muscle. The parietal pleura lines the wall of the pleural cavity.
I consists of a mesothelium and underlying connective tissue.
Figure 15.36
×125
Figure 15.36. Lung, Cow (Masson's). In the cow and pig, pul-
monary veins have thick bands of circularly arranged smooth
muscle.
Fgure 15.37. Nasal Cavity, Chicken. The vestibule is lined by α
uniquely structured, keratinized, stratifed squamous epithelium
(see Figure 15.38). The vestibular epithelium blends with the
epidermis on the inner side of each nostril. In this micrograph,
these epithelia lie to either side of a turbinate cartilage.
16
Figure 15.38. Vestibular Epithelium, Chicken. This keratinized,
stratihied squamous epithelium is characterized by the presence
pyknotic nuclei. One or two layers of basal cells are present. The
5
outer  surface  of the epithelium  presents  a  corrugated
appearance.
Figure 15.37
X62.5
Figure 15.39. Respiratory Epithelium, Chicken (Masson's). This
ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium is interrupted by
simple, branched, alveolar mucous glands.
Figure 15.38
× 250
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
205
1
Figure 15.40
x250
Figure 15.44
x25
8
KEY
1. Basal cell
 7. Olfactory cells, nuclei
 2 Bony tracheal ring 
 8. Pseudostratified epithelium 
 3. Bowman's gland 
9. Skeletal muscle
4. Cartilaginous tracheal ring
 10. Stratified squcmous epithelium 
 5. Mucous gland 
11. Supporting cell, nucleus
 6. Nerve, unmyelinated 
Figure 15.40. Olfactory Epithelium, Chicken (Masson's). This
pseudostratied columnar epithelium is similar fo that Found in
mammals (see Figure
e 15.3]. It is composed of basal, olfactory,
 and supporting cells.
9
Figure 15.41. Trachea, ls., Chicken. Cartilaginous tracheal
Figure 15.41
x12.5
rings are complete and overlap each other. When the trachea is
cut longitudinally, as in this preparation, the rings are cut trans-
versely and present a lenticular profile.
Figure 15.42. Trachea, X.s., Chicken. Simple alveolar mucous
glands occur in the ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium.
Portions of two overlapping tracheal rings are present. The inner
ring was cut through its thin edge, while the outer one was cut
through its thick middle region. See Figure 15.41 for an example
of the shape of a tracheal ring that has been cut transversely.
Figure 15.43. Trachea, x.s.,.(
 Chicken. Intraepithelial mucous
glands are abundant in the trachea of the chicken. Also see Figure
15.39.
Fgure 15.44. Trachea, Near Syrinx, Chicken. The maiority of
the posterior, complete rings of the trachea shown here are bony.
The ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium of the trachea
Figure15.42
X62.5
is Followed in the syrinx by a stratied squamous epithelium.
4
Figure 15.43
x125
206
CHAPTER 15
KEY
1. Bony tracheal ring
6. Internal tympanic membrane
 2. Bronchial rings
 7. Medial bronchial wall
3. Cartilaginous tracheal rings 
8. Pessulus
4. External tympanic membrane
9. Stratilied squcmous epithelium
 5. Intermediate syringeal cartilage
Figure 15.45. Trachea, Syrinx, and Primary Bronchi, l.s.
Chicken. As this drawing indicates, the syrinx is an upside-down-
Y-shaped structure positioned between the trachea and the
primcry bronchi. Two pairs of thin membranes, the external and
internal tympanic membranes, produce sound. The syrinx is sup-
5
 ported by cartilages and a wedge-shaped cartilaginous or bony
pessulus.
Figure 15.46. Syrinx, I.s., Chicken. The external and internal
tympanic membranes of the syrinx, as well as the bony pessulus 
and an intermediate syringeal cartilage, are shown.
Figure 15.47. Syrinx, l.s., Chicken. A portion of the external
tympanic membrane and intermediate syringeal cartilage.
Figure 15.45
Figure 15.46
×25
Figure 15.47
x125
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
207
KEY
1. Atrium
9. Pessulus
2. Bronchial cartilage
5
10. Primary bronchus
3. Elastic fibers
 11. Pseudostratified epithelium
 4. External tympanic membrane
 12. Secondary bronchus
5. Intermedicte syringeal cartilage
 13. Smooth muscle
 6. Internal tympanic membrane 
 14. Stratified columnar epithelium
 7. Lymphatic tissue
15. Stratified squamous epithelium 
8. Parabronchus 
16. Syrinx
5
Figure 15.48. Syrinx, I.s., Chicken (Orcein). Intermediate syrin-
 geal cartilages cre connected by numerous elastic ibers.
Figure 15.48
X62.5
Figure 15.49. Syrinx, I.s., Chicken. Portion of pessulus and inter-
nal tympanic membrane. The latter is covered by both a ciliated,
stratified columnar epithelium and by α stratified squamous
epithelium.
Figure 15.50. Tympanic Membrane and Primary Bronchus,
Chicken. Three transected bronchial cartilages. Bronchial carti-
lages are incomplete (C-shaped). They do not extend to the
medial side of the bronchus.
Figure 15.5 1. Lung, Chicken. Longitudinal section through a sec-
ondary bronchus and parabronchi. The presence of numerous
bronchial tree from the secondary bronchus.
Figure 15.49
x125
16
10
Figure 15.50
×12.5
13
12
Figure 15.51
x25
208
CHAPTER 15
KEY
1. Air capillary
8. Granulocyte
2. Atrium
9. Macrophage
3. Bone
10. Mucous cells
4. Cavity of air sac
11. Parabronchus 
5.Connective tissue lamina
12. Secondary bronchus
6. Epithelium 
13. Simple squamous epithelium
7. Erythrocytes in vascular capillary 14. Smooth muscle 
Figure 15.52. Lung, Chicken. Cross section of α parabronchus
and a portion of an adiacent secondary bronchus.
Figure 15.53. Lung, Chicken. Detail of the wall of a parabron-
X62.5
chus. Note the continvity of the air capillaries with the atria. The
latter are lined by an epithelium that varies from simple cuboidal
to simple squamous.
11
Figure 15.54. Abdominal Air Sac, Chicken. The wall of the air
4
sac consists of a connective tissue lamina and an epithelium that
may be simple squamous, cuboidal, or ciliated columnar. Air sacs
Figure 15.55. Humerus, X.s., Chicken (Masson's). Many bones
of the chicken contain extensions of air sacs.
×250
Figure 15.54
x250
+
Figure 15.55
x125
RESPIRATORY SYSTEM
209
16
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
MAMMALS
The pituitary, pineal, thyroid, parathyroid, and adrenal glands possess certain fea-
tures that distinguish them as organs of the endocrine system. They are very rich
in wide, thin-walled vessels called sinusoids. The sinusoids are intimately associ-
ated with parenchymal cells, whose secretory products (hormones) pass directly into the
circulatory system. Endocrine glands lack ducts. In contrast, exocrine glands convey their
 secretions (e.g., enzymes, mucus, and bile) through ducts to a mucosal or skin surface.
Endocrine cells are not limited to the glands presented in this chapter. For example,
hormones are secreted by interstitial cells of the testes, corpora lutea and ovarian follicles,
islets of Langerhans (pancreatic islets), and enterochromaffin cells of the gastrointestinal
epithelium.
Pituitary Gland
The pituitary gland (hypophysis) is a major endocrine gland that is suspended from the
hypothalamus of the brain. It releases several hormones, many of which influence the
activity of other endocrine glands. The glandular portion, the adenohypophysis, forms
from an outpocketing of the embryonic ectoderm of the dorsal portion of the oral cavity,
called Rathke's pouch. The pars distalis, pars tuberalis, and pars intermedia constitute
the adenohypophysis. The neural part of the pituitary gland, the neurohypophysis, is
derived from a ventral outpocketing of the diencephalon. It is divisible into a median
eminence, infundibular stalk, and pars nervosa.
sists of irregular cords of cells separated by sinusoids and sparse connective tissue. There
are two main types of parenchymal cells: chromophobes, characterized by a small
211
amount of cytoplasm that stains poorly, and chromophils,
thin trabeculae. The latter are continuous with sparse
with more abundant cytoplasm that is readily stained. The
intralobular connective tissue that contains numerous sinu-
chromophils are classified as acidophils (alpha cells) and
soids. The connective tissue is abundant in the pig and
basophils (beta cells). Basophils tend to be larger than
cow. Each lobule consists of numerous follicles of various
acidophils. Chromophobes are smaller than chromophils
sizes that are frequently flled with colloid. The follicular
 and are most evident in groups, appearing as clusters of
cells vary in height, depending on the state of activity of
closely packed nuclei in tissue sections.
the follicle. Their appearance changes from squamous or
The pars intermedia is situated between the pars dis-
low cuboidal in the resting stage to cuboidal or columnar
talis and the pars nervosa.
These regions are closely
in the active stage. In an active follicle, the periphery of
 apposed in the horse. In other domestic mammals, the pars
the colloid adjacent to the apical surface of the follicular
intermedia and pars distalis are partially separated by a
cells is vacuolated. In an inactive follicle, the colloid has
small cleft, the hypophyseal cavity, which is the vestigial
a smoother peripheral surface and vacuoles are not
cavity of Rathke's pouch. The pars intermedia consists
present.
predominantly of basophilic cells. Follicles filled with
 Parafollicular (C) cells occur among the cells that
colloid are often present.
line the thyroid follicles and also between the follicles.
The pars tuberalis is mainly located around the infun-
   d e     
dibular stalk. It is composed primarily of cords, clusters,
follicular cells. Their nuclei are relatively large and pale.
and follicles of small, faintly basophilic cells.
Parafollicular cells usually occur singly, but may also
The neurohypophysis contains numerous unmyelin-
appear in groups. These cells are particularly abundant
ated nerve fbers whose cell bodies are located in the
in the dog.
supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei of the hypothala-
mus. Their axons converge at the median eminence
(ventral boundary of the third ventricle) and form the
hypothalamohypophyseal tract. They pass through the
Parathyroid Glands
narrow infundibular stalk to the pars nervosa (infun-
dibular process). The neurosecretions of these cells move
The parathyroid glands are classified as internal and exter-
along within the axons and accumulate at the terminal
nal. Those that are adjacent to or embedded in the thyroid
regions of the nerve fibers as Herring bodies, which
gland are the internal parathyroids. The external parathy-
S s s    s
roids lie a variable distance away from the thyroid gland.
Overall, the pars nervosa has an unorganized, fibrous
 The parathyroid glands are surrounded by a thin capsule
appearance, and
individual axons are
 indistinct.
of connective tissue, which may be absent where the glands
 Numerous pituicytes (neuroglial cells) are scattered among
are deeply embedded within the thyroid gland. A stroma
the nerve fibers. They possess round to oval nuclei and
 of connective tissue is well developed in the pig and cow,
long cytoplasmic processes. Their cytoplasm cannot be
 but is sparse in other domestic mammals.
distinguished from nerve fibers in routine histologic
The parenchyma of the parathyroid gland consists
preparations.
primarily of clusters and cords of principal (chief) cells.
The infundibular cavity, which is continuous with the
There are two different functional stages of the principal
third ventricle and lined by ependymal cels, extends deep
cell. The light principal cellis inactive and has a large, pale
into the pars nervosa in the cat and pig and to a lesser
nucleus and pale, acidophilic cytoplasm. The dark princi-
extent in the dog and horse. The cavity does not reach
pal cell is a smaller, active cell with a small, dark nucleus
beyond the infundibular stalk in ruminants. These relation-
and a deeply acidophilic cytoplasm. In the sheep and goat,
ships are evident in midsagittal sections of the pituitary
light cells tend to be located peripheral to the more central,
gland.
dark cells. These cells are distributed randomly in the other
domestic mammals.
Oxyphilic cells are large cells with an acidophilic cyto-
Pineal Gland
plasm and a pyknotic nucleus. They have been reported to
occur in small numbers in the parathyroid glands of the
The pineal gland (pineal body; epiphysis cerebri) is a dorsal
horse and cow, particularly in older animals.
evagination of the roof of the diencephalon. It is covered
by connective tissue of the pia mater and divided into
lobules by septa of connective tissue. The parenchyma is
composed predominantly of pinealocytes, which are
Adrenal Glands
arranged as clusters, cords, or follicles. These epithelioid
cells have a round nucleus and acidophilic cytoplasm.
The paired adrenal glands are situated close to the anterior
Neuroglial cells are also present.
end of the kidneys. The glands are covered by a capsule of
dense irregular connective tissue that sometimes contains
smooth muscle. Clusters of epithelioid cortical cells also
Thyroid Gland
Occur in the capsule. Thin trabeculae project partially into
the parenchyma.
 Each lobe of the thyroid gland is surrounded by a thin
Each adrenal gland is organized into a peripheral
capsule of connective tissue and divided into lobules by
cortex and a central medulla. The adrenal cortex is
212
CHAPTER 16
divided into four zones. The zona glomerulosa (zona
contains small, round to elongated, slightly basophilic cells
multiformis) is the outermost zone. In the carnivore,
that are arranged in several layers.
horse, and pig, the parenchymal cells of this region are
The neurohypophysis includes the median eminence
columnar and arranged into arcs. In the horse, the colum-
of the tuber cinereum, the infundibular stalk, and the
nar cells are especially tall. In ruminants, the zona glo-
 pars nervosa (infundibular process). The median eminence
merulosa contains polyhedral cells that form irregular
and the infundibular stalk consist primarily of nerve
clusters or cords.
fbers, neuroglial cells, and ependymal cells that line
The zona intermedia lies between the zone glomeru-
the infundibular cavity. The pars nervosa has an irregular
losa and the zona fasciculata. It consists of small, closely
surface and consists of numerous lobules. Each lobule
 packed cells. This zone is seen more often in the horse and
contains a diverticulum of the infundibular cavity that
carnivore than in the other domestic mammals.
is lined by ependymal cells. The latter are surrounded 
The zona fasciculata, the widest zone of the adrenal
by irregular masses of tissue consisting of pituicytes
cortex, is formed by radially arranged cords of cuboidal
and other neuroglial cells, nerve fbers, and Herring
or polyhedral cells. The cords are one or two cells thick
bodies.
and separated by sinusoids. The cytoplasm of the cells in
this zone frequently appears foamy because of the presence
of numerous lipid vacuoles.
The zona reticularis is the innermost zone
Pineal Gland
the adrenal cortex. It is arranged as an irregular
network of anastomosing cords of cells surrounded by
The pineal gland (epiphysis cerebri) is a small, conical
body that is situated between the cerebral hemispheres
sinusoids.
The adrenal medulla is composed mostly of columnar
and the cerebellum. It is surrounded by connective tissue
or polyhedral chromaffin cells, which form clusters and
and is composed of a body and a narrow, ventral stalk
anastomosing cords separated by sinusoids. In domestic
that is attached to the roof of the third ventricle. The
mammals, an outer and inner zone of the medulla can
parenchyma of the gland is arranged into lobules separated
often be distinguished. The former consists of larger, more
by thin septa of connective tissue. The lobules contain
darkly stained cells, and the latter contains smaller, more
cells, predominantly pinealocytes, that form rosettes or
lightly stained cells. Ganglion cells, either individually
follicles.
or
in clusters, are scattered through the medulla. Because the
tions of the zona reticularis may appear within the
medulla.
Thyroid Glands
The thyroid glands are composed of numerous colloid-
flled follicles, as in mammals. Cells that are similar in
function to the parafollicular cells of mammals, however,
CHICKEN
occur in the ultimobranchial bodies, rather than the thyroid
glands, of the chicken.
Pituitary Gland
As in mammals, the pituitary gland (hypophysis) of the
Parathyroid Glands
chicken is attached to the base of the brain below the
diencephalon and is encapsulated by the dura mater.
The parathyroid glands are each surrounded by a capsule
The adenohypophysis is composed of the pars distalis and
of connective tissue. The parenchyma is composed of irreg-
pars tuberalis. A pars intermedia is absent. The pars dis-
ular cords of chief cells, separated by connective tissue and
talis is divided into a cephalic region and a caudal region.
 Both regions contain cords of acidophils and basophils,
numerous sinusoids.
and clusters of chromophobes. The acidophils of the
cephalic region are pale, and those of the caudal zone are
more darkly stained. Thus, the cephalic zone appears more
Adrenal Glands
basophilic, and the caudal zone appears more acidophilic.
The cords of cells of the former are more closely packed
The adrenal glands are enclosed within a capsule of dense
than those of the latter. Some parenchymal cells of the
connective tissue. Unlike mammals, the parenchyma is not
pars distalis may be arranged around a lumen filled with
organized into a distinct cortex and medulla. Instead, it is
colloid, especially in older birds. Cysts lined by ciliated
composed of intermingled cortical (interrenal) tissue and
cells and mucous cells also occur in this part of the pitu-
medullary  (chromaffin)  tissue.  The  cortical  cells are
itary gland.
arranged as irregular cords. These cells have dark nuclei
The pars tuberalis surrounds the infundibulum and
and appear columnar when the cords are sectioned longi-
spreads dorsally over the ventral surface of the brain for a
tudinally. In a cross section of a cord, the cells appear tall
short distance. Ventrally, it extends to the posterior margin
andt
of the cephalic zone of the pars distalis. The pars tuberalis
Medullary tissue is composed of polygonal cells. They are
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
213
larger than cortical cells and possess a large, round nucleus
Word Roots
and basophilic cytoplasm. Ganglion cells occur among the
 medullary cells. Two ganglia (the cranial and caudal supra-
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
renal ganglia) are apposed to the surface of the adrenal
Ad
To, toward
The cacdrenal glands are near the kidneys.
Ren
Kidney
 glands and are frequently included in histologic sections of
this gland.
Adeno
Gland 
 The ccenohypophysis is the glandular
 portion of the pituitary gland.
Hypo.
Down
The pituitcry gkand, which is also called the
Physis
Growth
hypophysis, develops in part as a
downgrowth fom the brain.
Para
 Beside, near 
The parathyroicd glands are beside the
thyroid glands.
Pars
Part
The pars distclis is the dlistal part of the
 pituitary gland.
 Pinea
A pine cone
The pineal gland resembles a small pine
cone.
Pituita
Mucus or
phlegm
 mucus that was expelled through the nostrils.
Rete
A net
The zona reticularis of the adrenal gland
 consists of an irregular network of cells.
Zona
A zone
 The zona intermedia is an area between the
 zona glomerulosa and zona fasciculata.
214
CHAPTER 16
10
Figure 16.1
x18
KEY
1. Cavity of Rathke's pouch
6. Median eminence
2. Ependymal cells 
7. Pars distalis
3. Follicle
8. Pars intermedia 
 4. Infundibular cavity
9.Pars nervosa
 5. Infundibular stalk'
10. Pars tuberalis
Figure 16.1. Pituitary Gland, Cat. Parasagital section showing 
all major components. In domestic mammals, except the horse,
Medicine, lowa State University.)
2
Figure 16.2. Pituitary Gland, Cat. Detail of the infundibular stalk
cnd pars tuberalis.Note the presence of smallfollicles in the pars
Figure 16.2
X62.5
tuberalislined byFainlybasophilicepithelialcell. (Photomicrograph
of a histologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 16.3. Pituitary Gland, Cat. Pars intermedia, pars distalis,
and pars nervosa. (Photomicrograph of a histologic section bor-
9
rowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State
University.)
5
Figure 16.3
x62.5
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
215
KEY
1. Acidophils
 6. Infundibular cavity
2 Blood vessel
7. Pars distalis
 3. Cavity of Rathke's pouch
8. Pars intermedia 
4. Chromophobes
9. Pars nervosa
5. Follicle
10. Pars tuberalis
Figure l6.4. Pituitary Gland, Dog. Detail of the pars distalis,
pars intermedia, and pars nervosa.
Figure 16.5. Pituitary(
Gland, Parosagittal Section, Horse.
Although present in other domestic animals, the cavity of Rathke's
pouch is lacking in the horse.
Figure l6.6. Pituitary Gland, Horse (Akian Blue, Orange G,
igure 16.4
x125
Schiff's Reagentf. Pars distalis, pars intermedia, and pars nervosa.
Note the presence of follicles in the pars intermedia.
10
Figure l6.7. Pituitary Gland, Horse (Akian Blue, Orange G,
Schiff's Reagenty. Detail of the pars intermedia and pars nervosa.
The latter has a distinctive ibrous appearance.
Figure 16.5
Figure 16.6
x12.5
Figure 16.7
x125
216
CHAPTER 16
Figure 16.8
X250
Figure 16.10
x25
KEY
1. Acidophil
 5. Infundibular stalk
2. Basophil
6. Pars distalis
3. Chromophobes
 7. Pars tuberalis
4.Infundibular cavity
8. Sinusoid
Figure 16.8. Pituitary Gland, Horse (Alkian Blue, Orange G,
acidophils are orange, whereas basophils vary from blue to red.
Chromophobes are small and pale.
Figure l6.9. Pituitary Gland, Horse. Detail of the pars distalis.
 Chromophobes appecr in clusters and have closely spaced nuclei.
Figure 16.10. Pituitary Gland, Horse. A portion of the infundibu-
lar stalk, pars distalis, and pars tuberalis.
Figure 16.9
180
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
217
Figure16.11
25
Figure 16.15
x250
KEY
 Adipose tissue
7. Parafollicular cell
2 Colloid
8. Parafollicular cells
 3. Fibers of neuroglial cells
9.Parathyroid gland
4. Follicle
10. Pinecl gland
5. Follicle, tangential cut
11. Pineal stalk 
 6. Follicular cell 
12. Pinealocytes
Figure 16.11. Pineal Gland, Dog. This gland consists primarily
of pinealocytes and is located in the midline of the epithalamus.
Fgure 16.12. Pineal Gland, Dog. Detail of the gland.
Figure16.12
x125
Figure 16.13. Thyroid and Parathyroid Glands, Dog. The baso-
philic, highly cellular parathyroid gland contrasts with the numer-
ous colloid-illed Follicles of the thyroid gland.
Fgure 16.14. Thyroid Gland, Inactive, Dog. Parafollicular cells
ficularly numerous and frequently occur in groups.
Figure 16.15. Thyroid Gland, Inactive, Dog. Large, pale-staining 
parafollicular cells often Form a part of the cellular lining of a
thyroid Follicle.
Figure16.13
25
Figure 16.14
x125
218
CHAPTER 16
1
Figure 16.16
X125
Figure 16.20
X62.5
KEY
1. Cilia
7. Follicular cel, pigmented
2. Colloid
8. Light cell
3. Cyst
 9. Principal cells
4. Dark cell
10. Space artifact
 5. Erythrocytes in sinusoid
11.Stroma
6. Follicular cell
Figure 16.16. Thyroid Gland, Active, Horse. Active thyroid Fol-
licles are characterized by tall follicular cells and vacuolated
colloid. Compare with Figures 16.15 and 16.17.
Figure 16.17. Thyroid Gland, Inactive, Goat. The high degree
x250
of vascularity ofthe thyroid gland is wellillustrated in fthismicro-
graph.Pigment granules accumulate in the Follicle cells of older
animals.
Figure 16.18. Parathyroid Gland, Dog. Cysts containing colloid 
frequently occur in the parathyroid gland. Such cysts are lined by
α ciliated columnar epithelium.
Figure 16.19. Parathyroid Gland, Dog. Both light and dark
principal cells are visible. The active, dark cells have a nucleus
with condensed chromatin and a dark, acidophilic cytoplasm. The
inactive, light cells have a larger and paler nucleus and a lighter,
acidophilic cytoplasm.
Figure 16.20. Parathyroid Gland, Cow. The stroma of connec-
tive tissue of the parathyroid gland of cows and pigs is
abundant.
Figure 16.18
X125
Figure16.19
×250
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
219
Figure16.21
X62.5
Figure 16.25
x25
KEY
1. Capsule
7. Sinusoid
 2 Epithelioid cells
8. Zona Fasciculata 
3. Ganglion cell
4. Medulla
10. Zona intermedia 
5.Medulla, inner region
11. Zona reticukaris, cells of
6. Medulla, outer region
Fgure 16.21. Adrenal Gland, Dog. Adrenal cortex and capsule.
The cells of the zona glomerulosa are arranged into arclike for-
mations in carnivores, horses, and pigs.
Figure l6.22. Adrenal Gland, Cat. Detail of a portion of the
Figure 16.22
x250
cortex. A zona intermedia occurs between the zona glomerulosa 
and zona Fasciculata. It is especially well developed in carnivores
and horses. It consists of small, polyhedral cells. Cells of the zona
Fasciculata are characteristically highly vacuolated.
Figure 16.23. Adrenal Gland, Horse. Adrenal cortex and
capsule.The zona glomerulosa consists of high arcs composed
ofespeciallytallepithelialcellsinthe horse.lustersofepithelioid
cortical cells frequently occur in the capsule of the adrenal gland.
A distinct intermediate zone separates the zona glomerulosa from
the zona fasciculata.
Fgure 16.24. Adrenal Gland, Horse. An autonomic ganglion,
partly surrounded by cells extending from the zona reticularis, is
situated in the medulla.
Figure 16.25. Adrenal Gland, Cow. Portions of the cortex and
medulla. The medulla is subdivided into an outer region of darkly
Figure16.23
X62.5
stained cells and an inner portion of lightly stained cells.
Figure 16.24
X62.5
220
CHAPTER 16
Figure 16.26
X62.5
Figure 16.30
x250
KEY
1. Capsule
12. Medulla, outer region
2. Chromaffin cells 
13. Pars distalis, caudal
22
3. Chromophils
14. Pars distalis, cephalic
4. Chromophobes
15.Pars nervosa
5. Colloid
16. Pars tuberalis
6. Cyst
17. Sinusoid, with erythrocytes
 7. Diencephalon
18. Skull
8. Ganglion cell
19. Zona Fasciculata 
9. Infundibular cavity
20. Zona glomerulosa
10. Infundibukar stalk
21. Zona intermedia 
 11. Medulla, inner region
22. Zona reticularis
Figure 16.27
x125
Figure l6.26. Adrenal Gland, Cow. Portion of the adrenal
cortex. The cells of the zona glomerulosa are crranged into
02
irregular groups and cords in ruminants. Compare with Figures 
16.21, 16.22, and 16.23.
Figure 16.27. Adrenal Gland, Cow. The basophilic cells of the
outer region of the adrenal medulla contrast with the paler cells
of the inner region.
Figure 16.28. Adrenal Gland, Sheep (Masson's). Adrenal
medula with ganglion cells and cells of the zona reticularis amid
the chromaffin cells.
Figure 16.29. Pituitary Gland, Parasagittal Section, Chicken. In
the chicken, the pars distalis is divisible into a cephalic zone and 
α caudal zone. The cephalic zone is more basophilic. Ciliated 
cysts commonly occur within the pars distalis. See Figure 16.32
For detail of a cyst.
Figure 16.28
x250
Figure 16.30. Pituitary Gland, Chicken. The cephalic zone of the
8
pars cdistalis consists of closely packed cords of chromophils and
chromophobes. Some cords have a lumen illed with colloid.
1
5
16
4
Figure 16.29
x12.5
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
221
.
14
Figure 16.31
x250
Figure 16.35
x25
KEY
 Acidophil
8. Mucous cell
 2 Basophil
 9. Pars distalis, caudal
3. Capsule
10. Pars tuberalis
4. Cerebellum
11. Pineal gland
 5. Ciliated cell
12. Pituicyte
6. Granulocytes
13. Sinusoid
7. Infundibular stalk
14. Skull
Figure 16.31. Pituitary Gland, Chicken. In the caudal zone of
the pars distalis, the cells of the cords are more loosely arranged
than those of the cephalic zone. Acidophils have a more intensely
x250
stained cytoplasm than those of the cephalic zone, and they can
Figure 16.32
be readily distinguished from ba sophils.
Figure 16.32. Pituitary Gland, Chicken. Portion of α cyst, in the
pars distalis, lined by ciliated cells and mucous cells.
Figure 16.33. Pituitary Gland, Chicken. Portions of the pars
tuberalis and adiacent infundibular stalk. The cells of the pars
tuberalis are rounded to elongated with a nely granular, slightly
basophilic cytoplasm and a round to oval nucleus.
d jo d  ua i d l ainy
wihin the pars nervosa. Pituicytes have a clear cytoplasm and a
large, vesicular nucleus.
Figure 16.35. Pineal Gland, Parasagittal Section, Chicken. The
body of the pineal gland, portion of the overlying skull, and the
cerebellum.
Figure 16.33
×250
Figure 16.34
x125
222
CHAPTER 16
KEY
1.Adipose tissue
6. Ganglion
2.Capsule
7. Medullary cells
3. Chief cells 
8. Rosette 
4. Cortical cells
9. Sinusoid
5. Follicle
Figure 16.36. Pineal Gland, Chicken. The parenchymal cells of
the pineal gland gre arranged as compact masses (rosettes) or
as round to oval follicles with distinct lumens.
Figure 16.37. Parathyroid Gland, Chicken. This gland consists
of chief cells arranged into a Feltwork of anastomosing cords. The
cords are surrounded by strands of connective tissue and numer-
Figure 16.36
ous sinusoids.
X125
Figure 16.38. Adrenal Gland, Chicken. Cords of cortfical cells
are interwoven between clumps and irregular masses of medul-
lary cells throughout the gland.
Figure 16.39. Adrenal Gland, Chicken. Detail of corticaol and
medullary, cells. Cortical cells are columnar. When longitudinal
cuts have been made through cords of cortical cells, the cells form
a bilayer. When cords are cut transversely, the cells are seen to
than cortical cells, and possess basophilic cytoplasm. They are
arranged as clumps or irregular masses.
Figure 16.37
×250
2
Figure16.38
X62.5
Figure 16.39
X250
ENDOCRINE SYSTEM
223
17
MALEREPRODUCTIVESYSTEM
MAMMALS
he male reproductive system includes the testes, the system of ducts that leads
from them, the penis, and accessory glands.
Testes
The testes are contained in the scrotum and are compound tubular glands that are
invested by a thick capsule of dense irregular connective tissue, the tunica albuginea.
This capsule is rich in smooth muscle in the stallion. The tunica albuginea is covered by
a peritoneum, the visceral layer of the tunica vaginalis. The latter is composed of a
mesothelium and underlying connective tissue that blends with that of the tunica albu-
ginea. Septa of connective tissue extend from the tunica albuginea into the testis, partially
or completely dividing the testis into lobules. These septa are thin in ruminants and
thicker in the carnivore, stallion, and boar. Centrally, the septa may merge with the loose
connective tissue of the mediastinum testis.
Within each lobule of the testis there are convoluted seminiferous tubules. These are
 lined by a stratified epithelium of spermatogenic cells and Sertoli cells. The spermatogenic
cells give rise to spermatozoa. Spermatogonia, the most immature spermatogenic cells,
are small, round cells with dark, round nuclei that lie adjacent to the basement mem-
brane. These undergo mitotic divisions and produce primary spermatocytes, larger cells
whose nuclei often show distinct chromatin. Primary spermatocytes undergo the first
 meiotic division, giving rise to smaller, secondary spermatocytes. Secondary spermato-
cytes are rarely observed because they undergo the second meiotic division shortly after
they arise, forming haploid spermatids. Early spermatids are round cells with pale nuclei
that occur in clusters toward the lumen of the seminiferous tubule. Late spermatids are
225
characterized by small, oval to elongated, dark heads, and
didymis. Its pseudostratifed columnar epithelium, with
long, faint tails that project into the lumen. They are even-
stereocilia, is thickest in the head region and is encircled
tually  released  from the seminiferous epithelium
as
by some smooth muscle. In the body (mid) region there
spermatozoa.
is less smooth muscle, and the epithelium is thinner. In the
Various combinations of developing spermatogenic
tail region of the epididymis, the pseudostratified epithe-
cells occur within the epithelium of a seminiferous tubule.
lium is thinnest and the surrounding smooth muscle is
These cell associations (stages) are unique and occupy only
most abundant. In the stallion, the lining of the duct in
a portion of the length of each tubule. The total number
the tail region of the epididymis forms short, villuslike
of different stages varies with different animals; for
projections.
example, rats are known to have 14 different stages, mice
have 12, and pigs have eight.
The cell mix within each stage can be observed while
Vas Deferens
examining a histologic section of the testis. In sections
through some seminiferous tubules, for example, sper-
The vas deferens (ductus deferens) leads from the duct
of the epididymis and joins with the urethra. The vas
matogonia, two layers of primary spermatocytes, and
deferens is lined by a pseudostratified columnar epithelium
numerous early spermatids may be apparent; in another
segment there may be spermatogonia, a single layer of
(some cells with stereocilia) that may become simple
columnar distally. The smooth muscle of its thick mus-
primary spermatocytes, and numerous early and late sper-
cularis presents a variety of arrangements. It may form
matids. Other spermatogenic cell combinations, character-
an inner circular and an outer longitudinal layer, and each
istic of the animal, become apparent as more tubules are
of these layers may contain interwoven fibers of smooth
examined.
Sertoli cells (sustentacular cells) are fewer in number
muscle. In contrast, the entire muscularis may be inter-
woven with no distinct layers of smooth muscle. No par-
than the spermatogenic cells. They are distinguished by a
ticular arrangement has been observed to be consistent
pale oval or triangular nucleus that has a prominent nucle-
within a species.
olus and occasional cleftlike infoldings. They are tall cells
that extend from the basement membrane to the lumen of
the tubule, but their boundaries are indistinct in routine
Accessory Glands
histologic  preparations..
 Numerous lateral and apical
invaginations of their cell membranes embrace the differ-
The male accessory glands include the glands of the
entiating spermatogenic cells.
ampulla, seminal vesicles, the bulbourethral glands, and
Flattened, contractile myoid cells lie just outside the
the prostate gland. They are composed of branched tubular
basement membrane of each seminiferous tubule. The con-
or tubuloacinar secretory units that often have vesicular
nective tissue between adjacent tubules contains polyhe-
dilations. The secretory epithelium of these glands is clas-
dral interstitial (Leydig) cells. These produce testosterone
sified as pseudostratifed because, although consisting pri-
and are particularly abundant in the stallion and boar.
marily of columnar cells (or sometimes cuboidal cells such
They are recognized by their small, round nucleus and an
 as in the prostate), occasional basal cells are present.
acidophilic, often foamy cytoplasm.
Near its junction with the urethra, the vas deferens
Near the terminal segment of a seminiferous tubule,
forms a dilated ampulla whose lamina propria and sub-
the spermatogenic cells decrease in number and the Sertoli
mucosa are filled with glandular secretory units. The
cells become more numerous. A transitional zone, lined by
ampulla is absent in the tomcat, and the ampullary glands
Sertoli cells, joins a seminiferous tubule to a straight tubule.
 are not well developed in the boar.
The latter may be lined by simple columnar, cuboidal, or
The prostate gland is a seromucous gland except in
squamous cells and is continuous with a network of anas-
the dog, where it is entirely serous. In the boar and rumi-
tomosing channels that form the rete testis. The rete testis
nants, the prostate gland consists mostly of a disseminate
 possesses a simple squamous or cuboidal epithelium that
 portion (pars disseminata) in the form of a glandular layer
may be bistratified cuboidal in the bull. It is surrounded
in the submucosa of the pelvic urethra. In the stallion and
by the loose connective tissue of the mediastinum testis.
carnivores, the disseminate portion is represented only by
scattered glands. The body of the prostate gland is well
 developed in the stallion and carnivore and is absent in the
Efferent Ductules and Duct
ram and billy goat (buck). It is an encapsulated, lobulated
of the Epididymis
gland that partially or completely surrounds a part of the
pelvic urethra.
Efferent ductules, lined by a simple columnar or a pseu-
The seminal vesicles (vesicular glands) are absent in
dostratified epithelium with some ciliated cells, lead from
carnivores. In the stallion they are true vesicular outpock-
the rete testis and pass through the tunica albuginea to
etings in the form of bladderlike sacs with wide central
join the duct of the epididymis in the head of the epididy-
lumens into which the glands open. In the boar and rumi-
mis. In the stallion, the tubules of the rete testis penetrate
nants they are compact glands with a lobulated surface.
the tunica albuginea and form an exratesticular rete testis,
The mucous-secreting bulbourethral (Cowper's) glands
which is then joined to the duct of the epididymis by
are present in all domestic mammals except the dog. The
efferent ductules. The coiled duct of the epididymis varies
columnar cells of the pseudostratified epithelium are tall
in structure from the head to the tail region of the epi
and pale and possess basally displaced nuclei.
226
CHAPTER 17
Urethra
 corpus cavernosum, where adipose tissue nearly replaces
the erectile tissue.
The male urethra, which carries both urine and semen,
 The cavernous spaces receive their blood supply from
can be divided into a pelvic and a penile portion. The
 groups of helicine arteries. The walls of these tortuous
pelvic urethra is lined by a transitional epithelium, which
vessels have cushionlike thickenings, formed from longitu-
may become stratified columnar or cuboidal distally. Along
dinal bundles of smooth muscle, epithelioid cells, and
the entire length of the urethra, the connective tissue below
abundant elastic tissue.
the mucosa contains erectile tissue with thin-walled cav-
The expanded, distal portion of the penis, called the 
ernous spaces (veins). In the pelvic urethra this erectile
glans penis, is best developed in the stallion and dog. It
tissue forms the stratum cavernosum (vascular stratum).
contains erectile tissue, which is continuous with that of
Peripheral to this stratum are the glands of the disseminate
the corpus spongiosum. In carnivores the glans contains
portion of the prostate gland. The muscularis of the
an os penis. This bone is small in the tomcat. It is well
urethra near the bladder consists of an inner and outer
developed in the dog and possesses a fibrocartilaginous tip.
longitudinal layer and a middle circular layer of smooth
The surface (visceral prepuce) of the glans penis of the
muscle. In the vicinity of the prostate gland, most of the
tomcat bears small, keratinized epidermal spines. Small
smooth muscle is replaced by skeletal urethral muscle.
epidermal projections also occur in the stallion and billy
However, some longitudinal smooth muscle remains. The
goat.
muscularis of the pelvic urethra is surrounded by an
adventitia.
The penile urethra, which courses through the ventral
Prepuce
region of the penis, is lined by a mixture of transitional,
stratified cuboidal, stratified columnar, or simple columnar
The prepuce is a tubelike reflection of skin that covers the
epithelium. The larger more abundant cavernous spaces
distal, free portion of the penis. It is composed of an exter-
of the penile urethra form the corpus spongiosum (corpus
nal, parietal, and visceral layer. The external layer is typical
cavernosum urethra), which is surrounded by a tunica
skin and is continuous with the abdominal skin. The exter-
albuginea. Except for an occasional cell, the wall of the
nal layer turns inward at the preputial opening to form the
 penile urethra lacks a muscularis of smooth muscle.
parietal prepuce (internal layer). This, in turn, reflects at
 In the stallion and ruminants, the terminal portion of
the fornix and continues onto the end of the penis as the
the urethra extends beyond the penis, forming a urethral
visceral prepuce. The stallion has an additional outer fold
process. It is covered by a cutaneous membrane and lined
called the sheath. Hair, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands
by transitional or stratified squamous epithelium. In the
occur over a variable distance from the external layer to
stallion the urethral process contains well-developed erec-
the parietal prepuce. Glands may occur occasionally in the
tile tissue. In the ram and billy goat the urethral process
visceral prepuce of the stallion.
contains small cavernous spaces and two cords of fibro-
cartilage that parallel the urethra.
CHICKEN
Penis
Testes
The penis can be divided into the body and glans penis.
Both regions contain the penile urethra with its erectile
The testes are situated in the abdominal cavity of the
tissue, the corpus spongiosum. The body of the penis
rooster. They are surrounded by a thin connective tissue
(corpus penis) is characterized by two additional masses
capsule, the tunica albuginea, which is covered by a peri-
of erectile tissue called the corpora cavernosa. Each corpus
toneum. There are no well-developed septa to divide the
cavernosum is enclosed by the dense connective tissue and
testes into lobules.
elastic fibers of the tunica albuginea. The tunic is especially
The epithelial cells of the convoluted seminiferous
s s un s un roq an u y
tubules are like those of mammals: Sertoli cells, spermato-
muscle in the stallion. It extends inward to form a network
gonia, primary spermatocytes, secondary spermatocytes,
of trabeculae between which lies the spongy erectile tissue.
spermatids, and spermatozoa. Unlike those in mammals,
The latter contains cavernous spaces, lined by endothelium
various cell associations do not occur in segments along
and surrounded by various proportions of smooth muscle
the length of the seminiferous tubules. Instead, the semi-
and fbroelastic connective tissue. The smooth muscle is
niferous epithelium is arranged into narrow columns of
predominant in the vascular penis of the stallion. In the
cells that undergo spermatogenesis independently. There is
fibroelastic penis of the boar and ruminants, the cavernous
very little connective tissue between adjacent seminiferous
spaces are surrounded mainly by connective tissue that is
tubules, and interstitial cells are sparse. They occur singly
rich in elastic fibers and contains little or no smooth
    d    
muscle. In the intermediate type of penis of the carnivore,
spaces. They are flattened to polyhedral cells with a rela-
both smooth muscle and connective tissue fll the spaces
tively large, round nucleus and cytoplasm that is often
between the cavernous vessels. The corpus cavernosum of
vacuolated.
 all domestic mammals contains scattered adipose tissue in
The seminiferous tubules are continuous with straight
the connective tissue between the cavernous vessels. This
tubules, which are lined by Sertoli cells. Straight tubules
is abundant in the tomcat, especially toward the tip of the
lead into the anastomosing channels of the rete testis,
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
227
which is lined by a simple cuboidal to squamous epithe-
 underlying smooth muscle, and a more peripheral layer of
lium. The rete testis lies outside the tunica albuginea below
 dense connective tissue. Each vas deferens merges with a
the epididymis.
small, conical ejaculatory duct, whose submucosa contains
erectile tissue. The ejaculatory duct protrudes and opens
 into the urodeum of the cloaca, marking the termination
Epididymis
of the duct system of the male.
Three types of tubules occur within the epididymis: effer-
ent ductules, connecting ducts, and the duct of the epi-
Word Roots
didymis. The numerous, convoluted efferent ductules join 
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
the rete testis to the connecting ducts. They are lined by
a simple epithelium of intermittent groups of tall and low
Corp
A body
Having numerous cavernous
columnar cells, as well as patches of cells that appear to
 Spongiosum
like α sponge
 spaces, the corpus spongiosum
is a spongelike mass.
 be pseudostratified. The epithelial cells are arranged into
Epi
Upon
 The epididymis is on the testis.
folds, and many of the cells bear tufts of cilia. The con-
Didym
Testis
necting ducts (excretory canals) are smaller in diameter
Inter
Between
Interstitial cells are situated in
than the other tubules of the epididymis and are lined by
 Sistum
Set
 the interstitial tissue between
 a pseudostratified columnar epithelium. The epithelial cells
 seminilerous tubules of the
are rarely ciliated and are not arranged into numerous
testes.
folds, as are the cells that line the efferent ductules. Thus,
Myo
Muscle
Myoid cells are contractile,
the luminal surface of the connecting ducts has a smooth
like muscle cells.
appearance. The single, convoluted duct of the epididymis
Rete
A net 
The rete testis consists of a
is similar in structure to the connecting ducts, except that
 retwork of channels in the 
it is much larger in diameter. All of the tubules of the
testis.
epididymis are surrounded and bound by connective 
Semin
 Seed, sperm
 Sperm are produced in the
tissue.
Fer
Carry
seminiferous tubules of the
testes.
Sperm
 Seed, male 
 Spermatogenic cells give rise 
Vas Deferens and Ejaculatory Duct
Genesis
reproductive cells
tb sperm.
Origin, birth
The duct of the epididymis joins the vas deferens at the
Tunic
A covering or cloak 
 The tunica albuginea is
Vagin
terminal portion of the epididymis. The latter is a convo-
A sheath
covered by the tunica 
luted duct with a pseudostratified columnar epithelium,
vaginais.
228
CHAPTER 17
Figure 17.1
×18
Figure 17.2
（90
KEY
1. Gonocyte
4. Sex cord
5. Straight tubule
3.Rete testis
6. Supporting cells
Figure 17.1. Testis, X.s., Baby Boar. Developing sex cords in the
testis of a two-day-old boar.
Fgure 17.2. Testis,
cords and interstitial cells. Two types of cells can be distinguished
in the sex cord. Supporting cells (small with dark nucleil are
positioned clong the edges of the cords. They will develop into
in the interior of the cords. They have large, pale nuclei.
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
229
KEY
13
1. Interstitial cells
8. Spermatid, late 
2. Lumen
9. Spermatogonia
 3. Myoid cell, nucleus 
10. Tunica albuginea
11. Tunica albuginea, smooth 
 5. Seminiferous tubule
muscle
6. Sertoli cell, nucleus
12. Tunica albuginea, vasculr
 7. Spemmatid, early
layer
13. Tunic voginalis
Fgure 17.3. Testis, Stallion (Mallory's). The tunica albuginea of
the stallion is characterized by the presence of smooth muscle.
Figure 17.4. Testis, Boar (Mallory's). The tunica albuginea con-
sists of dense irregular connective tissue. It lacks smooth muscle
Figure 17.3
x25
in domestic mammals, except the stallion.
Fgure 17.5. Seminiferous Tubules, Testis, Dog. A portion of
each of three adjacent seminiferous tubules is shown.
13
Summary of cells of the seminiferous tubule
Spermatogenic cells
 Spermatogonia: Small, round cells with dark, round
nuclei that lie on the basement membrane
nuclei offen show distinct chromatin
Secondary spermatocytes: Smaller and closer to
the lumen than primary spermatocytes; rarely seen
Figure 17.4
×25
after they form 
2
that occur in clusters near the lumen of the seminiferous
tubule
Late spermatids: Small, oval to elongated dark
heads, tucked in the apical surface of Sertoli cells, with
long tails that project into the lumen of the tubule
Spermatozoa: May be present in the lumen of the seminif-
erous tubule; they have elongated dark heads and long tails
Sertoli cells (sustentacular cells): Tall cells with poorly
deined outlines, as they have numerous apical and lateral
pockets that envelop the spermatogenic cells; have an elon-
gated, sometimes triangular, nucleus with ine chromatin and
 α prominent nucleolus 
6
6
8
.8
Figure 17.5
×360
Figure 17.9
X12.5
10
KEY
3
1. Efferent ductule
9. Sertoli cells
 2. Interstitial cell
10. Spematid, early 
3. Mediastinum testis
11.
Spemmatid, late
D6.90
4. Myoid cell, nucleus
12.
Spermatogonium
5. Primary spermatocyte
13. Straight tubule
 6. Rete testis, channel
14. Transitional zone
7. Seminiferous tubules
8
15. Tunica albuginea
 8. Sertoli cell, nucleus
Figure 17.6. Seminiferous Tubules, Testis, Stallion. Portions of
lour seminiferous tubules are visible.Note the numerous intersti-
tial cells (abundant in the boar and stallion] and the section 
through a straight tubule.
Figure 17.7. Interstitial Tissue, Testis, Ram. Interstitial tissve and
portions of three seminiferous tubules cre shown. Interstitial cells
 cre relatively sparse in carmivores and ruminants.
Figure 17.6
X180
Figure 17.8. Transitional Zone and Straight Tubule, Testis,
Stallion. A transitional zone joins a seminiferous tubule to a
straight tubule. Sertoli cells line this zone and protrude into the
lumen of the straight tubule.
Figure 17.9. Rete Testis, Stallion. Anastomosing channels of the
rete testis lie within the loose connective tissue of the mediastinum 
testis. In the stallion, the rete testis extends through the tunica 
albuginea and becomes extratesticular, as in this micrograph.
 Junctions of rete channels and efferent ductules can be seen. See
Figure 17.10 for a magnified view of a junction.
12
Synonyms:
Figure 17.7
X250
Interstitial cells = Leydig cells
Sertoli cells = sustentacular cells
13
Figure 17.8
×125
Figure 17.10
x250
X62.5
KEY
1. Columnar epithelium 
 7. Pseudostratified epithelium
2 Cuboidal epithelium, 
 8. Pseudostratified epithelium,
rete testis
efferent ductule
 3. Duct of the epididymis 
 9. Smooth muscle 
4.
 Efferent ductule
10. Spermatozoa
5. Loose connective tissue
11.
. Tunica albuginea, smooth muscle
6. Lymphocyte, migrating
12. Tunic voginalis, mesothelium
Fgure 17.l0. Junction of Rete Testhis and Efferent Ductule,
Stallion. The rete testis is lined by cuboidal cells, whereas the
efferent ductule is lined by α ciliated, pseudostratified columnar
Figure 17.11
×25
epithelivm.
Figure 17.11. Efferent Ductules, Stallion. Various cuts through
the tortuous efferent ductules are surrounded by loose connective
fissue.
Fgure 17.12. Efferent Ductules, Stallion. Efferent ductules cre
lined by a ciliated, pseudostratified columnar epithelium. However,
the epithelium may be simple columnar in some places.
Figure 17.13. Head of Epididymis, Stallion (Masson's). The epi-
connective fissue, which contains smooih muscle in the stallion.
Portions of the coiled duct of the epididymis are shown.
Figure 17.14. Head of Epididymis, Stallion. In this region the
pseudostratied columnar epithelium of the duct of the epididymis
Figure 17.12
x250
is thickest. Smooth muscle is scarce. Compare with Figures 17.15
and 17.16.
2
Figure 17.13
25
232
CHAPTER 17
Figure 17.15
X62.5
Figure 17.19
X62.5
KEY
1. Basal cell
6. Serosa
 2. Lamina propria 
7. Smooth muscle
3. Loose connective tissue
4. Muscularis
 9. Stereocilia 
 5. Pseudostratified epithelium
10. Villus-like projection
Figure 17.15. Body of Epididymis, Stallion. The duct of the
epididymis in this region is surrounded by more smooth muscle
than in the head of the epididymis, and the pseudostratified
columnar epithelium is not as thick as in the head of the epididy-
mis (see Figure 17.14).
Figure 17.16
x62.5
Figure 17.16. Tail of Epididymis, Stallion. A low, pseudostrati-
hed columnar epithelium and abundant circular smooth muscle
characterize the duct of the epididymis in this region. In the stal-
lion, the caudal segment ofthe ductf of the epididymis has villuslike
projections.
Figure 17.17. Tail of Epididymis, Stallion. Detail of the duct of
the epididymis lined by low,pseudostratified columnar epithelium
5.
and surrounded by abundant, circular smooth muscle.
Figure 17.l8. Vas Deferens, x.s., Dog. The bulk of the wall
consists of smooth muscle, which forms an inner circular and an
outer predominantly longitudinal layer with some randomly
arranged cells.
Figure 17.l9. Vas Deferens, X.s., Stallion (Masson's).
This
sectionof the vas deferens,takenromnecr the epididymis,has
Figure17.17
x250
long mucosal folds. The inner layer of the muscularis contains
interwoven bundles of smooth muscle.Although out of the field
of view in this micrograph, the smooth muscle of the outer layer
of the muscularis is mostly arranged longitudinally.
5
Figure 17.18
x25
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
233
Figure 17.20
X62.5
Figure 17.24
x25
KEY
Adventitia
7. Muscularis
2 Ampulla, lumen
 8. Pseudostratified epithelium
 3. Basal cell, nucleus 
9. Secretion
4. Gland
10. Serosa
5. Interlobular septum
11. Spermatozoa
 6. Lamina propria
Fgure 17.20. Vas Deferens, x.s., B
Boar (Masson's). The muscu-
laris consists of an acmixture of longitudinally cnd randomly
crranged smooth muscle.The epithelium is pseudostratied
columnar with stereocilia present intermittently.
Figure17.21
x12.5
Figure 17.21. Ampulla, X.s., Ram. The terminal segment of the 
2
vas deferens, the ampulla, contains branched tubuloalveolar
glands in the dog, stallion, cnd ruminants. The glands are poorly
developed in the boar. The ampulla is absent in the tomcat.
Figure 17.22. Ampulla, Ram. Detail of the mucosa. Spermatozoa
are stored in the glands close to their openings into the lumen of
the ampulla.
Figure 17.23. Ampulla, Ram. The secretory alveoli are lined by
a pseudostratified epithelium composed of cuboidal to columnar
cells and occasional basal cells.
Figure 17.24. Seminal Vesicle, Castrated Billy Goat. In the cas-
trated male, the glandular tissue of the accessory glands is greatly
reduced. Compare with Figure 17.25.
igure17.22
X62.5
Figure 17.23
×125
234
CHAPTER 17
Figure17.25
X25
Figure 17.29
x12.5
KEY
1. Basal cell
7. Pseudostratified epithelium
2. Capsule
8. Secretion
3. Duct
9. Stratum cavernosum
4. Gland
10. Trabecula 
 5. Interlobular septum
11. Transitional epithelium
6. Prostate gland
12. Urethra, lumen 
Figure 17.25. Seminal Vesicle, Ram. Lobules of tubuloalveolar
glands are divided by interlobular septa, which contain an abun-
dance of smooth muscle in ruminants. In the stallion and boar,
the septa consist predominantly of connective tissue with some
smooth muscle. Seminal vesicles are absent in carnivores.
Figure17.26
X250
Figure 17.26. Seminal Vesicle, Ram. The pseudostratihed glan-
dular epithelium is characterized by sparse basal cells. Note the 
muscular septum.
Figure 17.27. Body of the Prostate, Dog. The body of the pros-
tate, which is well developed in carnivores and the stallion, is
surrounded by a capsule of dense connective tissue and smooth
muscle. Trabeculae from the capsule divide the gland into lobules.
Figure 17.28. Body of the Prostate, Dog. In the dog, this is α
serous gland. Compare with Figure 17.31.
Figure 17.29. Disseminate Portion of the Prostate, X.s., Ram
(Masson's). This portion of the prostate is well developed in the
boar and ruminants. The glands are located within the submucosa
of the pelvic urethra. The stratum cavernosum of the pelvic urethra 
Figure 17.27
X12.5
contains cavernous spaces that are smaller and less numerous
than those of the corpus spongiosum of the penile urethra.
Figure 17.28
X62.5
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
235
12
qure1z.30
<125
12.5
Figure 17.31
x125
Figure 17.34
x62.5
KEY
Cavernous space
7. Secretory cells
2Corpus spongiosum
8. Serous cells
3. Duct
 9. Smooth muscle
 4. Lamina propria 
10. Spongy bone
5. Mucous cells
11. Transitional epithelium
 6. Os penis
12. Urethra, lumen
Figure 17.30. Disseminate Porion of the Prostate, x.s., Ram
(Masson's). The transitional epithelium of both the pelvic urethra
and a duct of the prostate gland is shown.
Figure 17.31. Disseminate Portion of the Prostate, X.s., Ram
(Masson's). The prostate is a mixed gland except in the dog,
where there are no mucous secretory units.
Fgure 17.32. Bulbourethral Gland, Boar. This gland is a com-
pound tubular gland in the boar, tomcat, and billy goat. It is a
tubuloalveolar gland in the stallion, bull, and ram. It is absent in
the dog. The pale-staining secretory cells are columnar or pyra-
midal and have basally displaced nuclei.
Figure 17.33. Penis, X.s., Puppy. Section is through the develop-
ing os penis, which is present in carnivores.
Figure 17.34. Penis, x.s., Puppy. Detail of the urethra and
portion of the os penis.
Figure17.32
X36
11
3
Figure 17.35
x12.5
Figure 17.39
x125
KEY
1.Cavernousspace
8. Lamina propria
 2. Connective tissue
 9. Os penis
3.Corpus cavernosum
10. Smooth muscle
 4. Corpus spongiosum
11.Stratified columnar epithelium
5. Dermis
12. Tunica albuginea
6. Endothelium
13. Urethra, lumen
7. Epidermmal spine 
Figure 17.35. Penis, I.s., Tomcat. In the tomcat, the distal portion
of the corpus cavernosum consists largely of nonerectile, adipose
5
fissue. A small os penis is present in the glans, and small spines 
cre present on the surface of the glans of the tomcat.
Figure 17.36
x62.5
(Photomicrograph of a histologic section borrowed from the
College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.]
Figure 17.36. Glans Penis, l.s., Tomcat. Detail of a keratinized 
epicdermal spine. (Photomicrograph of a histologic section bor-
rowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State
University.)
Figure 17.37. Penile Urethra, X.s., Stallion. Portion of the penile
urethra  with
spongiosum.
Figure 17.38. Corpus Spongiosum, Body of Penis, Stallion. The
caivernous spaces of the stallion and carnivore are surrounded by
connective fissve rich in elastic ibers and by many bundles of
smooth muscle.
igure 17.37
x12.5
of the urethra in this section is sratied columnar. The epithelium,
however, is variable in the penile urethra and in places may also
be simple columnar, transitional, or stratified cuboidal.
igure 17.38
X62.5
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
237
Figure 17.40
x12.5
Figure 17.44
×25
KEY
Adipose tissue
6. Elastic fibers
2 Cavernous space
7. Retractor penis muscle
3. Connective fissue
8. Smooth muscle
 4. Connective tissue trabecula
9. Tunica albuginea
5. Corpus cavernosum
10. Urethra, lumen
Figure 17.40. Body of Penis, Stallon. Loarge masses of smooth
muscle surround the cavernous spaces of the corpus cavernosum
 of the stallion.
Fgure 17.41. Body of Penis, X.s., Boar. A portion ofthe sigmoid
Hexure, including the retractor penis muscle.
Figure17.41
×12.5
Figure 17.42. Body of Penis, X.s., Boar (Orcein). The connective
tissue surrounding the cavernous spaces of the corpus cavernosum
is rich in elastic fibers in the boar and ruminants.
Fgure 17.43. Body of Penis, Boar. In the boar and ruminant,
the cavernous spaces of the corpus cavernosum are invested
largely by connective tissue and only a smattering of smooth
muscle.
Fgure 17.44. Penile Urethra, X.s., Ram. The distribution of the
cavernous spaces of the corpus spongiosum of the penile urethra
is especially well represented in this section.
Figure 17.42
×25
Figure 17.43
X62.5
238
CHAPTER 17
Figure17.45
62.5
Figure 17.49
×12.5
11
KEY
1. Cavernous space
8. Smooth muscle
2. Elastic fibers
9. Stratified squamous epithelium
3. Epidermis
10. Trabecula
4.Fibrocartilaginous cord
11. Transitional epithelium 
5. Helicine artery
12. Tunica albuginea
6. Lamina propria
13. Urethra, lumen 
1
7. Smegma
Figure 17.45. Body of Penis, X.s., Ram (Orcein). The cavernous 
spaces of the corpus spongiosum are surrounded by connective
tissue rich in elasfic fibers in boars and ruminants.
X25
Figure 17.46. Helicine Artery, Body of Penis, Ram (Orcein). The
corpus cavernosum containshelicine arteries,which are tortuous
vessels with an abundance of elastic ibers throughout their walls.
Figure 17.47. Helicine Artery, Body of Penis, Ram (Masson's).
cavernosum.
Figure 17.48. Urethral Process, X.s., Ram. The vrethral process
is a tortuous, wormlike extension of the urethra in the ram and
billy goat. One of the two ibrocartilaginous cords that parallel
the urethra is shown.
Figure 17.49. Urethral Pouch, Stallion. The vrethral pouch,
found only in the stallion, is filled with smegma, which is com-
posed of desquamated epithelial cells and the secretion of the
preputial glands.
Figure 17.47
X62.5
Figure 17.48
X62.5
MALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
239
Figure 17.50
×25
Figure 17.53
x250
KEY
1. Connecting duct
10. Rete testis
 2 Demal papilla 
11.
 Sebaceous gland 
 3. Eferent ductule
12. Seminiferous tubule
 4. Hair follicle 
13.9
 Sertoli cell, nucleus 
 5. Interstitial cell 
14. Spermatid, early
6. Lymphatic nodule
15. Spermatid, late
7.
 Parietal prepuce
16. Spermatogonium
8. Preputial gland
17. Stratified squamous epihelium
9. Primary spermatocyte
18. Visceral prepuce
Figure 17.50. Parietal Prepuce, Stallion. The dermis contains
x25
sebaceous glands and tubular preputial (sweat) glands.
Figure 17.51. Prepuce, Boar. The parietal and visceral prepuce
are shown.
Figure 17.52. Testis and Epididymis, x.s., Rooster. Seminiferous
tubules, the rete testis, and portions (efferent ductules and con-
necting ducts) of the epididymis.
Fgure 17.53. Intersthitial Tissue, Testis, Rooster. Interstitial
(leydig) _cells cre found principally in the lcrger intertubular
spaces. These cells are either polyhedral or elongated and may
contain vacuoles.
Figure17.52
×18
Figure17.57
×250
KEY
1. Cilia
8.
 Spermatid, late
2. Efferent ductule
9.
Spermatogonium
3. Primary spermatocyte
10.
Spematogonium, dividing 
4. Rete testis
11.
Spermatozoa
 5. Seminiferous tubule
12.
 Straight tubule
6. Sertoli cell, nucleus
13. Tunica albuginea
 7. Spemmatid, early
Figure 17.54. Seminiferous Tubules, Testis, Rooster. Detail of
portions of adjacent seminiferous tubules. Note that the seminifer-
ous epithelial cells are organized into narrow columns.
Figure 17.55. Testis, Rooster. A straight tubule, lined by Sertoli
cells, connects α seminiferous tubule with the rete testis.
X360
Figure 17.56. Straight Tubule, Testis, Rooster. Sertoli cells Form
 the epithelium of straight tubules.
Figure 17.57. Junction of Rete Testis and Efferent Ductule,
Rooster. The epithelial cells lining efferent ductules vary in shape
cnd many possess cilia. The rete testis is lined by squcmous
?
epithelical cells.
Figure17.55
X62.5
Figure 17.56
x250
KEY
1. Cilia
5. Pseudostratified epithelium
2 Connecting duct
 6. Smooth muscle
3.Duct of the epididymis
 7. Spermatozoa 
 4. Efferent ductule
Figure 17.58. Efferent Ductule, X.s., Rooster. Detail of an effer-
ent ductule. The epithelial cells vary in shape, and many becr
cilia. The epithelium is Folded and is surrounded by loose con-
nective tissue. Occasionally, smooth muscle may be present.
Fgure 17.59. Connecting Duct and Efferent Ductule, Rooster.
Connecting ducts present a smooth inner surface and are lined
by a pseudostratified columnar epithelium with ocasional basal
cells. The epithelial cells cre generally without cilia. In contrast,
Figure 17.58
X250
the efferent ductule has a Folded lining, and its epithelial cells are
mostly ciliated.
Figure 17.60. Duct of the Epididymis, Rooster. The duct of the
epididymis has a larger diameter than a connecting duct, but
oiherwise is comparable in structure with the latter.
Figure 17.61. Vas Deferens, Distal, Rooster. The lining epithe-
lium is similar to that of the epididymis. A layer of smooth muscle
separates the epithelium rom the surrounding connective tissue.
Figure 17.59
x250
×62.5
Figure 17.61
125
242
CHAPTER 17
18
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE
SYSTEM
MAMMALS
he ovaries, oviducts, uterus, vagina, and vulva are the major components of the
mammalian female reproductive system.
Ovaries
A simple squamous or cuboidal epithelium, germinal epithelium, often missing from
histologic preparations, covers the cortex of the ovary. Beneath the epithelium is a layer
of dense connective tissue, the tunica albuginea. A cortical stroma, containing ovarian
follicles in various stages of development, lies internal to the tunica albuginea. In bitches
and queens, but ordinarily not in other domestic mammals, cords of epithelioid cells
called interstitial glands occur throughout the stroma. The epithelioid cells are derived
from the theca interna of atretic, antral follicles or from the granulosa cells of atretic,
preantral follicles.
 A medulla consisting of richly vascularized loose connective tissue lies internal to
the ovarian cortex. In the mare, the medullary tissue is located external to the cortex.
Channels, lined by a cuboidal epithelium and called the rete ovari, are conspicuous
components of the medulla in carnivores and ruminants. Hilus cells (groups of epitheli-
oid cells) may be found close to the rete ovari in the region of the hilus in some
mammals.
 Primordial follicles are the least developed and most numerous follicles of the ovary.
by a layer of simple squamous follicle cells. In response to periodic hormonal stimula-
tion, growth is initiated in some of the primordial follicles. The earliest growing follicle,
243
the primary follicle, consists of an enlarging oocyte sur-
Uterus
rounded by a layer of cuboidal cells. Proliferation of the
follicle cells results in the formation of a multilaminar (late
 The wall of the bicornuate uterus of domestic mammals
primary) follicle. Fluid-flled spaces appearing between the
has three layers: the outer perimetrium (serosa), middle
follicle cells gradually coalesce, forming an antrum.
myometrium, and inner endometrium (mucosa). The myo-
Concomitantly, an acidophilic, translucent membrane, the
metrium is divisible into a thick, inner circular layer and
zona pellucida, appears around the oocyte. Further growth
a thin, outer longitudinal layer. A richly yascularized and
results in the formation of a secondary follicle with a
well-innervated stratum vasculare usually separates the
C-shaped antrum. Its follicle cells are now called the mem-
muscle layers. The stratum vasculare, however, is indistinct
brana granulosa. A sheath of stromal cells, the theca fol-
in the sow and may be located in the outer half of the
liculi, forms around the follicle. The theca differentiates
circular layer in the cow.
 into a cellular, vascular inner layer, the theca interna, and
The epithelium of the endometrium is simple cuboidal
an outer layer of connective tissue, the theca externa. The
or columnar in the bitch, queen, and mare, but may be
boundary between the stroma and the theca externa and
stratified or pseudostratified in ruminants and sows.
that between the theca externa and theca interna is often
Simple, branched uterine (endometrial) glands extend into
the lamina propria. These may be considerably coiled in
indistinct. Continued growth results in the formation of a
large tertiary (Graafian) follicle whose oocyte is surrounded
the mare, sow, and ruminants. Nonglandular regions of
the endometrium, called caruncles, occur in ruminants.
by a multilayer of membrana granulosa cells, the cumulus
oophorus. The columnar cells of the innermost portion of
The mucosa of the uterine cervix is elevated into lon-
the latter constitute the corona radiata, which is separated
gitudinal folds that may become subdivided into secondary
from the oocyte by the zona pellucida.
and tertiary folds. The epithelial lining is simple columnar
Ordinarily, each mature tertiary follicle contains a
with goblet cells. In the bitch, however, it is stratified squa-
single oocyte. However, the follicles of certain animals
mous. Glandular tissue fades in the cervix, extending to
(carnivores, sows, and ewes) may contain as many as six
the cervical os only in carnivores. An inner circular and an
outer longitudinal layer of smooth muscle form the
oocytes.
Mature follicles vary widely in size. They are about
muscularis.
2mm in diameter in the bitch and queen, 15 mm in the
cow, and as large as 70 mm in the mare. Maximum size is
reached just prior to ovulation. Following ovulation, gran-
Estrous Cycle
ulosa cells and cells of the theca interna of most species
The estrous cycle consists of a succession of stages. The
multiply, hypertrophy, and differentiate into granulosa
frst stage, proestrus, is characterized by endometrial
lutein cells and smaller, more peripheral theca lutein cells,
growth. It is followed by estrus, or the period when the
respectively, of the corpus futeum. A yellow pigment
female is receptive to the male. In most species, ovulation
(lutein) is formed by the luteal cells of the cow, mare, and
occurs during estrus. The development of the corpus
carnivores, but is lacking in ewes, nanny goats (does), and
luteum occurs during the next stage, metestrus. Diestrus
sows. Luteal cells produce progesterone. Regression of the
follows metestrus and coincides with the presence of a
corpus luteum occurs during late diestrus, leaving scar
fully functional corpus luteum. The development and
tissue, the corpus albicans.
secretory activity of the endometrial glands peak during
Although many primordial follicles begin the process
this time. Anestrus, a period of sexual inactivity, follows
of growth and differentiation, few become mature. The
diestrus.
majority undergo a degenerative regression, called atresia.
The oocyte and membrane granulosa degenerate first. Cells
of the theca interna hypertrophy, and the zona pellucida
Placenta
becomes swollen. Eventually, the entire follicle is resorbed.
The placenta is derived from the endometrium and the
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM). The degree of intimacy
Oviduct
between these two components varies and is a basis for
classifying placentas. A placenta is indeciduate when these
The oviduct is a muscular tube consisting of an isthmus,
two membranes are in contact but are not intimately fused.
which arises from the uterus, a middle segment,
.the
The placenta is deciduate when the membranes have
ampulla, and a funnel-shaped infundibulum, which lies
become fused. Little or no endometrium is lost during the
next to the ovary. From the outside inward, the wall of the
oviduct is comprised of a serosa, muscularis, lamina
(mare, ruminants, and sow). Conversely, considerable
propria, and epithelium. The muscularis, which is thickest
p m se u uod  isn si eso
in the isthmus, is formed mainly from circular smooth
placentas (carnivores).
muscle with a modicum of longitudinally arranged smooth
The extent to which the CAM contributes to the pla-
muscle external to it. Many of the epithelial cells lining the
centa varies. If most of the CAM contributes, as in the
cavity of the oviduct are ciliated. In part, the epithelium of
mare and sow, the placenta is diffuse; if numerous but
ruminants and sows is pseudostratified. The mucosa is
isolated areas contribute, as in ruminants, the placenta is
thrown into longitudinal folds, with less folding occurring
cotyledonary; when a beltlike portion of the CAM contrib-
in the isthmus than in the ampulla.
 utes, as in carnivores, the placenta is zonary.
244
CHAPTER 18
The surfaces of the chorioallantoic membrane and
 months and begins on the day when the bitch no longer
the endometrium may contact one another in three dif-
tolerates a male's advances. Anestrus follows diestrus and
ferent ways. These types of contact are designated as
may last from two to 10 months.
folded, villous, and labyrinthine. In the sow, both surfaces
Various types of epithelial cells are found in vaginal
are folded and are closely applied to each other. In the
smears taken during the estrous cycle. Parabasal cells are
mare and ruminants, chorioallantoic villi insert into
the smallest. They are round cells with round nuclei, and
pockets (crypts) in the endometrium. In carnivores, the
have the highest nucleocytoplasmic ratio of any of the
apposed surfaces form a complex, interlinked, fused
sloughed celis. Intermediate cells are larger than parabasal
labyrinth.
cells. Their nuclei are similar in size and shape to those of
Classification of the placenta can also be based on
the latter. The corners of intermediate cells are rounded.
the number of tissue layers separating the fetal and mater-
Superfcial intermediate cells (transitional cells) are bigger
nal blood. In the mare and sow, six layers intervene: the
than intermediate cells and have angular edges. Their
endothelium, connective tissue, and epithelium of the
nuclei resemble those of parabasal and intermediate cells.
CAM; and the epithelium, connective tissue, and endo-
Superficial cells are similar in size to superficial intermedi-
thelium of the endometrium. This configuration character-
ate cells. Their edges are angular and may be folded. Their
izes the epitheliochorial placenta. In ewes and nanny goats
nuclei are pyknotic, faded, or lacking.
(does), the epithelium of the caruncles (endometrial eleva-
 ( on a) sd   s
tions where functional contact with the CAM is made)
contain erythrocytes and neutrophils as well as parabasal,
is lost, thereby reducing the number of tissue layers
to
intermediate, superficial intermediate, and superficial cells.
five (syndesmochorial placenta). In the cow, the epithelium
During late proestrus, superfcial intermediate and super-
 of the caruncle remains intact (epitheliochorial), but por-
ficial cells are the most numerous, and neutrophils decline.
tions of the intercaruncular epithelium degenerate. In
The vast majority (90% or more) of cells found in
carnivores, both the endometrial epithelium and the endo-
smears taken during estrus are superficial cells. Similar
metrial connective tissue are lost, bringing the epithelium
smears may be obtained during late proestrus. Ordinarily,
of the CAM and the endothelium of the endometrium
during estrus, neutrophils are not observed. Erythrocytes
into contact. Only four tissue layers separate the fetal
show a reduction in number, but in many bitches they can
and maternal blood in this type, the endotheliochorial
be found throughout estrus and into early diestrus. Bacteria
placenta.
may be found in estrous smears.
During diestrus, superficial cells decrease by a
minimum of 20%. Parabasal and intermediate cells, which
Vagina
may have ben absent or very sparse, increase to more than
10% and frequently rise to more than 50%. Although
A mucosa, muscularis, and adventitia or serosa (cranial
neutrophils reappear during diestrus, smears from some
region only) form the wall of the vagina. The mucosa
bitches contain few or none. Because erythrocytes may be
is lined, throughout, by a stratified squamous epithelium
present in smears from early diestrus, it is not possible to
 in all species except the cow. In the anterior portion of
distinguish proestrus from diestrus without taking more
the vagina of the cow, the epithelium is stratified colum-
than one smear.
nar with goblet cells. In carnivores, the epithelial cells
During anestrus, parabasal and intermediate cells pre-
become keratinized during estrus. A lamina propria and
dominate in smears. Bacteria may be found, but will be
submucosa are present. Usually, the inner layer of the
less abundant than in proestrus or estrus. Neutrophils may
muscularis is thick and consists of circularly arranged
occur, but are ordinarily less abundant than in early
smooth muscle, while the outer layer is thin and consists
diestrus.
of longitudinally organized smooth muscle. In some
animals (bitch, queen, and sow), a thin layer of longi-
tudinal muscle occurs internal to the circular layer An
Vulva
adventitia or serosa is present.
In domestic mammals, the vulva includes the vestibule,
Vaginal Cytology
labia, and clitoris. The mucosal epithelium is stratifed
squamous. The major vestibular glands are bilateral,
Vaginal cytology provides a way of determining stages of
mucus-secreting, tubuloacinar glands in the submucosa,
the estrous cycle of the bitch or queen and therefore can
found in ruminants and the queen. Minor vestibular glands 
be helpful to the practitioner who is trying to determine
 Occur in the mucosa of most domestic animals. They are
the best time to breed an animal. In the bitch, for example,
small, branched,
 tubular, mucous glands distributed
 proestrus, estrus, diestrus, and anestrus are stages of the
through the vestibular mucosa.
estrous cycle. The formation of the corpus luteum occurs
The integument of the labia (lips of the vulva) has a
during late estrus in the bitch. Therefore, there is no met-
structure like that of the external skin. It is well endowed
estrus. Proestrus lasts an average of nine days and is char-
with both sebaceous and tubular apocrine glands.
acterized by a watery, bloody discharge and swollen vulva.
The clitoris consists of erectile tissue (corpus caverno-
 Estrus is evidenced when a bitch is willing to stand for
sum clitoridis), a glans, and a prepuce. The amount of
mating, and ordinarily lasts about nine days. A clear or
erectile tissue varies. The prepuce has parietal and visceral
bloody discharge is present. Diestrus lasts for about two
components as in males.
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
245
CHICKEN
secondary folds appear. The muscularis becomes sorted
out into circular and longitudinal layers in the neck.
Ovary
The magnum is the longest part of the oviduct. Its well
developed tubular glands produce albumin. Its mucosal
The left ovary and oviduct represent the reproductive
folds are more numerous and taller than those of the
organs of the hen. The ovary consists of an outer cortex
infundibulum. Tertiary folds are present. The muscularis
that envelops a vascular medulla. Ovarian follicles of
is better developed than in the infundibulum. The pseu-
various sizes occur within the cortex. A layer (germinal
dostratified epithelium is composed of ciliated columnar
epithelium) of cuboidal or flattened cells covers the cortex.
cells and secretory (goblet) cells.
The tunica albuginea, composed of dense connective tissue,
The isthmus is a relatively short region with a diameter
lies below the epithelium. A stroma of loose connective
less than that of the magnum. Its longitudinal mucosal
tissue occurs below the tunica albuginea.
folds possess numerous secondary folds. The muscularis is
 Developing follicles occur throughout the stroma of
better developed than the magnum's. The epithelium is
the cortex. Large follicles are suspended from the surface
ciliated, pseudostratified columnar with secretory cells. Its
of the ovary by stalks of cortical tissue. Each follicle consists
numerous tubular glands secrete the shell membranes.
of a growing, yolk-laden oocyte with a rounded nucleus
The uterus (shell gland) is an expanded portion of the
(germinal vesicle). The oocyte is surrounded by several
 oviduct. Its walls are not as thick as those of the preceding
layers. These are, from the outside inward, the theca externa,
segments. The muscularis is well developed, especially the
theca interna, membrana granulosa, and perivitelline mem-
longitudinal layer. The mucosa is thrown into longitudinal,
brane. The latter abuts the surface membrane of the oocyte.
leaf-shaped folds that are covered by a ciliated, pseu-
 The theca externa is formed from a compact connec-
 dostratified, columnar epithelium. The shell of the egg is
tive tissue that contains groups of pale interstitial (luteal)
 produced from secretions of its tubular glands.
cells. The latter may also be found, in groups, in the corti-
The vagina is a short, narrow duct. Its muscularis is
cal stroma and medulla. The theca interna is only about
well developed, especially the circular layer Its mucosa is
one quarter as thick as the externa. It is formed from a
thrown into numerous tall, narrow folds bearing many
compact layer of spindle-shaped cells. The membrana
small secondary folds. The surface is covered by a ciliated,
 granulosa consists of a single layer of cuboidal cells in the
 pseudostratified columnar epithelium with mucous cells.
smallest and largest follicles, but in those of intermediate
Sperm storage occurs in the sperm-host glands. These
size, the epithelium is pseudostratified columnar.
tubular glands occur within the connective tissue of the
The cortex of the mature ovary also contains concen-
mucosa of the vagina near the junction between the uterus
trations of fat-filled vacuolar cells. Numerous fat vacuoles
and vagina. After insemination, sperm appear in compact
occur throughout the cytoplasm of these cells, and their
masses within the glands. The vagina of the oviduct opens
nuclei are pyknotic. Collctions of these cells are believed
into the urodeum of the cloaca.
to represent regressing postovulatory follicles.
Atretic follicles are commonly found in normal active
Word Roots
 ovaries. In the most common type of atretic follicle, cells
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
 of the membrana granulosa proliferate, forming a number
Corona
A crown
The cells of the corona radiate enclose
of irregular layers around the oocyte. The oocyte becomes
the oocyte.
smallr and is eventually replaced by granulosa cells.
Corpus
Body
 A yellow pigment fomms in the cells of
Ultimately, scar tissue replaces the granulosa cells. In older
Lute
Yellowish
the corpus futeum in some mammals.
birds, the oocyte becomes surrounded by hyperplastic and
Jnfundibuium
A unnel
The infundibulum is the Funnel shaped
hypertrophied interstitial (luteal) cells during atresia. Both
portion of the oviduct.
the oocyte and the cells of the membrana granulosa eventu-
Isthm
A narrow
The isthmusis the relatively short and
ally degenerate.
passage
narrow partofthe oviduct ofthe chicken.
Magna
Great or
The magnum is the longest part of the
large
Oviduct
 oviduct of the chicken.
Metri
Uterus
The myometriumisthe middle, muscular
The oviduct of the chicken is tortuous and muscular. It
layer ofthe wallofthe uterus.
Multi
Many
A multilamnar folliclein the ovcry has
consists, in anterioposterior sequence, of the following five
Lamina
Layer
manylayersofcellsthat surround the
regions: infundibulum, magnum, isthmus, uterus (shell
Follicie
A litle bag
gland), and vagina. From the outside inward, the wall of
oocyte.
品
An egg
An oocyte is an immature egg cell.
the oviduct consists of a serosa, muscularis (outer longitu-
Cyte
Cell
 dinal and inner circular smooth muscle), lamina propria,
Ovi
Egg
The oviduct is a passageway for eggs.
 and epithelium. In most regions, the lamina propria con-
Pellvcid
Transparent  The zonc pellucicda is a transparent
tains glands.
membrane that develops around the
 The infundibulum is composed of a thin-walled funnel
oocyte in the ovary.
 and a neck region. Scattered bundles of smooth muscle lie
Stratum
Layer
The stratum vasculare is a richly
within the connective tissue between the serosa and cili-
Vas
A vessel
vascularized layer within the
ated, simple columnar epithelium. Longitudinal folds are
myometrium.
present in the mucosa within the interior of the funnel near
Theca
A capsule
A sheath of cells, the meca folliculi,
the neck. The folds increase in depth within the neck, and
or sheath
Fomms around the ovarian follicle.
246
CHAPTER 18
KEY
1. Antrum
 11. Oocyte, nucleus
2. Corona radiata 
12. Primary Follicle
3. Corpus luteum
13. Primordial follicles
4. Cortex
14. Stroma
5. Cumulus oophorus
15.Theca externa
6. Granulosa cells
16. Theca folliculi
7. Growing Ffollicles
17. Theca interna
8. Medulla
18. Tunica albuginea
9.Membrana granulosa
19. Zona pellucida
10. Oocyte, cytoplasm
Figure 18.1. Ovary, Queen. Follicles of various ages and a
corpus luteum can be seen in the cortex. A portion of the vascular
 medulla is present.
igure 18.1
x12.5
Figure 18.2. Ovary, Queen. Early follicles in the outer region of
3
the cortex.
Figure 18.3. Ovary, Bitch. A multilaminar, primary follicle.
Figure 18.4. Ovary, Queen. A young, tertiary follicle.
Figure 18.2
X125
6
10
igure 18.3
×125
iqure 18.
X62.5
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
247
Figure 18.8
x25
KEY
1. Antrum
 7. Membrana granulosa
 2 Corpus albicans.
8. Theca externa
3.
Germinal epithelium
9.Theca interna
 Granulosa lutein cell
10. Theca lutein cell
 5. Hypertrophied theca cells
11. Young terticry Follicle
 6. Interstitial gland 
12. Zona pellucida
Fgure 18.5. Ovary, Bitch. Portion of the wall of a tertiary follicle,
and part of an adjacent corpus luteum.
Fgure 18.6. Corpus Luteum, Ovary, Sow. Peripheral region of
a corpus luteum showing theca lutein cells(small and granulose
lutein cells (large).
Figure 18.7. Ovary, Bitch. Atretic Follicles, each with α swollen
Figure18.5
x180
zona pellucida.
Figure 18.8. Corpus Albicans, Ovary, Cow (Masson's). The scar
fissue of the corpus albicans is stained bright blue-green in this
 preparation.
18.
<125
Figure 18.7
X62.5
Figure 18.9
X62.5
Figure 18.13
x25
KEY
 1. Corpus luteum
4. Hilus cells
2. Folds
 5. Interstitial gland 
 3. Granulosa lutein cell
6. Rete ovari
Figure 18.9. Ovary, Bitch. Several interstitial glands are visible
within the stroma between two corpora lutea.
Figure 18.10. Interstitial Glands, Ovary, Bitch. Cords of epithe-
dre well developed in queens and bitches.
Figure 18.1l. Hilus Cells, Ovary, Cow. Clusters of epithelioid
Figure 18.10
x250
cellsloted in the vicinityfthehilusrecalled hiluscellshy
resemble the epithelioid cells of the interstitial glands (see Figure
18.101.
Figure 18.12. Rete Ovarii, Ovary, Cow. Cords of cell, or chan-
nels lined by cuboidal epithelial cells, located in the medulla of
the ovary are calld the rete ovari. They are considered to be
homologous to the rete testis.
Figure 18.13. Fimbria of Infundibulum, Oviduct, Mare. The
mucosa of the himbria is highly folded.
igure18.11
X62.5
igure 18.12
X62.5
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
249
×125
Figure 18.18
x12.5
KEY
Adipose tissue, mesosalpinx
 6. Lamina propria
2
Cilia
7. Muscularis
 3. Columnar epithelium, ciliated
8. Secretory bleb
4. Extruded nucleus
9.Serosa
5.Folds
10. Submucosa
Figure 18.14. Fmbria of Infundibulum, Oviduct, Mare. Detail
of the wall. Note the smooth muscle of the thin muscularis.
Figure 18.15. Fimbria of Infundibulum, Oviduct, Cow. Portions
of the imbria may lack smooth muscle, as in this example.
Figure 18.15
×125
Fgure 18.16. Infundibulum, Oviduct, Cow (Masson's). The epi-
thelium consists of ciliated, columnar epithelial cells and noncili-
ated, secretory cells. Extruded nuclei, which appear to arise from
epithelial cells, care common.
Fgure 18.17. Infundibulum, Neck, Oviduct, x.s., Cow. The
mucosa is highly folded, and the muscularis is thin.
Fgure 18.18. Ampulla, Oviduct, X.s., Cow. The mucosa is
highly Folded. The muscularis is relatively thick. Compare with
Figure 18.17.
Figure 18.16
x250
Figure 18.17
x12.5
250
CHAPTER 18
Figure18.19
×25
Figure 18.20
x25
Figure 18.23
x180
KEY
Circular muscle
6. Longitudinal muscle
2. Columnar epithelium
7.Myometrium, circular
3. Cuboidal epithelium 
 8. Myometrium, longitudinal
 4. Endometrial gland 
9. Stratum vasculare
5. Folds
Figure 18.19. Isthmus, Oviduct, x.s., Mare. The mucosa of the
 o  o d o  s a s sn
 muscularis is thickest in this part of the oviduct.
X250
Figure 18.20. Uterine Horn, X.s., Anestrus, Bitch. The endome-
trium is thin and the glands are sparse in anestrus.
Figure 18.21. Uterine Horn, X.s., Anestrus, Queen. The lumen
of the anestrus uterus is lined by a simple cuboidal epithelium.
Figure 18.22. Uterine Horn, X.s., Proestrus, Bitch. In proestrus,
the endometrium becomes thicker and the glands enlarge.
Figure 18.23. Uterine Horn, X.s., Proestrus, Bitch. Luminal epi-
thelial cells become columnar during proestrus and estrus.
igure 18.22
x12.5
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
251
Figure 18.24
X12.5
Figure 18.28
×250
KEY
1. Artery
7. Stratum vasculare
 2. Endometrial gland 
8. Tunica adventitia 
3. Mesometrium
9. Tunica intima 
4. Myometrium
10. Tunica media 
 5. Myometrium, circular.
11. Vein
6. Myometrium, longitudinal
Figure 18.24. Uterine Horn, X.s., Estrus, Bitch. A thick endome-
trium and highly developed glands care characteristic of the
estrous uterus.
Figure 18.25. Uterine Horn, X.s., Diestrus, Bitch. The endome-
Figure 18.25
X12.5
 trium and its glands become Fully developed during diestrus.
2
Fgure 18.26. Mesomettium, Bitch. The mesometrivm contains
6
an abundance of smooth muscle and numerous blood vessels.
Smooth muscle of the mesometrium is continuous with the outer,
kongitudinal layer of the myometrium.
Figure 18.27. Uterine Horn, Brood Mare (Orcein). There is an
abundance of elastic fibers (red-brown in this micrographj in the
intima and acdventitia of blood vessels of the uterus of animals
that have been through a pregnancy. The section is from the
midregion of the myometrium.
Figure 18.28. Uterine Horn, Brood Mare. Detail of a portion of
an artery in the myometrium. The intima becomes thickened with
elastic fibers and smooth muscle in animals that have experienced
Q pregnancy. The adventitia also becomes heavily infiltrated with
Figure18.26
x12.5
elastic fibers.
11
Figure 18.27
×25
252
CHAPTER 18
Figure 18.29
X25
Figure18.30
x125
x180
KEY
1. Blood vessels
6. Hemorrhagic region
2. Caruncle
7. Myometrium, circular
3. Cilia
8. Myometrium, longitudinal
4. Cuboidal epithelium
 9. Pseudostratified epithelium
 5. Endometrial gland
Figure 18.29. Uterine Horn, X.s., Metestrus, Cow. Metestrous
bleeding ocurs in the cow. Numerous erythrocytes of hemor-
rhagic regions can be seen beneath the surface epithelium (see 
Figure 18.30).
Figure18.31
x250
Figure 18.30. Uterus, Metestrus, Cow. Detail of Figure 18.29.
Hemorrhagic regions are evident in the endometrium beneath the 
surface epithelium. The epithelial cells are cuboidal during met 
estrus in the cow.
Figure 18.31. Uterine Horn, Cow (Masson's). The epithelial cells
lining the uterine glands are sometimes ciliated, as in this section.
Figure 18.32. Caruncle, Uterus, X.s., Cow. The endometrium of
the uterus of ruminants contains nonglandular, highly cellar
 prominences called caruncles. Uterine glands that lie deep to the
caruncle open near its base.
Figure 18.33. Caruncle, Uterus, Cow. The caruncle consists of
highly cellular (mostly fibroblasts} connective tissue and numerous
blood vessels located beneath the epithelium.
Figure 18.32
x12.5
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
253
Fig. 18.36
10
Fig. 18.42
Fig. 18.41
Fig.18.39
Fig. 18.35
Figure 18.34
KEY
1.
 Allantoic blood vessel
 6. Marginal hematoma
 2. Allantoic epithelium
7. Myometrium
11
 3. Chorioallantoic membrane
 8. Placental labyrinth 
4. Chorion laeve
Jaol buods 6
 5. Deep glandular layer
10. Supraglandulr layer
Fgure 18.34. Pkcenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial, Bitch
[Drawing). Carnivores have a zonary placenta that appears,
grossly, as a bellike band around the midle of the chorionic
sac. The chorionic (fetal tissue penetrates to the endothelium of
the maternal blood vessels. A placenta with this type of Fetal-
maternal junction is called an endotheliochorial placenta. The
associationbetween the maternalendotheliumand syntropho-
blast can be seen in Fiqures 18.37 and 18.39.
Figure 18.35
×25
Note: This drawing is of a section through a portion of one of the
edges of the zoncary placenta of a bitch.
hgure 18.35. Placenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial, Bitch
(Trichrome). Section through the deepest layers of the placenta.
See Figure 18.34 For location. The spongy layer is Formed by the
occluded uterine glands in the mid-region of the endometrium.
The deep glandular layer consists of the bases of the uterine
glands. The supraglandular layer is a sheet of connective tissue
between the deep glandular and spongy layers. (Photomicrograph
of a histologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.)
hgure 18.36. Placenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial, Bitch
[Trichrome). Portion of the chorioallantoic membrane and the
placental labyrinth. See Figure. 18.34 For location. The chorioal-
lantoic membrane in this micrograph appears thicker than normal
beccuse of the presence of extensive space artiact.Note the
presence of fetal blood vessels in the chorioallantoic membrane.
(Photomicrograph of a histologic section borrowed from the
Figure 18.36
X62.5
College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.!
254
CHAPTER 18
KEY
1. Allantoic blood vessel
 5. Maternal blood vessel
2.Chorioallantoic connective tissue
6. Necrotic endometrial tissue 
3. Cytotrophoblast 
 7. Syntrophoblast
4. Eroded endometrial epithelium 
8. Trophoblastic projection,
vacuolated cells
Figure 18.37. Placenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial), Bitch
[Trichrome). Section is through the placental labyrinth. Both
maternal and Fetal components of this endotheliochorial placenta
can be seen. (Photomicrograph of a histologic section borrowed
from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 18.38. Placenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial), Bitch
[Trichrome). Detail of the placental labyrinth. The maternal blood
<125
vessels are lined by endothelial cells with bulging nuclei.
(Photomicrograph of a histologic section borrowed  rom the
College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 18.39. Placenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial, Bitch
{Trichrome). Trophoblastic projections, lined by large, pale, vacu-
olated cells, protrude into spaces (areolae) in the region where
the placentallabyrinthis Forming.A portion ofthematernal fissue,
which has been partially destroyed by the invading trophoblast,
is represented by the red-stained, necrotic tissue seen in the lower
left quadrant of the micrograph. (Photomicrograph of a histologic
section borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa
State University.)
Figure 18.40. Placenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial), Bitch
{Trichrome). Detail of Figure 18.39. (Photomicrograph of a his-
tologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine,
igure 18.38
250
lowa State University.)
62.5
Figure18.40
×125
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
255
KEY
 Allantoic blood vessel
8. Marginal hematoma 
2
Chorioallantoic membrane
9. Maternal blood vessel
 3. Chorioallantoic villus
10. Microplacentome
4.
 Chorioallantoic villus, epithelium
 11. Placental labyrinth
 5. Chorion laeve, epithelium
12. Spongy zone
6. Crypt 
13. Uerine gland
7. Crypt, epithelium
14. Uterus, epithelium
hgure 18.41. Placenta (Zonary and Endotheliochorial), Bitch
{Trichrome). A portion of a marginal hematoma, consisting. of
uterine blood vessels, is shown. See Figure 18.34 For location.
12
(Photomicrograph of a histologic section borrowed from the
College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 18.41
x12.5
Fgure 18.42. Chorion Laeve, Bitch (Trichrome). The chorion
laeve is the part of the chorioallantoic sac that is not involved in
the Formation ofthe placenta.lts surface is smooth and is apposed
to the uterine epithelium. This section is from the region adjacent 
to the hematoma of the placenta. See Figure 18.34 for location.
(Photomicrograph of a histologic section borrowed from the 
College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.]
Figure 18.43. Placenta (Diffuse and Epitheliochorial, Mare. In
the horse, small tufts of branched chorioallantoic villi interdigitate
with crypts of the endometrium. Together, the tufts and the crypts
Form structures called microplacentomes. (Photomicrograph of a 
13
histologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.)
1
Figure 18.44. Placenta (Diffuse and Epitheliochorial), Mare.
Figure 18.42
X62.5
Detail of a microplacentome. Longitudinal and cross sections of
chorioallantoicvilli are surrounded by endometrial crypts.
.The
epithelium of the crypts, which may vary in height, is Hattened in
this region. The villi contain blood vessels and connective tissue
of a histologic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.!
Figure 18.43
25
Figure 18.44
×125
256
CHAPTER 18
6
2
Figure 18.45
×125
Figure 18.48
×12.5
KEY
10
1. Allantoic blood vessel
11. High columnar cells
5
2. Chorioallantoic membrane
12. Intercotyledonary endometrium
3. Chorioallantoic membrane,
13. Low columnar cells 
primary fold
14. Matemal blood vessel 
4. Chorioallantoic membrane,
15. Myometrium
10
secondary fold
16.Placentome
5. Chorioalantoic illus, epithelium 17.
poyiuo aoods
6. Crypt, epithelium
18. Stalk of placentome
:19
7. Cuboidal cells
19. Uterine gland
8. Endometrium, connective tissue
 9. Endometrium, primary fold 
10. Endometrium, secondary fold 
Figure 18.46
X12.5
Figure 18.45. Placenta (Diffuse and Epitheliochorial), Mare.
Detail of a placentome adiacent to the endometrium. The epithe-
lium of the endometrial crypt consists of pale, cuboidal cells. The
epithelium of the chorioallantoic villi is Formed from pink-stained
cuboidal and low columnar cells. (Photomicrograph of a histo-
logic section borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine,
lowa State University.)
Figure 18.46. Placenta (Diffuse and Epitheliochorial), Sow
(Trichrome). The placenta of the sow is folded, difuse, and epi-
theliochorial. Folds of the chorioallantoic membrane interdigitate
with Folds of the uterus. (Photomicrograph of a histologic section
borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State
University.!
Figure 18.47. Placenta (Diffuse and Epitheliochorial), Sow
{Trichrome}.Interdigitating secondary Folds of the chorioallantoic
membrane and endometrium. The bases of the folds of the cho-
rioallantoic membrane are lined by high columnar epithelial cells,
whereas the crests of the maternal Folds are covered by shorter
columnar cells. The remainder of both epithelial surfaces is lined
by cuboidal or Hattened cells. Note that the chorioallantoic epi-
thelial surface is invaded by capillaries. (Photomicrograph of a
histologic section borrowed from the Collge of Veterinary
Medicine, lowa State University.)
3
Figure 18.48. Placenta (Cotyledonary and Epitheliochorial),
Cow. A section through a placentome Formed from the association
of a cotyledon (clumps of chorioallantoic villil with a uterine
caruncle (endometrial elevation]. Note that the endometrial epi-
17
 thelium of the intercotyledonary region is discontinuous.
Figure18.47
X180
igure 18.49
x25
Figure 18.53
x250
KEY
1. Allantoic blood vessel
7. Diplokaryocyte
2. Chorioallantoic villus, branch
8. Lamina propria
3. Chorioallantoic villus, main stem
 9. Primary fold
4. Cilia
10. Secondary bold
 5. Crypt
11. Stratified squamous epithelium
 6. Cryptal epithelium 
12. Tertiary fold
Figure 18.49. Placenta (Cotyledonary and Epitheliochorial),
Cow. Detail of Figure 1 8.48. Highly branched chorioallantoic villi
interdligitate with uterine crypts.
Figure 18.50. Placenta (Cotyledonary and Epitheliochorial),
Figure18.50
×125
Cow. Detail of a portion of a placentome adjacent to the stalk.
Note that the cryptal epithelium is cuboidal or Hattened.
The
epithelium of the chorioallantoic villus consis of irregularly
shaped cells and binucleate giant cells (diplokaryocytes) .
Figure 18.51. Cervix of Uterus, Bitch. The mucosa of the cervix
is thrown into Folds. The epithelium of the bitch's cervix is stratified
squamous. (Photomicrograph of a histologic section borrowed
from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure 18.52. Cervix of Uterus, Mare. Cervical folds are evident.
Figure 18.53. Cervix of Uterus, Mare (Masson's). The cervical
epithelium is simple columnar, except in the bitch (see Figure
18.51)1. Epithelial cells may be ciliated.
Figure18.51
x125
Figure 18.52
X12.5
258
CHAPTER 18
Figure18.54
X125
Figure 18.58
X62.5
KEY
1. Adventia
 8. Muscularis
2.Cavernous spaces
 9. Stratified epithelium 
3. Columnar cells
10. Stratified squamous epithelium
4. Duct
11. Transitional epithelium
 5. Keratinized cells
12. Urethral epithelium
 6. Lamina propria
13. Vestibulkr epithelium 
7. Minor vestibular gland
Figure 18.54. Vagina, Anestrus, Bitch. The epithelium of the
carnivore's anestrous vagina is stratified squamous to stratified
cuboidal. (Photomicrograph ofa histologic section borrowed from
the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State University.)
Figure18.55
X62.5
Figure 18.55. Vagina, Estrus, Queen. In carnivores, the vagina
is lined by a thickened, keratinized, stratified squamous epithe-
lium during estrus. Exfoliated keratinized cell cre visible in the
 vaginal lumen in this micrograph.
Figure 18.56. Urethra, X.s., Queen. Section was taken from the
region close to the bladder. This portion of the urethra is lined by
a transitional epithelium. (Photomicrograph of a histologic section
borrowed from the College of Veterinary Medicine, lowa State
University.]
Figure 18.57. Junction of Vestibule and Urethra, X.s., Queen.
Near the vestibule, the urethra is lined by α stratified squamous
epithelium. Note the presence of cavernous spaces in the connec-
tive tissue adjacent to the muscularis. Such spaces occur only in
the distal two-thirds of the urethra in the doe, ewe, and queen.
Figure 18.56
X62.5
In allother domesticmammals, cavernous spaces occur through-
out the entire length of the urethra.
Figure 18.58. Vestibule, Queen. 
 Detail of α minor vestibular
gland. The secretory tubules of these branched, tubular glands
es  p   irl o o a  
squamous epithelium.
Figure 18.57
x12.5
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
259
Figure18.59
X62.5
Figure 18.63
x125
KEY
1. Columnar cells
5. Neutrophil
2. Duct
6. Parabasal cell
3. Erythrocyte
 7. Supericicl cell
 4. Intermediate cell 
8. Superficicl intermediate cell
Fgure 18.59. Vestibule, Queen. Detail of a major vestibular
电
gland. These glands are found in queens and ruminants. They
are compound tubular glands with secretory unitslike those of the
minor vestibular glands (see Figure 18.58].
Figure 18.60. Vaginal Smear, Anestrus, Bitch (Hema-3). During
Figure 18.60
x125
anestrus, parabasal and intermediate cells are the predominant
epithelial cells present. See the introduction For a description of
cell types. Neutrophils and bacteria may be present in' limited 
numbers.
Fgure 18.6l. Vaginal Smear, Early Proestrus, Bitch (Hema-3).
During early to mid proestrus, smears may contain neutrophils,
mediate, supericial intermediate, and superficicl cells).
Figure 18.62. Voginal Smear, Mid to Late Proestrus, Bitch (Diff-
cells are predominant. Neutrophils decrease in number at this
time.
Figure 18.63. Vaginal Smear, Estrus, Bitch (Diff-Quik). Most
(90% or more) of the epithelial cells from α bitch in estrus are
Figure 18.61
X125
Some estrous smears may contain large numbers of bacteria.
Neutrophils are not normally present.
Figure 18.62
125
260
CHAPTER 18
2
igure 18.64
×125
Figure 18.68
X62.5
KEY
1. Follicle, early
2.Follicle, late
 9. Oocyte, yolk-laden cytoplasm
3. Granulocytes
10. Parabasal cell
 4. Intermediate cell
11. Superficial cell 
5. Medulla
12. Superficicl intermediate cell
6. Neutrophil
13. Vacuolar cells
7. Oocyte
Figure 18.64. Vaginal Smear, Diestrus, Bitch (Diff-Quik). There
is a signihiccnt change in the numbers of epithelial-cell types
during diestrus. Superficial cells decrease, and parabasal and
intermediate cells increase. Neutrophils usually reappear during
Figure 18.65
x12.5
diestrus. Because erythrocytes may be present in smears from
bitches inearly diestrus,itisnot possible todistinguish proestrus
from diestrus on the basis of a single smear.
Figure 18.65. Ovary, Hen. A portion of the ovarian cortex with
developing follicles.
Figure 18.66. Ovary, Vacuolar Cells, Hen. A portion of the
cortex with a mass of Fat-laden vacuolar cells. The latter may
 represent regressing postovulatory Follicles.
Figure 18.67. Ovary:
.Vacuolar Cells, Hen. Detail of Figure
18.66. Vacuolar cells have pyknotic nuclei and contain numerous
 Fat vacuoles. Cell boundaries are often indistinct.
Figure 18.68. Ovary, Granulocytes, Hen. Granulocytes cre
often Found in the cortex of mature ovaries. The acidophilic gran-
×62.5
ules of these cells impart α red tinge to a large crea of the cortex
Figure 18.66
in this micrograph.
Figure 18.67
<250
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
261
不5米
-15
*16+
10
3
4
5
Figure 18.73
Figure18.69
×250
KEY
1.
Atretic follicle
10. Oocyte, yolk-laden cytoplasm
2 Cloaca
11. Ovary
 3. Developing follicle
12. Perivielline membrane
4. Infundibulum
13. Theca externa
5. Isthmus
14. Theca interna 
 6. Interstitical cells 
15. Uterus (shell gland)
7.Magnum
16. Vagina
8. Membrana granulosa
17. Yolk sphere
9. Membrana granulosa, thickened 
Fgure 18.69. Ovary, Developing Follicle, Hen. A portion of the
wall of a developing Follile. Note the Hatftened cells of the theca
interna and the presence of interstitial cells in the theca externa.
Figure 18.70
25
Figure 18.70. Ovary, Atretic Follicle, Hen. In some atretic Folli-
cles,intrstitil (lteal cells prolierate,yperrophy,ndmigt
inward (see Figure. 18.71).
Fgure 18.7l. Ovary, Atretic Follicle, Hen. Detail of Figure
18.70.
Figure 18.72. Ovary, Atretic Follicle, Hen. Cells of the mem-
brane granulosa have proliferated, Forming a thick layer charac-
teristic of many atretic Follicles.
Figure 18.73. Oviduct, Diogrammatic Drawing, Hen. The
oviduct of the hen is divisible into an infundibulum, magnum,
isthmus, uterus, and vagina.
×125
Figure 18.72
x12.5
262
CHAPTER 18
0
15
Figure 18.74
X62.5
Figure 18.78
×25
KEY
1. Ciliated epithelium
19. Primary fold.
2. Glandular groove
10. Pseudostratified columnar 
 3. Lamina propria 
epithelium
4. Mucosa
11. Regenerating gland
 5. Mucosal fold, infundibulum
12. Resting gland
6. Mucosal fold, magnum
13.Secondary Fold
7. Muscularis
14. Secretory gland 
8. Muscularis, circular
15. Serosa
16. Terticry Fold
Figure 18.74. Funnel of Infundibulum, Oviduct, X.s., Hen. The
mucosa is thrown into shallow ridges that increase in height as
the funnel narrows toward the neck region. The epithelium is cili-
Figure 18.75
X62.5
cted, simple columnar. Scattered bundles of smooth muscle Form
the muscularis. A serosa covers the funnel externally.
Figure 18.75. Neck of Infundibulum, X.s., Oviduct, Hen. Tall
primary mucosal folds bear secondary and tertiary Folds.
Figure 18.76. Neck of Infundibulum, X.s., Oviduct, Hen. Detail
of mucosa showing Folds lined by ciliated columnar cells. The
bottoms of the grooves between the Folds are lined by nonciliated
secretory cells.
Figure 18.77. Neck of Infundibulum and Magnum, x.s., Oviduct,
Hen. The primary mucosal folds of the magnum are taller and
broader vis-a-vis the infundibulum, because of the presence of
numerous tubular glands.
Figure 18.78. Magnum, X.s., Oviduct, Hen. Portion of a fold.
Depending on their activity, the tubular glands of the magnum 
Figure 18.76
x250
exhibit distinctive Features. Three morphologic phases of activity
can be recognized (regenerating, secretory, resting]. See Figures
18.80 and 18.81 for details.
Figure 18.77
x12.5
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
263
9
Figure18.79
x250
Figure 18.83
×125
KEY
1. Albumen
7. Magnum
2 Ciliated cell
8. Muscularis
 3. Epithelium, regenerating gland
 9. Pseudostratified epithelium 
10. Secretory cell
 5. Epithelium, secretory gland 
11. Tubular gland 
 6. Isthmus, primary fold 
hgure 18.79. Magnum, Oviduct, Hen. Detail of the epithelium.
Ciliated columnar and secretory (goblet] cells comprise the epi-
thelium of the magnum. The nuclei of the secretory cells cre round
and are located close to the base of the cell, whereas the nuclei
Figure 18.80
x250
of the ciliated cells are oval and occupy the central to apical
region of the cell. Accordingly, the epithelium is pseudostratied
columnar.
Figure 18.80. Magnum, Oviduct, Hen. Detail of regenerating
tubular glands. These glands have clearly defined lumens. The
secretory cells are cuboidal.
Figure 18.8 1. Magnum, Oviduct, Hen. Detail of secretory tubular
glands and resting fubular glands.Thecells ofthe secretory stage
cre characterized by pyknotic, basal nuclei. The entire cytoplasm
is illed with strongly acidophilic granules.The glandular lumens
may be dilated by secreted albumen. The cytoplasm of the cells
in the resting stage has a frothy appearance, and the lumens of
the glands are obscure.
Figure 18.82. Isthmus, x.s., Oviduct, Hen. The primary folds of
the isthmus are not as broad as those of the magnum. Compare
Figure 18.81
x250
with Figure 18.77. They are somewhat angular in appearance.
A portion of an adiacent region of the magnum is present in this
micrograph.
Fgure 18.83. Isthmus, Oviduct, Hen. A portion of the epithelium
and underlying tubular glands. The epithelium is ciliated pseu-
dostratified columnar. A tubular gland can be seen opening to
the surface. The glandular cells do not undergo obvious cyclic
 changes as in the magnum.
Figure 18.82
x12.5
264
CHAPTER 18
10
Figure 18.84
x12.5
Figure 18.88
x125
KEY
006
1. Apical cell
8. Muscularis
2. Basal cell, nucleus
9. Primary fold
3. Blood vessel
10. Pseudostratified epithelium
4. Concave surface
11.
 Secondary fold 
5. Duct
12. Sperm-host gland
6. Erythrocyte in capillary
13. Vacuole
7. Glandular epithelium 
10
Figure 18.84. Uterus (Shell Gland), Oviduct, Hen. The folds of
the uterus are not as broad as those of the magnum, and there
is less glandular tissue. This section was taken from a uterus that
had been fixed while containing an egg. Accordingly, the luminal
Figure 18.85
x250
surface is somewhat concave.
Figure 18.85. Uterus (Shell Gland), Oviduct, Hen. Ducts of
complex, branched, tubular glands pierce the ciliated pseu-
dostratified columnar epithelium at intervals. Ducts cre formed
3
 from polygonal gland cells.
Figure 18.86. Uterus (Shell Gland), Oviduct, Hen. Basal cells
[nuclei close to the basement membrane) of the pseudostratified
13
epithelium may contain vacuoles above and below their nuclei.
Apical cells (nuclei centrally located) contain numerous granules
before releasing their secretion.
Figure 18.87. Vagina, X.s., Oviduct, Hen. The mucosa of the
vagina is characterized by long, slender, primary Folds bearing
numerous small secondary folds.  The muscularis is highly
developed.
Figure 18.86
X625
Figure 18.88. Vagina, Proximal, Oviduct, Hen. Sperm-host
glands are tubular glands, lined by tall columnar cells, and are
located within the mucosa of the vagina near the uterovaginal
junction.Sperm are stored in these glands,remaining unctional
for up to 2l days.
Figure 18.87
×25
FEMALE REPRODUCTIVE SYSTEM
265
19
THE EYE
MAMMALS
The eye is a sensory organ designed for vision. Basically, it is composed of a lens
and a wall that is divided into three layers: an outer fbrous tunic (corneoscleral
layer), a middle vascular tunic (uvea), and an inner retina. The fbrous tunic is
divided into the posterior, opaque sclera and the anterior transparent cornea. The vas-
cular tunic includes the choroid, ciliary body, and iris. The retinal tunic consists of a
 10-layered, photosensitive retina and a bilayered, nonphotosensitive portion that covers
the ciliary body and the posterior surface of the iris.
FibrousTunic
Sclera
The sclera consists of densely interwoven bundles of collagenous fibers arranged parallel
to the surface of the wall of the eye. There are also fbroblasts, some fine elastic fbers,
and scattered melanocytes, especially in the innermost region of the sclera.
Cornea
The cornea is avascular. Its anterior (outer) surface is covered by the nonkeratinized,
stratified squamous anterior epithelium. Below this layer is Bowman's membrane, which
is not distinct in domestic mammals. The underlying stroma (substantia propria) is
composed of thin lamellae of collagenous fibers oriented parallel to the corneal surface.
Fibroblasts occur between the layers of fbers. Descemet's membrane is a relatively thick
membrane that separates the stroma from the posterior epithelium. The latter consists
267
of a single layer of squamous to low cuboidal cells that
Iris
covers the posterior surface of the cornea.
The iris is the most anterior part of the uveal tract. It forms
a thin, contractile diaphragm with a central aperature, the
pupil. The base of the iris is attached to the anterior portion
Limbus
The corneoscleral junction is called the limbus. Here, the
of the ciliary body. The stroma of connective tissue of the
regular collagenous lamellae of the corneal stroma merge
iris contains many melanocytes and blood vessels. The
with the interwoven fibers of the sclera. The appearance
stroma contains circumferentially arranged bundles of
smooth muscle that form the sphincter (constrictor) muscle.
of the stratified squamous epithelium of the cornea differs
from that of the bulbar conjunctiva, which overlies the
The anterior surface of the iris is not covered by an epi-
thelium, but rather by a discontinuous layer of stromal
sclera near the limbus. The deepest cells in the epithelium
of the bulbar conjunctiva are smaller and more closely
cells (fbroblasts and melanocytes). The posterior surface
is covered by a bilayer of epithelial cells, the pars iridica
packed than those of the anterior epithelium of the cornea.
In addition, the basal border of the conjunctival epithelium
retinae, which represents the most anterior continuation
d   p asd ae   s
of the nonphotosensitive portion of the retina. It consists
of a superficial layer of pigmented columnar cells and a
layer of loose connective tissue. The boundary between the
corneal epithelium and its underlying stroma, however, is
basal layer of partially pigmented myoepithelial cells. The
latter are elongated, radially arranged, contractile cells that
smooth.
form the dilator “muscle” of the iris. They have an apical,
pigmented portion containing the nucleus and a nonpig-
Vascular Tunic
mented basal portion. The nonpigme nted regions of these
cells border the stroma and appear as an acidophilic band.
Choroid
The pigmented portion of each myoepithelial cell lies just
The choroid is the portion of the vascular tunic of the eye
below the layer of pigmented columnar cells. In the horse,
pig, and ruminant, a number of corpora nigra iris gran-
that lies between the sclera and the photosensitive retina.
It contains numerous melanocytes. The fine network of
ules) project from the pupillary margin of the iris. They
connective tissue of the suprachoroid layer joins the sclera
are highly vascularized proliferations of the stroma and the
to the vascular layer of the choroid. The latter is composed
 pigmented epithelial cells of the iris.
of a profusion of blood vessels surrounded by loose con-
nective tissue. The choriocapillary layer contains a thin
Filtration Angle
network of capillaries that are distributed in a single plane.
Bruch's membrane, a refractile membrane that lies between
At the peripheral margin of the anterior chamber is the
the choriocapillary layer and the pigment epithelium of the
fltration angle, the area between the limbus, the base of
retina, is difficult to resolve.
the iris, and the ciliary body. This triangular region is
A reflective tapetum lucidum (responsible for eyeshine)
spanned by a latticework of tra beculae and intertrabecular,
is located between the choriocapillary and vascular layers
fluid-filled spaces. The trabeculae are composed of connec-
of the choroid in the dorsal portion of the eye. It is present
s e q parao ae e so sd pe ass aa
in all domestic mammals except the pig. The horse and
layer of squamous cells. They form the pectinate ligament,
ruminants have a fbrous tapetum lucidum composed of
the uveal trabecular meshwork, and the corneoscleral tra-
layers of collagenous fbers and fibroblasts. The cat and
becular meshwork. At the peripheral margin of the ante-
dog have a cellular tapetum lucidum formed by flattened,
rior chamber, excess aqueous humor passes through the
pentagonal or hexagonal cells that appear bricklike in
profle. The tapetal cells are filled with numerous 
rod-
Fontana within the uveal trabecular meshwork. These
shaped granules. The flat surfaces of the cells and the long
spaces communicate with those of the corneoscleral tra-
axes of their rod-shaped granules lie parallel to the surface
becular meshwork, which drain into the scleral venous
of the retina.
plexus. In the horse, the limbus does not overlap the pec-
tinate ligament of the filtration angle, so that the pectinate
Ciliary Body
ligament is apparent by direct examination of the eye. In
the other domestic mammals the limbus covers the pecti-
The ciliary body is an anterior continuation of the choroid
nate ligament, which is therefore obscured from view by
that extends to the base of the iris. The loose connective
 the opaque sclera.
tissue of the stroma contains smooth muscle, the ciliary
muscle, which lies peripheral to an inner, vascular region.
The epithelium of the ciliary body, which is formed by cells
Retina
of the nonphotosensitive portion of the retina, is called the
pars ciliaris retinae. It is a bilayer of cells consisting of a
The retina is the innermost layer of the wall of the eye.
basal layer of pigmented cells and a surface layer of non-
pigmented columnar cells. Short folds of the posterior
eye (adjacent to the cavity of the vitreous humor) from the
surface of the ciliary body become longer toward the iris
ora ciliaris retinae to the optic disc. The latter is the point
and form ciliary processes that project toward the lens.
of transition from the photosensitive retina to the nonpho-
Zonular fibers extend from the processes to the lens capsule
tosensitive retina. From the ora ciliaris retinae, the non-
near the equator of the lens.
photosensitive portion continues anteriorly as a bilayer of
268
CHAPTER 19
cells, forming the pars ciliaris retinae and the pars iridica
conjunctiva. The epithelium of the conjunctiva varies from
retinae, which cover the ciliary body and the posterior
stratified squamous to stratified columnar and may even
surface of the iris, respectively.
appear transitional. Goblet cells are often present. The
From the choroid to the cavity of the vitreous humor,
underlying layer of loose connective tissue may contain
the 10 layers of the photosensitive retina are as follows:
diffuse or nodular lymphatic tissue.
Pigment epithelium
 Layer of rods and cones
Eyelids
Outer limiting membrane (usually not apparent)
Outer nuclear layer
The eyelids are covered internally by the palpebral conjunc-
Outer plexiform layer
tiva and externally by thin skin. The skin contains hair fol-
 Inner nuclear layer
licles, sweat glands (glands of Moll), and sebaceous glands
(glands of Zeiss). In the pig, the glands are particularly well
Inner plexiform layer
developed. Between the dermis of the skin and the lamina
Ganglion cell layer
Nerve fiber layer
 propria of the palpebral conjunctiva is a plate of dense con-
Inner limiting membrane
nective tissue, the tarsus (tarsal plate). Large, multilobular,
sebaceous glands, called tarsal (Meibomian) glands, are
The cuboidal cells of the pigment epithelium contain
embedded in the tarsus. Their central ducts open onto the
few or no pigment granules in the part of the eye where
 palpebral surface near its junction with the skin.
the tapetum lucidum is located. In other parts of the eye,
pigment granules are numerous in the cells of the pigment
epithelium.
Nictitating Membrane
The nerve-fiber layer consists of axonal processes of
The nictitating membrane (third eyelid) is a ventromedial
the ganglion cells that converge at the optic disc and form
the optic nerve. Because photoreceptor cells are not present
the dog and ruminants and by elastic cartilage in the cat,
here, this region is also referred to as the blind spot.
 horse, and pig. The superfcial gland of the nictitating
Bundles of fibers of the optic nerve pass through perfora-
membrane surrounds the base of the cartilage. It is a serous
tions of the sclera. This sievelike part of the sclera is the
gland in the horse and cat, mixed in the dog and rumi-
lamina cribrosa.
nants, and mucous in the pig. The pig also has a Harderian
gland (deep gland of the nictitating membrane) that pro-
Lens
duces a fatty secretion.
The transparent, biconvex lens is avascular. It is composed
Lacrimal Gland
entirely of epithelial cells enclosed within a homogeneous
capsule. The cells on the anterior surface of the lens just
The lacrimal gland is a tubuloacinar gland, serous in the
below the capsule are simple cuboidal and form the lens
cat and mixed in the horse, ruminant, dog, and pig. It is
epithelium. Toward the equator of the lens, the cells
predominantly a mucous gland in the pig and mostly
become long, prismatic, and arranged in meridional rows,
serous in the horse and ruminant. There are also accessory
forming lens fbers. As new lens fibers develop from the
lacrimal glands, such as Krause's gland, which may be
lens epithelium at the germinal zone of the equator, older
serous or mixed.
lens fibers are displaced centrally and lose their nuclei. The
lens is suspended by zonular fibers (suspensory ligaments)
that extend from the lens capsule to the ciliary processes.
CHICKEN
Chambers of the Eye
Lens
The eye contains three fluid-flled regions. The anterior
The eye of the chicken is quite different from that of
chamber is bordered by the cornea, iris, and lens. The
mammals. Within the capsule the lens is divided into the
posterior chamber is located between the iris, lens, zonular
annular pad and the lens body. The annular pad forms an
fibers, and ciliary processes. Both of these chambers contain
outer ring around the equator of the lens body. It consists
aqueous humor. The most posterior compartment, the
 of radially arranged lens fibers with peripheral nuclei. In
cavity of the vitreous humor, lies behind the lens.
the lens body the lens fbers are oriented parallel to the
optical axis of the eye, and some nuclei are present, primar-
ily near the annular pad.
Conjunctiva
The conjunctiva is a thin, transparent, mucous mem brane.
Fibrous Tunic
The bulbar conjunctiva is continuous with the anterior
surface of the cornea at the limbus and covers the sclera
Sclera
for a short distance. The palpebral conjunctiva lines the
A remarkable feature of the avian sclera is the presence of
internal surface of the eyelids. The fornix of the conjunc-
a ring of overlapping scleral ossicles, anteriorly, and a
tiva is the point of reflexion of the bulbar and palpebral
 cup-shaped layer of hyaline cartilage, the scleral cartilage,
THE EYE
269
 posteriorly. The latter terminates internal to the scleral
Pecten
ossicles. Dense connective tissue encloses the scleral ossi-
cles and extends posteriorly, peripheral to the carilage
The pecten is a thin, highly vascular, pleated membrane
layer.
that protrudes into the cavity of the vitreous humor from
the ventral surface of the eye. Its base is secured intermit-
 tently to the linear, optic disc. The apical surface is attached
Cornea
The layers of the cornea of the chicken are similar to those
to a thickened mass of pectineal tissue called the bridge.
The pecten is characterized by an extensive network of
 of mammals. Bowman's membrane, however, is thicker
capillaries lined by thick endothelial cells with plump
sdd  n e a  
nuclei. Polymorphic pigment cells fill the spaces between
Descemet's membrane is relatively thin and less distinct.
the capillaries and larger vessels. The pecten is draped by
a covering membrane, which is thought to be continuous
Vascular Tunic
with the inner limiting membrane of the retina.
Filtration Angle
Choroid
The choroid is a thick, vascularized coat with numerous
The fltration angle of the chicken is somewhat different
pigment cells. The suprachoroid abuts the thin perichon-
from that of mammals. It is filled by a trabecular meshwork
drium of the scleral cartilage. The vascular layer of the
formed by the pectinate ligament (uveal meshwork) and the
choroid contains blood vessels and large spaces embedded
scleral trabecular meshwork. The pectinate ligament is a
in loose connective tissue. The choriocapillary layer is
loose network of elastic fibers covered by simple squamous
separated from the pigment epithelium of the retina by an
cells. It spans the filtration angle from the scleral tra becular
indistinct Bruch's membrane. No tapetum lucidum is
meshwork to the iris and the elastic tissue of the ciliary
 present in the chicken.
 body. The trabecular meshwork of the pectinate ligament
encloses the spaces of Fontana. The latter communicate
Ciliary Body
with the spaces of the scleral trabecular meshwork, which
The ciliary body is a thin layer of loose connective tissue
is formed by collagenous and elastic fibers. These spaces
with a thick outer region of numerous elastic fbers. It is
communicate with the canal of Schlemm within the sclera.
covered by a bilayer of more or less cuboidal, pigmented
basal cells and cuboidal to columnar, nonpigmented surface
Structures Associated With the Eye
cells. Folds of the lining of the ciliary body form ciliary
 The chicken has a thin, well-developed nictitating mem-
 processes that fuse to the lens capsule in the region of the
equator of the lens. More posteriorly, zonular fibers extend
brane. A supportive cartilage is absent. The inner surface
from the ciliary body to the lens capsule. The ciliary
of the eyelids is lined by the palpebral conjunctiva. The
muscles (Crampton's and Bricke's) are skeletal muscles
external surface is covered by thin skin with sparse feath-
ers. 1
No glands are present.
that lie across from the ciliary body, just inside the main
 portion of the sclera.
The lacrimal gland is a small, tubular gland that pro-
duces a mucous secretion. It lies medial to the caudal part
of the lower eyelid. The Harderian gland is a larger gland
Iris
that lies on the dorsal posterior surface of the eye. It is
The iris is thickest just above its narrow base, then tapers
 characterized by numerous plasma cells that surround the
toward the pupillary margin. The stroma contains a
tubular secretory units.
sphincter and dilator muscle. Both of these are formed
from small skeletal muscle cells that contain lipid vacuoles.
The dilator muscle is sparse and posterior to the thicker
Word Roots
sphincter muscle. The anterior (corneal) surface of the iris
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
is covered by a simple layer of nonpigmented, flattened
Corpus
Body
The corpora nigra that project fom the
epithelial cells. The posterior (lens) surface of the iris is
Nigra
Black, dark
papillary margin of the iris are highly
covered by a stratified layer of pigmented epithelial cells,
pigmented.
three to five cells thick.
Crib
A sieve
Bundles of fibers of the optic nerve
pass through the sievelike layer called
the lamina cribrosa of the sclera.
Retina
Lachrym
Tears
The lccrimal gland produces tears.
Limbus
An edge,
The limbus is the circular junction of
The photosensitive retina of the chicken is composed of 10
usually curved
the cornea with the sclera.
layers, as in mammals, but unlike that in mammals is
Palpebra
Eyelid
The palpebral conjunctiva lines the
avascular. The cells of the pigment epithelium are consider-
intemal surface of the eyelid.
ably different in the chicken. They are tall and narrow
Scler
Hard 
The sclera is the tough outer connective
rather than cuboidal. The nucleus occupies the smaller,
tissue layer of the wall of the eye.
basal region of each cell, which contains few or no pigment
Tape
A carpet
The toperum lucicum is the reflective
granules. The apical portion is filled with rod-shaped
Lucid
Light, clear,
layer of the choroid.
pigment granules that are oriented parallel to the long axis
shiny
of the cell. The apical cytoplasm often appears to be sepa-
Vitre
Glassy
Vireous humor is a transparent Hluid that
Humor
A fluid
Fills the posterior comparrment ofthe eye.
rated into tufts or strands of pigment granules.
270
CHAPTER 19
Ciliary muscle
Filtration
 Sclera
Bulbar
angle{
 Choroid
conjunctiva
Palpebral
conjunctiva
Ora ciliaris
retinae
Tapetum lucidum
Limbus
Pars ciliaris retinae
Iris
 Pars iridica retinae,
Retina
pigmented layer
Posterior
chamber
Anterior
chamber
Cavity of
vitreous humor
Pupil
Lens
Optic
disc
Cornea
Optic nerve
Sphincter
muscle
Zonular fiber
Dilator,
Ciliaryprocess
 myoepithelial cells
Palpebral
conjunctiva
Bulbar conjunctiva
Scleral venous plexus
Figure 19.1. Eye, Sagital Section, Dog. The relationship between various morphologic components of
the canine eye cre depicted.
THE EYE
271
18
22
22
21
12.
Figure 19.2
x12.5
Figure 19.6
x12.5
13
14
KEY
1. Anterior chamber
14. Lens epithelium
10
2. Bulbar conjunctiva
15. Lens fibers, new
3. Ciliary body.
15
16. Lens fibers, old 
4. Ciliary muscle
17. Limbus
 5. Ciliary process
18. Palpebral conjunctiva
6.Cornea
19. Pars ciliaris retinae
7. Comeoscleral trabecular
 20. Pectinate ligament 
meshwork
 21. Posterior chamber
8. Elastic fiber
22. Sclera
9. Filtration angle
23. Scleral venous plexus
16
10. Germinal zone
24. Spaces of Fontana
11. Iris
25. Vascular layer, choroid 
12. Lens
13. Lens capsule
Figure 19.3
x125
Figure 19.2. Eye, Dog. Anterior, peripheral portion of the eye.
Figure 19.3. Lens, Equator, Horse. Newly formed cnd older lens
fibers are visible in this section through fhe germinal zone. The
latter is themarginal band of lensepithelium fhat lies oround the
equator. Its cells are capable of dividing throughout adult life.
Figure 19.4. Ciliary Body, Dog. The epithelium of the ciliary
19
body is called the pars ciliaris retinae. This portion of the non-
photosensitive retina consists of an inner (closer to the cavity of
the vitreous humor], nonpigmented layer and an outer, heavily
pigmented layer of cells.
Figure 19.5. Ciliary Body, Cat (Orcein)]. In addition to smooth
muscle (see Figure 19.4], the ciliary body contains an abundance
Figure19.4
x125
of elastic fibers.
Figure 19.6. Eye, Horse. In a section through a horse's eye, the
limbus does not overlap the pectinate ligament. Compare with
8
Figure 19.7. The iltration angle is indicated by the triangular-
8
shaped area marked by the dashed line.
Figure 19.5
x250
272
CHAPTER 19
7
18
19
Figure 19.7
x12.5
Figure 19.11
x250
5
18
KEY
15.
1. Bulbar conjunctiva 
13. Nonpigmented cells
2. Ciliary process
14. Palpebral conjunctiva
3.Cornea
15. Pectinate ligament
 4. Corneoscleral trabecular 
16. Pigmented cells
meshwork
17. Pigmented surface cells
5.Descemet's membrane
18. Sclera
6. Filtration angle
19. Spaces of Fontana 
7. Iris
20. Sphincter muscle
8. Limbus
21. Stroma
9.Melanocyte
22. Uveal trabecular meshwork
9
10. Myoepithelial cll cytoplasm
23. Zonukar fibers
11.Myoepithelil cell,ncleus
12. Myoepithelial cells 
ure 19.8
×62.5
Figure 19.7. Eye, Pig. In a section through the eye of a domestic
mammal other than the horse, the limbus overlaps the pectinate
ligament. The area of the iltration angle is outlined by dots.
Figure 19.8. Filtration Angle, Pig. Collagenous fibers, elastic
ibers, fibroblasts, and pigment cells Form the pectinate ligament 
23
and the uveal trabecular meshwork. The corneoscleral trabecular
meshwork is α three-dimensional latficework of fine fibers of con-
nective tissue and ibroblasts lying adiacent to the sclera.
Figure 19.9. Ciliary Processes, Pig. The nonpigmented cells of
the epithelium of the ciliary processes cover the pigmented cells.
Together these two layers of cells comprise the pars ciliaris retinae,
16
13
mented cells give rise to the zonular ibers.
Figure19.9
X62.5
Figure 19.10. Iris, Horse. The back surface of the iris is covered
bya continuation of the pars ciliaris retinae and is called the pars
iridica retince. The surface layer of the pars iridica retinae con-
sists of heavily pigmented cells, cnd its inner layer is Formed by
the contractile, pigmented myoepithelial cells that dilate the iris.
Anteriorly, the iris is covered by α discontinuous layer of stromal
17
cells.
Figure 19.1l. Iris, Dog. The heavily pigmented cells of the pars
iridica retinae cover the posterior surface of the iris. The myoepi-
thelial cells of the pars iridica retinae are partially pigmented in
 the region of their nuclei.
Figure 19.10
X62.5
THE EYE
273
15
11
1
10
Figure 19.12
X625
Figure 19.16
X62.5
KEY
 1. Anterior epithelium
10. Melanocyte
2Bulbar conjunctiva, epithelium
11. Ora ciliaris retinae
3.Bulbar conjundtiva, lamina
12. Pars ciliaris retinae
propria
13. Posterior epithelium 
 4. Choroid
14. Retina, photosensitive
5. Cornea
15. Sclera
6. Corneal stroma 
16. Space artifacts
7. Corpus nigrum
17. Stroma
8. Descemet's membrane
9. Iris 
Fgure 19.12. Iris, Cat. In the cat, the melanocytes of the iris are
binucleate and contain rod-shaped melanosomes.
Figure 19.13
x12.5
Figure 19.13. Corpus Nigrum, Goat. In vngulates, the pupillary
border of the iris is diferentiated into corpora nigra, which are
vascularized outgrowths of the stroma and pigmented epithelium
of the iris.
-13
Figure 19.14. Cornea, Dog. The anterior surface is covered by
surface is covered by squamous or low cuboidal cells.
Figure 19.15. Junction of Cornea and Bulbar Conjunctiva, Pig.
Both the cornea and bulbar conjunctiva are covered by a nonke-
ratinized stratified squamous epithelium at their junction. The
basal border of the conjunctiva is irregular, and the cells of its
deepest layers are smaller than those of the anterior epithelium
of the cornea.
Figure 19.14
X62.5
Figure 19.16. Ora Ciliaris Retinae, Dog. The transition zone
between the photosensitive and the nonphotosensitive (pars cili-
aris retinae} regions of the retina is named the ora ciliaris retinae.
Figure 19.15
x125
274
CHAPTER 19
10
18
Figure 19.17
x25
Figure 19.20
×250
KEY
1. Blood vessel
13. Nerve fibers, bundle of
3
2. Choriocapillary layer
14. Optic disc
3. Choroid
15. Optic nerve
4. Cone
16. Outer nuclear layer 
5. Ganglion cell layer 
17. Outer plexifomm layer 
6.Inner limiting membrane
18. Pigment epithelium
19. Retina
8. Inner plexiform layer
20. Rod
 9. Lamina cribrosa 
21. Sclera
10. Layer of rods cnd cones
22. Tapetum lucidum
11. Melanocytes
23. Vascular layer, choroid
12. Nerve fiber layer
Figure 19.18
X125
Figure 19.17. Optic Nerve, Sagittal Section, Dog. Nerve fibers
of the retina converge to Form the optic nerve at the optic disc
(blind spot).
Figure 19.18. lamina Cribrosa, X.s., Dog. At the lamina cribrosa
the connective tissue of the sclera forms a sievelike framework,
which subdivides the optic nerve into bundles of fibers.
Figure 19.19. Retina, Choroid, and Part of the Sclera, Pig. Note
that the dencrites (cones) of cone cells of the pig cre particularly
plump and easily recognized.
Figure 19.20. Fbrous Tapetum Lucidum, Sheep. The tapetum
lucidum of ruminants and horses is a compact membrane of con-
nective tissue sandwiched between the choriocapillary and vas-
cular layers of the choroid. The cells of the pigment epithelium of
the retina contain few or no pigment granules where a tapetum 
lucidum is present. Compare with Figure 19.21.
11
6
16
7
8
2
Figure 19.19
X180
8
21
14
9
Figure 19.21
x250
Figure 19.25
x12.5
17
KEY
1. Anterior chamber 
13. Melanocytes
23
2. Bulbar conjunctiva
14. Nerve Fiber layer
3. Capillary, x.s.
15. Nictitcfing membrane, bulbar
10
 4. Choriocapillary layer
surface
5. Cornea
16. Outer nuclear layer
6. Cytoplasmic process
17. Ouler plexifomm layer
7. Descemet's membrane
18. Pectinate ligament
16
8. Elastic cartilage
19. Pigment epihelium
22
9. Ganglion cel layer
 20. Sclera
10.Inner nuclear layer
 21. Tapetal cell 
 11. Inner plexiform layer 
 22. Tapetum lucidum.
12. Layer of rods and cones
23.Vascular layer, choroid
Figure 19.22
250
Figure 19.21. Retina, Choroid, and Part of the Sclera, Dog.
Where the tapetum lucidum is lacking rom the choroid layer, the
C
cells of the pigment epithelium of the retina contain numerous 
melanosomes.
Figure 19.22. Cellular Tapetum Lucidum, Dog. In profile, the
cells of the tapetum lucidum of carmivores are bricklike. Note that
in this section the cells of the pigment epithelium of the retina cre
Figure 19.23. Melanocytes of Choroid Layer, Dog. Melanocytes
of the choroid layer care Hat polygonal cells with cytoplasmic
processes. Their polygonal shape is evident in this tangential cut
 through the choroid layer.
Figure 19.24. Tapetum Lucidum, Dog. Tapetal cell are Hattened
and have a pentagonal or hexagonal outline, which is apparent 
Figure 19.23
x250
in this tangential section through the choroid layer. The cells are
illed with numerous small rods, whose long axes parallel the Hat 
surfaces of the cells.
Figure 19.25. Nictitahing Membrane and Cornea, Horse. A
portion of the bulbar surface of the nictitating membrane and its
supporive cartilage are shown. The nictitating membrane is α
Fold of the ventromedial portion of the conjunctiva. It contains
elasticcailgntherepigndcatnd hylinecl
21
in the dog and ruminants.
Figure 19.24
X625
276
CHAPTER 19
Figure 19.26
x12.5
Figure 19.30
x125
KEY
1. Diffuse lymphatic tisue
9. Serous acinus
2. Duct
10. Stratified columnar epithelium
3. Epidermis 
11. Stratified squamous epithelium
4. Goblet cell
12. Superficicl gland
 5. Hair follicle
13. Sweat gland
6. Hyaline cartilage
14. Tarsal gland
7.Mucous acinus
15.Tarsus
 8. Palpebral conjunctiva 
Figure 19.26. Superficial Gland of the Nictitahing Membrane,
Dog. The base of the cartilage of the nictitating membrane is
surrounded by the superficial gland.
igure19.27
X125
Figure 19.27. Superficial Gland of the Nictitating Membrane,
Doq.
 This gland is mixed in the dog and ruminants. It is serous
in the horse and cat and mucous in the pig.
Figure 19.28. Palpebral Conjunctiva, Pig. The palpebral con-
junctiva is a mucous membrane that lines the inner surface of the
eyelid. Its stratified epithelium varies from squcmous through
10
columnar and may even appear transitional. Goblet cells may be 
present.
Figure 19.29. Eyelid, Lower, Horse. The outer surface of the
eyelid is covered by thin skin, while the inner surface is lined by
the palpebral conjunctiva. The tarsal gland is a multilobulated
gland whose duct opens onto the palpebral surface near the
margin of the eyelid. The torsal gland is surrounded by a con-
densed layer of connective tissue,the tarsus.
Figure 19.28
X62.5
Figure 19.30. Eyelid, Upper,
Pig. Numerous tubular sweat
glands (and sebaceous glands, not shown} ocur in the skin
3
Figure 19.29
x12.5
THE EYE
277
Figure 19.31
x12.5
Figure 19.35
x125
KEY
1.Acinus
9. Sclera
2 Epidermis
10. Sebaceous gland
 3. Fornix of conjunctiva 
11. Skeletal muscle tissue
4. Hair follicle
12. Smooth muscle tissue
5. Interlobular connective tissue
13. Sweat gland
6. Intralobular duct
14. Tarsal gland 
14
 7. Krause's gland 
15. Tarsus
8. Palpebral conjunctiva
2
Figure 19.3 1. Eyelid, Lower, Goat. The skin surface of the eyelid
05
contains hair follicles, sweat glands, and sebaceous glands.
Figure 19.32
X62.5
Figure 19.32. Eyelid, Lower, Goat. Bundles of smooth and skel-
etal muscle ibers are scattered in the connective tissue between
the tarsus and the skin surface of the eyelid.
Figure 19.33. Krause's Gland, Pig. Krause's gland is a small
accessory lacrimal gland (serous in this preparation) located near
the fornix of the conjunctiva.
Fgure 19.34. Harderian Gland, Pig. Among domestic mammals,
this gland is present only in the pig. It secretes a Fatty product.
Fgure 19.35. Lacrimal Gland, Cow. A compound tubular acinar
gland. The lacrimal gland is predominantly α serous gland in
ruminants and horses.
Figure 19.33
X62.5
Figure 19.34
x250
278
CHAPTER 19
28
23
10
20
25
9
Figure 19.39
X62.5
28
10
KEY
:14
1. Annular pad
15. Lens body
2. Anterior chamber
16. Lens fibers, annular pad 
15
3. Brucke's muscle
17. Lens fibers, lens body.
4. Bulbar conjunctiva
18. Nonpigmented epithelium, iris 
5. Canal of Schlemm
19. Pectinate ligament
6. Capsule 
 20. Pigmented epithelium, iris 
7. Cavity of the lens
21. Posterior chamber
22. Sclera
9. Ciliary body
23. Scleral carilage
Figure 19.36
10. Ciliary process
24. Scleral ossicle
11.Cornea
25. Scleral trabecular meshwork
12. Crampton's muscle
26. Spaces of Fontana
13. Dilator muscle
27. Sphincter muscle
14. Iris
28. Zonukr fibers
6
Figure 19.36. Eye, Drawing of an Anterolateral Segment,
Chicken. This crcawing illustrates the relative positions of various
structures seen in several micrographs of the chicken's eye in this
chapter.
Figure 19.37. Lens, Chicken. A portion of the annular pad and
lens body.
Figure 19.38. Filtration Angle, Chicken. The filtration angle is
bordered by the cornea, iris, ciliary body, and sclera in the
dhicken. It is bridged by a trabecular meshwork of the pectinate
Figure 19.37
ligament, which encloses the spaces of Fontana.
x125
Figure 19.39. Ciliary Process, Chicken (Masson's). Ciliary pro-
cesses occur below the base of the iris and fuse with the lens
capsule of the annular pad. The ciliary epithelium also attaches
to the capsule by zonular fibers.
4
2
24
191
10
Figure 19.38
×25
THE EYE
279
2
12
13
x250
Figure 19.44
×62.5
KEY
1. Bowman's membrane
10. Posterior epithelium
 2 Ciliary body
11. Scleral cartilage
 3. Descemet's membrane 
12. Scleral ossicle
 4. Dilator muscle cell
13. Space artifact
 5. Elastic fiber
14. S
Sphincter muscle cell
6. Lipid vacuole 
15. Squamous cell, nucleus 
 7. Nonpigmented epithelium, iris
16. Stratified squamous epithelium
8. Pectinate ligament 
17. Stroma
18
 9. Pigmented epithelium, iris
18. Zonular fibers 
18
hgure 19.40. Iris, Chicken. The iridial musculature of the chicken
Figure 19.41
x125
is composed of skeletal muscle cells,which are characterized by
the presence of numerous lipid vacuoles. Unlike mammals, the
anterior (corneal] surface of the iris is covered by a layer of Hat-
tnedpindelpsteirn
of the iris (see Figure 19.39) is covered by a sratified pigmented
epithelium that is three to hive cells thick.
hgure 19.41. Junction of Ciliary Body and Iris, Chicken (Orcein).
The elastic fibers of the pectinate ligament insert into cn elastic
meshwork of the ciliary body.
Figure 19.42. Pectinate Ligament, Chicken. The elastic ibers of
the pectinate ligament are covered by a simple squamous
epithelium.
Fgure 19.43. Cornea, Chicken. A well-developed Bowman's
membrane separates the anterior, stratified squamous epithelium
Figure 19.42
x250
of the cornea from the underlying stroma.
16
Figure 19.44. Sclera, Chicken. The sclera is strengthened ante-
riorly by overlapping bony plates ( scleral ossicles). Posteriorly, it
consists of a thin layer of cartilage. See Figure 19.36 For the
location of ossicles and cartilage. The region of overlap of these
skeletal elements is shown here.In this section the ciliary body
has separated from the sclera, creating α space artikact.
17
10
Figure 19.43
×62.5
280
CHAPTER 19
13
9
18
2
2
Figure 19.45
X62.5
Figure 19.49
×125
16
KEY
1. Blood vessels
12. Melanocyte
2. Bridge
13. Nerve fiber layer
3. Capillary
14. Optic nerve
4. Choriocapillary layer
15. Outer nuclear layer
5. Choroid 
16. Outer plexiom layer
6. Covering membrane
17. Pecten
7. Ganglion cell layer 
18. Pigment epithelium
8.Inner nuclear layer
19. Retina
9. Inner plexiform layer
 20. Scleral cartilage
10. Layer of rods and cones
 21. Space of choroid
 11. Loose connective tissue
Figure 19.45. Retina and Choroid, Chicken. The bulk of the
Figure 19.46
x250
choroid is composed of blood vessels and large spaces supported
by a loose connective tissue. The layers of the retina are compa-
rable with those of mammals.
grgnules. The basal region of each cell contains the nucleus and 
a few pigment granules.
Figure 19.47. Pecten, Chicken. The pecten is a thin, Folded, and 
heavily pigmented membrane that projects into the vitreous humor
from the posteroventral surface of the eye.
17
Figure 19.48. Pecten, Chicken. Numerous, polymorphic melano-
membrane. The large capillaries are lined by thick endothelial
cells with plump nuclei.
Figure 19.47
x12.5
Figure 19.49. Bridge of Pecten, Chicken. This thickened, highly
pigmented mass of pectineal tissue is located along the free edge
2
of the pecten.
Figure 19.48
×250
THE EYE
281
KEY
1. Choroid
8. Herbst corpuscle
9. Interlobular connective tissue
3. Dermis
10. Plasma cells
4. Epidermis
11. Retina
 5. Extrinsic muscle
12. Scleral cartilage
 6. Feather Follicle 
13. Secretory tubule
 7. Harderian gland
Figure 19.50. Eyelid, Chicken. A thin epidermis covers the
eyelid. Herbst corpuscles are associated with a Feather Follicle.
Figure 19.51. lacrimal Gland, Chicken. This compound tubular 
gland produces a mucoid secretion and is organized into lobules.
Figure19.50
X62.5
Figure 19.52. Harderian Gland, Chicken. This accessory immu-
nologic gland contains a multitude of plasma cells. It is located
 on the dorsal posterior surface of the eye.
6
Figure 19.53. Harderian Gland, Chicken. Detail ofthe Harderian
gland showing numerous plasma cells surrounding the vacuolated
cells of the tubular secretory units.
Figure 19.51
X25
Figure 19.52
x25
Figure 19.53
×250
282
CHAPTER 19
20
THE EAR
 ensations of sound and balance are received by separate and specialized areas of
the ear before being transmitted to the brain, where they are interpreted. Based on
anatomy, location, and function, the ear is divisible into external, middle, and
internal components. The external ear collects sound waves, which it channels to the
tympanic membrane. Vibrations produced in the latter are transmitted by the ossicles of
the middle ear to fluids of the inner (internal) ear, where they generate movements of
the delicate basilar membrane. Such movements stimulate sensory hair cells from which
impulses are relayed by sensory nerves to the brain, where the sound is identified.
MAMMALS
External Ear
The external ear of domestic mammals is comprised of the pinna (auricle), which collects
sound, and an external auditory meatus, which conveys the sound waves to the tympanic
membrane.
The external auditory meatus is lined by a continuation of the surface skin. Hair,
sebaceous glands, and tubular ceruminous glands are present. The combined secretions
of these glands, plus sloughed epithelial cells, form cerumen (ear wax). The outer portion 
of the meatus is supported by cartilage, the remainder by bone.
Middle Ear
Middle-ear ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) are located in the tympanic cavity. They
bridge the cavity from the tympanic membrane to the oval window located within the
 petrous part of the temporal bone.
283
The tympanic cavity is surrounded by bone. The tym-
is pointed. The floor of the duct is formed from the fibrous
panic membrane forms the lateral wall of the cavity. It is
 basilar membrane, which extends from the spiral ligament
composed of a thin, outer layer of epithelium that is con-
to the osseous spiral lamina. The roof is formed from the
tinuous with the skin of the external auditory meatus, a
vestibular (Reissner's) membrane, which consists of two
thin layer of connective tissue, and an inner layer of simple
adjacent layers of simple squamous epithelium. Above the
squamous or cuboidal epithelium. The remainder of the
roof is a large chamber, the scala vestibuli, which is filled
cavity is lined by ciliated columnar and simple squamous
with perilymph. Below the floor of the cochlear duct is
cells. The latter cover the ossicles, as well as portions of
another large chamber filled with perilymph, the scala
the wall of the cavity.
tympani. All three scalas follow a spiral path to the top of
the cochlear canal. At the apex the scala vestibuli com-
municates with the scala tympani through a tiny opening
Inner Ear
called the helicotrema.
 The upper surface of the basilar membrane supports
The membranous labyrinth of the inner ear consists of the
the acoustically sensitive organ of Corti, which is bathed
cochlear duct, sacculus, utriculus, and semicircular ducts.
by the endolymph within the cochlear duct. The lower
Cavities within the petrous segment of the temporal bone,
surface of the basilar membrane is lined by a simple squa-
 e d   d  
mous epithelium that faces the scala tympani. The organ
similar to cerebrospinal fluid), comprise the bony labyrinth
of Corti is comprised of sensory hair cells and various dif-
and house the membranous labyrinth. The cavities con-
ferent supporting cells. Overlying the organ of Corti and
taining the semicircular ducts are called the semicircular
extending from the spiral limbus (an elevation of connec-
canals; the one containing the saccule (sacculus) and utricle
tive tissue above the osseous spiral lamina) is the protein-
(utriculus) is called the vestibule; and the one containing
aceous tectorial membrane. Stereocilia of the sensory cells
the cochlear duct (membranous cochlea, scala media) is
of the organ of Corti contact the tectorial membrane. The
named the cochlear canal (cochlea; bony cochlea). The
stereocilia are displaced when the basilar membrane
cochlear canal spirals like a snail shell around a central
vibrates in response to sound waves passing through the
pillar of bone, the modiolus. A thin shelf of bone, the
fluid-filled scalas. The sensory cells respond to this pertur-
osseous spiral lamina, travels up the modiolus like the
bation by initiating impulses in the cochlear nerve, which
thread of a screw. The number of turns in the cochlear
are transmitted to the brain for interpretation. The stimu-
canal varies. There are two and one-half in the horse, three
latory sound waves are dissipated through the secondary
in the cat, and four in the pig, for example.
tympanic membrane of the round window located in the
Each semicircular duct is lined by a mesothelium, is
lower part of the medial wall of the tympanic cavity.
filled with endolymph, and bears an expansion,
the
ampulla. A sensory structure, the crista ampullaris, is
located in each ampulla. The sensory hair cells and sup-
CHICKEN
porting cells of each crista are covered by a gelatinous
cupula. When the latter is deflected during rotational
 The ear of the chicken consists of the same basic compo-
movements of the head, the sensory cells are stimulated
nents as that of the mammal, but there are some
and impulses are sent to the brain, where the signals are
differences.
interpreted.
 Both the saccule and utricle are filled with endolymph
and are lined, in part, by maculae, which are patchlike
External and Middle Ear
collections of sensory hair cells and supporting cells. The
Although an external auditory meatus is present in the
remainder of these structures is lined by mesothelium.
chicken, it is relatively short, and there is no pinna.
Embedded in the outer surface of the gelatinous otolithic
The middle ear is lined by a cuboidal epithelium that
membrane covering the maculae are numerous crystalline
also covers the columella, a single partially ossifed rod that
particles of calcium carbonate called otoliths (otoconia,
statoconia). As the membrane shifts in response to gravity
extends from the tympanic membrane to the oval window.
The columella transmits vibrations from the tympanic
acting on the otoliths, sensory cells of the maculae are
membrane to the internal ear, taking the place of the
 n sn u q  o s ss s
stimulus make the animal aware of the position of its head
malleus, incus, and stapes of mammals.
in space. Also, because of the effect of inertia on the oto-
lithic membranes when the body suddenly begins to move
Inner Ear
or slow down, hair cells are stimulated and the sensations
of acceleration and deceleration are experienced.
Unlike mammals, the saccule (sacculus) of the inner ear
The spirally organized cochlear duct is flled with
contains two maculae. The cochlear duct is a short, narrow,
endolymph and is roughly triangular in cross section. One
slightly curved tube. It possesses a terminal expansion, the
side of the duct is attached to the spiral ligament, a thick-
lagena, a structure peculiar to birds. The lagena contains
ening of the periosteal lining of the cochlear canal. This
a macula that is similar in structure and function to other
side consists of a stratified cuboidal epithelium, the stria
maculae (see under Mammals). The cochlear duct is sepa-
vascularis. Capillaries occur among the superficial cuboi-
rated from the overlying scala vestibuli by the tegmentum
dal cells of the stria. The side of the duct opposite the stria
vasculosum. The latter is composed of a thin membrane
284
CHAPTER 20
 of connective tissue integrated with a highly folded epithe-
Word Roots
lium containing numerous blood vessels. The epithelium
faces the cavity of the cochlear duct. The tegmentum occu-
ROOT
MEANING
EXAMPLE SENTENCE
pies the same position as the vestibular membrane in
Avdi
Hearing
 The external cucditory mearus
mammals. The common wall separating the cochlear duct
Meatus
A passageway
conveys sound waves to the
tympanic membrane.
from the scala tympani below is formed from the basilar
Helix
A coil
Thehelicotrema is the tiny opening
 membrane, a platform that supports the organ of Corti
Trema
A hole
at the apex of the bony cochlea
(papilla acustica or basilaris). As in mammals, the organ
through which the scala vestibuli
of Corti is composed of sensory and supporting cells and
and scala tympani communicate.
is overlain by a tectorial membrane that is in contact with
Labyrinth
A maze
The bony labyrinth cnd
the sensory hairs (stereocilia) of the sensory cells.
membranous iabyrinth of the
 inner ear are complex, mazelike 
passageways.
Malleus
A hammer
The three ossicles of the middle
Incus
Anvil
ecr, the moufleus, incus, and
Stapes
A stirrup
 stapes, resemble a hammer, anvil,
cnd stirrup, respectively.
Scala
Ladder or
 The passageways, namely the 
stairs
scafa vestibuli, scala media, and
to the top of the cochlear canal.
Tecto
A roof or
 The tectorial membrane covers the
cover
sereocilia of the sensory cells of
the organ of Corti.
Tympani
A drum
 The tympanic membrcane is
nicknamed the eardrum.
THE EAR
285
12
1
Figure 20.1
x25
Figure 20.5
X62.5
KEY
Adipose tissue
 7. Extemal auditory meatus
2Bone
 8. Hair follicle
 3. Ceruminous gland
9. Pigment granules
pna v
10. Sebaceous gland
5. Elastic cartilage
11. Tympanic cavity
6.Epidermis
12. Tympanic membrane 
Figure 20.1. External Auditory Meatus, Puppy. The outer portion
10
of the meatus is supported by elastic cartilage. The thin epidermis
nous glands. Small hair follicles are present.
Figure 20.2
x25
Figure 20.2. External Auditory Meatus, Puppy. The external
auditory meatus, near the tympanic membrane, contains large 
sebaceous glands.
Figure 20.3. External Auditory Meatus, Goat. The outer portion
of the external auditory meatus with numerous ceruminous glands
is shown. Hair Follicles and portions of sebaceous glands are also
present.
hgure 20.4. Ceruminous Gland, Goat. The secretory epithelium 
of these apocrine glands varies from cuboidal to columnar. The 
cells contain tiny, brown pigment granules.
Figure 20.5. Tympanic Membrane, Periphery, Puppy. The tym-
panic membrane has α core of collgenous ibers.lfis outer (exter-
nal auditory meatus] surface is covered by α stratified squamous
epithelium; its inner (tympanic cavity) surface is covered by α
simple squamous or cuboidal epithelium.
Figure 20.3
x25
Figure 20.4
×250
286
CHAPTER 20
15
6
Figure 20.6
x12.5
Figure 20.10
x125
3
KEY
1. Annular ligament
10. Malleus
2. Articukar cartilage
11. Saccule, macula of 
 3. Exernal auditory meatus 
12. Stapes, articular cartilage
6
4.Faciclnerve
13. Synovial cavity
5. Footplate, stapes
14. Temporal bone, perous part 
6. Incus
15. Tympanic cavity
7. Joint capsule with elastic fibers
16. Tympanic membrane
8. lenticular process, articular
17. Utricle, macula of
cartilage
18. Vestibule
9. Ligament
15
Figure 20.6. Malleus and Tympanic Membrane, Puppy. The
Figure 20.7
x250
handle (manubrium) of the malleus is attached to the tympanic
membrane.
8
Figure 20.7. Tympanic Membrane, Puppy. Where the manu-
brium of the mallus is embedded in the tympanicmembrane,the
connective tissue of the tympanic membrane is thicker than else-
12
where, and blood vessels are abundant.
15
5
Figure 20.8. Portion of Stapes and Incus, Puppy. The footplate
of the stapes is attached to the oval windowby an annular liga-
ment (broken on one side in this section]. The stapes articulates
with the lenticular process of the incus.
Figure 20.9. Joint, Malleus and Incus, Puppy. The head of the
malleus articulates with the body of the incus in this synovial joint.
Figure 20.10. Junction of Lenticular Process and Stapes, Puppy.
Figure 20.8
x12.5
The stapes arficulates with the lenticular process of the incus. See
Figure 20.8 for orientation.
15
15
Figure 20.9
×25
THE EAR
287
KEY
1. Ampulla, cavity
 8. Pseudostratified epithelium
2 Annular ligament
9. Sensory cell, nucleus 
10
3. Connective tissue
10. Stapes, articular cartilage
 4. Cupula, portion of
 11. Supporting cell, nucleus 
5. Mixed glands
12. Temporal bone, petrous part
6. Otolith
13. Type 1 cell
 7. Otolihic membrane 
Figure 20.1l. Annular Ligament, Stapes, Puppy. The stapes is
Fastened to the circular cartilage of the oval window by the fibro-
elastic, annular ligament. See Figure 20.8 for orientation.
2
Figure 20.12. Macula of Saccule, Puppy. Otoliths are embedded 
in a gelatinous otolithic membrane, which lies on an epithelium
Figure 20.11
x125
consisting of sensory and supporing cells.Chalicelike,Type |
sensory cells and the basal nuclei of supporting cells are evident
in this micrograph.
Figure 20.13. Crista Ampullaris, Puppy. This ridge of sensory
ampulla of a semicircular duct and is oriented at right angles to
the long axis of the duct. The epithelium consists of sensory and
supporting cells similar to those Found in the maculae. A mass of
 gelatinous material, the cupula, covers the surface epithelium.
Figure 20.14. Guttural Pouch, Horse. This diverticulum of the
Eustachian tube is lined by α ciliated, pseudostratified columnar
epithelium with goblet cells. Mixed glands occur in the lamina
propria.
Figure 20.12
x250
Figure 20.13
x125
Figure 20.14
X62.5
288
CHAPTER 20
Figure 20.15
x18
16
4
15
Figure 20.16
x90
KEY
1. Basilar membrane
10. Spiral ganglion
2 Cochlear duct
11.
Spiral ligament
3.Cochlear nerve
12.9
Spiral limbus
4. Inner tunnel
13.9
Spiral tunnel
5. Modiolus.
14.9
Stria vascularis
6. Organ of Corti
15. Tectorial membrane
 7. Osseous spiral lamina
16. Temporal bone, petrous part 
8. Scala tympani
17.Vestibular membrane
9. Scala vestibuli
Figure 20.15. Cochlea, Puppy. Cross section through a portion
of the spiral cochlea. See Figure 20.16 For details of cochlecr 
duct region.
Figure 20.16. Cochlear Duct in Cochlea, Puppy. Detail of the
region of the cochlear duct (scala media,membranous cochlea]
 and surrounding temporal bone that forms the cochlea.
THE EAR
289
KEY
4
1. Basilar membrane
13. Organ of Corti
 2. Blood vessel of connective
14. Perilymphatic space
tissue base
15. Raphe
4
3. Capillary
16. Scala media (cochlear duct]
4. Cartilaginous frame, caudal
17. Scala tympani
5. Carilaginous frame, rostral
18. Scala vestibuli
15
20
19. Semicircular canal, wall
7. Cochlear nerve
19
 20. Semicircular duct, wall
8. Dark cell
21. Supporting cells
9. Endolymphatic space
 22. Tectorial membrane
10.Hair cells
23. Tegmentum vasculosum
11.Homogeneous cells
12. Light cell
Figure 20.17. Semicircukar Canal, Xx.s., Chicken. The semicircu-
Figure 20.17
X62.5
lar canal is a part of the bony labyrinth. It contains the semicir-
18
cular duct, a part of the membranous labyrinth. The duct is lined
by. α simple squamous epithelium except at the raphe, where
11
cuboidal cells Form the lining.
16
Fgure 20. 18. Cochlear Ductin Cochlea, x.s., Chicken (Masson's).
22
Only a small portion of the bony cochlea that encloses the scala
media is visible. The three passageways of the cochlea (the scala
vestibuli, scala media, nd scala tympani are evidentThe teg-
mentum vasculosum (see Figure 20.20) separates the scala ves-
fibuli and the scala media. A portion of the organ of Corti is
magnified in Figure 20.19.
Figure 20.19. Organ of Corti, Cochlea, X.s., Chicken (Masson's).
17
1
6
cells with an overlying tectorial membrane.
Figure 20.18
X62.5
Figure 20.20. Tegmentum Vasculosum, Cochlea, .
Chicken
(Masson's). This thick membrane rests on a thin base of connec-
16
five tissve and possesses a highly folded epithelial surface with
22
numerous vascular loops.The epithelium consists of light cnd dark
cells.Dark cells have a constricted neck region that extends to the
surface of the epithelium. Their basal portion contains the nucleus
and is irregularly shaped. The cytoplasm is very dense. Light cells
10
have a pale cytoplasm and surround the dark cells.
21
17
Figure 20.19
x250
18
16
11
12
Figure 20.20
×250
290
CHAPTER 20
GLOSSARY
A band: The part of a sarcomere, of both skeletal and
Adventitia: The external layer of connective tissue cover-
cardiac muscle cells, containing actin and myosin myo-
ing a structure.
flaments and located centrally between the I bands of
Afferent arteriole: Smallest branch of the renal artery that
the sarcomere.
delivers blood directly to the glomerulus of a renal
Abomasum: The glandular stomach of a ruminant.
corpuscle.
Accessory gland: The name applied to any of the follow-
Agranulocyte: A leukocyte that lacks specific granules,
ing glands of the male reproductive system: bulboure-
e.g., a lymphocyte or monocyte.
thral, prostate, seminal vesicle.
Air capillary: In birds, a tiny respiratory tubule form-
Acid stain {anionic stain): A dye, used for histologic or
ing part of a network connecting parabronchi.
cytologic staining procedures, that carries a negative
Respiratory exchange occurs between the blood in
charge. Such dyes attach electrostatically to positively
surrounding blood capillaries and the gas within air
charged components of cells or other tissue elements.
capillaries.
Acidophil (alpha cell): An acidophilic chromophil found
Air sac: One of several rather large, thin-walled, and air-
within the pars distalis of the pituitary.
filled sacs found within various parts of the body
Acidophilic: Literally, possessing an affnity for acid
cavity of a bird. Many hollow bones of the chicken
(anionic) dyes which carry a negative charge. For
contain extensions of air sacs. The designation air sac
example, positively charged (cationic) amino groups of
is also used as a synonym for alveolus.
proteins in cells and tissues become stained with the
Alveolar bone: The bone lining the alveolus (root socket)
acid dye, eosin, which carries a net negative charge.
of a tooth. Collagenous fibers attach the root of the
Acinus: A small, grape-shaped secretory unit of an acinar
tooth to the alveolar bone.
gland or tubuloacinar gland.
Alveolar duct: The portion of the bronchial tree of a
Adenohypophysis: The glandular portion of the pituitary.
 mammal lying between a respiratory bronchiole and
It is derived during development from Rathke's pouch.
an alveolar sac.
It includes the pars distalis, pars tuberalis, and pars
Alveolar sac: A terminal, baglike expansion of the
intermedia.
bronchial tree whose wall is formed entirely from
Adipocyte: Synonym for fat cell.
alveoli.
Adipose tissue: Aggregates of adipocytes within loose
Alveolar septum: All of the tissue separating the cavities
connective tissue.
of adjacent alveoli of the lungs formed by type I alveo-
Adrenal cortex: That part of the adrenal gland surround-
 lar cells and pulmonary capillaries.
ing the medulla. It is divisible into four zones of cells
Alveolus: One of millions of thin-walled, tiny sacs forming
that produce steroid hormones.
the terminal limits of the bronchial tree. It is sometimes
Adrenal medulla: The region interior to the cortex of the
called an air sac. The term is also used as a synonym
adrenal gland. The chromaffin cells of the medulla
 for the acinus of an exocrine gland.
secrete the hormones epinephrine (adrenalin) and
Ameloblasts: Cells that form the enamel organ of a tooth
norepinephrine.
and produce the enamel.
291
Amorphous ground substance: A viscous and colorless
Astrocyte: A neuroglial cell having long processes and a
material that fills the spaces between the fibers, cells,
 starlike appearance.
and vessels of connective tissue.
Atresia:'
The degenerative regression of an ovarian
Ampulla: A dilated portion of a tubular structure such as
follicle.
the ampulla of a semicircular duct of the inner ear, or
Atretic follicle: An ovarian follicle that has undergone
the ampulla of the vas deferens or oviduct.
atresia.
Anal gland: A tubuloacinar gland found within the sub-
Atrium: A cavity or chamber such as an atrium of the
mucosa and muscularis of the anal canal of carnivores
heart or an air vesicle of a chicken's parabronchus.
and pigs.
Auerbach's plexus: A collection of nerve cells and fbers
Anal sac: One of a pair of pouchlike glands found within
lying between the circular and longitudinal layers of
the tissue adjacent to the anus.
the muscularis externa of the digestive tract.
Anastomosis: A connection between two structures.
Axon: The extension of a neuron that transmits impulses
Anestrus: In nonprimate mammals, the period of sexual
away from the cell body.
inactivity.
Axon hillock: The place of origin of an axon from a nerve
Anisocytosis: A condition exemplified by the existence of
cell body. The hillock lacks Nissl granules.
considerable variation in the size and shape of an ani-
Azurophilic granule: Nonspecific granules found in the
mal's erythrocytes. It is often associated with certain
cytoplasm of some leukocytes.
pathological conditions, but may occasionally be seen
Band cell: A granulocyte in the process of development
in a healthy individual.
and characterized by the presence of a straplike unseg-
Annular ligament: A fbroelastic ligament that attaches
 mented nucleus.
the stapes of the middle ear to the cartilage of the oval
Barb: A subdivision, bearing barbules, of a vane of a
window.
contour feather. The barbules of adjacent barbs inter-
Annular pad: The portion of the lens of the chicken's eye
lock with one another by means of their hooklets.
 located around the equator of the lens.
Barb stem: The stalk of the barb of a feather.
Annular sinus: A large blood sinus lying between the
Barbule: A projection, bearing hooklets, from a barb.
inner and outer layers of the connective tissue sheath
Basal cell: A pale cell found in the fundus of the gastric
of a sinus hair follicle.
glands of the ventriculus of the chicken. The term basal
Anterior chamber: The space, filled with aqueous humor,
cell is also applied to a cell attached to the basement
that is bounded by the cornea, iris, and lens of the eye.
membrane of a stratified epithelium.
Anterior epithelium: The stratified squamous epithelium
Basement membrane: A fibrous membrane separating the
of the outer surface of the cornea.
 cells of an epithelium from the underlying connective
Antrum: A cavity, such as the antrum of an ovarian
tissue.
follicle.
Basic stain {cationic stain): A dye used for histologic or
Aortic body: An encapsulated chemical receptor located
cytologic staining procedures that carries a positive
between the pulmonary artery and aorta. It detects
charge. Such stains attach electrostatically to nega-
changes in oxygen, carbon dioxide, and pH levels and
tively charged elements within cells and tissues.
functions in neural reflexes that adjust cardiac output
Basilar membrane: A membrane of the inner ear that
and respiratory rate.
supports the organ of Corti.
Apocrine gland: A gland whose secretory cells release
Basophil: A granulocyte characterized by large, baso-
their product by pinching off blebs of cytoplasm con-
philic, specific granules. Also, a cell of the pars distalis
taining secretory product from their free surface.
of the pituitary gland.
Aponeurosis: A white fbrous membrane that connects a
Basophilic: Literally, having an affinity for basic (cat-
muscle to a bone or fascia.
ionic) dyes that carry a net positive charge. For
Arachnoid layer:
The middle meninx enveloping the
example, negatively charged (anionic) groups in cells
 spinal cord and brain.
and tissues, such as phosphate groups of amino acids,
Argyrophilic: A substance having an affinity for silver.
sulfate groups of glycosaminoglycans, and carboxyl
Arrector pili muscle: The smooth muscle originating from
groups of proteins, become colored by the basic dyes
the dermis of the skin and inserting on the connective
toluidine blue and methylene blue.
tissue sheath of a hair follicle. Elevates the hair.
Basophilic erythroblast: A developing cell of the ery-
Arteriole: The smallest of the arteries. Consists of an
throid line characterized by an intensely basophilic
endothelium and one or two layers of smooth muscle.
cytoplasm and a large, round, and deeply stained
Arteriovenous anastomosis (arteriovenous shunt):
A
nucleus.
vessel that enables blood to flow directly from an
Bile canaliculus: A tiny channel, formed from the
artery to a vein without passing through a capillary
cell membranes of adjacent hepatocytes, that receives
bed.
bile from the hepatocyte and delivers it to a bile
Artery: A blood vessel that carries blood away from the
ductule.
heart to a capillary bed.
Bile ductule: A subdivision of a bile duct found within a
Artifact: Any alteration in appearance or structure that
portal area (tract) and lined by a simple cuboidal
 has been caused by artificial means.
epithelium.
Arytenoid cartilage: One of two small cartilages located
 Bistratifed epithelium: A stratifed epithelium consisting
at the back of the larynx.
of two layers of cells.
292
GLOSSARY
Blastocyst: The vesicular embryonic stage of a mammal
Calcified cartilage:(
Cartilage matrix that has become
that consists of an inner cell mass and outer cell mass
impregnated with calcium salts, as in the zone of cal-
(trophoblast) surrounding a fluid-filled cavity (blasto-
cification of the epiphyseal disc.
cele, blastocyst cavity).
Canal of Hering: A tiny channel, lined by simple cuboidal
Blind spot: The optic disc of the eye that lacks photore-
epithelium, that connects a bile canaliculus to a bile
ceptor cells.
ductule within a portal tract (area).
Bone marrow (active): The site of the formation of blood
Canal of Schlemm: A channel within the sclera that drains
 cells (hematopoiesis) within the marrow cavity of a
 excess aqueous humor from the eye to the circulatory
bone.
system.
Bone matrix: The hard, calcified substance of a bone,
Canaliculi: In bone, tiny channels that contain the pro-
consisting of hydroxyapatites and collagenous fibers.
cesses of osteocytes.
Bony labyrinth: The three interconnected bony spaces,
Capillary: A blood vessel ranging from 4 to 12 microm-
the cochlea, vestibule, and semicircular canals, of the
eters in diameter that is networked with other capil-
 inner ear located within the temporal bone of the skull.
laries and located between an arteriole and venule.
Bowman's capsule: The hollow, bulbus, initial portion of
Capsular epithelium: The outer simple squamous epithe-
a renal corpuscle. Its outer wall is the capsular epithe-
lium of Bowman's capsule.
lium (simple squamous), and its inner wall or glomeru-
Capsule of Glisson: A thin layer of connective tissue
lar epithelium is composed of podocytes.
enveloping the liver.
Bowman's gland: A mucoserous gland located in the
Cardiac gland: A mucous gland located in the cardiac
lamina propria below the respiratory epithelium. Its
gland region of the glandular stomach.
duct opens onto the respiratory epithelium.
Cardiac gland region: The proximal part of the glandular
Bowman's membrane: A 1
membrane of connective
stomach preceding the fundic gland region.
tissue that lies below the anterior epithelium of the
Cardiac muscle: The striated, involuntary muscle of the
cornea.
heart.
Brain sand: A granular, calcified material that may be
Cardiac skeleton: A supportive framework of connective
found in various parts of the brain.
tissue found at various locations within the wall of the
Bronchiole: A subdivision of the bronchial tree that
he art.
 begins at the termination of the smallest bronchus.
Carotid body: A chemical receptor located at the bifurca-
Bronchioles vary in diameter, amount of smooth
tion of the carotid arteries. It detects changes in oxygen,
muscle present, and whether a ciliated epithelium is
carbon dioxide, and pH levels and functions in neural
present.
reflexes that adjust cardiac output and respiratory rate.
Bronchus: Any subdivision of the bronchial tree from the
Caruncle: In ruminants, any nonglandular region of the
end of the trachea to a bronchiole. All bronchi are
mucosa of the uterus.
supported by cartilage and are lined by an epithelium
Cavernous space: A thin-walled vein that forms part of
that varies from ciliated pseudostratified columnar in
the erectile tissue of the urethra.
the larger bronchi to ciliated simple columnar in the
Cavity of the vitreous humor: A large space behind the
smaller ones.
lens of the eye that contains a transparent and colorless
Bruch's membrane: A thin, refractile membrane of the
gelatinous mass, the vitreous body (humor).
retina separating the choriocapillary layer of the
Cecum: In mammals, that portion of the large intestine
choroid from the pigment epithelium of the retina.
that unites with the small intestine. In chickens, one of
Bricke's muscle: A ciliary muscle (skeletal) of the chicken
two diverticuli that arise from the region of junction
eye.
of the ileum and large intestine.
Brunner's gland (duodenal or submucosal gland): A com-
Cellular tapetum lucidum: A cellular reflective layer of
pound tubuloacinar mucous gland found within the
the choroid of the eye of cats and dogs.
submucosa, and to some degree the lamina propria, of
Cementoid (precementum): Uncalcified cementum of a
the duodenum.
 tooth, produced by cells called cementoblasts.
Brush border: A border formed from numerous microvilli
Cementum: A layer of bonelike mineralized tissue cover-
 of variable length on the apical surface of certain epi-
 ing the dentin of the root of a tooth.
thelial cels, e.g., those of the proximal convoluted
Central artery: A branch of the splenic artery that passes
tubules of the kidney.
through the white pulp of the spleen.
Buffy coat: The thin layer of leukocytes between the
Central canal: The fluid-filled cavity within the center of
plasma and packed red blood cells in a sample of blood
the spinal cord.
that has been centrifuged.
Central nervous system: That part of the nervous system
Bulbar conjunctiva:
That portion of the conjunctiva
consisting of the brain and spinal cord.
located on the surface of the eyeball.
Central pallor: The pale central area, evident in a surface
Bulbourethral gland (Cowper's gland): An accessory male
view, of the biconcave erythrocyte.
reproductive gland that empties into the urethra. Its
Centroacinar cell: An extension of an intercalated duct
 secretion forms part of the seminal fluid.
of the pancreas into the interior of a secretory acinus.
Bursa of Fabricius: A saclike lymphatic (
diverticulum
Cerebellum: A part of the brain that lies above the
from the dorsal surface of the proctodeum of birds.
medulla and pons and below the posterior part of the
Calamus: The hollow quill of a feather.
cerebrum.
GLOSSARY
293
Cerebrospinal fuid: The clear fluid found within the ven-
Claw: A keratinized derivative of the skin found on the
tricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal
tips of the digits.
cord.
Clear cell: A cell of the secretory units of the carpal gland
Cerumen: A soft, waxy substance formed from the com-
of the pig.
bined secretions of the ceruminous and sebaceous
Clearing: In a tissue sample being processed, the replace-
 glands of the external auditory meatus and containing
ment of alcohol with a substance miscible with paraf-
sloughed epithelial cells.
fin prior to infltrating the sample with paraffin.
Ceruminous gland: A gland of the external auditory
Clitoris: A structure of the female that is homologous to
meatus whose secretions contribute to the composition
the glans penis of the male.
of the cerumen.
Cloaca: A chamber, internal to the vent, of various ver-
Cervical os: The opening of the cervix into the vagina.
tebrates that receives digestive wastes, reproductive
Chestnut: A small round or oval thickening of the epider-
cells, and urinary products.
mis located on the inner side of the legs of a horse.
Cochlea {cochlear canal): A spiral-shaped cavity within
Chief cell (stomach): A cell found in the fundic gland
the temporal bone of the skull forming a subdivision
region of the stomach that secretes pepsinogen.
of the bony labyrinth of the inner ear. It contains the
Chondrocyte: A cartilage cell surrounded by cartilage
scala tympani, scala vestibuli, and the cochlear duct,
matrix.
which is part of the membranous labyrinth.
Chondrogenic:
The capacity to produce cartilage. For
Cochlear duct (membranous（
 cochlea; scala media):
example, the perichondrium is a chondrogenic layer.
A spirally arranged part of the membranous labyrinth,
Chorioallantoic membrane: An extraembryonic mem-
whose walls are formed from the basilar membrane,
brane of amniotes formed from the fusion of the
stria vascularis, and vestibular membrane.
chorion and the allantois.
Collagen: A form of fibrous protein of which several
Choriocapillary layer: A network of capillaries of the
types exist.
choroid, distributed in a single plane, below Bruch's
Collagenous fbers: Fibers formed from one of the types
 membrane of the eye.
of the fibrous protein collagen.
Chorion laeve: A part of the chorionic sac, having a
Collecting tubule: The part of a uriniferous tubule that
smooth surface, that is not involved in the formation
 receives urine fltrate from a nephron.
of the placenta.
Colloid: A gelatinous material found within follicles of
Choroid: The portion of the uvea (vascular tunic) of the
the thyroid gland and the pars intermedia of the pitu-
 eye located between the sclera and the photosensitive
itary gland, among other places.
retina.
Columella: An ossicle of the middle ear of birds and some
Choroid plexus: A highly vascularized portion of the roof
other vertebrates.
of the fourth ventricle and of other ventricles of the
Comb: A highly vascularized derivative of the skin found
brain whose villi are surrounded by cerebrospinal
atop the head of the chicken.
fluid.
Compact bone: A bone whose dense matrix contains few
Chromaffn cells: Cells of the adrenal medulla that form
marrow spaces.
clusters:
and
 anastomosing cords separated by
Compound follicle: A hair follicle bearing several hair
sinusoids.
bulbs.
Chromophil: A cell of the pars distalis of the pituitary
Conjunctiva: An epithelial layer covering part of the
that can be stained with various kinds of histologic dye
 bulbar surface of the eye and the inner surface of the
substances.
eyelid.
Chromophobe: A small cell of the pars distalis of the
Connecting duct: Tubules of the epididymis of the rooster,
which are also called excretory canals.
Cilia: Relatively long, motile extensions of the free surface
Connective tissue proper: A category of connective tissue
 of the cell membrane of certain epithelial cells.
that includes loose, dense, reticular, elastic, and adipose
Ciliary body: The portion of the uvea between the choroid
tissues.
and the iris.
Connective tissue sheath (of hair follicle): A layer of con-
Ciliary muscle: The musculature of the ciliary body.
 nective tissue surrounding a hair follicle.
Ciliary process: A projection from the surface of the pars
Contour feather: A flight feather of birds with a central
ciliaris retinae of the ciliary body to which zonular
shaft consisting of a rachis supporting the vanes and
fibers are attached.
a hollow quill.
Circumanal gland: A partly sebaceous gland found in the
 Coprodeum: The portion of the cloaca that joins the large
subcutis near the anus of the dog.
intestine.
Circumferential lamellae: The bony lamellae that lie par-
Cornea: The anterior, transparent portion of the fbrous
 allel to the outer and inner surfaces of long bones.
tunic of the eye.
Circumvallate papilla: A large, round elevation bearing
Corneal stroma (substantia propria): Lamellae of collag-
numerous taste buds, found on the surface of the
enous fbers oriented parallel to the corneal surface
tongue.
and located between Bowman's and Descemet's mem-
Classic liverlobule: Acylindrical subunit (about 1 × 2 mm)
branes of the cornea.
of the liver that is composed of plates of hepatocytes
Corneoscleral trabecular meshwork: A meshwork of tra-
separated by an extensive network of sinusoids.
 beculae of connective tissue, fbroblasts, and pigment
294
GLOSSARY
cells found in the filtration angle of the eye immedi-
Cytoplasmic bridge: The region of adhesion (at the des-
ately adjacent of the sclera.
mosomes) between adjacent epithelial cells of the
Corneous cells: Keratinized cells of a feather follicle or
stratum spinosum of the epidermis.
surface epidermis.
Cytotrophoblast: The cellular layer of the trophoblast
Corneous connection: A strand of tissue extending from
(covering layer of the blastocyst) that contributes to
the corneous layer of a feather follicle to the calamus
the formation of the placenta.
of a developing feather.
Dark zone (glandular stomach): The distal and longest
Corona (of lymphatic nodule): The external layer, con-
 part of the fundic gland region of the stomach of car-
sisting of numerous small lymphocytes, of an activated
nivores; characterized by a thick mucosa and relatively
lymphatic nodule.
shallow gastric pits.
Corona radiata: The columnar cells abutting the zona
Deciduate placenta: A
type of placenta wherein the
pellucida and forming the innermost layer of the
chorioallantoic
 membrane has fused 
witht
the
cumulus oophorus of an ovarian follicle.
endometrium.
Coronary region: The proximal, peripheral part of the
Dendrite: The neuronal process that receives stimuli.
horse's hoof located above the laminae.
Dense irregular connective tissue: A form of connective
Corpora amylacea: Concretions of casein and cellular
tissue  proper  
that consists of relatively thick
debris found within the cavities of the secretory units
collagenous fbers arranged as a feltwork with scant
of the mammary gland.
space between them. The predominant cell is the
Corpora nigra: Highly vascularized proliferations of the
fibroblast.
pupillary margin of the iris.
Dense regular connective tissue: A form of connective
Corpus albicans: Scar tissue remaining following regres-
tissue proper that consists of relatively thick collage-
sion of the corpus luteum of the ovary.
nous fibers, arranged in parallel, with scant space
Corpus cavernosum: A mass of erectile tissue located
between them. The fibroblast is the only cell type
within the body of the penis.
present.
Corpus  cavernosum  clitoridis:
Erectile tissue of the
Dental lamina: A band of ectodermal cells from the
clitoris.
embryonic jaw that grow into the underlying mesen-
Corpus luteum: An endocrine gland derived from granu-
chyme. Buds from the dental lamina give rise to the
 losa cells and theca interna cells of a postovulatory
primordia of the enamel organs of the teeth.
 ovarian follicle; its cells secrete progesterone and
Dental papilla: A projection of mesenchyme of the embry-
estrogen.
onic jaw into the developing enamel organ.
Corpus spongiosum (corpus cavernosum urethra): Erectile
Dental pulp: The soft tissue of the pulp cavity of a
tissue within the glans of the penis and surrounding
tooth.
the penile urethra.
Dental sac: The mesenchymal precursor of the connective
Cortex (hair): That portion of a hair located between the
tissue surrounding a developing tooth, or the connec-
cuticle and the medulla.
tive tissue surrounding a developing tooth.
Cortical nephron (chicken): A nephron with a relatively
Dentin: The ivory that forms the mass of the tooth.
small renal corpuscle located in the cortex of the
Dermal papilla: A projection of the dermis into the over-
kidney.
lying epidermis.
Cotyledonary placenta: The type of placenta found in
Dermis: The connective tissue of the skin located beneath
ruminants where numerous, bean-shaped portions of
the epidermis.
the chorioallantoic membrane form the functional
Descemet's membrane: An acellular layer separating
connections with the endometrium.
the stroma from the posterior epithelium of the cornea.
Crampton's muscle: One of the ciliary muscles (skeletal)
Diaphysis: The shaft of a long bone.
 of the chicken's eye.
Diencephalon: A subdivision of the brain composed of
Crenated: Having a corrugated or scalloped border, e.g..
the thalamus, subthalamus, and hypothalamus.
 the cell membrane of an erythrocyte following the loss
Diestrus: That part of the estrous cycle, between metes-
of water.
trus and anestrus, when development and secretory
Crista ampullaris: A sensory structure located within the
 activity of the endometrial glands peak.
 ampulla of a semicircular duct of the inner ear.
Crop: A caudal diverticulum of the esophagus of the
acterized
by a moderate amount of scattered
chicken used for the temporary storage of food.
lymphocytes.
Crypt of Lieberkihn (intestinal gland): A simple tubular 
Diffuse placenta: The name given to a placenta when the
gland located within the lamina propria of the small
chorioallantoic membrane makes a major structural
 and large intestine.
contribution.
Cumulus oophorus: 
 The mound of granulosa cells
Digital cushion: The loose connective tissue (subcutis)
surrounding an oocyte of the ovarian follicle of a
below the dermis of the digital pad.
mammal.
 Digital pad: The soft, shock-absorbing tissue formed by
Cupula: The gelatinous covering of the sensory hair cells
the epidermis, dermis, and subcutis beneath the digits
of the crista ampullaris.
of many mammals.
Cuticle (hair): The layer of flat cells, arranged in a shin-
Diplokaryocyte: A binucleate giant cell of the epithelium
glelike manner on the surface of a hair.
of a chorionic villus of the placenta of the cow.
GLOSSARY
295
Distal convoluted tubule: That portion of a nephron
with bichromate solutions and produces either a
located between the loop of Henle and a collecting
hormone or a paracrine (a substance that acts locally
tubule.
by diffusing to a target organ).
Dorsal plate (claw): The keratinized, upper part of a claw.
Eosinophil: A granulocyte characterized by the presence
Dorsal root ganglion: The ganglion of the dorsal root of
of eosinophilic specific granules.
 a spinal nerve.
Ependymal cell: A neuroglial cell that lines the ventricles
Down feather: A soft, fluffy feather that lacks barbules
of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord.
with hooklets.
Epicardium: The outermost layer of the heart.
Duct of the epididymis: The highly convoluted duct
Epidermal collar: A thick ring of epidermal cells situated
forming a major part of the epididymis.
at the base of the follicle of a feather.
Dura mater: The outer meninx of dense connective tissue
Epidermal laminae: The platelike epidermal structures of
 surrounding the brain and spinal cord.
the wall of the horse's hoof.
Eccrine (merocrine) gland: The cells of these glands
Epidermal peg: A downward extension of the epidermis
release their product by exocytosis.
that alternates
 with  upward-extending
dermal
Efferent arteriole:
 The arteriole carrying blood away
papillae.
from the glomerulus of a renal corpuscle.
Epidermis: The ectodermally derived stratified squamous
Efferent ductule: One of several small tubes connecting
epithelium forming the surface layer of the skin.
the rete testis to the duct of the epididymis.
Epididymis: A highly coiled tube of the male reproductive
Elastic cartilage: A type of cartilage whose matrix con-
 system located between the efferent ductules and the
tains numerous elastic fbers.
vas deferens.
Elastic fber: A component of certain connective tissues
Epimysium: The outer sheath of connective tissue of a
that forms from the protein elastin.
muscle.
Ellipsoid: A fusiform structure, composed of macro-
Epineurium: The outer sheath of connective tissue of a
phages, that surrounds a portion of each of the capil-
 nerve.
laries of the penicillus of the spleen.
Epiphyseal disc: A plate of hyaline cartilage between the
Embedding: When an infltrated tissue is transferred to a
 epiphysis and diaphysis of a developing (growing) long
fresh solution of embedding medium (e.g., melted par-
bone.
 affin) and the paraffin is then allowed to harden.
Epiphysis:
The end (proximal or distal) of a long
Embryonal connective tissue: A form of connective tissue
bone.
exemplified by mesenchyme and mucous connective
Epithelial tuft: A grouping of simple columnar cells at the
tissue.
apex of a follicle within the bursa of Fabricius of a
Enamel: The hard, glistening material covering the
chicken.
exposed surface of a tooth.
Epitheliochorial placenta: A placenta with six tissue
Endocardium: The tissue layer lining the atria and ven-
layers between the maternal and fetal blood streams.
tricles of the heart.
Epithelioid cell: A cell that resembles an epithelial cell.
Endochondral bone:
: Bone that has been formed by
Epithelium: A cellular tissue that covers external surfaces
replacing a cartilaginous model.
or lines cavities.
Endocrine gland: A ductless gland.
Erectile tissue: A highly vascular tissue that allows for an
Endolymph: A clear fluid contained within the semicircu-
increase in turgidity of the penis or clitoris.
 lar ducts, sacculus, utriculus, and cochlear duct of the 
Ergot: An epidermal thickening found on the posterior
inner ear
surface of a horse's foot at the level of the distal end
Endometrial gland: A simple tubular gland of the endo-
of the metacarpal bone.
metrium of the uterus.
Erythrocyte: A red blood cell.
Endometrium: The mucosa of the uterus.
Estrous cycle: A cyclic event of a female nonprimate
Endomysium: 
The connective tissue immediately sur-
mammal involving changes in anatomic structure of
rounding individual muscle cells of a fascicle of a
reproductive organs, changes in physiologic condition,
muscle.
and changes in sexual behavior.
Endoneurium: The connective tissue immediately sur-
Estrus: That segment of the estrous cycle during which
 rounding the processes of nerve cells within a fascicle
the female is sexually receptive of the male.
of a nerve.
Euchromatic:
Endosteum: The layer of squamous osteogenic cells lining
nucleus of a fixed and stained cell when the chromatin
the entire marrow cavity and extending into the
is not highly coiled.
Haversian canals.
Exocrine gland: A gland with a duct system that carries
Endotheliochorial placenta: A type of placenta, found in
a secretion to a body surface or cavity.
carnivores, where the maternal and fetal blood are
Exocytosis: A process that occurs when a cytoplasmic
separated by four layers of tissue.
vesicle fuses with the cell membrane and releases its
Endothelium: The simple squamous epithelium lining the
 contents into the extracellular space.
cardiovascular system and lymphatic vessels.
External auditory meatus: The canal of the external ear.
Enterochromaffin cell: A form of APUD cell (amine-
External ear: That portion of the ear external to the
precursor uptake decarboxylase cell) found in the gas-
tympanic membrane, including the external auditory
trointestinal tract, among other places; it can be stained
meatus and the pinna.
296
GLOSSARY
External elastic membrane: The elastic membrane exter-
Fungiform papilla: A mushroom-shaped elevation of the
nal to the tunica media of some arteries.
surface of the tongue.
External root sheath: The layer of cells in the wall of a
Gallbladder: A saclike diverticulum of the common bile
hair follicle between the inner root sheath and the
 duct; functions as a storage depot for bile.
connective tissue sheath.
Ganglion cell layer (retina): Layer of cell bodies of neurons
Eyelid: The movable, muscular fold covering the eye.
between the inner, plexiform layer and the nerve fber
Eyeshine: The reflected glow in the eye of some animals
layer.
at night due to the presence of a tapetum lucidum in
Gastric furrow: A depression in the mucosa of the
the choroid.
 glandular stomach lined by columnar surface mucous
Fascia: A sheet of connective tissue surrounding, invest-
cells.
 ing, or binding together parts of the body.
Gastric pit (foveola): An invagination of the mucosa of
Fascicle: A bundle of structures such as a bundle of axons
the glandular stomach lined by columnar, surface
or a bundle of muscle cells.
mucous cells.
Feather follicle: The epidermal structure from which a
Germinal center: The central region of an activated lym-
feather grows.
phatic nodule, consisting mainly of lymphocytes of
Feather pulp: The vascularized, mesenchyme-like tissue
medium to large size.
 in the center of a developing feather.
Germinal epithelium: The epithelial layer covering the
 Feather sheath: The thin, epidermal surface layer of the
cortex of the ovary; composed of cuboidal or flattened
 calamus of a growing feather. It eventually disinte-
cells.
 grates, except for a collarlike remnant around the
Germinal vesicle: The nucleus of an oocyte.
calamus.
Germinal zone (lens of eye): A band of epithelial cells
Fibroblasts: Ubiquitous cells of the connective tissue,
located around the equator of the lens, capable of
responsible for producing the precursors of collagen
dividing throughout adult life.
 and elastin and for producing the amorphous ground
Gingiva: The gum surrounding a tooth.
substance.
Glands of Moll: Sweat glands of the skin of the eyelids.
Fibrocartilage (fbrous cartilage): Dense connective tissue
Glands of the anal sac: Tubular glands in the wali of an
containing isolated groups of chondrocytes surrounded
anal sac.
by small amounts of cartilage matrix.
Glands of Zeiss: Sebaceous glands of the skin of the
Fibroelastic tissue: Connective tissue proper containing a
eyelids.
mixture of collagenous and elastic fibers.
Gandular stomach: The portion of the stomach charac-
Fibrous tapetum lucidum: A reflective layer of the choroid
terized by the presence of various types of tubular
of the eyes of horses and ruminants that is composed
glands. It includes cardiac, fundic, body, and pyloric
of collagenous fbers and fbroblasts.
regions.
Fibrous tunic: An external sheath comprised of fibers of
Globular (globule) leukocyte: A leukocyte-like cell with
connective tissue.
large, round, eosinophilic granules, found in the
Filiform papilla: An
1 outgrowth on the surface of the
mucosa of the intestine and stomach and reported to
tongue bearing threadlike projections or spines.
 be derived from mast cell precursor cells in ruminants
Filoplume: A small, hairlike feather.
and rats.
Filtration angle: In the eye, the angle formed between the
Gomerular epithelium: The layer of podocytes in inti-
limbus, ciliary body, and the base of the iris.
mate contact with the glomerular capillary loops of a
Fimbria of the infundibulum: The fimbria is the fringed
renal corpuscle.
 border of the infundibulum of the oviduct.
Glomerulus: The tuft of capillary loops in the center of a
Fixative: A chemical or mixture of chemicals used to
renal corpuscle positioned between the afferent and
preserve the structural characteristics of fresh tissue.
efferent arteriole.
Foliate papilla: One of several foldlike elevations of the
Glycogen body: A structure, centrally located in the
surface of the tongue.
spinal cord of birds, whose cells contain a central mass
Follicular tonsil: A tonsil with deep invaginations (crypts)
of glycogen.
of its surface epithelium.
Glycosaminoglycans (GAGS): Long-chained, very hydro-
Forestomach: The nonglandular portion of the stomach
philic, sulfated polysaccharides. Most are directly
of the horse, ruminant, or pig.
bound to proteins and are collectively known as pro-
Formed elements: Collectively, the erythrocytes, leuko-
 cytes, and platelets of the blood.
fusion of water-soluble material throughout the ground
Fornix of conjunctiva: The point of reflection of the
substance of loose connective tissue and cartilage.
 bulbar and palpebral conjunctiva.
Goblet cell: A mucus-secreting cell having the shape of a
Fossa: A cavity or a pit.
goblet.
Fourth ventricle: The fluid-filled cavity of the medulla
Golgi apparatus: 1
 Membranous cellular organelle func-
oblongata of the brain.
tioning to modify, sort, and package proteins secreted
Frog: A caudal wedge-shaped part of the horse's hoof that
by a cell.
lies between the bars.
Gonocyte: A primordial germ cell.
Fundic gland region: A portion of the glandular stomach
Granulocyte: A leukocyte having specific granules, e.g.
lying between the cardiac and pyloric gland regions.
eosinophil, neutrophil, basophil, and heterophil.
GLOSSARY
297
Granulosa lutein cell: The principal cell type of the corpus
Heterochromatic: The appearance of the nucleus of a
 luteum; derived from a membrana granulosa cell of a
fixed and stained cell whose chromatin is tightly coiled.
postovulatory follicle.
Such chromatin stains readily, resulting in a grainy
Gray matter: That portion of the brain and spinal cord
nucleus.
containing the cell bodies of neurons and mainly
Heterophil: The most abundant of the granulocytes of the
unmyelinated neuronal fibers.
chicken. Its specific granules are spindle-shaped and
Ground substance: The substance, consisting mainly of
sometimes possess a distinct, ruby-red, spheric granule
glycoproteins and glycosaminoglycans, that fills the
centrally.
 spaces between the cellular and fbrous elements of
Hilus: An invaginated region of the margin of an organ
connective tissue.
where blood vessels enter and leave.
Guttural pouch: A diverticulum of the Eustachian tubes
Hilus cell: A group of epithelioid cells that may be found
of the horse.
close to the rete ovari near the hilus of the ovary in
H&E: Hematoxylin and eosin.
some mammals.
H band: A pale zone, devoid of actin filaments, located 
Histiocyte: A synonym for macrophage.
at the center of an A band of a sarcomere.
Holocrine secretion: A mode of secretion where disinte-
Hair bulb: The expanded base of a hair follicle.
 grated secretory cells and their product are released
Hair follicle: A derivative of the epidermis from which
from a gland.
 one or more hairs grow.
Hoof: The keratinized, epidermal, digital outgrowth of
Hair matrix: That portion of a hair bulb where cell divi-
 an ungulate.
sion occurs, giving rise to a hair shaft
Horn: A keratinized, epidermal outgrowth, with a bony
Hard keratin: A tough form of keratin found in hair and
core, of the head of some mammals.
nails, 
 among other places; contains more disulfide
Horn tubule (tubular horn): A tapering, keratinized, epi-
bonds and cystine than soft keratin.
dermal structure of the equine hoof that extends
Harderian gland: A large, tubular gland that lies on the
 toward the surface from a dermal papilla.
 dorsal posterior surface of the eye.
Howship's lacuna: An eroded area of bone surface pro-
Hassall's corpuscle: Acidophilic, concentric arrangements
duced by the activity of an osteoclast.
of reticular cells found in the medulla of the thymus
Hyaline cartilage: The most common form of cartilage
of mammals.
whose matrix has the appearance of ground glass in
Haversian canal: The canal in the center of a Haversian
the fresh state.
 system; contains blood vessels and nerves.
Hydroxyapatites:
: Crystals of calcium phosphate that
Haversian system (osteon): Collectively, concentrically
mineralize bone matrix, making it hard.
arranged bony lamellae, osteocytes, and a Haversian
Hypothalamohypophyseal tract: Collectively, the axons
 canal and its contents.
of neurosecretory cells within the infundibular stalk
Head of the epididymis:
The initial portion of the
and infundibular process of the pituitary gland.
epididymis.
I band: That portion of adjacent sarcomeres lying
Helicine artery: A tortuous vessel that supplies blood to
to either side of the Z-line of an uncontracted myof-
the cavernous spaces of the penis.
bril.
 The I band contains actin myofilaments
exclusively
canal of the inner ear connecting the cavity of the scala
Immature bone: A highly cellular form of bone that is
vestibuli with the cavity of the scala tympani.
replaced by mature bone during development.
Hemal node: A nodular structure found along blood
Incus: The ossicle of the middle ear located between the
vessels in ruminants; contains blood-filled sinuses
malleus and stapes.
between cellular cords.
Indeciduate placenta: A placenta whose endometrium
Hematoma: Blood that has escaped from a blood vessel(s)
and chorioallantoic membrane are in contact but
within a tissue or organ.
do not fuse, seen in the mare, ruminants, and the
Hermolymph node: A nodular structure, containing lym-
SOW.
phatic vessels, whose sinuses receive a mixture of
Infundibular cavity: An extension of the third ventricle
blood and lymph.
 into the infundibular stalk ofthe pituitary, and in some
Henle's loop: The
 U-shaped portion of a nephron
animals, into the infundibular process.
located between its proximal and distal convoluted
Infundibular stalk: That portion of the neurohypophysis
tubules.
between the median eminence and the infundibular
Hepatocyte: A liver cell.
process.
Hepatoid gland: The nonsebaceous portion of the cir-
Infundibulum: A ventral outpocketing of the diencepha-
cumanal glands of the dog. Its cells resemble hepato-
lon that develops into the neurohypophysis of the pitu-
cytes, hence the name hepatoid.
itary gland. Also, that part of the oviduct having a
Herbst corpuscle: A tactile, encapsulated nerve ending of
funnel shape and lying closest to the ovary.
the skin of birds resembling the pacinian corpuscle but
Inner limiting membrane: The part of the photosensitive
smaller.
retina of the eye abutting the vitreous body.
Herring body: A neurosecretion found within the axons 
Inner nuclear layer: The part of the photosensitive retina
of unmyelinated neurosecretory cells of the hypothal-
of the eye lying between the outer and inner plexiform
 amohypophyseal tract.
layers.
298
GLOSSARY
Inner plexiform layer: The part of the photosensitive
Juxtaglomerular cell: A modified cell (smooth muscle) of
retina of the eye lying between the inner nuclear and
an afferent arteriole of the kidney.
 ganglion cell layer.
Keratinized: A structure whose cells have become filled
Inner root sheath: That portion of a hair follicle lying
with the protein keratin.
between the hair and the external root sheath.
Keratinocyte: A skin cell whose cytoplasm becomes filled
Inner tunnel: A large cavity lying within the organ of
with keratin, a scleroprotein, or albuminoid substance
Corti of the inner ear.
over time. Found in the dead cells of the outer layer
Intercalated disc: A cell-surface modification found at
of the epidermis, hairs, horns, feathers, hooves, beaks,
both ends of cardiac muscle cells that enables cell-to-
etc.
cell adhesion and physiologic exchanges.
Keratinoid: A tough proteinaceous substance lining the
Intercalated duct: That part of the duct system of many
gizzard of the chicken.
glands that connects directly to the secretory unit.
 Keratohyalin granules: Vesicles found within the cells of
Intermediate cell: An epithelial cell of the vagina with
the stratum granulosum of the epidermis, whose con-
round corners, but larger than a parabasal cell, that
 tents will form the amorphous portion of keratin.
occurs during the estrous cycle.
Kohler illumination: Bright, even illumination required
Internal ear: That part of the ear comprised of the semi-
for optimal light microscopy and achieved by adjusting
circular ducts in semicircular canals, saccule, and
the light source in a prescribed manner.
utricle in the vestibule, and the cochlea.
 Krause's gland: An accessory lacrimal gland that may be
Internal elastic membrane: A sheetlike elastic membrane
either serous or mixed.
forming the outer boundary of the tunica intima of
Kupffer cell: A macrophage located within the blood
many arteries.
vascular system of the liver.
Interstitial cell (Leydig cell): A cell that produces testos-
1l.s.: Longitudinal section.
terone and is found in the connective tissue between
Labia: Lips.
 seminiferous tubules of the testes.
Labial gland: Mixed glands found within the lips of the
Interstitial gland cells: Epithelioid cells, arranged as cords,
mouth.
 in the stroma of the ovaries of bitches and queens but
Labyrinth: A complicated structural arrangement.
not ordinarily found in other domestic mammals.
Lacrimal gland: The tear gland.
Interstitial system (interstitial lamellae): A remnant of a
Lacuna: A small cavity or space.
 preexisting Haversian system (osteon) of bone.
Lagena: A terminal expansion of the cochlear duct of the
Interterritorial matrix: The matrix of hyaline cartilage
inner ear of birds.
surrounding the territorial matrix and possessing lesser
Lamella: A layer of material, e.g., of bone.
concentrations of glycosaminoglycans than territorial
Lamina cribrosa: The sievelike part of the sclera that
matrix.
partitions groups of axons of the optic nerve.
Intertubular horn: The keratinized epidermis of the hoof
 Lamina propria: The loose connective tissue beneath the
that surrounds the tubular horn.
epithelium of a mucous membrane.
Intralobular: That which is located within a lobule of a
Lamina subglandularis: A thick sheet of collagenous
gland.
fibers (stratum compactum) and the accompanying
Intralobular duct: A duct located within the lobule of a
layer of fibroblasts (stratum granulosum) between the
gland.
base of the glands and the muscularis mucosae of the
Intramembranous bone (membrane bone): Bone that
stomach of the cat and sometimes the dog. The lamina
develops directly within or under a membrane of con-
may also occur in the small intestine of carnivores.
nective tissue.
Laminar region: The part of the wall of the hoof that is
Iris: The pigmented portion of the uvea surrounding the
composed of numerous plates (laminae) that function
pupil of the eye.
to suspend the third phalanx from the hoof.
Islet of Langerhans: A multicellular, endocrine structure
Layer of rods and cones: In the retina of the eye, the layer
embedded within the exocrine pancreas that produces
comprised of the dendrites of the photoreceptor cells.
 insulin, glucagon, pancreatic polypeptide hormone,
Lens: A biconvex, transparent structure comprised of lens
 and somatostatin.
fbers, positioned between the iris and the vitreous 
Isogenous group: A small group of cells derived by
body.
cell division from a single cell, as exemplified by isog-
Lens body: The part of the eye of the chicken, exclusive
enous groups of chondrocytes often seen in cartilage
 of the annular pad, whose lens fibers are oriented
matrix.
parallel to the optical axis of the eye.
Isthmus (of the oviduct): The section of the oviduct
Lens epithelium: The layer of simple cuboidal epithelium
attached to the uterus.
 on the anterior surface (iris side) of the lens.
Isthmus (of the uropygial gland): The part of the drainage
Lens  
fbers:
Transparent, elongated, prismatic cells
 system of the uropygial gland located between the
forming the bulk of the substance of the lens of the
primary duct and the nipple.
eye.
Juxtaglomerular apparatus: A trinity of cellular struc-
Leukocyte: A white blood cell, either granulocyte or
tures associated with a nephron and consisting of the
agranulocyte.
macula densa, juxtaglomerular cells, and mesangial
Leydig cell: Synonym for the interstitial cell of the testis.
cells.
Leydig cells produce testosterone.
GLOSSARY
299
Ligamentum nuchae: A thick band of elastic tissue in the
 Medullary cone: The cone-shaped medullary portion of
dorsal neck that is especially well developed in grazing
the chicken's kidney that contains segments of urinifer-
animals.
ous tubules.
Light cell: Any cell, among contrasting dark cells, with
Medullary
cord:
One
of
many
interconnected
pale cytoplasm; found in such places as the epithelium
 segments of diffuse connective tissue, surrounded by
of the gallbladder or the tegmentum vasculosum of the
medullary sinuses, within the medulla of a lymph
inner ear of the chicken, among other places.
node.
Light zone (of the glandular stomach): The initial portion
Medullary nephron: The larger of two forms of nephrons
of the fundic gland region of the stomach of a carni-
of the chicken's kidney having the characteristics of the
vore; compared with the dark zone of the fundic gland
mammalian nephron.
 region, it is shorter and its mucosa is thinner.
 Medullary sinuses: The lymph-filled spaces surrounding
Limbus: The boundary line between the cornea and
the medullary cords of a lymph node.
sclera.
Megakaryocyte: An extraordinarily large cell of the bone
Lobule: The subdivision of a lobe of an organ such as a
marrow that produces blood platelets by a budding
 gland or the lung.
 process and releases them directly into the sinusoids of
Loop of Henle: The U-shaped portion of a nephron
the marrow.
 joining a proximal and distal convoluted tubule.
Meissner's plexus: As seen in histologic section, a spindle-
Loose {areolar) connective tissue: A type of connective
shaped collection of parasympathetic neurons and
tissue proper whose fibers are in the form of a non-
their processes found within the submucosa of the
compacted, open meshwork.
digestive tract.
Luteal cells (interstitial cells):
The lutein cells of the
 Melanocyte: A large, branched cell that produces mela-
corpus luteum of the mammalian ovary, or the pale
nosomes (tiny vesicles containing pigment).
interstitial cells within the theca externa surrounding
Membrana granulosa: The cells that line the antrum of a
the oocyte of an ovarian follicle of the chicken.
mammalian ovarian follicle.
Lymph node: A lymphatic organ having both afferent and
Membrane bone: Bone that is formed within or beneath
efferent lymphatic vessels.
a membrane by intramembranous ossification, e.g..
Lymphatic nodule: A temporary, spherical, or oval struc-
within embryonic mesenchyme or at the osteogenic
ture, consisting of numerous lymphocytes, found
surface of the periosteum or endosteum.
 q on  i   
Membranous labyrinth: A group of structures located
anywhere within the loose connective tissue of the
within the bony labyrinth of the inner ear. The mem-
body.
branous labyrinth includes the semicircular ducts, the
Lymphocyte: An agranulocyte with scant cytoplasm and,
utricle and saccule, and the cochlear duct (membra-
 typically, a large, round or broadly oval nucleus.
nous cochlea; scala media).
Macrophage: A phagocytic cell, derived from a mono-
Meninges: The three membranes enveloping both the
cyte, and widely distributed in tissues and organs
brain and spinal cord: pia mater, arachnoid mater, and
throughout the body.
dura mater.
Macula (of the ear): A patch of sensory and supporting
Merkel's cell: A cell of the epidermis of the skin that has
cells found within the sacculus (saccule) and utriculus
contact with tactile nerve endings.
(utricle) of the inner ear.
Merocrine gland (eccrine gland): An exocrine gland
Macula densa: A part of the juxtaglomerular apparatus
whose secretory cells release droplets of secretion by
 of a nephron and formed from closely packed epithe-
exocytosis.
lial cells of a portion of the wall of the distal convo-
Mesangial cells: Phagocytic cells found within the renal
luted tubule.
glomerulus.
 Magnum: The part of the chicken's oviduct whose gland
Mesenchyme:
Embryonal
connective
tissue
that
cells produce the albumin of the egg.
consists of stellate mesenchyme cells and ground
 Malleus: The middle ear ossicle in contact with the tym-
substance.
 panic membrane.
Mesobronchus: The intrapulmonary, primary bronchus
 Mammary gland: The milk-producing organ of the mam-
 of the chicken's lung.
malian female.
Mesometrium: The mesentery supporting the uterus from
Marginal zone: Splenic tissue located between the white
the abdominal wall.
and red pulp.
Mesosalpinx: The mesentery supporting the oviduct from
Mast cell: A large, granular, ubiquitous cell of the con-
the abdominal wall.
 nective tissue that produces histamine.
Mesothelium: The mesodermally derived, simple squa-
 Mature bone: Bone with an acidophilic matrix and fewer
mous epithelium covering the surface of mesenteries
 sdn ii aq a a e s
 and organs that protrude into coelomic cavities of the
development.
body.
Median eminence: T
The region of the floor of the dien-
Metachromsia: The circumstance in which a cell or tissue
cephalon of the brain from which the infundibular
component acquires a color different from the dye
stalk of the pituitary arises.
solution with which it is stained.
Medulla: The inner region of an organ such as the medulla
 Metamyelocyte: A developing granulocyte that possesses
of the kidney, ovary, or lymph node.
an indented nucleus and specific granules.
300
GLOSSARY
Metestrus: That part of the estrous cycle between estrus
Myelocyte: The developmental stage of a granulocyte
and diestrus. The development of the corpus luteum
following the promyelocyte stage.
 occurs during metestrus.
Myocardium: The middle, muscular layer of the heart wall.
Microplacentome: A placental structure of the mare con-
Myoepithelial cell: An epithelial cell with contractile
sisting of a small tuft of chorionic villi and a crypt of
properties, as found on the surface of many glandular
the endometrium into which it is inserted.
secretory units; also, one of the many contractile cells
Microvillus: A short, nonmotile, fingerlike projection of
forming the iridial dilator of the eye.
the free surface of certain epithelial cells. Usually
Myofbril: One of many contractile units, formed from
present in large numbers, thereby greatly increasing
linearly joined sarcomeres, as in skeletal and cardiac
the cell's surface area.
muscle cells.
Middle ear: A subdivision of the ear comprised of three
Myoflament: A linear subunit of a sarcomere made of
 small ossicles (malleus, incus, and stapes) or of a
the protein actin or myosin. Numerous myofilaments
columella.
of actin and myosin become assembled to form the
 Mixed gland: An exocrine gland whose secretory units
sarcomeres of myofbrils.
consist of either mucous or serous cells or a combina-
Myoid cell: A contractile cell, such as found at the surface
tion of these cells. Or, a gland with both endocrine and
of a seminiferous tubule.
exocrine components.
Myometrium: The layers of smooth muscle external to
Modiolus: The pillarlike bone in the center of the cochlea.
the endometrium of the uterus.
Monocyte: A large, agranular leukocyte with an oval,
Nasal cavity: One of a pair of bilaterally arranged cham-
indented or horseshoe-shaped nucleus and pale, blue-
bers
located
1between the external nares and
gray, often vacuolated, cytoplasm.
nasopharynx.
Mucosa: In the digestive tract, the mucous membrane
Nasolabial gland: An exocrine gland of the subcutis of
comprised of an epithelium, lamina propria, and mus-
the planum nasolabiale of ruminants.
cularis mucosae (latter is lacking in the mouth,
Nasopharynx: That portion of the pharynx between the
pharynx, and portions of the esophagus). In other
internal nares and the oropharynx.
organ systems, the epithelium lining the organ together
Necrotic: Pertaining to dead cells or tissue.
 s d n  a 
Nephron: The portion of a uriniferous tubule before the
mucosa.
collecting tubule; includes the renal corpuscle, proxi-
Mucous acinus: The bulblike secretory unit of a gland
mal convoluted tubule, loop of Henle, and distal con-
whose cells secrete mucus.
voluted tubule.
Mucous connective tissue: A form of embryonal connec-
Nerve fber layer {of the retina): The portion of the retina
tive tissue consisting of amorphous ground substance,
between the ganglion cell layer and the inner limiting
loosely arranged collagenous fibers, and fibroblasts.
membrane; consists of axons of ganglion cells.
Mucous membrane: A synonym for mucosa.
Neurilemma (neurolemma): In the peripheral nervous
Mucous neck cell: A cell of the neck region of a gastric
system, the sheath formed by Schwann cells that sur-
 gland that produces mucus.
 round a neuron's axon. The neurilemma may or may
Mucus: A viscous, slimy mixture of mucin, water, elec-
not include a myelin component.
trolytes, and cells. It is secreted by gland cells lining
 Neuroglia: Supportive cells of the central nervous system;
nasal, esophageal and other body cavities and serves
considered to be about 10 times more numerous than
to protect and lubricate surfaces.
neurons.
They include oligodendrocytes, astrocytes,
Multilaminar primary follicle: A preantral ovarian follicle
microglia, and ependymal cells.
whose oocyte is surrounded by several layers of follicle
 Neurohypophysis: The portion of the pituitary gland that
cells.
is derived from the infundibulum; consists of the
Multilocular adipocyte: An adipocyte (fat cell) containing
median eminence, infundibular stalk, and infundibular
numerous small lipid-filled vacuoles.
process (pars nervosa).
Multinucleate giant cell: A large, phagocytic cell with
Neuromuscular spindle: An encapsulated, fusiform (spin-
many
nuclei;
formed
by the ‘coalescence
of
dle-shaped) stretch receptor found within skeletal
macrophages.
muscle. It contains sensory and motor nerve endings
Multipolar neuron: A nerve cell having numerous den-
and
 intrafusal fbers 
(modified
muscle
cells).
drites and a single axon.
 Neuromuscular spindles regulate muscle tone.
Muscularis externa: The outermost layers of muscle in
Neutrophil: A polymorphonuclear granulocyte with fine
the wall of the digestive tract; may be smooth muscle,
specific granules.
skeletal muscle, or both.
Nictitating membrane: The third eyelid found in some
Muscularis mucosae:
The layer(s) of smooth muscle
animals.
below the lamina propria of the mucosa of the diges-
Nissl granule: The rough endoplasmic reticulum of a
tive tract.
neuron.
Myelin sheath: A derivative of the cell membrane of a
 Nonglandular stomach: The part of the stomach lacking
Schwann cell or of an oligodendrocyte; the sheath is
glandular elements.
arranged in concentric layers around axons.
ap sod s uas jo ad g ads pe 
 Myeloblast: An early stage in the development of a granu-
oped sinuses or no sinuses, as found in the cat, horse,
locyte of the bone marrow.
pig, and ruminants.
GLOSSARY
301
Nuclear bag fber: An intrafusal fber (modified
Outer root sheath (external root sheath): The layer of
skeletal muscle cell) of a neuromuscular spindle, char-
cells in the wall of a hair follicle between the inner root
acterized by the presence of many closely packed
sheath and the connective tissue sheath.
nuclei.
 Ovarian follicle: The cellular unit surrounding an oocyte 
Nucleolus: A small round or oval structure, within the
in the ovary.
nucleus
of
a cell, where ribonucleoprotein 
iS
 Oviduct: The tubular organ that receives an oocyte from
synthesized.
the ovary and conveys it, after fertilization, to the
 Odontoblasts: Cells on the surface of dental papillae that
exterior (birds) or to the uterus (mammals, except
produce uncalcified dentin (predentin).
prototherians) for implantation.
Olfactory epithelium: The pseudostratified columnar epi-
Oxyphil: A parenchymal cell of the parathyroid gland.
thelium of the nasal cavity that is comprised of sensory
Pacinian corpuscle: An encapsulated nerve ending that
cells, supporting cells, and basal cells.
responds to heavy pressure as opposed to light touch.
Oligodendrocyte: A highly branched neuroglial cell that
Palpebral conjunctiva: The mucous membrane lining the
forms the myelin sheath of axons within the central
eyelid.
 nervous system. By means of its many processes, a
Paneth cell: A secretory cell whose acidophilic granules
single oligodendrocyte can produce the myelin sheaths
contain lysozyme; found in the intestinal glands of
of many separate axons.
some mammals.
Omasum:
The
third subdivision of the ruminant
Papillary duct: A large urinary duct that opens to the
forestomach.
renal pelvis from the tip of a renal papilla of the
Optic disc: The portion of the eye where the axons of the
kidney.
 nerve fiber layer of the retina converge to form the
Papillary (superficial) layer of the dermis: The upper layer
 optic nerve. There are no light sensitive cels present
of loose connective tissue of the dermis with fingerlike
in the disc, hence the name blind spot.
extensions called dermal papillae that interdigitate
Optic nerve: The second cranial nerve.
with the epidermis.
Ora ciliaris retinae:
 The point of transition from the
Parabasal cell: A sloughed, small, round vaginal epithelial
photosensitive to the nonphotosensitive part of the
 cell, found in vaginal smears taken from an animal in
retina.
anestrus.
 Organ of Corti: The part of the inner ear that is sensitive
i    s
to sound.
branch of a secondary bronchus of the chicken lung.
 Oropharynx: The portion of the pharynx that is located
Parafollicular cell (C cell): Alarge, pale cell found between
behind the mouth.
epithelial cells of thyroid follicles and also between
Orthochromatophilic erythroblast: In the erythroid line,
follicles; produces the hormone calcitonin, whose
the smallest nucleated cell.
action lowers blood calcium level.
Os penis: A bone within the glans of the penis of
Parenchyma: The specific tissue cells of an organ as dis-
carnivores.
tinguished from the organ's supportive connective
 Osseous spiral lamina: A spiral shelf of bone around the
tissue, e.g., muscle cells as opposed to the connective
modiolus of the cochlea.
tissue supporting them.
Osteoblast: A cell that synthesizes and secretes bone
Parietal cell: A large acidophilic cell of the fundic and
matrix.
pyloric gland regions of the stomach that produces
 Osteoclast: A multinucleate giant cell that resorbs bone
hydrochloric acid.
matrix.
Pars ciliaris retinae:
The bilayered, nonphotosensitive
Osteocyte: A mature bone cell.
portion of the retina associated with the ciliary body
Osteoid: Uncalcified bone matrix.
and located between the ora ciliaris retinae and the
Otolith: A tiny structure with a prismatic shape found
pars iridica retinae.
embedded in the gelatinous covering (otolithic mem-
Pars convoluta (cortical labyrinth): That part of the renal
brane) of a macula of the utricle and saccule of the
cortex that contains renal corpuscles and convoluted
inner ear.
tubules, and is located between medullary rays.
Otolithic membrane: The gelatinous covering of a macula
Pars disseminata: The scattered portions of the prostate
 of the utricle and saccule of the inner ear.
gland.
Outer enamel epithelium: A layer of cells abutting
Pars distalis: Derived from Rathke's pouch and the largest
(externally) the stellate reticulum of a developing fetal
component of the pituitary gland. Alone or with the
tooth.
pars tuberalis, called the anterior lobe of the
Outer limiting membrane: The retinal layer formed from
pituitary.
the plasma membranes of Miller cells and located
Pars intermedia: That part of the pituitary gland located
between the layer of rods and cones and the outer
between the pars distalis and pars nervosa. A deriva-
nuclear layer.
tive of Rathke's pouch.
Outer nuclear layer: The retinal layer consisting of the
Pars iridica retinae: That part of the nonphotosensitive
nuclei of the rod and cone cells.
retina located on the side of the iris facing the lens.
Outer plexiform layer: T
 The retinal layer composed of
Pars nervosa: The major part of the neurohypophysis and
 neuronal fbers and located between the outer nuclear
a derivative of the hypothalamus; with the pars inter-
layer and the inner plexiform layer.
 media, forms the posterior lobe of the pituitary.
302
GLOSSARY
Pars radiata (medullary or cortical rays): The part of the
Placenta: A nutritive organ, derived in part from both the
renal cortex alternating with the pars convoluta and
endometrium and the chorion.
consisting of collecting tubules and the straight por-
Placentome: A structure formed from a cotyledon (clump
tions of nephrons.
of chorionic villi) and caruncle (elevation of the endo-
Pars tuberalis: The part of the pituitary gland that forms
 metrium) of a cotyledonary placenta.
a collar around the infundibular stalk; derived from
Planum: The flat surface of skin located between the
Rathke's pouch.
external nares.
Pecten: A thin, vascular pleated membrane that pro-
The acellular fluid portion of circulating
Plasma:
trudes from the ventral surface of the chicken's eye into
blood.
the cavity of the vitreous body.
Plasma cell: A derivative of the B cell that synthesizes
Pectinate ligament (uveal meshwork): A loose network of
immunoglobulins.
elastic fibers, covered by squamous cells, that spans the
Platelet: A fragment of membrane-bound cytoplasm,
filtration angle of the eye.
derived by budding from a megakaryocyte, with an
Penicillus: Term applied to the pulp arteries of the spleen
 important role in blood clotting.
and their branches because, collectively, they resemble
Plexus: A localized network of any of the following:
the bristles of an artist's brush.
neurons and their processes, blood vessels, or lym-
Penis, body of: Shaft of the intromittent organ of the
phatic vessels.
male.
Plica: A fold
Penis, glans of: The expanded terminal end of the
Podocyte: A highly branched cell whose processes inter-
penis.
digitate with those of other_podocytes to form the
Periarterial lymphatic sheath: The white pulp of the
glomerular epithelium of the Bowman's capsule of the
spleen.
kidney.
Pericardium: The visceral and parietal serosa of the peri-
Polychromatophilic erythroblast:  An erythroblast of
cardial cavity.
medium size with cytoplasm exhibiting both baso-
Perichondrium: The chondrogenic, dense irregular con-
philic and acidophilic areas.
nective tissue covering of hyaline or elastic cartilage.
Polymorphonuclear leukocyte: A granulocyte with a seg-
Perilymph: The fluid found in the bony labyrinth of the
mented nucleus.
inner ear surrounding the membranous labyrinth.
 Portal tract (area): An aggregation of blood vessels (and
Perimetrium: The serosa of the uterus.
sometimes lymphatic vessels) and a bile ductule within
Perimysium: The connective tissue surrounding a fascicle
the interlobular connective tissue of the liver.
of muscle cells.
Postcapillary venule: A venule, of the deep cortex of a
Perineurium: The connective tissue surrounding a bundle
lymph node, whose endothelial cells are cuboidal.
of nerve cell fibers (axons, dendrites, or both).
Posterior chamber (of the eye): The cavity, containing
Perinuclear halo: A lightly stained area of cytoplasm
aqueous humor, that is located between the iris and
separating the nuclear surface from the remainder of
the lens.
the cytoplasm in some small lymphocytes.
 Posterior epithelium (of the cornea): The simple cuboidal
Periople: The proximal border of the horse's hoof.
 or squamous epithelium covering the side of the cornea
Periosteum: The osteogenic, dense irregular connective
in contact with the aqueous humor.
tissue that covers portions of many bones.
Preantral follicle: A growing ovarian follicle that has not
Peritoneum: The serosa lining a coelomic cavity.
yet formed an antrum.
Perivitelline membrane: The membrane abutting the cell
Predentin: Uncalcified dentin.
membrane of the oocyte of a chicken's ovarian
Prepuce: The foreskin of the penis.
follicle.
Primary bronchus: A large bronchus branching directly
Pessullus: A small bone supporting the syrinx of a chicken.
from the trachea.
Peyer's patch: An aggregation of lymphatic tissue (nodular
Primary follicle: An ovarian follicle whose oocyte is sur-
and diffuse) in the lamina propria and submucosa of
rounded by a single layer of cuboidal cells. The term
the small intestine, especially the ileum.
is also used, by some authors, for a multilaminar
Photosensitive retina: The portion of the retina contain-
follicle.
ing light-sensitive rod and cone cells.
Primary hair: A large hair shaft produced by a compound
Pia mater:
 The delicate, well vascularized meninx in
follicle.
contact with the surface of the brain.
Primary spermatocyte: A diploid cell formed by differen-
Pigment epithelium: The pigmented layer of cells forming
tiation from a spermatogonium.
the outermost boundary of the retina.
Primordial follicle: The earliest, smallest, and most
Pineal gland: A dorsal evagination from the roof of the
numerous of ovarian follicles; consists of an oocyte
diencephalon of the brain.
surrounded by a layer of flat follicle cells.
Pinealocytes: The epithelioid, acidophilic, parenchymal
Principal cell (chief cell): A parenchymal cell of the para-
cells of the pineal gland.
thyroid gland. The name is also used for the small,
Pinna (auricle): The sound-collecting auricular append-
basophilic cell of the glandular stomach that secretes
age of the head.
pepsinogen.
Pituicytes: Neuroglial cells located among the neuronal
Proctodeum: That part of the chicken's cloaca that joins
fbers of the pars nervosa of the pituitary gland.
 the large intestine.
GLOSSARY
303
Proerythrocyte (rubriblast): A large, round cell of the
Respiratory bronchiole: A bronchiole with scattered
erythroid line with basophilic cytoplasm and a large
alveoli within its walls and positioned between a ter-
round nucleus.
minal bronchiole and an alveolar duct.
Proestrus: The first stage of the estrous cycle; character-
Rete ovari: Channels, lined by cuboidal cells, located
ized by growth of the endometrium.
within the medulla of the ovaries of carnivores and
Promyelocyte: An early granulocyte, recognized by
a
ruminants.
large nucleus with nucleoli and azurophilic cytoplas-
Rete testis: A network of channels located within the
mic granules.
loose connective tissue of the mediastinum testis.
 Proprioceptor: A sensory receptor, mainly in skeletal
Reticular fber: A thin, argyrophilic, collagenous fiber.
muscles, tendons, and joints, that responds to stimuli
Reticular {deep) layer of the dermis: The layer of the
arising within the body.
 dermis, consisting of dense irregular connective tissue,
Prostate gland: An accessory male reproductive gland
located below the papillary layer.
whose secretion contributes to the seminal fluid at
Reticular struicture: A diffuse form of Hassall's corpuscle
ejaculation.
in the thymus of the chicken, consisting of an irregular
Proventriculus: The glandular portion of the stomach of
mass of reticular cells, including degenerating ones, in
the chicken.
the medulla of lobules.
Proximal convoluted tubule: The long, highly convoluted
Reticular tissue: A special form of connective tissue
tubule of a nephron that arises from a renal corpuscle
 proper consisting of a feltwork of reticular fibers func-
and whose cells have a distinctive brush border.
tioning as a supportive framework for cells of the
Pseudostratified epithelium: An epithelium that appears
parenchyma. Among other locations, it is well repre-
to be stratified but is not. All of its cells are in contact
sented in the liver, spleen, and bone marrow.
with the basement membrane. Its stratified appearance
Reticulocyte: A newly produced erythrocyte.
is the result of its cells being of different heights and
Retina (photosensitive):
 The part of the retinal tunic of
their nuclei being located at different levels.
the eye containing light-sensitive rod and cone cells.
Pulp artery: An artery within the red pulp of the spleen
Retinal tunic: The innermost layer of the wall of the eye,
that arises from the central artery of the periarterial
consisting of the photosensitive retina, pars ciliaris
lymphatic sheath.
retinae, and pars iridica retinae.
Pupil: The opening in the center of the iris.
Romanovsky stain: A compound dye substance used for
Purkinje cell: A large, modified cardiac muscle cell that
 staining the various different cells of the blood and
forms a part of the heart's conduction system.
. The
bone marrow.
word also identifies the large multipolar nerve cells
Rouleau: An arrangement of erythrocytes, in a smear
present in the cerebellum at the junction of the granu-
 preparation, resembling a stack of discs or coins.
lar and molecular layers.
Rumen: The largest subdivision of the forestomach of
Pyknotic cell: A cell with a shrunken, basophilic nucleus
ruminants.
or a cell that has become reduced in size.
Saccule (sacculus): A part of the membranous labyrinth
Pyloric gland region: The terminal glandular region of the
within the vestibule of the inner ear; contains a macula
stomach, characterized by deep gastric pits and mucous 
whose sensory cells, when stimulated, make an animal
glands with some parietal cells.
aware of the position of its head in space and the
Pyramidal cell: A nerve cell having the shape of a pyramid,
sensations of linear acceleration and deceleration.
 as found in the cerebral cortex.
Sarcolemma:
 The plasmalemma (cell membrane) of a
Quill: The hard basal portion of a feather.
muscle cell.
Rachis: The part of the central shaft of a contour feather
Sarcomere: The unit of contraction of a skeletal or cardiac
bearing the vanes.
muscle myofbril; every sarcomere of a myofbril is
Rathke's pouch: An ectodermal diverticulum from the
located between adjacent Z lines.
roof of the oral cavity of an embryo.
Sarcoplasm: The cytoplasm of a muscle cell.
Red pulp: The portion of the parenchyma of the spleen
Satellite cell: A neuroglia cell in close proximity to the
other than the white pulp; characterized by the abun-
cell body of a neuron. Also, a cell with mesenchymal
dance of erythrocytes.
properties found intimately associated with skeletal
Reissner's membrane (vestibular membrane): The upper
muscle cells.
wall of the scala media of the inner ear separating it
Scala _tympani:
A
chamber of the inner ear, filled
from the scala vestibuli.
with perilymph, lying below the floor of the cochlear
Renal corpuscle: A component of the nephron consisting
duct.
 of Bowman's capsule and the glomerulus.
Scala vestibuli: A chamber of the inner ear flled with
Renal cortex: The outer part of the kidney, identified by
 perilymph, lying above the roof (vestibular membrane)
the presence of numerous renal corpuscles.
of the cochlear duct.
Renal medulla: The region of the kidney internal to the
Schiff's reagent: A colorless fuchsin sulfurous acid
cortex and dominated by loops of Henle, collecting
(leucofuchsin)  solution.  Leucofuchsin  is used  in
tubules, and vasa rectae.
the periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) reaction for demonstrat-
Renal papilla: The tip of a renal pyramid.
ing the presence of complex carbohydrates, e.g..
Renal pelvis: The expanded end of the ureter located
 glycogen, starch, cellulose, and proteoglycans, among
within the hilus of the kidney.
others.
304
GLOSSARY
Schwann cell: A cell of the peripheral nervous system
Shell gland: That portion of the oviduct of the chicken
 closely associated with neuronal processes and respon-
whose secretion produces the egg shell; the shell gland
sible for forming the neurilemma.
is also called the uterus.
Sclera: A part of the outermost tunic of the eye, consisting
Simple epithelium: An epithelium consisting of a single
of dense irregular connective tissue.
layer of cells, all of which are attached to the basement
Scleral cartilage: A cup-shaped layer of cartilage within
membrane.
the sclera of the eye of the chicken.
Sinus hair: A tactile hair, limited to the facial region, that
Scleral ossicle: A plate of bone, located anterior to the
 originates from a highly innervated follicle containing
scleral cartilage, within the sclera of the eye of the
a large blood-filled sinus.
chicken.
Sinus pad: In the sinus hair follicle of the dog, the sinus
Scleral trabecular meshwork: A webwork of elastic and
pad is a thickening of the inner connective tissue sheath
collagenous fibers, within the filtration angle of the eye
of the follicle that protrudes into the upper portion of
 of the chicken, whose spaces are continuous with the
the blood-filled sinus.
 spaces of Fontana of the uveal meshwork (pectinate
 Sinusal spleen: A spleen whose red pulp is characterized
ligament).
by numerous, blood-filled sinuses.
Scleral venous plexus: A system of channels that drain
Sinusoid: A thin-walled blood vessel with the character-
excess aqueous humor away from the eye.
istics of a capillary but having a larger and more irreg-
Scute: A large scale covered by keratin.
ular diameter.
Sebaceous gland: A holocrine gland of the skin that pro-
Small artery: Arbitrarily, an artery with up to eight or
duces an oily secretion.
nine layers of smooth muscle cels in the tunica media.
Sebaceous zone: The sebaceous region of the uropygial
The smallest of the small arteries is called an
gland of the chicken.
arteriole.
Secondary follicle: An ovarian follicle of the mammal
Smegma: The soft, cheesy deposit of desquamated epithe-
with a C-shaped antrum
lial cells and glandular secretions found on the glans
Secondary spermatocyte: The stage of spermatogenesis
and prepuce of the penis; it is also found in the urethral
pouch of the stallion.
Secretory duct: See striated duct.
Smudged cell: A ruptured, or otherwise distorted, leuko-
Semicircular canals: Tubular cavities within the temporal
cyte found in a blood or bone marrow smear.
bone of the skull forming a subdivision of the bony
Soft keratin: A form of keratin, found in such places as
labyrinth of the inner ear. They contain the semicircu-
the stratum corneum, that has fewer disulfide bonds
lar ducts of the membranous labyrinth.
and less cystine than hard keratin.
Seminal vesicle: An accessory reproductive gland that
Spaces of Fontana: Cavities filled with aqueous humor
 contributes to the seminal fluid at ejaculation.
within the trabecular meshworks of the eye.
Seminiferous tubule: A highly convoluted tubule within
Specifc granules: Granules within the cytoplasm of a
the testis where spermatogenesis occurs.
granulocyte that characterize the cell, e.g., eosinophilic
Sensory cell: A neuron that conveys sensory information 
 granules of an eosinophil.
to the central nervous system.
Sperm-host gland: Tubular glands of the vagina of the
Sensory hair cells (ear): Cells, with stereocilia on their
oviduct of the chicken that serve as storage depots for
apical surfaces, that will initiate an impulse to the
deposited sperm.
brain for interpretation when stimulated; found in the
Spermatid: The haploid cell following the secondary sper-
organ
of
Corti,
sacculus, utricle, and crista
matocyte during spermatogenesis.
ampullaris.
Spermatogenic cell: Any precursor of a spermatozoon
Serosa: The lining membrane of the coelom in all its
found within the seminiferous epithelium.
subdivisions; consists of a mesothelium and layer of
underlying connective tissue.
of the seminiferous epithelium
Serous demilune: A crescent-shaped cap, as seen in histo-
Sphincter (iris): The circumferentially arranged smooth
logic section, of serous cells on the surface of a mucous
muscle of the iris that enables pupillary constriction.
acinus.
Spicule: A small, frequently irregularly shaped piece of
Serouis membrane: A synonym for serosa.
bone.
Sertoli cell: A large, multifunctional cell, forming part of
Spiral ganglion: The auditory ganglion associated with
the epithelium of the wall of a seminiferous tubule.
the modiolus of the cochlea.
Serum: The acellular fluid part of blood obtained follow-
Spiral ligament: A thickening of the periosteal lining of
 ing coagulation.
the cochlear canal.
Sex cord: A convoluted cord of cells, within the testis of
 Spiral limbus: An elevation of connective tissue resting
 an embryo or young animal, whose cells will differenti-
on the osseous spiral lamina of the cochlea.
ate into stem cells.
Spiral tunnel: The space below the tectorial membrane of
Sharpey's fbers: Collagenous fibers that anchor the peri-
the inner ear.
osteum to bone or a tendon to bone.
Spleen: A major lymphatic and blood-filtering organ.
Sheathed artery: A vessel of the white pulp of the spleen
Spongy bone (cancellous bone): An architectural form of
 of the chicken that is surrounded by a ring of reticular
bone consisting of a three-dimensional meshwork of
cells.
 bony trabeculae containing numerous marrow spaces.
GLOSSARY
305
Spur: A sharp, horny process on each leg of various birds.
Striated duct: An intralobular duct of a salivary gland
Stapes: The middle ear ossicle attached to the oval
whose epithelial cells have vertical stripes (invagina-
window in the petrous portion of the temporal
tions of the plasma membrane) along their basal ends.
bone.
Stroma (corneal): The predominant layer of the cornea;
Stellate reticulum: A portion of the enamel organ of a
also called the substantia propria. It consists of lamel-
developing tooth characterized by star-shaped cells.
lae of collagenous fibers oriented parallel to the corneal
Stereocilia: Very long, nonmotile, flexible cell surface pro-
surface.
jections on the apices of certain cells, e.g., on the
Subarachnoid space: A space, flled with cerebrospinal
epithelial cells lining portions of the duct of the epi-
fluid, located between the arachnoid layer and pia
didymis and on the sensory hair cells of the inner ear;
 mater of the brain and spinal cord.
referred to as long microvilli.
Subcapsular sinus: The space, flled with lymph, beneath
Straight tubule: A tubule that connects a seminiferous
the capsule of a lymph node.
tubule with the rete testis.
Subcutis (subcutaneous connective tissue): The layer of
Stratifed epithelium: An epithelium consisting of two or
loose connective tissue deep to the skin.
more layers of cells with only the basal layer being in
Submucosa: 7
The layer of connective tissue beneath a
contact with the basement membrane.
mucous membrane.
Stratum basale: The layer of cells in contact with the
Sulcus (chicken proventriculus): A depression between
basement membrane of the epidermis.
folds of the mucosa of the proventriculus.
Stratum cavernosum: The erectile tissue of the pelvic
Superficial cell: Similar in size and shape to a superficial
urethra.
intermediate cell of a vaginal smear, but with a pyk-
Stratum compactum: A thick layer of collagenous fibers
notic nucleus, faded nucleus, or no nucleus.
located between the base of the glands and the mus-
Superficial gland of the nictitating membrane: Depending
cularis mucosae of the glandular stomach of the cat
on the type of animal, a serous, mucous, or mixed
and some dogs.
 gland surrounding the base of the cartilage supporting
Stratum corneum: The outermost, keratinized layer of the
the membrane.
epidermis.
Superficial intermediate cell: A large, vaginal, epithelial
Stratum germinativum: The layers of the epidermis below
cell with angular edges and a round nucleus found in
the stratum corneum of the chicken, i.e., the basal,
vaginal smears.
intermediate, and transitional layers. In mammals,
Surface mucous cells: Cells whose apical ends contain
stratum germinativum is a term sometimes employed
mucigen and form the epithelium of the glandular
to include both the stratum basale and the stratum
stomach of mammals. The mucus they secrete protects
spinosum.
the epithelial surface from abrasion and the acidity of
Stratum granulosum: The layer of cells below the stratum
the stomach content.
corneum
 whose cytoplasm contains keratohyalin
Sweat gland: A tubular or saclike gland of the skin; may
granules.
 be either apocrine or merocrine.
Stratum intermedium: The layer of cells located between
Syndesmochorial placenta: The type of placenta of ewes
 ameloblasts and the stellate reticulum of a developing
and nanny goats where five layers of tissue separate
tooth.
maternal from fetal blood.
Stratum lucidum: The layer of pale epidermal cells located
Synovial fuid: The clear lubricating fluid within the
 between the stratum corneum and stratum granulosum
synovial cavity of a synovial joint.
of thick skin.
Syntrophoblast:
The
syncytial
outer layer of the
Stratum medium: The major portion of the wall of the
trophoblast.
horse's hoof, consisting of tubular and intertubular
Syrinx: The voice box of the chicken, located where the
horn that extends from the coronary region to the
trachea bifurcates into two bronchi.
surface of the ground.
Taenia ceci: Flat bands of smooth muscle and elastic
Stratum spinosum: The layer of the epidermis directly
fbers within the cecum of horses and pigs.
above the stratum basale. It is characterized by cells
Taenia coli: Flat bands of smooth muscle and elastic
whose membranes have shrunken in all places except
fbers within the colon of horses and pigs.
where desmosomes occur, giving the cells the appear-
Tail of the epididymis: The end of the epididymis that
ance of having spines.
joins with the vas deferens.
Stratum vasculare: The richly vascularized and well
Tapetum lucidum: A fbrous or cellular reflective layer of
 innervated layer wedged between the inner circular
the choroid coat of the eye.
and outer longitudinal layers of the myometrium of
Tarsal glands: Large multilobular sebaceous glands
the bicornuate uterus of domestic mammals.
located within the tarsus (plate of dense connective
Stria vascularis: The stratified cuboidal epithelium of
tissue) of the palpebral conjunctiva.
the side of the cochlear duct that is attached to
Tarsus: A plate of dense connective tissue within the
the spiral ligament of the cochlear canal. Capillaries
eyelid. It is located between the dermis of the skin and
 occur among the superficial cuboidal cells of the
the lamina propria of the palpebral conjunctiva.
stria.
Taste bud: A multicellular, barrel-shaped structure, con-
Striated border: The border of apical microvilli of intes-
 sisting of sensory and supportive cells and located
tinal epithelial cells as seen in profle view.
within various parts of the epithelium of the tongue.
306
GLOSSARY
Taste pore: A tiny opening at the tip of a taste bud.
nal epithelium of the ovary or the layer surrounding
Teat canal: A channel, lined by stratified squamous epi-
the testis.
thelium, that opens onto the tip of a teat.
Tunica intima: The innermost tunic of the wall of a blood
Teat sinus: A channel, lined by a bistratified epithelium,
vessel.
that opens into a teat canal.
Tunica media: The middle, muscle layer of the wall of a
Tectorial membrane: A proteinaceous membrane that
blood vessel.
overlies and contacts the stereocilia of the sensory cells
Tunica vaginalis: The serosa of the testis and the
of the organ of Corti of the inner ear.
epididymis.
Tegmentum vasculosum: A vascularized membrane sepa-
Iympanic cavity: The cavity containing the middle ear
rating the cochlear duct from the overlying scala ves-
ossicles; also called the cavity of the middle ear.
tibuli of the inner ear of the chicken.
Iympanic membrane (eardrum): The membrane between
Tendon: A bundle or band of dense regular connective
the external auditory meatus and the tympanic cavity
tissue connecting a muscle to a bone.
(cavity of the middle ear).
Tendon sheath: A layer of cells and fibers of connective
Type I alveolar cells: Simple squamous epithelial cells that
tissue on the surface of a tendon.
line the alveoli of the lungs and form part of the alveo-
Territorial matrix: The matrix, rich in sulfated glycosami-
lar septa.
 noglycans, immediately surrounding a chondrocyte(s)
Type II alveolar cell: A cell present in the alveolar lining
of hyaline cartilage.
of the mammalian lung that produces surfactant.
Tertiary follicle: The large ovarian follicle just prior to
Surfactant reduces surface tension.
ovulation; also called a Graafian follicle.
Type I cell (of the macula): A chalice-shaped sensory cell 
Theca externa: The outer (connective tissue) layer of the
of the epithelium of the macula of a sacculus.
wall of a mammalian ovarian follicle.
Unilocular adipocyte: An adipocyte (fat cell) containing
Theca folliculi: A sheath of stromal cells, surrounding a
 a single, very large, lipid-filled vacuole.
 growing, mammalian ovarian follicle, that will differ-
Unipolar neuron: .
A nerve cell with two
processes
entiate into a theca externa and theca interna.
that arise from a single site on the surface of the nerve
Theca interna: The inner cellular and well vascularized
cell.
layer of the wall of a mammalian ovarian follicle.
Urachus: The portion of the reduced allantoic stalk
Theca lutein cell: A small lutein cell of a corpus luteum
between the apex of the bladder and the umbilicus
derived from a cell of the theca interna.
(belly button).
Thick skin: Hairless skin with an epidermis that is many
Ureter: The tube extending from the renal pelvis to the
cells thick, e.g., skin of a digital pad or of the planum
urinary bladder.
nasolabiale.
 Urethra: The tube extending from the urinary bladder to
Thin skin: Skin with an epidermis that is only a few cells
the exterior.
thick, e.g., skin of the trunk or of the legs among other
Urethral proces: An extension of the urethra beyond the
places.
 penis as in the stallion and ruminants.
Thrombocyte: A blood cell of the chicken with a role in
Urinary space: The cavity between the capsular epithe-
blood clot formation. Also, incorrectly used as a
lium and the glomerular epithelium of a renal
 synonym for a platelet of mammals.
corpuscle.
Thyroid follicle: A vesicle of the thyroid gland, formed
Urodeum: The portion of the cloaca of a chicken into
of a simple epithelium, that contains the storage form
which urinary wastes are deposited.
of thyroxin called thyroglobulin.
Uropygial gland (preen gland): A holocrine gland that
Tomial edge of beak: The cutting edge of a bird's beak
asp pei si pe oas ao e sd
Tonsil: A lymphatic organ found below the epithelium of
within the base of the tail of the chicken.
the pharynx. It is composed of lymphatic nodules and
 Uterine gland: A simple, tubular gland within the endo-
diffuse lymphatic tissue.
metrium of the uterus.
Trabecula: A part of the framework of connective tissue
Utricle {utriculus): Function same as for saccule.
 of an organ or structure, e.g., a bundle of fibers of the
Uveal trabecular meshwork: One of three meshworks of
splenic stroma or any of the irregularly shaped pieces
 connective tissue, within the fltration angle of the eye,
of bone that form part of the three-dimensional lat-
whose cavities are filled with aqueous humor.
ticework of spongy bone.
Vacuolar cell: A cell of the cortex of the chicken ovary
Transitional epithelium: An epithelium, limited to the
containing numerous fat vacuoles and a pyknotic
urinary system,
, whose appearance depends
onthe
 nucleus. Collections of these cells may represent the
 amount of fluid pressure applied against it.
remnants of a postovulatory follicle.
Trophoblast:
 The mesectodermal  layer covering
the
Vagina (of the chicken oviduct): The 
 segment of the
blastocyst.
 oviduct that opens into the urodeum of the cloaca.
Tubuloacinar
gland: A gland
whose secretory units
Valve: A leaflet of connective tissue, covered by endothe-
consist of tubules and acini.
lial cells, that assures fluid flow in one direction, as in
Tunica adventitia:
: The outermost layer of connective
the heart, veins, and lymphatic vessels.
tissue of a blood vessel.
Vane (of a feather): The most prominent feature of a
Tunica albuginia: A layer of dense connective tissue sur-
contour feather. It is formed of barbs and interlocking
 rounding a structure, e.g., the layer beneath the germi-
barbules positioned on opposite sides of the rachis.
GLOSSARY
307
Vas deferens: The sperm duct that extends from the testis
White pulp: The scattered but numerous concentrations
to the urethra.
of diffuse and nodular lymphatic tissue found through-
Vasa vasorum: Blood vessels within the wall of a blood
out the red pulp of the spleen.
vessel.
X.s.: Cross section.
Vasa recta: :
 Straight, thin-walled, large-diameter blood
Z band (line): The boundary between adjacent sarco-
vessels located within the medulla of the kidney.
meres of a myofbril; structurally, it represents the
Vascular tunic {uvea): The middle layer of the wall of the
point at which the actin flaments of adjacent sarco-
eye.
meres are in contact with the Z flament.
Vascular layer (of choroid): The portion of the choroid
Zona fasciculata: The thickest portion of the adrenal
layer of the eye that contains numerous blood vessels.
cortex; located between the zona glomerulosa or zona
Ventral root: The motor portion of a spinal nerve that
intermedia and the zona reticularis.
arises from the ventrolateral part of the spinal cord.
Zona glomerulosa (zona multiformis): The outermost
Venule: A small, thin-walled vein.
portion of the adrenal cortex.
Vestibular membrane: A thin, epithelial membrane sepa-
 j a jo ud   e
rating the cochlear duct from the scala vestibuli of the
located between the zona glomerulosa and the zona
inner ear.
fasciculata.
Vestibule: An entrance chamber, e.g., of the nose or vulva.
Zona pellucida: An acidophilic membrane separating an
Vestibule of the inner ear: A central cavity within the
oocyte from the cumulus oophorus.
temporal bone of the skull forming a subdivision of
Zona reticularis: The innermost portion of the adrenal
the bony labyrinth of the inner ear. It contains the
cortex located between the zona fasciculata and the
saccule and utricle of the membranous labyrinth.
adrenal medulla.
Villus: A finger-shaped process, e.g., intestinal villus.
Zonary placenta: A placenta, found in carnivores, that is
Visceral pleura:
：The
 serous membrane covering the
wrapped around the chorionic sac in the manner of a
surface of the lung.
cummerbund.
Vocal ligament: A band of elastic fibers enclosed in a fold
 Zone of calcification: The portion of the epiphyseal disc
of a mucous membrane.
where the cartilage matrix becomes infiltrated by
Volkmann canal: In the diaphysis of a long bone, any
calcium salts.
transverse channel connecting two Haversian canals or
Zone of hypertrophy: The portion of an epiphyseal disc
piercing the shaft of the bone.
where the chondrocytes become enlarged.
Vulva: The external genitalia of the female mammal; it
Zone  of  multiplication 
(proliferation):
 The
portion
includes the vestibule, labia, and clitoris.
of
 an epiphyseal
1  disc  where  chondrocytes  are
Wall (of hoof): The part of the hoof that is visible when
duplicated.
the digit is on the ground.
Zone of ossification: The portion of an epiphyseal disc
Wattle: A fleshy appendage of the skin as in the throat
where cartilage is being replaced by bone.
region of the neck of a chicken, goat, or pig.
 Zone of reserve cartilage: The portion of an epiphyseal
White line: The junction, at the surface of the ground, of
disc that is attached to the bone of the epiphysis.
the wall and sole of the horse's hoof.
Zonular fbers (suspensory ligaments): Collagenous sus-
White matter: The part of the brain or spinal cord con-
 pensory fibers that extend from the capsule of the lens
 taining numerous myelinated neuronaf processes.
to the ciliary processes.
308
GLOSSARY
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adam, W.s., Calhoun, M.l., Smith, E.M., and Stinson, A.W.: Microscopic
Hammersen, F: Sabotta/Hammersen. Histology. A Color Atlas of Microscopic
Anatomy of the Dog: A Photographic Atlas. Springheld, IL, Charles C.
Anatomy. 3rd Ed. Baltimore, Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1985.
Thomas, 1970.
Hamre, C.J.: Origin and diffrentiation of heterophil, eosinophil and basophil
Amann, R.P, Johnson, L., and Pickert, B.W.: Connection between the seminifer
Ieukocytes of chickens. Anar. Rec., 112:339, 1952.
ous rubules and the efferent ducts in the stallion. Am. J. Vet. Res., 38:1571,
Hodges, R.D.: The Histology of the Fowl. New York, Academic Press, 1974.
1977.
Humason, G.L.: Animal Tissue Technique. 4th Ed. San Francisco, W.H. Freeman 
Amoroso, E.C.: Histology of the placenta. Br. Med. Bull., 17:81, 1961.
and Co, 1979.
Arey, L.B.: Human Histology. 4th Ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1974.
Huntley, J.F: Mast cells and basophils: A review of their heterogeniety and func-
Banks, W.J.: Applied Veterinary Histology. Znd Ed. Batimore, williams &
tion. J. Comp. Path., 107:349, 1992.
wilkins, 1986.
Bjorkman, N.H.: Fine structure of the fetal-maternal area of exchange in the
1986.
epitheliochorial and endotheliochorial type of placentation. Acta Anat.,
Junqueira, L.C., and Carneiro,J: Basic Histology Znd Ed. Los Alros, CA, Lange
86(Suppl. 1):1, 1973.
Medical Publications, 1980.
Bloom, W., and Fawcert, D.W.: A Textbook of Histology. 10th Ed. Philadelphia,
Kelly, D.E., Wood, R.L., and Enders, A.C.: Bailey's Textbook of Microscopic
W.B. Saunders, 1975.
Anatomy. 18th Ed. Baltimore, williams & wilkins, 1984.
Borror, D.J.: Dictionary of Word Roots and Combining Forms. Mountain View,
Lawson, D.D., Nixon, G.s., Noble, H.W., and Weipers, W.L.: Dental anatomy
California, Mayfeld Publishing Co., 1960.
and histology of the dog. Res. Vet. Sci., I:201, 1960.
Calhoun, M.L.: The microscopic anatomy of the digestive tract of Gallus domes-
Leeson, T.s., and Leeson, C.R.: A Brief Atlas of Histology. Philadelphia, W.B.
ticus. Iowa Stare Coll J. Sci., 7:261, 1933.
Saunders, 1979.
Cole, H.H., and Cupps, PT. (eds.): Reproduction in Domestic Animals. Vol. 1.
Lewis, H.B., and Rebar, A.H.: Bone Marrow Evaluation in Veterinary Practice.
New York, Academic Press, 1959.
St. Louis, Ralston Purina, 1979.
Cole, H.H., and Cupps, PT. (eds.): Reproduction in Domestic Animals. New
Lindenmaier, P., and Kare, M.R.: The taste end-organs of the chicken. Poult. Sci.,
York, Academic Press, 1969.
38:545, 1959.
Czarnecki, C.M., and Hammer, R.F: Auto-tutorial Laboratory Guide. Micr-
Lucas, A.M., and Jamroz, C.: Atlas of Avian Hematology. Washington, D.C.,
oscopic Anatomy of Domestic Animals. St. Paul, MN, University of Minne-
United States Department of Agriculture, 1961.
sota, 1978.
Lucas, A.M., and Stertenheim, PR.: Avian Anatomy. Integument. Part I.
Dellmann, H.: Textbook of Veterinary Histology. 4th Ed. Philadelphia, Lea &.
Washington, D.C., United States Department of Agriculture, 1972.
Febiger, 1993.
Lucas, A.M., and Stettenheim, PR.: Avian Anatomy. Integument.
Part II.
Delly, J.G.: Photography Through the Microscope. 7th Ed. Rochestr, NY,
Washingron, D.C., United States Deparrment of Agriculture, 1972.
Eastman Kodak, 1980.
Melfi, R.C.: Permar's Oral Embryology and Microscopic Anaromy. 7th Ed.
Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1982.
VAN. 306). Ames, IA, Iowa State University, 1987.
Mescher, A.L.: Junqueira's Basic Histology Text and Atlas. 12th Ed. New York.
Di Fiore, M.S.H.: Atlas of Human Histology. Sth Ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger,
McGraw-Hill, 2010.
1981.
Murphy, C.J.: Raptor ophthalmology. Compend. Contin. Educ. Pract. Ver.,9:241,
 Elias, H.: Comparison of duodenal glands in domestic animals. Am. J. Ver. Res.,
1987.
8:311, 1947.
Natt, M.P, and Herrick, C.A.: Variation in the shape of the rodlike granules of
Evans, H.E., and Christensen, G.C.: Miller's Anaromy of the Dog. Znd Ed. Phila-
the chicken heterophil leukocyte and its possible signifcance. Poult. Sci.,
delphia, w.B. Saunders, 1979.
33:828, 1954.
Gartmer, L.P., and Hiatt, J.L.: Atlas of Histology. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins,
Nickel, R., Schummer, A., and Seiferle, E. (eds.): Anaromy of the Domestic Birds.
1987.
Translared by W.G. sillr and PA.L. Wight. New York, Springer-Verlag, 1977.
Geneser, F: Color Atlas of Histology. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1989.
Olson, PN., Behrendr, M.D., and Weiss, D.E.: Reproductive problems in thr
Gentle, M.J.: The lingual taste buds of Gallus Domesticus L. Br. Poult. Sci.,
bitch: Finding answers through vaginal cytology. Vet. Med., 82:344, 1987.
12:245, 1971.
Prince, J.H., Diesem, C.D., Eglitis, I., and Ruskell, G.L.: Anatomy and Histology
Getry, R.: Sisson and Grossman's The Anatomy of the Domestic Animals. Vol. 1.
of the Eye and Orbit in Domestic Animals. Springfeld, IL, Charles C. Thomas,
Sth Ed. Philadelphia, W.B. Saunders, 1975.
1960.
Ham, A.W., and Cormack, D.H.: Histology. Sth Ed. Philadelphia, J.B. Lippincott,
Rebar, A.H.: Handbook of Veterinary Cytology. St. Louis, Ralston Purina,
1979.
1980.
309
Reith, E.J., and Ross, M.H.: Atlas of Descriptive Histology. 3rd Ed. New York,
Stump, J.E.: Anatomy of the normal equine foot, including microscopic fearures
Harper & Row, 1977.
of the laminar region. J. Am. Vet. Med. Assoc., I 51:1588, 1967.
Rich, L.J.: The Morphology of Canine and Feline Blood Cells, Including Equine
Sturkie, P.D. (ed.): Avian Physiology. 3rd Ed. New York, Springer-Verlag,
References. St. Louis, Ralston Purina, 1976.
1976.
Ross, M.H., and Romrell, L.J.: Histology. 2nd Ed. Baltimore, Williams & Wilkins,
Telford, I.R., and Bridgman, C.F: Introduction to Functional Histology. Znd Ed.
1989.
New York, Harper and Collins, 1995.
Ross, M.H., Romrell, L.J., and Kaye, G.l.: Histology. A Text and Atlas. 3rd Ed.
Trautmann, A., and Fiebiger, J.: Fundamentals of the Histology of Domestic
Baltimore, williams & wilkins, 1995.
Animals. Translared and revised by R.E. Habel and E.L. Biberstein. Ithaca,
Samuel, C.A., Allen, WR., and Steven, D.H.: Studies on the equine placenta. I.
NY, Comstock, 1952.
Development of the microcotyledons. J. Reprod. Fertil., 41 :441, 1974.
Trautmann, A., and Fiebiger, J.: Fundamentals of the Histology of Domestic
Seely, J.C.: The harderian gland. Lab. Anim., 16:33, 1987.
Animals. Translared and revised by R.E. Habel and E.L. Biberstrin. Ithaca,
Shackleford, J.M., and Wilborn, W.H.: Ultrastructure of bovine parotid glands.
NY, Comstock, 1957.
J. Morphol., 127:453, 1969.
Webb, A.J., and Calhoun, M.L.: The microscopic anatomy of the skin of mongrel
Sloss, M.W.: The microscopic anatomy of the digestive tract of Sus scrofa domes-
dogs. Am. J. Ver. Res., 1 S:274, 1954.
tica. Am. J. Vet. Res., 1:578, 1954.
Weiss,L: Cell andTissurBiology,ATextbook of Hisology.6thEdBaltimort,
Smith, R.F: Microscopy and Phoromicrography. A Practical Guide. New York,
Munich, Urban & Schwarzenberg, 1988.
Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1982.
Weiss, L.: The red pulp of the spleen: Structural basis of blood How. Clin. Har-
Stedman, T.L.: Illustrated Stedman's Medical Dictionary. 24th Ed. Baltimore,
matol., 12:375, 1983.
Williams & wilkins, 1983.
Weiss, L., and Greep, R.O.: Histology. 4th Ed. New York, McGraw-Hill, 1977.
Strickland, J.H., and Calhoun, M.L.: The integumentary system of the cat. Am.
Wheater,PR.,Burkirt,H.G., and Daniels, V.G.:Functional Histology.A Text and
J. Vet. Res., 24:1018, 1963.
Colour Atlas. New York, Churchill Livingstone, 1987.
310
BIBUOGRAPHY
INDEX
Page numbers in italics denote figures.
A band, 62
Air capillary, 197, 209
A cell, 176, 177, 182
Air sac, 197
Abomasum, 160, 162
Air space, 133
Accessory glands, 226
Air vesicle (atrium), 197, 208, 209
Acidic (anionic) stains, 5
Albumen, 264
Acidophil, 212, 216,217, 222
Allantoic blood vessel,254,255,256,257,258
Acinar cell, 176
Allantoic epithelium, 254
Acinus, 176,177,182,278
Alpha cell. See Acidophil
Adenohypophysis, 211, 213
Alveolar bone, 143, 144
Adipocyte (adipose cell), 20, 24, 25, 165
Alveolar (type II) cell, 204
Adipose tissue
Alveolar duct, 203
cardiovascular system, 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 87
Alveolar sac, 203
connective tissue, 20, 21, 25
Alveolar septum, 204
digestive system, 145,148,151,153,154,160, 165,
Alveolus, 195,202,203, 204,205
169, 170
Ameloblast, 144
ear, 286
Amorphous ground substance, 19, 22, 27
endocrine system, 218, 223
Ampulla
female reproductive system, 250
ear, 284,288
integument, 117,118,135,136,138
female reproductive system, 244, 250
lymphatic system, 98, 103
male reproductive system, 226, 234
male reproductive system, 238
Anal canal, 140, 170, 172
nervous system, 72
Anal gland, 140, 170, 171
respiratory system, 199, 200, 201
Anal sac, 141, 170
urinary system, 189
Anastomotic artery, 83, 176
Adrenal cortex, 212
Anestrus, 244, 245,259,260
Adrenal gland, 212, 213, 220, 221, 223
Anionic (acidic) stains, 5
Adrenal medulla, 213
Annular ligament, 287, 288
Adventitia
Annular pad, 269, 279
digestive system, 139, 153, 154, 175
Annular sinus, 106, 119
female reproductive system, 259
Anterior chamber, 269, 271, 272, 276, 279
male reproductive system, 234
Anterior epithelium, 267, 274
tunica adventitia, 77,80,81,82,83,85,252
Antrum, 244, 247,248
urinary system, 191
Aorta, 83, 84, 85
Afferent arteriole, 188, 189
Aortic body, 86, 87
Agranulocyte, 42, 43
Apical cell, 265
311
Apocrine tubular gland, 106, 171
Basophilic band cell, 56
Arachnoid layer, 68
Basophilic erythroblast, 54, 55, 56
Areolar (loose) connective tissue
Basophilic myelocyte, 55, 56
defined, 20,22,23, 24
Basophilic substances, 5
digestive system, 145
Beta cell (basophil)
eye,281
blood, 42,43,44,45,46,47,52
male reproductive system, 232, 233
endocrine system, 212, 217, 222
Argyrophilic fiber, 20
Bifurcation, 63
Arrector pili muscle, 106, 114
Bile canaliculus, 141, 173
Arteriole
Bile duct, 173, 174
cardiovascular system, 77, 79, 80, 86, 87
 Binocular microscope, 8
connective tissue, 24
Binucleate hepatocyte, 174
digestive system, 155, 162
 Bipolar neurons, 65
lymphatic system, 90
Bistratified epithelium, 13, 17, 18
muscle, 60
bistratified columnar epithelium, 124, 125
Arteriovenous anastomoses, 78, 83
bistratifed cuboidal epithelium, 124, 125
Arteriovenous shunt, 75
Bitch. See Dog.
Artery, 39, 81, 87, 252
Blind spot, 269
Articular cartilage, 37, 287
Blood, 41-52
Articulating surface, 40
agranulocyte, 42, 43
Artifact (imperfections)
azurophilic granule, 42, 49
crackling artifiact, 10
basophil (beta cell), 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 52
defined, 9, 10
buffy coat, 45, 50
digestive system, 144, 148, 164
central pallor, 41
endocrine system, 219
chicken, 43, 51-52
eye, 274,280
crenated erythrocyte, 42
female reproductive system, 257
eosinophil, 42, 43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50, 51,52
nervous system, 73, 76
erythrocyte (red blood cell), 41, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47,
space artifact, 73,76, 148, 219,274, 280
48,49,50,51
Arytenoid cartilage, 199, 200
formed elements, 41
Astrocyte, 69
granulocyte, 42, 43, 51
Atresia, 244
heterophil, 43, 51, 52
Atretic follicle, 246, 262
leukocyte (white blood cell), 41, 42, 43, 44
Atrium, myocardium, 85
lymphocyte,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51
Atrium (air vesicle), 197, 208, 209
mammals, 41-43
Attachment epithelium, 144
monocyte, 42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49, 50, 51,52
Auerbach's plexus, 72, 167
neutrophi, 42,44, 45,46, 47,48, 49,50
Auricle (pinna), 29, 188, 283
plasma,41,44
Axial blood vessel, 132
platelet, 41,43,44,45,46, 47,49, 50
Axon, 65,73,74,76
polymorphonuclear leukocyte, 43
Axon hillock, 71
rouleaux, 42,45,47
Azurophilic granule, 42, 49, 55
serum, 41
smudged cell, 44, 45, 47, 52
B cell, 176, 177, 182
thrombocyte, 43, 51
Band cell, 54, 55, 56
vacuole, 43, 51
Bar, hoof, 128, 129
word roots, 43
Barb, 107,132
Blood vessel
Barbule, 107, 133
allantoic blood vessel, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258
Basal cell
axial blood vessel, 132
digestive system, 179
cardiovascular system, 103
female reproductive system, 265
digestive system, 144, 151, 152
integument, 106,131,134,138
ear, 290
male reproductive system, 233, 234, 235
endocrine, 216
respiratory system, 198, 205, 206
eye,275,281
Basal striations, 149
female reproductive system, 253, 265
Basement (glassy) membrane, 11, 16, 106, 121
integument, 118,124,125,131
Basic (cationic) stain, 5
lymphatic system, 103
Basilar membrane, 284, 289, 290
maternal blood vessel, 255, 256, 257
Basophil (beta cell)
mesenteric blood vessel, 75
blood, 42,43,44,45,46,47, 52
nervous system, 67, 74
endocrine system, 212, 217, 222
Boar. See Pig
312
INDEX
Body of penis (corpus penis), 227, 238, 239
basophilic band cell, 56
Body of prostate gland, 226, 235
basophilic erythroblast, 54, 55, 56
Bone, 31-40
basophilic myelocyte, 55, 56
artery, 39
chicken, 54
articular cartilage, 37
eosinophil, 56
articulating surface, 40
eosinophilic band cell, 55
bone marrow, 35, 38
eosinophilic myelocyte, 55
bone matrix, 31,32,33,34,36,37,38,40
erythrocyte, 55, 56
calcifed cartilage, 34, 36, 37, 38
erythroid,53
canaliculi, 32, 38
granulocyte, 53
cartilage, 40
hematopoietic tissue, 53
circumferential lamellae, 32
heterophil, 56
compact bone, 32, 38, 39
mammals, 53
concentric lamellae, 32
megakaryocyte, 54, 55
distal interphalangeal joint, 40
metamyelocyte, 54
ear, 286
mitotic figure, 55
endochondral bone, 34
myeloblast, 54
endochondral (intracartilaginous) ossification, 32, 38
myelocyte, 54
endosteum, 31, 39
neutrophil, 56
epiphyseal disc, 32, 37
 neutrophilic band cell, 55, 56
extensor tendon, 40
neutrophilic metamyelocyte, 56
fbrous capsule, 40
orthochromatophilic erythroblast, 54, 55, 56
haversian canal, 32, 38, 39
osteoblast, 54, 55
haversian systems, 32, 38
osteoclast, 54, 55
hyaline cartilage, 34, 35
plasma cell, 55
immature bone, 32, 33
pluripotent stem cell, 53
integument, 130,131,135,137
polychromatophilic erythroblast, 54, 56
interstitial system, 38
proerythrocyte, 53
intramembranous ossification, 32, 33
promyelocyte, 54, 56
joint cavity, 40
reticulocyte, 54, 56
lacuna, 32, 33,38
smudged cell, 55
lamellae, 32
vascular sinusoid, 53
marrow cavity, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39
word roots, 54
mature bone, 32, 33
Bone matrix, 31, 32,33,34,36,37,38,40
megakaryocyte, 36, 39
Bony labyrinth, 284
nerve, 39
Bony tracheal ring, 206, 207
nervous system, 67, 76
Bowman's capsule, 184, 187, 188, 194
osteoblast, 31, 33,36,37,38
Bowman's gland, 198, 206
osteoclast,32,33,36,38
 Bowman's membrane, 267, 280
oste0cyte,32,33,36,37,38,39
Brain sand, 69
osteoid,32,33
Bridge, 270, 281
osteon, 32, 38
Bronchi, 195,202, 204
periosteum, 31, 34, 35,37
Bronchial cartilage, 208
periosteum of femur, 39
Bronchial rings, 207
respiratory system, 198, 209
Bronchial tree, 195, 196
Sharpey's fber, 39, 40
Bronchiole, 196, 202, 203, 204
sinusoid, 36, 38
Bruch's membrane, 268
spongy bone, 32, 33, 37
Bricke's muscle, 279
synovial fold, 40
Brinner's gland, 140, 162, 164, 166
tendon,39
Brush border, 183, 188
vein, 39
Buffy coat, 45, 50
Volkmann's canal, 32, 38, 39
Bulb, hoof, 128, 129
word roots, 32
Bulbar conjunctiva, 268, 269, 271, 272, 273, 274, 276,
zone of calcification, 36, 37, 38
279
zone of hypertrophy, 35, 36, 37, 38
Bulbourethral (Cowper's) gland, 226, 236
zone of multiplication, 35, 37, 38
Bursa of Fabricius, 91, 104
zone of ossification, 35, 36, 37, 38
zone of reverse cartilage, 35, 37
C (parafollicular) cell, 212, 218
Bone marrow, 35, 38, 53-56
Calamus (quill), 107, 133, 134
azurophilic granule, 55
Calcified cartilage, 34, 36, 37, 38
band cell, 54
CAM (chorioallantoic membrane), 244, 254, 256, 257
INDEX
313
Canal of Hering, 141
internal elastic membrane, 77, 80, 81, 82
Canal of Schlemm, 270, 279
lymph node, 87
Canaliculi, 32, 38
lymphatic vessel, 78, 87
Capillary.
macrophage, 79
air capillary, 197, 209
mast cell, 79
cardiovascular system, 77, 79
medium artery, 77, 81, 82
choriocapillary layer 268, 275, 276, 281
medium vein, 78, 82
digestive system, 155, 176,182
mesenchyme-like tissue, 85
ear, 290
myocardium, 78, 84, 85,86
eye,276,281
myofibrils, 86
integument, 107,118,120,134,135
neurons, 86
lymphatic system, 90, 100
pancreas, 81
nervous system, 69
parenchyma cell, 86
 postcapillary venule, 90, 97
pericardial cavity, 86
respiratory system, 197, 209
pericardium, 86
sheathed, 90
plasma, 80,87
sinus capillary, 107, 134, 135
plasma cell, 79
urinary system, 192
portal vein, 82
Capillary layer, 91, 104
pulmonary artery, 83, 84, 85
Capsule
pulmonic (semilunar) valve, 85
bone, 40
Purkinje cell, 86
Bowman's, 184, 187, 188, 194
renal artery, 82
endocrine system, 220, 221,222, 223
right auricle, 84
eye,269,279
skeletal muscle, 79, 80
lens,272
small artery, 77, 79, 80, 81
lens capsule, 272
small vein, 77, 79, 80
lymphatic system, 90, 94,95, 96, 98, 99, 100, 101
smooth muscle, 79, 84
male reproductive system, 235
sweat gland, 80
nervous system, 75
tunica adventitia, 77, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85
urinary system, 183, 186, 187
tunica intima, 77, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85
Capsule of Glisson, 141, 142, 174
tunica media, 77, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85
Cardiac gland, 157,158, 160
Type I cell, 87
Cardiac gland region, 140, 157, 158, 160
Type II cell, 87
Cardiac muscle, 57, 58, 64, 84
umbilical artery, 83
Cardiac skeleton, 78, 85, 86
uterine gland, 79
Cardiac sphincter, 158
valves, 78, 80, 82, 85, 87
Cardiovascular system, 77-87
vasa vasorum, 78,84
adipose tissue, 81, 82, 84, 85, 86, 87
vein, 81, 87
anastomotic artery, 83
vena cava, 84
aorta,83, 84,85
venule,77, 79, 80, 87
aortic body, 86, 87
word roots, 78
arteriole, 77, 79, 80, 86, 87
Carpal gland, 121
 arteriovenous anastomoses, 78, 83
Cartilage, 27-30
artery, 81,87
amorphous ground substance, 27
atrium, myocardium, 85
chondroblast, 27
capillary, 77, 79
chondrocyte, 27, 29, 30
cardiac muscle, 84
collagenous fiber, 27, 28, 30
cardiac skeleton, 78, 85, 86
elastic cartilage, 27, 29, 30
cecum, 87
elastic fber, 28, 29, 30
chondrocyte, 86
extracellular matrix, 27
collagenous fiber, 84
fbrocartilage, 27, 30
elastic fiber, 81, 84
hyaline cartilage, 27, 29
endocardium, 78, 84
integument, 130
endothelial cell, 79, 80
 interterritorial matrix, 27, 29
endothelium, 77, 87
isogenous groups, 27, 29
epicardium, 78
lacuna, 27, 29, 30
epithelioid cell, 83
perichondrium, 27, 29
erythrocyte, 79, 80, 81, 87
plate, 95
external elastic membrane, 81, 82
respiratory system, 198
glomus, 83
territorial matrix, 27, 29
heart, 78
word roots, 28
314
INDEX
Cartilage plate, 95
blood, 43, 51, 52
Cartilaginous frame, 290
bone, 38
Cartilaginous tracheal ring, 206, 207
bone marrow, 56
Caruncle, 244, 245, 253
cardiovascular system, 81, 87
Cat
cartilage, 30
blood,44,45
connective tissue, 22
bone, 37,38, 39
digestive system, 141-142, 177, 178, 179,180, 181,
bone marrow, 55, 56
182
cardiovascular system, 80, 81, 82, 86
ear, 284-285,290
cartilage, 29
endocrine system, 213-214, 221, 222, 223
connective tissue, 22
erythrocyte, average size, 9
digestive system, 146, 148, 153, 159, 161, 162, 164,
eye,269-270,279,280,281,282
165,167,168,170,171,173
female reproductive system, 246, 261, 262, 263, 264,
endocrine system, 215, 220
265
epithelium, 14, 16, 17, 18
integument, 132,133,134,135,136,137,138
eye,272,274
lymphatic system, 91, 103, 104
female reproductive system, 247, 251, 259, 260
male reproductive system, 227-228, 240, 241, 242
integument,108,112,114,122,123
nervous system, 75, 76
lymphatic system, 92, 93, 103
respiratory system, 196-197, 205, 206, 207, 208,
male reproductive system, 237
209
muscle, 59,61,63,64
urinary system, 184-185, 193, 194
nervous system, 69, 74, 75
Chief cell
respiratory system, 200,202, 203, 204, 205
digestive system, 140, 158,159,160,161,179
urinary system, 187, 191
endocrine system, 223
Cationic (basic) stain, 5
Chondrocyte, 27, 29, 30, 86
Caudal larynx (syrinx), 197, 207, 208
Chorioallantoic connective tissue, 255
Caudal region, 213
Chorioallantoic membrane (CAM), 244, 254, 256, 257
Cavernous space
Chorioallantoic villus, 256, 257, 258
female reproductive system, 259
Choriocapillary layer, 268, 275, 276, 281
male reproductive system, 227, 236, 237, 238,
Chorion laeve, 254, 256
239
Choroid, 268,270,271,274,275,281,282
Cavernous vein, 198
Choroid plexus, 69
Cavity of air sac, 209
Chromaffin cell, 221
Cavity of lens, 279
Chromophil, 212, 221
Cavity of Rathke's pouch, 212, 215, 216
Chromophobe, 2i2, 216, 217,221
Cavity of renal pelvis, 189, 190
Cilia
Cavity of vitreous humor, 269, 271, 279
endocrine system, 219
Cecal band, 169
female reproductive system, 250, 253, 258
Cecal tonsil, 103
male reproductive system, 241, 242
Cecum, 87,140,142, 168,169, 180
nervous system, 71
Cellular tapetum lucidum, 268, 276
stereocilia, 11, 233
Cementum, 144
Ciliary body, 268, 270, 272, 279,280
Centering slides, 5
Ciliary muscle,268,270,271,272
Central artery, 90, 99, 100
Central canal, 70, 71, 75
Ciliated cell, 222, 264
Central lacteal, 163, 167
Ciliated epithelium, 263
Central layer, 138
Ciliated pseudostratifed columnar epithelium, 16, 197
Central pallor, 41
Circular muscle, 251
Central vein
Circumanal gland, 141, 170, 171, 172
digestive system, 173, 174, 182
Circumferential lamellae, 32
urinary system, 184
Circumvallate papilla, 139, 147
Centroacinar cell, 176, 177
Classic lobule, 141
Cephalic region, 213
Claw, 126,137
Cerebellum, 67, 69, 222
Claw fold, 126
Cerebral cortex, 67
Clear cell, 121
Cerebrospinal fluid, 68
Clearing specimens, 3
Ceruminous gland, 286
Clitoris, 245
Cervix, 244, 258
Cloaca, 142, 181,262
Cheek, 143
Cochlea, 289, 290
Chestnut, 127
Cochlear canal, 284
Chicken
Cochlear duct, 284, 289
INDEX 
315
Cochlear nerve, 289, 290
lymphocyte, 20, 22,23,25
Collagenous band, 124
macrophage, 20, 24
Collagenous fiber
male reproductive system, 237, 238
cardiovascular system, 84
mast cell, 20, 22, 23
cartilage, 27,28, 30
mesenchyme tissue, 20, 22
connective tissue, 20, 22, 23, 24
mucous connective tissue, 20, 22
integument, 117
muscle, 19
Collecting duct, 194, 282
neutrophil, 20, 22
Collecting tubule, 184, 185, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191,
plasma cell, 20, 22, 23
194
reticular fber, 20, 25
Colloid, 218, 219,221
reticular tissue, 20, 25
Colon, 140, 169
Schiff's reagent, 20
Columella, 284
silver stains, 20
Columnar cell, 259, 260
tendon and tendon sheath, 24, 25
Columnar epithelium
urinary system, 187
bistratified, 124, 125
Weigert's resorcin fuchsin, 20
ciliated pseudostratifed columnar epithelium, 16, 197
word roots, 21
digestive system, 157,158, 160,161,167,172, 181
Connective tissue (band of), 155, 156
eye,277
Connective tissue (coat of), 151
female reproductive system, 250, 251, 263
Connective tissue (core of), 147, 148
male reproductive system, 232, 237
Connective tissue (lamina of), 209
 pseudostratifed columnar epithelium, 12, 13, 16,
Connective tissue (papilla of), 143, 145, 146, 147, 154,
196,263
158
respiratory system, 196,197,202, 208
 Connective tissue (partition of), 174
simple columnar epithelium, 158, 160, 161, 172, 181
Connective tissue (septum of), 176
stratified columnar epithelium, 12, 13, 18, 208, 237,
Connective tissue sheath, 106, 116, 118, 119
277
Connective-tissue (trabecula of), 238
types, 13,16
Constrictor (sphincter) muscle, 268, 271, 273, 279, 280
Comb, 107, 134, 135
Contour feather 107
Common follicular opening, 106, 114
Coprodeum, 181
Compact bone, 32, 38, 39
Cornea, 267,269,270,271,272,273,274,276,279,
Compound follicle, 106
280
Concentric lamellae, 32
Corneal stoma, 274
Cones, 275, 276, 281
Corneoscleral layer (fbrous tunic), 267, 269
Conical papilla, 148, 156
Corneoscleral trabecular meshwork, 268, 272, 273
Conjunctiva, 269
Corneous cell, 132
Connecting duct (excretory canal), 228, 240, 242
Corona, 89, 92
Connective tissue, 19-25. See also specific tissues
Corona radiata, 244, 247
adipocyte, 20, 24, 25
Coronary dermis, 128
adipose tissue, 20, 21, 25
Coronary epidermis, 128
amorphous ground substance, 19, 22
Coronary region of hoof, 128, 129, 130
argyrophilic fiber, 20
Corpora amylacea, 122, 123
 arteriole, 24
Corpora nigra (iris granule), 268
collagenous fber, 20, 22, 23, 24
Corpus albicans, 244, 248
 connective tissue proper, 19, 20
Corpus cavernosum, 227, 237, 238
dense connective tissue, 20
Corpus cavernosum clitoridis (erectile tissue), 245
 dense irregular connective tissue, 20, 24
 Corpus cavernosum urethra (corpus spongiosum), 227,
dense regular connective tissue, 20, 24
236, 237
ear, 288
Corpus luteum, 244, 247, 249
elastic fiber, 20, 22, 25
Corpus nigrum, 274
elastic tissue, 20, 21, 25
Corpus penis (body of penis), 227, 238, 239
embryonal connective tissue, 19
 (eqan nsouaae sndo) nsouods sndro
eosinophil, 20,22,23,24
236, 237
epithelium, 19, 22, 24
Cortex
erythroctye in capillary, 22
hair, 106, 116, 118
extracellular matrix, 19, 20
kidney, 183, 186, 188, 193,194
fbroblast, 19,20,22,23,24,25
lymph node, 90, 95, 96,97,101,102,104
globular leukocyte, 20, 23
Cortical cell, 223
integument, 123
Cortical labyrinth (pars convoluta), 183
loose (areolar) connective tissue, 20, 22, 23, 24
Cortical nephrons, 184
lymphatic system, 103
Cortical sinus, 94, 96
316
INDEX
Cortical stroma, 243
Dental lamina, 143
Cortical tissue, lymphatic system, 95
Dental pad, 145
Cortical tissue (interrenal), 213
Dental papilla, 143, 144
Cortical type, 184
Dental pulp, 144
Cotyledonary placenta, 244, 257
Dental sac, 143, 144
Covering membrane, 281
Dentin, 144
Coverslipping, 4
Dentinoenamel junction, 144
Cow
Dermal feather papilla, 107, 132, 135
blood, 47
Dermal lamina, 131
cartilage, 29
Dermal papilla, 106, 108, 110, 116, 127, 130, 132,
connective tissue, 22, 23, 24, 25
240
digestive system, 145,149,155,156, 161,166, 169,
Dermis
177
coronary, 128
endocrine system, 219, 220, 221
eye,282
epithelium, 15, 16
histology, 10
eye,278
integument,106,108,109,110,113,114,115,116,
female reproductive system, 248, 249, 250, 253, 257,
117,118,121,125,126,127,130,132,133,134,
258
135,136,137
integument,110,111,119,122,123,124,125,127
laminar, 128, 130, 131
lymphatic system, 94, 95, 96, 97, 100
male reproductive system, 237
nervous system, 71, 75
nervous system, 76
respiratory system, 201,202, 205
perioplic, 128, 130
urinary system, 190, 191, 192
Descemet's membrane, 267,273,274, 276, 280
Cowper's gland (bulbourethral), 226, 236
Diencephalon, 221
Crackling artifact, 10
Diestrus, 244,245,252,261
Crampton's muscle, 279
Diffuse lymphatic tissue
Crenated erythrocyte, 42
diffuse placenta, 244, 256, 257
Crista ampullaris, 284, 288
eye,277
Crop, 141, 178
lymphatic system, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98
Crypt, 94,256,257, 258
Digestive system, 139-182
Crypt of Lieberkihn
A cell, 176, 177, 182
digestive system, 140, 142, 162, 164, 165, 166, 167,
abomasum, 160, 162
168,169,170,171,172,180,181
acinar cell, 176
lymphatic system, 103
acinus, 176, 177,
182
Cryptal epithelium, 258
adipose cell, 165
Cuboidal epithelium
adipose tissue, 145,148, 151,153, 154,160, 165,
bistratified, 124
169,170
defined, 11, 13, 15
adventitia, 139, 153, 154, 175
female reproductive system, 251, 253
alveolar bone, 143, 144
male reproductive system, 232
ameloblast, 144
respiratory system, 203
anal canal, 140, 170, 172
Cumulus oophorus, 244, 247
anal gland, 140, 170, 171
Cupula, 288
anal sac, 141, 170
Cuticle, 116
anastomotic artery, 176
Cyst, 219,221
apocrine tubular gland, 171
Cystic duct, 176
arteriole, 155, 162
Cytoplasmic process, 276
artifact, 164
Cytotrophoblast, 255
attachment epithelium, 144
Auerbach's plexus, 167
Dark cell, 121, 159, 175, 176, 219,290
B cell, 176, 177, 182
Dark principal cell, 212
basal cell, 179
Dark zone, 140
basal striations, 149
Dartos muscle, 117
bile canaliculus, 141, 173
Deciduate, 244
bile duct, 173, 174
Deep cortex, 94, 97
binucleate hepatocyte, 174
Deep glandular layer, 254
blood vessel, 144, 151, 152
Dehydration, 3
Brinner's gland, 140, 162, 164, 166
Dendrite, 65, 67, 71
canal of Hering, 141
 Dense connective tissue, 20
capillary, 155, 176, 182
Dense irregular connective tissue, 20, 24
capsule of Glisson, 141, 142, 174
Dense regular connective tissue, 20, 24
cardiac gland, 157, 158, 160
INDEX 
317
Digestive system, Continued
gallbladder, 141, 142, 175
cardiac gland region, 140, 157, 158, 160
gastric furrow, 140, 162
cardiac sphincter, 158
gastric gland, 179
cecal band, 169
gastric pit (foveolae), 140, 158,159,160,161,162,179
cecum, 140,142, 168,169,180
gingiva,144
cementum, 144
gland cell, 178, 179
central lacteal, 163, 167
glands of the anal sac, 170, 171
central vein, 173, 174, 182
glandular stomach, 140
centroacinar cell, 176, 177
globular leukocyte, 161, 165, 167
cheek, 143
goblet cell, 140, 141, 151,163, 164, 167, 168, 169,
chicken, 141-142
170,172,174,175,176,177
chief cell, 140, 158, 159, 160, 161, 179
hair follicle, 143, 172
circumanal gland, 141, 170, 171, 172
hard palate, 145
circumvallate papilla, 139, 147
hepatic artery, 173
classic lobule, 141
hepatocyte, 141, 173, 174, 182
cloaca, 142, 181
hepatoid gland, 141
colon, 140, 169
Herbst corpuscle, 181
columnar epithelium, 157, 167
horn tubule-like structure, 145
conical papilla, 148, 156
hyaline cartilage, 177
connective tissue (band of), 155, 156
ileum, 140, 141, 168, 180
connective tissue (coat of), 151
intercalated duct, 141,149, 150, 151, 176, 177
connective tissue (core of), 147, 148
intercellular space, 178
connective tissue (papilla of), 143, 145, 146, 147,
interlobular connective tissue, 148, 149, 150, 151
154, 158
interlobular duct, 141, 148, 151, 176
 connective tissue (partition of), 174
intestinal absorptive cell, 163
 connective tissue (septum of), 176
intestinal lumen, 167
coprodeum, 181
intestine, 140, 141-142
crop,141,178
intralobular duct, 143, 148
crypt of Lieberkihn, 140, 142, 162, 164, 165, 166,
islet of Langerhans, 141, 176, 177
167,168,169,170,171,172,180,181
jejunum, 140, 141, 167, 168
cystic duct, 176
keratinized cell, 155
dark cell, 159, 175, 176
keratinized epidermis, 172
dark zone, 140
keratinized epithelium, 171
dental lamina, 143
keratinoid, 141, 179
dental pad, 145
Kupffer cell, 174
dental papilla, 143, 144
labial gland, 143
dental pulp, 144
lamina propria, 139,144,145,152,153,154, 155,
dental sac, 143, 144
156,157,158,159,160,161,162,163,165,167,
dentin, 144
168, 169,170, 172, 175, 178, 179
dentinoenamel junction, 144
lamina subglandularis, 140, 159, 161
duct, 143,147,151,152,153,164,177
large intestine, 140, 142, 180
duodenum, 140,141,162,163,164,165,166,180
light cell, 175, 176
elastic fber, 152, 157
light zone, 140, 158
enamel, 144
lingual salivary gland, 147, 148
enamel epithelium, 143, 144
lip,143
enamel space, 144
liver, 141, 142, 173,174,175,182
eosinophil, 167, 168
lobule, 148,173, 182
epidermis, 170
loose connective tissue, 145
epithelial cell, 160
lymphatic nodule, 158, 168, 169, 181
epithelium, 139, 144, 145, 151,175
lymphatic tissue, 180
erythrocyte, 182
lymphatic vessel, 155, 157, 173
esophageal gland, 158
lymphocyte, 161,163,165
esophagus, 140,141,152,153,154,157,158,178
lymphoglandular ridge, 181
external anal sphincter, 170, 171
mammals, 139-141
fber bundle, 144
margo plicatus, 158
filiform papilla, 139, 146, 148
Meissner's plexus, 167
foliate papilla, 139
mesothelium, 174
forestomach, 140
mitotic figure, 168
fundic gland, 158, 159, 160
mixed gland, 140, 145, 151,152, 153, 157
fundic gland region, 140, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161
mucosa, 139,159,160,165,166,168, 169,170,
fungiform papilla, 139, 146
171, 175
318
INDEX
mucous acinus, 143, 149, 150, 151, 175
spine, 146
mucous gland, 140,145,148,152,153,154,165,
spiral colon, 170
178
stellate reticulum, 143, 144
mucous neck cell, 159
stomach,140,141,158,159,161,163
mucous precursor, 160, 161
stratified squamous epithelium, 143, 145, 147, 148,
muscle, 148
151,152,153,154,155,156,157,158,171,172,
muscle band, 169
177,178,181
muscularis, 175, 176
stratum basale, 145
muscularis externa,139, 152,153, 154,155,156,
stratum compactum, 140, 159, 162, 167
157,159,160,161,162,164,165,166,167,168,
stratum corneum, 145
169,170,171,178,179,180
stratum granulosum, 140, 143,159,162,172
muscularis mucosae, 139, 152,153,154, 156, 157,
stratum intermedium, 144
158,159,160,161,162,164,166,167,168,169,
stratum spinosum, 145,146
170,178,180
striated border, 140, 163, 165, 169, 170, 175
odontoblast, 144
striated duct, 149, 150, 151
omasum, 156, 157
sublingual gland, 150, 151
oropharynx, 140, 151, 152
submandibular gland, 149,150
 pacinian corpuscle, 141
submuc0sa,139,145,152,153,154,155,156,158,
palatine bone, 145
159,160, 161,162,164, 165, 166,167, 168,169,
pancreas,141, 142,176,177, 182
170,178,179,180
paneth cell, 165
sulcus,178
papilla, 139, 146,157
supporting cell, 146
parietal cell, 140, 158, 159, 160, 161
surface epithelium, 179
parotid gland, 148, 149
surface mucous cell, 159, 161, 163
periodontal ligament, 144
taenia coli,140,169,170
Peyer's patch, 140
taste buds, 139, 141, 146, 147, 177,178
plica (folds), 178
tertiary duct, 178, 179
pore,178
tongue,139,177
portal tract (area), 141, 174
tubular gland, 140, 181
portal vein, 173, 174
tubular mucous unit, 150
precentrum, 144
urodeum, 181
predentin, 144
vein, 157,169
primary duct, 178
ventriculus (gizzard), 141, 179
proctodeum, 181
villus,140, 162,164,165,167,168,180, 181
proventriculus, 141, 178, 179
word roots, 142
pyloric gland, 161, 162
Digital cushion, 111, 112
pyloric gland region, 140, 161, 162, 163
Digital pad, 106, 107, 111, 112, 126,136
rectoanal junction, 170, 171, 172
Dilator, 271
rectum, 140,170
Dilator muscle, 279, 280
reticular fber, 182
Diplokaryocyte, 258
reticulum, 155, 156
rumen, 155
Distal convoluted tubule, 183, 187, 188, 193, 194
salivary gland, 141, 177
Distal interphalangeal joint, 40
sebaceous gland, 143, 171, 172
Distal phalanx, 126, 137
secondary duct, 178, 179
Dog
secretory unit, 149,164, 165, 166
blood, 44
sensory cell, 146
bone, 33,35,36,38,39
serosa,139,154,159,161,164,166,168,169,173,
cardiovascular system, 79, 82, 84, 85, 86
178,180
cartilage, 29, 30
serous acinus,143,149,150,175
connective tissue, 22, 25
serous demilune, 143,149,150, 151
digestive system, 143, 144, 145, 149, 150, 151, 152,
serous gland, 148, 165
153,157,158,159,161,162,163,164,167,168,
simple columnar epithelium, 158, 160, 161, 172, 181
169,170,171,172,175,176
sinusoid, 141, 173, 174, 182
ear, 286, 287,288,289
skeletal muscle,143,146,148, 151,153,154,172,
endocrine system, 216, 218, 219, 220
181
epithelium, 16, 17
small artery, 169
erythrocyte, average size, 9
small intestine, 140
eye,271,272,273,274,275,276,277
smooth muscle, 153, 154, 159, 181
female reproductive system, 248, 249, 251, 252, 254,
soft palate, 145
255,256,258,259,260,261
space artifact, 144, 148
histology, 10
INDEX
319
Dog, Continued
crista ampullaris, 284, 288
integument, 108,111,113,118,119,120,123,126
cupula, 288
lymphatic system,93,94,95,97,98,99,101,102
dark cell, 290
male reproductive system, 230, 233, 235, 236
duct, 286
muscle, 62
elastic cartilage, 286
nervous system, 67, 69, 71, 72
endolymph, 284
respiratory system, 198, 199, 201, 204
endolymphatic space, 290
urinary system, 186, 187, 189
epidermis, 286
Dorsal plate, 137
external auditory meatus, 283, 286, 287
Dorsal root ganglion, 71, 72, 76
external ear, 283
Down feather 107
facial nerve, 287
 Drying specimen on warmer, 4, 5
gelatinous cupula, 284
Duct
guttural pouch, 288
alveolar duct, 203
hair cell, 290
bile duct, 173, 174
hair follicle, 286
cochlear duct, 284, 289
helicotrema, 284
collecting duct, 194, 282
homogenous cell, 290
connecting duct (excretory canal), 228, 240, 242
incus, 284, 287
cystic duct, 176
inner tunnel, 289
digestive system, 143,147,151, 152, 153, 164,177
internal ear 283, 284
ear, 286
lagena, 28.5
ejaculatory duct, 228
lenticular process, 287
of epididymis, 226, 228, 232, 242
ligament, 287
eye,277
light cell, 290
female reproductive system, 259, 260, 265
maculae, 284, 285
intercalated duct, 141, 149, 150, 151, 176, 177, 199
malleus, 284, 287
interlobular duct, 122,141, 148, 151, 176
mammals, 283-284
intralobular duct, 107, 111, 143, 148, 278
membranous labyrinth, 284
male reproductive system, 235, 236
middle ear 283, 284
papillary duct, 183, 189, 190,191
middle-ear ossicles, 283
perilobular collecting duct, 185
mixed gland, 288
primary duct, 178
modiolus, 284, 289
respiratory system, 199
organ of Corti, 284, 289, 290
secondary duct, 178, 179
osseous spiral lamina, 284, 289
semicircular duct, 284, 290
Otolith (otoconia, statoconia), 284, 288
striated duct, 149, 150, 151, 199
otolithic membrane, 284, 288
of sweat gland,110,111,112,118,120,121
perilymph, 284
tertiary duct, 178, 179
perilymphatic space, 290
Ductus deferens (vas deferens), 226, 228, 233, 234, 242
pigment granule, 286
Duodenum, 140, 141, 162, 163, 164,165, 166,180
pinna (auricle), 283
Dura mater, 67
pseudostratifed epithelium, 288
raphe, 290
Ear, 283-290
sacculus, 284, 287
adipose tissue, 286
scala media, 290
ampulla, 284,288
scala tympani, 284, 289, 290
annular ligament, 287, 288
scala vestibuli, 284, 289, 290
articular cartilage, 287
sebaceous gland, 286
basilar membrane, 284, 289, 290
semicircular canal, 284, 290
blood vessel, 290
semicircular duct, 284, 290
bone, 286
sensory cell, 288
bony labyrinth, 284
sensory hair cell, 283, 284
capillary, 290
spiral ganglion, 289
cartilaginous frame, 290
spiral ligament, 284, 289
ceruminous gland, 286
spiral limbus, 284, 289
chicken, 284-28.5
spiral tunnel, 289
cochlea, 289, 290
stapes, 284, 287,288
cochlear canal, 284
stria vascularis, 284
cochlear duct, 284, 289
supporting cell, 288, 290
cochlear nerve, 289, 290
synovial cavity, 287
columella, 284
tectorial membrane, 284, 289, 290
connective tissue, 288
tegmentum vasculosum, 285, 290
320
INDEX
temporal bone, 287, 288, 289
diencephalon, 221
tubular ceruminous gland, 283
ependymal cell, 215
tympanic cavity, 283, 284, 286, 287
epitheliod cell, 220
tympanic membrane, 283, 286, 287
fber of neuroglial cell, 218
Type 1 cell, 288
follicle, 212,215,216,218, 219,223
utriculus, 284,287
ganglion, 220, 221,223
vestibular (Reissner's) membrane, 284, 289
granulocyte, 222
vestibule, 284, 287
Herring body, 212
word roots, 285
hypophyseal cavity, 212
Efferent arteriole, 189
infundibular cavity, 212, 215, 216, 217,221
Efferent ductule, 226, 228,231,232, 240, 241, 242
infundibular stalk, 212,213, 215,217,221,222
Ejaculatory duct, 228
light cell, 219
Elastic band, 202, 204
light principle cell, 212
Elastic cartilage, 27, 29, 30, 118, 199, 276, 286
mammals, 211-213
Elastic fber
median eminence (ventral boundary of third
cardiovascular system, 81, 84
ventricle), 212, 213, 215
cartilage, 27, 29, 30
medulla, 220, 221
connective tissue, 20, 22, 25
medullary cell, 223
digestive system, 152, 157
medullary (chromaffin) tissue, 213
eye, 272,280
mucous cell, 222
integument, 117, 124
neurohypophysis, 211, 213
lymphatic system, 100, 101
parafolicular (C) cell, 212, 218
male reproductive system, 238, 239
parathyroid gland, 212, 213, 218, 219, 223
respiratory system, 200, 201, 203, 208
pars distalis, 211, 212,213, 215,216,217,221,
Elastic tendon, 134
222
Elastic tissue, 20, 21, 25
pars intermedia, 211, 212, 215, 216
Ellipsoid, 90, 99, 100
pars nervosa, 212, 213, 215,216, 221
Embryonal connective tissue, 19
pars tuberalis, 211, 212,213,215,216,217,221,
Enamel epithelium, 143, 144
222
Enamel space, 144
pineal gland, 212, 213, 218,222, 223
Endocardium, 78, 84
pineal stalk, 218
Endochondral (intracartilaginous) bone, 32, 34, 38
pinealocyte, 212, 218
Endocrine system, 211-223. See also Female
pituicyte (neuroglial cell), 212, 222
reproductive system; Male reproductive system;
pituitary gland, 211-212, 213, 215,216,217,221,
specific endocrine organs
222
acidophil (alpha cell), 212, 216, 217, 222
principal cell, 219
adenohypophysis, 211, 213
principal (chief) cell, 212
adipose tissue, 218, 223
Rathke's pouch, 212, 215, 216
adrenal cortex, 212
rosette, 223
adrenal gland, 212, 213, 220,221, 223
sinusoid,217,220,221,222,223
adrenal medulla, 213
skull,221,222
basophil (beta cell), 212, 217, 222
space artifact, 219
blood vessel, 216
stroma,219
capsule,220,221,222,223
thyroid gland, 212, 213, 218, 219
caudal region, pars distalis, 213
ultimobranchial body, 213
cavity of Rathke's pouch, 212, 215, 216
vestigal cavity, 212
cephalic region, pars distalis, 213
word roots, 214
cerebellum, 222
zona fasciculata, 213, 220, 221
chicken, 213-214
zona glomerulosa (zona multiformis), 213, 220, 221
chief cell, 223
zona intermedia, 213, 220, 221
chromaffin cell, 221
zona reticularis, 213, 220, 221
chromophil, 212, 221
Endolymph, 284
chromophobe,212, 216,217, 221
Endolymphatic space, 290
cilia, 219
Endometrial gland, 251, 252, 253
ciliated cell, 222
Endometrium, 257
colloid, 218, 219, 221
Endomysium, 57, 61, 62
cortical cell, 223
Endoneurium, 73
cortical (interrenal) tissue, 213
Endosteum, 31, 39
cyst, 219,221
Endothelial cell, 79, 80, 97, 98, 99, 119, 134
dark cell, 219
Endotheliochorial placenta, 254, 255, 256
 dark principal cell, 212
Endothelium, 77, 87, 237
INDEX
321
Eosinophil
stratifed cuboidal epithelium, 12, 13
blood, 42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52
stratified epithelium, 11, 12
bone marrow, 56
stratifed squamous epithelium, 12, 13, 17
connective tissue, 20, 22, 23, 24
transitional epithelium, 12, 13, 18
digestive system, 167, 168
word roots, 12
Eosinophilic band cell, 55
 Erectile tissue (corpus cavernosum clitoridis),
Eosinophilic myelocyte, 55
24.5
Ependymal cell, 215
Eroded endometrial epithelium, 255
Epicardium, 78
 Erythrocyte (red blood cell), 41
Epidermal collar, 132
bone marrow, 55, 56
Epidermal lamina, 129, 131
cardiovascular system, 79, 80, 81, 87
Epidermal peg, 108, 135
crenated erythrocyte, 42
Epidermal spine, 237
defined,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51
Epidermis
digestive system, 182
coronary, 128
female reproductive system, 260, 265
digestive system, 170, 172
integument,119,134
ear, 286
lymphatic system, 98, 103
eye,277,278,282
proerythrocyte, 53
histology, 10
urinary system, 191, 194
integument, 105-106, 109, 110, 112, 114, 115, 117,
Erythroid, 53
118,119,121,122,123,124,125,126,130,132
Esophageal gland, 158
134, 135,138
Esophagus
keratinized, 172
digestive system, 140,141,152,153, 154,157, 158,
laminar, 128
178
 male reproductive system, 239
respiratory system, 200
nervous system, 76
Estrous cycle, 244
perioplic, 128, 130
Estrus, 244,245,252,259, 260
respiratory system, 205
Excretory canal (connecting duct), 228, 240, 242
Epididymis, 226, 228, 233
Extensor tendon, 40
Epiglottis, 93,199
 External anal sphincter, 170, 171
Epimysium, 58
External auditory meatus, 283, 286, 287
Epineurium, 72
External ear, 283
Epiphyseal disc, 32, 37
External elastic membrane, 81, 82
Epithelial cell, 160, 220
External tymponic membrane, 207, 208
Epithelial tuft, 91, 104
Extracellular matrix, 19, 20, 27
Epitheliochorial placenta, 245, 257, 258
 Extrapulmonary primary bronchus, 197
Epithelioid cell, 83
Extratesticular rete testis, 226
Epithelium, 11-18. See also Columnar epithelium;
Extrinsic muscle, 282
Cuboidal epithelium; Pseudostratified epithelium;
Eye, 267-282
Stratified squamous epithelium; Transitional
acinus,278
epithelium
annular pad, 269, 279
 basement (glassy) membrane, 11, 16
anterior chamber, 269, 271, 272, 276, 279
bistratified epithelium, 13, 17, 18
anterior epithelium, 267, 274
ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium, 16
blind spot, 269
columnar epithelium, 11, 13, 16
blood vessel, 275, 281
connective tissue, 11, 14, 19, 22, 24
Bowman's membrane, 267, 280
cuboidal epithelium, 11, 13, 15
bridge, 270, 281
digestive system, 139, 144, 145, 151, 175
Bruch's membrane, 268
female reproductive system, 264
Bricke's muscle, 279
goblet cell, 16
bulbar conjunctiva, 268, 269,271,272, 273,274,
hepatocyte, 14
276, 279
integument,108,124,125
canal of Schlemm, 270, 279
lamina propria, 16, 17
capillary, 276, 281
lymphocyte, 16
capsule, 269, 279
nervous system, 69
cavity of lens, 279
 pseudostratified columnar epithelium, 12, 13, 16
cavity of vitreous humor, 269, 271, 279
respiratory system, 209
cellular tapetum lucidum, 268, 276
simple epithelium, 11, 12
chicken, 269-270
smooth muscle,14, 16,17,18
choriocapillary layer, 268, 275, 276, 281
squamous epithelium, 11, 13, 14, 15
choroid, 268,270,271,274, 275,281, 282
stratified columnar epithelium, 12, 13, 18
ciliary body, 268, 270, 272, 279, 280
322
INDEX
ciliary muscle, 268, 270, 271, 272
nonpigmented epithelium, 273, 279, 280
ciliary process, 268, 271, 272,273, 279
optic disc, 269, 271, 275
collecting duct, 282
optic nerve, 271, 275,281
cones, 275, 276, 281
ora ciliaris retinae, 268, 271, 274
conjunctiva, 269
outer nuclear layer, 275, 276, 281
cornea,267,269,270,271,272,273,274,276,
outer plexiform layer, 275, 276, 281
279,280
palpebral conjunctiva, 269, 271, 272, 273, 277, 278
corneal stoma, 274
pars ciliaris retinae, 268, 271,272, 274
corneoscleral trabecular meshwork, 268, 272, 273
pars iridica retinae, 268, 271
corpora nigra (iris granule), 268
pecten, 270, 281
corpus nigrum, 274
pectinate ligament (uveal meshwork), 268, 270, 272,
covering membrane, 281
273,276,279,280
Crampton's muscle, 279
pigmented columnar cell, 268
cytoplasmic process, 276
pigmented epithelium, 273, 275, 276, 279, 280, 281
dermis, 282
pigmented myoepithelial cell, 268
Descemet's membrane, 267,273, 274, 276, 280
plasma cell, 282
diffuse lymphatic tissue, 277
posterior chamber, 269, 271, 272, 279
dilator, 271
posterior epithelium, 267, 274, 280
dilator muscle, 279, 280
pupil, 268, 271
duct, 277
retina, 267,268,270,271,274,275,276,281,282
elastic cartilage, 276
rods, 275,276, 281
elastic fber, 272, 280
sclera, 267,269,271,272,273,274,275,276,278,
epidermis, 277, 278, 282
279
extrinsic muscle, 282
scleral cartilage, 269, 279, 280, 281, 282
eyelid,269,270,277,278,282
scleral ossicles, 269, 279, 280
feather follicle, 282
scleral trabecular meshwork, 270, 279
fbroblast, 268
scleral venous plexus, 268, 271, 272
fibrous tapetum lucidum, 268, 275
sebaceous gland (glands of Zeiss), 269, 278
fbrous tunic (corneoscleral layer), 267, 269
secretory tubule, 282
fltration angle, 268, 270, 271, 272, 273, 279
serous acinus, 277
fornix of conjunctiva, 269, 278
skeletal muscle, 278
ganglion,275,276,281
smooth muscle, 278
germinal zone, 272
space artifact, 274, 280
goblet cell, 277
spaces of Fontana, 268, 270, 272, 273, 279
hair follicle, 277, 278
sphincter (constrictor) muscle, 268, 271, 273, 279,
harderian gland, 269, 270, 278, 282
280
Herbst corpuscle, 282
squamous epithelium, 280
hyaline cartilage, 277
stratifed columnar epithelium, 277
inner limitating membrane, 275
stratified squamous epithelium, 277, 280
inner nuclear layer, 275, 276, 281
stroma (substantia propria), 267, 268, 273, 274, 280
inner plexiform layer, 275, 276, 281
superficial gland of nictitating membrane, 269, 277
interlobular connective tissue, 278, 282
suprachoroid layer, 268
intralobular duct, 278
sweat gland (glands of Moll), 269, 277, 278
iris,268,270,271,272,273,274,279,280
tapetal cell, 276
Krause's gland, 278
tapetum lucidum, 268, 271,275,276
lacrimal gland, 269, 270, 278, 282
tarsal (Meibomian) gland, 269, 277, 278
lamina cribrosa, 269, 275
tarsus, 269,277,278
lens, 267,269,271,272
uveal trabecular meshwork, 268, 273
lens body, 269, 279
vascular layer, 268,272,275,276
lens capsule, 272
vascular tunic (uvea), 267, 268, 270
lens epithelium, 269, 272
word roots, 270
lens fiber 269, 272, 279
zonular fber 268, 269, 271,273, 279,280
lmbus, 268, 271, 272, 273
Eyelid,269,270,277,278,282
lipid vacuole, 280
loose connective tissue, 281
Facial nerve, 287
mammals, 267-269
Fascicles, 58
melanocyte, 268, 273, 274, 275,276, 281
Fat cell (adipose cell), 20, 24, 25, 165
mucous acinus, 277
Fat vacuole, 187
myoepithelial cell, 271, 273
Feather, 132, 138, 282
nerve fiber, 275, 276, 281
Feather follicle, 132, 138, 282
nictitating membrane, 269, 270, 276
Feather muscle,132,133,134
INDEX 
323
Feather pulp, 107, 132, 133
follicle, 243, 247, 261, 262
Feather sheath, 132, 133
germinal epithelium, 243, 248
Female reproductive system, 243-265
germinal vesicle, 246
adipose tissue, 250
glandular epithelium, 265
adventitia, 259
glandular groove, 263
albumen, 264
glans,245
allantoic blood vessel, 254, 255, 256, 257, 258
granulocyte, 261
 allantoic epithelium, 254
granulosa cell, 247, 248, 249
ampulla,244,250
hematoma, 254, 256
anestrus, 244, 245,259,260
hemorrhagic region, 253
antrum, 244,247, 248
high columnar cell, 257
apical cell, 265
hilus cell, 243, 249
artery, 252
hypertrophied theca cell, 248
artresia, 244
indeciduate, 244
atretic follicle, 246, 262
infundibulum, 244, 246, 250, 262, 263
basal cell, 265
intercotyledonary endometrium, 257
blood vessel, 253, 265
intermediate cell, 245, 260, 261
caruncle,244, 245,253
interstitial cell, 246, 262
cavernous space, 259
interstitial gland, 243, 248, 249
cervix, 244, 258
isthmus of oviduct, 244, 246, 251, 262, 264
chicken, 246
keratinized cell, 259
chorioallantoic connective tissue, 255
labia, 24.5
chorioallantoic membrane (CAM), 244, 254, 256,
labyrinthine surfaces, 245
257
lamina propria, 250, 258, 259, 263
chorioallantoic villus, 256, 257, 258
longitudinal muscle, 251
chorion laeve, 254, 256
low columnar walls, 257
cilia,250,253,258
magnum, oviduct, 246,262,263, 264
ciliated cell, 264
mammals,243-245
ciliated epithelium, 263
maternal blood vessel, 255, 256, 257
circular muscle, 251
medulla, 0vary, 243, 246, 261
clitoris, 245
membrana granulosa, 244, 246, 247, 248, 262
cloaca, 262
mesometrium, 252
columnar cell, 259, 260
metestrus, 244, 245, 253
columnar epithelium, 250, 251
microplacentome, 256
corona radiata, 244, 247
mucosa, 263
corpus albicans, 244, 248
multilaminar (late primary) follicle, 244
corpus luteum, 244, 247, 249
muscularis,250,259,263,264,265
cortical stroma, 243
myometrium, 244,251,252,253,254,257
cotyledonary placenta, 244, 257
neutrophil, 260, 261
crypt,256,257,258
0ocyte, 247,261,262
cryptal epithelium, 258
ovaries,243,246,247,248,249,261,262
cuboidal epithelium, 251, 253, 257
oviduct, 244, 246,249, 250, 263, 264, 265
cumulus 0ophorus, 244, 247
parabasal cell, 245, 260, 261
cytotrophoblast, 255
perimetrium (serosa), 244
deciduate, 244
perivitelline membrane, 246, 262
deep glandular layer, 254
placenta,244,254,255,256,257,258
diestrus, 244, 245,252, 261
placental labyrinth, 254, 256
diffuse placenta, 244, 256, 257
placentome, 257
diplokaryocyte, 258
prepuce, 24.5
duct,259,260,265
primary fold, 258, 263, 264, 265
endometrial epithelium, 255
primary follicle, 247
endometrial gland, 251, 252, 253
primary 00cyte, 243
endometrium, 244, 257
primordial follicle, 243, 247
endotheliochorial placenta, 254, 255, 256
proestrus, 244, 245, 260
epitheliochorial placenta, 245, 257, 258
 pseudostratifed columnar epithelium, 263
epithelium, 264
pseudostratified epithelium, 253, 264, 265
erectile tissue (corpus cavernosum clitoridis), 245
regenerating gland, 263, 264
erythrocyte, 260, 265
resting gland, 263, 264
estrous cycle, 244
rete ovari, 243, 249
estrus,244,245,252,259,260
secondary fold, 258, 265
folds,245,249,250,251
secondary follicle, 244
324
INDEX
secretory bleb, 250
Field of view, microscope, 8
secretory cell, 264
Filiform papilla, 139, 146, 148
secretory gland, 263,264
Filoplume, 107
serosa, 250,263
Filtration angle, 268, 270, 271, 272, 273, 279
shell gland (uterus), 246, 262, 265
Fixation, specimen, 3
space artifact, 257
Fluid-filled space, 75
sperm-host gland, 246, 265
Fold
spongy layer, 254,256
claw fold, 126
stratified epithelium, 259
female reproductive system, 245, 249, 250, 251
stratified squamous epithelium, 258, 259
follicular fold, 120
stratum vasculare, 244, 251, 252
histology, 10
stroma, 246,247
lymphatic system, 91
submucosa, 250
primary fold, 258, 263,264, 265
superfcial cell, 245, 260, 261
secondary fold, 258, 265
superfcial intermediate cell, 245, 260, 261
synovial fold, 40
supraglandular layer, 254
tertiary fold, 258, 263
syndesmochorial placenta, 245
vestibular fold, 93
syntrophoblast, 255
vocal fold, 200
tertiary fold, 258, 263
Foliate papilla, 139
tertiary (Graafian) follicle, 244, 248
Follicle
theca externa, 244, 246, 247,248,262
 compound, 106
theca folliculi, 244, 247
digestive system, 143, 172
theca interna, 244, 246, 247, 248,262
ear, 286
theca lutein cell, 248
endocrine system, 212, 215, 216,218, 223
transitional epithelium, 259
eye,277,278,282
trophoblastic projection, 255
feather, 132, 138, 282
tubular gland, 264
female reproductive system, 243, 247, 261, 262
tunica adventitia, 252
hair 106,108, 109,115,118,119,120,121,122,
tunica albuginea, 243, 246, 247
124,127,130,143,172,240,277,278,286
tunica intima, 252
integument,106,108,109,115,118,119,120,121,
tunica media,252
122,124,127,130,132,134,138
urethra, 259
lymphatic system, 90, 91, 104
urethral epithelium, 259
multilaminar (late primary), 244
urodeum, 246
primary, 106, 247
uterine (endometrial) gland, 244, 256, 257
primordial, 243, 247
uterine horn, 251, 252, 253
secondary, 106, 244
uterus,244,253,256,265
tertiary (Graafian), 244, 248
vacuolar cell, 246, 255, 261
tonsillar, 90
vacuole, 265
Follicular fold, 120
vagina, 245, 246, 259, 262,265
Footpad, 137
vaginal smear, 245, 260, 261
Forestomach, 140
vein,252
Formed elements, 41
vestibular epithelium, 259
Fornix of conjunctiva, 269, 278
vestibular gland, 259
Fossa, 93
vestibule, 245, 260
Fourth ventricle, 69
vilous surfaces, 245
Foveolae (gastric pit), 140, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162,
vulva, 245
179
word roots, 246
Frog, hoof, 128, 129
yolk sphere, 262
Fuchsin stains, 5
zona pellucida, 244, 247, 248
Fundic gland, 158, 159, 160
zonary placenta,244,254,255,256,257,258
Fundic gland region, 140, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161
Fber bundle, 144
Fungiform papilla, 139, 146
Fiber of neuroglial cell, 218
Fibroblast, 19, 20,22,23,24,25,135,268
Gallbladder 141, 142, 175
Fibrocartilage, 27, 30
Ganglion
Fibrocartilaginous cord, 239
dorsal root ganglion, 71, 72, 76
Fibroelastic membrane, 201
endocrine system, 220, 221, 223
Fibrous astrocyte, 69
eye,275,276,281
Fibrous capsule, 40
 nervous system, 66
Fibrous tapetum lucidum, 268, 275
parasympathetic ganglion, 72
Fibrous tunic (corneoscleral layer), 267, 269
spiral ganglion, 289
INDEX 
325
Gastric furrow, 140, 162
sebaceous gland, 106, 109, 114, 115, 117, 118, 119,
Gastric gland, 179
120,121,122,124,143,171,172,240,269,278,
Gastric pit (foveolae), 140, 158, 159, 160, 161, 162,
286
179
secondary, 263
Gelatinous cupula, 284
secretory, 264
Germinal center, 89, 92
serous, 148, 165, 198, 200, 202
Germinal epithelium, 243, 248
shell gland (uterus), 246, 262, 265
Germinal matrix cell, 106
sperm-host gland, 246, 265
Germinal vesicle, 246
sublingual gland, 150,151
Germinal zone, 272
submandibular gland, 149, 150
Giemsa’s stain, 5
superficial gland of nictitating membrane, 269, 277
Gingiva,144
tarsal (Meibomian) gland, 269, 277, 278
Gizzard (ventriculus), 141, 179
thyroid gland, 212, 213, 218, 219
Gland. See also Sweat gland; specific glands
tracheal gland, 201
accessory, 226
tubular, 140, 181, 264
adrenal gland, 212,213, 220,221,223
uterine (endometrial) gland, 79, 244, 256, 257
anal gland, 140, 170, 171
vestibular, 259
apocrine tubular gland, 171
Glands of Moll, 269, 277, 278
Bowman's gland, 198, 206
Glands of Zeiss, 269, 278
Brinner's gland, 140, 162,164,166
Glandular epithelium, 122, 265
cardiac gland, 157, 158, 160
Glandular groove, 263
cardiac gland region, 140, 157, 158, 160
Glandular stomach, 140
carpal, 121
Glans, 245
circumanal gland, 141, 170, 171, 172
Glans penis, 227, 237
digestive system, 178
Glassy (basement) membrane, 11, 16, 106, 121
esophageal gland, 158
Glisson's capsule, 141, 142, 174
fundic gland, 158, 159, 160
Globular leukocyte, 20, 23, 161, 165, 167
fundic gland region, 140, 157, 158, 159, 160, 161
Glomerulus, 184
gastric gland, 179
Glomus, 83
gland cell, 178, 179
Glottis, 199
glands of Moll, 269, 277, 278
Glycogen body, 75, 76
glands of Zeiss, 269, 278
Glycogen zone, 107, 137, 138
harderian gland, 269, 270, 278, 282
Goat
hepatoid gland, 141
blood, 50
integument,120,122,138
cardiovascular system, 79, 86
interstitial, 243, 248,249
digestive system, 146, 147, 148, 156, 157, 160, 162,
Krause's gland, 278
166,170,174,175
labial gland, 143
ear, 286
lacrimal gland, 269, 270, 278, 282
endocrine system, 219
lingual salivary gland, 147, 148
epithelium, 17, 18
male reproductive system, 234, 235
erythrocyte, average size, 9
mammary, 107,122,123
eye,274,278
merocrine sweat gland, 106, 110, 111, 126
integument, 117,118
mixed, 140, 145,151,152,153,157,199,200,201,
 male reproductive system, 234
202
nervous system, 67
mucous,140,145,148,152,153,154,165,178,
respiratory system, 199, 200, 201
205,206
urinary system, 190, 191,192
nasolabial, 110
Goblet cell
parathyroid gland, 212, 213, 218, 219, 223
digestive system, 140, 141, 151, 163, 164, 167, 168,
parotid gland, 148, 149
169, 170, 172, 174, 175, 176, 177
pineal gland,212,213,218,222,223
epithelium, 16
pituitary gland,211-212,213,215,216,217,221,
eye,277
222
respiratory system, 198, 200, 201, 202
preputial, 240
Gonocyte, 229
prostate,226,235
Graafian (tertiary) follicle, 244, 248
pyloric gland, 161, 162
Granular layer, 67, 69
pyloric gland region, 140, 161, 162, 163
Granulocyte
regenerating, 263, 264
agranulocyte, 42
resting, 263, 264
blood, 42, 43, 51
salivary gland, 93, 94,141, 177
bone marrow, 53
endocrine system, 222
326
INDEX
female reproductive system, 261
drying on warmer, 4, 5
lymphatic system, 98, 103
epidermis, 10
respiratory system, 209
erythrocyte, average size, 9
Granulosa cell, 247, 248, 249
field of view, 8
Gray matter, 66, 70, 71,75, 76
fixation, 3
Guttural pouch, 288
fold, 10
fuchsin stains, 5
H band, 62
Giemsa’s stains, 5
Hair
goat erythrocyte, average size, 9
bulb, 106, 114, 115, 117, 119, 121
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains, 5
cell, ear, 290
hints, 5, 8
integument,106,113,114,115,117,119,120
histochemical procedure, 5
sensory hairs, 198
immunohistochemical procedure, 5
sinus (tactile) hair, 106
infltration, 3
Hair follicle
interpreting sections, 5, 6-7
digestive system, 143, 172
knife marks (scratches), 10
ear, 286
Kohler illumination, 8
eye, 277, 278
lake, 5
integument, 106,108,109,115,118,119,120,121,
Mallory stain, 5
122,124,127,130
Masson stain, 5
 male reproductive system, 240
methylene blue stains, 5
Hard palate, 145
microscope use tips, 5-9
Harderian gland, 269, 270, 278, 282
miscroscopy, 8
Hassalls (thymic) corpuscle, 90, 102
mordant, 5
Haversian canal, 32, 38, 39
Orcein stains, 5
Haversian systems, 32, 38
paraffin procedure, 3, 4
Head of epididymis, 232
pointer in ocular, 5
Heart, 78
preparation, 3-5, 4
Helicine artery, 227, 239
relocating structures, 8
Helicotrema, 284
resorcin fuchsin, 5
Hemal node, 90, 98
Romanovsky stains, 5
Hematopoietic tissue, 53
sectioning with microtome, 3, 4, 5
Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stains, 5
separation artifact, 10
Hemolymph node, 90
silver stains for reticular fiber and nervous tissue, 5
Hemorrhagic region, 253
 stain precipitate, 10
Hen. See Chicken
staining, 4
Henle's l0op, 189, 190, 191, 194
toluidine blue stains, 5
Hepatic artery, 173
 transferring sections to slide, 4
Hepatocyte, 14,141, 173, 174, 182
trichrome stains, 5
Hepatoid gland, 141
troubleshooting, 9
Herbst corpuscle, 76, 135, 181, 282
verniers, 8, 8
Herring body, 212
Weigert's stains, 5
Heterophil, 43, 51, 52, 56
Wright's stains, 5
High columnar cell, 257
Homogenous cell, 290.
Hilus cell, 243, 249
Hoof (horse), 128, 132
Histiocyte. See Macrophage
Horn, 127
Histochemical procedure, 5
Horn tubule, 127, 130, 131,132
Histology, 3-10
Horn tubule-like structure, 145
acidic (anionic) stains, 5
Horse
 artifact (imperfections), 9, 10
blood, 46
basic (cationic) stain, 5
bone, 33, 40
basophilic substances, 5
cardiovascular system, 83, 87
binocular microscope, 8
cartilage, 30
centering slides, 5
connective tissue, 24
chicken erythrocyte, average size, 9
digestive system, 146,148, 149, 153, 158, 160, 165,
clearing, 3
168,169,172,173,174,176
coverslipping, 4
ear, 288
crackling artifact, 10
endocrine system, 216, 217, 219, 220
dehydration, 3
eye,272,273,276,277
dermis, 10
female reproductive system, 249, 250, 251, 252, 256,
 dog erythrocyte, average size, 9
257,258
INDEX
327
Horse, Continued
collagenous band, 124
histology, 10
collagenous fiber, 117
integument,109,115,116,120,124,125,127,129
comb,107,134,135
130,131,132
common follicular opening, 106, 114
lymphatic system, 94, 95, 96, 97, 100
 compound follicle, 106
male reproductive system, 230, 231, 232, 233, 237,
connective tissue, 123
238,239,240
connective tissue sheath, 106, 116, 118, 119
muscle, 61,63
contour feather, 107
nervous system, 74
corneous cell, 132
respiratory system, 200, 204
coronary dermis, 128
urinary system,188,189,192
 coronary epidermis, 128
Humerus, 209
coronary region of hoof, 128, 129, 130
Hyaline cartilage, 27, 29, 34, 35, 177, 200, 201,202,
corpora amylacea, 122, 123
277
cortex, hair, 106, 116, 118
Hypertrophied theca cell, 248
cuticle, 116
Hypophyseal cavity, 212
dark cell, 121
dartos muscle, 117
I band, 62
dermal lamina, 131
leum, 140,141,168, 180
dermal (feather) papilla, 106, 107, 108, 110, 116,
Immature bone, 32, 33
127,130,132,135
Immunohistochemical procedure, 5
dermis,106,108,109,110,113,114,115,116,
Imperfections. See Artifact
117,118,121,125,126,127,130, 132,133,134,
Incus, 284,287
135,136,137
Indeciduate, 244
digital cushion, 111, 112
Infiltration, 3
digital pad, 106,107, 111, 112, 126, 136
Infraorbital pouch, 121
distal phalanx, 126, 137
Infundibular cavity,212,215,216,217,221
dorsal plate, 137
Infundibular stalk, 212,213,215,217, 221,222
down feather, 107
Infundibulum, 0viduct, 244, 246, 250, 262, 263
duct of sweat gland, 110, 111, 112, 118, 121
Inguinal pouch, 122
elastic cartilage, 118
Inner core, 75
elastic fber, 117, 124
Inner limitating membrane, 275
elastic tendon, 134
Inner nuclear layer, 275, 276, 281
endothelial cell, 119, 134
Inner plexiform layer, 275, 276, 281
epidermal collar, 132
Inner root sheath, 106, 116, 118, 119, 120
epidermal lamina, 129, 131
Inner tunnel, 289
epidermal peg, 108, 135
Integument, 105-138
epidermis,105-106,109,110,112,114,115,117,
adipose tissue, 117, 118, 135, 136, 138
118,119,121,122,123,124,125,126,130, 132,
air space, 133
134,135,138
annular sinus, 106, 119
epithelium, 108, 124, 125
arrector pili muscle, 106, 114
erythrocyte, 119, 134
axial blood vessel, 132
feather follicle, 132, 138
bar, hoof, 128, 129
feather muscle, 132, 133, 134
barb,107,132
feather pulp,107, 132,133
barbule, 107, 133
feather sheath, 132,133
basal cell, 106, 131, 134, 138
fibroblast, 135
basement (glassy) membrane, 106, 121
floplume, 107
bistratified columnar epithelium, 124, 125
follicle, 134
bistratified cuboidal epithelium, 124, 125
follicular folds, 120
blood vessel, 118, 124, 125, 131
footpad, 137
bone, 130,131, 135,137
frog, hoof, 128, 129
bulb, hoof, 128, 129
germinal (matrix) cell, 106
calamus (quill), 107, 133, 134
gland,120,122,138
capillary, 118, 120
glandular epithelium, 122
carpal gland, 121
glycogen zone, 107,137,138
cartilage, 130
hair,106,113,114,115,117,119,120
central layer, 138
hair bulb, 106, 114, 115, 117,119,121
chestnut, 127
hair follicle, 106, 108, 109, 115, 118,119, 120, 121,
claw, 126,137
122,124,127,130
claw fold, 126
Herbst corpuscle, 135
clear cell, 121
hoof (horse), 128, 132
328
INDEX
horn, 127
sebaceous gland, 106, 109, 114, 115, 117, 118, 119,
horn tubule, 127, 130, 131, 132
120,121,122,124
infraorbital pouch, 121
sebaceous zone, 107, 137
inguinal pouch, 122
secondary follicle, 106
inner root sheath, 106, 116, 118, 119,120
secondary laminae, 128
intercellular bridges, 109, 111
secretion, 123
interlobular connective tissue, 122
secretory acinus, 111
interlobular duct, 122
secretory cell, 121, 123
intermediate cell, 138
secretory portion, sweat gland, 120
intermediate layer, 134
secretory unit, 122,123
intertubular horn, 128
sinus capillary, 107, 134, 135
intralobular connective tissue, 123
sinus (tactile) hair, 106
intralobular duct, 107, 111
sinus hair follicle, 109
isthmus of uropygial gland, 107, 138
sinus pad, 119
keratin, 136
skeletal muscle, 111, 114
keratinocyte, 111
skin,105-106,113,114,115,116,117,118,132,
lamina propria, 124, 125
133,134
laminae, 126
smooth muscle, 118, 123, 124, 125
laminae region of hoof, 128, 129, 131
sole, hoof, 128, 129
laminar dermis, 128, 130, 131
spur, 136
laminar horn, 128
stem cell, 120
limiting furrow, 126
stratified squamous epithelium, 125
lobe, lumen, 107, 137
stratum basale,106,108,109, 110, 112, 113, 114,
lobule, 122
117, 125, 127
lymphatic vessel, 122, 124
stratum corneum,105,108,110,112,113,114,
mammals, 105-107
117,125,127,132,133,134,135,136
mammary gland,107,122,123
stratum germinativum, 132,133, 134,135,136,137
medulla, hair, 106, 116, 118
stratum granulosum, 105,108, 112, 113, 117, 127
melanocyte, 106, 109, 132
stratum internum, 128
Merkel's cell, 119, 135
stratum lucidum, 105, 108, 112
merocrine sweat gland, 106, 110, 111, 126
stratum medium, hoof, 128, 129,131
middle phalanx, 126
stratum spinosum, 105,108,109,110,112,113,
mucous connective tissue, 107, 134, 135
114,117, 125,127
multilocular fat cell, 137
stratum tectorium, 128
myoepithelial cell, 106, 110, 120, 121, 123
subcutis, 105, 108, 114,136
nasolabial gland, 110
sulcus, 136
nose,109
surface groove, 108, 110
nuclei stack, 132, 135
sweat gland, 106,108,109,115,116,117,120,
oral cavity, 135
121,122,123,124
outer-root sheath, 116, 118, 119, 120
teat,123
pacinian corpuscle, 111
teat canal, 125
palatine ridge, 135
teat sinus, 123, 124, 125
papilla, 107
tendon, 137
papillary layer, 106, 111, 112
tomial edge, 135
perioplic dermis, 128, 130
trabecula, 119
perioplic epidermis, 128, 130
transitional layer, 134
perioplic region of hoof, 128, 129
tubular horn, 128
periosteum, 135
tubuloacinar gland, 107
pinna,118
unguinal scale, 137
planum nasale, 108
uropygial (preen) gland, 107, 137, 138
planum nasolabiale, 110, 111
vacuolated cell, 120
planum rostrale, 110
ventral plate, 137
primary follicle, 106
venule, 118
primary hair, 118
wattle, 107
primary lamina, 128
white line, hoof, 128, 129
pyknotic cell, 116, 120
word roots, 128
rachis, 107
Intercalated disc, 58, 63, 64
reticular layer, 106, 111, 112
Intercalated duct
reticulate scale, 136
digestive system, 141, 149, 150, 151,176, 177
scrotum, 117, 118
respiratory system, 199
scutes, 136
Intercellular bridges, 109, 111
INDEX
329
Intercellular space, 178
Lagena, 285
Intercostal muscle, 205
Lake, 5
 Intercotyledonary endometrium, 257
Lamellae, 32
 Interlobular connective tissue
Lamina cribrosa, 269, 275
digestive system, 148, 149, 150, 151
 Lamina propria
eye, 278,282
digestive system, 139,144, 145,152,153,154,155,
integument, 122
156,157,158,159,160, 161, 162,163,165, 167,
Interlobular duct, 122, 141, 148, 151, 176
168,169,170,172,175,178,179
Interlobular septum, 234, 235
epithelium,16,17
Intermediate cell, 138, 245, 260, 261
female reproductive system, 250, 258, 259, 263
Intermediate layer, 134
lymphatic system, 104, 124, 125
Intermediate syringeal cartilage, 207, 208
male reproductive system, 233, 234, 236, 237, 239
Internal ear 283, 284
respiratory system, 196, 199, 200, 201, 202,205
Internal elastic membrane, 77, 80, 81, 82
urinary system, 191, 192
Internal tymponic membrane, 207, 208
Lamina subglandularis, 140, 159, 161
 Interpreting sections, specimen, 5, 6-7
Laminae region of hoof, 128, 129, 131
Interrenal (cortical) tissue, 213
Laminar dermis, 128, 130, 131
Interstitial cell
Laminar epidermis, 128
female reproductive system, 246, 262
Laminar horn, 128
Leydig cell, 226, 228, 229, 230,231, 240
Large intestine, 140, 142, 180
Interstitial gland, 243, 248, 249
Larynx, 195, 196, 197
Interstitial systems, bone, 38
Lens, eye, 267,269, 271,272
Interterritorial matrix, 27, 29
Lens body, 269, 279
Intertubular horn, 128
Lens capsule, 272
Intestinal absorptive cell, 163
Lens epithelium, 269, 272
Intestinal lumen, 167
Lens fber, 269, 272, 279
Intestine, 140, 141-142
Lenticular process, 287
 Intracartilaginous (endochondral) bone, 32, 34, 38
Leukocyte (white blood cell)
Intralobular connective tissue, 123
blood, 41, 42,43,44
Intralobular duct, 107, 111, 143, 148, 278
connective tissue, 20, 23
Intralobular vein, 193
digestive system, 161, 165, 167
Intramembranous bone, 32, 33
globular (globule) leukocyte, 20, 23, 161, 165,
 Intrapulmonary primary bronchi (mesobronchi), 197
167
Iris, 268,270,271,272,273,274,279,280
infiltration, lymphatic system, 94
Iris granule (corpora nigra), 268
 polymorphonuclear leukocyte, 43
Islet of Langerhans, 141, 176, 177
Leydig (interstitial) cell, 226, 228, 229, 230, 231,
Isogenous groups, 27, 29
240
Isthmus of oviduct, 244, 246, 251, 262, 264
Ligament, 287
Isthmus of uropygial gland, 107, 138
Light cell, 175, 176, 219, 290
Light principle cell, 212
Jejunum, 140,141,167,168
Light zone, 140, 158
Joint cavity, 40
Limbus, 268,271,272,273
Juxtaglomerular cell, 184, 188
Limiting furrow, 126
Lingual salivary gland, 147, 148
Keratin, 136
Lingual tonsil, 90
Keratinized cell, 155, 259
Lip, 143
Keratinized epidermis, 172
Lipid vacuole, 280
Keratinized epithelium, 171
Liver, 141, 142, 173, 174, 175, 182
Keratinocyte, 111
Lobe, lumen, 107, 137
Keratinoid, 141, 179
Lobule, 122, 148, 173, 182
Kidney, 187
Longitudinal muscle, 251
Knife marks (scratches), 10
Loop of Henle, 184
Kohler illumination, 8
Loose (areolar) connective tissue
Krause's gland, 278
defined, 20,22, 23,24
Kupffer cell, 174
digestive system, 145
eye,281
Labia,245
male reproductive system, 232, 233
Labial gland, 143
Low columnar cell, 257
Labyrinthine surfaces, 245
Lumen, 230
Lacrimal gland, 269, 270, 278, 282
Lungs, 196, 209
Lacuna, 27,29,30,32,33,38
Lymph node, 87, 90, 95
330
INDEX
Lymphatic nodule
mucous acinus, 93
digestive system, 158,168, 169,181
 multinucleate giant cell, 97
lymphatic system, 89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 98, 99, 103
muscularis, 104
male reproductive system, 240
muscularis externa, 92, 93, 103
respiratory system, 202
myoid cell, 91, 104
Lymphatic system, 89-104. See also Lymph node;
nonsinusal spleens, 90
Lymphatic nodule; Lymphatic vessel
palatine tonsil, 90, 93, 94
adipose tissue, 98, 103
paraepiglottic tonsil, 90, 93
arteriole,90
penicillus, 90
blood vessel, 103
periarterial lymphatic sheath (PALS), 90, 100
bursa of Fabricius, 91, 104
Peyer's patch, 89, 92
capillary, 90, 100
postcapillary venule, 90, 97
capillary layer, 91, 104
primary bronchi, 95
capsule, 90, 94,95, 96, 98,99, 100, 101
pseudostratifed epithelium, 104
cartilage plate, 95
pulp artery, 90
cecal tonsil, 103
red pulp, 90, 91, 99, 100, 101, 103
central artery, 90, 99, 100
reticular cell, 92, 97, 98, 103
chicken, 91
reticular fiber, 96
connective tissue, 103
reticular structure, 91, 104
corona, 89, 92
salivary gland, 93, 94
cortex, lymph node, 90, 95, 96, 97, 101, 102,104
septum, 90,101,104
cortical sinus, 94, 96
serosa, 100,101
cortical tissue, 95
serous acinus, 93
crypt, 94
serous demilune, 93
crypt of Lieberkihn, 103
sheathed artery, 91, 103
deep cortex, 94,97
sheathed capillary, 90
diffuse lymphatic tissue, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98
sinusal spleens, 90
elastic fber, 100, 101
skeletal muscle, 93
ellipsoid, 90, 99, 100
smooth muscle, 96, 97, 100, 101
endothelial cell, 97, 98, 99
spleen, 90, 91, 99, 100, 101, 103
epiglottis, 93
splenic artery, 90
epithelial tuft, 91, 104
stratified squamous epithelium, 93, 94
erythrocyte, 98,103
subcapsular sinus, 90, 94, 96, 98
folds (plica), 91
submucosa, 92, 93
follicle, 91, 104
thymus, 90,91, 101, 102, 103,104
fossa, 93
tonsil, 90
germinal center, 89, 92
tonsillar follicle, 90
granulocyte, 98, 103
trabecula, 90,94,96,97,99,100, 101
Hassall's (thymic) corpuscle, 90, 102
trabecular artery, 90
hemal node, 90, 98
tracheobronchial lymph node, 95
hemolymph node, 90
tubal tonsil, 90
lamina propria, 104
undifferentiated epithelial cell, 91, 104
leukocyte infltration, 94
venous sinus, 90, 99
lingual tonsil, 90
vesicles, 104
lobule of thymus, 90
vestibular fold, 93
lymph node, 90, 95
villus, 92, 93
lymphatic nodule, 89, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96,98, 99,
white pulp, 90, 91, 99, 101
103
Lymphatic tissue, 180, 194, 208
lymphatic vessel, 101
Lymphatic vessel
lymphocyte,92,97,98
cardiovascular system, 78, 87
macrophage, 97, 98
digestive system, 155, 157, 173
mammals, 89-91
integument, 122, 124
marginal zone, 90, 99, 100
lymphatic system, 101
mast cell, 97
Lymphocyte
medulla, lymph node, 95, 97, 98
blood,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51
medulla, thymus, 90, 101, 102, 104
connective tissue, 20, 22, 23, 25
medullary cord, 94, 95, 97, 98
digestive system, 161, 163, 165
medullary sinus, 90, 94, 95, 97, 98
epithelium, 16
megakaryocyte, 98
lymphatic system, 92, 97, 98
mesothelium, 99, 103
male reproductive system, 232
mucosa, 92
Lymphoglandular ridge, 181
INDEX 
331
Macrophage (histiocyte)
muscularis, 233, 234
cardiovascular system, 79
myoid cell, 226, 230, 231
connective tissue, 20, 24
os penis, 227, 236, 237
lymphatic system, 97, 98
 parietal prepuce, 240
respiratory system, 203, 204, 209
pelvis urethra, 227
Macula densa, 184, 187, 188, 189
penile urethra, 227, 237, 238
Maculae, 284, 285
penis, 227,236, 237
Magnum, oviduct, 246, 262, 263, 264
peritoneum, 225, 227
Male reproductive system, 225-242
prepuce, 227
 accessory glands, 226
preputial gland, 240
adipose tissue, 238
primary spermatocyte,225,230,231, 240,241
adventitia,234
prostate gland, 226, 235
ampulla, 226,234
pseudostratified epithelium, 232, 233, 234, 235, 242
basal cell, 233, 234, 235
rete testis, 226,228,229,231,232,240,241
body of penis (corpus penis), 227, 238, 239
retractor penis muscle, 238
body of prostate gland, 226, 235
sebaceous gland, 240
bulbourethral (Cowper's) gland, 226, 236
secondary spermatocyte, 226
capsule, 235
secretion,234,235
cavernous space,227,236,237,238,239
secretory cell, 236
chicken, 227-228
seminal vesicle, 226, 234, 235
cilia, 241, 242
seminiferous tubule, 225,227, 230,231,240,241
columnar epithelium, 232
serosa,233,234
connecting duct (excretory canal), 228, 240, 242
serous cell, 236
connective tissue, 237, 238
Sertoli cell, 225, 226, 230, 231, 240, 241
connective-tissue trabecula, 238
sex cord, 229
corpus cavernosum, 227, 237,238
smegma, 239
 corpus spongiosum (corpus cavernosum urethra),
smooth muscle, 232,233,236,237,238,239, 242
227,236,237
spermatids, 225,230, 231, 240,241
cuboidal epithelium, 232
spermatogenic cell, 225
dermal papilla, 240
spermatogonium,225,230,231,240, 241
dermis, 237
spermatozoa,225,232,233,234,241,242
disseminate portion (pars disseminata), prostate, 226
spongy bone, 236
duct, 235,236
stereocilia, 233
duct of the epididymis, 226, 228, 232, 242
straight tubule, 226, 228,229, 231, 241
efferent ductule,226, 228,231, 232,240, 241, 242
stratifed columnar epithelium, 237
ejaculatory duct, 228
stratified squamous epithelium, 239, 240
elastic fber, 238, 239
stratum cavernosum (vascular stratum), 227, 235
endothelium, 237
supporting cell, 229
epidermal spine, 237
testis, 225, 227,229,230,240,241
epidermis, 239
trabecula,235,239
epididymis, 226, 228, 233
transitional epithelium, 235, 236, 239
extratesticular rete testis, 226
transitional zone, 226, 231
fbrocartilaginous cord, 239
tunica albuginea, 225,227, 230,231,232,237, 238,
gland, 234,235
239, 241
glans penis, 227, 237
tunica vaginalis, 225, 230, 232
gonocyte,229
urethra, 227,235,236,237,238, 239
hair follicle, 240
urethral pouch, 239
head of epididymis, 232
urethral process, 227, 239
helicine artery, 227, 239
vas deferens, 226, 228, 233, 234, 242
interlobular septum, 234, 235
villus-like projection, 233
interstitial (Leydig) cell, 226, 228, 229, 230, 231,
visceral prepuce, 240
240
word roots, 228
lamina propria, 233, 234, 236, 237, 239
Malleus, 284, 287
loose connective tissue, 232, 233
Mallory stain, 5
lumen, 230
Mammals
lymphatic nodule, 240
blood, 41-43
lymphocyte, 232
bone marrow, 53
male accessory gland, 226
digestive system, 139-141
mammals,225-227
ear, 283-284
mediastinum testis, 225, 226, 231
endocrine system, 211-213
mucous cell, 236
eye,267-269
332
INDEX
female reproductive system, 243-245
Middle phalanx, 126
integument, 105-107
Miscroscopy, 8
lymphatic system, 89-91
Mitotic figure, 55, 168
male reproductive system, 225-227
Mixed gland
urinary system, 183-184
digestive system, 140, 145, 151, 152,153, 157
Mammary gland, 107, 122, 123
ear, 288
Mare. See Horse
respiratory system, 199, 200, 201, 202
Marginal hematoma, 254, 256
Modiolus, 284, 289
Marginal zone, 90, 99, 100
Molecular layer, 67, 68, 69
Margo plicatus, 158
Monocyte,42,43,44,45,46,47,48,49,50,51,52
Marrow cavity, 31, 34, 35, 36, 37, 39
Mordant, 5
Masson stain, 5
Mucosa. See also Muscularis mucosae; Submucosa
Mast cell, 20, 22, 23, 79, 97
digestive system, 139, 159,160, 165, 166, 168, 169,
Maternal blood vessel, 255, 256, 257
170, 171, 175
Mature bone, 32, 33
female reproductive system, 263
Medial bronchial wall, 207
lymphatic system, 92
Median eminence (ventral boundary of third ventricle),
Mucous acinus
212, 213, 215
digestive system, 143,149, 150, 151, 175
Mediastinum testis, 225, 226, 231
eye,277
Medium artery, 77, 81, 82
lymphatic system, 93
Medium vein, 78, 82
Mucous cell, 209, 222, 236
Medulla
Mucous connective tissue, 20, 22, 107, 134, 135,
endocrine system, 220, 221
191
hair, 106, 116, 118
 Mucous gland
lymph node,95,97,98
digestive system, 140, 145, 148, 152, 153, 154, 165,
lymphatic system, 90, 101, 102, 104
178
ovary,243,246,261
respiratory system, 205, 206
urinary system, 184, 186, 189
urinary system, 192
Medullary cavity. See Marrow cavity
Mucous neck cell, 159
Medullary cell, 223
Mucous precursor, 160, 161
Medullary (chromaffin) tissue, 213
Multilaminar (late primary) follicle, 244
Medullary cone, 185, 193
Multilocular fat cell, 137
Medullary cord, 94, 95, 97, 98
Multinucleate giant cell, 97
Medullary sinus, 90, 94, 95, 97, 98
Multipolar neuron, 65, 70, 71, 75, 76
Medullary tract, 185
Muscle, 57-64. See also Skeletal muscle; Smooth
Megakaryocyte, 36, 39, 54, 55, 98
muscle
Meissner's plexus, 72, 167
A band, 62
Melanocyte
arteriole, 60
eye, 268,273,274,275,276,281
band,169
integument,106,109,132
bifurcation, 63
Membrana granulosa, 244, 246, 247, 248, 262
cardiac muscle, 57, 58, 64
Membranous labyrinth, 284
connective tissue, 19
Meninges, 65, 68
digestive system, 148
Merkel's cell, 119, 135
endomysium, 57, 61, 62
Merocrine sweat gland, 106, 110, 111, 126
epimysium, 58
Mesangial cell, 184, 194
fascicles, 58
Mesenchyme tissue, 20, 22
H band, 62
Mesenchyme-like tissue, 85
I band, 62
Mesenteric blood vessel, 75
intercalated disc, 58, 63, 64
Mesobronchi (intrapulmonary primary bronchi), 197
muscle fiber, 57
Mesometrium, 252
myofbrils, 61, 62, 63, 64
Mesothelium, 67, 99, 103, 174, 204
myoflaments, 57
Metamyelocyte, 54
perimysium, 58, 61
 Metarubricyte (orthochromatophilic erythroblast), 54,
sarcolemma, 58
55,56
sarcoplasm, 57
Metestrus, 244, 245, 253
skeletal muscle, 57, 58, 61, 63
Methylene blue stains, 5
smooth muscle, 57, 59
Microplacentome, 256
venule, 60
Microscope use tips, 5-9
word roots, 58
Microvilli, 11
Z band, 62
Middle ear, 283, 284
Muscle fiber, 57
INDEX 
333
Muscularis. See also Muscularis externa; Muscularis
central canal, 70, 71, 75
mucosae
cerebellum, 67, 69
digestive system, 175, 176
cerebral cortex, 67
female reproductive system, 250, 259, 263, 264,
cerebrospinal fluid, 68
265
choroid plexus, 69
 lymphatic system, 104
cilia, 71
male reproductive system, 233, 234
dendrite, 65, 67,71
respiratory system, 201, 202, 203
dermis, 76
urinary system, 191,192,194
dorsal root ganglion, 71, 72, 76
Muscularis externa
dura mater, 67
digestive system, 139,152,153,154,155,156,157,
endoneurium, 73
159,160,161,162,164,165,166, 167,168, 169,
epidermis, 76
170, 171,178,179,180
epineurium, 72
lymphatic system, 92, 93, 103
epithelium, 69
respiratory system, 200
fbrous astrocyte, 69
Muscularis mucosae
fluid-flled space, 75
digestive system, 139,152, 153, 154, 156, 157, 158,
fourth ventricle, 69
159,160,161,162,164,166,167,168,169,170,
ganglia, 65
178,180
glycogen body, 75, 76
urinary system, 192
granular layer, 67, 69
Myelin sheath, 66, 73, 74
gray matter, 66, 70, 71, 75, 76
Myeloblast, 54
Herbst corpuscle, 76
Myelocyte, 54
inner core, 75
Myocardium, 78, 84, 85, 86
Meissner's plexus, 72
Myoepithelial cell
meninges, 65, 68
eye,271,273
mesenteric blood vessel, 75
integument, 106, 110, 120,121, 123
mesothelium, 67
pigmented myoepithelial cell, 268
molecular layer, 67, 68, 69
Myofbrils, 61, 62, 63, 64, 86
multipolar neuron, 65, 70, 71, 75, 76
Myoflaments, 57
myelin sheath, 66, 73, 74
Myoid cell, 91, 104, 226, 230, 231
nerve, 72,74, 75
Myometrium,244,251,252,253,254,257
nerve fascicles, 73, 74
nerve fiber, 71, 72, 74
Nasal cavity, 195, 196, 198, 199, 205
neuroglial cells, 65
Nasal concha, 198
 neuromuscular spindle, 75
Nasolabial gland, 110
neurons, 65, 69
Nasopharynx, 196, 199
nissl granule, 71, 72
Nerve
nuclear bag fber, 75
bone, 39
nuclear chain fiber, 75
cochlear nerve, 289, 290
nucleolus, 71
facial nerve, 287
nucleus, 71
nervous system, 72, 74, 75
outer core, 75
optic nerve,271,275,281
 pacinian corpuscle, 75
respiratory system, 205, 206
pancreas, 75
small encapsulated nerve endings, 75
parasympathetic ganglion, 72
Nerve fascicles, 73, 74
perineurium, 72, 73, 74
Nerve fber, 71,72,74,275, 276, 281
periosteum, 67
Nervous system, 65-76
 perivascular space, 69
adipose tissue, 72
pia mater, 67, 68, 69
 arachnoid layer, 68
plexus, 72
 arteriovenous shunt, 75
Purkinje cell, 67, 69
astrocyte, 69
pyramidal cell, 67
Auerbach's plexus, 72
satellite cell, 72
axon,65,73,74,76
Schwann cell, 66, 74
axon hillock, 71
Sharpey's fiber, 76
blood vessel, 67, 74
skeletal muscle, 75
bone, 67, 76
small artery, 68
brain sand, 69
small encapsulated nerve endings, 75
capillary, 69
space artifact, 73, 76
capsule, 75
spinal cord, 70
cell body, 65
subarachnoid space, 67
334
INDEX
submucosa, 72
Palatine ridge, 135
unipolar neuron, 65, 76
Palatine tonsil, 90, 93, 94
ventral root, 76
Palpebral conjunctiva, 269, 271, 272, 273, 277,
venule, 69
278
white matter, 66, 67, 70, 75, 76
PALS (periarterial lymphatic sheath), 90, 100
word roots, 66
Pancreas,75,81,141,142,176,177,182
Neuroglial cell (pituicyte), 65
Paneth cell, 165
Neurohypophysis, 211, 213
Papilla, 107, 139, 146, 157
Neuromuscular spindle, 75, 205
Papillary duct, 183, 189, 190,191
Neurons, 65, 69, 86
Papillary layer, 106, 111, 112
Neutrophil
Parabasal cell, 245, 260, 261
blood, 42,44,45,46,47,48,49,50
Parabronchi, 197, 208, 209
bone marrow, 56
Paraepiglottic tonsil, 90, 93
connective tissue, 20, 22
Paraffin procedure, 3, 4
female reproductive system, 260, 261
Parafollicular (C) cell, 212, 218
Neutrophilic band cell, 55, 56
Parasympathetic ganglion, 72
Neutrophilic metamyelocyte, 56
Parathyroid gland, 212, 213, 218, 219, 223
Nictitating membrane, 269, 270, 276
Parenchyma cell, 86
Nissl granule, 71, 72
Parietal cell, 140, 158, 159, 160, 161
Nonpigmented epithelium, 273, 279, 280
Parietal layer, 184, 188
Nonsinusal spleens, 90
Parietal pleura, 205
Nose, 109
Parietal prepuce, 240
Nuclear bag fiber, 75
Parotid gland, 148, 149
Nuclear chain fiber, 75
Pars ciliaris retinae, 268, 271, 272, 274
Nuclei stack, 132, 135
Pars convoluta, 183, 186
Nucleolus, 71
Pars distalis,211, 212,213,215,216, 217,221,222
Nucleus, 71
Pars intermedia, 211, 212, 215, 216
Pars iridica retinae, 268, 271
Odontoblast, 144
Pars nervosa, 212, 213,215, 216,221
Olfactory cell, 198, 206
Pars radiata, 183, 186, 189
Olfactory epithelium, 198, 206
Pars tuberalis, 211,212,213,215,216,217,221,
Omasum, 156, 157
222
Oocyte, 247, 261,262
Pecten, 270, 281
Optic disc, 269, 271, 275
Pectinate ligament (uveal meshwork), 268, 270, 272,
Optic nerve, 271, 275, 281
273,276,279,280
Ora ciliaris retinae, 268, 271, 274
Pelvic urethra, 227
Oral cavity, 135
Penicillus, 90
Orcein stains, 5
Penile urethra, 227, 237, 238
Organ of Corti, 284, 289, 290
Penis, 227, 236, 237
Oropharynx, 140,151,152,196
Periarterial lymphatic sheath (PALS), 90, 100
Orthochromatophilic erythroblast (metarubricyte), 54,
Pericardial cavity, 86
55,56
Pericardium, 86
Os penis, 227, 236, 237
Perichondrium, 27, 29, 201
Osseous spiral lamina, 284, 289
Perilobular collecting duct, 185
Osteoblast,31,33,36,37,38, 54,55
Perilymph, 284
Oste0clast, 32,33,36,38, 54, 55
Perilymphatic space, 290
Oste0cyte,32,33,36,37,38,39
Perimetrium (serosa), 244
Osteoid, 32, 33
Perimysium, 58, 61
Osteon, 32, 38
Perineurium, 72, 73, 74
Osteoprogenitor (osteogenic) stem cell, 31
Periodontal ligament, 144
Otolith (otoconia, statoconia), 284, 288
Perioplic dermis, 128, 130
Otolithic membrane, 284, 288
Perioplic epidermis, 128, 130
Outer core, 75
 Perioplic region of hoof, 128, 129
Outer nuclear layer, 275, 276, 281
Periosteum, 31,34,35,37,39,67,135
Outer plexiform layer, 275, 276, 281
Peritoneum, 225, 227
Outer r0ot sheath, 116,118,119,120
Perivascular space, 69
Ovaries, 243,246, 247,248, 249, 261,262
Perivitelline membrane, 246, 262
Oviduct, 244, 246,249, 250, 263,264,265
Pessulus, 207, 208
Peyer's patch, 89, 92, 140
Pacinian corpuscle, 75, 111, 141
Pharynx, 195, 196, 197
Palatine bone, 145
Pia mater, 67, 68, 69
INDEX 
335
Pig
Primary follicle, 106, 247
blood.47
Primary hair, 118
cardiovascular system, 79, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 86, 87
Primary lamina, 128
 connective tissue, 24
Primary 0ocyte, 243
digestive system, 145,151, 153,154, 158, 165, 170,
Primary spermatocyte, 225, 230, 231, 240, 241
174,175,176,177
Primordial follicle, 243, 247
epithelium, 14, 17,18
Principal (chief) cell, 212, 219
eye,273,274,275,277,278
Proctodeum, 181
female reproductive system, 248, 257
Proerythrocyte, 53
histology, 10
Proestrus, 244, 245, 260
integument, 110, 117,121
Promyelocyte, 54, 56
lymphatic system, 92, 95, 100
Prostate gland, 226, 235
male reproductive system, 229, 230, 234, 236, 238,
Proventriculus, 141, 178, 179
240
Proximal convoluted tubule, 183,187,188, 189, 193,194
muscle,64
Pseudostratified columnar epithelium, 12, 13, 16, 196,
nervous system, 72, 73, 74
263
respiratory system, 203, 204
Pseudostratified epithelium
urinary system,188,189,192
ear, 288
Pigmented columnar cell, 268
female reproductive system, 253, 264, 265
Pigmented epithelium, 273, 275, 276, 279, 280, 281
lymphatic system, 104
Pigmented granule, 286
male reproductive system, 232, 233, 234, 235,242
Pigmented myoepithelial cell, 268
respiratory system, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202, 205,
Pineal gland,212, 213, 218, 222,223
206,208
Pineal stalk, 218
urinary system, 194
Pinealocyte, 212, 218
Pulmonary artery, 83, 84, 85
Pinna (auricle), 283
Pulmonary vein, 205
cartilage, 29
 Pulmonic (semilunar) valve, 85
integument, 118
Pulp artery, 90
Pituicyte (neuroglial cel), 212, 222
Pupil, 268, 271
Pituitary gland (hypophysis), 211-212, 213, 215, 216,
Puppy. See Dog
217,221,222
Purkinje cell, 67, 69, 86
Placenta,244,254,255,256,257,258
Pyknotic cell, 116, 120
Placental labyrinth, 254, 256
Pyknotic nucleus, 205
Placentome, 257
Pyloric gland, 161, 162
Planum nasale, 108
Pyloric gland region, 140, 161, 162, 163
Planum nasolabiale, 110, 111
Pyramidal cell, 67
Planum rostrale, 110
Plasma, 41, 44,80,87
Queen. See Cat
Plasma cell, 20, 22, 23, 55, 79, 200, 282
Quill (calamus), 107, 133, 134
Platelet, 41, 43,44, 45,46, 47,49, 50
Plexus, 72
Rachis, 107
Plica (folds), 178
Ram. See Sheep
Pluripotent stem cell, 53
Raphe, 290
Pointer in ocular, 5
Rathke's pouch, 212, 215, 216
Polychromatophilic erythroblast (rubricyte), 54, 56
Rectoanal junction, 170, 171, 172
Polymorphonuclear leukocyte, 43
Rectum, 140,170
Pore, 178
 Red blood cell. See Erythrocyte
Portal tract (area), 141, 174
Red pulp, 90, 91, 99, 100, 101, 103
Portal vein, 82, 173, 174
Regenerating gland, 263, 264
Postcapillary venule, 90, 97
Reissner's (vestibular) membrane, 284, 289
Posterior chamber, 269, 271, 272, 279
 Relocating structures, 8
Posterior epithelium, 267, 274, 280
Renal artery, 82
Precementum, 144
Renal corpuscle, 184, 186, 187, 193
Predentin, 144
Renal papilla, 183, 189, 190
Preen (uropygial) gland, 107, 137, 138
Renal pelvis, 183
Preparation, specimen, 3-5, 4
Resorcin fuchsin stain, 5
Prepuce, 227, 24.5
Respiratory bronchiole, 203
Preputial gland, 240
Respiratory epithelium, 198, 205
Primary bronchi, 95, 201, 208
Respiratory system, 195-209
Primary duct, 178
adipose tissue, 199, 200, 201
Primary fold, 258, 263, 264, 265
air capillary, 197, 209
336
INDEX
air sac, 197
nerve, 205, 206
alveolar duct, 203
neuromuscular spindle, 205
alveolar sac, 203
olfactory cell, 198, 206
alveolar septum, 204
olfactory epithelium, 198, 206
alveolus, 195, 202,203,204, 205
oropharynx, 196
arytenoid cartilage, 199, 200
parabronchi (tertiary bronchi), 197, 208, 209
atrium (air vesicle), 197, 208, 209
parietal pleura, 205
basal cell, 198, 205, 206
perichondrium, 201
bone, 198,209
pessulus, 207,208
bony tracheal ring, 206, 207
pharynx, 195, 196, 197
Bowman's gland, 198, 206
plasma cell, 200
bronchi, 195,196, 202, 204
primary bronchi, 201, 208
bronchial cartilage, 208
pseudostratified columnar epithelium, 196
bronchial ring, 207
pseudostratifed epithelium, 198, 199, 200, 201, 202,
bronchiole, 196, 202,203, 204
205,206,208
cartilage, 198
pulmonary vein, 205
cartilaginous tracheal ring, 206, 207
pyknotic nucleus, 205
cavernous vein, 198
respiratory bronchiole, 203
cavity of air sac, 209
respiratory epithelium, 198, 205
chicken, 196-197
secondary bronchi, 208, 209
ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium, 197
sensory hairs, 198
columnar epithelium, 202
septum,205
connective tissue (lamina of), 209
serous acinus, 199
cuboidal epithelium, 203
serous gland, 198, 200, 202
duct,199
simple squamous epithelium, 209
elastic band, 202, 204
skeletal muscle, 199, 200, 206
elastic cartilage, 199
smooth muscle, 203, 205, 208, 209
elastic fber, 200, 201, 203, 208
stratifed columnar epithelium, 208
epidermis, 205
stratified squamous epithelium, 196, 198, 199, 200,
epiglottis, 199
206, 207, 208
epithelium, 209
striated duct, 199
esophagus, 200
submucosa, 199, 200
external tymponic membrane, 207, 208
supporting cell, 198, 206
extrapulmonary primary bronchi, 197
syrinx, 197,207,208
fbroelastic membrane, 201
taste buds, 199
glottis, 199
trachea, 195,196,197,200,201, 206,207
goblet cell, 198, 200, 201, 202
tracheal gland, 201
granulocyte, 209
trachealis muscle, 200, 201
humerus, 209
turbinate cartilage, 205
hyaline cartilage, 200, 201, 202
tympanic membrane, 208
intercalated duct, 199
Type II alveolar cell, 204
intercostal muscle, 205
vestibular epithelium, 205
intermediate syringeal cartilage, 207, 208
vestibule, 195
internal tymponic membrane, 207, 208
visceral pleura, 196, 204
intrapulmonary primary bronchi (mesobronchi), 197
vocal fold, 200
lamina propria, 196, 199, 200, 201, 202, 205
vocal ligament, 200
larynx, 195, 196, 197
word roots, 197
lungs, 196, 209
Resting gland, 263, 264
lymphatic nodule, 202
Rete 0vari, 243, 249
lymphatic tissue, 208
Rete testis,226,228,229,231,232,240,241
macrophage (histiocyte), 203, 204, 209
Reticular cell, 92, 97, 98, 103
medial bronchial wall, 207
Reticular fber 20, 25, 96, 182, 191
mesothelium, 204
Reticular layer, 106, 111, 112
mixed gland, 199, 200, 201, 202
Reticular structure, 91, 104
mucous cell, 209
Reticular tissue, 20, 25
mucous gland, 205, 206
Reticulate scale, 136
muscularis, 201, 202, 203
Reticulocyte, 54, 56
muscularis externa, 200
Reticulum, 155, 156
nasal cavity, 195, 196, 198,199, 205
Retina, 267,268, 270,271, 274,275, 276,281,282
nasal concha, 198
Retractor penis muscle, 238
nasopharynx, 196, 199
Right auricle, 84
INDEX
337
Rods, 275, 276, 281
Separation (space) artifact, 10
Romanovsky stains, 5
Septa,90
Rooster. See Chicken
Septum, 101,104,205
Rosette, 223
Serosa
Rouleaux, 42, 45, 47
digestive system, 139, 154,159,161,164, 166, 168,
Rubricyte (polychromatophilic erythroblast), 54, 56
169,173,178,180
Rumen, 155
female reproductive system, 250, 263
lymphatic system, 100, 101
Sacculus, 284, 287
male reproductive system, 233, 234
Salivary gland, 93, 94, 141, 177
urinary system, 194
Sarcolemma, 58
Serous acinus
Sarcoplasm, 57
digestive system, 143, 149, 150, 175
Satellite cell, 72
eye,277
Scala media, 290
lymphatic system, 93
Scala tympani, 284, 289, 290
respiratory system, 199
Scala vestibuli, 284, 289, 290
Serous cell, 236
Schwann cell, 66, 74
Serous demilune
Sclera,267,269,271,272,273,274,275,276,278,
digestive system, 143, 149, 150, 151
279
lymphatic system, 93
Scleral cartilage, 269, 279, 280, 281, 282
Serous gland
Scleral ossicles, 269, 279, 280
digestive system, 148, 165
Scleral trabecular meshwork, 270, 279
respiratory system, 198, 200, 202
Scleral venous plexus, 268, 271, 272
Sertoli cell, 225, 226, 230, 231,240, 241
Scratches (knife marks), 10
Serum, 41
Scrotum, 117, 118
Sex cord, 229
Scutes, 136
Sharpey's fber, 39, 40, 76
 Sebaceous gland
Sheathed artery, 91, 103
digestive system, 143, 171, 172
Sheathed capillary, 90
ear, 286
Sheep
eye,278
blood, 49
glands of Zeiss, eye, 269
bone, 40
integument, 106,109,114,115,117,118,119,120,
cardiovascular system, 79, 80, 84
121,122,124
connective tissue, 25
 male reproductive system, 240
digestive system, 143,145, 149,150, 154,155,156,
Sebaceous zone, 107, 137
157,160,166,177
Secondary bronchi, 208, 209
endocrine system, 221
Secondary duct, 178, 179
epithelium, 14,15,16, 17
Secondary fold, 258, 263, 265
eye,275
Secondary follicle, 106, 244
integument,117,118,120,121,122,124
Secondary gland, 263
lymphatic system, 96, 97, 98, 101
Secondary laminae, 128
male reproductive system, 231, 234, 235, 236, 238,
Secondary spermatocyte, 226
239
Secretion, 123, 234, 235
muscle, 59, 63
Secretory acinus, 111
nervous system,67,68, 70,71
Secretory bleb, 250
respiratory system, 199, 201, 203
Secretory cell, 121, 123, 236, 264
urinary system, 187
Secretory gland, 264
Shell gland (uterus), 246, 262, 265
Secretory portion, sweat gland, 120
Silver stains, 5, 20
Secretory (striated) duct, 149, 150, 151, 199
Simple columnar epithelium, 158, 160, 161, 172, 181
Secretory tubule, 282
Simple epithelia, 11, 12
Secretory unit, 122, 123,149, 164, 165,166
Simple squamous epithelium, 209
 Section (specimen)
Single hair follicle, 109
interpreting sections, 5, 6-7
Sinus capillary, 107, 134, 135
preparation, 3-5, 4
Sinus pad, 119
sectioning with microtome, 3, 4, 5
Sinus (tactile) hair, 106
Semicircular canal, 284, 290
Sinusal spleens, 90
Semicircular duct, 284, 290
Sinusoid
Seminal vesicle, 226, 234, 235
bone, 36, 38
Seminiferous tubule, 225, 227, 230, 231, 240, 241
digestive system, 141, 173, 174, 182
Sensory cell, 146, 288
endocrine system, 217, 220, 221, 222, 223
Sensory hair cell, 283, 284
vascular sinusoid, 53
338
INDEX
Skeletal muscle
 Staining specimen, 4
cardiovascular system, 79, 80
Stallion. See Horse
defined, 57, 58, 61, 63
Stapes, 284, 287, 288
digestive system, 143,146, 148, 151, 153,154, 172,
Statoconia (otolith), 284, 288
181
Stellate reticulum, 143, 144
eye,278
Stem cell, 120
integument, 111,114
Stereocilia, 11, 233
lymphatic system, 93
Stomach,140,141,158,159,161,163
nervous system, 75
Straight tubule, 226, 228,229, 231, 241
respiratory system, 199, 200, 206
Stratifed columnar epithelium, 12, 13, 18, 208, 237,
Skin and skin derivatives. See Integument
277
Skull, 221, 222
Stratifed cuboidal epithelium, 12, 13
Small artery, 68,77, 79, 80, 81, 169
Stratified epithelium, 11, 12, 259
 Small encapsulated nerve endings, 75
 Stratified squamous epithelium
Small intestine, 140
defined, 12, 13, 17
Small vein, 77, 79, 80
digestive system, 143, 145, 147, 148,151, 152,153,
Smegma, 239
154,155,156,157,158,171,172,177,178,181
Smooth muscle
eye,277,280
cardiovascular system, 79, 84
female reproductive system, 258, 259
digestive system, 153, 154, 159, 181
integument, 125
epithelium, 14,16,17, 18
lymphatic system, 93, 94
eye, 278
male reproductive system, 239, 240
integument,118,123,124,125
respiratory system, 196, 198, 199, 200, 206, 207,
lymphatic system, 96, 97, 100, 101
208
male reproductive system, 232, 233, 236, 237, 238,
Stratum basale
239, 242
digestive system, 145
muscle, 57,59
integument,106,108,109,110,112,113,114,117,
respiratory system, 203, 205, 208, 209
125,127
urinary system, 187
Stratum cavernosum (vascular stratum), 227, 235
Smudged cell, 44, 45, 47, 52, 55
Stratum compactum, 140, 159, 162, 167
Soft palate, 145
 Stratum corneum
Sole, hoof, 128, 129
digestive system, 145
Sow. See Pig
integument,105,108,110,112,113,114,117,125,
Space artifact
127,132,133,134,135,136
digestive system, 144, 148
Stratum germinativum, 132, 133, 134,135,136, 137
endocrine system, 219
Stratum granulosum
eye, 274,280
digestive system, 140, 143, 159, 162,172
female reproductive system, 257
integument,105,108,112,113,117,127
nervous system, 73, 76
Stratum intermedium, 144
Spaces of Fontana, 268, 270, 272, 273, 279
 Stratum internum, 128
Spermatids, 225,230, 231, 240, 241
Stratum lucidum, 105, 108, 112
Spermatogenic cell, 225
Stratum medium, hoof, 128, 129, 131
Spermatogonium, 225, 230, 231,240, 241
 Stratum spinosum
Spermatozoa,225,232,233,234,241,242
digestive system, 145, 146
Sperm-host gland, 246, 265
integument, 105,108,109,110,112,113,114,117,
Sphincter (constrictor) muscle, 268, 271, 273, 279, 280
125,127
Spinal cord, 70
 Stratum tectorium, 128
Spine, 146
Stratum vasculare, 244, 251, 252
Spiral colon, 170
Stria vascularis, 284
Spiral ganglion, 289
Striated border 140, 163, 165, 169, 170, 175
Spiral ligament, 284, 289
Striated duct,149,150,151,199
Spiral limbus, 284, 289
Stroma
Spiral tunnel, 289
 endocrine system, 219
Spleen, 90,91, 99, 100, 101,103
eye, 273,274,280
Splenic artery, 90
female reproductive system, 246, 247
Spongy bone, 32, 33, 37,236
Stroma (substantia propria), 267, 268
Spongy layer, 254, 256
Subarachnoid space, 67
Spur, 136
Subcapsular sinus, 90, 94, 96, 98
Squamous cell, 280
Subcapsular vein, 187
Squamous epithelium, 11, 13, 14, 15
Subcutis, 105, 108, 114, 136
Stain precipitate, 10
Sublingual gland, 150, 151
INDEX 
339
Submandibular gland, 149, 150
Territorial matrix, 27, 29
Submucosa
Tertiary bronchi (parabronchi), 197
digestive system,139,145,152,153,154,155,156,
Tertiary duct, 178, 179
158,159,160,161,162,164,165,166,167,168,
Tertiary fold, 258, 263
169, 170,178,179,180
Tertiary (Graafian) follicle, 244, 248
female reproductive system, 250
Testis, 225,227,229,230,240,241
lymphatic system, 92, 93
Theca externa, 244, 246, 247,248,262
nervous system, 72
Theca folliculi, 244, 247
respiratory system, 199, 200
Theca interna, 244, 246, 247, 248,262
urinary system, 192
Theca lutein cell, 248
Sulcus, 136, 178
Thrombocyte, 43, 51
Superficial cell, 245, 260, 261
Thymic (Hassall's) corpuscle, 90, 102
Superficial cortex, 187
Thymus, 90, 91, 101,102, 103, 104
Superficial gland of nictitating membrane, 269,
Thyroid gland, 212, 213, 218, 219
277
Toluidine blue stains, 5
Superficial intermediate cell, 245, 260, 261
Tomcat. See Cat
Supporting cell
Tomial edge, 135
digestive system, 146
Tongue, 139, 177
ear, 288, 290
Tonsil, 90
male reproductive system, 229
Tonsillar follicle, 90
respiratory system, 198, 206
Trabecula
Suprachoroid layer, 268
integument, 119
Supraglandular layer, 254
lymphatic system, 90, 94, 96, 97,99, 100,
Surface epithelium, 179
101
Surface groove, 108, 110
male reproductive system, 235, 239
Surface mucous cell, 159, 161, 163
Trabecular artery, 90
Sweat gland
Trachea, 195, 196, 197, 200, 201, 206, 207
 cardiovascular system, 80
Tracheal gland, 201
duct of, 110, 111, 112, 118, 120, 121
Trachealis muscle, 200, 201
eye,277,278
Tracheobronchial lymph node, 95
glands of Moll, eye, 269
Transferring sections to slide, 4
integument,108,109,115,116,117,120,121,122,
Transitional epithelium
123,124
defined, 12, 13, 18
merocrine sweat gland, 106, 110, 111, 126
female reproductive system, 259
secretory portion, sweat gland, 120
male reproductive system, 235, 236, 239
Syndesmochorial placenta, 245
urinary system, 191, 192
Synovial cavity, 287
Transitional layer, 134
Synovial fold, 40
Transitional zone, 226, 231
Syntrophoblast, 255
Trichrome stains, 5
Syrinx, 197,207,208
Trophoblastic projection, 255
Troubleshooting, microscopy, 9
Taenia coli, 140, 169, 170
Tubal tonsil, 90
Tapetal cell, 276
Tubular ceruminous gland, 283
Tapetum lucidum, 268, 271, 275, 276
Tubular gland, 140, 181, 264
Tarsal (Meibomian) gland, 269, 277, 278
Tubular horn, 128
Tarsus, 269, 277,278
Tubular mucous unit, 150
Taste buds
Tubuloacinar gland, 107
digestive system, 139, 141, 146, 147, 177, 178
Tunica adventitia
respiratory system, 199
cardiovascular system, 77, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85
Teat, 123
female reproductive system, 252
Teat canal, 125
Tunica albuginea
Teat sinus, 123, 124, 125
female reproductive system, 243, 246, 247
Tectorial membrane, 284, 289, 290
male reproductive system, 225, 227, 230, 231, 232,
Tegmentum vasculosum, 285, 290
237,238,239,241
Temporal bone, 287, 288, 289
Tunica intima
Tendon
cardiovascular system, 77, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85
bone, 39
female reproductive system, 252
connective tissue, 24, 25
Tunica media
elastic tendon, 134
cardiovascular system, 77, 80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85
extensor tendon, 40
female reproductive system, 252
integument, 137
Tunica vaginalis, 225, 230, 232
340
INDEX
Turbinate cartilage, 205
macula densa, 184, 187, 188, 189
Tympanic cavity, 283, 284,286,287
mammals, 183-184
Tympanic membrane
medulla, kidney, 184, 186, 189
ear, 283,286,287
medullary cone, 185, 193
respiratory system, 208
medullary tracts, 185
Type 1 cell (of macula), 288
medullary type, 184
Type I (glomus) cell, 87
mesangial cell, 184, 194
Type II (alveolar) cell, 204
mucous connective tissue, 191
Type II (sustentacular) cell, 87
mucous gland, 192
muscularis, 191, 192, 194
Ultimobranchial body, 213
muscularis muscosae, 192
Umbilical artery, 83
papillary duct, 183,189, 190,191
Undifferentiated epithelial cell, 91, 104
parietal layer, 184, 188
Unguinal scale, 137
pars convoluta, 183, 186
Unipolar neuron, 65, 76
pars radiata, 183, 186, 189
Urachus, 191
perilobular collcting duct, 185
Ureter, 184, 185, 191, 192, 194
proximal convoluted tubule, 183, 187, 188, 189,
Urethra
193, 194
 corpus spongiosum (corpus cavernosum urethra),
 pseudostratified epithelium, 194
227,236,237
renal corpuscle, 184, 186, 187, 193
female reproductive system, 259
renal papilla, 183, 189, 190
male reproductive system, 227, 235, 236, 237, 238,
renal pelvis, 183
239
reticular fber, 191
pelvic urethra, 227
serosa, 194
penile urethra, 227, 237, 238
smooth muscle, 187
Urethral epithelium, 259
subcapsular vein, 187
Urethral pouch, 239
submucosa, 192
Urethral process, 227, 239
superficial cortex, 187
Urinary bladder, 184, 192
transitional epithelium, 191, 192
Urinary space, 184, 187, 188, 189, 194
urachus, 191
Urinary system, 183-194
ureter, 184,185,191,192,194
adipose tissue, 189
urinary bladder, 184, 192
adventitia, 191
urinary space, 184, 187, 188, 189, 194
afferent arteriole, 188, 189
vasa recta,184, 189, 190,191
Bowman's capsule, 184, 187, 188, 194
visceral layer, 184
brush border 183, 188
word roots, 185
capillary, 192
Urodeum, 181, 246
capsule, 183, 186,187
Uropygial (preen) gland, 107, 137, 138
cavity of renal pelvis, 189, 190
Uterine (endometrial) gland, 79, 244, 256, 257
central vein, 184
Uterine horn, 251, 252, 253
chicken, 184-185
Uterus, 244, 253, 256,265
collecting duct, 194
Utriculus, 284, 287
collecting tubule, 184, 185, 187, 188, 189, 190, 191,
Uvea (vascular tunic), 267, 268, 270
194
Uveal meshwork (pectinate ligament), 268, 270, 272,
connective tissue, 187
273,276,279,280
cortex, kidney, 183, 186, 188, 193, 194
Uveal trabecular meshwork, 268, 273
cortical nephrons, 184
cortical type, 184
Vacuolar cell, 246, 261
distal convoluted tubule, 183, 187, 188, 193, 194
Vacuolated cell, 120, 255
efferent arteriole, 189
Vacuole, 43, 51, 265
erythrocyte, 191, 194
Vagina, 245, 246,259, 262,265
fat vacuole, 187
Vaginal smear, 245, 260, 261
glomerulus, 184
Valves, 78, 80, 82, 85, 87
Henle's l0op, 189, 190, 191, 194
Vas deferens (ductus deferens), 226, 228, 233, 234,
intralobular vein, 193
242
juxtaglomerular apparatus, 184
Vasa recta, 184, 189, 190, 191
juxtaglomerular cell, 184, 188
Vasa vasorum, 78, 84
kidney, 187
Vascular layer, 268, 272,275, 276
lamina propria, 191, 192
Vascular sinusoid, 53
loop of Henle, 184
Vascular stratum (stratum cavernosum), 227, 235
lymphatic tissue, 194
Vascular tunic (uvea), 267, 268, 270
INDEX
341
Vein
Vocal fold, 200
bone, 39
Vocal ligament, 200
cardiovascular system, 81, 87
Volkmann's canal, 32, 38, 39
cavernous vein, 198
Vulva, 245
central vein, digestive system, 173, 174, 182
 central vein, urinary system, 184
Wattle, 107
digestive system, 157, 169
Weigert stain (resorcin fuchsin), 5
female reproductive system, 252
White blood cell. See Leukocyte
intralobular vein, 193
White line, hoof, 128, 129
medium vein, 78, 82
White matter, 66, 67, 70, 75, 76
portal vein, 82, 173, 174
White pulp, 90, 91, 99, 101
pulmonary vein, 205
Word roots
small vein, 77, 79, 80
blood, 43
subcapsular vein, 187
bone, 32
Vena cava, 84
bone marrow, 54
Venous sinus, 90, 99
cardiovascular system, 78
Ventral boundary of third ventricle (median eminence),
cartilage, 28
212,213,215
connective tissue, 21
Ventral plate, 137
digestive system, 142
Ventral root, 76
ear, 28.5
Ventriculus (gizzard), 141, 179
endocrine system, 214
Venule
epithelium, 12
cardiovascular system, 77, 79, 80, 87
eye,270
integument, 118
female reproductive system, 246
muscle, 60
integument, 128
 nervous system, 69
male reproductive system, 228
Verniers, for relocating structures, 8, 8
muscle, 58
Vesicles, 104
nervous system, 66
Vestibular epithelium, 205, 259
respiratory system, 197
Vestibular fold, 93
urinary system, 185
Vestibular gland, 259
Wright stain (Romanovsky), 5
Vestibular (Reissner's) membrane, 284, 289
Vestibule
Yolk sphere, 262
ear, 284, 287
female reproductive system, 260
Z band, 62
 male reproductive system, 245
Zona fasciculata, 213, 220, 221
respiratory system, 195
Zona glomerulosa (zone multiformis), 213, 220, 221
Vestigal cavity, 212
Zona intermedia, 213, 220, 221
Villous surfaces, 245
Zona pellucida, 244, 247, 248
Villus
Zona reticularis, 213, 220, 221
chorioallantoic villus, 256, 257, 258
Zonary placenta, 244,254, 255, 256, 257,258
digestive system, 140, 162, 164,165, 167, 168, 180,
Zone multiformis (zona glomerulosa), 213, 220, 221
181
Zone of calcification, 36, 37, 38
female reproductive system, 256, 257, 258
Zone of hypertrophy, 35, 36, 37, 38
lymphatic system, 92, 93
Zone of multiplication, 35, 37, 38
Visceral layer, 184
Zone of ossification, 35, 36, 37, 38
Visceral pleura, 196, 204
Zone of reverse cartilage, 35, 37
Visceral prepuce, 240
Zonular fber, 268, 269, 271, 273, 279, 280
342
INDEX