Clinical Handbook
on Canine Dermatology
Third Edition 201l
Virbac
www.virbacderm.com
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.co m
Clinical
Handbook
Dermatology
on
Canine
ThirdEdition
odpi
0 2011
Pierre JASMIN, DVM
Virbac thanks everyone wbo bas participated in the
elaboration of this document for tbeir invaluable
collaboration.
Virbac has taken every effort to ensure the accuracy of the
information in the Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology.
However, Virbac S.A. makes no warranties or representations
 as to its accuracy and shall not be liable for any direct, incidental,
consequential, indirect or punitive damages arising out of any errors,
omissions, or inaccuracies in the content of this book.
Note that some agents mentioned in this document may not
 be licensed or available in your country.
The user should therefore always refer to the instructions enclosed
authorities for use in the country concerned.
Copyright  VIRBAC S.A.
No part of this publication may be produced or transmitted,
 in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying.
recording or otherwise, or stored in any retrieval system
of any nature, without the written permission of the copyright
holder, application for which shall be made to Virbac S.A.
Preface
This book is a truly original manual of canine dermatology.
Many dermatotogical guides or bandbooks are available and may be pleasant to read and
convey a good understanding of canine dermatoses. However, this book puts forward a
quite novel and stimulating approach.
Pierre JASMIN, its author, bas developed the concept of classifying tbe dermatoses in a
special way wbicb facilitates the clinical approacb. He distinguisbes three groups of
cutaneous diseases: first, a group of infectious and parasitic, primary or secondary
dermatoses wbich are considered initially.Asecond group containing the most common
primary dermatoses is then presented and, finally, a third group of rare primary dermatoses
is considered. His practical approach is thus applied sequentially from group 1 through to
group 3. Tbese threesteps are modulated according to tbe age of tbe animal, enabling
dermatoses of young dogs to be distinguisbed from those of adutt dogs.
A diagnostic approach to otitis externa is proposed separately.
This original and efficient approach is complemented by summaries of tbe essential elements of every dermatological
consultation:bistory-taking and the clinical examination.Finally,Dr.JASMINreviews one of the most useful but least
understood of the dermatological complementary examination procedures: cutaneous bistopatbology.
An important feature is the presentation of the common dermatoses as monograpbs in tbe middle section of tbe bandbook.
These diseases are reviewed in a concise and consistent manner covering definition and general information,aetiology and
patbogenesis, epidemiology, clinical signs, diagnosis and, of course, treatment. Case follou-up and prognosis are considered at
the end ofeacb monograpb.
This practical,rigorousandwellillustrated document provides afertile sourceforthe studentand theaspiring clinician,
as well as tbe experienced practitioner already interested in dermatology. It provides rapid access to a wide range of knowledge
and data,relevant to dermatological practice and in this way simplifies and facilitates the diagnostic approach to
dermatological cases.
suaqod asuafau pua ofpaosoduoins puauuCafouaqudpufpnoqsooq
of canine dermatology are encountered in daily practice.
Didier Noel CARLOTTl, DVM, Diplomate ECVD
Preface of the third edition
This edition bas included new information on many dermatoses and recent advances on otitis externa. Tbe practicability
remains uncbanged, ofcourse, and tbe need fora 3rd edition demonstrates the usefutness of Dr Jasmins approach in every
day practice.Both students and veterinary clinicians will bave at their disposal an updated tool of great quality and readily
usable.
Didier Noel CARLOTTI, DVM, Diplomate ECVD
Before speaking
Canine dermatology is, and will remain, a cballenging field.
It requires a very wide variety of knowledge ranging in many topics including: bacteriology, mycology, parasitology,
immunology, allergology, endocrinology, cancerology.
But it is also this variety that makes it so engaging and entbralling.
Dermatology may thus be frustrating at times, but it can also generate much satisfaction.
However comlex thisfieldiskeep inmind tbata large numberofcasesmay beacbieved successfully:patient relief,wner
satisfaction and gratification of the clinician. In order to accomplish this goal, it is necessary to follow a method, to master it,
to refine it and to ultimately model it for itself.
May I by this bandbook belp you to acbieve this.Itis anybow this ambitious intent that motivated me with passion all
along its conception.
Pierre JASMIN, DVM
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Table of Contents
Presentation
The dermatological approach
Taking the history
Dermatological examination - Lesions
Differential diagnosis for groups of related dermatoses
1/ General approach
2/ Otitis externa
3/ Dermatoses of adult dogs
4/ Dermatoses of young dogs
Monograpbs of the major canine dermatoses
Dermatophytosis
Sarcoptic mange
Dermatoses associated with infestations by other parasites
 Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis (juvenile onset and adult onset)
Pyoderma - General presentation
Simple approach pyoderma
 Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BOG) syndrome
 Malassezia dermatitis and yeast overgrowth
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD)
 Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)-(Food Allergy and Food Intolerance)
 Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy)
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICS and SCS)
Hypothyroidism
 Otitis externa
Applications and use of skin biopsies
Elements of pbysiology and structure of bealtby canine skin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Presentation
It will be important in tbe first instance for users to read tbe presentation and first
part of the bandbook in their entirety to gain a proper understanding of the aims
and general philosopby of tbe dermatological approacb proposed.
Concept of the document
This document is designed to be used as
a reference aid for the diagnosis and
management of canine dermatological
cases on a daily basis
It is not an exhaustive bibliographic
review, but should be used as a clinical
handbook available for consultation at
any time and presenting a rational
approach to the diagnosis and
management of canine dermatological
cases. It aims to provide a practical and
efficient pathway that, in most cases, will
enable the practitioner to establish an
accurate diagnosis and formulate an
 appropriate treatment or management
plan.
The need for a clinical bandbook
Why does Dermatology remain such a difficult area of veterinary medicine, even though skin lesions
are readily observed and the skin is easily accessible for detailed examination and sampling? There are
three principal reasons for this paradox.
1. The skin has a limited range of reaction patterns and so many different dermatoses have
lesions which appear similar. Clinical signs are thus of limited diagnostic significance.
2. Although the skin lends itself to biopsy sampling the value of histopathology
(even though rich in information) is quite variable amongst different skin diseases. Indeed, the
of the dermatosis.
3. Several dermatoses may occur simultaneously on the same animal, presenting a complex
picture. This may require sequential investigation, first of secondary dermatoses and then of the
primary disease(s).
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Solutions provided by the Clinical Handbook
1-Grouping of Dermatoses by Frequency and Sequence of Investigation.
Fortunately, most dermatological cases seen in practice are caused by a small number of specific
diseases. In all of these conditions a clinical approach is essential and histopathology is seldom
useful. We can divide these conditions into two groups (Groups 1 and 2) based on the
sequence of investigative procedures which is required. Group 1 includes a small number of
 dermatoses associated with infectious or parasitic agents. This group is subdivided into 1a,
uncommon primary dermatoses, and 1b, common secondary dermatoses. Group 2 is made up of
a small number of commonly occuring primary dermatoses that are typically associated with the
secondary conditions of group 1b.
The other dermatoses, which are uncommon, but which encompass a much larger range of
diseases, are placed in Group 3. These conditions require a more sophisticated approach, in
which histopathology plays a very important part. Investigation should include the use of skin
biopsy samples. Biopsies are also required in all cases in which other diagnostic procedures have
failed to provide a precise diagnosis.
DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS
SEQUENCE OF
OF RELATED DERMATOSES
INVESTIGATION
GROUP 1:
GROUP 1a: Some primary dermatoses
Specific
Few and relatively uncommon.
infectious
Always as a first step
and
parasitic
GROUP 1b: Secondary dermatoses
dermatoses
Few but common.
GROUP 2: Commonest primary dermatoses
Only as a second step
Few but very common.
GROUP 3: Rare primary dermatoses
At any time if suspected
Many different but rare dermatoses.
This approach must permit us to progress, in each case, toward the diagnosis of the encountered
dermatosis, because it explains in a concrete and practical way which dermatoses have to be
previously excluded (or confirmed) in a first step, to be able to carry on toward a precise diagnosis
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
2-Separation of Animals into Two Categories: Young Dogs and Adults.
A second fundamental classification in this approach is the separation of cases into two age
ranges, young dogs and adults, where the division between the two categories is puberty.
Why this separation? Sexual maturity is associated with the development of a mature endocrine
 Dermatological conditions in dogs are actually fundamentally different depending on whether the
dog is "mature" or not. This necessitates a specific dermatological approach for each of these two
categories.
In dogs, there is considerable variation between breeds in the age of acquisition of puberty. One
year is a good marker for medium-sized breeds but in small breeds puberty will tend to occur
earlier; in large breeds it will be later. Exceptions to this pattern may exist amongst specific breeds
and between individuals.
Courtesy of:PierreJasmin
Clinical Handbook on CanineDermatology
Content and Structure of the Clinical Handbook
Part 1 presents the general approach and specific procedures to follow when faced with
a dermatological problem:
1. How to initiate the approach and take the history.
2. Dermatological examination, identification of the principal lesions and use of a lesion map.
3. Identifying the different diagnostic groups (1a, 1b, 2 and 3), assembly of a list of appropriate
differential diagnoses corresponding to each group and the sequence of diagnostic procedures.
· The concept is presented first as a table which specifies the sequence of diagnostic
procedures according to their groups.
·● Specific dermatoses to be considered in the two age groups, adults and young dogs, are listed
for each group.
+ The management of otitis externa, which is considered as a specific dermatological problem,
is described separately in a table. A specific monograph is devoted to otitis and describes a
 clinical method of investigation.
Part 2 presents monographs in which each dermatosis or group of dermatoses is reviewed from a
clinical and practical perspective. Only the useful key points essential to the proper management of the
problem are described. The same general plan is followed for all the monographs, including definition,
aetiology, pathogenesis, epidemiology, clinical signs, diagnosis, treatment, prognosis, follow-up and
conclusions. Note that some agents mentioned under Treatment may not be licensed or available in
your country.
Part 3 is devoted to a detailed analysis of the efective use of skin biopsies, enabling the reader to
maximise the efficiency and diagnostic power of the histopathological examination.
Part 4 presents some elements on canine skin physiology, structure, epidermis renewal, follicular cycle
 and differences with human skin.
Philosopby of the Clinical Handbook
An analysis of cases encountered in practice led to the realisation tbat a diagnostic approach could be designed
wbich would enable the small number of very common dermatoses to be efficiently diagnosed, using clinical
uaiaffp Aupu aq fo sisoubviq shnpp pup shop bunoA Aq paiaffns suonpuoo q bupuauoffp pup sainpaooid
but rarer dermatoses could be achieoed with the aid of histopatbological examination of skin biopsy specimens.
This approach bas enabled us to provide a frameuwork for diagnosis and management of the great majority of
cases witbout neglecting the diagnostic approacbes required for rarer conditions.
This document is the product of this analysis and has been assembled with the collaboration of
some of the best-known specialists in veterinary dermatology. Virbac, faithful to its philosophy.
hopes that this book will address both your needs and your expectations.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.1
 The dermatological
approach
Part.1
The dermatological
approach
odpi
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
 The dermatological approach · 1
Part.1
Taking the history
A dermatological sign (Pruritus, Alopecia, Otitis...) can be:
A reason for consultation
Noticed at consultation
In every case plan sufficient time
to fill in the History Sheet and to initiate the approach.
Evaluate the time available to you and the owner.
History Sheet
Allocate sufficient time to enable you to explain
Aetgh
and initiate the approach.
You can give the history sheet to the owner and
ask him/her to complete it in the waiting room.
Information on the sheet should be amplified by
DermatologicalHistory
questioning the owner.  You and the owner
should be seated.  Take the dog off the
consultation table if it was first placed there.
Make a special appointment if necessary and
give the owner the history sheet to fill in at home.
Ask him/her to bring it back on the day of the
appointment.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.1
 The dermatological approach · 2
History Sheet
Date:
Owner:
Dog's name:
Age:
Breed:
Sex:
..Weight:
General History
1/ Age when acquired and origin (breeder, pet store...):
2/ Ceographical area of home, present and past (trips, kennels...):
3/ Way of life, environment (exercise, house, garden, flat...) and in-contact pets:
4/ Diet (current and previous):
5/ Reproduction (frequency of oestrus, pregnancy, behaviour of male...):
6/ Previous diseases and surgery:
7/ Unrelated previous dermatoses:
8/ Current non skin-related problems:
9/ Behavioural changes..
Dermatological History
1/ Chief complaint: 
2/ Date of onset..
 3/ Pruritus, severity and time of onset (before or after lesions):
4/ Specific clinical signs and related behaviour: ..
● Itching of feet (licking, chewing):
· Itching of head, lips, chin, periorbital area (scratching, rubbing):
· Otitis, itching of ear pinnae (scratching, shaking):
· Itching of anogenital area (rubbing, licking and chewing):
· Ophthalmological signs, conjunctivitis and/or epiphora (ocular secretion):
● Upper respiratory signs, nasal discharge and/or sneezing:
· Lower respiratory signs, asthmatic problems..
5/ First cutaneous lesions observed and their development:
6/ Seasonal influences:
7/ Other affected animals (cohabiting, lineage) or human beings in contact:
8/ Presence of fleas and anti-parasitic treatments given:
9/ Shampoos and grooming:
10/ Owner's view (personal opinion, remarks) on the dermatosis of his dog:
11/ Previous treatments (date, products, dosage and duration) and responses:
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
The dermatological approach · 3
Part.1
Dermatological examination - Lesions
Standard general examination
Including weight, temperature, pulse, auscultation, lymph nodes and abdominal palpation,
ophthalmological examination..
General examina
ation. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Thorough dermatological examination
Search carefully for primary and secondary lesions with a lens if necessary.
Note all these lesions on the silhouette.
The entire skin and haircoat must be thoroughly investigated. This should be done first when the dog is
standing up, starting from the face down to the tail, going through the back and the flanks. Then the
dog is laid down to examine the ventral aspect and the limbs to their extremities.
Dermatological exammation of standing animal. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Dermatological examination of lying animal. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Using the information provided by the history and the silhouette, and taking account of any
abnormalities detected in the general examination, the list of differential diagnoses is developed and
related to the defined disease group (see the table page 9 explaining the general approach to
differential diagnosis for groups of related dermatoses).
These diseases are listed separately for the adult dog and the young dog in two diferent action plans.
The history and the lesion map are essential for the clinical approach but will also be found very useful in
supporting interpretation of histopathological analysis and for the clinical follow-up.
* See the presentation of the handbook which defines the difference between young dog and adult dog.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.1
The dermatological approach · 4
PRIMARY
DEFINITIONS AND CLINICAL ELEMENTS
LESIONS
Dermal vasodilatation causing redness of the skin that disappears when pressure is applied, as in diascopy (glass slide 
ERYTHEMA
ads ami jo 'uis snoaueino paaasgo Auanbay isow aul suoeseui yo aesipu us aun isunese passaid
Sometimes the only sign. Commonly in the interdigital spaces in atopy, Malassezia dermatitis, microbial overgrowth
PAPULES
Raised, solid, circumscribed elevations of the skin, from 1 mm up to 1 cm diameter, usually indicative of a cellular infiltrate.
PUSTULES
Raised, circumscribed, normally thin-walled lesions containing pus (typically 1 to 3 mm). If follicular, consider follicular
(SUPERFICIAL
 infections involving bacteria (pyoderma), Demodex (demodicosis), dermatophytes (ringworm). If non-follicular - consider
PUSTULES
impetigo in young dogs, bullous autoimmune dermatoses in adults. Characteristic secondary lesions are epidermal
AND
collarettes. Pustules may extend by rupture of hair follicles to form furuncles. Dermal involvement causes vascular
FURUNCLES)
Papules surmounted with a small central crust, may need examination with a hand lens. Commonly found in sarcoptic
CRUSTED PAPULES
mange.
VESICLES
 Small, raised, circumscribed, fluid-filled epidermal lesions. If larger than 1 cm are called bullae.
BULLAE
NODULES
dermis or rarely, in the subcutis.
 Solid masses involving any tissue in the skin or subcutis and usually caused by neoplasia or granuloma formation - usually
TUMOURS
 circumscribed but may be diffuse.
SECONDARY
DEFINITIONS AND CLINICAL ELEMENTS
LESIONS
SCALES*
 Hakes released from the skin surface and composed of masses of cornified cells. Indicates defective keratinisation.
 Dried exudate adherent to the skin surface - may contain squames, blood. Often caused by rupture and desiccation of
CRUSTS*
 primary lesions containing pus or exudate, or following damage to the skin including selftrauma.
EROSIONS
Superficial lesions confined to the epidermis and which heal without scar formation (consider "hot spots"). Excoriations
EXCORIATIONS
are selfinflicted and often linear - seen in pruritic dermatoses.
 Lesions in which the epidermis is breached, there is damage to dermal tissues and a haemorrhagic exudate. They are
ULCERS*
 associated with dermal or subcutaneous pathology. Scarring occurs. Ulcers may be present in cellulitis.
EPIDERMAL
Scales arranged in a circular or arciform pattern and representing remnants of a pustule or vesidle or a zone of focal
COLLARETTES
 inflammation such as a papule. Strongly suggestive of superficial pyoderma.
FOLLICULAR
Squames and sebaceous debris which has been cast around the hairs within a follicle, often matting together several hairs.
CASTS*
Consider folicular dermatoses such as demodicosis and dermatophytosis.
Plugs of keratin and sebum, which dilate hair follicles, initially pale in colour they darken with time. This material can be
COMEDONES*
 expressed by digital pressure. Consider demodicosis and dermatophytosis, or endocrinopathy, particularly Cushing's
syndrome.
primary
Chronic thickening and hardening of the skin with exaggeration of the normal markings - usually associated with
prolonged and continual friction, and accompanied by excessive accumulation of melanin - hyperpigmentation. Cause
LICHENIFICATION
 may be endocrine (diffuse pattern) but is more often postinflammatory (latticework appearance) - a major sign of chronic
HY'PERPIGMENTATION*
inflammation. Alterations of hair colour may also occur commonly as a postinflammatory event. Consider atopic
dermatitis or food allergy when there is dyscoloration of the paws due to continual licking.
may
Abnormal hair loss - may be partial or complete, circumscribed or difuse, symmetrical or asymmetrical. Note the general
pattern first and then following close examination with a lens describe it clearly on the silhouette. Consider conditions
ALOPECIA*
 altering hair development such as endocrine disorders (tend to be symmetrical), and those resulting in follicular damage,
(oaui io seane y paneosse pue jeawwas) womsu pue sisoowap 'apoid se yons
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
The dermatological approach · 5
Part.1
Principal primary lesions
Clinical features
Erythema. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Erythema. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Papules. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Crusted Papule. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Non Follicular Pustules. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Follicular Pustules. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Furuncles. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Tumour (Mycasis fongoide). Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.1
The dermatological approach · 6
Principal secondary lesions
Clinical features
Scales. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Excoriations. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Erasions. Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
Ulcers. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Follicular casts. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Comedones. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Lichenification/Hyperpigmentation. Courtesyof D.N. Carlotti
Alopecia. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
The dermatological approach · 7
Part.1
Silhouette
Left front side
Left
Riqht front
hind
Right
CC
LO
ett
Right front
Right hind
Right side
 Right front
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.1
The dermatological approach · 8
Clinical Record
Owner:
Animal's name:
Date
 Dermatological
Complementary
 Differentials
Treatment
examination
 examinations
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
The dermatological approach · 9
Part.1
Differential diagnosis for groups of related dermatoses:
1/General approach
HISTOPATHOLOGY
USEFULNESSOF
Sometines diagnostic.
The clinicalapproach
May help the clinician
The cinicalapproach
Rarely diagnostic.
ys Aueu ot reianas 
biopsies are necessary
his/her approach.
good biopsies.
is essential.
aeiua
isessential.
Treatif one of these is present and always check for
"All the diagnosed dematoses canbe teated at the same time, but all the susected dematoeshave tobe managed suessvely
·Treat if one orseveralare present and considera
e
monographs
TREATMENT
refertothe
group I and 2 diseases.
(especially pruritus).
follow-up.
Rarerbut generallymore sever
PRIORITYIN THELIST
uopaseq
onebasedncncat
OFDIFFERENTIALS
Aqauo
Whenan uncommon lesional
successfully treated,reoccur.
Definitively eliminate the
Differential
Diagnosis
treatmentof
sUB
UPLL
ata time.
auere
When s
SEQUENCEOF
INVESTIGATION
Always as
a first step
At any time
if suspected
seAjuo
Pn
C
山
Few and relatively uncommon.
Secondary dermatoses
(see lists of the specific dermatoses)
primary dermatoses
Commonest primary dermatoses
OFRELATEDDERMATOSES
GROUP1b:
OLAEI
GROUP1a:
z dnaoAgeass
DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS
Rare primary dermatoses
Many different dermatosesbut.rare.
Some
GROUP2:
GROUP3:
GROUP1:
Specific
infectious
parasitic
dermatoses
pue
Part.1
The dermatological approach • 10
2/Otitis externa
PREVALENCE OF OTITIS AND ASSOCIATED DERMATOSES
±(groups 1 and 3) 
Young dog
+++
+1
±(groups 1 and 3)
+++ (group 2)
Adult dog
+++
-1
十1
into the general dermatological approach
This method provides an
CLINICAL METHOD
OF INVESTIGATION
accurate diagnosis for
 Parasitic Erythemato-Ceruminous Otitis
Erythemato-Ceruminous Otitis
TYPE OF OTITIS EXTERNA
 Otitis due to a Foreign Body
 Associated dermatoses
Suppurative Otitis
(NPECO/IECO)
{FBO)
{PECO)
(Os)
or Infectious E
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
The dermatological approach · 11
Part.1
3/Dermatoses of adult dogs
3
less common and very often secondary
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
 juawpea leye paieeddesip sey l! j! io sntunid ou j!
&MANY OTHER DERMATOSES
 more likely alopecic
Spontaneous Cushing's syndrome
 latrogenic Cushing's syndrome
 endocrine disorders
 of secondary dermatoses
 Hypothyroidism
 after the successful treatment of a secondary dermatosis of group1b
 Beware of the previous use of corticosteroids!
0
EOUs
Pyo) Demodicosis
 of dermatoses in adult dogs
 ONLY AS A SECOND STEP .
AT ANY TIME IF SUSPECTED
 ALWAYS AS A FIRST STEP 
4
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF ALLERGIES
+
 Dermatophytosis
 more likely pruritic
3
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.1
The dermatological approach · 12
4/Dermatoses of young dogs
2
3
shop bunor ui aeu aq pinous 'shinpe ui uouuo Aaa
pnop ui uaym algei shop hnpe aui oi ja
 more likely alopecic
(q ldnoub) sasojewiap Aepuosas
 (immature immune and endocrine systems)
 DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF
 Remember the euthyroid sick syndrome!
ENDOCRINE DISORDERS
(Other endrocrine disorders)
Hypothyroidism
 Sequence of investigation for the differential diagnosis
 specific infectious and parasitic dermatoses (group1)
(immature immune and endocrine systems)
 of dermatoses in young dogs
AT ANY TIME IF SUSPECTED
ALWAYS AS A FIRST STEP 
 ONLY AS A SECOND STEP 
DIFFERENTIAL DIAGNOSIS OF
Dermatophytosis
Demodicosis
ALLERGIES
 more likely pruritic
Z
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Monographs
Part.2
of the major
canine dermatoses
canine dermatoses
odpj
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatophytosis · 1
Part.2
Dermatophytosis
Introduction /Definition
→ Infection of the hair, claw or stratum corneum
by filamentous fungi belonging to the
dermatophytes and normaly involving species
of the genera Microsporum and Trichophyton.
→ Infection almost always affects the hair
Dog affected by dermatophytosis. Micrasporum canis.
follicles leading to crusting and hair loss.
Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary College, London
Microsporum persicolor infects the stratum
corneum and not the hair shaft.
 Affected animals usually recover spontaneously after a period of several weeks but chronic
 infection may occur.
→ The disease is zoonotic.
→ Dermatophytosis in dogs is not very common but clinical signs are highly variable and this
disease is one of the major primary infectious dermatoses that have to be investigated as a first
step in the diagnostic procedure.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→Aetiology.
· The dermatophytes are classified by their principal habitats into three groups. Geophilic
species persist as saprophytes in soil whereas the zoophilic species live principally on animals
(Table 1). Anthropophilic species are those which normally affect man.
· In dogs, species of the genera Microsporum and Trichophyton cause nearly all cases of
der matophytosis.
Table 1. Principal Veterinary Dermatophyte Species, their Hosts and Habitat.
GENUS
SPECIES
HOSTS
HABITAT
Microsporum
canis
cat, dog, horse, rodents, man
zoophilic
equinum
horse, cat, dog
zoophilic
gypseum
dog, cat, horse, man
geophilic
nanum
pig, man 
zoophilic
persicolor
dog, cat, rodents
zoophilic
Tricophyton
equinum
horse, dog, cat, man
zoophilic
erinacei
hedgehog, dog, cat, man
zoophilic
mentagrophytes
cat, dog, rodents, man
zoophilic
verrucosum
cattle, sheep, man 
zoophilic
· Microsporum:
· M. canis is responsible for the great majority of canine infections.
· As a geophilic species, M. gypseum, is influenced by soil conditions and the prevalence of
infection with this dermatophyte varies in different regions.
· M. persicolor is more difficult to diagnose as it infects the stratum corneum rather than
the hair shaft.
· Infection with M. equinum and M. nanum is rarely diagnosed.
· Irichophyton:
· About 30% of dermatophyte infections are caused by I. mentagrophytes.
· Infection with the other Trichophyton species is uncommon to rare.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Dermatophytosis· 2
→ Pathogenesis.
· Dermatophyte infections are acquired by contact with dermatophyte arthrospores derived
from infected animals, soil or fomites.
· Following adherence of the arthrospores to cells of the stratum corneum, germination occurs 
with production of hyphae, which invade the stratum corneum aided by the secretion of
keratinases.
· Penetration of anagen hair shafts then occurs with invasion extending through the hair shaft
(endothrix invasion) as far as the new keratin at the base of the hair but not into the mitotically
active hair matrix.
· Invasion ceases when hairs enter the telogen growth phase.
· Following hyphal invasion of the hair shaft, masses of infective spherical arthrospores are
formed on the surface of the hairs (ectothrix production).
· Invasion provokes an inflammatory response and, under normal circumstances, this leads to
resolution of the disease within 1-3 months. Chronic infection occurs when the host is unable
to generate a curative immune response.
Erythrocyts
®
Lymphocyte
Basophls
Nertrophils
Epsinophils
Staphylococcus
odpl
Dermatophytosis ringworm due t Mirosporum canis (fungal foliculitis).
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatophytosis · 3
Part.2
Epidemiology
→ Infective forms of dermatophytes are derived either from soil (M. gypseum infection) or from
animals.
 Potential animal sources are listed in Table 1.
→ The commonest source of M. canis is infected cats, whereas Trichophyton spp. are often
acquired from wild rodent carriers. Hedgehogs are a source of I. erinacei.
 M. canis spores in infected premises can remain
viable for over 1 year.
→ In some countries, hunting dogs are
 predisposed to M. gypseum infections.
 Terriers, which like to investigate areas
 inhabited by wild rodents, are predisposed to
Irichophyton spp. infections.
 M. persicofor is most often associated with
wood mice and bank voles but canine infection
 may be acquired from domestic rabbits.
Cat affected by dermatophytosis. Micrasporum canis.
→ The disease is most often diagnosed in young
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
dogs (animals less than one year old).
→ Older animals are less susceptible and, if previously exposed to dermatophytes, may have
developed immunity.
 Cats may develop a carrier status in the absence of clinically apparent lesions and represent an
insidious source of contamination for dogs.
Dog affcted by dermatophytasis. Trichophyton mentagrophytes.
Dog affected by dermatophyts. Trichophyton mentagrophyte.
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Dermatophytosis · 4
Clinical signs
 Signs can be very variable and diagnostically
 misleading. For example: circular crusting
lesions (as in human dermatophytosis) are
 caused by other common diseases e.g.
superficial pyoderma; in contrast diffuse
 scaling and crusting with pruritus suggestive
of allergy may be caused by dermatophytosis.
→ Iypical dermatophytosis.
· Focal or multifocal areas of alopecia
 including broken hairs at the periphery,
which extend centrifugally and may heal
centrally.
· Take care to differentiate these from the target lesions of superficial pyoderma.
· Pruritus may be variable, typically low to absent.
→ Other lesions.
· Folliculitis, furunculosis and crusting, which may be well demarcated and can resemble
 autoimmune disease.
· Scaling which may be quite extensive and may or may not have an erythematous margin.
· Nodular, deep, inflammatory, suppurating lesions, also known as "kerion".
· In the healing phase, lesions may be smooth and shiny, particularly with Trichophyton infections.
→ Onychomycosis: infection of the claws may occur with or without evidence of claw bed inflammation
(paronychia) and onychodystrophy.
→ Secondary bacterial infection, particularly with staphylococci, may occur.
d pe 
Dog affcted by dermatophytos Micraspoum peicr.
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Dog affected by dermatophytasis. Micrasporum gypseum.
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatophytosis · 5
Part.2
Diagnosis
Clinical signs may not be diagnostic and thus history,
indicating contact with infected animals or people, and
diagnostic tests are of prime importance.
EA /
→History.
· The disease is more common in young dogs
(animals less than 1 year old). Some dogs are
more exposed (see epidemiology).
· There may be a history of contact with pets,
 particularly cats, or with wild rodents. Humans in
 contact may also have characteristic circular,
 alopecic, erythematous, scaling or crusting lesions.
· The disease is generally progressive spreading from an initial site to other sites or extending
to form a single confluent lesion (typical of Trichophyton).
→ Clinical elements.
· Focal alopecia, scaling lesions with broken
hairs at the periphery and variable pruritus.
· With Irichophyton lesions may be much
more inflammatory with confluent
progressive areas of marked crusting and
hair loss.
· In M. persicofor infection, the hair shafts are
not invaded and broken hairs are not a
feature unless a consequence of self trauma.
· Folliculitis, furunculosis, paronychia and
 onychodystrophy may be present.
→Major elements of history and clinical signs.
Dog affected by dermatophytasis. Micrasporum canis.
· History of contact with infected animals.
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
· Ringworm lesions in humans, especially
children, in contact (typically M. canis infection).
· Progressive, focal or multifocal alopecia with scaling.
 Major differentials.
· Owing to variable clinical signs, the possible differentials include a wide range of diseases (see page 3).
· Consider crusting, scaling and alopecic diseases including cases of bacterial folliculitis and
furunculosis, hypersensitivities, demodicosis, autoimmune crusting diseases, follicular
dystrophy/dysplasia and sterile eosinophilic pustulosis (Ofugi's disease).
Lesional aspect in a dog affected by dermatophytasis
Lesional aspect in a dog affcted by a superficial pyoderma.
due to Microsporum canis. Courtesy of: S. White
Courtesy of: S. White
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Dermatophytosis · 6
 Compfementary examinations.
· Wood's lamp:
· M. canis infected hairs will fluoresce with a
characteristic apple green colour in about
50% of cases.
· Other dermatophyte species do not induce
this fluorescence.
WOOD'S LAMP EXAMINATION :
Woods lamp examination: fluorescence of a hair infected
MAXIMISING EFFICACY
by Microsporum canis. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
 Lamp should have a builtin lens to enable small broken hairs
to be seen.
 Bulbs gradually lose their potency. Check function with known
Wood's Lamp positive hair from time to time.
 Allow the lamp to warm up for a few minutes before use.
→[
 Do the examination in a dark room.
→ Allow your eyes to become accustomed to the dark if possible.
 Look for apple-green fluorescence associated with the hairs.
→ Collect fluorescent hairs for subsequent microscopic or 
cultural examination.
· Direct microscopic examination:
Direct microscopic examination of a hair infected by
· Collect crusted and broken hairs or Wood's
Microsporum canis (x500).Courtesy of: D.N.Carlotti
lamp positive material by hair plucking or
skin scraping and suspend it in 10% KOH or
in cotton blue-lactophenol, which stains
 fungal elements blue. Breaking up the crusts 
facilitates examination. Warm the slide gently
to speed clearing with KOH. Apply a
coverslip.
· Examine at low power (total magnification c.
X20 - X40) and look for hairs which are
broken or fragmented, or which appear to
have a thin coating of material over the
surface.
· Switch to high power (total magnification c.
Direct micrascopic examination of a hair infected by
X400-500) and look for the spherical
Micrasporum gypseum (x500). Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
dermatophyte arthrospores on the surfaces
of the hairs. You may also see hyphae
within the hairs and corneocytes.
· Cytology of smears:
· Sometimes dermatophyte infection is
associated with purulent lesions (furuncles).
Examination of stained smears (Diff-Quik,
immersion: X1000) may indicate possible
dermatophytosis (to see the procedure, refer
to the monographs on pyodermas).
· Microscopic observation shows non-
degenerate neutrophils, macrophages and
Cytology of a smear of a pustule asociated with a Microsporm
sometimes lymphocytes and plasma cells,
gypseum mfection: see non degenerate neutrophils, macrophages
usually without any bacteria.
and lymphocytes. (Diff-Quik stain, x1000).
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatophytosis · 7
Part.2
· Fungal culture:
· Isolation of the dermatophyte confirms the
 diagnosis and enables the species involved to be
identified. This may aid determination of the
source of the infection.
· Note that dermatophytes may sometimes
 contaminate the coat and thus compatible
clinical signs should be present in addition to the
 presence of the pathogen before
DTM culture of a dermatophyte method of sampling
dermatophytosis can be confirmed.
of hairs. Courtesy of: D. Pin
· Prior disinfection of the site to be sampled with
70% alcohol may be useful in reducing growth of
other organisms. Gently spray the sampling area.
· Collect hairs and/or crusts as described page 5.
·Send the collected material to a veterinary
laboratory or culture the specimens yourself.
· Culture on dermatophyte test medium (DTM) is
a very convenient method.
· This medium contains inhibitors which
suppress many but not all contaminants
and the pH indicator, phenol red.
DTM culture of a dermatophyte inoculation method of the
· Gently apply the samples on the surface of
medium. Courtesy of: D. Pin
the medium, in different areas and in
 particular around the periphery.
· The DTM bottle should not be completely
closed, as the growth of dermatophytes is 
aerobic.
· Incubate at room temperature or, better at
25-30°C (above a radiator for example).
· Cultures must be examined regularly, and
saved for at least a month.
· Growth of flat white colonies producing a
red colour in the surrounding medium
within 10-14 days is suggestive of a
DTM cultures. Negative on the lef. Positive to Microsporum
canisin the middle Growth of a contaminant on the right.
dermatophyte.
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
· Aspergillus is an example of a contaminant
which might grow and cause reddening with 14 days, however, its colonies are blue-
 green or greyish in colour and unlike those of the dermatophytes.
· Alternatively, culture can be done on Sabouraud's dextrose agar. However, this method
requires a more complete knowledge of the appearance of dermatophyte cultures as there
 is no indicator to aid identification.
· Further tests can then be done to identify the species isolated, either within your
 practice, if you have sufficient expertise, or the culture can be sent to a laboratory for
identification.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Dermatophytosis · 8
·The Mackenzie Brush Technique for sampling:
· This is a method which enables efficient screening of the skin and coat for the presence of
dermatophytes and their arthrospores, especially when characteristic lesions are absent.
· It is a particularly effective method in searching for carriers, amongst in-contact cats for
example. It is also suitable for screening the skin and coat for residual infection whilst
monitoring the progress of treatment.
· The coat of the animal is brushed with a sterile brush and this is then pressed into the surface
of the culture medium, which is incubated as above.
· Traditionally, a toothbrush has been used as these can be purchased packaged in an
uncontaminated state. However, it is impossible to
sample a thick coat efficiently with a toothbrush.
 Plastic grooming brushes with well-separated teeth
are more efficient.
· Biopsy:
· Biopsy samples of affected skin are an effective
method of diagnosis.
· Samples are taken from the edges of the lesions
 and fixed in the normal way.
· Sometimes the pathologist will need to use special
 stains (e.g. PAS: Periodic Acid-Schiff) to
demonstrate the dermatophyte elements.
Histopathologic image (x400) of a hair infected by a
dermatophyte. PAS stain. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Treatment
→ Generaf remarks.
· It is important to note that many dermatophyte infections will resolve spontaneously within 3
 months and thus recovery may not be directly related to the therapy used.
· Other animals within the home may also be infected at a clinical or subclinical level. These
animals should be examined and treated if infection is detected.
· Infections with Irichophyton and cases of onychomycosis are often more difficult to treat
successfully.
 Topica! treatment.
· Topical therapy is unlikely to be effective on its own in eliminating infection but it may help to
 reduce contamination of the environment and spread of infection to owners and other animals.
· A combination of topical and systemic therapy is best in most cases.
· Clipping:
· The coat should be clipped around focal lesions for a distance of about 5 cm or, when the
lesions are generalised or extensive, the whole coat should be clipped.
· Clipping disrupts the skin surface and facilitates penetration by dermatophytes. Thus it is
 advisable to clip a few days after starting topical and systemic therapy, when the antifungal
agents are established in the skin.
· Clippers and premises must be disinfected after use and the removed hair should be
autoclaved or incinerated.
· Because the infection of hairs extends below the skin surface, it is wise to clip the coat again
 after a growth of about 1-2 cm has occurred to remove newly appearing hairs bearing
 arthrospores.
· Products:
· Localised lesions can be treated with miconazole or clotrimazole creams and lotions applied
daily.
· More extensive infections can be treated with enilconazole washes at three-day intervals.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatophytosis · 9
Part.2
→ Systemic treatment.
· Griseofulvin:
· It is teratogenic and so must not be handled by
women of child-bearing age and should not be
used on pregnant animals. Side effects including
gastrointestinal and haematological changes
sometimes occur.
· Doses of 30-50 mg/kg daily should be effective
but can be doubled if the lower dose is not
Ringworm in human. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
effective.
· The drug should be given with a fatty meal, e.g. add 2.5 - 5.0 ml of vegetable oil or of a
veterinary EFA supplement, to aid absorption. EFA supplements also provides linoleic
 acid, which aids skin barrier function and improves coat condition.
· Treatment will normally be needed for weeks to months and should be continued for at
 least two weeks after clinical recovery.
· Azoles:
· Ketoconazole is employed at 10 mg/kg daily and itraconazole is used at 5 to
10 mg/kg daily. Itraconazole is registered for use in cats as a palatable liquid given at 
5 mg/kg for 7 days on 3 occasions alternating with 7-day treatment free perods.
· Side effects with ketoconazole include hepatotoxicity, adrenal and gonadal hormone
suppression, anorexia and vomiting; it is contraindicated in pregnancy. Itraconazole is
better tolerated.
Additional treatment.
· Dermatophytosis should be carefully investigated in all in-contact pets, especially in cats
(which can be important asymptomatic carriers), and treated if necessary.
· Environmental decontamination:
· In view of the extensive dispersal of infected hairs and squames from affected animals
and the prolonged survival of arthrospores, decontamination should be attempted.
· Thorough cleaning and the use of disinfectants where possible is advisable. Carpets and
soft furnishings should be vacuum cleaned.
· This procedure should be repeated on a number of occasions as the infection comes
under control.
· Owners' lesions:
· If the owners have lesions, they should be advised to consult a dermatologist.
· They are a potential source of reinfection for the animals.
+ Comments.
· It is important to involve the owner and to gain his/her co-operation, as dermatophytosis is
sometimes difficult to resolve, especially where several animals in a household are involved.
· In older animals and where treatment does not seem effective, check for concurrent disease
 and possible causes of immunosuppression.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Dermatophytosis · 10
Prognosis
· Where only a single animal is involved the prognosis is good.
· In groups of animals, particularly if cats are involved, in older animals and in onychomycosis,
 the prognosis should be guarded.
Follow-up
· Therapy must be continued after clinical recovery and negative culture results.
ing duel aun suisn pamooy ag ueo Aaaonai jo ssaioid aun sase aaisod duel spoom ul ·
ultimately should always be checked with cultures.
· Animals may be susceptible to reinfection.
· The owner should be warned to look for signs of recurrence.
· In difficult cases monitoring, e.g. with the Mackenzie brush technique during the months
following recovery may be warranted.
Conclusions
 Dermatophytosis is a very pleomorphic disease and is easily missed when it appears other
than the classical form.
 The possibility of a dermatophytosis is too frequently ruled out from the differential diagnosis
when it appears in other than the classical form.
 Fungal cultures should always be done if in doubt.
 Treatment failures are often due to non-compliance with good treatment regimens.
 Treatment often needs to be continued for many weeks with regular monitoring of the
 progress of response to therapy.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Sarcoptic mange · 1
Part.2
Sarcoptic mange
Introduction / Definition
→ Highly contagious parasitic dermatosis caused by the
multiplication in the epidermis of an acarine mite of the
species Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis (200 to 400 μm).
→ Intensely pruritic.
Micrascopic view of adult Sarcoptes (x1 25). Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
→ Quite common.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→ The parasite: Sarcoptes scabiei.
· Mite specific to dogs, although limited infection of cats is
occasionally reported.
· Parasitic life cycle (egg-larva-nymph-adult): short, 2 to 3 weeks.
· The fertilised females on the skin surface move rapidly towards
the warmer areas of the skin and burrow into the epidermis to
lay eggs.
Sarcoptes scabiei. Courtesy of P Jasmin
· Life expectancy of adult mites: 4 to 5 weeks.
· In the environment (off the host), the different
 parasitic stages survive for only short periods (2
Erythrocyte
to 6 days at 25°C). Nevertheless, at lower
Lymnphocytes
temperatures and high humidity, nymphs and
Mast cells
females can survive for up to 3 weeks and may
Basophils
lead to reinfection.
Nevtrophils
→ Pathogenesis.
Eosinophils
Staphylococcus
· The dlinical signs may appear within one week
odpi
 affe infection.
pachydermatis
· They result from mechanical iritation and
Sarcoptic mange parasitic dermatitis due to Sarcoptes scabiei
hypersensitivity.
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Epidemiology
→ The condition has remained a consistent problem over the years occurring with variable frequency.
→ Major consideration in the differential diagnosis of pruritic dermatoses in dogs.
→ Highly contagious infection but marked individual variation in disease expression with the possibility of
asymptomatic carriers. Infection generally results from direct contact but sometimes by indirect contact, with the
origin of the disease remaining obscure.
→ Possible contagion to humans:
· Appearance of pruritic papules on the trunk, arms and legs.
● However, as the parasite is not well adapted to human skin, adults rapidly die and cannot reproduce; affected
individuals normally recover spontaneously once the animal is successfully treated.
→Most commonly found in puppies and young dogs, especially those coming from pet stores or some breeders.
However, it also occurs in adult dogs.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Sarcoptic mange · 2
Clinical signs
→ Symptoms and lesions may be more subtle and discreet than portrayed in the literature,
particularly in well groomed animals and/or when parasiticides are frequently used.
→ There is severe and constant pruritus often leading to a rapid appearance of extensive
excoriations.
→ Primary lesions: erythematous papules, crusted papules. Typical primary lesions (to be scraped!)
are crusted papules which represent the exact points where the fertilised females entered the
epidermis. They appear either just prior to, or simultaneously with the development of increasing
pruritus.
→ Secondary lesions: crusts, excoriations, hyperpigmentation, lichenification.
→ Associated dermatological findings: scaling and seborrhoeic problems, alopecia, pyotraumatic
dermatitis, otitis externa affecting the margins of the ear flaps.
 Lesion distribution: the favourite habitats of the mites and thus the sites of the lesions are the
margins of the ear pinnae and the bony prominences, especialy elbows and hocks, and then the
ventral portions of the chest and abdomen. When the disease spreads, the entire body may be
 involved, but the dorsal midline is always spared.
Affected margin of the ear pinnae. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Crusted papules on an elbow. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Sarcoptic mange · 3
Part.2
Diagnosis
→ History.
· Rapid onset of pruritus.
· Possible contagion: pet stores, kennels, grooming parlours, veterinarian's office..
· Evidence of spread to other dogs or humans (or rarely cats).
· Partial previous response to parasiticidal or corticosteroid therapy (some 40% of cases
respond partially to the latter, but there is a rapid reappearance of the pruritus).
Hitory Sheet
1/ Age
Lesions on an affected owner (crusted papules). Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
 Clinical efements.
· Pruritus: the intensity is directly related to
the number of parasites only at the onset.
Very rapidly (3 to 4 weeks after infestation),
hypersensitivity reactions lead to very
marked pruritus, often with low numbers of
parasites that are difficult to demonstrate
 even with the aid of multiple skin scrapings).
· Lesions and distribution pattern (see page 2).
Very severe pruritus in a dog affected by Sarcoptic mange
Courtesy of: H. Koch
→ Pinnal-pedal reflex.
· Highly suggestive, positive in more than 80%
of cases and rare in other pruritic
dermatoses.
· This test should be correctly and consistently
 performed.
Location at which the pinnal-pedal reflex should be induced.
(Henrys area). Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Sarcoptic mange · 4
→Differential diagnosis.
· Atopic dermatitis: there is the possibility of cross-reactivity between Sarcoptes and
Dermatophagoides farinae (Df), and positive skin tests to the latter may be found in cases of
sarcoptic mange.
· Food allergy.
· Folliculitis, Malassezia dermatitis, bacterial overgrowth and rarely, atypical dermatophytosis and
 pemphigus foliaceus.
→ Scrapings.
· From crusted papules (elbows and hocks).
· From the ear margins, preferably in lesional areas.
· It is vital to note that:
· This is the only way to obtain absolute confirmation of the diagnosis.
· It is quite difficult to diagnose sarcoptic mange by skin scrapings.
considered even if skin scrapings are negative.
· Failure to find any mites does not eliminate the diagnosis!
The best lesion to scrape is a crusted papule, which has resulted from penetration of a female
 into the epidermis. The mite and/or its eggs may be underneath!
· Look for these crusted papules first on the ear margins, elbows and hocks, with a lens if
necessary.
· "Much more time has to be spent searching for the area to be scraped than actually
scraping" (contrary to the case in demodicosis).
· Scrape the ear margins, especially if no crusted papule has been found.
· Scrape with a blunt scalpel blade. Put a few drops of liquid paraffin, mineral oil or
lactophenol on a microscope slide, lubricate the scalpel blade and use that to soften the 
skin (this facilitates scrapings and the adherence of the scraped material to the blade and 
its transfer to the slide). Then scrape until capillary bleeding results.
With the scalpel blade, macerate and spread the sampled material in the liquid that has
been placed on the slide, then crush it under the coverslip.
· Microscopic observations:
· Every field must be examined carefully.
· Focus on suspicious areas using the 40X objective, if necessary.
· If the sample is quite thick, do not forget to focus up and down to ensure that the whole
sample is checked. Note the presence of adults (200 to 400 μum), of eggs or of faecal
 pellets. Demonstration of any of these is diagnostic.
Scraping of an ear margin. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
 Preparation of a sample on a slide. Couresy of: D.N. Carlotti
→ Serology.
· In some countries, tests for circulating IgG antibodies to Sarcoptes are available. They indicate
recent infestation but may not give positive results until 6 weeks after infestation.
→Skin biopsies.
· At best these are only suggestive, with parasites only rarely observed.
· The disease is characterised by hypersensitivity reactions that result in histopathological
changes similar to those encountered in allergic dermatitis.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Sarcoptic mange · 5
Part.2
 Therapeutic trial (see treatment).
· Must be undertaken rigorously, as if the diagnosis had been confirmed.
· Sometimes ambiguous as other parasitic dermatoses may respond.
· The evaluation of efficacy is based on the reduction in pruritus (be careful: see next paragraph!)
and then of lesions. The response is generally rapid. No final conclusion can be made before
the minimum recommended duration of treatment is achieved.
indication of a positive diagnosis (this may result from the death of the parasites).
· The diagnosis is excluded with decreasing reliability with the use of a systemic injectable
treatment, then a systemic treatment given orally, and finally topical therapy.
· Be sure to use products that are not out of date, and that have been properly stored.
Treatment
→ Topical treatment.
· Selamectin (6mg/kg) and moxidectin
(2.5mg/kg) are effective when applied
 as spot-on preparations at monthly
intervals. Treatment for 2 to 3 months is
 advisable.
· Fipronil spray (0.25%) has been
shown to be effective in 5-week old
 puppies when used on 3 occasions at 
 3-week intervals. It is useful in very
 young puppies and pregnant or
nursing bitches.
· Acaricidal dips can also be used. These
Micrascopic view of egs and facal pellesof Sarcoptes (x400).
 are usually given twice a week for a
Note the image has been focused on the eggs. Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
minimum of 6 applications (unless
 otherwise recommended in the directions for use).
· All parts of the skin must to be treated,
with particular attention given to the lesions around the ears and eyes.
· Products: organophosphates (phosmet, 0.09%),
lime sulfur (2 to 3%), amitraz (0.05%,
3 times at 15 day intervals). Resistance may occur.
· Clipping and pre-treatment with keratolytic and antiseborrhoeic shampoos are indicated.
 Systemic treatment.
· Very effective.
· Ivermectin (250 to 400 μg/kg, 2 or 3 times at 10 or 15 day intervals) by subcutaneous injection
(may be painful but, can be relieved by the addition of a local anaesthetic in the same syringe).
· Strictly contra-indicated in Collies, Shetlands, Bobtails, sheepdogs, and their crosses.
· As this is not an approved drug for this indication, it must be given with the consent of the
· Milbemycin oxime (2 mg/kg, 3 times at 1 week intervals) orally. Again, this is not an approved
drug.
→ Additional therapy.
· Keratolytic, antiseborrhoeic, antipruritic and emollient topical shampoos and lotions.
· Possible systemic corticosteroid treatment for the first week in cases with very intense pruritus
(prednisolone, 0.5 to 1 mg/kg/day orally, 2 or 3 days): only when a definitive diagnosis has
been made by scrapings.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Sarcoptic mange · 6
→Importantremarks.
· An exacerbation of pruritus at the very beginning of the treatment is frequent and suggests
the correct diagnosis and efficacy of the treatment (but it is useful to give the owners notice
of this fact!). Be sure to treat the affected animal long enough after complete clinical recovery
· Treatment of in-contact dogs is strongly indicated.
· Treatment of the environment using an environmental parasiticide may be necessary.
· Change, or thoroughly cleanse the animals bedding.
Prognosis
→ Excellent response to the correct treatment and a rapid cure.
Follow-up
reinfection from the environment or another infected animal.
 Repeated recurrences will necessitate a complete and thorough epidemiological investigation.
Conclusions
 The possible confusion with allergic dermatitis, together with the difficulty and the time
sometimes needed for the differential diagnosis of allergies, make it vital to exclude this
condition prior to the work up for the other pruritic dermatoses.
+ "When in doubt, treat !"
Sarcoptic mange. Courtesy of: P Jasmin
Sarcoptic mange Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Sarcoptic mange. Courtesy of: P Jasmin
Sarcoptic mange. Courtesy of: P Jasmin
 Sarcoptic mange Courtesy of P Jasin
Sarcoptic mange. Courtesy of: P Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatoses associated with infestations by other parasites · 1
Part.2
Dermatoses associated with infestations by
other parasites: Fleas, Lice, Cheyletiella,
Neotrombicula and Straelensia
Introduction / Definition
→ Infestations with ectoparasites other than Sarcoptes, including insects (fleas, lice) and mites
(Cheyletiella, Neotrombicula and Straelensia) are described.
 Infestation may be subclinical for all of these except Neotrombicula and Straelensia.
 Clinical disease is associated with variable degrees of pruritus.
→ Frequency of occurrence of ectoparasic infestations by decreasing order: fleas, Sarcoptes,
Neotrombicula, Cheyletiella and lice. Infestation with Straelensia is rare but is reported in France
and the lberian Peninsula.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→Aetiology.
· Flea infestation. Normally caused by Ctenocephalides felis but Ctenocephalides canis also
infests dogs in certain areas and is more common in southern Europe. Infestation with species
from man (Pulex irritans, P. simulans) and wildlife (e.g. Archeopsylla erinacei from hedgehogs
and Spilopsyllus cuniculi from rabbits) also occurs. Only the adults live on the dog. Eggs are laid
after the female has fed on blood and fall into the environment where they develop through
larval and pupal stages to give rise to new adults, which seek a new mammalian host. Most of
the life cycle is spent off the host. Typically it lasts 3-4 weeks but can take up to 6 months
ocephalides felis Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
x400].（
H
Ctenocephalides felis. Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Cheyletiella yasguri. Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Neotrombicula autumnalis Courtesy of: P Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Dermatoses associated with infestations by other parasites · 2
· Louse infestation (pediculosis). Dogs may be infested with the sucking louse, Linognathus
setosus, which ingests blood via its piercing mouthparts. It is found particularly on the long ears of
breeds such as the spaniel, basset and Afghan hounds. The biting louse of dogs, Trichodectes
canis, which feeds on epidermal debris and is more active, generally causes more irritation. It is
chiefly found on the head, neck and tail and tends to cause problems particularly in puppies. It
can act as an intermediate host for the tapeworm, Dipylidium caninum. Lice spend their entire life
cycle on their host. Eggs laid by the female are cemented to the hairs at one end and give rise to
nymphal stages and then adults. Louse life cycles take 20-40 days.
· Cheyfetiella infestation (cheyletiellosis). Normally caused by
Cheyletiella yasguri. Other species may also infest the dog,
particularly C parasitivorax and C. blakei, typically found in rabbits
and cats respectively. Owners may also develop transient
infestation. The mites live in "pseudotunnels" within cellular debris
 at the skin surface and feed on tissue fluid with their piercing
mouthparts. Eggs are attached to the hairs with fine filaments and
are smaller than those of lice. Nymphs emerge from the eggs and
eventually develop into adults. The life cycle entirely spent on the
host, takes about 21 days.
· Neotrombicula infestation (trombiculidosis). Infestation by the
Cheyletiella yasguri (x400).
larval stage of the freeliving mite, Neotrombicula autumnalis which
Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary College, London
emerges from eggs laid in damp soil by the female in late summer
and autumn and climbs upwards, typically on grass stems, and
awaits the arrival of a host to which it attaches. The larva feeds on
host fluids via piercing mouthparts for 3 days or more and then falls
off to continue its life cycle in the environment.
· Straefensia cynotis infestation (trombiculidosis). As with
Neotrombicula infestation is by free living larvae in later summer and
autumn in dogs in rural environments. The larvae invade the hair
 follicles and after a prolonged feeding cycle may emerge and return
to the environment.
→ Pathogenesis.
Neotrombicula (x400).
These infestations commonly affect young dogs (especially from
Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary College, London
breeding colonies) but also occur in adult dogs.
· Cutaneous irritation is generally associated with hypersensitivity reactions to the bites of these
parasites (see monograph on flea allergy dermatitis). Where there is a state of anergy or low-grade
sensitivity, infestation may be subclinical.
· In flea, louse and Neotrombicula infestations, crusted papules and excoriations associated with
self-trauma may occur. Infestation with Neotrombicula normally causes intense irritation.
In cheyletiellosis, abundant scaling is usually present. Straelensia infestation is associated with
development of nodular lesions, often with a purulent dermatitis, folliculitis, furunculosis and crusts ;
pruritus is uncommon but can be intense.
· Anaemia may be caused by heavy infestations of fleas or lice, particularly in young or small dogs.
Erythrocytes
Lymphocyte
Mast cells
Netrophils
Esinophils
Staphylococcus
odpi
rdpo
Melayseratis
Cheyletiellos: parasitic dermatitis due to Cheyletiella yasguri.
Trombiculidiasis: parasitic dermatitis due to Neotrombicula
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
autumnalis Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatoses associated with infestations by other parasites · 3
Part.2
Epidemiology
→ Fleas. See monograph on flea allergy dermatitis.
→ Lice. These insects are unable to tolerate high temperatures at the skin surface and populations
generally fall in the summer. Infestations tend to be greater in winter.
Transfer between animals occurs with close contact and infestation is promoted by poor management,
crowding and debility. Lice are quite host specific and so transmission does not occur to dogs from
other mammalian species. The entire life cycle is spent on the host.
→ Cheyletiella. Transfer between animals may occur via contact or from the environment. Adults can
survive off the host for up to 10 days in a cool environment but the nymphal stages survive no longer
than 48 hours. The entire life cycle is spent on the host. Sequestration of the mites in the nasal cavity
has been reported and may enable survival and continuing infestation despite use of topical
parasiticides
→ Neotrombicula. Larvae are picked up from vegetation growing in moist, cool environments in the late
summer and autumn and feed for a few days before falling off. The remainder of the life cycle occurs in
the environment.
→ Straelensia. Larvae are acquired in rural environments, especially woodlands, by hunting dogs.
Spontaneous remission can occur but may take up to 12 months.
Clinical signs
→ Fleas. In the absence of flea allergy, minor irritation but anaemia and accumulation of flea dirt in the
       s   s
→ Lice. In some animals there is intense pruritus and crusted papules may be seen. In such cases, hair
loss associated with self-trauma is likely. Infestation may also be sub-clinical or cause only scaling or
signs of "seborrhoea sicca". Higher populations of lice tend to be found on the head, especially the
ears, and adjacent to body openings. The coat is commonly matted, hiding the lice.
→ Cheyletiella. Signs vary from intense pruritus that may even simulate neurological disease, with much 
scaling, to mild or sub-clinical infestation with minimal scurf. Scaling usually commences on the
dorsal trunk but can become very extensive.
→ Neotrombicula. The mites attach close to the points of contact with infested soil or vegetation where
they accumulate and may be seen as orange-red spots. They are commonly found on the feet, the
head and particularly the ears, and the ventrum. Erythema, papules and crusts, together with scaling,
excoriation and alopecia associated with self-trauma are found in and around the infested areas.
→ Straelensia. The mites invade hair follicles particularly dorsally, including the head, causing
erythematous, alopecic nodules and papules sometimes with marked purulent exudation, folliculitis,
furunculosis and crusting, Limbs; ventral abdomen and chest tend to be spared but lesions can be
generalised. Pruritus is uncommon and may be associated with secondary infection.
Louse infestation
Cheyletiella infestation
Neotrombicula infestation
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Dermatoses associated with infestations by other parasites · 4
Diagnosis
→ History.
History Sheet
· Fleas. See monograph on flea allergy dermatitis.
· Lice. Crowding and poor management, including malnutrition, are
GeneralHistor
usually important factors. Dogs may have been bought from breeding
establishments with endemic infestation or may have visited infested
n, fla..l and
premises.
· Cheyletiella. Direct or indirect contact with infested dogs, cats or
ologicalHlistory
rabbits. Papular lesions may be present on the owners, particularly the
arms, around the waist and on the thighs.
These normally resolve when the infestation in the dog has been cleared.
· Neotrombicula. Occurrence of marked, focal pruritus of the head, ears,
 feet or ventrum occuring in the late summer or autumn in dogs that 
have visited infested areas of ground. Infestation may extend into the
winter in warmer climates. Often there is local knowledge of such areas
and owners may have had a similar problem in previous years.
· Straelensia. Appearance of alopecic nodules and papules in late summer
and autumn in dogs living in rural and wooded environments, particularly
hunting dogs, in Southem France and the Iberian Peninsula.
→ Clinical elements.
· Fleas. See monograph on flea allergy dermatitis.
· Lice. Anaemia and debilitation with sucking lice. Poor coat
 condition with matting, particularly on the head and ears, and
around body openings. Pruritus varying from marked to mild.
Selfinflicted wounds and secondary infection may be significant.
Occasionally signs may mimic those of flea allergy dermatitis.
Infestation may be subclinical or associated only with mild
scaling. Lice are visible as dark ovoid objects. Good lighting and
 a lens aids detection. Trichodectes canis is about 1-1.5 mm in
length. It moves rapidly and may be difficult to catch.
Louse infestation in a dog. Couresy of: P Bourdeau
Linognathus setosus is up to 2 mm in length and is less mobile.
· Cheyfetiella. Scaling which may be severe, particularly of the
 trunk. Pruritus varying from severe (scratch reflex causes dog to
 collapse) to mild. Occasionally scaling, crusting and erythema
mimicking sarcoptic mange may occur. Some cases show only
 slight scaling and no pruritus. Inapparent infestation also occurs.
· Neotrombicufa. Usually marked pruritus of the head,
 particularly the ears, feet and/or the ventrum with
accumulations of orange-red mites, visible singly with a hand 
lens. Papules, pustules and crusts may be present. Self-inflicted
excoriations, with hair loss and scaling may occur. Some cases
Cheyletiella infestation in a dog. Courtesy of: H. Koch
 are non-pruritic.
· Straefensia. Erythematous alopecic nodules and papules
 particularly affecting dorsal parts of the body.
Commonly non-pruritic.
 Major elements of history and clinical signs.
· Fleas. Flea allergy. Anaemia in heavy infestations.
· Lice. Matting of the coat, poor management. Lice and or eggs 
visible in the coat.
· Cheyletiefla. Scaling and pruritus. Papular lesions on owners.
· Neotrombicula. Late summer and autumn. Pruritus of head and
feet. Accumulations of orange-red mites.
· Straelensia. Late summer and autumn. Dorsal parts of body.
Neotrombicula infestation in a dog.
 Commonly non-pruritic. Rural dogs.
Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary College, London
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Dermatoses associated with infestations by other parasites · 5
Part.2
→ Differential diagnosis.
· Fleas. See monograph on flea allergy. Where there is no allergy,
causes of anaemia (including lice).
· Lice. Ectoparasitic infestations including fleas, Cheyletiella,
Neotrombicula, Otodectes and Sarcoptes, and other causes of
debility and anaemia.
· Cheyletiella. Ectoparasitic infestations including fleas,
Neotrombicula, Otodectes and Sarcoptes, and keratinisation
disorders.
· Neotrombicula. Ectoparasitic infestations including fleas,
Cheyletiella, Otodectes and Sarcoptes.
· Straelensia. Superficial and deep pyoderma; demodicosis.
→ Complementary examinations.
· Coat brushings. This method is very efficient. The objective is to
have a maximum of cutaneous debris (hairs, scales..) fall down
onto a piece of paper, by brushing vigorously the back of the
Coat brushing technique in a dog affected by
animal. Collected debris is first observed by eye (it is then
Cheyletiella infestation. Courtesy of: D. Pin
possible to see some scales "moving") and then dropped onto
a slide with lactophenol or liquid paraffin and examined under a
coverslip at low magnification. This technique is effective for
searching for Cheyletiella present on the skin surface, but also
allows the detection of flea faeces (wet paper test), or lice and
their eggs attached to the hairs (lice are more mobile and are
about 1-2 mm in length).
· Hair plucks. Mount in paraffin and examine as above for eggs
 and lice or mites.
· Skin scrapings. Remove hair (scissors), apply paraffin to the skin
 Mount scrapings and examine as above.
· Tape strips. Use transparent adhesive tape. Apply to the affected
area. Useful for trapping lice and collecting hair to check for the
presence of eggs and lice or mites. Also useful for Neotrombicula.
After sampling, press the adhesive side of the tape onto a glass
slide and examine in the microscope as above.
· Biopsy. Straelensia infestation is best diagnosed by histopathology;
Coat brushings from a dog affected by
skin scrapings are usually negative.
Cheyletiella infestation. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Treatment
→ Topical treatment.
· Feas. See monograph on flea allergy dermatitis.
· Lice. Shampoo the dog with a good cleansing shampoo and then apply an insecticide of your choice.
Lice are readily killed by insecticides. Selamectin is effective against biting lice.
· Cheyletiella. Four weekly treatments with a parasiticide effective against Cheyletiella will usually be
 curative. Most insecticides and acaricides are effective. Selamectin is reported to be effective as a spot-
on. All dogs and cats in contact should be treated. Heavy-coated dogs should be closely clipped to
ensure effective penetration of the parasiticidal agent. An antiseborrhoeic shampoo can also be useful.
Environmental treatment is advisable (see below). Where topical treatment is unsuccessful or cannot be
effectively applied (aggressive animals, large numbers affected, owners cannot cope, sequestration of the
mites within the nose suspected) systemic therapy may be necessary.
· Neotrombicufa. One or two applications of an insecticidal shampoo are normally effective. Animals
should be kept away from the infested area until the Neotrombicula larval season has ended. Combined
permethrin and pyriproxyfen is reported to be effective as a spray or a spot-on.
· Straefensia. Topical therapy alone is not effective but fipronil spray every 15 days combined with systemic
therapy may be useful. Antimicrobial shampoos may help to control crusting and secondary infection.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Dermatoses associated with infestations by other parasites · 6
 Systemic treatment.
· Fleas. See monograph on flea allergy dermatitis.
· Lice. Systemic insecticidal treatment is not required.
· Cheyletiella. Where topical therapy is not effective or is not feasible, ivermectin (300 μug/kg
 subcutaneously) on two or three occasions at two week intervals may be used. See monograph on
sarcoptic mange, and especially contra-indications.
· Neotrombicula. Systemic insecticidal treatment is not required.
· Antiinflammatory therapy. In all these diseases use of glucocorticoids at antinflammatory doses
 may be useful to control pruritus and reduce inflammation initially. To be avoided if possible.
· Antibiotic therapy. Where there is secondary pyoderma, treatment with an antibiotic effective
against Staphylococcus pseudintermedius should be instituted. See monographs on pyoderma.
· Straelensia. Subcutaneous ivermectin (300 μg/kg) and fipronil spray every 15 days, together with
Oral cephalosporins are reported to be effective in achieving complete cure or preventing
complications until remission. Spontaneous remission may occur after up to 12 months or more.
 Additional treatment.
· Treatment of the environment. Environmental cleaning, particularly the use of a powerful vacuum
cleaner, followed by the use of a parasiticide which persists in the environment for two weeks or
more is advisable in cheyletiellosis and may be useful in infestation with lice where many animals
 are affected. See monograph on flea allergy for antiflea measures.
· Better management. Parasitic infestation, particularly with lice, is likely to be more severe in animals
that are not well groomed, are malnourished or in poor bodily condition. Management may need to
be improved to aid recovery and reduce the likelihood of recurrence, especially in louse infestation.
→ Comments.
· Lack of success is likely to occur most often because of failure of owners to properly and fully
prescribed treatments. Clear explanation of what is required and maintenance of good
 communication with owners until the parasites have been eliminated is very important.
Prognosis
→ Provided that treatments are properly applied, the prognosis is good In trombiculidiasis, owners
should be warned to avoid infested areas in late summer and autumn.
→ Flea allergy is much more difficult to treat successfully (see monograph on flea allergy dermatitis).
Follow-up
→ It is important to re-check the animals to ensure that the parasites have been eliminated. If in doubt,
extend the period of treatment.
→ Occasionally, lack of response may be due to resistance to the agent used and a new course of
treatment with a different product may be necessary.
Conclusions
 These parasitic infestations require careful evaluation and treatment. Good communication with
the owners and careful application of the treatments are the keys to success.
Their frequency should not be underestimated.
→ Hea infestation of course is frequent and must be vigorously treated (even in absence of allergic
signs).
→ Cheyletiellosis is underestimated and must be investigated.
 Trombiculidosis due to Neotrombicula is more often recognised, because of its seasonal influence,
and also because it is more easily detected and often recognised by the owners, but it is rarer than
cheyletiellosis.
 Lice infestation is quite rare in many countries but it may be commoner in others.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 1
Part.2
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis
(juvenile onset and adult onset)
Introduction / Definition
 Demodicosis is a relatively common disease that affects
predominantly pure-bred dogs.
→ It is associated with proliferation of the mites Demodex canis,
which are nommal inhabitants of the hair folicle, and
sometimes of the sebaceous glands.
→ Secondary bacterial infection of the hair follicles often occurs
and rupture of the hair folicle wall may lead to the presence of
free mites in the dermis, and a severe pyogenic infection.
Micrascopic view of Demodex canis adults (x64).
→ Classically, two forms of demodicosis are described, namely
Courtesy of: D. Pin
localised and generalised. Cases of the former usually self-cure,
whereas generalised demodicosis is a severe disease requiring aggressive therapy. However, the distinction
Also, it should be remembered that every case of generalised demodicosis was once localised.
→ In addition to localised and generalised demodicosis, the following foms are recognised:
· Juvenile onset demodicosis (onset prior to puberty) and
· Squamous demodicosis (with no secondary infection)
adult onset demodicosis:
 and pustular demodicosis (pyodemodicosis) where
→ Juvenile onset is by far the most common, and
there is an associated pyoderma. Treatment of the latter
although a serious disease, offers a better prognosis
 involves appropriate antibiotics in addition to parasiticidal
than does adult onset..
therapy.
→ Adult onset is usually associated with severe internal
· Pododemodicosis is a demodicosis affecting the feet, 
disease and is often very difficult to control.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→ The parasite.
· The condition is associated with the mite Demodex canis.
· These mites reside in the hair follicles and sometimes the sebaceous glands where they live on sebum and
cellular debris.
· Four stages are seen, the diamond shaped egg, the 6-legged larvae, and the 8-egged nymphal form which
develops into the adult.
·Their habitat is restricted to the skin, but may be found in the ear canal. In severe demodicosis all stages may
be found in the lymphoid tissues and in many other internal organs. It is assumed that they reach these sites by
simple drainage via the lymphatics.
pdp,
Generalised demodicasis in 5 dogs of the same litter.
Demodex canis. Courtesy of P. Jasmin.
Courtesy of: R.E.W. Halliwell.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 2
→Heredity.
· There is absolutely no doubt that the tendency to develop generalised demodicosis is inherited.
Although the precise mode has yet to be elucidated, it is clear that the condlition can be transmitted
both by the dam and the sire.
· Thus at this point, the recommendation is that neither the sire nor the dam of litters that have resulted
 in generalised demodicosis should be used again for breeding.
· It is difficult to be as certain in the case of localised demodicosis, although lines have certainly been
encountered within breeding kennels that have a higher than expected incidence.
 Proliferation of the mites.
· As already indicated, Demodex
canis is a normal inhabitant of
canine skin.
· The puppy acquires the mites
within the first few hours of
Erythrocyte
suckling, and only animals reared
Lymphocyte
artificially are free of mites.
· The factors that cause
 Mast cells
 proliferation are probably multiple
Basophils
and complex. However, much
Nerrophils
interest has focussed on the
Ensinophils
immunological factors.
· There appears to be a high
odpJ
incidence of demodicosis in
pachydematis
malnourished puppies, and
also in association with severe
Demodicosis (Demodex canis): demodectic folliculitis. Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
internal parasitism.
· Adult onset generalised demodicosis is usually associated with a serious internal disease
and is not infrequently seen with multicentric lymphoma, hyperadrenocorticism and
hypothyroidism. It may also develop secondarily to chronic corticosteroid or
immunosuppressive therapy.
· However, in some cases, no underlying disease can be identified.
· Data from several studies are certainly consistent with demodicosis being associated with a T
cell immunodeficiency.
· But it is not always clear as to whether this defect is the cause or the result of the disease.
s   e s n   se    
· In support of this, it has been shown that normal dogs show positive delayed intradermal
skin tests to crude Demodex antigen, whereas animals with demodicosis react negatively.
· Clearly, such tests must be repeated with purified antigens before conclusive deductions are
made.
· In addition, there is some evidence in favour of hormonal involvement
· Although many dog with Demodex suffer from a "euthyroid sick syndrome", with low T4 levels,
but a normal TsH response, occasional cases are truly hypothyroid, and will not respond to
parasiticidal therapy unless supplemented with thyroid hormone.
· Intact bitches with generalised demodicosis that have been successfully treated, will frequently
relapse when they come into oestrus.
· In conclusion, although immunological factors are certainly relevant, there are probably a
number of different and interrelated factors that can lead to proliferation of the mites.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 3
Part.2
 Development of pustular demodicosis (pyodemodicosis).
· The following sequence of events occurs:
· Proliferation of mites within the hair
follicle interferes with the normal
clearing mechanisms of the follicle and
predisposes to infection with
Staphyfococcus pseudintermedius.
· Subsequent rupture of the hair follicle
leads to a bacterial furunculosis and free
mites in the dermis initiate a foreign body
reaction.
· Free keratin from the hair shaft represents
further foreign body material.
Generalised pyodemodicasis. Courtesy of: R.E. W. Halliwell.
· In long-standing cases the infection can go
deeper and cellulitis develops.
This is particularly serious when it
involves the interdigital area,
leading to severe
Erythrorytes
pododemodecosis.
Lymphocytes
Mast cels
Basophils
Nertrophils
Epsinophils
Stahylpcecas
odpj
Pyodemodicasis (Demnodex canis): demodicasis + bacterial celulitis. Courtesy of: P Jasmin
Epidemiology
The epidemiology can be considered in terms of three differing types:
 Juvenile onset of localised demodicosis.
· Peak age of onset is 3-6 months.
· Although some lines of differing breeds may be predisposed,
localised demodicosis is generally thought of as being a relatively
 common disease, but without any inherited predisposition.
 Juvenile onset of generalised demodicosis.
· Again, onset is usually from 3-6 months and it is rare for this to
commence after puberty.
· Fortunately, this disease is less common.
· It usually commences as localised demodicosis, of which some
Juvenile onset of localised demodicosis.
10% of cases may progress to the generalised form.
Courtesy of H. Koch
· Here, there is a clear inherited predisposition. Breeds commonly quoted as being predisposed
include: Old English Sheepdog, German shepherd, Great Dane, Chinese shar pei, Collie,
Doberman pinscher, English bulldog, Boxer, Afghan hound, Dalmatian, Dachshund, Beagle...
· This predisposition can be transmitted both by the dam and the sire.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 4
 Aduft onset of generalised demodicosis.
· This is far less common, and is usualy associated
with a severe internal disease (e.g. lymphoreticular
neoplasia, endocrine disorders, or the use of
 corticosteroids or immunosuppressive drugs).
· Sometimes, demodicosis appears prior to overt signs 
 of internal disease, and so a continuing search must
be made for such diseases during the course of
treatment.
Adult onset of generalised denodicasis. Courtesy of: H. Koch
Squamous demodicasis (with no secondary
Squamous demodicasis (with no secondary bacterial infection)
bacterial infection) in a Saluki. Close view
in a Saluki. Clase view of a foot (pododemodicasis).
of the lower back. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical signs
→ Demodicosis may have any of the following appearances:
· Areas of predilection are the face, particularly the periocular
 area and commissures of the lips, and the forelegs.
· Focal, demarcated areas of alopecia accompanied by a
fine scale.
· Such areas may be erythematous.
· Areas of follicular plugging are often seen and may be
the only sign when the disease involves the hairless areas.
· Focal, or generalised areas of seborrhoea manifested
by excessive scale and a waxy surface lipid film.
· Most cases of demodicosis are non-pruritic unless
 there is a secondary pyoderma.
However, rarely, some localised and some more
 generalised cases may be quite pruritic, markedly
erythematous and occasionally appear clinically
compatible with atopic dermatitis.
· Some cases, usually those with marked follicular
 plugging, develop a bacterial folliculitis and show
pustules which tend not to progress to the
development of marked epidermal collarettes.
· Deep pyoderma, either furunculosis or cellulitis is
Celulitslesons in aog afftedbypydedss.
often a sequel and indeed this may be the only
Courtesy of: D.Pin
presenting sign.
· Very rarely, ulceration may develop, especially on the face and mucocutaneous areas which may mimic
autoimmune diseases.
· Caution: all cases of deep pyoderma, especially if present in an unusual site or in an unusual breed, must
be carefully evaluated for demodicosis (deep pyoderma = scrapings!).
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 5
Part.2
→ When does localised demodicosis become generalised demodicosis?
· This is debatable.
· However, in general the presence of more than 5 patches of localised demodicosis, or the
development of confluent patches should alert the clinician to the possibility that generalised
disease exists and that aggressive therapy is indicated.
Generalised pyodemodicasis in a dog. Close view of the lower
Generalised pyodemodicasis in a dog.
back. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clase view of a foot (pododemodicosis). Courtesy of: D. Pin
Diagnosis
→ History.
· Juvenile onset localised demodicosis is the most common.
· Although Demodex canis is acquired by puppies within the
first few hours of suckling it is a normal inhabitant of canine
skin and demodicosis is not a contagious disease.
· Adult onset generalised demodicosis is far less common and
 is usually associated with an identifiable internal disease,
 non skin-related problems:
which may be of a serious nature. In some cases the onset of
demodecosis precedes the overt development of the
underlying disease.
→ Clinical elements.
· Major lesions are focal to generalised areas of alopecia and
seborrhoea.
· With a predilection of development on the face and forelegs.
· Areas of follicular plugging are often seen.
· Demodicosis is usually non-pruritic except when there is a 
 secondary pyoderma.
· Secondary pyoderma (folliculitis, furunculosis or cellulitis) is not infrequent.
→ Skin scrapings.
· The diagnosis is most often made by demonstration of the mites by skin scraping.
· Demodex mites are exceedingly rare in normal skin, and the presence of more than one mite in
a scraping, and particularly the presence of young forms and eggs, enable confirmation of the
diagnosis.
· The performance of the skin scraping:
1 - Some 3-5 sites are selected for skin scraping.
2 - The hair, if present, is clipped.
 3 - The skin is gently squeezed between thumb and forefinger to force the mites more superficially
in the hair follicle.
4 - The skin is moistened with liquid paraffin or mineral oil.
5 - Some is also placed on the slide.
 6 - The skin is then scraped using a blunted scalpel blade until capillary bleeding is observed.
7 - The material is then transferred to the slide.
8 - The entire slide is scanned using the 10x objective.
9 - Focus on suspicious areas using the 40X objective if necessary.
10 - The proportion of live and dead mites, of adult and young forms and of eggs should be recorded.
· Note that mites are more readily demonstrated in demodicosis than in Sarcoptic mange and
failure to demonstrate mites by skin scraping eliminates the diagnosis. The only exception to
this is in cases of pododemodecosis, when the mites may be very hard to find.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 6
Skin scraping. Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
Skin scraping. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Skin scraping. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Skin scraping. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
 Other diagnostic aids.
· Examination of hair "pluckings": as the mites are deep in the hair follicle, they are often readily
observed around the hair bulb of hairs plucked from the periphery of lesions. However this
 method is less sensitive than is skin scraping.
· Examination of pustular exudate: material squeezed from areas of deep pyoderma frequently
reveal many mites free in the exudate.
· Skin biopsies:
· Biopsy samples of affected skin are an effective method of diagnosis, but are unnecessary
for routine cases.
· Sometimes the mites may be very deep, especially when associated with a deep
pyoderma such as in pododemodicosis and not readily demonstrated by skin scrapings.
· In some breeds, such as Chinese shar pei, the skin is sometimes difficult to scrape.
· If the clinical index of suspicion is high such cases should be biopsied if negative skin
scrapings result.
· In demodicosis, contrary to the case in Sarcoptic mange, mites are easily seen during
histopathological examination of skin biopsies.
→ Major differentials.
· The localised form is readily confused clinically with dermatophytosis.
· Lesions of demodicosis also resemble those of leishmaniasis and occasionally, the two diseases
may coexist.
· The pustular form resembles any other form of deep pyoderma.
panniculitis and (in areas of the world where they exist) the intermediate and deep mycoses
such as sporotrichosis.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 7
Part.2
Localised denodicosis
Lesional aspect in a dog affected by dermatophytosis
Courtesy of: R.E.W. Hallwell.
due to Microsporum canis. Courtesy of: S. White
Treatment
→ Localised demodicosis.
· This is usually a self-limiting disease that cures spontaneously.
· Treatment with parasiticides is usually not warranted.
· In general it can be stated that:
· Cases that have very few mites are probably curing themselves and treatment is not warranted.
· Where many mites are seen and especially young forms and eggs treatment should be given.
· However, always remember that some 10% of cases of localised dlemodicosis go on to become generalised.
 Therefore, whether or not treatment is given a careful follow-up is necessary.
→ Generafised demodicosis.
· Aggressive acaricidal therapy is necessary for this is a potentially fatal disease.
● Amitraz is used at 250 parts per million (ppm) applied every 2 weeks in the USA, but at 500 ppm
weekly in most other countries.
· It should not be used in Chihuahuas, and is used at lower concentrations in debilitated animals
· Other considerations in the use of amitraz are:
· long and medium coated dogs should be clipped and the hair kept short during treatment,
· any crusts should be removed by warm water soaks,
· skin scrapings should be taken every 2-3 weeks to monitor the response in terms of the live/dead mite
ratio, and the number of eggs and juvenile forms,
● therapy should be continued for at least 2 weeks or 2 dips after mites were last demonstrated.
· Amitraz is also marketed as a spot-on product in association with metaflumizone with a label claim for demodecosis
· Milbemycin oxime in doses of 1-2 mg/kg for 8 weeks is generally effective, and licensed in some countries.
· A combination of 10% imidacloprid and 2.5% moxidectin has recently been licensed in most countries. It is applied
topically in spot form at monthly intervals for up to four months. Recent studies have shown that it is safe and more
effective when applied weekly.
· Antibiotic therapy.
· Concomitant antibiotics should be used in cases of pustular demodicosis.
·Generally, an antibiotic that is appropriate forStaphylococcus peudintermedius s used rrespective f
whether gram-negative organisms are also isolated.
· In cases with severe secondary infections, culture and sensitivity are mandatory, and if the animal is severely
debilitated, an antibiotic that will encompass both Gram-positives and Gram-negatives may be necessary and
indeed life-saving.
· Antibiotic therapy should be continued until the mite population is wel-controlled.
· Further supportive therapy.
· Remember that cases of adult-onset demodicosis are likely to be associated with an underlying disease
process or with drug administration.
· Any contributing disease must, therefore, be treated.
· Allintact bitches must be subjected to ovariohysterectomy, or recurrence will be very likely.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Demodicosis and pyodemodicosis · 8
Follow-up
+ Generaf remarks.
· Follow up involves a full clinical examination and multiple skin scrapings from affected areas.
· Live mites are readily identified by their movement, even under oil.
· The proportion of live/dead mites, anc the proportion of eggs, young forms and adults are recorded.
· All cases, both localised and generalised, should be re-checked initially at intervals of 2 weeks and assessed as above.
· Cases of localised demodicosis in which it was elected not to give treatment initially, should be immediately
pue sa sau a go uonodoid aeae e j lo upaids jo suis mous Aau j deaun ppiseed oi paipalqns 
young forms are found.
· Cases under long term treatment can be checked monthly, and if the proportion of live/dead mites is not climinishing,
 then consideration should be given to the use of an alternative therapy.
→ The approach to recurrent and/or resistant cases.
· Recurrent cases:
· Be sure that the treatment has been correctly applied.
· If using amitraz at 250 ppm, and on every other week, consider using it at 500 ppm and weekly.
· If there is an inadequate response to amitraz, consider using imidacloprid/moxidectin, or vice versa.
· Be sure that the entire mite population has, as far as can be ascertained, been eliminated.
paan anssans pue aaedodde uaaq se aeasp suapun ae ei ans ag 
· In cases that tend to recur, consider using prophylactic dips with amitraz every week, every other week, or maybe
monthly according to the response.
· Alternatively, consider longer term therapy with imidacloprid/moxidectin.
·Resistant cases:
● Before proceeding to use unlicensed products, extralabel use of amitraz by using it at 1000 ppm applied to half 
the body only, or spot-treatment of resistant areas such as pododemodicosis on a daily or alternate day basis
should be considered.
· Other parasiticides that are unlicensed, but that have been shown to be effective are:
· oral ivermectin at 400-600 μg/kg daily for up to 8 months, as required. Collies of all types, old English
sheepdogs, other herding dogs and their crosses, and any other dogs with the MDR 1 gene mutation
should never receive ivermectin, which is not licensed for this use in any country of the world. Toxicity has
been recorded even in dogs lacking this mutation.
● milbemycin oxime has been used orally at doses of 0.5-2.0mg/kg Investigators recommend starting with
sul 'suns au jo suat u asuodsat poo e pou st aau j yuou ypea asop au suiseaun pue by/suso
drug appears to be safe in colies,
· moxidectin has also been used orally at 200-400 μg/kg daily for up to 6 months. In contrast to ivermectin,
milbemycin oxime and moxidectin appear to be welltolerated in all breeds.
Prognosis
→The prognosis for juvenile onset localised demodicosis is very good.
→The prognosis for juvenile onset generalised demodicosis is always guarded.
· Recurrence even over one year after apparently successful therapy may occur.
· Essentially, the case of severe, generalised demodicosis can never be considered as cured.
 In particular, pododemodicosis has an especially guarded prognosis.
· However, upon recurrence, reinstitution of therapy may still be successful.
→ The prognosis for adult onset generalised demodicosis is especialy guarded.
· In that it is often associated with serious underlying disease.
· However, if the underlying disease is successfully controlled, then the demodicosis should also be controlled.
Conclusions
→ Demodicosis is often a frustrating disease to manage and one where the precise aetiological
factors are poorly understood.
→ Owner education is vital in obtaining co-operation in the therapeutic approaches which may
be expensive and are often long-term.
 In adult dogs, generalised demodicosis is a very serious disease and is usually secondary to an
underlying disease process. Both the demodicosis and the underlying disease must be treated.
→ In young dogs generalised demodicosis is still a very serious disease with a guarded
prognosis, but there is usually an absence of underlying disease.
→ Juvenile localised demodicosis is usually a benign and self-limiting disease, although all such
cases should be carefully monitored for any tendency to develop generalised disease.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Pyoderma - General presentation · 1
 Part.2
Pyoderma - General presentation
Introduction / Definition
 Canine pyoderma is a pyogenic bacterial infection of the dog's skin
→ Pyodermas are very frequent, more or less pruritic dermatoses of dogs.
→ They should always be considered as a possible differential diagnosis at primary presentation
of canine dermatoses
→ Correct diagnosis is of major importance, especially in the case of pruritic skin diseases, as
 pyoderma can mimic a great number of dermatoses and above all be secondary to them.
Key points and classification
→ According to the origin and/or immune status of the dog, they can be superficial or deep,
localised or generalised.
A recurrent pyoderma is a pyoderma that responds well to appropriate therapy (topical and
systemic antibiotic) but that relapses regularly, which implies repeated treatments.
A resistant pyoderma is a pyoderma that does not respond to a number of usually effective
therapies, particularly classical antibiotic treatments and thus necessitates aggressive
treatment, including with particular antibiotics.
→ Pyoderma has different causes and/or characteristics depending upon whether it is found in
young or adult dogs. Even though the first fundamental division of the general dermatological
approach proposed is done according to the age of the animal, for practicality and the
purposes of clarity, pyodermas will be differently but closely classified as "simple approach
 pyodermas" and as "complex approach pyodermas".
→ Terminology.
· Simple approach pyodermas may be primary or idiopathic, or related to causes that
need to be investigated simultaneously in the first instance. There can be evident causes
(folded skin in intertrigo) or other dermatoses, mostly ectoparasitic infestations
(demodicosis and Sarcoptic mange in particular).
· Complex approach pyodermas are secondary to underlying causes (mostly allergies and
endocrine disorders) that need to be explored in the second instance, after treating the
 pyoderma when it interferes with any further diagnosis.
→ In the young dog.
and impetigo (exceptionally a juvenile pyodemodicosis may be deep).
→ In the adult dog.
· Simple approach pyodermas are rarely present. In most cases, complex approach
pyoderma is present secondary to allergic dermatitis or endocrine disorders.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Pyoderma - General presentation · 2
· Simple approach pyodermas are superficial: intertrigo, idiopathic folliculitis (in short-
haired breeds or due to so-called bacterial hypersensitivity) and folliculitis related to
ectoparasitic infestation (except for demodicosis that is secondary in adult dogs;
pyodemodicosis then has a complex approach).
· Complex approach pyodermas are secondary and chiefly very frequent (directly related
to the frequency of the underlying cause). They can be:
· superficial (folliculitis): usually secondary to allergic dermatitis, very frequent.
· deep (furunculosis and cellulitis including pyodemodicosis): generally secondary to
endocrine disorders, much lower frequency.
complex approach" as they are generally secondary to a flea allergy dermatitis 
relatively frequent.
· NB: some rare cases of localised deep pyoderma (e.g., pododermatitis) are idiopathic and
then of simple approach.
→ Simple approach pyodermas therefore represent the majority of pyodermas found in young
dogs and in some rare cases, adults. They are chiefly superficial.
→ Complex approach pyodermas follow the occurrence of underlying dermatoses and concern
only adult dogs. They are more frequently superficial and secondary to allergic dermatitis.
→ Table summarising the different classifications:
AGE
YOUNG DOG
ADULI DOG
CATEGORY
TYPES OF
SUPERFICIAL
DEEP
PSEUDO-
SUPERFICIAL
DEEP
PSEUDO-
PYODERMAS
 PYODERMAS
PYODERMAS
PYODERMAS
PYODERMAS
PYODERMAS
PYODERMAS
=0
Intertrigo
=0
Intertrigo,
(ldiopathic
SIMPLE
APPROACH
Juvenile
interdigita!
Folliculitis
(Pyodemodicosis)
Idiopathic
=0
cellulitis *
pyoderma)
PYODERMAS
Impetigo
{Canine acne)
folliculitis 
(Nasal pyoderma)
(Localised cellulitis)
Furunculosis
COMPLEX
Cellulitis 
Pyotraumatic
Folliculitis
{including 
APPROACH
0
0
dermatitis
Impetigo**
 Pyodemodicosis)
PYODERMAS
("Hot spot")
Interdigital 
 pyoderma
Typography indicating the relative importance of these pyodermas: yery frequent. frequent, not frequent, rare.
Because of their specific nature, some pyodermas are classified in the third group of the diagnostic approach:
* Juvenile cellulitis is a rare pseudo-pyoderma affecting puppies of only few months old, which must however be thoroughly
investigated.
** Impetigo is rarely seen in adults but it is usually severe and secondary to trauma or debilitating underlying diseases (Cushing's
syndrome....
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Pyoderma - General presentation · 3
Part.2
Aetiology, pathogenesis and epidemiology
 Canine pyoderma is due to the multiplication of bacteria in the epidermis and its appendages (hair follicles in
folliculitis, or sweat glands in hidradenitis) in the case of superficial pyoderma, and with invasion of the dermis in the
case of deep pyoderma.
→ The bacteria.
· In most cases, the sole agent involved is a coagulase-positive staphylococcus specific to the dog -Staphylococcus
pseudintermedfus.
· In other rare cases, other species of pathogenic staphylococci can be found - Staphylococcus aureus or
Staphylococcus hyicus or Staphylococcus schleiferi (var schleiferi or coagulans).
· Other bacteria can be involved, particularly gram-negative bacteria (Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus mirabilis,
Escherichia cofi.), but their development is usually secondary to the outgrowth of Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius.
· Therefore, the latter will always have to be the principle
target of the treatment, whatever the results of bacterial
culture.
→ Pathogenesis.
 In the dog, the statum corneum is far thinner and more
compact than that of any other species, and there is a
paucity of intercellular emulsion.Futhermore, the hair
follicule infundibulum of the dog is open, lacking a sebum
plug.
· Staphyfococcus pseudintermedius belongs to
the resident flora of the dog's skin and mucosa.
Staphylococcus intermedius in a neutrophil(phagocytasis).
· It becomes pathogenic when the equilibrium of the
Courtesy of: D. Pin
cutaneous ecosystem is disturbed by modifications in
the surface micro-environment. Pathogenic staphylococci can easily colonize an inflammed and excoriated,
seborrhoeic skin. In fact, inflammed skin has accelerated epidermal proliferation and desquamation and is more
humid and warmer. These alterations of the skin surface micro-environment promote the multiplication of bacteria
Furthermore, self-trauma and excoriations due to pruritus further degrade the epidermal defences and allow
inoculation of bacteria into the skin.
· This explains why pyodermas are essentially secondary to underlying dermatoses.
They are therefore very frequent in adult dogs, which group is more susceptible to skin diseases and in particular,
allergies. Allergic skin disease, notably atopic dermatitis, is thus probably one of the most common causes of
canine pyoderma and particularly of recurrent pyoderma.
In addition, it has been demonstrated that dogs affected with primary seborrhoea have markedly higher cutaneous
bacterial counts than normal dogs, with a flora composed primarily of coagulase-positive staphylococci. Any
seborrhoeic skin disease (including allergic skin disease and endocrinopathies) is therefore a possible cause of
canine pyoderma. If the keratoseborrhoeic condition is not controlled, the pyodema can become recurrent.
· A vicious circle can then take place, staphylococci secreting virulent factors aggravating the cutaneous lesions
 and therefore the bacterial overgrowth. Antibacterial therapy is hence the key component in general therapy.
 Pyodermas are not contagious neither to animals nor to humans. Nevertheless, routine hygienic rules must be
respected when the animal presents with suppurative lesions.
→ The aetiology of recurrent pyoderma includes:.
· Anatomic defect i.e. excessive folds that cause intertrigo.
· Allergic skin disease, generating skin inflammation and consequently skin infection, mostly superficial (folliculitis)
but also deep in severe and poorly treated cases.
· Keratinisation disorders.
· Immunological deficiencies.
· Inappropriate treatments:
 Poor selection of antibiotics.
 Lack of complementary anti-microbial topical treatment.
 Too short antibiotic therapy.
 Too low dosage of antibiotic therapy.
 Simultaneous use of contra-indlicated drugs, particularly glucocorticoids that are never indicated in pyoderma,
even in case of severe pruritus, because of their rebound effect; in addition, the pruritus due to pyoderma
disappears very quickly after the initiation of specific therapy.
The main cause of resistant pyoderma is infection with resistant strains, including MRSP (and eventually Methicillin
Resistant Staphylococcus aureus - MRSA - or Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus schleiferei - MRSS) or
Pseudomonas spp.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Pyoderma - General presentation · 4
Diagnostic methods
 Clinical suspicion is fundamental and may justify by itself the initiation of systemic
antibacterial therapy, especially where there are pustules.
→ Cytology.
· An excellent method to support the clinical diagnosis, providing there are good data
indicating the presence of pyoderma or other possible causes. It is also reliable and allows
rapid performance and interpretation (at the patient's side) and relatively inexpensive.
· The cellular types observed in pyodermas are the following:
· Microscopic observation of pus is substantiated by the presence of neutrophils
which can be degenerate (also called "impaired") or non-degenerate. The degenerate
neutrophils indicate an active immune status. They do not stain much and appear
neutrophils appear healthy and well stained (dark purple).
· Presence of bacteria, generally cocci (and more rarely rods).
· Bacteria may be extracellular (next to the neutrophils) or intracellular. In the latter
case a few bacteria are gathered in vacuoles in a neutrophil appearing degenerate:
this a sign of engulfment (phagocytosis) which indicates an immune response by the
host and is suggestive of an active disease status, mainly if that phagocytosis is seen
be considered as pathogens and therefore a diagnosis of a pyoderma can be made.
immune response which indicates a more chronic and/or severe condition.
· Red blood cells may be present, indicating capillary lesions and therefore a deeper
involvement.
· Most cellular elements are easily observed, however, signs of phagocytosis, which
 represent a fundamental diagnostic feature, must be explored. They are easily found -
observation should be focused on accumulations of cocci.
· The quantity of all the elements observed must be assessed (o to +++) in order to
evaluate the intensity of the condition and to help the follow-up. As an example, the
decrease of phagocytosis observed during a therapy may be a sign of the efficacy of
that therapy.
· Cytologic findings may also allow consideration of other dermatoses, for example:
· The lack of bacteria in the presence of many non-degenerate neutrophils may suggest
a single, polygonal aspect) and especially with healthy neutrophils, an auto-immune
dermatosis may be suspected - most commonly pemphigus foliaceous).
absence of bacteria may indicate a dermatophytosis.
· Eosinophils are found in pustular reactions to arthropod stings, etc.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Pyoderma - General presentation · 5
Part.2
· Practical guidelines to sampling and taking
direct impression smears:
· In the cases of fold pyodermas (or even
"hot spots"), perform an impression
smear by pressing the slide against the
lesion, the edge (or a corner) is sufficient
for sampling small areas.
· In the cases of impetigo, folliculitis and
furunculosis, look for an intact purulent
lesion (pustule or furuncle), open it gently
with the corner of the slide or a needle
pinching the skin between two fingers in
Method to open a pustule with the edge of a micrascopic slide.
order to express the fluid, and apply the
Courtesy of D. Pin
slide on to several areas of the pus.
· In cases of cellulitis, take samples under
the crust, selecting crust revealing pus and
 apply the slide to several areas.
· Slide preparation and fast-acting dye
(Diff-Quik type):
· Note on the slide where the sample has
been placed (write the nature and the
location of the sample). This will be the
examination side.
· Let the samples dry for I to 2 minutes in
open air.
· Immerse the slides in the three different
dyes, following the advised contact times
(generally 30 seconds each).
· Rinse the slides thoroughly with clear
Method to spread on a micrascopic slide the material contained in a
water and blot them carefully with a paper
pustule. Courtesy of: D. Pin
towel, examination side upwards, until the 
water is completely absorbed.
· A hair-dryer may be used (gently) for final drying.
· Microscopic examination:
· First locate evenly spread and fully stained areas and place them under the microscope,
examination side upwards!
· Under low (1ox objective) magnification look for the areas with most cells particularly
the neutrophils that appear as agglutinated "Q".
· Then change to the 40X objective.
· Without modifying the depth setting, place the slide between two objective lenses to
apply a few drops of immersion oil on the chosen area. Turn to the high power objective
(100x immersion) adjusting the focus.
the reading side may be on the other side!
· Scan the sample over a large area for a few minutes and look for characteristic images,
such as cocci phagocytosis, eventually looking in other areas of the sample (adding some
immersion oil if necessary).
· The images commonly found for each type of pyoderma are described in the chapter
concerning the specific diagnosis.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Pyoderma - General presentation · 6
→ Skin biopsies.
· May reveal characteristic images of pyoderma.
· Skin biopsies are required when support of the clinical diagnosis is needed, particularly if
therapy has failed in spite of a strong suspicion (histopathology willthen either confirm the
diagnosis and support the continuation of an antibacterial therapy, or give proof or
suggestion of another disease).
→ Culture and Sensitivity testing.
· This test is not a diagnostic procedure by itself in dermatology, but it can confirm the
presumption, revealing the presence of one (or several) pathogen(s) inside a lesion.
· It should above all be considered as a guide to treatment.
· It normally allows the identification of the bacteria present in the pus, and the testing of
their sensitivity:
· with the conditions that the causal bacteria has been sampled (and not a normal skin
resident species), that it survived during transportation (use the appropriate medium),
that it is not inhibited by contaminating species and there is agreement with a
laboratory that routinely isolates Staphylococcus pseudintermedius.
· Choose antibiotics that need to be included in the sensitivity test and be sure that the
laboratory employs adapted discs/systems and refers to validated critical concentrations,
especially for Staphylococcus pseudintermedius.
· These tests must be kept for difficult cases, e.g. therapy failure, cases refractory to
treatment (resistant pyoderma), multiple relapses on animal treated several times
(recurrent pyoderma), severe deep pyoderma...
Obviously, the identification of a MRSP (Methicillin Resistant Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius) or Pseudomonas spp. is mandatory since these bacteria can be
considered as a cause of pyoderma resistant to a well conducted antibiotic treatment.
It is likely that the increase of number of resistant strains will lead to a more frequent use
Of bacterial culturing and sensitivity testing.
Microscopic picture of a direct smear of a folicular pustule.
Phagocytasis of cocci by neutrophils (Diff-Quik stain, xi000).
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Pyoderma - General presentation · 7
Part.2
General therapy
→ Classically, pyoderma therapy requires antiseptic topical therapy combined with systemic
antibiotics. This association hastens the healing process and allows a faster recovery,
compared with systemic treatment alone
Antibiotics.
· Systemic antibiotics are necessary in most pyoderma cases
· The initial prescription must be for a minimum of two weeks plus one to two additional
weeks after clinical recovery.
· The antibiotic can be renewed for courses of two to three weeks if necessary.
· Appropriate antibiotics for skin infections:
· must be active on staphylococci and resistant to their enzymatic inactivators (e.g.
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius secretes penicillinases),
· must have an appropriate kinetics and good cutaneous penetration,
· must be active in pus and reactive tissues (particularly in deep pyoderma),
· must be easily taken orally to facilitate long term treatment by the owner,
· because of duration of the treatment it must be well tolerated, particularly in young dogs,
· its clinical efficacy must have been proven in recent trials.
· Macrolides and lincosamides, but resistance is increasing and with crossing between
these two families.
· Diaminopyrimidines potentiated sulfonamides. Possibilities of development of
polyarthritis (principally in Dobermans) and keratoconjunctivitis sicca in long term
treatments.
· Penicillins resistant to penicillinases: Amoxicillin + clavulanic acid (clavulanic acid is an
 essential inhibitor of penicillinases, amoxicillin alone is not efficacious in pyoderma
treatments) and oxacillin (infrequently used; may induce vomiting and levels of
resistance are increasing).
· Cephalosporins (cephalexin and cefadroxil). Cephalexin is a molecule that has been
used for many years in veterinary medicine. Thanks to its excellent clinical efficacy, it
remains a first choice antibiotic in veterinary dermatology.
· Fluoroquinolones, should not be used in young dogs (especially in big breeds) because
of their toxic effect on cartilage. As resistances increase quickly, they should not be used
 as first intention antibiotics, particularly in superficial pyoderma.
The best recent clinical results have been obtained with clindamycin, fluoroquinolones
and cephalexin. Always choose veterinary specialities for which efficacy has been proven in
practice.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Pyoderma - General presentation · 8
→ Corticosteroid therapy.
· Inadequate and indiscriminate use of corticosteroids can produce difficulties in diagnosis
and treatment. Except for special cases (pseudo-pyodermas such as juvenile cellulitis), the
use of corticosteroids is strictly contraindicated in pyoderma, even in the presence of
pruritus because of "rebound effect" - a severe relapse.
· As a factor of immunodeficiency it favours the outbreak of pyoderma, in particular deep
pyoderma (with a possible development of iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome in the worst
cases).
· Furthermore, diminishing the pruritus in a symptomatic manner does not allow evaluating
the component due to the pyoderma itself (which will disappear with the healing of the
lesions) and the component due to an eventual underlying pruritic dermatosis.
Issasons sumolloy (sep may e u Aipiden sheaddesip eapod e on anp snund aui ·
antibacterial treatment.
→ Topical therapy.
 Antiseptic topical products include
shampoos, ointments and lotions (used as
adjuncts to antibiotics or for symptomatic
relief). In case of resistant pyoderma, they
become a major part of the treatment.
· Shampoos (especially antiseptic) are very
useful, at least at the beginning of the
treatment. They allow the mechanical
removal of debris, pus, crusts and bacteria
(also eliminated by the antiseptic action).
They contain various antiseptics:
Cellulitis. After clipping, before shampoo. Courtesy of P. Jasmin
chlorhexidine, benzoyl peroxide, ethyl
lactate or piroctone olamine. Products containing sugars
(glycotechnology) can decrease the adherence of
staphylococci and pseudomonas.
Ointments, creams and gels containing fucidic acid or
benzoyl peroxide are useful for treating localized lesions of
 pyoderma. Chlorhexidine can be used in lotions and sprays,
 as an antibacterial agent.
shampoos) is of benefit in all pyodermas.
→ Therapy duration and follow-up.
· Antibiotic therapy in dermatology is protracted! The
recovery time for canine pyoderma is totally different from
almost all other bacterial infections. The owner must be
made aware of this peculiarity of canine dermatology.
· Whatever the case, a minimum of three weeks to initiate
Cellulitis. After cliping, after shampoo.
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
the treatment must be prescribed.
· The first re-visit should be planned after this time; the owner
must of course be aware of the need to come back before
if the condition deteriorates (e.g. non-effective treatment, or worse, a cutaneous drug
reaction due to the molecule prescribed)
· At that visit, prescribe a further two weeks of treatment if it has not completely
recovered for at least one week.
· In case of resistance or recurrence, several cultures and sensitivity testings may be done
during the follow-up.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Simple approach pyoderma * 1
Part.2
Simple approach pyoderma
All young dog pyodermas and rare cases in the adult.
Young dogs: Intertrigo - Folliculitis - Impetigo
Adult dogs: Intertrigo - Idiopathic folliculitis
Introduction / Definition
→ The simple approach pyoderma can be primary or idiopathic, or related to underlying causes that
or other skin diseases, mostly ectoparasite infestations (particularly demodicosis and sarcoptic mange).
→ Therefore these pyodermas do not have identifiable underlying causes or they have causes that can
be diagnosed simultaneously during the first step.
→ They concern mainly superficial pyodermas: intertrigo (or "fold pyoderma"), folliculitis and impetigo.
→ Intertrigo occurs in young as well as in adult dogs and is due to anatomical defects (exaggerated
skin folds).
→ In the young dog folliculitis and juvenile impetigo are often found; most frequently idiopathic, but
they can also be linked to parasitic infestation (especially sarcoptic mange). In some rare cases of
juvenile demodicosis, a pyodemodicosis may develop with presence of a furunculosis and/or a
cellulitis (rarely a folliculitis), both demodicosis and deep pyoderma must be then treated
rare cases in young dogs!). See the monograph on demodicosis.
→ In the adult dog idiopathic folliculitis (short-coated breed pyoderma, so-called bacterial
their presence in adults requires the exploration of an underlying cause). Impetigo in adults is a rare
and severe condition that can be easily confused with a bullous auto-immune dermatitis and is almost
always due to severe underlying causes. It can then be classified in group 3 of the diagnostic
approach (information is given in the chapter on complex approach pyodermas).
→ Relatively frequent in young dogs, the simple approach pyoderma is seldom found in adults, and is
essentially idiopathic folliculitis in short-coated breeds.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→ Intertrigo.
· Some animals are anatomically or "physiologically" (obesity, lactation..) predisposed to have an
exceptionally folded skin that creates a warm, humid and dark environment favourable to bacterial
colonisation and overgrowth. An excess of sebum, tears, saliva or urine in some folds are also
aggravating factors.
· The infection is due to cutaneous micro-
Erythrocytes
trauma caused by continuous friction.
Lymphocyis
→Folliculitis.
Mast els
· Development of micro-abscesses
Suydaseg
(pustules) centred on hair follicles by
bacterial multiplication and invasion.
slurdousg
odpl
Malassezia
Follicular pustule Ex bacterial folliculits Courtesy of P Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Simple approach pyoderma * 2
→ Impetigo.
Erythrocytes
● Development of micro-abscesses (pustules) in or
Lymphocytes
under the epidermal stratum corneum by
 Mast cells 
bacterial multiplication and invasion.
Basophils
Nertrophils
Epidemiology
Ensinophils
Staphylpcos
→ Intertrigo.
edp)
Malas
· Concerns the young dog as well as the adult,
without any particular distinction.
· The infection develops on skin surfaces that are in
intimate contact with each other. Folds are therefore predeliction sites of infection.
 acquired anatomical defects.
· According to the site of the infection, there are different types of fold pyodermas: labial, facial, vulval,
caudal, ventral (between pendulous mammary glands), obese fold pyodermas, and/or more or less
generalised in other parts of the body in very "folded" breeds.
→Folliculitis and impetigo.
· In young dogs, juvenile folliculitis and impetigo:
● Impetigo and folliculitis are non-contagious and most often idiopathic. They can be linked to an
ectoparasite infestation and both may be present in the same animal.
· Impetigo is seen almost exclusively in young dogs. It is sometimes associated with a viral
· These pyodermas evolve generally just before (or during) puberty: hormonal imbalances in an
immature endocrine system (or at maturation) may be implicated.
· Relapses can be frequent until adulthood, but generally stop spontaneously after puberty.
· In adults dogs:
● Idiopathic folliculitis is non-contagious. Relapses may be frequent.
● Impetigo is seldom seen in adults, in which it is a secondary pyoderma (see next chapter).
Clinical signs
 General remarks.
· Presence of pruritus, erythema (even though not always seen and sometimes discreet in impetigo),
 papules and/or pustules must automatically lead to a suspicion of pyoderima (chiefly superficial in
the young dog).
→ Intertrigo.
· "Unfold" the suspected folds (it may lead to an interesting discovery during a routine examination!).
· Erythema, exudate and nauseating odour may be discovered in the folds.
· Pruritus of variable intensity may be present.
Labial intertrigo. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Simple approach pyoderma * 3
Part.2
→Folliculitis.
· More or less pruritic, sometimes intensely, with scratching responsible for modification of
lesion.
· Primary lesions: marked erythematous reaction (inflammation generally intense), relatively
small follicular papules and pustules (therefore centred on hair follicles, that need to be
observed with a lens!).
· Secondary lesions: follicular pustules are quite fragile and transient: they result in crusts
and epidermal collarettes after rupture. Due to the location of the pustules, significant
hair loss (alopecia) may result. It is frequently the major sign, and sometimes the only
sign in cases of short-coated breed folliculitis (coat with a "moth-eaten" look): look for
pustules through the hair-coat with a hand lens, usually visible on the ventral aspect; this
will lead to your diagnosis!
· In cases of folliculitis due to "bacterial hypersensitivity", the erythema and epidermal
collarettes are more pronounced and extended (target lesions), and the pruritus may be
very severe.
→ Impetigo.
· Pruritus is generally not severe (if intense, it usually indicates follicular involvement).
· Primary lesions: erythema (generally less marked than in folliculitis), non-follicular papules
and pustules (therefore randomly distributed, irrespective of hair follicles), commonly
located on the axilla and the abdomen (easily visible in this area). Follicular pustules
 present in folliculitis are not as easily recognised as the non-follicular pustules found in
impetigo.
· Secondary lesions: impetigo pustules are very fragile and transient; after rupture, a yellow
exudate dries into honey-coloured crusts.
Impetig in a young dog. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Simple approach pyoderma  4
Diagnosis
History Sheet
Age .
→History.
· General remarks:
· Pruritus and lesions appear at the same time.
· Intertrigo:
· Labial: bad smell from the animal's mouth.
DermatologicalHistory
· Facial: brachycephalic breeds with skin folds between the
2/Date
muzzle and the eyes; frequently associated with corneal
3/Pruitus
ulceration.
· Vulval and on the limbs: due to obesity.
· Caudal: in breeds with corkscrew tail, folds at the tail base.
● Mammary (ventral midline): lactation.
· Folliculitis:
· Young dog.
· Short-coated breeds.
· Pruritus varies but can be severe. Folliculitis is a major
cifferential diagnosis in young dogs with pruritus.
· Impetigo:
· Abdominal and axillary lesions in a young dog.
Clinical elements and distribution pattern of skin
lesions (see pages 2 and 3).
· Intertrigo:
· Folds involvement, moist and greasy aspect
with a bad odour.
· Folliculitis:
· In young dogs: evolves preferentially on the
ventral aspect of the body (axilla, groin and 
abdomen), sometimes generalised, lesions
are more papular than pustular.
· In adult dogs (short-coated breed
folliculitis): lesions on the head, the back,
the chest and the limbs, but can sometimes 
Short-coated breed folliculitis.
be extended to the whole body with a
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
"moth-eaten" look:
· multiple small areas, with varying degrees at alopecia and small groups of hair tufting
together and rising above the skin's surface with a different orientation.
· careful examination reveals the characteristic lesions, papules and pustules.
· Impetigo:
· Lesions are essentially abdominal and axillary (variable pruritus and erythema, sometimes
subtle).
Major differentials.
· Intertrigo:
· Especially if labial and vulval: demodicosis, candidiasis, auto-immune skin disease at the onset
(mucocutaneous junction affected) and neoplasia.
· Folliculitis and impetigo:
· Sarcoptic mange with presence of papules:
· non follicular in sarcoptic mange,
● follicular in folliculitis,
· also non follicular in impetigo, but generally distinctly associated with pustules.
eosinophilic pustulosis: Ofugi's disease).
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
 Simple approach pyoderma · 5
Part.2
→ Cytologic findings characteristic of each type of pyoderma.
· General remarks:
· Direct smear is a valuable aid to the diagnosis of pyoderma.
· Refer to the chapter "general diagnostic means in pyodermas"
· In intertrigo, bacterial colonisation will mostly be observed:
· Numerous healthy neutrophils
· Extracellular cocci (or possibly some rods).
· Impaired neutrophils, sometimes some are in the phagocytic state.
· In folliculitis and impetigo, images of
bacterial invasion:
· Numerous impaired neutrophils.
· Cocci (rarely some rods):
hagocytosis of
· more or less abundant in an
extracellular position,
· but mostly in an intracellular
position (in impaired neutrophils
in phagocytic state), evidence of
 phagocytosis is variable in
frequency but should be looked
for since it is always present!
· Eosinophils are sometimes present.
Cytologic picture of a bacterial invasion.
(Diff-Quik stan, x1000). Courtey of D.N. Carltti
→ Skin biopsies.
approach pyoderma. However, it may rule out or confirm its presence.
· Very beneficial in atypical cases, particularly when pustular lesions are not found in spite
of a thorough examination with a hand lens (in those cases, biopsies of simple papular
lesions will certainly lead to the diagnosis).
· In all cases, perform biopsies on several primary lesions: pustules (keeping them intact!)
and papules, but also any other suspect lesion, in particular when the presence of
 pyoderma is doubtful.
→ Therapeutic trial.
· Empirical systemic antibiotic therapy is required.
· It is perfectly conceivable when pyodermas are superficial, on a first intention basis.
· Prescribe a treatment for courses of 3 weeks (2 courses minimum + 1 additional week
· continue the treatment if healing is evident (at least 50% of the lesions and/or the
pruritus has disappeared),
· occasionally, efficacy of the treatment may be questionable, mostly if improvement is
transient, or if only discrete healing is present; however treatments rarely fail when
proper antibacterial therapy is used (proper choice of the antibiotic, dosage and
duration). This may be due to the onset of a bacterial resistance.
· If there is no demonstrated bacterial resistance, cast doubts on the bacterial involvement
and challenge the diagnosis if no improvement is seen, or if the case worsens.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Simple approach pyoderma · 6
Treatment
→ Refer to the chapter "General therapy of pyodermas"
→ Intertrigo.
· Topical therapy:
· The use of antiseptic and/or antiseborrheic shampoos is necessary at least when
initiating the treatment in order to physically remove most of the debris, pus, scales,
crusts and bacteria. They must be used
once daily, at least during the first
week, then twice a week until lesions
begin to heal, and then routinely to
prevent recurrence.
· Various antibacterial or antiseptic
topical products can also be used in
addition to the shampoos, and in
maintenance and prevention.
Exceptionally (intense inflammation),
an antibacterial lotion with
corticosteroids may be prescribed for
a few days.
Cytologic picture of a bacterial colonisation.
· Systemic antibiotic therapy:
(Diff-Quik stain, x1000). Courtesy of: D. Pin
· Generally not necessary, may be prescribed only in addition to the topical therapy
which remains essential.
· Adjunctive therapy:
· Corrective surgery could be performed in some cases.
· Weight loss is of benefit in obese fold pyoderma.
→ Folliculitis and impetigo.
. Topical therapy:
· Antiseptic shampoos:
· very useful as an adjunct to systemic therapy,
· hastens healing and allows a faster recovery,
· may be sufficient in young dogs, particularly in cases of impetigo.
· Antiseptic lotions:
· appropriate after the use of shampoos in particular for preventing relapses.
. Systemic therapy:
· Systemic antibiotic therapy (usually empirical), by courses of 3 weeks, renewable
until resolution, including I week after lesion healing:
· beneficial in the young dog for a faster recovery,
· mandatory in the adult dog.
· Corticosteroid therapy: contraindicated.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Simple approach pyoderma * 7
Part.2
 Important remarks.
. Intertrigo:
· As long as predisposing factors are present (folds), relapses are frequent.
· A maintenance prophylactic topical therapy is usually necessary.
· Folliculitis and impetigo:
· In young dogs:
· they can clear spontaneously without any treatment (but not in adults!),
· relapses can be frequent, without any particular reason. However, they respond
well to therapy and above all disappear spontaneously at puberty (persuade the
owners to wait!),
· a sole topical therapy is sometimes sufficient and may prevent or limit relapses,
· pruritus ceases when the lesions disappear! (As compared to folliculitis secondary
to allergic dermatitis in adults)
· In adult dogs:
· systemic therapy is mandatory,
· topical therapy is very useful in addition to systemic therapy or as a maintenance
 therapy to prevent recurrence.
Prognosis
→ Intertrigo.
· Variable in the long term if predisposing factors (folds) are not controlled.
 Impetigo and folliculitis.
· In young dogs:
· Good with appropriate systemic therapy.
· Good in the long term, often clears completely at puberty.
· In adult dogs:
· The prognosis is relatively good in short-coated breeds if folliculitis is treated properly
with systemic antibiotic therapy, but a permanent follow-up is necessary in the long term.
· NB: impetigo in adults (rare) has a poorer prognosis because the underlying cause is 
frequently serious.
Follow-up
→ During the treatment.
· Follow-up by courses of 3 weeks if systemic therapy has been prescribed.
· Renew the antibiotic therapy by courses of 2 weeks until lesion healing, normally 3 to 8
weeks, including a week after clinical recovery.
· Preferably monitor after I week for intertrigo and at the beginning for juvenile folliculitis and
→ Recurrence follow-up after recovery.
· Simple approach pyodermas relapse!
· Start another systemic therapy if necessary as soon as the lesions reappear, based on culture
and sensitivity testing.
· Limit relapses by prescribing permanent topical therapy - this will be accomplished as often as
possible:
· With antiseptic shampoos, perhaps once to twice a week or eventually every 15 days if
sufficient - needs close co-operation of owners.
· With the use of antiseptic lotions, easy to use, in particular when they are available in
pump spray bottles.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Simple approach pyoderma * 8
Conclusions
 Pyoderma is a major consideration in the differential diagnosis of skin diseases
in young dogs.
→ Particular cases:
· A rare deep pyoderma in the young dog is called "canine acne" and clinically
 appears as furunculosis on the chin. The only feature in common with human acne is
its chronic character and resistance to therapy. It seems to be related to keratinisation
defects.
· In adult dogs, "nasal furunculosis" is idiopathic and "pressure points cellulitis" is
 due to repeated trauma.
Those rare cases of deep pyoderma have a simple approach. They require prolonged
systemic antibiotic therapy coupled with local treatment.
 A folliculitis can be an idiopathic primary folliculitis, as well as a secondary folliculitis
The symptoms resolve in the former after treatment and the follow-up is focused on
treating the relapses. When the latter clears, other lesions and/or pruritus generally
persist; follow-up includes treating the relapses as well as exploring an underlying cause
(e.g. an allergic dermatitis). Refer to the following chapter.
 Giving a 3 week antibiotic course followed by thorough and efficient monitoring is a
prerequisite above all else when a pyoderma is suspected.
★ "When in doubt, treat!"
 Juvenile yoderma in two puppies of the same liter. Not described here.
Juvenile pyoderma in two puppies of thesae liter.
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
 Not described here. Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BoG) syndrome · 1
Part.2
Complex approach pyoderma
Secondary to underlying dermatoses and only in adults
Superficial pyodermas: Eolliculitis - Impetigo
Deep pyodermas: Furunculosis - Cellulitis
Pseudo-pyodermas: Pyotraumatic dermatitis ("Hot Spot")
Introduction / Definition
→ Complex approach pyoderma is a skin infection for
which an underlying cause needs to be explored.
→ It can also be defined as a secondary pyoderma
from an aetiology and pathogenesis point of view.
 It can be a superficial pyoderma (folliculitis or very
rarely impetigo), a deep pyoderma (furunculosis
and cellulitis) or a pseudo-pyoderma (pyotraumatic
dermatitis or "hot spot").
Epidermal collarette (secondary folliculitis).
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
→ Secondary pyoderma (or complex approach
pyoderma) concerns only the adult dog.
→ Impetigo is primary in young dogs and secondary in adult dogs, but because of its singularity, its
seriousness, its possible confusion with a bullous auto-immune skin disease and its constant relation to
a severe underlying disease, it is classified in group 3 of the dermatological approach and as such is not
detailed here (only a few basics will be given).
→ Secondary pyoderma is very frequent, especially folliculitis.
→ The most frequent underlying skin diseases are classified in two major groups:
· Allergies, which lead essentially to folliculitis or "hot spots", especially atopy in the former and flea
 bite allergy in the latter.
· Endocrine disorders, mostly responsible for the occurrence of deep pyoderma.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
 Introduction.
· Any physical or functional skin modification may result in secondary bacterial infection, superficial at
first and deep when there is an immunodeficiency component.
· Bacterial multiplication is either confined to the epidermis and its appendages in superficial
pyoderma (hair follicles in folliculitis, or even sweat glands in hidradenitis) or progresses over the
basement membrane and invades the dermis in deep pyoderma. When infection is present in "hot
· The initial pathogenic agent is generally Staphylococcus pseudintermedius. Even though other
 pathogens may develop taking advantage of the lesions created by the staphylococci (especially
Gram negatives - particularly in deep pyoderma), their pathogenic role is not clearly established.
For this reason, the outcome of bacteriological cultures (especially isolation of Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius) must always be considered in the context of the overall clinical investigation.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BoG) syndrome · 2
 Secondary folliculitis.
· Development of micro-abscesses (pustules) in the hair folicles by bacterial multiplication and
invasion (in impetigo the micro-abscesses develop in or under the epidermal stratum comeum).
Erythrocyte
Lynphocytes
Mast cells
Basophils
Nertrophils
isinophils
odp
Follicular pustule. Ex bacterial folliculitis. Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
· In rare cases, a "bacterial hypersensitivity" may occur and seems responsible for diffuse lesions
("Superficial Spreading Pyoderma") with very severe inflammation. A similar situation may also be
found in idiopathic folliculitis (see previous chapter).
→ Deep pyoderma.
● In furunculosis, the hair follicle ruptures, resulting in intradermal micro-abscesses (pustules)
centred on a follicular residue called a furuncle. Most of them follow folliculitis (which is
generally transient).
Erythrocytes
Lymphocytes
 Mast cells
Basophils
Nertrophils
Esinophils
单
odp
pechydermatis
Furunculosis: bacterial infection withrupture of the hair follicle
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
· Cellulitis occurs when furuncles spread outward. Hence, the dermis (or even the
hypodermis) is totally invaded by the infectious process that continues to extend.
Erythrocytes
Lymphocytes
Mast cells
Basophils
Nertrophils
Esinophils
Malasezia
Cellulitis: bacterial infection with invasion of the dermis
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on CanineDermatology
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BOG) syndrome · 3
Part.2
· Evolution of superficial pyoderma into deep pyoderma is possible and may be due to:
· Trauma by pressure, licking, chewing or scratching.
· Follicular lesions as in demodicosis.
· Spontaneous immunodeficiency status (endocrine disorders) or most frequently
iatrogenic in origin (corticosteroid therapy).
NB: demodicosis is frequently related to deep pyoderma lesions. Pyodemodicosis is
one of the most severe canine skin diseases; its occurrence follows a generalised
demodicosis and involves lesions of cellulitis. That is why skin scraping is the first
line of approach to these lesions!
(juvenile furunculosis of the chin), "nasal furunculosis" and "pressure points cellulitis".
★ "Hot spots"
· Localised erosive lesion following self-inflicted trauma.
· Occurrence of "hot spots" confirms the presence of a pruritic condition.
· Primary or secondary lesions of vasculitis could be present.
· The warm environment due to a very dense undercoat may be a predisposing factor.
· The role of self trauma is much more important in perpetuating the lesions than the
initial infection.
· Hot spots should be differentiated from pyotraumatic folliculitis, a true pyoderma (intact
 pustules of folliculitis/furunculosis surround the oozing and suppurative area).
Epidemiology
→ Secondary pyodermas are non-contagious and 
generated by underlying diseases.
→ Folliculitis and "hot spots" are very frequent, deep
pyoderma is much rarer!
→ Secondary folliculitis.
· Accounts for a very large proportion of
canine dermatological cases.
· Occurs preferentially in dogs affected with
allergic dermatitis, in particular atopic
Generalised secondary folliculitis.
dermatitis.
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
→ Deep pyoderma.
· It is much rarer, but also more severe.
· It occurs generally in dogs with immunodeficiency.
· Occurrence in the feet (especially if symmetrical) may have an allergic origin (atopy, food
allergy).
· Secondary furunculosis, more or less generalised, is the most common. More localised
deep pyodermas (canine acne, nasal furunculosis and pressure points cellulitis) generally
have a simple approach. Furunculosis can progress in cellulitis lesions.
· An idiopathic furunculosis-cellulitis complex is seen in German Shepherds. It must be
assessed as idiopathic only after having explored all possible underlying causes (refer to
the conclusion).
★"Hot spots"
· Pyotraumatic dermatitis is a frequent canine skin disease.
· It is secondary to pruritic skin diseases, especially allergies and more particularly flea allergy
dermatitis.
· It may occur after a selfinflicted trauma, but only in certain individuals and without any
rational explanation.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BOG) syndrome · 4
Clinical signs
 General remarks.
· Clinical signs are extremely variable according to the type of pyoderma.
· NB: Impetigo is seldom seen in adult dogs. The pustular pattern could be due to repeated
micro-traumas (e.g. thorny bushes during hunting..). Numerous pustules are found on the
most exposed areas (ears, neck, shoulders, axilla, limbs, abdomen...). A severe bullous
condition occurs sometimes, particularly in severe immunodeficiency (Cushing's disease..)
+ Secondary folliculitis.
· Primary lesions: marked erythematous reaction (inflammation generally intense), relatively
small follicular papules and pustules (therefore centred on hair follicles that need to be
observed with a lens!).
· Secondary lesions: follicular pustules are quite fragile and transient, they result in crusts and
epidermal collarettes (frequently generalised) after rupture. Due to the location of the
pustules, a significant hair loss (alopecia) may result. It is frequently a major sign, especially in
short-coated breeds (coat with a "moth-eaten" look). Always explore thoroughly all the hair-
coat with a hand lens to locate the pustule - this will lead to your diagnosis!
· More or less pruritic, sometimes intensely, with scratching responsible for lesion
modification. NB: when pruritus occurs, it is absolutely necessary to treat the folliculitis first in
order to assess if the underlying dermatosis is pruritic or not
Follicular pustule discovered during a thorough exploration of all
the skin surface Courtesy of: P.Jasmin
→ Deep pyoderma.
· Pruritus may be present but is usually not severe.
· Presence of pain is more common, as well as systemic signs.
· Furunculosis lesions: large prominent pustules, erythema, cutaneous thickening, pus with
blood, alopecia and scars. These lesions can evolve in more extended cellulitis lesions:
crusts, ulcers, fistulas, suppuration and necrosis. The former lesions can also be observed
 at first, without a visible furunculosis stage.
· Cellulitis can be localised or generalised, more severe and frequently associated with
hyperthermia, generalised lymphadenopathy and debilitation.
· An exclusively pedal form called "interdigital pyoderma complex" can be observed.
Generally secondary and very uncomfortable for the dog, its therapy and diagnosis are a
challenge for the clinician. Both sides of the web are affected, and the foot is oedematous.
The pads are usually intact but perionyxis and onyxis may be observed.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BoG) syndrome · 5
Part.2
Furunculosis. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
→ "Hot spots"
· Pruritus is initially very intense, causing the
dog to lick and bite itself incessantly. This self-
inflicted trauma is responsible for most clinical
signs. The pruritus is soon followed by pain
· The lesion is frequently unique and well
demarcated, very inflamed, erythematous and
exudative. It appears suddenly and extends
very quickly (in a few hours). Cutaneous
thickening follows and the skin may be
covered by a layer of pus due to bacterial
colonisation (but not invasion).
Cellulitis. Courtesy of P Jasmin
Pyotraumatic dermatitis (hot spots). Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Diagnosis
→History.
· General remarks:
· Remember that folliculitis is very frequent.
· Previous antibacterial therapy does not exclude this suspicion:
· first, because of the specific requirements of antibacterial therapy in dermatology
(especially concerning the choice of an adequate drug and the aspect of a
sufficient duration of treatment), the previous treatment(s) may not have been
properly conducted (most frequently),
· second, because even after well conducted therapy (at least three weeks with an
established efficient antibiotic, clinical monitoring and continuation for one or 
two weeks after clinical recovery), relapses are typical and sometimes occur
suddenly since these dermatoses are secondary.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BoG) syndrome · 6
· Folliculitis:
History Sheet
● Pruritus (scratching) may be severe. Folliculitis is a
Ape 
 major differential in the case of generalised pruritus
in a dog.
· Pruritus and lesions may appear simultaneously. More
 frequently, in cases of underlying allergic dermatitis,
the pruritus appears prior to the lesions. In between:
· pruritus can first be localised and then
generalised when the lesions appear.
d/
tirne of onset Ibefore or aft
· it can also be manifest in different ways before
and after the lesions occur: extremity chewing
and/or licking, rubbing the face (e.g. underlying
atopy) followed by body scratching when the
lesions occur (e.g. folliculitis).
· Partial corticosteroid response (the pruritus, and 
sometimes the lesions, regress) followed by a severe
relapse (rebound effect).
· Eventually, only a partial response to well conducted
 antibacterial therapy but coupled with corticosteroid therapy.
· Good response to well conducted antibacterial therapy (relapses are normal if the cause
is not controlled!).
· Improvement but no resolution when the antibiotic course is too short (less than three
weeks), and failure when the antibiotic used is not adequate (see choice of antibiotics)
· Deep pyoderma:
· The lesions appear gradually and oozing is noted by the owner.
· Pruritus or pain appears simultaneously or after the lesions.
exclusively).
· Previous corticosteroid treatments (particularly with long-acting injectables).
·"Hot spots":
· Usually a sole lesion, appearing suddenly with initial severe pruritus followed by marked
pain.
· Constant licking/biting and lesion extension
· Possible previous occurrences with spontaneous recovery.
→ Clinical elements and distribution pattern of skin lesions (see pages 4 and 5).
· Folliculitis:
· Generally pruritus resulting in scratching of the body.
· More papular than pustular lesions, found on the ventral area of the body (axillae and
abdomen), the head, the back, the thorax and the limbs, but the whole body may be
affected.
· Deep pyoderma:
· A local or generalised lymph node reaction is commonly observed with a debilitating
condition.
· Lesions of furunculosis can extend to the flanks and back and become generalised.
· Cellulitis lesions tend to occur on the rump and the thighs. Localised cellulitis tends to
be secondary to furunculosis whether the generalised form is due to demodicosis or
immunodeficiency (e.g. endocrine disorders).
· An exclusively pedal pattern of furunculosis and cellulitis is sometimes observed
("interdigital pyoderma complex"), and causes lameness. In this area, a very transient
folliculitis stage may exist but irritation, digital friction and self-trauma are all factors
favouring rapid development into deep pyoderma.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BOG) syndrome · 7
Part.2
. "Hot spots":
· Intense pruritus followed by frequent marked pain.
· Spreading and localised lesion, usually on the dorsal area (particularly in case of
underlying flea allergy dermatitis), or on the thighs
→ Major differentials.
· Folliculitis:
· Skin diseases that can result in follicular pustules: demodicosis and ringworm (other
than bacteria, Demodex and dermatophytes are the two other invaders of the hair
follicle). Cytological examination may give some clues (refer to corresponding
monographs).
· Other pustular dermatoses (may not be follicular): bullous auto-immune dermatoses
(in particular pemphigus foliaceous) and exceptionally subcorneal pustular dermatosis
 and eosinophilic pustulosis. Cytological examination is a fundamental diagnostic step
for these dermatoses.
· Deep pyoderma:
when the feet are affected.
· Auto-immune dermatosis, neoplasia and when the pedal area is affected: foreign
bodies, leishmaniasis, trombiculidiasis, Pelodera dermatitis, hookworm dermatitis,
dermatophytosis (sometimes with onyxis) etc.
. "Hot spots":
· Pyotraumatic folliculitis and eventually, dermatophytosis, localised demodicosis,
neoplasia and calcinosis cutis.
→ Cytologic findings characteristic of each type of pyoderma.
· General remarks:
· Direct smear test is of paramount importance in the diagnosis of pyoderma.
· Refer to the chapter describing general diagnostic methods of pyoderma.
· Folliculitis cytologic findings are images of bacterial invasion:
· Numerous impaired neutrophils.
· Cocci (rarely rods):
· more or less abundant in an
extracellular position,
· but mostly in an intracellular
position (impaired neutrophils in
state of phagocytosis),
phagocytic pictures vary in
number but should be looked
for since they are always
present!
· Eosinophils are sometimes present.
Cytologic picture of a bacterial invasion (dep pyoderma).
· In deep pyoderma:
(Diff-Quik stain, x1000). Courtesy of: D. Pin
· It is possible and necessary to verify
the presence of an infectious process, considering the following:
· it is usually easy to sample pus from a furuncle (preferably), under crusts, or from
a fistula,
· the condition is severe and the differential diagnosis is complex,
· it is not reasonable to perform a therapeutic trial.
· Images of bacterial invasion, i.e. altered neutrophils and Cocci, similar to those
found in folliculitis will be observed.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BOG) syndrome · 8
· But micro-organisms and phagocytic pictures are rarer, but they must however be
looked for!
· In addition, the presence of macrophages and/or lymphoplasmocytes suggest a more
chronic infection (pyogranulomatous reaction).
· Red blood cells are frequently present indicating a deep injury with vascular lesions.
· Epithelial cells (as in superficial pemphigus!) are not unusual
· "Hot spots" are characterised by images of bacterial colonisation:
· Microbial agents found are numerous Cocci (sometimes rods) in an extracellular
position. Their pathogenic role is doubtful.
· Some healthy neutrophils.
· More or less numerous degenerate neutrophils in a state of phagocytosis (which has
not an important significance since it is not observed inside a cutaneous lesion).
+ Skin biopsies.
 approach pyoderma. However, it may rule out or confirm its presence.
· Very beneficial in atypical cases:
· In folliculitis, when pustular lesions are not found in spite of a thorough examination
to the diagnosis).
· They should be done with no hesitation when deep pyoderma is suspected,
particularly in the pedal area (biopsies are sometimes difficult to perform, but they
 provide consistent diagnostic data).
· In all cases, perform biopsies on several primary lesions: pustules, furuncles (keeping
them intact!) and papules, but also any other lesion like ulcers (inside, around and on the
margins), in particular when the presence of pyoderma is uncertain.
→ Therapeutic trial.
· Folliculitis:
· Empirical systemic antibiotic therapy is required and may evaluate the importance of
the bacterial involvement in the condition.
· It is perfectly conceivable when pyodermas are superficial.
· However, resistant pyodermas become common. Cultures and sensitivity testing
 should be used in suspicion of such cases.
· Prescribe a treatment for a minimum of 3 weeks and monitor the patient:
· pursue the treatment if healing is evident (at least 5o% of the lesions and/or the
pruritus has disappeared),
· cast doubts on bacterial involvement and challenge the diagnosis if no
improvement is seen, or if the case worsens,
· occasionally, efficacy of the treatment may be questionable, mostly if
improvement is transient, or if only discrete healing is present. However,
treatments rarely fail when proper antibacterial therapy is used (proper choice of
antibiotic, dosage and duration).
· Make your assessment exclusively on the regression of papules, pustules and
epidermal collarettes, since erythema and pruritus may persist if the underlying
dermatosis is pruritic.
· Deep pyoderma:
· A therapeutic trial is not conceivable when deep pyoderma is suspected.
· Establishing an acute diagnosis and ruling out the other differentials are necessary
(history, clinical features, cytology, bacteriology may be sufficient, histopathology
may be useful).
. "Hot spots":
· Since the diagnosis is relatively simple, it is not really a "trial"
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BoG) syndrome · 9
Part.2
Treatment
→ Refer to the chapter "General therapy of pyodermas"
→ Folliculitis.
· Topical therapy:
· Antiseptic shampoos:
· very useful as an adjunct to systemic
therapy,
· hastens healing and allows a faster
Cellulitis. Lesional aspect before clipping.
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
recovery.
· Antiseptic lotions:
· useful after the use of shampoos in
particular for preventing relapses.
· Systemic therapy:
· Imperative systemic antibiotic therapy (usually
empirical but culture and sensitivity testing
should be done in case of suspicion of
resistance), by courses of three weeks,
renewable until resolution, including one to two
Celulits Lesional aspt after clping.
 additional weeks after clinical recovery.
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
· Corticosteroid therapy: contraindicated.
→ Deep pyoderma.
. Topical therapy:
·Antiseptic shampoos:
· very useful as an adjunct to systemic therapy,
· very beneficial in removing the majority of pus, debris, crusts along with bacteria,
· allows active oxygenation of the tissues essential to healing,
· hastens healing therefore allows a faster recovery and above all provides immediate
relief to the patient.
· Antiseptic lotions:
· useful between shampoo applications to maintain local antiseptic pressure.
· Systemic therapy:
· Imperative prolonged systemic antibiotic therapy most often based on sensitivity
testing (refer to the general advice concerning culture and sensitivity at the beginning of
the monograph), by courses of three weeks, renewable until resolution, including two to
four additional weeks after clinical recovery.
· Corticosteroid therapy: strictly contraindicated.
·Adjunctive therapy:
· Clipping the lesional areas is of extreme benefit and greatly contributes to lesion healing.
particularly in the case of cellulitis. It must be done under general anaesthesia (close
clipping down to the skin, even if the lesions bleed).
· It is worth bathing the patient afterwards (with an antiseptic shampoo). Owners should
be warned in advance of the procedure - to return a dog with multiple bleeding ulcers or
S        o  s   
· Draining of potential abscesses (always in addition to a local antiseptic therapy and
 systemic antibiotic therapy) may be performed in interdigital pyoderma.
· In some cases of recurrent idiopathic cellulitis, immunotherapy with staphylococcal
extracts or autogenous vaccines (preferably with a Staphylococcus pseudintermedius
strain).
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
01 : awoipuss (aog) yoaiaao leyapeg pue ewapod ypeoidde xaidwo
→ "Hot spots".
· Topical therapy:
· Local disinfecting with antiseptic shampoos is useful.
· Various antiseptic and topical corticosteroid products may be used as a sole
treatment.
· Resolution should be obtained in a few days. Alopecia persists longer!
· Systemic therapy:
· Antibiotic: generally not necessary.
· Corticosteroid: generally not necessary but can be useful if the inflammation or the
pain is intense (prednisolone 0.5-1 mg/kg/day, 3 to 5 days). To be avoided if a
differential diagnosis of allergies is undertaken.
→ Important remarks.
· General remarks:
· Prescribe a minimum duration of treatment of three weeks plus one to four
· the therapy must be pursued if healing is obvious
· efficacy of the treatment must be questioned if improvement is temporary, or if
only discrete healing is present.
• In true pyoderma, topical therapy is essential and systemic therapy mandatory.
· Folliculitis:
· Pruritus is usually present but may be due, at least in part, to the underlying
dermatosis.
· Pruritus ceases when the lesions disappear if the underlying dermatosis is non-
pruritic and persists if it is pruritic (most frequently). The "remaining" pruritus can
then appear differently:
· the pruritus can first be generalised and then localised (face, ears, feet) when the
lesions disappear,
· therefore, it can appear differently before and after the lesions disappear:
prevailing body scratching followed by extremity chewing and/or licking, rubbing
the face when the lesions disappear (e.g. underlying atopy).
● Beware of previous use of corticosteroids. Even if used long before, they could
interfere with this assessment.
· Deep pyoderma:
· If the patient's condition is causing concern,
particularly if pruritus is absent, undertake an
immediate investigation into an underlying
immunodeficiency.
· Beware of the euthyroid sick syndrome. In this
type of disease (or any other serious disease)
low levels of thyroxin (basal T4) are frequently
observed, which might lead to a suspicion that
the patient is suffering from hypothyroidism
when it is in fact perfectly euthyroid.
Cellulitis. Courtesy of H. Schroeder.
Hypothyroidism can be an underlying cause of
deep pyoderma, but this is not as common as endocrine assay results might suggest.
."Hot spots":
· The treatment should be aimed at preventing self-trauma and to break the vicious
circle lesions-pruritus-trauma. An effective treatment leads to rapid lesion healing.
· It is then mandatory to prevent any hypersensitivity reactions, largely suspected to be
the cause of the lesions (especially from vasculitis). Among the underlying causes of
pyotraumatic dermatitis, flea allergy dermatitis is the commonest, followed more
rarely by atopy, food allergy or parasitic infestation (in particular sarcoptic mange)
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Il : awoipuas (aog) ymoaiaao leyapeg pue ewapod ypeoidde xaidwo
Part.2
Prognosis
→Folliculitis.
· The prognosis is good with the appropriate systemic antibiotic therapy but diagnosis and control of
the underlying dermatosis is mandatory. This control may sometimes be difficult (e.g. underlying
atopic dermatitis) and relapses may occur frequently.
→ Deep pyoderma.
· Usualy more serious, because of the pyoderma in itself and because of the underlying disease.
· The prognosis is better in the long term if it is a deep pyoderma due to abusive use of
corticosteroids on an allergic animal (therefore proscribe these drugs).
→"Hot spots".
· Relapses may be frequent if the underlying dermatosis is not controlled. Since it is generally due
to flea allergy dermatitis, this can be effectively controlled nowadays (refer to the monograph).
→N.B: impetigo in the adult dog has a poorer prognosis because of the gravity of the underlying
cause in many cases.
Follow-up
→ During the treatment of true pyodermas.
● Monitoring every two to three weeks might be necessary. A monthly follow-up can then be planned for
deep pyodermas.
· Renew the antibacterial therapy by courses of two to three weeks (or more for deep pyodermas)
until lesion healing, normally 2 to 8 weeks for folliculitis and 4 to 12 weeks for deep pyodermas,
then prescribe two to four additional weeks of therapy.
→ Follow-up after recovery: investigation of an underlying cause and control of relapses.
· The treatment and resolution of a secondary pyoderma are of course necessary as a first step, but
 they are only a stage in managing the specific dermatological case.
· When marked symptoms and/or lesions persist or when relapses are too frequent and need
repeated antibacterial therapy, it becomes necessary to explore and control the underlying cause.
· Folliculitis is frequently secondary to an allergy.
· Because in most cases the underlying dermatosis can not possibly be resolved but only more or
less controlled according to the dermatosis involved, relapses of pyoderma are still possible and
must be followed-up carefully.
 shampoos and/or lotions, and start another systemic antibacterial therapy as soon as pyoderma
lesions reappear.
Conclusions
→ Secondary folliculitis is as common as deep pyoderma is rare!
→ Pyoderma, in particular folliculitis, is a major consideration in the differential diagnosis of skin 
diseases in dogs.
→ Treatment of the secondary pyoderma is a prerequisite at first, and effective dermatological
diagnosis will be established by reassessing the patient after recovery.
 The most frequent case is a folliculitis - recovery will allow a further differential diagnosis of
allergies. An appropriate antibiotic therapy of three weeks, including one or two weeks after
 clinical recovery, followed by a thorough and efficient monitoring with regard to history is a
prerequisite above all suspicion of folliculitis.
"When in doubt, treat!"
→ Managing a deep pyoderma involving a differential diagnosis of endocrine disorders (or broadly
of immunodeficiency) is rare. However, these cases are more severe and depend upon a precise
diagnosis.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Zl : awopuas (5og) ymoaiaao (eyaioeg pue ewapoAd ypeoidde xaidwo
Importance of the follow-up and owner education
in complex approach cases
A regular follow-up of the case is very important.
· A patient affected with pyoderma must not be "dropped off" its antibiotic treatment
without any follow-up. Success is due as much to a good follow-up as to the treatment!
· Explain to the client that this treatment is only a first step: even though it is mandatory
and will relieve the discomfort, symptoms due to an unavoidable underlying dermatosis
 may persist and/or the pyoderma has a high chance of recurring. Exploring the cause will
certainly be necessary if we want to control the dermatological problem of the patient in
the long term.
· In the case of folliculitis, any decision for further investigation must be taken with the
owner's co-operation, and when the patient's discomfort is obvious or when very
 frequent antibacterial treatment is needed.
· In the case of a deep pyoderma, explain that the underlying cause must be explored
immediately because of the severity of the condition and unavoidable recurrence. Chiefly,
an immunodeficiency must be explored: first as an endocrine origin (Cushing's syndrome,
hypothyroidism...) then consider other more unusual possible causes (auto-immune
dermatosis, leishmaniasis, ehrlichiosis..). If no cause is found, this will allow us to declare
the pyoderma as "idiopathic", then prolonged and repeated antibacterial treatments must
be prescribed. Immunotherapy must still confirm its efficacy.
· Indicate as well that corticosteroids are contraindicated, first for medical reasons, and
then strictly if any further dermatological work up needs to be done.
· Corticosteroids act as "pro-infectious" factors and are responsible for "rebound" effects.
● Eventually, if necessary, and always out of pyoderma periods, a corticosteroid may be
prescribed to help control an allergic dermatitis underlying a folliculitis: mostly atopy as
flea allergy dermatitis and food allergy are quite easy to diagnose and control by other
 means (refer to the corresponding monographs). Prescribe then the lowest dosage
possible and monitor rigorously and regularly for microbial over-infections such as
pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis and bacterial overgrowths (Staphylococcus 
pseudintermedius and Malassezia pachydermatis). Stop corticosteroids and initiate another
anti-infectious treatment as soon as a cutaneous infection recurs. Always try to discontinue
the use of corticosteroids; inform, educate and convince the owner about that.
· Moreover, pruritus due to pyoderma decreases very quickly (in a few days) after the
initiation of the antibiotic treatment.
· Keep also in mind that controlling the bacterial problem may lead to a sufficient
reduction in general pruritus, thus allowing a delay in the necessity for controlling the
eventual underlying pruritic dermatosis!
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BOG) syndrome · 13
Part.2
Bacterial overgrowth (BoG) syndrome
(Staphylococcus pseudintermedius)
Only in adults, idiopathic or secondary, generally to an allergic dermatitis.
Introduction / Definition
 Until recently BOG was not believed to be a
major dermatological problem, now it is being
 considered as an entirely separate
dermatological entity: the "BOG syndrome"
→ A bacterial overgrowth is a surface bacterial
proliferation that appears without any lesions
of pyoderma. Generally Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius is involved.
Cytologic picture of a 'tape strip test'* in a case of BOG.
(Diff-Quik stain, x1000). Courtesy of: D. Pin
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
(skin and mucosae) can cause a syndrome exhibiting "superficial lesions" (see "clinical signs")
and pruritus, without formation of pyoderma lesions, called bacterial overgrowth (BOG)
syndrome.
→ Clinically, a main feature of BOG syndrome is the absence of papules, pustules, epidermal
collarettes and crusts which can be explained by the location of the bacteria at the surface of
the skin, not in the hair follicles, and the absence of folliculitis.
→ Lesions are mainly ventral, probably because moisture is the principal factor affecting
cutaneous microbial populations.
→ Anti-staphylococcal IgE levels of affected dogs are usually low, except maybe in "true
idiopathic cases" where a real bacterial allergy could also explain the dermatitis. This suggests
that staphylococcal hypersensitivity is usually not the pathogenic process of BOG syndrome.
However, some bacterial factors such as a variety of toxins and enzyme secretions may cause
Mast cels 
Ensinophils
®
odpl
Mealaserats
Bacterial overgrowth (Staph.) - BOG
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
l : awopuas (aog) ymoasaao geyaioeg pue ewapoad yeoidde xaidwo
Epidemiology
 There does not seem to be any sex or breed predisposition.
 BOG syndrome may affect young adults and adults.
Clinical signs
 Pruritus and offensive odour are usually severe and may be the principal chief complaint
→ Lesions are erythema, lichenification, hyperpigmentation and excoriations associated with
alopecia and localised or generalised greasy keratoseborrhoeic disorder.
→ Presence of a bilateral erythemato-ceruminous otitis externa is very frequent.
→ Lesions are mainly ventral, particularly on the axillary and inguinal regions. However, this
condition may occur in all the body areas and may be confused with an atopic dermatitis.
→ It is the case that the BOG syndrome can be secondary to an underlying allergic skin disease,
 notably atopic dermatitis. The approach of such cases will need two steps.
Ventral view of a dog presenting with BOG.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Ventral view o a dog presenting with BOG.
Close vew of the axilary region of a dog prenting with BOG.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Sl . awopuas (aoa) ymoaiaao geyaeg pue ewapod yeoidde xaldwo
Part.2
Diagnosis
→ Cytology is an important diagnostic aid: the
microscopic observation of numerous
bacteria present on the surface of the skin,
 combined with erythema and pruritus
(generally intense) suggests a true bacterial
proliferation that requires a treatment.
→ In many cases, Cocci are found to be 
adherent to corneocytes.
→ By the same sampling procedure (surface
(RAL@ stain, x1000).
direct impression smear or better with a
Courtesy of: D. Pin
"tape strip test"), cytology may also reveal the
presence of Malassezia pachydermatis.
→ This syndrome should be systematically
included in the differential diagnosis of
pruritic dermatitis and cytology is the
complementary examination of choice, it is
therefore mandatory in the presence of
pruritus in a dog, particularly in case of
suspicion of atopic dermatitis. It can quickly
reveal or confirm the presence of either a
bacterial or yeast overgrowth, or both!
pansund aq uau ueo sisousep aul 
immediately if these pathogens are absent,
Cytologic picture of a tape strip test' in a case of BOG, with coccr
Or after having eliminated them from the
adherent to a cornecyte (RAL? stain, x1000).
skin of the animal if they are present.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Treatment
→ Oral antibiotic courses of three weeks (at least two courses may be necessary), including
 one or two weeks after clinical recovery, in conjunction with a topical antiseptic therapy
(shampoo and/or lotion) is usually efficient to eliminate cutaneous bacterial overgrowth and
associated clinical signs.
→ Cephalexin has been proven to also reduce mucosal staphylococci hyperproliferation, also
present in BOG cases, and suspected to be a potential "reservoir" for skin proliferation. This
may help in the BOG syndrome control.
→ In some cases, treatment may alleviate the pruritus tremendously, and this might explain why
some cases of atopic dermatitis seems to be antibiotic responsive.
Prognosis
→ Prognosis is usually good: BOG may however sometimes need a long course of antibiotic
treatment and antiseptic shampoo.
→ It may also frequently reoccur, until the underlying dermatosis is controlled.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Complex approach pyoderma and Bacterial overgrowth (BOG) syndrome · 16
Follow-up
 A cautious follow-up is mandatory.
→ An underlying allergic skin disease is usually present and a
differential diagnosis of allergies may be then undertaken when
BOG syndrome is controlled (bacteriological recovery but some
remaining clinical signs).
 When BOG and associated clinical signs totally disappear, the
investigation of an underlying cause becomes difficult, and this
bacterial overgrowth will be labelled as "idiopathic". This is less 
frequent and may be secondary to an immunologic abnormality or
an underlying defect in skin integrity promoting multiplication of
bacteria.
Ventral view of an atopic dog presenting
with BOG. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Conclusions
 The BOG syndrome (Staphylococcus pseudintermedius overgrowth) is a superficial cutaneous
disorder without any characteristic primary lesions, and may then mimic and worsen an allergic
skin disease.
 Secondary BOG syndrome is, at least potentially, frequent!
 It is a major differential in the diagnosis of pruritic dermatoses in dogs.
 The most frequent case is a BOG syndrome where recovery leads to the need for carrying out a
differential diagnosis of allergies.
→ The underlying dermatosis and relapses need to be controlled.
→ Staphylococcus pseudintermedius and Malassezia pachydermatis may have similar and
concomitant roles.
Importance of the follow-up
and owner education
A regular follow-up of the case is very important.
· A patient affected with BOG must not be "dropped offr its antibiotic treatment without any
follow-up. Success is due as much to a good follow-up as to the treatment!
· Explain to the client that this treatiment is only a first step: even though it is mandatory and will
 relieve the discomfort, symptoms due to an underlying dermatosis may persist and/or the BOG
has a high chance of recurring. Exploring the cause will certainly be necessary if we want to
control the dermatological problem of the patient in the long term.
· In the case of BOG, any decision for further investigation must be taken with the owner's co-
operation, and when the patient's discomfort is obvious or when very frequent antibacterial
treatment is needed.
· If no cause is found, this will allow us to declare the BOG as "idiopathic", then prolonged and
 repeated antibacterial treatments must be prescribed.
· Topical antiseptic therapy is very important to contribute to the prevention of
resistances to antibiotics used systemically.
· Pruritus due to BOG may decrease guickly as soon as the BOG starts to be controlled.
· Keep also in mind that controlling the bacterial overgrowth may lead to a sufficient reduction
in general pruritus, thus allowing a delay in the necessity for controlling the eventual
underlying pruritic dermatosis!
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Malassezia dermatitis and yeast overgrowth · 1
Part.2
Malassezia dermatitis
and yeast overgrowth
Introduction / Definition
→ Malassezia dermatitis is a fungal skin infection.
→ The pathogenic agent, Malassezia pachydermatis (Pityrosporum
canis in the past) is a lipophilic yeast belonging to the cutaneous
microflora of the normal dog, along with Staphylococcus
pseudintermedius (principal pathogenic agent of canine pyoderma),
→ In certain conditions, related to cutaneous and/or immune-mediated
Micrascopic view of a Malassezia pachydermatis culture.
factors, Malassezia may proliferate within the stratum corneum.
(Diff-Quik stain, x1000). Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
peu e aunboe uaun Aeu ymoaaao jseah suanbasgns aul 
 pathogenic capacity and initiate a true dermatitis.
→ Malassezia dermatitis is relatively frequent in dogs, and is usually very pruritic.
 mimic many dermatoses and mostly be secondary to them.
op hpe ue u paadsns aq saeaie aoaau snu h 
→ Since Mafassezia are frequently associated to other dermatoses (which are also often pruritic) and since the
subsequent lesional aspect is far from specific, the component of the clinical signs due to the yeast can only
 be determined after an efficient antifungal treatment.
→ Consequently, "Malassezia dermatitis" designation should be only used when the presence of yeast is effectively
responsible for the clinical signs, and therefore when the latter disappear after treatment (meaning after a
"therapeutic trial"). The remaining clinical signs are then due to an underlying dermatosis, or if there are no
symptoms left, the Malassezia dermatits is idiopathic.
→ However, and for this reason amongst others, any yeast overgrowth must be eliminated whether an actual
 Malassezia dermattis is present or not.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
 Malassezia pachydermatis.
· The Malassezia genus includes unicellular lipophilic yeasts, i.e. their growth is favoured by the presence
 of lipids.
· Several species (e.g. Malassezia furfur, M. sympodialis, M. globosa, M. obtusa, M. restricta, M. sloofiae) are
lipid-dependent, which means that their development requires the presence of long-chain fatty acids.
· Only one species, Malassezia pachydermatis, is lipophilic but not lipid-dependent; it contents itself with
short-chain fatty acids and readily grows on usual mediums.
· The identification of species is difficult and is based on molecular biology techniques.
· M. pachydermatis is characterised by a monopolar budding from a broad base. This type of reproduction 
leads to its characteristic "peanut-shaped" appearance under the microscope.
· These yeasts are small(2-7μm) and they are better observed under high power magnification (100x
objective).
· Malassezia pachydermatis belongs to the resident microflora of the dog's skin.
· Approximately 50% of normal dogs carry this yeast in their haircoat and skin.
· The perianal region seems to be the preferential site for Malassezia portage and appears as a dispersion
 area, as is the case for staphylococci.
· The external ear canal does not seem to be a preferential portage area (nevertheless, Malassezia otitis is
frequently observed).
· The most frequent cutaneous locations in the normal dog appear to be the lips and limb extremities.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Malassezia denmatitis and yeast overgrowth · 2
 Pathogenesis.
· Normal canine response to yeast presence on the skin surface:
· non specific response mechanism (neutrophil phagocytosis),
induction, lymphokine production which stimulates macrophagic phagocytosis and basal keratinocyte
multiplication.
· Consequences: yeast elimination, either directly by destruction, or indirectly by the shedding mechanic
action.
· Some pathogenic alterations favour the development of the normally saprophytic Malassezia pachydermatis
into a pathogenic status able to multiply and proliferate:
· disruption of the cutaneous ecological equilibrium,
· modifications of the capacity and mechanism of host defence.
· Predisposing factors enhancing the multiplication of Malassezia pachydermatis: excessive production
and/or modiffcation of the nature of the sebum and/or cerumen, excessive humidity, disruption of the
epidermal barrier, presence of skin folds.
· These modiffcations are mainly due to structural alterations generated by primary causes.
· This explains why Malassezia dermatitis is essentially secondary to other (so called) underlying
dermatoses and/or associated with other secondary dermatoses.
saae Aeuassa siseap aed aue Aa paae aq Au ya shop hnpe u janbay sna s i o
and endocrine disorders.
· Amongst the underlying or associated dermatoses, the following are frequently observed:
· skin allergies and most particularly atopic dematitis,
· endocrine disorders and most particularly hypothyroidism,
Cushing's syndrome,
· parasitic infestation and in particular demodicosis,
· pyoderma,
· keratoseborrhoeic disorders of various origin.
 still aggravates the cutaneous problems:
· by producing lipases that modify the surface lipid film,
'aao-un, peuapida, au dn Supaads Aq .
· by the development of an immediate hypersensitivity to Malassezia pachydermatis which then
becomes an allergen as shown for example by: positive skin testing with Malassezia extracts and high
 levels of IgG and igE in atopic dogs with or without Malassezia dermatitis in comparison with non
 atopic affected dogs and healthy dogs.
· All these modifications contribute in diminishing the skin integrity and aggravating the lesional status and
 are therefore responsible for the appearance or exacerbation of pruritus, which can become intense.
· A true vicious circle can develop; an antifungal therapy then becomes the first key point of the
dermatological treatment.
Erythrocyte
Lymphocytes
 Mast cells
Besophils
S'taphyloccos
odp
gechydematis
Malassezia dermatitis. Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Malassezia dermatitis and yeast overgrowth · 3
Part.2
Epidemiology
 Mafassezia dermatitis is not contagious to other animals or humans.
 It affects adult dogs of all ages. There is no sex predisposition (neutered animals could be predisposed).
 Certain breeds seem predisposed to develop Malassezia dermatitis: West Highland white terrier, Basset
hound, English setter, Shih Tzu, Dachshund, Cocker spaniel, American Cocker, Poodle, German shepherd,
Collie, Shetland sheepdog, Jack Russell terrier, Silky terrier, Australian terrier, Springer spaniel and Shar pei.
→ In temperate countries of the Northern Hemisphere, Malassezia dermatitis often begins during the
summer, a period of the year also favourable to the expression of allergic dermatitis. Thereafter, it may
persist all winter.
Chinical signs
 Pruritus is always present and is usually intense. For this reason, Mafassezia dermatitis must be
unconditionally treated at first to be able to evaluate if the underlying dermatosis is pruritic and to what
degree.
 Primary lesions: generalised or localised erythema, papules and erythematous
maculae.
 Secondary lesions: greasy seborrhoea, crusts, diffuse alopecia,
hyperpigmentation and lichenification when chronic.
 Lesions are preferentially localised on the ventral aspect of the body (neck,
axillae, abdomen, and inguinal area) and the perianal region.
→ Other areas also frequently affected are the face (ears, lips, muzzle) and the
limbs (medial thighs and extremities).
→ An offensive odour of rancid grease is also frequently present.
 Erythemato-ceruminous otitis externa is frequently associated (refer to the Otitis Monograph).
Malasezia dermatitis. Lesional aspect of the chin
and neck. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Malassezia dermatitis. Associated otitis
Malassezia dermatits. Axilla lesional
externa. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
aspect. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Malassezia dermatitis. Lesional aspet of the groin
Malassezia dermatits. Lesional aspect
Malassezia dermatitis. Lesional aspert of the extrenities.
and abdomen. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
of a limb. Courtesy of: H. Koch
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Malassezia denmatitis and yeast overgrowth · 4
Diagnosis
 General remarks.
· The diagnosis is based on history, clinical examination, Malassezia observation on the
 cutaneous lesions and on the response to a specific antifungal therapy.
· Yeast identification may be obtained by various means.
· Clinical examination and cytology are essential and justify by themselves the initiation of
 antifungal therapy.
→History.
· All breeds may be affected, but certain breeds
seem predisposed (see above).
· Constant pruritus (scratching), sometimes
 intense. Malassezia dermatitis is a major
differential in case of generalised pruritus in a
dog.
· Pruritus and lesions generally appear
simultaneously or the lesions are preceded by
matologicalHlistory
the pruritus when the patient is affected by an
 3/ Pruritus, im
and time of onset {befor
underlying allergic dermatitis: very frequent
case!
· Partial response to corticosteroids (pruritus and
 sometimes lesion) followed by a severe relapse.
→ Clinical signs and distribution pattern (see page 3).
 11/ Prev
· Generalised pruritus.
· Pruritus localisation mimics atopic dermatitis
since the distribution is similar and since both
conditions are frequently associated.
· Erythema and keratoseborrhoeic disorders on the ventral aspect of the body, the neck, the
face, the perianal region and the limbs. The whole body may also be affected.
→ Cytology.
· General remarks:
· Cytology is reliable, allows rapid performance and interpretation (it needs a few minutes
at the patient's side) and inexpensive!
· Various sampling techniques exist:
· direct impression smear,
· cellophane tape test (tape strip test),
· smear from a skin scraping,
· swab smear.
· The first two methods must be preferred, the swab smear being reserved for auricular
sampling or when cutaneous exudate is important.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Malassezia dermatitis and yeast overgrowth · 5
Part.2
· Direct impression smear performance and fast-
acting staining (Diff-Quik type):
· A slide is placed and rubbed against the
 lesional areas. The edge (or even a corner) of
the slide may be sufficient if the area to
sample is small (interdigital area for example).
· Perform several smears in different lesional
 areas.
· Note the side where the sample has been
placed. This will be the examination side.
· Let the samples dry for 1 to 2 minutes in
 Performing an impresion smear. Courtesy of: D. Pin
open air.
· Immerse the slides in the three different solutions used for classic haematological fast-acting
staining, following the advised contact times (generally 30 seconds each).
· Rinse the slides thoroughly with clear water and blot them carefully with an absorbent paper,
examination side upwards, until the water is completely absorbed.
· A hair-dryer may be used (gently) for final drying.
· Technique for a cellophane tape test and fast-acting staining (Diff-Quik type):
· A clear cellophane tape is pressed firmly on the lesions.
· Sample several times in different lesional areas.
· Make a loop with the piece of cellophane tape by fixing it at the end of a slide, the adhesive
side carrying the material sampled outwards.
· Immerse the different pieces of tape in the three different solutions used for classic
haematological fast-acting staining, following the advised contact times (generally 30 seconds
each).
· Rinse the pieces of adhesive tape thoroughly with clear water. Eliminate excess water with an
 absorbent paper.
ap ieu oy (a) psn ag ae lapey y -
· Unroll the adhesive tape and stick it on the slide.
Cellophane tape est performance. Pressing a piece on a lesional area.
Cellophane tape test performance Pressing a piece on a lesional area.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Malassezia dematitis and yeast overgrowth · 6
Cellophane tape est performance.
Cellophane tape tet performance.
Cellophane tape test performance.
Fixing the piece at the ed oftheslide and staining.
Fixing thepee at thendof the slide andstaining.
Fixing the piee at the end of the slide and staining.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Courtesy of D. Pin
· Microscopic observations:
· Locate macroscopically well stained areas and centre them under the microscope lens.
· Take care in positioning the slide on the right side: material sampled (for a direct impression smear) or
cellophane, upward.
· Look for the areas with most cells under low (1ox objective) magnification, particularly epidermal cells debris,
where Malassezia tend to cluster.
· Then locate the areas likely to be best interpreted under the 40x objective.
· Without modifying the depth setting, place the slide between two objective lenses and apply a few drops of
 immersion oil on the chosen area. Tum to the high power objective (10ox immersion) adjusting the focus.
·● If the image of a direct impression smear stays blurred, the slide may have been accidentally turned upside
down, and the reading side may be on the other side!
· Scan the sample over a large area for a few minutes.
· Quote semi-quantitatively (scale from O to +++) the numbers of Malassezia present
· Interpretation:
another and from one site to another in the same.
· The simple fact of observing yeast (Malassezia pachydermatis), whatever their number, must be taken
 into account for an animal clinically affected with a dermatological disorder:
· even if the implication of Malassezia in the dermatitis has not been demonstrated, it represents a potential
"danger",
· and even if it is true that the higher the number of yeast present, the higher the probability that they have a
 pathogenic role in the dermatitis, a small number may cause important clinical consequences in case of 
hypersensitivity to the yeast.
· The treatment could simply be adapted to the number of yeasts present, and/or to the gravity of the
clinical signs.
· However, the ultimate proof of the implication of Malassezia is a positive response to therapy.
Micrascopic view of a direct impression smear. Malassezia pachydermatis.
Microscopic view of a sample on cellophane tape.
(Diff-Quik stain, x1000). Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Malassezia pachydermatis.(Diff-Quik stain,x1000).
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Malassezia dermatitis and yeast overgrowth · 7
Part.2
· Fungal culture and sensitivity:
· This test may be useful in rare, specific cases. Its realisation has no actual additional
benefit compared to cytology, being more complex and results are delayed.
· Several methods are used for collecting material to culiture: collected hairs, swab,
Mackenzie Brush Technique...
· The material may be placed on Sabouraud medium supplemented with antibiotics and
olive oil.
· Sensitivity testing is generally useless, since Malassezia is normally sensitive to classic
antifungal and antiseptic agents (see "therapy").
· These tests should rather be reserved for difficult cases: unsuccessful therapy, multiple
relapses when patients are treated several times...
· Keep in mind that Malassezia belongs to the normal microflora of the dog's skin: as for any
opportunist agent, it is the number of colonies that should be taken into account.
· Histopathology:
· Skin biopsies are usually not necessary in the diagnostic work-up of Malassezia dermatitis
 and the sensitivity of this test is chiefly inferior to that of cytology.
· May be performed to confirm the presence of yeast, to appreciate their implication in the
dermatosis, but never to exclude their presence or their implication.
Periodic Acid-Schiff: PAS), but their absence does not exclude the possibility of their
presence on the animal, even of a high population.
· The presence of a histopathological pattern evoking a true Malassezia dermatitis
may lead to conjecture regarding its implication in the dermatosis.
→"Therapeutic trial".
· Its goal is not to give evidence of yeast overgrowth, but of its implication or not in the
 clinical signs observed, i.e. the presence or absence of a true Malassezia dermatitis.
· This "trial" must therefore always be preceded by the observation of Malassezia "overgrowth"
· A systemic antifungal therapy will be preferred. Nevertheless, the use of efficient topical
 Differential diagnosis.
· The differential diagnosis is complex since the clinical signs of this pruritic dermatitis are not
specific, and the principal primary lesion, the erythema, may be observed in all dermatitis!
· Moreover, Malassezia dermatitis is associated and/or aggravated by most dermatoses belonging
 to the differential diagnosis.
· However, this dermatitis is a major differential to be ruled out or treated, particularly as a
secondary dermatosis, before investigating primary causes (essentially allergies and
particularly atopic dermatitis)
· The differential diagnosis includes (refer to corresponding monographs):
· Hypersensitivity skin conditions (atopy, FAD, food allergy, or even contact dermatitis)
which are also the most frequent primary causes.
· Parasitic dermatoses (sarcoptic mange, and more rarely, infestations by other parasites).
· Any other cause of keratoseborrhoeic disorders combined with a dermatitis.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Malassezia demmatitis and yeast overgrowth · 8
Treatment
→General remarks
· The therapy of Malassezia dermatitis is based on
the sole use of topical therapy or in
combination with a systemic antifungal
 treatment, depending on the gravity of the
clinical signs, the importance of the overgrowth,
the desired potency of the treatment and the
 potential secondary effects.
· The combination ensures a faster improvement
 and healing and this confirms the diagnosis (see
above). Furthermore the maintenance of
remission with the sole topical therapy is also
 Malassezia dermatitis. Courtesy of: H. Koch
helpful in confirming the diagnosis. However,
when confronted by tolerance and economic
reasons, a sole topical treatment correctly applied may be justified and sufficient.
Antifungal systemic treatment.
· Products:
· The systemic treatment of Malassezia dermatitis is essentially based on ketoconazole.
· The dosage for dogs is 5 to 10 mg/kg SID taken at the beginning of meals.
· This drug is well tolerated, but biochemical parameters must be monitored when
treatments are prolonged. Indeed, an increased level of serum ALT precedes the onset of
clinical signs of intolerance (anorexia, vomiting) due to liver toxicity.
· Itraconazole may be used at 5 to 20 mg/kg every 24 to 48 hours.
· Griseofulvin is not active against Malassezia.
· Evolution and duration:
· The initial prescription must last a minimum of three weeks.
· Pruritus diminishes in the first week and the lesions start healing during the second.
· A treatment of a few weeks is generally necessary and must be continued after clinical
recovery (7 to 10 days).
→ Corticosteroid therapy.
· Corticosteroids are contra-indicated in Malassezia dermatitis, even in the presence of pruritus,
for there is a risk of "rebound" effects, i.e. of severe relapse.
· They represent a factor of immunodeficiency favouring the onset of skin infections ( with a
risk of developing an iatrogenic Cushing's syndrome).
· Furthermore, eliminating the pruritus symptomatically does not allow evaluation of the
component due to Malassezia overgrowth and the component due to an underlying pruritic
dermatosis. Non implication of Malassezia in the dermatitis and/or absence of underlying
dermatosis and/or presence of a non-pruritic underlying dermatosis may be falsely concluded.
· Inappropriate use of corticosteroids may lead to therapeutic difficulties on one hand and
diagnostic misunderstandings on the other.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Malassezia dermatitis and yeast overgrowth · 9
Part.2
→ Topical therapy.
· Topical treatment is essential, and may be sufficient by itself. In any case, it is extremely
 beneficial when combined with a systemic treatment.
· Available topics are mainly shampoos and lotions (which can be used in addition to or after
shampooing)
· These topical agents include antiseptic or antifungal agents (chlorhexidine, miconazole,
econazole, enilconazole, ketoconazole...).
· The use of antiseptic or antifungal shampoos, 2 or 3 times a week for two weeks and then
 every week until healing, first enables the mechanical removal of a large quantity of debris 
 and yeast and then directly counteracts the microbial proliferation.
· The use of antiseptic lotions, as often as possible in combination with shampoos reinforces the
efficiency of topical therapy and may allow reducing the frequency of shampoos.
· Antifungal lotions are also available for use after an antiseborrhoeic shampoo for example
· Regular use of antiseptic shampoos and/or lotions may effectively prevent relapses.
→ Course follow-up.
· Assess the animal for the first time preferably after 3 weeks (efficacy of the treatment may
not be properly assessed before 15 days).
· Then assess the animal at least every 3 to 4 weeks.
· Assess by cytology at each consultation the decrease of cutaneous yeast counts.
· The remission of clinical signs may not be obtained if the underlying dermatosis is severe,
therefore the efficacy of the treatment will be assessed by yeast counting.
· Interpretation of clinical signs improvement:
If dinical sins disappearorreress afeyeast overrowth clears, t wa inded aMaass
If the clinical signs persist once the yeast
dermatitis.
Overgrowth has cleared up, there was no
+ If the clinical signs dissappear completely, the Malassezia dermatitis is "idiopathic" (rare).
Malassezia dermatitis.
f they mly reress, anuderlynmatosis st e estated (frequet):
· The microbial population must be
 If pruritus ceases, the underlying dermatosis is not pruritic (rare case)
always controlled in any case.
· If pruritus persists, the underlying dermatosis is pruritic (very frequent case).
· Further dermatological workup
● Beware of previous use of corticosteroids which may come to confuse this analysis.
needs to be done.
Prognosis
deaun aedoidde ue ym poo Aensn si sisouoid aul <
→ Nevertheless, Malassezia dermatitis secondary to an underlying dermatosis requires a permanent
long-term follow-up.
frequent.
Follow-up
→ Cytological examination at each consultation also represents a key feature.
→ Treatment and recovery of a secondary Malassezia dermatitis are of course necessary as a first
intention but they are only a step in the management of the dermatological case.
→ Investigation of an associated or underlying dermatosis, follow-up and prevention of relapses
after healing are indispensable.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
 Malassezia denmatitis and yeast overgrowth · 10
Conclusions
 Malassezia dermatitis is a superficial cutaneous disorder without any characteristic primary
lesions, and may then mimic and worsen an allergic skin disease.
 Secondary Malassezia dermatitis is, at least potentially, freguent!
→ It is a major differential in the diagnosis of pruritic dermatoses in dogs.
→ The most frequent case is a Malassezia dermatitis where recovery leads to the need for
carrying out a differential diagnosis of allergies.
 The underlying dermatosis and relapses need to be controlled.
 Malassezia pachydermatis and Staphyfococcus pseudintermedius may have similar and
concomitant role.
The best
friends!
Mp
Mficroscopic view of a sample on cellophane tape.
Combined proliferation of Malassezia and staphylococci.
(Diff-Quik stain, x1000). Courtesy of: D. Pin
Importance of the follow-up
and owner education
· A regular follow-up of the case is very important.
· Explain to the client that this treatment is only a first step, certainly essential and will relieve
the discomfort. Yet, specify that symptoms due to a possible underlying dermatosis may persist
and/or that the dermatitis has a high chance of recurring and that exploring the cause will
 certainly be necessary in order to control the dermatological problem in the long term.
· The decision for further investigation must be taken with the owner's co-operation when the
patient's discomfort becomes obvious or when treatments become too frequent.
· Indicate that corticosteroids are contra-indicated, first for medical reasons, and then strictly if
any further dermatological work-up needs to be done.
· Corticosteroids act as "pro-infectious" factors and are responsible for "rebound" effects.
· Eventually, if necessary, and always out of infectious periods, corticosteroids may be prescribed
to help control an underlying allergic dermatitis: mostly atopy as flea allergy dermatitis and food
allergy are easily controlled by other means (refer to corresponding monographs). Prescribe the
"lowest" dosage possible and monitor rigorously and regularly for microbial infection or
overgrowth: pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, bacterial overgrowth or both (concurrent
Staphylococcus pseudintermedius and Malassezia pachydermatis overgrowth). Stop corticosteroids
and renew anti-microbial therapy as soon as a skin infection recurs. Always try to discontinue
the use of corticosteroids: inform, educate and convince the owners about that.
· Moreover, pruritus due to Malassezia dermatitis decreases quickly (in a few days) after
initiating the treatment.
· Keep also in mind that controlling the fungal problem may lead to a sufficient reduction in
general pruritus, thus allowing a delay in the necessity for controlling the eventual underlying
pruritic dermatosis!
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 1
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD)
Introduction / Definition
→ FAD is a pruritic dermatitis arising from a hypersensitivity to the
bites of fleas (most often Ctenocephafides felis).
→ Very frequent, it is one of the commonest causes of pruritus in
dogs.
→ FAD is one of the three major allergic skin diseases that have to
be considered in the differential diagnosis of pruritic dermatoses,
the others being canine atopic dermatitis (CAD) and adverse food
reactions (AFR): food allergy and food intolerance.
Photomicrograph of Ctenocephalide felisfels.
Courtesy of: B. Blagburn, Auburn University.
AL, USA
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→ The fea.
· Fleas are extremely common in temperate and warmer climates, with varying levels of infestation of
 pets and their environment, closely linked to ambient temperature and humidity.
· A clear understanding of the life cycle and environmental requirements is essential in order to
develop flea control strategies and obtain owner compliance, especially when overt signs of
 infestation are lacking.
工
Ctenocephalides felis. Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 2
→The development of hypersensitivity.
● Factors that determine whether or not a dog becomes allergic to fleas include:
· Exposure to fleas early in life tends to reduce the likelihood that a dog will become allergic
to fleas.
· Intermittent exposure to the bites of fleas favours the development of hypersensitivity,
whereas continual exposure tends to be protective, and leads to immunological tolerance.
· Dogs that are atopic, and suffer from atopic dermatitis (CAD) are predisposed to the
development of flea allergy.
→ The pathogenesis in a hypersensitive dog.
· Both immediate and delayed hypersensitivity are involved, and can be visualised following
intradermal skin testing when a reaction at both 15 to 20mins and 48hrs is seen.
· The sequence of events that occurs following the bite of a flea in a hypersensitive individual are as
follows:
· The flea saliva contains a number of protein antigens to which the patient will have been
 sensitised by prior exposure.
· Hypersensitive dogs can develop their disease via a number of immunopathogenic pathways,
which are:
· the majority of sensitive dogs develop IgE antibodies (immediate, or type I
hypersensitivity), and thus mast cell-derived mediators are involved,
● in addition, some dogs manifest cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity with an influx of
basophils armed with IgE antibody into the site of the application of allergen,
+ most dogs also have cell-rmediated, delayed, or type IV hypersensitivity. Injection of the
allergen causes an influx of lymphocytes and macrophages and a variety of interleukins are
 involved. In a certain number of cases (probably 15 to 30%), delayed hypersensitivity
alone exists.
Erythrocytes
Lymphocytes
 Mast cells
Basophils
Nertrophils
Ensinophils
2
odpj
Dermal papule Ex. Flea Allrgy Dermatitis.
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 3
Part.2
Epidemiology
requirements of the cause which is the flea. Types of fleas involved are:
· Ctenocephalides felis is the major species involved world-wide.
well-adapted, and less hardy.
· Infestations with flea species more usually associated with human infestations, namely Pulex
irritans and Pulex simulans are occasionally found.
· Sometimes, fleas whose natural hosts are poultry and wildlife are implicated. Such infestations
are usually readily controlled.
→ The environmental conditions most suitable for the reproduction and survival of the flea are:
· Moderate temperatures of 18-30°C
· High relative humidity of 70-80%
· They do not survive in colder climates, or in hot climates with low humidity.
→ Flea infestation without allergy is actually much more common than is FAD.
 FAD is non contagious but flea infestation is!
→ The major features of the biology of Ctenocephalides felis and the pre-adult components of the
life cycle are as follows:
· Adult fleas are host-dependant blood-sucking ectoparasites.
· They may attack humans in heavily infested environments where more suitable hosts are
scarce or absent.
· They can leave their host and survive in a standard house-hold environment but will die quickly
 unless a new host is found. They should then be considered permanent rather than transient
parasites.
· Under optimum conditions, adults can live for long periods without feeding and 1 to 2 weeks
under household conditions, but a blood meal is necessary for reproduction, which takes
place on the host.
· Feeding fleas can survive up to 1o0 days on their host.
· When well fed, a female can lay up to 50 eggs/day and up to 2000 during her entire lifetime.
· Eggs are laid on the host and fall into the environment for development. Females lay
preferentially at night and therefore the animal's sleeping areas will be most heavily infested and
require special attention in the control programme.
· Eggs hatch to larvae (3 larval stages)
migrate downwards and away from light. They will then be found preferentially for example in
cracks in the flooring, between floor planks and deep in the pile of carpets. This knowledge is
 all the tiled floor of a very bright kitchen, but one must be careful to treat cracks and crevasses
and underneath and behind furniture.
· Very little food is necessary for the development of the larvae which live on blood-containing
faecal pellets that fall from the host.
· The third larval stage pupates into an oval sticky cocoon.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 4
· This stage is the most resistant to both insect growth regulators (IGRs) and to adulticides. Thus,
environmental control alone may not be sufficient, and FAD affected pets must be protected from
the newly emerged adult fleas by treatment with adulticides, at least at the beginning, and when 
any new environmental contamination occurs.
· Each cocoon contain a preemerged adult which can lie dormant for long periods, up to 3 or 4 months.
· In the presence of appropriate stimuli (vibration, increased carbon dioxide and heat), adult fleas
This explains for example why a house where an infested animal has lived, even if uninhabited for
a long time, may remain an important source of infestation for a newly arrived animal.
· The life-cycle is typically completed in around 4-5 weeks. It may be accelerated to 3 weeks 0r
less, or slowed to 6 months, depending upon environmental conditions.
→ Approximate percentages of the different parasitic stages present in the household.
Adults
5%
1
aednd
15%
.
Larvae
Eggs
Lifestages of Ctenocephalides felis felis.
Courtesy of: B. Blagburn, Auburn University, AL, USA
Clinical Handbook on CanineDermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 5
Part.2
Ctenocephalides felis life cycle in the environment and on the hosts
Scanning electron micrograph of Ctenocephalides
felis adult. Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary
College, London
Scanning electron micrograph of Ctenocephalides
felis pupa Courty of Royal Veteriary
College, London
Adult fleas may survive 1 to 3 months on the host.
They may represent a very low percentage of all
 the parasitic stages which occupy the house!
Co-inhabiting cat
FAD affected dog
Outside cat
5
2 to 10 days
Scanning electron micrograph of
Ctenocephalides felis larva. Courtesy of:
Royal Veterinary College, London
felis eg Courtesy of Royal Veterinary College.
London
Reservoirs of fleas (host-environment life cycle)
Sources of infestation
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 6
Clinical signs
 FAD is still sometimes called "summer eczema"!
→ The primary eruption is an erythematous papule, which may develop a
crust before disappearing in 2-4 days.
 The distribution involves mainly the lower back and posterior and inner
thighs. These are also the sites most favoured by the fleas.
→ Secondary lesions resulting from self-trauma due to the intense pruritus.
→ Changes seen in chronic cases include seborrhoea, crusting, alopecia and
eventually lichenification.
Dog affected by FAD and by
denodicasis secondary to corticasteroid
therapy.Courtyf:H.Schroder
History Sheet
weight 
logicalHistory
Diagnosis
+ History.
· Age of onset : young adult dogs (1 to 6 years in 75% of
cases).
· The history should document exposure to fleas.
· However, in exquisitely sensitive animals, only one or two
fleas may be present, and may escape notice.
· The owner also may notice the presence of flea faeces, small comma-shaped dark material
which leaves a red stain behind when rubbed on moistened white paper.
· Demonstration of fleas or flea excreta supports the diagnosis but absence of those elements
do not exclude it: in one study up to 2/3 of confirmed FAD affected animals showed no
evidence of fleas, and 1/3 showed no evidence of fleas or of flea faeces!
· However, a careful examination for both fleas and flea faeces must always be undertaken.
· Fleas and flea faeces are more readily demonstrable with the use of a flea comb. Also, the
use during consultation of a quick knock-down flea spray (e.g. permethrin) will kill many
fleas, which then will fall onto the examination table. A brushing may help render them
directly visible to both the owner and the veterinarian. This may convince those who state
that their dog never has any fleas!
· If faecal pellets only are found, demonstrate
to the owners that the findings are not
merely dirt by rubbing the flea faeces on
moistened white paper. They may then be
convinced at least that fleas have recently
been on the pet.
Flea faeces rubbed on a moistened white paper.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 7
Part.2
· The area of pruritus is also an important consideration.
· Previous parasiticidal treatments may not exclude the diagnosis depending on the products
used and the rigour of application.
· There is usually a good response to systemic glucocorticoids, followed by a relapse unless the
fleas are controlled at the same time.
· Seasonal influence:
· More likely to appear in favourable seasons (e.g. late spring, summer and early autumn in
temperate climates).
· May however be present during the whole year in favourable climates, with the
constituent parts of the life cycle surviving indoors in the winter.
· Clinical signs may also persist year-round, even in the absence of fleas, if the FAD is
 associated with a concomitant disease (e.g. atopic dermatitis due to house dust mites).
 Clinica! efements.
 Key clinical features that are supportive
of the diagnosis are:
· Characteristic distribution.
· Evidence of a papular and crusting
primary eruption, accompanied by
a variety of secondary changes.
· The presence of fleas and/or flea
faeces, although absence of these
may not exclude the diagnosis.
→ Major differentials.
· The major differential is atopic
Photomicrograph of Ctencephald felsfe Couey f P Boueau
dermatitis, although it must be
remembered that the two
conditions may co-exist in the
 same patient:
· In one study 4/5 of dogs with FAD
were also affected by atopic
dermatitis!
· Also, 1/3 of dogs with atopic
 dermatitis were also affected by
FAD!
· Key distinguishing features of
atopic dermatitis:
· The distribution is facial and
ventral.
· There is usually a concomitant
otitis externa.
Dog affected by FAD and atopy. General view. Courtesy of R.E. W. Halliwell
· Refer to the monograph on
atopic dermatitis.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 8
Dog affected by FAD and atopy. FAD lesions involving the lower back.
Dog affected by FAD and atopy. AD lesions involving the ventral area,
Courtesy of: R.E.W. Halliwell
axillae Courtesy of: R.E.W Halliwell
Dog affected by FAD and atopy. Close view of FAD lesions involving the
Dog affcted by FAD and atopy. AD lesions involving the ventral area,
lower back. Courtesy of R.E.W. Halliwell
groin. Courtesy of: R.E.W. Halliwell
· Care must also be taken to exclude other parasitic dermatoses including infestation with
Cheyletiella, Trombicula and lice.
· Depending upon the geographic location, FAD may well be by far the most common allergic skin
disease in small animal practice, and must be confirmed or excluded with certainty during the
differential diagnosis of allergies, once the common parasitic and microbial skin diseases have
 been excluded (dermatoses of groups 1a and 1b).
 Diagnostic tests.
· Confirmation of the diagnosis of FAD should be made.
· The "gold standard test" remains the intradermal skin test with a positive immediate (10-20
minutes) or delayed (24-48 hours) reaction to flea allergens. This test can be performed in
 conjunction with intradermal injections of other allergens to detect hypersensitivity in atopic
dogs, but may also be performed alone with a positive (histamine) and negative (diluent) control.
· Refer to the monograph on atopic
dermatitis for the method of
determination.
· In the event of a negative result at 10-20
minutes, it is important to check the site
at 48 hrs for any delayed reaction. The
site must therefore be carefully marked
with an indelible marker. It should be
noted that in contrast to the urticarial
immediate reaction, the delayed
reaction may be evidenced by local
erythema, palpable thickening or a
Positive intradermal skin test at 20. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
crusted papule.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 9
Part.2
Pasitive intradermal skin est at 48hrs. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlott
Pasitive intradermal skin test at 48hrs. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
· In vitro assays for allergen-specific IgE are available but they are less reliable, both in
terms of sensitivity and specificity. They can be performed using either monoclonal or
polyclonal anti-canine IgE, or with the Fce receptor assay. However, some 15-30% of cases
of FAD will show delayed hypersensitivity only and will thus have a true positive delayed
skin test, but a negative in vitro test.
· It must be remembered finally that the demonstration of hypersensitivity does not alone justify
not necessarily mean that the dermatitis observed is the result of FAD or of FAD alone.
Response to parasiticidal therapy is then of major significance.
→ Therapeutic trial.
· The only true way to confirm the diagnosis is by a therapeutic trial.
· For full details, see the section on flea control.
· The aim is to eliminate the flea bites over a 2-3 week period to allow resolution of the
clinical signs.
· Main considerations:
· All pets should be treated.
· If there is a heavy environmental contamination, this must also be treated with an
adulticide and an IGR
· A spray formulation is likely to give the quickest response for on-animal use.
· Ideally a product with a quick killing action should be used.
· Permethrin deserves special consideration for such a trial as it fulfils the above criteria,
· Symptomatic, anti-inflammatory therapy must not be used (or at best for only 2-3 days
 if the patient is severely affected) as it will interfere with the conclusions.
· Conclusions:
· A positive response (successful therapeutic trial): if the clinical signs resolve, the
diagnosis may be confirmed since the positive predictive value (PPV) is very high.
· A negative response (unsuccessful therapeutic trial): the dog may not be affected by
FAD, but the negative predictive value (NPV) is not as high as the PPV.
· a negative response may be due to the fact that the patient is still being bitten,
· increase this NPV using permethrin and following an adequate protocol (see below)
to be able to conclude that actually the dog is not suffering from FAD
· The therapeutic trial may have been effective, but leading to a partial response:
· pursue (or reinforce) the treatment if specific clinical signs of FAD remain,
· the dog may have concomitant atopic dermatitis (and/or an adverse food reaction) if
of initiating a control of the atopic dermatitis should be evaluated afterwards.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 10
· The recommended protocol is summarised below:
· 1, 2 and 3 are mandatory.
· 4 is highly recommended.
· 5 considerably increases the NPV
· The long term treatment may be adapted in each case (depending on the occurrence of
 clinical signs in the affected animal and of the environmental parasitic infestation).
 Days of treatment and/or consultation
Do
D7
D14
D 15 to D21
 Long term
1. Taking the history and clinical
examination
2. Treatment of the affected dog with an
efficient product (adulticide + 1GR)
by the vet 
by the owner 
by the owner
3. Treatment of the in-contact pets
with IGRs
4. Treatment of the in-contact pets
 with adulticides
5. Perfect environmental treatment
Treatment
General remarks.
· The only way to avoid the clinical signs (symptoms and lesions) of FAD in affected dogs is to
eliminate the source of allergenic challenge i.e. prevent all flea bites by eliminating the fleas.
· Resolution will then occur within 15 days.
· Prevention of access of allergen to the animal is the best way to control any allergy. And, if most
of the time, this is unfortunately not possible in atopy, it is possible in FAD, so it should be the
goal.
· FAD can be perfectly controlled with the correct use of parasiticides.
· See "flea control" and "therapeutic trial" sections.
→Symptomatic and anti-inflammatory.
· General remarks.
· Symptomatic anti-pruritic therapy should be used with caution, remembering that it will
 no longer be possible to assess the efficacy of the anti-parasite strategy.
· If they are required, it is preferable to use short-term oral corticosteroids than long-acting
injectable forms which may induce serious side effects with repeated use.
· Reassure the owner that pruritus will rapidly decrease with a successful parasiticidal
therapy.
· However, symptomatic antipruritic therapy should not be used in the case of a therapeutic
trial.
· Topical therapy:
· Topical therapy is not generally employed in the therapy of FAD, except in relation to flea
control (see below).
· The use of shampoos and/or lotions may be appropriate in some cases.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 11
Part.2
· Systemic therapy:
· Corticosteroids:
· Effectively control the inflammatory response.
· Preferably, oral products rather than long-acting injectables.
· May be sometimes helpful at the beginning, but do not replace an appropriate
 parasiticidal treatment (which would be rapidly effective alone!).
· Their use does not allow correct evaluation of the "flea control' efficacy.
· Other anti-inflammatory agents:
· Antihistamines are generally ineffective in FAD.
· Essential Fatty Acids, in sufficient doses may help, especially if there is concomitant
 atopic dermatitis.
· Antibiotics:
· Any secondary bacterial infection is usually minimal, and does not require systemic
treatment.
· Occasionaly, however, animals are encountered where the acquisition of a flea
infestation initiates a generalised pyoderma. In such cases, a 2 week course of a
suitable antibiotic is indicated (see complex approach pyoderma monographs).
· Additional therapy:
· Immunotherapy with the currently available products is not effective.
+ Fea controf.
· General remarks:
· Although less rigorous protocols may be adequate to keep flea infestation controlled in
non-allergic animals, the final objective in a case of FAD is to avoid any flea from biting
the affected animal during its life.
· Total elimination of the flea population within the household is the best way.
· There are three distinct but related means of achieving the final objective:
· eliminate the flea population from each animal in the household (the affected
 animal and all the in-contact pets),
· protect them from continued infestation from adult fleas from the environment,
· eliminate from the environment the reservoir of eggs, larvae and pupae.
· Three principles must be considered when selecting the optimal method for flea control.
· careful consideration of the environmental conditions and of any in-contact animals
must precede the formulation of the treatment regime,
· the goal is to eliminate the flea population as rapidly as possible, and with products
that have repellent and/or anti-feeding properties to treat the affected animal,
· use of a combination of products, so called "integrated flea control", is likely both to
be more effective and also to limit the development of insecticidal resistance.
· Informing the owner and constructing the flea control programme:
· After the diagnosis is established, the most cost-effective flea control has to be chosen,
bearing in mind any special circumstances pertaining to the pets, the environment and
the owner.
· The most appropriate programme must be formulated aiming at all in-contact pets and
the environment (both inside and outside if appropriate) where they spend time.
· A major factor in achieving success is client education, taking the time to explain
essential features of flea biology, as they affect the selected strategy, and of the properties
of the products selected and the rationale behind their use.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 12
· The owners must be convinced that the most effective control programme is not ikely to be
 the cheapest, but that time and money will be saved in the long run by adopting an effective
strategy:
· the least treatment acceptable is the application of efficient and quick acting topical
parasiticidals on the affected animal at appropriate intervals
· the efficacy will be greatly increased by an efficient environmental treatment, even if done
only once at the beginning.
· After this discussion, explain that the animal's treatment might be reduced later (especially in
winter.) and that if clinical signs of FAD reappear, this is because of ineffective parasite
control, which will then have to be reinforced, first by re-initiating topical treatment of the
affected animal and second by re-evaluating the treatment of the in-contact pets and of the
environment.
ENVIRONMENTAL TREATMENT
→ Adulticides and IGRs applied in each habitat where the
 affected dog goes (even once a year), in each room,
using foggers, sprays on pump-sprays to treat where
foggers do not.
 In warmer climates contamination of the outside
environment may be a significant source of
reinfestation, and an aduticide and an IGR should be
applied to shady areas where there is plenty of organic
debris. The IGR chosen should be resistant to ultraviolet
light (e.g. pyriproxyfen-as opposed to methoprene
 Photomicrograph of Ctenocephalides felis egs and larvae.
which may be inactivated by ultraviolet light).
Courtesy of: B. Blagburm, Auburn University. AL, USA
 Do not forget all the areas frequented less commonly
by the affected animal, including the car, the garage...
 Affected animals and all in-contact pets may be "used"
 to assist in the environmental treatment, giving them 
topical or systemic IGR (pyriproxyfen and lufenuron for
example). Then, if a flea "accidentally" takes a blood
meal on such treated animals, it will not reproduce thus
 preventing environmental contamination.
TREATMENT OF IN-CONTACT PETS
Photomicrograph of Ctenocephalides felis larvae and pupae at base
 Treatment with IGRs and/or adulticides.
carpet. Courtesy of: B. Blagburn, Auburn University, AL, USA
→ IGRs may be sufficient in long-term control.
TOPICAL TREATMENT OF AFFECTED ANIMALS
→ The best way to protect an affected dog from FAD is
topical applications with locally acting products
containing aduiticides preferably in association with
an IGR.
 Maintenance of continual and effective anti-parasite
 pressure is recommended.
Photomicrograph of Ctenocephalids felis pupae.
Courtesy of: B. Blagburm, Auburn University, AL, USA
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 13
Part.2
Adulticides and IGRs in Flea Control
Example of an aggressive first treatment
Newly emerged
IGR + ADULTICIDE
hungry adult fleas
Pupxe =
Adult flea responsible for
resistance forms
the FAD clinical signs
ADULTICIDE
十
IGR
IGR
ADULTICIDE
Co-inhabiting cat
FAD affected dog
Outside cat
IGR
ADULTICIDE
Eggs
Larvae
IGR
IGR
ANIMAL TREATMENT:
SPRAYS, SPOT-ON or LINE-ON for ADULTICIDE
ENVIRONMENTAL TREATMENT:
(preferably SPRAY for the FAD affected DOG)
SPRAYS & FOGGERS
& IGRs (preferably TOPICAL)
NOTE: IGRs given to animals contribute to the environmental treatment
Reservoirs of fleas (host-environment life cycle)
Sources of infestation
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 14
Adulticide and IGRs in Flea Control
Example of maintenance treatment
Possible presence of
newly arrived adult fleas
(from the outside cat
for example
Adult flea which could 
have been responsible of
FAD clinical signs!
ADULTICIDE
IGR
IGR
Co-inhabiting ca
FAD affected dog
ANIMAL TREATMENT:
SPRAYS, SPOT-ON or LINE-ON for ADULTICIDE
(preferably SPRAY for the FAD affected DOG)
& IGRs (preferably TOPICAL)
NOTE: IGRs given to animals participate to the environmental treatment
Reservoirs of fleas (host-environment life cycle)
Sources of infestation
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 15
Part.2
→Iypes of products available.
· Products used can be divided into two types, namely the insecticides, which kill the flea, and
 insect growth regulators (IGRs) which act on other stages of the life-cycle. The latter can be
applied to the environment or to animals.
· Insecticides: amongst the older products, organophosphates and carbamates are still very
been shown to have an anti-feeding as well as a quick killing action. A number of new
products have become available in recent years, including fipronil, imidacloprid and
selamectin.
the juvenile hormone analogues which are ovicidal and larvicidal. Methoprene and fenoxycarb
 Also, it has recently been shown to have insecticidal activity. Pyriproxyfen may be used alone
for environmental treatment or on in-contact pets. It has been shown to act against newly
emerged adults fleas, limiting their ability to take their first blood meal (which has to be taken
very quickly otherwise fleas rapidly die).
· Effective flea control involves use of a combination of insecticidal and growth regulating
products.
→ Topical parasiticidal therapy.
· Shampoos:
· Shampoos are generally only effective in mild infestations and where there is little
environmental contamination. However, they may form part of an approach using
combinations of products.
· Pyrethroids or carbamates are usually employed
· Sprays:
· These are still popular ways by which to apply pyrethroids and also fipronil.
· They are often used in therapeutic trials.
· Collars:
· Although collars are often used for controlling flea infestation, more aggressive therapy is
usually required for the treatment of FAD. Organophosphates and pyrethroids are often
employed in collars.
· Spot and line application:
· Permethrin, fipronil, imidacloprid, selamectin, metaflumizone and pyriprole are
insecticides often used in this way.
· The potent insect growth regulator pyriproxyfen is also available in this form alone, or
 admixed with permethrin as a potent integrated approach.
→ Oral parasiticidal therapy.
· The older oral products were of limited efficacy in FAD, as the flea has to bite before it gains
access to the product (as is the case for systemicaly acting topical products).
· Two recent products may be effective in this formulation, namely nitenpyram (very short acting)
and spinosad.
Also, two IGR can be administered orally: tablets containing lufenuron, and pyriproxyfen in a
registered pet-food.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) · 16
Prognosis
 The prognosis for FAD is good so long as a complete therapeutic strategy is involved which takes
into account all in-contact animals that could provide a reservoir, as well as the environment.
Follow-up
 After the initial treatment, it is important to evaluate the clinical situation 2-3 weeks later. If the
treatment is only partially successful, a reassessment of all aspects, and especially the
environmental situation, is important.
 It must be remembered that once the animal is allergic, it is likely to remain so indefinitely
→ Therefore it is imperative that a long-term prevention strategy is developed for the future and
regularly reassessed.
Conclusions
 FAD is still a very common skin disease in temperate climates.
→ The only effective means of curing and preventing FAD remains the protection of the
affected animal from flea bites.
→ Newer products and the use of an integrated approach employing both an insecticide and
an insect growth regulator have now made what used to be a very difficult problem, readily
controllable.
However, the key to success is still to develop a programme tailored to the individual
situation and including all in-contact animals.
→ Combination therapy using an insecticide and an insect growth regulator tremendously
enhances the speed of success and the efficacy of long term prevention.
→ Management of FAD is not really complex in itself, but it has to be remembered that it may
be associated with secondary cutaneous infections and/or other allergic dermatitis, especially
with atopic dermatitis (increasing the risk of cutaneous infections).
Photomicrograph of Ctenocephalides felis egg.
Photomicrograph of Ctenocephalides felis larva.
Courtesy of: P Bourdeau
Courtesy of: P. Bourdeau
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 1
Part.2
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR)
(Food Allergy and Food Intolerance)
Introduction / Definition
 Adverse food reactions can involve either
immunologic or non-immunologic
 mechanisms. The former are called food
allergy, and the latter are food intolerance.
The relative incidence of each in veterinary
medicine is unknown, and as the clinical signs
are probably indistinguishable, they will be
considered as one entity.
 Typically, AFR leads to a non seasonal pruritus
→ AFR may coexist with Canine Atopic Dermatitis
(CAD), and Flea Allergy Dermatitis (FAD) can, of
Major food products incriminated. Courtesy of: P Jasmin
course, be superimposed.
 AFR is one of the three major allergic skin diseases that have to be considered in the differential
diagnosis of pruritic dermatoses, the others being FAD and CAD, clinical signs of AFR being similar
to the latter in a certain number of cases.
→ During this differential diagnosis of allergies, AFR takes a particular place: after exclusion of FAD,
even though AFR is not so common, it should always be investigated and excluded (or controlled)
before initiating any treatment of CAD (even if the dog showed a positive intradermal test).
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→ The allergens.
· Most dog owners believe that their dog cannot be affected by AFR because the dog has been on
the same diet for years!
· The offending antigen is usually a basic food ingredient of the diet, theoretically containing
proteins (of unknown nature), and possible also carbohydrates.
· Sensitisation to an antigen often follows a long refractory period, up to two years or more, before
clinical manifestations become evident.
· Major food ingredients involved in allergic reactions include meat (beef, pork, lamb.), fish, egg,
milk and dairy products, wheat, rice, soybean, maize and other cereals.
· In most cases, pruritus is due to one allergen or posibly two, but some dogs are multisensitive.
· It has also been shown that some food antigens cross-react. Thus most animals reacting to beef
(probably the major food allergen in dogs) will also react to lamb and milk.
· Commercial canned or dry pet food (which may contain some or many of these ingredients)
can as readily cause AFRs as do home prepared diets.
· Involvement of these ingredients varies between regions of the world.
· Several studies on dogs affected by AFR showed that 3/4 of cases were due to beef, dairy
products and wheat.
· Adverse reactions in dogs to corn, rice, pork and fish are rarely reported.
· Contrary to what occurs in man, additives or preservatives are not considered to be a common
cause of AFRs in dogs but it may be possible.
 Pathogenesis.
· The specific immunological mechanisms involved in food allergy are not well understood
· Type I (immediate anaphylactic response), type Il, type Ill (Arthus phenomenon) and type IV
(cell-mediated reactions) have all been hypothesised.
· It is likely that animals that respond quickly to a diet trial and relapse upon challenge within
1-2 days are IgE-mediated.
· Dogs affected by AFR may be predisposed to secondary staphylococcal and/or Malassezia
 infections and/or proliferation.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 2
Epidemiology
→ AFR is not an uncommon skin disease.
→ Estimates of its incidence range from 1 to 5 % of all dermatological
cases and 5 to 30 % of allergic dermatoses.
→ The following features are highly characteristic:
· Age of onset has been reported to be very variable, from a few
than 10 years (almost certainly involving real allergic reactions).
Onset of pruritus late in the animal's life (> 7yrs) may be a
compatible sign. However, in general, AFR has an earlier age of
onset that does CAD, with almost one half of cases
commencing prior to one year of age.
· Breeds predisposed to AFRs include those predisposed to
 CAD and in addition, German shepherds, pugs and 
Rhodesian ridgebacks.
Clinical signs
Dog affected by food allergy. Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
→ The degree of pruritus is variable but often intense and relatively
 constant from the time of onset and sometimes quite refractory to
 corticosteroid therapy.
→ Pruritus and lesions can be generalised but the distribution is predominantly
facial and ventral (axillary and inguinal), with scratching of the trunk, rubbing
of the face (lips, chin...) and chewing of the feet frequently seen. Sometimes it
can be rather focal, and involve a distribution unusual for CAD, such as the
distal part of all the limbs.
→ Erythema and a papular eruption may occur and are the most common
primary lesions. Other primary cutaneous manifestations may include urticaria
and angio-oedema (particularly in very young dogs).
→ In most cases secondary lesions develop and include excoriations, crusts,
lichenification, hyperpigmentation and keratoseborhoeic changes.
→ Secondary dermatoses may occur, such as bacterial overgrowth, folliculitis,
Malassezia dermatitis, bacterial overgrowth, pyotraumatic dermatitis (hot-
Dog affcted by food allergy.
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotfi
spot) and bacterial pododermatitis.
→ After treatment of secondary dermatoses, typically the patient remains
 pruritic in the areas of predilection for AFR.
→ A primarily erythematous bilateral ofitis extema may be observed, with a
rapid occurrence of a secondary infection involving bacteria and/or the yeast
Malassezia (see the monograph on otitis).
→ Gastrointestinal signs, such as vomiting and diarrhoea, are reported in 10 to 
15 % of cases, and are sometimes the only apparent clinical signs of food
allergy. Colitis (in some cases associated with perianal fistulas) has been
reported. In some cases, increased frequency of defecation, and/or flatulence,
can be an indication of a mild gastrointestinal disorder that can point to AFR.
Thus concomitant gastrointestinal and dermatological signs are highly
suggestive of an AFR.
 Neurological signs (seizures) are rarely seen in dogs, but many owners report
→ It is not known if canine "asthma", which is very uncommon, may sometimes
be associated with AFRs.
Dog affcted by food allergy.
→ It is important to re-emphasise that similar clinical signs can result from other
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
diseases (CAD, FAD, Malassezia dermatitis idiopathic bacterial folliculits Sarcoptic mange..). These must therefore
 be excluded and the secondary complications treated before AFR can be implicated in the disease process.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 3
Part.2
Diagnosis
→ General history.
· Sudden or progressive onset of a mild to severe pruritus,
sometimes late in the animal's life.
· Onset of pruritic disease at <6 months of age, with or
without urticaria.
· Perennial pruritus with no seasonal influence.
· The delay between ingestion of the offending food and
onset of signs may depend on which type of hypersensitivity
response predominates and on the particular antigens
11/ P
involved. However most affected dogs have a constant
pruritus with no obvious relationship to the diet.
· Pruritus refractory to corticosteroid therapy,
particularly in chronic cases (this is compatible with AFR
and might be an important point in the diagnostic
criterion in the differential diagnosis of allergies). Early
 cases, however, sometimes respond quite well to
corticosteroids.
· Because of a possible poor corticosteroid response to
pruritus in chronic cases, dogs with food allergy are
more likely to present with secondary iatrogenic
Cushing's syndrome.
→ Dietary history.
Dog affected by food allergy. Courtesy of D.N. Carloti
· The dietary history should be carefully reviewed with
the owner with two main objectives:
· first, to identify ingredients commonly associated
with AFR,
· second, to determine what ingredients that have
 never been eaten by the dog should be used for
the elimination diet.
· This history should include commercial foods, treats,
biscuits, supplements, chewable medication, chew toys
 and also access to other sources of food: e.g. various
leftovers from human meals, commercial cat food...
Dog affected by food allergy. Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
 Clinica! efements.
· Remember that clinical signs may be similar or identical to atopic dermatitis.
· Pruritus of the face (rubbing) and of distal extremities (licking, chewing).
· Distal, facial and ventral to generalised distribution of lesions.
· Bilateral pododermatitis.
· Otitis externa.
· Secondary pyoderma and/or bacterial overgrowth.
The above dog affer 7 weks of an elimination diet.
The above dog affer 7 weeks of an elimination diet.
The above dog affer 7 weeks of an
Courtesy of D.N. Carloti
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
eimination diet. Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 4
→ Major differentials.
· FAD (Flea Allergy Dermatitis):
· The major differential in flea-endemic areas is FAD.
· The two diseases may co-exist in the same patient but FAD is more frequently associated
with atopic dermatitis.
· Key distinguishing features of FAD are (see monograph on FAD):
· There is always a primary eruption, which is papular and crusting.
· The distribution involves the lower back and posterior and inner thighs.
· There is no obvious association with otitis externa.
· CAD (Canine Atopic Dermatitis):
· It should be emphasised that clinical features of CAD can be identical to those of AFR.
Differential diagnosis is thus very important
· Thus most dermatologists prefer to look for AFR prior to exploring further a diagnosis of
CAD (see monograph on atopic dermatitis).
· As has been noted in the case of FAD, atopic dermatitis and AFR often exist in the same
patient.
· Key distinguishing features of CAD are (see monograph on atopic dermatitis):
· Peak-age of atopic dermatitis is between 1 and 3 years old.
· Primary papular eruption might be less frequent than in AFR.
· There is often an associated otitis externa, as in the case with AFR.
· Is the following case a dog affected by AFR or atopic dermatitis?
Generalised ventral erythema in a dog.
Clase view of the IDT showing hypesensiivity
Courtesy of D. Pin
suspicion of atopic dermatitis.
to Graminacee, Df, Dp and flea extracts.
Courtesy of D. Pin
Courtesy of D. Pin
Closeview of the abdominal erythema
Close view of the axillary erythema.
Clase view of the periorbital erythema
Courtesy of D. Pin
Courtesy of D. Pin
Courtesy of D. Pin
· The above pictures show a dog affected by food allergy (diagnosed by elimination diet
 and provocation tests) which perfectly mimics atopic dermatitis.
IDT.
· This emphasises first that a positive IDT is not diagnostic for atopic dermatitis, and
second that it is necessary to perform an elimination diet test before trying to control
any atopic dermatitis, even in the face of a positive IDT.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 5
Part.2
· Parasitic Dermatoses:
· As is the case in FAD, care must also be taken to exclude the pruritic parasitic dermatoses.
· These include Sarcoptic mange (see monograph on Sarcoptic mange) and infestation with
Cheyletiella, Trombicula and lice (see monograph on dermatoses associated with infestations by
 other parasites).
· Allergic Contact Dermatitis (ACD):
· Food allergy may also be confused with allergic contact dermatitis, which is very rare in dogs.
· Key features of allergic contact dermatitis are:
· There is always a primary eruption which is macular (erythema) and papular.
· The eruption is restricted to contact areas where the hair is absent or thin.
 Diagnostic tests.
· General remarks:
· The use of in vitro tests for food allergen-specific IgE and/or IgG is controversial. It has been shown
that although normal dogs have IgG antibodies to food antigens, and that some also have IgE
AFR than in normal dogs. So although serology cannot be used to make the diagnosis, it may be
helpful in identifying the suitable composition of the elimination diet - particularly in relation
to cross-reacting antigens
· Histopathology is not diagnostic but may be suggestive of cutaneous hypersensitivity.
· The only definitive way to confirm the diagnosis of AFR is to perform a prolonged elimination
diet trial ("hypoallergenic" test diet).
· The purpose of this trial is to evaluate the improvement of clinical signs and especially pruritus.
· In order to appreciate the effect of the trial diet, no other therapy is permitted, neither
systemic nor topical, especially corticosteroids! (However if the dog is severely pruritic, a
short course of short-acting corticosteroids may be used for symptomatic relief early in the
dietary trial)
· Furthermore all other primary dermatoses (including FAD) and secondary dermatoses
(especially cutaneous infections) have to be excluded or treated before and during the
diet trial.
· In a dog affected by AFR, clinical signs will gradually decrease, over 3-8 weeks once the
offending allergen has been eliminated from the diet.
· Practical guideline for the elimination diet test:
· Constraints and contents of the diet:
· The elimination diet must exclude all former diet components that have been previously
 ingested by the animal: see the dietary history.
● If serology has been undertaken, foods should be chosen to which no IgE antibody, and at
best low levels of lgG antibody, are shown.
· Although commercial "hypoallergenic" diets are available (both limited antigen and
hydrolysed protein),it is better to perform the test with a homemade diet. The positive
predictive values are comparable with both diets but the negative one is much higher with
the homemade diet.
· If owners are really reluctant to cook an elimination diet, commercial "hypoallergenic
diets" should be considered. However, owners have to be advised that it is not the best way
and that food allergy may remain questionable in case of a negative response.
· The elimination diet is usually composed of a single protein source and a single
carbohydrate source, a meat and a vegetable.
· The dog must "never" have previously eaten the included foods. In case of difficulties in
finding foods that the dog has never eaten before, it can be considered that the animal might
not be sensitised to a food component ingested less than once per month previously.
· Note that cross-reaction between beef and lamb has been recently demonstrated. If the dog
has been fed with one, do not use the other in the elimination diet.
· In Europe, elimination diets commonly include pork, horse meat, or boiled fish with boiled
potatoes, turnips, tomatoes or spinach. Advise the owner not to use commercial tins.
· Even though a hypoallergenic diet may not be adequate for long term nutrition,
gastrointestinal problems are rare. In the case of constipation or diarrhoea, the best course of
action is to vary the respective quantities of the meat or the vegetable.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 6
· Absolutely no other food is permitted during this period:
· Likewise, no salt, butter, sauce, supplement, vitamins, treats, rawhide strips, or even
chewable toys, especially bones, are allowed. If cooked, food has to be boiled
(without salt), broiled (without oil or butter) or cooked in a micro-wave oven.
· Be careful that the dog has no access to another pet food, e.g. cat food.
· Dogs are frequently given titbits; owners are often reluctant to stop this. If this is the
case (ask the owner), it is easy instead to give a piece of meat which is included in
the elimination diet, especially prepared and stocked in the fridge.
· All people who might be in contact with the affected dog (even once!), e.g. al
members of the family (especially children), friends, guests... have to be aware of the
"treatment" of the dog and clearly advised that they must not give anything to the
dog.
· Tell the owner that if an "accident" occurs during the test (e.g. a piece of bread
dropped on the floor and eaten by the dog), they have to advise you of this event
and that the test should be re-started.
· The animal should be controlled during the trial, to avoid any incidental ingestion of
foods other than the permitted ones.
· Duration:
· Improvement of clinical signs is usualy gradual and may take a long time to
 become evident.
· Some dogs respond within 3-4 weeks, but if not, the diet must be given for a
minimum of 8 weeks, and prolonged beyond (up to 12 weeks if necessary), in case
of partial amelioration after 8 weeks.
· Conducting an elimination diet is not easy, the basic condition is that the owner has
to be convinced of its importance. But when the owner agrees to perform it, do not
 hesitate to prolong it for as long as necessary.
· Examples of three different elimination diet results:
Level of pruritus (symptoms)
Introduction of a homemade
Highly suspicious at week 5
Provocation test
 elimination diet.
and positive result at week 8.
at the end of week &.
Time (weeks)
Level of pruritus (symptoms)
Introduction of a commercial
Highly suspicious at week 8 and positive result at week 10.
Provocation test
"hypoallergenic" diet.
The elimination diet has been prolonged due to partial response at week 8.
at the end of week 10.
10
Time (weeks)
Level of pruritus (symptoms)
Introduction of a homemade
 Negative response
No food allergy.
elimination diet.
at the end of week 10.
ntradermal 
skin test.
Time (weeks)
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 7
Part.2
· Provocation test:
· In case of positive response to the elimination diet, the diagnosis must be confirmed by
 reintroduction of the former diet components, one by one at 10 to 15 day intervals. This is
because it has been shown that in 20-30% of cases the improvement following dietary change
is coincidental, and not a result of the dietary change itself. These cases will not relapse upon
challenge.
· Recrudescence of the clinical signs may occur within 2-3 days, but sometimes is delayed up
to 14 days.
· This allows the determination of the specific allergenic agent but also confirms the
diagnosis.
· Previous foods may be reintroduced:
· in addition to the elimination diet (with only a decrease in the amount given), especially in
case of the use of a commercial diet,
· or instead of one of the components of a homemade elimination diet (e.g. beef meat
instead of chicken meat).
· When a food component causes the recurrence of clinical signs, stop it immediately, and feed
the dog again with the previous foods that caused no signs. This should resolve the clinical
signs induced by the food challenge (within a few days to a few weeks).
· Examples of two different provocation test results:
 Homemade elimination diet with chicken.
Level of pruritus
 Beef instead of chicken.
鼎
 Elimination of beef, and chicken
again instead.
Reintroduction of the former homemade diet
with chicken instead of beef.
10
AFR to beef is diagnosed (frequent cases).
Time (days)
Commercial "hypoallergenic" diet.
Level of pruritus
+ Beef
Elimination of pork.
Reintroduction of the former commercial
diet with which the dog was previously
fed.It did not contain any pork!
+Rice.
Wheat
Pork
But beside its diet, the dog was fed
with pork from time to time.
2
10
10
10
10
10
10
AFR to pork is diagnosed.
Reintroduction of one of the
Time (days)
 Reintroduction of the offending component,
Definitive elimination of
components which were includled
previously given to the dog in its diet.
 offending component.
in the former diet of the dog.
 Dog fed with the elimination diet.
continue the elimination diet.
were included in the former diet of the dog.
· Conclusions:
· When the offending component has been found, it must never be given to the dog again (although
 some dogs may tolerate a new exposure later in life, after a long and strict avoidance).
· If a commercial food is suspected, it may be impossible to determine the exact allergenic agent, so 
changing to a homemade diet may be the best solution. As commercial dog foods contain many
common foodstuffs and additives, changing from one to another is not recommended.
· AFR often occurs in association with CAD, and in some regions also with FAD.
· Dogs affected by concomitant AFR and CAD may show a significant but not total improvement
of their clinical signs during a dietary elimination trial. These patients must then be worked up
for concomitant CAD.
· One of the most important sources of errors is owner compliance. To increase compliance, it may
 be pertinent to ask the owner to precisely notice the date, foods given and dinical sign
modifications during the whole dietary elimination trial and provocation test.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Adverse Food Reactions (AFR) · 8
Clinical management
→ General remarks.
· Contrary to atopic dermatitis, food allergy can usually be perfectly controlled.
· Avoidance of the allergen(s) by omitting the offending food(s) identified
during the test diet is the key to a successful "treatment"
· Diagnosis and clinical recovery are then concomitant.
· An accurate identification of the offending allergen is necessary.
· Once the diagnosis has been made, feeding a commercial hypoallergenic diet -
either limited antigen or a hydrolysed protein diet, is preferable to feeding a
home prepared diet for maintenance. Although the hydrolysed protein diets
should be the ultimate limited antigen diet, unfortunately not every animal is
satisfactorily controlled by such diets.
· A tolerable homeprepared diet is an altenative, and canusually be achieved,
but must be balanced with vitamin, mineral and essential faty acid
Dog affected by AFR.
supplements.
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
· Secondary complications such as bacterial and/or Malassezia infection
(including otitis externa) have to be treated before and curing the elimination diet, but should not recur since
food hypersensitivity is controlled.
· Any associated FAD has to be managed by flea control
→ Topicaf treatment.
· Shampoos and lotions formulated to help control allergic skin diseases are useful (see Atopic Dermatitis
Monograph).
· Otitis externa should be treated with an antibiotic, anti-yeast and anti-inflammatory otic preparation.
· An antiseptic ear cleanser may be useful for regular ear cleaning.
→ Systemic treatment.
· Systemic treatments and especially corticosteroids are usually unnecessary, bearing in mind that food allergy
may not respond well to corticosteroid therapy.
· However, essential fatty acids may improve the skin and haircoat quality.
Prognosis
 The prognosis for food allergy is good because the offending allergen can be eliminated.
 Rarely, dogs will become sensitised to the new diet, necessitating further investigations and dietary manipulations.
 Very rarely, dogs may become sensitised to new diets so quickly that they have to be maintained on antinflammatory
 or immunosuppressive therapy.
Follow-up
 All dogs with confirmed AFR should be checked periodically to ensure that they are stil asymptomatic.
Conclusions
→ Food allergy (or AFR) is not a common skin disease but is not rare.
 An elimination diet should be instituted when appropriate, i.e. where there is suspicion of an
AFR, and also in cases of CAD to ensure that there is not also a contribution from an AFR.
→ Even if the understanding of this skin disease is not complete at the present time, diagnosis and
long term management of dogs with AFR is achievable.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) * 1
Part.2
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy)
Introduction / Definition
→ Canine atopic dermatitis (CAD) is defined as: "A genetically
predisposed inflammatory and pruritic skin disease with
characteristic clinical features associated with IgE antibodies
most commonly to environmental allergens.""
→ Very frequent, atopy affects from 3-15% of the canine population
 and in some studies up to 50% of dermatological cases involve
atopic dogs.
 Clinical signs are variable and are frequently complicated by
concomitant flea allergy dermatitis (FAD) ), adverse food
reactions (AFRs) and/or associated secondary infections
(especially staphylococcal folliculitis),
Scanning electron micrograph of Dermatophagoides farine.
→ CAD is one of the three major allergic skin diseases that has to be
Courtesy of Royal Veterinary College, London
considered in the differential diagnosis of pruritic dermatoses, the
others being FAD and AFRs.
→ The clinical diagnosis is facilitated by eliminating the possibility of other diseases, and treating or
controlling any concomitant diseases: remaining clinical signs should then be carefully assessed for
compatibility with those associated with CAD.
→ Atopy, atopic disease and canine atopic dermatitis (CAD) are all acceptable terms for the same disease, with the
latter preferred by the International Task Force on Canine Atopic Dermatitis (ITFCAD).
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
 The alflergens.
· Formerly called "inhalant allergens", the current preferred
name is "aeroallergens", as they are believed to gain access
to the body via the percutaneous route.
· The majority of CAD cases result from hypersensitivity to
house dust mites, leading to a non seasonal dermatitis
(although the severity of the signs may vary with changes in
the environmental allergenic load).
· Less commonly, pollen allergies are involved, which may
Scanning electron micrograph of pollens.
typically lead to a seasonal dermatitis.
Courtesy of CMEABG, Lyon
· Involvement of other allergens (moulds, human or animal
dander..) are less common.
· The list of allergens that should be included in intradermal test
(IDT) protocols must be adapted for each different area, in
each different country and in each different continent!
· However, throughout the world, the major allergens involved
in CAD are house dust mites, and especially
Dermatophagoides faninae (Df), and to a lesser extent
Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus (Dp). This leads to a non
activity of the dust mites, and also if there are additional 
seasonal allergens involved.
Dermatophagoides farinae
Courtesy of P Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 2
→ Pathogenesis.
· The symptoms that affect atopic dogs are directly linked to an inherited dysfunction of the
immune system and also to defects in cutaneous barrier function that facilitate access of
allergens and predispose them to bacterial and yeast proliferation and infections.
· The following steps are believed to be important in the pathogenesis:
· Access of allergen is via the percutaneous route. Alteration of epidermal function barrier
in atopic dogs facilitates this penetration.
specific IgE.
· The pathogenesis also involves interaction of allergen with IgE antibody attached to mast
cells.
· A variety of mediators are involved including histamine, leukotrienes and proteases from
mast cells, and probably also interleukins from keratinocytes.
· Staphylococci attach more readily to the skin of atopic dogs, and this leads to the
development of a bacterial overgrowth and/or secondary pyoderma which is usually a
folliculitis. Atopic dogs also have impaired cell-mediated immunity which favours the
persistence of the infection, and they may develop IgE anti-staphylococcal antibodies
which add to the allergenic load.
· Furthermore, there is often proliferation of the yeast Malassezia pachydermatis with
 the development of IgE antibodies against soluble antigens further compounding
the disease process.
· Chronically affected atopic dogs frequently develop severe seborrhoeic changes.
Erythrocytes
Lymphocyte
Mast cells
Basophils
Eosinophils
Cutannoun
nflammation
odp
mndpu
Atopic dermatitis: allergy to environmental allergens (D. farinae- house dust mites).
Courtesy of: P Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 3
Part.2
→ With the exception of flea allergy dermatitis in flea-endemic
areas, CAD is the most common allergic skin disease, and one of
the most common pruritic dermatoses.
→ The following features are highly characteristic:
· The peak age of onset is between one and three years of age.
It is uncommon for it to commence at less than 6 months of
age and very rare at more than 7 years of age.
· Although it can affect any breed,including mixed-bred dogs,
there is a greater than expected incidence in terriers, setters,
golden and Labrador retrievers, Dalmatians, English bulldogs,
boxers, bichon frisés, Lhasa apsos, English springer spaniels 
and the Chinese shar pei.
· Most cases suffer from perennial pruritus that may be subject
to seasonal exacerbation in severity. However, a minority are
affected for a limited time each year if their sensitivities are 
Atopic dog, periorbital erythema, of ips and of chin.
restricted to seasonal pollen allergens.
Courtesy of S. White
Clinical signs
→ The degree of pruritus ranges from mild to intense.
→ The distribution of pruritus and lesions is predominantly facial
and ventral, with scratching of the trunk, rubbing of the face
(lips, chin...) and chewing of the feet frequently seen.
→ In the early case, there may be little in the way of primary
eruption, but by the time of presentation there are usually
erythematous macules and papules. However, some 60% of
Atopic dog, ventral generalised erythema.
cases suffer from a secondary pyoderma which is usually a
Courtesy of: R.E. W. Halliwell
folliculitis. Treatment with antibiotics alone will clear the
 pyoderma, but typically, the patient remains pruritic with the
pruritus then restricted to the sites of predilection for atopic
dermatitis. In occasional cases, the pruritus ceases when the
pyoderma is controlled, which seems to represent a subclinical
atopic state. The pyoderma, and the pruritus generally return 
 shortly after the cessation of antibiotic therapy.
 Evidence of self-trauma: a variety of skin changes may result,
 commonly including excoriations and occasionally acral lick 
granulomas and episodes of acute moist dermatitis (hot-spots).
→ An otitis externa accompanies some 80% of cases (!), and
Atapic dog, interdigital erythema.
occasionally it may be the sole presenting sign. Characteristically,
Courtesy of: R.E. W. Halliwell
the otitis commences by affecting the inner surface of the pinna
and the vertical ear canal, but in longstanding cases the horizontal
ear canal also becomes involved with a secondary infection
involving bacteria and/or the yeast Malassezia (refer to the Otitis
Monograph).
→ Seborrhoeic skin changes are commonly seen in chronic cases
with a greasiness of the skin and hair coat and marked scaling
accompanied by varying degrees of alopecia.
→ It is important to re-emphasise that similar clinical signs can
result from other diseases. These must therefore be excluded,
Atopic dog, otitis and ear pinnae erythema.
and the secondary complications controlled, before the clinical
Courtesy of R.E.W. Halliwell
diagnosis of CAD can be made.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 4
Diagnosis
KEY CRITERIA
· Onset of clinical signs between 1 and 3 years old
→Historical and clinical diagnostic
· Gradual onset of pruritus, especially on the face (rubbing)
criteria.
and on the extremities (licking, chewing).
· Those criteria (key historical and 
· Corticosteroid responsive pruritus (at least at the
clinical features) provide
beginning). Discoloration of the hair on the extremities
consistency in the diagnosis of
 may be a very significant sign.
atopic dermatitis. They should be
· Bilateral front feet pododermatitis.
 documented after ruling out or 
· Otitis externa.
controlling other primary
· Inflammation of the internal surface of the pinnae.
 dermatoses and secondary
· Facial erythema (around eyes, lips and of the chin).
● Positive iDT (or serological test for allergen-specific IgE).
cutaneous infections.
· Considering the key criteria, the
OTHER RELEVANT CRITERIA
 greater the number that are
satisfied, the more specific will be
· Breed predisposition and/or family history.
the diagnosis (but lower will be the
+ Chronic or chronically relapsing dermatitis for more than two years.
diagnostic sensitivity).
· Secondary cutaneous infections, especially bacterial folliculitis.
· Bilateral conjunctivitis and/or epiphora.
· In practice, the best compromise for
● Lesions (lichenification) of the flexural surface of the tarsus.
 sensitivity and specificity is where
· Seasonal aggravation of symptoms.
three to four key criteria are
+ Variation in severity with environmental changes.
● In some cases, there is exacerbation when in contact with grasses 
satisfied.
(may also result in contact dermatitis).
· Presence of other relevant criteria
IMPORTANT EXCLUSIONS ARE: Absence of dorso-lumbar
 supports the diagnosis.
involvement (as is seen commonly in FAD). Absence of involvement of
 the ear margins (as is commonly seen in scabies).
Iching ofeking chwin.
hn
Oti, iin fichin
Atopic dog, chewing the extremity of one of his front feet.
 
Observethelefronfoot turnedaround.
plil
uauspealepeeu suas edaadn
ayuoeuyqseamapuesqtau
q
ground.indicating an intense chewing.Courtesy of:P.Jasin
Fistcutaeu eio obeedad hedebpe
f Seasonal influenoes: ....
....
Atopic dog, chewing the extremity of one of his front feet.
Ohserve both front fet turned around alowing the anima to chew here the
palmar aspect ofthe eft one. Courtey of P Jasmin
Atopic dog, scratching his ear.
Courtesy of P Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 5
Part.2
→ Major differentials.
· Flea allergy dermatitis (FAD):
· The major differential in flea-endemic areas is FAD.
· However, the two diseases often co-exist in the same patient, and most atopic dogs will develop
FAD if exposed to fleas.
· Key distinguishing features of FAD are (see monograph on FAD):
· There is always a primary eruption, which is papular and crusting.
· The distribution involves the lower back and posterior and inner thighs.
· There is no obvious association with otitis externa.
· Adverse food reactions (AFR):
· More difficult is the distinction from AFR whose clinical features can be similar to those of CAD.
diet for 8 weeks prior to exploring further a diagnosis of CAD (see monograph on adverse food
reactions)
· Adverse food reactions and canine atopic dermatitis can exist in the same patient.
· Key distinguishing features of AFR are (see monograph on adverse food reactions):
· AFR can occur at any age, with some 50% of cases commencing prior to 1 year of age.
· There might be more often a primary papular eruption than in CAD.
· There is often an associated otitis externa as in the case with CAD.
· Parasitic Dermatoses:
· As is the case in FAD, care must also be taken to exclude the pruritic parasitic dermatoses.
Cheyletiella, Trombicula and lice (see monograph on dermatoses associated with infestations by
other parasites).
· Allergic Contact Dermatitis (ACD):
·Key features of allergic contact dermatitis are:
· There is always a primary eruption which is macular (erythema) and papular.
· The eruption is restricted to contact areas where the hair is absent or thin.
→ Diagnostic tests.
· Confirmation of the clinical diagnosis of CAD should be made:
· The "Gold Standard test" remains the intradermal test with a positive immediate (10-20 minutes)
included and the possible role of concomitant FAD can be assessed by including flea antigen.
with many false positives and thus a lack of specificity, and others from a lack of sensitivity, and
they may thus be less reliable. The selection of a reliable laboratory is thus essential. They can be
performed either using monoclonal or polyclonal antisera specific for canine lgE, or alternatively
using the cloned · chain of the FcA receptor (the mast cell receptor that binds IgE)
[asn aie (asuen aaissed snosooaiay, do ,sisan uoenueaap ddoseg,) sanbiuuat iena 
laboratory tests in the diagnosis of allergies mediated by immediate hypersensitivity, but not
practical for routine use.
· It is critical to remember that a positive intradermal skin test or a positive in vitro test for IgE does
not of itself justify a diagnosis, as many normal animals may also be positive. The test results must
be interpreted in the light of a carefully taken history and carefully observed clinical signs.
· These tests have two purposes; one is to support the clinical diagnosis and the other is to permit
the selection of allergens for immunotherapy.
· In a small minority of cases whose clinical signs are typical for CAD, negative serology and
negative IDTs may be obtained. Obviously it is possible that the allergens responsible for the
an important subset of CAD, and the International Task Force on Canine Atopic Dermatitis
(ITFCAD) has proposed the use of the term "Canine atopic-like dermatitis" for such cases.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 6
 Practical guideline for intradermal skin tests.
Corticosteroids interfere with the skin test and the
patient should be off therapy for 3 weeks (in the case
of oral products) or at least 6 weeks after the effect has
worn off in the case of long-acting injectables.
Paradoxically, the pruritus recurs well before a valid
positive skin test can be obtained. If there is doubt, it is
wise to inject just the positive control alone and if
Skin test material showing the numbered syringes.
there is no response, or just a poor response, the
Courtesy of D. Pin
animal should be reassessed in a month. Remember
also that topical, ophthalmic and otic corticosteroid
containing preparations may also interfere. Similarly,
antihistamines will interfere for up to 10 days after the
last dose.
Excessive stress may also inhibit the intradermal
reactions (maybe due to endogenous release of
cortisol).
Most dermatologists routinely use sedation with e.g.
xylazine. In some cases sedation may not be necessary,
 and suitable restraint may be obtained with the
assistance of the owner and/or veterinary nurse. It is
important, however, not to use any sedative with
antihistamine properties.
The animal is positioned in lateral recumbancy.
Skintest fl fln
the injection sites and injections.
Courtesy of D. Pin
The injections must be performed on the animal's
thorax. An area is clipped (use equipment in perfect
condition) around 15 cm x 10 cm, that is as far as
possible free from any dermatitic changes. This area is
 sufficient for up to 60 allergens.
For esthetic reasons, it may be wise to use an area that
is lowest and closest to the anterior limb.
Mark the injection sites with an indelible pen.
8
The animal is ready. The allergens should be stored at
4°C (degrees Celsius) in glass vials and returned to the
refrigerator immediately as they are unstable at room
temperature. A small amount only is thus placed in the
plastic, 1ml numbered syringes.
Skin test, injection and formation of an intradermic lump.
Note the time of the commencement of the test.
Courtesy of D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 7
Part.2
10
Perform the injections above and below the pen
marks. Stretch slightly the skin site between two fingers
and puncture the skin in a tangential manner, the bevel
upwards in order to penetrate into the dermis. The
amount to inject is about 0,05 ml. The intention is to
create a small intradermal "bleb", big enough to be 
visible but not too much. The most important point is
 to inject the same amount of each allergen.
If the "bleb" does not appear or disappears quickly, it
Skin test,reading mehd in ahrizontal lh.
may be because the injection has been administered
Courtesy of D.N. Carlotti
subcutaneously: start again. If liquid leaks on the skin
 surface, remove it immediately with absorbent paper
to avoid contaminating adjacent injection sites.
12
 The injection sites may bleed a little. Swab any such
 sites gently with a paper towel at the end of the test.
1.3
The times at which the test is started and completed must
be noted. With a little training, 20 to 40 injections can be
given in 5 to 10 minutes. After the injections are
completed, the animal is maintained in lateral recumbency,
and must not be allowed to traumatize the injection sites.
14
 The results are read in batches, each 15-20 minutes
after the injections were administered.
15
 A positive reaction manifests as an erythematous
Skin test pesitv to fea, Df, Dpand graminaeae
wheal. The presence of erythema is important as well
(+ human dander and cat dander). Allergens from Ib to 4b
as the elevation above the skin surface. The tests are
come from another laboratory than those from I to 40.
best read in the dark, using incident light
Courtesy of D. Pin
16
Grade each site and record the result (refer to the
 grading methods).
17
For the interpretation of the flea allergen results, refer
to the FAD monograph.
18
Do not hesitate to ask the owner to repeat the test if
equivocal results are obtained, or if the histamine
.11 .12 .13 :14 .15:16 17 .18 :19 .20
reaction is poor. An interval of 2-4 weeks is
.21 22 232425 2627282930
appropriate, and, of course, corticosteroids should not
be administered in the interim.
叶
Dp
6.h.
It should be remembered that an animal with Sarcoptic
13 4
19
 mange may show positive reactions to house dust
gam.
叶
D
 mites because of cross-reactions.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 8
→ List of major European allergens to be included in the screen.
1/
Phteum pratense, Timothy grass
Always give the same number to each allergen and try to inject 
2/
Salix, Willow
them at the same place in all intradermal tests.
31
Quercus robur, Oak
4/
 Betula verrucosa, Birchtree
 Robinia pseudoacacia, Robinia
6/
Artemisia vulgaire, Mugwort
71
 Plantago lanceolata, Plantain
8/
Urtica dioica, Nettle
/6
 Taraxacum officinale, Dandelion 
Injection site
2
4
10/ Graminacex
11/ Bird feathers 
12/ Cat dander
7
8
.9
. 10
 13/ Human dander 
Mark of the 
14/ Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus, Dp
 injection site 
15/
Dermmatophagordes farinae, Df
11
. 12
.13
. 14
15
16/ Cotton
17/ Moulds
18/ Ctenocephalides felis, Flea
19/ Diluent
 Clipped area
16
17
18
19
 20/ Histamine
Results and
interpretation.
· A possible grading method for intradermal skin tests reactions.
· A grade of up to 20 is assigned to each reaction.
· Measure the diameter of the reactions and allow 1 point per mm
(refer to the largest width if the reaction is not circular).
· Add from 1 to 4 points according to the intensity of the erythema and elevation above the skin.
● If the grade is over 20 (rare cases) assign a grade of 20 (maximal grade)
· An allergen reaction will ordinarily be considered as positive if its grade R
is above the mean of the positive control grade (P) and the negative control grade (N)
(which are respectively the histamine and diluent reactions):
P+N
Rn, positive if R,
● Use another system or your own if you prefer, but always
use the same.
· Another classical method is the use of a 1-4 scale, where 1
is just discernibly greater that the negative control and 4
 approximates to the size of the histamine wheal.
· Example of the above skin test results:
· Df: 10 mm reaction and 3 points for the erythema,
10 mm
Rpf =13.
· Histamine: 14 mm reaction and 4 points for the
erythema, P=18.
14 mm
· Diluent: 1 mm reaction and 0 points for the
erythema, N=1.
· No other reaction has been noted.
1,5 cm
P+N18+1
·RDf= 13 >
= 9,5
2
2
· Conclusion: The skin test is positive to Df (Dermatophagoides farinae)
 and the animal is hypersensitive to house dust mites.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 9
Part.2
Treatment
+ General remarks.
· Atopic dermatitis cannot usually be cured but only
controlled.
· It is one of the most difficult skin disorders to control as.
most of the time, dogs cannot be protected from
allergen exposure (especially in the case of 
Atopic dog. Hair hyperpigmentation of extremities
hypersensitivity to house dust mites).
resulting from constant licking.
· However, quality of life can be considerably improved
CourtesyfRyalVeeinaryColle
and atopic dermatitis much easier to control when
secondary complications such as bacterial and/or Malassezia infection or overgrowth are
effectively treated. Also, of course, vigorous treatment of any concomitant otitis externa and
any associated FAD (or AFR), must be undertaken.
→ Allergen avoidance.
· This is theoretically the best treatment.
· But usually, avoidance of allergens is not possible or practical. However, it may be in some
· An accurate identification of the offending allergen is first necessary.
· In very rare cases the complete elimination of allergens may be possible (birds in case of
· In most cases, the aim will be to achieve a decrease in exposure. For example, in the case of
hypersensitivity to house dust mites, the exposure may be decreased if pets stay longer
outside and/or away from the bedrooms, which have the highest concentration of dust mites.
If in doubt, special kits are available for home use by which the relative dust mite
 concentration of different areas can be assessed.
· The use of a miticide in the environment may also help, and recent studies have shown the
can persist in the environment for some months. Pyriproxyfen has also been shown to be
useful in reducing mite proliferation and the combination with an adulticide such as
 permethrin, can be very effective.
 Topicaf treatment.
epidermal barrier and to help control the inflammatory process and any secondary cutaneous
infections.
· Shampoos:
· Shampoos are helpful as an aid to the control of atopic dermatitis. Dependant on the
stage of the disease, different types may be of value.
 allergen penetration.
· A shampoo containing immunomodulating factors such as mono-oligosaccharides may
 provide a soothing effect, acting directly against some immune mechanisms.
· A shampoo containing EFA (such as linoleic acid) may help to restore the epidermal barrier.
· Where cytological examination reveals proliferation of Malassezia and/or staphylococci,
antimicrobial shampoos are very helpful.
· A shampoo with antimicrobial activity may also help to prevent secondary microbial
Overgrowths.
· Antipruritic shampoos, such as those containing colloidal oatmeal will provide soothing
effects.
· Attention must also be given to the skin barrier function directly, and shampoos containing
ceramides will assist in this.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 10
· Lotions:
· Lotions with the same properties described above for the shampoos will reinforce the
effects of the shampoos and facilitate treatment.
· Other topicals:
· Other topicals are often indicated, again, dependent upon the presenting signs.
· Spot-on preparations containing ceramides have been shown to be effective in restoring
skin barrier function and should form part of the therapeutic approach.
· If there is only a limited area of involvement, topical corticosteroid preparations may be
preferable to systemic administration. Particularly indicated is hydrocortisone aceponate
which is not absorbed, and has fewer side effects than do other topical steroids.
· An antibiotic, anti-yeast and anti-inflammatory otic preparation for any concomitant otitis
externa.
· Astringents and antiseptic solutions applied to any acute moist dermatitis (hot-spot),
 possibly more frequent in FAD.
→ Systemic treatments.
A number of systemic drugs are used in the control of atopic dermatitis. These include:
· Corticosteroids:
· Corticosteroids are generally highly effective in relieving the pruritus. However, oral, short-
acting products only should be employed, and, ideally, using an alternate-day regimen.
· The effect of corticosteroids is only transient.
· Ciclosporin:
· When dosed at 5mg/kg this is as effective as corticosteroids, although with a slower
onset of action.
· Antihistamines:
· These may sometimes give partial, or very occasionally complete relief. Although
hydroxyzine (2mg/kg TID) is often favoured, some cases respond better to one
antihistamine than another; and this is quite unpredictable.
· Try one after another for courses of 10 to 15 days.
· Essential fatty acids (EFAs):
· These may have significant anti-inflammatory action and assist in restoring the barrier
function of the skin if used in a formulation providing sufficient quantities of both n-6
and n-3 EFAs with a ratio close to 5:1.
· There is synergistic activity with both antihistamines and with corticosteroids, and so
 sometimes combination therapy is employed.
· Antibiotics:
for renewable courses of 2 weeks plus 1 to 2 additional weeks after clinical recovery
should be used.
· Antibiotics may also be helpful in cases where there is bacterial overgrowth, with or
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 11 
Part.2
· Immunotherapy:
· Immunotherapy or hyposensitisation with allergen solutions is the cornerstone of the
therapy in atopic dermatitis.
· However, it may not be appropriate for cases in which:
· effective control is achieved with medical therapy other than corticosteroids,
· there is a short season of involvement that is readily controlled with low dose
corticosteroids..
· All cases should be treated with immunotherapy after undertaking intradermal tests (or in
vitro tests for allergen-specific IgE).
· It is usual to limit the vaccine to 10 allergens, being sure to include house dust mite, even
if there is only a weak positive reaction.
· Response to immunotherapy may be quite brisk (within 3 months) or delayed for up to
 9 months. Animals failing to respond by then are unlikely to respond with further therapy
and reassessment is necessary.
· Concomitant medical therapy can be used during the course of immunotherapy and in
 most cases the doses required can be reduced with time as the immunotherapy
treatment starts to become effective.
· It is extremely important to monitor frequently and to introduce effective therapy for any
secondary complications if and when they arise.
 Conclusions.
· It is important to re-emphasise that the continuous control of secondary infections is the first step!
· The control of CAD itself generally requires combination therapy.
· The basis of the therapeutic approach is hyposensitisation, together with concomitant medical
therapy including EFAs and the frequent use of topical products (shampoos and lotions).
· With good management, the necessity for using corticosteroids will be considerably reduced.
Gram.
Df
Dp
1
Flea
H
D
Flea
 Reduced IDT. Pasitive reactions to Df, Dp, a flea extract
and histamine positive control. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Canine Atopic Dermatitis (CAD; Atopy) · 12
Prognosis
→ The prognosis for atopic dermatitis is quite good.
→ However, the percentage of cases that are "cured" and require no further therapy is small.
→ Most cases require lifelong control with immunotherapy, supplemented from time to time with
 other medical therapy.
Follow-up
→ Frequent follow-ups, allowing one to be alert for the clinical situation to change are the key to
 success in managing atopic dermatitis.
→ Bacterial folliculitis and bacterial or Malassezia proliferation can recur.
→ Also, the frequency and dose of immunotherapy may need to be adjusted in the light of the
response. Some cases improve with each injection, and then relapse after a few days. More
frequent, lower dose therapy may be helpful. Also, some studies have shown that when the usual
full dose immunotherapy is ineffective, lower doses may paradoxically achieve better results.
→ The main challenge is to follow the clinical evolution of the plethora of clinical signs resulting
from atopic dermatitis itself, and from the associated secondary complications. Then, a
thorough historical and clinical assessment is needed at each consultation time with the aim of
 objectively following the response to therapy.
Conclusions
+ Atopic dermatitis is a common skin disease.
 Following the proposed dermatological approach allows the diagnosis of CAD if clinical
signs remain after having ruled out (or controlled), parasitic dermatoses, secondary
cutaneous infections and other allergies (FAD and AFR).
 Successful management is dependant on a thorough understanding of the pathogenesis and
of the potential complications, and on a willingness to modify the therapy in the light of a
changing situation.
Atopic dog, chewing the extremity of one of his front fet.
Observe both front fet turned around allowing the anima to chew here the
palmar aspect ofthe eft one. Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICs and Scs) · 1
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous
Cushing's syndromes (Ics and Scs)
Introduction / Definition
→ Systemic disease as a result of chronic
glucocorticoid excess, often with cutaneous
involvement.
→ Two spontaneous types of Cushing's syndrome:
· pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism,
· hyperadrenocorticism caused by
adrenocortical tumours.
→ In addition: latrogenic hypercorticism.
→ Cushing's syndrome is a common disorder in
Affected dog by ICS, with an underlying FA D.
dogs.
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
 Regufation of gfucocorticoids secretion.
· Cortisol is secreted and released by the adrenal glands.
· The amount of secretion depends directly on the plasma concentration of adreno-
 corticocotropic hormone (ACTH) which is synthesised in the anterior lobe of the pituitary gland
from the precursor molecule pro-opiomelanocortin (POMC).
· The ACTH synthesis is regulated by the hypothalamus and the central nervous system via
 neurotransmitters that cause the release of corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) and arginine
vasopressin (AVP).
· The ACTH secretion is also regulated by stress factors (increased production) and exogenous
glucocorticoids (negative feedback leading to the inhibition of ACTH secretion).
· The blood cortisol levels vary by a factor of 9 to 10 during the day in healthy dogs and normal
levels range between 1-6μg/dl (27-165 nmol/l). Thus a single blood test for cortisol is not
diagnostic for either hyper- or hypoadrenocorticism.
Regulation of
Cortisol and AcTH
glucocorticoid secretion
in plasma
Synthetic
HYPOTHALAMUS
corticosteroids
CRH
 PITUITARY GLAND
ADRENAL GLANDS
KIDNEYS
5
17
hours
Urinary cortisol
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (Ics and Scs) · 2
→Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH).
· 85% of spontaneous Cushing's cases.
· Caused by changes ranging from hyperplasia to neoplasia of the pituitary gland.
· 70% occurring in the anterior lobe (mainly microadenoma).
· 30% occurring in the pars intermedia 
(often macroadenoma).
· Consequences:
· increased ACTH production,
· stimulation of both adrenal glands,
· often bilateral hyperplasia,
· increased cortisol production,
 decreased endogenous ACTH
production
Pituitary-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
Affected dog by PDH. Courtesy of D. Pin
HYPOTHALAMUS
CRH
Tumour / Hyperplasia ?
PITuITARY GLAND
1
ACTH
 ADRENAL GLANDS
KIDNEYS
Cortisol
Affected dog by PDH. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlott
→Adrenal-dependent hyperadrenocorticism (ADH).
· = 15% of spontaneous Cushing's cases.
· Caused by a tumour of one (rarely both)
 adrenocortical glands.
· Adenoma or adenocarcinoma.
· Consequences:
· atrophy of contralateral adrenal gland,
· increased cortisol production.
Adrenal-dependent
hyperadrenocorticism
 HYPOTHALAMUS
CRH
 PITUITARY GLAND
TACTH N
 ADRENAL GLANDS
Tumou
KIDNEYS
 Cortisol
Adrenocortical gland tumor (adenoma). Courtey of: D.N. Carlotti
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (Ics and Scs) · 3
Part.2
→ fatrogenic hypercorticism.
· Caused by inappropriate chronic use of glucocorticoid therapy, systemic or in some cases topicals, particularly
 the more potent glucocorticoids.
· Consequences:
· elevated blood level of circulating glucocorticoids,
· reduction of endogenous corficoid production,
· often atrophy of both adrenal glands,
· secondary adrenocortical insufficiency with reduced production of both glucocorticoids and
 mineralocorticoids which may lead to a life-threatening Addisonian crisis when the glucocorticoid
 administration is stopped.
latrogenic hypercorticism
HYPOTHALAMUS
Synthetic
CRH
corticosteroid
PITUITARY GLAND
ADRENAL GLANDS
KIDNEYS
ICS with secondary Malasezia dermatitis and pyoderma
in a 5 years old allergic dog. Courtesy of: D. Pin
+
Consequences on the cortisof fevel in pfasma.
Theoretical cortisol in plasma
 Cortisol (nmol/l}
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
ypocorticisn
9101112hours
ICS with secondary Malassezia dermatitis and pyoderma
in a 5 years old aflergic dog. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Epidemiology
 Breed and age predilections for spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism (ScS).
· Poodles, Yorkshire terriers and dachshunds are more commonly affected, but Cushing's syndrome is also seen in
many other breeds.
· The disease is frequently seen between the ages of 6 to 9 years.
→ Breed predilections for iatrogenic hypercorticism (ICS).
· Tolerance to glucocorticoid therapy is very variable amongst individuals and breeds, and depends on the
duration and level of administration.
· Small dogs and certain breeds (such as Boxers) show a higher risk of developing iatrogenic hypercorticism.
Clinical signs
 Chronic excessive glucocorticoid blood levels result in a varying spectrum of both cutaneous and systemic signs.
+ Skin and hair.
COMMONLY OBSERVED
LESS COMMONLY OBSERVED
Hair loss (alopecia) mainly affecting the trunk, mostly bilateral.
· Easy epilation of hairs.
 Head and legs are usually unaffected.
· Secondary infection and/or colonisation of the skin by
· Regrowth of hair reduced or absent following clipping.
 bacteria and/or Malassezia with or without pruritus.
· Decreased thickness and elasticity of the skin.
+ Demodicosis
+ Telangiectasis, prominent blood vessels.
+ Calcinosis cutis, often with focal inflammation and pruritus.
+ Comedones.
+ Dry skin.
+ Hyperpigmentation.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICs and Scs) · 4
odpi
Clase view of the skin of a dog affected by SCS
with decreased thickness of the skin and
telangiectasis. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
Alopecia and skin atrophy. Ex. Cushing's syndrome
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clase view of the skin of a dog affcted by CS with
calcinosis.Courtesy of Royal Veterinary College.
London
odpj
Clased comedone Ex. endocrine disorders...
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clase view of the skin of a dog affected by CS
with hyperpigentation, comedones and pustues
(secondary pyoderma). Courtesy of H. Koch
odpj
Open comedone Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clase view of the skin of a dog affected by SCS
with hyperpigmentation and calcinosis.
Courtesy of: P Jasmin
+ Non dermatofogicaf signs.
COMMONLY OBSERVED
LESS COMMONLY OBSERVED
 Polydipsia / polyuria.
+ (Recurrent) urinary tract infections (cystitis).
+ Polyphagia
· Acute pancreatitis.
Aeaawoeday suauaaieua jeuwopge Ksaqo on bupea sisauaody paseaioul 
+ Pulmonary embolism.
+ Panting, exercise intolerance.
+ Testicular atrophy, aspermatogenesis.
● Muscle weakness and atrophy (particularly invoving the temporal and
+ Prolonged intervals between oestrus cycles.
 gastrocnemius muscles).
+ Congestive heart failure.
Anoestrus.
● Glycosuria, diabetes mellitus ("steroid diabetes"),
 Calcification, particularly of blood vessels, lung and adrenal glands.
 often insulin resistant.
+ Poor wound healing.
+ Tendency to corneal ulcers.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (Ics and SCs) · 5
Part.2
Diagnosis
→ History.
It is very important to obtain accurate
details of all corticosteroid preparations
 administered to assist in the distinction
between spontaneous and iatrogenic
Cushing's syndrome. The diagnosis
of the latter may be possible without recourse to exhaustive
tests, but just based upon the history and clinical signs.
→ Clinical signs.
Very variable, see previous
paragraphs.
→ Diagnostic tests:
1
Haematology and blood chemistry: may be a useful
first indicator in the differential diagnosis of endocrine
disorders alongside differential blood cell counts
(especially lymphocytes, eosinophils), cholesterol, AP,
AST, ALT, glucose and basal free T4-
· Hormone assays and function tests.
· Also helpful in some cases:
· Diagnostic imaging: X ray, ultrasonography,
 computertomography, NMR (Nuclear Magnetic
Resonance).
Gemeral viw of a dog affctel by CS wih bilateral alopca.
· Skin biopsies.
Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary College London
→Haematology / Blood chemistry.
MOSI COMMON ABNORMALITIES AND THEIR FRQUENCY IN DOGS WIIH HYPERCORTICISM
Common
 Less common
门
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
of all cases
+
AP ↑T (86%)
Leucocytosis (84%) with
Monocytosis (14%)
Eosinopaenia (0 to 1% d'eosinophils) (84%)
AST, ALT TT (50%)
Cholesteroi ↑↑ (48%)
Glucose T↑ (45%)
Phosphorus ↓ (38%)
Erythrocytosis (17%)
· Classicaly, dogs with Cushing's syndrome, from whatever cause, show a leucocytosis,
Iymphopenia, eosinopenia, a markedly elevated AP, and moderately elevated AST, ALT,
cholesterol and glucose.
· Such tests are used for a first screening although they do not enable a definitive diagnosis.
* Low free I4 serum levels do not necessarily indicate hypothyroidism in patients with Cushing's
 disease. They may just be a secondary effect caused by elevated cortisol levels (euthyroid sick
syndrome).
+ Hormone assays and function tests.
· Please note:
· For the evaluation of cortisol serum or plasma levels the blood needs to be centrifuged
within 30 minutes after collection.
· Serum, plasma and urine samples for the evaluation of cortisol levels need to be kept in the
refrigerator until mailing.
· Serum samples for the evaluation of ACTH need to be shipped on dry ice to the laboratory
immediately after collection.
· Procedures are given below but also follow any procedures recommended by your own
laboratory.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICS and SCs) · 6
→ ACTH stimulation test.
· First test in case of high suspicion of ICs or to eliminate the hypothesis before investigating a SCS
· Test principle: cortisol determination immediately before and after stimulation with ACTH.
· Indication: evaluation of the adrenocortical reserve in cases of suspected iatrogenic
hypercorticism (Ics), in cases of suspected spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism (SCs) and also in
cases of suspected hypoadrenocorticism.
· Performance: a fasting blood sample is taken in the morning, immediately before and 90 minutes
 after the intravenous injection of 0.25 mg synthetic ACTH.
· Interpretation:
· ICS and hypoadrenocorticism: cortisol basal level normal or low normal (1-6 μg/dl / 27-160
nmol/l) only mild or no increase after stimulation.
· SCS: variable, but sometimes high cortisol basal level (10 μg/dl / 270 nmol/l) or more than
3 times higher than basal level after stimulation and reaching > 20 μg/dl (550 nmol/l).
ACTH Stimulation Test
Cortisol
(nmol/l)
800
hypercorticism
700
600
500
0030
normal
200
100
hypocorticism
0
Ta
To+ 1h30
Time
→ Determination of Urinary Cortisol Creatinine Ratio (UCCR).
· This test is a good first screening test in case of low suspicion and to eliminate an hypothesis.
· It is also easier to conduct, as the samples are taken "at home' by the owner.
· UCCR has a high negative predictive value (NPV) for SCS:
· If the ratio is low, it is very unlikely that the dog is affected.
· The hypothesis may then be excluded.
· The positive predictive value (PPV) is lower. A high UCCR may be due to endogenous
cortisol secretion due to stress of the animal. To increase this PPV, tell the owner to try to
avoid any stress of the dog.
· If the ratio is high, to confirm the diagnosis, a dexamethasone suppression test should then
be performed.
· UCCR has also a high negative predictive value (NPV) for ICS:
· If the ratio is high, it is very unlikely that the dog is affected.
· The hypothesis may then be excluded.
· If the ratio is low, to confirm the diagnosis, the ACTH stimulation test should then be
performed.
· The ratio is derived by dividing the urine cortisol level in nmol/l by the creatinine level in
nmol/l. Reported reference ranges vary between laboratories, with a normal value ranging
from < 10 x10+ to < 60 x106 and so your individual laboratory should be consulted for
interpretation.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICs and Scs) · 7
Part.2
→ Low Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
LDDST (dexamethasone I.V. = 0,01 mg/kg)
(LDDST).
· Test principle: cortisol determination in
Gortisol
(nmol/l)
the blood before and some time after the
SCS {ADH and 30% of PDH}
 administration of a low dose of exogenous
150
PDH (70% of PDH)
corticosteroids. In healthy dogs the
 negative feedback mechanism causes a
N (no CS)
decrease in ACTH secretion and thus a
ICS
suppression of cortisol production
(< 1μg/dl or 27 nmol/l) after 3 or 4 hours 
and 8 hours.
· Indication: suspicion of spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism (SCS)
· Procedure: blood is taken in the morning immediately before and, 3-4 and 8 hours after the i.v.
injection of 0.01 mg/kg dexamethasone.
· Interpretation: in dogs with hyperadrenocorticism, levels either remain high or are
suppressed after 4 hours and then increased again after 8 hours.
· If the value at 4 hours is at least 50% lower than the basal one and increases again after
 8 hours, PDH is very likely.
· If levels remain high, it indicates a SCs and more likely an adrenal tumour but it may be a
dexamethasone-resistant pituitary tumour (often macroadenoma of the pars intermedia
which is under dopamine control). Then a HDDST or ACTH measurement wil permit
differentiation between PDH and ADH.
→High Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
(HDDST).
· Test principle: cortisol determination in the
HDDST (dexamethasone I.V. = 0,1 mg/kg)
blood immediately before and after the
administration of a high dose of
Cortisol
dexamethasone. The ACTH production in
nmol1]
ADH
dogs with PDH can be suppressed by high
doses of a potent exogenous
corticosteroids, leading to a decreased
cortisol production. In adrenal adenomas
PDHor
 Or adenocarcinomas the autonomous
hours
hypersecretion of cortisol is not influenced
by high doses of exogenous
corticosteroids.
· Indication: suspicion of adrenal hyperadrenocorticism (ADH).
· Performance: blood is taken in the morning immediately before and 4 hours and 8 hours after
the intravenous injection of 0,1 mg/kg dexamethasone.
· Interpretation:
·+ If no suppression, ADH is very likely.
· Suppression of 50% or more from basal cortisol at sample 2 and 3 may indicate a pituitary
tumour (PDH).
· Definitive confirmation of the diagnosis can be achieved by ACTH measurement,
which will be low in adrenal tumors, or by ultrasonography of the adrenal glands and
computertomography of the pituitary.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICS and Scs) · 8
→ UCCR with HDDST.
· Indication: suspicion of spontaneous hyperadrenocorticism.
· This test is done on 3 consecutive days and should be performed at home since the stress of hospitalisation
can influence the results.
· Test principle: cortisol determination in urine, twice before and once after the administration of a high dose
of exogenous corticosteroids.
· Performance: the first (fasting!) urine in the morning is collected at day 1 and 2 and kept cool. After the
second sample is taken, 0.1 mg/kg dexamethasone is given orally every 8 hours. On day 3 the first morning
urine is collected and the samples mailed to the laboratory to determine the Cortisol/Creatinine (C/C) ratio.
· This procedure also gives information about the origin of hyperadrenocorticism, pituitary or adrenal (PDH
or ADH) because it combines a test for basal adrenocortical function and a dynamic test for the
differentiation between primary and secondary hyperadrenocorticism.
· Interpretation (the values given below are for illustration - be sure to obtain normal values from your
laboratory):
· Day 1 and 2
●Hyperadrenocorticism: C/C ratio > 25 x106
● Normadrenocorticism: C/C ratio <15 x106
+ Questionable: C/C ratio 15-25 x106
· Day 3 (in addition to increased C/C ratio on samples 1 and 2)
· ADH or dexamethasone resistant PDH: C/C ratio of sample 3, less than 50% lower than mean
of samples 1 and 2.
7 pue I saldwes jo ueaw uey xamol %os ueq anou ' adues jo one, 3/ :hdd ·
→ Measurement of endogenous ACTH.
· Very useful but no routine laboratory test.
· Ask a specialist how and where to perform this test.
● The endogenous ACTH levels allow the differentiation between PDH and ADH:
· > 120 pg/ml: PDH
+< 30 pg/ml: ADH
→ Summary: diagnosis of Cushing's Syndrome (CS) iatrogenic (ICS) and spontaneous (SCS).
HAEMATOLOGY / BLOOD CHEMISTRY
Always consider haematology and blood chemistry tests first,
in the differential diagnosis of endocrine disorders.
FIRST SCREENING HORMONAL TESTS
f,
high suspicion of ICs due to history,
or,
no precise idea if ICs or SCS:
→ ACTH stimulation test, then diagnosis of ICS or investigation of SCS.
If,
no precise idea if ICS or SCS and wish of surely eliminating ICS or SCS:
SECOND STEP HORMONAL TESTS
f,
hypothesis of ICs excluded,
and, suspicion of SCs due to history, clinical signs and first screening laboratory tests:
→ To exclude the hypothesis (low suspicion), choose a test with a high NPV:
· Urinary Cortisol Creatinine Ratio (UCCR) alone.
→ To confirm the hypothesis (high suspicion), choose a test with a high PPV:
· Low Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (LDDST).
· Urinary Cortisol Creatinine Ratio (UCCR) with High Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test 
(HDDST) orally.
→ To precisely differentiate between PDH and ADH:
· study the results of low dose dexamethasone suppression test (LDDST),
· and/or High Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test (HDDST) I.V.,
· and/or measurement of endogenous ACTH
· and/or diagnostic imaging.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (Ics and Scs) · 9
Part.2
→ Schematic representation of the diagnostic possibilities depending on hypotheses and chosen tests.
Legends
Affections:
Hypotheses
Confirmed hypotheses
Eliminated lhypotheses
Z=
 Normal dog
CS=
Cushing's Syndrome (hypercorticism)
Tests :
ICS=
latrogenic Cushing's Syndrome 
LDDST =Low Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test
SCS =
 Spontaneous Cushing's Syndrome 
HDDST =
 High Dose Dexamethasone Suppression Test 
PDH = 
 Pituitary Dependant Hyperadrenocorticism
UCCR =
Determination of Urinary Cortisol Creatinine Ratio
ADH =
 Adrenal Dependant Hyperadrenocorticism
 ACTH-S-T = ACTH Stimulation Test
ACTH-S-T, LDDST and HDDST
Cs ? / N?
ACTH-S-T
Ics
SCs ? / N?
To
To+1h30
To
To+1h30
LDDST
SCS
N
PDH
ADH ? / PDH ?
To+4hTo+8h
To+4hTo+8h
To
To+4hTo+8h
HDDST
ADH
PDH
ToTo+4h To+8h
To
To+4hTo+8h
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (Ics and Scs) · 10
ACTH-S-T, HDDST and LDDST
N/S
ACTH-S-T
Ics
SCS (ADH) ? / N ?
To
To+1h30
TO
To+1h30
HDDST
ADH
PDH ?N?
To
To+4h To+8h
To
To+4hTo+8h
LDDST
N
PDH
To
To+4hTo+8h
To
To+4hTo+8h
UCCR with HDDST orally
Do not forget the use of UCCR + HDDST orally which provides useful information and is easier to
conduct (no need for hospitalisation) compared to other tests using blood samples.
Clinical Handbook on CanineDermatology
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICS and Scs) · 11 
Part.2
ACTH-S-T, and UCCR alone
N/S
ACTH-S-T
Ics
SCs ? / N?
To
To+1h30
70
To+1h30
UCCR alone
N
SCS
SCs ? N ?
Other tests
to differentiate
SCS / N
D1
D1
UccR as a first screening test
no Scs ?
or
no Ics ?
UCCR
5C5
D1
D1
ACTH-S-T
Other tests
to differentiate
to differentiate
N / Ics
N / PDH / ADH
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICS and Scs) · 12
Treatment
 PDH
→ Hypophysectomy.
destruction of the pituitary gland.
 accurate determination of the size and localisation of the gland.
surgeon.
· In PDH, surgery shows a lower recurrence rate than the conservative (medical) therapy.
· Diabetes insipidus, permanent central or secondary hypothyroidism and keratoconjunctivitis sicca are the
 most common sequelae and must be controlled periodically.
· A lifelong L-thyroxine replacement therapy is mandatory.
→ Chemicaf destruction of the adrenaf cortices with o,p'DDD.
· There are two main protocols - one aims to selectively destroy the adrenal cortex whilst sparing the
mineralocorticoid-producing zona glomerulosa. Complete destruction of the cortex does not result, and the
therapy is maintained using interval dosing. The second seeks to non-selectively destroy the three layers of
the cortex, and life-long supplementation is required. In neither case is there any effect on the pituitary
pathology, and in fact any pituitary adenoma may actually enlarge due to lack of negative feedback.
· Selective destruction:
● Induction phase: 25 mg/kg SID for 7-10 days.
· Maintenance dosage: 25 mg/kg SID once every 7-10 days.
· The substitution with low doses of prednisolone (0,25 mg/kg) on the days of o,p'DDD application helps
to prevent the risk of hypoadrenocorticism with addisonian crisis which is the most common side effect of
this therapy.
· ACTH stimulation tests are recommended at the end of the induction phase and periodically during the
maintenance phase. Ideally, the resting level should be between 1.0 and 3 μg/dl (27-80 nmol/l), and the
stimulated level should be between 3.0 and 5.0 μg/dl (80-135 nmol/)
· The treatment regime needs to be adapted individually due to variations in the response to therapy. For
this purpose the owner needs to observe abnormalitfies in his dog's normal behaviour, particularly during
the first two or three weeks of therapy.
· With any medical treatment, deficiency of glucocorticoids (lethargy, anorexia) or mineralocorticoids
(Addisonian crisis) are possible complications.
· If PU/PD is observed and persists after more than 10 days of therapy the daily dosage of o,p 'DDD may
 still be too low to achieve a therapeutic effect. Normal consumption of water is about 20 ml/kg/d.
numbers of lymphocytes, low glucose and elevated urea, creatinine and total protein serum levels, serum
Na:K ratio less then 24:1 (normal 33:1), ECG: spiked T wave, flat P wave and prolonged Q-T interval.
.Non-selective destruction:
The following treatment schedule is more aggressive and aims at the complete quick destruction of
· 50-75 mg/kg 0,p 'DDD daily for 25 days, divided in 3-4 doses, with food
· On the third day supplementation begins:
· Cortisone, 2 mg/kg daily.
· Fludrocortisone, 0,0125 mg/kg daily.
· Sodium chloride, 0,1 mg/kg daily.
· Alfl doses are divided into 2-3 administrations.
· After 25-30 days, the cortisone is reduced to 0,5-1 mg/kg daily and fludrocortisone and/or
salt are adjusted to the needs depending on the resuits of measurements of Na and K
 plasma levels. This regimen has a lower incidence of relapses (30%) compared with the
"classic" schedule. For all types of therapy, good owner compliance is mandatory. He/she
must be welf informed about the pathogenesis of the disease, possible side effects of the
treatment, re-examinations and costs. Written instructions are highly recommended.
· Since the primary lesion in the pituitary gland is not affected by these therapies, the relapse rate
is high (more than 5o%) and the risk of tumour growth is not reduced.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (ICs and Scs) · 13
Part.2
→ Inhibition of cortisol production.
·Trilostane:
· Trilostane competitively inhibits the enzyme 3-beta-hydroxysteroid-dehydrogenase which processes
the conversion of pregnenolone to progesterone, reducing steroid hormone levels.
· This is the first choice for treatment of PDH and the only licensed drug in Europe and the USA.
·Published data shows that response rates are as good or better than those with o,p'DDD, with
mean survival rates of 930 days.
● Unlike o,p'DDD, trilostane is usually given daily for life, although some 5-10% of cases appear to 
be "cured" after 1-2 years, and therapy can be withdrawn.
· Various treatment protocols with trilostane exist. At the present time a twice daily administration is
recommended.
[es ui lauiy ynu si sseg sylad e uo pe rapim saea oos aa oi aessaau asop ai o
dogs than large breeds.
· The dosage of 6 mg/kg/day, divided twice daily is a usual starting dose which may result in a
resolution of clinical signs and routine laboratory abnormalities.
· Some dogs may need higher dosages to achieve good response.
· Monitoring should consist of: clinical evaluation, assessment of water intake, and ACTH stimulation
tests should be undertaken at 7, 28 and 56 days to assess the response. Similarly to treatment with
o,p'DDD, well-controlled animals have a basal cortisol of 1-3μg/dl (< 27-80 nmol/l) which
aenbape jo yoe[ lo/pue (p/8n I > jo an[ea sunsal y (/owu 5el-os) (/8r s-e punoie o sate[nws
stimulation indicates excessive suppression, and the dosage should be reduced. As the duration of
effect of trilostane is considerably less than 24 hours, the test should be performed 2-4 hours after
administration at which time it will show peak activity.
· Monitoring by measuring urinary cortisol/creatinine ratios is not reliable.
· Ketoconazole:
· Ketoconazole inhibits the production of cortisol by the adrenal glands. This effect is reversible.
The recommended dose is 10 mg/kg daily per os, divided in 2-3 doses.
· As ketoconazole has multiple side effects, the patients must be re-examined in short intervals,
particularly at the beginning of the therapy. Liver parameters need to be monitored closely
 se po     (s t )
· The first ACTH stimulation test for the control of cortisol production by the adrenal glands is
recommended after 3-4 weeks of therapy and then depending on the course.
· Ketoconazole is less effective than trilostane or o,p 'DDD
 ADH
→ The therapy of choice for ADH is the adrenalectomy of the affected gland. It is imperative to
supplement with both glucocorticoids and mineralocorticoids during and immediately post surgery,
and for up to 10 days afterwards on a gradually reducing dose.
→ If this is not possible or the tumour is inoperable, o,p' DDD may be used at the same therapeutic
schedule as described for PDH (50-75 mg/kg daily for 25 days initially and then for at least 3 months
once weekly).
→ After this time, ultrasonography and X rays are recommended to re-evaluate the tumour size and
decide about the continuation of the therapy.
 So long as the tumor is not malignant, and there bare no secondaries, this approach leads to a
complete and permanent cure.
 latrogenic hypercorticism (lcS)
→ Gradual corticosteroid withdrawal.
→ If the withdrawal is too brisk, a deficiency of either glucocorticoids and/or mineralocorticoids may
term supplementation may be necessary, and will certainly be required if the patient is subjected to
 any stressful situations, such as even minor surgery.
→ Summary
THERAPY OF CUSHING'S SYNDROME
PDH
ADH
latrogenic hypercorticism (ICS)
· Hypophysectomy
· Unilateral adrenalectomy
· Corticosteroid withdrawal
· Radiation therapy of pituatary gland
· Conservative therapy with
or conservative therapy (o,p'DDD,
0,p'DDD
trilostane or ketoconazole)
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
latrogenic and spontaneous Cushing's syndromes (Ics and Scs) · 14
Prognosis
→ Iatrogenic hypercorticism (ICS).
· Good in most cases, so long as they are carefully managed.
 Pituitary-dependent hyperadrenocorticism
(PDH).
· Very variable response to therapy.
→ Hyperadrenocorticism caused by
adrenocortical tumours (ADH).
· Excellent if unilateral tumour was removed
 and no metastasis have occurred.
· Guarded to poor in other cases.
Follow-up
Dog affected by SCS. Note abdominal enlargement.
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
+ ICS.
· Side effects of complete withdrawal of corticosteroid therapy such as glucocorticoid
insufficiency or an Addisonian crisis are uncommon, but the owner and clinician must be
alert for the warning signs.
· It is still helpful to re-examine the animal and to investigate primary diseases camouflaged
 by the cortisone-therapy:
· usually allergic skin diseases,
· ectoparasites infestations...
· A thorough workup will be required after
 cessation of the corticosteroid therapy:
· secondary cutaneous infections
(bacteria and/or yeast), may be more
evident upon withdrawal of the
corticosteroids,
·"steroid diabetes" is uncommon
★ SCS.
Close view of the skin of a dog affected by SCS with secondary
· Extensive monitoring of each case is
pyoderma. Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
mandatory.
Conclusions
→ latrogenic hypercorticism is frequently observed due to abuse of corticosteroids. In most
cases the diagnosis and treatment are uncomplicated. But the diagnosis of the disease for
which the corticosteroid therapy was instituted in the first place, such as allergic skin disease,
must be taken up.
→ The spontaneous types of Cushing's syndrome are less common, are frequently overlooked
particularly in early stages and need extensive tests to confirm the diagnosis. Several types of
treatment exist depending on the type of disease (pituitary dependent or caused by
adrenocortical tumours) and depending on the individual animal.
 The outcome depends often also on an early enough diagnosis as well as on the patience of
the owner of the animal and her/his ability to co-operate. Many dogs' lives can be prolonged 
Or saved.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Hypothyroidism · 1
Part.2
Hypothyroidism
Introduction / Definition
 A disease syndrome caused by insufficient production of thyroid hormone and leading to a wide
variety of clinical signs. Classically, there is lethargy, weight gain and alopecia. Secondary skin
 infection may occur.
→ Hypothyroidism in dogs is rare. Amongst the endocrine disorders, Cushing's syndrome is much
more common.
→ "False positive" laboratory test results are common and may reflect euthyroid sick syndrome.
Aetiology / Pathogenesis
→ Aetiology.
· Primary hypothyroidism. Nearly all cases (over 90%) are caused by naturally occurring disease.
The principal causes are lymphocytic thyroiditis, an immune-mediated disease associated with
 infiltration into the thyroid gland of lymphocytes, plasma cells and macrophages, and idiopathic
thyroid necrosis and atrophy.
· Secondary hypothyroidism is a rare cause of hypothyroidism. It is chiefly associated with pituitary
 neoplasia and pituitary dwarfism, leading to a deficiency of thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH)
and consequent lack of secretion of hormone by the thyroid gland. Suppression of TsH can also
 be caused by glucocorticoid administration or by thyroid supplementation of euthyroid dogs.
→ Pathogenesis.
· Overall effects. The clinical signs of hypothyroidism are a consequence of the lack of
 circulating thyroid hormones and the effects of this on metabolism in different organs.
hypothyroidism, growing hairs proceed to telogen and are shed but lack of replacement by
anagen hairs leads to alopecia. In body areas subjected to friction, hair shedding is promoted
and hair loss becomes obvious at an earlier stage. An uncommon consequence of this
disruption of the hair growth cycle is hypertrichosis.
· Effects on protein and lipid synthesis commonly lead to dullness of the coat, brittle hairs and
Erythrocytes
2oydukT
Mast cels 
slydaseg
Neutrophils
Eosinophils
Pdp
Malaswematis
Keratoseborrhoeic disorder.Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Hypothyroidism · 2
Epidemiology
schnauzers, Scotish deerhounds, bullmastifs and boxers, and can occur in crossbreeds.
beagles, boxers, Brittany spaniels, chow chows, cocker spaniels, dachshunds, dobermann pinschers, English
bulldogs, golden retrievers, great Danes, Irish setters, Irish wolfhounds, Malamutes, miniature schnauzers,
Newfoundlands, Pomeranians, poodles and Shetland sheepdogs. Crossbred dogs and German shepherds
are believed to be at lower risk. The disease is commoner in dogs aged 6 to 10 but may occur at an earlier
age in giant and predisposed breeds. Neutered animals may have an increased predisposition.
Clinical signs
 Signs of hypothyroidism are diverse and very variable and affect a variety of organ systems. Those
associated with organs other than the skin are listed in the table.
 Some clinical signs of hypothyroidism affecting systems other than the skin:
Metabolic
Cardiovascular
Haematological  Ocular
Gastrointestinal Neuromuscular
Reproductive
Lethargy
Bradycardia
Anemia
Corneal lipid deposition Constipation
Seizure
Anoestrus
 Mental depression  Cardiac arrhythmia
Aedongeo
 Corneal ulceration
Diarrhoea
Ataxia
Silent oestrus 
Weight gain
Hyperlipidaemia Uveitis
Circling
Prolonged oestral
Thermophilia
Vestibular signs
bleeding
Weakness
Testicular atrophy
 Facial nerve paralysis Decreased libido
→ Cutaneous signs of hypothyroidism. Classically, there is a bilaterally symmetrical, non-pruritic alopecia
focussed on the trunk and tending to first affect areas subjected to pressure or friction (flanks, perineum,
tail, ventrum etc.) but which may become widespread. The coat is easily epilated and tends to be dry and
brittle. Regrowth either does not occur or is slow after clipping. Sometimes lack of hair shedding leads to
marked thickening of the coat (hypertrichosis) and the retained hairs may become bleached, particularly at
the tips of the hairs.
→ Commonly there is scaling and the skin surface may be dry or greasy (seborrhoea); hyperpigmentation
may be present. The skin may feel cool and may show myxoedema. Predisposition to bruising, poor healing
of skin wounds and excessive scarring may also occur.
Lateral view of a dog affected by hypothyroidism. Courtesy of: H. Koch
Courtesy of H. Koch
 Cutaneous infection.
· Dogs with hypothyroidism are more susceptible to skin infections: regional or generalised superficial or deep
 pyoderma, bacterial and/or yeast overgrowths (Staphylococcus pseudintermedius and/or Malassezia
pachydermatis) and otitis externa.
· In the presence of skin infection or seborrhoea, pruritus may be an important sign.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Hypothyroidism · 3
Part.2
Diagnosis
History Sheet
weight 
→History.
· Classically there is lethargy, dullness, unwilingness
to exercise or poor exercise tolerance and a tendency
to gain weight without an increase in calorific intake. Heat-
seeking during cold weather may also have been observed.
These signs are more clearly shown in adult dogs but can be
insidious in onset and may only be noticed by observant owners.
· A dull coat, hair loss including a "rat tail", seborrhoea and
 recurrent skin infections which respond well to antimicrobial
therapy may also be reported. Neurological, reproductive or
 gastrointestinal abnormalities as listed in the table may also be
reported.
· Hair loss appears first and is most prominent in areas of skin
 subjected to traumatic stress, particularly friction. Such areas
include the ventral trunk, the tail and perineal area, and
 pressure points including the flanks. Hair loss may be
observed on the neck, in friction areas between the skin and
the collar. In cases of extensive hair loss, the head and feet are
 sometimes spared.
 Clinica! elements.
· Signs can be very variable.
· Systemic signs such as lethargy, mental dullness,
thermophilia, obesity and bradycardia are important
 indicators but any of the signs listed in the table may be
observed.
· Cutaneous signs. Bilaterally symmetrical alopecia, possibly
 including "rat tail" points towards endocrine disease.
· Skin thickening (myxoedema), particularly of the face and forehead and associated with drooping
of the eyelids and thickened facial skin folds may be apparent giving a "tragic facial expression".
· Skin infection, including superficial and deep pyoderma, Malassezia dermatitis, and / or otitis
externa may be present.
→ Major elements of history and clinical signs.
· Alopecia, dry and brittle coat.
· Recurrent skin infection.
· Dullness, lethargy, weight gain.
→ Differential diagnosis.
· This is very wide and should include: other endocrinopathies; follicular dystrophy/dysplasia;
 superficial and deep pyoderma; bacterial overgrowth; Malassezia dermatitis; and otitis externa.
hypothyroidism. Courtesy of: D. Pin
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Hypothyroidism * 4
 Compfementary examinations.
· Trichography. Examination of hair pluck
samples can be helpful. Hairs plucked from
areas of hypotrichosis are mounted in liquid
paraffin and examined microscopically. Ensure
 that the hairs are plucked firmly so that anagen
hairs, which are less easily removed, are not left
behind. The presence exclusively of telogen
hairs suggests failure of anagen initiation and
 may point towards endocrinopathy. Broken
hairs are indicative of pruritus, which may be
Kerataseborrhoeic disorder in a Labrit affected by hypathyroidism.
 present in hypothyroidism when there is
Courtesy of: D. Pin
secondary infection or as a consequence of dry
or scaly skin.
· Screening tests are useful in animals with clinical signs consistent with hypothyroidism. All such tests
must be related to normal values and in dynamic hormone tests to expected response values
provided by the diagnostic laboratories carrying out the laboratory procedures.
· Routine blood tests in hypothyroid dogs may show mild, non-regenerative anaemia (30 to 50%
of cases) and hypercholesterolaemia (7o% or more of cases). Raised levels of alanine
 aminotransferase, alkaline phosphatase and creatine kinase may be found. These are useful
pointers but are not diagnostic
· Serum total thyroxine (total T4) measurement is a useful screening method. Levels are
generally below normal in hypothyroidism. However, total T4 levels normally fluctuate in
healthy dogs, and are depressed by therapy with a variety of drugs, mainutrition and in non-
thyroidal disease. Thus dogs with normal thyroid function may have low T4 levels.
ou se yns se a ti  sn e s si (i sa a ag s 
disease, malnutrition and drug therapy and is thus a better screening test of thyroid function but
only when levels are measured by the equilibrium dialysis method. Less accurate methods have
 no advantage over measurement of total T4-
· Canine TSH assay. Serum TSH levels are elevated in about 40% of dogs with primary
hypothyroidism but may also be present in about 15% of euthyroid dogs. Thus TSH assay alone
is not a reliable test. Assessment of both TSH and T4 levels increases the diagnostic accuracy.
Low total or free T4 together with high TSH is strongly supportive of a diagnosis of
hypothyroidism. As with allthese assays, specific cut-off levels should be provided by the
laboratory carrying out the assay.
+ Dynamic thyroid function tests. Both TSH and TRH (Thyrotropin Releasing Hormone) response tests are
used.
· TSH response test. This involves measurement of serum total T4 prior to and six hours
following intravenous administration of TSH or 50-100 μg recombinant human TSH). Post-TSH
levels of T4 below 20 nmol/L are diagnostic for hypothyroidism whilst levels above 30 nmol/L
are normal, in assays from most laboratories. This test is generally accepted as the most reliable
but as pharmaceutical grade TSH is not available, chemical grade product has to be used and
including owner's consent, should be obtained before it is used. The TSH response test is
especially useful in cases where there is non-thyroidal disease or where drugs affecting thyroid
function tests are being used. In such cases administration of 150 μg recombinant human TSH
is recommended.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Hypothyroidism · 5
Part.2
following intravenous administration of TRH (0.2 to 0.1 mg/kg). A normal response is
assessed as elevation of T4 to 1.5 times the baseline level (+50%). A normal response is
indicative of euthyroid status but because some normal dogs may not respond, lack of
response cannot be used to confirm hypothyroidism. Side effects which may be observed
following TRH administration include depression, rapid breathing, vomiting, defecation
and salivation. May be less reliable than the TSH response test.
· Sources of errors. A variety of factors can affect serum thyroid hormone levels and thus
possible, when performing thyroid function tests.
· Breed effects. Breeds known to have thyroid hormone levels at the bottom end or below
generally accepted normal ranges include Alaskan sled dogs, Scottish deerhounds and
greyhounds.
· Drug effects. Glucocorticoids and sulphonamides may depress thyroid hormone levels. A
thyroid atrophy and after prolonged administration may affect thyroid function tests for
periods of weeks to months; at least 8 weeks should be allowed after withdrawing T4
before carrying out such tests.
· Non-thyroidal illness. Serum T3 and T4 are reduced by illness and severe malnutrition but
free T4 measured by equilibrium dialysis may remain unaffected. Serum TSH levels may
also be elevated in up to about 30% of those dogs. Thus tests should be delayed until
thyroidal iliness and should be employed to confirm hypothyroidism when the results of
other tests are not conclusive.
· Autoimmune thyroiditis. This condition may occur in 50% of cases of hypothyroidism.
Autoantibodies to thyroid hormone can affect assays and may raise or lower the values
given by different assay procedures. However, free T4 assays using equilibrium dialysis are
 not affected by autoantibodies to T4.
Treatment
 Topical treatment.
· In cases of pyoderma, bacterial overgrowth and Malassezia dermatitis, treatment with
antimicrobial shampoos should be considered in conjunction with systemic therapy, where
appropriate (refer to the corresponding monographs). Where there is seborrhoea, the use of
antiseborrhoeic shampoos and with dry skin, moisturisers, will be beneficial.
 Systemic treatment.
· Treatment with T4 will generally be effective; both primary and secondary hypothyroidism are
treated in the same way. Doses of 0.01-0.04 mg/kg (10-40 μg/kg) daily are given once daily or
divided at 12-hour intervals. Improved demeanour should occur within 4 weeks but resolution
of skin problems may take as long as six months. Treatment should be continued for at least
three months to determine whether therapy is likely to be effective. Once a good response has
been obtained, consideration should be given to reducing the frequency of administration,
from twice to once daily, as well as the dose level. Treatment with Tg is seldom necessary and
is less convenient; doses of 4-6 μg/kg every 8 hours are used.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Hypothyroidism * 6
· Post-pill tests. Testing of the level of T4 achieved after administration of the therapeutic dose
may be necessary in cases which fail to respond to therapy initially or those in which clinical
signs recur. Following treatment, blood levels should be within the normal range in 4-6 hours.
Higher peak levels will be expected with once daily therapy. In cases with poor responses in
which 6-hour levels are adequate, levels should be reassessed at 24 hours. If levels at 24 hours
are too low then consideration should be given to dosing twice daily and, where necessary,
raising the dose. Where the post-pill levels of T4 are substantially above normal and there is a
lack of clinical response, the diagnosis of hypothyroidism should be questioned.
· Dogs with other diseases may need special consideration. Where there are other
endocrinopathies, these will need to be treated as well. In hypoadrenocorticism, the adrenal
insufficiency should be effectively treated before administration of T4. In diabetes melitus,
dosage of insulin may need to be adjusted when T4 therapy is instituted. In heart disease,
dosage with T4 should be started at a low level and gradually increased. A suggested regimen is
to begin with 5 μg/kg every 12 hours and to increase the dose every two weeks by 5μug/kg
every 12 hours until a therapeutic dose is reached.
Additional treatment.
· Systemic antibiotics. Bactericidal antibiotics are advisable to treat any concurrent bacterial
infection. Normal dose rates are used (see monographs on pyoderma) and the response is
usually very good. Unless thyroid supplementation is instituted, recurrence of the pyoderma
will occur. See monograph on complex approach pyoderma.
 Comments.
· Concurrent topical therapy is an important aspect of the treatment whilst waiting for skin and
coat problems to resolve.
Prognosis
o usin ot spl pue aa si ti y uaidns aso jo a in a ul 
disease related to the hypothyroidism.
→ Therapy needs to be lifelong.
Follow-up
→ Post-pill testing and adjustment of the dose of thyroid supplementation may be required should
the clinical signs recur.
Conclusions
 Hypothyroidism is a disease that may be difficult to diagnose in some cases because of the
very wide range of clinical signs and problems with thyroid hormone assessment.
 Once a diagnosis has been made, recovery is normally complete and the dog can have a
good quality of life provided that appropriate supplementation is maintained.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Otitis externa · 1
Part.2
Otitis externa
This monograph is not an exhaustive list of clinical signs
and causes of otitis externa, but a chronological and
clinical method of investigation to allow management of
otitis externa cases as specific dermatological problems.
Even if it is generally not necessary, it is recommended
that the patient be sedated to facilitate better
examination and sampling quality.
HISTORY AND CLINICAL EXAMINAIION
1/Specific history of otitis
· Must be registered in the sections "otitis" and 
"response to therapy"
· These elements help to categorize each case
in terms of severity.
· Local pathology: degree of pruritus (relief
when the ears are massaged..), pain
(whining..), neurological involvement.
Clinical examination : ear canal palpation and area to stimulate
· Affected pets in contact (in case of ear mites).
to trigger an auditopodal reflex. Courtesy of: D. Pin
f investigation
· Duration of otitis externa.
· Number of relapses.
· Previous treatments: type of therapy, products 
used, duration, efficacy / response.
· Grooming and cleaning routine: method,
products used.
Clinical method of i
2/Preliminary clinical examination
● Head and ear position (head tilt, ear usually held
low if painful, or neurological problem if there is 
an otitis media).
· Gentle palpation of the ear canal (EC), note:
Far mite infestation.
level of pruritus, pain,hyperplasia, amount f
Adult Otodectes cynotis (x40).
discharge.
Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary College, London
● Pinnae and EC examination, note:
· Primary and secondary lesions,
hyperplasia...
· Discharge or pus - amount and nature.
· Odour.
● Look for an audito-podal reflex by stimulating
the external orifice of the ear canal (suggestive
sign of ear mites).
· Assess the hearing.
Ear mite infestation. Direct cytological examination of an exudate
sampling. Eggs of Otodectes cynotis (x400).
Courtesy of: Royal Veterinary College, London
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Otitis externa · 2
OIOSCOPY AND SAMPLING
3/Sampling for mycology
and/or bacteriology
· Must be done with a sterile swab.
4/Exudate sampling for direct
microscopic examination
· Must be done with a swab or a curette.
· Parasitic investigation (eggs, larva and adults):
Erythemato-ceruminous otitis.
· Otodectes cynotis in ear mite infestation
Direct cytological examination of an exudate sampling.
Clinical method of investigation 
(1/10 of otitis cases),
Cocci scondary infection with Staphylococcus intermedius.
· Demodex canis or cati (rare).
See also few Malassezia. (Diff-Quik stain, x1000).
Courtesy of: D. Pin
· Refer to the slide preparation and
examination in the "sarcoptic mange"
monograph.
5/Exudate or pus sampling
for cytological microscopic
 examination after fast-staining
· Look for perpetuating microbial factors: yeasts
(mainly Malassezia pachydermatis), cocci
(Staphylococcus pseudin termedius in
Erythemato-ceruminous otitis.
particular), rods (Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Direct cytological examination of an exudate sampling.
most frequently)..
Yeast secondary infection with Malassezia pachydermatis.
(Diff-Quik stain, x1000). Courtesy of: D. Pin
· Presence of neutrophils indicating the
presence of pus in suppurative otitis externa.
· Refer to the procedures in the "Pyoderma" and 
" Malassezia dermatitis" monographs.
6/Otoscopy / Video-otoscopy
 General aspect of the ear canal lining including
assessment of amount and quality of
 discharge, presence of ulcers and/or nodular
lesions.
· Appearance of the tympanic membrane.
· Look for foreign body
· Video-otoscopy has same use as otoscopy but
with better accuracy (requires a good quality
Suppurative otiis.
video-otoscope). It can be very demonstrative
Direct cytological examination of an exudate sampling.
for the owner and allows to take pictures and 
Secondary infection with rods. (Diff-Quik stain, x1000).
Courtesy of: D. Pin
assess the healing.
· Clinical method of investigation
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Otitis externa · 3
Part.2
OTIIIS MANAGEMENT
7/Ear canal cleansing
and further otoscopy / video-
otoscopy
· If the ear canal is severely occluded.
· When the tympanic membrane has not
been visualized, in particular in severe
and/or chronic cases where an otitis media
 may be suspected.
Cleansing bulb flushing.
· It allows a thorough assessment of the local 
Courtesy of: D. N. Carlotti
disease; ear canal inside layer, presence of
nodular and/or ulcerative lesions, presence
of foreign body and observation of the
Clinical method of investigation
tympanic membrane - on which any lesions
would suggest otitis media (however,
absence of tympanic membrane lesions
does not exclude a suspicion of otitis
media).
8/Exploration and management
 of an otitis media
· Major suspicion in cases of chronic otitis
externa, particularly when suppurative, with
or without rupture of the tympanic
Suppurative otitis before cleansing.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
membrane.
· Diagnosis:
· otitis media likely when the tympanic
membrane is ruptured,
· CT-Scan imaging: very useful diagnosis
method,
· myringotomy and tympanic bulla
aspect· open mouth tympanic bulla
radiographs (older method, much less 
accurate than CT-Scan).
· Management:
· when the tympanic membrane is
 ruptured or after a myringotomy:
sampling for culture and sensitivity
(± mycology and sensitivity to 
antifungal agents),
 Suppurative otitis afer cleansing.
· refer to "therapy".
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Otitis externa · 4
9/Use of samples from the ear
canal
· Send to a laboratory for bacteriology / mycology in cases of:
· otitis media,
· chronic suppurative otitis, 
· severe recurrent otitis.
· Sensitivity must include antibiotics usually effective on the
bacteria found in otitis:
· important if a systemic treatment is prescribed,
· provides useful infomation but is less deteminant 
Parasiic erythemato-ceruminous otitis.
Courtesy of: D. N. Carlotti
regarding choice of topical treatment (local antibiotic
 concentrations are far in excess of the systemic
concentrations assayed in the in vitro sensitivity
detemination).
10/Therapy: in clinic and by the
owner
Foreign Body Otitis
/estigation
· Withdrawal of the foreign body.
· Secondary infection treatment.
Parasitic Erythemato-Ceruminous Otitis externa (ear
mites)
inve
· Topical acaracidal therapy.
· Systemic acaracidal therapy (refer to systemic
 Non parasitic erythemato-ceruminous otitis with Malassezia.
6
(Malasszia dematis& Atopy).
 therapy of sarcoptic mange).
Courtesy of: D.N. Carlotti
 method
· Concomitant antiseptic flushing solution can be used
when Malassezia sp. is also present.
Infectious Erythemato-Ceruminous or Suppurative
Otitis externa (yeast and/or bacteria)
Clinical 
· Topical therapy with a preparation containing
 antibiotic, antifungal and antinflammatory agents,
known to be effective.
· Prerequisite initial cleansing in the practice in
 presence of copious discharge and exudates: ear
flushing using adapted devices, most often under
general anaesthesia, with an antiseptic and cleaning
solution. · Prerequisite regular cleansing by the
pue areupsip snodos jo aouasaid u laumo 
exudate:
· with an antiseptic cleaning solution applied
 Non parasitic erythemato-ceruminous ottis
generously,
with microbial secondary infection (Atopy).
· gentle massage of the ear canal,
Courtesy of: D. Pin
· wipe off the secretions and excess product that
 appear at the external orifice of the ear canal
with a paper towel,
· repeat the procedure several times if necessary,
Aeaad pnous uoeedaid onadeiau aui 
 be applied a few minutes later.
· Inflammation can persist once the infection is
controlled:
· preventive use of an antiseptic ear cleanser,
· use of a therapeutic preparation containing
corticosteroids in case of severe inflammation,
· the basic therapy is the treatment or control
of the associated disease.
Suppurative oits with Pseudomanas.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Courtesy of: D. Pin
Otitis externa · 5
Part.2
Otitis media
· Topical cleansing with an antiseptic solution,
under sedation, when the tympanic membrane
is ruptured or after myringotomy.
· Topical therapy with a preparation containing
 antibiotic, antifungal and anti-inflammatory
(corticosteroid) agents.
· Antibiotic systemic therapy at high dosage.
Antimicrobial topical products
· An antiseptic topical cleanser can be used in
the first intention and can be excellent for
 maintenance and long-term prevention. The
Myringotomy under video-otoscope.
 of investigation
Courtesy of: D. N. Carlotti & O. Toulza
addition of sugars (glycotechnology) helps in 
 reducing microbial adherence.
· A therapeutic product speciffc for acute otitis
externa must include a broad spectrum antibiotic,
an antifungal agent (effective against Malassezia)
 and a steroidal anti-inflammatory agent:
Clinical method (
· treat by courses of 1 to 2 weeks, and at
least one week more after healing and/or
 microbial clearance (no microbial agents 
revealed on cytology),
· avoid prolonged administration, treat 
when infection is established until 
 recovery and elimination of the infection
(repeat regularly cytological controls).
Systemic therapy
· Antibiotic and/or antifungal agents: useful in
case of otitis media (at a high dosage) in order
CT-Scan imaging. Filledright tympanic bulla.
Courtesy of: E Durieux
to increase the local level of the active
 ingredients delivered by the topical therapy
(which remains vital).
· Corticosteroids: sometimes useful (and in some
severe cases of otitis externa) to reduce
 thickening of the integument and narrowing of 
the ear canal in chronic otitis externa and
therefore to avoid surgery (which would not 
 solve the problem on the long termj.
Exploration and control of the associated
dermatosis is the next critical step.
INTEGRATION OF CHRONIC
OR RECCURENT CASES OF OTITIS
IN THE GENERAL
DERMATOLOGICAL
APPROACH
(Refer to Part.1)
Open mouth tympanic bulla radiograph: aspect of the tympanic
bulla in a case of chronic otitis media.
Courtesy of: Ecole Nationale Veterinaire d'Alfort France.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.2
Otitis externa · 6
Conclusions
 Prevalence of otitis externa
Average
Unilateral (U)
Perpetuating factors
Type
Primary causes
prevalence
or Bilateral (B)
to control
FBO
 Possible secondary
U
Foreign Body (FB)
(Otitis due to a Foreign Body)
infection
PECO
Otodectes +++,
 Possible secondary
(Parasitic Erythemato-
= 1/10
B at 95%
Others +
infection
Ceruminous Otitis)
NPECO / IECO
 Mainly yeast (Malassezia
Allergic dermatitis in
(Non Parasitic /
pachydermatis +++) and cocci
= 2/3
B at 75%
85% of cases : mainly
Infectious Erythemato-
[Staphylococcus pseudintermedius
 atopic dermatitis
Ceruminous Otitis)
+++, streptococci +, others ±)
ECO complication
Bacteria and particularly rods
SO
=1/4
U at 50%
(refer to its causes)
(Pseudomanas aeruginosa +++,
(Suppurative Otitis)
 FB otitis complication 
 Proteus spp +, others ±)
Adult dog
Infectious Erythemato-Ceruminous Otitis externa are commonly found, and can degenerate into
suppurative otitis externa in the most chronic (and/or poorly controlled) cases.
Otitis externa, especially Erythemato-Ceruminous Otitis externa, is generally found in adult dogs as
they are quasi systematicaly associated with a general dermatosis (in particular an allergic dermatitis)
which concern only adult dogs.
Young dog
The young dog is mainly affected by parasitic otitis
externa, which may become secondarily infected, or
less commonly, by foreign body otitis externa.
Erythemato-ceruminous otitis with Malassezia.
Courtesy of: D. Pin
edpi
Otodectes cynotis. Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.3
Applications and use
of skin biopsies
Part.3
Applications and use
of skin biopsies
odpi
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 1
Part.3
Introduction
→ Skin biopsy followed by histopathological analysis is one of the most helpful procedures in the diagnosis of
dermatological problems.
 This chapter is entirely devoted to the description of skin biopsies, their indications and techniques. Its goal is to
demonstrate the major indications for this procedure and to give some basic rules that will enable optimum
information to be derived from the histological examination.
more difficult. They are not necessarily indicated for the more common dermatoses for which the dinical
approach is a prerequisite, but biopsies are never useless.
The role of the clinician and the role of the pathologist
 The analysis of skin biopsies requires close teamwork between the clinician and the pathologist.
 The role of the clinician is very important as he/she is responsible for the first step: the choice of the area
to biopsy.
important and critical, as he/she has to interpret,
THE ROLE OF THE CLINICIAN
without seeing the animal, a histological picture at
a fixed time point in what is an evolving
 Histopathology may well be inconclusive if the biopsies
pathological process. It is usually a combination of
submitted by the clinician have not been selected from the
optimal site, if poor technique has been used, or they have
images, observed on histopathological sections
not been well preserved.
from one or several specimens that enables the
 If all the above conditions are met, a good pathologist
pathologist to distinguish one (or several)
should be able to provide you reliable and often conclusive
information.
differential(s) with more or less certainty.
 When skin biopsies are performed:
· The first objective may be to reach the diagnosis with the highest positive predictive value (PPV).
· Of equal importance, the second objective could be to rule out one (or several) differentials.
In this case, the goal is to derive the highest negative predictive value (NPV).
of the former and the NPV of the latter.
sooed aui on paugns sadues yo laqunu aun pue Aenb an 'ad au do agisuodsan si ueiiu aul 
who must have particular expertise in dermatopathology, and the submission must be accompanied by a
complete history, a report of the dermatological examination, and a map of the lesions with the biopsy sites
indicated.
followed.
When to biopsy ?
General information / Client information
pointing the clinician in the right direction.
 When this procedure is advised, the owner must be made aware that the results will not necessarily provide a
 precise diagnosis, but the information obtained will nonetheless be extremely useful in the case management.
 Also important is the fact that the cost/benefit ratio is high, and that the results can be obtained relatively
quickly.
→ The skin biopsy should be scheduled for a specific appointment to ensure that it is performed optimally
and to emphasize the importance of the procedure to the owner.
 Also an indication of the likely total cost must be given, emphasising the potential benefits relative to that cost.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.3
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 2
Indications for skin biopsies in the groups of related dermatoses
(refer to the first part of the handbook)
 For the most frequent dermatoses (groups 1 and 2), the clinical approach is essential.
results are sometimes diagnostic and if not they may help rule out some differentials.
· For those in group 2 (most frequent primary dermatoses - allergies and endocrine disorders),
histopathological examination is seldom diagnostic. However, histopathology may help the clinician in
(pyoderma in particular).
 For all the other, less common (group 3) dermatoses, histopathology is essential to establish the final
diagnosis. This is because they are often severe requiring long and expensive treatment which may have 
side effects, and thus a definitive diagnosis, obtainable only by skin biopsies, is essential.
 Skin biopsies are thus particularly indicated:
· When a specific condition is suspected:
· for which the analysis of skin biopsies is recognised to be diagnostic,
sisap z do I dnoe e sy sisouep s auo hoddns on sasim auo uaum o
· When the lesions appear atypical, or have a sudden and dramatic onset.
· For any erosive dermatosis (e.g.: generalised ulcerative lesions).
· If there is any suspicion of neoplasia.
· When any dermatosis belonging to group 3 is suspected. In this case, histopathology almost always 
gives a diagnosis.
· When the performance of other tests have not enabled a diagnosis.
· When a treatment, apparently correctly followed, has not resolved the problem.
· When one wishes to confirm the clinical approach taken towards such dermatoses, in particular for the
most frequent primary dermatoses (group 2). It may first of all confirm the absence or regression of
secondary dermatoses (group 1b) and give an indication for possible further diagnostic tests helpful in 
the differential diagnosis of, for example, allergies or endocrine disorders.
 In all cases, and more particularly for the group 1 and 2 dermatoses, the establishment of the diagnosis is 
the responsibility of the clinician, taking into account the history, the clinical examination and possible other
additional tests.
DIAGNOSTIC GROUPS OF RELATED DERMATOSES
SEQUENCE OF
USEFULNESS OF
(see lists of the specific dermatoses)
INVESTIGATION
HISTOPATHOLOGY
GROUP 1a:
GROUP 1:
 Some primary dermatoses
Specific
Few and relatively uncommon.
Sometimes diagnostic.
infectious
Always as
GROUP 1b:
and
a first step
Secondary dermatoses
 The clinical approach
parasitic
few but common.
is essential.
dermatoses
(occurring secondary to the primary
dermatoses, essentially of group 2)
GROUP 2:
Rarely diagnostic.
Only as
Commonest primary dermatoses
May help the clinician to re-orientate
Few but very common.
a second step
his/her approach.
(very often associated with secondary dermatoses)
The clinical approach is essential.
GROUP 3:
Diagnostic in the great majority
Rare primary dermatoses
At any time if suspected
 of cases with good biopsies.
Many different dermatoses but rare.
Many skin biopsies are indicated.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 3
Part.3
What to biopsy ?
+ How many samples?
· When it has been decided to undertake skin biopsies, with the owner's agreement, there
should be no hesitation in taking a number of samples: the cost is identical, the time
required almost the same and the value of the information obtained is often directly
proportional to the number of samples
· Different areas are often in different stages of the disease process. The performance of
numerous biopsies therefore gives a better "sampling" of the various phases of the
pathological mechanism in question. This can be enormously helpful to the pathologist.
· The clinician will thus have to endeavour to sample
different areas of different clinical aspects
With experience, and guided by
(ranging from the most severely affected areas
previous results, the clinician will in
to the normal).
time be able to refine his choices
· Taking five biopsies is an acceptable average.
and thus reduce the number of
biopsy samples submitted for
→ Nature of the samples.
analysis.
· Primary lesions of all types must be sampled first
(papular, pustular, nodules, or even erythema...). As they result from the principal
pathogenic processes, they will be more reliably diagnostic
· As a rule, biopsy "all" suspect lesions, particularly when the primary lesions are not easily
identifiable. A crust examination, for example, will sometimes give extremely useful
information.
How to biopsy ?
→ Material.
· Ready availability of all the necessary instruments 
and materials will facilitate high standards and
ensure that biopsies can be undertaken whenever
there is any indication.
· The goal is not to work under aseptic but clean
conditions. However, sterile instruments and
materials must be used.
● A small surgery box should be reserved
exclusively for skin biopsies and contain only the
necessary instruments.
· The materials necessary are not highly specialised:
· the appropriate amount of a local
anaesthetic (2% lidocaine), enough for 1 to 2
ml for each biopsy site, sterile syringes and
The requisite material. Courtesy of D. Pin
needles; a general anaesthetic should also be
available,
· suture, absorbable or non-absorbable,
· a pair of sterile gloves,
● absorbent paper towel on which to dab the samples,
● a small cold sterilisation tray containing the 6mm sterile punches, in good condition,
+ a small sterile surgical box containing: a new blade, a scalpel handle, two pairs of thin scissors,
 straight and curved, dissecting forceps, a small clamp, a very small pair of eye forceps, gauze
pads, suture material (rat-toothed forceps and needle holder),
● 10% formalin-filled vials,
· and the necessary labels and documents for appropriate submission.
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.3
 Applications and use of skin biopsies * 4
 Patient preparation.
· The biopsy sites must remain perfectly intact, as the skin surface
material is often of great value to the pathologist.
· avoid clipping (or plucking!) the hair before sampling, as important
material could be removed
· avoid preliminary scrubbing.
· Before anaesthesia it is preferable to circle with an indelible marker the
Patient preparation,marking of he
sites that will be sampled.
sits for biopsy. (*)
· Note the sites on the lesion map and indicate precisely the nature of the
samples (type of lesion, normal area immediately adjacent to such
Jesion..
 Locaf anaesthesia.
● Most of the time, skin biopsies may be performed under local
anaesthesia with appropriate physical restraint:
· a sub-cutaneous injection of 1 ml (or 2 ml) of 2% lidocaine per
site is sufficient,
· gently fold the skin, without damaging the lesions,
Local anaesthesia. (*)
· the anaesthetic is injected under the biopsy site making sure that
the product penetrates under the skin,
· introduce the needle into the immediate periphery of the biopsy
 site and reposition the needle carefully, several times, depositing
the anaesthetic in several places,
· wait approximately 5 to 10 minutes before performing the biopsy.
 General anaesthesia.
· General anaesthesia may be useful for fractious animals
· It is generally necessary when sampling the feet (footpads, nails),
face (periorbital, muzzie, nasal planum), ano-genital areas,
Punch biopsy tecnique. (*)
the medial aspect of the pinnae or the tail.
 Punch biopsies.
· This is the simplest and quickest technique.
· In general, a 6 mm punch provides good sampling material with
minimal trauma.
· Hold the skin flat without stretching it.
· Apply the punch perpendicular to the skin surface.
· Exert sufficient pressure to the punch with the hand while "rolling" it
with a continuous rotational movement between the thumb and the 
Punch biopsy technique. (*)
index finger.
· The pressure must be maintained until one feels the skin loosen as the
 blade of the punch penetrates the subcutaneous tissue.
· Pick up the sample very carefully by the under surface, taking care not 
to crush or even squeeze it:
· the fragment sampled generally emerges when the punch is
withdrawn, then the subcutaneous fat by which it is still attached
just has to be cut,
· if not, gently lift the sample by introducing closed forceps into the
wound.
· The specimen may be picked up by the subcutaneous fat.
Punch biopsy technique. (*)
· In order to remove the blood, gently blot the distal surface of the
sample on an absorbent paper towel.
· Then put it immediately into the fixative.
· The biopsy punch technique has the enormous advantage of allowing
numerous samplings, generally under local anaesthesia, and is well
accepted by the owner.
· However, it does not allow the inclusion of diseased and normal tissue
within the same sample (except if the lesion is very small).
If a comparison has to be made between the diseased skin and normal
skin of the same region, an adjacent normal area has to be biopsied
Punch biopsy technique (*)
separately (refer to the chapter concerning the sites to biopsy).
(*): Courtesy of D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 5
Part.3
 Elliptica wedge biopsies.
· This biopsy technique is useful when the lesions to be sampled are large
(nodules, neoplasia.) and/or deep (panniculitis) and/or very fragile (big
pustules, bullae, vesicles...).
· This method is also used when surgical resection of the lesion is indicated
(nodule, tumour...).
· However, in order to enable adequate fixation by the formalin, the
Elliptical wedgetechnique Biopsy site
representative piece will suffice.
affer local anaesthesia. (*)
· Another interesting feature of this method is that the section defines a long
axis if one requires the specimen to be cut prior to bring embedded (see
chapter concerning the precise selection of sites to biopsy).
· The dermis and epidermis must be sectioned simultaneously, firmly and
contin uously.
ied e suisn iey snoauengns au aq uawads au aeaala aualis pue youd o
of fine eye forceps.
· Trim away the deep tissue with fine iris scissors.
· Gently blot the distal surface of the specimen on an absorbent paper towel 
in order to eliminate excess blood.
Elliptical wedge technique. Sectin of
the biopsy. (*)
· Immediately place the sample into the fixative.
· This technique is theoretically the best, but presents certain disadvantages: it
sampling, and ultimately is less acceptable to the owner.
· It is on the other hand the only technique allowing the inclusion of lesional
tissue as well as normal tissue in the same sample (see chapter concerning
the precise selection of sites to biopsy).
 Specimen conservation.
Elliptical wedge technique. Suture. (*)
after removal, thus preventing desiccation and autolysis.
· Do not use other fixatives (such as Bouin's fluid).
· Some specialist laboratories provide vials containing the correct fixative.
· All specimens may be placed in the same vial, but the total volume of
fixative must be at least ten times greater than the total volume of the
specimens.
· Distribution of multiple samples in different vials may be useful for sample
identification: a vial, for example, for each site biopsied.
 Haemostasis, antisepsis and suture.
· Do not worry about the bleeding until the samples are completely
Sample to be dropped in a fixation vial.
Blood elimination. (*)
removed and placed in the fixation vials!
· Haemostasis is generally readily effected by simple compression. It may
 sometimes be more difficult in certain areas (facial, pedal, auricular).
· Dab gently with an antiseptic solution and suture the wounds when all
biopsies have been taken. If a wound keeps bleeding, compress firmly
with clean gauze before suturing. The use of haemostats is rarely
necessary.
· For 6mm punch sites, a single interrupted suture is generally sufficient.
ssaau a lou u sanns sns yond ut ho 
● For ellptical wedge biopsies, suture (preferably simple interrupted)
Biopsy site after sampling. (*)
appropriate to sample size.
Compression haemostasis. (*)
Suture of a biopsysite (6 m punch). (*)
Suture of a biopsy site (6mm punch). (*)
(*): Courtesy of D. Pin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.3
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 6
→ Sample dispatch.
· The mailing must include the case history and clinical data (including a map of the lesions).
· It is important to indicate clearly the sites and the type of lesion biopsied on the map.
· Distributing the samples in multiple vials is also useful.
· The pathologist will then be able to identify easily the origin of the different biopsies submitted.
· The simplest procedure is to send a photocopy of the history, clinical records and lesional map
filled in during the consultation (including accurate indication of the sites and nature of the
lesions biopsied).
· It is also necessary to indicate which other tests have been undertaken, with results if available,
 and details of alltreatment given together with any response.
· Skin biopsies should be submitted to a reliable, reputable laboratory,
 making sure a dermatopathologist will interpret the samples.
History
y
BIOPNY
afaomen
1px Farmahn
BIOPNY
denemnaia!
10% Formalin
Fontpad
iesng sf fhucpens
 site and aspect of each sample
 must be precisely indicated on the
lesion map.
Lesion map
Clinical record
Fught hn
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 7
Part.3
Practical guidelines
+ General method.
· Search for several lesions of the same type; choose the best specimen - not just the first one
found.
· Care must be taken not to damage the lesion while sampling, especially primary lesions such as
pustules, which can be very fragile.
· Ensure that all parts of the biopsy sample are placed in the fixation vial, e.g. crust. All material
provided are (normally!) analysed by the laboratory and observed by the pathologist (a crust
may carry useful information).
· Keep in mind that the pathologist will bisect the specimen through its long axis, symmetrically
and perpendicularly to the skin surface (Fig1).
Fig1
Microtome blade used for
histologic sections
Skin
surface
X
X
Biopsy
 Specimen
(Three-dimensional image)
transection
 plane
 Specimen transection
 according to X/X 
Captions for the diagrams
= patient skin
= punch biopsy
= elliptical wedge biopsy
= area apparently healthy
= extensive lesional area
= lesion considered as significant
= histological section
correct biopsy procedure
biopsy procedure incorrect
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.3
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 8
→ Sampling of well-demarcated lesions.
· Most of the time, a punch can be used.
· When the biopsy is performed with a punch, the specimen is cylindrical and the section
will be generally done randomly according to one of the diameters.
· It is thus very important to accurately focus the punch on the chosen lesion (Fig2).
· If the lesion is not centred, the bisection will probably miss the lesion and normal tissue
will be processed (Fig3).
· Furthermore, focusing the punch will considerably limit the risk of damaging the lesion
that will then be preserved intact (a critical factor for enabling a diagnosis with a skin
biopsy).
Fig2
Fig3
Punch
Upper view
X
Cutaneous area
apparently normal
Lesion to sample:
papulo-pustule
Histopathological
aspect of the
Histological
Tissue apparently normal
Jejnysnd-ojnded
section (X/X)
after histopathological
lesion
analysis
· In the case of a larger lesion, sample it entirely by performing an elliptical wedge biopsy,
keeping in mind that the long axis must pass through the lesion (Fig4). This technique is a
 prerequisite with fragile and/or transient lesions (bullae, vesicles, or even furuncles...).
Fig4
Lesion to sample
Elliptical wedge
biopsy
Adjacent skin area
apparently
Histopathological aspect
 of the lesion sampled 
Histological
section (X/X)
Histopathological aspect
of the immediate
adjacent area to the lesion
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Applications and use of skin biopsies * 9
Part.3
 Sampling extensive fesional areas.
· The biopsy must be performed within the lesion (Fig5)
· With a punch, it is preferable not to biopsy surrounding normal skin, for there is a great risk
that such a sectioning such a biopsy may miss the lesion (Fig6).
Fig5
Fig6
 Lesional
autaneous area
ypund
X
biopsy
Histopathological
Histopathological
Histological
aspect of the
aspect of the irmmediate
extensive
adjacent area
section (X/X)
lesional area
to the lesion
· It is better to perform an elliptical wedge biopsy with a scalpel; the long axis will be chosen
 perpendicular to a tangent of the lesion (Fig7). Otherwise two or three punch biopsies are
necessary.
the lesional area with the adjacent cutaneous area.
· If wel-demarcated lesions considered significant are present within the extensive lesion, at
 least one of them should be included in the biopsy specimen, along its long axis.
Fig7
 Extensive lesional area
 Significant lesion
to sample
Elliptical wedge
biopsy
Histopathologikal aspect of
Histological
the signifikant lesion sampled
section (X/X)
Histopathological
Histopathological
aspect of the
aspect of the irmmediate
extensive
 adjacent area to
lesional area
the lesion
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.3
Applications and use of skin biopsies · 10
Key points to keep in mind
→ Histopathology is an important part of the diagnostic work up of the dermatological case.
 Skilled teamwork between the pathologist and the clinician is essential to obtain the best information from the skin biopsies.
 For this same reason, the choice of the pathologist to whom the samples wil be sent is crucial.
 It is strongly recommended to have the skin biopsies examined by a veterinary dermatologist proficient in dermatohistopathology or by a
 It should be made clear on the report which pathologist has examined the biopsies in order to facilitate any later discussions.
 However, the clinician should be able to rely on the pathologist and the resultant report if the few basic rules which were descibed are
followed, i.e. if the biopsy samples are: 
· 1°) in sufficient quantity,
· 2°) of suitable quality,
· 3°) of relevant nature (i.e. taken from areas truly representative of the skin condition),
· 4°) and accompanied by:
· a well described history of the case,
· concise description of the results of the dermatological examination (a detailed lesional map i an excellent method),
· the results of other laboratory examinations and any therapeutic trials carried out,
+ the results of all previous treatments,
· and possible differential diagnosis indicated from the history :
· Particularly, the biopsies must:
· be multiple,
· include all primary lesions, as well as secondary lesions,
· as far as possible, include the whole lesion and part of the immediately adjacent area,
· otherwise, the centre of the lesion, a peripheral area, an area bordering normal skin and even normal skin itself.
· The number of sites to biopsy may seem numerous, but:
● first of all there is usually no additional fee for several specimens,
· then, the greater the number of samples, the better are the chances of finding diagnostic sections,
· finally and most importantly, it is quite obvious that not every biopsy submitted along these lines will have the same diagnostic
value. Nevertheless, when the likely diagnosis is unclear, it is better to provide samples that will not be useful, rather than failing to
provide samples that could have been crucial in establishing the diagnosis!
· Of course, with experience, or in the case of a classical condition with limited differentials, the selection of the sites to biopsy may be
refined and the number of samples reduced.
·It is aso important to specifyif one wishes a precise diagnostic confirmation of a strong clinical suspicion and/or if one wishes on the
contrary to nule out such or such differential for which the clinical suspicion is weak, or even if one wishes to rule out a rare dermatosis
(group 3).
· Not having a precise idea (or any idea at all of the cause of the skin condition is important information which willstil be of value to the
pathologist!
Conclusions
→Well conducted histopathology is:
· Seldom useless, even for the most frequent
dermatoses (for which the clinical approach is
essential), particularly for those of group 1. The skin
biopsy results will at least allow the clinician to rule
out certain diagnostic differentials (more
particularly from the group 3).
· Suggestive in many cases
(for example for the group 2 dermatoses, for which
once again, the clinical approach is essential).
· Diagnostic for a great number of dermatoses
(belonging in particular to group 3).
→Aff in aff, histopathological analysis is as
rdpo
revealing by what itshows as by what it
does not show!
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.4
Elements of physiology
and structure of
healthy canine skin
Part.4
odpj
structure of healthy canine skin
 Elements of physiology and
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
 Elements of physiology and structure of healthy canine skin • 1
Part.4
Physiology of the dog's skin
The skin should be considered as a vital organ, providing whole body protection (for other organs and
fissues): it has connections with other organs and with the interior of the body (usually via the mucosae) at
the eyes, tympanic membrane, nose, mouth, and ano-genital area.
The skin is also responsible for many physiological functions, with continuous renewal of the epidermis and
of the haircoat via the follicular cycle.
General functions
Enclosing barrier:
The most important function of skin is to make possible an internal environment for all other organs by
maintaining an effective barrier to the loss of water, electrolytes, and macromolecules.
Environmental protection:
A related function is the exclusion of external injurious agents, chemical, physical, and microbiologic, from
entrance into the internal environment.
Motion and shape:
 The flexibility, elasticity, and toughness of the skin allow motion and provide shape and form.
Adnexa production:
Skin produces important keratinised structures such as hair, claws, and the horny layer of the epidermis.
Temperature regulation:
Skin plays a role in the regulation of body temperature through its support of the hair coat and regulation of
 cutaneous blood supply.
Storage:
The skin is a reservoir of electrolytes, water, vitamins, fat, carbohydrates, proteins, and other materials.
Indicator:
The skin may be an important indicator of general health, internal disease, and the effects of substances
applied topically or taken internally.
Immunoregulation:
Keratinocytes, Langerhans' cells, and lymphocytes together provide the skin with an immunosurveillance
Pigmentation:
 Processes in the skin (melanin formation, vascularity, and keratinisation) help determine the colour of the coat
Antimicrobial action:
ene pe raee aau (sapnad ge sapida ue u pidi an anns us a
properties.
Sensory perception:
Skin is a primary sense organ for touch, pressure, pain, itch, heat, and cold.
Secretion:
Skin is a secretory organ by virtue of its apocrine (epitrichial, eccrine (arichial), and sebaceous glands.
Excretion:
 The skin functions in a limited way as an excretory organ.
Vitamin D production:
Vitamin D is produced in the skin through stimulation by solar radiation. Vitamin D3 is formed in the epidermis
 and hydroxylated in the liver and again in the kidney. It is important in the regulation of epidermal proliferation
and differentiation.
SCOTT D.W., MILLER W.H., CRIFFIN C.E.: Structure and Function of the Skin. In: MULLER & KIRK's Small Animal Dermatology, 20OO, 6lh ed., p 1-70
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.4
7 - uys aujues Ayeay yo ainsnis pue Aoloisayd jo siuawa
Normal dog's skin structure
Dogs skin and haircoat
Courtesy of: P Jasmin
edpl
Dogs skin biopsy
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Secondary hairs
Primary hair
Superficiallipidfim
Epidermis
cornified layer
intermediary layers
Epidermis
basal layer
basal membrane
Sweatgland(apocrine)
Dermis
Hair follicle
odpj
Sebaceous gland
Cutting of the Dog's skin showing the structure Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Elements of physiology and structure of healthy canine skin · 3
Part.4
Epidemis renewal
Completerenewal of the epidermisin3weeks
Natural elimination of invisible
cornified dead cells
differentiation&
migratlon
multiplication
odpj
Epidermis renewal of the dog's skin. Courtesy of: P Jasmin
Follicular cycle of the dog's skin
Growh of a new halrunderand beside the old one,the
s
ieu.peap..
pushed out by the new one and falls to the ground.
A complete mosaic shedding oocurs3 to 4 times a year,
with hormonal &nycthemeral rhythm influences
"old"hair
umau,
odpi
Follicular cycle of the dogs skin. Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Part.4
t + uys auiues Ayeay yo annnis pue AholoisAyd yo stuawa
Fundamental differences between
canine and human skin
①CutaneouspH difference:up to7.5in dogs/5.5inhuman
2Epidermal thickness:3-5layers indogs/10-15inhuman
③Quickerepidermal turnoverin dogs:20days/28days inhuman
Follicularcyclical:in dogs/continuous in human
5No exocrine sudoral glandsin dogs
(except in footpads and eyelids)
odpj
Canine skin
Courtesy of: P. Jasmin
odpj
Human skin
Courtesy of P. Jasmin
Clinical Handbook on Canine Dermatology
Virbac dermatology:
Sharing the power
Third Edition @20l!
of innovative solutions
odpj
Nirbac
www.virbacderm.com