Fundamentalsof
SmallAnimal
Surgery
Fred Anthony Mann,
Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon
WILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http:/ttahc.taobao.com
Fundamentals of
SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Fundamentals of
SMALLANMAL
SURGERY
Fred Anthony Mann
Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
Hun-Young Yoon
WWILEY-BLACKWELL
A Johm Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Publication
 Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing program
has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical and Medical business to form Wiley-Blackwell
Registered offce: John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offces: 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
For details of our global editorial offces, for customer services and for information about how to apply for
permission to reuse the copyright matenial in this book please see our website at
www.wiley.com /wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the intemal or personal use of specific
clients, is granted by Blackwell Publishing, provided that the base fee is paid directly to the Copyright
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923. For those organizations that have been granted
a photocopy license by CCC, a separate system of payments has been arranged. The fee codes for users of the
Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-7817-6118-5/2011.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in
regard to the subject mater covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in
competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Mann, Fred Anthony.
Fundamentals of small animal surgery / Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu, Hun-Young
Yoon.
p;cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
 Summary: "Fundamentals of Small Animal Surgery offers a thorough introduction to the surgical
principles essential to good veterinary practice. With many high-quality line drawings and clinical
photographs to complement the detailed descriptions, the book is a useful resource for building basic
 and postoperative pain management, the book is a valuable reference for surgical procedure training in
veterinary or veterinary technician schools, and serves as a refresher for veterinarians and technicians in
practice." -Provided by publisher.
[SBN 978-0-7817-6118-5 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Veterinary surgery.  2. Pet medicine. I. Constantinescu,
Gheorghe M., 1932- II. Yoon, Hun-Young. IIl. Title.
 [DNLM: 1. Animal Diseases-surgery. 2. Animals, Domestic-surgery. 3. Surgical Procedures,
Operative-veterinary. SF 911]
SF981.M257 2011
636.089'7-dc22
2010042173
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12 pt New Baskerville by Aptara? Inc., New Delhi, India
12011
DEDICATIONS
We, the authors, dedicate this textbook to all of the students who we have had the pleasure of train-
ing in the art and science of small animal surgery and to all of those companion animals who have
benefitted from their surgical skills. The authors also state the following individual dedications.
I dedicate this textbook to my loving wife, Dr. Colette Wagner-Mann, my son, Lucas Mann, and
my daughter, Danielle Mann. I thank them for their love, understanding, and patience as I have
 dedicated enormous amounts of time to veterinary student education, including the production
of this textbook.
My contribution to this book as an anatomist. and medical illustrator started long ago and was
 encouraged by my wife, Dr. Ileana Constantinescu, whom I thank warmly for her unlimited support,
understanding, and sacrifice. I dedicate this book to her, to my son Dr. Razvan Constantinescu
and daughter Adina Klima, and their families.
A、Pnotautiea
I would like to thank my wonderful family, my wife, Kyunghwa Kim, and my son, Dongbin Yoon,
CONTENTS
Contributors 
 ix
7Operating Room Protocol 45
Preface  xi
Fed Anthony Mann
Acknowledgments  xii
8  Surgical Atire   56
1
Preoperative Patient Assessment
Fred Anthony Mann
3
Elizabeth A. Swanson and
 Scrubbing, Gowning, and
Fred Anthony Mann
Gloving
63
2
 Basic Small Animal Anesthesia  8
Hun-Young Yoon and
John R. Dodam and Fred Anthony Mann
Fed Anthony Mann
3
 Asepsis in Small Animal Surgery
10
 Surgical Preparation and Animal
Fred Anthony Mann
Positioning   83
Hun-Young Yoon and
 Antibiotic Use in Small Animal
Fred Anthony Mann
Surgery   21
Elizabeth A. Swanson and
11
 Surgical Draping
107
Fred Anthony Mann
Hun-Young Yoon and
Fred Anthony Mann
Basic Surgical Instruments  25
Fred Anthony Mann
12
 Instrument Handling
128
Hun-Young Yoon and
 Pack Preparation for Sterilization 
35
Fred Anthony Mann
Fred Anthony Mann
* All pencil drawings (see Chapters 5 through 14, 16, 17, and 20) are original and are illustrated by Ir. Gheorghe M. Constantinescu.
vii
vili
CONTENTS
13
 Surgical Knot Tying
143
17   Surgical Tubes cand Drains   208
Hun-Young Yoon and
Fred Anthony Mann
Fed Anthony Mann
18  Canine Ovariohysterectomy   277
14
 Suture Materials and Basic Suture
Fred Anthony Mann
Patterns
155
19  Postoperative Pain
Carios H. de M. Souza and Fred Anthony
Management 391
Mann
John P Punke and Fred Anthony Mann
15B
 Basic wound Healing and wound
 20  Patient Aftercare and Followup 406
Closure
176
Elizabeth A. Swanson and
Carlos H. de M. Souza and Fred Anthony
Fred Anthony Mann
Mann
165
 Surgical Hemostasis
187
Index 420
Elizabeth A. Swanson and
Fed Anthony Mann
CONTRIBUTORS
Gheorghe M. Constantinescu, DVM, PhD,
Professor
mult Drhc
 Department of Veterinary Medicine and
Professor of Veterinary Anatomy and Medical
Surgery
llustrator
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
 Department of Biomedical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Missouri
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
John P. Punke, DVM
 Small Animal Surgery Resident
John R. Dodam, DVM, MS, PhD, Diplomate
 Department of Veterinary Medicine and
ACVA
Surgery
Associate Professor
Chairman
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Department of Veterinary Medicine and
University of Missouri
Surgery
Columbia, Missouri
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
College of Veterinary Medicine
Carlos H. de M. Souza, DVM, MS, Diplomate
University of Missouri
ACVIM (Oncology)
Columbia, Missouri
Assistant. Professor of Small Animal Surgery
 Department of Veterinary Medicine and
Fred Anthony Mann, DVM, MS, Diplomate
Surgery
ACVS, Diplomate ACVECC
Veterinary Medical Teaching Hospital
 Director of Small Animal Emergency and
College of Veterinary Medicine
Critical Care Services
University of Missouri
Small Animal Soft Tissue Surgery Service Chief
Columbia, Missouri
ix
CONTRIBUTORS
 Elizabeth A. Swanson, DVM
Hun-Young Yoon, DVM, MS, PhD
Small Animal Surgery Resident
Research Professor
Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences
College of Veterinary Medicine
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
Veterinary Science Research Institute
School of Veterinary Medicine
Konkuk University
Purdue University
Seoul, South Korea
West. Lafayette, Indiana
PREFACE
Today, owners of dogs and cats typically con- gical techniques. This textbook is intended to
sider their pets to be members of the fam- facilitate the initial stages of surgical training
ily. As such, the pet-owning public expects 
and to serve as a refresher to those in the pro-
access to the same level of medical and sur-
 fession who may have had little surgical experi-
 gical care that is available to human beings.
ence since veterinary or veterinary technician
Further, the general public expects veterinar-
schooling. It is the authors' hope that those
ians to have a certain level of surgical com-
studying to be veterinarians and veterinary tech-
 petence immediately upon graduation from
 nicians will find this textbook to be a help-
veterinary school. To that end, veterinary edu-
 ful complement to their instruction and that.
cators are charged with preparing veterinary
graduate veterinarians and veterinary techni-
students to be competent surgeons. Competent.
cians will find this textbook to be valuable in
surgery begins with a thorough knowledge of
 postgraduate in-service training for veterinary
s se n id p snd s
staff.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank the following individuals for assis
Eric A. Rowe, DVM
 tance with photography, artwork, and portions
Small Animal Surgery Resident
of some chapters:
 Department of Clinical Sciences
Veterinary Teaching Hospital
Mr. Howard Wilson
College of Veterinary Medicine
Senior Multimedia Specialist.
North Carolina State University
College of Veterinary Medicine
 Raleigh, North Carolina
University of Missouri
[Assistance with portions of Chapters 3, 7,
Columbia, Missouri
and 17 while employed as a Small Animal
[Photographic and artistic assistance]
Soft Tissue Research/Teaching Intern at the
Mr. Donald L. Connor
University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri]
Senior Multimedia Specialist.
College of Veterinary Medicine
Last, but not least, we extend our thanks and
 appreciation to Nancy Turner, Development.
University of Missouri
Editor for Health Sciences, Wiley-Blackwell,
 Columbia, Missouri
Ames, Iowa, for her patience with the authors,
[Artistic assistance]
assistance in attention to details, guidance
Linda M. Berent, DVM, PhD, Diplomate
through the publication process, and dedica
ACVP (Clinical and Anatomic Pathology)
tion to making this work the best it can be. We
Clinical Assistant Professor
also thank the staff of Wiley-Blackwell for mak-
 Department of Veterinary Pathobiology
ing this book a reality.
College of Veterinary Medicine
University of Missouri
Columbia, Missouri
[Assistance in assuring accuracy in the first.
section of Chapter 16]
xii
Fundamentals of
SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Chapter 1
PREOPERATIVE PATIENT
ASSESSMENT
Elizabeth A. Swanson and Fred Anthony Mann
In general practice, the veterinarian often
HISTORY
already knows the patient being presented for
surgery. Even so, the veterinarian should take
 Even when the patient is known to the surgeon,
this opportunity to instill a sense of confidence
a current and detailed patient history should
and firmly establish a solid veterinarian-
be obtained from the owner at the time of pre.
client-patient. relationship. To that end, a
sentation. The presenting complaint is ascer-
complete history and physical examination
tained and details recorded on the duration of
are paramount in the surgeon's toolbox of 
 the problem, what clinical signs have been ob-
information about the patient. The history and
served, and whether the owner feels the prob
physical examination will determine whether
 lem is better, worse, or the same as when it was
a patient is a good candidate for surgery, will
first noticed. Such historical information may
 determine what. further tests are necessary prior
 r   ka e n nad aq m
to anesthesia, and will allow the veterinarian
 ing presented for elective ovariohysterectomy
to give the owner an accurate assessment of
or orchiectomy; however, it is necessary to make
what to expect. The information gained also
certain that there have been no changes in the
helps to guide decision-making regarding
 patient's health status prior to surgery. In ad-
anesthetic protocol, type of procedure to be
dition, for dogs and cats presenting for ovario-
performed, pain management, and postop-
hysterectomy, it is important to always ask about.
erative care. In short, nothing can replace a
when the animal was last in heat and if there is
thorough history and physical examination
a possibility that the animal is pregnant.
in establishing a base of information about
Other information gathered when taking
the patient that can be used for perioperative
 the history includes environment, diet, patient.
decision making.
lifestyle, any current or previous medical condi-
tions, previous surgeries, current medications
(including over-the-counter medications, sup-
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, lst edition.
plements, and heartworm and flea/tick preven-
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
tatives), and adverse reactions to medication.
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
Appetite, drinking, urination, defecation, and
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
occurrences of coughing, sneezing, vomiting
cular system, respiratory system, digestive tract,
and/or diarrhea are also noted.
urogenital system, integument, musculoskeletal
Medical information may lead the veterinar-
 system, and neural system. The precise order of
ian to identify previously undiagnosed disor-
the examination is not. dictated, but to ensure
 ders, such as hyperthyroidism in a geriatric cat.
that no system is missed, the examiner should
 presented for dental prophylaxis with increased
establish an order and remain consistent from
appetite and concurrent weight loss. Patient.
 one patient to the next.
lifestyle can play a huge role in determining
which procedure should be performed. For ex-
ample, external fixation of a tibial fracture in a
LABORATORY DATA
 free-roaming farm dog may not be the best. op-
tion for healing and management of that frac-
Findings during the history and physical ex-
ture.
amination will help determine which labora-
 In the case of an emergency, basic infor-
tory data are necessary. For a young, healthy
mation should include signalment, the pre-
animal less than five years of age that is pre-
senting complaint, major concurrent medical
sented for elective surgery, a laboratory base-
 conditions, current medications, and drug sen-
line of packed cell volume (PCV), total protein
sitivities. The remainder of the history may be
(TP), blood urea nitrogen (BUN) or creatinine,
 obtained at the first available opportunity.
 blood glucose, and urine specific gravity will typ-
ically suffice. Full laboratory work-up, includ-
ing complete blood cell count (CBC), serum
PHYSICAL EXAMINATION
chemistries, electrolytes, and urinalysis, are in
 order for patients older than five years and
The physical examination may commence once
 any sick or debilitated patient. A recent heart-
the history has been taken. A more experienced
worm test. should be required for patients who
 practitioner will be able to begin the physi-
have lived or traveled in endemic areas. All cats
cal examination while still taking the history,
should be tested for feline leukemia and feline
 immunodeficiency virus if they have not previ-
ing emergency cases. The importance of a good
 ously been tested. Cats that have access to the
physical examination cannot be overly stressed.
 outside or that come in regular contact with
A thorough physical examination can identify
 an outdoor cat should be tested annually. Addi-
both major and subtle changes in a patient's
tional tests may be run in patients with specific
condition that may affect what is done for that.
 medical conditions.
patient. The finding of a swollen vulva in an
Advanced laboratory tests may be indicated
 intact female dog presented for ovariohysterec-
 in certain conditions. Breeds that have a high
tomy may lead the veterinarian to discuss with
 incidence of von Willebrand's Disease, such as
the owner the increased risk of hemorrhage
 Doberman pinschers, should have a buccal mu-
and, potentially, the recommendation to post-
 cosal bleeding time (BMBT) performed as part
pone the surgery.
e rq d dd 
A consistent, systematic approach is recom-
elective or otherwise, is performed, even if there
mended for physical examination. Important.
 is no history of abnormal bleeding tendencies.
 developments may be missed when the exam-
A prolonged BMBT (>5 minutes) indicates fur
iner makes the mistake of focusing only on the
ther testing, such as for von Willebrand's fac-
 presenting problem. Afullexamination consists
tor (vWF). An elective procedure may be post-
of close inspection of the head and neck (eyes,
 poned pending further information. If surgery
ears, nose, oral cavity), lymph nodes, cardiovas-
 is required and the patient is suspected to
PREOPERATIVE PATIENT ASSESSMENT
have Type I (low concentration of vWF) von
(BE), anion gap, and electrolyte concentrations
Willebrand's disease, the animal may be pre-
 can be interpreted together to evaluate respira-
treated with desmopressin acetate (l-deamino-
tory function and to determine the cause of
 8-D-arginine vasopression, also called DDAVP)
 acid-base imbalance. Blood gas analysis is used
or administered cryoprecipitate. Fresh whole
to help determine what, if any, supplemental
blood, fresh frozen plasma, or cryoprecipitate
therapy is necessary and to help monitor the
may be necessary if significant hemorrhage oc-
response to treatment.
curs or in dogs with Type II (low concentration
Critical patients, especially those with ef-
of large multimers of vWF) or Type III (com-
 fusive disease processes, such as peritonitis,
plete absence or only trace amounts of vWF)
 protein-losing enteropathy, generalized lym-
von Willebrand's disease. If time allows, desmo-
phangiectasia, and burns, may lose a large
pressin can also be acdministered to a blood
amount. of protein into the effusion through
donor 30-120 minutes prior to blood collec-
 leaky blood vessels. Loss of protein, especially al
tion. The BMBT is also indicated to assess the
bumin, causes movement of intravascular fluid
bleeding tendency of patients with suspected
into the interstitium (edema) or body cavities
thrombocytopathia, such as dogs that have been
via osmosis. The pressure exerted within the
 treated with aspirin.
blood vessels by albumin and other colloids is
 Platelet. counts and coagulation panels are
called colloid oncotic pressure (COP), which
a p ss os sd e  ss
can be measured from a patient's whole blood
 bruising, ecchymoses, or petechia pre- or post-
sample. The measurement of COP is used to
 operatively. Platelet counts and coagulation
 help direct fluid therapy, particularly the use
 panels should also be run for patients undergo-
of colloids, such as hetastarch, dextran, whole
blood, and plasma.
is possible and adequate hemostasis may not.
be directly achieved, such as for liver biopsies
obtained via laparoscopy or ultrasound-guided
DIAGNOSTIC IMAGING
needle biopsy. If a coagulopathy is diagnosed,
fresh frozen plasma should be administered to
 Diagnostic imaging is not routinely performed
provide coagulation factors. Also, transfusion of
fresh whole blood may be necessary to stabilize
Other conditions, however, benefit from data
a patient with thrombocytopenia. It is impor-
 obtained through radiography, ultrasonogra-
tant to realize that whole blood, platelet-rich
phy, and more advanced imaging modalities,
plasma, and platelets do not significantly raise
the platelet count.
resonance imaging (MRI). Patients undergo-
 Arterial blood gas analysis and acid-base sta-
ing surgery as therapy for neoplasia should be
tus should be evaluated in patients with sus-
staged according to the suspected tumor type,
pected hypoxia or hypoventilation, such as pa-
 and diagnostic imaging is part of the staging
tients with pulmonary disease (i.e., aspiration
 process. Minimal data obtained for oncologi-
pneumonia, pulmonary edema, thromboem-
cal surgery patients should include CBC, serum
bolism), pneumothorax, pleural effusion, and
chemistries, urinalysis, thoracic radiographs
in critical patients that are in shock, are sep-
(right and left lateral views and ventrodorsal
tic, or are showing signs of systemic inflam-
view), right. lateral and ventrodorsal abdominal
matory response syndrome. The arterial partial
 radiographs, and abdominal ultrasound. Com-
 puted tomography or MRI, whichever is more
pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2), pH, bicar-
appropriate for the given situation, is used to
bonate concentration ([HCOs-]), base excess 
'su jeims ued diau pue sioui deu 
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 The minimal database for trauma patients
defects is performed, using positive-contrast. cys-
should include PCV/TP, BUN, blood glu-
tourethography.
cose, urine specific gravity, right lateral and
 Postoperative radiographs are indicated for
ventrodorsal thoracic and  abdominal radio-
 any orthopedic procedure where metal im-
 graphs, and sometimes abdominal ultrasound.
 plants are used or removed. Radiographs are
Diaphragmatic continuity, body wall continuity,
also taken after cystotomy to document. removal
 of uroliths from the urinary bladder. Proper na-
be assessed, in addition to looking for pneu-
 sogastric and esophageal feeding tube position
 mothorax, pleural and peritoneal effusion, and
 and percutaneous chest tube placement should
pulmonary contusions.
be checked radiographically with orthogonal
While orthogonal views are always preferred
thoracic views.
when interpreting radiographs, obtaining a
right lateral radiograph of a critical, bloating
 dog will usually suffice in diagnosing gastric
dilatation-volvulus (GDV) . Right and left lateral
ASSESSMENT OF ANESTHETIC AND
and ventrodorsal thoracic radiographs should
SURGICAL RISK
also be taken in geriatric dogs with GDV to
evaluate for evidence of neoplasia, because the
Once the full picture has been obtained, as ap-
presence of neoplasia may influence owner de-
propriate for the patient and situation, the pa-
cisions. Of course, the GDV patient must be
tient's anesthetic and surgical risk is assessed.
stable enough to take additional radiographs
 In 1963, the American Society of Anesthesiol-
prior to surgery.
ogists developed a simple classification system
Patients with a heart murmur or known car-
 by which to determine a patient's physical sta-
diac disease should have right lateral and either
tus and potential risk for complications. These
ventrodorsal or dorsoventral thoracic radio-
 same criteria have been adapted for use in vet-
 graphs taken and, if indicated, an echocardio-
 erinary medicine (Table 1.1).1.2 In general, no
 gram performed prior to anesthesia. Right. lat-
adjustment to the anesthetic protocol is consid-
eral and ventrodorsal thoracic radiographs are
 ered unless a patient is classified as Physical Sta-
 indicated for any vomiting or regurgitating pa-
tus 3 or higher. In human medicine, a sixth level
tient to assess for aspiration pneumonia and for
 has been added to include brain-dead patients
 patients that develop an increased respiratory
whose organs are being removed for donation.
effort or respiratory distress during treatment.
The letter E is used to denote an emergent case.
Various forms of contrast. radiography are
 For example, most cases of gastric dilatation-
used in the diagnosis of medical problems.
 volvulus would be designated as physical status
Videofluoroscopy can be used to evaluate
4-E.
esophageal  function  and 
l  gastric
emptying
Clients should be alerted to the possible com
times. Oral administration of barium with se-
 plications of the procedure to be performed
quential right lateral and ventrodorsal abdom-
 and the relative likelihood of adverse events.
 inal radiographs is used to evaluate gastroin-
Even routine, elective procedures carry risk,
testinal motility and to identify gastrointestinal
 and it is wrong not to inform the client. For all
obstruction, such as from a foreign object. or
 patients, general anesthesia poses risk of death,
tumor. Excretory urography is useful in eval-
albeit minor in healthy animals. Common risks,
uating renal function of the opposite kidney
 such as hemorrhage, incisional dehiscence, and
prior to nephrectomy if renal function is ques-
 postoperative infection of the surgical wound,
tionable. Evaluation of the urinary bladder and
 should always be discussed, in addition to
urethra for tumors, tears, and luminal flling
 any complications specific to the procedure
PREOPERATIVE PATIENT ASSESSMENT
Table 1.1
 Physical status classification system"
 Physical status
 Patient condition
Examples
1
 Normal, healthy patient
 Elective ovariohysterectomy; elective
orchiectomy
2
 Patient with localized disease
 Fractures; cranial cruciate ligament rupture; skin
or mild systemic disease
laceration; skin mass removal (E: Open fracture)
3
 Patient with severe systemic
 Renal failure; fever; hyperadrenocorticism;
disease
dehydration; anemia (E: Gastrointestinal
perforation)
4
 Patient with severe systemic
 Any condition prone to developing systemic
disease that is a constant
inflammatory response; heart failure
threat to life
(E: Gastric dilatation-votvulus)
5
 Moribund patient not
Systemic inflammatory response that is
expected to live with or
progressing toward multiple organ
without the operation
dysfunction; trauma with decompensatory
shock (E: Intestinal votuulus)
 Brain-dead patient whose
 Currently no veterinary examples
organs may be removed for
donation purposes
*Based on Classification of Physical Status. ASA Relative Value Guide. 2009.
(www.asahq.org/clinical/physicalstatus.htm) of the American Society of Anesthesiologists. A copy of the
full text can be obtained from ASA, 520 N. Northwest Highway, Park Ridge, Illinois 60068-2573.
 performed. A wellinformed client is in a better
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
position to recognize and handle complications
than one who is not.
Additional information about preoperative patient
l pumoy aq ueo Aiodims ieue leus u juassiss
the following textbook chapters:
REFERENCES
1. Fossum TW. Preoperative and intraoperative care
of the surgical patient. In: Fossum TW, ed. Small
1. Muir WW. Considerations for general anesthesia.
Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby
In: Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds.
Elsevier, 2007:22-31.
Lumb Jones Veterinary Anesthesia and Anaigesia,
2. Shmon C. Assessment and preparation of the sur-
4th ed. Ames, [owa: Blackwell Professional Pub
gical patient and operating team. In: Slatter D, ed.
lishing, 2009:17.
Textbook of Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. Philadel-
2. Muir WW, Hubbell JAE, Bednarski RM, Skarda
phia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2003;162-168.
 RT. Patient evaluation and preparation. In: Muir
3
 Brooks M. von Willebrand Disease. In: Feldman
WW, Hubbell JAE, Bednarski RM, Skarda RT, eds.
BF, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schatm's Veterinary Hema-
Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia, 4th ed. St. Louis,
tology, 5th ed. Baltimore, Maryland: Lippincott
Missouni: Mosby Elsevier, 2007:22.
Williams & Wilkins, 2000:509-515.
Chapter 2
BASIC SMALLANIMAL
ANESTHESIA
John R. Dodam and Fred Anthony Mann
A single chapter cannot provide a comprehen-
 cific drug combinations, or for appropriate dos-
sive review of small animal anesthesia. Instead,
ing recommendations.
 Drugs used in anesthesia premedication are
framework that can be expanded and modified
usually given by intramuscular or subcutaneous
to fit the needs and goals of the surgeon and 
 injection 20-40 minutes prior to the induction
anesthetist. The procedural framework will be
 of general anesthesia. Premedication of the pa-
based upon an anesthetic protocol that includes
 tient is important from a logistical standpoint.
preoperative assessment of the patient; pre med-
because the drugs may sedate or calm the pa-
ication with sedative, analgesic, and/or anti-
tient, decrease the level of physical restraint re-
cholinergic agents; induction of unconscious-
quired, and facilitate catheter placement. Im-
ness by intravenous injection of a hypnotic,
 portantly, anesthesia premedication drugs may
sedative, or dissociative agent; maintenance of
improve the quality of anesthetic induction
anesthesia with an inhalant anesthetic; and re-
 and/or recovery and decrease the requirement.
covery of the patient.
for induction or maintenance anesthetics. Pre-
 medication drugs may also be used to provide
preemptive analgesia. Indeed, the administra-
DRUGS USED IN SMALL ANIMAL
tion of analgesic drugs prior to a surgical insult.
ANESTHESIA
may improve the effectiveness of postoperative
-sod sd e rn ne pe sa
The following is a summary of the classes of
operative pain. Premedication drugs may also
drugs used for premedication, induction, or 
be used to modify autonomic tone, stabilize or
maintenance of anesthesia. Please consult an
increase heart rate, or decrease salivary secre-
appropriate resource for more detailed infor-
tions.
 mation concerning any of the listed agents, spe-
Fundamentats of Small Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
Anticholinergics
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
Anticholinergic agents like atropine or gly-
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
copyrrolate
   
BASIC SMALL ANIMAL ANESTHESIA
acetylcholine at muscarinic receptors of the
ketamine and tiletamine) to induce anesthesia
autonomic nervous system. Thus, these agents 
 Benzodiazepines are not typically given alone
are used to increase heart rate (or prevent.
for preoperative sedation because they are rela
bradycardia) and decrease salivary and respira-
tively ineffective unless an animal is depressed,
tory secretions. They also increase gastric pH,
very young, or very old. Paradoxically, benzodi-
decrease gastrointestinal motility, and evoke
 azepines can cause excitement in some animals
bronchodilation. Although many veterinarians
when given alone. Moreover, diazepam is not
use these agents routinely as part of premedica-
absorbed predictably after intramuscular injec-
tion protocols, others prefer to use them only as
tion. When combined with induction agents,
needed to treat bradycardia. Both atropine and
benzodiazepines decrease the required doses of
glycopyrrolate can cause tachycardia and/or
 those agents, provide for muscle relaxation, and
ventricular dysrhythmias, but. the risk is higher
have minor effects on the cardliovascular sys-
after intravenous injection than intramuscular
tem. Benzodiazepines are also frequently used
 or subcutaneous acdministration. Glycopyrro-
 for their anticonvulsant properties. The actions
late has a longer duration of action than
 of benzodiazepine drugs are reversible with ad-
atropine and does not cause central nervous
 ministration of flumazenil, a specific antagonist.
system effects. Atropine has a shorter onset
time than glycopyrrolate. For these reasons,
glycopyrrolate is often preferred as part of
Apha-Two Agonists
an anesthesia premedication protocol, while
 atropine is preferred for emergency treatment
 Alpha-two agonists (e.g., xylazine and dexmede-
of life-threatening bradycardia.
tomidine) decrease the release of norepine-
phrine in the central nervous system. This
effect. causes reliable sedation, analgesia, and
Phenothiazines
 muscle relaxation, and greatly decreases the re-
quirements for other anesthetic agents. Alpha-
Acepromazine is a phenothiazine tranquilizer
two agonists cause cardiovascular changes
that produces mental calming without provid-
that are characterized by bradycardia, bipha
ing analgesia. It. decreases histamine release,
sic blood pressure changes (hypertension
has antidysrhythmic properties, and has been
followed by hypotension), and a significant.
reported to decrease mortality associated with
decrease in cardiac output. These drugs also
anesthesia. However, acepromazine causes va-
cause hyperglycemia, diuresis, and decreased
sodilatation, hypotension, hypothermia, and
gastrointestinal motility. Emesis is common
decreased platelet. function, and may decrease
when low doses of these drugs are given by the
seizure threshold. Acepromazine is commonly
intramuscular or subcutaneous route. Xylazine
 used with opioids as part of premedication pro-
is shorter-acting than dexmedetomidine and is
tocols, and because of its long duration of ac-
more likely to be associated with cardiac dys-
tion, premedication with acepromazine may
 rhythmias. The effects of alpha-two agonists can
help to smooth postoperative recoveries.
 be reversed by specific antagonists. The effects
of xylazine are typically reversed in small animal
patients with yohimbine, while dexmedeto-
Benzodiazepines
midine effects are reversed with atipamezole.
Alpha-two agonists are frequently given in
 Benzodiazepine drugs (e.g., diazepam, mida-
combination with opioid drugs to decrease
zolam, and zolazepam) are tranquilizers fre-
the dose administered and to limit the car
quently paired with dissociative agents (e.g.,  diopulmonary effects of the alpha-two agonists.
10
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Anticholinergic drugs may be given to limit.
buphine and butorphanol can also be used to
reverse the effects of mu agonists (e.g., mor-
ough the routine use of glycopyrrolate with
phine and hydromorphone). The advantage of
 dexmedetomidine is somewhat controversial.
using nalbuphine and butorphanol is that, un-
like naloxone, they will provide mild to moder-
ate analgesia through their agonistic effects at.
Opioids
the opioid kappa receptor.
 Tramadol is an atypical opioid that is cur-
 Opioids are commonly used for their analgesic
rently available in an oral formulation. Tra-
activity and anesthetic sparing effects. In gen-
 madol has effects on the opioid mu receptor
eral, they cause mild to moderate sedation, but.
and also works through other pathways in the
may be associated with excitation in some an-
central nervous system. Because an injectable
formulation is not currently available in the
fects are effectively eliminated when the agents
 United States, tramadol's use in the preoper-
are administered concurrently with tranquiliz-
ative period is limited.
ers or sedatives like acepromazine or xylazine.
In general, full agonists (e.g., morphine, oxy-
morphone, hydromorphone, and fentanyl) are
Nonsteroidal Anti-inflammatory
 considered to be more efficacious than partial
Drugs (NSAIDs)
 agonists or agonist/antagonists (butorphanol,
buprenorphine, and nalbuphine). Side effects 
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs decrease
may also be more likely with the full agonist.
 pain and inflammation by interfering with the
opioids. Respiratory depression, bradycardia,
 production of prostaglandins and, in a few
vomiting, decreased gastrointestinal propulsive
cases, leukotrienes. Newer agents like carpro-
motility, and urine retention are all potential
fen, deracoxib, meloxicam, and tepoxalin are
side effects. Morphine may also evoke histamine
 markedly less toxic than older NSAIDs like as-
release. Morphine, oxymorphone, and hydro-
 pirin, indomethacin, and phenylbutazone. Re-
morphone are commonly used as part. of pre-
 nal failure and gastrointestinal ulceration are
medication protocols. Fentanyl may be given
the most significant toxic effects of NSAIDs,
intramuscularly as part. of a premedication pro-
and anesthesia-induced hypotension can con-
tocol. However, fentanyl has a very short du-
tribute to NSAID toxicity. Some NSAIDs also
ration of action (less than an hour) and is fre-
inhibit platelet. function. Because of these po-
quently administered as a constant rate infusion
tential side effects, and because NSAIDs do not.
when more prolonged analgesia is required.
alter anesthetic requirements, many veterinari-
 Partial agonists and agonist/antagonist drugs
 ans confine the use of NSAIDs to the postoper-
are generally used to treat. mild to moderate
ative period.
pain. Butorphanol is frequently used to pre-
medicate small animal patients. However, bu-
torphanol's duration of action is short in the
Dissociative Agents
dog. Buprenorphine, because of its relatively
long duration of action, is frequently used to
 Dissociative drugs like ketamine and tiletamine
provide postoperative pain relief in dogs and
are N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists
cats.
that may be administered intravenously or in-
The effects of opioids are reversible. Nalox-
tramuscularly as part. of premedication proto-
one is the most commonly used full antago-
cols or for the induction of anesthesia. Disso
 nist used in small animal anesthesia today. Nal-
 ciative agents are not well suited to be given
BASIC SMALL ANIMAL ANESTHESIA
11
as a sole agent for premedication or induction
 minimized or eliminated by administration of a
of anesthesia because they provide poor mus-
 sedative, tranquilizer, or analgesic drug prior
cle relaxation and are associated with patient.
to induction of anesthesia. Moreover, the exci-
movement. Ketamine is frequently given intra-
 tatory effects of thiopental can be minimized if
venously and concurrently with midazolam or
 approximately half of the calculated bolus is ad-
diazepam to induce anesthesia, and tiletamine
 ministered rapidly (the remaining drug should
 is available as a commercial preparation with zo-
 be given incrementally and to effect). Propo-
lazepam (Telazol, Fort Dodge Animal Health,
fol administration is not typically associated
Fort Dodge, IA) for intravenous or intramus-
with excitatory behavior, and side-effects like
cular administration in small animals. Dissocia-
 hypotension and apnea can be decreased by giv-
tive agents provide effective somatic analgesia,
 ing the drug slowly and to effect. Repeated daily
but are poor visceral analgesics. Unlike most.
administration of propofol may cause oxidative
anesthetic drugs, dissociative agents generally
 damage to feline red blood cells, but a single in-
maintain or increase blood pressure, heart rate,
travenous induction dose has not been shown to
and cardiac output. They may also cause cere-
 be problematic. Current preparations of propo-
bral vasodilatation, an increase in cerebral
fol have a limited shelf life because the formu-
metabolic rate, and an increase in cerebral
lation promotes the growth of bacteria or yeast,
blood flow.
and the contents of a bottle should be used
within 6 hours of opening. Thiopental is associ-
ated with prolonged recoveries in sighthounds
Hypnotic Agents
after a single induction dose, and in all animals
after repeated administration for anesthesia
Thiopental and propofol are two commonly
maintenance.
used hypnotic/sedative drugs in small animal
veterinary anesthesia. Both are used to induce
unconsciousness by intravenous injection prior
STEP-BY-STEP APPROACH TO
to inhalant anesthesia. Due to rapid clear-
ANESTHETIZING THE SMALL ANIMAL
ance, propofol has a shorter duration of action
PATIENT
than thiopental and may be used to maintain
anesthesia by intermittent intravenous injec-
The following outline details premedication,
tion or constant rate infusion. Propofol causes
intravenous induction of anesthesia, and main-
as much, or greater, cardiovascular depression
tenance of anesthesia with an inhalant anes-
than thiopental, but is much less likely to be
thetic. As one would expect, this outline should
associated with cardiac dysrhythmias. Unlike
not be used as a substitute for methodical
thiopental, propofol does not cause perivascu-
 lar damage and is not a controlled substance.
thought and practical adjustments for each in-
 dividual patient, but it can serve as a checklist.
Both drugs are respiratory depressants, but.
and training guide for performing small animal
anesthesia.
desaturation of hemoglobin. Whenever either
drug is used, the practitioner should be pre-
1. A thorough history should be taken
 pared to orotracheally intubate the animal and
and physical examination performed prior
 provide for the administration of oxygen and
ventilation. Propofol administration may be as-
tient. Laboratory evaluations of hematocrit,
sociated with pain and movement. Thiopental
plasma protein, serum urea nitrogen or
may be associated with transient. excitatory be
creatinine, and urine specifc gravity are
havior after injection. These drug effects can be
also part of a routine preoperative workup.
12
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Additional diagnostic tests may be nec-
5. Assemble supplies and equipment that will
essary depending upon the condition of
be used for anesthesia.
the patient and the procedure to be per-
a. Select the most appropriate endotra-
formed. Owners should be informed of the
 cheal tube for the patient.
risks associated with anesthesia and should
b. Check the integrity of the endotracheal
 provide written permission to perform
tube and cuff.
anesthesia. Owners should also be asked to
i. Endotracheal tubes are used to
express their wishes with regard to emer-
maintain a patent airway, allow for
gency management, should a catastrophic
controlled ventilation, protect the
event occur during the animal's hospital
 airway from contamination with for-
stay.
eign material, and to prevent expo-
 2. The specific anesthetic protocol should be
sure of personnel to waste anesthetic
chosen based upon the history, physical ex-
gas.
amination, laboratory evaluation, and the
i. Examine the endotracheal tube for
 procedure to be performed. The anesthetic
defects.
protocol should also outline the strategy
. The endotracheal tube cuff system is
that will be used to control postoperative
checked using the following proce-
pain. A discussion of anesthesia for concur-
dure:
rent diseases or for specific diagnostic or
1. Attach an air-filled syringe to the
therapeutic procedures is beyond the scope
inflating valve and fll the cuff
of this chapter.
with air until distended.
a. Consider the feasibility of local and/or
 2. Remove the syringe from the in-
regional  analgesia  techniques  as
a
flating valve.
supplement. to the general anesthetic
 3. Allow the cuff to remain inflated
protocol.
for 5-15 minutes.
 3. Calculate doses of drugs that will be used
4. Observe the cuff for deflation.
for premedication and induction of anes-
a. If deflation occurs, the tube
thesia. Label syringes for all drugs that will
should be removed from ser-
be used for premedication and induction.
vice.
Make sure that all controlled substances are
5. If the cuff has remained inflated,
properly accounted.
withdraw all air from the cuff via
4. Administer preanesthetic drugs (sedatives
 the inflating valve using a syringe.
and analgesic drugs). An animal should be
iv. Keep the tube on a clean surface
returned to its cage after premedication,
prior to use.
and 20-30 minutes should be allowed be-
v. The outside surface of the patient.
fore moving the animal for catheterization
end of the endotracheal tube may be
 and induction. While waiting for the pre-
lubricated with a modest. amount. of
medications to exert their effects, the ani-
water-soluble lubricating jelly prior
mal should be observed to ensure its well-
to insertion into the airway.
being, but should not be disturbed. Indeed,
c. Check the integrity of the anesthetic cir-
excessive stimulation may diminish the ef-
cuit.
fectiveness of sedative drugs.
i. Assemble the 2
 anesthetic
circuit
a. Intramuscular sites for premedication
(y-piece and reservoir bag); attach
are the quadriceps muscle (preferred),
the oxygen and evacuation sources,
lumbar musculature, and semimembra-
 and perform a pressure check of the
nosus/semitendinosus muscles.
system.
BASIC SMALL ANIMAL ANESTHESIA
13
i. The patient circuit should be able to
on a Mapleson F nonrebreathing
hold pressure (30 cm HzO) for 15
system.
seconds.
6. Crystalloid intravenous replacement fluids
i. Inspection and assessment of a non-
(i.e., lactated Ringer's solution) are com-
rebreathing circuit depends upon
 monly used during general anesthesia.
the type of circuit being used. In
a. Fluid rate and types may be altered de-
general, a nonrebreathing circuit is
 pending upon the patient, the procedure
used for patients less than 8-kg body
being performed, and the duration of
weight. A circle system is used when
the procedure.
the patient is greater than or equal
b. Calculate fluid administration rate prior
to 8-kg body weight.
to anesthesia. A rate of 10 mL/kg/h is
d. Check the level of inhalant anesthetic in
calculated and administered for the first.
the vaporizer. Fill as necessary.
hour of anesthesia, 5 mL/kg/h there-
e. Calculate the fresh gas flows for the anes-
after.
thetic circuit.
c. Fluids may be administered by an elec-
i. To operate the system in a semi-
 tronically controlled fluid pump or by
closed fashion, the following guide-
 gravity flow. When calculating fluid rates
lines should be applied:
using gravity flow, the size of the drip set.
1. Generally, oxygen flow rates of
is necessary to determine the administra
22-44 mL/kg/min
are
consid-
tion rate (in drops/minute). Common
ered to be acceptable main tenance
sizes for drips sets are: 10, 15, and 60
flow rates for a semi-closed cir-
drops/mL.
cle system. Alternatively, mainte-
d. Insert a fluid administration set into the
nance flow may be calculated based
 intravenous fluid bag and prime the tub-
upon estimated oxygen consump-
ing.
tion multiplied by three (i.e., 5-10
 7. Once supplies and equipment are collected
mL oxygen flow/kg/min
×3).
and prepared for use, the sedated animal
 Lower oxygen flow rates are used
should be placed on a table and restrained
when a circle circuit is operated in
for catheter placement.
a “closed" fashion.
a. The animal should be restrained in a
 2. Fresh gas flow is expected to be
manner that minimizes stress for the an-
higher during anesthetic induction
imal and prevents injury to the handler
 and recovery. In general, a fresh gas
or to the anesthetist.
flow rate of 1-2 L/min is consid-
8. The intravenous catheter site should be
ered acceptable during induction,
clipped and surgically prepared.
and 500 mL/min to 1 L/min is ac-
a. The cephalic/accessory cephalic and
ceptable for the maintenance pe-
 lateral saphenous veins are common
riod of anesthesia when using a cir-
sites of catheter placement in the
cle syst.em.
dog.
3. The appropriate oxygen flow for
b. The
cephalic/accessory cephalic and
 a nonrebreathing system depends
upon the system being used. In
sites for catheter placement in the
most cases, a flow that is cal-
cat.
culated as 300
× body weight.
 9. An over-the-needle catheter is inserted into
(kg) and expressed in ml/kg/min
the vein, and a T-port is connected to the
is appropriate for small patients
catheter.
14
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
a. Alternately, the fluid administration set.
1. The laryngoscope blade may be used
may be attached directly to the intra-
to gently depress the epiglottis, if nec-
venous catheter.
essary.
10. The catheter and attached T-port are taped
 2. In cats, lidocaine may be sprayed
into place and triple antibiotic ointment.
onto the larynx to decrease sensitiv-
(or other nonirritating disinfectant/ antibi-
ity and laryngospasm during endotra-
cheal intubation.
plied to the catheter site. Sterile gauze or
c. The endotracheal tube should be ad-
a sterile band-aid may be used to cover the
vanced into the mouth, through the lar-
catheter site after the catheter is secured to
ynx, and into the trachea.
the limb with tape.
d. The length
l of the tube should be
11. Prior to injection of an induction agent,
checked to ensure that the tip is located
the catheter is assessed to ensure that it. is
just cranial to the thoracic inlet.
placed into the lumen of the vein. Injec-
e. Endotracheal tubes have the potential to
tion of sterile normal saline solution may
injure the patient. Cats are particularly
be used for this purpose.
 prone to injury associated with endotra-
 12. The animal should be assessed briefly prior
cheal intubation. The following should
to induction general anesthesia. Specif-
be considered to prevent endotracheal
cally, a final check of pulse rate, pulse qual-
tube problems:
ity, and mucous membrane color should be
1. Proper inflation of the cuff
performed just prior to induction of anes-
 a. Over inflation may damage the pa-
thesia.
tient's airway.
a. Abnormalities in pulse rate, pulse reg-
b. Under inflation will allow aspira-
ularity, or mucous membrane color
tion of foreign material into the
should lead the anesthetist. to investigate
airways and lungs.
the cause of the abnormalities and re-
c. Once the cuff is inflated, the en-
assess the plan of action.
dotracheal tube should not be
13. Induction may be accomplished by ad-
twisted, inserted, or removed with-
ministration of the selected induction
out first deflating the cuff. [During
agent.
dentistry procedures, temporar-
14. The mouth
nofthe
animal should be
ily detach the anesthetic tubing
held
open by
the assistant, and the
from the endotracheal tube be-
tongue
  pulled forward using 
agauze
 fore turning the animal from one
square.
side to the other, because twist-
a. The tongue should be pulled rostrally
ing the inflated cuff can tear the
and between the mandibular canines.
trachea.]
The anesthetist. should not place his/her
2. Proper placement of the tube
fingers between the animal's teeth. In-
 a. Improper esophageal placement is
 stead, the tongue should be moved out-
not. effective for delivering oxygen
side the mouth, using the endotracheal
or anesthetic, does not protect the
ali  s apeq adosueoa
 airway, and does not ensure airway
 be safely grasped.
patency.
b. If used, the laryngoscope blade should
b. The tip of the endotracheal tube
be pressed against the base of the
should be located in the trachea
 tongue. This will pull down the epiglottis
and just cranial to the thoracic
 and expose the larynx.
inlet.
BASIC SMALL ANIMAL ANESTHESIA
15
i. Atube inserted too far caudally
 a. Pressure should not be held in the sys-
 may isolate a single mainstem
tem for more than 1-2 seconds.
bronchus and cause significant.
b. Ifa leak is heard, the pressure-relief valve
 gas exchange abnormalities.
should be opened, and the cuff inflated
i. A tube that. is not. inserted far
with air. A volume of 1-3 mL is an appro-
enough into the trachea may
 priate volume for small animals.
be easier to dislodge. In addi-
C.
 The above steps should be repeated until
tion, in this position, the cuff
a leak is no longer heard when a pressure
 may be located in the larynx
of 20-25 cm HzO is maintained in the
and inflation may traumatize
circuit.
the larynx.
d. Open the pressure-relief valve when the
i. The length of insertion nec-
cuff inflation procedure is complete.
essary may be estimated prior
19.
The vaporizer may be initially set at. 2-3% if
to induction of anesthesia by
isoflurane is the inhalant anesthetic that is
holding the tube next. to the
 being acdministered. If sevoflurane is used,
animal's head and neck.
 the vaporizer may initially be set at 3-5%.
iv. The length of insertion should
a.
 The actual vaporizer setting should be
be verified after placement by
determined after evaluating depth of
 palpation of the tip of the tube
 anesthesia and cardiovascular perfor-
in the trachea.
mance.
15. The animal should be placed in lateral
b. The initial vaporizer setting will be influ-
recumbence, and the endotracheal tube
enced by the drugs used for premedica-
should be connected to the anesthetic ma-
tion and induction of anesthesia.
chine and the oxygen turned on (1-2
20. The animal's respirations, pulse rate, and
L/min).
depth of anesthesia should be monitored
 16. The pulse and heart beat should be as-
in a continuous fashion. Entries should be
sessed.
made onto the anesthesia record every 5
17. The anesthetist. should secure the endotra
minutes.
cheal tube to the animal using roll gauze.
 21. The esophageal stethoscope is lubricated
The gauze should be tightly secured to the
and advanced through the oral cavity and
endotracheal tube with half of a square
into the esophagus while simultaneously
 knot, and then tied over the animal's muz-
 listening through the earpieces. Insert. to
zle (dogs) or behind its head (dogs and
the depth where cardiac sounds are most.
cats) using a “bow" or other knot that can
clearly heard.
be untied easily and quickly. Other devices
22. Connect.
 crystalloid fluids to the intra-
are commercially available to secure the en-
venous catheter aseptically. Begin admin-
 dotracheal tube to the patient. Some prac-
istration at the calculated rate (see 6.b.
tices use lengths of intravenous tubing for
above).
23. Lubricate the eyes with sterile ophthalmic
18. Check for a leak around the endotracheal
ointment to decrease the risk for corneal
tube by closing the pressure-relief valve on
ulceration.
 the anesthesia machine and squeezing the
24. The animal may now be prepared for
reservoir bag to a pressure of 20-25 cm
HgO. A leak can be heard in the oral cavity
ration).
when positive pressure is being held in the
25. Anesthetic and oxygen flow should be
circuit/ patient.
adjusted to maintenance levels when an
16
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 appropriate and stable plane of anesthesia
flushed with saline solution and left in
has been established (5-15 minutes after
place until the animal has recovered and
induction).
can maintain homeostasis. In routine cases,
a. Record observations, physiological pa-
the catheter is maintained until the an-
rameters, and interventions on the anes-
imal can ambulate. Animals with exces-
thesia record.
sive surgical blood loss, electrolyte distur-
 b. Adjust the vaporizer setting to maintain
 bances, ongoing fluid losses, increased risk
 an appropriate depth of anesthesia.
for seizures, abnormal cardiopulmonary
26. Physical monitoring should be combined
function, or those exhibiting pain or dys-
with device-based assessment to ensure pa-
phoria should not have their catheter re-
tient well being. The following are fre-
 moved immediately. These animals should
quently used to monitor anesthetized pa-
 be reassessed and the appropriate therapy
tients:
instituted.
a. Electrocardiography
 30. The animal should be monitored during
b. Capnography
 the postoperative period. The following pa-
c. Pulse oximetry
rameters are particularly important to as-
d.
 Noninvasive blood pressure monitoring
sess:
(oscillometric or Doppler)
a. Respiratory and cardiovascular function
e. Rectal or esophageal temperature mea-
i. Pulse rate and quality
surement.
ii. Respiratory rate
 i. Temperature support is routinely re-
i. Hemoglobin saturation (via pulse
quired to prevent hypothermia during
oximetry)
 anesthesia and surgery.
b. Temperature
27. When the diagnostic or therapeutic proce-
c. Level of pain
dure is completed, the vaporizer may be
d. Mentation
shut off and oxygen flow continued until
the patient begins to swallow. Based upon
the procedure performed, the premedica-
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
tions used, and the incorporation of local
and regional analgesia techniques, it may
Additional information about small animal anesthe-
be necessary to administer additional anal-
 siology, analgesia, and perioperative medicine can be
gesic drugs prior to recovery.
found in the following textbooks:
28. The endotracheal tube cuff should be de-
flated completely prior to removal.
1. Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA, eds.
a. In some cases, partial deflation is uti-
Lumb  JonesVeterinary Anesthesia and Anaigesia,
lized if there is suspicion that fluid
4th ed. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Professional Pub-
lishing, 2009.
or foreign material may have entered
2. Carroll GL, ed. Small Animal Anesthesia and Anat-
the trachea next to the endotracheal
gesia. Ames, lowa: Blackwell Professional Publish-
tube.
ing, 2008.
29. In general, fluid administration is discon-
 3. Muir WW, Hubbel JAE, Bednarski RM, Skarda
tinued when anesthetic administration
is
RT. Handbook of Veterinary Anesthesia, 4th ed. St.
completed. The intravenous catheter is
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Chapter 3
ASEPSIS IN SMALL
ANIMAL SURGERY
Fred Anthony Mann
General principles of aseptic technique have
substance that can be applied to inanimate
been established to minimize the likelihood of
objects, such as certain surgical instruments
wound contamination and subsequent wound
or operating room furnishings.
infection. Thorough understanding of aseptic
· Sterilization: destruction of all microorgan-
technique requires knowledge of the following
isms and spores on an object. Sterilization can
five widely used terms:
be performed by application of heat (steam
autoclave), ethylene oxide gas, vapor phase
· Asepsis: condition in which there are no vi-
hydrogen peroxide, irradiation, and chemi-
able pathogenic microorganisms present in
cals (glutaraldehyde). Sterilization is used for
the tissue.
surgical instruments and any object. that will
· Sepsis:
condition  in  which
1there are
have direct contact within or around open
pathogenic microorganisms, or byproducts
surgical wounds.
 of the said microorganisms, present in the
tissue.
Prevention of bacterial contamination is of
● Antisepsis: safe application of an agent (an-
utmost importance in surgical wounds. Con-
tiseptic) with the purpose of removing or
sequences of bacterial contamination and pur-
inactivating offending microorganisms. An
suant infection include systemic disease (peri-
antiseptic is a chemical substance that. can be
tonitis, sepsis, etc.), increased healing times,
topically applied to living tissue.
 prolonged pain, delayed recovery, and altered
 Disinfection: application of a chemical sub-
cosmesis. Eliminating microorganisms from
stance (disinfectant) with the purpose of de-
within or around a surgical wound would ul-
stroying the vegetative forms of bacteria but.
timately render it impossible for bacterial con-
not the spores. A disinfectant is a chemical
tamination and infection to occur. Therefore,
it is important to know and be aware of the
sources of bacterial contamination in the oper-
Fundameniats of Small Amimat Surgery, 1st edition.
ating theater. These sources include: scrubbed
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
and nonscrubbed personnel within the op-
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
erating room, surgical equipment, operating
17
18
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
room equipment, and the patient, the latter
1. Scrubbed personnel are to stay inside and
being the most. common source of bacteria for
only touch objects located within the sterile
surgical wound infections. Aseptic techniques
field. The converse is equally true that non-
have been designed and implemented in or-
scrubbed personnel are only allowed out-
der to minimize the risk of contamination. If
side of the sterile feld.
these techniques are properly followed, wound
 2. Talking and unnecessary movement must.
infection is unlikely unless there is a gross
be kept to an absolute minimum.
breach in the established surgical barriers. Sur-
3. Members of the surgical team should visu-
gical barriers and specific techniques of aseptic
alize the sterile field at all times. The reason
patient preparation are discussed in Chapters 9,
is that direct. visualization of sterile objects
10, and 11.
decreases the likelihood of contamination
The air in the room acts as a vehicle for intro-
with nonsterile objects.
duction of bacteria into the wound. Therefore,
4. The patient table and instrument table,
it is important. to keep air turbulence to a min-
once donned with sterile barriers are only
imum by limiting the number of unnecessary
considered sterile at table height. The
 personnel, the amount. of needless action, and
drapes and cords that hang off of the ta-
the amount of talking while in the operating
bles are out of the surgical team's sight and
theater. This being said, there is no such thing
must be considered contaminated.
as a sterile surgery and there is a level of contam-
 5. The drapes used to cover the patient, pa-
ination that is present in all wounds. There is a
tient. table, and instrument table (s) should
be impermeable to moisture. This will ulti-
 organisms per gram of tissue or per milliliter of
mately lead to prevention of strikethrough
fluid constitutes an infection. In most cases, an
contamination. (Strikethrough contamina-
immunocompetent individual would be able to
tion is defined as the translocation of bac-
clear pathogens in lower concentrations with-
teria from the nonsterile side to the sterile
out intervention.
side of a surgical barrier due to the material
An infection may develop due to impaired
becoming saturated with either body fluid
host defenses and characteristics of the bacte-
 or irrigation fluid.)
rial inoculums, and as a result of various local
6. Gowns, once donned, are considered ster-
factors, such as tissue necrosis, dead space, re-
ile from just below the shoulders to the
duced blood supply, and presence of foreign
waist and from gloved finger tips to 2 inches
material. One goal of the surgical team must.
above the elbow. Because of this, hands
be to preoperatively address patient character-
should be kept above the level of the waist,
istics listed above as well as evaluate periop-
close to the body, and clasped together
erative and intraoperative measures to ensure
when not in use.
that contamination of the surgical wound is
 7. Scrubbed personnel that sit during a surgi-
avoided at all costs. Perioperative measures in-
cal procedure should remain seated until
clude patient preparation, sterilization of surgi-
the procedure is completed.
cal instruments, surgeon scrub, and donning
 8. Only use properly sterilized equipment
of sterile barriers (on both surgeon and pa-
that has sterility indicators both within
tient). Specifics of these perioperative measures
the pack and on the outer wrapping. If
 and other practices designed to prevent surgical
sterility of an object is not known or
wound contamination are discussed in Chap-
is questioned for any reason, consider it.
ters 6 through 11. The following is a list of rules
contaminated.
commonly followed to minimize intraoperative
 9. If a sterile instrument, contained in a ster-
contamination:
ile pouch, touches the open edge of that.
ASEPSIS IN SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
6L
pouch while being opened, the instru-
can also be effective against bacterial spores
ment is considered contaminated and a
with prolonged contact times. Iodophors are
new instrument must be opened. A surgi-
rapid in action and work by penetrating the cell
cal pack/pouch whose outside barrier has
 wall and replacing the intracellular molecules
 become damaged, wet, or compromised in
 with free iodine that has been liberated by the
any way must. be considered contaminated
iodophor solution. Dilute iodophor solutions
and must not be used.
are considered more effcacious due to the fact
10. Pouring sterile liquid into a sterile bowl
that more free iodine molecules are liberated
should be performed by a nonsterile per-
in weaker solutions. There is minimal resid-
son with the sterile person holding the bowl
 ual action (therefore, reapplication every 4 to
away from the sterile field. The nonster-
 6 hours is warranted) and there is inactivation
ile person should carefully pour the liq-
 in the presence of organic material, such as
uid without splashing or dripping onto the
red and white blood cells and necrotic tissue.
 sterile field. The nonsterile fluid receptacle
 Higher concentrations of iodophors have been
 must not touch the sterile bowl.
shown to cause tissue necrosis; therefore, a 1 %
solution has been advocated (l:10 dilution of
These rules are mainstays of aseptic technique
10% stock solution). Side effects include cuta-
that when first introduced appear laborious and
neous hypersensitivity reactions (up to 50% of
somewhat. cumbersome; however, once prac-
canine patients). Care must be taken because io-
ticed, most. of the rules quickly become second
dine can be systemically absorbed across open
nature.
wounds and mucous membranes and has been
There are several antiseptic solutions that.
reported to cause increases in systemic iodine
 are currently used in veterinary practice today.
concentration and transient thyroid dysfunc-
Examples of these include: aliphatic alcohols,
tion. Systemic absorption of iodine is of con-
iodophors, and chlorhexidine.
cern especially in very young animals, patients
Aliphatic alcohols, such as 70% isopropyl al-
with large open wounds, or patients that have
cohol, are effective against a wide range of bac-
severe burns. Metabolic acidosis has also been
teria and many viruses. Alcohols are rapid in ac-
reported with repeat application. Iodine con-
tion and work by denaturing bacterial cell walls
 taining detergents are commonly used when
and cell wall proteins. There is minimal residual 
 preparing the patient's skin for surgical incision
action when used alone and side effects include
 or the surgeon's skin prior to donning sterile
skin irritation, desiccation, and tissue necrosis
surgical gloves.
in open wounds. Alcohols are commonly used
Chlorhexidine is effective against a wide
with other agents when preparing skin for sur-
range of bacteria; however, it is minimally ef-
gical incision. However, since isopropyl alcohol
 piden si l 'sasna pue lny isee sa
may decrease the residual activity of chlorhexi-
action and works by disrupting the cell mem-
dine, it is recommended not to follow chlorhexi-
 brane and precipitating cellular components
dine application with an isopropyl alcohol rinse 
 such as proteins. There is good residual action
during skin preparation. Alcohol must also be
(up to two days) and chlorhexidine is not. in-
avoided in preparation of patient skin for laser
activated in the presence of organic material.
surgery to prevent the possibility of an intraop-
The efficacy of chlorhexidine solution incre ases
erative fire when the laser beam contacts the
 with repeated applications. Systemic absorption
alcohol.
and hypersensitivity do not appear to be signif-
Iodophors, such as povidone-iodine solu-
icant. disadvantages with chlorhexidine as with
tion, are effective against. a wide range of bac-
the iodophors. However, one disadvantage of
teria, fungi, viruses, protozoa, and yeasts, and
 these solutions is otic and corneal toxicity. Care
20
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
should be taken to avoid contact. with the tym-
product is touted to provide a rapid antimicro-
panic membrane and the cornea. A concentra-
bial kill of a broad spectrum of microorganisms
tion of 0.05% chlorhexidine has been shown to
with greater than 99% microbial kill in 15 sec-
 be effective when used as an antiseptic solution
onds.
(1:40 dilution of stock solution) in wounds. The
There are other products on the veterinary
gluconate and diacetate salts will precipitate
 market intended for use in skin preparation
when diluted using 0.9% sodium chloride or
 prior to surgical procedures; however, the prod-
lactated Ringer's solution; therefore, sterile wa-
ucts listed above are by far the most commonly
ter is recommended as a diluent. However, this
used agents.
 precipitation has not been associated with de-
crease in antibacterial activity of the compound
or wound morbidity. Chlorhexidine containing
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
detergents are commonly used when prepar-
ing the patient's skin for surgical incision or
Additional information about asepsis in small animal
the surgeon's skin prior to donning sterile sur-
 surgery can be found in the following textbooks:
gical gloves. Alternatively, waterless and scrub-
less hand antiseptics have become popular for
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
preparing the surgeon's skin. One such prod-
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animal Surgical Nursing Skills
 chlorhexidine gluconate and 61 % w/w ethyl al-
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
2006.
cohol and has been approved by the Food and
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
 Drug Administration for the preparation of skin
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
prior to a surgical procedure. This scrubless
2003.
Chapter 4
ANTIB OTIC USE NSMALL
ANIMAL SURGERY
Elizabeth A. Swanson and Fred Anthony Mann
Proper aseptic technique during surgery min-
Appropriate surgical antibiotic use revolves
imizes the occurrence of surgical infections;
however, when infection does occur, the con-
 Prophylactic antibiotic use is the administration
sequences can be dire. Antibiotics are used in
 of antibiotics before contamination occurs and
surgery to help prevent and treat infection, but.
 only when there is high likelihood that infection
lack of basic understanding of antibiotic use
could develop or when an infection would be
leads to misuse, overuse, improper application,
catastrophic, should one develop. Therapeutic
and creation of super infections, all to patient.
 antibiosis is used when an infection is already
detriment. The goals of this chapter are to in-
present and is based on culture and susceptibil-
 troduce the basic concepts of perioperative an-
ity testing whenever possible. Empiric therapy
tibiotic therapy and to offer guidance in devel-
may be started based on expected contaminants
 oping an appropriate plan for antibiotic use in
while waiting for culture and susceptibility re-
surgery.
sults, but wise empirical selection is advised be-
With
the
development.
of methicillin-
cause poor responses to susceptible drugs may
resistant. Staphylococcus
species  and  other
occur when the contaminant was not suscepti-
multidrug-resistant bacteria, it is no longer con-
ble to the first antibiotic administered.
sidered acceptable to administer an antibiotic
The decision to use perioperative prophy-
to every surgical patient. Furthermore, it has
lactic antibiotics to prevent infection is deter-
never been acceptable to use antibiotics to
mined by an assessment of the risk of infection
compensate for poor aseptic technique during
according to the length of the procedure, cer
surgery. Veterinarians must be diligent about.
tain host factors, and the surgical wound en-
when, where, and how antibiotics are being
vironment. As mentioned above, prophylactic
used in their patients.
antibiotic use cannot offset poor surgical per-
formance, such as excessive tissue trauma or
faulty aseptic technique. After all, the mere
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, lst edition.
 presence of bacteria rarely causes infection.
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
Alteration of local host defenses caused by
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
the surgical trauma (i.e., local ischemia) is
21
22
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
necessary for routine numbers of bacteria to
During surgery, care must be taken to min-
establish a wound infection. Therefore, proper
imize contamination of the surgical site and
surgical technique in an immunocompetent. pa-
surrounding tissues to maximize the effect of
tient undergoing a procedure anticipated to
 prophylactic antibiotic administration. The en-
last for a reasonable duration forgoes the need
vironment around a surgical wound can have
for antibiotic therapy. See Chapter 3 for infor-
 a profound impact on the risk of developing
 mation on asepsis and prevention of wound
infection. Large hematomas or blood clots,
infection.
necrotic tissue, and foreign objects (includ-
Prophylactic antibiotics should be consid-
ing surgical sponges) left at a surgical site in-
ered for any procedure expected to last longer
hibit host defense mechanisms and promote
than 90 minutes. Infection risk doubles for ev-
bacterial growth. Traumatized and devitalized
ery 70 minutes the patient is in surgery.' Prophy-
tissues are unable to mount protective forces
lactic antibiotics should also be administered in
 against infection and are often also hypoxic,
any case where an implant. (e.g., bone plates,
thereby promoting both aerobic and anaero-
synthetic mesh, polymethylmethacrylate bone
bic bacterial growth. Unless a wound has been
cement, nonabsorbable suture) is placed. In-
 made under controlled aseptic condlitions, such
fection around an implant at. the very least. will
as a planned surgical incision after antiseptic
 delay healing and at the worst will cause sur-
 preparation, some contamination from the out-
gical failure. Examples of catastrophic failure
side environment has likely occurred. Contam
include the need to remove implants after a to-
inated wounds can be converted into clean-
 tal hip arthroplasty or amputation of a limb due
 contaminated wounds through careful debride-
to intractable infection at the surgical site. Im-
 ment of devitalized tissues and copious lavage,
 plants promote formation of a bioflm that har-
which may negate the need for antibiotic ther-
bors bacteria and inhibits natural host mech-
 apy altogether. In contaminated wound surgery.
anisms and antibiotic effectiveness. The only
 antibiotic therapy should be limited to peri-
way to assuredly eliminate a surgical infection
 operative prophylaxis, if used at all. Obviously,
where an implant is involved is to remove the
 infected wounds warrant antibiotic administra
implant.
tion to be continued postoperatively with thera-
Certain host factors, such as the presence
peutic intent, meaning a daily course of admin-
of concurrent disease, very young or advanced
istration until the infection is resolved.
age, or immunosuppressive therapy may also in-
 Most body lumens have a native flora. These
crease a patient's assessed risk and prompt the
bacteria often serve vital functions, such as
use of perioperative antibiotics. For example,
aiding in digestion. However, these same or-
patients with diabetes mellitus or hyperadreno-
ganisms in the peritoneal cavity will lead to
corticism have impaired immune systems and
life-threatening illness. Controlled, surgical in-
are, therefore, more prone to developing in-
cisions into body lumens are considered clean-
fection. Very young and geriatric patients have
contaminated wounds; prophylactic antibiotics
 immature or impaired immune systems, respec-
 are not. warranted unless anticipated surgical
tively, that may increase the chance of devel-
time is 90 minutes or longer. Careful surgi-
 oping a postoperative infection. Chemotherapy
 cal technique to prevent gross spillage of lu-
by its nature suppresses the immune system.
minal contents into the body cavities is essen-
Any patient currently undergoing chemother-
tial. If luminal contents spill into a body cav-
 apy or that has recently completed an immuno-
ity, the surgical site becomes contaminated and
suppressive chemotherapeutic regimen should
 should be treated by removal of the spillage and
be considered at high risk for infection at the
copious lavage. Such spillage is not a reason
surgical sit.e.
to continue antibiotics postoperatively. As with
ANTIBIOTIC USE IN SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
23
traumatic wounds, contaminated surgical sites
prior to the skin incision) and repeat that dose
can be converted to clean-contaminated ones
every 90 minutes during surgery. Administra-
through copious lavage. Antibiotic therapy be-
tion is terminated within 24 hours, preferably
yond perioperative prophylaxis is not neces-
as soon as the surgery is fnished, even if con-
sary and could even be detrimental by promot-
tamination occurs during the operation. All pa-
ing development of resistant infection or by
tients should be monitored for signs of infection
masking serious infection, such as peritonitis,
(e.g., redness, heat, swelling, pain, purulent dis-
thereby delaying prompt aggressive therapeu-
charge, fever, poor doing, vomiting, anorexia,
tic management.
respiratory distress, body cavity effusions) in the
Selection of which prophylactic antibiotic to
Table 4.1 lists commonly used prophylactic an-
targeted tissue. The most common bacterial
 tibiotics with dosages and indications for use.
source for surgical wound infections, especially
Colorectal surgeries carry perhaps the great-
in orthopedic and neurosurgical procedures, is
est risk of infection because of the high num-
 from the skin. Skin bacteria are typically gram
 bers of bacteria that live in this area. Preoper-
positive cocci, usually Staphylococcus aureus or
 ative preparation with oral antibiotics can help
S. intermedius. A second common source of in-
decrease the number of bacterial organisms
fection is from fecal contamination. Feces con-
within the colon. The most common oral antibi-
tain colorectal organisms, such as enteric gram
otic used for this purpose is neomycin started
 negative bacilli (Escherichia coli) and anaerobes 
 24-72 hours before the planned procedure at a
( Bacteroides spp.). Whenever a body lumen is en-
 dosage of 20 mg/kg every 8 hours. Intravenous
tered, prophylaxis should be centered on the
 prophylaxis at the time of anesthetic induction
typical flora of the lumen entered. Gastroin-
 is typically used as well (see Table 4.1). Mechan-
testinal organisms include gram-positive cocci,
ical bowel preparation with enemas and intesti-
enteric gram-negative bacilli, and anaerobes.
 nal cathartic agents (i.e., GoLYTELY@, Brain-
Airway organisms include gram-positive cocci
 tree Laboratories, Inc., Braintree, MA) are not
(Staphylococcus spp.) and gram-negative bacilli
recommended because, although they will re-
(E. coli). Urogenital organisms include E. coli 
 duce the amount of fecal material prese nt, they
and Streptococcus spp., and are more likely found
also liquefy remaining fecal material and in-
with urinary tract. infection, pyometra, or pro-
crease the risk of contamination from spillage.
static abscess. Antibiotic prophylaxis is not rec-
 In order to work prophylactically, the antibi-
ommended for routine, elective procedures in-
 otic must be present at the potential site of in-
volving the urogenital tract, such as ovariohys-
fection before contamination occurs. For that
terectomy and orchiectomy. Normal flora of
reason, the selected antibiotic is administered
the liver include anaerobic organisms as well as
intravenously 30-60 minutes prior to frst in-
 gram-positive and gram-negative aerobic bacte-
cision (or roughly at the time of anesthetic
ria, but hepatobiliary procedures may be also
induction) and then repeated based on the
be contaminated by organisms arising from the
pharmacokinetics of the selected antibiotic.
gastrointestinal tract.
Prophylactic antibiotics are discontinued within
The most commonly used perioperative pro-
24 hours of wound closure, preferably at the
phylactic antibiotic is cefazolin because of its
end of the surgical procedure. Continuing an-
effectiveness against. the most. common periop-
tibiotics beyond 24 hours actually puts the pa-
erative contaminants and its ability to penetrate
tient at risk for infection. Animals with clean
most tissues of the body.2 Typical perioperative
protocol is to administer cefazolin (22 mg/kg)
 rioperative prophylactic protocol have higher
intravenously at induction (ideally, 30 minutes 
 infection rates than animals that do not receive
24
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Table 4.1
 Antibiotics used for perioperative prophylaxis in small animal surgery
Antibiotic
Dosage
Route
Frequencya
Indications
Cefazolin
 22 mg/kg
IV
Every 90 minutes
 Most commonly used prophylactic
antibiotic; orthopedic procedures;
most soft tissue procedures;
neurosurgical procedures
Cefoxitin
22 mg/kg
IV
Every 90 minutes
Gastrointestinal surgery;
hepatobiliary surgery
Ampicillin
20 mg/kg
IV
Once at induction
 At risk urogenital procedures
 Potassium
70,000 U/kg
IV
Every 90 minutes
Orthopedic procedures
Penicillin G
Neomycin
 20 mg/kg
PO
Every & hourss
 Preoperative preparation for
colorectal procedures
Erythromycin
10-20 mg/kg
PO
Every 8-12 hourss
 Preoperative preparation for
colorectal procedures
 Metronidazole
20 mg/kg
IV
Once at induction 
 Preoperative preparation for
colorectal procedures
Enrofloxacin
5 mg/kg
IVor IM
Every 2 hours
 At risk urogenital procedures 
IV, intravenous; PO, oral; IM, intramuscular.
°All prophylactic antibiotics are given at the time of anesthetic induction, ideally 30 minutes prior to the
 skin incision, but no longer than 60 minutes prior to the skin incision. [Exception: When intraoperative
culture samples are planned, antibiotic administration is typically withheld until the sample is obtained.
Then, the frst dose of antibiotic is given.]
Jo juu aui nv Aisans ot ioud sinou -t unsaq aie suogeiedaid eiaioios ioy uaai sgoqnue [eig
cefoxitin or metronidazole) is also employed.
"Intravenous administration of enrofloxacin has been associated with anaphylactic reaction. If given
intravenously, enrofloxacin should be diluted and given slowly.
 antibiotics.? If infection is noted during surgery,
3. Brown DC, Conzemius MG, Shofer F, Swann H.
or if sepsis is suspected, antibiotic treatment.
Epidemiologic evaluation of postoperative wound
infections in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc
may be continued postoperatively pending cul-
ture and susceptibility results, when available,
1997;210:1302-1306.
and adjusted according to patient response.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
REFERENCES
Additional information about antibiotic usage in
 small animal surgery can be found in the following
1. Eugster S, Schawalder P, Gaschen F, et al. A
textbooks:
prospective study of postoperative surgical site in-
fections in dogs and cats. Vet Surg 2004;33:542-
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
550.
Louis, Missouni: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
 2. Page CP, Bohnen JM, Fletcher JR, et al. Antimicro-
2. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
bial prophylaxis for surgical wounds: guidelines
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
for clinical care. Arch Surg 1993;128:79-88.
2003.
Chapter 5
BASIC SURGICAL
INSTRUMENTS
Fred Anthony Mann
Successful accomplishment of small animal sur-
and the number 7 Bard-Parker scalpel handle
(Figure 5.2d), a fine (thin) version, also ac-
tion. There are many specialized instruments
commodate the four blade sizes listed above.
for specific procedures, but there are certain
 Scalpel blades should always be used on a han
basic instruments that are common to nearly
dle, and a ratcheted instrument, such as a nee-
all surgical procedures. These basic instruments
dle holder, should be used to manipulate the
are designed to secure surgical drapes; to cut,
blade onto the handle. Using a blade without
manipulate, and retract tissues; to suction sur-
a handle or loading the blade onto the han-
 gical fields for maintaining visualization; to pro-
 dle inappropriately puts the surgeon's valuable
vide hemostasis; and to achieve wound closure.
 fingers at risk for accidental injury. The main
Surgical drapes are secured to each other
use of the scalpel is for cutting skin, but it. can
and to the patient's skin with towel forceps (also
be used for cutting other tissues. Scissors are
referred to as towel clamps or towel clips). The
 cutting instruments for tissues other than skin.
Backhaus towel forceps are the most. common
Because of the crushing effect. of scissors, skin
instrument use d to secure sterile surgical drapes
incision is reserved for scalpels. Subcutaneous
(Figure 5.1) (see also Chapter 11).
tissues, fasciae, tendons, and other structures
Basic surgical instruments for cutting are
beyond the skin are often cut with scissors. Most.
scalpels and scissors. The most. common scalpel
scissors come in both straight and curved vari-
blade sizes used in small animal surgery are
eties. Curved tissue scissors are more versatile
10, 11, 12, and 15 (Figure 5.2a), and the most.
and nearly always preferred over straight scis-
common handle to accommodate these blade
sors when available. There are numerous scis-
sizes is the number 3 Bard-Parker scalpel han-
sor types for specified procedures, but the three
dle (Figure 5.2b). The number 3L Bard-Parker
basic types are those for cutting delicate tissues
scalpel handle (Figure 5.2c), a long version,
(Metzenbaum scissors; Figure 5.3a), muscle fas-
ciae and other tough tissues (Mayo scissors;
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
Figure 5.3b), and sutures. Metzenbaum and
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
Mayo scissors should not be used for cutting
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
sutures because such will shorten the sharpness
25
26
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
enemstantinere
Bneomtantiu
(a)
(a)
Figure 5.1B
 Backhaus towel forceps: (a) standard and (b) small sizes.
Gnenstatiner
(b)
enenstatiner
(c)
BaQrnataubin
(a)
(d)
11, 12, and 15, (b) number 3 Bard-Parker scalpel handle, (c) number 3L Bard-Parker scalpel handle, and
(d) number 7 Bard-Parker scalpel handle.
BASIC SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS
27
(a)
(e)
(b)
nemstartine
(f)
(c)
BaOrtonfe
(g)
enenstantinen
Gnemotantinere
(d)
(h)
Hoaa () 'siossis oen (q) 'siossns unequazian (e) (suossins Aq pasn siossios uouuo G'g ainsi
cartilage and wire scissors, (d) Roger wire cutting scissors, (e) Bantam wire cutting scissors, (f) Sistrunk
 scissors, (g) stitch scissors, and (h) sharp-sharp general operating scissors.
28
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 life of these expensive instruments. Scissors for
 Instruments for manipulation of tissue are
cutting sutures should be used only for that pur-
 pose and for cutting fabric such as making a fen-
 dle tissue without direct digital contact. The
estration in a disposable sterile drape. Unlike
most. commonly used tissue forceps are thumb
tissue scissors, straight varieties of suture scissors
forceps. Some examples are listed here from
are often preferred instead of curved scissors.
 most. to least. traumatic: rat-toothed thumb for-
ceps (Figures 5.4a and 5.4b), Brown-Adson
thors' didactic surgery laboratory and preferred
thumb forceps (Figure 5.4c), and DeBakey tis-
by the author in clinical surgery are the Vernon
 sue forceps (Figure 5.4d). Thumb forceps are
cartilage and wire scissors (Figure 5.3c). These
held with the thumb and index finger in chop-
scissors have serrated edges on both blades,
stick fashion (Figures 5.5a and 5.5b) to min-
which help prevent suture slippage during the
imize tissue trauma. Thumb forceps are also
cut. Other wire scissors such as the Roger wire
used for handlling needles during suturing. Nee-
cutting scissors (Figure 5.3d), which have one
dle grasping should be done delicately so as to
serrated edge, and the Bantam wire cutting scis-
 preserve the tips of the thumb forceps. Dam-
sors (Figure 5.3e), which are available with or
 aged/dulled tips will add to tissue trauma when
without one serrated edge, are also good for
the forceps are used again to manipulate tis-
cutting suture. Some surgeons prefer to use
sue. Ratcheted tissue forceps allow manipula-
the Sistrunk scissors (Figure 5.3f) for cutting
 tion of tissues without repeated grasping. Exam-
suture, but these scissors are actually designed
 ples of such forceps are the Allis tissue forceps
for cutting tissue and do not. have the serrated
(Figure 5.6a) and the Babcock tissue forceps
edge advantage. Stitch scissors (Figure 5.3g)
(Figure 5.6b). For ideally minimizing tissue
are used for cutting skin sutures to remove
 trauma, these forceps are avoided altogether.
them; they are not. intended for intraoperative
 In fact, the Allis tissue forceps have been nick-
use. In addition to the above types of scissors,
named the “Allis trauma forceps"' to drive home
some surgeons like to include in their surgi-
this concept. If ratcheted tissue forceps are nec-
cal packs general operating scissors, such as the
 essary, the Babcock tissue forceps are preferred
because it is less traumatic than the Allis tissue
5.3h), which are used for very precise dissection.
forceps.
W
enenstatiner
enRnstartinere
(a)
(b)
enpnsta.tin
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.4 Common thumb forceps: (a) rat-toothed thumb forceps with narrow thumb and finger blades,
(b) rat-toothed thumb forceps with wide thumb and finger blades, (c) Brown-Adson thumb forceps, and
(d) DeBakey tissue forceps.
BASIC SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS 
29
eneastantiner
eorstaCer
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.5 Proper method of holding thumb forceps: (a) thumb view and (b) index finger view.
 Retraction of tissues is necessary for visu-
(Figure 5.7e). The rake portions of the Senn
alization of the targeted area of the surgery.
 and Volkman retractors are available in sharp
Various retractors are available to achieve this
 and blunt varieties. The Meyerding's tiny teeth
objective. Retractors are classified into two ma-
 help keep the retracted tissue confined behind
jor categories: handheld retractors and self-
the retractor and less likely to slip out com-
retaining retractors. Common handheld re-
 pared to the smooth blades of the Army-Navy
tractors include the Senn retractor (Figure
 retractor. The Hohmann retractor is available
5.7a), Volkmann retractor (Figure 5.7b), Army-
in standard size and a small variety referred
Navy retractor (Figure 5.7c), Meyerding re-
to as baby Hohmann retractors. Hohmann re-
 tractor (Figure 5.7d), and Hohmann retractor
 tractors are used most commonly in orthopedic
enRastatier
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.6 Ratcheted tissue forceps: (a) Allis tissue forceps and (b) Babcock tissue forceps.
30
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
enenstatiner
enenstatiun
(a)
(b)
Snensta
(c)
enenstatie
enenstantinr
(e)
(d)
Figure 5.7 Common handheld retractors: (a) Senn retractor, (b) Volkmann retractor, (c) Army-Navy re-
tractor, (d) Meyerding retractor, and (e) Hohmann retractor.
procedures by hooking and levering tissue over
can be used for deeper tissues as long as vi-
a bony area. Self-retaining retractors are handy
tal structures are not put at risk by the sharp
when there is not enough intraoperative assis-
 points. The Weitlaner retractor is available with
tance or room for handheld retraction. Com-
 sharp or blunt tips. Balfour and Finochietto
mon self-retaining retractors include the Gelpi
 retractors are designed to hold body cavities
perineal retractor (Figure 5.8a), Weitlaner re-
 open. The Balfour retractor is meant for keep-
tractor (Figure 5.8b), Balfour retractor (Figure
 ing open celiotomy incisions, but can be used
5.8c), Finochietto rib retractor (Figure 5.8d),
 as a rib retractor. The Finochietto rib retrac-
and Frazier laminectomy
retractor (Figure
tor is a specific rib spreader to keep open a
5.8e). The Gelpi and Weitlaner retractors are
 thoracotomy incision. The Frazier laminectomy
used to retract skin and superficial tissues. They
retractor may be used for thoracotomy incision
enenstetin
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.8 Common self-retaining retractors: (a) Gelpi perineal retractor, (b) Weitlaner retractor.
BASIC SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS
31
enenstatin
enenstantiner
(c)
(p)
eneastatine
(e)
Figure 5.8
(Continued) (c) Balfour retractor, (d) Finochietto nib retractor, and (e) Frazier laminectomy
retractor.
field of blood and effusions. Four common
rib spreader or Balfour retractor is not avail-
hemostatic forceps are the mosquito hemo-
able. The Frazier laminectomy retractor is also
 static forceps (Figure 5.9a), the Kelly hemo-
 helpful for retracting the sternohyoideus mus-
static forceps (Figure 5.9b), the Rochester-
 cles during neck surgery.
 Pean hemostatic forceps (Figure 5.9c), and the
Maintenance of good visualization requires 
Rochester-Carmalt forceps (Figure 5.9d). The
 proper hemostasis and clearing the surgical
 curved varieties of these forceps are more
32
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
eneastr
(a)
(b)
enenstatiuen
Snensta
(c)
(d)
Figure 5.9 Common hemostatic forceps: (a) mosquito hemostatic forceps, (b) Kelly hemostatic forceps,
(c) Rochester-Pean hemostatic forceps, and (d) Rochester-Carmalt forceps.
useful than the straight versions. Mosquito for-
cle during ovariohysterectomy) . The Rochester
ceps are used to clamp small (approximately 1
 Carmalt forceps are applied with the jaws per-
mm diameter) vessels to prevent bleeding or to
 pendicular to the pedicle to take advantage of
stop bleeding if the vessel is cut before forceps
the serrations that are parallel to the jaws (see
application. Kelly and Rochester-Pean forceps
 Chapters 12 and 18). Because of the crossed
are designed for similar hemostasis of larger ves-
 serrations at. the tip, Rochester-Carmalt forceps
sels. Mosquito, Kelly, and Rochester-Pean hemo-
 could be used on vessels in a manner similar
static forceps have serrations that. are perpen-
to mosquito and Kelly forceps, but are typically
dicular to the jaws so that the vessel is less likely
too large for that purpose.
to slip when the hemostat is properly applied,
Three common suction tips that are attached
that is, with the forceps' tip on the end of the
 to suction tubing and vacuum source for aspi-
vessel and the jaws oriented parallel to the ves-
 rating blood and fluid from surgical fields are
sel (see Chapter 12). Rochester-Carmalt.forceps
the Poole suction tip (Figure 5.10a), Yankauer
have serrations on the jaws that are parallel to
 suction tip (Figure 5.10b), and Frazier suction
the jaws. At the tip of the Rochester-Carmalt for-
tip (Figure 5.10c). The Poole suction tip usually
ce ps, there are also perpendicular serrations. As
has a detachable guard with many tiny fenes-
such, this instrument is designed for maximal
trations to allow suction of the abdominal cav-
security of clamped tissue. The most common
 ity without plugging by tissues such as omen-
use for the Rochester-Carmalt forceps is for  tum. The guard can be removed when more
 clamping vascular pedicles (i.e., ovarian pedi-
i-precise suctioning is desired in areas where
BASIC SURGICAL INSTRUMENTS 
33
enenstantiner
(a)
enemstartinerne
(b)
eaConataubn
(c)
Figure 5.10 Common suction tips: (a) Poole suction tip, (b) Yankauer suction tip, and (c) Frazier
suction tip.
tissues are less likely to plug the suction tip.
 Closure of the surgical wound with suture
 ao psn s d ns nn a
requires needle holders (also referred to as
the thoracic cavity where plugging with tissues
 needle drivers), thumb forceps, and suture
is not likely. The Frazier suction tip is smaller
scissors. A variety of sizes and styles of needle
than Poole and Yankauer tips and is used in
 holders are available. The size and type chosen
small areas of fluid accumulation such as ortho-
 depend on the surgical procedure and sizes
 pedic and neurologic surgical approaches. The
of suture and suture needle. A very commonly
Frazier suction tip has a hole where the sur-
used needle holder is the Mayo-Hegar nee-
geon's thumb hoids the instrument. Covering
 dle holder (Figure 5.1la). Another popular
this hole provides high-pressure suction; leav-
needle holder that incorporates suture scissors
ing the hole uncovered provides low-pressure
in the jaws is the Olsen-Hegar needle holder
suction, which is less likely to suck tissues into
(Figure 5.1lb). Caution must be exercised
the tip, thereby preventing unnecessary tissue
when using the latter needle holder to prevent.
trauma.
 premature cutting of suture.
34
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
enenste.tier
(a)
(b)
Figure 5.11
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animal Surgical Nursing Skills
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
Additional information about instrumentation in
2006.
small animal surgery can be found in the following
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
textbooks:
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
2003.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Chapter 6
PACK PREPARATION FOR
STERILIZATION
Fred Anthony Mann
The most common form of sterilization for
 ments, preferably with distilled water to avoid
gown and instrument packs is steam under 
 mineral deposits that limit instrument life. The
pressure. Gas sterilization with ethylene oxide
next step is to place the instruments (box locks
and plasma sterilization with hydrogen perox-
 open) in a basin containing warm water and
ide gas are used for materials other than stain-
a surgical instrument detergent. A soft. brush
less steel, linen, and nonwoven fabric (*paper")
 is used to clean each instrument, paying atten-
that would be damaged by steam sterilization.
tion to box locks and crevices. Each instrument
Because of health hazards associated with ethy-
 is rinsed in distilled water and allowed to dry.
lene oxide gas, gas plasma sterilization is replac-
At this point, one may use an ultrasonic cleaner
ing ethylene oxide for materials that cannot be
with an enzymatic solution to assist in breaking
steam sterilized. However, gas plasma steriliza-
down soils. After a final rinse with distilled wa-
 tion does have some limitations, one being that
ter an instrument lubricant (commonly called
it. cannot penetrate the walls of devices with lu-
*instrument milk") is applied by spraying or dip-
mens. As such, one cannot depend on the lu-
ping, and the instruments are allowed to air dry
 men of tubes to be sterile when gas plasma ster-
 prior to wrapping.
ilization is used.
 Instruments may be sterilized in individual
Surgical instruments should be adequately
 wrappers (Figure 6.1) or grouped into packs for
cleaned and lubricated before packing for ster-
 general or specified types of surgeries. When in-
ilization. Immediately after usage in surgery,
struments are grouped into packs, surgical trays
instruments should be presoaked in distilled
(Figure 6.2) are helpful in keeping instruments
water or in water mixed with a detergent so-
 organized. A linen towel placed in the bottom
 lution designed for this specific purpose. Then,
of a stainless steel tray will help prevent sliding
precleaning is performed by rinsing the instru-
of instruments and pooling of moisture from
the steam sterilization proces. Double wrap-
 ping should be routine for surgical packs. Linen
Fundamentats of Small Amimat Surgery, 1st edition.
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
 pers, but are more likely to absorb moisture and
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
provide an avenue for microbial entry. Linen
35
36
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Snota
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.1 Instrument packaged in an individual disposable wrapper for sterilization: (a) heat sealing a
 plastic/paper wrapper and (b) completed individual instrument package ready for sterilizati on.
wrappers may be laundered and used many
when the sterile pack is opened only the inside
times, but they should be inspected for wear and
 of the gown is touched as the gown is lifted out.
tear before each use. Unsoiled paper wrappers
 of the pack. Furthermore, folding must make
may be reused once or twice, but the integrity
sure that. sleeves and other outer surfaces are
of the material must be closely inspected.
 not at risk for contamination as the gown is un-
Surgical gowns must be properly folded be-
folded for donning. After the gown is folded
fore wrapping. Slight variations in folding may
inside out, accordion-pleated folding is done to
be dictated by the style of gown, but the basic
 reduce the gown to a size and shape suitable for
goal is to fold the gown inside out. such that.
wrapping (Figure 6.3).
Stenso
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.2 Surgical instrument trays for containing surgical instruments so that they can be wrapped for
stenilization: (a) pan style and (b) rack style.
PACK PREPARATION FOR STERILIZATION
37
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
must be maintained, (b) folding neck down to expose the sleeve entry points, (c) folding night side inward
to cover the right sleeve, (d) folding left side inward to cover the left sleeve and folding the gown in half
lengthwise to result in a rectangular shape,
38
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(e)
(t)
Figure 6.3
(Continued) (e) folding the rectangular gown in an accordion pleat, and (f) finishing the
accordion pleat with the sleeve hole in an upward corner (area of left hand).
Surgical drapes are typically prepared for
tents are oriented on the wrapper with the
wrapping by  folding  in accordion-pleated
edges in line with the corners of the wrappers
fashion so that the drape may be aseptically
(Figure 6.6).
unfolded and applied while preserving one
Gowns, hand towels, drapes, and other linens
fold (Figure 6.4). Huck towels (towels for hand 
 to be sterilized in packs should be inspected for
drying) are also folded in accordion-pleated
flaws, laundered, dried, and properly folded.
fashion.
 Paper gowns and drapes are designed for one-
 There are two basic methods of wrapping in-
time use and should not be sterilized after they
strument, gown, and drape packs: (1) square
have been soiled.
method and (2) angled method. With the
All packs should contain internal steriliza-
square method, the pack contents are ori-
tion indicators (Figures 6.1 and 6.6a). Addition-
 ally, sterilization indicator tape should be ap-
allel to the edges of the wrappers (Figure 
 plied externally to all wrapped packs (Figures
 6.5). With the angled method, the pack con-
6.5f and 6.6g).
PACK PREPARATION FOR STERILIZATION
39
a
SRCuofantiew
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
ao pue yy ul papioy adeap (e) uogezais pue suddeam rog adeip (oims e suioy u sdas i'g ani
side accordion pleated, (b) both sides accordion pleated and the pleats folded toward each other to create
a long rectangle, (c) accordion pleating of the rectangle, (d) finished accordion fold, and (e) (see page 40)
40
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
SCootantiooz
(e)
Figure 6.4 (Continued) (e) demonstration of how the drape would be unfolded, preserving one fold, and
held for application to the surgical field.
PACK PREPARATION FOR STERILIZATION
41
(a)
(b)
Figure 6.5 Square method of wrapping surgical packs: (a) instruments in an instrument tray placed on two
wrappers with edges of the tray parallel to edges of the wrappers, (b) left edge accordion pleated with flap
for grasping during pack opening (top drawing), and right edge pleated in like fashion and lapped over the
left flap (bottom drawing),
42
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 6.5
(Continued) (c) perpendicular sides folded over the night and left pleated folds, (d) completed
inner wrap, (e) outer wrap left and night flaps folded in pleats identical to inner wrap, and (f) completed
outer wrap secured with autoclave tape.
PACK PREPARATION FOR STERILIZATION
43
(a)
(b)
(C)
(d)
Figure 6.6 Angled method of wrapping surgical packs: (a) drapes placed on two wrappers with edges of
drapes in line with the corners of the wrappers, (b) first edge folded so that the pleat creates a triangular
to overlap the opposite side, and final side advanced to cover previous sides and tucked under the previous
folds leaving a tab for pulling to open,
44
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(e)
SuCrnstonti
(g)
(f)
Figure 6.6 (Continued) (e) beginning of outer wrap identical to inner wrap, (f) folding of sides of wrap
'aden aaeioone ym paimoss deim iaino panalduos (8) pue suyont on noud
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animal Surgical Nursing Skills
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
 Additional information about surgical pack prepara-
2006.
 tion and sterilization in small animal surgery can be
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd
found in the following textbooks:
ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2003.
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, Srd ed. St.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Chapter 7
OPERATNG ROOM
PROTOCOL
Fred Anthony Mann
 Individuals that. may be present during a sur-
 be worn within the surgical suite and are not.
gical procedure include the surgeon, assistant.
surgeon, circulating nurse, and anesthetist. Cer-
ally, footwear should be dedicated for use in
tainly, in academic institutions, residents, in-
the surgical suite, or protective shoe covers
terns, veterinary students, other trainees, and
("booties") should be donned over the indi-
observers may also be present. Responsibilities
vidual's shoes; however, there is no established
of people inside the operating room revolve
evidence that wearing shoe covering decreases
around maintaining an aseptic environment,
surgical wound infection rate. A laboratory coat.
contributing to the efficiency of the procedure,
should never be worn into the surgical suite.
and ensuring safety for both the patient and the
 Laboratory coats are worn over surgical scrubs
while outside the surgical suite where the pa-
ter is to discuss these responsibilities with the
 tients are prepared for surgery and in all parts
hope of allowing the reader to develop a fun-
 of the building other than the operative theater.
  n  
The keys to efficiency in the surgical suite
room protocol.
r n ae a e ssad ae
 Prior to entering the surgical suite, all per-
the next step of the procedure. Pertinent di
sonnel need to be properly attired. The specifics
 agnostic imaging studies should be available in
of surgical attire are illustrated in Chapter 8;
 the surgical suite. These include radiographic
however, a brief introduction follows. All per-
images, computed tomography images, relevant.
sonnel, regardless of their role, should have a
ultrasound images, and/or magnetic resonance
surgical cap (+/- beard cover), a surgical mask 
images. Hard copies of these images should be
covering their nose and mouth, and a clean
placed on the available light boxes, or if the
pair of surgical scrubs. These scrubs should only
facility is equipped with digital imaging capabil-
ities, the images should be made available on a
 computer screen in the operating room. Having
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, lst edition
these images available, prior to entering the sur-
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
gical suite, willaid the surgery team in localizing
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
and visualizing the surgical site which, in effect,
45
46
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 7.1  Floor target for discarding used gauze sponges and laparotomy pads.
will allow the surgeon to plan surgical margins
 improving the overall efficiency of the proce-
(lumpectomies and mass removals) and avoid dure. An assistant surgeon's responsibility is
adjacent anatomical structures during the dis-
 to maintain a clean and tidy instrument table.
section. Other diagnostic reports should also be
 Used gauze sponges should be discarded onto
available and include complete blood counts, a water-impermeable drape on the floor in
serum chemistries, ancillary blood tests (coag- order to easily account for them (Figure 7.1).
ulation profles, bile acid profiles, etc.), culture Discarding sponges directly into a waste recep-
and susceptibility results, cytology reports, and
 tacle or allowing them to be removed from the
histology reports. Having these results available  room for whatever reason makes it. difficult to
will aid in decision-making and will hasten any
 verify that no sponges are left in the patient at.
 paper work should additional samples need to
the end of the procedure. Bloody instruments
be submitted.
 should be wiped free of debris and placed back
 Physical movements made during a surgery
 on the instrument table in an orderly manner.
OPERATING ROOM PROTOCOL
47
the patient should be passed off to nonsterile
phasis. Talking and movement should be kept.
cessing. It. is the
   s 
tient to airborne particles and to maintain fo
the surgeon's next move. Always think about.
cus on the surgical procedure and the patient.
the next step of the procedure and have the 
 Scrubbed personnel should face the sterile field
proposed implement ready to hand to the sur-
 at all times. Gowns are considered sterile from
 just below the shoulder to the waist. and from
dry gauze sponge ready to blot away extraneous
gloved finger tips to two inches above the el-
blood or fluid, or as complex as assembling
bow. Therefore, scrubbed personnel should not.
a saw to create an osteotomy. When passing a
 compromise the integrity of the sterile field with
ringed instrument, hold the instrument with
unnecessary movement. Only use properly ster-
the rings pointing downward (Figure 7.2). The
 ilized instruments during a sterile surgical pro-
surgeon will ask for the instrument by name
 cedure. There should be a sterility indicator on
and will extend his/her palm to receive the
the outside and inside of the surgical packs. Be
instrument (Figure 7.3). With a quick flick of
sure to pay attention to these sterility indica-
the wrist, the assistant surgeon should force-
tors so that unsterilized instruments are not ac-
fully place the ringed part of the instrument.
cidentally used. Some instruments will not be
into the waiting palm of the surgeon (Figure
 included in the surgery pack and instead will
7.4). Forceful placement. into the surgeon's
 be sterilized in separate pouches. Do not use
hand permits the surgeon to confirm that the
 an instrument that is enclosed in a wet steriliza-
instrument is there without taking his/her eyes
tion pouch. Instruments in pouches that have
 off the surgical feld. A scalpel should be gently
encountered moisture are no longer consid-
passed handle first into the waiting grasp of
ered sterile. If a sterile instrument, contained
the surgeon (Figures 7.5-7.7). Scalpels are not.
in a sterile pouch, touches the open edge of
forcefully passed. Sometimes, the surgeon will
 that pouch while being opened, it is considered
use hand signals to request specific instruments
 contaminated and a new instrument must be
(Figures 7.8-7.12) . Hand signals contribute to
opened.
efficient use of intraoperative time as long as
A sponge count (4 inch × 4 inch radiopaque
both the surgeon and assistant know the hand
must be performed prior to the initial skin inci-
instruments will reduce the risk of dropping
sion. The number of sponges is told to the anes-
instruments either into the operative site or
thetist who records the number on the anes
onto the floor. Consider that the instrument
 thesia log which will ultimately become part of
may be the only sterile one of its kind in the hos-
 the patient's permanent record. If additional
pital, and an unlucky meeting with a nonsterile
sponges are added to the surgery table, these
surface may delay the surgery while the contam-
 too should be counted and added to the sponge
inated instrument is being resterilized, or may
count on the anesthesia log. Prior to closing the
force the surgical plan to be altered so that. a
surgical incision (specifically, prior to closing
 less desirable instrument can act a replacement.
 the linea alba for celiotomies and prior to in-
During the surgical procedure, it is imper-
tercostal space apposition for thoracotomies),
ative that all personnel focus on practicing
 both used and un used sponges must be counted
and maintaining aseptic principles. Guidelines
 to verify that the number of sponges remaining
for aseptic technique are outlined in Chapter 3,
at the end of the procedure match the num-
and while all of these guidelines are considered
ber of sponges opened throughout the proce-
appropriate operating room protocol, there are
dure. A sterile assistant counts the sponges and
a few that are repeated in this chapter for em-
laparotomy pads on the sterile feld while a
48
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 7.2 Passing a ringed instrument. The instrument should be handed to the surgeon closed (but not
 locked if it is a ratcheted instrument) with the rings at a downward angle, so the surgeon can grasp the
instrument and immediately utilize it without adjusting his/her gnip. Curved instruments should be passed
with the tips curving upward.
OnOonKanbipern
specific instrument.
OPERATING ROOM PROTOCOL
49
e ym uied suosains au ou paddeus si suaunnsu au auaunnsu posu e suiana i'g ami
definitive flick of the wrist.
nonsterile assistant counts the sponges that.
 tential pathogens. Adhering to the principle of
have been discarded from the sterile field
 low noise and restricted movement is difficult.
(Figure 7.13). A statement confrming that
 in teaching institutions, but is nonetheless an
the preincision and preclosure sponge counts 
important goal to target. The door of the oper-
 match is written on the anesthesia log. The act.
 ating room is to remain closed at. all times and
of counting sponges will ensure that no sponges
should only be opened for the passage of sur-
are inadvertentlyleft behind inside a body cavity
 gical supplies, appropriate personnel, and the
as a foreign body (referred to as a textiloma or
 patient. The storage of certain commonly used
gossypiboma). Should the sponge counts not.
surgical supplies in the surgical suite is accept-
match, a recount must be performed. If the
able. These may include, but are not limited
count still does not match, the animal is rou-
to, sterile gloves, suture material, skin staplers,
tinely closed and two orthogonal radiographic
- sasuods auordei pue 'srenbs aznes
views of the abdomen must be performed to vi-
ing commonly used supplies in the operating
sualize the rogue sponge or confrm that no
room decreases traffic by minimizing the need
sponge has been left behind. Obviously, ra-
for personnel to move in and out of the room
diopaque sponges must be used to radiographi-
 to retrieve the aditional supplies.
cally confirm presence or absence of a retained
Oversights and omissions are mistakes all hu-
sponge.
 man beings can make, including surgeons and
It is always advisable to minimize the num-
 other operating room personnel. To minimize
ber of people in the surgical suite. This will de-
such potentially devastating errors, some sur
crease the amount of talking and moving within
gical teams use surgery safety checklists (Table
the room and will dlirectly decrease the proba-
7.1). Use of such checklists is encouraged and
bility that the patient will be exposed to po-
 can be customized for the surgical facility.
50
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
scalpel, but without the thumb touching the fingers.
OuOonoJauJiei
Figure 7.6 Passing a scalpel. The assistant should hold the scalpel handle with the blade pointed toward
him/herself and the sharp edge down with the hand over the top of the handle.
OPERATING ROOM PROTOCOL
51
 Figure 7.7  Receiving a scalpel. The surgeon will receive the scalpel handle in an over-the-top grip ready for
cuting.
52
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
OrOonoJa
pue padieos e uiou yi se uogou uno e saye uosms ui iadies e isanhai oi ieuis pueh d'4 ami
then opens the fingers to accept the handle.
OPERATING ROOM PROTOCOL
53
Figure 7.9 Hand signal to request scissors. The surgeon opens and closes the second and third fingers
(pointer and middle fngers) as if scissors were opening and closing and then extends an open palm.
1auy (iauod) isry pue qumyn ayn sden uossms aui 'sdaoioy qunyi isanhar on ieuais puh 0i'g ani
together like pinchers and then extends the open palm. If the dominant hand is already occupied by needle
holders, the surgeon will signal for and receive the thumb forceps with the nondominant hand.
openpalm.
554
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
extends the open palm.
 Figure 7.13 Performinga sponge count on a water-impermeable drape placed on the floor near the surgeon 
or assistant surgeon. A circulating assistant dons nonsterile examination gloves to count the sponges and
laparotomy pads on the floor target, while the gowned assistant counts the sponges and laparotomy pads
ruo yoea woy paeredss ag pinous sped Auoioredei pue ssuods aneg piay aiyas au uo ueai ie
 and opened fully to make certain more than one are not bunched together and inadvertently missed in the
count.
OPERATING ROOM PROTOCOL
55
Table 7.1  Example of a surgery safety checklist
DATE OF SURGERY:
CASE #:
PATIENT NAME:
PATIENT LABEL
SOFT TISSUE SURGERY INTRAOPERATIVE CHECKLIST
 POSITloNING (per surgeon preference plus check the following)
Leg ties - proper looseness
 Electrosurgery ground plate - proper contact and sufficient gel
Acceptable warming devices - proper contact; away from eyes
PULL SPECIAL INSTRUMENTS
MISCELLANEOUSSURGICALSUPPLIESFEESHEET
 Check the circle when each
D
VERIFY PATIENT
checklist item is done.
)
INTRODUCTION OF PARTICIPANTS
VERIFY SURGERY/PROCEDURES TO BE PERFORMED
Check and write N/A if that
REVIEW ANTICIPATED CRITICAL EVENTS/STEPS OF PROCEDURE
item is not needed or
 SPONGE/LAPAROTOMY PAD COUNT - PREOPERATIVE
otherwise not applicable.
 ANTIBIOTICS GIVEN
BIOPSIES
CULTURE/SUSCEPTIBILITY
SPECIAL ONCOLOGY SAMPLES
SPONGE/LAPAROTOMY PAD COUNT - POSTOPERATIVE
URINARY CATHETER
FEEDING TUBE (TYPE:
NASAL OXYGEN TUBE
ARTERIAL CATHETER MONITORING
CENTRAL VENOUS CATHETER
 POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT PLAN
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Haynes AB, Weiser TG, Berry WR, et al. A sur-
Additional information about operating room
gical safety checklist to reduce morbidity and
mortality in a global population. N Engl J Med
protocol in small animal surgery can be found
2009;360:491-499.
in the following textbook and journal article:
1.Busch SJ, ed. Small Animat Surgical Nursing Skills
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouni: Mosby Elsevier,
2006.
Chapter 8
SURGICAL ATTIRE
Fred Anthony Mann
The proper surgical attire depends on the loca- droplets could be directed toward the sterile
tion of the surgery personnel. In the sterile op-
 feld. An alternative mask is a somewhat rigid
 erating theater, a scrub suit (Figure 8.1) should
 mask (Figure 8.3) that conforms to the nose
be worn along with a surgical cap and mask 
and mouth and is secured with a single elastic
(Figures 8.2-8.4) . The surgical scrub suit should
 band that is positioned on the back of the head.
be worn with the shirt tail tucked. Under-
This mask may be preferred by those who wear
garments should not be visible. For instance,
eyeglasses to help prevent fogging of glasses.
no sleeves should extend past the scrub shirt.
However, traditional masks that tie behind the
sleeves and no collars should be visible above
 neck and head often have a moldable band at.
the “V" of the scrub shirt neck. A cap and mask 
the bridge of the nose that conforms the mask
should be donned immediately prior to enter-
to the face and minimizes the possibility of fog-
ing the operating theater. The cap is put on 
 ging eyeglasses. People with long hair, beards,
first. Once the cap is in place, there should be
 and side burns require head gear that keeps
no hair showing. That is, no hair should be ex-
hair from escaping. Special caps called hoods
tending from the borders of the cap. After the
(Figure 8.4) are designed for this purpose.
cap is in place, the mask is positioned such that.
Disposable surgical shoe covers ("booties")
the bottom tie is tied behind the neck and the
 are required in many hospitals (Figure 8.5).
top tie is tied behind the head. Both ties should
Regardless of whether shoe covers are used,
be snug and the mask conformed to the face so
 shoes should be clean and should be worn only
that air filters through the mask during breath-
 at. work, preferably only in the operating the-
ing. Breaths should not cause air flow out the
ater (Figure 8.6). Shoe covers should not be
top, sides, or bottom of the mask. Coughing
worn outside of the operating theater, because
can force air out. the sides of a properly donned
they can drag hospital debris into the operating
mask. As such, a person scrubbed for surgery
 rooms, thus defeating the purpose of wearing
should not turn his/her head to cough or else
them. Likewise, it is best to wear shoes other
Fundameniats of Small Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
56
SURGICAL ATTIRE
57
enPonotauteu
Figure 8.l  Surgical scrub suit. The shirt should be tucked into the pants.
58
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
SrorotasuSinern
Figure 8.2 Bouffant surgical cap and standard surgical mask. Ears should be covered by this type of surgical
cap. Both mask ties are tied behind the head. The method of crossing the mask ties and tying the bottom tie
 on the top of the head is inappropriate.
than those worn in the operating theater when
tient. The laboratory coat. must. not be worn in
 traveling about the hospital.
the operating theater.
Attire other than a scrub suit should be worn
Those in the operating theater who are not.
outside the operating theater. When a scrub suit.
 scrubbing for the surgical procedure should
is worn outside of the operating theater (such dress similarly to the surgeons. Alternately,
as in the animal preparatory area) it should be there are other styles of operating room ap-
ad nu s aq uom q uo ie had ot (g am ne  e a ia
laboratory coats are preferred because the in- forming surgery; however, it is important that.
tention is to protect as much of the scrubs as this apparel is not worn outside the operat-
possible. The purpose of the laboratory coat is  ing theater without appropriate covering. For
as dirt, dust, and hair. It is especially important may wear cap, mask, and shoe covers, and
that the laboratory coat be worn during clip- cover *street clothes" with a nonsterile surgical
ping and rough preparation of the animal pa- gown.
SURGICAL ATTIRE
59
Figure 8.3  Rigid surgical mask.
60
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
SRoustaeShee
Figure 8.4 Surgical hood. Hoods are also called beard covers.
SURGICAL ATTIRE
61
Saeouskeutinen
Figure 8.5 Shoe covers. If used, shoe covers should be donned immediately before entering the operating
theater. They should not be worn outside of the operating theater. The laboratory coat illustrated in this
figure would be removed immediately before entering the operating theater.
Srloskantiu
Figure 8.6S
 Surgical shoes. Commercially available surgical shoes are designed to facilitate comfort for
surgeons who must stand in one position for long periods of time. These shoes are not necessarily designed
for comfort in walking about the hospital. It is not necessary to have these specifically designed shoes, but
the shoes chosen should be dedicated to the operating theater and not worn outside of the hospital, and
preferably not worn outside of the operating theater.
62
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
BeonstaeAun
Sugeiado au yo apisno ins qniss au iaaos shemie pinous ieos Aioneioqei aui reos Aioneroqet L'g a.m
 rooms and should never be won in the operating theater.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animal Surgical Nursing Shills
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
 Additional information about surgical attire in small
2006.
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animat Surgery,
animal surgery can be found in the following text-
books:
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
2003.
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Chapter 9
SCRUBBING, GOWNING
AND GLOVING
Hun-Young Yoon and Fred Anthony Mann
 Surgical scrubbing is performed to remove as
niques are required to prevent microbial con-
many microorganisms as possible from finger
 tamination during surgery.
nails, hands, and forearms by mechanical wash-
 Before surgical scrubbing, rings, watches,
ing and chemical antisepsis before participating
 and jewelry should be removed, and gown and
in a surgical procedure. Commonly available
gloves need to be aseptically opened in the
scrub antiseptics include chlorhexidine glu-
surgery area. For traditional surgical scrubbing,
conate, chlorhexidine diacetate, iodophors, tri-
a nail pick and a brush (Figure 9.1) are needed
closan, and chloroxylenol. Also, brushless rubs
 as well as scrub agent. Surgical scrubbing should
containing chlorhexidine gluconate, ethyl alco-
begin with a brief, general hand and forearm
hol, or chloroxylenol are available. Whatever wash to remove surface debris. Then, the subun-
scrub agent is chosen, it is important. to follow  gual areas of both hands are cleaned under run-
the manufacturer's written directions for scrub
ning water using a nail pick (Figure 9.2). The
time and whether the use of a brush is recom-
   a a ri si ds 
mended. Scrubbing is typically performed for
wet. fingers, hands, and forearms, using a brush
five minutes. Scrub time is shorter for brushless 
 and soft sponge. A brush is applied to the fin-
rubs compared with traditional agents. Gown-
gernails (Figure 9.3). A soft sponge is applied
ing is performed to build a barrier between
to the fingers, hands, and forearms. Each finger
the skin and the clothes of the surgical team
is divided into four sides (Figure 9.4) and a sofft
member and the sterile surgical field. Likewise,
 sponge is applied as ten up and down strokes
gloving is performed to build a barrier between
to each of the four surfaces from the tip of the
the hands of the surgical team member and
finger to the palm (Figure 9.5). Then, the palm,
the patient because hands cannot be sterilized.
 back, and sides of the hand are scrubbed as ten
 Proper scrubbing, gowning, and gloving tech-
up and down strokes (Figure 9.6). The forearm
is divided into four planes and a soft sponge
is applied to the four planes from the wrist to
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
the elbow (Figure 9.7). This process is repeated
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
for the opposite fngers, hand, and forearm,
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
and the used brush with sponge is discarded
63
64
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
[ms au yo uaos oy pasn aie (u) auods yos e ym ysq e pue (a) yi  y I'h am
team members.
SnPontanRua
Figure 9.2 The subungual areas of both hands are cleaned under running water using a nail pick.
SCRUBBING, GOWNING. AND GLOVING
65
Saonotoufirane
Figure 9.3 A brush with antiseptic scrub is applied to the fingermails.
in appropriate containers without contaminat-
 in order to not contaminate a sterilized gown
ing the scrubbed skin. Then, water is allowed to
 pack when grasping the sterile towel. The next.
run from the tips of the fingers to the elbows
 step is to dry fingers, hands, and forearms with
for rinsing (Figure 9.8). After rinsing, the rem-
a sterile towel, which is typically located on the
 nant of water on fingers, hands, and forearms 
top of a sterilized gown in a sterile pack. One
 is allowed to drip off the elbows before drying
end of the towel is used to dry one hand and
66
 Figure 9.4  Each finger is divided into four sides for scrubbing.
forearm from fingers to the elbow, and then first scrubbing of each day, the subungual areas
the opposite end on the opposite side of the of both hands are cleaned under running water
towel is used to dry the other hand and forearm  using a nail pick (Figure 9.2). Then, a brief,
(Figure 9.9). Once the towel leaves the hand, it  general hand and forearm wash and dry should
cannot go back up to the hand. During drying.
be performed to remove surface debris. Hands
the sterile towel should not. touch any nonster-
 and arms must. be dry before applying scrubless
ile surfaces other than the fingers, hands, and rub solutions. Dispense one pump of the rub
fore arms. Bending forward and extending arms  solution into the palm of one hand using a foot.
will prevent. the sterile towel from touching the
 pedal (Figure 9.10) and dip the five fngertips
nonsterile scrub top.
 of the opposite hand into the lotion to work it
For surgical scrubbing using brushless rubs,
under the nails (Figure 9.11). The remaining
finger nails and hands must be clean. For the
lotion is spread over the hand (Figure 9.12)
Figure 9.5 A soft sponge is applied to each of the four surfaces from the tip of the finger to the palm.
SCRUBBING. GOWNING. AND GLOVING
Figure 9.6 A soft sponge is applied to the palm, back, and sides of the hand.
Figure 9.7  A forearm is divided into four sides and a soft sponge is applied to the four sides from the wrist
to the elbow.
6名
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 9.8 Water is allowed to run from the tips of the fingers to the elbows for rinsing.
Figure 9.9 One end of a sterile towel is used to dry one hand and forearm from fingers to the elbow, and
then the opposite end on the opposite side of the towel is used to dry the other hand and forearm.
SCRUBBING, GOWNING. AND GLOVING
69
Avagard
16floz=500mL
BnCotantiro
Figure 9.10 For surgical scrubbing using brushless rubs, one pump of solution is dispensed into the palm
 of one hand using a foot pedal.
70
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
aOnstanLiu
Figure 9.1l The five fingertips of the opposite hand are dipped into the brushless rub lotion to work it
un der the nails.
SReomkantial
Figure 9.12 The brushless rub lotion is spread over the hand.
SCRUBBING, GOWNING. AND GLOVING
71
Figure 9.13 The remaining brushless rub lotion is spread over the forearm up to the elbow.
and up to the elbow (Figure 9.13). This pro-
 and the surgeon steps away from the table. The
cess is repeated for the opposite fingers, hand,
 next step is to identify the neckline and hold it.
and forearm. A third pump of the scrub solu-
while the armholes are found, and the gown is
tion is dispensed into either hand to provide
 allowed to open (Figure 9.15). Both arms are
another rubbing of both hands and forearms
advanced into the sleeves simultaneously, but.
(Figure 9.14). Both hands are allowed to dry
the hands are not allowed to pass all the way
before gowning and gloving.
 through the cuffs in order to allow for closed
Gowns are folded inside out in the packs.
 gloving (Figure 9.16). An assistant secures the
SlContantin
Figure 9.14  A third pump of the brushless rub solution is dispensed into either hand to provide another
rubbing of both hands and forearms.
72
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 9.15
The neckline of the sterile surgical gown is identified and held while the armholes are found.
to pass all the way through the cuffs in order to allow for closed gloving.
SCRUBBING, GOWNING. AND GLOVING
73
aCntantinsa
Figure 9.17 Closed gloving technique. One glove (left glove) is picked up by the opposite (right) hand,
keeping fingers inside the cuff of the gown. The side of the glove is grasped.
inside waist tie. If a sterile-back gown is used, into the gloves. The ventral rim of the glove
the appropriate tie is secured affer gloving is  is grasped with the hand that is to be gloved
done.
(Figure 9.18). The glove is laid on the palm
There are three methods of gloving: (1)
with the fingers of the glove facing toward the
closed gloving, (2) open gloving, and (3) as- e
 elbow (Figure 9.19). Then, the dorsal rim of the
sisted gloving. Both open and closed gloving
 glove is grasped with the opposite hand to open
enable the scrubbed personnel to glove them-
1
it wide (Figure 9.20). The rim of the glove is ex-
selves. Assisted gloving requires the asstance
 tended over the cuff of the gown with the index
of another scrubbed-in team member. Closed finger and thumb of the opposite hand (Figure
gloving technique provides assurance against 9.21). Then, the third, fourth, and fth fingers
contamination because no bare skin is exposed  are extended into the glove (Figure 9.22). The
in the process. For the closed gloving tech-  glove is advanced all the way over the gown cuff
nique, one glove is picked up by the opposite with the index finger and thumb of the oppo-
hand, keeping fingers inside the cuff of the site hand (Figure 9.23), thus completing one
 gown and grasping the side of the glove (Figure  side of gloving (Figure 9.24). This process is re-
9.17).The hands should remain within the cuffs peated for opposite hand, but is easier ecause
 of the gown until they are aseptically inserted of the freedom of the gloved hand.
74
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 9.18 Closed gloving technique. The ventral im of the (left) glove is grasped with the (left) hand
that is to be gloved.
SCnslanin
Figure 9.19 Closed gloving technique. The (left) glove is laid on the (left) palm with the fingers of the
glove facing toward the elbow. The ventral rim of the glove is still grasped with the fingers of the (left) hand
that is to be gloved.
SCRUBBING, GOWNING. AND GLOVING
75
Suemtat
hand to open it wide as the left fingers are extended into the glove. The right hand must stay entirely within
 the gown sleeve during gloving of the left hand.
SCntantiun
Figure 9.21 Closed gloving technique. The rim of the (left) glove is extended over the cuff of the gown
with the index finger and thumb of the opposite (right) hand.
76
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
SACnotantis
Figure 9.22
 Closed gloving technique. The third, fourth and fifth fingers of the left hand are extended into
the glove.
Figure 9.23 Closed gloving technique. The (left) glove is advanced all the way over the gown cuff with the
index finger and thumb of the opposite (right) hand.
SCRUBBING, GOWNING. AND GLOVING
77
aContaDreon
Figure 9.24 Closed gloving technique. One side of gloving (left hand) is completed.
Open gloving technique is used if one glove
Assisted gloving is used when a sterile team
becomes contaminated during surgery and an member is available to assist in gloving an-
assistant is not available to perform assisted glov-other scrubbed-in team member. Assted glov-
ing, or when only the hands need to be ster- i
ing may be performed as the initial gloving
ile and no gown is needed, such as for ster-
1
 technique, or it can be performed to change
ile surgical scrubs, minor surgical procedures,
 contaminated gloves. Once a surgical glove is
bone marrow biopsies, or catheterizations. For 
contaminated, a nonsterile assistant helps re-
the open gloving technique, the skin surface
move the glove (Figure 9.29). The entire hand
(the folded cuff) of the first glove is grabbed
(but none of the wrist) should be outside of
between the thumb and the index finger of the
the gown's cuff (Figure 9.30). A gowned and
opposite hand, and the hand is extended into gloved assistant holds the palm of the glove to-
the glove (Figure 9.25) without unfolding the ward the person needing the glove. The cuff
cuff. Then, the gloved hand reaches under the  of the glove is stretched wide by fingers placed
folded cuff on the ventral surface of the second  on the outer surface of the glove (Figure 9.31).
glove to pick it up (Figure 9.26). The cuff of The thumbs of the assistant are not used to
the second glove is pulled to cover the entire hold the glove, thereby preventing the assis-
cuff of the gown (Figure 9.27). Once the sec- tant. from accidentall touching the exposed
ond glove is all the way on, the cuff of the first.
hand of the person needing the glove (Figure
 glove is unfolded using the gloved hand (Figure
9.31). When there is a sterile glove on one hand,
9.28). Care is taken to avoid contamination of
the sterile gloved hand can help introduce the
the gloved thumb during this process.
other hand into a glove (Figure 9.32). The
78
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
SaCnstanhrenk
Figure 9.25 Open gloving technique. The skin surface (the folded cuff) of the first (left) glove is grasped
between the thumb and the index finger of the opposite (right) hand, and the left hand is extended into
theglove.
SaCnstanien
Figure 9.26 Open gloving technique. The gloved (left) hand reaches under the folded cuff on the ventral
 surface of the second (right) glove to pick it up.
SCRUBBING. GOWNING. AND GLOVING
79
 Figure 9.27  Open gloving technique. The cuff of the second (rnight) glove is pulled over the gown sleeve to
cover the entire cuff of the gown.
SaPnlanlipen
Figure 9.28 Open gloving technique. Once the second (right) glove is all the way on, the cuff of the first
(left) glove is unfolded using the (night) gloved hand, making sure that no glove surface touches any exposed
skin in the process.
80
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
onotauboicen
Figure 9.29 Degloving. When a glove is contaminated, a nonsterile assistant helps remove the glove by
 grasping the palm and the back of the glove.
SCenvantiner
Figure 9.30 Degloving. The end result is that the fingers are located out of the gown's cuff.
SCRUBBING. GOWNING. AND GLOVING
81
aiGrstat
 Figure 9.31 Assisted gloving technique. A gowned and gloved assistant has the cuff of the glove stretched
aun ou puey aun saonpo uoasins aua uaui aao aun jo aoeyns ino ayn uo paoeid siauy Aq apim
glove.
Figure 9.32 Assisted gloving technique. When there is a sterile glove on one (night) hand, that hand can
help introduce the other (left) hand into a glove.
82
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 assistant. pulls the cuff of the glove over the cuff
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
of the gown as the hand is pushed into the
glove.
 Additional information about scrubbing, gowning,
 If surgical gloves are contaminated at the
 and gloving in small animal surgery can be found in
beginning of the procedure before the sur-
the following textbooks:
 geon's hands and wrists have had a chance
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
 to perspire, degloving can be performed in
Louis, Missouni: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
such a manner that the surgeon's hands stay
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animat Surgicat Nursing Skills
entirely under the gown sleeves and cuffs. In
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
 this case, the surgeon has the option of putting
2006.
 on new sterile gloves using the closed gloving
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd
technique.
ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2003.
Chapter 10
SURGICAL PREPARATION
AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
Hun-Young Yoon and Fred Anthony Mann
Surgical preparation is subdivided into ini-
surgical procedure requires. A general guide-
-ad e e (asu) uedad p
line is to clip at least. 4 cm on each side of the
tion (sterile). Initial preparation includes hair
 incision; however, clipping area depends on the
clipping, urinary bladder expression, prepuce
size of the animal and the procedures [abdom-
flushing, limb gloving and taping (for limb pro-
inal (Figure 10.2), orchiectomy (Figures 10.3
cedures), and rough scrubbing. Before initial
and 10.4), thoracic (Figure 10.5), neurologic
 preparation, ophthalmic antibiotic ointments 
(Figures 10.6-10.8), orthopedic (Figure 10.9),
or lubricants are placed on the cornea and con-
perineal (Figure 10.10), ocular (Figure 10.11),
junctiva. Once an animal has been stabilized
auricular (Figure 10.12), mandibular (Figure
under anesthesia, clipping begins. It is ideal to
10.13), nasal (Figure 10.14), and cranial (Fig-
u uedad non psod eu u a
ure 10.15) procedures] to be performed. After
the same way as for the surgical procedure, but.
hair removal is completed, loose hair is removed
this is not always necessary. When clipping, one
with a vacuum. For limb procedures, the hair is
hand holds a clipper while the opposite hand
 removed from the surgical site and well beyond
tenses the skin to encourage easy movement. of
it. If exposure of the paw is unnecessary, the
the clipper. The clipper should be held using
hair can be left on the paw (Figure 10.9). The
a standard “pencil grip" (Figure 10.1) and ini-
animal's urinary bladder should be expressed
tial clipping may be done along the hair growth
to avoid inadvertent. cystotomy when entering
pattern. Subsequent clipping should be against.
the abdominal cavity and to avoid urine soil-
the pattern of hair growth to obtain a closer
ing from urination during any surgical proce-
clip. Hair should be liberally clipped around
 dure. Expression of the urinary bladder may be
the proposed incision site so that the incision
 contraindicated, or care should be taken to ex-
can be extended within the sterile field as the
press the urinary bladder, if the abdomen has
been traumatized. The urinary bladder can be
expressed with the animal in either dorsal or
Fundamentats of SmallAmimat Surgery, 1st edition
lateral recumbence, but is more easily achieved
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
with lateral recumbence. When expressing the
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
urinary bladder, care should be taken to use
83
84
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 10.1 Clipping of hair. The clipper should be held using a standard *pencil grip", initially clipping
along the hair growth pattern. Subsequent clipping should be against the pattern of hair growth to obtain a
closer clip.
gentle, constant pressure rather than a pulsat- cervical procedures, and median sternotomies.
dal half of the body, the prepuce is flushed with
 some oral procedures, and most ophthalmic
 antiseptic solution before preparing the surgi-
 procedures. Ventral recumbence positioning is
cal site.
used for dorsal spinal procedures and some
 If not yet done, the animal is placed in its sur-
 ophthalmic procedures. The paw can be ex-
gical position after clipping and vacuuming. Po-
 cluded from the surgical area by placing an ex-
sitioning depends on the propose d surgical site.
 amination glove over the distal extremity and
The animal is positioned in dorsal recumbence
 covering the glove with tape (Figure 10.17). To
[thoracoabdominal positioner (Figure 10.16)
 avoid a tourniquet effect, the tape should not be
can be used] for abdominal procedures, ventral applied too tightly. Then, the limb is carefully
Figure 10.2 Clipping for an abdominal procedure. The clip extends cranially to the middle part of the
ventral thorax, caudally to the base of the scrotum or vulva, and bilaterally to a line parallel with the fold of
the flank.
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
85
aonotaRutr
Figure 10.3 Clipping for canine orchiectomy. Clip the entire inguinal area, the entire prepuce, the scrotum,
and a few centimeters caudal to the scrotum. The scrotum should be gently clipped first, while the clippers
are still cool, to avoid scrotal skin irnitation. Long hair in the periphery of the clipped region should be
trimmed to prevent it from creeping under the drapes into the stenile field.
stand for final prepping and draping (Figure
action is used to scrub the site: target, orthope-
10.17). Two scrubs are performed: (1) a rough
 dic, or perineal. The target pattern is primar-
scrub outside the operating room and (2) a ster-
ily used to scrub surgical sites for abdominal,
 ile scrub in the operating room.
thoracic, and neurologic procedures. The first.
The skin is scrubbed with germicidal solu-
step is to take one of the rinsing sponges and
tions to remove debris and reduce bacterial
wipe around the periphery of the clipped mar-
 populations. Depending on the area of the body gin. This moistens the hair and flattens it down,
86
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.4 Preparation for feline orchiectomy. (a) With the cat in lateral recumbence, the thoracic limbs
are pulled toward the head and the tail pulled dorsally. (b) Scrotal hair is plucked. Clipping is not routinely
done for feline castration.
which helps prevent. the hair from flying onto
for enough strokes (approximately 30 strokes)
the clipped area. The second step is to scrub
 to achieve gross cleansing. After scrubbing the
the surgical site with one scrub sponge using
 intended incision site, move the sponge in a
an antiseptic soap (typically, chlorhexidine or
 progressively outward circle until the hair is
povidone iodine). Start at the proposed incision
reached (Figure 10.18). Once the hair or any
site and then move the sponge back and forth other contaminated area has been touched with
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.5 Clipping for a thoracic procedure. (a) For lateral thoracotomy, the clip extends from the
cranial aspect of the scapula and the proximal part of the brachium, caudally to the middle part of the
abdomen, ventrally to the stermum, and dorsally to the vertebral dorsal spinous processes. (b) For median
stermotomy, the clip extends from cranial to the manubrium, caudally past the xiphoid to the mid-abdomen,
and bilaterally to a line parallel with the fold of the flank, allowing plenty of space for aseptic intercostal
thoracic tube placement.
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
87
Figure 10.6 Clipping for thoracolumbar spinal surgery. The clip extends from the caudal cervical vertebrae
and scapulae, caudally to the sacrum, and at least 4 cm lateral to midline bilaterally.
the sponge, the sponge must never return to second scrub pattern is that used with orthope-
the proposed incision site. The scrub should be  dic surgeries. Once the limb is suspended, the
repeated at least. two more times. Dry or wet. rough scrub can begin. Begin at the tape edge
gauze can be used for rinsing off the chemical of the suspended limb from distal to proximal,
with same pattern as the scrub. The gauze does  moving circumferentially around the limb. The
not need to be sterile for the rough scrub. The  scrub is repeated a minimum of three times
Figure 10.7 Clipping for a ventral approach to the cervical region. The clip extends from the middle part
of the mandible, caudally to the manubrium, and bilaterally to the side of the neck at least 4 cm from the
proposed incision, depending on the size of the animal.
88
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 10.8 Clipping for a dorsal approach to the cervical region. The clip extends from the occipital
protuberance, caudally to the cranial thoracic vertebrae, and bilaterally to the side of the neck at least 4 cm
lateral to the proposed incision, depending on the size of the animal.
(a)
(b
Figure 10.9  Clipping for a pelvic limb procedure where exposure of the paw is not required. The entire
limb should be clipped except for the paw such that the clip extends (a) dorsaly past dorsal midlline and
(b) ventrally past ventral midline.
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
89
Figure 10.10  Clipping for perineal and perianal procedures. The animal will eventually be placed in ventral
recumbence with pelvic limbs hanging over the padded edge of the surgical table. Therefore, the entire
penineal and penianal areas are clipped, as well as the caudomedial aspects of the thighs.
Q6
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
SaPonstauJius
Figure 10.1l  Clipping for an ophthalmic procedure. The periocular area is carefully clipped. The cilia on
the upper lid are removed for intraocular procedures, such as a cataract procedure.
before rinsing. Rinsing is performed in the to the surgeon. The animal is typically placed
same pattern as the scrub. The third scrub pat-  on a circulating warm water heating pad. If
perineal surgeries, a purse-string suture should plate should be positioned under the animal
be placed around the anus before scrubbing
(Figure 10.19). Then, perform a target pattern  should be applied. Adhesive ground plates re-
 on the clipped area to the right. and left of quire clipping of hair and contain conductive
the anus. As with other patterns, the scrub is gel with the adhesive so that no aditional con-
followed by a rinse. For deep area scrubbing, tact gel should be applied. The body is braced
such as oral procedures, a cotton tip applicator
 in position with a thoracoabdominal positioner
soaked with antiseptic solution can be used to
(Figure 10.16), sandbags, a vacuum-activated
swab the oral mucosa.
 positioning device, or other stabilizing aid.
 After rough scrub prepping is complete, the
 Tape, a foam rubber tube, or rolled towels may
animal is moved to the surgical suite and po- be used to secure and elevate the head, neck,
sitioned so that the operative site is accessible or body. The animal's limbs are tied to the table
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
L6
BnQonnlauJies
Figure 10.12 Clipping for an auricular procedure. The clip extends from the periocular area, caudally to
the center of the neck, dorsally to the contralateral ear, and ventrally to the midline of the neck. Both sides
 of the pinna should be clipped.
using two loose loops, the distal loop being a
A It is very important for successful surgery to
half hitch (Figure 10.20). Care must be taken 
 place and secure the animal in proper position
to apply these loops loosely to avoid ischemic in-
 on the operating table. The specific position-
jury to the distal limbs. For limb procedures, the
 ing depends on the procedure to be performed.
limb should be carefully suspended with tape
 For abdominal procedures, the animal is placed
from an intravenous fluid stand (Figure 10.17).
 in dorsal recumbence with all four legs loosely
92
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 10.13 Clipping for a ventral approach to the mandible. The entire lower jaw is clipped. The clip
extends caudally to the center of the neck.
secured to the operating table (Figure 10.21).
 possible and secured to the table, taking care to
 Deep-chested dogs may require a thoracoab-
 avoid ischemic injury that could occur if leg ties
dominal positioner (Figure 10.21), bracing with
 are too tight. For thoracolumbar spinal surgery
sandbags, or some other stabilizing aid. Some
(Figure 10.25), sandbags or rolled padding can
operating tables are designed with adjustability
 be used to brace an animal and prevent lean-
to form a V-trough. For canine castration, the
 ing to one side. Tape applied across the scapu-
dog is placed and tied in the same position as for
 lae and iliac wings helps provide stability Tho-
an abdominal procedure (Figure 10.22). For fe-
 racic limbs are extended cranially and the pelvic
line castration, the cat.is placed in lateral recum-
 limbs are bent in a natural lying position. For a
bence with the pelvic limbs pulled toward the  ventral approach to the cervical region (Figure
head (Figure 10.4). Some surgeons prefer dor-1
10.26), the thoracic limbs are secured caudally
sal recumbence for feline castration, which re-
 with ropes, and rolled padding is placed under
quires some sort of positioning aid. For thoracic the neck. The maxilla is secured to the table
d  s   a   i   pd si d  
10.23) or dorsal (Figure 10.24) recumbence de- tioning aids along the thorax are usually also
pending on the intended approach. The tho-  required to maintain straight positioning. For
racic limbs are extended cranially as much as a dorsal approach to the neck (Figure 10.27),
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
93
SrOonstaute
Figure 10.14 Clipping for a dorsal approach to the nasal cavity and/or frontal sinuses. The entire frontal
rolled padding is placed under the neck and the  the table and the pelvic limbs are tied so that.
head is secured with tape over the occipital pro-  they hang over the edge at the end of the table.
tuberance. For most. orthopedic procedures, Rolled towels are placed between the table and
the animal is placed in lateral recumbence (Fig-  limbs for padding. The tail is fixed over the back
ure 10.28). If the right limb is the surgical with tape. For feline perineal urethrostomy,
site, the animal is placed in left lateral recum- the cat may be placed in dorsal recumbence
bence. If the lef. limb is the focus, the animal  with pelvic limbs forward to facilitate access to
is positioned in right lateral recumbence. For abdomen if prepubic urethrostomy becomes
a limb procedure where exposure of the paw necessary. For auricular procedures (Figure
is required (Figure 10.29), the entire limb, in- 10.31), the animal is placed in lateral recum-
clucding the paw, should be clipped, and a towel  bence. Vacuum-activated positioning devices or
ing the limb. For perineal procedures (Figure ear is manipulated with a towel forceps clamped
10.30), the animal is typically placed in ventral
on the end of the pinna and secured to an in-
recumbence. The thoracic limbs are secured to  travenous fluid stand with tape. For periocular
94
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Slonstautuen
 ocular area and the bilateral skullis clipped. The periocular area is clipped when the rostral cranium must
be approached.
Sentaue
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.16 Thoracoabdominal positioner (a) for most dogs and (b) for small dogs and cats.
 SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
95
Figure 10.17  Positioning for a thoracic limb procedure where exposure of the paw is not required. The
clipped paw is excluded from the surgical area by placing a latex glove over the distal extremity and securing
the glove to the limb with tape. The glove should be covered with tape and the limb suspended with tape
from an in travenous fluid stand.
96
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 10.18  Abdominal preparation. With the animal secured in proper position, scrubbing is performed
at the proposed incision site using circular motion, moving from the center to the periphery. Referred to as
the rough scrub, this first scrub does not require the use of sterile gloves. A nonsterile examination glove is
implied in this illustration.
 animal to be placed in dorsal recumbence. For
is placed on a folded towel or an elevated con-
 extraocular procedures, the animal is placed in
forming rest (vacuum-activated positioning de-
ventral or lateral recumbence. For oral proce-
vice) so that the eye can be positioned exactly
dures, the animal is placed in dorsal, ventral,
nCualauXie
Suuauay ot roud (auau) snue aun apnso on pay pue (al) snue aun punoie paoeid si ainans suusasind
the purse-string suture, a lubricated gauze tampon is placed in the rectum to contain feces.
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
97
Figure 10.20 Securing limbs to the operating table. The limb is tied to the operating table using two loose
pooq asuoiduos nou op sclool aun ains ayu on uayei st aieo yyiey e buiaq dool ieisp aun 'sdool
supply.
86
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
品at
Figure 10.2l  Positioning for an abdominal procedure. The animal is placed in dorsal recumbence with all
four legs loosely secured to the operating table. Deep-chested animals must be placed in a thoracoabdominal
positioner or braced by sandbags, towels, or other positioning aid to maintain straight positioning.
will interfere with the surgical field, it can be
The final sterile preparation is performed
 placed through the pharynx into the trachea via
after the animal is positioned appropriately
a lateral cervical incision (pharyngeal intuba-
on the operating table. For the final sterile
tion). When positioning for a dorsal approach
 preparation, a sterile bowl and sterile gauze
to the nasal cavity or the frontal sinuses, rolled
 are used, and sterile gloves are worn. The ger-
padding is placed under the mandible and
 micidal scrub is poured into a sterile bowl.
the mandible is secured to the table with tape
 Sponges are handled with sterile sponge for-
(Figure 10.33).
ceps or a gloved hand using aseptic technique.
Figure 10.22 Positioning for canine castration. The animal is placed and tied in the same position as for an
abdominal procedure (see also Figure 10.21).
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
uOndaf
Figure 10.23  Positioning for lateral thoracotomy. The patient is placed in lateral recumbence. The thoracic
limbs are extended cranially as much as possible and secured to the table.
Scrubbing is started at the incision site. A circu-
 natively with each solution three times to allow
lar scrubbing motion is used, moving from the
for five minutes of contact. time. When the f-
center to the periphery (Figure 10.34). Sponges
 nal povidone-iodine scrub is completed, a 10%
should not be returned from the periphery to
 povidlone-iodine solution should be sprayed on
the center. Sponges are discarded after reach-
 the site. When chlorhexidine is used, the final
ing the periphery. The final sterile preparation
 chlorhexidine scrub is followed by spraying with
is performed in the same pattern as the initial
chlorhexidine solution. Dry sterile gauze, in-
nonsterile preparation. When using povidone-
stead of alcohol, is used to wipe away chlorhex-
iodine and alcohol, the site is scrubbed alter-
 idine scrub after each scrub application.
an abdominal procedure. The thoracic limbs are extended cranially as much as possible and secured to the
table, taking care to avoid vascular compromise by the leg ties. Deep-chested animals must be placed in a
thoracoabdominal positioner, braced by sandbags, or stabilized with some other positioning aid to maintain
straight positioning.
100
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 10.25  Positioning for thoracolumbar spinal surgery. The animal is symmetrically secured with ropes,
euuipe ioy pasn q ue adei pauiad ag lm Aiasins aiaym are aun iapun paseid s supped paloi pue
to maintain proper positioning.
Figure 10.26 Positioning for a ventral approach to the cervical region. The thoracic limbs are secured
caudally with ropes and rolled padding is placed under the neck. The maxilla is secured to the table with
 tape incorporating the canine teeth to maintain symmetry. Lateral positioning aids along the thorax may
 also be helpful to maintain proper positioning.
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
101
Figure 10.27 Positioning for a dorsal approach to the neck. Rolled padding is placed under the neck, and
the head is secured to the table with tape on the occipital protuberance.
(a)
(b)
Figure 10.28 Positioning for a limb procedure where exposure of the paw is not required. (a) If the right
 limb is the surgical site, the animal is placed in left lateral recumbence. An examination glove is placed over
unshaven paw and tape covers the examination glove. A tape stirrup is secured to the foot for handling the
limb. (b) If the left limb is the focus, the animal is positioned in night lateral recumbence.
102
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 10.29 Positioning for a limb procedure where exposure of the paw is required. The entire limb
including the paw should be clipped and the limb is secured with a towel clamp applied to the claw for
manipulating the limb. Only the nail should be clamped so that there is no possibility of injuning the distal
interphalangeal joint.
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
103
Sienotau
 Figure 10.30  Positioning for perineal and anal procedures. The animal is placed in ventral recumbence
with pelvic limbs hanging over the padded edge of the surgical table, and the tail is fixed over the back
with tape. The pelvic limbs are secured over the edge at the end of the table. The table edge should be well
padded to protect the limbs from pressure injury. Care must also be exercised to prevent distal limb ischemia
caused by the leg ties. Using tape instead of rope may be preferred for securing the distal limbs.
104
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
StGnstauta
Figure 10.31  Positioning for auricular surgery. The ear is manipulated with a towel forceps clamped on the
 end of the pinna and attached to an intravenous fluid stand with tape.
CnOnstaufianu
 traocular procedures, the animal is placed in dorsal recumbence). The animal's head is placed on towels
(or vacuum-activated positioning devices) so that the eye can be positioned exactly as required. The nose is
secured with tape.
SURGICAL PREPARATION AND ANIMAL POSITIONING
105
enQnokaubruae
 Figure 10.33  Positioning for a dorsal approach to the nasal cavity and/or frontal sinus. Rolled padding is
placed under the mandible and the mandible is secured to the operating table with tape. Tape across the
occipital protuberance further stabilizes the head.
Figure 10.34 Abdominal preparation. After positioning the animal on the operating table, the final stenile
 preparation is performed in similar fashion as the rough scrub, except sterile gloves are worn and sterile
supplies are used. Scrubbing is begun at the proposed incision site. A circular scrubbing motion is used,
moving from the center to the periphery.
106
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animal Surgical Nursing Skills
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
 Additional information about patient preparation in
2006.
small animal surgery can be found in the following
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbooh of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd
textbooks:
ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2003.
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Chapter 11
SURGICAL DRAPING
Hun-Young Yoon and Fred Anthony Mann
Draping isolates the surgical site from con-
level should be considered nonsterile because
taminated areas and provides a sterile working
 they are not within the surgeon's visual field
area. Once the animal has been positioned
 and their sterility cannot be verified. Four quar-
and the skin aseptically prepared, the animal is
 ter drapes are placed at the periphery of the
draped by a gowned and gloved surgical team
prepared area according to the surgical proce-
member. There are two layers of drapes for
dures [abdominal (Figure 11.3), orchiectomy
 patient draping. The frst layer consists of four
(Figure 11.4), thoracic (Figure 11.5), neuro-
quarter drapes. The second layer consists of
logic (Figure 11.6), orthopedic (Figure 11.7),
 one full drape.
 perineal (Figure 11.8), ocular (Figure 11.9),au-
For placement of the first. layer of drapes, the
ricular (Figure 11.10), oral (Figure 11.11), nasal
upper corners of the folcded drape are grasped
(Figure 11.12), and cranial (Figure 11.13)] to
with three fingers (thumb, index, and third fin-
 be performed. The edge of each lateral drape
gers), and the part of drape that is located to-
should be approximately 2 cm from the pro-
ward the surgeon is unfolded (Figure ll.1).
posed skin incision. If an abdominal incision
The most upper fold is left folded to provide 
extends to the pubis in male dogs, the pre-
two layers of barrier in the area closest to the
puce should be clamped to one side with a
proposed incision. The upper corners of the
sterile towel clamp before the placement of the
folded drape are inserted between the index 
first layer of drapes (Figure 11.14). The pre-
and third fingers in scissor-like fashion with the
 puce is clamped to the side opposite to the side
flap of the retained fold away from the per-
where the surgeon stands. The prepuce is left.
son placing the drape (Figure 11.2). Then, the
 unclamped and draped into the surgical field
hands are rotated so that the palms face away
from the person placing the drape, allowing
 planned, such as with cystotomy for removal of
the drape corners to serve as barriers of pro-
urinary calculi. For canine orchiectomy, the first.
tection as the drape is placed (Figure 11.2).
 drape is placed over the preputial opening cra-
Portions of the drapes that drop below table
nially (Figure 11.4a). Four quarter drapes are
placed at the periphery of the prepared area
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, lst edition.
and secured at the corners with sterile Backhaus
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
towel clamps (Figure 11.4b). For lateral thora-
and Hun-Young Yoon.
cotomy (Figure 11.5), the cranial and caudal
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
107
108
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 are grasped with three fingers (thumb, index, and third fingers). The part of drape that is located toward
the surgeon is unfolded, leaving folded the top portion of the drape held by the fingers. The remaining fold
of the quarter drape faces the surgical area (side of drape shown in bottom picture) and the other side of
the quarter drape faces the surgeon.
 Figure 11.2  A quarter drape held for application to the patient. The upper corners of the folded drape are 
inserted between the index and third fingers in scissor-like fashion, and the hands are rotated with the palms
 away from the surgeon in order to protect the surgeon's gloves during drape application.
SURGICAL DRAPING
109
GiChotaneu
 sites. The edge of each lateral drape should be approximately 2 cm from the proposed skin incision. The
 application of quarter drapes is followed by placement of a full drape that will be fenestrated. The order of
quarter drape placement is somewhat dictated by surgeon preference, but progressing from caudal to right
lateral to cranial to left lateral is recommended. Note: In this figure the progression is from caudal to left
lateral to cranial to night lateral.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1l.4 Draping for canine castration. (a) The first drape is placed over the preputial opening cranially.
Note how the gloved fingers are protected from contamination. (b) Four quarter drapes are placed at the
of quarter drapes is followed by placement of a full drape that will be fenestrated.
110
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Cranial
Ventral
Snmotautu
Figure 1l.5 Draping for left lateral thoracotomy. The edges of the cranial and caudal drapes should be
greater than 2 cm from the proposed skin incision, making sure that enough aseptically prepared skin is
accessible for thoracostomy tube placement. The dorsal and ventral drapes should be placed on dorsal and
ventral midlines. The application of quarter drapes is followed by placement of a full drape that will be
fenestrated.
drapes should be placed first. The edges of the ineal procedure (Figure 11.8), the first drape
cranial and caudal drapes should be greater  is placed dorsally. The second and third drapes
 than 2 cm from the proposed skin incision. Cau-:
 are placed bilaterally. The three drapes are se-
dally, there should be enough exposed asepti- cured with two sterile Backhaus towel clamps.
cally prepared skin for thoracostomy tube place-.
 Another two towel clamps are used to secure
ment. The dorsal and ventral drapes should be  drapes when the fourth drape is placed ven-
placed to allow incision from dorsal midline to  trally. Additional towel clamps can be used to
ventral midline. For a dorsal approach to the  secure the lateral parts of the bilateral drapes
cervical region (Figure 11.6), the cranial drape and ventral drape. For an ophthalmic proce-
is placed caudal to the occipital protuberance, dure (Figure 1l.9), three drapes are placed
and the caudal drape is placed cranial to the 
 in triangulated fashion around the eye and se-
thoracic vertebra. The lateral drapes are placed  cured with three Backhaus towel clamps. For an
approximately 2 cm lateral to the proposed inci- auricular procedure (Figure 11.10), four quar-
sion. For a pelvic limb procedure (Figure 11.7),
, ter drapes are placed around the ear with the
the mediai drape should cover the genitalia,
 entire pinna draped into the surgical field. If
the proposed incision site. Four quarter drapes cess to ear canals should be provided by drape
are placed and secured with sterile Backhaus
 placement. Drapes are used to isolate surgical
towel clamps after the leg is hung. For a per-
felds involving the oral cavity (Figure 11.11)
SURGICAL DRAPING
111
Figure 1l.6 Draping for a dorsal approach to the cervical spine. The cranial drape is placed caudal to the
applied approximately 2 cm lateral to the proposed incision. The application of quarter drapes is followed
by placement of a full drape that will be fenestrated.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1l.7 Draping for a left pelvic limb procedure. (a) Placement of the lateral drape depends on the
 proposed incision site. (b) The medial drape should cover the penis and scrotum in males, and the vulva in
The application of quarter drapes is followed by sterile wrapping of the distal limb, which will be pulled
through a fenestrated full drape.
112
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
oPoutontan
Figure ll.8 Draping for a perineal procedure. The first drape is placed dorsally. The second and third
drapes are placed bilaterally. The three drapes are secured with two sterile Backhaus towel clamps. Another
 two towel clamps are used to secure drapes when the fourth drape is placed ventrally. Additional towel clamps 
can be used to secure the lateral parts of the bilateral drapes and ventral drape. The application of quarter
drapes is followed by placement of a full drape that will be fenestrated.
Figure ll.9 Draping for an ophthalmic procedure. Three drapes are placed around the eye and secured
with three Backhaus towel clanmps. The application of the triangulated drapes is followed by placement of a
full drape that will be fenestrated.
SURGICAL DRAPING
113
BhConstancer
Figure 1l.10 Draping for an auricular procedure. Four quarter drapes are placed around the ear with the
entire pinna draped into the surgical site. If ear canal resection or ablation is performed, access to ear canals
should be provided by drape placement. The application of quarter drapes is followed by placement of a ful
drape that will be fenestrated.
despite the inability to eliminate all oral bac-
draping. For a dorsal approach to the nasal cav-
teria. For bilateral mandibulectomy, the rostral
ity or the frontal sinus (Figure 1l.12), the cau-
drape is placed between the upper jaw and the
dal drape is placed immediately caudal to the
lower jaw to the level of the lip commissure, and
 frontal sinus and the rostral drape is placed near
the caudal drape is placed caudal to the end of
 the nasal planum. Lateral drapes are placed ap-
the mandibules (Figure 11.1la). For unilateral 
-u pasodd  oi en u I ai
mandibulectomy, the mandible is isolated with
cision. For a dorsal approach to the cranium
four drapes and four Backhaus towel clamps
(Figure 11.13), the rostral drape is placed at.
(Figure 11.11b). One drape is placed over the
1
 the caudal portion of the frontal sinus and the
endotracheal tube (Figure 11.11b) . For intrao-
caudal drape is placed at the occipital protu-
ral or lateral approach to the maxilla, the max-
berance. Placement of lateral drapes depends
illa is isolated with four drapes and four Back-
on the amount of access to the skull that is
haus towel clamps (Figure 11.11c). One drape
needed.
is placed over the endotracheal tube (Figure
Once drapes are placed, they should not be
11.1 1c). The hair should be clipped for a lateral
 readjusted toward the incision site because this
approach to the maxilla prior to prepping and
 carries bacteria onto the prepared skin. Drapes
114
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 1l.1l Draping for oral procedures. (a) For bilateral mandibulectomy, the rostral drape is placed
between the upper jaw and the lower jaw to the level of the lip commissure, and the caudal drape is placed
caudally to the end of the mandibules. (b) For unilateral mandibulectomy, the mandible is isolated with
four drapes and four Backhaus towel clamps. One drape is placed over the endotracheal tube. (c) For
intraoral or lateral approach to the maxilla, the maxilla is isolated with four drapes and four Backhaus towel
clamps. One drape is placed over the endotracheal tube. The hair should be clipped for a lateral approach
to the maxilla. The application of quarter drapes is followed by placement of a full drape that will be
fenestrated.
SURGICAL DRAPING
115
at the caudal portion of the frontal sinuses and the rostral drape is placed on the rostral portion of the nasal
quarter drapes is followed by placement of a full drape that will be fenestrated.
placed too close to the incision may be pulled full drape and underlying quarter drape at. the
is secured to the patient's skin by Backhaus
11.16).
towel clamps (Figure 11.15). The tips of the 
For the placement. of the second layer of
the tip of the towel clamp penetrates the skin, on the proposed incision site (Figure 11.17).
it is considered nonsterile and should not be 
 It is bilaterally unfolded first (Figure 11.18a),
remove d and repositioned. Typically, four towel
1  then it is unfolded cranially and caudally (Fig-
clamps are used, one at each quarter drape junc-1
ure 11.18b). The full drape is placed over the
tion. If the proposed incision site is long, addi-
 animal, the entire surgical table, and the instru-
tional Backhaus towel clamps can be added. For
 ment table to provide a continuous sterile field
celiotomy and thoracotomy, these additional
(Figure 11.19). Full drapes that are not folded
clamps are applied after fenestrating the full
specifically for this type of draping (i.e., folded
drape. The clamp is placed through both the
 in standard accordion fashion) may require an
116
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 1l.13 Draping for a dorsal approach to the cranium. The rostral drape is placed on the caudal
portion of the frontal sinuses and the caudal drape is placed on the occipital protuberance. Placement of
lateral drapes depends on the amount of access to the skull that is needed. The application of quarter drapes
is followed by placement of a full drape that will be fenestrated.
 one side with a stenile towel clamp before the placement of the first layer of drapes. Note: A right-handed
surgeon typically clamps the prepuce to the dog's left side.
SURGICAL DRAPING
117
SiOrstantiare
Figure 1l.15 Placement of towel clamps. Two adjacent drapes and skin should be included between the
tips of the towel clamps when drapes are secured with sterile Backhaus towel clamps.
assistant for placement, particularly when this
 After an appropriately sized hole is made in
drape is large. An appropriately sized hole is the full drape, the skin incision is performed.
made in the full drape over the proposed inci-
 After incising the subcutaneous tissue so that
sion site (Figure 1l.20). Some full drapes are the skin edges retract suffciently, the technique
already fenestrated and care must. be taken to
 referred to as “toweling in" may be performed.!
place the fenestration in the correct. spot. Ad- A drape is placed along one edge of the incision
ditional towel clamps can be used to secure the
 parallel to the edge of the incision line and
full drape to the four quarter drapes to prevent.
covering the other edge (Figure 11.21). One
fold is left in the drape so that the folded edge
be strategically placed (Figure 11.16) and as few
will be secured to the skin edge, and when the
as posible should be used so that they do not.
 secured drape is flipped, the flap fold will be
 interfere with surgery. It is common for suture
 against the full drape. The purpose of toweling
to become tangled on these exposed clamps 
 in is to further isolate the surgical wound from
during closure of the incision.
 the patient's skin. While no recent studies have
118
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 11.16 Placement ofadditional towel clamps. Ifthe proposed incision site is long, additional Backhaus
 towel clamps can be added between the cranial and caudal clamps after fenestration of the full drape.
Figure 1l.17 Application of the outer layer of drape (full drape). A folded full drape is placed on the
proposed incision site.
(a)
(b)
Figure ll.18 Unfolding a full drape. (a) The full drape is unfolded bilaterally first and (b) then unfolded
cranially and caudally.
SURGICAL DRAPING
119
BOotfe
Figure ll.19 Completed application of a full drape. The full drape is placed over the animal, the entire
 surgical table, and the instrument table (Mayo stand) to provide a continuous sterile feld.
 Figure 11.20  Making a hole in a full drape. An appropriately sized hole is made at the proposed incision
 site. Note: Some full drapes are already fenestrated and care must be taken to place the fenestration in the
correct spot.
120
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 1l.21 Toweling in. After the skin and subcutaneous tissue have been incised, a drape is placed along
one edge of the incision line parallel to the edge of the incision line and covening the other edge. One fold is
left in the drape so that the folded edge will be secured to the skin edge. When the secured drape is flipped,
the flap fold will be against the full drape.
substantiated the claim of a 1962 study2 that intercostal incision, the edges of the incision
toweling in actually decreases infection rates 
 are covered with laparotomy sponges and Bal-
compared to when it is not done, isolating
 four or Finochietto rib retractors (Figures 11.24
the surgical wound in this manner offers some
 and 11.25). Surgeons who do not towel in, use
other advantages. For example, instruments are
these laparotomy sponges to provide additional
less likely to fall under the full drape and quar-
barrier from exposed skin. Some surgeons will
ter drapes, and particulate matter from under
 apply an adhesive drape (3MTM IobanTM 2 An-
the drapes is less likely to gain access to the
timicrobial Incise Drape, 3M Health Care, St.
exposed tissues. The latter is of particular con-
 Paul, MN) to the skin and full drape prior to
to prevent patient hypothermia. Toweling in patients, to serve the function of toweling in.
also helps prevent. tissue desiccation that occurs
 It is debatable whether plastic adhesive draping
when warm air flow devices push air from under  significantly contributes to reduction of surgi-
 the quarter and full drapes, causing air to blow  cal infections, but this technique affords other
across the exposed tissues. The method of tow-  advantages of surgical field isolation similar to
 eling in involves attaching drapes to the edges  toweling in.
of the skin incision with clips (Figure 11.22),
 For orthopedic procedures involving long
towel clamps (Figure 11.23), or a continuous
 bones and joints, access to the entire limb is
suture pattern. After making a linea alba or necessary. The limb is suspended above the
SURGICAL DRAPING
121
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 1l.22 Toweling in using clips. (a) The drape is attached to the edge of the skin incision with clips.
(b) After the second drape is applied, two additional clips are placed, one cranially and one caudally, to
attach both drapes at the level of the beginning and end of the incision. Then, the second drape is turned
over on the opposite side. (c) Both drapes are attached to the edges of the skin incision.
122
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
(C)
Figure 1l.23  Toweling in using towel clamps. (a) The drape is attached to the edge of the skin incision with
 towel clamps. (b) After the second drape is applied, two aditional towel clamps are placed, one cranially and
is a au 'i  yo pa   au yo ii aun  si yoq  o  ao
 drape is turned over on the opposite side. (c) Both drapes are attached to the edges of the skin incision.
SURGICAL DRAPING
123
Cranial
Caudal
Figure 1l.24  Placing laparotomy sponges and Balfour retractors in an abdominal procedure. After incising
the linea alba, the incision edges are covered with laparotomy sponges. Balfour retractors are used to retract
the abdominal wall.
Dorsal
Cranial
Caudal
Figure 1l.25 Placing laparotomy sponges and Finochietto retractors in left lateral thoracotomy. After
making an incision between ribs, the incision edges are covered with laparotomy sponges. Finochietto
retractors are used to retract the thoracic wall.
124
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 Figure l1.26 Small sterile drape used to wrap the distal limb. The drape should cover all of the taped area.
 The tape holding the elevated limb is cut by a nonsterile asstant while the sterile surgical member grasps
the limb in the small stenile drape.
SaenstauBicen
 Figure 1l1.27 Attaching a small sterile drape that is wrapped around the distal limb. After it is wrapped, the
drape is secured to the skin with sterile Backhaus towel clamps.
SURGICAL DRAPING
125
Figure 1l.28 Sterile stockinette used to cover the entire limb. The stockinette is carefully unrolled down the
limb and secured with sterile Backhaus towel clamps at the base of the limb on the body, clamping through
the stockinette and underlying quarter drapes.
Figure 1l.29 Full drape for limb procedure. The limb covered with a stockinette is placed through a
fenestration in the full drape.
126
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure ll.30 Combination of sterile plastic adhesive and stockinette for an orthopedic limb procedure.
(a) Plastic adhesive drape (left) may be applied to the stockinette (right) over the proposed incision site.
(b) Then, a fenestration (hashed line) is made in the plastic adhesive-stockinette combination (arrows) at
the proposed incision site.
Siontoetrese
 nation are attached to the edges of the incised skin by clips after the skin incision is made.
SURGICAL DRAPING
127
surgery table or elevated by an assistant. The
REFERENCE
limb is isolated at its base by four quarter drapes
and the drapes are secured with towel clamps
1. Knecht CD, Allen AR, Williams DJ, Johnson
(Figure 11.7). A small sterile drape is used to
JH.Fundamentat Techniques in Veterinary Surgery
wrap the distal portion of the limb (Figure
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders Co,
11.26). The tape holding the elevated limb is
1987:17-18.
cut while the sterile surgical member grasps
2. Shepherd RC, Kinmonth JB. Skin preparation
the limb in the small sterile drape. The drape
and towelling in prevention of wound infection.
should cover all taped area and is secured with a
Br Med /1962;2:151-153.
3. Webster J, Alghamdi A. Use of plastic ad-
towel clamp (Figure 11.27). Then, a stockinette
hesive drapes during surgery for preventing
 is rolled up the limb to a point. proximal to
surgical site infection. (
Cochrane Database Syst
the proposed incision and secured with towel
Rev 2007(4):CD006353. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.
clamps at. the base of the limb on the body
CD006353.pub2.
(Figure 11.28). The limb is placed through a
fenestration of a full drape (Figure 11.29). For
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
toweling in of orthopedic procedures on long
bones, a stockinette, plastic adhesive drape,
Additional information about draping in small ani-
or adhesive-stockinette combination can be
used (Figure 1l.30). When using an adhesive-
 mal surgery can be found in the following textbooks:
stockinette combination, a fenestration is made
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
over the proposed incision site, and the edges
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
of this fenestration are sutured to the incised
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animat Surgical Nursing Shills
skin edges or secured to the incised skin edges
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouni: Mosby Elsevier,
using clips (Figure 11.31). The plastic adhesive
2006.
drape at the surgical site is advantageous as a
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd
waterproof barrier.
ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2003.
Chapter 12
INSTRUMENT HANDLING
Hun-Young Yoon and Fred Anthony Mann
Successful accomplishment of small animal sur-
(Figure 12.3a) or on one side of the scalpel han-
gical procedures requires proper handling of
 dle (Figure 12.3b). The fingertip grip is recom-
surgical instruments. Proper instrument han-
 mended for long incisions because arm move-
dling can minimize tissue trauma and avoid in-
 ment is used instead of finger movement. For
strument damage.
the palm grip, the scalpel handle is held with
 Two general categories of instruments are
the palm while the thumb is placed on the back
ringed instruments and nonringed instru-
 of the scalpel blade (Figure 12.4). This grip is
ments. For ringed instruments, the thumb and
recommended when great. pressure must. be ap-
fourth fnger are usually placed in the upper
 plied to incise tissue. As with the fingertip grip,
and lower rings, respectively, and the index fin-
 arm motion is used rather than finger motion.
ger can be placed along the shank for added
 For the pencil grip, the scalpel handle is held
control and stability (Figure 12.1). For non-
like gripping a pencil in conventional pencil
ringed instruments, handling varies depending
holding fashion (Figure 12.5). The pencil grip
on the specific instrument.
is best suited for short, precise incisions because
 The Backhaus towel forceps is placed using
 finger movement is used instead of arm move-
the ringed instrument handling technique. The
 ment. With the scalpel blade inverted, the pen-
tips of the Backhaus towel forceps are closed to
 cil grip is used to make the stab incision in the
secure surgical drapes to each other and to the
linea alba for celiotomy while thumb forceps
patient's skin by clamping with the thumb and
 hold the linea alba upward (Figure 12.6).
fourth finger (Figure 12.2).
There are two basic grips for holding sur-
There are three basic grips for holding a
gical scissors: the forehand grip and the back-
scalpel: fingertip grip (Figure 12.3), palm grip
hand grip. For the forehand grip, the thumb
(Figure 12.4), and pencil grip (Figure 12.5).
 and fourth finger (wide-based tripod grip) are
For the fngertip grip, the scalpel handle is held
placed in the upper and lower rings (Figure
with the tips of fingers. The index finger can be
12.7a), or the thenar eminence and fourth fin-
placed either on the back of the scalpel blade
 ger (thenar eminence-fourth fnger grip) are
placed out of the upper ring and in the lower
Fundamentats of Small Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
ring, respectively (Figure 12.7b). For the back-
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
hand grip method, the thumb and index finger
and Hun-Young Yoon.
(thumb-index finger grip; Figure 12.8a) or the
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
128
INSTRUMENT HANDLING
129
Figure 12.1 Ringed instrument (such as the Rochester-Carmalt shown in this picture) handling: The thumb
and stability. [Note: There are other acceptable methods for holding needle holders and scissors, but other
ringed instruments are held in this fashion.]
thumb and fourth finger (thumb-fourth finger thumb-index finger grip (Figure 12.8a) is used
 grip; Figure 12.8b) are placed in the upper and
1 when the surgeon must execute reverse cut-
lower rings. The scissor grip method that best.
ting toward the surgeon's dominant side (from
utilizes the three scissor forces (closing, shear- left to right for a right-handed surgeon). Al-
ing, and torque) is the wide-based tripod grip.
 ternately, the backhand thumb-fourth finger
The thenar eminence-fourth finger grip pro-
 grip (Figure 12.8b) may be used for reversed
vides adequate shearing force, reduced clos-
cutting, but. this method requires more body
ing force, and practically no torque compared
shifting than the backhand thumb-index finger
with the wide-based tripod grip. A backhand
grip.
130
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 12.2 Backhaus towel forceps handling: The Backhaus towel forceps is clamped using the thumb and
fourth fingers to secure surgical drapes to each other and to the patient's skin.
INSTRUMENT HANDLING
LEL
eprolatia
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.3  Scalpel handling (fingertip grip): For the fingertip gnip, the scalpel handle is held with the tips
 a  o ( o a  a   a o ()      x a ' o
the scalpel handle.
There are three basic methods of cutting
ments such as the Allis tissue forceps and
tissues with scissors: scissor cutting (Figure 
the Babcock tissue forceps are handled us-
12.9a), push cutting (Figure 12.9b), and blunt.
ing the ringed instrument handling technique
dissection (Figure 12.9c). Scissor cutting and
(Figure 12.1). When tissue forceps are used,
 push cutting constitute sharp dissection (Fig-
the minimum amount of tissue is grasped, and
ures 12.9a and 12.9b). Scissor cutting is most
the minimum amount. of pressure necessary to
 applicable for short incisions and heavy fascia.
hold the tissue is applied to minimize tissue
Long incision of delicate tissue is often initi-
 trauma. Thumb forceps are usually held in the
ated with a scissor cut and continued by push
surgeon's nondominant hand and used to as-
 cutting (Figure 12.9b). Blunt dissection is used
sist cutting tissue (Figures 12.9a and 12.9c) and
to separate anatomical structures, such as when
suturing (Figure 12.10). When in use, thumb
 developing skin flaps. Blunt. dissection is typi-
forceps are grasped in chopstick fashion. When
cally avoided, because it is more traumatic than
temporarily not in use, thumb forceps are car-
sharp dissection and tends to created excessive
ried in the palmed position, leaving the thumb,
dead space.
index finger, and middle finger free (Figure
There are two basic grips for holding instru-
12.11). While gentle holding of thumb forceps
ments for manipulation of tissue. Thumb for-
will minimize tissue trauma, it is also important.
ceps are held with the thumb and index finger
to use the appropriate tissue forceps for the
 in chopstick fashion as mentioned in Chap-
structure to be grasped. Rat-toothed thumb for-
ter 5 (Figures 5.5a and 5.5b). Ringed instru-
 ce ps or Brown-Adson thumb forceps are used to
132
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 12.4 Scalpel handling (palm grip): For the palm grip, the scalpel handle is held with the palm, and
the thumb is placed on the back of the scalpel blade.
BaCortautie
Figure 12.5 Scalpel handling (pencil grip): For the pencil grip, the scalpel handle is held in conventional
pencil gripping fashion.
INSTRUMENT HANDLING
133
aeonatatun
Figure 12.6S
 Scalpel handling (inverted pencil grip): Inverted blade press cuting (stab incision) is applied
using the pencil grip to incise the linea alba while the adjacent linea alba is lifted with thumb forceps.
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.7 Scissors handling (two methods of forehand grip): (a) Wide-based tipod grip—The thumb
gnip—The thenar eminence stabilizes the upper ring, and the fourth finger occupies the lower ning.
134
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
and index finger are placed in the scissor nings with the scissors pointing backwards. (b) Thumb-fourth
turned backwards.
[a]
(b)
(c)
Figure 12.9 Cutting and dissecting with scissors: (a) Scissor cutting may be performed in underhanded
fashion (as demonstrated here) or overhanded fashion (usually preferred). (b) Push cutting is likened to
cutting wrapping paper and is properly executed using the midportion of the scissor blades with the blades
 partially open. (c) Blunt dissection is generally reserved for separating anatomical structures, such as when
 elevating skin and subcutaneous from underlying fascia to create a skin flap.
INSTRUMENT HANDLING
135
the tissue after the needle holder is disengaged.
Seonotautian
Figure 12.1l Thumb forceps when temporarily not in use: The thumb forceps is carried in the palmed
position, leaving the thumb, index finger, and middle finger free.
136
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
surgery using an assistant's hand. (b) Selfretaining (Weitlaner) retractor placed to visualize the targeted
area of the surgery without an assistant.
manipulate skin and other dense tissues, Brown-
 Retractors are used to obtain proper visu-
Adson thumb forceps can be used to grasp
 alization of the targeted area of the surgery.
suture needles, and DeBakey tissue forceps
Healthy tissue withstands the pressure of re-
are used for viscera and other delicate tissues.
 tractors, but. too much pressure may cause neu-
 Ratcheted tissue forceps (such as Allis and Bab-
rovascular compromise and tissue damage. If
cock tissue forceps) are used for manipulation
too little retraction is provided, however, the
 of tissues without repeated grasping. Such ap-
 surgeon is not able to see clearly, and the pro-
 plication is usually more traumatic than thumb
 cedure may be compromised. Finding a proper
forceps and is, therefore, limited to grasping
medium is very important to achieve successful
structures that. will be excised, especially when
 accomplishment of retractor application. Both
Allis tissue forceps are used. Babcock tissue for-
hand held retractors and self-retaining retrac-
ceps are less traumatic than Allis tissue forceps;
tors (Figure 12.12) are available in sharp and
therefore, some surgeons will use Babcock tis-
blunt varieties. Care should be taken not to
sue forceps to manipulated structures that they
 traumatize tissues or damage vessels and nerves
do not intend to excise.
 during retractor application, especially when
INSTRUMENT HANDLING
LEL
Figure 12.13 Hemostatic forceps handing: A single (Kelly) hemmostat is held in the dominant hand using
 the wide-based tripod gnip with the thumb and fourth finger in the instrument rings.
retractors with sharp blades are used. With clamping method is used. The tip of the hemo-
blunt blades, pressure damage can occur if the stat is pointed toward the vessel and the tip
retractor is applied too forcefully to the tis- is used to grasp the smallest amount of tis-
sue. Self-retaining retractors are indispensable sue, preferably only the bleeding vessel itself
 in working without an assistant (Figure 12.12b).(
(Figure 12.14a). After the hemostatic forceps
The major hazard of selfretaining retractors is applied, the instrument. is turned so that
is trauma or ischemia at the point of contact. the tip is facing upward to facilitate ligature
During lengthy procedures, it is advisable to re-
 application. For occluding vessels within pedi-
lease self-retaining retractors periodically (ev-
cles, the jaw-clamping method can be used.
ery 15 minutes) to prevent prolonged ischemia
 In this case, hemostatic forceps are applied
 of wound edges.
 perpendicular to the vessel with the tip fac-
 Correct. application of hemostatic forceps
ing upward (Figure 12.14b). The jaw is used
aids visualization by affording proper hemosta-
to grasp the pedicle, taking care to avoid
sis and minimizing the amount of blood in inadvertent grasping of adjacent structures.
the surgical feld. For placing hemostatic for  When a surgical assistant is not available and
ceps, a single hemostat is grasped with the 
 hemostats are applied in succession, multiple
 dominant hand in the wide-based tripod grip
 d a   q  ssu 
(Figure 12.13), and a thumb forceps is used 
dominant hand (Figure 12.15). Hemostasis can
 in the opposite hand for manipulation of tis- also be achieved by the use of electrosurgery.
sues surrounding the bleeding point. There
 The assistant may electrocoagulate tissue or
are two methods for application of hemostatic
a vessel or may elevate the hemostat that is
forceps: tip-clamping method (Figure 12.14a) on the vessel so that the surgeon can acti-
occluding small superficial bleeders, the tip- forceps.
138
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
uentantiu
(a)
(b)
tip of the hemostat is pointed toward the vessel and the tip is used to grasp the smallest amount of tissue,
preferably only the bleeding vessel itself. Then, the hemostat is turned so that the tip faces upward (not
shown). (b) Jaw-clamping method for occluding vessels within tissue pedicles—Hemostatic forceps are
applied perpendicular to the vessel with the tip facing upwards. The hemostatic forceps are left with the tip
facing upward.
Clearance of blood from the surgical feld  to allow suction of the abdominal cavity with-
is accomplished with surgical sponges and out plugging by tissues, such as omentum. Un-
 Poole, Yankauer, and Frazier (See Chapter 5; nal cavity, provided that a sponge is placed over
Figure 5.10). The Poole suction tip usually has  the tip to prevent tissue from being sucked into
a detachable guard with many tiny fenestrations the single opening. The Poole guard can be
aOtarGin
Figure 12.15 Carrying multiple hemostats when a surgical assistant is not available: When hemostats are
 applied in succession, multiple hemostats can be carried with the palm of the dominant hand.
INSTRUMENT HANDLING 
139
removed when more precise suctioning is de-
the palm grip method, the needle holder is
sired in areas where tissues are less likely to
gripped with the palm and the five fingers
plug the suction tip. The Yankauer suction tip
(Figure 12.16c). This method provides strong
is used commonly in the thoracic cavity and
 driving force for placing sutures in tough tis-
dleep pockets where plugging with tissues is not.
sues but less precise control compared to the
likely. The Frazier suction tip is smaller than
thumb-fourth finger grip. In the pencil grip
Poole and Yankauer tips and is used in small
1  method, a needle holder is grasped like grip-
areas of fluid accumulation, such as orthope-
ping a pencil in conventional fashion (Figure
 dic and neurologic surgical approaches. The
12.16d). Spring-opening needle holders with
Frazier suction tip has a hole where the sur-
finger pressure, such as the Castroviejo needle
geon's thumb holds the instrument. Covering
holder, are usually held with a pencil grip. This
this hole provides high-pressure suction. Leav-
method facilitates fine movements of the fin-
ing the hole uncovered provides low-pressure
gers; therefore, the pencil grip is appropriate
suction which is less likely to suck tissues into
for delicate work, such as vascular and oph-
the tip and, therefore, less likely to cause un-
thalmic surgery. Regardlless of the method of
necessary tissue trauma.
grasping a needle holder, the needle is gener-
There are four basic methods of grasping a
ally grasped perpendicular to the long axis of
 needle holder: (1) thumb-fourth finger grip,
the needle holder and near the tip of the needle
(2) thenar eminence grip, (3) palm grip, and
(Figure 12.17a) for greatest. driving force, near
(4) pencil grip. In the thumb-fourth finger
the midpoint of the needle (Figure 12.17b) for
 grip, the fingers are used to control opening
 general-purpose suturing, and near the suture
and closing of the instrument (Figure 12.16a).
attachment of the needle (Figure 12.17c) for
This method provides excellent control and
 suturing delicate tissues and spanning long dis-
 is recommended for novice surgeons. In the
 tances. When driving or extracting the needle,
thenar eminence grip, the thenar eminence,
 a single rotating motion of the hand is most effi-
thumb, and fourth finger are used to control
cient. The thumb forceps is used to pull the nee-
opening and closing of the instrument. The
 dle through the tissue after the needle holder is
thenar eminence is placed on the upper ring
disengaged (Figure 12.10). In addition to driv-
and the fourth finger is placed in the lower
 ing needles, the needle holder is used to load
ring while the thumb placed along the shaf. of
the scalpel bladle onto the scalpel handle (Fig-
the instrument (Figure 12.16b). This method
ure 12.18a) and to remove the scalpel blade
provides good mobility, and, therefore, is rec-
from the scalpel handle (Figure 12.18b).
 ommended for continuous suture patterns. In
140
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
[b]
enetaa
(c)
(d)
uy ymog pue quq audua tuy ymo-qmy aui (e) siaoy aaau uu 91ai am
are used to control opening and closing of the instrument. (b) The thenar eminence gnip—The thenar
eminence, thumb, and fourth finger are used to control opening and closing of the instrument with the
instrument. (c) The palm gip-The needle holder is gripped with the palm and the five fingers. (d) Pencil
gip—A Castroviejo needle holder is grasped like gripping a pencil in conventional pencil-holding fashion.
INSTRUMENT HANDLING
141
eneastantiner
Gnemstantiner
(a)
(b)
eneastantiner
(c)
Figure 12.17 Holding a suture needle: A needle is generally grasped perpendicular to the long axis of the
needle holder: (a) near the tip of the needle for greatest driving force; (b) near the midpoint of the needle
(og pue sinssy aeoap suns roy apaau aun yo pua ains aun reau (o) ro uuns asodimdieiauis rog
spanning the greatest distance.
142
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 12.18 Loading and removing a scalpel blade: A needle holder is used (a) to grasp the back of the
scalpel blade to load the blade onto the scalpel handle, and (b) to grasp the end of the scalpel blade closest
to the handle to remove the scalpel blade from the scalpel handle.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Busch SJ, ed. Small Animat Surgical Nursing Skills
and Concepts. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
Additional information about instrument handling
2006.
 in small animal surgery can be found in the following
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animatl Surgery,
textbooks:
Srd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
2003.
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animat Surgery, Srd ed. St.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Chapter 13
SURGICAL KNOT TYING
Hun-Young Yoon and Fred Anthony Mann
Proper surgical knot tying is required for suc-
recommended because they are subject to slip-
cessful hemostasis and wound closure. Failure 
page. However, a slip knot. can be intentionally
of a surgical knot can result in hemorrhage or
 used when tying knots in deep cavities or where
wound dehiscence, both which can result in sig-
 maneuvering space is limited. Then, the slip
nificant. patient morbidity. There are three basic
 knot is covered with at least one square knot to
surgical knots: square knot, surgeon's knot, and
 prevent loosening. A surgeon's knot is similar to
slip knot. A granny knot is never considered to
a square knot except that one strand is passed
be an appropriate surgical knot. There are two
through the loop twice on the first throw. The
general methods of tying knots: hand ties and
surgeon's knot can be advantageous for ligation
instrument ties.
of thick vascular pedicles or during wound clo-
A knot consists of at least two throws laid on
sures when tissue tension precludes adequate
top of each other and tightened. Two consecu-
tightening of the first throw of a square knot.
tive simple throws result in a square knot, slip
Hand ties are particularly useful in confined
knot, or granny knot (Figure 13.1). A square
or difficult to reach areas or when sutures
knot is produced by reversing direction on each
have been preplaced, as in thoracotomy clo-
successive simple throw and maintaining even
sure. Hand ties require that suture ends are
tension on both strands as each throw is tight-
 left longer than is needed for an instrument
ened. Failure to maintain even tension on both
tie. There are two-hand (Figure 13.2) and one-
strands or applying upward tension on strands
 hand (Figure 13.3) techniques for hand tying.
often results in a slip knot. A granny knot results
and both can be done in right-handed or left.
from failing to reverse direction on successive
 handed fashion. In this chapter, only the ties
simple throws. The most. reliable configuration
 most. commonly used by the principal author
for a knot is superimposition of a square knot.
 are illustrated. Two-hand technique allows good
The granny knot and slip knot are not usually
 control and accuracy, but it is awkward for tying
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, lst edition.
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
143
144
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
eaeoustauLiurw
(e)
Figure 13.1 Types of knots: (a) single throw, (b) square knot, (c) surgeon's knot, (d) slip knot, and
(e) granny knot.
 in deep cavities and confined spaces. One-hand
 erinary practice because there is less waste of
technique is more adaptable to deep cavities
suture; however, the veterinarian should be ac-
 and confined spaces, but the first knot may need
 complished in both hand and instrument tying
to be a slip knot. Instrument ties (Figure 13.4)
 to be prepared for any situation that will require
are more commonly used than hand ties in vet-
 one or the other.
SURGICAL KNOT YING
145
(a]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 13.2 Two-hand knot tying technique (left-handed). (a) The night and left strands are held in the
is hooked along the medial aspect of the leftindex finger, and the left thumb is passed below and around the
xapu al au jo sdg aui () iauao ind aie qunu pue iauy xapu al ay jo sdu au () sb, premyoeg
finger and thumb, still together, are placed upward through the loop formed by the strands. (e) The right
 strand is grasped between the left index finger and thumb. (f) The right strand is released from the right
hand.
146
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(6)
(h)
(k)
()
Figure 13.2 (Continued) (g) The right strand is pushed downward through the suture loop. (h) The night
strand is returmed to the night hand. (i) Even tension is applied to the suture ends as the throw is tightened.
(j) Single throw is completed. (k) The left strand is hooked along the lateral aspect of the left thumb (the
left thumb is placed to the left of the left strand). (1) The right strand is brought between the index finger
and thumb of the left hand, forming another backward “4".
SURGICAL KNOT YING
147
(m)
(n)
(o)
(p)
o sy au (u) rayaon ind are qu pue auy xapu ai ay go sdy aui (u) (puu) 7't am
the left index finger and thumb, still together, are placed downward through the loop formed by the strands.
(o) The right strand is grasped between the left index finger and thumb. (p) The right strand is released 
from the night hand.
148
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(r)
AOntavien
(s)
(t)
Figure 13.2 (Continued) (q) The right strand is pushed upward through the suture loop. (r) The night
 strand is returned to the right hand. (s) Even tension is applied to the suture ends to tighten the square
knot. (t) The square knot is completed.
SURGICAL KNOT YING
149
(a)
(b)
(o)
(d)
Figure 13.3 One-hand knot tying technique (right-handed). (a) The right strand is placed on the palm of
the right hand and held between the third finger and thumb of the right hand. The left strand is held in the
left hand in similar fashion, but is grasped by the left thumb and the index finger. (b) The right strand is
brought to the left over the left strand (the index finger of the right hand is placed between the two strands)
such that the strand resembles a “4". (c) The distal phalanx of the index finger of the right hand is flexed.
(d) The night strand is drawn through the suture loop using the dorsal surface of the nail of the right index
finger.
150
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(9
(h)
Figure 13.3  (Continued) (e) The right strand is pulled through the loop by the tips of the index and third
fingers of the ight hand. (f) The right strand is pulled all the way through the loop using the index and
third fingers. (g) The right hand grip is shifted to the thumb and index finger, and even tension is applied to
the two strands as the left hand moves away from and the night hand moves toward the surgeon. (h) Single
throw is completed.
SURGICAL KNOT YING
151
i
(k)
(1)
Figure 13.3 (Continued) (i) The third, fourth, and fifth fingers of the right hand are unfolded. (j) The right
hand is flipped over (supinated). (k) The left strand is brought between the right index and third fingers,
forming another "4". (l) The distal phalanx of the right third finger is flexed, and the night strand is drawn
152
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(m)
n
(q)
hand. (n) The thumb-index finger grip is released, and the night strand is held entirely by the third and
fourth fingers to pull it through the loop. (o) The night strand is pulled downward through the loop. (p)
The night hand is pronated, and the right strand is regrasped between the night thumb and index finger.
and the right hand moves away from the surgeon. (q) The square knot is completed.
SURGICAL KNOT YING
153
(a)
(b)
(d)
(e)
Figure 13.4 Instrument tie (night-handed). (a) The strand nearest the operator is wrapped once around
the needle holder to form a loop, and the end of the far piece of suture is grasped with the needle holder.
(b) The strand nearest the operator can be wrapped twice for a surgeon's throw. (c) The strand in the needle
holder is brought toward the operator, and the strand in the opposite hand is moved away from the operator,
as even tension is applied to the two strands. (d) The strand farthest from the operator is wrapped once over
the needle holder to form a loop, and the end of the strand nearest the operator is grasped with the needle
holder. (e) The strand is pulled through the loop away from the operator, and even tension is applied to the
two strands to tighten the knot.
154
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Edlich RF, Long WB. Surgical Knot Tying Man-
比al, Srd ed. Norwalk, Connecticut: Covidien,
 Additional information about knot tying in small an-
2008.
3. Ethicon, Inc. Knot Tying Manual. Somerville, New
imal surgery can be found in the following textbook
and manuals:
Jersey: Ethicon, Inc., 2005.
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Chapter 14
SUTURE MATERIALS AND
BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
Carios H. de M. Souza and Fred Anthony Mann
Suture materials are essential to veterinary
tation are classified as absorbable; whereas
 surgery. They must provide stable wound clo-
most suture materials will eventually be ab-
sure and support until tissue healing has oc-
sorbed. The truly nonabsorbable sutures are
curred. The ideal suture material should have
 polypropylene and stainless steel. Natural ma-
excellent handling characteristics, knot secu-
terials are absorbed through enzymatic degra-
rity, and high tensile strength per diameter ra-
dation by macrophages. Synthetic materials
tio. The suture material should be easily steril-
 are absorbed through nonenzymatic hydroly.
ized, nontoxic, nonallergenic, nonteratogenic,
sis of ester bonds, with final byproducts be-
noncarcinogenic, and should not promote bac-
 ing carbon dioxide and water. With hydrolytic
terial colonization. In addition, the ideal suture
absorption, the rate of suture degradation is
material should be absorbed without causing tis-
not affected by inflammation or infection.
sue reaction, and its absorption rate should not.
Absorbable suture materials commonly used
be influenced by the presence of inflammation
in veterinary practice include: surgical gut,
or changes in body pH. Since there is no single
polyglactin 910 (Coated Vicryl, Ethicon, Inc.,
suture material that fulfills all of the above crite-
Summerville, NJ), polyglycolic acid (Dexon
ria, the surgeon must choose the one that best.
II, Covidien Animal Health and Dental Di-
applies to the particular animal and tissue being
vision, Mansfield, MA), poliglecaprone 
25
sutured.
(Monocryl, Ethicon, Inc., Summerville, NJ), gly-
Suture materials are classified as absorbable
comer 631 (Biosyn, Covidien Animal Health
or nonabsorbable, natural or synthetic, and
and Dental Division, Mansfield, MA), glycol-
monofilament or multifilament, based on com-
ide /lactide copolymer (Polysorb, Covidien An-
position and structure. Materials that lose
imal Health and Dental Division, Mansfield,
tensile strength within 60 days of implan-
MA), polydioxanone (PDS II, Ethicon, Inc.,
Summerville, NJ), and polyglyconate (Maxon,
Covidien Animal Health and Dental Division,
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
Mansfeld, MA). Table 14.1 summarizes proper-
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
ties of these commonly used absorbable suture
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
materials.
155
156
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Table 14.1
 Properties of some common absorbable suture materials
Approximate
loss of tensile
Complete
strength at 14
 absorption
Reactivity
Knot
Name
days (%)
(days)
Strengtha
Handlinga
(rank)b
security
Chromic gut
50
90
+
++
6
Polyglactin 910
30
56-70
+++
+++
5
+++
 Polyglycolic acid
35
90
+++
+++
6
+++
 Poliglecaprone
60-80
90-110
+++
++++
4
++++
Polydioxanone
20
180-240
++++
+++
++
Polyglyconate
25
180
++++
++++
1
++++
Glycomer 631
25
90-180
NA
NA
2
NA
Glycolide/lactide
20
56-70
NA
NA
NA
NA
copolymer
Worst = +; best =
+++
Lowest reactivity = 1; highest reactivity = 6. [Note: While the tissue reactivity of gut is significant, the
relative reactivity of the synthetic absorbable suture matenials does not seem to be of noticeable clinical
importance.]
'Studies in rats show poliglecaprone to be less reactive than polydioxanone.
Nonabsorbable
suture materials include
ABSORBABLE SUTURE MATERIALS
natural and synthetic fibers. Silk is the most.
commonly used nonabsorbable natural fber.
 Surgical gut (catgut) is a natural multiflament.
Synthetic
 nonabsorbable
suture
materials
suture made from either intestinal submucosa
include polyester
(Ethibond,
Ethicon,
Inc.,
(ovine) or serosa (bovine). It consists of 90%
 Summerville, NJ:
;Mersilene,
Ethicon,
Inc.,
 collagen. When cured with chromic salts, sur
Summerville, NJ; and TiCron, Covidien An-
gical gut has increased strength, less inflam-
imal Health and Dental Division, Mansfield,
 matory reaction, and slower absorption. Sur-
MA), polybutester (Novafl, Covidien Animal
gical gut is absorbed by enzymatic digestion
Health and Dental Division, Mansfield, MA),
 and phagocytosis by macrophages. Inflamma-
nylon, polymerized caprolactam (Braunamid,
tion, infection, and catabolic states increase the
 Jorgensen Laboratories, Inc., Loveland, CO),
rate of absorption. Chromic gut is diffcult. to
polypropylene, and stainless steel.
.Natural
handle, has poor knot. security when wet, and
fbers incite significant tissue reaction; thus,
has become less popular due to wide availability
synthetic nonabsorbable materials are usually
 of greater quality synthetic absorbable sutures.
 preferred. A number of discrepancies exist.
 Polyglactin 910 is a braided multiflament
in the  veterinary
literature
related to
the
 synthetic suture material made of 90% glycol-
characteristics of specific suture materials. The
 ide and 10% L-lactide. Coating of polyglactin
information below (including the tables) is de-
910with
 calcium  stearate
and a second
copolymer
(polyglactin 370) increases han-
 pany catalogues, http:/ /ecatalog.ethicon.com/
dling characteristics and decreases tissue drag.
sutures,
 http:/ /www.covidien.com/syneture,
but also decreases knot security. Polyglactin
and the personal experience of the authors.
 910 has greater initial strength than surgical
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
157
gut and polyglycolic acid. It elicits minimal
 has caused less tissue reaction than polyglactin
-ay aq paqosqe si pue uonnan Aoneu
910 and polydioxanone. Poliglecaprone 25 has
drolysis. Polyglactin 910 is best used in tis-
been shown to cause mild inflammatory reac-
sues that heal with a rapid increase in ten-
tion when used to close the linea alba of cats.
sile strength, such as the urinary bladder and
Glycomer 631 is a synthetic monofilament sul-
the gastrointestinal tract. When compared to
ture made of a combination of glycolide, diox-
polydioxanone, polyglactin 910 has been shown 
anone, and trimethylene carbonate. It displays
to elicit less inflammatory reaction in the
very little tissue drag. Glycomer 631 loses 25% of
linea alba of cats. A rapidly absorbed type of
 its tensile strength in 2 weeks. Effective wound
polyglactin 910 (Vicryl-Rapide, Ethicon, Inc.,
support is maintained for 3 weeks and absorp-
Summerville, NJ) was developed for situations
tion is complete in 3-6 months.
where the surgeon desires to minimize the time
Glycolide /lactide copolymer is a braided syn-
tissues are exposed to suture material. Vicryl-
thetic suture covered with a copolymer of capro-
Rapide is polyglactin 910 that is irradiated to
lactone, glycolide, and calcium stearoyl lacty-
increase absorption rate. Vicryl-Rapide is re-
late. The manufacturer indicates that. effective
ported by the manufacturer to be the fastest-
wound support is maintained for three weeks
absorbing synthetic suture, losing 50% of its ten-
 and absorption is complete in 56-70 days.
'skep v1-o1 ie %ooi pue shep g ie qsuans as
Polydioxa
inoneis
a monoflament synthetic
 Polyglycolic acid is a multiflament braided
suture made from a polymer of paradioxanone.
synthetic suture material with greater initial
 It has greater tensile strength compared
to
strength than surgical gut. Also, in compari-
 surgical gut and lower tissue drag compared
son to surgical gut, polyglycolic acid incites less
 to braided absorbable sutures. Polydioxanone
inflammatory reaction. Polyglycolic acid is ab-
has notable memory, which decreases its han-
sorbed by hydrolysis and has a pattern of loss of
dling quality, and has the lowest knot. security
strength similar to polyglactin 910. It has good
 of the synthetic absorbable sutures. Polydiox-
handling characteristics, but tissue drag and rel-
anone loses approximately 20% of its tensile
atively low knot. security are drawbacks. Polygly-
strength in two weeks and is used in tissues
colic acid may be less desirable for use in the
where long-term strength is needed, such as the
oral cavity and in infected urinary bladder due
linea alba. Polydioxanone may cause more skin
to the alkaline pH, which increases its absorp-
reaction than poliglecaprone 25 and glycomer
tion rate. Polyglycolic acid can be used in intesti-
631, but tissue reactions can be expected to be
nal anastomosis and in circumstances where
minimal with all three of these suture materials.
 long-term tensile strength is not a requirement.
 Polyglyconate is a monofilament synthetic su-
Poliglecaprone 25 is a monofilament syn-
ture material with properties similar to poly-
thetic suture material made from copolymers
dioxanone. It maintains approximately 75% of
of glycolide and epsilon caprolactone. It has
its tensile strength in 14 days. Polyglyconate
greater initial tensile strength than chromic
 has less memory and suture kinking and bet-
gut and is designed to lose most of its tensile 
 ter knot security than polydioxanone. Like poly
strength over 14 days. Poliglecaprone 25 is used
 dioxanone, polyglyconate incites minimal tissue
in tissues that gain tensile strength rapidly, such
reaction.
as urinary bladder and subcutaneous tissue.
 Antimicrobial sutures have been promoted
Poliglecaprone 25 has excellent handling char-
to decrease the chance of surgical wound
acteristics and knot security. Very few studies
infection.
Polyglactin
910
(Coated  Vicryl
have investigated the tissue reaction caused by
PLUS, Ethicon, Inc., Summerville, NJ), poligle-
poliglecaprone 25 in comparison to other syn-
caprone 25 (Monocryl PLUS, Ethicon, Inc.,
thetic sutures. In rat studies, poliglecaprone 25
 Summerville, NJ), and polydioxanone (PDS II
158
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
PLUS, Ethicon, Inc., Summerville, NJ) are cur-
security. Polybutester has high elasticity (up
rently available with the impregnated antibac-
to 30%) without losing tensile strength and
terial triclosan.In vitro studies show that tri-
can be used in tissues where prolonged wound
closan can inhibit the growth of staphylococcal
 healing is expected to occur, such as linea alba
species, but clinical studies showing the effects
 and tendons. In addition, because the suture
of triclosan-impregnated sutures on infection
 allows significant. compliance, polybutester has
rates are not currently available. Blinded stud-
been used in venous and arterial anastomosis
ies have not. shown differences in the handling
 and skin.
characteristics of traditional versus triclosan-
Nylon is a polyamide nonabsorbable suture
impregnated sutures.
 material derived from hexamethylenediamine
and adipic acid. It is available as monoflament.
 and multiflament, but monoflament is more
NONABSORBABLE SUTURE MATERIALS
widely used. Nylon has good handling charac-
teristics and knot. security, although memory
Silk is the only natural nonabsorbable suture
 and stiffness are negative factors. Nylon is com-
material in common use today. Silk is a braided
monly used as a skin suture due to its elastic ca-
multifilament suture made from the cocoon of
 pabilities, which are important since post surgi-
the silk worm. Silk elicits intense inflammatory
 cal inflammation and edema are common, and
reaction and has marked capillarity. It is inex-
 nonelastic suture will cut the swelling tissue. Ny.
 pensive, has excellent handling characteristics,
 lon is metabolized over 2-3 years by hydrolysis.
and has excellent knot security. Coating (wax
 In this process, adipic acid is released, which has
or silicone) decreases suture capillarity and the
antibacterial effects. Most. suture companies dis-
tissue's inflammatory response at the expense
 tribute nylon suture. One company distributes
of knot. security. Silk must not be applied in in-
 a fluorescent monoflament nylon suture (Fluo-
fected tissues since it will decrease the number
 rescent Supramid, S. Jackson, Inc., Alexandria,
of bacteria necessary to cause a wound infec-
VA) that makes the suture easy to find at the
tion. Also, silk and can cause granulomas when
time of removal.
used in hollow viscera. Silk loses most of its ten-
 Polymerized caprolactam is another polya
sile strength in 6 months. Today, silk is still com-
mide suture. It is a twisted multiflament su-
monly used in vascular surgery (not as vascular
ture that is coated with a polyethylene sheath
grafts) and as inexpensive and dependable lig-
to minimize capillarity. Polymerized caprolac-
ature material.
tam has superior tensile strength compared to
 Polyester is a nonabsorbable multifilament
nylon, catgut, and silk, and incites less tissue
material made from polyethylene terephtha-
reaction when compared to catgut and silk. Ex-
late. Polyester is stronger than surgical gut and
 cessive swelling with the possibility of sinus for-
silk and does not lose significant strength over
 mation has been reported; therefore, polymer
time. Polyester incites a severe inflammatory
ized caprolactam should be reserved for skin
reaction and has marked tissue drag. Coating
 suturing only.
with polybutilate decreases tissue drag and in-
 Polypropylene is a nonabsorbable synthetic
creases handling characteristics at the expense
 suture material that displays minimal tissue
of knot security. Polyester must. not be used in
 drag and moderate strength and knot secu-
infected wounds.
rity. It tends to be stiff and have significant.
Polybutester is formed from a monofilament.
memory, which decreases its handling char-
copolymer of polybutyline and polytetramethy-
acteristics. Polypropylene is the one of the
lene. It elicits minimal tissue reactivity and
 least thrombogenic sutures available and is
displays good handling characteristics and knot.
 commonly used in vascular surgery. Most suture
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
159
SnConotadie
Figure 14.1  Skin closure using stainless steel staples.
companies distribute polypropylene suture.
 cific suture pattern may vary depending on the
One  company distributes a fluorescent
area being sutured, the length of the incision,
monoflament polypropylene suture (Fluorofl,
the tension at. the suture line, and the specific
Intervet/Schering-Plough
Animal
Health,
 need for apposition, inversion, or eversion of
Millsboro, DE) that makes the suture easy to
the tissues.
find at the time of removal.
Suture patterns can be broadly categorized
Stainless steel is biologically inert and the
as interrupted or continuous. Commonly
strongest of the suture materials. It is commonly
employed interrupted suture patterns include
used in orthopedics in the form of stainless steel
the simple interrupted (Figure 14.2), cruciate
implants, but is uncommonly used as a suture
(Figure 14.3), figure-of-eight (Figure 14.4), and
material. Stainless steel suture has a tendency
interrupted intradermal (Figure 14.5). Com-
 to cut through tissue and has poor handling
 monly used continuous suture patterns include
characteristics. Although stainless steel sutures
simple continuous (Figure 14.6), continuous
are not routinely used for closure of soft tis-
intradermal (Figures 14.7 and 14.8), and
sues, stainless steel skin staples (Figure 14.1) are
Ford interlocking (Figure 14.9). Some suture
 becoming increasingly popular due to easy ap-
 patterns, like the Lembert (Figure 14.10) can
plication and improved speed in closure, com-
be either interrupted or continuous. Typically,
 pared to conventional suturing.
continuous patterns such as the Cushing (Fig-
ure 14.11), Connell (Figure 14.12), and contin-
BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
uous Lembert (Figures 14.10a and 14.10b) are
used when inversion is desired, but an inter-
A variety of suture patterns have been described
rupted pattern such as the interrupted Lembert.
for use in veterinary surgery. The use of a spe-
(Figure 14.10c) or Halsted (Figure 14.13) is
160
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
aBontatieom
Figure 14.2 Simple interrupted sutures (skin closure demonstrated).
aBonotaitp
aeootatiem
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.3 Cruciate suture (skin closure demonstrated): (a) with and (b) without suture passes numbered.
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
161
aConotaJium
(a)
(b)
s  (e) (np a s) s (o op ai) r ite am
tightmess on this model; therefore, this figure-ofeight suture appears tighter than would be desired for
ordinary small animal skin incision closure.]
162
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
BaBonotaltico
Figure 14.5 Interrupted intradermal (subcuticular) suture with bunied knot.
Figure 14.6 Simple continuous suture pattem. Skin closure is demonstrated; however, this pattem is more
 commonly used in subcutaneous tissues and for linea alba closure.
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
163
aeontatieom
Figure 14.7 Continuous intradermal (subcuticular) suture pattern with vertical suture bites. The needle
enters perpendicular to the skin edge.
BnBonotartico
Figure 14.8 Continuous intradermal (subcuticular) suture pattem with horizontal suture bites. The needle
enters parallel to the skin edge.
164
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
BBonotatieoan
Figure 14.9  Ford interlocking suture pattern.
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.10 Lembert suture pattern: (a) continuous patterm, such as for gasthic or urinary bladder closure,
showing suture passage without the tightening that is usually done with each passage; (b) final appearance
 of continuous Lembert pattern in a urinary bladder demonstrating how this suture is not readily apparent
on the serosal surface when properly tightened; and
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
165
uCsxstautinm
(c)
Figure 14.10 (Continued) (c) interrupted Lembert suture.
Bontartie
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.1l Cushing suture pattern: (a) demonstration of suture passage and (b) final appearance when
properly tightened. Note the scalloped appearance of the finished product with no suture showing except
for the knot at each end.
166
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
SBonotaltieo
a
(b)
Figure 14.12 Connell suture patterm: (a) demonstration of suture passage and (b) final appearance when
properly tightened (same as drawing in Figure 14.11b) in a gastrotomy closure. Note the scalloped appearance
of the finished product with no suture showing except for the knot at each end (only one end visible, which
is to the right in the photograph of the finished product).
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
167
Figure 14.13  Halsted suture pattern.
occasionally used to invert. tissue. Eversion of tfion minimized with good apposition of wound
tissue can be accomplished with a vertical mat-
edges. Inverting sutures (Table 14.3; Figures
tress (Figure 14.14) or horizontal mattress (Fig-
14.10-14.13 and 14.18) are commonly used to
ure 14.15) suture pattern. A specialized mattress
close hollow viscera in gastric and urogenital
suture, the Mayo mattress (also called the vest.
surgery. Inversion decreases exposure of the su-
 over pants suture, Figure 14.16), results in over-
 ture when properly tightened and, therefore,
lapping of one tissue edge over the other. One 
may decrease contamination and adhesion for-
situation where the Mayo mattress is used is in
mation. The Lembert suture can also be used
hernia repair. The Mayo mattress is especially
for fascial imbrications such as done during
useful for closing the linea alba in repair of a
correction of patellar luxation and for closure
ventral abdominal hernia or dehiscence.
of muscle stumps when a limb is amputated.
Suture patterns are also categorized in three
Tension-relieving suture patterns (Table 14.4;
different groups: appositional, inverting, and
Figures 14.14-14.16, 14.19, and 14.20) are used
tension-relieving sutures. Appositional sutures
to decrease stress on suture lines, such as in
(Table 14.2; Figures 14.2-14.9 and 14.17) are
 reconstructive skin surgery and herniorrhaphy.
ideal when there is no excessive tension on
 Tension-relieving sutures are also used in tis-
the incision, and are commonly used for clo-
sues where gain of wound strength is protracted,
sure of skin, intestine, and urinary bladder.
such as in nerves and tendons. In reconstructive
Wound healing will be optimal and scar forma-
 surgery, skin edges are often advanced using
168
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
BQontat
Figure 14.14  Interrupted vertical mattress.
Bonotat.con
aeonotaton
(a)
(b)
Figure 14.15 Horizontal mattress: (a) interrupted and (b) continuous.
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
169
Eaertantia
Figure 14.16 Mayo mattress (vest over pants) suture pattern.
Table 14.2  Appositional suture patterns 
Pattern
Features
Uses
 Simple interupted (Figure
Easy to perform. Provides secure closure.
Skin, muscle fascia,
14.2)
Equal tension throughout the wound.
 gastrointestinal tract
Can cause eversion of edges if excessive
knot tightening is applied.
[nterrupted cruciate and
 Stronger closure compared to simple
Skin, muscle fascia
figure-of-eight sutures
interrupted. Less skin eversion
(Figures 14.3 and 14.4)
compared to simple in terrupted.
 [nterrupted intradermal
 Deep superficial-superficial deep pattern.
 Skin apposition (with
(subcuticular) (Figure
buried knots)
14.5)
 Simple continuous (Figure
 Fast and economical pattern. Leads to
Subcutis, linea alba,
14.6)
 air/water tight seals. Knot/suture failure
 stomach, and small
may lead to complete dehiscence.
intestine
Continuous intradermal
Horizontal or vertical pattern. Results in
 Meticulous skin
(subcuticular) (Figures
excellent apposition and aesthetics if
 apposition, especially
14.7 and 14.8)
 carefully and correctly applied.
when skin sutures are
 not performed
Ford interlocking (Figure
Greater secunity in case of a broken suture
Skin
14.9)
(dehiscence usually incomplete).
Gambee (Figure 14.17)
 Modified simple interrupted. Prevents 
Small intestinal
mucosal eversion.
 apposition
170
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 14.17  Gambee suture.
a tension-relieving technique called walking
 knot), the skin advances because the fascial
sutures (Figure 14.20). Walking sutures are
suture bite is taken closer to the eventual
simple interrupted sutures placed in the sub-
wound edge than the suture bite in the dermis.
cutaneous space that engage (1) the dermis
 Staggered rows of walking sutures are placed
(intradermal), beginning some distance back
until the skin edges can touch each other with-
from the skin edge, and (2) the underlying
 out tension. Synthetic absorbable suture mate-
muscle fascia toward the center of the wound.
 rial (such as polydioxanone) is used for walking
As each suture is tied (requires a surgeon's
sutures.
Table 14.3  Inverting suture patterns
Pattern
Features
Uses
Lembert (Figure 14.10)
 Similar to a vertical mattress except it
Closure of hollow viscera.
inverts tissue. Interrupted or
Imbrication of fascia.
continuous.
Cushing (Figure 14.11)
Suture bites parallel to incision. Does
Closure of hollow viscera.
not penetrate mucosa.
Connell (Figure 14.12)
 Same as Cushing pattern, but penetrates
Closure of hollow viscera.
the mucosa.
Halsted (Figure 14.13)
Variation of interrupted Lembert (looks
 Fascia im brication.
 like a combination of Lembert and
horizontal mattress that results in
tissue inversion).
Purse-string (Figure 14.18)
Variation of Lembert.
Closure around ostomy tubes.
Suture bites progress in a circle.
Temporary anal closure to
prevent fecal con tamination
during surgery and to treat
rectal prolapse.
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
171
2
3
Figure 14.18  Purse-string suture pattern.
Table 14.4 Tension-relieving suture patterns
Type
Features
Uses
 [nterrupted vertical
 Everting, but can be appositional if
Skin, oral mucosa, and fascia
mattress (Figure 14.14)
carefully placed.
Horizontal mattress
Everting. Can potentially cause decrease
Skin, subcutis, and fascia
(Figure 14.15)
blood supply of the incorporated 
tissue. Usually interrupted, but can be
continuous.
 Mayo mattress (vest over
 Overlaps one tissue edge over the other.
Hermiorrhaphy, such as
pants) (Figure 14.16)
 repair of linea alba
dehiscence
Near and far vaniations
 May cause eversion. Diminish tension on
 Skin and fascia
(Figure 14.19)
the wound edges.
 Walking sutures (Figure
 Placed in staggered rows. Advance skin 
Closure of large skin defects
14.20)
edges toward each other.
172
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
[a]
(b)
Figure 14.19 Near and far variations: (a) far-near, near-far and (b) far-far, near-near
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
173
[a]
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 14.20  Placement of a walking suture in a formalin-fixed specimen of canine skin and abdominal wall:
(a) The skin to be advanced is undermined judiciously leaving islands of loose connective tissue attaching
the dermis to the underlying fascia in order to preserve blood supply to the skin. (b) A suture bite is taken
in the dermis with a finger of the nondominant hand (not seen) serving as a backstop to ensure that the
needle does not penetrate the epidermis. [Note: fluorescent polypropylene suture is used here for purposes
of demonstration, whereas synthetic absorbable suture would be used clinically.] (c) This close-up view
demonstrates proper needle passage in the dermis. (d) Pulling the strands of suture in the dermal suture
bite confirms adequate engagement of the dermis and assists in determining how far to stretch the skin for
the muscle fascia engagement. (e) The needle engages the muscle fascia toward the center of the wound
closer to the proposed wound edge than the dermal bite so that the skin will advance when the knot is tied.
(f) A surgeon's knot (followed by a square knot) is necessary because the tendency of the dermis to retract
will make it difficult to maintain tightness of the first throw of a square knot while the second throw is being
tied.
174
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(g)
(h)
i
(k)
Figure 14.20 (Continued) (g) As the surgeon's throw is tightened, a dimple will occur in the epidermis at
the point of dermal engagement. The suture must not be visible in this dimple when viewed on the skin
surface. (h) The dimple may be pushed by an assistant's finger toward the muscle fascia engagement site to
make tying the knot easier. With this maneuver, the assistant may roll the skin edge back as demonstrated
here to allow the surgeon to visualize the knot as it is tied. (i) The completed knot advances the skin edge as
is demonstrated here. (j) When the suture strands are cut the free portion of the skin typically obscures the
knot, but the knot remains visible in this fixed specimen. (k) A dimple should be present in the skin at the
 position of each walking suture, but the suture should not penetrate the epidermis and, therefore, should
not be visible on the skin.
SUTURE MATERIALS AND BASIC SUTURE PATTERNS
175
REFERENCES
after immersion in canine unine with or without
bactenia. Am / Vet Res 2004;65:847-853.
1. Rochat MC, Pope ER, Carson WL, Wagner-Mann 
 8. Ribeiro CMB, Silva Jr VA, Silva Neto JC, Vasconce-
CC, et al. Comparison of the degree of abdomi-
los BCE. Estudo clinico e histopatologico da rea-
 nal adhesion formation associated with chromic
cao tecidual intema e exterma dos fios monofil-
gut and polyprolylene suture materials. Am / Vet
amentos de nylon a poliglecaprone 25 em ratos.
Res 1996;57:943-947.
Acta Cir Bras 2005;20:284-291.
 2. Kirpensteijn J, Maarschalkerweerd RJ, Koeman
9. Al-Qattan MM. Vicryl Rapide@ versus Vicry1@
JP, Kooistra HS, et al. Comparison of two suture
suture in skin closure of the hand in children:
 materials for intradermal skin closure in dogs.
a randomized prospective study. J Hand Surg
Vet Q 1997;19:20-22.
2005;30B:90-91.
3. Runk A, Allen SW, Mahaffey EA. Tissue reactivity
10. Hochberg J, Meyer KM, Marion MD. Suture
choice and other methods of skin closure. Surg
to polyglecaprone in the feline linea alba. Vet Surg
1999;28:466-471.
Clin North Am 2009;89:627-641.
4. Molea G, Schonauer F, Bifulco G, D'Angelo D.
Comparative study on biocomapatibility and ab-
sorption times of three absorbable monofila-
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
ment suture materials (polydioxanone, poligle-
caprone, glycomer 631). Br J Plast Surg 2000;
53:137-141.
Additional information about suture materials and
5. Nary Filho H, Matsumoto MA, Matista AC, Lopes
pumoy aq ueo Aiaems ieuue eus u suaned ains
LC, et al. Comparative study of tissue response
in the following textbooks:
to polyglecaprone 25, polyglactin 910, and poly-
tetrafluoroethylene suture matenials in rats. Braz
1. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
Dent / 2002;13:86-91.
Louis, Missouni: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
6. Tan RHH, Bell RJW, Dowling BA, Dart AJ. Su-
2. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
ture matenials: composition and applications
 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
2003.
140-145.
3. Edlich RF, Long WB. Surgical Knot Tying Manual,
 7. Greenberg CB, Davidson EB, Bellmer DD, Mor-
Srd ed. Norwalk, Connecticut: Covidien, 2008.
ton RJ, et al. Evaluation ofthe tensile strengths of
4. Ethicon, Inc. Knot Tying Manual. Somerville, New
four monoflament absorbable suture materials
Jersey: Ethicon, Inc., 2005.
Chapter 15
BASICWOUNDHEALNG
AND WOUND CLOSURE
Carios H. de M. Souza and Fred Anthony Mann
A wound can be defined as the loss of con-
which lasts 5-10 minutes, occurs in response
tinuity of the structure of the body resulting
to catecholamines and local mast cell products
from an injury. Wound healing is the reestab-
(serotonin and bradykinin) to temporarily de-
lishment of tissue continuity. Healing of wounds
 crease blood loss from small vessels. Local va-
occurs through well orchestrated cellular and
 sodilatation follows, in response to histamine
biochemical events. For the purpose of teach-
 and interleukin-8 (IL-8), which allows plasma
ing, these events can be explained by phases
 and intravascular cellular components to reach
where activation of different. cellular elements
the extravascular space. By the action of the
and specific signaling molecules takes place. In 
damaged blood vessels, platelets, and clotting
living organisms, the processes of wound heal-
 factors contained in the blood, fibrin is gener-
ing are interwoven and a clear demarcation be-
 ated and a blood clot is formed. Fibrin in as-
tween phases does not occur. The three broad
sociation with fbronectin and activated factor
phases of wound healing are (1) inflammation
XIII generate the provisional extracellular ma-
and debridement, (2) repair (also called prolif-
 trix, creating a scaffold for cell migration and
eration), and (3) maturation.
early collagen deposition.
The inflammation that occurs after creation
 of a wound is characterized by migration of
INFLAMMATION AND DEBRIDEMENT
leukocytes from the intravascular space into the
PHASE
wound bed. Initially, neutrophils constitute the
majority of leukocytes in the wound, but their
The wound is flled with blood immediately af-
 numbers are soon exceeded by macrophages.
ter injury. After clotting, the blood becomes the
Tissue macrophages and mast cells are acti-
first barrier to the outside environment. Tran-
vated at the time of injury and are respon
sient vasoconstriction of local blood vessels,
sible for the release of prostaglandins and
leukotrienes, which attract neutrophils to the
Fundamentats of Small Animat Surgery, 1st edition.
wound. Macrophages also produce interleukin-
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
1 (IL-1), which stimulates endothelial cells to
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 produce IL-8, also important for neutrophil
176
BASIC WOUND HEALING AND WOUND CLOSURE
177
chemotaxis. The neutrophils and macrophages
accumulation of collagen in the wound, sepa
reach the affected area by margination, attach-
rates the repair phase from the inflammatory
ment, and diapedesis. Once at the wound site,
phase. The combination of large numbers of fi-
neutrophils release proteinases and superoxide
broblasts and the formation of new capillaries
radicals that degrade necrotic tissue and kill 
gives the granulation tissue its red fleshy and
bacteria, respectively. Although important, neu-
 granular appearance. The transition from pro-
trophils are not essential for wound healing.
visional extracellular matrix to granulation tis-
The short-lived neutrophils degenerate and die,
sue is usually evident by 3-5 days after initial
and together with degraded tissue and wound
wounding. The period prior to granulation tis-
 fluid, form the wound exudate known as pus.
sue formation is also called the lag phase due
 Blood monocytes differentiate into macro-
to the lack of gain in wound strength. The pres-
phages in the wound. Macrophages are essen-
ence of granulation tissue markedlly increases
tial for wound healing. They produce a variety
the wound's resistance to infection. Granula-
of cytokines that potentiate the immune re-
tion tissue also serves as a surface for epithelial
sponse. Macrophages also produce fbronectin
 cell movement and provides myofibroblasts for
and a variety of growth factors, such
as
wound contraction.
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF),
Angiogenesis is the formation of new cap-
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), epider-
 illaries from vessels present at the limits of
 mal growth factor (EGF), and fbroblast growth
the wound. Angiogenesis results from the mi-
factor (FGF) . These growth factors stimulate mi-
 gration and proliferation of endothelial cells
tosis and are essential for cell proliferation to
in response to growth factors produced by
Occur. Macrophages are capable of phagocyto-
 macrophages, such as VEGF, FGF, transforming
sis of large particles and are vital to the debride-
 growth factor beta (TGF β), angiogenin, and an-
ment process of the wound. Their presence in 
giopoetin. The migration of endothelial cells
the wound decreases as the wound becomes free
and the proliferation of endothelium from the
of necrotic tissue and bacteria.
wound margins are regulated by the extracellu-
 As the production of prostaglandins, leuko-
lar matrix (ECM) . As wound healing progresses,
trienes, and cytokines decrease, fewer cells are
proteins also present in the ECM (i.e., trom-
attracted to the wound bed. However, chronic
bospondin and angiostatin) are responsible for
wounds, especially those containing foreign
apoptosis of endothelial cells and decrease in
matter, usually continue to feature increased
the number of capillaries. Capillary death gives
numbers of macrophages, which can coalesce
the wound a pale appearance characteristic of
and become very large and multinucleated (ep-
 old granulation tissue.
ithelioid macrophages). Growth factors and cy-
Fibroplasia is the proliferation of wound f-
tokines prodluced by macrophages stimulate fi-
 broblasts and the consequent. prodluction of col-
broblasts to produce and eventually modify the
 lagen. Growth factors (including PDGF, FGF,
provisional matrix, which becomes granulation
 and TGFβ) and proteins called integrin recep-
tissule.
tors present in the ECM are responsible for the
attraction and migration of fibroblasts into the
wound, respectively. Fibroblasts and epithelial
REPAIR (PROLIFERATIVE) PHASE
cells express integrins on their surface. Binding
to the integrin receptors stimulates and guides
The repair phase of wound healing includes
the movement. of both fibroblasts and epithe-
angiogenesis, fbroplasia, epithelialization, and
 lial cells to cover the wound. The migration of
wound contraction. The appearance of in- f
fibroblasts into the wound leads to increased
creased numbers of fbroblasts, which leads to
  a     
178
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
predominant type of collagen in the wound.
the wound becomes stellate in appearance.
Initially, collagen type Ill predominates, but col-
Contraction of the wound ceases as the ten-
lagen type I becomes the most common type
 sion on the surrounding skin equals contract-
of collagen as the wound is filled with fibrob-
 ing forces. The end result of contraction is
lasts. The greatest increase in collagen content.
 usually beneficial by decreasing the diameter
occurs between 7 and 14 days affter wound-
 of the wound. Around tubular structures and
ing. After this period, the numbers of fbrob-
 joints, excessive contraction may lead to stric-
lasts and new capillaries decrease, the collagen
tures and gait abnormalities, respectively, a pro-
content stabilizes, and the granulation tissue
cess referred to as contracture.
changes into a relatively acellular scar. Gain-
ing of strength continues slowly over several
months, although the scar tissue never achieves
MATURATION PHASE
the strength of the original intact tissues.
Epithelialization is the covering of the wound
Maturation is the phase of wound healing char-
with new epithelial cells. The early events of ep-
 acterized by progressive gain of tissue strength.
ithelialization include mobilization and migra-
As the wound matures, the ECM progressively
tion of epithelial cells from the wound edges. In
 becomes scar. Collagen deposition and gain in
partial-thickness skin wounds, epithelialization
tissue strength are marked in the first. 7-14 days
occurs almost immediately, with mobilization
 and then decrease. Despite the initial rapid gain
of epithelial cells from the wound edges and
 in strength, wounded tissues attain only 20%
skin appendages. In full-thickness wounds, for-
 of their final strength in the first three weeks
mation of granulation tissue is necessary before
 after wounding. Tissue strength continues to
epithelialization can occur. In order to migrate,
 improve as collagen fibers rearrange and cross-
the epithelial cells at the edges of the wound
 linkage of collagen fibers increases. Equilib-
must change their phenotype and disconnect
 rium between ECM degradation by matrix met-
from neighboring cells. Up-regulation of ma-
 alloproteinases and inhibition of degradation
trix metalloproteinases to act on the basement
 by tissue inhibitors of metalloproteinases is
membrane, change in the pattern of surface
 slowly achieved. Maturation may take months
integrins, and up-regulation of microtubules
or years, but still, the final tensile strength of the
and other contractile proteins, are some of the
scar is only 70-80% of normal tissue. In fact, the
     s
process
of wound maturation continues
cells. Once cells come in contact with each
for the life of the animal, with only two tissues
other, their movement ceases (contact inhibi-
capable of returning to 100% of the tissue's un-
tion), the phenotypic changes reverse, and a
wounded strength: urinary bladder and bone.
new basement membrane is formed. In large
 open wounds, where complete contraction does
not occur, epithelialization continues. A thin
WOUND CLOSURE
layer of epithelial cells covers the wound in such
cases. This thin layer is easily traumatized, and
Local wound factors, additional injuries, and
repetitive trauma may prevent epithelialization
time elapsed since the creation of the wound
from being complete.
 must be considered prior to wound closure in
Wound contraction is a process that de-
order to increase the chances of uncomplicated
creases the size of a wound. Wound contraction
healing. Knowledge of how the wound was cre-
is achieved by the migration of myofbroblasts
 ated (incision by a sharp blade, gunshot, car ac-
toward the center of the wound. As the wound
cident, etc.) is of extreme importance to deter
contracts, the surrounding skin stretches and
 mine the expected amount of tissue trauma and
BASIC WOUND HEALING AND WOUND CLOSURE
179
chances of wound contamination and necrosis.
material (dirt, asphalt, feces, etc.). Debride-
Wounds can be managed by primary closure, de-
ment of necrotic tissue should be performed
layed primary closure, secondary closure, and
daily until additional necrosis is not. detected
second intention healing. First-intention heal-
 and a healthy bed of granulation tissue covers
ing refers to surgical closure of a wound with the
the wound (longer than 5 days). Advancement
intent of having the apposed wound edges heal
 of local skin with walking sutures, skin flaps, or
to each other without a need for epithelium to
skin grafts may be required for closure.
migrate across a granulation bed. All three of
Second intention healing is nonclosure of a
the above mentioned closures are performed to
 wound. Closure is achieved naturally as previ-
achieve first-intention healing, whereas second-
ously described in this chapter. Second inten-
tion healing is dependent on wound contrac-
 position of wound edges.
tion and epithelialization. Small uncomplicated
Primary closure is closure of a wound soon
wounds or wounds where local or distant tissues
after it is created. A planned surgical incision is
are not available for closure may be suitable
the most. obvious example of a wound suitable
 for second intention healing. Second intention
for primary closure. Clean wounds can be man-
healing should be avoided in wounds adjacent.
aged by wound cleaning and primary closure
to tubular structures (perianal wounds), or in
if within a few (preferably 6) hours of wound
 periarticular wounds, due to the risk of stricture
creation. In such wounds, there should be min-
imal, if any, need for debridement. At wound
evaluation, the surgeon must decide that the
chances of additional loss of tissue viability and
MANAGEMENT OF ACUTE TRAUMATIC
infection will be minimal after closure. In addi-
WOUNDS AND DECIDING WHEN AND
tion, primary closure should result in minimal
HOW tO ClOSe thEM
tension on wound edges in order to minimize
the chances for dehiscence.
General practitioners and veterinarians who
 Delayed primary closure is closure of a
practice emergency medicine are often pre-
wound after a delay to determine wound via-
sented with wounds that have just. occurred,
bility, but before the onset. of granulation tis-
and what veterinarians do to initially manage
sue. Delayed primary closure is employed when
these wounds may dictate the ultimate outcome
there is minimal to moderate tissue damage,
of the definitive treatment. The remainder of
 but the chances of contamination progressing
this chapter is written to stimulate the reader
to infection are significant. Cleaning, debride-
to think about the decisions involved in acute
ment, and bandaging are performed until the
wound management and accompanying antibi-
wound is suitable for closure. Delayed primary
 otic therapy that may (or may not) be indicate d.
closure is performed within 3 days after wound
Answers to the questions posed below are in-
creation, prior to the presence of granulation
complete or absent in order to promote an ac-
tissue. Local or distant tissue (tissue flaps) may
 tive thought. process when managing any partic-
 be required for wound closure.
ular wound.
Secondary closure is wound closure after
the onset of granulation tissue. Wounds with
extensive tissue loss or necrosis, severe con-
Initial Wound Care
tamination, or marked presence of debris are
good candidates for secondary closure. In such
 Early management of acutely inflicted wounds
wounds, extensive cleaning is usually necessary
greatly influences healing and ultimate out-
due to the presence of large amounts of foreign
 come. Prompt and efficient wound inspection,
180
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
lavage, appropriate debridement, and aseptic
treatment, but why should wounds be lavaged?
bandaging of wounds are the predecessors of
optimal results. It is debatable whether topi-
 lavage? List one advantage and one disadvan-
cal medications are indicated and, if indicated,
tage of pressurizing the lavage. What is the op-
what topical medications should be used. A
 timal lavage pressure and how can this pres-
"cook book" approach to the steps in wound
sure be achieved? Should puncture wounds be
 management discussed below will inevitably re-
lavaged? Why or why not?
sult in an undesirable outcome at. an unex-
Here are some answers: Wounds are lavaged
 pected time. Thoughtful consideration of the
 to hydrate them. Remember the old adage that.
questions below should be part of the wound
"moist tissues are happy tissues." Also, another
 management process each time a veterinarian
 old adage states that *dilution is the solution to
is presented with an acute wound to manage.
pollution." As such, lavage is performed to re-
move small debris and to “dilute" the bacteria
Wound inspection
 e  r sd inl e r
 matter, even the particulate variety, will make
A thorough examination of the wound is essen-
the wound environment less conducive to bac-
tial for determining the immediate course of
action, the posibilities for closure, and initial
terial growth, and copious lavage will help “wash
 away" bacteria as well. Depending on the solu-
prognosis for success of treatment. Consider the
 tion used for lavage, some bacteria may even
necessity of the various components of wound
be killed. A number of solutions have been
inspection. Why is adequate clipping of hair
 used to lavage acute traumatic wounds. A bal-
around the wound important? How does one
anced electrolyte solution with a physiologically
protect the wound from clipped hair during
the process of clipping, and why is it impor-
tion) is ideal. Other solutions that have been
tant to provide this protection? Why are sterile
successfully used for wound lavage include nor-
gloves and sterile instruments used to inspect.
acute traumatic wounds? Is it really necessary
 mal saline, 0.05% chlorhexidine, and tap wa-
 that the gloves and instruments are sterile given
ter, the latter typically reserved for wounds that.
are excessively covered with environmental dirt.
that these wounds are already contaminated?
and grime. When antiseptics are used, solutions
Here are some answers: Generous hair re-
should be used; scrubs (detergents) should not.
moval is important. for adequate visualization,
 be applied to wounds. Some prefer to pressurize
optimal decontamination, and general hygiene.
the lavage to facilitate removal of foreign mat-
 Protection of the wound from clipped hair is
ter in the wound. A disadvantage to pressurized
accomplished by packing the wound with ster-
lavage is the potential to drive bacteria into the
ile gauze and/or sterile jelly. This protection
tissues rather than washing them away. The op-
is necessary to avoid foreign body (hair) con-
 timal lavage pressure has been taught to be 9 psi
tamination of the wound. Sterile gloves and
 achieved using an 18- or 19-gauge hypodermic
instruments are used to avoid iatrogenic con-
needle attached to a 35-mL syringe. However, in
tamination. The wound needs to be protected
one study (Gall T, Monnet E. Pressure dynamics
from contamination by microorganisms in the
of common techniques used for wound flush-
hospital environment. that could lead to serious
ing. Abstract. In: Proceedings of the 2008 Ameri-
nosocomial infection by resistant bacteria.
can College of Veterinary Surgeons Veterinary Sym-
posium, San Diego, CA, October 23-25, 2008,
Lovage
p. 13.), a 35-mL syringe and 18-gauge hy-
It is generally accepted that wounds should
podermic needle  produced nearly double
be irrigated (lavaged) during inspection and
that amount of pressure. Lavage of puncture
BASIC WOUND HEALING AND WOUND CLOSURE
181
wounds can be detrimental. Doing so could in-
quire splinted bandaging? What wounds do not.
troduce fluid into the subcutaneous tissues, and
 require bandaging? Why is it important for the
it is likely that all of the introduced fluid cannot.
contact layer of the bandage to be sterile? What.
be retrieved, ultimately resulting in “iatrogenic"
 is the purpose of a wet-to-dry dressing? When is
edema. Therefore, it is recommended not to
 a dry-to-dry dressing used? When is it appropri-
lavage puncture wounds, but rather to surface
ate to switch from an adherent to a nonadher
cleanse them.
ent. dressing?
Here are some answers: Ideally, all wounds
should be bandaged after surgical debride-
Surgical Debridement
ment. Unfortunately, bandaging is not. always
Debridement is the “removal of debris," the re-
practical. Essentially, all wounds in hospitalized
moval of dead tissue and foreign material. The
 patients should be bandaged if at all possible
proper English pronunciation (dibred'msnt)
in order to minimize the chance of nosoco-
is recommended to emphasize that debris,
 mial wound infection. Splinted bandages are re.
not. living tissue, is being removed. How does 
 quired for wounds around joints or wounds that.
debridement differ from “freshening wound
are otherwise subjected to excessive movement.
Wounds that can be safely left unbandaged are
 those that. are covered by healthy granulation
sia/restraint for surgical debridement. Why are
tissue and are going to be managed at home
sterile drapes, instruments, and gloves impor-
and not in the hospital environment. The con-
tant for debridement?
tact layer of bandages is sterile in order to
 Here are some answers: The technique of
 protect against iatrogenic contamination. Wet-
freshening wound edges involves incision un-
to-dry dressings are used when continued de-
til bleeding is witnessed; therefore, freshening
bridement. is required. A dry-to-dry dressing is
removes viable tissue. Debridement does not re-
used when the wound is already wet due to exu
move viable tissue. Freshening edges has no role
dation, and, like the wet-to-dry dressing, the dry-
in surgical debridement of wounds. Freshening
to-cdry dressing is used for debridement. Wet-to-
is occasionally done during wound closure (see
dry and dry-to-dry dressings are adherent to the
*Freshening wound edges" below), but only
wound. A switch from adherent. to nonadher-
when necessary for cosmesis or to avoid bury-
ent dressing is done once there is a granulation
 bed to protect the granulation tissue from being
for surgical debridement is general anesthesia.
 disrupted during bandage changes.
The actual protocol should be tailored to the
 individual patient, but in most. cases, thorough
debridement is best. done with an intubated pa-
Dopicar Medicatons/Ointments
tient and inhalant anesthesia. Sterile drapes,
 instruments, and gloves are important for sur-
There seems to be an innate tendency for vet.
gical debridement to avoid iatrogenic contami-
 erinarians to apply medications to wounds, and
nation.
wound care products seem to be widely avail-
able. What ointments are appropriate for appli-
cation to wounds? What ointments may delay
Aseptic Bandaging
wound healing? What ointments may enhance
Bandaging a wound after surgical debride-
wound healing? List. the reason(s) for using any
 justifiable ointment. [Is the ointment used for
 antimicrobial effect, enzymatic debridement,
wounds require bandaging? What wounds re-
 and/or direct. enhancement of healing?]
182
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Here are some answers: Any of a number
close. Second intention healing is nonclosure.
of available topical wound medications may be
 Instead of closing the wound, the processes of
deemed appropriate. Some for which the au-
 contraction and epithelialization are allowed to
 thor has found appropriate use include triple
 progress naturally to afford eventual closure.
antibiotic ointment, gentamicin ointment, sil.
 Deciding which method of closure is best. for
ver sulfadiazine cream, trypsin with balsam of
 any individual patient requires analysis of multi-
peru and castor oil spray or ointment (Granulex 
 ple factors, such as wound classification, timing
V, Pfizer Animal Health, Exton, PA), sugar, and
of the injury, cause of the injury, and the owner's
unpasteurized honey. However, the author typ-
financial limitations. Relying only on any one of
ically avoids topical wound treatments unless
these four factors for determining the method
a specified purpose is desired and likely to be
of wound closure is flirting with failure. Fol-
achieved with the ointment. Further, one must.
 lowing is an outline of the four factors used to
consider potential detrimental effects of oint-
 determine the most. appropriate type of wound
ments. For example, some ointments wil trap
closure and discussion of each factor.
exudates in the wound thereby contributing to
bacterial growth rather than combating it. And,
Wound classification
many ointments will have some negative effect.
1. Clean
on wound healing. Petrolatum, a base found in
 2. Clean-contaminated
some ointments, delays the epithelial stage of
 3. Contaminated
wound healing. On the other hand, some top-
4. Dirty/Infected
ical wound medications enhance wound heal-
Timing ofinjury
ing. Notable examples of products that opti-
mize wound healing are trypsin (because of
1. Within 6 hours of injury
enzymatic debridement), sugar, and unpasteur-
 2. Beyond 6 hours of injury
ized honey. Whenever a topical agent is applied
Cause of injury
to a wound a justifiable reason (antimicrobial
effect, enzymatic debridement, and/or direct.
1. Puncture wound
enhancement of healing) should be evident.
 2. Sharp laceration
 3. Sharp laceration with tissue loss (anatomic
degloving)
Deciding on Wound Closure
4. Blunt injury (physiologic degloving)
Options for wound closure (as detailed above)
Owner'sfinancial limitations
are primary closure, delayed primary closure,
1. Is second intention closure really more eco-
secondary wound closure, and second inten-
nomical than surgical closure?
tion healing. Primary wound closure is closure
2. Is primary closure ever warranted if dehis-
performed immediately after wounding (within
cence is likely?
the frst few hours). Delayed primary closure
is closure of the wound after allowing enough
Wound Classification
time to ascertain vascular compromise (usually
18-24 hours, but definitely before the onset. of
 Clean wounds are rare with acute injury. The
granulation tissue). Secondary wound closure
best example of a clean wound is a surgi
is closure after the appearance of granulation
cal incision in aseptically prepared skin that
tissue within the wound. The presence of gran-
 does not penetrate a contaminated lumen, such
ulation tissue signals that the wound is reason-
as the alimentary or respiratory tract. Clean-
ably resistant to infection and, therefore, safe to
 contaminated wounds are wounds with minimal
BASIC WIOUND HEALING AND WIOUND CLOSURE
183
contamination. The best example of a clean-
Cause of injury
contaminated wound is a surgical incision in
 Puncture wounds are not typicall closed be-
 an aseptically prepared patient in which the ali-
cause the amount of subcutaneous trauma is
mentary or respiratory tract is entered. Acute
diffcult to determine, and the punctures al-
traumatic wounds with minimal environmen-
low for drainage. In general, puncture wounds
tal debris and absence of necrotic tissue may
 are not surgically explored unless there is a
also be considered to be clean-contaminated
wounds. Primary wound closure can be per-
known foreign object that must be retrieved.
 Sharp lacerations offer the best opportunity for
formed with minimal risk of ensuing infection
primary wound closure, whereas sharp lacera-
in clean and clean-contaminated wounds (af-
tion with tissue loss (anatomic degloving) and
ter appropriate wound inspection and lavage).
oosyd Amu suq oi anp spuom uado
Contaminated wounds are nonsurgical wounds
degloving) require some time to determine the
(or surgical wounds with major breaks in aseptic
health of the tissue. Delayed primary closure
technique) where presence of bacteria is likely,
 is more appropriate than primary closure for
but there are no gross signs of infection. Con-
taminated wounds can be closed by primary
anatomic and physiologic degloving wounds. In
wound closure if they are converted to clean-
some cases, secondary wound closure is best for
contaminated wounds through the process of
degloving wounds.
lavage. Dirty/infected wounds are wounds with
foreign debris and/or gross evidence of infec-
Owner's Financial Limitations
tion (such as purulent exudate). Dirty/infected
wounds might also contain necrotic tissue. For
The owner's desire for a fiscally conservative
a wound to be infected, enough time must.
 approach may make second-intention healing
or primary wound closure more appealing than
have passed to allow proliferation of bacte-
ria to the concentration of 10 bacteria per
delayed primary or secondary wound closure.
gram of tissue (or per mL of tissue fluid). Pri-
However, the wrong closure choice could re-
mary wound closure is rarely performed for
sult in more financial burden than if the wound
dirty/infected wounds, but theoretically could
was managed most appropriately in the first.
be done if the wound can be converted to a
place. Second-intention healing may necessi-
clean-contaminated state through the processes
tate wound management and bandaging for a
 protracted period of time resulting in accumu-
of lavage and debridement.
lation of more financial investment. than if sur-
gical closure (at the appropriate time) was per-
Timing of Injury
formed. Likewise, closing a wound before it is
Assuming all other factors support primary
ready could result in infection and/or dehis-
wound closure, such closure is safer if per-
cence and the added costs of dealing with those
formed within 6 hours of the injury, because
complications.
by 6 hours, bacteria have had enough time to
multiply to numbers capable of causing infec-
tion (105 bacterial organisms per gram of tissue
"Freshening Wound Edges"
 or per mL of tissue fluid for most bacteria).
Wounds older than 6 hours would ideally be
 During wound closure, one is often tempted to
 managed as open wounds and have delayed pri-
 mary or secondary wound closure once it is cer-
 edges" is contraindicated because it offsets
tain that infection is not developing or after an
the advantage of the secondary wound phe-
infection that develops is eliminated.
nomenon (i.e., accelerated healing due to
184
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
already present and active fibroblasts). When
(see also Chapter 17). A commonly used pas-
might one justify “freshening the edges" of a
 sive drain is the Penrose drain (Figures 17.8a
wound? Perhaps edges should be trimmed if
and 17.8b). A commonly used active drain is
an exquisite cosmetic effect. is desired (and in
the Jackson-Pratt drain (Figures 17.8c and 17.8f
the best. interests of the patient). During sec-
through 17.8k). Passive drains are economical
ondary wound closure epithelium that has be-
 and easily placed, but ideally should be ban-
gun migration over the granulation bed may
 daged to collect drainage and protect. from as-
require excision to prevent its burial under the
 cending infection. Also, passive drains must. be
surgically advanced skin edges. One might con-
maintained for 5 days before removal to en-
sider excision of this advancing epithelium to
sure that the tissues have sealed to obliterate
be “freshening of the wound edge."
dead space. A passive drain that can be removed
prior to 5 days was probably unnecessary. Active
drains pull tissues together causing early obliter-
Managing Wound Drainage
ation of dead space and permitting early drain
removal (typically 2-3 days after surgery). Fur-
Wound drainage can be expected in most. trau-
ther, active suction and the closed nature of the
matic wounds. How is wound drainage man-
 drain help protect against ascending infection.
aged in open wounds? Drainage must be con-
 The major disadvantage of active drains is that
trolled in wounds that are surgically closed.
they are more expensive than passive drains;
Methods for drainage control include obliter-
however, their effectiveness may offset the ex-
ation of dead space and incorporation of a pas-
pense.
sive or active wound drain. Describe a wound in
which no surgical drain is necessary. Describe
the proper method of dead space obliteration.
When would a passive or active wound drain
Antibiotic Therapy in Wound
be indicated? Identify some particular types of
Management
 passive drains. Identify some particular types of
active drains. What are the advantages and dis-
There is a tendency to prescribe antibiotic
advantages of a passive wound drain? What are
therapy for animals with wounds to provide a
the advantages and disadvantages of an active
"cover" for infection, even when there is no evi-
wound drain?
dence that infection is present. or likely. How-
 Here are some answers: Drainage in open
ever, indiscriminate use of antibiotics is po-
wounds is achieved through the wounds them-
tentially harmful. And, as a profession, if we
selves. Ideally, open wounds are bandaged so
 do not curtail inappropriate use of antibiotics,
that. wound fluids are absorbed into the ban-
 governmental restrictions could limit, or pre-
dage and removed during bandage changes.
 vent altogether, access to certain antimicro-
Drains can be omitted in surgically closed
 bial drugs for veterinary use. When manag-
wounds if dead space is obliterated. Dead space
 ing a wound, certain questions should come to
is obliterated with careful placement. of sutures mind regarding antibiotic therapy. Answering
similar to “walking sutures." Dead space can these questions is much preferred to the sim-
also be obliterated with bandaging, but ban-
  sd  ss  aa, 
dage obliteration of dead space is more read-
ly achieved on limbs than on other areas of  The reader is encouraged to carefully consider
the body. When it is not possible to effectively the following questions before prescribing sys-
obliterate dead space with suture or bandage, a  temic or topical antibiotics in the treatment of
 passive or active wound drain is recommended  wounds.
BASIC WOUND HEALING AND WOUND CLOSURE
185
Acute Wounds
4. Davidson EB. Managing bite wounds in dogs
and cats: part II. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
The mere presence of a laceration is not an indi-
1998;20:974-991, 1006.
cation for emergency administration of antibi
5. Devitt CM, Seim HB, Willer R, et al. Passive
otic therapy. However, the acutely traumatized
drainage versus primary closure after total ear
patient may require antibiotic therapy for other
canal ablation-lateral bulla osteotomy in dogs:
reasons. List some potential indications for an-
59 dogs (1985-1995). Vet Surg 1997;26:210-216.
tibiotic therapy in acutely traumatized patients.
6. Dunning D. Surgical wound infection and the
How might antibiotic administration affect. the
use ofantimicrobials. In: Slatter D, ed. Textbook of
wound?
Smal Animat Surgery,3rd ed. Philadelphia, Penn-
sylvania: Saunders, 2003:113-122.
7. Eron LJ. Targeting lurking pathogens in acute
traumatic and chronic wounds. J Emerg Med
Infected Wounds
1999;17:189-195.
8. Fossum TW, Willard MD. Surgical infections
Most clinicians feel that antibiotic therapy is in-
and antibiotic selection. In: Fossum TW, ed.
dicated for infected wounds. If that is the case,
Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Missouri:
what antibiotic should be used? The antibiotic
Mosby, 2007:79-89.
should be given by what route? How long should
9. Gall T, Monnet E. Pressure dynamics of com-
the antibiotic be administered? What factors
mon techniques used for wound flushing. Ab-
guide the choice of antibiotic? Should antibiotic
stract. In: Proceedings of the 2008 American College
therapy be guided by culture and susceptibility?
ofVeterinary Surgeons Veterinary Symposium,San
 If so, when and how should the bacteriology
Diego, CA, October 23-25, 2008, p. 13.
sample be obtained? What would be some dis-
10. Hedlund C. Surgery of the integumentary sys-
tem. In: Fossum TW, ed. Small Animatl Surgery,
advantages of antibiotic administration in the
3rd ed. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier,
 management of open wounds?
2007:159-176.
See Chapter 4 for discussion of antibiotic use
11. Holt DE,
,Giffn G. Bite wounds in dogs
in surgery.
and cats.Vt Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
2000;30:669-679.
12. Jang SS, Breher JE, Dabaco LA, Hirsh DC.
Organisms isolated from dogs and cats with
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
anaerobic infections and susceptibility to se-
lected antimicrobial agents. J Am Vet Med Assoc
For detailed descriptions of wound management and
1997;210:1610-1614.
discussion of the issues represented in the questions
13. Janis JE, Kwon RK, Lalonde DH. A practical
guide to wound healing. Plast Reconstr Surg
following references:
2010;125:230e-244e.
14. Marberry KM, Kazmier P, Simpson WA, et al.
1. Brown DC, Conzemius MG, Shofer F, Swann
 Surfactant wound irnigation for the treatment of
H. Epidemiologic evaluation of postoperative
wound infections in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med
Res 2002;403:73-39.
Assoc 1997;210:1302-1306.
15. Mathews KA, Binnington AG. Wound manage-
2. Buffa EA, Lubbe AM, Verstraete FJM, Swaim
ment using sugar. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
SF. The effects of wound lavage solutions on
2002;24:41-50.
canine fibroblasts: an in vitro study. Vet Surg
 16. Mathews KA, Binnington AG. Wound manage-
1997;26:460-466.
ment using honey. Compend Cont Educ Pract Vet
 3. Davidson EB. Managing bite wounds in dogs
2002;24:53-60.
and cats: part I. Compend Contin Educ Pract Vet
17. Miller CW. Bandages and drains. In: Slatter
1998;20:811-821.
D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd
186
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2003:
20. Vasseur PB, Levy J, Dowd E, Eliot J. Surgical
244-249.
wound infection rates in dogs and cats: data
18. Nicholson M, Beal M, Shofer F, Brown DC. Epi-
from a teaching hospital. Vet Surg 1988;17:60-64.
demiologic evaluation of postoperative wound
21. Waldron DR, Zimmerman-Pope N. Superficial
infection in clean-contaminated wounds: a ret-
skin wounds. In: Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small
rospective study of 239 dogs and cats. Vet Surg
Animat Surgery, Srd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylva-
2002;31:577-581.
nia: Saunders, 2003:259-273.
19. Noble WC, Lloyd DH. Pathogenesis and man-
22. Weston C. The science behind topical nega
 agement of wound infections in domestic ani-
tive pressure therapy. Acta Chir Beg 2010;110:
mals.Vet Dermatol 1997;8:243-248.
19-27.
Chapter 16
SURGICALHEMOSTASIS
Elizabeth A. Swanson and Fred Anthony Mann
Achieving hemostasis in surgery is essential for  P
platelets, and the coagulation cascade to initi
prevention of severe hemorrhage and for pro-
ate the formation of a temporary platelet. plug
vision of adequate visualization of the surgical
 followed by a more stable fibrin clot. Following
feld. Maintaining hemostasis in the surgical
injury to a vessel, transient vasoconstriction oc-
i rs add aa e s d
curs in response to endothelin release by dam-
including gentle tissue handling, the use of
aged vascular endothelium. Thromboxane A2
appropriate instruments, and a thorough
(TXA2), bradykinin, and fbrinopeptide B are
knowledge of both the anatomy and the proce-
 also released and may contribute to vasocon-
dure to be performed. Despite proper attention
striction. The extent of vasoconstriction and its
to hemostasis, hemorrhage inevitably occurs
effect. on bleeding depends on the amount of
during surgery, and a working knowledge of the
smooth muscle present in the vessel wall (i.e.,
hemostatic measures available to the veterinary
arteries have more smooth muscle than veins;
surgeon is invaluable. Multiple options avail-
capillaries have no smooth muscle), the size of
 able to help control surgicail hemorrhage are
the vessel, and the size and location of the de-
discussed in this chapter, the selection of which
fect. in the endothelium.
 is greatly enhanced by a basic understanding
The endothelium of a blood vessel is an ac-
of the biology of hemostasis. The reader
1S
 tive component of hemostasis. In health, the en-
referred to internal medicine and hematology
dothelium functions to maintain vascular tone,
textbooks for more in-depth discussions
of
to provide a semipermeable barrier, and to
hemostasis, but an overview is provided here.
 prevent inappropriate thrombus formation via
the release of prostacyclin (prostaglandin I2),
thrombomodulin, heparin-like molecules, and
tissue plasminogen activator. Primary hemostasis
HEMOSTASIS
(Figure 16.1) is initiated by contact of the cir-
culating blood with exposed extracellular ma-
 Hemostasis is a complex process that involves
trix at the site of the injury. This matrix is pri-
multiple interactions between the vascular wall,
marily composed of subendothelial type II col-
Fundamentats of Small Amimat Surgery, 1st edition.
lagen, which can bind and activate platelets.
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
The damaged endothelium releases von Wille-
and Hun-Young Yoon.
brand's factor (vWF), an adhesive protein that.
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
187
188
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
②
Platelet
Plateletactivation/
adherence
shape change
ReleaseofvWF
Releaseof
TXA2,ADP,PAF
Collagen
exposure
③
Plateletrecruitment/
activation
Endothelial
injury
Platelet
aggregation
TXA2
Plateletplug
ADP
PAF
VWF
①）：
ercdunbes
Figure 16.1 The primary hemostasis pathway. Damage to the endothelium exposes collagen which releases
vWF and causes platelets to adhere to the damaged area (1). Once adhered, the platelets activate and change
shape (2). The activated platelets release granules containing TXAg, ADP, and PAF, which act to recruit and
activate additional circulating platelets (3). The activated platelets aggregate (4) to form a platelet plug over
the damaged vessel wall. vWF, von Willebrand's factor; TXAz, Thromboxane Ag; ADP, Adenosine diphospate;
PAF, Platelet activating factor.
allows the platelets to adhere to the damaged
 of the platelet plug is limited by prostacyclin se-
vessel wall. Once they adhere, the platelets
 creted by normal, intact endothelial cells and by
become activated, change shape, and release 
 endothelium-dependent. relaxing factor-nitric
TXAg, adenosine diphosphate and platelet acti-
oxide released from venous endothelium. Both
vating factor to recruit. additional platelets from
 substances inhibit platelet function and cause
the circulation and form a platelet. aggregate.
vasodilation, which increases blood flow and di-
The platelet aggregate serves to plug the in-
 lutes other platelet activators.
jured site while a more stable fbrin clot forms.
The initial platelet. plug is stabilized by a se-
The activated platelets change their phos-
ries of enzymatic reactions that result in the
 pholipid profle to increase phosphatidyl serine
cleavage of fbrinogen into fibrin, which cross-
(also known as platelet. factor 3) and procoag-
links on the surface of the activated platelets
ulant. activity. This procoagulant. activity is an
 and traps platelets, red blood cells, leukocytes,
essential link between primary hemostasis and
 and plasma into a fibrin clot. This process is
secondary hemostasis, as it provides the phos-
known as secondary hemostasis (Figure 16.2). Tra-
 pholipid surface needed to bind calcium to pro-
 ditionally, the coagulation cascade is taught as
thrombin and factors VII, IX, and X of the coag-
 two pathways, extrinsic and intrinsic, of cascad-
ulation cascade and serves to localize secondary
 ing reactions that result in the formation of a
coagulation to the site of vessel injury. The size
 fibrin clot. In actuality, these pathways interact.
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS 
189
Intrinsic
Extrinsic
Damagedvessel
IXa
TF+Ca
VIII
VII
Common
Ca+PL
Thrombin
XllaxI
Prothrombin
+
↓Ca*+PL
Fibrin
Stable
Fibrinogen
fibrin
Figure 16.2 The secondary hemostasis pathway. The extrinsic pathway is initiated when tissue factor from
damaged endothelium combines with calcium and activates factor Vll. The intrinsic pathway is initiated
when thrombin activates factor XI and, to a lesser extent, when blood contacts damaged endothelium, which
activates factor Xll. Both pathways intersect at the common pathway, and activate factor X which leads to the
formation of a fibrin clot. Prothrombin is also known as factor Il, and fibrinogen is also known as factor I.
Factors are indicated as Roman numerals, activated factors are denoted by the letter α. Ca?+, Calcium ion;
PL, Phospholipid; TF, Tissue factor. Each branch of the pathway is shaded and labeled.
at many different levels, and the extrinsic path-
initiation mechanism does occur, in vivo studies
way is now considered the initiator of coagu-
have now shown that. the majority of the factor
 lation while the intrinsic pathway sustains and
 XI activation is provided by thrombin produced
amplifies the reaction.
by the extrinsic pathway and explains why factor
 The extrinsic pathway (also known as the ini-
XII deficiencies are clinically silent. Activated
tiation pathway) begins with damage to the en-
factor XI activates factor IX in the presence of
dothelium and surrounding tissues. The dam-
ionized calcium. Factor IX combines with acti-
aged tissues release tissue factor which in the
vated factor VIII in the presence of platelet or
presence of ionized calcium forms a complex
tissue phospholipids and ionized calcium and
with factor VI1. This activated factor VII com-
activates factor X.
plex, then activates factor X to begin the com-
At this point, a common pathway is described
mon pathway.
in which activated factor X forms a complex
The intrinsic pathway (also known as the am-
with tissue or platelet phospholipids, ionized
plification pathway) was previously thought to
calcium, and activated factor V, which cleaves
be solely initiated in the blood by contact be-
 prothrombin (also called factor II) into throm-
tween the blood and the damaged subendothe-
 bin. Thrombin cleaves fibrinogen (also called
 lial collagen, resulting in activation of factor 
factor I) into fibrin monomers that polymer-
XIl, which in turn activates factor XI. While this
ize into fibrin chains and form a weak clot.
190
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Thrombin further activates factor Xlll, cat-
 The primary and secondary hemostatic path-
alyzed by ionized calcium, which promotes
ways, the inhibitory pathways, and the fbri-
cross-linking between the fibrin fibers and the
nolytic system all work together with the ulti-
formation of a stable clot. Thrombin also acts
 mate goal to restore vascular wall integrity with
to cleave prothrombin to activate factors V, VIII,
minimal blood loss and prevention of coagula-
and XI and to activate platelets in an excellent.
tion beyond the injured area.
model of biological amplification.
The coagulation cascade is primarily inhib-
ited by two pathways: the antithrombin-heparin
CONTROL OF SURGICAL
pathway  and  the  thrombomodulin-protein
HEMORRHAGE
C-protein S pathway. Antithrombin provides
 80% of the thrombin inhibitory capacity of
Hemorrhage during surgery occurs when an in-
plasma. Combined with heparin-like molecules
cision made into a tissue disrupts blood vessels.
on the endothelium, antithrombin binds to
It. is desirable to minimize blood loss to avoid
thrombin and neutralizes its activity. Antithrom-
 detrimental effects to the patient and to main-
bin also inactivates active factors XI1, XI, X, and
tain visualization of the surgical feld. Bloodless
 IX. Endogenous heparin-like molecules are also
felds save valuable surgical time. The type of
believed to enhance the release of tissue factor
hemostatic method used depends on the tissue
 pathway inhibitor from endothelial cells, and
type, nature of the hemorrhage, and size of the
in a high shear stress environment will inter-
bleeding vessel. The following section will in-
fere with platelet-vWF binding. Protein C, acti-
vated by the thrombin-thrombomodulin com-
troduce the hemostatic methods currently avail-
 plex, inhibits the coagulation system and ac-
able in veterinary medicine
tivates the fbrinolytic system. Fibrinolysis acts
to limit the size of the developing thrombus.
Activated protein C, in combination with cal-
DIRECT PRESSURE AND HEMOSTATIC
cium and cofactor protein S, inactivates mem-
FORCEPS
brane phospholipid-bound activated factors V
and Vf11, preventing the activation of factor
 Applying direct pressure to a bleeding vessel is
X and the cleavage of fbrinogen into fbrin.
 a rapid method of staunching blood loss. This
Thrombomodulin complexes with and neutral-
 may be done with gentle digital pressure or by
izes thrombin, thereby inhibiting fbrinogen
 compression or blotting with a gauze sponge
cleavage, activation of factor V, and activation
(Figure 16.3). Excessive pressure may inhibit.
of platelets.
coagulation by preventing platelets and coag-
The fibrinolytic system serves to enzymati-
ulation factors from reaching the site of tran-
cally degrade fibrin clots and to maintain a
 section. When using a gauze sponge, gentle
 patent vascular system. Plasminogen can be acti-
 pressure over the area of hemorrhage should
vated into plasmin by activated factor XIl, tissue
be applied for a length of time sufficient for
plasminogen activator, urinary plasminogen ac-
 coagulation and then lifted, being careful not.
tivator, urokinase, and streptokinase. Plasmin 
to disrupt the clot that has formed. A wiping
causes the breakdown of fbrin into fbrino-
 motion should be avoided. Using a moistened
gen degradation products, which are cleared
 sponge may help minimize disruption of the
by mononuclear cells via phagocytosis. Fib-
 clot when the sponge is removed, but. too much
rinolysis is inhibited by α2-antiplasmin, α2-
 moisture in the sponge will result in less effec-
macroglobulin, and plasminogen activator in-
tive hemostasis. Direct pressure provides perma
hibitor types one and two.
nent hemostasis for small vessels (capillaries)
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS
191
(a
(b)
(心)
Hemorrhage from the scalpel incision obscures the subcutaneous tissues that still must be incised to remove
the segment of skin. (b) Direct pressure is being applied to the skin incision with a dry gauze sponge.
'paauoe uaaq sey sisisouy j uieiiaose on pa Aue st aauods aznee aui ()
192
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
with low-pre ssure hemorrhage and is atraumatic
tissue when electrofulguration is not available.
when used properly. Direct pressure also pro-
Another use for electrodessication is to dry the
vides temporary hemostasis for large or high-
 surface of an ulcerated tumor prior to its exci-
pressure vessels until permanent hemostasis can
 sion, thus minimizing the potential for contam-
be performed by electrocoagulation or ligature
ination of the surgical wound during excision of
placement
the mass. Some electrosurgical units have a ful-
Large vessels can be clamped with hemo-
 guration setting that allows for the destruction
static forceps. Hemostats crush the tissue and
 of living tissue by delivering electrical sparks to
stimulate coagulation. Small, low-pressure ves-
the tissue without touching the electrode tip to
sels can be sealed this way without the need
the tissue. The primary use of electrofulgura-
for ligation. Hemostats may be placed on large
tion is for ablation of chronic inflammatory tis-
vessels to stop bleeding until the vessel can be
sue. Electrofulguration offers the capability of
ligated or electrocoagulated. Grasp as little of
more tissue destruction than electrodessication,
the surrounding tissue as possible to avoid tis-
 and the amount of that destruction is controlled
sue damage and impaired healing. When using
 by the power setting. Electrofulguration is used
hemostats, the size of the instrument should be
without a ground plate, and electrodessication
matched to the vessel being clamped. The tips
 can be performed without a ground plate, but.
of the instrument should be used to grasp the
care must be taken to avoid excessive tissue dam-
cut end of small vessels. Larger vessels and vas-
 age from currents dissipating into surrounding
cular pedicles should be clamped in the jaws of 
tissues. Ground plates (Figure 16.5) with ade-
the instrument. with the curved tips pointing up
 quate patient. contact are mandatory for elec-
(Figure 16.4).
troincision and electrocoagulation to ensure a
 proper circuit and prevent patient injury.
Electrosurgery is rarely used to incise skin
ELECTROSURGERY
 because collateral thermal necrosis may result
 in delayed wound healing and possibly dehis-
Electrosurgery is the application of a high-
 cence. However, the combination of cutting
frequency electrical current to tissue for the
 and coagulation provided by electroincision is
purpose of incision, coagulation, dessication,
 advantageous and effective in vascular tissues,
or fulguration. The characteristics of the waves
 such as muscle. As the tip incises the muscle
in the current. determine the degree of inci-
belly, it coagulates the tissue and minimizes
sion and coagulation. Continuous waves pro-
bleeding. Subcutaneous fat. and fascia are also
duce cutting while interrupted waves produce
 amenable to electroincision for hemorrhage
coagulation. A fully rectified current. allows for
control and visualization of tissue planes, mak-
both incision and coagulation. The electrosur-
 ing electrosurgery an excellent tool for cutting
gical generator (Figure 16.5) has settings for
 tissues deep to masses that are being excised.
both incision (cutting mode) and coagulation.
 Short, brush-like strokes are used to reduce lat-
The choice of mode (cutting versus coagula-
 eral heat production and tissue damage during
tion) is made by a switch on the generator or on
 electrosurgical incision.
the monopolar hand piece (Figure 16.6). Elec-
Electrocoagulation is offten erroneously
trodessication is performed by choosing the
 called electrocautery. Electrocautery (Figure
coagulation mode and touching the electrode
' m kq aq 1o d 1eia e sieu (2'91
tip to the tissue to allow radial spread of the
 high amperage, direct or alternating current
heat-generating current to dry the tissues. Elec-
that coagulates the vessel without passing a cur-
trodessication is not. commonly indicated, but
 rent through the patient.! With electrocautery,
has been used to ablate chronic inflammatory
heat is applied directly to the tissue. True
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS 
193
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.4 The proper use of hemostatic forceps to clamp bleeding vessels: (a) Use the tips of a mosquito
or Kelly hemostatic forceps to grasp the end of a small vessel. Grasping with the tip parallel to the vessel
 as demonstrated here is ideal, because this grasp orients the forceps serrations perpendicular to the vessel,
 making the vessel lesslikely to slip from the forceps. (b) The jaws (serrated porti on) of the hemostatic forceps
may be placed perpendicular to the vessel or pedicle with the curved tip pointing upward for large vessels
and vascular pedicles.
194
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Force2
品
食
Figure 16.5 Electrosurgical generator with monopolar (white hand piece) and bipolar (forceps hand piece
with white cord) capabilities. The bipolar forceps electrode is activated by pressing the foot switch located on
the floor, and the current flows from one tip of the forceps to the other. The monopolar electrode requires
generous patient contact of the ground plate with conductive gel (inset) for safe and effective current that
runs through the patient's body. Metal ground plates as demonstrated here have given way to safer adhesive
conductive ground plates.
electrocoagulation passes electrical current
 arteries 1 mm or less in diameter and on veins
from a metal tip to the blood vessel as described
 2 mm or less in diameter.
above. Heat is produced in the tissue itself by ab-
 Monopolar electrocoagulation (Figure 16.6)
sorption of the electrical energy and conversion
is the most. commonly employed form of elec-
into thermal energy that seals the vessel. The
 trosurgery. Alternating electrical current passes
tip of the electrosurgery hand piece does not.
 from the hand piece, through the patient's
become hot. Electrocoagulation is best used on  body, and into a ground plate. The metal tip
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS
195
(shown here) or a needle tip. The toggle switch is used to activate the electrical current. One side of the
toggle activates electrocoagulation and the other side activates electroincision.
因
solano
 Figure 16.7 Electrocautery unit. An electrical current generated from a battery in the handle heats the
metal filament. The heated metal is then applied directly to the bleeding source to burn (i.e., cauterize) the
tissue to control bleeding.
196
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
Cnotanl.
(b)
 Figure 16.8 Monopolar electrocoagulation comparing direct and coaptive methods: (a) Direct electrocoag-
ulation is performed by touching the tip of the hand piece directly to the vessel to be coagulated. (b) Coaptive
electrocoagulation is performed by grasping the vessel with a hemostat or thumb forceps and then touching
the tip of the hand piece anywhere on the metal instrument to transmit electrical current through the
instrument to the vessel. During coaptive electrocoagulation caution must be exercised to prevent touching
any other tissues with the metal instrument, because those tissues will also be coagulated.
of the hand piece should contact a very focal
ulation; Figures 16.8a and 16.9a), or the current.
area of tissue, ideally, only the blood vessel to
 can be transmitted along a metal instrument to
 be coagulated; however, the ground plate must.
the vessel (coaptive electrocoagulation; Figures
maximize contact surface area with the patient's
16.8b and 16.9b). To prevent collateral burns,
body to prevent thermal burns. The surgical
the instrument should be held perpendicular to
field must be dry for monopolar electrocoagula-
the surface to be coagulated so that the metal
tion to work, as the accumulated blood will limit.
tip does not. touch unintended tissue.
direct application of energy to the point of inter-
Bipolar electrocoagulation (Figure 16.10)
est. A monopolar tip can be applied directly to
uses electrode forceps to pass the electrical
the tissue to be coagulated (direct electrocoag-
current from one tip to the other through
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS
197
(a)
(a)
Figure 16.9 Monopolar electrocoagulation in a clinical case: (a) Direct electrocoagulation is being ap-
through a DeBakey tissue forceps to control a bleeding vessel during an amputation.
the vessel to be coagulated. Since no current. mal effect on surrounding tissues, and allowing
passes through the rest of the patient's body, no 
 coagulation to occur in a wet surgical field. The
 ground plate is necessary. The tips of the forceps
lower risk of causing thermal injury to nearby
 must be held about. 1 mm apart. when grasping
tissues makes bipolar electrocoagulation partic-
tissue to allow the current. to flow. Advantages of
 ularly advantageous for neurologic procedures,
bipolar over monopolar electrocoagulation in-
such as hemilaminectomy. Unlike monopolar
clude requiring a lower current, having a mini-
 electrocoagulation which can be activated by a
Figure 16.10 Bipolar electrocoagulation hand piece. A 1 mm gap must be maintained between the tips of
the hand piece to allow electrical current to flow.
198
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
switch on the hand piece (Figure 16.6), a foot.
Vet Surg, Ellman International, Oceanside, NY)
pedal (Figure 16.5) is required to activate the
function in a similar manner as standard elec-
bipolar current.
 trosurgery with both cutting and coagulating
 Both forms of electrocoagulation require
 settings. The source of energy for these units is
that the hand piece tips be kept clean of debris
ultra high-frequency (e.g., 4 MHz) radio waves
and char to maximize direct. current transmis-
that pass from a fine wire tip (active electrode)
sion to the vessel. Improper use may allow arc-
 into the tissue to be cut or coagulated, depend-
ing of the electrical current and sparks, which
 ing on the waveform setting chosen, and on
can result in severe burns, tissue channeling
 to a flat antenna (passive electrode) located in
(current passing through a narrow channel of
 a plate placed underneath the patient (Figure
tissue causing thermal injury distant. from the
16.11). There is no need for conductive gel on
electrode tip), secondary hemorrhage due to a
the passive electrode, because it is not a ground-
lack of a good seal, delayed wound healing, and
 ing terminal and does not need to be in direct.
operating room fires.
 contact. with the skin. The patient is not part.
of an electrical circuit, and the wire electrode
remains cold at all times. Incision and coagu-
RADIOSURGERY
lation occur when tissue resistance to the high-
frequency radio energy induces localized heat.
Radiosurgical devices (Surgitron Dual Fre-
that. vaporizes individual cells. Fine soft tissue
quency RF/120 Device and Surgitron EMC -
 incisions are posible with this technology.
Figure 16.1l  Radiosurgery unit. Multiple tip styles are available for the handle. A curved tip is demonstrated
here. The handle is plugged into the white fulguration port in this photo, but would be plugged into the
black center hand piece port for the more commonly used modes of cutting and coagulation. The white
passive electrode is an antenna that receives the radio waves to complete the circuit running through the
 patient. The white plate is not a grounding terminal and does not need to be in direct contact with the skin.
As such, there is no need for conductive gel. The white plate is not necessary for fulguration, but is necessary
for cutting and coagulation. The current is activated by stepping on the foot switch (inset).
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS
199
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.12 LigaSureTM Vessel Sealing System (photos courtesy of Covidien Animal Health and Dental
Division, Mansfield, MA): (a) The LigaSureTM Vessel Sealing Generator provides the energy thatis delivered
to the hand pieces. (b) Some commonly employed LigaSure hand pieces include: (1) the LigaSure AtlasTM
"uauns sdonsorede iapia/ialeas A wanseai aun (a) suaunnsuj idosoiede suyms pue
 and (3) the LigaSure PreciseTM Sealer/Divider Instrument.
FEEDBACK-MONITORED BIPOLAR
Figure 16.12) and the EnSeal Tissue Sealing
FORCEPS
and Hemostasis System (Ethicon Endo-Surgery,
Cincinnati, OH; www.surgrx.com) seal vessels
Newer forms of electrosurgical devices have
and tissue bundles up to and including 7 mm
been developed as feedback-monitored bipo-
diameter. Feedback-monitored devices are able
lar forceps. These devices are very useful in
to produce a more reliable seal on large vessels
open celiotomy procedures, such as splenec-
with less lateral thermal energy than traditional
tomy and liver lobectomy, and in laparoscopic
 monopolar or bipolar electrosurgical units. The
 procedures. Both the LigaSure Vessel Sealing
System (Covidien Animal Health and Den-
 porated tissues and completes a bipolar cir-
cuit. High-voltage, low-current. energy passes
tal Division, Mansfeld, MA; www.ligasure.com;
200
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
through the tissue and produces heat that de-
by water. Water in cells and tissues is heated
natures collagen and elastin in the tissue. Col-
on contact with the beam. Tissues coagulate as
lagen bundles form across the vessel lumen
the temperature reaches 50-100°C and vapor-
in the crushed area and seal the vessel.2 Both
 ize when the temperature rises above 100°C.5
 devices possess a feedback control system that.
 Laser surgery provides hemostasis of small ves-
senses the amount and conductivity of the tis-
 sels during incision, maintaining a dry surgical
sues within the instrument's grasp and adjusts
 feld. Larger vessels can be ablated by increas-
the strength of current delivered. Once the end-
 ing the distance between the tip of the hand
point is reached, the current is discontinued
 piece and the tissue to defocus the laser beam.
and the machine emits a signal indicating the
The beam is then moved in a sweeping motion
process is complete.
over the vessel.
ULTRASONICALLY ACTIVATED
SCALPEL
VESSEL LIGATION
 Another type of energy-based vascular sealing
Large vessels should be ligated with suture to
and cutting instrument is the ultrasonically acti-
provide adequate hemostasis (Figure 16.15).
vated scalpel (Harmonic Scalpel, Ethicon Endo-
Ligatures can be placed before or after a vesselis
Surgery, Cincinnati, OH; www.harmonic.com;
transected. Ifligating after transection, usually a
 hemostat is placed on the vessel as previously de-
Figure 16.13). An electromagnetic current pro-
duced by the generator is passed through a
scribed to provide temporary hemostasis. The
piezoelectric transducer in the hand piece. The
vessel should be cleared of as much surround-
transducer converts the current into mechani-
ing tissue as possible to help prevent slipping of
cal energy by causing the blade to vibrate at. a
 the ligature. Double ligation is recommended,
frequency of 55.5 kHz. Friction caused by the
especially for large arteries. Arteries and veins
should be ligated separately to avoid formation
vibrating jaws of the instrument creates ther-
mal energy in the tissues that heats and va-
of arteriovenous fistulas.
porizes water.34 The proteins within the tis-
Acceptable materials for routine vessel liga-
tion are monoflament or braided absorbable
sues are denatured and form a coagulum that.
seals the vessels and tissues in the instrument's
sutures (
(poliglecaprone 25, polyglactin 910,
grasp. The temperatures in the tissues are lower
chromic gut). Long-lasting suture is usually
 not necessary for ligation because vessels seal
than those produced by other electrosurgical
quickly. Some surgeons, however, prefer silk be-
devices; therefore, less smoke and char are
 produced.4 The Harmonic Scalpel is approved
cause of its handling characteristics and knot.
to seal vessels up to 5 mm in diameter.
security. Suture size is matched to the size of
the vessel to be ligated, keeping in mind that.
using the smallest appropriate size of suture will
SURGICAL LASERS
improve knot security. Ligatures should be tied
with square knots because of the dependable
The use of surgical lasers for soft tissue surgeries
security of square knots. A surgeon's throw may
of various complexities has become popular in
be used for the first knot when ligating vascular
small animal practice. The most popular laser
 pedicles if tissue tension does not allow ade-
 in general practice is the carbon dioxide laser
quate tightening of a simple throw. It. should
(Figure 16.14),6 which produces a focused,
 be remembered that surgeon's knots are bulky
10,600 nm wavelength that is highly absorbed
 and may provide less knot security.
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS 
201
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.13 The Harmonic Scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH): (a) The Harmonic
?
Gen
 erator 300 produces an electromagnetic current that passes through a piezoelectric transducer in the hand
piece.(b) The Harmonic ACE?
 36 cm Ergonomically-Enhanced Curved Shear disposable blade (left) is
interfaced with the generator by a cable (night). The metal portion of the cable (called the hand piece)
attaches to the disposable blade at the location indicated by the arrow. The inset is a closeup of the blade
tip. Electromagnetic energy from the generator stimulates vibration of the piezoelectric transducer located
between two metal cylinders in the hand piece. The sine waves that are produced travel to the blade and
cause the blade to vibrate at 55.5 kHz.
[a]
(c)
Figure 16.14
202
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS
203
SnContaHiuem
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.15 Suture ligation ofa blood vessel: (a) A circumferential ligature may be placed around the vessel
vessel. Then, three additional throws are added to result in two square knots. When there is a surrounding
tissue along with the vessel in the jaws of the forceps, the forceps is flashed as the first throw is secured.
Specifically, flashing refers to rapid loosening and tightening of the hemostatic forceps as the first throw
of the ligature is secured. The flashing maneuver is done such that one does not actually see the forceps
loosening and the jaws do not move off of the tissue/vessel pedicle. (b) A transfixation ligature is used for
large vessels and pedicles. The transfixation is performed after a more proximally located circumferential
suture is placed. The needle of the suture is passed through a small section of the wall of the vessel and
secured with a simple throw. Then, the rest of the suture is passed around the circumference of the vessel,
tightened, and secured with two square knots. [See Chapter 18 for the method of transfixation for vascular
pedicles.]
Figure 16.14 Carbon dioxide laser: (a) A common veterinary laser (The Luxar AccuVet Novapulse LX-20SP
surgical COg laser, Lumenis, Inc., Santa Clara, CA; left side of photograph) employs a hollow wave guide to
deliver the laser beam to the hand piece and tip (inset). An evacuation system (rnight side of photograph)
is used to remove plume that is generated when the laser interacts with tissue. (b) Different laser hand
pieces available for vanious applications include: (1) the standard hand piece which is held as a pencil, (2)
an angled hand piece that is useful for work in the oral cavity, and (3) LAUP attachments. LAUP stands for
laser-assisted uvuloplasty, a soft palate surgery performed in people. The LAUP attachments are useful for
resection of canine elongated soft palates. The LAUP handle (to night of angled hand piece) has a quick
release mechanism (black arrow) to which can be attached an extension without a backstop (to right of
LAUP handle) or with a metal backstop (to night of the extension without a backstop). Both extensions
are equipped with exhaust ports (white arrows) that can be connected to suction tubing. These extensions
require a long 0.8 mm tip (far night). (c) Some optional tips for use in the standard hand piece are (1) a
0.25 mm ceramic tip, (2) a 0.3 mm metal tip, and (3) a 0.4 mm fine metal taper tip.
204
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.16 Stainless steel hemostatic clips: (a) This photo demonstrates the Hemoclips (Weck Closure
Systems, Research Tniangle Park, NC) applicator and clips in the cartridge. The insets show closeups of a
metal Hemoclip alone and loaded in the applicator tip. (b) Hemoclips may be placed on an isolated blood
vessel where a hemostatic forceps would ordinarily be placed, followed by transection of the vessel in the
appropriate location (arrow). Hemoclips may also be applied after a vessel has been cut and occluded with a
hemostatic forceps. The diameter of the blood vessel should measure 1/3 to 2/3 the length of the clip arm.
Metal vascular clips (Hemoclips, Weck Clo-
 can assist in achieving hemostasis and improv-
sure Systems, Research Triangle Park, NC) can
 ing visibility. Topical hemostatic agents are also
also be used to ligate vessels up to 5 mm in
 useful in areas where pressure or heat injury
diameter (Figure 16.16). Vascular clips are ap-
is detrimental to function of an organ, as in
plied with a special applicator after a vessel has
 surgery of the central nervous system. Topical
been cleared of surrounding tissue. Clip size is
 hemostatic agents are not appropriate for con-
based on the size of the vessel; the vessel diame-
 trol of active arterial hemorrhage. The exact.
ter should be between one-third and two-thirds
method of action varies from one material to
the length of the clip. Vascular clips are quicker
 the next, but in general they work by providing
 to apply than traditional ligatures, but. may be
 a substrate for more rapid coagulation. For this
more likely to be dislodged from the vessel end,
reason, a functional hemostatic pathway must
be present.
Disposable multifire vascular clips (Auto Suture
Premium Surgiclip II, Covidien Animal Health
and Dental Division, Mansfield, MA) are also
Bone Wax
available.
Bone Wax (Medline Industries, Mundelein, IL;
Figure 16.17) is used to tamponade bleed
HEMOSTATIC AGENTS
ing from bone surfaces. Unlike other topical
 hemostatic agents, bone wax has no effect. on
Low pressure, diffuse hemorrhage, such as that.
the coagulation cascade. Bone wax is made of
seen from the liver or spleen, is often not.
 semisynthetic beeswax and a softening agent.
controllable by the methods described above.
 such as isopropyl palmitate so that it can be
For these instances, topical hemostatic agents 
 compressed into cancellous bone. Bone wax
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS 
205
Figure 16.17 Bone Wax (Medline Industries, Mundelein, IL).
 is nonabsorbable and inhibits bone healing;
Gelatin Sponges
therefore, only a small amount should be used,
and it. should not be used in fractures or os-
Gelfoam (Pharmacia & Upjohn, New York,
teotomies where osteogenesis is required for
NY; Figure 16.18a) and Vetspon (Novartis
healing. Common uses for application of bone
Animal Health, Greensboro, NC; Figure
wax are to control osseous hemorrhage from
16.18b) are sterile, water-insoluble, absorbable,
 porcine gelatin sponges used to control low
mandibulectomies. Bone wax is available in 2.5
pressure capillary hemorrhage. The porous and
 gram sterile foil pouches.
expandable nature of gelatin sponges allows
(a)
(b)
Figure 16.18 Gelatin sponges: (a) Gelfoam (Pharmacia& Upjohn, New York, NY) and (b) Vetspon (Novartis
Animal Health, Greensboro, NC).
206
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
them to hold many times their weight in whole
act as a nidus for infection and abscess forma-
blood. As the sponge saturates with blood, it.
tion, so they should never be left. in a contami-
tamponades the bleeding surface and provides 
nated site.
 a mechanical matrix that promotes and sup-
 ports platelet aggregation and fbrin strand
formation.
Oxidized Regenerated Cellulose
squares, and cubes, depending on the manu-
Oxidized regenerated cellulose (Surgicel, John-
facturer, and can be cut and contoured to tissue
son & Johnson, Somerville, NJ) can be cut. and
surfaces. They can be applied either dry or satu-
easily manipulated to conform to almost. any
rated with sterile saline solution. As with suture
bleeding surface. Hemostasis is achieved by the
material, only the minimal amount. needed to
formation of a gelatinous mass on contact with
achieve hemostasis should be used to minimize
blood that acts as an artificial clot. Since the
the amount of foreign body reaction. The dry
mechanism of action is through hemoglobin,
sponge should be compressed and then held in
 oxidized regenerated cellulose is not activated
place with moderate pressure until hemostasis
by body fluids other than blood. It is absorbable
cccurs. To use a wet sponge, the sponge should
within 7-14 days and induces minimal inflam-
be dipped in saline, squeezed to remove excess 
 mation. Like gelatin sponges, oxidized regener-
moisture, and then immersed again to remove 
 ated cellulose swells after contact with blood
any air bubbles in the matrix. A wet gelatin
and thus should be removed from enclosed
sponge is applied to bleeding tissue in the same
bony spaces after hemostasis is achieved. Oxi-
manner as a dry sponge.
dized regenerated cellulose is available in three
different forms: (1) a mesh with good flexibil-
weeks and do not appear to inhibit wound heal-
ity and versatility (Surgicel Original, Johnson
ing. They should be removed after hemostasis
& Johnson, Somerville, NJ; Figure 16.19), (2)
is achieved in enclosed bony spaces, such as the
a mesh with a denser weave for heavier bleed-
spinal canal and calvarium to avoid inciting scar
 ing and that can hold suture (Surgicel Nu-Knit,
tissue formation and resultant. compressive in--
Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, NJ), and (3)
jury to neural tissues. Gelatin sponges can also  a soft, layered material with the consistency of
SURGICAL HEMOSTASIS 
207
 cotton that can be peeled off in the needed
 10 dogs with naturally occurring splenic disease.
amount (Surgicel Fibrillar, Johnson & Johnson,
Vet Surg 2005;34:174-178.
Somerville, NJ).
4. Clements RH, Palepu R. In vivo comparison of
the coagulation capability of SonoSurg and Har-
monic Ace on 4 mm and 5 mm arteries. Surg
Endosc 2007;21:2203-2206.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
5. Holt TL, Mann FA. Soft tissue 
 applications
of lasers. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract
The authors thank Linda M. Berent, DVM,
2002;32(3):569-599.
PhD, Diplomate ACVP (Clinical and Anatomic
Pathology), Department of Pathobiology, Uni-
versity of Missouri for assistance in writing the
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
 hemostasis portion of this chapter.
Additional information about hemostasis and surgi-
 cal control of bleeding can be found in the following
REFERENCES
textbooks and journal article:
1. Feldman BV, Zinkl JG, Jain NC, eds. Schaim's Vet-
1. Fucci V,Elkins AD. Electrosurgery: principles and
erinary Hematotlogy, Sth ed. Philadelphia, Pennsyl-
guidelines in veterinary medicine. Compend Con-
vania: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2000.
tin Educ Pract Vet 1991;13:407-415.
2. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
2. Harold KL, Pollinger H, Matthews BD, et al.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Comparison of ultrasonic energy, bipolar ther-
3. Slatter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
 mal energy, and vascular clips for the hemostasis
Srd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
 of small, medium-, and largesized arteries. Surg
2003.
Endosc 2003;17:1228-1230.
4. Miller WW. Using high-frequency radio wave
3. Royals SR, Ellison GW, Adin CA, et al. Use of an
technology in
veterinary
surgery.Vet Med
ultrasonically activated scalpel for splenectomy in
2004;99:796-802.
Chapter 17
SURGICAL TUBES AND
DRAINS
Fred Anthony Mann
Tubes and drains used in veterinary surgery are
 tube and placement materials are organized.
numerous and include intranasal tubes, thora-
The length of tube (i.e., how far the tube is
costomy tubes, tracheostomy tubes, cystostomy
inserted) determines the usage. For oxygen ad-
tubes, feeding tubes, wound drains, and abdom-
ministration, the tube is inserted to level of the
inal drains. The purpose of this chapter is to
medial canthus of the eye (Figures 17.le and
introduce the reader to some common surgical
17.1f). For nasoesophageal feeding, the tube is
tubes and drains by providing a description of
 measured from approximately the ffth inter-
each of the above-mentioned tubes, stating the
 costal space to the lateral commissure of the
indications for use of each tube, and mention-
nostril, and for nasogastric feeding, the tube
 ing potential complications.
is measured from the thirteenth rib to the lat-
eral commissure of the nostril. Friction sutures'
are used to anchor the tube in place. In most
INTRANASAL TUBES
cases, tube anchoring may be achieved with
2-0 monofilament suture passed through a 20.
 Intranasal tubes are used for oxygen adminis-
 gauge hypodermic needle (Figure 17.1g). The
 tration and for feeding into the esophagus or 
first friction suture to anchor the tube is be-
stomach (Figures 17.la and 17.1b). The tech-
 gun at the lateral commissure of the nostril im-
nique for placing an intranasal tube is the same
mediately before introducing the tube (Figures
for each of these uses (Figures 17.1c through
17.1h and 17.li). After tying one square knot.
17.1o). In awake animals, ophthalmic anes-
 and leaving the strands long in preparation for
thetic (Figures 17.1c and 17.1d) is instilled into
 a surgeon's knot, the tube is lubricated (Fig
the nostril and allowed to take effect while the
ure 17.lj). The lubricated tube is introduced
after using a thumb to elevate the nose (Fig-
ure 17.1k). Elevating the nose in this manner
facilitates introduction of the tube into the ven-
Fundameniats of Small Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
 tral meatus, the desired route of passage. Pass-
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
ing the tube in the dorsal and/or middle mea-
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
tus may result in hemorrhage and discomfort.
208
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
209
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.1(
(a) Red rubber feeding tube. This tube is commonly used for intranasal oxygen administration.
If long enough for the patient in question, this tube may also be used for nasogastric or nasoesophageal
feeding. Common red rubber tube lengths are 4l and 56 cm. The long version of this tube can be used as
a jejunostomy tube, although other tube types are preferred for that usage. (b) Nasogastric feeding tube.
The tube pictured is made of polyurethane, which causes less inflammatory tissue reaction than red rubber
tubes. A stylet is typically required to stiffen the tube enough for passage.
210
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
USP.0.5
NDC61314-016-01
RxOnly
FAL
Proparacaine
Hydrochloride
Ophthalmic
Solution,USP
0.5%
0.5%15mL
15mL STERILE
ALCON
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Figure 17.1 (Continued) (c) Topical ophthalmic anesthetic for numbing the nasal mucosa prior to intro-
ducing an intranasal tube. (d) Instilling topical ophthalmic anesthetic into the nose prior to introducing an
intranasal tube. The nose is lifted to make sure anesthetic trickles down the ventral meatus. (e) Estimating
the length of red rubber tube to be inserted for nasal oxygen administration. The tube is measured from
the medial canthus of the eye to the lateral commissure of the nostnil. (f) Marking an intranasal tube before
insertion. A permanent marker is used to mark the level of the tube that should be at the lateral commissure
of the nostril when the tube is inserted to its desired location.
Once the ventral meatus is entered, the nose eral commissure of the nostril (Figure 17.lm),
aql qimpues oi pan si ouy suoaams e pue uosod jeou e oi ley oi pamone aq keu
while the tube is advanced to the desired length
 tube between the square knot and surgeon's
(Figure 17.1l). Then, the tube is positioned
knot. such that. the tube is indented slightly by
over the previously tied square knot. at. the lat-
the suture (Figure 17.1n). Additional friction
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
211
FLUOROFILII
POLYPROPYLENESUTURE-STERIL
SUTUREFRORVETRNARSBANLE
psaheripouoh
(g)
(h)
()
(i）
Figure 17.l  (Continued) (g) Suture material and needle for placing fiction sutures. Suture material that is
easily seen against the animal's skin and hair is desired for ease of removal when the tube is no longer needed.
Most nasal tubes will require 2-0 suture material which is easily passed through a 20-gauge hypodermic needle.
inserted at the lateral commissure of the nostril, and 2-0 monoflament nonabsorbable suture is passed
through the needle from the bevel to the hub. Then, the needle is withdrawn. (i) First knot in the first
friction suture for anchoring an intranasal tube. One square knot is tied and the suture strands are leftlong
enough to tie another knot once the tube is inserted into the nose and advanced to the desired location.
(j) Lubnicating an intranasal tube prior to insertion. The tube may be lubricated with water soluble jelly or
with lidocaine jelly as demonstrated in this figure. Lidocaine jelly will provide topical anesthesia for the nasal
mucosa, in case previously administered anesthetic drops are ineffective.
212
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(k)
(1
(m)
(n)
Figure 17.1l (Continued) (k) Thumbing the nose upward to facilitate introduction of a tube into the ventral
meatus. (l) Advancement of an intranasal tube to the desired location. Once the tube is in the ventral meatus
the nose is lowered to its natural position and the tube is advanced until the mark made with a permanent
marker resides just out of sight within the nose. (m) Preparing to finish the friction knot at the lateral
commissure of the nostril. The intranasal tube is turned upward to rest on the previously tied square knot
 taking care to make sure the mark made with the permanent marker does not exit the nose. (n) Completed
fiction suture at the lateral commissure of the nostril. The tube has been positioned onto the square knot
and a surgeon knot is tied to sandwich the tube between the two knots. The surgeon, knot is tied such that
there is slight indentation of the tube by the suture. Other fiction sutures will be added, but this is the most
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
213
(0)
Figure 17.l (Continued) (o) Multiple fiction sutures securing an intranasal tube along the bridge of the
nose and over the top of the head. Placing a friction suture at the extermal occipital protuberance prevents
the tube from draping over an eye when the dog is in sternal position or standing.
-sue jo ape pue 'anbedo-oipen 'aioq ae ai huoe aqni au ouue oi paoeid are sains
bridge of the nose and over the top of the head cent polyvinyl chloride. Some are sold with
(Figure 17.1o). A friction suture placed at the an aluminum trocar-tipped insert that, when 
external occipital protuberance will prevent. the
 placed inside the tube, extends just past. the tip
tube from hanging over the animal's eye when
of the tube and aids in penetration through
the animal is in sternal recumbence or standing
the thoracic wall (Argyle Trocar Catheter, Covi-
position.
 dien Animal Health and Dental Division, Mans-
feld, MA; Figures 17.2a and 17.2b). A large
bore tube of red rubber, silicone (Bio-sil, Sil-
THORACOSTOMY TUBES
med Corporation, Taunton, MA; Figure 17.2c),
or other biomaterial can also be used for tho-
Thoracostomy tubes are indicated to manage
 racostomy; however, placement is more diff-
traumatic or nontraumatic pneumothorax or
cult since there is no trocar, and the possibil-
ple ural effusion when thoracocentesis is not suf-
ity of air leaking around the tube is greater
ficient. Thoracostomy tubes are also placed for
due to the wider tunnel created by an instru-
postoperative management of thoracotomy and
 ment. used to facilitate introduction of the tube.
diaphragmatic hernia repair patients. Commer-
 Trocar tubes are suited for percutanous place-
cially available thoracostomy tubes are generally
ment whereas nontrocar tubes are used for
214
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(a)
Figure 17.2 (a) Commercially available thoracostomy tube with aluminum trocar inserted into the tube.
(b) Commercially available thoracostomy tube with aluminum trocar removed.
intraoperative placement during thoracotomy  contaminating the tube or gloved hands of the
size of thoracostomy tube has been said to be ap-rier drapes are recommended after prepping is
proximately the same diameter as the animal's  complete to further protect. the surgical field
mainstem bronchus. However, radiographs to and sterile equipment and supplies. Infltrate
make that assessment may not be available.
 local anesthetic (9 parts lidocaine mixed with 1
Therefore, a thumb rule is to use the largest.
 part sodium bicarbonate) at the proposed site
 diameter tube that is small enough to fit com-
 of insertion through the skin, at the proposed
fortably between two ribs.
intercostal space entry, and in the tissues that
 To prepare for percutaneous thoracostomy
 will be tunneled between these two sites. The
tube placement, ensure that the patient. is un-  local anesthetic placed at this time will facilitate
der general anesthesia and is breathing supple-  postoperative analgesia.
mental oxygen through an endotracheal tube.
Key features of percutaneous thoracostomy
Even in critically ill animals, thoracostomy tube  tube placement include a small stab incision in
placement with local anesthesia alone is not  the skin and underlying latissimus dorsi mus
recommended, because the patient will greatly cle in the caudodorsal aspect of the thorax,
benefit from a secure airway, positive pressure
 cranioventral tunneling under the latissimus
ventilation, and supplemental oxygen. Patients
 dorsi muscle2 for a distance of at least. two in-
in respiratory distress should be preoxygenated
 tercostal spaces, penetration of the intercostal
for approximately 5-10 minutes prior to begin- space (usually, the seventh or eighth space), and
ning the procedure. Clip hair widely and asep-  continued advancement of the tube such that.
tically prepare the skin on the side of the tho-
it rests on the dorsal portion of the sternum
rax so that the procedure can progress without  (Figure 17.2d). The description that follows
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
215
(c)
(d)
(e)
Figure 17.2  (Continued) (c) Silastic tubing with fenestrations added at the tip for use as a thoracostomy tube.
[nset is a close-up view of the fenestrations. When making tube fenestrations care is taken to avoid making
fenestrations too large, which could cause the tube to break. Ideally, a fenestration should encompass one-
fourth of the tube diameter and should definitely be less than half of the diameter. [Note: Tubing modifed
in this manner may also be used as an esophagostomy tube.] (d) Lateral thoracic radiograph demonstrating
ideal thoracostomy tube placement in a dog. (e) Left lateral canine thorax prepared for thoracostomy tube
placement demonstrating the location of the eleventh rib at the point where the skin incision will be made
(11) and the location of the eighth intercostal space at the point where the tube will enter the thoracic
cavity (8).
details the placement. of a thoracostomy tube
cle (Figure 17.2g) without inadvertent puncture
 in the left eighth intercostal space.
into the thoracic cavity. The stab incision should
When using a trocar thoracostomy tube, a be just large enough to accommodate the tube.
stab incision in the dorsal third of the left lat-  The trocar tube is then tunneled under the latis-
eral thoracic wall is made through the skin and  simus dorsi muscle from the eleventh rib to the
the latissimus dorsi muscle over the eleventh rib eighth intercostal space in the middle third of
using a number 11 scalpel blade (Figures 17.2e  the thoracic wall (Figure 17.2h). Once the tip
and 17.2f) . Making the stab directly over a rib al-  reaches the eighth intercostal space, the trocar
lows full penetration of the latissimus dorsi mus-  tube is raised perpendicular to the chest. wall.
216
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(g)
(1)
(h)
Figure 17.2 (Continued) (f) Stab incision with a number 11 blade over the eleventh rib in the dorsal third
of a canine thorax in preparation for thoracostomy tube placement. The stab incision is made over the rib so
that the entire thicknes of the latissimus dorsi muscle may be cut without risk of penetrating the intercostal
muscles and inadvertently entering the thoracic cavity with the blade. (g) Stab incision over the eleventh rib
in the dorsal third of a canine thorax in preparation for thoracostomy tube placement demonstrating that
the latissimus dorsi muscle has been incised. Incising the latissimus dorsi muscle allows the thoracostomy
tube to be inserted under that muscle creating a “sublatissimal" tunnel instead of a subcutaneous tunnel, the
latter which is more prone to air leakage around the thoracostomy tube. Note that the stab incision in both
the skin and latissimus dorsi muscle is small, just large enough to accommodate the thoracostomy tube. (h)
Advancing a trocar thoracostomy tube under the latissimus dorsi muscle from a stab incision at the eleventh
nib in a cranioventral direction to the eighth intercostal space to the point of intended penetration into the
thoracic cavity (8).
The trocar tube is firmly grasped with the non-
 is used to pop the trocar tube through the in-
dominant hand 1 to 2 cm from the body wall  tercostal space with one rapid motion (Figures
(or leavingjust enough space between the hand 17.2i and 17.2j). The tube is thrust carefully but.
and chest wall that approximates the thickness  briskly into the thoracic cavity by tapping with
of the intercostal muscles) while the other hand  the dominant hand. Once the trocar tube is in
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
217
(i
(i
Figure 17.2  (Continued) (i) Positioning a trocar thoracostomy tube perpendicular to the left thoracic wall
to this positioning. This resistance and a mound of tissue that appears at the cranial aspect of the tube when
the tube is lifted to this position indicate that a tunnel deep to the latissimus dorsi muscle has indeed been
achieved. The tube is grasped tightly with the nondominant hand close to the thoracic wall leaving a space
between the side of the hand and thoracic skin that is approximately the same as the estimated thickness of
the intercostal space through which the tube must penetrate. The palm of the dominant hand is used to hit
the trocar such that the tube quickly enters the thoracic cavity without damage to underlying structures. The
nondominant hand serves as a stop to prevent over penetration of the thoracostomy tube when it is hit by the
dominant hand. (j) Trocar thoracostomy tube that has penetrated the intercostal space. The nondominant
hand has provided a stop. The next step is to lower the tube, retract the trocar slightly, and advance the tube
cranioventrally.
the pleural space, the trocar is withdrawn 1 cm  trocar tube to be inserted from the skin incision
(Figure 17.2k) to protect. thoracic cavity con-  to the thoracic inlet. is inserted. The trocar is
tents from trocar tip trauma, and the tube is ad-  removed when the tube reaches the sternum to
vanced in a cranioventral direction without re-  a
 allow advancement to the thoracic inlet. The ob
sistance until the predetermined length of the  jective is to have the fenestrated portion of the
218
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(k)
(1)
Figure 17.2 (Continued) (k) Withdrawal of the trocar for approximately 1 cm so that it is entirely within
the tube. This maneuver is performed before the cranioventral advancement of the tube within the thoracic
Maintaining the trocar in this manner aids in tube advancement by providing stiffness. The trocar is removed
completely once the advancing tube comes in contact with the sternum, and the tube without the trocar is
advanced to its final position. (1) Completed trocar thoracostomy tube placementin the lefteighth intercostal
space (8) of a dog. Four fiction sutures of large monofilament nonabsorbable suture (size l polybutester in
this case) anchor the tube to skin and underlying fascia. The first friction suture (the one closest to the skin
incision) is placed by directing the suture needle deeply through the skin until it reflects off the closest rib
(11), ensuring significant engagement of underlying fascia and minimal sliding of the tube through the skin 
incision.
tube just dorsal to the sternum and the tip of the  forceps. A curved Rochester-Carmalt forceps is
tube approach (but not. through) the thoracic used to create a tunnel as wide as the width of
inlet. At least. one friction suture is placed to the forceps under the latissimus dorsi muscle
prevent dislodgement while finishing touches from the eleventh rib to the eighth intercostal
(such as applying a tubing clamp, connecting
 space in the middle third of the thoracic wall,
a tubing adaptor, and manually evacuating the
 and the forceps is removed. [Note: Some clin-
 thoracic cavity of air and fluid with a syringe)
 icians prefer to penetrate the intercostal space
are performed. Then, a radiograph is taken to
 at this point to make it easier to later get the
ensure proper placement (Figure 17.2d) . Once forceps-tube combination through the space.]
friction sutures are placed so that four friction  in the tip of the Rochester-Carmalt forceps
sutures keep the tube in place (Figure 17.21).
 with the tube parallel to the body of the for
For a tube without a trocar, a Rochester-  ceps (Figure 17.2m). The thoracostomy tube
Carmalt forceps is used to facilitate placement.
 with forceps is then passed through the tun-
A stab incision in the dorsal third of the left.
 nel created under latissimus dorsi muscle from
lateral thoracic wall through the skin and the
the eleventh rib to the eighth intercostal space
latissimus dorsi muscle is made with a num-
(Figure 17.2n). Once the tip reaches the eighth
ber 11 scalpel blade as described for the tro-
 intercostal space, the forceps is raised perpen-
car technique (Figure 17.2g). The incision is  dicular to the thoracic wall. The thoracostomy
usually a bit larger than that. made for the tro-
tube with forceps is then firmly grasped 1-2 cm
car technique in order to accommodate the from the body wall with one hand while the
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
219
(m)
(n)
Figure 17.2  (Continued) (m) Grasping a thoracostomy tube in thejaws ofa curved Rochester-Carmaltforceps
for forceps-assisted thoracostomy tube placement. Note that the tips of the forceps extend slightly beyond
the tube to facilitate penetration of the intercostal space. (n) Thoracostomy tube and forceps combination
migrating cranioventrally from an incision over the eleventh rib to the eighth intercostal space.
other hand is used to pop the thoracostomy
pleural space, the forceps is removed and
tube with forceps through the thoracic wall
the tube is advanced in a cranioventral direc-
musculature into the pleural space (Figures
tion without. resistance until the predetermined
17.2o and 17.2p). [Note: If the intercostal space  length of the tube from the skin incision to the
was previously penetrated with the forceps, thoracic inlet is inserted.
the forceps-tube combination may be pushed
 After the thoracostomy tube advancement is
more slowly through the intercostal space.] complete for either (trocar or forceps assisted)
Once the thoracostomy tube has entered the
 technique, a mattress suture may be placed in
220
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(0)
(c)
Figure 17.2 (Continued) (o) Positioning a thoracostomy tube and forceps combination perpendicular to
the thoracic wall immediately prior to entering the left thoracic cavity. The latissimus dorsi muscle ofers
considerable resistance to this positioning as noted by the mound of tissue that appears at the cranial
aspect of the tube-forceps combination when lifted to this position. The tube is grasped tightly with the
nondominant hand close to the thoracic wall leaving a space between the side of the hand and thoracic skin
that is approximately the same as the estimated thickness of the intercostal space through which the tube-
forceps combination must penetrate. The palm of the dominant hand is used to hit the forceps such that the
tube-forceps quickly enters the thoracic cavity without damage to underlying structures. The nondominant
hand serves as a stop to prevent over penetration of the tube-forceps commbination when it is hit by the
dominant hand. [Note: Some prefer to advance the forceps without the tube to penetrate the intercostal
space, and then remove the forceps, attach the tube, and advance the tube-forceps combination. With this
method the tube-forceps combination may be pushed through the previously punctured intercostal space
rather than thrust through it.] (p) Thoracostomy tube and forceps combination that has penetrated the
intercostal space. The nondominant hand has provided a stop. The next step is to lower the tube, remove
the forceps, and advance the tube cranioventrally.
the skin incision around the tube to provide
 the tube is anchored with at least. one friction
a seal and negate the need for suturing upon:
 suture' to secure the tube to the skin and un-
tube removal. Additional interrupted sutures
derlying fascia while finishing touches are done.
d a i uo, ue u yos - e rar si ui i a a jo 
than the tube diameter. A tube clamp (Figures tient" setting. and a syringe is used to remove
17.2q and 17.2r) is placed (but. left open) and  air and fluid until negative intrapleural pressure
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
221
(q)
(r)
Figure 17.2 (Continued) (q) Plastic tube clamps, three different sizes. This clamp must be applied to a
thoracostomy tube before attaching a tubing adapter and three-way stopcock or continuous suction tubing.
(r) Plastic clamp applied to a thoracostomy tube. The clamp is left open until fluid and air is manually
evacuated from the thoracic cavity.
is achieved (Figure 17.2s) . Care is taken to avoid 
If a thoracic bandage is applied to protect the
excessive pull on the syringe so that lung tis- thoracostomy tube, it must. be applied loosely
sue is not pulled into the tube. Once negative enough to avoid compromising thoracic wall
pressure is achieved, the tube clamp is closed,
excursions and must be removed at least. daily
 as, a  aso si o dos 
 to examine the thoracostomy site. Therefore, a
patient" setting (Figure 17.2t), and thoracic
 patch bandage over the thoracostomy skin in-
radiographs are taken to check tube place-
cision may be more practical if a bandage is
 ment. Once the proper tube placement. is doc-
desired.
umented, three additional friction sutures' are
When placing a thoracostomy tube during
applied and anesthesia may be discontinued,
, thoracotomy, the tube is placed immediately
assuming no other procedures requiring anes-
 prior to intercostal apposition (or sternal ap-
thesia are planned.
 position with median sternotomies). The same
222
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(s)
(t
Figure 17.2  (Continued) (s) Adaptation of a thoracostomy tube for manual evacuation of intrathoracic air
and fluid using a plastic tubing clamp, tubing adapter, three-way stopcock, and large syringe. Note that the
clamp is open and the stopcock is open to the patient. (t) Position of thoracostomy tube clamp and three-way
stopcock after air and fluid have been evacuated to achieve negative intrathoracic pressure. Note that the
 adapters. Care is taken to make sure alljunctions are tightened securely and leak-free to avoid introduction
 of air into the thoracic cavity.
stab incision and tunneling is performed as and left open, and at least one friction suture
 described above for percutaneous placement, 
 is applied. When the thoracic cavity is closed
 Ke un Xressaoauun si aqn reoni e mq
 in airtight fashion, air aspiration and final tube
be pulled through the intercostal space with a
 anchoring may progress as described above for
 Rochester-Carmalt forceps after incising the in-
 percutaneous thoracostomy tube placement. A
tercostal muscles or gently pushing the forceps
 postoperative radiograph is typically unneces-
through the intercostal muscles. Because of the sary since proper placement is confirmed by
exposure afforded by the surgical approach, direct visualization.
blunt thrusting is not necessary. Once proper
When placing a thoracostomy tube in con-
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
223
(u)
(V)
Figure 17.2 (Continued) (u) Thoracostomy tube placed during diaphragmatic herniorrhaphy. Note that the
tube is placed through a stab incision in a healthy portion of the diaphragm before the rent in the diaphragm
is closed. (v) Thoracostomy tube exiting the right abdominal wall after diaphragmatic herniorrhaphy. One
friction suture is anchoring this tube duning closure; three additional friction sutures will be added after or
during skin closure.
whenever there is need for maintaining tho-
and will be drained by the thoracic tube. Ad
racic cavity negative pressure after an abdom-
 vance the tube toward the cranial aspect of the
inal procedure), the tube enters the thoracic
sternum, using a finger through the rent to en
cavity through the diaphragm and exits the ven-
 sure that the tube reaches the proper location.
trolateral abdominal wall (Figures 17.2u and 
Tie the mattress (or purse-string) suture so that
17.2v). During diaphragmatic herniorrhaphy,
, the diaphragm everts against the tube. Next,
the tube is placed through an uninjured por-
create an exit portal for the tube in the ven-
tion of the diaphragm into the thoracic cavity
trolateral abdominal wall. Make a stab incision
before closure of the rent. Place a mattress or with a number 11 scalpel blade in the skin of the
purse-string suture in the muscular portion of  mid to cranial abdomen approximately 3-4 cm
the diaphragm. Puncture the diaphragm in the lateral to the midline incision, depending on
center of the suture with a number 11 scalpel
1 the size of the patient. Place a Kelly hemostatic
blade. The hole should be only large enough
 forceps into the stab incision and gently push it.
to accommodate the thoracic tube. Insert the
 in a cranioventral direction to create a mound
tube through the stab incision and into the tho-  of tissue in the internal lateral abdominal wall
rax. If not already done during hernia reduc-  caudal to the diaphragm. Incise this mound
tion, insert a hand through the rent and break with the number 11l scalpel blade making
both sides of the pleural cavity communicate  chest tube. Grasp the chest tube with the
224
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(w)
Figure 17.2 (Continued) (w) Continuous thoracic suction unit. This unit has a collection chamber (on the
left in this photograph) that is attached by tubing to the patient's thoracostomy tube and a suction chamber
(on the night in this photograph) that is attached by tubing to a regulator and continuous suction source.
The suction chamber is flled to 10-12 cm of water to achieve that amount of negative intrathoracic pressure.
The middle cham ber is the water seal (also called an air trap). Filling the middle chamber with water to the
indicated line will trap air and prevent air from moving into the collection chamber and toward the patient.
forceps and pull the tube through the abdom-
tical, but does not allow consistent lung expan-
 inal wall. Verify proper tube placement, and
sion as air or fluid accumulates between aspira-
anchor the tube to the skin and underlying
tions.
abdominal fascia with a single friction suture.
Complications due to thoracostomy tubes
[Three additional friction sutures will be added
 are uncommon. Some complications to keep
later during final skin closure.]
 in mind include lung injury, tube malfunctions,
Once a thoracostomy tube is in place, on-
tube site infection, and inadvertent pneumo-
going pneumothorax and pleural effusions 
thorax from either loose or faulty connections
are best managed by interfacing thoracos-
 or from damage of the tube by the animal.
tomy tubes with continuous suction thoracic
Thoracostomy tube management includes
drainage systems (Figure 17.2w). Intermittent.
 efforts to prevent iatrogenic introduction of
manual aspiration of the thoracostomy tube is 
 air. Continuous suction units (Figure 17.2w)
an alternative if continuous suction is not prac-
 have a safety mechanism, the water seal, that.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
225
prevents atmospheric air from entering the pa-
is less likely to create complications than the
tient, if there is a disconnection from the suc-
traumatic removal associated with the animal
tion source. However, a hole in the thoracos-
dislodging the tube.
tomy tube or in the tubing between the patient.
Tube removal can be uncomfortable; there-
and the continuous suction unit, or a loose con-
 fore , analgesia is warranted. An injectable opiod
nection between the thoracostomy tube and the
 or nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug given
tubing connecting it. to the suction unit, will
 while pre paring for tube removal is helpful, but.
permit. introduction of atmospheric air into the
local anesthesia is the main method of ensuring
 patient's pleural space. Fortunately, the water
 pain-free tube removal. Instill local anesthetic
seal provides a means of monitoring for this sit-
(e.g., a 9:1 solution of 2% lidocaine:sodium
uation. The water seal should not routinely bub-
bicarbonate) in the subcutaneous tissues and
ble. Bubbling in the water seal indicates that the
musculature, inclucding the intercostal space,
suction unit is pulling in air. That air is either
surrounding the tube. The local block will not.
atmospheric air being pulled into the tubing
totally eliminate discomfort. because the tube
u xeououmaud huoluo kq paonpod ne 1o
will traverse sensitive pleural surfaces on the
the latter case, air bubbling indicates successful
way out. Interpleural bupivacaine can be used to
management. of pneumothorax until the abnor-
obviate the intrathoracic component of the dis-
mality causing the pneumothorax is corrected
 comfort, but the initial burning sensation may
and the bubbling stops. Bubbling due to a leak
be uncomfortable. Since sodium bicarbonate
in the system between the patient and the suc-
 cannot be added to bupviacaine without result-
 tion unit must be ruled out by inspection of the
 ing in a cloudy solution, a 9:1 solution of 2%
tubing and connections because, if iatrogenic
lidocaine:sodium bicarbonate may be used in-
introduction of air into the pleural space is oc-
terpleurally instead. In the latter case, care must.
curring, the patient's life could be in jeopardy in
be taken to avoid lidocaine overdose because li-
a matter of seconds. Tubes that are not attached
docaine is also used for the subcutaneous and
to continuous suction units are monitored by
intercostal analgesia for tube removal. The skin
periodic manual aspiration with a syringe. Care
around the tube is cleansed with chlorhexidine
must be taken to avoid excessive suction pres-
scrub, the friction sutures are cut, the tube is
sure which could injure the lungs. Iatrogenic
clamped, and gentle traction is applied to effect
 introduction of air is avoided by proper knowl-
removal. It is important that the tube does not
edge and use of connectors, tubing clamps, and 
tear lung tissue on the way out. Lung damage
three-way stopcocks.
could occur if excessive suction was applied to
Thoracostomy tubes must also be monitored
the tube immediately prior to removal. There.
to prevent premature dislodgement. Naive re-
fore, inject. 4-5 mL of air into the tube imme.
liance on friction sutures that anchor the tube
diately prior to removal to ensure that no lung
may result in premature removal. Likewise, ban-
tissue has been sucked into the tube. Air in-
dages may provide a false sense of security be-
 jection should not be necessary as long as no
cause as a loose bandage slips it may actually pull
suction is applied to the tube after instillation
the thoracostomy tube with it. Physical restraint.
 of interpleural bupivacaine.
(such as an Elizabethan collar) and sometimes
Deciding when to remove a thoracostomy
chemical restraint (tranquilization) will be nec-
 tube is not always straightforward. In cases of
essary to prevent premature dislodgement in
pneumothorax, thoracostomy tubes can usually
active patients. If the animal's activity creates
be removed once negative pressure has been
doubts as to the ability to prevent premature
achieved for a 24-hour period, depending on
dislodgement, assess the true need for the tube,
the cause of the pneumothorax. For patients
and remove the tube if it is not serving a use-
with pleural effusion, it has commonly been
ful and necessary purpose. Controlled removal
accepted in the past that thoracostomy tubes
226
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
should be removed when the production of laryngeal masses, proximal tracheal obstruc-
pleural fluid drops below 2 mL/kg/day; how-
 tion, and brachycephalic upper airway syn-
ever, this targeted amount. was challenged by
drome. Tracheostomy tubes are commercially
a study in which both cats and dogs had chest
 available, or they can be fashioned from an
tubes removed at volumes of 3-10 mL/kg/day endotracheal tube. One specific commercially
without clinical consequence.? Rather than re-
 available tube (Shiley? Low Pressure Cuffed
lying on strict daily pleural fluid volume assess-
Tracheostomy Tube, Covidien Animal Health
ment, the timing of thoracostomy tube removal
and Dental Division, Mansfield, MA) is a plastic
is best based on volume trends, clinical signs
 tube that has a cuffed or uncuffed outer tube
and patient status, and gross and cytologic char-
 and an inner cannula which can be removed
acteristics of the pleural fluid.
to facilitate cleaning the inner lumen (Figures
17.3a and 17.3b). Some tube sizes are too small
to contain a cuff and inner cannula, so small
dogs and cats will not benefit from these acces-
TRACHEOSTOMY TUBES
 sories. Commercially available tubes are usually
supplied with an obturator (Figure 17.3a). The
Temporary tracheostomy tube placement is obturator is used only during placement to
performed to bypass upper airway obstruc-
 keep from dragging blood and secretions into
tions caused by conditions, such as laryngeal the lumen. The obturator is removed as soon as
2
enenstatiner
(a)
Health and Dental Division, Mansfield, MA). The components are: (1) obturator, which is inserted into
the tracheostomy tube immediately before placement to keep secretions out of the tube during insertion
and removed as soon as the tube is in the trachea; (2) tracheostomy tube, which is secured with umbilical
tapes attached to eyelets in the flange of the swivel neck plate and tied behind the neck; (3) inner cannula,
which is placed in the tracheostomy tube and replaced at regular intervals, and (4) closed-end cannula,
which can be used to temporaily occlude the tracheostomy tube to test for the patient's ability to breathe
around the tube.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
227
eneastantiner
enenstatiner
(b)
(C)
Cuffed Tracheostomy Tube, Covidien Animal Health and Dental Division, Mansfield, MA) with inner cannula
locked in place and umbilical tapes tied to eyelets in the flange. [Note: The cuff would only be inflated when
positive-pressure ventilation is necessary. The deflated cuff increases the surface area on which secretions
can accumulate, thereby complicating tracheostomy hygiene when cuffed tubes are used beyond the need
for ventilation.] (c) Tracheostomy tube fashioned from a standard endotracheal tube. [Note: The inflation
channel can be preserved if the cuffis needed. Preserving the inflation channel results in a curve to the tube
that is rotated about 90? to the desired curve.]
If the animal requires manual or mechanical
drastic curve approximately equal to 90°. This
ventilation, a cuffed tube is necessary. Oth-
curvature may predispose the canine or feline
erwise, an uncuffed tube is preferred. The 
patient. to airway obstruction due to the straight.
cuff may be problematic in management of
anatomy of their tracheas.
airway obstruction in awake patients because
A homemade tracheostomy tube can be con-
secretions may accumulate around the deflated
structed using an endotracheal tube (Figure
cuff. The tube should not be larger than
17.3c). Choose an endotracheal tube that is ap-
half the diameter of the trachea; however,
 proximately one size smaller than what would
multiple sizes should be available during
ordinarily be used for orotracheal intubation.
placement. Commercially available tubes have
 Remove the tube adapter and cut along both
been designed for use in humans and have a sides (180° apart) of the adapter end of the
228
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
endotracheal tube to a level about half the 
ventral neck from the chin to the manubrium
length of the tube. If an inflatable cuff is
 sterni with wide lateral margins. Make a ven-
needed, the cuts can be carefully made to
tral midline cervical skin incision just caudal
preserve the inflation channel. Reattach the 
 to the larynx for a distance of approximately 4
adapter at the apices of the cuts. Umbilical
 cm, depending on the size of the patient (Fig-
tape or intravenous tubing can be attached to
ure 17.3d). Apply a self-retaining retractor to
both newly created wings and used to secure
 hold open the skin edges and clear just enough
the tube around the patient's neck. This type of
 subcutaneous tissue to identify the midline di-
tracheostomy tube is often preferred by some 
 vision of the sternohyoideus muscles (Figure
clinicians because the shape of the tube con-
17.3e). Separate the sternohyoideus muscles on
forms to the straight anatomy of the canine and
 the midline and reposition the self-retaining re-
feline trachea. One disadvantage of the home-
tractors on the sternohyoideus muscles to ex-
made tracheostomy tube is that when the infla-
 pose the trachea (Figure 17.3f). Incise the an-
tion channel is preserved the natural curve of
 nular ligament between the second and third
the tube is about 90° rotated; however, no prob-
 tracheal rings (Figure 17.3g). This trachealloca-
lems with this deviation have been reported.
tion is chosen because it is the preferred stomal
Equipment needed for tracheostomy tube
site for permanent tracheostomy should such
placement includes an endotracheal tube for
 be required. Place stay sutures around the sec-
orotracheal intubation, standard anesthetic
 ond and third tracheal rings, knot the sutures
supplies, clippers, prepping scrub and solu-
 and tag them with hemostats (Figure 17.3h).
tion, barrier drape, sterile surgical gloves, ster-
o  pd aq  ss as  
ile gauze, surgical instruments, suture material,
 posite directions to open the tracheal incision
ss a  en  m
 to facilitate placement of the tracheostomy tube
surgical instruments, which may be packaged
 as the endotracheal tube is removed. [During
together in a tracheostomy pack, are two towel
the postoperative course, the stay sutures can
forceps, a scalpel handle to accommodate a
 be used for manipulation during reinsertion of
number 10 or number 15 scalpel blade, thumb
 a tube that has been inadvertently dislodged
forceps (Adson-Brown or DeBakey tissue for-
 or requires changing.] The tracheostomy tube
ceps), Metzenbaum scissors, needle holders,
is inserted with the obturator in place (Figure
two mosquito hemostatic forceps, and suture
17.3i), but the obturator is quickly removed
scissors. Self-retaining retractors, such as a Gelpi
(Figure 17.3j) and replaced with an inner can-
perineal retractor (preferably two) or a Weit-
nula, if available, as soon as the tracheostomy
laner retractor, are quite helpful. Suction capa-
tube is positioned in the trachea. Secure the
 tracheostomy tube by attaching umbilical tape
available.
to each flange eyelet and tying the tapes behind
When placing a tracheostomy tube, ensure
the neck (Figures 17.3k and 17.31).
that the patient is under general anesthesia and
 A dressing/bandage is optional and only
 is breathing supplemental oxygen through an
used to maintain cleanliness and absorb
endotracheal tube. The emergent “slash" tra-
 drainage of serosanguinous fluid from the in-
cheostomy should be a rare occurrence; usu-
cision. The authors prefer to leave the neck
ally, there is time to capture the airway with an
 and incision uncovered for easy observation of
endotracheal tube and prepare the patient for
 swelling, bleeding, accumulated secretions, and
a controlled surgical approach. Patients in res-
 tube position, and for prompt intervention if
piratory distress should be preoxygenated for
 needed. If a bandage is desired, wait to apply
approximately 5-10 minutes prior to beginning
it until the animal is awake and standing or in
 the procedure. Clip and aseptically prepare the
ventral recumbence. A bandage applied to a
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
229
eneaotartinen
(d)
(e)
Figure 17.3 (Continued) (d) Positioning and preparation for tracheostomy tube placement. The dog is in
dorsal recumbence with the thoracic limbs pulled caudally. An endotracheal tube is in place and should
be attached to anesthetic tubing. The curved mark on the skin represents the caudal aspect of the thyroid
cartilage, the straight mark immediately caudal to the curved mark represents the cricoid cartilage, and the
midline straight mark indicates the proposed skin incision. Note that the surgical field is widely clipped and
prepared. The endotracheal tube would be attached to an oxygen source and, most likely,inhalant anesthetic.
The endotracheal tube cuff would be deflated for removal as the tracheostomy tube is inserted. (e) Surgical
approach to the trachea for tracheostomy tube placement. Cranial is to the left. The skin incision is made
immediately caudal to the cricoid cartilage over approximately the first through fourth tracheal rings. The
skin edges are retracted with a Gelpi perineal retractor to facilitate identification of the stermohyoideus
muscles (black arrows) and their midline division. The thyroidea caudalis vein (white arrow) located on the
midline on the dorsal aspect of the stermohyoideus muscles is avoided to minimize hemorrhage.
recumbent extended neck is likely to change
is delivered directly into the trachea, making
position when the patient recovers and becomes
the trachea an oxygen-rich reservoir. Upon re-
more active, causing patient discomfort or inter-
covery from anesthesia the need for supplemen-
fering with tube positioning. A neck bandage
 tal oxygen is based on the individual patient's
must be changed at least once daily to observe 
needs.
for tube site complications. Simply peeking un-
 Tracheostomy tube hygiene is extremely im-
der the bandage is not sufficient.
 portant because of the risk of iatrogenic res-
 piratory infection and the possibility of acute
 oxygen is continued while the animal recovers.
fatal obstruction due to accumulated respira-
 tory tract secretions. Immediately after surgi
small tube (8 French) placed into the lumen
cal placement and for the frst several hours,
of the tracheostomy tube. The oxygen flow rate
tracheostomy tubes require constant vigilance
should be nearly half of what is required with in-
 and hourly removal of intraluminal secretions.
tranasal oxygen administration because oxygen  Around-the-clock  observation  and  care  are
230
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Saenata.tn
nenata.tiuen
(1)
(g)
Figure 17.3 (Continued) (f) Isolating the trachea pnior to tracheotomy for tracheostomy tube placement.
Cranial is to the left. The thyroidea caudalis vein is retracted laterally with one of the stermohyoideus
muscles. The Gelpi perineal retractor is repositioned to retract the sternohyoideus muscles, and the loose
fascia covening the ventral surface of the trachea is incised with Metzenbaum scissors. A second Gelpi perineal
retractor is placed for craniocaudal retraction of skin and loose fascia exposing the tracheal rings. (g) Incising
the second and third tracheal rings is isolated and incised. After the initial annular incision, the scalpel blade
is turned upward to extend the incision, taking care to not damage the underlying endotracheal tube or its
cuff. The tracheotomy is limited to 50% or less of the tracheal circumference.
mandatory. Preferably, the tube in place is one contact with, or drip onto, respiratory tract tis-
with an inner cannula that can be temporarily
 sues. Wear examination gloves when providing
removed for cleaning and sanitizing and then 
 tracheostomy tube care, and remember to peri-
replaced. Small tracheostomy tubes do not have
 odically cleanse the peristomal skin with warm
inner cannulae; therefore, clean (ideally, ster-
 0.05% chlorhexidine solution. Scrub solutions
ile) soft suction catheters are inserted to clear
 are avoided to prevent contact of soap with res-
the tubular lumens of secretions.
 piratory epithelium.
Strict adherence to asepsis
cannot be
Humidification of the airway is important to
overemphasized in tracheostomy tube mainte-
decrease the viscosity of respiratory secretions
nance. Unfortunately, it is rarely practical to
and facilitate their removal. Humidification is
use sterilized equipment at each tube clean-
 achieved by instillation of 2-3 mL of sterile iso-
ing session, but sanitization is possible. Use
tonic saline solution into the trachea at the end
a 0.05% chlorhexidine solution to soak (and
of each tube cleaning session. If humidification
clean) tracheostomy tube components and suc-
 is not suffcient to prevent respiratory tract des-
tioning accessories, but be sure to rinse with
iccation and development of viscous secretions,
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
231
enenstatinc
(h)
enenotati
(i
Figure 17.3  ( Continued) (h) Placing tracheal stay sutures immediately before tracheostomy tube placement.
Cranial is to the left. The suture needle is placed around the second tracheal ring, the ring just cranial to
the tracheotomy, the suture is knotted such that a long loop is retained, and the free ends of the stay suture
are tagged temporarily with a mosquito hemostatic forceps. A second identical stay suture is placed around
the third tracheal ring, the ringjust caudal to the tracheotomy. (i) Preparing to insert a tracheostomy tube.
Cranial is to the left. The cranial and caudal stay sutures are retracted to pull open the tracheotomy. The
endotracheal tube cuff will now be deflated and the endotracheal tube removed as the tracheostomy tube
is inserted. The obturator is inserted into the tracheostomy tube immediately before placing the tube into
the trachea. The purpose of the obturator is to keep blood and other secretions from being scraped into the
tracheostomy tube lumen during placement. (j) Insertion of a tracheostomy tube. Cranial is to the left The
obturator is removed as soon as the tracheostomy tube is in place. After removing the obturator, the inner
cannula (if applicable) is placed into the tracheostomy tube. The hemostatic forceps are removed from the
stay sutures and the stay sutures are left in place.
232
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
nenstatiner
enenstatiner
(k)
(1)
Figure 17.3  (Continued) (k) Completed tracheostomy tube placement (ventral view). Cranial is to the left.
place. The stay sutures are used to facilitate replacement of the tracheostomy tube in the case of inadvertent on
cricoid cartilage (straight mark). (1) Completed tracheostomy tube placement (lateral view).The umbilical
tapes are tied on the back of the neck.
Potential complications of tracheostomy
CYSTOSTOMY TUBES
tubes include continued irritation of the tra-
cheal lumen by the tube and accumulation of 
 Indications for cystostomy tube placement. in-
mucus, both which may result in gagging and
clude urinary diversion in the face of urinary
coughing. Tracheal obstruction can occur due
tract trauma or urinary tract obstruction (for-
to mucus accumulation or due to occlusion
eign body, cystic calculi, neoplasia, etc.), or
of the tube opening as it lies against the tra-
to rest a surgically repaired urethra. It may
cheal mucosa. Tube dislodgement can also OC-
 also be advisable to place a cystostomy tube
cur should the umbilical tape ties become loose.
if urinary bladder atony is present. to avoid
Local subcutaneous emphysema can sometimes
over-distension. A Foley catheter (Figure 17.4a)
occur as air leaks around the tube into the tis-
or a Stamey Malecot. catheter (Cook Medical
sues. Long-term complications can include tra-
 Inc., Bloomington, IN; Figures 17.4b and 17.4c)
cheal stenosis or stricture.
may be used as a cystostomy tube. The Foley
When it is determined that the tracheostomy
catheter is preferred because urine leakage into
tube is no longer needed, umbilical tapes are 
the peritoneal cavity has been noted with per-
cut, the tube is extracted, and the resultant.
cutaneously placed Stamey Malecot. catheters.
 open wound is allowed to heal by second in-
 These two catheters are better suited for tem-
tention. The patient may continue to breathe
porary rather than long-term urinary diversion
through the stoma for several days until suffi-
due to their length and likelihood of inad-
cient wound contraction occurs.
vertent premature removal. A long version of
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
233
(a)
Figure 17.4  (a) Silicone Foley catheter. An 8 French catheter is illustrated. The insert shows inflation of the
bulb. The arrow points to tube fenestrations.
Foley catheter is available for urethral catheter-
and all cats and a 5 cm long parapreputial in-
ization of male dogs (Smiths Medical, Wauke-
cision just cranial to the pubis in male dogs.
sha, WI; Figure 17.4d). This Foley catheter is
Enter the abdomen through a standard linea
not suitable as a cystostomy tube because it is
alba incision. Locate the urinary bladder and
excessively long. A low profle gastrostomy tube
place a stay suture in its apex (Figure 17.4f).
(Cook Medical Inc., Bloomington, IN; Figure
Perform a test inflation of the Foley catheter
17.4e) may be used as a long-term cystostomy
 bulb to make sure it. is not. defective (Figure
tube to decrease the chances that the tube will
17.4g). Then, introduce the catheter into the
be damaged or removed by the patient. Planned
 peritoneal cavity through the abdominal wall
removal is more difficult with this device com-
to one side of the linea alba. Make a tiny stab
pared to Foley and Stamey Malecot. catheters. i
incision in the internal abdominal wall with a
The following description of cystostomy tube
-e oi ynoua q sf aa diess I aqu 
 placement technique employs a standard sili-
commodate the tube (typically an 8 French Fo-
cone Foley catheter.
 Prior to placing a cystostomy tube, clip and
linea alba, depending on the size of the patient.
aseptically prepare the ventral abdomen from
(Figures 17.4h and 17.4i). Insert a mosquito
the xyphoid cartilage to the distal pubis with
hemostatic forceps into the stab and push out-
wide lateral margins. The standard approach is ward to create a mound of tissue as visualized
a ventral midline celiotomy. If a full abdomi-  on the skin (Figures 17.4j and 17.4k). Using the
nal exploration is not necessary, make a ventral number 11 scalpel blade, incise the mound of
midline incision approximately 5 cm long just skin and underlying tissue over the tip of the
234
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(C)
(C)
Figure 17.4 (Continued) (b) Stamey Malecot catheter. A polyethylene catheter is illustrated. The inserts
demonstrate how the needle obturator straightens the flanged portion of the catheter for penetration into
the abdomen and into the urinary bladder. (c) Stamey Malecot catheter without the needle obturator. The
flanged portion of the catheter is designed to keep the catheter in the urinary bladder. [Note: Urine leakage
around this catheter has been reported with percutaneous placement.
exposed (Figures 17.4l and 17.4m). Again, this  (Figure 17.4r). Suction any urine that is present.
stab should be just big enough to accommodate  inside the lumen of the urinary bladder. Ensure
catheter with the mosquito hemostatic forceps  date the tube. It is acceptable for the hole to be
and pull the catheter into the abdomen (Fig- snug around the tube. If the hole is too large,
ures 17.4n through 17.4p). Place a purse-string  it will be difficult to maintain a leak-proof seal
suture directly at the proposed catheter site us- once the purse-string suture is tied. Place the
ing absorbable suture material (Figure 17.4q).  tube into the urinary bladder (Figure 17.4s).
Puncture the urinary bladder in the center of  Advance the tube into the lumen of the uri-
 the purse-string using a number 11 scalpel blade  nary bladder well past the level of the deflated
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
235
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
Figure 17.4  (Continued) (d) Silicone Foley catheter for urethral cathetenization of male dogs. This catheter is
 notsuitable for cystostomy tube placement because ofits excessive length. (e) Silicone low profile gastrostomy
tube. This tube has two side holes (see insets) in the triangulated tip. The tip is elongated with a plastic or
metal obturator to facilitate insertion through the abdominal wall and into the stomach (or into the bladder
if used for a cystostomy tube). In this photograph, a plastic obturator is inserted into the tube. A metal
obturator is pictured next to the low profle gastrostomy tube. The right insert demonstrates using the metal
obturator to elongate the tube. Pushing the obturator with a thumb while holding the tube flanges with the
first and second fingers in syringe-like fashion elongates the tip. (f) Isolation of urinary bladder for cystostomy
tube placement. A stay suture of 3-0 poliglecaprone 25 is placed in the apex of the urinary bladder and
tagged with a mosquito hemostatic forceps. The suture is placed using a wide bite that penetrates the full
thickness of the urinary bladder wall in order to ensure engagement of the submucosa. (g) Performing test
inflation of a Foley catheter prior to use as a cystostomy tube. The preferred inflation medium is sterile water.
The bulb is deflated before insertion.
236
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(h)
(i)
[k}
(1)
(m)
Figure 17.4 (Continued) (h) Preparing to make a stab incision in the left abdominal wall with a number 11
 scalpel blade. (i) Tiny stab incision in the left abdominal walljust large enough to accommodate the tips of a
mosquito hemostatic forceps. (j) Inserting tips of mosquito hemostatic forceps into left abdominal wall stab
incision. (k) Advancing tips of mosquito hemostatic forceps laterally through the left abdominal wall stab
incision until a mound of skin is visible over the forceps tips. (l) Preparing to make a stab incision in the
skin of the left abdominal wall over the mosquito hemostatic forceps tips with a number 1l scalpel blade.
(m) [ncising the left abdominal wall with a number 11 scalpel blade just enough to permit protrusion of the
mosquito hemostatic forceps tips.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
237
(n)
(0)
(p)
(a)
Figure 17.4  (Continued) (n) Grasping the tip of the Foley catheter into the tips of the mosquito hemostatic
forceps in preparation for pulling the catheter into the abdomen. (o) Pulling the Foley catheter into the
abdomen. (p) Foley catheter introduced into the abdomen and urinary bladder exteniorized in preparation
for cystostomy. (q) Purse string suture (3-0 poliglecaprone 25) in the left dorsolateral portion of the urinary
bladder encircling the proposed site of cystostomy Suture bites for the pursestring suture must engage the
submucosa, and it is acceptable to place these bites full-thickness through the uninary bladder wall to ensure
submucosal engagement.
balloon (Figure 17.4t). Tie the purse-string su-
tie the preplaced sutures to tack the urinary
ture snugly (Figure 17.4u) and cut. the strands
sbladder to the abdominal wall (Figure 17.4x).
(Figure 17.4v). If the purse-string is tied too Gently pull the catheter until the purse-string
tightly, ischemia and necrosis of the stoma
 suture inhibits its extraction and use four fric-
may develop. Preplace two to four absorbable tion sutures' to secure the tube to the skin and
sutures from the urinary bladder (near the  underlying fascia (Figure 17.4y).
catheter entrance) to the body wall (Figure
 If a low-profle gastrostomy tube is being
17.4w). At this point, the balloon should be in- placed to serve as a cystostomy tube, the inci-
flated with sterile water (Figure 17.4w). Then, sion in the abdominal wall will need to be large
238
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(r)
(s)
[t]
(u)
(v)
Figure 17.4 (Continued) (r) Making a stab incision in the urinary bladder for placement of a cystostomy
tube. The stab is made in the center of the preplaced pursestring suture using a number ll scalpel blade.
The sharp edge of the blade is oriented toward the purse-string strands to avoid inadvertent severing of the
suture within the bladder tissue. (s) Inserting a Foley catheter into a stab incision in the center of a preplaced
pursestring suture in the urinary bladder. (t) Advancing the Foley catheter into the urinary bladder before
the pursestring suture is tied. (u) Tied pursestring suture after the Foley catheter is advanced deeply into the
urinary bladder. (v) Finished purse -string suture with strands cut. Next, the urinary bladder will be anchored
to the body wall.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
239
(w1)
(w2)
(w3)
Figure 17.4  (Continued) (w) Preplacing sutures from the abdominal wall to the urinary bladder to result in
a cystopexy when tied. All sutures are placed fullthickness into the urinary bladder taking care not to hit
the tube with suture bites. (1) The first suture is placed dorsal to the tube in the body wall and dorsal to the
tube in the urinary bladder. (2) The first suture is tagged with mosquito hemostatic forceps and one to three
similar sutures are additionally preplaced around the tube. (3) Four tacking sutures have been preplaced
from the abdominal wall to the urinary bladder and the Foley bulb is inflated with sterile water.
in order to accommodate the size of the tube's
-ns huoei paoeidand pue ars hus-asd
tip. This tube comes with an obturator (Figure
 tures as directed above. One or two interrupted
17.4e) that can be used to stretch the catheter
 sutures may be required in the abdominal wall
into a more slender tube that will allow both
and skin incisions to ensure a snug ft. If that is
the abdominal wall and urinary bladder inci-
 the case, the abdominal sutures must. be placed
sions to be as small as possible. Once the tube
 before the tacking sutures are tied.
is through the abdominal wall and into the uri-
 The method of cystostomy tube removal de-
nary bladder, remove the stylet to deploy the
pends on whether a Foley catheter or low-
catheter into its intended shape. Tighten the  profile gastrostomy tube is used. For the Foley
240
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(x)
(y)
Figure 17.4  (Continued) (x) Cystopexy completed. Four preplaced sutures from the abdominal wall to the
urinary bladder around a Foley catheter have been tied and the stay suture in the apex of the uninary bladder
has been removed. (y) Four fiction sutures anchoring a cystostomy tube. The first friction suture (closest
to the tube exit) is placed while the abdomen is still open and with mild traction on the catheter so that
the Foley bulb is against the urinary bladder wall. The remaining friction sutures are placed after abdominal
closure. Note the syringe with saline attached to the catheter. After each friction suture is tied, saline is
injected and aspirated to make sure that no fmiction suture occludes the lumen of the catheter.
catheter, first.remove the friction sutures. Then, the tube. If dislodgement occurs before the
empty the bulb by attaching a syringe to the in-
urinary bladder stoma has adhered to the ab-
flation valve port and aspirating. Emptying the
 dominal wall, uroabdomen may occur resulting
bulb will not be possible if the friction sutures
 in urine peritonitis. If dislodgement. occurs af-
are occluding the inflation channel; therefore,
ter the urinary bladder stoma has adhered to
it is best to remove the friction sutures com-
the abdominal wall, urine scalding on the peri-
pletely from the Foley catheter. After empty-
stomal skin may occur or cystitis could develop
ing the bulb, the catheter should be easily ex-
from locally introduced bacteria. Another mi-
tracted. Low profle gastrostomy tubes are rarely
 nor complication is transient hematuria; how-
removed unless the reason for which they were
ever, this is generally self-limiting and should
used as a cystostomy tube has resolved. To re-
 clear within a few days after surgery.
move a low profle gastrostomy tube, insert the
obturator to stretch the tube into a skinnier
ESOPHAGOSTOMY TUBES
shape while extracting. Moderate force will be
necessary to remove the low profile gastrostomy
Esophagostomy tubes can be used for nutri-
tube. Local infltration of surrounding tissues
tional support as long as the animal is not vomit-
with a 9:1 solution of 2% lidocaine:sodium bi-
ing and does not have esophageal dysfunction.
carbonate will help control patient discomfort.
 Some clinicians prefer esophagostomy tubes
during removal. Local anesthetic is also used
 over gastrostomy tubes because of potentially
for removal of a Foley catheter cystostomy tube,
 more serious complications with gastrostomy
although there should be minimal pain with Fo-
tubes, such as peritonitis. Dogs and cats gen-
ley catheter removal.
erally tolerate esophagostomy tubes and they
The most significant complication of cys-
can eat voluntarily with the tube in place when
tostomy tubes is inadvertent dislodgement. of:
 appetite returns. Due to the large bore nature
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
241
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.5 (a) Commercially available silicone esophagostomy tube (Feline Esophagostomy Tube - Sili-
cone, Smiths Medical, Waukesha, WI). (b) 12inch curved Rochester-Pean forceps for use as an esophagos
tomy tube placement forceps.
of esophagostomy tubes (14 French or  nique described here employs a red rubber
larger), blenderized diets may be used, tube, whereas silicone tubes are preferred.
in  contrast  to liquid  diets required  for 
 Prior to placing an esophagostomy tube,
nasoesophageal/nasogastric feeding. Silicone
 place the patient in right lateral recumbence.
esophagostomy tubes are commercially avail-
 Clip and aseptically prepare an area on the left.
able (Feline Esophagostomy Tube—Silicone, lateral neck extending from the ramus of the
Smiths Medical, Waukesha, WI; Figure 17.5a), mandible to the caudal cervical area and from
but esophagostomy tubes can be made from  the wing of the atlas to the trachea. Premeasure
most types of tubing by fashioning side holes the length of the tube from the seventh inter-
 in the tip (Figure 17.2c). Some general guide- costal space to the proposed exit point of the
lines for size of esophagostomy tube are 14 feeding tube in the mid portion of the neck.
French for animals less than 10 kg and 19 L
Using a long Rochester-Pean (Figure 17.5b) or
kg. The esophagostomy tube placement tech-  closed into the oral cavity and esophagus caudal
242
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(c)
(d)
(e)
(t)
Figure 17.5 (Continued) (c) Esophagostomy incision. The blade is incising over tips of the esophagos-
tomy placement forceps, making an incision just large enough to accommodate the chosen tube. (d)
Esophagostomy placement forceps emerging through the skin from the esophagus. (e) Grasping the tip
of the esophagostomy tube in the tips of the sophagostomy placement forceps. Note that a red rubber tube
is being used, but silicone tubing is preferred. (f) Esophagostomy tube pulled into the esophagus and out
the oral cavity.
to the hyoid apparatus so that the incision over  and 17.5h). Advance the tube into the esopha-
the forceps tip will be in the mid portion of the gus until a “pop" is palpated, indlicating that the
 neck. Make a small skin incision over the tips  tube has straightened into the distal esophagus.
of the forceps using a number 10 scalpel blade When the tube is directed down the esophagus
e g ss aqni aul jo uood jeuaixa au (shop s pue sieo on aea gi aqu o)
just large enough to accommodate the tube  caudal-to-cranial orientation (Figure 17.5g) to
(Figure 17.5c) and deepen this incision to the  a cranial-to-caudal orientation (Figure 17.5i).
esophagus until the forceps tips emerge (Fig-
 e a ps aq ors aqi au
ure 17.5d). Grasp the tip of the tube with the  to ensure that it is straight and not kinked in
forceps (Figure 17.5e) and pull the tube into  the pharynx. At this point, a lateral thoracic ra-
and out of the oral cavity (Figure 17.5f). Using diograph should be taken to confirm proper
the forceps, redirect the distal end of the feed- placement of the tube. Once proper place-
ing tube back into the mouth (Figures 17.5g  ment is confirmed, the tube is anchored with a
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
243
(g)
(h)
(i
(i
Figure 17.5 (Continued) (g) Turning the esophagostomy tube in order to direct it down the esophagus.
Note that the tube is grasped by the esophagostomy placement forceps in the curved portion of the forceps.
[n this photo, the tube is positioned along the outer portion of the forceps' curve. (h) Positioning of an
esophagostomy tube along the inner portion of an esophagostomy placement forceps curve as would be
make release of the forceps easier and less likely to inadvertently pull the tube back out the oral cavity.
(i) External position of the esophagostomy tube when the tube is effectively directed caudally down the
esophagus. The tube in this position should easily slide cranially and caudally within the esophagus without
changing direction if proper placement has been achieved. (j) Deep passage of a suture needle to engage
the periosteum of the wing of the altas and surrounding fascia in preparation for the first friction suture to
anchor the esophagostomy tube. [Make sure that a large needle is chosen to achieve this objective and be
careful to not lose the needle under the skin.]
friction suture' (1-0 or larger, depending on strands to ensure adequate fascia and periosteal
the size of the tube) that engages the fascia engagement (Figure 17.5k) before tying the
and periosteum of the wing of the atlas. The knot. Tie a square knot gently against the skin
suture needle is passed deeply to hit the wing
 (Figure 17.5l), place the tube onto the square
of the atlas before turning upward and exit- knot, and then tie a surgeon's knot so that the
ing the skin (Figure 17.5j). Tug on the suture suture slightly indents the tube to complete
244
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
飞
(m)
(n)
Figure 17.5 (Continued) (k) Tugging on suture strands to verify that the planned fiction suture has engaged
the peniosteum of the wing of the atlas and surrounding fascia. (1) Square knot tied in the suture engaging
the periosteum of the wing of the atlas and surrounding fascia. This knot is tied as if placing a skin incision
suture. Then, the tube is placed against the knot and a surgeon's knot is applied to sandwich the tube
between the square knot and surgeon's knot, thus completing the friction suture. (m) Completed friction
suture anchoring the esophagostomy tube to the periosteum of the wing of the atlas and surrounding fascia.
Additional friction sutures may be placed to assist anchoring the tube to skin and underlying fascia. (n)
recumbence or standing and the ear is hanging downward, the esophagostomy tube should lie naturally
behind the ear.
the friction suture (Figure 17.5m). Additional
 the esophageal lumen so that no food residue
friction sutures may be placed to secure the tube
 is dragged through and deposited in the sub-
to the skin and underlying cervical fascia. Flush cutaneous tissues around the stoma site. The
the tube and cap it (Figure 17.5n). Flush the stoma is allowed to heal by second intention.
tube with approximately 5 mL of saline (pre- Complications of esophagostomy tubes can in-
ferred) or water prior to and after each feeding. clude stomal infections, aspiration of water or
tomy tube, flush the tube with saline or wa- monia, esophagitis due to reflux of gastric acid
ter to ensure that residual food is flushed into and regurgitation, and inadvertent tracheal
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
245
placement. Other complications of esophageal
 and 24 French for dogs greater than 10 kg. Al-
tubes may include occlusion or inadvertent re-
though a large Foley catheter could be used for
 moval by the patient.
gastrostomy, the bulb may eventually burst in
the presence of gastric acid, posing a threat for
 premature dislodgement. or leakage of gastric
GASTROSTOMY TUBES
contents around the tube. Therefore, a Pezzer
mushroom tip catheter (Peg Feeding Tube,
Gastrostomy tubes can be used for nutritional S
 Smiths Medical, Waukesha, WI; Figure 17.6a) is
support for animals that are not vomiting and 
 preferred, and silicone is preferred over latex.
are particularly useful when esophageal func-
Large (20 mm for 16 French tubes and 25 mm
tion is in question. Gastrostomy tubes may be
for 20 French tubes) and small (15 mm for 16
 placed with an endoscope (percutaneous en-
French tubes and 20 mm for 20 French tubes)
doscopic gastrostomy) or with the aid of spe-
mushroom tip diameters are available (Smiths
cially designed instrumentation (percutaneous
Medical, Waukesha, WI); the small mushroom
nonendoscopic gastrostomy). These minimally
 is preferred for ease of removal when the tube
invasive methods of gastrostomy tube place-
- is no longer needed.
 ment are preferred over surgical placement;
 During celiotomy the gastrostomy tube may
other reasons and the patient requires a gas- f
the left body wall, as is done with minimally inva-
tric tube, it is more efficient to place the tube
 sive techniques. However, intraoperative place-
surgically than to close the celiotomy and ap-
ment affords the option of placing the tube in
 ply one of the nonsurgical techniques. Surgical
the pyloric antrum to exit through the right
 placement is described below.
body wall. The latter choice is a good idea in
Gastrostomy tubes should have a diameter
dogs that are predisposed to gastric dilatation-
large enough to accommodate feeding of gru-
volvulus, because right-sided gastrostomy tube
els, meaning that they must be 14 French or
 placement results in a prophylactic gastropexy.
larger. Most commonly, 20 French tubes are
Right-sided gastrostomy tube placement in a
used for cats and small dogs (up to 10 kg)
large breed dog is described here.
(a)
Figure 17.6 (a) Silicone Pezzar mushroom-tipped gastrostomy tube (Peg Feeding Tube, Smiths Medical,
Waukesha, WI). Inset is a closeup view of mushroom tip of the tube.
246
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(b)
(C)
Figure 17.6 (Continued) (b) Scalpel pointing to the proposed incision site in the right body wall caudal to
the last rib for surgical gastrostomy tube placement. (c) Incision in the night body wall for surgical gastrostomy
tube placement. This incision will need to be deepened and lengthened to accommodate the Pezzar tube
mushroom tip. (d) Elongation of a Pezzar tube mushroom tip using Rochester-Carmalt forceps as would be
done to pass the tube through the abdominal wall. Care must be taken to not tear the tip of the tube with the
forceps. (e) Advancing a Rochester-Carmalt forceps through the right body wall incision until the tip can be
palpated under a mound of skin. (f) Incising the skin over a Rochester-Carmalt forceps that has been passed
through the right abdominal wall musculature. This skin incision must be large enough to accommodate the
mushroom tip of the Pezzar tube.
Upon completion of the surgical procedures tube mushroom. [Note: The mushroom may
an exit stoma for the tube in the right lateral 17.6d); therefore, the incision in the abdomi-
abdominal wall immediately caudal to the last. nal musculature must. be larger than the tube
rib. Using a number 10 scalpel blade, make an (
diameter.] Place a Rochester-Carmalt forceps
incision in the abdominal musculature approx- t
 through the abdominal wall incision and ad-
imately 6 cm lateral to the linea alba incision  vance through the subcutaneous tissue until the
(Figures 17.6b and 17.6c). This incision must  skin is reached. Advance the forceps to create a
be large enough to accommodate the Pezzar conical elevation of skin (Figure 17.6e). Make
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
247
(d)
(e)
(1)
Figure 17.6 (Continued)
248
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(9)
(h)
Figure 17.6 (Continued) (g) Tips of a Rochester-Carmalt forceps emerging through the skin to grasp the
aun 1d o sdaoroy aieure-rasauooy ym aqn Auoisonse e jo dn aun suidsei (u) dn aqn Auosoiss
tube into the peritoneal cavity.
an incision over the tips of the forceps until
(Figure 17.6i). Place a purse-string suture in
the forceps protrudes through the hole (Fig-
 the stomach at the proposed tube site (pyloric
ures 17.6f and 17.6g). Increase the size of the
 antrum immediately to the right of the incisura
skin incision to accommodate the Pezzar mush-
 angularis) using 2-0 or 3-0 absorbable suture
room. Grasp the tip of the feeding tube with  material. A short-lasting suture material, such
tube through the hole and into the abdomen
 string suture because the diminishing tensile
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
249
(i)
(i
(j) Gastrostomy tube coursing from the night abdominal wall into the stomach. The tip of the tube is in the
stomach and the purse-string suture around the gastrostomy has been tied.
strength will be advantageous at the time of  cipal author prefers polypropylene. Take full-
tube removal. Stab into the stomach in the area  thickness bites in the stomach to ensure en-
surrounded by the purse-string suture using a
gagement of the submucosa, taking care not. to
number 11 scalpel blade. Extend this incision
 incorporate the tube or its mushroom in the
so that. it. is just. large enough to accommodate
 process. Also, make sure that there is enough
the mushroom, being careful not to cut the 
distance between these preplaced sutures so
purse-string suture. Insert. the tube into the gas-  that the mushroom will not be impeded by them
trostomy incision and tie the purse-string su- when the tube is removed. When preplacing
ture so that the stomach is snugly against. the
 four sutures, place the dorsal suture first, fol-
tube and the mushroom is deep in the stom- lowed by the cranial and caudal sutures, and
ach lumen (Figure 17.6j). Preplace two to four  lastly the ventral suture. Pull the gastrostomy
sutures from the stomach to the body wall us-  tube to draw the mushroom against the purse-
ing 1-0 monoflament suture (Figure 17.6k). string suture and the stomach against the ab-
Absorbable suture is acceptable, but the prin- dominal wall (Figure 17.6l). Tie the preplaced
250
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(k)
(1)
Figure 17.6 (Continued) (k) Two sutures (one cranial to the tube and one caudal to the tube) to anchor
the stomach to the right abdominal wall have been preplaced around the gastrostomy, taking care to not
touch the tube or its tip during suture bites. [f four tacking sutures are used (recommended), the dorsal
 suture is preplaced first, followed by the cranial and caudal sutures, and the ventral suture is preplaced last.
sutures (dorsal, then cranial and caudal, and local anesthetic (9 parts lidocaine mixed with
lastly ventral) to complete the pexy of the stom-
1 part sodium bicarbonate) into the subcuta-
ach to the body wall (Figures 17.6m and 17.6n).
 neous tissue and muscle surrounding the tube.
Place a friction suture'externally to secure the
After allowing the local anesthetic to take effect,
tube to the skin and underlying fascia, and later
 pull snugly on the tube with one hand while the
add three additional friction sutures after the 
 other hand presses against the body wall at the
abdomen is closed.
tube exit site. Continue to pull until the mush-
When removing a gastrostomy tube, inject.
 room collapses and the tube comes out.
the tube with 10-15 mL of water or saline to
Potential complications of gastrostomy tubes
ensure that residual food is flushed into the 
 include stomal infections, inadvertent complete
gastric lumen and not dragged through the sub-
 or partial removal, tube occlusion, and peritoni-
cutaneous tissues of the abdominal wall. Inject. tis. An Elizabethan collar is essential for as long
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
251
(m)
(n)
 Figure 17.6 (Continued) (m) Tying the preplaced stomach-to-body wall sutures. (n) Completed anchoring
of the stomach to the night body wall.
as the gastrostomy tube is present in order to
Urethral Catheter, Covidien Animal Health &c
avoid chewing the tube or inadvertently pulling
 Dental Division, Mansfield, MA; Figure 17.1a),
it. out. of the abdomen.
polyurethane  (Argyle  Indwell  Polyurethane
Feeding Tube, Covidien Animal Health & Den-
tal Division, Mansfield, MA), polyvinyl chloride
(Argyle Polyvinyl Chloride Feeding Tube with
JEJUNOSTOMY TUBES
Sentinel Line, Covidien Animal Health & Den-
tal Division, Mansfeld, MA; Figure 17.7a), and
Jejunostomy tubes are indicated for nutritional
silicone (Nasal Oxygen/Feeding Tube-Silicone,
support. in patients that are vomiting and may
 Smiths Medical, Waukesha, WI) tubes (usually
be placed preemptively during celiotomy when-
 5, 8, or 10 French) may be used. Silicone (Figure
ever postoperative vomiting is a realistic pos-
17.7b) is preferred because of minimal tissue
sibility. Feeding into jejunostomy tubes is lim-
reactivity compared to other tube biomaterials.
ited to liquid diets because of the small di-
 If not. damaged, silicone tubes can be cleaned,
ameter of the tube (l0 French or smaller).
steam sterilized, and used again. Minimally in-
Red rubber (SOVEREIGN Feeding Tube and
vasive nasojejunostomy tubes can be placed, but.
252
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Covidien Animal Health & Dental Division, Mansfield, MA). The green cap indicates that the tube is made
of polyvinyl chloride. A blue cap would indicate that the tube is made of polyurethane. (b) Silicone naso-
gastric tube (Nasal Oxygen/Feeding Tube-Silicone, Smiths Medical, Waukesha, WI) for use as a jejunostomy
tube. Manufacture of the white tube was discontinued in 2009. The clear tube substitute is less stiff, more
stretchable, and a little more collapsible than the white tube.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
253
(c)
(d)
inal wall. [Cranial is to the right; view is from the perspective of an assistant to a right-handed surgeon.] Note
the location of the incisional gastropexy cranial to the proposed jejunostomy tube entry site. The number
11 scalpel blade points to the proposed tube exit site. (d) [solated loop of jejunum for placement of a
jejunostomy tube. [Cranial is to the left; view is from a right-handed surgeon's perspective.]
surgical jejunostomy is currently more com-
to rest at such sites. The tube is introduced into
monly performed and is described here.
the abdomen before placing it in the jejunum
 Upon completion of the surgical procedures
(Figure 17.7f). A tiny stab incision is made with
for which the celiotomy was performed, identify a number 11 scalpel blade in the transversus
the site in the abdominal wall where the tube abdominis muscle in the caudal aspect of
will exit. The exit stoma for the tube should  the incision and approximately 4 cm from
be located in the right lateral abdominal  the midline incision. A mosquito hemostatic
wall in the mid abdomen caudal to where  forceps is introduced into the stab and force
a gastropexy would typically be performed
 applied in a craniolateral direction until the
(Figure 17.7c). Whereas a left abdominal wall
tip can be palpated just lateral to the nipples
stoma would be acceptable, the authors find
 of the mammary chain. A tiny stab incision is
the right abdominal wall more practical for a
made over the tip of the forceps, taking care
right-handed surgeon and more anatomically
 not to make the incision any larger than that.
appropriate for the segment of small intestine necessary to permit exposure of the forceps'
that will accommodate the tube. Isolate the tip. Then, the tip of the jenunostomy tube is
loop of intestine into which the jejunostomy
 grasped with the forceps and the tube is pulled
tube will be placed (Figure 17.7d) and place
into the abdomen. After it. is in the abdomen,
a stay suture to maintain orientation (Figure t
the tube is placed into the jejunum (Figure
17.7e). The tube should enter the jejunum as 1
17.7g). A purse-string suture (or horizontal
cranially as is practical. It is acceptable for the mattress suture, as preferred by the principal
tube to span an enterotomy or anastomosis author) is placed in the antimesenteric bor-
site, but avoid having the tip of the tube come  der of the previously isolated cranial segment of
254
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(e1)
(e2)
(e3)
Figure 17.7(
(Continued) (e) Placing a 3-0 poliglecaprone 25 stay suture just cranial to the proposed jejunos-
tomy site. [Cranial is to the left; view is from a night-handed surgeon's perspective.] (1) A full-thickness bite
moved to the animal's left and the stay suture maintains onientation while the tube is introduced into the
abdomen.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
255
jejunum using 3-0 absorbable monoflament
t and there should be little concern for peritoni-
suture material (such as poliglecaprone 25 or tis if the tube is prematurely removed by the
glycomer 631). A tiny stab incision just large
 patient. Prior to the development of the inter-
enough to accommodate the tube is made with
 locking box suture pattern jejunostomy tubes
a number 11 blade in the center of the horizon- were left in place for 5-7 days to wait for the
tal mattress suture, and the jejunostomy tube 
is introduced into the stab and advanced cau-  feeding tube was being used.
dally for a generous distance (one long intesti-
The feeding tube is placed into the intes
nal loop, the length supplied by at least three
tine as described above before the interlock-
vascular arcades). The mattress suture is tied
ing box sutures are placed. Then, the box su-
 and the jejunum is secured to the body wall us-
tures are placed in the following order. The first.
ing 3-0 monofilament suture (poliglecaprone
 box is started by passing caudocranially in the
 25 or glycomer 631) in an interlocking box pat-
abdominal wall ventral (superficial) to the je-
tern (Figures 17.7h and 17.7i).
junostomy site. The suture is then passed trans-
 The interlocking box pattern is chosen in-
versely across the jejunum (full-thickness bite)
stead of simple interrupted sutures that tack the
ventrodorsally just cranial to the jejunostomy.
jejunum to the body wall because the interlock-
 The third pass is from cranial to caudal in the
ing boxes keep fluid around the tube in the
 abdominal wall dorsal (deep) to the jejunos-
intestine. Fluid could potentially leak around
tomy, and the final pass is from dorsal to ven-
the tube into the subcutaneous tissues, but in-
 tral transversely in the intestine caudal to the
testinal fluid should not be able to leak into the
 jejunostomy. The suture strands are left long
peritoneal cavity. There is no need to wait for ad-
and tagged with hemostats. The second box is
hesions to seal the area around the tube for safe started by passing ventrodorsally in the abdom-
tube removal as is the case with simple tacking
 inal wall cranial to the jejunostomy. The sec
sutures. With the interlocking box technique
 ond suture is passed craniocaudally in the intes-
the tube may be safely removed at any time,4t
tine dorsal (deep) to the jejunostomy. The third
(f1)
(f2)
Figure 17.7
(Continued) (f) Pulling the jejunostomy tube into the abdomen. [Cranial is to the night; view
is from an assistant surgeon's perspective, assuming that the surgeon is right handed.] (1) A tiny puncture
is made in the transversus abdominis muscle with a number 1l scalpel blade 2-3 cm from the linea alba
incision, depending on the size of the patient. (2) A mosquito hemostatic forceps is introduced into the tiny
puncture in the transversus abdominis muscle.
256
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(f3)
(f4)
(f5)
(6)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (3) The forceps is advanced in a craniolateral direction until the tip can be felt
under the skin just lateral to the nipple line. (4) A number 1l scalpel blade is used to make a tiny incision
d a qe o paao ae s s au (a) s ss ym us a aixa s a au ) a
of the tube.
suture is passed dorsoventrally in the body wall
are tied to secure the first box and the cranial
 caudal to the jejunostomy, and the final pass is
 strands are tied to secure the second box. Exter-
from caudal to cranial in the intestine ventral  nally, the jejunostomy tube is anchored to skin
(superficial) to the jejunostomy. The cranial su-
 and underling fascia with four interrupted fric-
ture strands are pulled together as are the previ-
tion sutures placed 1 cm apart (Figure 17.7j).1
 ously placed caudal strands. The caudal strands Size 2-0 nylon or polypropylene is preferred for
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
257
(17)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (7) The tube is pulled into the abdominal cavity.
anchoring 8 French and 10 French tubes; size
 Complications of jejunostomy tubes include
3-0 is used for 5 French tubes.
local cellulitis, inadvertent. complete or partial
When removing a jejunostomy tube, inject.
removal of the tube, tube occlusion, stomal in-
the tube with approximately 10 mL of water or
fection, and peritonitis. Self-limiting local cel-
saline to ensure that residual food is flushed
 lulitis is the most common complication.
into the intestinal lumen and not dragged
through the subcutaneous tissues of the abdom-
inal wall. Cut the friction sutures and gently
WOUND DRAINS
extract. the tube. Although jejunostomy tube re-
 moval is well tolerated by dogs and cats, infltra-
Drains are generally made of latex, silcone, or
tion with local anesthetic around the exit stoma
other pliable material, and are mostly tubular in
skin and body wall will lessen tube removal
shape. Some of the varieties, particularly, Pen-
discomfort. Periodically, cleanse the stoma as
rose drains (Penrose Drain, Cardinal Health,
needed to remove secretions. Secretions from 
McGaw Park, IL; Figures 17.8a and 17.8b), are
the stoma are usually mild and typically resolve
easily collapsible. Drain use is indicated when
in 3-5 days.
normally apposed tissue has been separated
258
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(g1)
(g2)
Figure 17.7
(Continued) (g) Placing the jejunostomy tube into the intestine. [Cranial is to the night; view
is from an assistant surgeon's perspective, assuming that the surgeon is night handed.] (1) A saline-filled
syringe is attached to the jejunostomy tube to later dilate the intestine with saline to aid advancement of
The tube is positioned in the cranial aspect of the feld while the pursestring suture (actually a horizontal
mattress suture) is placed.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
259
(g3)
(g4)
(g5)
(g6)
(g7)
(g8)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (3) The first bite (full thickness) of the mattress suture is placed craniocaudally. (4)
The second bite (full thickness) of the mattress suture is placed caudocranially. (5) The properly executed
mattress suture resembles a “smiley face." (6) A number ll blade is used to make a hole in the center of the
mattress suture (a “nose" in the “smiley face"). The blade is held upside down with the sharp edge toward
the “eyes" of the “smiley face" to avoid cutting the suture as could occur if the blade penetrated too close
to the “mouth" of the “smiley face." Note that the cranial stay suture has been removed and the tube is in
position to be threaded into the hole that will be made in the intestine. (7) The hole in the intestine should
aus aum ununaaua u Aepnes papeaiyn si aqni aui (8) aqni aun aepouoaoe oi ynoua asiei isnag
counter tension is applied to the tagged ends of the mattress suture.
260
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(g9)
(g10)
(g11)
(g12)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (9) Saline is periodically injected into the intestine to provide mild distention and
 lubrication for ease of tube passage. (10) The tube is advanced for a generous distance (the amount of
intestine supplied by about three vascular arcades). The arrow indicates the position of the tube's tip. (11)
The horizontal mattress suture is tied to prevent leakage around the tube during remaining manipulations.
The tube can still slide through the hole in the intestine so care must be taken to make sure the tube does
not back out during the remainder of the procedure. (12) The strands of the mattress suture have been cut
and the jejunum aligned with the body wall in preparation for jejunopexy. The arrow points to the tip of the
tube within the jejunum.
and a pocket. of dead space is created that. can- (
(clotted or unclotted) , it is termed a hematoma.
not be sufficiently closed. When this pocket is If the character of the fluid is that of serosan-
created, blood vessels and lymphatics are de- guinous fluid, it is termed a seroma. Regardlless
stroyed, which may lead to accumulation of  of the fluid characteristics, its presence provides
fluid inside the newly created pocket. If the a rich culture medium for bacteria to multiply.
character of the fluid is that of frank blood  a barrier for new blood vessels to form in the
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
261
(h1)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (h) Anchoring the jejunum to the body wall using the interlocking box suture
pattern. [Cranial is to the right; view is from an assistant surgeon's perspective, assuming that the surgeon is
right handed.] (1) The jejunostomy site is brought close to the tube exit site on the body wall leaving a short 
segment of tube visible for orientation.
apposing tissue, and, in general, leads to a de- medicine is the flattened, cylindrical latex or
lay in wound healing. However, drains should  silicone tube called the Penrose drain (Figure
only be placed when clearly indicated, because
17.8a) ; however, stiffer tubular drains can also
the inappropriate use of a drain can be detri-  act as passive drains. Since passive drains rely on
mental to the animal and lead to wound de-
 gravity, they must be placed such that the distal
hiscence, infection, abscess formation, or even
end of the drain exits from the wound in the
death. The surgeon should carefully consider
most dependent site (Figure 17.8b). A Penrose
the likelihood of a seroma, the viability of the tis-
drain should never be fenestrated for two rea
sue, the ability to appropriately close the wound,
sons: (1) fenestrations may increase the chances
and the ability to restrict the movement of the
 that the drain will break upon attempted re-
wound area and the patient after surgery. Drains
 moval and (2) fenestration will decrease the sur-
can also be placed in the peritoneal cavity to re- f
face area of the drain thereby limiting capillary
move bile, urine, or other aberrant fluids.
action, which is necessary for the Penrose drain
Drains are classified as either passive or ac-
to work in the first. place. Noncollapsible, tubu-
tive. Passive drains rely on gravity and capil lar passive drains can be fenestrated because, in
lary action to drain fluid from a wound. The addition to fluid running along the outside of
 most common passive drain used in veterinary  t
 the drain via capillary action, there is a pressure
262
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(h2)
(h3)
Figure 17.7  (Continued) (2) Synthetic absorbable suture (3-0 poliglecaprone 25) is used for the interlocking
through during one of the passages. During passage all suture bites must avoid hitting the tube. (3) For the
first box, the tagged suture end is leftin the caudal aspect of the surgical field and the first suture bite will
be from caudal to cranial in the body wall.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
263
(h4)
(h5)
(h6)
(h7)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (4) The first suture bite is taken from caudal to cranial in the body wall superficial
to the tube. (5) The second bite of the first box is placed full thickness transversely across the intestine from
superficial to deep cranial to the tube such that the passage is orientated at a night angle to the first body wall
suture. (6) The third bite of the first box is passed from cranial to caudal in the body wall deep to the tube.
This passage is perpendicular to the intestinal suture passage and parallel to the oniginal body wall suture
passage. (7) The fourth and final suture passage for the first box is made full thickness transversely across
the intestine from deep to superficial caudal to the tube.
difference between the wound pocket. and the  semiquantification of exudative volume from
inner lumen of the tube which will encourage the drain. Bandages must. be changed daily
 luminal drainage. Passive drains should be cov- or more frequently should strike through oc-
ered by a bandage after placement. Bandaging cur. Frequency of bandage changing can be de-
affords protection from ascending bacterial in-  creased once drainage volume has decreased.
fections, protection of surrounding skin from
Active drains, also known as closed suction
wound fluid scalding as well as a method for drains, are more effcient than passive drains
264
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(h8)
(h9)
(h10)
(h11)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (8) The four suture passages of the first box have been completed. (9) The suture
strands have been tagged with a hemostatic forceps (not shown) so that mild tension on the strands can
provide orientation while the second box is developed. A small segment of tube is left visible for orientation
during development of the second box. (10) The strand of suture for the second box is tagged with a
mosquito hemostatic forceps and that forceps is placed in the cranial aspect of the surgical field to maintain
 orientation. [Note that 3-0 fluorescent polypropylene is being used for demonstration purposes to more
easily discern the two boxes, but synthetic absorbable suture would be used in clinical cases.] (1l) The first
pass of the second box is placed in the body wall cranial to the tube from superficial to deep, essentially
in removing fluid from a wound or a body cav-  by application of external suction. In applying
ity. Active drains also decrease the likelihood
 suction, not only is wound fluid removed from
of drain-related infection compared to passive the local area, but. also the wound layers are
drains. These drains are termed “active" be-
 drawn closer in apposition, which in effect. de-
cause they actively remove fluid from the wound
creases dead space, decreases the likelihood of
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
265
(h12)
(h13)
(h14)
(h15)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (12) The frst pass of the second box is completed and the second pass is being
planned. The second pass of the second box is the most difficult suture pass because it goes craniocaudally in
the intestine deep to the tube. To achieve this passage, the surgeon is positioning the nondominant hand to
rotate the down side of the intestine upward. (13) The intestine has been rotated so that the intestine deep
to the tube is now accessible for an easy pass by the right-handed surgeon. (14) With the intestine rotated,
the deep pass appears to be going caudocranially. The true cranial to caudal passage will be evident when
the intestine is rotated back to its normal position. (15) The needle is grasped at the point before rotating
the intestine back to its normal location.
seroma formation, and facilitates early adhesion  trated section molded to a silastic tube that. is
of skin to the underlying wound bed. The most.
 attached to a flexible bulb (*grenade"). Activa-
commonly used active drain in veterinary prac-  tion of the grenade by depression of this bulb es-
tice is what. is known as a Jackson-Pratt. closed  tablishes negative pressure in the wound cavity.
suction drain (Jackson-Pratt Silicone Flat Drain
 A homemade closed suction drain, for small
and Jackson-Pratt Reservoir, Cardinal Health, wounds, can be constructed using a butterfly
McGaw Park, IL; Figure 17.8c). This drain is catheter and a vacutainer blood collection tube
composed of a flat or round, flexible, fenes- (Figure 17.8d). Cut off the luer lock portion
266
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(h16)
(h17)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (16) As the intestine is rotated back to normal position, the needle is passed
craniocaudally so that it will be in proper orientation for the third suture passage of the second box. (17)
With the intestine back in normal onientation and the second pass suture running craniocaudally, the third
pass may be performed.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
267
(h18)
(h19)
(h20)
(h21)
(h22)
(h23)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (18) The third pass of the second box is placed in the body wall from deep to
superficial caudal to the tube essentially connecting the dots created there by frst box body wall suture
passes. (19) The fourth and final pass of the second box is made full thickness in the intestine superficial to
the tube caudocranially. (20) Both boxes of the interlocking box are completed. (21) When the strands of
both boxes are pulled, the intestine abuts the body wall and the tube is no longer visible. (22) The strands of
each box are tied. Either box may be tied first. (23) Cutting the free strands after tying the knots completes
the interlocking box jejunopexy.
268
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(i1)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (i) Artistic summary of the interlocking box jejunopexy. [These drawings are
to Figure 17.7h.] (1) The red suture represents the first box with suture passes in the following order: (a)
caudal to cranial in the body wall superficial to the tube, (b) superficial to deep in the intestine cranial to
the tube, (c) cranial to caudal in the body wall deep to the tube, and (d) deep to superficial in the intestine
caudal to the tube. The black suture represents the second box with suture passes in the following order:
(a) superficial to deep in the body wall cranial to the tube, (b) cranial to caudal in the intestine deep to the
tube, (c) deep to superficial in the body wall caudal to the tube, and (d) caudal to cranial in the intestine
superficial to the tube.
of the butterfly catheter and create small fen-
 drains are not very efficient because they re-
estrations 1-2 cm from the end of the catheter.
quire frequent changing of the collection tubes
These fenestrations should not. be larger than  when there is significant drainage.
25% of the circumference of the catheter. The
 Another alternative for a closed suction drain
end of the drain is then inserted into the is to use fenestrated tubing attached to a 35-60
wound through a separate stab incision. After mL syringe. Gently pull back on the syringe.
the wound is closed, the butterfly needle por- Once negative pressure is obtained, place an
skin and underlying fascia with four friction su- maintain negative pressure (Figure 17.8e). Al-
tures. Monitor the collection tube frequently ways completely occlude the tube prior to emp
and change to a new collection tube before tying or changing to a new receptacle such that.
complete filling so as to always maintain neg-
air is not drawn into the wound pocket. The
 ative pressure. Vacuum blood collection tube sharp needle that maintains the plunger in an
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
269
(i2)
(i3)
with forceps in the cranial aspect of the surgical field.
270
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(i4)
(i5)
 holes in the body wall andjejunum are juxtaposed and sandwiched between the jejunum and body wall within
the interlocking boxes. Therefore, any fluid around the tube will stay in the intestine or could potentially
leak into the subcutaneous tissues, but intestinal fluid should not be able to leak into the peritoneal cavity.
The suture strands are retained in this drawing for onientation purposes, but would be knotted and cut at
this point.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
271
(j1)
j2
(j3)
(j4)
Figure 17.7 (Continued) (j) Anchoring the jejunostomy tube to the skin and underlying fascia with four
friction sutures. (1) The first friction suture is placed as soon as the interlocking box jejunopexy is complete
so that inadvertent tube withdrawal does not occur during remaining surgical manipulations. The surgeon's
nondominant hand is stabilizing the body wall at the jejunsotomy site from within the peritoneal cavity to serve
as a reference point for placement of the first friction suture and ensure that the friction suture penetrates
underlying fascia without entering the abdomen. (2) The frst friction suture is placed immediately cranial
and slightly lateral to the tube exit site. (3) Saline is injected into the tube after each friction suture is placed
to make sure that the lumen of the tube is not obstructed by the suture. (4) Three additional friction sutures
are placed after the abdominal incision is closed.
aspirating position poses injury risk to the pa- (
 drain when it was installed to ensure removal
tient and care givers; therefore, this type of suc-
of the entire drain. Place the drain inside the
tion drain is not recommended.
 wound in a vertical alignment. The proximal
When placing a passive drain, clip and asep-
end of the drain is then advanced away from
tically prepare a wide area around the wound.tl
the wound opening and then sutured to the
The portion of the drain that will be placed  skin in a nondependent area by passing a sim-
inside the wound should be measured and  ple interrupted transcutaneous nonabsorbable
recorded. The length of the drain when re-
suture. Next, a new stab incision is created at.
272
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(a)
(b)
Figure 17.8 (a) Collapsible latex drain (Penrose Drain, Cardinal Health, McGaw Park, IL). (b) Latex
Penrose drain in place on the left side of a dog. [Cranial is to the left and ventral is to the bottom of the
photograph.] A curved laceration just dorsal to the nipple line spanning the junction of the thorax and
abdomen has been sutured. Prior to closure a Penrose drain was placed because of a pocket of dead space
umder the wound and dorsal to it. Note that the exit hole for the Penrose drain is ventral to the wound so that
gravity flow will be facilitated when the dog is standing or in sternal recumbence. There is no drain exposed
dorsally. Instead, a single nylon suture through the skin anchors the drain in the subcutaneous space to help
prevent the drain from sliding out. A second anchoring suture is seen where the drain exits. The second
anchoring suture is placed to help prevent retraction of the drain into the wound. Both anchoring sutures
must be removed in order to remove the Penrose drain.
the primary wound opening. This stab incision have to be sutured to the skin. Third, because
will act as an exit portal for the distal end of the drain works under suction, the exit portal
-ol suapuadap e u paseid aq oi paau jou saop aui og ynoua aarel aq pmous pue ueip au
drain to exit and for fluid to discharge. A drain  cation. Four friction sutures should be used
should never exit through the primary incision
 to secure the drain to the skin and underlying
because there is an increased risk of incision de-  fascia.
hiscence. If the wound pocket is especially deep
 Jackson-Pratt drains are particularly helpful
and there is adequate subcutaneous closure, it.
pad aq keu uep aul 'spunom daap u
is acceptable for the drain to lie beneath the su-  through the wound with hemostatic forceps
ture line. Once the drain is passed through the via a small stab incision in the skin, or the
exit portal, the distal end of the drain should drain may be passed from within outward us-
rupted nonabsorbable suture (Figure 17.8b).
17.8k). Once the drain is placed (Figure 17.8j),
When placing an active drain, many of the the wound is closed. After wound closure the
rules mentioned above still apply. There are drain is anchored to skin and underlying fascia
only a few differences when placing active with four friction sutures, areservoir is attached,
drains.First, the exit portal shouid be just large and suction is activated (Figure 178k).
enough to accommodate the drain tube. This
Active drains may also be used to remove
will ensure a leak proof seal such that the drain fluid from the abdominal cavity. Indications for
can maintain suction within the wound. Sec- abdominal drainage include septic abdomen,
ond, the proximal portion of the drain does not.  uroabdomen, and bile peritonitis. Once the
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
273
(C)
Figure 17.8 (Continued) (c) Jackson-Pratt closed suction drain (Jackson-Pratt Silicone Flat Drain and
 Jackson-Pratt Reservoir, Cardinal Health, McGaw Park, IL). Inset is a close up of the tip of the drain show-
ing fenestrations. The tubular nonfenestrated portion of the drain is attached to the reservoir. The drain
reservoir is squeezed and the air exit is plugged to initiate and maintain suction.
primary condition  has been surgically ad-  Four friction sutures should be used to secure
dressed, a drain is placed prior to abdominal  the drain tube to the skin and underlying fascia.
closure. Create an exit. stoma for the tube in
 There are no set duration guidelines that.
a number 1l scalpel blade, make a stab inci-
 ever, most passive drains must. remain in place
sion in the skin approximately 5-6 cm lateral to  for at least 5 days for maximal benefit, and most.
the midline incision. Place a hemostatic forceps active drains can be removed within 3-5 days.
through the stab incision and advance through Generally, drains are maintained for 3-5 days
the subcutaneous tissue until the peritoneum is  and rarely as long as 10 days. A rule of thumb for
reached. Visualize the tips of the Kelly hemostat  drain removal is that drains should be removed
as a conical elevation protruding from the peri-  once the volume of drainage trends downward
toneum. Lightly incise a small hole over the tips or the character of the discharge changes to
such that the tips protrude through the hole.
a serous or serosanguinous appearance. The
Grasp the proximal end of the drain tube with  drain itself will elicit a small amount of tran-
the hemostatic forceps and gently pull the tube sudation just from being in the tissue, so it is
through the hole and out through the skin. Al- unlikely that. there will ever be complete ces-
ternatively, a sharp metal trocar fixed to the end  sation of fluid discharge. If the discharge does
of the drain tube (Figure 17.8f) may be pushed  stop flowing, suspect an outflow occlusion. Rule
from the inside of the abdomen out through the  out kinking of the drain tube, blood or tis-
skin, negating the need to incise an exit portal. sue clot in the lumen of the drain, and tissue
274
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
(e)
(d)
(f)
(9)
Figure 17.8  (Continued) (d) Active drains using modified butterfly catheters attached to vacutainer blood
collection tubes. In this case, the drains are placed in the subcutaneous tissue under the ears. This was once a
 method to provide drainage after total ear canal ablation, but drains are no longer used for that procedure.
(e) Active drain using a syringe to provide suction. An 18-gauge hypodermic needle is driven through the
syringe plunger and rests on the wings of the syringe barrel to provide suction. A clamp or stopcock is
necessary to prevent introduction of air in the wound when the syringe is being emptied. Both clamp and
stopcock are pictured here. The clamp and stopcock must remain open during suctioning and closed when
emptying the syringe. (f) Sharp metal trocar fixed to the nonfenestrated end of a Jackson-Pratt drain tube.
(g) Jackson-Pratt drain placement at the time of secondary wound closure subsequent to incisional drainage
 of a surgical wound abscess. The surgeon is using a sharp metal trocar to make the exit portal such that the
 drain is pulled from within outward.
SURGICAL TUBES AND DRAINS
275
(h)
(i)
(i
(k)
Figure 17.8 (Continued) (h) Exit of a drain trocar distant from the wound edge. The circle shows the tip
of the trocar coming through the skin. (i) Using a drain trocar to pull a Jackson-Pratt drain into the wound
toward the exit hole. Note the metal trocar has been passed through the abdominal skin. (j) Jackson-Pratt 
drain in a deep wound prior to wound closure. Note the fenestrated portion of the drain is entirely in the
wound and the tubular nonfenestrated portion exits the skin. It is important to have a tight seal around the
tube at the exit with no fenestrations showing so that negative pressure can be maintained within the wound.
(k) Completely placed Jackson-Pratt drain. Note the reservoir holding constant suction drawing red tinged
fluid coming from the wound. Also note that the tube is anchored to the skin and underlying fascia with four
friction sutures.
276
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
blocking the fenestrations of the drain (i.e.,
3. Marques Al, Tattersall J, Shaw DJ, Welsh E. Retro-
 omentum in an abdominal drain). If the cause
 spective analysis of the relationship between time
of the obstruction cannot be corrected, the mal-
 of thoracostomy drain removal and discharge
functioning drain should be removed. Cytology
time. J Small Anim Pract 2009;50:162-166.
4. Daye RM, Huber ML, Henderson RA. Interlock-
of the wound fluid may be helpful in determin-
ing if it is safe to remove a drain. A decrease
ing box jejunostomy: a new technique for en-
 in the number of bacteria and the appearance
teral feeding. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 1999;35:129-
134.
of healthy neutrophils may be good indica-
tors that the drain may be removed. Remove
 a wound drain after local anesthetic infltration
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
by cutting the friction sutures and extracting
manually.
 small animal surgery can be found in the following
textbooks:
REFERENCES
1. Hackett TB, Mazzaferro EM. Veterinary Emergency
1. Song EK, Mann FA, Wagner-Mann CC. Compar-
and Critical Care Procedures. Ames, Iowa: Blackwell
ison of different tube matenials and use of Chi-
Publishing Professional, 2006.
2. Silverstein DC, Hopper K. Small Animal Critical
nese finger trap or four friction suture technique
-ou pue Xoisounl Kuoisonses smaas 1og
Care Medicine. St. Louis, Missouri: Saunders Else-
racostomy tubes in dogs. Vet Surg 2008;37:212-
ver, 2009.
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
221.
2. Yoon H, Mann FA, Lee S, Branson KR. Com-
 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
parison of the amounts of air leakage into the
2003.
thoracic cavity associated with four thoracostomy
4. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd ed. St.
tube placement techniques in canine cadavers.
Louis, Missouri: Mosby Elsevier, 2007.
Am J Vet Res 2009;70:1161-1167.
Chapter 18
CANINE
OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
Fred Anthony Mann
Ovariohysterectomy is one of the most. common
Empty the dog's urinary bladder by manual
surgical proce dures performed by small animal
 e ai ls li rd ssdxa
veterinarians. While the basics of the surgical
ping and prior to the first surgical scrub applica-
procedure to remove the ovaries and uterus
 tion. Emptying the urinary bladder is important.
must be performed each time to be successful,
to help avoid inadvertent cystotomy when the
there are many variants of certain portions of
scalpel enters the abdominal cavity. Palpate the
the surgical procedure that are based on indi-
vidual preferences. This chapter covers canine
as much urine as possible. Urinary bladder ex-
ovariohysterectomy in a meticulous step-by-step
 pression is more easily achieved with the dog
fashion in a manner used by the principal au-
in lateral recumbence. Apply pressure on both
thor to teach veterinary students.
sides forcing the urine caudally to the trigone.
Liberally clip the ventral abdomen from the
Continue to increase pressure until the urethral
 mid-thorax to the vulva. The surgical prepara-
sphincter relaxes and urine starts to flow. Main-
tion should include a wide clip that extends
tain pressure on the sides of the urinary bladder
from cranial to the xiphoid cartilage to caudal
until it is empty. Be careful to avoid excessive
to the brim of the pelvis and lateral to the sym-
pressure that will traumatize the urinary blad-
metrical folds of the flank and mammae to at.
der and result in hematuria. If expression would
least. the level of the ventral border of the ribs
require excessive pressure, it is better to wait.
(see also Chapter 10). A long and wide clip and
and aspirate the urine intraoperatively with a
aseptic surgical preparation are necessary to be
 syringe and hypodermic needle than risk iatro-
prepared to extend the incision in case of an
 genic injury.
unforeseen event, such as a dropped ovarian
 After urinary bladder expression, a rough
 pedicle.
surgical scrub is performed and the dog is
moved to the operating table. The dog is
placed in dorsal recumbence with the limbs
Fundameniats of Smalt Animat Surgery, lst edition.
extended and loosely secured to the operating
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
table (Figures 18.1-18.4), and a sterile surgical
@ 20ll Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 preparation is performed (see also Chapter 10).
277
278
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.1  Dorsally recumbent positioning for canine ovariohysterectomy viewed from the left caudal
aspect of the patient: Limbs are extended and tied loosely to the operating table. [Caution: Tying limbs
too tightly can cause a tourniquet effect and resultant ischemic injury.] The instrument table (Mayo stand)
is positioned at the caudal edge of the operating table so that a continuous sterile field can eventually be
developed from the surgical site to the instruments after the instrument pack has been opened. [The device
with the large corrugated tubing is a warming device that will be turmed on once surgical drapes are applied.]
Figure 18.2 Dorsally recumbent positioning for canine ovaniohysterectomy viewed from the caudal aspect
 of the patient. Note the positioning of anesthetist and monitoning devices at the cranial aspect of the patient
 and the instrument table (Mayo stand) at the caudal edge of the operating table.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
279
Figure 18.3 Dorsally recumbent positioning for canine ovariohysterectomy viewed from the right lateral
aspect of the patient, the side of the table at which a right-handed surgeon will work.
After the sterile preparation is complete, the  instrument pack such that the wrap overlaps
surgical instrument pack is placed on the Mayo  the edge of the operating table and covers the
instrument. stand (or other instrument table)  dog's paws (Figures 18.6-18.8). The surgeon
positioned at the caudal edge of the operating
uses drapes from a separate pack (Figure
table (Figures 18.1 and 18.2). A nonsterile
18.7) to apply four quarter drapes (Figures
assistant opens the outer wrap of the surgical
18.9-18.14). The surgical field is quadrant
instrument pack (Figure 18.5). The gowned d
 draped to allow a midline incision extending
Figure 18.4 Dorsally recumbent positioning for canine ovariohysterectomy viewed from the right lateral
aspect of the patient, closeup view of the ovariohysterectomy surgical site. [The alligator clip outside the
surgical field is one of the electrocardiographic monitoring leads.]
280
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.5 Opening the outer wrap of the sterile instrument pack by a nonsterile assistant. [Note the
 position of the instrument table such that the outer wrap will cover the patient's distal pelvic limbs when
opened.]
Figure 18.6 Opening the inner wrap of the sterile instrument pack by the gowned and gloved surgeon.
Care is taken to protect the hands from contamination as the wrap is allowed to fall.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
281
Figure 18.7 Opened sterile instrument pack. Note the opened sterile drape pack in the background.
282
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.8 Opened sterile instrument pack and patient as viewed from the dog's left side. Note that the
wraps have covered the distal pelvic limbs of the dog. The next step is to apply four quarter drapes.
Figure 18.9 Application of the first quarter drape over the cranial aspect of the dog with the edge at the
  ie oi se os ap au dp s on u si a r ix a yo 
hands in the process. If the drape is placed too far caudally, it can be pulled cranially by grasping the area
of drape just below the left hand of the surgeon in this picture. If the drape is placed too far cranially,
there is no correction except to apply a new drape in the appropriate position. In such a case, a nonsterile
assistant should discard the inappropriately applied drape before the new drape is applied. Altermately, the
inappropriate drape may remain and a new stenile drape can be placed over it.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
283
Figure 18.10 Application of the second quarter drape on the right side of the dog. Notice how the surgeon
holds the drape corners and releases them to protect the fingers from inadvertent contamination during
drape application. If the drape is placed too far medially, it can be pulled laterally by grasping the drape just
lateral to the surgical feld. If the drape is placed too far laterally, there is no correction except to apply a
new drape in the appropriate position.
Figure 18.1l Attachment of the first and second quarter drapes. The junction of the first two drapes
(near the surgeon's left hand in this picture) will be attached to each other and the underlying skin with
towel forceps. A conveniently packed instrument pack will have towel clamps on top since they are the first
instruments to be used.
284
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.12 Application of the third quarter drape on the dog's left side. An assistant surgeon may apply
this drape, or the surgeon may move to this side of the table temporanily to do so. If the drape is placed too
far medially, it can be pulled laterally by grasping the drape just lateral to the exposed skin. [Note: Fingers
should not touch the dog's skin in this process.] If the drape is placed too far laterally, there is no correction
except to apply a new drape in the appropriate position. Towel clamps are used to secure the first and third
drapes to each other and the underlying skin before placing the final (caudal) quarter drape.
Figure 18.13 Application of the fourth quarter drape at the caudal aspect of the dog. If the drape is placed
too far cranially, it can be pulled caudally by grasping the drape just caudolateral to the exposed skin. [Note:
Fingers should not touch the dog's skin in this process.] If the drape is placed too far caudally, there is no
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
285
Figure 18.14 Completed quarter drapes with a towel forceps at each cormer, as viewed from the dog's
right side (right-handed surgeon's perspective). The dog's head is to the left in this photograph. Note that
instrument tray and place in on top of the quarter drape. The same maneuver will be necessary when the
full drape is applied to cover the quarter drapes.
of the pelvis. The edge of each lateral drape ger, which indicates the caudal extent of the
   s s  i s    a   
proposed skin incision (just medial to the  dal to the umbilicus to the point identified
nipples). There are two common methods by the index finger. In cats, the index finger
 of quarter drape placement. with regard to indicates the middle of the skin incision. In
order of placement. With the first method, (
other words, make the skin incision in cats
the cranial and caudal drapes are applied first.
more caudally to better exteriorize the uterine
The cranial drape should be at the base of the
body.
xiphoid cartilage. The caudal drape should be
After applying the full drape (Figures
at. the cranial brim of the pelvis. The lateral
 18.17 and 18.18), the incision landmarks are
drapes are applied next and secured with towel
 estimated before fenestrating the full drape
forceps to themselves and to the skin at the 
(Figure 18.19). The full drape is fenestrated by
intersecting corners. With the second method,
cutting in the form of an *I"' with flaps oriented
the quarter drapes are placed in the following
laterally (Figures 18.20-18.22). The flaps of
order: (1) caudal, (2) lateral, (3) cranial, and
 the full drape are rolled under (but exterior to
(4) lateral, towel clamping at each intersecting 
 the quarter drapes) and secured with two towel
corner along the way.
forceps (Figure 18.23).
Before applying the full drape, it is help-
 Perform a sponge count prior to making the
ful to identify the landmarks for the ovario-
skin incision and have the anesthetist record
hysterectomy skin incision (Figures 18.15 and
1
the number of sponges. Count any additional
18.16). The surgeon's nondominant hand is
 placed with the thumb on the cranial aspect
have the anesthetist add them to the original
of the pubis and the fifth fnger on the um- count. Organize the surgical instruments on
bilicus. The midpoint between the fifth finger  the instrument table prior to making the skin
and thumb is identified with the index fin-  incision.
286
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.15 Ascertaining the location of the ovariohysterectomy skin incision prior to application of the
full drape, as viewed from the right-handed surgeon's perspective. The third finger of the left hand points
to the umbilical scar and the thumb palpates the cranial brim of the pubis. The index fnger finds the
midpoint of the line between the umbilicus and pubis. This midpoint approximates the caudal aspect of the
ovariohysterectomy incision in dogs, the cranial start of the incision being the caudal edge of the umbilical
Figure 18.16 Ascertaining the location of the ovariohysterectomy skin incision prior to application of the
full drape, as viewed from the dog's left side. The dog's head is to the right. The third finger of the left hand
 points to the umbilical scar and the thumb palpates the cranial brim of the pubis. The index finger finds the
midpoint of the line between the umbilicus and pubis. This midpoint approximates the caudal aspect of the
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
287
Smaller drapes than what is demonstrated here are typically used for canine and feline ovaniohysterectomies
performed by solo surge ons.
by drape) is to the right in this photograph. Note that the instrument pack (left of picture) has been placed
[ims au on pis asui aun oy piy aais snonuguos e si aiaun ieun pue adep iy au jo don uo
site.
288
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.19 Ascertaining the site for fenestration of the full paper drape. The dog's head is to the left
in this photograph. The third finger of the surgeon's right hand is palpating the cranial brim of the pubis
and the other fingers are estimating the previously determined skin incision, the flexed left third finger at
the level of the cranial aspect of the incision and the right index finger at the caudal aspect of the incision.
The fenestration will be made such that the edges are approximately 2 cm from the skin incision laterally,
cranially, and caudally.
Figure 18.20 Fenestrating the full drape, first cut. The fenestration is made in the form of an “I" with the
top and bottom of the “I" in the cranial and caudal aspects of the drape. In this picture, the caudal (bottom
of the *I") cut is being made. The cut should be approximately 4 cm.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
289
Figure 18.21 Nearly completed full drape fenestration. An Ishaped fenestration is being completed by
cutting the top of the *"I" at the cranial aspect of the fenestration.
 Figure 18.22 Completed fenestration of the full drape. An Ishaped incision has been made in the drape
creating approximately 2 cm lateral flaps which will be rolled under and secured with towel clamps.
290
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.23 Completed draping for canine ovariohysterectomy. The lateral edges of the fenestration are
rolled under, placed on top of the quarter drapes, and secured with towel forceps in the central portion
of the fenestration. The towel forceps clamp through both drapes and skin laterally and through only skin
medially, with the rings of the forceps resting caudally.
Verify the location of the skin incision linea alba using a push cut (Figures 18.35 and
(Figures 18.24-18.26) and incise the skin from
 18.36) and avoid undermining of the subcuta-
cranial to caudal (Figures 18.27-18.30). The neous tissue. Undermining creates dead space,
index finger and thumb of the nondominant  which will predispose to seroma formation post.
hand are used to tense the skin and apply operatively. The subcutaneous fat attaches to
lateral pressure as the skin is incised. Apply
 the linea alba bilaterally; therefore, a push cut.
enough pressure to incise the full thickness of
 is necessary on both the left. and right sides of
the skin. Continue the incision caudally with
 the linea alba. The linea alba is very thin in cats
one continuous motion.
and in the caudal part of the abdomen in dogs,
 Hemostasis using gauze pressure (Figure
 making its identification more difficult.
18.31), mosquito hemostatic forceps, and/or
Lift the linea alba with thumb forceps in the
incising the next level. Use sponges with a slow  the abdominal wall into the peritoneal cavity
 motion. Wiping may remove blood clots that are
 the blade points upward (Figures 18.40-18.42).
sealing smaller vessels and causes unnecessary
The blade of the scalpel faces upward
tissue trauma. Wiping also “paints" the field red,
 so that when it penetrates the peritoneal cavity.
 making it difficult to differentiate tissue planes
 the risk of damaging abdominal contents is
and identify anatomical landmarks.
reduced. The stab incision should be made
Find the midline and incise the subcuta-  at the cranial aspect of the incision near
neous tissue, using Metzenbaum scissors to ex- the umbilicus, if possible, because the fat in
pose the linea alba (Figures 18.32-18.39). In-  the falciform ligament at this location offers
cise the subcutaneous fat from both sides of the  additional protection against iatrogenic injury.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
291
Figure 18.24 Final identification of the proposed ovariohysterectomy skin incision, as viewed from the
right-handed surgeon's perspective. The third finger of the left hand points to the umbilical scar and
the thumb palpates the cranial brim of the pubis. The index finger finds the midpoint of the line between
the umbilicus and pubis. This midpoint approximates the caudal aspect of the ovariohysterectomy incision
in dogs, the cranial start of the incision being the caudal edge of the umbilical scar. [In cats, the index finger
point marks the mid portion of the ovariohysterectomy incision.]
Figure 18.25 Final determination of the ovariohysterectomy skin incision. The night index finger is pointing
to the cranial brim of the pubis and the left index finger is pointing to the umbilical scar. For illustrative
purposes, a sterile black marker has been used to demonstrate the midpoint of the line between the two
extent of the incision is marked with the colored circle.]
292
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 marker has been used to draw the proposed incision. [The caudal extent of this incision was underestimated
by approximately 2 cm; therefore, the skin incision was continued for that distance past the caudal end of
the black ink.]
Figure 18.27 The canine ovaniohysterectomy skin incision. The skin is tensed with the thumb and index
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
293
Figure 18.28  Making the canine ovariohysterectomy skin incision. The skin is incised from cranial to caudal.
Ideally, the full thickness of the skin is incised in one cranial-to-caudal motion.
Figure 18.29 Deepening the canine ovariohysterectomy skin incision. The skin incision is deepened by
tensing the skin laterally with the thumb and index finger of the nondominant hand while gentle pressure
is applied to the scalpel as it is moved from cranial to caudal. Care is taken to stay on midline and avoid
filletingof subcutaneous tissues.
294
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.30 Completed canine ovariohysterectomy skin incision. The skin edges should be easily spread
apart before incising the subcutaneous tissues to expose the linea alba.
Figure 18.31 Skin incision hemorrhage control. Direct pressure with a gauze sponge is usually sufficient
 to control ovariohysterectomy skin incision hemorrhage before progressing to subcutaneous tissue incision.
Gauze is applied directly with pressure for a few seconds and then removed. Rapid blotting and wiping are
traumatic to tissues, fail to efficiently control bleeding, and serve to paint the field red, making it difficult to
differentiate tissue layers.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
295
Figure 18.32 Subcutaneous tissue incision: identifying the midline. In very thin dogs and cats, the linea alba
might be visible through the subcutaneous fat. In other cases, the midline can be found by observing the
subtle trough effect when the skin edges are gently spread. The hemostatic forceps in this picture is pointing
to the trough effect indicating the midline.
Figure 18.33 Subcutaneous tissue incision: isolating the midline for incision. Thumb forceps are used to
elevate the subcutaneous fat at the midline in preparation for incision with Metzenbaum scissors.
296
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.34 Subcutaneous tissue incision: beginning the incision. While thumb forceps elevates the sub-
cutaneous fat at the midline, Metzenbaum scissors are used to snip a fenestration that is deep enough to
contact the extermal rectus sheath at the linea alba in the caudal aspect of the incision.
Figure 18.35 Subcutaneous tissue incision: continuing the incision. One blade of the Metzenbaum scis-
sors is placed in the fenestration and against the external rectus sheath trapping the full thickness of the
subcutaneous fat between the scissor blades.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
297
Figure 18.36 Subcutaneous tissue incision: extending the incision. With one blade of the Metzenbaum
scissors against the extermal rectus sheath and subcutaneous fat between the scissor blades, the blades are
partially closed and the scissors are pushed cranially to incise the subcutaneous tissue. This maneuver cuts
the subcutaneous fat off one side of the linea alba. A second fenestration and push cut are then performed
to remove the subcutaneous attachment from the other side of the linea alba.
Figure 18.37 Subcutaneous tissue incision: completion of subcutaneous incision from the night side of the
linea alba.
298
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.38 Subcutaneous tissue incision: fenestration of subcutaneous tissue on the left side of the linea
alba. A push cut is then performed to remove the subcutaneous attachment from the left side of the linea
alba.
Figure18.39
 Completed subcutaneous incision. The subcutaneous fat has been incised from the linea alba
bilaterally.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
299
Figure 18.40 Entering the penitoneal cavity: lifting the linea alba with thumb forceps. The linea alba is
 grasped with thumb forceps in the cranial aspect of the incision and lifted outward so that abdominal
contents will fall away from the site where the scalpel blade will puncture.
Figure 18.41 Entering the peritoneal cavity: stab incision location. The linea alba is elevated with thumb
forceps in the cranial aspect of the incision so that a stab incision may be made as close to the umbilicus as
 possible. The scalpel is held in pencil gnip fashion with the sharp edge of the blade positioned upward.
300
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.42 Entering the peritoneal cavity: stab incision. While the linea alba is elevated with thumb
forceps, a scalpel held in pencil grip fashion with the sharp edge of the blade positioned upward is carefully
stabbed through the linea alba. By making the stab in the cranial portion of the incision the internal organs
should be somewhat protected by fat extending caudally from the falciform ligament. Nonetheless, care
should be exercised to avoid inadvertently injuring an intermal organ, which most commonly is the urinary
bladder, especially if it had not been fully evacuated during surgical preparations.
 Insert. the thumb forceps into the stab inci-  make closure of the linea alba diffcult. Incision
sion to use as a groove dlirector for the scalpel off of the midline will also make closure dif-
as the linea alba incision is made from cra-  ficult. Paramedian incisions may require more
nial to caudal (Figures 18.43 and 18.44). The time and effort to suture to ensure appropriate
thumb forceps and scalpel blade should be apposition.
moved in tandem so that the incision is com-
 Before searching for the ovaries and uterus,
pleted with one continuous motion. The en-
 it is important for the surgeon to have a com-
tire linea alba incision may be made in this  fortable knowledge of the regional anatomy.
fashion, or Mayo scissors can be used to ex-
 Some structures will be visualized, but other
tend the incision caudally (Figure 18.45) and
 important regional structures will be out of
cranially (Figure 18.46). Be sure to keep the sight, yet easily damaged if their locations are
tip of the scissors against the linea alba as they  not noted for their protection. For ovariohys-
are inserted into the abdomen and lift outward  t
terectomy, the surgeon must have an accurate
while cutting. The linea alba is generally too
 and comfortable knowledge of the following
tough to cut with a push-cutting motion. Once
 anatomical structures and  their  locations:
the opening is large enough to accommodate
 kidneys, ureters, suspensory ligament of the
midline cranially and caudally. Stop the linea the broad ligament), ovarian vascular pedicles,
alba incision at the cranial and caudal aspects proper ovarian ligament, uterine horns, uter-
of the skin incision. Extending the lineal inci- ine body, uterine arteries, mesometrium (the
  a o   e  h in s ae p s an  
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
301
Figure 18.43 Extending the linea alba incision: groove director. After the stab incision is made, the thumb
forceps is inserted to confirm that the penitoneal cavity has been entered and, with the tips directed caudally
is used to lift upward on the linea alba while a scalpel is used to incise from cranial to caudal.
Figure 18.44 Extending the linea alba incision: groove director and scalpel. The thumb forceps lift upward
and move in concert with the scalpel to extend the linea alba caudally.
302
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.45 Extending the linea alba incision with Mayo scissors: caudal extension. Mayo scissors may be
used instead of the scalpel and groove director technique. The scissor method is particularly helpful for
directing off-midline incisions back to the midline.
Figure 18.46  Extending the linea alba incision with Mayo scissors: cranial extension.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
303
Figure 18.47 Completed linea alba incision for ovariohysterectomy. The left index finger is inserted into
the cranial aspect of the linea alba incision to lift the abdominal wall outward in preparation for placement
of an ovaniohysterectomy hook.
round ligament of the uterus, and the in- 18.47). Hold the ovariohysterectomy hook with
guinal canal. Complete understanding of ab- the hook facing upward (Figure 18.48). In-
geon operating in the peritoneal cavity, but.
mid to caudal portion of the incision (Fig-
the above structures are a sample of impor-
ures 18.49 and 18.50). Keep the hook fac-
tant structures relative to routine ovariohys-
ing outward (laterally) against the body wall.
When the hook reaches the deepest point,
terectomy. When unplanned events occur, such
as a dropped ovarian pedicle, more in depth 
turn the hook medially and sweep the hook
understanding of abdominal anatomy is re-
toward the midline and slowly withdraw it.
quired to efficiently and effectively rectify the
(Figures 18.51 and 18.52). If immediate re-
situation.
sistance is felt, stop, release the tissue and
An ovariohysterectomy hook is used to lo-
 try again. If intestine or omentum is exte-
cate the first ovary to be removed. The left. riorized, replace the structure into the peri-
 ovary, insert the index finger of the nondom- tly exteriorize the remainder of the uterine
 inant hand into the cranial portion of the  horn and trace it to the ovary (Figures 18.53
304
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.48 Snook ovariohysterectomy hook. The ovaniohysterectomy hook is held with the inner surface
of the hook pointing upward in preparation for placement into the left side of the peritoneal cavity.
Figure 18.49 Introducing the ovariohysterectomy hook. With the left index finger lifting the abdominal
wall outward, the ovariohysterectomy hook, with the inner surface of the hook pointing upward, is placed
into the penitoneal cavity along the left abdominal wall.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
305
Figure 18.50 Advancing the ovariohysterectomy hook. With the inner surface of the hook pointing upward,
the hook is advanced into the penitoneal cavity by rubbing it along the left abdominal wall until the hook
hits the dorsal portion of the abdomen.
Figure 18.51 Turming the ovaniohysterectomy hook. When the hook hits bottom at the dorsal portion of
the peritoneal cavity, the hook is rotated so that the inner surface of the hook is directed medially.
306
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
to exteriorize the left uterine horm.
Figure 18.53 Finding the left ovary. Once the ovaniohysterectomy hook is extracted as far as it will go without
 damaging its catch, the index finger and thumb of the surgeon's nondominant hand may be used to locate
theovary.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
307
Figure 18.54
 Exteriorizing the left ovary. With the ovariohysterectomy hook still attached to the left uterine
horn, the ovary is exterionized and the proper ligament is identified.
Identify the ovary and uterine horn be- f
 finger on the cranial surface of the ligament.
fore applying any hemostatic forceps. Place a
Placing the index finger on the side of the
mosquito hemostatic forceps on the proper
.ligament increases the chance of poking a
ovarian ligament (Figure 18.55) to aid retrac-
hole in the mesovarium and possibly lacerat-
tion of the ovary. Hold the mosquito forceps
ing the ovarian vessels rather than rupturing
in the dominant hand so that the ovary is ex-
the suspensory ligament. Alternatively, and pre-
teriorized in a direct outward (ventral) direc-
ferred by the principal author whenever pos-
tion (Figure 18.56). The forceps is used to hold
sible, the index finger may be inserted along
the ovarian pedicle in this position to prevent
with the thumb to grasp the suspensory liga-
inadvertent caudal traction that could result
 ment between the thumb and index finger as
in premature tearing of the ovarian pedicle.
far down in the abdomen as possible (Figure
Use the nondominant hand (thumb and in-
18.57). Then, a twisting motion is used to break
dex finger) to strum and eventually tear the 
the suspensory ligament (Figures 18.58-18.64).
suspensory ligament from its attachment. on
 Sharp transection of the suspensory ligament.
the diaphragm in the region of the last rib
is generally avoided since the blood vessels
(Figures 18.56-18.66). Slide the index finger
 in the suspensory ligament will bleed more
of the nondominant hand down the lateral
1 when this technique is used. When the sus-
aspect of the suspensory ligament. as far as
 pensory ligament is adequately broken, the
 possible (Figure 18.56). Apply increasing pres-
 ovary and part. of the ovarian pedicle should
sure in a caudomedial direction until the lig-
be readily exteriorized (Figures 18.65 and
ament breaks. Use the flat part of the index
18.66).
308
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 Figure 18.55 Clamping the proper ligament. A mosquito hemostat is applied to the proper ligament to
 maintain the ovary in an exteriorized position and to assist manipulations.
Figure 18.56 Positioning the ovarian pedicle. The mosquito hemostat attached to the proper ligament is
held in the surgeon's dominant hand and manipulated to make sure that the ovarian pedicle is loose relative
to the suspensory ligament and that the pedicle is directed outward instead of caudally. [Note: Pulling the
ovarian pedicle caudally causes it to become parallel to and in close proximity with the suspensory ligament,
increasing the chance of causing hemorrhage as the suspensory ligament is tensed and torm.]
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
309
Figure 18.57 Stretching the suspensory ligament. The index finger and thumb of the nondominant hand
are used to strum and stretch the suspensory ligament. [ncreased pressure is applied to the suspensory
ligament in a caudomedial direction until the ligament breaks.
Figure 18.58  Tearing the suspensory ligament. Once strumming has stretched the suspensory ligament to
somewhat exteriorize it, the ligament may be grasped between the thumb and index finger to apply force in 
atwistingaction.
310
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.59 Incomplete tearing of the suspensory ligament. Partial tearing of the suspensory ligament may
 allow good exteriorization of the ovary and pedicle, but the remaining suspensory ligament will interfere
withligation.
Figure 18.60 Incomplete tearing of the suspensory ligament (closeup view). A small band of the suspensory
ligament remains between the thumb and index finger.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
311
Figure 18.61 Remaining band of suspensory ligament. The remaining band of suspensory ligament cranial
to the ovarian pedicle must be removed for optimal forceps placement and ligation.
Figure 18.62 Detaching the remaining band of suspensory ligament. While steadying the ovarian pedicle
with the mosquito forceps on the proper ligament and holding the suspensory ligament between the thumb
and index finger, the middle finger can be used to tear the remaining band out of the abdomen.
312
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.63 Detaching the remaining band of suspensory ligament (closeup view). The middle finger of
the nondominant hand is used to help apply caudomedial pressure on the remaining band of suspensory
ligament while the dominant hand and mosquito hemostat on the proper ligament steady the ovarian pedicle
to prevent tearing of ovanian vessels in the process. [Note that the ovarian pedicle remains loose while the
Figure 18.64 Complete detachment of the suspensory ligament. The ovary and its pedicle are optimally
exteniorized.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
313
Figure18.65
Verification of complete detachment of the suspensory ligament. The torm cranial aspect of
the suspensory ligament should be exterionized, as noted on the tip of the ning finger of this surgeon's left
hand.
Figure 18.66 Preparation for ligating the left ovarian pedicle. The tip of the suspensory ligament noted
lying on the drape in the cranial aspect of this picture will be pulled up toward the ovary when the forceps
 are applied so that the suspensory ligament is eventually excised along with the ovary.
314
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.67 Isolating the left ovarian pedicle. Using a Rochester-Carmalt forceps, an avascular area of
mesovanium adjacent to the ovarian vessels is identified for perforation to make a window as close to the
ovarian vessels as possible.
Use a Rochester-Carmalt forceps intended
 Apply Rochester-Carmalt forceps to the ovar-
for the ovarian pedicle to create a window in the
 ian pedicle using a three-clamp technique. The
broad ligament between the ovary and uterine
 most proximal clamp should be placed first, tak-
horn (Figures 18.67-18.72). [Note: In cats and
ing care to leave enough room between that
very small dogs, a mosquito or Kelly hemostatic
 clamp and the ovary for a second clamp and
 also a cut between the second clamp and the
forceps may be used in place of a Rochester-
Carmalt forceps.] The ovarian pedicle typically
ovary, and making sure that the entire ovary
contains a lot of fat in addition to the ves-
will be excised when the cut is made (Fig-
sels (Figure 18.67). Look for a clear area in
ure 18.73). Place the second clamp immedi-
the broad ligament caudal to the pedicle and 
ately distal to the frst clamp so that a mini-
make a window with the tips of the forceps (Fig-
 mal amount of tissue (approximately 5 mm)
f can be seen between the two clamps (Figures
ures 18.67-18.69). Make sure all branches of
the ovarian artery will be included. Open the
18.74-18.76). Always hold the ovary while apply-
Rochester-Carmalt. forceps so that the window
ing these two clamps to be sure all ovarian tissue
is spread open parallel to the vascular pedicle
will be excised. Remove the mosquito forceps
(Figures 18.70 and 18.71). Lift the suspensory
ligament. so that it will not be incorporated in
 across the uterine horn at this location (Figures
clamping of the vascular pedicle but will be dis-
18.77 and 18.78) . This third clamp is to control
tal to the clamps as it is attached to the ovary
 backflow bleeding when the ovarian pedicle is
(Figures 18.71 and 18.72).
incised.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
315
Figure 18.68 Perforating the left mesovarium. Rochester-Carmalt forceps are used to perforate the meso-
vanium and are onientated so that the jaws will open parallel to the ovanian pedicle.
Figure 18.69  Preparing to make a mesovarium window. The ovary is stabilized with the mosquito forceps on
the proper ligament and the Rochester-Carmalt forceps penetrating the mesovarium is positioned to open
the jaws parallel to the ovarian pedicle.
316
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.70 Making the mesovarium window next to the left ovarian pedicle. The Rochester-Carmalt
forceps jaws are maximally spread parallel to the ovarian pedicle to create a large window.
Figure 18.7l Completed left mesovarium window. Note the proximity of the window to the ovarian pedicle
and the location of the suspensory ligament resting on the tip of the surgeon's left little finger.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
317
Figure 18.72 The left ovarian pedicle ready for forceps application. Note that the suspensory ligament is
held out of the way so that it is not entrapped in the eventually applied forceps and ligatures.
Carmalt forceps is applied with the tips pointed upward and as far proximal as possible leaving a comfortable
318
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.74 Application of the second hemostatic forceps on the left ovarian pedicle. The second curved
 Rochester-Carmalt forceps is applied parallel to the first forceps with the tips pointing upward.
Figure 18.75 Application of the second hemostatic forceps on the left ovarian pedicle (closeup view). The
tips of both Rochester-Carmalt forceps are parallel with only a small amount of tissue (4-5 mm) between
them. Note that the tips protrude only a couple mm beyond the pedicle to allow easy manipulation of suture
around them.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
319
Figure 18.76 Preparation for placing a third hemostatic forceps to control backflow bleeding at the left
forceps on the ovarian pedicle and a cut made between the second and third forceps. Alternately, the third
forceps (not shown) may be applied across the mesometrium and uterus at the level of the proper ligament
after removing the mosquito hemostatic forceps attached to that structure. Then, the incision may be made
immediately distal to the second Rochester-Carmalt forceps.
Figure 18.77 Application of the third hemostatic forceps to control backflow bleeding at the left ovarian
pedicle. A Kelly hemostatic forceps is applied across the mesometrium and uterus at the level of the proper
ligament where the mosquito hemostatic forceps was previously attached. Notice that the tips of the Kelly
hemostatic forceps are oriented toward the ovary.
320
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.78 Completion of three forceps application prior toincising the left ovarian pedicle. Two parallel
 Rochester-Carmalt forceps are attached to the ovarian pedicle, and a Kelly hemostatic forceps across the
mesometrium and uterus at the level of the proper ligament will control backflow bleeding. The suspensory
ligament is being held between the surgeon's left thumb and ring finger to demonstrate that this structure
is not incorporated within the forceps.
 As soon as the clamps are applied, Metzen- Be careful to avoid the uterine arteries that run
baum scissors are used to incise the ovarian parallel to the uterine horns when tearing and
pedicle between the midle clamp and the pulling the broad and round ligaments.
owary (Figures 18.79-18.83). Transecting the
There are multiple surgeon preferences
pedicle before placing ligatures makes manipu- for ligating ovarian pedicles. The principal
lations easier, but if a forceps slips, the pedicle
author prefers a simple transfixation suture
will retract into the peritoneal cavity. Leaving
 method as illustrated in this chapter (Fig-
 the ovary attached during ligature application
ures 18.92-18.115). To begin transfixation of
actually creates a false sense of security because
the left ovarian pedicle, gently push a closed
tissues can tear at any forceps even if the forceps  mosquito hemostatic forceps through the pedi-
does not slip. Transecting the ovarian pedicle cle just proximal to the proximal clamp (Fig-
first. allows for less manipulation during liga-
ures 18.92-18.95). This manipulation pushes
ture placement and, therefore, less chance of
the vessels away from the mosquito forceps
tearing tissue at the forceps.
and is less likely to injure vessels than pass-
Move the ovary caudally so that it and the en-
ing a suture needle through the pedicle. Some
tire left uterine horn rest in the caudal aspect. of
 surgeons pass the suture end of the needle
the surgical field while ligating the left ovarian through the pedicle to avoid spearing vessels
pedicle (Figures 18.84-18.94). To fully exteri- with the needle point. However, the hemo-
orize the uterine horn, manually remove the stat method described here is even less likely
broad ligament and round ligament (Figures to injure a vessel and also results in less
18.85-18.94). Pull the round ligament entirely  dragging of suture through the pedicle tis
 au qei pue eisoay an uado ans ((oeish pue agi sam) uope aul go mo
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
321
Figure 18.79 Preparation to incise the left ovanian pedicle with Metzenbaum scissors. The curve of the
 Metzenbaum scissors is oriented upward, similar to the orientation of the Rochester-Carmalt forceps.
Figure 18.80  Incising the left ovarian pedicle. The pedicle is incised with Metzenbaum scissors immediately
distal to the second Rochester-Carmalt forceps.
322
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.81 Incising the left ovarian pedicle (closeup view). Note how close the incision is made to the
second Rochester-Carmalt. The pedicle is incised with Metzenbaum scissors so that only a couple mm of
tissue will remain immediately distal to the second Rochester-Carmalt forceps.
Figure 18.82 Completion of the Metzenbaum incision of the left ovanian pedicle. Note the parallel orien-
tation of the scissor blades and Rochester-Carmalt forceps tips.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
323
Figure 18.83 Completed left ovarian pedicle incision. The ovary, uterus, and backflow controlling forceps
can now be moved caudally out of the way.
Figure 18.84 Moving the left ovary and uterus caudally. Directing the ovary and uterus caudally makes room 
for manipulating and ligating the ovarian pedicle.
324
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
toneal cavity to free the uterine horn and facilitate caudal displacement of the ovary and utenine hom.
It is best to extract the broad ligament now to maximally get the uterine horn and ovary out of the way.
 Furthermore, this maneuver will be necessary later, if not done now, when it is time to ligate the uterine body.
Figure 18.86 Finding the left round ligament of the uterus. While retracting the uterine horm and ovary
caudally with the dominant hand, the surgeon uses the left hand to locate the round ligament. Removing
the round ligament allows for maximal caudal exteriorization of the uterine horn, which will become handy
later when the second uterine horn must be traced.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
325
Figure 18.87  Isolating the left round ligament. The round ligament is carefully grasped as it runs parallel
to the uterine horn on the edge of the broad ligament.
Figure 18.88  Preparing to extract the left round ligament. The round ligamentis separated from the uterine
horn to avoid damaging the uterine artery and vein duning its extraction.
326
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.89 Visualizing the left round ligament. The round ligament is fully visualized before manually
extracting it.
Figure 18.90 Extracting the left round ligament. An outward extraction force is applied to the round
ligament to pull it out of the inguinal canal.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
327
Figure 18.91  Completed left round ligament extraction. After extraction of the broad and round ligaments
the left ovary and uterine horn are positioned caudally. Then, the left ovanian pedicle will be ligated.
Figure 18.92 Location of frst suture in left ovarian pedicle. The mosquito hemostatic forceps points to the
first suture location immediately proximal to the first Rochester-Carmalt forceps.
328
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.93  Passing a mosquito hemostatic forceps through left ovarian pedicle at the location for the first
sutuure.
Figure 18.94 Exit location of a mosquito hemostatic forceps on the lateral side of the left ovarian pedicle.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
329
Figure 18.95 Continued advancement of a mosquito hemostatic forceps through the left ovarian pedicle
immediately proximal to the first Rochester-Carmalt forceps.
end of the suture (Figures 18.96 and 18.97).(
clamp is removed (Figures 18.112 and 18.113).
one side for tying (Figures 18.98 and 18.99).  and withdrawn to see if tension relief results
Tie one half of a square knot. (one throw)
 in hemorrhage (Figures 18.114 and 18.115). In
and bring the suture around the opposite side
 some instances, the upward tension will prevent
of the pedicle (Figures 18.100-18.104). Tie a
 bleeding while the pedicle is exteriorized, but.
surgeon's knot, removing the first (proximal)
then bleeding will occur when the tension is
clamp as the first throw of the surgeon's knot is
S reduced. If bleeding is noted, exteriorize the
tightened (Figures 18.105-18.109). Most of the
 pedicle again and reapply hemostats prior to
knot should be within the crimp of tissue where
attempting another ligation. If the ligature is
the proximal clamp had been. Tighten the sur-
secure and no hemorrhage is noted, the stump
geon's throw completely. Then, place three ad-
 is gently placed into the peritoneal cavity to al-
ditional throws to complete a surgeon's knot low the pedicle to slowly retract into the peri-
followed by a square knot. A second circum- toneal cavity before it is released. If at any point.
ferential ligature may be placed a few millime-  in the procedure the pedicle slips into the peri-
ters proximal to the transfixation suture (Fig- toneal cavity before ligation is secure, method-
ures 18.110-18.112). Then, the pedicle stump ically use knowledge of regional anatomy to lo-
is grasped with thumb forceps as the remaining
cate the stump. Retract. the descending colon
330
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.96 Opening a mosquito forceps after penetrating the left ovanian pedicle in order to introduce
suture for ligation.
Figure 18.97 Grasping suture in a mosquito forceps that penetrates the left ovarian pedicle. The suture
will be pulled through the ovarian pedicle. The suture matenial used for pedicle ligation in this case is 3-0
polyglactin910.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
331
Figure 18.98  Passing the ligature suture around the caudal side of the left ovarian pedicle.
Figure 18.99 Preparing to tie the suture around the caudal side of the left ovarian pedicle. An instrument
tie may be performed with the mosquito hemostatic forceps, or the surgeon may switch to a needle holder.
332
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.100
Tying the suture at the caudal aspect of the left ovarian pedicle with one throw (half of a
squareknot).
Figure 18.10l  Positioning the first (and only) throw of a square knot at the caudal aspect of the left ovarian 
pedicle.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
333
Figure 18.102 Secuning the first (and only) throw of a square knot at the caudal aspect of the left ovarian
pedicle.
Figure 18.103 Passing the free end of the suture around the cranial aspect of the left ovarian pedicle.
334
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.104 Preparing to tie the ligature around the cranial aspect of the left ovarian pedicle.
Figure 18.105 Developing a surgeon's throw for ligating the cranial aspect of the left ovarian pedicle.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
335
Figure 18.106 Positioning the surgeon's throw at the cranial aspect of the left ovarian pedicle.
Figure 18.107 Tightening the surgeon's throw at the cranial aspect of the left ovarian pedicle.
336
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.108 Securing the surgeon's throw at the cranial aspect of the left ovarian pedicle. As this throw
tightens, the single throw in the caudal aspect of the pedicle is secured. Notice that the more proximal
Rochester-Carmalt forceps is removed to allow full tightening of the ligature. Some surgeons attempt to have
this surgeon's throw fall into the crimped tissue at the previous Rochester-Carmalt forceps site as the ligature
is tightened; however, tightening proximal to the crimped tissue is also acceptable. The purpose of removing
the proximal Rochester-Carmalt forceps is to allow the ligated tissue to collapse into a tubular shape. Not
doing so can result in a loose ligature when the forceps is removed.
by placing a simple throw after the surgeons throw, and then the suture was cut. Some surgeons prefer to
add a square knot on top of the surgeon's knot before cutting the suture.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
337
Figure 18.110  Preparing to place a second ligature applied circumferentially.
Figure 18.1ll Placement of a circumferential ligature proximal to the transfixation suture. The first throw
of a square knot is demonstrated. Typically, this ligature is accomplished with two square knots. Note that
this second ligature is reasonably close to the transfixation suture.
338
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.112 Completed ligation of left ovarnian pedicle. The pedicle is grasped with a thumb forceps
between the distal (transfixation) ligature and the remaining Rochester-Carmalt forceps in preparation for
release of the pedicle.
leased so that the pedicle may be gently placed into the peritoneal cavity with the thumb forceps
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
339
Figure 18.114 Placing the ligated left ovarian pedicle into the peritoneal cavity. The thumb forceps is used
to gently place the ovarian pedicle into the abdomen, but the pedicle is not released from the thumb forceps
until it is certain that the ligature will prevent bleeding.
8
Figure 18.115 Checking the ligated left ovarian pedicle before final release into the peritoneal cavity. After
gently placing the ovarian pedicle into the abdomen, without releasing the thumb forceps, the pedicle is
extenionized again to check its integrity. Tension on the pedicle, as occurs when forceps hold the pedicle
exteriorized, can control hemorrhage by stretching the vessels,thereby decreasing their diameters. Removing
the tension when the pedicle is placed into the abdomen will allow the vessels to fill with blood, and bleeding
with occur if the pedicle ligatures are loose. If bleeding does not occur when the tension on the pedicle is
relieved, then the pedicle may be released when it is replaced into the peritoneal cavity.
340
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.116 Preparing to find the right uterine horn. After the left ovarian pedicle is released the
left ovary and uterine horn are pulled caudally to expose the uterine body. If the broad and round liga-
ments have not been removed, they must be removed at this point to adequately extenionize the uterine
body.
(left side) or descending duodenum (right  In small patients, a thumb forceps may be nec-
side) medially, identify the pedicle at the cau- essary to grasp the right uterine horn (Fig-
dal pole of the kidney, and grasp it. with thumb ure 18.118) to begin tracing it. to the ovary
forceps. Adequate exposure usually requires
(Figures 18.119 and 18.120). Once the ovary
extension of the abdominal incision. Never
is located and the proper ligament clamped
apply crushing clamps until the pedicle has 
(Figure 18.121), the procedures of breaking
 been isolated to avoid iatrogenic injury to the
the suspensory ligament, making a mesovar-
ureter.
ian window, applying three clamps, excising
 Find the right ovary by tracing the left uter-
 the ovary, removing the broad and round lig-
 ine horn to the uterine body to locate the right.
 aments, transfixing the ovarian pedicle, and re-
uterine horn. [Note: Use the ovariohysterec-
turning the pedicle to the peritoneal cavity are
tomy hook for retrieving only the first ovary.
performed just as was done on the left (Fig-
Using the hook for the second ovary frequently
ures 18.56-18.115). Both ovaries and uterine
results in entangling the urinary bladder with
horns are pulled caudally (Figures 18.122 and
the reproductive tract.] If the left broad and 
18.123) during transfixation and release of the
round ligaments have been removed, tracing
 ligated right pedicle into the peritoneal cavity.
from the left to right horn is easily achieved by
 The uterus may remain in this position during
pulling the left ovary caudally until the uterine  ligation of the uterine body, or the horns may
body is exposed (Figures 18.116 and 18.117). be pulled cranially and outward. The former
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
347
Figure 18.117  Exteriorizing the uterine body and night uterine horm. Caudal traction on the left ovary and
uterine hom pulls the uterine body up through the caudal aspect of the incision.
while the left uterine homm is pulled caudally. In small patients, it is helpful to first grasp the night uterine
hom at its junction with the uterine body.
342
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.119 Tracing the right uterine horn toward the right ovary.
Figure 18.120 Exteriorizing the rnight ovary.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
343
Figure 18.121 Applying a mosquito hemostatic forceps to the right proper ligament.
Figure 18.122 Caudal placement of the night ovary and uterine hon prior to ligation of the night ovarian
pedicle. The broad and round ligaments have been manually torn and extracted so that the right ovary
and uterine horm can be positioned caudally in preparation for uterine body ligation and extraction. At this
point, the right ovanian pedicle will be ligated and replaced into the penitoneal cavity.
344
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
into the abdomen and the uterus is retracted caudally.
is preferred when the surgeon is operating
 tion incorporating the uterine vessels as illus-
without a scrubbed assistant, but for illustra-
trated in this chapter will suffice. Transfixa-
tive purposes the latter is shown in this chapter
tion begins with passage of the needle through
(Figures 18.124-18.155).
the uterine body in forward fashion (Figures
Ligation of the uterine arteries and veins 
18.125-18.129). There is no need to back the
may be done independently of the uterine
 needle through the uterine body because, un
body ligation, or the uterine blood vessels may
like the ovarian pedicle, the uterine vessels
be incorporated in the uterine body transfixa-
and branches can be easily seen and avoided.
tion suture. Separate vessel ligation is advised
 Place the first. throw of a square knot (Fig-
when the uterine arteries are large and promi-
ures 18.130-18.133) and then pass the suture
i s ar go as asoo an pe  si  rs, 'shop r u u
be placed on the uterine arteries and veins.
ures 18.134-18.136) and tie a surgeon's knot.
To place a “stick tie" ligature, take a small su-
(Figures 18.137-18.143). A second (circumfer-
ture bite in the uterine wall adjacent to the 
uterine vessels and then ligate the vessels. As  transfixation suture (Figures 18.144-18.146).
the ligature is tied, the knot is stuck against
 Then, place a Rochester-Carmalt forceps across
the uterine wall. When the uterus is small,
the uterus distal (cranial) to the transfixation
circumferential uterine vessel ligatures can be
suture (Figures 18.147 and 18.148) to control
placed rather than using “stick tie" ligatures.
backflow bleeding from the uterus as it is cut.
Most. small and medium- sized dogs, particu-
 Place a mosquito hemostat on one edge of the
larly those that have had few or no estrus cy-
uterine stump (Figure 18.149) to keep it from
cles, do not require separate ligation of the
 prematurely disappearing into the peritoneal
uterine vessels; simple uterine body transfixa-
cavity, and cut between the transfixation suture
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
345
remain in the caudally retracted position for ligating the uterine vessels and uterine body. [For illustrative
purposes, the uterus in this case is lifted upward and cranially for uterine body ligation.]
Figure 18.125 Location of transfixation suture in the uterine body. The suture needle points to the uter-
ine body midway between the cervix and uterine bifurcation. The suture material used for uterine body
transfixation in this case is 3-0 polyglactin 910.
346
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.1261
 Passing transfixation suture needle through the midportion of the uterine body.
Figure 18.127 Passing transfixation suture needle around the night side of the uterine body
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
347
Figure 18.129 First pass of transfixation suture before tying the first throw.
348
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.130 Preparing to tie the first throw of a transfixation suture in the utenine body
Figure 18.131
 Shortening the free end of the strand of the uterine body transfixation suture before tying
thefirstthrow.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
349
Figure 18.132 Developing first throw (half of a square knot) on the uterine body transfixation suture.
Figure 18.133 Tightening the single throw (half of a square knot) on the right side of the uterine body.
350
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.134 Preparing to pass the free end of the transfixation suture around the uterine body after the
single throw has been tightened on the right side of the utenine body.
throw has been tightened on the night side of the uterine body.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
357
Figure 18.136 Both strands of the transfixation suture on the left side of the uterus pnior to tying that side
of the transfixation.
Figure 18.137 Developing a surgeon's throw as the first throw on the left side of the uterine body.
352
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.138 Grasping the free end of the suture to begin a surgeon's throw on the left side of the uterine
body. [Notice the single throw on the night side of the uterine body.]
Figure 18.139 Pulling the free end of the suture strand toward the right side to continue a surgeon's throw.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
353
Figure 18.140 Advancing a surgeon's throw toward the uterine body.
Figure 18.141 Positioning the surgeon's throw on the uterine body
354
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.142 Tightening the surgeon's throw on the uterine body
Figure 18.143
 Prepaning to cut the transfixation suture after finishing a surgeon's knot and covering it with
asquareknot.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
355
Figure 18.144 Preparing to place a circumferential square knot proximal (caudal) to the transfixation
suture on the uterine body.
theuterinebody.
356
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.1461
 Finishing a square knot on the utenine body proximal (caudal) to the transfixation suture.
Figure 18.147 Placing a Rochester-Carmalt forceps on the portion of the uterus to be excised. The forceps
is placed loosely close to the transfixation suture and moved away from the transfixation suture to milk blood
away from site to be incised.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
357
Figure 18.148 Securing the Rochester-Carmalt forceps on the uterus. Note the blanched appearance of the
portion of the uterus to be incised.
Figure 18.149 Applying a mosquito hemostatic forceps to the edge of the uterine stump pnior to incising
the uterine body. This maneuver is performed to prevent the uterine stump from disappearing into the
abdomen when the uterus is incised and the horms and ovanies are removed.
358
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.150 [ncising the uterine body just distal (cranial) to the mosquito hemostatic forceps attached
to the right edge of the uterine body.
and Rochester-Carmalt forceps (Figures 18.150 cised. [Note: Incising or excising additional
and 18.151) to complete the excision of the tissue at this time causes more tissue trauma
uterus and ovaries. Grasp the uterine stump and creates dead space; therefore, it is best to
with thumbforceps (Figure 18.152), remove the
 make a good surgical approach, optimally ex-
 mosquito hemostat (Figure 18.153), and check 
 posing the linea alba before incising into the
for bleeding before carefully releasing the
abdomen, in order to facilitate a good clo-
stump into the peritoneal cavity (Figures 18.154
sure.] Close the external rectus sheath using
and 18.155).
long-acting synthetic absorbable suture mate-
 Abdominal closure begins as soon as the uter-
rial in a simple continuous suture pattern (Fig-
ine stump is within the abdomen and there
 ures 18.157-18.166). Suture size varies with
are no signs of bleeding that require inspec-
the size of the patient, but general guidelines
tion. The external rectus sheath must be se-
 are 0 for large dogs, 2-0 for medium-sized
curely closed to ensure that. abdominal wall
 dogs, and 3-0 for small dogs and cats. Tie
dehiscence does not. occur. Proper closure
 three square knots (six throws) in each end of
necessitates good visualization of the exter-
the continuous suture pattern. In general, su-
nal rectus sheath (Figure 18.156). If the ini- ture bites should be 5 mm from the incision
the external rectus sheath will be readily vis-  longer bites can be used for large dogs. Suture
ible. If for any reason the external rectus bites less than 5 mm are more likely to cause is-
sheath is not. easily seen, the subcutaneous chemia of wound edges than wider and longer
tissue obscuring it should be incised or ex- bites.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
359
Figure 18.151 Mosquito hemostatic forceps attached to the uterine stump after excising the uterine horns
and ovaries.
Figure 18.152 Grasping the uterine stump with Brown-Adson thumb forceps as the mosquito hemostatic
forceps are released from the edge of the uterine stump.
360
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.153 Placing the uterine stump into the abdomen to relieve tension on it and check for security
of the ligatures.
Figure 18.154 Inspecting the uterine stump for security of ligatures and absence of hemorrhage. The night
 abdlominal wall is being retracted by mosquito hemostatic forceps to facilitate visualization of the uterine
stump.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
367
Figure 18.155  Final placement of uterine stump into the abdomen.
Figure 18.156 Preparing to close the linea alba. The left subcutaneous tissue is being retracted with thumb
forceps, and the suture needle is retracting the right subcutaneous tissue to visualize the caudal extent of the
linea alba incision.
362
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.157 Beginning the linea alba closure. The needle is starting on the left side of the linea alba in
the caudal aspect of the incision, approximately 5 mm from the incised edge. Linea alba closure is being
achieved in this case with 2-0 polydioxanone suture.
Figure 18.158 Exiting the suture needle at the left edge of the linea alba incision.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
363
Figure 18.159 Lifting the right edge of the linea alba incision onto the suture needle that is engaging the
left side of the linea alba.
Figure 18.160 Penetrating the extermal rectus sheath with the suture needle approximately 5 mm from the
linea alba incision.
364
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.161
 Tying three square knots at the caudal end of the linea alba incision.
Figure18.162
 Advancing the linea alba closure with a simple continuous suture. A suture bite is being taken
in the external rectus sheath approximately 5 mm from the left incision edge and exits at the incision edge.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
365
Figure 18.163 Penetrating the night extermal rectus sheath to advance the continuous closure of the linea
alba.
Figure 18.164 Finishing the linea alba closure toward the cranial end of the incision with a suture bite in
the left extemal rectus sheath.
366
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.165 Finishing the linea alba closure toward the cranial end of the incision with a bite in the night
external rectus sheath. The next bite will preserve a suture loop for tying.
knots are recommended.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
367
Figure 18.167 Closing the subcutaneous tissues, beginning at the caudal end of the incision with a buried
knot. The first bite is taken deep in the wound, in the external rectus sheath, and is directed toward the night
side. The subcutaneous tissue is being closed in this case with 3-0 poliglecaprone 25.
closure, the subcutaneous tissue is closed with ive and are not dependent upon to bring
short-acting synthetic absorbable suture mate- the dermal edges into apposition (Figures
rial in a simple continuous suture pattern, bury-
18.167-18.210). If performed meticulously,
ing the knots on each end. Suture size varies
skin sutures may not be necessary for this sub-
with the size of the patient, but general guide-
cuticular pattern. Whichever subcutaneous clo-
lines are 2-0 for large dogs, 3-0 for medium-
sure is used, take a bite down into the external
sized dogs, and 4-0 for small dogs and cats.
1
rectus sheath every third or fourth suture pas-
Some surgeons prefer to perform a strictly sub-  sage to eliminate dead space. When skin sutures
cutaneous closure followed by skin sutures to are used, an interrupted pattern is preferred.
perform an intradermal (also called subcuticu- interrupted, cruciate, and figure-of-eight su-
lar) technique to close the skin edges without.
 tures (Figure 18.211). Synthetic nonabsorbable
the need for skin sutures. Demonstrated in this 
monofilament suture is preferred for skin
chapter is a subcuticular pattern that. closes the   sutures.
368
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.168 Bringing the suture needle up from the bite in the external rectus sheath toward the skin
edge at the caudal end of the incision.
Figure 18.169 Bringing the suture needle up from the bite in the extermal rectus sheath, through the
 subcutaneous fat, and out of the wound at the skin edge, engaging the dermis at the caudal end of the
incision.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
369
Figure 18.170 Completion of first suture pass in the process of burying the knot at the beginning of
subcutaneous closure in the caudal aspect of the incision. The needle portion of the strand is toward the
right (lower portion of the photograph) and the needleless portion of the strand is toward the left and
cranial (upper portion of the photograph).
 Figure 18.171 Beginning the second pass of burying the knot in the subcutaneous closure at the caudal
aspect of the incision. The needle engages the dermis under the left skin edge across from the exit on the
opposite skin edge.
370
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.172  Finishing the second pass of burying the knotin the subcutaneous closure on the leftside at
the caudal aspect of the incision. The needle comes out in the deep tissues and will be tied to the opposite
strand that engages the external rectus sheath.
Figure 18.173 Beginning to tie the buried knot in the subcutaneous closure at the caudal aspect of the
incision. The first throw of a square knot is being tied. Note that the strands are pulled parallel to the incision,
instead of the usual perpendicular onientation, in order to help sink the knot deep under the subcutaneous
fat.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
371
of the incision. Note that the strands are pulled parallel to the incision to help sink the knot deep under the
subcutaneous fat.
Figure 18.175 Finishing the buried knot in the subcutaneous closure at the caudal aspect of the incision.
 Note that the strands are pulled parallel to the incision to sink the knot deep under the subcutaneous fat.
Three square knots are recommended.
372
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.176 Advancing the subcutaneous closure by engaging the dermis just under the skin edge on the
left and avoiding the bulk of the subcutaneous fat.
Figure 18.177 Continuing the subcutaneous closure by engaging the dermis just under the skin edge on
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
373
Figure 18.178 Continuing the subcutaneous closure by engaging the dermis just under the skin on both
sides. Note how minimal subcutaneous fat is incorporated in the needle.
Figure 18.179 Pulling the suture that engages only dermis on each side. Note how this patterm apposes the
skin edges in the completed portion of the closure in the caudal aspect of the incision.
374
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.180 Continuing the subcutaneous closure by engaging the dermis just under the left skin edge
and preparing to obliterate dead space.
Figure 18.18l Engaging external rectus sheath as the suture needle passes toward the right side. This
maneuver is done approximately every third pass in order to obliterate dead space. Note that the needle
passes over the subcutaneous fat, instead of through it, before engaging the external rectus sheath.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
375
Figure 18.182 Needle exiting the external rectus sheath after engaging the dermis under the left skin edge
under the right skin edge.
Figure 18.183 Passing the suture through the dermis of the right skin edge after taking a bite in the external
rectus sheath to obliterate dead space.
376
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
sheath.
Figure 18.185 Continuing the subcutaneous closure in the mid portion of the incision on the left. Note
where the needle enters the dermis and how the ring finger of the nondominant hand can be used to
facilitate needle placement.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
377
Figure 18.186 Passing the suture needle through the dermis on the left in the midportion of the incision.
Figure 18.187 Closeup view of passing the suture needle through the dermis on the left in the midportion
of the incision. Note that the thumb forceps must be used with a gentle touch to avoid excessive trauma to
theskinedge.
378
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.188 Preparing to tie a knot at the cranial end of the incision. Planning for this knot requires
 saving enough room for what would ordinarily be two more suture passes.
Figure 18.189 First passage of the needle in preparation for a bunied knot at the cranial end of the incision.
After engaging dermis just under the left skin edge, the needle is directed into the deep tissues.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
379
Figure 18.190 Ensuring engagement of deep tissue with the first needle passage for burying a knot at the
cranial end of the incision. The deep bite is taken in the external rectus sheath.
this strand emerges from the deep tissues and will eventually be one side of a loop to which the free strand
of suture will be tied.
380
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.192 Second passage of the needle in preparation for a bunied knot at the cranial end of the
incision. The first strand is lifted with mild tension to somewhat exteriorize the extermal rectus sheath to
under the right skin edge and the resultant loop of suture will be preserved for tying.
Figure 18.193 Preserving a loop of suture after the second suture passage for burying a knot at the cranial
end of the incision. Note that both strands of the loop emerge from the depths of the wound and the free
strand exits just under the night skin edge. One more needle pass will be necessary before the knot can be
tied.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
381
Figure 18.194 Third and final needle pass in preparation for a buried knot at the cranial edge of the
incision. Note that dermis is engaged just under the left skin edge so that when the knot is tied, the skin
edges will be apposed between this location and the night skin edge where the opposite strand is emerging.
After engaging the dermis, the needle will be directed into the deep tissues to engage the external rectus
sheath next to the loop strands.
Figure 18.195 Directing the third needle pass toward the external rectus sheath in preparation for a buried
knot at the cranial edge of the incision. The needle has engaged the dermis and is angled slightly caudally
toward the loop strands.
382
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.196 Engaging the extermal rectus sheath with the final needle pass in preparation for a buried
knot at the cranial edge of the incision. Note that the needle engages the extermal rectus sheath just cranial
to the preserved deep loop. Care is taken to make sure the needle will exit the wound between the deep
loop (retracted caudally) and the final appositional strands (located cranially). Otherwise, the appositional
strands will prevent the knot from sinking deeply.
Figure 18.197  Location of strands immediately prior to tying a buried knot at the cranial end of the incision
(as viewed by the surgeon). The deep loop is being retracted caudally and to the dog's left and the free strand
(also deep) that will be tied to that loop is being pulled caudally parallel to the incision. The two strands in
loop.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
383
Figure 18.198  Location of strands immediately prior to tying a buried knot at the cranial end of the incision
(ventral view). Note how the deep strand and deep loop are located between the last two appositional suture
passages. The last appositional suture passage is the superficial loop in the cranial aspect of the incision. It
is important that the deep strand and deep loop are both on the same side of the superficial loop, or else
the superficial loop will prevent the knot from sinking into the deep portion of the wound when the deep
strand and loop are tied.
Figure 18.199 Tying the deep strand and deep loop to create a buried knot at the cranial end of the
incision. Note that the strand and loop are pulled parallel to the incision to facilitate sinking the knot within
the wound. Also note how equal tension is applied to each strand of the deep loop.
384
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.200 Completing the buried knot at the cranial end of the incision. Three square knots have been
placed.
Figure 18.201  Cutting the loop of the knot at the cranial end of the incision in preparation to sink the
knot. The loop is cut as close to the knot as possible. "On the knot, but not the knot.'
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
385
Figure 18.202  Deep strand and knot after the loop has been cut and prior to sinking the knot at the cranial
end of the incision.
Figure18.203
 Passing the needle in preparation to sink the knot at the cranial aspect of the incision. The
 deep strand is elevated to visualize the knot and place the needle into the deep tissue immediately adjacent
to theknot.
386
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.204 Passing the needle laterally for sinking the knot at the cranial aspect of the incision. The
needle is passed up from the deep tissues toward the skin on the right side of the incision (toward the
night-handed surgeon).
Figure 18.205 Penetrating the skin on the right side of the incision with the needle that has engaged deep
tissues near the knot.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
387
Figure 18.206 Pulling the deep suture strand through the skin to the night of the incision in preparation
to sink the knot at the cranial aspect of the incision. When the strand is pulled completely, the loop that is
apparent over the knot will disappear as will the knot.
Figure 18.207 Pulling the deep suture strand through the skin on the night side of the incision to make the
388
 FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Figure 18.208 Sinking the suture knot at the cranial aspect of the incision by pulling snugly on the deep
suture strand exiting to the night of the incision.
Figure 18.209 Cutting the deep suture strand that is attached to the buried knot at the cranial end of the
incision. Tension is held on the strand while suture scissors cut the strand at skin level so that the end of the
suture retracts under the skin.
CANINE OVARIOHYSTERECTOMY
389
Figure 18.210 Final appearance of ovariohysterectomy incision after subcutaneous closure. If there is good
skin edge apposition without gapping when lateral tension is applied by the surgeon's fingers, then skin
sutures are optional.
Figure 18.21l Final appearance of ovariohysterectomy incision after skin closure. In this case, interrupted
figure-ofeight 3-0 nylon sutures have been used.
390
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Fossum TW, ed. Small Animal Surgery, 3rd
ed. St.
Louis,
Missouni:
Mosby
Elsevier,
 Additional information about ovariohysterectomy in
2007.
3. Slatter D, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery,
small animal surgery can be found in the following
textbooks:
3rd ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders,
2003.
1. Bojrab MJ, ed. Current Techniques in Small Animal
Surgery, 4th ed. Baltimore, Maryland: Williams &
Wilkens, 1998.
Chapter 19
POSTOPERATVE PAN
MANAGEMENT
John P Punke and Fred Anthony Mann
Dying is nothing, but pain is a very serious matter
HENRY JACOB BIGELOW, 1871
Henry J. Bigelow, MD (1818-1890) was a sur-
fort. Analgesic plans should be tailored to each
geon and anesthesiologist. in the days when
patient's disease, behavior, and pain tolerance,
opium and hemp were common analgesics. He
 and modifed based on response to treatments.
realized the importance of sound pain man-
Performing an indicated surgery is in the
agement as the basis of quality medicine and
 patient's best interest, but every surgery in-
surgery and the need for improvement in
duces pain to some degree, and that pain
his time. The importance of adequate pain
must be abated for the patient's wellbeing.
management in veterinary patients cannot be
Cessation of pain is obviously important for
stressed enough today.
patient comfort, but is also beneficial to the
A textbook on surgery could not be complete
overall healing process. Studies in human be-
 d se rr e 
 ings have shown that appropriate analgesic use
ment. The degree of pain induced by surgery is
 speeds healing, decreases hospital stays, and de-
dependent on the underlying disease process,
creases postoperative complications and mor
anatomic location, invasiveness of the proce-
tality rates. Patients with adequate pain con-
dure, and concurrent disease. For example, one
trol eat sooner after surgery, heal faster, and
would expect a fracture repair to induce more
 have fewer complications.1. The mechanisms
pain than a routine castration. In general, or-
behind these results are complicated and are
thopedic pain is considered to be more severe
not fully understood. Pain is a complex entity
than soft tissue pain. And, premedicating pa-
that involves physical, emotional, and psycho-
tients before they experience injury and pain
logical components. The effects of pain on fu
(i.e., preemptive analgesia) has been shown
ture emotions and perception of future pain
to significantly decrease postoperative discom-
can be long lasting. Studies have shown that.
men who were circumcized as infants without.
pain control have a significantly decreased pain
Fundameniats of Small Amimat Surgery, lst edition.
tolerance compared to uncircumcized adults,
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
or those with adequate pain control at the time
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 of circumcision.$-5 This effect is independent
391
392
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
of conscious memory since these procedures
 ized nerve fibers termed nociceptors. Nocicep-
were performed within days of birth. Perhaps
tors come in three forms determined by the
 puppies and kittens with adequate pain control
noxious stimulus that they detect: mechanosen-
at the time of castration or ovariohysterectomy
sitive, thermosensitive, and chemosensitive.
would be better pets and patients with an in-
 Mechanoreceptors respond to stretching, com-
creased tolerance for pain in the future as well.
pression, and crushing. Thermoreceptors
In addition to the obvious immediate and
respond to heat and cold. Chemoreceptors
potential long-term benefits to the patient, ap-
respond to a large number of compounds,
 propriate analgesic use can be considered good
including  neurotransmitters
s (acetylcholine,
 practice management and business as well. Vet-
 neurokinin-1, and others), prostaglandins (A2α :
erinary technicians and staff are compassion-
thromboxane, and others), bradykinin, his-
ate people. Morale is quickly injured when a
tamine, proteolytic enzymes, acids, cytokines
patient under their care is thought to be suf-
(tumor necrosis factor, interleukins, and oth-
fering without. adequate pain control. Similarly,
 ers), and leukotrienes. Once nociceptors have
today's pet. owners increasingly see their pets as
been stimulated beyond their threshold poten-
family members. They do not want their family
tial, an action potential is propagated from a
peripheral nerve to the spinal cord. Peripheral
invest. in analgesic therz
nerves can be of two general types: myelinated A
fibers and nonmyelinated C fibers. Type A fibers
 be optional for pet owners. The price of appro-
 are fast conducting and result in an acute, lo-
 priate analgesia should be included in the cost.
 calized, sharp, and rapid onset of pain. Type
 of a given procedure without question. A vet-
C fbers when stimulated result in a diffuse,
erinarian would not. offer a client the option
 chronic, dull, throbbing pain. Both A and C pe-
of ligating an ovarian pedicle or not. during an
 ripheral fbers terminate in the dorsal horn of
ovariohysterectomy due to the severe potential
 the spinal cord before ascending to the brain for
complications for the patient. Why make anal-
 conscious perception. Conscious perception of
 gesia care optional given all of its advantages to
nociception is the sensation of pain. Other con-
patient care?
current sensations or observations (the classi-
cal signs of inflammation) may be present as
a result of cytokine-induced inflammation at.
PATHOPHYSIOLOGY OF ACUTE PAIN
the site of injury: redness (rubor), heat. (calor),
swelling (tumor), pain (dolor) , and loss of func-
It is beyond the scope of this chapter to delve
tion (functio laesa). Withdrawal reflexes can
deeply into the pathophysiology and modula-
be stimulated from nociception at the level of
tion of pain. There are numerous textbooks
the spinal cord before pain is registered. And,
dedicated to the physiology of pain alone. It is
 in the brain, the reticular activating system is
necessary, however, for a clinician to realize that.
stimulated by nociception to cause increased
there are many processes that intertwine and
awareness, cardiopulmonary effects, and stress
overlap to result in the sensation of pain. Ad-
re sponses.
dressing only one mechanism of pain or inflam-
Pain results from an intricate interaction of
mation may alleviate some of the negative sen-
events, and as such, can be addressed at multi-
sation, but may not completely resolve the pain,
 ple levels. When pain is inhibited by multiple
 depending on the pain's source and severity.
mechanisms simultaneously utilizing multiple
Pain is a complex entity that begins with no-
classes of analgesics, an exponential increase
ciception. Nociception is the process by which
 in analgesic efficacy results. This is termed
an insult results in the stimulation of special-
multimodal analgesia.  Multimodal analgesic
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
393
techniques are the basis of modern pain
reversibly blocking the transduction of noci
 management, and should be used in every clin-
ception by peripheral nerves. Normally, nerve
ical case where anything above very mild pain
fibers send sensory signals to the central ner-
exists. A common example of multimodal anal-
 vous system by depolarization of nerve mem-
gesia is to use a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
 branes via a rapid inward intracellular flux of
drug (NSAID), opioid, and local analgesic tech-
sodium ions from the extracellular space. Local
nique in combination. The resulting effect
 anesthetics block this process by inhibiting the
would be almost. complete elimination of pain 
 conformational change of the sodium ion chan-
 in the immediately postoperative period by the
 nels, thus preventing sodium ion influx and sig-
local analgesic drug, and persistently lower lev-
 nal transduction.
els of pain sensation in the following hours
Traditionally, local anesthetics have been
and days due to inhibition of prostaglandins
 more commonly used in large animal veteri-
(NSAID) at the tissue level and blockade of mu
 nary practice than small animal practice. How-
receptors (opioid) in the brain and dorsal horn
ever, there are many opportunities for their in-
of the spinal cord.
creased usage in small animals as well. In regard
Another major principle in modern anal-
to postoperative pain management, the utility
gesic therapy is that of preemptive analgesia. The
  s   s ss  
rationale for preemptive analgesia is that once
preemptive manner. Since the majority of ef-
pain has occurred, higher doses of analgesics
fects occur locally, local anesthetics can be used
are required to control that pain. Waiting for
 in a variety of methods with high efficacy and
 pain to occur is not desirable because of the de-
little to no systemic side effects (Table 19.1). Lo-
creased ability to control the pain, and because
 cal anesthetics are most. effective when directly
the risk for drug side effects is increased as in-
 applied to the nerve or nerves that would trans-
creased dosages of drugs are used. Therefore, it.
mit. the nociceptive signal to the central ner-
is more desirable to treat pain before it occurs.
vous system, as with specific nerve blocks and
 In other words, the best time to start. treating
epidurals. However, local anesthetics can also be
postoperative pain is preoperatively.
used regionally, as with lidocaine patches, line
 The need for preemptive analgesia comes
blocks, intra-articular injections, and regional
from the physiologic process of central sensitiza-
limb perfusions. Further reading of anesthe-
tion, also known as the “windup phenomenon."
sia textbooks is recommended for instructional
 Intense pain activates amino-hydroxy-methyl-
purposes, especially in regard to specific nerve
isoxazolepropionate/kainate and N-methyl-D-
 blocks techniques and epidural administration.
aspartate (NMDA) receptors. In response,
Dosages for local and intravenous (lidocaine
signaling pathways alter gene expression and
 only) use are given in Table 19.2.
increase the responsiveness of the central ner-
Lidocaine is the local anesthetic drug used
vous system to further noxious stimuli. Thus,
for constant rate infusion (CRl) because it
future pain levels are increased over what they
has the highest safety margin for intravenous
would be otherwise, making control with anal-
administration. Constant rate infusion calcula-
gesic therapy more diffcult.
 tions are described later in this chapter. When
administering intradermal or local infusions of
local anesthetics, one should always aspirate
LOCAL ANESTHETICS
frst before injection to avoid inadvertent in-
travenous or intra-arterial administration. Sim-
Of all the analgesics available to veterinarians,
ilarly, lidocaine and bupivacaine are sometimes
local anesthetics are the only class that com-
supplemented with epinephrine (5 μg/mL)
    s  s 
/to cause local vasoconstriction and prolong
394
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Table 19.11
 Potential routes for local anesthetic administration
Route
Technique
Examples
Nerve block
Injected adjacent to the specific nerve of Onychectomy, dental nerve
interest
blocks
[ncisional line block
[njected over the planned incision, or
 Prior to any skin incision,
around the lesion
laceration repair
Splash block
Applied directly on a wound or exposed
Open wound care, nerves
nerve
exposed during amputation
Transdermal
 Application of lidocaine patches directly
Around celiotomy incision
to or around a lesion
Regional limb perfusion
Injected into the vein of a limb distal to
For complete nerve blockade of
 an applied tourniquet
a distal limb to facilitate toe
amputation
Epidural
[njected directly into the epidural space
 Prior to pelvic limb orthopedic
surgery
Intra-articular
 Directly injected into the joint of interest Intraoperatively for joint surgery
(Do not use bupivacaine)
Constant rate
Given as a continuous infusion as an
 Postoperatively for major
intravenous infusion
adjunctive analgesic (lidocaine only,
orthopedic or soft tissue
 avoid lidocaine infusion in cats)
surgery
anesthetic effect. Intravascular injection could
 and relevant. anatomy involved in performing
cause untoward cardiovascular effects. Either
epidural anesthesia, but epidural administra-
lidocaine or mepivacaine can be used
for
tion can be easily and safely performed in expe-
intra-articular injection,
but lidocaine
has
rienced hands.
been shown to enhance methylprednisolone-
 Increased systemic concentrations of local
induced chondrocyte death in vitro. Bupiva-
anesthetics have a predictable pattern of central
caine has been associated with chondrocyte
     n
 death when given intra-articularly in both peo-
vous system excitement followed by depression,
 ple and dogs.
 apnea, and cardiovascular collapse. When given
 Local analgesics can also be given epidurally
intravenously, bupivacaine can cause cardiac ar-
to completely block motor function and sen-
rhythmias and ventricular fibrillation. The neu-
sation through the spinal nerve roots bilater-
rologic side effects of local anesthetics occur
ally. Epidural administration provides profound
 in cats at lower concentrations than in dogs.
pain control and motor blockade of most of the
 Allergic-type reactions to local anesthetics are
anatomy caudal to the umbilicus including the
 rare, and more often associated with the preser-
pelvic limbs, perineum, and tail. When com-
vative
(methylparaben) than the
anesthetic
bined with an opioid (usually preservative-free
itself.
morphine), the epidural drug combination is
synergistic and is an excellent option for pa-
tients requiring surgery caudal to the umbilicus.
The spread of local anesthetic in the epidural
OPIOIDS
space is a function of both concentration and
volume of the drug administered. The reader is
Opioid analgesics are some of the safest and
referred to other resources to learn technique
most effective analgesic drugs available to the
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
395
Table 19.2  Dosages (mg/kg, unless otherwise noted) and some unique properties of
 local anesthetics, N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists, and alpha-two agonists
use din veterinary medicine
Drug
Dog dosages
Cat dosages
Unique properties
Local anesthetics
 Bupivacaine
Up to 2 for local infusion
Up to 1 for local infusion 
Not for intravenous
1-1.5 for epidural
1-1.5 for epidural
use
administration
administration
Lidocaine
Up to 6 local infusion
Up to 3 local infusion
Take care to not give
 2-4 IV bolus, then
0.25-1 IV bolus, then
the local infusion
0.15-0.45 mg/kg/h
0.06-0.24 mg/kg/h
dosage
CRI
CRI*
intravenously.
4.4 for epidural
4.4 for epidural
*Although a dosage is
 given, avoid
intravenous use in
cats.
 Mepivacaine
Up to 6 local infusion 
Up to 3 local infusion 
 Not for intravenous
use
N-methyl-D-aspartate Receptor Antagonists
Ketamine
0.5 IV for induction
0.5 IV for induction
0.6 mg/kg/h CRI
0.6 mg/kg/h CRI 
intraoperatively
intraoperatively
0.12 mg/kg/h CRI for
0.12 mg/kg/h CRI for
postoperative analgesia
postoperative analgesia
Tiletamine
6-10 IM for short
6-10 IM for short
Only available in
duration
duration
com bination with
9-13 IM for induction of
9-13 IM for induction of
zolazepam
anesthesia
anesthesia
 Amantadine
3-5 PO q 24
3-5 PO q 24
Literature only
supports usage for
chronic pain.
Alpha-two Agonists
Xylazine
0.5-1 IV
0.5-1 IV
1.1-2.2 IM, SC
1.1 IM
Medetomidine
0.01-0.02 IV for short 
0.015-0.03 IV for short
sedation and analgesia
sedation and analgesia
use
use
0.001-0.002 mg/kg/h
CRI for extended
sedation and analgesia
Dexmedetomidine
0.005-0.01 IV for short
0.008-0.015 IV for short
 sedation and analgesia
 sedation and analgesia
Lse
use
0.0005-0.001 mg/kg/h
CRI for extended
sedation and analgesia
CRI, constant rate infusion; IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; PO, by mouth; SC, subcutaneous.
396
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
veterinarian for managing acute and postop-
well. Buprenorphine is the best example of a
erative pain. They rapidly act to provide anal-
mu receptol
r partial agonist. It has the unique
gesia without loss of consciousness or mobil-
 ability to be given transbuccally in cats with al-
ity. Opioids exert. their effect. by binding to one
 most identical pharmacokinetics as if given in-
 of four opioid receptors: mu, delta, kappa, or
 travenously. Buprenorphine is also used com-
nociceptin opioid peptide. Mu receptors are
 monly as a CRI with lidocaine for moderate to
opioid activity. Traditionally, mu receptors were
 appetite suppression than morphine CRIs.
thought to only exist. in the central nervous sys-
Agonist/antagonists are opioids that may
tem. However, there is recent evidence that mu
 stimulate and exert their effects on one opi-
oid receptor (usually the kappa receptor) while
well. The significance of their peripheral loca-
simultaneously binding and inhibiting another
fion is not known.
opioid receptor (usually the mu receptor). Bu-
There  are  four general  categories 
of
 torphanol and nalbuphine are the prototypical
opioids: full agonists, partial agonists, ago-
 agonist/antagonists. Analgesia provided by bu-
nist/antagonists, and antagonists. Examples
 torphanol and nalbuphine is moderate at best.
and dosages of each are listed in Table 19.3.
 and short lived. The duration of effect is only
Full mu agonists exert maximal activation of
1-3 hours, while sedative effects last longer. Bu-
the mu receptor when bound. In general, these
torphanol tends to be one of the more expen-
opioids are best used for moderate to severe
sive opioids used in veterinary practice.
 pain control. Morphine is the prototypical full
 Antagonists have high affinity for the mu and
agonist and is generally the basis to which
all other opioids are compared. Morphine is
   se  si
inexpensive and routinely used subcutaneously,
them from the receptors. Antagonists, however,
intramuscularly, intravenously either as a bo-
 do not activate receptors, thus preventing opi-
lus or constant rate infusion, or epidurally.
 oid activity. Antagonists are particularly useful
Other examples of full mu agonists include
in cases of opioid overdosage; however, the an-
codeine, fentanyl, hydrocodone,
, hydromor
tagonist will reverse all opioid effects, including
phone, meperidine, methadone, and oxymor-
analgesia. Agonist/antagonists may be a bet-
phone. Each varies in its duration of action,
ter first choice for mild overdose. Naloxone
unique side effects, availability and cost. For ex-
 and naltrexone are examples of full antago-
ample, morphine can cause mast cell degran-
 nists. Naloxone's clinical effects last about half
ulation as an adverse side effect in dogs. Dogs
the duration of naltrexone. Therefore, naltrex-
with mast cell tumors should be treated with a
 one may be a better antidote for longer lasting
opioids.
erative care. Methadone is not widely available
Side effects of opioids include a variety of sys-
for clinical usage in the United States; however,
 tems. Central nervous system depression may
it. has the unique property of additional anal-
be a desirable side effect. However, cats may
gesia and prevention of central sensitization by
become excitable when given opioids, espe-
inhibition of the NMDA receptor as well as act-
cially morphine. Dysphoria may also be seen
 ing as an opioid.
 in dogs, especially malamute and husky-type
 Partial mu agonists bind to the mu receptor
breeds. Bradycardia secondary to increased va-
 like a full agonist, but produce limited clinical
 gal tone may be seen in nonpainful patients.
effect. As a result, mu receptor partial agonists
Fortunately, other cardiovascular effects of opi-
have a ceiling effect at. which they maximally
 oids are minimal. In people, respiratory de-
produce analgesia and adverse side effects as
 pression can be profound and life- threatening.
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
397
Table 19.3
 Dosages (mg/kg) and some unique properties of opioids used in veterinary
medicine
Drug
Dog dosages
Cat dosages
 Unique properties
Pure Agonists
Codeine
1-2 PO
0.1-1 PO
Do not give the
preparation with
acetaminophen to
cats
Fentanyl
0.002-0.005 IV
0.001-0.005 IV
 Profound analgesic
0.002-0.06/h IV CR[
0.002-0.03/h IV CRI
effects,
 Recommended as a
CRI due to short
half life,
Decreases anesthesia
requirements
Hydromorphone
0.05-0.2 IV, IM, SC
0.05-0.2 IV, IM, SC
May cause
0.05-0.1/h CRI
0.05-0.1/h CRI
 hyperthermia in 
cats,
 May elicit panting in
ssop
Methadone
0.05-1.5 IM, SC, PO
0.05-0.5 IM, SC, PO
Also has NMDA
receptor antagonist
properties
 Morphinea
0.3-2.0 IM, SC
0.05-0.2 IM, SC
May cause emesis,
0.1-0.5 IV
0.1-0.2 epidural
May cause mast cell
0.05-0.3/h CRI
degranulation
0.1-0.2 epidural
Partial Agonists
 Buprenorphine
0.005-0.03 IV, IM, SC
0.005-0.03 IV, IM, SC
Ceiling effect with
0.04/day CRI
0.01-0.03 PO6
 analgesia and
0.04/day CRI
adverse side effects
Agonist-Antagonists
 Butorphanol
0.1-0.4 IV, IM, SC
0.1-0.8 IV, IM, SC
1-3 hours duration of
0.5-2.0 PO
0.5-1.0 PO
analgesia
Nalbuphine
0.3-0.5 IM, SC
0.2-0.4 IM, SC
1-3 hours duration of
0.1-0.3 IV
0.1-0.2 IV
analgesia
Antagonists
Naloxone
0.002-0.04 IV
0.002-0.02 IV
 Effects last up to 45
minutes
Naltrexone
0.0025-0.003 IV
0.0025-0.003 IV
Approximately twice
the duration of
effect as naloxone
CRI, constant rate infusion; IV, intravenous; IM, intramuscular; NMDA, N-methyl D-aspartate; PO, by
mouth; SC, subcutaneous.
*Morphine without preservatives is recommended for epidural administration.
Buprenorphine as an injectable formulation has been shown to be effective when given transbuccally to
cats.
398
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
However, veterinary patients rarely suffer res-
termed COX-3 (actuallya splice variant of COX-
piratory depression from opioid administra-
1), has been identified in some species includ-
tion alone. As mentioned earlier, morphine has
ing man and the dog. In general, COX-1 is
been associated with histamine release in dogs,
the “house-keeping" COX isoform responsible
especially when given intravenously. Histamine
for normal homeostasis in tissues including the
release can cause profound vasodilatation, hy-
stomach, intestines, kidneys, platelets, and re-
potension, and cardiovascular collapse Nausea,
 productive tract. Theory holds that COX-2 is
vomiting, and defecation are common after ad-
 produced in response to local tissue injury to
ministration of opioids. Vomiting is more likely
 promote inflammation. Working on this the-
with subcutaneous or intramuscular administra-
 ory, pharmaceutical companies have developed
 tion than with intravenous boluses. With long-
NSAIDs that are more selective for the COX-2
term use, opioids may cause constipation. Uri-
enzyme in an effort. to inhibit inducible COX-2
nary retention may occur with morphine use
 production to reduce inflammation, while min-
secondary to decreased detrusor muscle tone
imizing NSAID side effects thought. to be caused
and increased urinary bladder sphincter tone.
by COX-1 inhibition.
Urinary catheterization or manual urinary blad-
However, in opposition to the COX-1:COX-2
paradigm, COX-2 has been found to be pro-
duced at. basal levels in endothelial cells, syn-
ovial cells, chondrocytes, smooth muscle cells,
fbroblasts, monocytes, and macrophages. Ad-
NONSTEROIDAL ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
ditionally, while COX-2 selective NSAIDs have a
DRUGS
side effect rate about 50% of the nonselective
NSAIDs, severe and potentially fatal side effects
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are an
 still occur with COX-2 selective NSAIDs.
extensively researched drug class and the
 In addition to the COX pathway, arachidonic
 most prescribed pharmaceutical in veterinary
 acid can be metabolized by the 5-lipoxygenase
medicine.6
Nonsteroidal
anti-inflammatory
(5-LOX) enzyme to produce another group
of eicosanoid compounds called leukotrienes.
by inhibition of prostaglandin synthesis. They
 Leukotrienes are proinflammatory in their own
exert their action locally at the site of tissue
right, and have been shown to be potent. chem-
damage where there is release of arachidonic
ical attractants and activators of neutrophils.
acid from cell walls secondary to cellular in-
When the COX pathways are inhibited by non-
 jury. They also have been shown to act within
selective NSAIDs, arachidonic acid metabolism
the central nervous system. Nonsteroidal anti-
 may be shunted preferentially through the 5-
 inflammatory drugs have been given epidurally
 LOX pathway. Combined COX/LOX inhibitors
with the same clinical effect as systemic admin-
 have been developed to block both pathways si-
istration.
multaneously. Simultaneous COX/LOX block-
Current research  and development of
 ade has the theoretical advantages of increasing
NSAIDs has been guided by the COX-1:COX-:
 analgesic efficacy and decreasing adverse side
2 theory of NSAID efficacy and side effects.
 effects that may be present due to leukotriene
There are multiple isoforms of the cyclooxy-
 production. There may be merit in this theory.
genase (COX) enzyme that. eventually con-
Tepoxalin is the only COX/LOX inhibitor cur-
vert arachidonic acid to functional eicosanoids 
 rently on the veterinary market. It is a nons-
called prostaglandins. The two major COX en-
elective inhibitor of the COX enzymes. How-
zymes are COX-1 and COX-2, though a third,
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
66
has a safety profle that is similar to the selec-
ent NSAIDs. Finally, NSAIDs should always be
tive COX-2 inhibitors. In a single dose surgical
used within or below their recommended thera
 model, tepoxalin did not alter hemostatic, hep-
peutic dose range. Chronically, NSAIDs should
atic, or renal function.7 In a separate study, dogs
be tapered to the lowest effective dose. Non-
with gastric ulcers healed faster on tepoxalin
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be
compared to firocoxib (a highly COX-2 selec-
given with food.
tive NSAID), which significantly delayed gastric
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug side ef-
healing.8 Both of these studies and early clini-
 fects have been associated mostly with the gas-
cal results support the theoretical advantage of
 trointestinal tract and include vomiting, diar-
combined COX/LOX inhibition over COX-2
rhea, hematemesis, melena, and perforation of
inhibition alone.
the stomach or duodenum. Perforating ulcers
For
 postoperative
pain
 management,
can be silent and occur with no prior clini-
NSAIDs have better effect when given pre-
cal signs. Aspirin is unique in having a local
emptively. There are injectable forms of both
erosive effect on gastric mucosa in addition
carprofen and meloxicam that can be given
to systemic COX-1 inhibition. Renal disease
at anesthetic induction. The oral formulations
has occurred secondary to NSAID administra-
can then be continued postoperatively for con-
tion; however, most reports of renal dysfunc-
tinued pain control. Loading doses at twice the
tion have occurred when NSAIDs were given
daily dose of meloxicam, carprofen, and tepox-
to hypovolemic patients or those with underly-
alin have been recommended, but are not en-
 ing renal disease. Hepatotoxicosis has also been
tirely necessary (see Table 19.4). Some authors 
reported with NSAIDs, but is largely an id-
have recommended screening renal and hep-
iosyncratic effect. Idiosyncratic hepatotoxico-
atic function by performing serum chemistries
sis usually occurs within the frst 21 days of
prior to administration, but
nospecific
administration, but has been reported up to
 guidelines have been evaluated scientifically.
180 days later. Most dogs recover from hep-
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are
atic toxicity once the NSAID is discontinued.
highly efficacious and should be considered
 The hypercoagulability syndrome that has been
whenever possible as part of a complete anal-
seen in people with COX-2 selective NSAIDs
gesic protocol. However, there are a number
does not seem to be a concern with any of
of contraindications to NSAID use, and NSAID
the NSAIDs used in dogs and cats. Similarly,
side effects can be fatal. Nonsteroidal anti-
aspirin and ketoprofen are the only NSAIDs
inflammatory drugs should not be used in pa-
commonly used in veterinary patients that have
tients receiving concurrent systemic corticos-
been shown to delay clinical bleeding times
teroids because of an unacceptably high risk
by their inhibition of platelet thromboxane
of gastrointestinal ulceration and perforation.
production.
 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should
With the numerous choices for NSAID selec
also be avoided in patients with renal or hep-
tion, the question is often asked about which
atic dysfunction, hypovolemia (dehydration, hy-
 specific NSAID to choose. The COX-2 selective
potension, shock, or ascites), hemorrhage, co-
NSAIDs have been shown to result in fewer ad-
agulopathy, pulmonary disease, or gastroin testi-
verse side effects. However, side effects seem to
nal disease, and should not be used in pregnant.
 be idiosyncratic and individualistic. So, an indi-
or actively breeding females. Different NSAIDs
vidual may tolerate a nonselective NSAID bet-
should not be used concurrently. Pharmaceuti-
ter than a selective one. For postoperative us-
cal companies recommend a 3-4 half-life wash
 age, the injectable formulation is convenient. to
out period between administrations of differ-
administer. Following injection, the same drug
400
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
Table 19.4 Recommended oral dosages (mg/kg, unless otherwise noted) of
 nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) for usage in veterinary medicine?
Drug
Dog dosages
Cat dosages
Comments
 Nonselective NSAIDsb
Aspirin
10-25 q 12 hours
10 q 48-72 hours
Causes irreversible platelet
inhibition
Avoid usage if possible
Etodolac
10-15 q 24 hours
 Not for use in cats due
Has narrow therapeutic
to lack of research
window, great care in
on dosage in cats
dosage must be taken
Cycloxygenase2 (COX-2) Selective NSAIDsa
Carprofen
2.2 q 12 hours,
2-4 once
 Available in an injectable
4.4 q 24 hours
formulation for use at the
same dosage
Deracoxib
1-2 q 24,
No recommended
 May be a useful alternative
 3-4 in postoperative
dosages
to piroxicam for dogs
period (no more than
with transitional cell 
7 days)
carcinoma
Firocoxib
5 q 24 hours
No recommended
Reported to be the most 
dosages
 selective NSAID for the
COX-2 enzyme
Meloxi-
0.2 once,
0.1 once,
 Accurate dosage is made
cam
0.1 q 24 hours
0.05-0.1 q 24 hours,
easier by liquid
0.1 mg/cat" chronically
formulation; available in
 an injectable formulation
for use at the same
dosage
Piroxicam
0.3 mg/kg q 48 hours
No recommended
 Dose accurately due to
dosages
 narrow therapeutic index
COX/Lipoxygenase (LOX) Inhibitors
Tepoxalin
10-20 once,
No recommended
 Mucosal disk formulation
10 q 24 hours
dosages
commercially available
 NSAIDs that are not currently recommended for usage in veterinary medicine are not listed.
* Based on in vitro testing in dogs.
 Note this dosage is per entire cat, not mg/kg, due to the highly variable and potentially extended half-life
 of meloxicam in cats.
should be used in its oral formulation. Initial
 good tolerance on one particular NSAID, it may
NSAID selection is usually based on clinician
be wise to continue using that one. However, for
preference and experience, rather than one
 patients with no prior NSAID history, drug se-
NSAID being “better" than another. Specific
lection can be made on drug availability, cost,
NSAIDs used are then changed based on pa-
formulation (chewable tablet, liquid, injectable,
tient tolerance. So, if a patient has a history of
etc.), and clinician preference.
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
401
N-METHYL-D-ASPARTATE RECEPTOR
cle relaxant effects; however, they have potent.
ANTAGONISTS
analgesic effects as well. There are a number
of alpha-two receptor subtypes (alpha-two A,
Ketamine and tiletamine are dissociative anes-
alpha-two B, alpha-two C, and alpha-two D) in
thetics that are commonly used in veterinary
 the central nervous system and peripherally.
medicine. In addition to anesthesia, they pro-
Differences in affinity for each receptor sub-
vide good somatic pain control. As a third ben-
type account for the differences in alpha-two
eficial trait, ketamine and tiletamine have been
 agonist effects and dosages in each species. Side
shown to be good preemptive analgesics by
effects of alpha-two agonist administration are
preventing “wind up" via antagonism of the
 primarily cardiovascular in nature and include
NMDA receptor. So, in patients in which dis-
severe
 bradycardia, bradyarrhythmias, and
sociative anesthetics are a good choice, usage
hypotension. With initial administration, an in-
of these drugs enhances intraoperative and
crease in peripheral vascular tone causes a phys-
 iologic hypertension and bradycardlia. Hypoten-
commercially available in combination with the
sion can occur subsequently. Alpha-two agonists
benzodiazepine zolazepam. Ketamine is less ex-
are contraindicated in patients with cardiovas-
pensive than the tiletamine-zolazepam combi-
cular disease and should be used cautiously in
very young, old, or debilitated patients. How-
nation and can be used as a sole agent. In re-
cent years, ketamine CRIs have come into vogue
     
for treatment of severe traumatic and postsur
with other analgesics and can make a nice ad-
gical pain. Ketamine CRIs (often in combina-
 junct in combination with opioids or other anal-
tion with an opioid and lidocaine) are highly
 gesics to provide good multimodal pain control.
efficacious for pain control, but can cause dra-
 Alpha-two agonists should be used at the lowest.
 matic sedation, which may or may not be desir-
dose necessary and in combination with other
able depending on patient circumstances (see
analgesics to achieve the desired effect (see
Table 19.2). A major advantage of alpha-two ag-
Table 19.2).
 Dissociative analgesics give poor muscle re-
onists is that they are rapidly and completely
 laxation and may cause tremors or seizures
reversible with the administration of alpha-two
when given alone. They are most. often admin-
antagonists. Yohimbine and atipamezole are the
istered in combination with a benzodiazepine.
two most. common alpha-two antagonists.
 Dissociatives are contraindicated in patients
Xylazine was the first. alpha-two agonist syn-
with increased intracranial pressure or head in-
thesized.
Xylazine is effective, readily avail-
able, and inexpensive, but may be associated
jury.
with increased cardiovascular side effects com-
Amantadine is an NMDA receptor antagonist.
that has been shown to have beneficial analgesic
 pared with newer alpha-two agonists. Medeto-
 properties in dogs with chronic pain when given
midine was the most commonly used sedative
for 60 days. Its effcacy in postoperative patients
in small animal practice when it was taken off
has not been evaluated or shown as of the time
the market. Medetomidine was more highly
 of this writing.
selective for the alpha-two receptor, and thus
more potent than xylazine. It was supplied as
a racemic mixture of two optical enantiomers
of the same compound, levomedetomidine
ALPHA-TWO AGONISTS
and dexmedetomidine, the latter being the
only active enantiomer. A purified dexmedeto-
Alpha-two agonists are mostly known in vet-
midine formulation has replaced medetomi
erinary medicine for their sedative and mus-
 dine. Dexmedetomidine is an alpha-two agonist.
402
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
100
Fentanyl
sta
75
Hydromorphone
ste
50
25
0
100
200
300
400
500
Time(minutes)
Figure 19.1 Example graph of the time to steady state drug concentrations for a healthy adult dog on a
hydromorphone (half-life = 80 minutes) constant rate infusion (CRI) compared to a fentanyl (halflife = 45
minutes) CRI without administration of a loading dose. Circles and boxes represent successive half-life times
for fentanyl and hydromorphone, respectively, for up to five halflives.
currently on the market in the United States,
will be at 50% of steady state, 75% at two half
but has not been shown to have clinical ben-
lives, 87.5% at three half-lives, and so on. After
efits (besides being twice as potent) over the
five half-lives, the serum drug concentration will
racemic mixture.
only be at 97% of steady state. In clinical terms,
if a healthy adult dog is not given a loading dose
 of hydromorphone (half-life = 80 minutes), but.
CONSTANT RATE INFUSION
solely placed on a hydromorphone CRI postop-
eratively, it would take 6 hours and 40 minutes
Constant rate infusion (CRl) of various anal-
for that patient to reach 97% of the steady state
gesics can provide effective, reliable, steady-
level of hydromorphone (see Figure 19.1). To
 state analgesic drug concentrations for postop-
provide immediate postoperative pain control
erative patients. Constant rate infusions avoid
from hydromorphone, a loading dose should
fluctuations in blood concentrations of anal-
 be given when the CRI is initiated to bring the
gesics so that the risk of toxicity at peak con-
 patient to steady state drug concentrations and
centrations and potential loss of analgesia at.
 adequate analgesia. More simply, the purpose
trough concentrations are avoided. Except for
of the CRI is not. to initiate analgesic concen-
NSAIDs, all of the previously listed drug classes 
trations of a drug, but to maintain them at that.
can be administered by CRI for pain control.
level once a loading dose is given. In the same
 Basic knowledge of CRI pharmacology is im-
regard, once the infusion rate is changed (in-
portant for effective use.
 creased or decreased) after the drug is at steady
When CRIs are initiated without giving a
 state, it would then take another five halflives
 loading dose, the time required for the drug
to reach 97% of the new steady state level. As an
to reach steady state is dictated solely by the
 illustration of how serum drug concentrations
 halflife of that drug in the patient. Increases 
change in a logarithmic fashion, morphine can
in the serum concentration of a drug occur in
 be detected in the urine of healthy adult dogs 6
logarithmic fashion. In one half-life, the drug 
 days after a single intravenous dose even though
POSTOPERATIVE PAINMANAGEMENT
403
Method A:
In order to calculate the rate a full strength drug should be given to a patient for a given CRl rate:
PatientWeight(kg)XCRIrate(mg/kg/hr)
drugconcentration(mg/ml)
To administer undiluted morphine (10 mg/ml) as a CRl to a 25 kg patient at 0.1 mg/kg/hr:
25kgx0.1mg/kg/hr
=0.25ml/hr
10mg/ml
(u/w s'z si yiym) juw se'o jot has aa pinous dwnd asuas au
Method B:
In order to calculate the amount of analgesic to be added to a 250 mLbag of 0.9% sodium chloride to
make a CRl to be given to a patient at 10 ml/hr, the following formula is used:
Patientweight(kg)xCRlrate(mg/kg/hr)
volumeoffluid tobediluted(ml)
X
drugconcentration(mg/ml)
desiredrateofinfusion(ml/hr
= volume of fluid to be replaced with drug
For the same scenario in Method A:
250ml
10mg/ml
10ml/hr
= 6.25 ml of morphine (10 mg/ml)
So, 6.25 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride should be removed from the 250 ml bag and replaced with 6.25 ml
of morphine (10 mg/ml). The resulting solution will provide morphine at 0.1 mg/kg/hr when given at 10
ml/hr.
Figure 19.2 Formula and example calculations for a constant rate infusion (CRI),
404
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
 analgesic effects are gone by6 hours or so. A CRI
 gesic efficacy and side effects unique to the drug
of fentanyl (half life = 45 minutes) is graphed
class. It is vitally important. that the veterinary
as well in Figure 19.1 to illustrate the difference
clinician knows and understands the analgesics
 half-life makes in CRI management.
 available and their limitations. The importance
The easiest way to administer a CRI in the
of multimodal analgesia and its ability to mini-
clinical setting is to use an electronic syringe
 mize adverse drug effects by using lower dosages
-pu dud sus ramau a jo sun dund
 of different drug classes in combination to max-
els calculate and aclminister the drug at. the ap-
imize efficacy and minimize adverse effects can-
 propriate rate after the following information
not be stressed enough. Likewise, the concept.
is entered: the patient's body weight, concen-
 of maximizing pain control by giving analgesics
 tration of drug, and rate of CRI administration
 preemptively should be utilized at every oppor-
(mg/kg/h, micrograms/kg/min, etc.). It is pos-
tunity. In this way, veterinarians can provide the
sible to do the calculations by hand (Method A
 best possible postoperative care for their pa-
-pe oi dumd shuuks e ias pue (7'61 amat u!
tients.
minister the drug at the desired rate (mL/h,
mL/min, etc.). An alternative method for CRI
administration (Method B in Figure 19.2) is to
REFERENCES
resuspend the drug in a volume of physiologic
intravenous fluids (usually 0.9% sodium chlo-
1. Bonnet F, Marret E. Postoperative pain manage-
ride) so that the fluids can be given at a desired
ment and outcome after surgery. Best Pract Res
rate that also gives appropriate drug administra-
Clin Anaesthesiol 2007;21:99-107.
tion. If this second method is used, care must be
2. Kehlet H. Effect of postoperative pain treatment
 taken to not fluid overload smaller patients by
on outcome: current status and future strategies.
making the CRI fluid rate higher than physio-
Langenbecks Arch Surg 2004;389:244-249.
logically tolerable. Regardless of which method
 3. Fitzgerald M, Millard C, McIntosh N. Cutaneous
is used, careful attention should be made to be
hypersensitivity following peripheral tissue dam-
 age in newborn infants and its reversal with topi-
sure that the appropriate units are used in calcu-
cal anaesthesia. Pain 1989;39:31-36.
lation. All weights should be in kilograms, and
4.
Geyer J, Ellsbury D, Kleiber C, et al. An evidence-
CRI rates should be converted to mg/kg/hour.
based multidisciplinary protocol for neonatal
Constant rate infusion doses can be listed in
circumcision pain management. J Obstet Gynecol
reference texts as drug units of micrograms
Neonatal Nurs 2002;31:403-410.
per kilogram, and time can be expressed per
5. Weisman SJ, Bernstein B, Schechter NL. Conse-
minute, hour, or day.
quences of inadequate analgesia during painful
procedures in children. Arch Pediatr Adolesc Med
1998;152:147-149.
CONCLUSIONS
6. Bergh MS, Budsberg SC. The coxib NSAIDs:
In summary, veterinary patients are fortunate
tance in veteninary medicine. J Vet Intern Med
2005;19:633-643.
to have many analgesic drugs and protocols
7. Kay-Mugford PA, Grimm KA, Weingarten AJ,
available to ease the inevitable discomfort that.
et al. Effect of preoperative administration of
occurs with surgical intervention. It is the vet-
tepoxalin on hemostasis and hepatic and renal
erinarian's responsibility to choose the appro-
fiunction in dogs. Vet Ther 2004;5:120-127.
-s  p d on sondo d
Goodman L, Torres B, Punke J, et al. Effects of
cally induced pain for each individual patient.
frocoxib and tepoxalin on healing in a canine
while avoiding adverse drug effects. The anal-
gastric mucosal injury model. J Vet Intern Med
gesic drugs available today have levels of anal-
2009;23:56-62.
POSTOPERATIVE PAIN MANAGEMENT
405
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
2. Plumb DC. Veterinary Drug Handbook, 5th ed.
Ames, Iowa: Blackwell Publishing, 2005.
Additional information about analgesic drugs and
3. Tranquilli WJ, Thurmon JC, Grimm KA. Lumb
 Jones?Veterinary Anesthesia and Anaigesia. Ames,
postoperative pain management in small animal
 surgery can be found in the following textbooks:
[owa: Blackwell Publishing, 2007.
1. Gaynor JS, Muir Il. WW. Handbook of Veterinary
[Note: Drug dosages and other information
 Pain Management. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby Else-
in the tables and figures in this chapter are
vier, 2009.
pe ssu ed np renrau uo paseq
the above three additional resources.]
Chapter 20
PATIENTAFTERCARE
AND FOLLOWUP
Elizabeth A. Swanson and Fred Anthony Mann
 Postoperative care and followup are just as im-
IMMEDIATELY POSTOPERATIVE CARE
 portant as the care and attention to detail af-
forded before and during surgery. Good care
 A patient frst entering the recovery ward or
 in the immediately postoperative period will fa-
 intensive care unit is usually still awakening
cilitate a smooth recovery from anesthesia and
 from anesthesia. A patent airway should be
keep the patient comfortable, whether the pro-
 maintained with the endotracheal tube until
cedure was a simple feline castration or a com-
a strong swallow reflex has returned. Because
 plicated liver lobe resection or fracture repair.
 flaccid, redundant soft tissue structures may
Providing warmth, maintaining adequate per-
interfere with normal respiration in brachy-
fusion and ventilation, providing good nursing
 cephalic breeds, it is best in these breeds to
care and analgesia, maintaining a positive nu-
wait. to extubate until the animal is lifting its
 tritional status, and restricting activity to allow
head and starting to chew the tube. Recovering
 proper wound healing are all important factors
 patients with endotracheal tubes in place must.
that will be discussed in this chapter. Followup
be monitored closely so that the tube is not.
after the patient is released from the hospi-
 accidently severed. After extubation, ascertain
 tal is essential to maintaining open communi-
 that the patient is breathing in an unobstructed
cations with the client. Followup communica-
 manner before leaving the area.
tions and examinations allow the surgeon to
Basic postoperative monitoring for all pa-
monitor the healing process, determine if ad-
tients regardless of procedure performed in-
ditional care is needed, and decide when it is
 cludes measuring body temperature and as-
 appropriate for the patient to return to normal
 sessing cardiovascular parameters, respiratory
activity.
function, level of consciousness, and pain sta-
tus. Most patients are cold by the time they
 reach the recovery area. An anesthetized pa-
tient. is unable to regulate its body temper-
Fundameniats of Small Animat Surgery, Ist edition.
ature and will lose heat quickly on transfer
By Fred Anthony Mann, Gheorghe M. Constantinescu
and Hun-Young Yoon.
from the operating table. Small patients have a
@ 201l Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
higher surface area to body mass ratio and will
406
PATIENT AFTERCARE AND FOLLOWUP
407
dissipate body heat. faster than larger patients.
ing, and cyanotic mucous membranes are all
Body temperature should be checked every
30-60 minutes until it has reached
100°F
may be seen with pneumothorax, pleural effu-
(37.8°C). Once the body temperature is nor-
sion, pulmonary edema, pulmonary contusions.
mal, a stable, awake patient can be moved from
 pneumonia, or pulmonary thromboembolism.
the recovery area to the regular wards. Exter-
 Any abnormal changes in the parameters listed
nal heat sources should be turned off or re-
  s  m a
moved from patients who are able to regulate
tervention as discussed later in this chapter.
their body temperature.
Oxygenation can be assessed via the partial
The simplest parameters used to monitor ad-
 pressure of arterial oxygen (PaOz) and arterial
equacy of perfusion and ventilation are heart.
 oxygen saturation of hemoglobin (SaOz) on an
rate, pulse quality, respiratory rate and effort,
arterial blood gas or, less invasively and more
mucous membrane color, and capillary refill
frequently, via pulse oximetry. Pulse oximeters
time. These parameters should be monitored
display pulse rate and hemoglobin saturation;
hourly until the patient is awake and alert after
therefore, the use of pulse oximeters is limited
anesthesia, then every 6-12 hours thereafter, de-
in the presence of vasoconstriction and poorly
pending on the nature of the case. Critical pa-
 detectable pulses. However, the detection of a
tients require more frequent monitoring. For
 snd e uuy ko no ssnd yeam
example, a patient recovering from thoraco-
 indicate impaired peripheral circulation and
tomy should be checked hourly for changes in
warrant additional investigation. If the pulse
respiratory rate or character. Heart rate, pulse
 rate displayed on the pulse oximeter does not
quality, mucous membrane color, and capil-
match the palpable pulse rate or auscultable
lary refill time are used to assess perfusion.
heart rate, then the hemoglobin saturation
Tachycardia (as an example, greater than 180
 reading should be considered unreliable. Pulse
 09g ueui iaieai pue shop un ainuu iad sieaq
oximeters measure the percent hemoglobin sat-
beats per minute in cats) with weak, thready
 uration by transmitting red and infrared light.
pulses, and pale mucous membranes indicates
through the blood and tissues. Red light is ab-
poor perfusion from hypovolemia, shock, or sys-
sorbed more by unsaturated hemoglobin than
temic inflammatory response. [Note: Cats do
infrared light, whereas infrared light is more
not. have the same baroreceptor response to
 absorbed by oxygenated hemoglobin than red
hypovolemia as dogs, so feline heart rates can
light. The amount of light absorbed is mea-
be normal or low in the face of hypovolemia.
sured and the pulse oximeter calculates and
Also, both dogs and cats will have bradycardia in
displays the percentage of hemoglobin that is
the terminal stages of shock (decompensatory
 oxygenated. In the process of calculation, the
shock).]  Either tachycardia or bradycardia
 pulse oximeter is able to cancel the hemoglobin
with weak and/or skipped pulses may indicate a
in venous blood and tissues by measuring dur-
life-threatening cardiac arrhythmia that. should
ing a pulse (hence, the term pulse oximeter),
be addressed. A prolonged capillary refill time
thereby estimating the percent saturation of ar
may indicate poor cardiac output or circulation;
terial hemoglobin (SpO2). The SaOg (and thus
however, caution must. be used since capillary
the SpO2) is related to the partial pressure of
 refll time can still be present in patients with
 oxygen (PaOg) by a sigmoidal curve known as
no heart. beat.
the oxygen-hemoglobin dissociation curve. A
 Respiratory rate, respiratory character and
 normal PaOg at sea level and room temperature
effort, and mucous membrane color help de-
is from 80 to 110 mmHg, which corresponds
termine ventilation and oxygenation adequacy.
to a pulse oximeter reading of 95% to 100%.
Rapid respirations, shallow or labored breath-
Since 90% SaO2 corresponds to a PaO2 of
408
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
60 mmHg, treatment. with supplemental oxygen
lenging. Both should be addressed since pain
is indicated when the SpOg falls below 90%.
has been shown to be increased in the anx-
Adequacy of ventilation can be assessed on
 a mud pa ad sno
a blood gas or via capnography. End-tidal car-
domestic animals includes vocalization, shiver-
 bon dioxide (ETCO2) is measured via capnog-
 ing, reluctance to move, restlessness or inability
raphy and can be used as an estimate of the arte-
 to get comfortable, guarding the injured area,
rial partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2)
aggression, excessive salivation, dilated pupils,
that is measured directly by arterial blood gas
 hypertension, and increased respiratory rate.
analysis. Normal PaCOg is between 35 and
 Postoperative pain management is discussed in
45 mmHg. Since COg diffuses rapidly across the
 more detail in Chapter 19.
pulmonary capillary endothelium and alveolar
Critical cases and patients with abnormali
tissues, ETCOg values are similar to PaCOg. An
 ties in the basic parameters mentioned above
ETCO2 over 60 mmHg indicates hypoventila-
 require additional monitoring. Blood pressure
tion, while an ETCOg below 20 mmHg indicates
 can be measured directly via an arterial catheter
 hyperventilation.
 or indirectly using Doppler or oscillometric
 Level of consciousness should be monitored
at least. hourly to make sure the patient. is wak-
potension while under anesthesia, significant.
ing properly. When recovering from anesthe-
hemorrhage, sepsis, or that may be in dan-
sia, patients should gradually transition from 
 ger of developing a systemic inflammatory re-
sleeping to wakefulness (although some seda-
 sponse should have blood pressure monitored.
tion is acceptable depending on the adminis-
 Direct arterial pressures and oscillometric indi-
tration of analgesics or sedatives) . Most patients
 rect pressures have the benefit of providing sys
will awaken over a period of 15-20 minutes.
 tolic, diastolic, and mean pressures. The ideal
Prolonged recoveries will be seen in critically
 mean arterial pressure to ensure adequate per-
ill, hypothermic, hypoglycemic, anemic, hypox-
 fusion of the brain and kidneys is between 80
emic, and hypoproteinemic patients. Patients 
 and 90 mmHg. Mean pressures below 60 mmHg
that. are over-anesthetized will also take longer
result. in inadequate blood flow to the kidneys
to return to consciousness. Dysphoric or anx-
 and could result in renal damage. Also, inade-
ious patients may require administration of a
quate perfusion of the kidneys may predispose
sedative (acepromazine or dexmedetomidine)
to damage caused by the use of NSAIDs. Au-
to calm the patient and reduce the risk of injury.
toregulation in the brain maintains adequate
A change in consciousness to a more depressed
cerebral blood flow as long as the mean arterial
state indicates a problem that should be inves-
blood pre ssure is between 50 and 150 mmHg. If
figated and corrected as soon as possible (i.e.,
a method to obtain mean arterial pressure is not.
increased intracranial pressure, hypoglycemia,
 available, Doppler indirect pressure measure-
sepsis, or shock secondary to hemorrhage).
 ments are still useful. A systolic pressure greater
Patients should also be monitored for evi-
than 100 mmHg will usually indicate adequate
 dence of pain and discomfort. It is no longer
tissue perfusion.
considered acceptable to allow a patient to re-
Glucose should be monitored in patients
main painful because of the belief that pain
whose ability to regulate blood glucose concen-
will help restrict. activity and, therefore, assist.
 trations is impaired. Very young, debilitated,
in healing. Both human and animal patients 
  ssoe se  sad os 
recover better and faster when their pain has
 tic peritonitis), as well as those in immedi-
 aa  ue sse eee 
ficult to assess in the veterinary patient; differ-
 sh unt attenuation or excision of an insulinoma,
entiating between pain and anxiety can be chal-  should have blood or serum glucose checked
PATIENT AFTERCARE AND FOLLOWUP
409
immediately postoperatively  and  frequently
cause rehemorrhaging by dislodging early clots
thereafter, as the individual case requires, in
 as the fluid therapy increases blood pressure. A
the first 24-48 hours. Hypoglycemia (blood
 process called hypotensive resuscitation is prac-
glucose less than 60 mg/dL) will prolong re-
ticed in actively hemorrhaging cases, whereby
covery from anesthesia. Other signs of hypo-
blood pressure is monitored and fluid therapy
glycemia include lethargy, depression, tremors,
 is titrated to achieve an arterial blood pres-
weakness, ataxia, seizures, and coma. Patients at.
sure above that which would cause renal im
risk for hypoglycemia who are able to eat should
pairment (i.e., above a mean arterial pressure
be fed small meals every two to three hours
of 60 mmHg), but not as high as normal. In
to help maintain euglycemia. Hypoglycemic pa-
such cases, the targeted mean arterial blood
tients and patients at risk of hypoglycemia that.
 pressure is typically 70-80 mmHg. Reoperation
are unable to eat should have dextrose added
may be required to find and ligate bleeding ves
to their intravenous fluids (usually 2.5% or 5%
sels; however, increased intra-abdominal pres-
dextrose in a balanced electrolyte solution) and
sure from the accumulating abdominal fluid or
 may require a 25% dextrose bolus (1 mL/kg)
from an abdominal bandage usually controls
 to control clinical signs.
 intra-abdominal hemorrhage that has resulted
Hemorrhage is always a potential complica-
 from surgical manipulations. Elective proce-
tion of surgery. Blood loss may be severe in
dures, especially ovariohysterectomy, should be
some procedures, such as splenectomy for a
monitored for postoperative hemorrhage, just.
ruptured splenic mass, liver lobectomy, and in
 as any other operative procedure.
cases of trauma. Measurement of packed cell
Central venous pressure (CVP) is used to
volume (PCV) and total protein (TP) is a quick
monitor volume status in critical postoperative
 method to ascertain blood loss. However, in per-
patients and to guide intravenous fluid therapy.
acute hemorrhage PCV and TP will be normal
Normal CVP is between 0 and 10 cm HgO. Val-
(or the same as baseline) until fluid shift from
 ues less than O cm HgO indicate hypovolemia
the intracellular and interstitial compartments 
and the need for increased or ongoing fluid
to the intravascular space occurs. A complete
therapy; whereas, values greater than 10 cm
blood count (CBC) can also be used. Postop-
 HgO indicate volume overload or myocardial
erative patients who have had significant blood
 insuffciency, and fluid therapy should be de-
loss or who may be hemorrhaging postopera-
 creased or discontinued. To measure CVP, a wa-
tively should have a PCV/TP checked imme-
ter manometer (or intravenous extension tub-
diately postoperatively, and then as needed,
 ing adjacent to a centimeter ruler) is connected
depending on the case. Early signs of hemor-
   s   p s 
rhage include light pink or pale mucous mem-
venous line, usually a jugular catheter (Figure
 branes, increased heart rate, weak peripheral
20.1). The manometer is placed perpendicu-
 pulses, and drop in blood pressure. Advanced
lar to the floor with the 0 cm mark located
signs of hemorrhage are weakness, collapse, and
at the level of the right atrium (Figure 20.2).
death. A distended abdomen or dyspnea may
Sterile saline is first used to flush the jugular
be noted if the bleeding occurs in the abdom-
catheter, then the line is closed to the patient.
inal or thoracic cavity, respectively. Total pro-
 and the manometer is flled. The line is then
tein may fall before PCV if splenic contraction
 opened to both the patient and the manometer,
occurs. Treatment includes judicious fluid ther-
 and pressures are allowed to equilibrate (Figure
apy and blood transfusion. While rapid intra-
20.3). Once the fluid level stops falling, CVP is
venous crystalloid or other fluid bolusing may
read at the bottom of the fluid meniscus (Fig-
be necessary for resuscitation of a patient in
ure 20.3). The meniscus should oscillate up and
hemorrhagic shock, care must be taken not to 
 down approximately 1 mm with each breath. A
410
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
-10
-15
-20ml
(a) ruler (or altermatively, a water manometer - not shown); (b) 20 mL syringe for stenile 0.9% sodium
chloride; (c) intravenous extension tubing; (d) stopcock; and (e) intravenous catheter cap.
stationary meniscus should alert to a possible
pressure include edema and delayed tissue
 artifactual reading.
healing.
Hypoproteinemic patients often require col-
 In addition to monitoring the parameters
 loid therapy to maintain intravascular volume
 listed above, good nursing care is essential for
and to prevent the formation of edema. Col-
 all patients. The purpose of nursing care is to
loid osmotic pressure (COP), also called col-
 keep the patient as comfortable as possible and
loid oncotic pressure, is measured from a blood
 in a state of optimal hygiene. Patients recover-
sample with an instrument called a colloid os-
 ing from surgery should be kept warm, clean,
mometer, and is used to guide colloid admin-
 and dry. The effects of hypothermia have been
istration. Normal COP values are between 20
 dliscussed previously. Excessive moisture on the
and 25 mmHg. Values less than 15 mmHg
 skin is uncomfortable and can lead to macer-
warrant intervention to maintain plasma on-
 ation and infection. Urine and fecal scalding
cotic pressure. Causes of hypoproteinemia in-
 should be avoided by immediately picking up af-
 clude loss (protein-losing enteropathy, protein 
 ter the patient, regular checking/changing bed-
losing-nephropathy, abdominal effusion), lack
 ding in recumbent patients, using absorbent.
 of protein intake (anorexia), and lack of pro- padding under patients, and gently washing a
tein production (liver failure). Consequences soiled patient with water or waterless shampoo.
of hypoproteinemia and low plasma oncotic  Bathing human intensive care unit patients with
PATIENT AFTERCARE AND FOLLOWUP
411
 Figure 20.2 Central venous pressure setup in a postoperative feline patient. Note that the zero centimeter
mark toward the bottom of the ruler (indicated by the arrow) is on a level equal to the level of the cat's night
atrium with the cat in left lateral recumbence.
 Figure 20.3  Closeup view of a central venous pressure measurement using intravenous extension tubing
and ruler for a manometer. The central venous pressure should be read at the bottom of the fluid meniscus,
and in this case is 4.6 cm HgO.
412
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
chlorhexidine has been shown to decrease
catheters should be maintained in critical and
nosocomial infection rates; therefore, chlorhex-
debilitated patients and in patients receiving
idine should be considered for cleaning at risk
intravenous pain medications (via intermittent.
vete rinary patients.
injections or constant rate infusion) postoper-
 All patients should be supplied with appro-
atively. The types of intravenous catheters that
priate bedding. Recumbent animals require
may be in place in a surgical patient include
thicker bedding and should be turned from side
 peripheral venous catheters (cephalic, lateral
to side every four to six hours to prevent decu-
saphenous), central venous catheters (exter
bital ulcers. Incisions should be monitored at
 nal jugular), and arterial catheters. There are
least twice daily to make sure they are clean 
 some differences in maintaining each type of
and dry with no evidence of swelling, redness,
 catheter; however, all should be monitored for
 dehiscence, or discharge. Patients will become
 patency, proper placement, and development.
uncomfortable if they are unable to void their
of inflammation or infection. Unused catheters
bladders. Ambulatory patients can be walked or
 should be flushed with saline every six hours
carted outside. Urinary bladders should be gen-
 to maintain patency. Arterial catheters should
tly expressed or emptied via a urinary catheter
be flushed and locked with heparinized saline
in nonambulatory patients who are unable to
when not in use. Alternatively, arterial lines
void their bladders (i.e., a dog recovering from
 can be maintained by connecting them to hep-
hemilaminectomy). Retained urine can lead to
 arinized saline in a pressure bag. Heparinized
urinary tract infection. Urinary catheterization
saline is not necessary for venous catheters. In
and attachment to a closed urine collection sys-
fact, overuse of heparinized flush can inadver-
tem should be considered in recumbent pa-
tently heparinize the patient (i.e., prolong clot-
tients for hygiene purposes and can also be used
 ting times), particularly in small dogs and cats.
to monitor urine output.
Since veterinary patients often move around
 Orthopedic patients often have a dressing or
 in their cage or run, it is important to ensure
that catheters remain in place. Inadvertent sub-
as Bioclusive (Johnson & Johnson, Langhorne,
cutaneous administration of fluids and medi-
PA) and Telfa Island Dressings (Covidien, Mans-
cations may occur, potentially with disastrous
field, MA), are placed over an incision to protect.
consequences, if an intravenous catheter is dis-
it and prevent. contamination until a fibrin seal
 lodged or partially pulled out. An intravenous
 has formed. Bandages are placed to protect an
 catheter should be removed once it is no longer
incision, provide additional stabilization for a
 needed, if swelling or phlebitis is noted, or if pa-
limb, and/or provide moderate pressure to de-
tency cannot. be safely restored. At least twice
crease postoperative swelling. Bandages should
 daily inspection of catheter sites is necessary
be kept clean and dry at all times. They should
 to detect and promptly address catheter-related
be monitored for slipping as this can lead to
 problems.
constriction of the limb and interfere with cir-
Chest tubes, feeding tubes (esophagostomy,
culation. Digits should be checked regularly for
 gastrostomy, jejunostomy), indwelling urinary
swelling, indicating a bandage that is too tight.
catheters, and drains should be kept clean and
Bandages should be changed if strikethrough is
 patent. If a chest. tube is used for intermittent.
noted, if they become wet. or soiled, or if slip-
evacuation of the pleural space, it is important
ping or swelling is noted.
to make sure that the clamp is in place and
Intravenous catheters should not be re-
closed when the tube is not in use to prevent ia-
moved in healthy patients undergoing elective
 trogenic pneumothorax. The patient should be
surgery until they are awake and body tem-
 prevented from chewing or pulling the tubes
 perature has returned to normal. Intravenous
by placing a t-shirt, stockinette, bandage, or
PATIENT AFTERCARE AND FOLLOWUP
413
Elizabethan collar. The stomas around chest.
are referred to medicine, critical care, and fluid
tubes, feeding tubes, and drains should be mon-
therapy textbooks for more detailed discussion
itored at least. twice daily for redness, swelling,
of intravenous fluid therapy.
leakage, and discharge. A thorough discussion
The routine use of antibiotics after surgery
 of surgical tubes and drains can be found in
is not indicated. Administration of antibiotics
Chapter 17.
should be reserved for known bacterial infec
Most surgical patients, with the exception
of uncomplicated elective procedures, will be
tibility results. When perioperative antibiotics
 kept on intravenous fluids after surgery. Both
are continued postoperatively, they are discon-
crystalloids and colloids are used, based on the
tinued within 24 hours. See Chapter 4 for a
patient's needs. The most. common crystalloids
complete discussion of antibiotic use in small
used postoperatively include lactated Ringer's
animal surgery.
solution, Normosol-R, Plasma-Lyte, and 0.9%
sodium chloride. Potassium chloride, dextrose,
and B-vitamins may be added according to the
NUTRITIONAL SUPPORT
 patient's individual requirements. Colloids in-
clude hetastarch, dextran, blood products, and
Nutrition is essential to meet the metabolic
Oxyglobin (Biopure Corporation, Cambridge,
 needs of all surgical patients. When calorie in-
MA), although the availability of the latter has
take is insufficient, the body is unable to mount.
fluctuated over the years. Isotonic crystalloids
 an adaptive response due to the influence of cat.
are typically chosen for maintenance fluids.
echolamines, glucocorticoids, and other prod-
Calorie-based fluid maintenance is the dosage
ucts of the inflammatory process. As a result, in-
of fluids on the premise that one milliliter
stead of utilizing fat. stores as an energy source
of water is lost for every kilocalorie of energy
(as a healthy animal would) the surgical patient.
that is utilized. As such, the same formula as
continues to break down muscle for protein,
that. used for calculating daily resting energy
which results in a net loss of lean body mass.
requirement can be used to calculate daily
 Malnutrition and the concomitant loss of lean
fluid maintenance (see this chapter, section on
body mass decrease the patient's ability to repair
Nutritional Support). Maintenance fluid ad-
tissue and resist infection with the ultimate re-
dic patients without other complicating factors.
 of death. Oral intake of food is ideal, if the pa-
 Critical patients and patients with metabolic
tient is able to eat. While it is recommended that.
dysfunction, such as renal disease, require
nutritional intervention should take place if a
higher rates ranging from 1.5 times mainte-
patient has been anorexic or partially anorexic
nance to shock doses (90 mL/kg) of fluids.
for five days or longer, early feeding (within 24
Lower fluid rates are indicated for cardiac pa-
hours of surgery) is best for surgical patients.
tients. When colloids are used, the dosage is
 Interventional nutrition should be employed if
based on the needs of the patient and the goal of
voluntary oral intake does not. occur within 24
the colloid, but the basic dosage for hetastarch
hours or is contraindicated.
and dextran is 20 mL/kg/day. Care should be
If the gastrointestinal tract is functional, en-
taken when using colloids in cats, as cats are
teral feeding via a feeding tube should be consi-
 more sensitive to colloid effects than dogs. In
 dered. Preplanning for nutritional support and
general, give colloids to cats at lower dosages
 placement of a feeding tube during surgery
 and slower rates than calculated for dogs. Fluid
when warranted (such as in patients with pro-
therapy that. is too aggressive can lead to vol-
longed preoperative anorexia, severe debilita
ume overload and pulmonary edema. Readers  tion, or extensive gastrointestinal resection)
414
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
can prevent future anesthetic episodes a few
 ond or third day. The total volume should be
days later to place a feeding tube when the
divided into four to six feedings per day, unless
patient refuses to eat. Furthermore, it is pru-
aisounfaf pasn huaq si aqnn soisoufaf e
dent to take advantage of anesthesia to place
a feeding tube whenever the surgical proce- because distention of the intestine with boluses
(i.e., nausea-inducing analgesics) is prone to of the diet. Most clinicians begin jejunostomy
causing anorexia. For example, it. would be a
 feedings with less than the calculated calories
good idea to place a jejunostomy tube prior to
 and volume, and increase the amount daily with
closing the abdomen for a surgical procedure
 hopes of reaching the RER by the third day of
where the operative manipulations could result.
 jejunal feeding.
in nausea or anorexia. In fact, it would be bet.
 Potential complications of enteral feeding
ter to have a jejunostomy tube in a postoper-
tubes include clogging of the tube, refeeding
ative abdominal surgery patient that does not
 syndrome if a patient has been anorexic for
require a feeding tube than not to have one
 some time and rapid reinstitution of feeding
in a similar patient. who does not. eat or begins
 occurs, vomiting, diarrhea, premature removal
vomiting.
by the patient, and aspiration if the tube is in-
 Options for feeding tubes include nasoe-
correctly placed in the nasopharynx or trachea.
The amount. of fluid provided via enteral feed-
junostomy tubes. Care and maintenance
of
ing should be included in the calculation of the
feeding tubes are discussed previously and in
 daily fluid requirement to avoid overhydration
Chapter 17. Smaller diameter tubes, such as
 of the patient. Enteral feeding may be gradually
nasoesophageal and jejunostomy tubes, require
 reduced once the patient is eating at least 60%
use of a liquid diet. Larger tubes can accommo-
of its RER and discontinued once the patient
date canned foods such as Hill's Prescription
 is able to meet its energy requirements. Tubes
Diet a/d (Hill's Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka,
 should not be pulled until it is certain the pa-
KS), Iams Veterinary Diet Maximum Calorie
tient will continue to eat enough to meet its
(The Iams Company, Dayton, OH), or Royal
 daily RER. Percutaneously placed gastrostomy
Canin Recovery RS (Royal Canin USA, Inc., St.
tubes, andjejunostomy tubes that have been ap
Charles, MO).
plied without using the interlocking box tech-
 In general, a veterinary diet should be used.
nique, should not be removed until 10 days (gas-
Concurrent medical conditions may impact. the
trostomy tubes) or 5 days (jejunostomy tubes)
choice of diet. One example would be in renal
 after placement. to allow sufficient. adhesions to
patients where a low protein diet may be desir-
 form between the stomach or jejunum and the
able. The reader is referred to nutrition text-
body wall. The interlocking box method [See
books for detailed discussion of diet selection
 Chapter 17] allows for safe immediately postop-
for various disease states. The resting energy re-
erative removal of a jejunostomy tube, and this
quirement (RER) for most patients can be cal-
 is advantageous in the event of inadvertent re-
culated using the equation kcal/day = 30(weight
 moval or if the patient begins eating soon after
in kg) + 70. The RER for patients less than 2 kg
 surgery and can be sent home before the ffth
and greater than 45 kg should be calculated us-
 postoperative day.
ing the equation kcal/day = 70(weight in kg).75.
 Parenteral nutrition should be considered
 Ilness factors are no longer used in determin-
for any patient without a jejunostomy tube that.
 ing energy requirements of sick patients. One-
is unable to tolerate oral or enteral feedings
quarter to 1/2 of the RER is given on day one,
 due to vomiting, severe pancreatitis, or an in-
with an increase to 100% of the RER by the sec-
creased risk of aspiration due to the inability
PATIENT AFTERCARE AND FOLLOWUP
415
to protect. the airway. Commercial formulations
the coxofemoral joint. In most soft tissue pro-
for partial parenteral nutrition (PPN) and to-
cedures, normal activity may be resumed once
tal parenteral nutrition (TPN) are available. In
the sutures or staples are removed. A gradual
 general, a dedicated intravenous catheter and
return to normal activity after confirmation of
the ability to maintain aseptic vascular access,
 adequate bone healing is recommended for or-
24-hour nursing care, and the ability to run in-
thopedic patients to strengthen muscles, liga-
house se rum chemistries for patient monitoring
 ments, and tendons and to prevent overuse in-
must be available. All catheters and lines must.
 juries of the affected limb.
 be handled with aseptic technique to minimize
 Physical therapy is beneficial for patients
contamination. Partial parenteral nutrition is
 during extended periods of enforced rest and
indicated for short-term use only as it does not.
 for immobile patients. The benefits of physical
 provide for all caloric requirements. Because
 therapy include prevention of muscle contrac-
TPN is intended to provide for all caloric re-
ture, decreased muscle atrophy, maintenance
quirements and is initiated gradually over 3
 of normal joint range of motion, improved
days, TPN should only be used in cases that are
circulation, and improved function of the af-
expected to require parenteral nutrition for 3
fected limb. Simple forms of physical therapy
days or longer. Worksheets are available to cal-
include cold packing for the first 24 hours after
culate PPN and TPN requirements.3
surgery to decrease inflammation and swelling.
 Potential complications associated with par-
enteral nutrition include clogging of the line
 culation and relax tissues. Warm packing also
or catheter, phlebitis, thromboembolism, and
 helps resolve edema and seroma. Passive range
sepsis. Most of these complications can be
of motion exercises serve to maintain joint mo-
avoided by careful adherence to monitoring
 bility and flexibility. Ambulatory patients can
and aseptic protocols. Serum concentrations of
glucose, electrolytes, phosphorus, and magne-
 trolled leash walks, walking up or down inclines
sium should be monitored in all animals receiv-
 or stairs, and swimming. More information on
ing parenteral nutrition. Parenteral feeding can
 physical therapy can be found in other surgical
be discontinued once the patient is consuming
textbooks.
60% or more of its RER. The reader is referred
to nutrition textbooks for detailed information
on parenteral nutrition.
FOLLOWUP
 Followup care is as important as perioperative
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
care for the surgical patient. Followup care in-
cludes a combination of written instructions,
Physical activity should be restricted to a ken-
recheck visits, and phone conversations. Pa-
nel or small room with short, controlled leash
tients should be released with written instruc-
walks for dogs to eliminate for the first. 10-14
tions for the owners to follow. Dismissal instruc
days after surgery to allow the incision to heal.
tions should minimally include the procedure
Most. orthopedic procedures require confine-
 performed and instructions for activity restric
ment for six to eight weeks to allow for bone
fion (amount and length of time), incision
healing. Exceptions include young dogs (pup-
 and/or bandage monitoring and care, preven-
pies) that can heal in three to four weeks and
tion of licking and chewing of the surgery site,
 procedures such as femoral head and neck ex-
nutrition, and follow-up visits for suture re-
cision where early return to controlled activity
 moval, physical examination, laboratory mon-
is encouraged to increase range of motion at
1
itoring, and radiographs, as is appropriate for
416
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
the patient. The written instructions should also
tory followup. Patients undergoing cystotomy
include recommendations for the owner to call
if any complications arise.
yses and imaging studies performed to mon-
 Skin sutures and staples are typically
re-
itor for effectiveness of therapy and recur-
 moved 10-14 days postoperatively, but. may be
rence of stones. Radiographic evaluation for
left in place longer if delayed wound healing is
 bone healing should be performed eight weeks
expected. Patients with hyperadrenocorticism
or that are taking corticosteroids may require
atric orthopedic patients can be checked at
a longer time to heal. Sutures for auricular
two to four weeks postoperatively since their
hematoma repair should be left in at least 17
bones heal faster. Some procedures such as
days to allow for fibrosis of the cartilage layers 
 repair of a mandibular fracture or placement.
of the pinna. Incisions over areas of high mo-
of an external skeletal fixator for fracture re-
tion are subjected to large amounts of tension
 pair require more time to heal. The intervals
and, therefore, require more time to heal. The
 of radiographic rechecks should be adjusted
consequence of removing sutures too early is in-
accordingly.
cisional dehiscence and of leaving them in too
Ensuring client compliance with followup
long is local irritation and formation of drain-
recommendations can be difficult at times,
ing tracts. Some surgeons will close the skin
especially in cases where the client lives a
 of spay and castration incisions with intrader-
long distance from the veterinary hospital,
 mal sutures instead of skin sutures. A followup
has limited mobility, or limited funds. Refer-
appointment. at 10-14 days to check incisional
ral centers with good relations with their re-
healing is still advised in these cases.
ferring veterinarians may opt to have all or
most followup care take place at the refer-
of the suture with the fingers or an instrument.
 ring practice. Some veterinarians do not charge
such as a hemostat or thumb forceps and cut-
for suture removal or for quick well-being
ting the loop of the suture with stitch scissors
 rechecks in order to encourage compliant fol-
(Figure 20.4). Use caution not to cut both sides
      
of the loop to prevent retention of part of the
forming the owner of the importance of fol-
suture and a potential foreign body reaction.
 lowup and by providing a realistic estimate of
Skin staples are removed using a surgical staple
 costs (such as for repeated laboratory work or
remover. The staple remover is placed so that.
 radiographs).
the side with two “teeth" is slid under the sta-
A brief telephone call a day or two after
ple. The instrument is closed so that the single
 surgery to check on the patient can go a long
"tooth" engages the cross-member of the staple
 way in instilling confidence in the veterinarian
and causes the staple to bend in half, straight-
 and making the owner feel that the veterinar
ening the legs and removing the staple from
ian cares about their pet. The telephone call
the skin (Figure 20.5). In the absence of a sta-
- jd o Ado d oe r
 ple remover, a mosquito hemostatic forceps can 
plications by timely intervention if a problem is
be used to spread open the staple and remove
revealed. The veterinarian should also be avail-
it. Sometimes, a staple will have turned in the
 able to take a client telephone call or to call
skin. Mosquito hemostats can be used to rotate
 back in a timely manner if the client perceives
the staple into the original position for easier
 a problem with their pet. Prompt communica-
removal. Manipulating skin staples with hemo-
tion, of course, requires skill and training of the
static forceps may cause patient discomfort.
receptionist or technician answering the tele-
 Some procedures, such as parathyroidec-
phone to determine if the problem needs
tomy or insulinoma excision, require labora-
to be addressed immediately by having the
PATIENT AFTERCARE AND FOLLOWUP
417
eneastantiner
while the loop of the suture is cut with stitch scissors.
patient return to the hospital, if the doctor 
good communication among the veterinarian,
needs to be interrupted to take the call, or if the
veterinary staff, and the owner. Followup care
 problem can wait. for a return call. Communi-
should be tailored to the needs of each indi-
cation among the practice team members is es-
vidual patient, and can include monitoring of
sential.
incision healing, recovery, laboratory workup,
 In short, good followup care is a combi-
 and radiographic examination, as well as moral
nation of reexamination of the patient and
support of the client. Complications can be
418
FUNDAMENTALS OF SMALL ANIMAL SURGERY
gentats
 slid under the staple. The instrument is closed so that the single “tooth" engages the cross-member of the
staple and causes the staple to bend in half, straightening the legs, and thereby removing the staple from
the skin.
identified and treated in a timely manner. Fi-
3. Chan DL, Freeman LM. Nutrition in cnitical ill-
nally, the surgeon can ensure that the patient.
ness. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 2006; 36:
 has healed adequately before returning to nor-
1225-1241.
mal activity.
ADDITIONAL RESOURCES
REFERENCES
care in small animal surgery can
be found in
1. Quandt JE. Postoperative patient care. In: Slat-
the following textbook, publication, and textbook
ter DH, ed. Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 3rd
chapters:
ed. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2003:
2608-2612
1. DiBartola SP, ed. Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-Base
 2. Carroll GL. Analgesia and pain. Vet Clin North Am
Disorders in Small Animal Practice, 3rd ed. Philadel-
Small Anim Pract 1999; 29: 701-717.
phia, Pennsylvania: Saunders, 2005.
PATIENT AFTERCARE AND FOLLOWUP
419
 2. Kirk CA, Bartges JW, eds. Dietary Management and
Animat Surgery, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby,
Nutrition,Veterinary Clinics of North America: Small
2007:111-129.
Animat Practice. Philadelphia, Pennsylvania: Saun-
4. Willard MD, Seim HB. Postoperative care of the
ders, November 2006:36(6).
surgical patient. In: Fossum TW, ed. Small Ani-
 3. Knap K, Johnson AL, Schulz K Fundamentals of
mal Surgery, 3rd ed. St. Louis, Missouri: Mosby,
physical rehabilitation. In: Fossum TW, ed. Small
2007:90-110.
INDEX
Abdominal closure
endotracheal tubes, 406
canine ovaniohysterectomy, 358, 361 f -389 f, 367
glucose, 408-409
Absorbable suture materials, 156-158
hemorrhage, 409
antimicrobial sutures, 157-158
intravenous catheters, 412
glycolide/lactide copolymer, 156f, 157
IV fluids, 413
glycomer 631, 156t, 157
level of consciousness monitoring, 408
 poliglecaprone 25, 156f, 157
nursing care, 410, 412
polydioxanone, 156t, 157
pain, 408
polyglactin 910, 156-157, 156f
postoperative monitoring, 406-408
 polyglycolic acid, 156t, 157
tubes and drains, 412-413
polyglyconate, 156f, 157
nutritional support, 413-415
properties, 156f
overview, 406
 surgical gut (catgut), 156, 156f
 pain management. See Postoperative pain
Acepromazine, 9
management
Acid-base status, 5
physical activity, 415
Active surgical drains, 261, 263-265,
Aliphatic alcohols, 19
273 f-274 f
Allis tissue forceps, 28, 29 f
Acute traumatic wound management, 179-185
handling, 129f, 131
Aftercare and followup, 406-418
Alpha-two agonists, 9-10, 401-402
followup, 415-418
Amantadine, 395t, 401
immediately postoperative care, 406-413
Ampicillin, 24f
antibiotics, 413
Anal purse-string suture, 90, 96 f
bedding, 412
Anesthesia, 8-16
 central venous pressure (CVP), 409-410
dissociative agents, 10-11
colloid therapy, 410
drugs used, 8-11
cnitical cases, 408
alpha-two agonists, 9-10
dressings or bandages, 412
 anticholinergics, 8-9
420
INDEX
421
benzodiazepines, 9
Bard-Parker scalpel handle, 25, 26 f
phenothizines, 9
Basic surgical instruments, 25-34
hypnotic agents, 11
forceps, 28, 28 f-29 f
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
hemostatic forceps, 31-32, 32 f
10
needle holders, 33, 34 f
opioids, 10
overview, 25
overview, 8
retractors, 29-31, 30f-31 f
step-bystep approach, 11-16
scalpels, 25, 25 f
Anesthetic and surgical risk assessment, 6-7, 7f
scissors, 25, 27f, 28
Angiogenesis, 177
suction tips, 32-33, 33 f
Animal positioning. See Positioning
towel forceps, 25, 26 f
Antibiotics, 21-24, 184-185
 Bedding, for immedliately postoperative care, 412
acute wounds, 185
Benzodiazepines, 9
colorectal surgeries, 23
Bigelow, Henry J., 391
decision to use penioperative prophylactic
 Blood glucose, 4
antibiotics, 21-22
 Blood urea nitrogen (BUN), 4
host factors, 22
Blunt dissection, 131, 134 f
immediately postoperative care, 413
Bone wax, 204-205, 205f
infected wounds, 185
Brown-Adson thumb forceps, 28, 28 f, 347 f, 359 f
length of procedure and, 22
handling, 131, 136
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus species and, 21
Brush for surgical scrubbing, 63, 64 f-65 f
native flora and, 22-23
Brushless rubs, surgical scrubbing using, 66,
overview, 21
69 f-71 f
selection, 23, 24f
Buccal mucosal bleeding time (BMBT), 4-5
cefazolin, 23, 24f
BUN (blood wrea nitrogen), 4
Anticholinergics, 8-9
Bupivacaine, 393-394, 395f
Antimicrobial sutures, 157-158
Buprenorphine, 10, 396, 397f
Antisepsis, definition of, 17
Butorphanol, 10, 396, 397f
Appositional sutures, 167, 169f
Army-Navy retractor, 29, 30 f
Carbon dioxide laser, 200, 202 f-203 f
Arterial blood gas analysis, 5
Carprofen, 10, 400f
Asceptic bandaging, 181
CBC (complete blood count), 4
Asepsis, 17-20, 47
Cefazolin, 23, 24f
 antiseptic solutions, 19-20
Cefoxitin, 24f
 aliphatic alcohols, 19
Central sensitization, 393
chlorhexidine, 19-20
Central venous pressure (CVP)
iodophors, 19
immediately postoperative care, 409-410
definitions, 17
Checklists, 49, 55f
overview, 17-18
Chlorhexidine, 19-20
rules, 18-19
Clipping, 83, 84 f-94 f
Aspinin, 10, 400f
abdominal procedure, 83, 84 f
Assisted gloving, 73, 77, 81 f
aunicular procedure, 83, 91 f
Atipamezole, 401
cranial procedure, 83, 94 f
Atropine, 8-9
mandibular procedure, 83, 92 f
nasal procedure, 83, 93 f
Babcock tissue forceps, 28, 29f
neurologic procedure, 83, 87f-88 f
Backhaus towel forceps, 25, 26 f, 110, 113, 115,
ocular procedure, 83, 90 f
117f-118f, 124 f-125f, 128, 130 f
orchiectomy, 83, 85 f-86f
Balfour retractors, 30-31, 31 f, 123 f
orthopedic procedure, 83, 88 f
 Bantam wire cutting scissors, 27f, 28
ovariohysterectomy, 277
422
INDEX
Clipping (Cont.)
 Direct pressure for surgical hemostasis, 190, 191 f,
perineal procedure, 83, 89f, 96 f
192
thoracic procedure, 83, 86 f
 Disinfection, definition of, 17
thoracolumbar spinal surgery, 83, 87 f
 Dissociative anesthetic agents, 10-11
Closed gloving, 73,73 f-77f
 Doberman pinschers
Closure, wound, 182-183
yon Willebrand's disease and, 4
cause of injury, 183
 Drainage, wound, 184
 owner's fnancial limitations, 183
Drains, surgical, 257, 260-261, 263-265, 268,
timing of injury, 183
271-276
wound classification, 182-183
active, 261, 263-265, 273 f-274f
Coagulation panels, 5
Jackson-Pratt drain, 272, 273 f-275f
Codeine, 396, 397f
overview, 208
Colloid oncotic pressure (COP), 5
passive, 261, 263, 272 f
 Colloid therapy, for immediately postoperative care,
Penrose drain, 261, 272f
410
removal, 273, 276
Colorectal surgenies, antibiotic use for, 23
Draping, 107-127
Complete blood count (CBC), 4
 abdominal procedures, 107, 109 f
Computed tomography, 5
auricular procedure, 107, 110, 113f
Connell sutures, 159, 166 f
canine castration, 107, 109f, 110
Constant rate infusion (CRI), 402, 402 f -403 f, 404
canine ovariohysterectomy, 279, 282 f-290 f,
Continuous sutures, 159
285
Connell, 159, 166f
dorsal approach to cervical spine, 107, 110, 111 f
Cushing, 159, 165 f
dorsal approach to cranium, 107, 113, 116 f
Ford interlocking, 159, 164 f
 dorsal approach to nasal cavity or frontal sinuses,
honizontal mattress, 167, 168 f
107,113,115f
intradermal, 159, 163 f
first layer, placement of, 107-115
Lembert, 159, 164 f
left lateral thoracotomy, 107, 110 f
simple continuous, 159, 162f
left pelvic limb procedure, 107, 110, 111 f
Continuous thoracic suction unit, 224, 224 f
no readjustment toward incision site, 113, 115
COX-1 and COX-2, 398-399
ophthalmic procedure,107, 110,112
CPO (colloid oncotic pressure), 5
oral procedures, 107, 110, 113, 114 f
Creatinine, 4
orthopedic procedures, 120, 124 f-126 f, 127
CRI (constant rate infusion), 402, 402 f -403 f, 404
overview, 107
Cruciate sutures, 159, 160 f
 pack preparation for stenilization, 38, 39 f-40 f
Cushing sutures, 159, 165 f
perneal procedure, 107, 110, 112 f
CVP (central venous pressure)
second layer, placement of, 115, 117, 118 f-119 f
immediately postoperative care, 409-410
skin incision, 117, 120
Cystostomy tubes, 232-240
towel clamps, placement of, 115, 117f-118 f
“toweling in,” 117, 120, 120 f-122f
DeBakey tissue forceps, 28, 28 f
 Dressings or bandages
 Degloving, 77, 80 f, 82
immediately postoperative care, 412
Delayed primary closure, 179
Deracoxib, 10, 400f
Electrolytes, 4
 Desmopressin acetate (DDAVP), 5
Electrosurgery, 192, 194-198
Dexmedetomidine, 9-10, 395t, 401-402
Endotracheal tubes
 Diagnostic imaging, 5-6
immediately postoperative care, 406
 availability in operating room, 45-46
Enrofloxacin, 24f
oncological surgery patients, 5
Epithelialization, 177-178
trauma patients, 6
Erythromycin, 24f
Diazepam, 9
 Esophagostomy tubes, 240-245
INDEX
423
Etodolac, 400f
Gloving, 73-82
Excretory urography, 6
Glucose, in immediately postoperative care,
408-409
Feedback-monitored bipolar forceps, 199-200, 199 f
Glycolide/lactide copolymer sutures, 156f, 157
 Feline immunodeficiency virus, 4
Glycomer 631 sutures, 156f, 157
 Felinen leukemia, 4
Glycopyrrolate, 8-10
Fentanyl, 10, 396, 397f
Gowning, 71-73
Fibroplasia, 177-178
Granny knot, 143, 144 f
Figure-ofeight sutures, 159, 161 f
Finochietto retractors, 30-31, 31 f, 123 f
Halsted sutures, 159, 167 f
Firocoxib, 400f
Handheld retractors, 29, 30f, 136, 136 f
Folding gowns
Hand signals to request instruments, 47, 52 f-54 f
pack preparation for sterilization, 36, 37 f-38 f
Hand ties, 143-144, 145f -152f
Foley catheter, 232-233, 233 f, 235f
Harmonic Scalpel, 201 f
Followup and aftercare, 406-418
Hemorrhage
followup, 415-418, 417 f-418 f
immediately postoperative care, 409
immediately postoperative care, 406-413
Hemostasis, surgical, 187-207
antibiotics, 413
canine ovariohysterectomy, 290, 294f
bedding, 412
control of surgical hemorrhage, 190
 central venous pressure (CVP), 409-410
direct pressure and hemostatic forceps, 190,
colloid therapy, 410
191f, 192, 193f
cnitical cases, 408
electrosurgery, 192, 194-198
dressings or bandages, 412
fedback-monitored bipolar forceps, 199-200,
endotracheal tubes, 406
199 f
glucose, 408-409
hemostatic agents, 204-207
hemorrhage, 409
bone wax, 204-205, 205f
intravenous catheters, 412
 gelatin sponges, 205-206, 205 f
V fluids, 413
oxidized regenerated cellulose, 206-207, 206 f
level of consciousnes monitoring, 408
overview, 187
nursing care, 410, 412
process of hemostasis, 187-190, 188 f -189 f
pain, 408
radiosurgery, 198, 198 f
 postoperative monitoring, 406-408
surgical lasers, 200, 202f -203 f
tubes and drains, 412-413
ultrasonically activated scalpel, 200, 201 f
nutritional support, 413-415
vessel ligation, 200, 203 f -204 f, 204
overview, 406
Hemostatic agents, 201, 204-207
pain management. Se Postoperative pain
bone wax, 204-205, 205 f
management
gelatin sponges, 205-206, 205 f
physical activity, 415
oxidized regenerated cellulose, 206-207, 206 f
Forceps, 28, 28 f-29 f
Hemostatic clips, 204, 204 f
Ford interlocking sutures, 159, 164 f
Hemostatic forceps, 31-32, 32 f, 137, 137 f-138 f
Frazier laminectomy retractor, 30-31, 31 f
canine ovariohysterectomy, 307
Frazier suction tip, 32-33, 33 f, 138-139
handling, 137, 137 f-138 f
“Freshening wound edges," 183-184
hand signals to request, 53 f
surgical hemostasis, 192, 193f
Gas sterilization with ethylene oxide, 35
History, 3-4
Gastric dilatation-volvulus (GDV), 6
Hohmann retractor, 29-30, 30f
Gastrostomy tubes, 245-251
Horizontal mattress sutures, 167, 168 f
Gelatin sponges, 205-206, 205 f
Hydrocodone, 396
Gelfoam, 205-206, 205f
Hydromorphone, 10, 396, 397f
Gelpi perineal retractor, 30, 30 f
constant rate infusion (CRI), 402, 402 f
424
INDEX
Hyperthyroidism, 4
vertical mattress, 167, 168 f
Hypnotic agents, 11
walking, 170, 173 f -174 f
[ntradermal sutures
 Imaging studies, 5-6
continuous, 159, 163f
availability of in operating room, 45-46
interrupted, 159, 162 f
Indomethacin, 10
[ntranasal tubes, 208-213
[nstrument pack
[ntravenous catheters
canine ovariohysterectomy, 279, 280 f -282 f
immediately postoperative care, 412
preparation for sterilization, 35, 36 f
Intravenous fluids
[nstruments, 25-33
immediately postoperative care, 413
forceps, 28, 28 f-29 f
Inverting sutures, 167, 170f
hemostatic forceps, 31-32, 32 f
[odophors, 19
needle holders, 33, 33 f-34 f
overview, 25
Jackson-Pratt drain, 265, 272, 273 f-275 f
retractors, 29-31, 30 f-31 f
Jejunostomy tubes, 251-257
scalpels, 25, 25f
scissors, 25,27f, 28
Kelly hemostatic forceps, 31-32, 32 f, 273, 320 f
suction tips, 32-33, 33f
Ketamine, 10-11, 395f, 401
towel forceps, 25, 26 f
Knot tying, surgical, 143-153
[nstruments, handling of, 128-142
hand ties, 143-144, 145 f-152f
 Backhaus towel forceps, 128, 130 f
instrument ties, 143-144, 153 f
clearance of blood from surgical field,
overview, 143, 144 f
138-139
hand signals to request instruments, 47,
Laboratory data, 4-5
52 f-54 f
 Laparotomy sponges, 123 f
hemostatic forceps, 137, 137 f-138 f
Lasers, surgical, 200, 202 f -203 f
instruments for manipulation of tissue, 131,
Lavage, 180-181
136
 Lembert sutures
needle holder, grasping, 139, 140 f-142
continuous, 159,164 f
nonringed instruments, 128
interrupted, 159, 165 f
 passing and receiving instruments, 47,
Level of consciousness monitoring
48 f-52 f
immediately postoperative care, 408
retractors, 136-137, 136 f
Lidocaine, 393-394, 395f
ringed instruments, 47, 48 f-49f, 128, 129f
Ligation
scalpels, 47, 50f-52f, 128, 131 f-133f
canine ovariohysterectomy
 surgical scissors, 128-129
ligating ovanian pedicles, 313 f, 320,
blunt dissection, 131, 134 f
323f-339f, 329
push cutting, 131, 134 f
ligation of uterine arteries and veins, 344
scissor cutting, 131, 134 f
ligation of utenine body, 344, 345 f, 358
thumb forceps, 28, 29f, 131, 135 f
vessels, 200, 203f -203 f, 204, 344
[nstrument ties, 143-144, 153 f
 Linea alba
 [ntermal stenilization indicators, 38
canine ovariohysterectomy, 290, 300, 301 f -303 f
[nterrupted sutures, 159
Local analgesics, in multimodal analgesia, 393
cruciate, 159, 160 f
Local anesthetics, 393-394, 394f-395f
figure-ofeight, 159, 161 f
 dosages and unique properties, 395f
Halsted, 159, 167f
routes of administration, 394f
honizontal mattress, 167, 168 f
intradermal, 159, 162f
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 5
Lembert, 159, 165 f
Mayo-Hegar needle holder, 33, 34 f
 simple interrupted, 159, 160 f
Mayo instrument stand, 278 f, 279
INDEX
425
Mayo mattress suture (vest over pants suture), 167,
Olsen-Hegar needle holder, 33, 34 f
169 f
Open gloving, 73, 78 f-79 f
Mayo scissors, 25, 27 f
 Operating room protocol, 45-55
Medetomidine, 395f, 401
aseptic principles, 47
Meloxicam, 10, 400f
checklists, 49, 55f
 Meperidine, 396
 hand signals to request instruments, 47,
 Mepicavaine, 395f
52 f-54 f
Methadone, 396, 397f
imaging studies, availability of, 45-46
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus species, antibiotic
minimizing number of people, 49
use and, 21
overview, 45
 Methylparaben, allergic-type reaction to, 394
passing and receiving instruments, 47, 48 f -52f
Metronidazole, 24f
physical movements, 46, 46 f
 Metzenbaum scissors, 25, 27 f
sponge count, 47,49, 54 f
canine ovaniohysterectomy, 320, 321 f-322 f
surgical attire, 45
Meyerding retractor, 29, 30 f
Opioids, 10, 394, 396, 397f, 398
Midazolam, 9
 dosages and unique properties, 397tf
Monabsorbable suture materials, 158-159
multimodal analgesia, 393
nylon, 158
Orthopedic procedures
 polybutester, 158
clipping for, 83, 88 f
polyester, 158
surgical draping, 120, 124 f-126 f, 127
 polymerized caprolactam, 158
Ovariohysterectomy, canine, 277-389
polypropylene, 158-159
abdominal closure, 358, 361 f-389 f, 367
silk, 158
clipping, 277
stainless steel, 159, 159f
draping, 279, 282f -290 f, 285
Morphine, 10, 396, 397f
entering peritoneal cavity, 290, 299 f-300 f, 300
Mosquito hemostatic forceps, 31-32, 32 f, 308 f,
excision of uterus and ovanies, 345 f -361 f, 358
328f-331f, 357f-360f
hemostasis, 290, 294 f
MRI (magnetic resonance imaging), 5
hemostatic forceps, 307
Multimodal analgesia, 392-393
incising ovarian pedicle with Metzenbaum
scissors, 320
Nail pick, 63, 64 f
instrument pack, 279, 280 f-282 f
Nalbuphine, 10, 396, 397f
isolating ovarian pedicle with Rochester-Carmalt
Naloxone, 10, 396, 397f
forceps, 314, 314 f-320 f
Naltre0xone, 396, 397f
ligating ovanian pedicles, 313f, 320, 323 f-339 f,
Needle holders, 33, 34 f
329
grasping, 139,140 f-142f
ligation of uterine arteries and veins, 344
hand signals to request, 54f
ligation of uterine body, 344, 345 f, 358
Neomycin, 24f
linea alba incision, 290, 300, 301 f-303 f
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists,
ovariohysterectomy hook, 303, 304 f-306 f
401
overview, 277
Nociception, 392
positioning, 277, 278f-279f
Nonringed instruments, 128
searching for ovanies and uterus, 300, 303,
Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs),
306 f-307f, 340
10, 398-400, 400f
skin incision, 290, 291 f-298 f, 300
dosages, 400f
sponge count, 285
multimodal analgesia, 393
surgical scrub, 277
suspensory ligament, 307, 309 f -313 f
care, 410, 412
urinary bladder expression, 277
 Nutritional support, 413-415
Oxidized regenerated cellulose, 206-207, 206 f
Nylon sutures, 158
Oxymorphone, 10, 396
426
INDEX
Packed cell volume (PCV), 4
limb procedure, 93, 101 f-102f
 Pack preparation for sterilization, 35-44
median sternotomy, 92, 99 f
folding gowns, 36, 37f-38 f
perineal and anal procedures, 93, 103 f
 gas sterilization with ethylene oxide, 35
peniocular procedures, 96, 104 f
instruments, 35, 36f
thoracic limb procedure, 95 f
intermal stenilization indicators, 38
thoracolumbar spinal surgery, 92, 100 f
overview, 35, 36f
ventral approach to cervical region, 92, 100 f
 plasma sterilization with hydrogen peroxide gas,
Postoperative care, 406-413. See aiso Aftercare and
35
 followup; Postoperative pain management
surgical drapes, 38, 39f -40 f
 Postoperative pain management, 391-404, 408
wrapping, 38, 41 f-44 f
 alpha-two agonists, 401-402
 Pain management, postoperative. See Postoperative
constant rate infusion (CRI), 402, 402 f-403 f,
pain management
404
Partial parenteral nutrition (PPN), 415
importance of adequate pain control, 391-392
Passive surgical drains, 261, 263, 272 f
local anesthetics, 393-394, 394f-395f
PCV (packed cell volume), 4
 N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonists, 401
“Pencil grip"
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, 398-400,
clippers, 83, 84 f
400f
needle holder, 139, 140 f
opioids, 394, 396, 397t, 398
Penicillin G, 24f
overview, 391-392, 404
Penrose drain, 261, 272f
 pathophysiology of acute pain, 392-393
Pezzer mushroom tip catheter, 245-246, 245 f-248 f
Potassium, 24f
 Phenothizines, 9
 PPN (partial parenteral nutrition), 415
 Phenylbutazone, 10
 Preemptive analgesia, 393
 Physical activity after surgery, 415
 Premedication anesthesia, 8
 Physical examination, 4
 Preoperative patient assessment, 3-7
 Physical status classification, 6, 7f
 anesthetic and surgical risk assessment, 6-7, 7f
Piroxicam, 400f
diagnostic imaging, 5-6
 Plasma sterilization with hydrogen peroxide gas,
history, 3-4
35
laboratory data, 4-5
 Platelet counts, 5
overview, 3
 Poliglecaprone 25 sutures, 156f, 157, 262f
physical examination, 4
Polybutester sutures, 158
 Prepuce placement for abdominal incisions, 116 f
Polydioxanone sutures, 156f, 157
Primary closure, 179
Polyester sutures, 158
 Propofol, 11
 Polyglactin 910 sutures, 156-157, 156f
Push cutting, 131, 134 f
Polyglycolic acid sutures, 156f, 157
 Polyglyconate sutures, 156f, 157
 Radiographs, 5-6
 Polymenized caprolactam sutures, 158
Radiosurgery, 198, 198 f
 Polypropylene sutures, 158-159
Ratcheted tissue forceps, 28
Poole suction tip, 32-33, 33 f, 138-139
 Rat-toothed thumb forceps, 28, 28 f
Positioning, 84-85, 90-105
handling, 131, 136
 abdominal procedures, 84, 98 f
Red rubber feeding tube, 209 f, 251
 aunicular surgery, 93, 104 f
Removal of surgical drains, 273, 276
canine castration, 92, 98 f
Resting energy requirement (RER), 414-415
canine ovariohysterectomy, 277, 278f-279 f
Retractors, 29-31, 30f-31f, 136-137, 136 f
 dorsal approach to nasal cavity and/or frontal
handling, 136-137, 136 f
sinus, 98, 105 f
Ringed instruments, 128, 129 f
dorsal approach to neck, 93, 101 f
handling, 128, 129 f, 131
 lateral thoracotomy, 92, 99 f
Risk assessment, anesthetic and surgical, 6-7, 7f
INDEX
427
Rochester-Carmalt forceps, 31-32, 32f, 129 f, 222,
Surgeon's knot, 143, 144 f
246, 246f-248 f
Surgical attire, 45, 56-62
canine ovariohysterectomy, 314, 314 f -322 f,
overview, 56
327f, 336f, 338f, 344, 356f-357f
scrub suit, 56, 57f, 58
Rochester-Pean hemostatic forceps, 31-32, 32 f
shoes and shoe covers, 56, 58, 61 f
 Roger wire cuting scissors, 27 f, 28
surgical cap and mask, 56, 58 f-60 f
Surgical debridement, 181
Scalpels, 25, 25f, 128, 131 f-133f
Surgical draping, 107-127
handling, 47, 50 f-52f, 128, 131f-133f
abdominal procedures, 107, 109f
loading and removing blades, 139, 142 f
aunicular procedure, 107, 110, 113 f
ultrasonically activated, 199, 199 f-200 f, 201
canine castration, 107, 109 f, 110
Scissors, 25, 27f, 28, 128-129
canine ovaniohysterectomy, 279, 282f -290 f,
blunt dissection, 131, 134 f
285
gips, 128-129, 133 f-134 f
dorsal approach to cervical spine, 107, 110, 111 f
hand signals to request, 53f
dorsal approach to cranium, 107, 113, 116 f
push cutting, 131, 134 f
 dorsal approach to nasal cavity or frontal sinuses,
scissor cutting, 131, 134 f
107,113,115
Scrubbing, gowning, and gloving, 63-82
first layer, placement of, 107-115
gloving, 73-82
left lateral thoracotomy, 107, 110 f
gowning, 71-73
left pelvic limb procedure, 107, 110, 111 f
scrubbing, 63-71
no readjustment toward incision site, 113, 115
Scrubbing patient's skin, 85-87, 90, 98-99
ophthalmic procedure, 107, 110, 112 f
Serub suit, 56, 57f, 58
oral procedures, 107, 110, 113, 114 f
Secondary closure, 179
orthopedic procedures, 120, 124f-126 f, 127
Second intention healing, 179
overview, 107
Self-retaining retractors, 29-30, 30 f-31 f, 136-137,
pack preparation for sterilization, 38, 39 f -40 f
136 f
perineal procedure, 107, 110, 112f
Senn retractor, 29, 30 f
second layer, placement of, 115, 117, 118 f-119 f
Sepsis, definition of, 17
skin incision, 117, 120
Serum chemistries, 4
towel clamps, placement of, 115, 117 f-118 f
Sharpsharp general operating scissors, 27f, 28
“toweling in,” 117, 120, 120f-122 f
Shoes and shoe covers, 56, 58, 61 f
Surgical gut (catgut) sutures, 156, 156f
Silk sutures, 158
Surgical hood, 60f
Simple continuous sutures, 159, 162f, 364 f
Simple interrupted sutures, 159, 160 f
Surgical knot tying, 143-153
Sistrunk scissors, 27 f, 28
hand ties, 143-144, 145 f-152f
Slip knot, 143, 144f
instrument ties, 143-144, 153f
Sponge count, 47, 49, 54f, 285
overview, 143, 144 f
 Sponge for surgical scrubbing, 63, 66 f-67 f
Surgical lasers, 200, 202 f-203 f
Square knot, 143, 144 f, 366 f
 Surgical preparation and animal positioning.
Stainless steel sutures, 159, 159f
83-105
Stamey Malecot catheters, 232-233, 234 f
clipping, 83, 84 f-94 f
Staples, removal of, 416, 418 f
final preparation, 83, 98-99, 105 f
 Sterilization, definition of, 17
initial preparation, 83
 Sterilization, pack. See Pack preparation for
overview, 83
sterilization
posi tioning,84-85, 90-105
Sterilization indicators, internal, 38
abdominal procedures, 84, 98 f
Stitch scissors, 27 f, 28
 auricular surgery, 93, 104 f
Stockinette to cover limb, 125 f -126 f
canine castration, 92, 98f
Suction tips, 32-33, 33f
canine ovariohysterectomy, 277, 278 f-279 f
428
INDEX
Surgical preparation and animal positioning (Cont.)
Ford interlocking, 159, 164 f
dorsal approach to nasal cavity and/or frontal
honizontal mattress, 167, 168 f
sinus, 98, 105f
simple continuous, 159, 162 f
dorsal approach to neck, 93, 101 f
interrupted, 159
lateral thoracotomy, 92, 99 f
cruciate, 159, 160 f
limb procedure, 93, 101 f-102 f
figure-ofeight, 159, 161 f
 median stermotomy, 92, 99 f
Halsted, 159, 167f
perineal and anal procedures, 93, 103 f
honizontal mattress, 167, 168 f
periocular procedures, 96, 104 f
interrupted Intradermal, 159, 162 f
thoracic limb procedure, 95 f
interrupted Lembert, 159, 165 f
thoracolumbar spinal surgery, 92, 100 f
 simple interrupted, 159, 160 f
ventral approach to cervical region, 92,
vertical mattress, 167, 168 f
100 f
walking, 170, 173 f-174 f
scrubbing patient's skin, 85-87, 90, 98-99
inverting, 167, 170f
Surgical scissors, 25, 27 f, 28, 128-129
tension-relieving, 167, 170, 171f
blunt dissection, 131, 134f
Suture removal, 416, 417 f
gips, 128-129, 133 f-134 f
hand signals to request, 53 f
Tension-relieving sutures, 167, 170, 171f
push cutting, 131, 134 f
Tepoxalin, 10, 400f
scissor cutting, 131, 134f
Thiopental, 11
Surgical tubes. See Tubes, surgical
Thoracoabdominal positioner, 90, 92, 94 f
 Suspensory ligament
Thoracostomy tubes, 213-226
canine ovaniohysterectomy, 307, 309 f -313 f
Thumb forceps, 28, 131, 135 f
Suture materials, 155-159
handling, 131, 135 f
absorbable suture matenials, 156-158
hand signals to request, 53f
antimicrobial sutures, 157-158
Tiletamine, 10, 395f, 401
 glycolide/lactide copolymer, 156f, 157
Topical medications/ointments, 181-182
glycomer 631, 156f, 157
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 415
poliglecaprone 25, 156f, 157
Total protein (TP), 4
polydioxanone, 156t, 157
Towel forceps, 25, 26f, 117f-118f
polyglactin 910, 156-157, 156f
surgical draping, 115, 117f-118 f
polyglycolic acid, 156t, 157
“Toweling in,” 117, 120, 120 f-122f
polyglyconate, 156f, 157
Tracheostomy tubes, 226-232
properties, 156f
Tramadol, 10
surgical gut (catgut), 156, 156f
Tubes, surgical, 208-257
 nonabsorbable suture materials, 158-159
cystostomy tubes, 232-240
nylon, 158
esophagostomy tubes, 240-245
polybutester, 158
gastrostomy tubes, 245-251
polyester, 158
immediately postoperative care, 412-413
 polymerized caprolactam, 158
intranasal tubes, 208-213
polypropylene, 158-159
jejunostomy tubes, 251-257
silk, 158
overview, 208
stainless steel, 159, 159f
thoracostomy tubes, 213-226
overview, 155-156, 156 f
tracheostomy tubes, 226-232
Suture patterms, 159-174
appositional, 167, 169f
Ultrasonically activated scalpel, 200, 201 f
continuous, 159
 Ultrasonography, 5
Connell, 159, 166 f
Urinalysis, 4
continuous intradermal, 159, 163 f
Urinary bladder expression
continuous Lembert, 159, 164f
canine ovariohysterectomy, 277
Cushing, 159, 165f
Urine specific gravity, 4
INDEX
429
Vemon cartilage and wire scissors, 27 f, 28
antibiotic therapy, 184-185
Vertical mattress sutures, 167, 168 f
 acute wounds, 185
Vessel ligation, 200, 203 f-204 f, 204
infected wounds, 185
Vest over pants suture (Mayo mattress suture), 167,
drainage, 184
169 f
"freshening wound edges," 183-184
Videofluoroscopy, 6
inflammation and debnidement phase, 176-177
Volkmann retractor, 29, 30f, 136 f
initial wound care, 179-182
von Willebrand's disease, 4-5
asceptic bandaging, 181
lavage, 180-181
Walking sutures, 170, 173 f-174 f
surgical debridement, 181
Weitlaner retractor, 30, 30 f, 136 f
topical medications/ointments, 181-182
"Windup phenomenon," 393
wound inspection, 180
Wound closure, 178-185
maturation phase, 178
cause of injury, 183
overview, 176, 178-179
owner's fnancial limitations, 183
repair (proliferative) phase, 177-178
timing of injury, 183
wound classification, 182-183
Xylazine, 9, 395f, 401
Wound contraction, 177-178
Wound drains. See Drains, surgical
Yankauer suction tip, 32-33, 33f, 138-139
Wound edges, “freshening," 183-184
Yohimbine, 401
Wound healing, 176-178
 acute traumatic wound management, 179-185
Zolazepam, 9