Manual
of Clinical
Procedures in
Dogs, Cats,
Rabbits, &
Rodents
Steven E. Crow
Sally O. Walshaw
Jennifer E. Boyle
THIRD EDITION
MWILEY-BLACKWELL
小尾巴宠物健康中心http://ttahc.taobao.com
Manual of
CLINICAL PROCEDURES
IN DOGS, CATS, RABBITS,
AND RODENTS
Third Edition
Manual of
CLINICAL
PROCEDURES
IN DOGS, CATS.
RABBITS, AND
RODENTS
Third Edition
Steven E. Crow, dvm;
Diplomate, AcvIM
VCA SacramentoVeterinary Referral Center
Sacramento, California
Sally O. Walshaw, MA, VMD
Canton, Michigan
Jennifer E. Boyle, Rvt, vTs
Cool, California
llustrated by Cynthia Bronson Morton,
Derek Fox, and Steve Oerding
VWILEY-BLACKWELL
A John Wiley & Sonis, Iic., Publication
Edition first published 2009
@ 2009 Wiley-Blackwell
Blackwell Publishing was acquired by John Wiley & Sons in February 2007. Blackwell's publishing
program has been merged with Wiley's global Scientific, Technical, and Medical business to form
Wiley-Blackwell.
Editorial Offce
212l State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offices, for customer services, and for information about how to apply
for permmission to reuse the copyright material in this book, please see our Web site at www.wiley.
com/wiley-blackwell.
Authorization to photocopy items for internal or personal use, or the internal or personal use of specific
Clearance Center, 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 0l923. For those organizations that have been
sapoo aay aul paoueiie uaaq seu siuawed go waisas aieiedas e oo Aq asuaat Adoooioud e paiueio
for users of the Transactional Reporting Service are ISBN-13: 978-0-8138-1304-2/2009.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand
paiaisoai io syreuapeil 'syreu aoias saueu apein aie yooq siul ul pasn saeu ionpoid pue saeu
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information
pabeaua jou sl iauslqnd aul ieul bupueisiapun aul uo pros stll 'paiaaos ianew ioalqns aul ol piebai u!
in rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the
services of a competent professional should be sought.
Disclaimer
The contents of this work are intended to further general scientific research, understanding, and
e lugouid io fupuauuosai se uodn paai aq nou pnous pue papuaju nou aie pue A[uo uorssnos
specific method, diagnosis, or treatment by practitioners for any particular patient. The publisher and
the author make no representations or warranties with respect to the accuracy or completeness of the
contents of this work and specifically disclaim all warranties, including without limitation any implied
warranties of fitness for a particular purpose. In view of ongoing research, equipment modifications,
changes in governmental regulations, and the constant flow of information relating to the use of
medicines, equipment, and devices, the reader is urged to review and evaluate the information provided
in the package insert or instructions for each medicine, equipment, or device for, among other things.
any changes in the instructions or indication of usage and for added warnings and precautions. Readers
should consult with a specialist where appropriate. The fact that an organization or Website is referred
to in this work as a citation and/or a potential source of further information does not mean that the
author or the publisher endorses the information the organization or Web site may provide or
recommendations it may make. Further, readers should be aware that Internet Web sites listed in this
work may have changed or disappeared between when this work was written and when it is read. No
warranty may be created or extended by any promotional statements for this work. Neither the
 publisher nor the author shall be liable for any damages arising herefrom.
Library of Congress Caialoguing-in-PublicaiionDaia
Crow, Steven E.
Manual of clinical procedures in dogs, cats, rabbits, and rodents / Steven E. Crow, Sally O. Walshaw,
Jennifer E. Boyle.- Srd ed.
‘> : d
Rev. ed. of: Manual of clinical procedures in the dog, cat, and rabbit / Steven E. Crow, Sally O.
Walshaw. 2nd ed. 1997.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-8138-1304-2 (pbk. : alk. paper) 1. Dogs-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals, etc.
2. Cats-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals, etc. 3. Rabbits-Diseases-Handbooks, manuals,
etc. 4. Veterinary clinical pathology. L Walshaw, Sally O. Il. Boyle, Jennifer E. Il. Crow,
Steven E. Manual of clinical procedures in the dog, cat, and rabbit. IV. Title.
[DNLM: 1. Dog Diseases. 2. Cat Diseases. 3. Rabbits. 4. Rodentia. 5. Veterinary
Medicine. SF 991 C953m 2009]
SF991.C76 2009
636.089dc22
2008053863
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
Set in 10/12 pt New Baskerville by SNP Best-set Typesetter Ltd., Hong Kong
Printed in Singapore
12009
DEDICATIONS
Since the publication of the second edition in 1997, written in 1996, 1 have mourned
the loss of four men, each of whom meant a great deal to me both personally
 m     r    i is p
experiences with each of them. I think of them often and always fondly. With love and
 great respect, I dedicate this edition to them.
Matthew Steven Crow, beloved son and teacher
Lover of sports, rock, and outstanding women! A courageous, inspirational,
persistent, compassionate, and intelligent young man. He built a Field of Dreams.
Special doesn't come close to covering it. We lost. an important citizen much,
much too early.
Donald Low, DVM, PhD, DACVIM
Sage advisor, boss, mentor, role model, joke teller extraordinaire, fellow beignet
lover, and instigator of the first. edition of the Manual.
Mark Bloomberg, DVM, MS, DACVS
Brian Hill, DVM, MS, DACVIM
Friends across the miles, valued colleagues, exemplary teachers for veterinary
students and residents, lovers of life and basketball, confidantes. Both gone way
too early!
Gentlemen, thanks for sharing your lives with me. You are greatly missed!
SC
and my friends, family, and colleagues for their endless support.
JB
CONTENTS
Preface ix
Acknowledgments xi
Part 1
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
3
Chapter
1
Restraint of Dogs and Cats
2
Blood Collection  19
3
Injection Techniques  35
4
Placement cnd Care of Intravenous Catheters 49
5
Oral Administration of Medications
79
6
Dermatologic Procedures 87
7
Impression Preparations 101
8
 Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy
105
6
Ophthalmic Procedures
111
10
Ear Care 129
11
Pedicure 135
12
Urethral Catheterization 
139
13
Digital Rectal Examination
157
14
Anal Sac Expression and Cannulation161
15
 Enema 
167
Part Il
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
171
Chapter
16
Skin Preparation
173
17
Intubation    177
vi
vii
CONTENTS
18
Gastric Lavage 217
19
Dental Examination and Prophylaxis
221
20
Nasopharyngeal Procedures  229
21
Transtracheal Aspiration  237
22
Centesis 243
23
Peritoneal Catheterization and Lavage  251
24
Needle Biopsy of Masses and Viscera 
 259
25
Urohydropropulsion 285
26
Prostatic Massage/Washing  289
27
Semen Collection and Artificial Insemination 293
28
Vaginal Examination and Specimen Collection 299
29
Bone Marrow Aspiration and Biopsy
305
30
Cerebrospinal Fluid Collection317
Part III
EmERGENCY PROCEDURES  325
Chapter
31
Rapid Evaluation of Bleeding and Cloting
Disorders  327
32
Transfusion of Blood and Plasma
335
33
Placement of Intraosseous Catheters 339
34
Tracheostomy
343
Part IV
 A     
Chapter
35
Restraint of Rabbits 351
36
Selected Clinical Procedures in Rabbits 359
37
Selected Clinical Procedures in Small Rodents
371
Index 385
PREFACE
The Manual of Clinical Procedures in Dogs, Cats, Rabbits, and Rodents is intended as a
textbook for veterinary technology and veterinary medical students, as well as a useful
clinical tool for veterinarians and veterinary technicians in small animal practice or
laboratory animal care facilities. As in the frst two editions, the text is organized by
Manual may be used as a clinical handbook in addition to being a teaching instrument.
Features that make this manual most. useful are the rationale/amplifcation segments
which answer the reader's how and why questions, and the illustrations, which show
drawings have been added as well as photographs of equipment and materials used
in the procedures.
As in previous editions, the scope of the Manual has been deliberately limited
to procedures that. can be completed in most. modern veterinary facilities and that.
equipment is required; thus, they can be cost-effective even in small practices. As vet-
erinary practice becomes more sophisticated in the 21st. century, most progressive
small animal practices have added valuable diagnostic and therapeutic tools: sonog
raphy, digital radiography, computed tomography, magnetic resonance imaging.
 point-of-care hematology and chemistry analyzers, laparoscopy, and video-endoscopy.
These valuable clinical tools help us to do our job better every day and can be excel.
lent adjuncts for completing many of the procedures described in this manual. Fiber-
optic otoscopes have greatly improved visualization of the ear canal, tympanum, and
Ossicles. Cystocentesis is now most often done with ultrasound guidance. Blind biopsy
techniques described in the first two editions of the Manual have been replaced by
utrasound-guided needle biopsy or laparoscopic biopsy techniques, allowing the clini-
cian to provide larger, more conclusive biopsy specimens for pathologists. Although
the Manual does not demonstrate those technology-enhanced procedures, we heartily
support using the most. advanced methods available.
The four chapters in our new Section IlI describe important techniques that are
particularly of value in emergency clinics and intensive care facilities: proper tech-
nique to prepare for and administer transfusions; placement of intraosseous catheters.
ix
X
PREFACE
a technique especially valuable in puppies, kittens, and other neonates; and detailed
instructions on the placement and management of multilumen catheters.
The safety of personnel and patients in the veterinary workplace continues to be
a high priority for employers, employees, and the general public. Chapter 1, Restraint
of Dogs and Cats, is as timely today as in the frst two editions. Today, many entering
animals in a clinical or laboratory setting. Chapters 35 through 37 focus on safe and
effective methods of restraint of rabbits and other small mammals. Adequate restraint
of animals by trained employees is vital in providing humane care for these small
 s a r s i se  n m h  u s
veterinary health care team members and animal owners. Throughout the Manual we
describe proper disposal of medical waste. Careful use and disposal of sharp items is
encouraged. It is our hope that proper knowledge of the clinical procedures in the
Manual will enhance workplace safety as well as con tribute to animal health.
We recommend that. the reader use the Manualin the following ways:
● When frst learning a procedure, the entire chapter or segment should be studied,
including purposes, indications, contraindications, possible complications, equip-
 ment needed, restraint and positioning, and preparations. This background is
● Careful attention to comments in the rationale/amplification sections will help the
operator avoid common errors of omission or commission.
● For subsequent cases, the reader may use the technical action guidelines in a
cookbook fashion; however, periodic review of other sections of the procedure/
description is recommended.
* Careful attention should be paid to Notes that appear in italics throughout the
Manual.
* To ensure proper positioning of needles, catheters, and hands, the reader must
attempt to duplicate the orientation shown in the line drawings.
If these guidelines are followed, we are confident. that. the user of the Manual can
become proficient in a wide variety of diagnostic and therapeutic techniques.
While we try to instruct our readers in the “how to" of clinical procedures, we
hope our equally important message of "whether to" also is understood by the reader.
As animal advocates, we have carefully scrutinized each of the procedures with respect.
to the degree or risk of pain and injury versus expected benefits. No animal was
injured in the production of this manual. We implore our readers to respect the
feelings of animals (and their owners) and the contributions of animals in all aspects
of their professional activities.
Steven E. Crow, DVM
Sally O. Walshaw, MA, VMD
Jennifer E. Boyle, RVT, VTS
Primum non nocere (first of all do no harm)
HIPPOCRATES
This is like deja vu all over again.
YOGI BERRA
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors would like to express their gratitude to the following individuals for
their assistance and/or helpful comments during the preparation of this edition of
the text.
Melanie Campbell, DVM, DACVIM (Neurology)
Cheryl Hamilton, RVT
Krista Lau, RVT
Clare Knightly, RVT
Catie McDonald, DVM
Deborah Morey, DVM, DACVECC
Nancy Gassaway, RVT
Laurie Scott, RT(T)
Richard Walshaw, BVMS, DACVS
Christopher Wong, DVM
We are also grateful to Steve Oerding of MediaWorks, IET Academic Technology
Services, University of California-Davis for his collaboration and artistry on new
drawings in many chapters of this edition.
xi
Manual of
CLINICAL PROCEDURES
IN dogs, Cats, rabbItS,
AND RODENTS
Third Edition
Part 1
ROUTNE
CLNICAI
PROCEDURES
monly performed in small animal practices or laboratory
animal facilities. Busy veterinary practitioners are likely to
employ these techniques one or more times daily. Profi-
ciency in these procedures willallowveterinarians and
technicians to perform their duties more efficiently.
Many readers will have considerable experience with
these routine procedures; however, attention to indica-
tions, contraindications, and preparations should help even
 the most experienced clinician to select and apply these
techniques more appropriately.
Experience enables you to recognize a mistake when you make it again.
FRANKLIN P. JONES
Chapter 1
RESTRAINT OF DOGS
AND CATS
Don't be impatient withyour patients.
CARL OSBORNE
Restraint is the restriction of an animal's activity by verbal, physical, or pharmacologic
means so that the animal is prevented from injuring itself or others.
NOTE: Restraining a dog or cat forcibly is dangerous to both the handler and the animal. Most
puuupup uaymauunypunpafpsppunyquo spopunsoppaumomad
physical restraint; however, we strongly recommend the use of pharmacologic agents to assist in
properrestraintfor:
·procedures that are painful
·procedures that require holding an animal in a position that compromises its respiration
·severely frightened or aggressive animals
Purposes
1. To facilitate physical examination, including ophthalmic and rectal examinations
 2. To administer oral, injectable, and topical materials
3. To apply bandages
4. To perform certain procedures (e.g., urinary catheterization)
 5. To prevent. self-mutilation (Elizabethan collar)
Complications
1. Dyspnea
2. Hyperthermia
5
6
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
3. Tissue trauma (e.g., muscle strain)
4.Stress
Equipment Needed
* Strips of gauze or cloth, 100 to 150 cm in length, 2 to 5 cm in width; or commercially
available nylon or rayon muzzles
● Elizabethan collar of appropriate size
VerbAl ReStraINT
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. In general, begin with the least
1. The amount of restraint needed will
severe restraint technique and
depend on the environment, the
proceed to more severe methods if
animal's behavior, and the degree of
necessary.
discomfort caused by the procedure.
2. Speak to the dog or cat. when
2. Speaking to the animal initially in a
approaching it.
calm, soothing voice helps to prevent.
startling it. This is especially
important if the animal is blind or is
looking in another direction.
3. Use the animal's name.
3. Pet. animals are usually conditioned
to respond to their names.
4. If necessary, speak frmly to the
4. Say “no" in a sharp, clear tone of
animal.
voice. Verbal restraint can be a useful
adjunct to the physical restraint of
pet. animals.
 5. Assstant: Stand on opposite side of
5. The intended site for treatment or
 animal from person performing
examination must be easily
procedure.
accessible.
PhYSICAL RESTRAINT WITh DOG In StANDING POSItION
(Fig. 1-1)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Place one arm under dog's neck so
1. The dog's head should be positioned
that forearm holds dog's head
so that. it is virtually impossible for
securely.
the dog to bite either the person
RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND CATS
Figure 1-1  Restraint with dog in standing position
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
restraining it or the person
performing the procedure.
2. Place other arm underneath dog's
2. An arm underneath the dog's
abdomen or thorax.
abdomen will prevent the dog from
sitting down during the procedure.
3. Pull dog close to chest. of person
3. The restrainer has more control of
performing restraint.
the animal's movement if the animal
is held closely.
PhySICal reStraInt WIth doG SITtIng Or In
STERNAL RECUMBENCY (Fig. 1-2)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Place one arm under dog's neck so
1. Adequate restraint of the dog's head
that the forearm holds dog's head
 is important for all procedures.
securely.
2. Place other arm around dog's
 2. An arm underneath or around dog's
hindquarters.
hindquarters will prevent it from
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 1l-2  Restraint with dog in sitting position.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
standing up or lying down during the
procedure.
3. Pull dog close to chest of person
3. The restrainer has more control of
performing restraint.
the animal's movement if the animal
is held closely.
PhySICAl RESTraINT WIth dOg In LAterAL
RECUMBENCY (Fig. 1-3)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. With the dog in standing position,
1. If the dog is a giant. breed, it will
reach across dog's back and take
suffice to reach across the dog's back
hold of both forelegs in one hand
and take hold of the foreleg and the
and both hind legs in other hand.
hind leg that are closer to the person
doing the restraint.
RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND CATS
Figure 1-3 Restraint with dog in lateral recumbency
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Place index fnger of each hand
2. Placing the index finger between the
between the two legs being held.
legs ensures a good grip if the dog
tries to move its legs.
3. Gradually lift dog's legs off table (or
3. The dog should be shifted from a
floor) and allow its back to slowly
standing position to lateral
slide against your body to a position
 recumbency gently and gradually.
of lateral recumbency.
4. To immobilize head, exert. pressure
4. Adequate restraint of the dog's head
on side of dog's neck with forearm.
is important for all procedures.
 5. Hold legs proximal to carpus and
5. Holding the animal in this manner
tarsus, if possible.
provides better control of the legs.
USE OF A MUZZLE ON THE DOG (Fig. 1-4)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Place commercial muzzle of
1. Use of sturdy or double-thickness
appropriate size on dog. Alternatively,
gauze is recommended for large
cut strip of gauze or cloth
dogs. A weak or poorly made muzzle
approximately 125 cm in length for a
leads to a false sense of security and
40- to 50-lb. dog.
the possibility of one's being bitten
Figure 1-4 (A, B, C, D, and E) Applying muzzle to dog.
10
RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND CATS
11
D
Figure l-4  Continued
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
by the dog. Commercially available
nylon or rayon muzzles should be
disinfected between uses in order to
avoid disease transmission.
 2. Before approaching animal, make
 2. Preparation of the muzzle in advance
loop with one half of a square knot
helps to ensure rapid placement and
so that diameter of loop is about.
minimizes the length of time the
twice the diameter of dog's snout.
operator's hands must. be near the
dog's mouth.
3. Slip loop over dog's nose and mouth
with the half square knot on dorsal
from the dog's mouth as possible
surface of dog's snout (Fig. l-4A),
while the muzzle is applied. Placing a
then tighten quickly by pulling on
muzzle on a fractious dog requires at.
ends (Fig. 1-4B).
least. two people; one person holds
the leash and distracts the dog while
the other applies the muzzle.
4. Cross (but do not tie) free ends
4. Each step of this procedure must be
of muzzle under dog's lower jaw
done quickly if the animal is
(Fig. 1-4C).
fractious. If the ends are crossed but
not tied under the mandible, the
muzzle can be removed quickly in
case of emergency (see No. 6 below).
 5. Bring ends of muzzle up behind
5. The bow should be placed directly
dog's ears (Fig. 1-4D) and tie in a
behind the dog's ears and tied
bow (Fig. 1-4E).
fightly. The dog will be able to open
its mouth if the muzzle is tied loosely.
12
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. To remove muzzle quickly from a
6. A muzzle prevents panting and must
fractious dog, untie bow and pull on
be used judiciously in heavy-coated
one end of muzzle material.
animals or in warm environments. A
muzzle should be removed
immediately if an animal has
difficulty breathing or starts to vomit.
USE OF ELIZABETHAN COLLAR (Fig. 1-5)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Select or make an Elizabethan collar
1. In general, Elizabethan collars should
of appropriate size and strength for
 be made of tough, flexible materials
the animal.
like plastic rather than easily torn
substances like cardboard. Ideal
length is approximately 2-3 cm
longer than the animal's snout, with
the base of the collar pushed
caudally against the shoulders.
2. Place Elizabethan collar on neck of
 2. Some advantages of the Elizabethan
fractious dog or cat to prevent animal
collar as a restraint device are that.
from biting while it is being handled
the animal can pant with the collar
(Fig. 1-5A) or to prevent the animal
in place; the collar can be left. on the
from biting or licking itself.
animal when it is returned to a
hospital kennel, facilitating later
removal of the animal for further
treatments; the collar is reasonably
well tolerated by most. animals.
3. To ensure that collar will remain on
3. Most collars are sturdy, reusable, and
animal, use prefabricated attachment
easily cleaned. Several companies
loops on commercially available
supply a variety of sizes of
types, or place three holes in
Elizabethan collars, and most of
container so that. a triangular-shaped
these can be cut to size for animals
opening is created for animal's head
that fall between the standard sizes.
when cord is passed through three
For do-it-yourself enthusiasts,
holes (Fig. 1-5B).
Elizabethan collars for cats and very
small dogs can be constructed out of 
empty dessert topping containers.
Collars for dogs can be fashioned
from plastic buckets of appropriate
sizes.
RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND CATS
13
B
Figure 1-5  Commercial Elizabethan collar on a dog.
PhySICAl rESTrAINt WIth CAt In LAterAl RECUMbENCy
(Fig. 1-6)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip curved end of cat's claws if it
1. Restraining a cat can be more
must be restrained for lengthy or
difficult than restraining a dog
uncomfortable procedure or if it. is
because cats: a) can move very
fractious (Chapter 11).
quickly; b) are agile and strong; c)
may use their claws as well as their
teeth to defend themselves; d) are
small animals that. can be injured by
indiscriminate use of force.
14
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 2. With cat in standing position, reach
across cat's back and take hold of
both forelegs in one hand and both
hind legs in other hand.
 3. Gradually pull cat's legs off table and
3. The cat should be shifted from a
allow its back to slide against your
standing position to lateral
body to a position of lateral
recumbency gently.
recumbency.
4. After placing cat in lateral
recumbency, use one hand to hold
wide adhesive tape can be used to
all four legs (Fig. 1-6).
bind together the front legs and the
hind legs, respectively.
5. Place other hand so that palm of
5. Placing an Elizabethan collar on a
hand surrounds the top of cat's head
fractious cat before beginning the
and cat's jaws are held closed by
restraint procedure eliminates the
fngers and thumb (Fig. 1-6).
necessity of holding the cat's mouth
closed with one hand while holding
all four legs with the other hand. A
cat's small size and great. agility make
immobilization of its head with the
 restrainer's forearm virtually
impossible.
Figure 1-6 Restraint with cat in lateral recumbency
RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND CATS
15
Figure 1-7   Restraint with cat in sternal recumbency.
PhySICAl rESTrAINt WIth CAt In SterNAl rECUmbenCY
(Fig. 1-7)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Apply gentle, firm pressure to cat's
1. Sternal recumbency is a position to
back to encourage it. to assume
which few cats object.
 position of sternal recumbency.
2. Place one forearm against. each side
of cat's body with cat's head facing
away from restrainer.
3. Immobilize cat's head using both
3. The person doing the procedure can
hands.
approach from the side or from the
cat's rear so as to remain out of
reach of the front. claws, should the
cat attempt to strike.
PHYSICAL RESTRAINT OF MODERATELY
FRACTIOUS CAT (Fig. 1-8)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Close all doors and windows of the
1. If the cat gets away from the
room.
restrainer, it will not escape from the
building.
16
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure l-8 Restraint of moderately fractious cat.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Take scruff of cat's neck in one hand.
2. It is important. to grasp as much of
the loose skin as possible along the
cranial portion of the cat's neck,
beginning between its ears.
Otherwise the cat. may be able to
turn its head around and bite.
 3. Wrap fingers of other hand around
and through cat's hind legs.
4. Gently stretch the cat out. by
4. A cat restrained in this manner may
separating your hands.
be held in lateral recumbency or in
vertical position. Most fractious cats
will raise strong vocal protests to this
procedure. The necessary procedure
should be done quickly. If the
restrainer begins to lose control of
the cat, he or she should alert. other
 people involved in the procedure,
then let go of the cat with both
hands at the same time.
NOTE: An alternate method of restraint for a moderately fractious cat is to grasp the zygomatic
arches with thumb and fingers of one hand while resting the top of the cat's head against the
palm of the same hand.Meanwhile,an assistant wraps a thick terrycloth towel snuggly around
the cat's neck and torso, being sure to enclose all 4 legs in the towel. The cloth is wrapped around
RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND CATS
17
severaltimesbeforefoldingoverthebottomend.Thebodyofthe catcanthenbeheldunder
the arm of theperson restraining the head.This formof restraintis particularly useful for
drawing blood from or inserting a catheter into the jugular vein or for administering oral
medications.
Vicious dogs and catsrequire specialrestraint techniques,for example,rabies poles and
pharmacologic agents. Such procedures carry significant risks for animals and persons
involved.
PHARMACOLOGIC RESTRAINT OF DOGS AND CATS
Complications
1. Respiratory distress
 2. Anaphylactic reaction
3. Excessive or inadequate sedation
4. Cardiac arrhythmias
 5. Hypotension
6.Vomiting
Equipment Needed
+ Sterile syringes and needles of appropriate size
● Elizabethan collar and/or muzzle
planned
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Weigh animal.
1. All chemical restraint drugs must be
dosed carefully to avoid improper
dosage.
2. Review animal's history and perform
 2. Choice of the appropriate drug or
complete physical examination prior
drugs requires careful attention to
to administering any drugs, if
detail, including drug interactions,
possible.
contraindications and complications
and the health status of the animal.
If the animal is fractious and may
18
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
injure itself or personnel,
examination may not be appropriate.
3. Assistant: Using minimal but.
 3. Follow principles and techniques
adequate physical restraint, hold the
described in the previous sections of
animal so that the drug or
this chapter.
medication may be administered
orally or by intravenous,
subcutaneous, or intramuscular
injection.
4. Observe animal until adequate
4. Untoward reactions to chemical
sedation is obtained.
restraint agents may include
vomiting, hypotension, seizures, and
respiratory distress. If any of these
signs are noted, immediate
 examination and treatment by a
veterinarian is required.
5. When procedure(s) are completed,
5. An advantage of narcotic and α-1
administer reversal agent, when
agonist. drugs is the availability of
available.
antidotes to reverse or minimize
excessive or prolonged sedation.
Bibliography
Anderson RS, Edney ATB: Practical Animal Handling. Oxford, England, Pergamon Press,
1994
 Fowler M: Restraint and Handling of Wild and Domestic Animals. Ames, [owa State University
Press, 1978
Lane DR, Cooper B: Veterinary Nursing (Formerly Jones's Animal Nursing, 5th edition).
Oxford, England, Pergamon Press, 1994
McCurnin DM, Poffenbarger EM: Small Animal Physical Diagnosis and Clinical Procedures.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1991
Pratt PW (ed): Medical Nursing for Animal Health Technicians. Santa Barbara, American Vet-
erinary Publications, 1985
Wolz G: Personal Communication,1982
Chapter 2
BLOOD COLLECTION
Itis impossiblefor anyone to begin to learnwhat he thinks he alreadyknows.
EPICTETUS
ROUTINE VENIPUNCTURE
Routine venipuncture is the placement of a needle into a vein.
Purposes
1. To obtain a sample of venous blood for routine clinical pathology tests, for example,
complete blood count (CBC) and serum chemistry determinations
2. To administer medications, fluids, blood, and certain test substances
Complications
1. Minor hemorrhage
2. Subcutaneous hematoma formation
3. Vascular trauma
4. Thrombophlebitis
Equipment Needed
·Cotton
● 70% alcohol or other skin disinfectant
19
20 ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
● 3-mL, 6-mL, or 12-mL syringe, Vacutainer* holder, or 21- to 23-gauge butterfly
catheter
● 20- to 22-gauge, 1-inch hypodermic needle
●Blood collection tubes, with or without anticoagulant, depending on laboratory tests
to be performed
· Adhesive tape, 1 inch wide
Restraint and Positioning
 Routine blood collection in dogs and cats generally requires two persons: one obtains
the blood sample while the other restrains the animal. For an uncooperative dog.
muzzling may be necessary. An Elizabethan collar is useful for the restraint of an
uncooperative cat or brachycephalic dog. A puppy or kitten may relax for blood col-
lection from the jugular vein if grasped by the skin at the back of its neck.
Position for Collection from Jugular Vein
1. Place animal in sternal recumbency on table.
 2. With one hand, grasp animal's front legs at carpal joints and pull front legs off
edge of table.
 3. With other hand, extend animal's neck by grasping its muzzle and directing its
nostrils toward ceiling (Fig. 2-1).
Alternate position: Restrain animal in lateral recumbency with neck extended and
front legs pulled caudally (Fig. 2-2).
Alternate restraint for puppy or kitten jugular venipuncture: Grasp skin on back
of animal's neck and lift animal's front feet from table surface.
NOTE: Whenever possible, obtain blood samples by jugular venipuncture
Position for Gollection from Gephalic Vein (Fig. 2-3)
 1. Place animal in sitting position or sternal recumbency.
 2. Extend animal's front leg by placing fingers of one hand behind animal's elbow.
 3. Compress cephalic vein with thumb and stabilize vein on dorsal surface of front
leg by stretching skin slightly.
Position for Collection from Lateral Saphenous Vein
(Recurrent Tarsal Vein) (Fig. 2-4)
1. Place animal in lateral recumbency.
  (s s s a  a ss  s  
proximal tibial segment.
* Becton-Dickinson Co., Rutherford, NJ,
B
Figure 2-1
Restraint for jugular venipuncture: A, dog and B, cat.
Figure 2-2 Restraint for jugular venipuncture with animal in lateral recumbency.
21
Figure 2-3 Restraint for cephalic venipuncture: (A) dog; (B) cat.
B
Figure 2-4  (A and B) Lateral saphenous venipuncture.
22
BLOOD COLLECTION
23
Position for Collection from Medial Saphenous Vein
1. Place animal in lateral recumbency.
 2. Extend opposing stifle and compress vein by frmly pressing on animal's upper
inner thigh (inguinal area)
Position for Collection from Femoral Vein (Fig. 2-5)
1. Place animal in lateral recumbency.
 2. With one hand, abduct uppermost hind leg to permit access to medial aspect. of
other hind leg.
 3. With other hand, compress femoral vein on medial side of upper thigh with
th umb.
NOTE:An additional person may be needed to restrain the head and forelegs of the animal for
this procedure.
Figure 2-5 Femoral venipuncture.
24
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Prepare bandage for cephalic,
1. Bandaging peripheral veins
lateral saphenous, or medial
following venipuncture minimizes
saphenous vein from dry cotton ball
hemorrhage and hematoma
and l-inch-wide adhesive tape. Fold
formation. Folding over the end of
over tab at one end of adhesive
the adhesive tape facilitates removal
strip.
of the bandage later.
 2. Swab area of vein with cotton
2. Skin disinfectant removes surface
moistened with 70% alcohol or
debris and moistens hair, making
other skin disinfectant.
vein easier to see.
3. Distend vein with blood ("raise
3. The restrainer distends the vein for
vein") by compressing vein closer to
cephalic, saphenous, and femoral
heart than venipuncture site.
venipuncture, while the person
performing venipuncture holds the
leg at metacarpal/metatarsal region
with one hand. The person
performing jugular venipuncture
distends the jugular vein with one
hand by pressing firmly with thumb
 or fingertips on lower neck near
thoracic inlet (Fig. 2-6).
4. Clip hair from area if vein cannot.
4. All veins are difficult to see and
be seen or palpated.
palpate in obese animals. In
emergency situations, a cut-down
procedure may be necessary to
expose the vein. (pp. 74-78). The
jugular vein is preferred for blood
collection in cats and toy breed
dogs because of the small size of leg
veins. Hair clipping should be
avoided whenever possible if the
animal is exhibited regularly.
 5. Select appropriate venipuncture
 5. Use of appropriate equipment will
equipment for vein and animal.
help to minimize trauma to the
vein. A 22-gauge needle is suitable
for animals weighing up to 60 1b.; a
20-gauge needle may be used for
dogs over 60 lb. in weight. The
Vacutainer system should not. be
used on small veins because the
vacuum in the blood collection tube
may cause collapse of a small vein.
6. Inspect venipuncture equipment for
6. Discard any needles with barbed
flaws.
ends. If needle and syringe are to
BLOOD COLLECTION
25
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
be used, firmly attach the needle to
the syringe and move the syringe
plunger back and forth several times
to determine that it moves freely.
7. Hold syringe barrel, butterfly
7. Usually the needle can be inserted
catheter, or Vacutainer system so
through the skin and directly into
that needle bevel is up. Insert.
the vein with one motion.
needle at. approximately 30-degree
Appearance of a few drops of blood
angle with skin so that distal 1.0 to
in the needle hub or at the distal
1.5 cm of needle is threaded into
end of the Vacutainer needle is
vein (Fig. 2-7).
evidence of successful venipuncture.
8. If vein rolls to either side, insert.
 8. Rolling of the blood vessel under
needle under skin lateral to vein,
the skin is a common problem in
then puncture vein.
certain breeds (e.g., Dachshund),
and with certain veins (i.e., the
lateral saphenous vein).
9. Aspirate blood by withdrawing
9. A needle inserted into the cephalic
syringe plunger. If Vacutainer system
vein can be stabilized by holding the
is used, force blood collection tube
syringe or Vacutainer holder in
stopper onto distal end of needle
place with the thumb and wrapping
after one or two drops of blood
the fingers around the animal's leg
have appeared.
until collection is completed (Fig. 2-
8A). If blood flow stops suddenly
Figure 2-6  Distending jugular vein.
Figure 2-7
[ntroducing needle into vein.
B
Figure 2-8
(A) Stabilizing syringe during blood collection. (B) Collecting blood using a but-
terfly catheter.
26
BLOOD COLLECTION
27
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
during collection, rotate the needle
slightly within the vein, thereby
positioning the bevel in the main
stream of blood flow. For cephalic,
lateral saphenous, medial
saphenous, or femoral
venipuncture, the animal's foot may
be gently squeezed to stimulate
venous blood return. Alternatively, a
butterfly catheter may be used for
blood collection (Fig. 2-8B). Refer
to Chapter 4, pp. 52-54, for
insertion technique.
10. Release (or ask restrainer to
10. The distending pressure on the vein
release) distending pressure on
should be released before the
vein.
needle is removed from the vein to
minimize hemorrhage from the
venipuncture site.
11. Remove needle from vein and
11. Pressure on the venipuncture site
immediately apply pressure to
immediately after needle removal
venipuncture site with dry cotton
will decrease the possibility of
ball.
hemorrhage.
12. Apply previously prepared bandage
12.1
 Bandaging to prevent hemorrhage
with some compression to cephalic,
and subcutaneous hematoma
lateral saphenous, or medial
formation is especially important.
saphenous venipuncture site (Fig. 2-
in seriously ill animal patients
9). Hold frm pressure on jugular or
because repeated venipuncture
femoral venipuncture site for at.
for diagnostic and therapeutic
least 60 seconds.
procedures may be necessary.
13. Place blood promptly into
13. Hemolysis of the blood sample or
appropriate collection tube(s) by
clotting of the blood in the syringe
allowing sample to flow into tube.
or anticoagulant tube can be
When using anticoagulant coated
prevented by careful handling of
tubes, invert blood sample gently
the sample after collection. Avoid
several times to mix sample with
forcefully squirting the blood
anticoagulan t.
through the needle into the
 collection tube. Vigorous shaking
of a blood sample in an
anticoagulant tube is more likely
to result in hemolysis than is
gentle inversion of the tube several
times.
14. Remove bandage from animal's leg
vein in 30 to 60 minutes.
28
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 2-9
Bandaging venipuncture site after removal of needle or catheter.
BlOOD COLlECtION FOR COAGULATION STUDIeS
Coagulation studies are performed on venous blood.
Complications, Equipment Needed,
Restraint, and Positioning
These are the same as for routine venipuncture (pp. 19-23), except that a Vacutainer
holder and two tubes or a butterfly catheter and two syringes are required for each
blood sample collected.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Follow procedure for routine
1. The Vacutainer system is best for
venipuncture using a Vacutainer
obtaining blood for coagulation
holder or a butterfly catheter
studies from the jugular vein.
(pp. 24-27, Nos. 1 to 9).
2. Aspirate 1 mL of blood into first
2. The butterfly catheter prevents
syringe or insert. first tube in
excessive blood loss and potential
Vacutainer holder. Leaving catheter
contamination of sample. The tube
BLOOD COLLECTION
29
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
or holder in vein, detach and retain
or syringe can be used for other tests,
first syringe or tube. Attach second
if needed.
syringe to needle or insert second
tube in holder and collect suffcient
blood for laboratory tests.
3. Follow procedure for aspirating
 3. The two-syringe technique minimizes
 blood, handling sample, and care of
the amount of tissue thromboplastin
vein in routine venipuncture
in the final sample. Tissue
(pp. 27-28, Nos. 10 to 14).
 thromboplastin released by
venipuncture can alter the results of
coagulation studies.
4. Obtain control samples by repeating
4. A control specimen should be
entire procedure on normal animal.
collected each time coagulation
studies are to be performed.
 5. If any problems occur during
 5. Blood collection problems that. could
collection, discard sample and obtain
affect the accuracy of coagulation
a new sample from a different. site or
studies include failure to collect. a
at a later time.
suffcient amount of blood and
traumatic puncture of the skin.
COLlECTION OF bLOOD FOR tRANSFUSION
Transfusion collection is the obtaining of blood from a donor for use in treating a
recipient.
Complications
1. Hemorrhage
2. Subcutaneous hematoma formation
 3. Fibrosis of jugular vein
Equipment Needed
+Cotton
* Clipper with No. 40 blade
· Skin preparation material
- 2% chlorhexidine scrub
- 70% alcohol
- Sterile gauze sponges (2" × 2")
* Drugs for sedation or anesthesia if necessary
30
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
+ Bandaging material
 Sterile gauze sponges
Antimicrobial ointment
- Gauze bandage
- Adhesive tape (2 inches wide)
+ Collection apparatus for canine blood
- Commercial plastic blood collection bag containing anticoagulant (e.g., citrate
phosphate dextrose adenine; CPDA) with accompanying needle and tubing
* Collection apparatus for feline blood
- 60-mL syringe containing 7 mL of CPDA (for collecting 53 mL of feline blood)
18-gauge needle or 2l-gauge winged infusion set.
Restraint and Positioning
Sedation or administration of anesthetic may be needed because the animal must.
remain relatively immobile throughout the 5- to 15-minute collection procedure to
minimize trauma to the jugular vein.
A dog should be restrained in sternal or lateral recumbency on a table for col-
lection from the jugular vein (Figs. 2-1 and 2-2).
A cat should be restrained in lateral recumbency with its head held slightly lower
than its body over the edge of the table and with the cat's nose turned toward the
ceiling. In this position, the cat's jugular vein is easily visualized and stabilized for
venipuncture.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip hair from ventral neck area.
1. Good visualization of the jugular vein
 helps prevent traumatic
venipuncture.
2. Prepare skin of ventral neck area,
2. Strict attention to asepsis is important.
using 2% chlorhexidine and alcohol.
to decrease the possibility of
thrombophlebitis and subsequent
fbrosis of the donor animal's jugular
vein.
3. Distend jugular vein with blood as for
routine venipuncture (Fig. 2-6).
4. Insert needle (with bevel up) into
4. The needle hub may be taped loosely
jugular vein.
to the animal's neck during
collection, using l-inch wide adhesive
tape.
5. Collect sample, gently agitating
 5. Gentle agitation of the blood
collection container several times
collection container ensures mixing
during collection.
of the blood with the anticoagulant.
BLOOD COLLECTION
31
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Release distending pressure on vein
6. The distending pressure on the vein
if it has been necessary to maintain
should be released before the needle
distending pressure throughout.
is removed from the vein to minimize
collection.
hemorrhage from the venipuncture
site.
7. Remove needle from vein and
immediately hold pressure with dry
cotton ball on venipuncture site for
at. least. 1l minute.
8. Apply sterile bandage to neck area
8. Firm pressure for at least. l minute,
directly over venipuncture site.
followed by bandaging of the neck
area for at least 24 hours after
transfusion collection, will help to
prevent. hemorrhage, subcutaneous
hematoma formation, and
thrombophlebitis.
ARTERIAL PUNCTURE
Arterial puncture is the placement of a needle into an artery for the purpose of obtain-
ing a blood sample.
Purposes
To obtain a sample of arterial blood for determination of blood gas concentrations
and acid-base status.
Complications
1. Hemorrhage
2. Subcutaneous hematoma formation
3.Arterial thrombosis
Equipment Needed
*Cotton
* Clipper with No. 40 blade
32
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
* Skin preparation material
2% chlorhexidine scrub
70% alcohol
- Sterile gauze sponges (2" x 2")
● 3-mL syringe rinsed with 0.25 mL of sodium heparin (1000 USP units/mL)
● 22-gauge, 1-inch needle
●Rubber stopper
+ Con tainer of ice large enough to hold syringe
Restraint and Positioning
The femoral or pedal artery may be used in the dog or cat for routine arterial blood
collection. The femoral is the larger of the two arteries; however, it is also more diffi-
risk of hemorrhage. For femoral artery blood collection, the animal is placed in lateral
 e  a r s e q d ns si  
be palpated on the proximal, medial aspect of the opposite leg. For pedal artery
puncture, the animal is placed in lateral recumbency as well, with the down side
extended to access the medial aspect. of the pedal artery.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip hair from area.
2. Stretch skin between thumb and
forefinger of one hand and palpate
femoral artery with other hand,
 then release while skin is prepared.
 3. Prepare skin over artery, using 2%
3. To minimize the possibility of
chlorhexidine and alcohol.
iatrogenic infection, it is advisable
to prepare the skin over the artery
as for surgery.
4. Inspect. arterial puncture equipment.
4. Discard any needles with barbed
(22-gauge needle and syringe) for
ends. Attach needle to syringe and
flaws.
move syringe plunger back and
forth several times to determine that.
it moves freely.
 5. Stretch skin between thumb and
 5. Avoid contaminating exact site
forefinger of one hand. Palpate
where arterial puncture will be
 pulsing artery proximal and distal to
performed.
where skin puncture will be made.
BLOOD COLLECTION
33
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Hold barrel of syringe so that.
6. If possible, the needle should be
 needle bevel is up. Insert needle
inserted through the skin and
through skin at approximately 45-
directly into the artery with one
to 60-degree angle with skin
motion. Successful arterial puncture
(Fig. 2-10).
has occurred if the arterial blood
starts to push back the syringe
plunger.
 7. Aspirate sample and remove needle
from skin.
8. Hold syringe upright, tap on
8. Evacuation of air from the syringe
syringe to cause air bubbles to rise
and insertion of needle into rubber
(Fig. 2-11A), eject air bubbles from
stopper prevent inaccurate results.
syringe (Fig. 2-11B), and insert.
needle into rubber stopper.
 9. Immediately apply firm pressure
 9. Firm pressure on the arterial
with dry cotton ball at. arterial
puncture site decreases the
puncture site.
possibility of hemorrhage and
subcutaneous hematoma formation.
Hold pressure on arterial puncture
site for 3 to 5 minutes. Hold
pressure for 15 minutes or until
bleeding has stopped if animal has a
bleeding problem.
10. Submit sample immediately to
10. If the analysis will not be performed
laboratory for blood gas and pH
within 5 minutes, place the blood-
determinations.
filled syringe in a container with ice
to preserve the condition of the
blood.
Figure 2-10 Femoral arterial puncture.
34
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 2-11  (A & B) Removing air bubbles from syringe.
Bibliography
Anderson LK: The coagulation system: Some tips on testing. Comp Contin Educ for AHT
1(5):200-205, 1980
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures & Emergency Treat-
ment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Brunner LS, Suddarth DS: The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice, Srd ed. Philadelphia,
JB Lippincott, 1982
 Dial SM: Hematology, chemistry profle, and urinalysis for pediatric patients. Comp Contin
Educ for Prac Vet 14(2):305-308, 1992
 [ntravartolo C: Blood transfiusions in dogs and cats. Comp Contin Educ for AHT 2(6):302-308,
1981
Jones BV: Animal Nursing, Part 1. Oxford, Pergamon Press, 1966
 Kirk RW, Bistner SI: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
Pichler ME, Turnwald GH: Blood transfusion in the dog and cat, Part I. Physiology, collection,
storage, and indications for whole blood therapy. Comp Contin Educ for Prac Vet
7(1):64-71, 1985
Schall WD, Perman V: Diseases of the red blood cells. In Ettinger SJ (ed): Textbook of Veteri-
nary Internal Medicine, Vol. 2. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1975
Chapter 3
INJECTION
TECHNIQUES
Well done is better than well said.
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
 i so a aq  sa  a s o a  
vein), intramuscular (within a muscle), subcutaneous (under the skin), intraperito-
neal (within the peritoneal cavity), and intradermal (within the skin).
Purposes
To administer fluids, pharmacologic agents, biologic preparations, and certain test.
substances.
NOTE:The injection route that has been determined by the manufacturer to be the most effective
and the safestusually isindicatedon theproduct label.Certain materials must be administered
intravenously becausethey will cause tissue necrosisifgiven outside thevascular system.Suspen-
sions(cloudy-appearing liquids）should neverbegivenbytheintravenousorintraperitoneal
routes.When no information is given regarding appropriate routes of administration,refer to
guidelines inTable3-1.
Complications
1. Irritation, necrosis, or infection at injection site
 2. Allergic reaction to material injected
3. Nerve damage (mainly a complication of intramuscular injections)
 4. Damage to abdominal viscera and peritonitis (a complication of intraperitoneal
injections)
35
36
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
TABLE 3-1.
Recommended routes of injection.
Prescribed Agent
Possible Route(s)
Biologic preparations, (e.g., vaccines)
Subcutaneous, intramuscular
Pharmacologic agents, (e.g., antibiotics,
[ntravenous, intramuscular, subcutaneous,
tranquilizers)
intraperitoneal
Local anesthetic agents
[ntradermal, subcutaneous
Fluids
[ntravenous, subcutaneous, intraperitoneal
Certain test substances
[ntravenous, intramuscular, intradermal
Dialysis solutions
[ntraperitoneal
Equipment Needed
+Cotton
+ 70% alcohol or other skin disinfectant
+ Sterile syringe of appropriate size
+ Sterile needle of appropriate size
● Adhesive tape, 1 inch wide (for cephalic or saphenous vein injections)
● Clipper with No. 40 blade (for intradermal and some intravenous injections)
Restraint and Positioning
route of injection. It is helpful to have an assistant restrain the animal, although this
may not be necessary for subcutaneous injections in tractable animals. The animal
should be positioned so that the intended injection site is accessible (Chapter 1).
PREPARATION FOR INJECTIONS
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Check medication with regard to
1. It is important. to take measures to
"The Five Rights": right. patient,
prevent errors in medication
right drug, right dose, right route,
administration.
right time and frequency. Also
check expiration date and examine
medication for presence of foreign
material.
INJECTION TECHNIQUES
37
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Wash hands
2. Washing hands between patients is
important in controlling
communicable diseases in a
hospital.
 3. Select appropriate needle size.
 3. Use of appropriate needle size will
help to minimize trauma to the
tissues. For intravenous,
intramuscular, subcutaneous, and
intraperitoneal injections, use 22-
gauge needle for animals weighing
up to 60 lb. and 20-gauge or 22-
 gauge needle for dogs over 60 1b.
For intradermal injections, use 25-
gauge or 27-gauge needle.
4. Aseptically attach sterile needle to
4. Syringe size will be dictated by
sterile syringe.
volume of material to be injected,
for example, a tuberculin syringe is
routinely used for intradermal
injections.
5. Use cotton moistened with 70%
 5. Cleaning the rubber stopper
alcohol to swab rubber stopper of
removes any dust or other
bottle containing material to be
contaminan ts.
injected.
6. Remove needle cover and aspirate
6. Pressurizing multiple-dose vials with
into syringe a volume of air equal to
air facilitates withdrawal of material
that of material to be injected.
to be injected.
Inject this air into bottle.
 7. Insert needle through center of
7. Careful insertion of needle into
bottle stopper.
 bottle stopper minimizes needle
damage.
8. Invert bottle and position needle
8. Proper needle position will
bevel within liquid in bottle. Hold
minimize air bubble aspiration into
 apparatus with needle end pointed
syringe.
toward ceiling.
9. Withdraw syringe plunger to
aspirate desired amount of
medication and, if possible, an
additional 0.5 to 1 mL.
10. While holding bottle and needle/
10. Removing air bubbles from the
syringe in vertical position, tap on
syringe eliminates the risk of air
syringe to force any air bubbles
embolism when the material is
in syringe to rise toward needle
injected. Large air bubbles displace
hub.
liquid material and could cause
inaccurate dosing.
38
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
11. Push syringe plunger back to
11. It is safer to remove air bubbles this
desired amount of medication,
way than to contaminate the room
thereby forcing any air bubbles back
and its occupants with potentially
in to bottle.
hazardous materials from the bottle
(e.g., chemotherapeutic agents).
12. Remove needle from bottle. Slide
12. Needle contamination must be
needle loosely into needle cover
avoided to minimize causing
using one hand only to prevent.
iatrogenic infection. Cytotoxic
needle stick injury.
substances for treating cancer and
potent anesthetic agents are
examples of hazardous materials
that could be accidentally injected
when recapping a needle.
NOTE: Steps 5 through 11 are unnecessary if using ampoules. An ampoule is opened by fractur-
ing the glass, and then the contents are drawn directly into the needle and attached syringe.
INTRAVENOUSINJECTION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for injection.
1. See pp. 36-38.
 2. Place animal in appropriate position
2. See Chapter 2, pp. 20-23.
for intravenous injection into
jugular, cephalic, lateral saphenous
or femoral vein.
 3. Follow procedure described for
3. Prepare bandage, disinfect.
blood collection (Chapter 2,
venipuncture site, distend vein with
Nos. 1 to 4, p. 24).
blood, and clip hair (if necessary).
4. Hold syringe barrel so that needle
4. If vessel rolls, insert needle under
bevel is up. Insert needle at.
skin lateral to the vein, then
approximately 30-degree angle with
puncture the vein. Appearance of a
skin.
few drops of blood in the needle
hub is evidence of successful
venipuncture.
5. Advance needle until at least half of
 5. When syringe plunger is withdrawn,
needle is within vein.
blood should flow quickly into
syringe.
6. Release (or ask assistant to release)
6. The distending pressure must. be
distending pressure on vein.
released to allow the injected
material to flow easily into the
circulation.
INJECTION TECHNIQUES
39
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 7. Aspirate small amount. of blood into
7. A rapid flow of blood into the
needle hub.
syringe is assurance of proper
needle placement.
 8. Inject material at. moderate rate into
8. When a volume greater than 5 mL
vein. Stabilize needle inserted into
or when any irritating substance is
cephalic vein by taping syringe
injected intravenously, it is advisable
barrel to leg or by holding syringe
to check needle placement within
barrel with thumb while wrapping
the vein by aspirating blood into the
fngers around animal's leg
syringe several times during the
(Fig. 2-8, p. 26).
injection.
9. Remove needle from vein and
9. Pressure on the venipuncture site
 immediately apply pressure with dry
immediately following needle
cotton ball to venipuncture site.
removal will decrease the possibility
of hemorrhage and perivascular
leakage of the injected material.
10. Apply previously prepared bandage
10. Bandaging to prevent hemorrhage
with some compression to cephalic,
or subcutaneous hematoma
saphenous, or femoral venipuncture
formation is especially important in
site. Hold frm pressure on jugular
seriously ill animal patients because
venipuncture site for at least 60
repeated venipuncture for
seconds.
diagnostic and therapeutic
procedures may be necessary.
11. Note on animal's medical record
11. Note date, time, medication, serial/
that medication was given.
lot. number, dosage, route, initials of
 persons administering medication,
and comments.
12. Remove bandage from animal's leg
in 30 to 60 minutes.
INTRAMUSCULAR INJECTION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for injection.
1. See pp. 36-38.
 2. Place animal in lateral recumbency
 2. Intramuscular injections are given in
or in sitting or standing position.
the quadriceps muscle group or
anterior thigh, lumbodorsal muscles
on either side of lumbar vertebrae,
or triceps muscles, posterior to
humerus in front leg (Fig. 3-1). All
three of the recommended muscle
40
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 3-l Muscle groups suitable for intramuscular injection.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
groups can be used when the animal
is sitting, standing, or recumbent.
The hamstring muscle group
(semitendinosus, semimembranosus)
should be avoided if at all possible
 because of the risk of sciatic nerve
injury.
3. Restrain animal as needed.
 3. Intramuscular injections can be
painful.
4. Swab skin over intended injection
4. A disinfectant. removes surface debris
site with cotton moistened with 70%
from the skin and hair.
alcohol or other skin disinfectant.
 5. Insert needle through skin into
5. Quick insertion of the needle
muscle at. approximately 45-degree to
through muscle tissue is less painful
90-degree angle (Fig. 3-2).
than slow advancement. of the
needle.
 6. Before injecting, pull back on syringe
plunger. If blood enters syringe,
indicates that a blood vessel has been
select a different. injection site in
entered. Some agents, approved for
another muscle or a different part of
intramuscular use only, may cause
same muscle.
severe allergic reactions and even
death if given intravascularly.
7. If no blood is aspirated into syringe,
7. The maximum volume that. should
inject material at moderate rate into
be injected intramuscularly at any
muscle.
one site is 2 mL in the cat and 3 mL
INJECTION TECHNIQUES
41
Figure 3-2
2Placement of needle for intramuscular injection into quadriceps.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
to 5 mL in the dog. Muscle tissue is
dense and cannot accommodate
 large volumes of injectable material.
8. Remove needle from muscle and
 8. Massaging the muscle after injection
gently massage muscle.
aids in dispersal of the injected
material and decreases pain.
9. Note in animal's medical record that
9. Note date, time, medication, serial/
 medication was given.
lot number, dosage, route, initials,
and comments. It is important to
note the injection site so that. the
 available sites can be rotated during
subsequent intramuscular injections.
42
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
SUBCUTANEOUS TNJECTION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for injection.
1. See pp. 36-38.
 2. Place animal in sternal recumbency,
2. Most cats and dogs tolerate
or in standing or sitting position.
subcutaneous injections quite well so
that minimal restraint is required.
3. Pick up fold of skin over animal's
3. Cats and dogs have freely movable
neck or back by pinching skin
skin along the dorsal portion of the
between thumb and fingers.
neck and back.
4. Swab skin over intended injection
4. A disinfectant removes surface debris
site with cotton moistened with 70%
from the skin and hair.
alcohol or other skin disinfectant.
5. Insert. needle to its hub through skin
5. The needle should slide easily under
fold into subcutaneous tissue space
the skin. If resistance is met, the
(Fig. 3-3).
needle may be positioned
intradermally or intramuscularly and
should be redirected.
6. Before injecting, pull back on syringe
 6. The presence of blood in the syringe
plunger and observe if any blood
indicates that. a blood vessel has been
enters syringe. If blood enters
 entered. Some agents, approved for
syringe, select a different injection
subcutaneous use only, may cause
site.
severe allergic reactions and even
death if given intravascularly.
7. If no blood can be aspirated into
7. The dorsal subcutaneous tissue of
syringe, inject material at moderate
dogs and cats can accommodate
rate under skin (Fig. 3-4).
relatively large volumes of fluid, from
30 mL to 50 mL at one site.
8. Remove needle from skin and
 8. Massaging the injection site aids in 
massage injection area.
dispersal of the injected material.
9. Note in animal's medical record that
9. Note date, time, medication, serial/
medication was given.
lot number, dosage, route, initials,
and comments.
INTRAPERITONEAL TNJECTION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for injection.
1. See pp. 36-38.
2. Select an appropriate gauge and
2. The needle used for intraperitoneal
length needle.
injections should be 3 to 5 cm in
Figure 33 Placement of needle for subcutaneous injection.
Figure 34 Subcutaneous injection.
43
44
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
length. An over-the-needle
intravenous catheter may be used
instead of a needle for this
procedure.
3. Palpate abdomen to determine
 3. If the animal's bladder is empty, the
whether urinary bladder is empty.
possibility of inadvertently
puncturing this organ is markedly
reduced. If the bladder is distended,
allow the animal to urinate or
empty bladder by catheterization.
4. Place animal in dorsal or lateral
4. Depending on the animal's size and
recumbency.
temperament, one or two assistants
will be needed to restrain the
animal.
5. Swab skin over intended injection
5. A disinfectant removes surface
site with cotton moistened with 70%
debris from the skin and hair.
alcohol or other skin disinfectant.
6. Elevate animal's hindquarters
6. Elevation of the hindquarters allows
approximately 10 to 15 cm higher
most of the viscera to move anterior
than front. quarters.
to the intended injection site.
7. Insert. needle at a point. midway
7. Direct needle toward pubis into
between umbilicus and pubis just
abdomen.
lateral to linea alba (Fig. 3-5).
Figure 35 Intraperitoneal injection.
INJECTION TECHNIQUES
45
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 8. Before injecting, pull back on
8. The presence of blood, urine, or
syringe plunger and observe for
intestinal contents in the syringe
blood, urine, or intestinal contents
indicates that the needle is
en tering syringe.
positioned incorrectly within the
peritoneal cavity or that there is
abdominal disease or injury.
9. If blood, urine, or intestinal
 9. The peritoneal cavity of dogs and
contents are not aspirated into
cats can accommodate relatively
syringe, inject material at. moderate
large volumes of fluid (e.g., up to
rate into peritoneal cavity.
5 liters in a large dog).
 Intraperitoneal fluid administration
can be a lifesaving procedure in tiny
hypovolemic animals, such as
seriously ill neonates.
10. Remove needle from abdomen.
11. Note in animal's medical record
11. Note date, time, medication, serial/
that medication was given.
lot. number, dosage, route, initials 
and comments.
INTRADERMAL INJECTION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for injection.
1. See pp. 36-38.
 2. Clip hair from intended injection
 2. For a single injection, clip about. a
site.
10-cm square area on lateral
abdomen or thorax. For intradermal
 skin testing, clip a large area on the
thorax or abdomen. Clipping
should be done in an area that is
free of skin lesions. Gentle use of
the clippers is essential to avoid
trauma to the skin.
3. Avoid use of soaps or disinfectants
 3. Such agents may cause local allergic
on skin where intradermal skin test
reactions that will mask test results.
injections will be made.
4. For intradermal skin testing, place
 animal in lateral recumbency.
5. Mark skin beneath each intended
5. Marking ensures even spacing of
injection site with felt-tip pen.
injections and facilitates recording
of test results.
46
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Hold syringe barrel with needle
bevel up at approximately 10-degree
angle with skin.
7. Stretch skin between thumb and
7. It is not necessary to insert the
forefinger of one hand and insert
needle to its hub when giving an
needle within epidermis until bevel
in tradermal injection.
is completely enclosed within skin
layers (Fig. 3-6).
8. Check for correct placement of
8. The metal of the needle should be
needle intradermailly by lifting up
just visible through the epidermis if
on tip of needle.
the needle is positioned properly.
9. Inject 0.05 to 0.1 mL intradermally
9. A small intradermal bleb of fluid
(Fig. 3-7); then remove needle from
 should be present at the injection
skin.
site.
10. For intradermal infiltration of local
10. Local anesthesia may be used for
anesthetic agent, place animal in
excision of small benign skin lesions
position that affords access to area
and suturing of small wounds.
to be injected.
11. Clip hair from area to be infltrated
with local anesthetic and prepare
Figure 3-6 Inserting needle intradermally
INJECTION TECHNIQUES
47
Figure 3-7
7 Intradermal injection.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
skin, using 2% chlorhexidine scrub
and 70% alcohol (Chapter 16,
p. 173-175).
12. Inject local anesthetic intradermally,
12. The volume of local anesthetic used
repeating Nos. 6 to 8, p. 46.
will depend on the size and location
of the lesion.
Bibliography
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook ofVeterinary Procedures & Emergency Treat-
ment, 6th ed., Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Boothe DM, Tannert K: Surgical considerations for drug and fluid therapy in the pediatric
patient. Comp Contin Educ for Prac Vet 14(3):313-329, 1992
Brunner LS, Suddarth DS: The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice, Srd ed. Philadelphia,
JB Lippincott, 1982
CDC: Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection. www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/gl_
surgicalsite.html, 1999
48
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Kirk RW, Bistner SI: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
O'Grady NP et al.: Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections.
MMWR 51(RR10):1-26. www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5110a1.htm, 2002
Pratt PW (ed): Medical Nursing for Animal Health Technicians. Santa Barbara, American Vet-
erinary Publications, 1985
Chapter 4
PLACEMENT AND
CARE
 OF
NTRAVENOUS
CATHETERS
The recollectionof quality remains long after the price has been forgotten.
BENJAMIN FRANKLIN
Intravenous catheterization is the placement of a hollow device, a catheter, into a vein.
Purposes
1. To administer fluids, medications, anesthetic agents, blood components, and
certain test. substances
2. To measure central venous pressure
3. To provide ready access to the circulatory system for anticipated metabolic emer-
gencies (e.g., seizures, hypoglycemia, and shock)
Complications
1. Occlusion, malpositioning, and breakage of the catheter
 2. Thrombophlebitis
3. Extravasation and resultant infiltration of subcutaneous tissues
4. Infection
 5. Hemorrhage and subcutaneous hematoma formation
6. Pyrogenic reaction
49
50
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
7. Circulatory overload
8. Air embolism
9. Allergic reaction
Equipment Needed
*Cotton
* Clipper with No. 40 blade
* Skin preparation materials
2% chlorhexidine scrub
70% alcohol
Sterile gauze sponges (2" × 2")
● Bandaging material
 Sterile gauze sponges
Gauze bandage
Adhesive tape (%", 1", and 2")
Splint (if necessary)
 n   s i ng as pu o  i  s 
 of normal saline)
· Injection cap
* T-port (if necessary)
● Fluid administration set. (if necessary)
● Extension tubing (if necessary)
* Intravenous catheter(s)
Winged infusion set. ("butterfly")
Over-the-needle catheter ("needle inside")
Through-the-needle catheter ("needle outside")
Through-the-needle catheter with break-away needle ("needle outside")
Multiple lumen intravenous catheter
Restraint and Positioning
There are five veins in both dogs and cats that are accessible for intravenous catheter
ization: jugular, cephalic, lateral saphenous (recurrent tarsal), medial saphenous and
femoral. The jugular is the vein of choice for administration of hypertonic solutions,
long-term fluid administration, and central venous pressure measurement.
Adequate restraint is important throughout the procedure to ensure aseptic
placement of the catheter and proper bandaging of the catheterization site. The
position used depends on the vein selected for catheterization. (See Chapter 2,
pp. 20-23).
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
51
PREPARATION FOR INTRAVENOUS CATHETERIZATION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Wash hands.
1. Every precaution must be taken to
reduce the chance of causing
iatrogenic infection.
2. Clip hair over a wide area around
2. Good visualization of the vein aids in
insertion site.
atraumatic venipuncture. Clipping of
hair is a necessary part of skin
 preparation. Be sure to clip
adequately below where the catheter
will be placed to avoid dragging the
sterile catheter through hair.
 3. Prepare clipped area as for surgery.
3. Use 2% chlorhexidine scrub and
70% alcohol (See Chapter 16,
Pp. 173-175).
4. Select intravenous catheter of
4. Factors influencing catheter selection
 appropriate diameter and length
include size and location of vein and
(Table 41).
the reason for catheterization. To
minimize thrombophlebitis, use the
smallest diameter catheter that will
allow the infusion rate required for
the animal's needs.
5. Inspect catheter for flaws.
 5. Discard any catheter with a barbed
needle, frayed tip, or immobile parts.
TABLE 41.
 Recommended imtravenous catheter sizes for routine use in
dogs and cats.
Animal
Vein
Catheter Type
Size
Cephalic
Over-the-needle
20 gauge, 1  in.
Femoral
Over-the-needle
20 gauge, 1 W in.
Jugular
Through-the-needle
19 gauge, 8 in.
Dog
Cephalic
Through-the-needle
19 gauge, 8 or 12 in.
Over-the-needle
18 or 20 gauge, 1% in.
Lateral saphenous
Through-the-needle
19 gauge, 8 or 12 in.
Over-the-needlle
18 or 20 gauge, 1% in.
Jugular (≤30 kg)
Through-the-needlle
19 gauge, 8 or 12 in.
Jugular (>30 kg)
Through-the-needle
16 gauge, 12 in.
52
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
INSErTION OF WINGED INFUSION SEt ("bUTTeRFly")
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See p. 51. The relatively short
needle on the winged infusion set
limits its use, for the most part, to
cephalic, saphenous, and femoral
veins.
2. Distend (or ask assistant to distend)
2. See Chapter 2, p. 24, No. 3.
vein with blood.
 3. Hold winged infusion set so that
3. In general, insertion of a needle
bevel of needle is up, while
into a vein with its bevel up helps to
squeezing wings of set. together
minimize trauma to the wall of the
between thumb and index finger
vein.
(Fig. 41).
4. Insert needle (with bevel up) at.
4. A flash of blood should appear in
approximately 30-degree angle with
the plastic tubing near the proximal
skin.
end of the needle.
 5. Advance needle into vein.
5. Inadvertent puncturing of the
opposite wall of the vein usually can
be avoided by lifting the wings
slightly while threading the needle
into the vein.
6. Release (or ask assistant. to release)
distending pressure on vein.
7. Attach injection cap, syringe, or
7. Starting the infusion helps to
fluid infusion set, and begin 
anchor the needle in the vein and
administration of prescribed fluid
prevent. backflow of blood. In
or agent.
general, winged infusion sets are
suitable in animals only for short-
term administration of
pharmacologic agents or for fluid
administration during anesthesia.
An injection cap is not. required
under these circumstances.
8. Hold infusion set. in place by
 8. The tape serves to hold the needle
applying adhesive tape parallel to
in place.
needle on each wing, then across
 entire apparatus and encircling leg
(Fig. 42).
9. Make loop in tubing and tape this
9. If the animal moves, the butterfly
loop to animal (Fig. 42).
needle can easily become dislodged
or puncture the opposite wall of the
Figure 4-1
 [nserting winged intravenous infusion set.
53
54
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
vein. A loop in the tubing prevents
traction on the needle when the leg
 and infusion set are moved.
10. Repeatedly check position of
10. Frequent checking of correct needle
butterfly needle within vein by
placement is advisable when
aspiration of blood into a syringe or
irritating substances are being
by lowering fluid bottle below
administered through a winged
animal's body level.
infusion set. This catheter is not
meant. as a long-term catheter.
Never leave the patient unattended
when using a butterfly catheter for
fluid or medication administration.
11. Remove needle from vein and
11. Pressure on the venipuncture site
immediately apply pressure to
and bandaging of the site following
venipuncture site with dry cotton
needle removal will decrease the
ball.
possibility of hemorrhage and
subcutaneous hematoma formation.
12. Apply previously prepared bandage
12. Bandaging to prevent hemorrhage
with gentle compression to cephalic,
and subcutaneous hematoma
saphenous, or femoral venipuncture
formation is especially important in
site (Fig. 2-9, p. 28). Maintain frm
seriously ill animal patients because
pressure on jugular venipuncture
repeated venipuncture for
site for at least 60 seconds.
 diagnostic and therapeutic
 proce dures may be necessary.
13. Remove bandage from animal's leg
vein in 30 to 60 minutes
INSERTION OF OVER-ThE-NEEDle CAThETeR
(.EGISNI ETGEEN)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See p. 51. Over-the-needle catheters
are not recommended for use in the
jugular vein. The short length of
these catheters impedes securing
them in the neck. Also it is difficult.
to puncture the thicker skin in the
neck area with an over-the-needle
catheter.
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
55
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
2. Place sufficient length of V-inch
 2. This tape will serve to anchor the
adhesive tape around catheter hub
catheter firmly to the leg once it has
to encircle animal's leg.
been placed in the vein.
3. Distend (or ask assistant to distend)
3. See Chapter 2, p. 24, No. 3.
vein with blood.
4. Insert needle and catheter into vein
4. Rapid flow of blood into the hub of
with needle bevel up (Fig. 43).
the needle indicates successful
venipuncture.
5. Advance needle into vein until at
5. The catheter is slightly shorter than
least 1.5 cm is within vein.
the needle in an over-the-needle
catheter. Entry of the catheter into
the vein is ensured by placing a
suffcient portion of the needle
within the lumen of the vein.
6. Hold needle in place and slowly
6. Once the advancing of the catheter
advance only catheter farther into
has begun, the metal needle must.
vein until catheter hub is at point of
not be reinserted through the
skin puncture (Fig. 44). If catheter
catheter because the needle could
will not thread easily, remove entire
cut the catheter.
apparatus, place a temporary
bandage over venipuncture site, and
attempt catheterization in another
vein or at a more proximal part of
same vein.
7. Hold catheter hub and withdraw
7. The catheter can be removed
needle from catheter.
inadvertently if it is not held in
place while the needle is withdrawn.
Figure 4-3  Inserting over-the-needle intravenous catheter.
56
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 44 Advancing over-the-needle intravenous catheter.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
8. Place injection cap or T-port. on
 8. An injection cap provides a sterile
catheter (Fig. 45).
seal to the intravenous catheter. A
T-port should be placed on the
catheter for continuous fluid
administration. The intravenous
fluid infusion tubing can be
inserted directly into the injection
cap.
 9. Wrap adhesive tape strip attached to
 9. This tape anchors the catheter to
catheter hub around animal's leg.
the leg. Firm anchoring of the
 catheter prevents trauma to the vein
caused by excessive movement of
the catheter.
10. Flush catheter with heparinized
10. Heparinized saline will keep the
saline.
catheter patent while the bandage is
 placed on the leg.
11. Cleanse venipuncture site of any
11. Blood is a good culture medium for
blood with cotton.
bacterial growth. Removal of any
blood extravasated during the
procedure will help to decrease the
possibility of infection.
12. Place sterile gauze sponge over
12. The CDC has determined that the
insertion site (Fig. 46).
most effective way to prevent.
catheter-related infections is to
Figure 45 Injection cap on intravenous catheter.
Figure 46 Covering catheter insertion point with sterile gauze.
57
58
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 47 Bandage protecting intravenous catheterization site.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
avoid multiuse antimicrobial
ointment. A sterile gauze sponge
should be aseptically placed over
the catheter insertion site.
13. Bandage leg using gauze bandaging
13. Careful bandaging of the leg over a
material and adhesive tape,
wide area helps to prevent.
 leaving only injection cap exposed
contamination of the catheter
(Fig. 47).
 insertion site and resulting
infection. A splint may be
incorporated into the bandage if
the animal repeatedly moves its leg
into a position that interferes with
the flow rate of the intravenous
infusion.
14. Flush catheter with heparinized
14. The heparinized saline will keep the
saline every 8 to 12 hours when not
catheter patent.
in continuous use.
15. Remove bandage and inspect leg
15. The bandage should be changed
every 24 hours, or immediately if
immediately if it becomes wet or
animal gives evidence of pain in
soiled. The bandage should be
catheterized leg, or if intravenous
changed and the leg inspected for
infusion cannot be administered
swelling, pain, redness, or increased
easily.
skin temperature every 24 hours.
 Such signs may indicate one or
more of the following
complications: infiltration of
subcutaneous tissues due to catheter
moving out of the vein,
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
59
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
thrombophlebitis, or infection. If
any of these signs are present, the
catheter should be removed and the
catheter tip should be submitted for
bacteriologic culture.
16. If continuous intravenous fluid
16. Utilizing a T-port allows for venous
administration is maintained, a
access while preventing
T-port. should be placed on catheter
contamination by disconnection and
to help avoid contamination of fluid
reconnection of fluid line. A needle
line. Change fluid administration
should never be inserted into the
set. every 24 to 72 hours.
 injection cap for the purpose of
long-term fluid administration.
 Changing the fluid administration
apparatus helps to prevent the
infusion of microorganisms
originating within the apparatus
itself.
17. When catheter is removed,
17. Pressure on the venipuncture site
immediately apply pressure to
and bandaging of the site following
catheterization site with dry cotton
catheter removal will decrease the
ball. Then apply previously
possibility of hemorrhage and
 prepared bandage.
subcutaneous hematoma formation.
INSERtIOn Of ThROUGh-The-NeEDLE CAThETER
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See p. 51. Examine the apparatus
carefully to determine that the
catheter moves easily within the
needle.
2. Distend (or ask assistant to distend)
2. See Chapter 2, p. 24, No.3.
vein with blood.
3. Insert needle (with catheter
3. Because of the length of this type of
withdrawn inside needle) into vein
catheter (20 or 30 cm), it should be
with needle bevel up (Fig. 48).
inserted close to the carpus if the
cephalic vein is used. A through-the-
needle catheter is inserted
downward into the jugular vein
toward the thoracic inlet (Fig. 49).
Figure 48 Inserting through-the-needle intravenous catheter into cephalic vein.
Figure 4-9
Inserting through-the-needle intravenous catheter into jugular vein.
60
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
61
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
It. may be easier, especially in the
neck area, to insert the needle
through the skin before
venipuncture is attempted.
4. Advance needle into vein until at.
4. Venipuncture is confirmed when a
least 1.5 cm is within vein.
flash of blood is seen in the
catheter. Entry of the catheter into
the vein is ensured by placing a
sufficient portion of the needle
within the lumen before the
catheter is threaded.
5. Hold needle firmly with one hand
5. Occasionally the animal's leg or
and thread catheter into vein by
neck must be flexed or extended to
pushing catheter hub within plastic
allow the catheter to advance as far
sleeve (Fig. 410A) until catheter
 as possible into the vein.
hub has been advanced into needle
hub (Fig. 410B).
6. Disconnect. plastic sleeve from
6. It is sometimes necessary to hold
needle (Fig. 411).
the needle hub with a forceps to
prevent. excessive needle motion
and possible laceration of the vein.
7. Withdraw needle from skin and
7. The function of the wire stylet is to
remove wire stylet.
add rigidity to the catheter while it
is being advanced into the vein.
8. Place injection cap or T-port on
8. An injection cap provides a sterile
catheter.
seal to the catheter. A T-port should
be placed on the catheter for
continuous fluid administration to
allow for venous access while
preventing contamination by
disconnection and reconnection of
the fluid line.
9. Flush catheter with heparinized
9. The heparinized saline will keep the
saline.
catheter patent while the
catheterization site is bandaged.
10. Place needle guard over point at.
10. The needle guard protects the
which catheter emerges from tip of
catheter from being severed by the
needle (Fig. 412) and snap it shut.
needle.
11. Double back external portion of
11. Be careful not to kink the catheter.
catheter to facilitate bandaging
(Fig. 413).
12. Follow complete bandage
procedures previously described for
bandaging, care, and removal of
Figure 4-10 (A) Advancing through-the-needle intravenous catheter inside plastic sleeve, and
(B) Catheter hub fully advanced into needle hub.
Figure 4-11
 Disconnecting plastic sleeve from needle hub.
62
Figure 4-12 Placing needle guard on through-the-needle intravenous catheter.
Figure 4-13  Positioning external portion of through-the-needle intravenous catheter prior to
bandaging: (A) leg and (B) neck.
63
64
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
catheter (Fig. 414). (See pp. 56-59,
Nos. 11 to 17.)
13. If hypertonic fluids are to be
13. It is important to make sure that the
administered, radiograph thorax to
catheter is properly positioned (e.g.,
check catheter position within
not. folded back on itself or
jugular vein.
positioned in a small vein such as
the internal thoracic vein).
Hypertonic solutions should be
given only in large veins, where the
volume of blood will decrease the
possibility of thrombophlebitis.
INSERTION OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETER
WIth BREaK-AWAY NEeDlE
Additional Equipment Needed
● Small sterile drape
+ Surgeon's gloves
● Sterile scissors (if placing catheter in jugular vein)
● Suture material (for suturing catheter flange to skin)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. An intravenous catheter with a
break-away needle is especially
useful for the jugular and lateral
saphenous veins in the dog and for
 the jugular and medial saphenous
veins in the cat.
2. Put on gloves. Place sterile drape
2. Strict attention to asepsis is essential
around catheterization site.
to decrease the possibility of
infection.
3. If catheter will be placed in jugular
3. If the catheter is too long, its distal
vein, premeasure catheter length
end will reach the right atrium
from insertion site on animal's neck
where it could initiate cardiac
to third rib space. Then cut catheter
arrhyth mia.
to proper length with sterile scissors.
Figure 414  (A, B, C) Bandaging intravenous through-the-needle catheter in jugular vein.
65
66
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 4-15
Advancing intravenous catheter with break-away needle into vein.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Insert needle (with catheter
4. A through-the-needle catheter is
withdrawn inside needle) into vein
inserted downward into the jugular
with needle bevel up.
vein toward the thoracic inlet
(Fig. 4-9).
5. Advance needle into vein until at
5. Venipuncture is confirmed when a
least 1.5 cm is within vein lumen
flash of blood is seen in the
(Fig. 415).
catheter. Entry of the catheter into
the lumen of the vein is ensured by
placing a sufficient portion of the
needle within the vein before the
catheter is threaded.
6. Hold needle firmly with one hand
and thread flexible catheter into
vein until proximal end reaches
needle hub.
7. Withdraw metal needle from vein
7. The metal needle must be
and skin.
completely out of the skin before it
is taken apart.
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
67
DerekBFox%
Figure 4-16 Peeling away halves of break-away needle.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 8. Squeeze plastic wings together to
break seal on metal needle.
9. Peel needle halves apart. and discard
(Fig 416).
10. Remove wire stylet.
11. The function of the wire stylet is to
add rigidity to the catheter while it.
 is being advanced into the vein.
12. Place injection cap or T-port. on
12. An injection cap provides a sterile
catheter.
seal to the catheter. A T-port. should
be placed on the catheter for
continuous fluid administration to
allow for venous access while
 preven ting contamination by
disconnection and reconnection of
fluid line.
68
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
13. Flush catheter with heparinized
13. The heparinized saline will keep the
saline.
catheter patent. while the
catheterization site is bandaged.
14. If desired, suture catheter flange to
animal's skin.
15. Follow complete bandaging
procedures previously described for
bandaging, care, and removal of
catheter (Fig. 414). (See pp. 56-59,
Nos. 11 to 17.)
MULTIPLe lUMEN INTRAVENOUS CATHETeRS
Multiple lumen intravenous catheters are useful when administering two continuous
nutrition (TPN) formulas. The catheter is inserted with the aid of a guide wire and a
vein dilator. Completely sterile technique must be used for placement of these
catheters.
Additional Equipment Needed
* 1 or 2 assistants
· clippers
* appropriate size sandbag, or roll gauze for very small animals
+ 2% chlorhexidine scrub and alcohol
* appropriate size jugular catheter
·2 sterile feld drapes
* cap and mask
* sterile gloves
+ local anesthetic (2% lidocaine)
+ scalpel blade
* package of sterile 4" × 4" gauze sponges
+ sterile suturing instruments
* sterile 6 mL syringe
+ 20 g needle
* alcohol cotton ball
· heparinized saline
* suture material
● 18 or 20 g peripheral catheter
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
69
+ 2"× 2" sterile gauze
·tape
● roll gauze of appropriate size
Procedure
Preparation
1. Place a sterile drape over Mayo stand. Aseptically place all sterile items and
second drape onto sterile field.
2. Place alcohol ball on top of heparinized saline bottle.
 3. Don cap, mask, and sterile gloves
 aaa ao ad s  a s  g  a 
syringe and remove needle guard.
 5. Draw 6 mL of heparinized saline into syringe using aseptic technique.
6. Remove intermittent infusion plug from brown distal port and leave open.
7. Flush all ports with heparinized saline.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Assess jugular veins for visibility,
thrombosis, hematoma,
dermatopathy, or anything else that.
might. make catheterization difficult.
or impossible. Select a vein to
catheterize.
2. Assistant: Restrain animal in lateral
 2. Support material under the neck
recumbency with sandbag or gauze
will bow the neck toward the
roll under neck or shoulder.
operator while providing physical
comfort for the animal. Sedation
may be necessary. Avoid general
anesthesia because most patients
requiring multiple lumen catheters
are in critical condition.
3. Measure from expected insertion
3. This measurement is the length to
 site to caudal edge of triceps
which the catheter should be
muscles.
inserted. The end of the catheter
should reach the vena cava half way
between the thoracic inlet and the
right atrium. If the catheter is too
long, its distal end will contact the
right atrium where it. could initiate
a cardiac arrhythmia.
70
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Clip and remove hair from neck
4. Clip widely so that long hairs at the
over jugular vein.
edge cannot fall into the aseptic
area.
 5. Prepare skin with dilute
5. Strict attention to asepsis is essential
chlorhexidine scrub and alcohol
to decrease the possibility of
(3 times each, ending with alcohol).
infection.
6. Cut. a hole of appropriate size in
 6. A sterile drape helps to prevent.
 middle of drape and place drape
inadvertent contamination of the
over intended puncture site.
catheter and guide wire.
7. Tent skin and make a small skin
7. The incision must be large enough
puncture/incision.
to allow easy passage of the
intended catheter through the skin
at the insertion site.
8. Assistant Reach under drape and
 occlude jugular vein by applying
 digital pressure near thoracic inlet.
9. Insert. introducer catheter/needle
into vein (Fig. 4-17) with point
directed toward thorax; then
remove needle, leaving catheter in
vein.
10. Feed guide wire into catheter
10. The length of guide wire remaining
and down jugular vein 5 to 8 cm
visible should be longer than the
(Fig. 418).
length of the multilumen catheter
and the central port. Control the
end of the wire so that it does not
make contact. with a nonsterile area.
11. Remove catheter, leaving guide wire
11. Do not let go of the guide wire. It.
in vein.
can be drawn into the vessel and
cause an emergency situation.
Figure 4-17 Inserting introducer catheter/needle for multilumen catheter in jugular vein.
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
71
Figure 4-18 Guide wire fed into jugular vein through introducer catheter.
Figure 419 Feeding vessel wall dilator over guide wire into the jugular vein.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
12. Feed vessel wall dilator over guide
12. This step requires an aggressive,
wire and advance it into vein as far
forceful insertion. A twisting/
as it will go (Fig. 4-19).
turning technique may facilitate
dilator insertion.
13. Remove dilator from vein and guide
13. Use sterile gauze to apply pressure
wire and quickly apply digital
to the dilated vessel to avoid
pressure at. skin entry site to control
excessive blood loss.
hemorrhage.
14. Feed tip of multilumen catheter
 over guide wire until about 2.5 cm
of wire protrudes from brown/distal
port (Fig. 420).
15. Hold end of guide wire frmly so
15. Never let go of the guide wire. If
that it is not inserted with catheter
lost in the catheter, the catheter and
72
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 420 Passing multilumen catheter over guide wire until ~25 cm of the wire extends
out end of middle (brown) port.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
and slide catheter into vein to
guide wire will need to be removed
predetermined length (Fig. 421).
and the procedure started over.
16. Remove guide wire and place an
16. An infusion plug provides a sterile
 infusion plug on brown extension
seal to the catheter. The
tube port; aspirate any air and flush
heparinized saline will keep the
line with heparinized saline.
catheter patent while the skin
incision is sutured and the
catheterization site is bandaged.
NOTE: Secure catheter in following manner if it has been partialy inserted (less than fuill
length):
17. Assistant: Hold catheter and animal
17. Do not allow the catheter to back
so that catheter does not
out and become contaminated.
accidentally back out of vein
18. Place rubber butterfly sheath
18. This step allows a portion of the
around catheter at prescribed level,
catheter to be secured outside of
as close to skin puncture site as
the vessel. Insure that the catheter is
possible.
not pinched or occluded.
19. Suture rubber butterfly sheath to
catheter by placing ligatures around
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
73
Figure 4-21  Slide catheter over guide wire into jugular vein.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 indented portion at. either end of
rubber sheath.
20. Place fastener clamp over rubber
butterfly.
NOTE: Secure catheter in the following manner if it has been inserted to full length:
21. Assistant: Hold catheter and patient.
so that catheter does not
accidentally become dislodged.
22. Place catheter on neck, behind ear,
making sure that there are no kinks
in catheter.
 23. Place a stay suture in skin next to
23. These sutures will facilitate catheter
 side holes in fastener clamp.
exchange if/when it is necessary to
do so.
 24. Suture wings of clamp to these stay
sutures. Suture hub of catheter to
neck skin also (Fig. 4-22).
25. Check each port to make sure that
25. If the catheter ports cannot be
they can be aspirated and flushed.
aspirated, the catheter may need to
be repositioned or backed out.
74
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 4-22 Multilumen catheter secured to neck by sutures.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
26. Clean area of blood and antiseptic
26. Blood is a good culture medium for
solution.
bacterial growth. Removal of any
blood extravasated during the
procedure will help to decrease the
possibility of infection.
27. Place a sterile 2" x 2" gauze over
27. CDC guidelines advise placing a
insertion site and wrap catheter and
sterile gauze square over the
neck with roll gauze.
insertion site to help avoid catheter-
related infections.
 28. Secure gauze and ports with tape.
INSERtIOn OF CUt-DOWN CAthETER
Additional Equipment Needed
● Sterile drapes
● Surgeon's gloves
● Cap and mask
PLACEMENT AND CARE OF INTRAVENOUS CATHETERS
75
* Scalpel blade
* Curved hemostat.
· Suture material
+ Local anesthetic (2% lidocaine)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization of
1. A through-the-needle catheter is
 jugular vein.
suitable for use in the cut-down
procedure. In hypotensive,
debilitated, or very young animals,
the veins may not be visible or
palpable, rendering a cut-down
 procedure necessary for intravenous
catheterization.
2. Don cap, mask, and sterile gloves.
2. Strict attention to asepsis is essential
Place sterile drapes around
to decrease the possibility of
catheterization site.
infection.
3. Infltrate region of incision with
3. General anesthesia should be
local anesthetic (2% lidocaine).
avoided because of the critical
condition of the patient.
4. Make a longitudinal skin incision
over jugular vein.
5. Using blunt dissection, isolate vein
5. These ligatures will be needed
and use curved hemostat to
above and below the venipuncture
preplace two 12- to 15-cm lengths of
site to prevent hemorrhage. The
absorbable suture material under
normal compressing effect of the
vein on each side of proposed
surrounding tissues will be
insertion site (Fig. 423).
disrupted by the surgical dissection.
6. Tie distal ligature (ligature closer to
animal's head), but do not. cut ends
of ligature yet.
7. Insert. through-the-needle catheter
7. See pp. 59-61 (Nos. 3 to 6).
into vein routinely, but. do not.
remove wire stylet at this time.
8. Ligate vein around catheter
8. The wire stylet. prevents the ligature
proximal to insertion site
from crushing the catheter.
(Fig. 424).
9. Tie loose ends of distal ligature
9. Tying the distal ligature stabilizes
around catheter to hold it. to
the catheter further and prevents
outside wall of vein distal to
kinking at the insertion site.
insertion site (Fig. 425).
76
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 4-23 Preplacing suture material during cut-down intravenous catheterization.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
10. Remove wire stylet.
11. Place injection cap or T-port on
11. An injection cap provides a sterile
catheter.
seal to the catheter. A T-port should
be placed on the catheter for
con tinuous fluid administration to
allow for venous access while
preventing contamination by
disconnection and reconnection of
fluid line.
12. Flush catheter with heparinized
12. The heparinized saline will keep the
saline.
catheter patent while the skin
incision is sutured and the
catheterization site is bandaged.
13. Place needle guard over point. at.
13. The needle guard protects the
which catheter emerges from tip of
catheter from being severed by the
needle, and snap it shut.
needle.
14. Suture skin incision.
14. The skin sutures can be removed
when the incision has healed (7 to
10 days).
15. Double back external portion of
15. Be careful not to kink the catheter.
catheter to facilitate bandaging
(Fig. 413, p. 63).
16. Follow complete procedure
previously described for bandaging,
Figure 4-24 Tying proximal ligature around vein.
Figure 4-25 Tying distal ligature around vein and catheter
77
78ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
care, and removal of catheter (Fig.
414). (See pp. 56-59, Nos. 11 to
17)
17. It is important. to make sure that the
17. If hypertonic fluids are to be
catheter is properly positioned (e.g..
administered, take thoracic
not folded back on itself or
radiograph to check catheter
positioned in a small vein such as
position within jugular vein.
the internal thoracic vein).
Hypertonic solutions should be
given only in large veins, where the
volume of blood will decrease the
possibility of thrombophlebitis.
NOTE: Certain complications of intravenous therapy, such as pyrogenic reaction, circulatory
overload,and air embolism,are beyond the scope of this book but are discussed in depth in The
Lippincott. Manual of Nursing Practice, third edition.
Bibliography
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency
Treatment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Brunner LS, Suddarth DS: The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice, Srd ed. Philadelphia,
JB Lippincott, 1982
Burrows CF: Techniques and complications of intravenous and intraartrial catheterization in
dogs and cats. JAVMA 163(12):1357-1363, 1973
CDC: Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection. www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/gl_
surgicalsite.html, 1999
Haskins SC: Fluid and electrolyte therapy. Comp Contin Educ for Pract Vet 6(3):244-257,
1984
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
Lane DR, Cooper B: Veterinary Nursing (Formerly Jones's Animal Nursing, 5th edition).
Oxford, England, Pergamon Press, 1994
Managing IV Therapy, A Nursing Photobook, In Nursing '81 Photobook. Springhouse, PA,
[ntermed Communications, 1980
O'Grady NP et al.: Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections.
MMWR 51(RR10):1-26. www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5110a1.htm, 2002
Chapter 5
ORAL
ADMNISTRATION
OF MEDICATIONS
Patience is the companion of wisdom.
ANONYMOUS
Oral administration of medications is the placement of solid or liquid material in the oral
cavity so that specific quantities of the material are swallowed.
Purposes
 1. To administer medications, water, and nutritional supplements
 2. To administer certain radiographic con trast materials
Contraindications
1. Dysphagia, regurgitation, and vomiting
2. Acute pancreatitis
 3. Esophageal and gastroin testinal obstruction
4. Esophageal surgery within the past 2 to 7 days, depending on extent of injury
5. Gastric or intestinal surgery within the past. 12 to 24 hours
6. Head and neck trauma
Complications
1. Aspiration of medications into respiratory tract.
2. Inaccurate dosing
79
80
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Equipment Needed
+ For capsules or tablets:
Lubricant.
 Pilling device
· For liquids:
Syringe, small bottle, or spoon
Restraint and Positioning
The procedure may be accomplished with the animal standing, sitting, or in sternal
recumbency. Minimal restraint should be used. When handling vicious animals, oral
medication can be offered in small amounts of palatable food. It is imperative that.
the animal be fully conscious whenever medications are administered orally.
AdMINISTRATION OF CAPSUlE OR TAbLET
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Check medication to be
1. It is important to take measures to
administered with regard to "The
 prevent errors of medication
Five Rights": right patient, right.
administration.
drug, right dose, right route, right.
time and frequency.
2. Wash hands.
2. Washing hands between patients is
important in controlling
communicable diseases in a
hospital. It is advisable to wear
nonsterile examination gloves when
administering oral medication to an
animal with a communicable
disease.
3. Lubricate capsule or tablet.
3. Lubrication of the capsule or tablet,
with butter or water-soluble
lubricant, makes it easier to swallow.
4. Place capsule or tablet in pilling
4. A pilling device is useful for
device (Fig. 5-1) or hold between
administering capsules or tablets to
thumb and index finger of one
a cat or a dog that resists attempts
hand (Fig. 5-2).
to hold the mouth open during the
procedure.
ORAL ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS
81
Figure 5-1  Commercial pilling device.
Figure 5-2
Manually placing capsule on base of dog's tongue.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
5. Place palm of other hand on dorsal
surface of animal's snout.
6. Insert thumb behind one upper
6. Rolling the animal's lips inward over
canine tooth into mouth and stroke
its teeth may minimize the
animal's hard palate.
possibility of the person being
bitten. Tactile stimulation of the
hard palate often leads to
spontaneous opening of the mouth.
82
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 5-3 Placing capsule on base of cat's tongue with pilling device.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
7. Tilt animal's nostrils toward ceiling.
7. This head position causes relaxation
of the lower jaw muscles in many
animals, thereby eliminating the
need for forceful attempts to pry
open the animal's mouth.
8. Press downward on animal's lower
 8. At this point, the animal's mouth
incisors with fourth and ffth fingers
should be open wide.
of hand holding medications.
9. Place capsule or tablet on base of
9. An animal can easily eject from its
animal's tongue (Figs. 5-2 or 5-3)
mouth a capsule or tablet placed on
the rostral portion of the tongue.
10. Withdraw hand or pilling device
from animal's mouth.
11. Close animal's mouth quickly and
11. Licking of the nasal planum
hold it. closed, while at same time
indicates that the animal has
gently rubbing laryngeal area.
swallowed.
12. Note in animal's medical record
12. The following information should
that medication was given.
be noted in the medical record:
date, time, medication, dosage,
route, initials of individual
administering medication, and
comments.
ORAL ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS
83
AdMINISTRATION OF LIQUId MEDICATION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Check medication to be
1. It is important to take measures to
administered, using “The Five
prevent errors of medication
Rights": right. patient, right. drug.
administration.
right. dose, right. route, right time
and frequency.
2. Wash hands.
 2. Washing hands between patients is
 important in controlling
communicable diseases in a hospital.
It is advisable to wear nonsterile
examination gloves while
administering oral medication to an
animal with a communicable disease.
 3. Place liquid medication in syringe or
 3. A spoon may be used to administer
small bottle.
 palatable liquids to animals of quiet.
te mperamen t.
4. With one hand, form a pouch from
4. The animal's jaws therefore can
animal's cheek just. caudal to
remain closed during the procedure.
commissures of its lips by placing
finger or thumb inside cheek and
pulling laterally on lip (Fig. 5-4).
Figure 5-4 Forming a cheek pouch for administration of liquids.
84
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 5-5  Administering liquid medication orally.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
5. Place liquid medication into cheek
5. The dorsal surface of the animal's
pouch, small amounts at a time
snout should be parallel to the
(Fig. 5-5).
ground or only slightly elevated while
liquids are administered. Avoiding
pointing the animal's nostrils toward
the ceiling minimizes the possibility
of aspiration of the liquid into the
respiratory tract.
6. Give medication slowly.
6. To ensure adequate dosing, it. is
advisable to administer a small 
amount. of liquid and wait until the
animal swallows before placing any
more liquid into the cheek pouch.
7. Note in animal's medical record
7. The following information should be
that medication was given.
noted in the medical record: date,
time, medication, dosage, route,
 initials of individual administering
medication, and comments.
Bibliography
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency
Treatment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Giving Medications, A Nursing Photobook. In Nursing '80 Photobook. Springhouse, PA,
[ntermed Communications, 1980
ORAL ADMINISTRATION OF MEDICATIONS
85
Jones BV: Animal Nursing, Part 2. Oxford, Peragamon Press, 1966
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
McCurnin DM: Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians, Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
1985
Chapter
DERMATOLOGIC
PROCEDURES
What wesee dependsmainlyon what we lookfor.
JOHN LUBBOCK
This chapter describes several procedures that are useful for gathering diagnostic
information about skin diseases.
SKIN CULTURE
Skin cultureis the inoculation of suitable media with material from the skin.
Purposes
1. To identify bacterial and fungal pathogens of the skin
 2. To determine the antibiotic sensitivity of bacterial skin pathogens
Equipment Needed
·Cotton
+ Culture media
● Sterile 22-gauge needle or scalpel blade (for bacterial culture)
* Scalpel blade
● Hemostatic forceps (for fungal culture)
· 70% alcohol (for bacterial culture)
87
88
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Restraint and Positioning
An assistant restrains the animal in a position that affords access to the skin lesion (s)
(see Chapter 1).
BACTERIAL CULTURE OF A SKIN PUSTULE
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip hair around pustule.
1. Clipping must be done carefully to
avoid rupturing the pustule. A 2.5-
cm-square area is usually adequate
for culturing a skin pustule.
2. Cleanse clipped area gently with
2. Disinfection of the pustule with 70%
cotton moistened with 70% alcohol.
alcohol removes surface
con taminants that might invalidate
the culture results.
3. Let the skin air dry.
3. Do not collect material while skin is
still moist because excess alcohol may
be transferred to the swab.
4. Insert tip of swab into pustule after
puncturing it with sterile 22-gauge
needle or after incising the pustule
with point of No. 1l scalpel blade.
5. Inoculate material into suitable
5. The culture media can be inoculated
bacterial culture media.
directly, or the swab can be placed in
transport. medium.
6. Cleanse open pustule with 70%
alcohol.
CULTURE FOR DERMATOPHYTES
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clean edge of lesion with cotton
1. Gentle cleansing with water removes
moistened with water.
superficial debris but will not.
interfere with fungal culture results.
2. Using scalpel blade or hemostat,
2. Recovery of dermatophytes is most.
scrape or pluck several hairs from
successful if visibly diseased hairs
edge of lesion.
from the edge of the lesion are
cultured.
DERMATOLOGIC PROCEDURES
89
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
3. Inoculate dermatophyte culture
3. Forcing of hairs below the surface of
medium with hairs by forcing hairs
the medium ensures contact of
below surface of medium.
 dermatophytes on the hair with the
culture medium.
4. In absence of lesions or when carrier
4. A new toothbrush in its package is
status is suspected, use a new
free of fungal organisms.
toothbrush to briskly brush hair on
animal's body.
 5. Inoculate dermatophyte culture
5. The toothbrush collection procedure
medium by pressing toothbrush
is especially useful for diagnosing
several times to surface of medium
feline dermatophytosis.
6. Place cover on culture medium but
6. Fungal growth may be enhanced by
do not close tightly.
placing the medium in the dark.
7. Incubate at room temperature and
7. Dermatophyte organisms will cause a
check daily for growth.
color change in dermatophyte test.
medium when minimal growth is
visible.
SKIN SCRAPING
Skin scrapingis a diagnostic procedure involving intentional abrasion of a skin lesion
with a scalpel blade.
Purpose
To detect the presence of microscopic skin parasites
Complications
Minor hemorrhage
Equipment Needed
+ Scalpel blade
+ Glass slides
● Mineral oil or potassium hydroxide
06
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Restraint and Positioning
(s s s ar i ss se rn sod e   ar ss ns 
(see Chapter 1).
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Place one drop of mineral oil on
each of several glass slides.
2. Insert edge of scalpel blade into
2. Moistening the scalpel blade with
mineral oil on glass slide.
 mineral oil provides a sticky surface
 for collecting mites and ova during
the scraping.
3. Select. lesion (s) to be scraped,
 3. If sarcoptic mange is suspected,
avoiding areas of severe excoriation.
lesions on the ears, elbows, and
hocks should be scraped.
4. Pinch fold of skin and scrape surface
4. Pinching the skin helps to move the
until drops of capillary blood appear
demodectic mites out. of the deeper
(Fig. 6-1).
parts of the hair follicles. The
normally deep location of
demodectic mites within the skin
necessitates scraping to the level of
capillaries.
5. Transfer hair and epithelial debris
5. Several scrapings should be made
collected from skin scraping into
and the site of the scraping indicated
Figure 6-1 Skin scraping. Note that a fold of skin is pinched between the fingers to move mites
out of hair follicles
DERMATOLOGIC PROCEDURES
16
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
drop of mineral oil on glass slide by
on each glass slide. As many as 20
swirling or scraping material on slide
scrapings may be necessary to obtain
edge.
sarcoptic mites.
6.Examine immediately.
6. If potassium hydroxide is used,
waiting several minutes may result in
some clearing of the prepared
specimens.
7. Note results of skin scrapings in
 7. Note date, scraping sites, number of
animal's medical record.
live and dead mites, larvae, and ova
at each site. This is especially
 important in following the progress
of animals being treated with
parasiticides.
CELLOPHANE TAPE PREPARATION
A cellophane tape preparation is used to collect material from the surface of the skin and
hair coat.
Purpose
To detect the presence of certain skin parasites, including flea larvae, lice, and
mites
Equipment Needed
+ Clear cellophane tape
+ Glass slides
● Mineral oil
Restraint and Positioning
The animal is restrained in sternal recumbency or in a sitting or standing position.
92
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 6-2 Collecting specimen from skin, using cellophane tape.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Select site for sampling.
1. Choose an area in which seborrhea
 or black debris is present, usually
along the dorsal midline.
2. Tear off a 3- to 5-cm piece of
cellophane tape, attach one end to a
glass slide, and double it back onto
slide so that sticky side does not.
contact slide.
3. Part. hair and touch sticky side of
3. Loose particles will adhere to the
clear cellophane tape to hair and
tape. The attached slide adds rigidity
skin (Fig. 6-2).
to the tape and may improve
collection of parasites.
4. Place a drop of mineral oil on glass
slide and flip tape so that sticky side
with collected debris attaches to slide
and covers oil.
5. Examine under microscope and note
5. Note date, sampling site, number,
findings in animal's medical record.
 and identity of parasitic organisms
collected.
SKIN VACUUMING FOR ECTOPARASITES
Skin vacuuming is a diagnostic procedure for enhancing the recovery of superficial
ectoparasites.
DERMATOLOGIC PROCEDURES
93
Purpose
To detect. the presence of microscopic skin parasites
Equipment Needed
+ Small vacuum cleaner with wand attachment.
+Blunt scalpel
● Filter paper, for example, in-line, non-gauze milk filter
+ Hand lens or dissecting microscope
● 10% potassium hydroxide
* Beaker and test tube
●Hot plate
+ Glass slides and cover slips
·Centrifuge
+ Fecal flotation solution
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Assemble apparatus with filter paper
1. The filter paper will trap hair, debris,
between wand attachment and
and ectoparasites.
vacuum cleaner hose (Fig 6-3).
 2. If vacuum cleaner noise frightens
2. Some animals are frightened by the
animal, position vacuum cleaner in
sound of the vacuum, but others
 adjacent room with vacuum tubing
 seem to enjoy the vacuuming
brought through a door slightly ajar.
procedure.
3. Vacuum animal's hair coat while
 3. Blunt scraping of areas most likely to
scraping it with edge of vacuum wand
harbor certain ectoparasites or
or with blunt scalpel (Fig 6-4).
suspicious lesions may increase the
recovery of parasites during the
vacuuming process.
4. Remove filter and examine with hand
4. Certain parasites, such as lice and
Jens or dissecting microscope.
Cheyletiella mites, may be seen with
a hand lens or dissecting microscope
crawling about in the debris on the
filter paper.
5. Place filter in beaker with 10%
5. The hot potassium hydroxide
potassium hydroxide and heat until
dissolves debris in the sample.
 just. boiling.
Figure 6-3 Small vacuum cleaner with wand attachment and filter paper in place
Figure 6-4 Skin vacuuming a dog.
94
DERMATOLOGIC PROCEDURES
95
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Pour suspension from beaker into
6. Centrifuging the suspension helps to
test. tube and centrifuge at 1,000
concentrate any ectoparasites or their
RPM for 5 minutes.
eggs in the sample.
7. Pour off supernatant, add fecal
 7. Any ectoparasites or their eggs will be
flotation solution and centrifuge for
further concen trated.
5minutes.
8. Fill test. tube to top with fecal
 8. Ectoparasites and/or their eggs will
flotation solution, place cover slip on
float to the top of the solution.
top of test tube, and wait for 5
minutes.
9. Place cover slip on microscope slide
9. This procedure is especially valuable
and examine with regular light
 in recovering elusive ectoparasites,
microscope.
such as Sarcoptes.
SKIN BIOPSY
 Skin biopsy is the removal of a small section of skin for histopathology or for making
impression smears. A very small skin lesion may be excised completely by means of
the biopsy procedure.
Purposes
1. To demonstrate the presence of bacterial, fungal, or parasitic organisms responsi
ble for a particular skin disorder
2. To diagnose immune-mediated skin diseases
3. To identify skin tumors
4. To further characterize skin lesions for which fine-needle aspiration did not provide
a definitive diagnosis
Complications
1. Minor hemorrhage
2. Infection
3. Scar formation
Equipment Needed
+ Clipper with No. 40 blade
96
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
+ Skin preparation materials:
Cotton
Mild soap (not povidone-iodine)
70% alcohol
 Sterile gauze sponges (2" × 2")
+ Sterile equipment for biopsy procedure:
Surgeon's gloves
Surgical drape
Gauze sponges (2" × 2")
Fine-tooth forceps
4mm Keyes cutaneous biopsy punch* or No. 15 scalpel blade
Needle-holding forceps
Suture material
+ Equipment for local anesthesia:
1-mL syringe
 25-gauge needle
Local anesthetic solution (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
+ Materials for handling biopsy specimen:
 25-gauge needle
 Paper towels
Container with preservative: 10% formalin
Glass slides for impression smears
● Drugs for sedation (if necessary)
Restraint and Positioning
An assistant restrains the animal in a position that affords access to the skin lesion (s).
It may be necessary to tranquilize or sedate uncooperative animals
PrEPARAtION FOr SKIn bIOPSY
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Select appropriate biopsy site.
1. Avoid traumatized, crusted, or
atypical lesions. Biopsies should be
obtained from different-stage lesions
as well as normal tissue. If possible,
try to take a sample that includes the
*J. Sklar Manufacturing Co., Long Island City, N.Y.
DERMATOLOGIC PROCEDURES
97
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
transition from normal to abnormal
tissue.
2. Clip hair carefully from site.
 2. It is important to avoid traumatizing
 the biopsy area during clipping.
3. Prepare clipped area by washing
 3. Vigorous scrubbing may distort. the
udde pe deos p ym au
microscopic findings and therefore
70% alcohol.
should be avoided. Iodine
preparations should not be used
because they can interfere with
histology staining.
4. Instill 0.5 mL to 1 mL of local
4. Avoid instilling local anesthetic
anesthetic intradermally and
directly into the lesion because this
subcutaneously around and beneath
may cause artifacts in the
biopsy site.
preparation.
 5. Place surgical drape around biopsy
site and don sterile gloves.
CUtANEOUS pUNCh bIOpSY
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for biopsy.
1. See p. 96-97.
 2. Press skin biopsy punch firmly onto
 2. Use fingers of the other hand to
chosen site while applying rotary
stretch the skin over the biopsy site
motion, until entire skin has been
while the punch is introduced.
penetrated (Fig. 6-5).
3. Remove punch from site and hold
3. Hemostasis after biopsy is best.
firm pressure on site with sterile
achieved with firm pressure because
gauze sponges to stop bleeding.
cauterizing agents may enhance scar
formation.
4. If necessary, use a 25-gauge needle to
4. In many instances, the biopsy core
skewer biopsy core and raise it. above
will remain in situ instead of being
skin level. Cut. base off with sharp
contained in the instrument lumen.
scissors or scalpel blade (Fig. 6-6).
 5. Carefully remove biopsy specimen
 5. An additional specimen may be taken
from punch instrument with
for the purpose of making
20-gauge needle.
impression smears.
6. Blot specimen on paper to remove
6. See Chapter 7, pp. 101-103.
excess blood.
86
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 6-5  Using skin biopsy punch.
Figure 6-6
 Severing base of biopsy specimen from underlying tissues
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
7. Make impression smears or place in
7. See Chapter 7, pp. 101-103.
container with preservative.
8. Suture skin incision.
8. One or two single interrupted sutures
usually are adequate to achieve
primary closure.
DERMATOLOGIC PROCEDURES
66
CUtANEOUS WEDGE bIOPSY
(ELLIPTICAL INCISIONAL BIOPSy)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Select appropriate biopsy site and
1. Avoid traumatized, crusted, or
pre pare for biopsy.
 atypical lesions. Biopsies of different
stages of lesions, as well as normal
tissue, should be obtained. If
possible, try to take a sample that.
includes the transition from normal
to abnormal tissue. See p. 96-97,
Nos. 1 to 5.
 2. Make elliptical incision, extending
2. A 1- to 2-cm-long incision is usually
from normal tissue into lesion
sufficient for biopsy. A slightly longer
through entire skin thickness.
incision may be necessary if the
lesion is surrounded by fbrous tissue.
To facilitate skin closure, the width of
the ellipse should be no more than
50% of its length.
 3. Sever any subcutaneous attachments
with sharp scissors, and remove
wedge of tissue created by incision
(Fig. 6-7).
Figure 6-7 Removing cutaneous wedge by elliptical incisional biopsy.
100
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
4. Hold firm pressure on site with
4. Hemostasis after biopsy is best.
sterile gauze sponges to stop
achieved with frm pressure because
bleeding.
cauterizing agents may enhance scar
formation.
5. Blot biopsy specimen with paper to
5. See Chapter 7, pp. 101-103.
remove excess blood.
6. Make impression smears and place in
6. See Chapter 7, pp. 101-103.
container with preservative.
7. Suture skin incision.
7. Simple interrupted, nonabsorbable
sutures are appropriate for most.
biopsy sites.
Bibliography
Allen SK, McKeever PJ: Skin biopsy techniques. Vet Clin North Am 4(2):269-280, 1974
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures & Emergency Treat-
ment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Clinkinbeard KD, Cowell RL, Morton RJ, Walker DB, Gowan HL, Meinkoth JH: Diagnostic
cytology: Bacterial infections. Comp Con Edu for Prac Vet 17(1):71-84, 1995
DeBoer DJ, Moriello KA: Clinical update on feline dermatophytosis—Part I. Comp Con Edu
for Prac Vet 17(10):1197-1204, 1995
Kirk RW, Bistner SI: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
Locke PH, Harvey RG, Mason IS, eds: BSAVA Manual of Small Animal Dermatology. Chelten-
ham, England, British Small Animal Veterinary Association, 1993
Muller GH, Kirk RW: Small Animal Dermatology, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1976
Murphy A, Schillhorn Van Veen T: Personal Communication, 1993
Stannard AA: Current concepts in small animal dermatology, 59th Annual Postgraduate Confer-
ence for Veterinarians, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, January 27, 1982
Chapter 7
IMPRESSION
PREPARATIONS
Aim for perfection.Half right is always half wrong.
LAWRENCE LEVESON
Impression preparations (also known as touch preparations or impression smears) are
mens, or masses in situ onto microscope slides. Specimens that can be used for impres.
sion smears include ulcerated tumors, surgically excised tumors, and core biopsy
specimens.
Purposes
1. To differentiate among causes of organomegaly involving lymph nodes, spleen,
kidneys, liver, prostate, mammary glands, and other organs
 2. To differentiate among inflammation, hyperplasia, and neoplasia as the cause of
skin,subcutaneous,and other accessible tumors
 3. To differentiate benign from malignant neoplasia for diagnostic and therapeutic
planning purposes
 4. To differentiate carcinomas from sarcomas for diagnostic and therapeutic planning
purposes
Equipment Needed
+ Scalpel blade
* Glass slides
· Sterile gauze
+ Paper towel or blotter
101
102
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare specimen in following
1. To ensure adequate cellular material
manner:
for interpretation, a freshly cut
● Excised mass: slice mass with sharp
surface free of contamination by
scalpel blade to expose an internal
blood and exudate is needed. Care
surface, and then blot until dry.
should be taken not to crush the
● Biopsy sample: blot specimen
specimen.
repeatedly until no visible fluid
soils paper (Fig. 7-1).
● Mass in situ: clean surface by
scraping with sterile gauze or
scalpel blade. Blot. mass repeatedly.
2. Touch biopsy or mass lightly to a
2. Firm pressure is not required. If
clean glass slide and withdraw
exfoliation does not occur, the
immediately.
specimen may be lightly scraped. Do
 not rub specimen against slide.
 Rubbing or smearing causes
distortion or rupture of cells.
3. Make several imprints on each slide
(Fig. 7-2).
4. Make several slides.
4. Having several slides allows the
cytologist to use multiple stains, if
necessary, for diagnosis.
Xip rm aded iaiy uo uaads anssg sugoia i ani
IMPRESSIONPREPARATIONS
103
Figure 7-2  Touching tissue specimen to glass slide to make impression preparation.
Bibliography
Allen SK, McKeever PJ: Skin biopsy techniques. Vet Clin N Am 4:269-280, 1974
 Perman V, Alsaker RD, Ris RC: Cytology of the Dog and Cat, pp. 1-5. South Bend, Indiana,
American Animal Hospital Association Monograph, 1979
Rebar AH: Handbook of Veterinary Cytology. St. Louis, Purina Company Monograph, 1981
Stevens JB, Perman V, Osborne CA: Biopsy sample management, staining, and examination.
Vet Clin North Am 4:233-253, 1974
Chapter 8
FINE-NEEDLE
ASPIRATION BIOPSV
Not failure,but low aim, is a crime.
LOWELL
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy is a diagnostic proce dure involving introduction of a narrow-
gauge, rigid hypodermic needle into a tissue or organ and removal of a small amount.
of tissue by suction.
Purposes
1. To differentiate among causes of organomegaly involving lymph nodes, spleen,
mammary glands, and other organs
 2. To differentiate among inflammation, hyperplasia, and neoplasia as the cause of
skin, subcutaneous, and other accessible tumors
 3. To differentiate benign from malignant neoplasia for diagnostic and therapeutic
planning purposes
4. To differentiate carcinomas from sarcomas for diagnostic and therapeutic planning
purposes
Complications
1. Minor hemorrhage
2. Tissue damage
Equipment Needed
+ 22- to 25-gauge, %-inch to 3%2-inch sterile needles
●3-mL syringe
+ Glass slides
105
106
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. With animal restrained in an
1. Local or general anesthesia is not
appropriate position, isolate lesion in
required, except in rare instances.
one hand.
2. Prepare skin overlying lesion.
2. For most lesions, simple cleansing
and disinfection of the skin is all that
is required. Intracavitary tumors or
heavily soiled areas should have the
hair clipped and the skin carefully
scrubbed and disinfected.
Attached syringe technique:
Attached syringe technique:
3. Carefully introduce needle, with
 3. In large lesions, the needle is
syringe tightly attached, into lesion.
directed into the peripheral parts of
the lesion to avoid the necrotic
center
4. Apply negative pressure at needle
4. Several brisk excursions of the
bevel end by withdrawing syringe
syringe plunger are made.
plunger (Fig. 8-1).
5. Partially withdraw needle and
5. This step helps to ensure adequate
redirect. it into lesion (Fig. 8-2).
sampling of the lesion.
 6. Again apply suction by several brisk
movements of syringe plunger.
7. Release negative pressure by allowing
7. Release of the negative pressure
syringe plunger to retract, and
retains the sample within the needle
withdraw needle from lesion.
lumen.
 8. Separate needle from syringe and
draw air into syringe.
Detached needle technique:(in place of steps
Detached needle technique:This technique is
3-8 above)
easier andsaferin animals thatwill nothold
still and affords better control of the needle
direction anddepthfortheoperatorItispar-
ticularly recommended for aspiratinglesions on
the head or neck.
 3. Detach needle from syringe.
 3. By using a detached needle, there is
less chance of the needle direction
being altered by the animal's
movements.
4. Carefully introduce needle into
4. Direct the needle into the specific
lesion.
 portion of the nodule or cyst. to be
sampled. When uncertain which
part to use, select. the periphery
FINE-NEEDLE ASPIRATION BIOPSY
107
Figure 8-1 Aspiration of lymph node or other mass by brisk withdrawal of syringe plunger,
creating suction at needle bevel.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
rather than the center of a mass or
lymph node, because the center is
often necrotic and will yield a poor
cytology specimen.
5. In a back and forth motion, slide
5. A very small amount. of fluid is
needle in and out. of lesion several
forced into the lumen of the needle
times.
with each pass.
 6. Change direction of needle and
6. Second and third passes of the
slide needle in and out of lesion
needle should be in slightly
again.
different directions.
7. Repeat step 6 a third time, then
withdraw needle from lesion.
108
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 8-2 Partial withdrawal and redirection of needle/syringe assembly.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
8. Draw air into syringe.
8. The air is used to expel the contents
from the needle lumen.
9. Reattach syringe to needle and
9. Expulsion should be rapid and
expel contents of needle lumen
forceful to remove all material from
onto clean microscope slides
the needle lumen. Only a small
(Fig. 8-3).
drop of fluid is obtained in most.
aspirations.
10. Make smears of aspirated fluid
10. Push smears or squash preparations
immediately.
 are made, depending on fluid
viscosity. Squash preparations are
more successful in producing thin
smears when the fluid is highly
viscous. Mix thick fluids with a small
FINE-NEEDLE ASPIRATION BIOPSY
109
Figure 8-3
 Expelling aspirated fluid from needle lumen with air-filled syringe.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
drop of physiologic saline prior to
making smears to decrease
shredding/shearing of nuclei.
Smears may be stained with a variety
of pigments. Whenever possible,
three or four slides should be made.
Bibliography
Rebar AH: Handbook of Veterinary Cytology, St. Louis, Purina Company, 1981
Soderstrom N: Fine-Needle Aspiration Biopsy New York, Grune & Stratton, 1996
Chapter
OPHTHALMIC
PROCEDURES
You can observe a lot just by watching.
YOGI BERRA
This chapter describes a number of diagnostic and therapeutic procedures that are
commonly used in caring for the eye.
Diagnostic Procedures
* Schirmer tear test.
+ Corneoconjunctival culture
+ Staining of the cornea
● Corneoconjunctival smear and scraping
* Applanation tonometer?
NOTE: These procedures are listed in an order conducive to proceeding from one procedure to
and careful planningof the appropriate sequence is recommended.Read the rationale/amplifica-
tioncommentsineachsectionthoroughly.
Therapeutic Procedures
+ Topical administration of ophthalmic medication
● Subconjunctival injection
* Flushing of nasolacrimal duct.
a. SMP Division, Cooper Laboratonies, Inc., San German, PR 00753.
111
112
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Restraint and Positioning
An assistant restrains the animal in sternal recumbency or in a sitting position for
most of the procedures. Topical administration of ophthalmic medication usually can
be accomplished without the aid of an assistant. If the animal is fractious, it will be
necessary to apply a muzzle or to tranquilize the animal.
SCHIRMER TEAR TEST
Purpose
To assess the amount of tear production in each eye
Complications
1. Corneal irritation
2. Corneoconjunctival infection
Equipment Needed
* Schirmer tear test. strips?
* Metric ruler
● Topical ophthalmic anesthetic
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Perform Schirmer tear test. I before
1. The results of the test will be affected
any other procedures on eye.
by other procedures involving eyelid
manipulations, instillation of topical
materials, and procurement of
specimens.
2. While keeping test strip within sterile
2. The notched end of the strip should
package, fold strip at. notch.
be kept sterile because this is the
portion that. will be placed in contact
with the eye.
b. Giemsa Tissue Stain, Wolbach Modification, Dade (Harleco), Division American Hospital Supply Corp.
Gibbstown, NJ 08027.
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
113
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 3. Remove sterile strip from package
3. Avoid moving the strip across the
 and insert folded end between lower
cornea. In the Schirmer tear test I,
eyelid and cornea near lateral
the rate of basal and reflex tear
canthus (Fig. 9-1).
production is measured as the animal
forms tears in response to the
sensation of the strip contacting the
eye.
4. Hold strip in place for 1 minute and
 prevent animal from rubbing eye.
 5. Remove strip and measure length of
5. The normal rate of basal and reflex
strip from notch to wet/dry interface
 tear production, as measured by the
according to package instructions.
Schirmer tear test I, in cats and dogs,
is 13 to 25 mm per minute.
6. To perform Schirmer tear test II
6. Specimens for bacteriologic cultures
a. Lift upper eyelid with index fnger
should be obtained before
and instill one to two drops of
conducting Schirmer tear test II
topical ophthalmic anesthetic at.
because topical solutions can
12 o'clock position on globe
interfere with culture results.
(Fig. 9-2).
b. Wait 30 to 60 seconds.
c. Prevent animal from rubbing its
eye.
 7. Repeat Nos. 2 to 5 as for Schirmer
7. The Schirmer tear test II measures
tear test I.
basal tear flow. The value obtained
should be approximately one half
that of the Schirmer tear test I.
Figure 9-l Schirmer tear test strip in place between lower eyelid and cornea.
114
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 9-2
2 Instilling topical ophthalmic anesthetic. Note that the drops are placed at the 12
o'clock position on the globe.
CORNEOCONJUNCTIVAL CULTURE
Purposes
1. To identify bacterial, fungal, and other pathogens of the cornea and conjunctiva,
especially in severe, chronic, or nonresponsive conditions
 2. To determine the antibiotic sensitivity of corneoconjunctival pathogens
Complication
Corneal irritation
Equipment Needed
● Sterile swabs for bacterial and fungal cultures
● Tube with transport. medium
● Specific bacterial and fungal culture media (if desired)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 1. Obtain specimens for culture before
1. Topical medications, including
instilling any topical ophthalmic
anesthetics, can interfere with culture
medications.
results.
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
115
Figure 9-3  Obtaining specimen for corneoconjunctival culture.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Moisten end of culture swab with
2. There is better recovery of organisms
liquid transport medium.
and less chance of corneal irritation
if a moistened swab is used to obtain
the specimen.
3. Evert. lower eyelid by pulling skin of
 3. Do not. put finger in palpebral
lower eyelid ventrally with index
fissure.
finger.
4. Gently rub swab on cornea and/or
4. Debris and normal skin flora on
conjunctival sac, avoiding eyelid
eyelid margins can interfere with the
margins (Fig. 9-3).
accuracy of culture results.
5. Replace swab in transport. tube or
 5. Transport. inoculated media to
inoculate culture media immediately.
laboratory as soon as possible.
STAINING ThE CORNEA
Purposes
1. To determine presence, location, and severity of corneal ulcers
2. To demonstrate patency of nasolacrimal duct.
Equipment Needed
* Ophthalmic irrigating solution
● Sterile fluorescein impregnated strips or fluorescein ophthalmic solution
116
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Perform corneal staining after
1. The stain will interfere with the
Schirmer tear test I and after
results of these tests. Use of a topical
specimens have been obtained for
ophthalmic anesthetic may result in a
bacteriologic culture and cytology
false-positive stain reaction.
but before instilling topical
ophthalmic anesthetic.
2. Moisten end of sterile fluorescein
2. Sterile fluorescein strips are
strip with ophthalmic irrigating
recommended rather than the
solution or artificial tear solution.
fluorescein solution because the
solution can easily become
con taminated with microorganisms.
3. Elevate upper eyelid by pulling
dorsally on skin of upper lid.
4. Place moistened tip of fluorescein
4. It is important to avoid touching the
strip against bulbar conjunctiva for
fluorescein strip directly to the
one or two seconds (Fig. 9-4).
cornea because this may cause
staining artifacts.
5. Remove strip and allow animal to
5. Blinking helps to distribute the stain.
blin k.
6. Liberally flush eye with ophthalmic
6. The sodium ions in the solution will
irrigating solution.
enhance the stain.
7. Examine cornea in a partially
 7. The exposed corneal stroma in an
darkened room.
ulcer stains bright green with
fluorescein. Use of an ultraviolet
light source (i.e., Wood's lamp) may
enhance the observer's perception of
stromal stain retention.
8. Observe external nares for
 8. The appearance of fluorescein dye at.
emergence of green dye.
 the nostril indicates patency of the
nasolacrimal duct.
Figure 9-4 Staining of cornea with fluorescein. Note that fluorescein strip is applied to the
bulbar conjunctiva rather than directly to the cornea.
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
117
CORNEOCONJUNCTIVAL SMEAR AND SCRAPING
Purpose
To obtain specimen (s) for cytology examination
Complication
Corneal irritation
Equipment Needed
● Topical ophthalmic anesthetic
+ Glass slides
● Stains (one or more may be selected)
■ Gram's stain
·Modified Giemsa stain
2 mL of Wolbach modified Giemsa tissue stain
2 mL of Wright's buffer (pH 6.8)
50 mL of distilled water
· New methylene blue stain
+ Sterile cotton swabs for smear
+ Sterile metal ocular spatula for scraping
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Remove mucus or exudate from
1. Clean eyelids gently with water-
eyelids (Fig. 9-5).
moistened cottonballsso that.excess
debris is not. collected inadvertently
with the specimen.
 2. Lift upper eyelid with index finger to
2. It is important that the anesthetic
expose sclera and instill one or two
flow down over the entire cornea for
drops of topical ophthalmic
adequate desensitization to occur.
anesthetic at 12 o'clock position on
globe.
118
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 9-5
 Removing mucus or exudate from eyelids.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
3. Wait 30 to 60 seconds.
4. Evert lower eyelid by pulling
downward on skin just below lower
eyelid margin.
 5. For smear preparation, swab cornea
5. Debris and normal skin flora on
 and conjunctiva with cofton-tipped
eyelid margins can interfere with the
applicator, avoiding eyelid margins
accuracy of cytology examination.
(Fig. 9-3, p. 115). For scraping, gently
rub area of cornea or conjunctiva
with metal ocular spatula until a
small droplet. of material is collected
(Fig. 9-6).
6. Roll material from swab onto clean
glass slides (Fig. 9-7). Spread material
from scraping over glass slides.
7. Allow slides to air dry and then stain.
7. A gram-stained slide can be
examined for bacteria. The modified
Giemsa stain is useful for cytology
examination.
8. For Giemsa staining: Fix slide for 5
minutes in absolute methanol; stain
with modified Giemsa stain for 20
minutes; rinse with running tap water
and allow to air dry.
 9. Prevent animal from rubbing its eye.
9. Instillation of topical medication
often causes an animal to rub its eye.
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
119
Figure 9-6 Obtaining corneoconjunctival scraping.
Figure 9-7  Placing corneoconjunctival specimen on glass slide.
MEASURING INTRAOCULAR PRESSURe
Purpose
To measure intraocular pressure
Complication
Corneal irritation or erosion
120
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Equipment Needed
* Topical ophthalmic anesthetic
● Applanation tonometer
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Check tonometer before using.
1. Tonometer must. be clean to prevent.
Follow manufacturer's direction for
contamination of the animal's
use.
cornea.
 2. Lift upper eyelid with index finger
2. It is important that the anesthetic
to expose sclera and instill one or
flows down over the entire cornea
two drops of topical ophthalmic
for adequate desensitization to
anesthetic at. 12 o'clock position on
occur.
globe.
3. Wait 30 to 60 seconds.
4. Tilt animal's snout upward toward
4. Avoid applying pressure to the
ceiling and retract. lower eyelid with
globe.
finger of one hand.
5. With other hand, grasp tonometer
5. Resting the hand holding the
with thumb and index fnger while
tonometer on the animal's head
resting other fingers on animal's
helps to steady the instrument
skull just above upper eyelid.
during the procedure.
6.Place sheathed tip of tonometer
6. An applanation tonometer works
 gently on central part of cornea
with only a light touch to the
such that tonometer is
cornea. It is not necessary or
 perpendicular to cornea and to
desirable to press it. frmly against.
floor (Fig. 9-8).
the eye. Pressure on the jugular vein
or excessive pressure on the eye will
falsely elevate the tonometry results.
7. When instrument beeps, note
 7. In general, the tonometer will beep
reading.
right. away if the instrument is held
exactly perpendicular to the cornea
so that the flat tip is parallel to the
cornea.
8. Lift instrument off cornea slightly.
9. Repeat procedure two more times.
 9. The average of three readings is
used. Normal IOP values in dogs
and cats are 15 to 25 mm Hg.
c. Tonopen, Medtronic Ophthalmics, Medtronic USA, Inc., 6743 Southpoint Drive North,Jacksonville, FL
32216.
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
121
Figure 9-8 Touching applanation tonometer to cornea.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
10. Remove rubber sheath and wipe
10. The rubber sheath prevents cross-
tonometer clean after each use.
contamination between animals.
Enclose in container.
11. Prevent animal from rubbing its eye.
11. Instillation of topical medication
often is followed by the animal
attempting to rub its eye.
ToPIcal ADMinISTratIOn Of OphThalmIc MedICAtION
Purpose
To medicate cornea, conjunctiva, and anterior uveal tract.
Complication
Self-trauma to the eye by the animal
Equipment Needed
+ Ophthalmic irrigating solution
+ Cotton
+ Ophthalmic solution or ointment.
122
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
● Bandaging materials for paws (if necessary):
Gauze
Adhesive tape, 1 or 2 inches in width
● Elizabethan collar (if necessary)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clean eyelids and adjacent facial skin
1. Keep animal's lids closed during
with cotton moistened with warm
 cleansing to prevent trauma to
water.
cornea.
2. Remove debris on cornea and
 2. The eye and eyelids should be
conjunctival sac by everting eyelids
cleaned before instilling medication
and flushing thoroughly with
to ensure effectiveness of treatment.
 ophthalmic irrigating solution.
3. Hold solution or ointment. container
between thumb and index finger of
one hand while using third fnger or
heel of hand to lift upper eyelid.
4. Instill one or two drops of solution or 
4. It is important to avoid
small ribbon of ointment on sclera at.
 con taminating the medicine bottle or
12 o'clock position (Fig. 9-9). Then
tube by touching it to the eye or
release eyelid.
eyelid.
5. If instilling several medications, wait.
5. Solutions cannot readily penetrate a
at least l minute between
flm of ointment. Topical medications
 applications, and always instill 
will enter the nasolacrimal duct and
solutions before ointments.
therefore may be licked from the
 nose. Atropine has a bitter taste and
may induce salivation.
Figure 9-9 Instilling ophthalmic ointment.
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
123
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 6. Apply petroleum-based oin tment to
6. The petroleum-based ointment will
facial skin adjacent to eye if ocular
prevent scalding of the skin by the
discharge is present.
ocular discharges.
7. Note in animal's medical record that.
7. Note date, time, medication, eye(s)
medication was given
medicated, comments, and initials.
8. Prevent self-trauma to eye by
8. Animals commonly try to rub the
 bandaging dewclaws or entire feet, or
eyes after topical medications,
by placing Elizabethan collar on
 particularly solutions, are instilled.
animal.
SUBCONJUNCTIVAL INJECTION
Purpose
To medicate the anterior uveal tract
Complications
1. Systemic over dosage
2. Penetration of the globe by needle
Equipment Needed
+Cotton
* Ophthalmic irrigating solution
* Topical ophthalmic anesthetic
+ 25-gauge needle
+ Tuberculin syringe
+ Ocular fixation forceps
● Magnifying loupe (if desired)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clean eyelids and cornea as
1. See p. 117, Nos. 1 and 2.
 previously described.
 2. Lift upper eyelid to expose sclera and
2. It is important. that the anesthetic
instill one or two drops of topical
flow down over the entire eye for
ophthalmic anesthetic at 12 o'clock
adequate desensitization to occur.
position on globe.
124
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 9-10  Performing subconjunctival injection.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
3. Wait 30 to 60 seconds.
4. Ask assistant to lift animal's upper
eyelid.
 5. Grasp bulbar conjunctiva with ocular
fixation forceps and insert needle
under bulbar conjunctiva (Fig. 9-10).
 6. Withdraw syringe plunger slightly. If
6. No more than 0.25 mL should be
no blood appears in syringe, inject.
injected at any one site.
medication. If blood appears in
syringe, remove needle and select
different site for injection.
7. Note in animal's medical record that.
7. Note date, time, medication, eye(s)
medication was given.
medicated, comments, and initials.
FLUSHING NASOLACRIMAL DUCTS
Purposes
1. To determine patency of nasolacrimal duct.
2. To relieve minor obstruction of nasolacrimal duct
Complication
Corneal irritation
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
125
Equipment Needed
·Cotton
· Ophthalmic irrigating solution
· Topical ophthalmic anesthetic
● Sterile blunt metal probe (lacrimal duct dilator), 18- to 22-gauge
* Sterile cannula
● Syringe containing 5 mL sterile saline
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clean eyelids and cornea as
1. See p. 117, Nos. 1 and 2.
previously described.
 2. Lift upper eyelid to expose sclera and
instill one or two drops of topical
ophthalmic anesthetic at. 12 o'clock
position on globe.
3. Wait. 30 to 60 seconds.
 4. Dilate upper and lower openings
4. The puncta are located close to the
(puncta) of nasolacrimal duct with
medial canthus. Entering the
 blunt metal probe of appropriate
opening is facilitated by slowly
diameter (Fig. 9-11).
moving the metal probe along the
inner lid margin toward the medial
canthus while tensing the lid. The
upper punctum is entered more
easily than the lower.
Figure 9-1l  Dilating puncta of nasolacrimal duct with blunt metal probe.
126
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 9-12 Flushing nasolacrimal duct.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
5. Cannulate upper or lower punctum
5. Flushing of the duct. can be
with commercial lacrimal cannula or
accomplished by cannulating only
with 20-gauge (or 22-gauge) Teflon
one of the puncta.
or polyethylene intravenous catheter
(with needle removed).
6. Flush 3 to 5 mL sterile saline through
6. If all of the flushing solution exits
cannulated punctum (Fig. 9-12).
through the other punctum rather
than at the nostril, occlude the other
 punctum with fnger tip or cotton
swab.
7. See pp. 115-116 for use of
 7. The emergence of fluorescein at. the
fluorescein stain as an alternative
 external naris indicates the patency
method for determining patency of
of the nasolacrimal duct.
nasolacrimal duct.
Bibliography
Brightman AH: Current concepts in ocular pharmacology. Vet Clin North Am 10(2):261-280,
1980
Brunner LS, Suddarth DS: The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
JB Lippincott, 1982
Glaze MB: Care of the ophthalmic patient. Compend Contin Educ for AHT 1(4):173-178,
1980
Helper LC: Magrane's Canine Ophthalmology, 4th ed. Philadelphia, Lea and Febiger, 1989
Kural E, Lindley D, Krohne S: Canine glaucoma Part I. Comp Contin Educ for Prac Vet
17(8):1017-1026, 1995
OPHTHALMIC PROCEDURES
127
Magrane WC: Canine Ophthalmology, 3rd ed. Philadelphia, Lea & Febiger, 1977
 Pratt PW (ed): Medical Nursing for Animal Health Technicians. Santa Barbara, CA, American
Veterinary Publications, 1985
Severin GA: Veterinary Ophthalmology Notes, 2nd ed. Fort Collins, Coloradlo State University
Press,1979
Slatter DH: Fundamentals of Veterinary Ophthalmology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1981
Whitley RD: Diagnostic and treatment techniques of corneal diseases in small animals. Compend
Contin Educ for AHT 1(2):64-69, 1980
Chapter 10
EAR CARE
Use what talents you possess: the woods would be very silent if
no birds sang there except those that sang best.
HENRY VAN DYKE
 Ear care includes obtaining samples for cytology and/or culture as well as cleaning
and medicating the external ear canal.
Purposes
1. To obtain specimens for diagnosis of external ear canal diseases
2. To remove cerumen (waxy material), foreign objects, matted hair, and other
debris.
3. To treat otitis externa
4. To prepare site for surgical procedures on the external ear canal
Complications
1. Rupture of tympanic membrane
 2. Injury to external ear canal
Equipment Needed
+Cotton
● Bulb syringe or 10-mL hypodermic syringe
● Solution and waste bowls
* Cotton-tipped swabs
129
130
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
● Hemostat for hair removal (if necessary)
● Mild soap or ceruminolytic agents
+ Otoscope—fber optic, if possible
● Prescribed medication
NOTE: When using a standard otoscope, the edges of the ear drum are partialy oscured by the
ear canal walls, even in animals with healthy ears. In general, only the central 40% to 60%
of the tympanic membrane is visualized through an otoscope cone. Consequently, perimeter tears
providevisualizationof thetympanicmembraneperimeter.
Restraint and Positioning
Most tractable animals will tolerate ear cleaning and medicating with minimal restraint.
a sn  ns o d s un   so sisse 
hand around the animal's snout to stabilize the animal's head. Fractious animals
or those with painful ear infections may require general anesthesia or chemical
tranquilization.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Examine each ear carefully. Check
1. The external ear canal is composed
for odor, ulceration, reddening.
of a lateral vertical segment, which
proliferation of tissue, discharge, or
leads to a horizontal portion that
debris. If signs of inflammation or
terminates medially at the tympanic
exudate are noted, aseptically
membrane. It may be difficult to see
inoculate sterile cotton-tipped swabs
the eardrum in inflamed ears or in
with ear canal contents by inserting
older dogs due to narrowing and
swab tip 1 to 2 cm into vertical
hardening of the ear canal. When
canal.
collecting ear swabs, obtain a
sample for microbiologic culture
frst, and then make a second swab
for cytology. In severe cases, it is 
wise to sample from each ear and
submit separate cultures for each
ear. Cytology examination may
reveal a preponderance of yeast
organisms, Gram positive bacteria,
or Gram negative bacteria. Such
information is useful when initiating
treatment.
EAR CARE
131
Figure 10-1  Examining ear with otoscope.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Examine each ear with otoscope
2.
Apply lateral tension to ear pinna
starting with more normal ear
(flap) to straighten ear canal as
(Fig. 10-1).
otoscope is advanced. A fiber optic
otoscope, with or without. video
attachment, affords significantly
better visualization of the ear canal
and tympanic membrane. It is
important to avoid contaminating a
normal ear with debris from an
infected one.
 3. Remove hair, if present, by grasping
3. Poodles and some terriers normally
groups of hairs with hemostat and
have hair growing in their external
twisting handle of hemostat until
ear canals. An alternative method of
hairs are gently removed (Fig. 10-2).
hair removal is simply to pluck the
hairs out using fngers.
4. If ear drum appears intact, instill
4. Excess irrigating solution can be
caught. in a waste bowl held beneath
mild soapy water by bulb syringe
the ear. Massaging the skin over the
(Fig. 10-3) and gently massage skin
external ear canal helps to loosen
over external ear canal. If tympanic
accumulated debris.
membrane cannot be seen, use only
sterile water or saline for flushing.
 5. Use pieces of cotton to remove
 5. Cleansing of the ear canal with
loosened debris and discharge from
cotton wrapped around an index
ear canal (Fig. 10-4).
finger is a method that involves
132
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 10-2
 Removing hairs from external ear canal.
Figure 10-3
[nstilling liquid agents into ear with bulb syringe.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
virtually no danger of rupturing the
tympanic membrane.
6. Repeat. procedure as needed to
6. Allowing the animal to shake its
remove all visible debris.
head from time to time will help
dislodge debris in the deeper
portions of the ear canal.
EAR CARE
133
Figure 10-4:
 Removing loosened debnis from ear canal with cotton.
Figure 10-5 Cleaning interior folds of pinna with cotton-tipped swab.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
7. Rinse ear canal with warm water or
 7. Residual soap or other cleansing
 normal saline.
agent may be irritating and can
interfere with otic medication.
8. Cleanse folds of skin on interior
 8. Cotton-tipped swabs may be safely
 part of pinna with cotton-tipped
used on the ear flap, but their use
swabs (Fig. 10-5).
in the deeper portions of the ear
134
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
canal is not recommended unless
the animal is anesthetized.
9. Dry ear canal as thoroughly as
9. Use pieces of cotton and allow the
possible.
animal to shake its head.
10. Inspect ear canal with otoscope.
10. Thoroughness of cleaning can be
evaluated, and any lesions previously
obscured by debris may be visible
now.
11. Instill prescribed medication (drops
11. As a rule, do not instill any
or ointment) and massage external
potentially irritating solution or
ear canal gently.
medication into the ear canal if the
ear drum may be damaged.
 Massaging the ear aids in dispersal
of the medication throughout the
external ear canal. Note in animal's
medical record: date, time,
 medication, dosage, ear(s)
medicated, initials, and comments.
Bibliography
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures & Emergency Treat-
ment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Brumner LS, Suddarth DS: The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
JB Lippincott, 1982
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia WB Saunders, 1985
McCurnin DM: Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
1985
Chapter 11
PEDICURE
Small deedsdonearebetter thangreat deedsplanned.
PETER MARSHALL
Pedicure in cats and dogs consists of prophylactic or therapeutic trimming of the
toenails.
Purposes
1. To prevent traumatic nail fracture
 2. To trim or amputate damaged or ingrown toenails
3. To allow normal ambulation on footpads
4. To minimize physical damage to property, human beings, and other animals
Complications
1. Minor hemorrhage
2. Permanent deformity of toenails
Equipment Needed
* Commercial pet toenail clippers (guillotine type or scissors type) for dogs or human
toenail clippers for cats
* Cauterizing agent (e.g., silver nitrate or ferric subsulfate applicators)
135
136
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Restraint and Positioning
Nail trimming can be accomplished with the animal standing or in lateral recumbency.
An assistant may be needed to restrain the animal. A muzzle or Elizabethan collar,
and sometimes even chemical tranquilization, may be necessary if the animal objects
to the procedure (see Chapter 1).
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. If animal has light-colored toenails,
1. It is easy to see and avoid the pink
note location of vascular matrix.
matrix containing blood vessels and
nerve supply if the animal has light-
colored toenails.
2. When using a guillotine-type nail
2. This type of clipper is recommended
clippers
for general use because it is
 inexpensive and can be used safely
 by pet owners for regular nail
trimming.
a. Slide ring over nail and position
a. Holding the clippers in this
clippers so that screws on clipper
way helps to prevent inadvertent.
face base of toenail.
clipping of the nail too short.
b. Place ring 2 mm from end of
b. If animal has dark-colored
vascular matrix.
toenails, clip small amount. of nail
 at a time and look at clipped
cross-section. When the matrix
is near the clipped edge, the
cross-section will begin to appear
"meaty" and lighter in color.
c. Clip nail by forcefully squeezing
c. The nail is severed by the beveled
clipper handles together, thereby
cutting blade as the latter slides
advancing cutting blade
across the rigid metal ring
(Fig. 11-1)
encircling the nail.
 3. If bleeding from toenail occurs, apply
 3. Silver nitrate-impregnated
cauterizing agent (Fig. 11-2).
applicators or cotton swabs
moistened with ferric subsulfate
solution are effective cauterizing
 agents. Electrocautery can cause nail
deformity and should not be used to
stop hemorrhage from toenails, even
if the animal is under general
anesthesia.
PEDICURE
137
Figure 11-1
 Clipping toenail using guillotine-type clippers.
Figure 1l-2  Cauterizing bleeding toenail matrix.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Use scissors-type nail clippers for
4. Ingrown toenails can result in painful
clipping toenails that have grown
inflammation or infection of the foot.
into foot pads (Fig. 11-3).
 pad. Aftercare may include soaking
the foot several times daily in warm
Epsom salt solutions.
5. Use human toenail trimmer to clip
5. Cat. claws are much thinner and
claws of most. cats (Fig. 11-4).
delicate; the matrix of the nail is
usually readily visible.
6. Examine feet to make certain all
6. Regular monthly trimming or filing
toenails, including dewclaws, have
 of toenails will cause the matrix to
been trimmed.
retract. so that the nail length can
gradually be shortened.
138
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 11-3
Figure 11-4
Clipping toenails of cat using human toenail clippers.
Bibliography
McCurnin DM: Clinical Textbook for Veterinary Technicians. Philadelphia, WB Saunders,
1985
Muller GH, Kirk RW: Small Animal Dermatology. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1969
Chapter 12
URETHRAL
CATHETERIZATION
If at first you don't succeed, try, try, again. Then give up.
There'sno usebeingadamnfoolaboutit.
W.C.FIELDS
Urethral catheterization is the placement of a hollow tube, that is, a catheter, into the
urethra.
Purposes
1. To collect urine for analysis or bacteriologic culture if the specimen cannot be
 obtained by percutaneous cystocentesis
 2. To administer medication or radiographic con trast media directly into the urinary
bladder
3. To provide closed continuous drainage of urine (e.g., when careful monitoring of
urine output is necessary)
4. To relieve urethral obstruction
Complications
1. Trauma to urethra or urinary bladder
2. Urinary tract infection
Equipment Needed
 For urethral catheterization of male dog
+ Cotton
+ Chlorhexidine scrub
139
140
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
+Mild soap
● Dilute chlorhexidine or sterile saline flush
+ Sterile surgeon's gloves
· Sterile urinary catheter
* Sterile lubricating jelly
* Container for urine
· Tubing and antimicrobial ointment (if continuous urine drainage is to be
established)
For urethral catheterization of female dog
+ Cotton
+ Chlorhexidine scrub
* Dilute chlorhexidine or sterile saline flush
+ Sterile surgeon's gloves
+ Sterile urinary catheter
● Sterile lubricating jelly or antimicrobial ointment.
● 0.3 mL topical ophthalmic anesthetic or 0.5% lidocaine in tuberculin syringe with
needle removed
· Container for urine
· Tubing and antimicrobial ointment (if continuous urine drainage is to be
established)
· Light. source and sterile vaginal speculum for visual technique
For urethral catheterization of cat
+Cotton
* Chlorhexidine scrub
+ Sterile surgeon's gloves
* Sterile urinary catheter
+Sterile lubricating jelly
+ Container for urine
● Adhesive tape, monofilament nonabsorbable suture material, tubing, antimicrobial
ointment (if continuous urine drainage is to be established)
● Drugs for tranquilization or anesthesia (if necessary)
+ 0.2 mL topical ophthalmic anesthetic or 0.5% lidocaine in tuberculin syringe with
needle removed (for female cat)
+ Elizabethan collar
Restraint and Positioning
An assistant is needed to restrain the animal so that aseptic technique can be main-
tained throughout the procedure. The position preferred for urethral catheterization
is lateral recumbency for the male dog. The male cat and the female cat can be posi-
tioned in lateral or sternal recumbency. Ideally, the female dog should be restrained
in a standing position for urethral catheterization, but other acceptable positions are
sternal or lateral recumbency.
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION
141
PREPARATION FOR URETHRAL CATHETeRIZATION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip and clean area around prepuce
1. It is advisable to clip long hairs from
or vulva using chlorhexidine scrub.
 the area immediately surrounding
For male and female dogs, flush
the prepuce or vulva if continuous
prepuce or vestibule with dilute
urine drainage is to be established.
chlorhexidine or sterile saline.
Flushing the prepuce or vestibule
Repeat. cleaning around prepuce or
assists in main taining asepsis.
vulva. Rinse thoroughly and dry.
 2. Select catheter of appropriate size
2. To minimize trauma to the urinary
and type (see Table 12-1).
tract, use the most flexible and the
smallest diameter catheter that can
be inserted easily. The Foley self-
retaining catheter with an inflatable
tip is available in sizes 6 F and larger
for continuous urine drainage.
3. Wash hands thoroughly and don
 3. Every precaution must be taken to
sterile surgeon's gloves.
reduce the chance of iatrogenic
infection. Persons experienced in
urinary catheterization may be able
to advance the catheter slowly out of
its sterile package and thus maintain
 asepsis without wearing surgeon's
gloves. Urethral catheterization
TABLE 12-1
 Recommended urethral catheter sizes for routine use in dogs
and cats.
Animal
Urethral Catheter Type
Size
 Flexible vinyl, red rubber, or Tomcat catheter
3/F
(polyethylene)
Male dog (≤25 1b.)
 Flexible vinyl, red rubber, or polyethylene
3/ or 5 F
Male dog (≥25 1b.)
Flexible vinyl, red rubber, or polyethylene
8F
Male dog (>75 1b.)
Flexible vinyl, red rubber, or polyethylene
10 or 12 F
Female dog (<10 1b.)
Flexible vinyl, red rubber, metal, or
5F
polyethylene
Female dog (10 to 50 1b.)
 Flexible vinyl, red rubber, metal, or
8F
polyethylene
Female dog (>50 1b.)
Flexible vinyl, red rubber, metal, or
10, 12, or 14 F
polyethylene
142
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
requires two or more persons. It.
should not be attempted without.
assistance.
4. Examine catheter for flaws.
4. Discard any catheter that has a rough
surface, eyes (holes) that are
occluded, or a weakened area.
URETHRAL CAThETeRIZATION OF MAlE DOG
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See pp. 141-142.
Tranquilize or anesthetize, if
necessary.
2. Estimate length of catheter needed
2. If a flexible catheter is advanced too
to enter urinary bladder by holding
far into the urinary bladder, the
catheter above dog in approximate
catheter can become knotted or
 position for catheterization (Fig.
folded back on itself within the
12-1).
bladder.
3. Assistant: Place dog in lateral
3. To retract the prepuce, the assistant.
recumbency and abduct dog's upper
should grip the prepuce caudal to
rear leg. Then retract dog's prepuce
the os penis with one hand and slide
such that distal 3 to 4 cm of glans
the prepuce caudally with the other
penis is exposed (Fig. 12-2).
hand.
Figure 12-1 Estimating length of urethral catheter for male dog.
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION
143
Figure 12-2 Retracting dog's prepuce.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Assistant: Clean distal glans penis with
4. Any preputial glandular secretions
mild soap.
are thereby removed.
 5. Operator: Lubricate end of catheter
 5. In addition to facilitating passage,
liberally with sterile lubricating jelly
thorough lubrication of catheters
and insert catheter tip into urethral
reduces the chance of forcing
orifice at distal end of glans penis
bacteria from the distal urethra into
(Fig. 12-3).
the bladder. To prevent.
contamination of the catheter as it is
 being advanced, retain rest. of
catheter within sterile package or
coiled within gloved hand.
6. Advance catheter into urinary
6. Slight resistance may be encoun tered
bladder.
as the catheter passes over the ischial
arch.
7. If no urine appears when catheter
7. Advance catheter 2 to 4 cm farther, if
has been advanced sufficiently to
necessary. Manual compression of the
enter bladder, try to aspirate urine
urinary bladder to start urine flow is
from catheter by a syringe.
not recommended because this
increases the risk of iatrogenic
infection.
8. Collect urine specimen. (See
8. We do not advise instilling dilute
antiseptic solutions into the bladder
continuous urine drainage system.)
after routine catheterization. Stock
solutions of an tiseptics may be
contaminated with resistant bacteria.
9. Withdraw catheter, using gentle
9. Note date, time, catheter type and
traction, and note in animal's
size, amount of urine collected, any
medical record that catheterization
medication instilled, comments, and
was performed.
initials.
144
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 12-3  Inserting wrethral catheter into penile urethra.
UREThRAL CATHETERIZATION OF FEMALE
dog (VISUal teChnIQUe)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See pp. 141-142.
Tranquilize or anesthetize, if
necessary.
2. Assistant. Restrain dog in standing
2. If dog's tail is held straight up, some
position or sternal recumbency and
 dogs will strain or defecate during
hold dog's tail to side (Fig. 12-4).
the procedure.
3. Operator: Insert lubricated sterile
3. Instillation of topical anesthetic will
tuberculin syringe (with needle
decrease the dog's discomfort and
removed) containing 0.3 mL topical
thus lessen struggling during the
ophthalmic anesthetic or 0.5%
procedure.
lidocaine approximately 3 to 5 cm
into vagina and instill anesthetic.
 4. Lubricate vaginal speculum and end
4. For the visual technique, the
of catheter liberally with sterile
catheter most easily introduced is
lubricating jelly.
either the rigid metal type or a
Foley catheter equipped with a
metal stylet.
 5. Insert. speculum into vagina with tip
5. The clitoral fossa is a blind sac just.
of speculum directed first. dorsally,
inside the ventral opening of the
then cranially, to avoid clitoral fossa.
vulva. In addition to the usual
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION
145
Figure 12-4 Restraint of female dog for urethral catheterization
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
vaginal speculum, a variety of
instruments can be used to locate
the urethral opening: laryngoscope,
otoscope, modifed empty syringe
case, modified test tube.
6. Assistant: Hold and adjust. light.
6. The urethral orifice is located on
source as necessary.
the ventral surface of the vagina,
approximately 2 to 4 cm cranial to
the opening of the vulva.
7.Operator: Introduce catheter through
7. The urethra of the female dog is
 speculum into urethral orifice and
 approximately 5 to 10 cm in length.
 advance into urinary bladder (Fig.
12-5).
 8. If no urine appears when catheter
8. Advance catheter 2 to 4 cm farther
has been advanced sufficiently to
if necessary. Care must be taken if
enter bladder, attach a syringe to
the dog struggles while a rigid metal
distal end of catheter and try to
catheter is in place because it could
aspirate urine.
perforate the bladder wall. Manual
compression of the urinary bladder
to start urine flow is not
recommended because this
increases the risk of iatrogenic
infection.
 9. Collect urine specimen. (See
9. We do not advise instilling dilute
Pp. 153-154 for management of
antiseptic solutions into the bladder
continuous urine drainage system.)
after routine catheterization. Stock
solutions of an tiseptics may be
contaminated with resistant bacteria.
146
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 12-5 [ntroducing metal urethral catheter into female dog by visual technique.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
10. Remove catheter and note in
10. Note date, time, catheter type and
animal's medical record that
 size, amount of urine collected, any
catheterization was performed.
medication instilled, comments, and
initials.
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION OF FEMALE
DOG (tACTIlE TECHNIQUE)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See pp. 141-142.
2. Assistant. Restrain dog in standing
2. If dog's tail is held straight up, some
position or sternal recumbency and
dogs will strain or defecate during
hold dog's tail to side.
the procedure.
3. Operator: Insert. lubricated sterile
3. Instillation of topical anesthetic will
tuberculin syringe (with needle
decrease the dog's discomfort and
removed) containing 0.3 mL topical
thus lessen struggling during the
ophthalmic anesthetic or 0.5%
procedure.
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION
147
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
lidocaine approximately 3 to 5 cm
into vagina and instill anesthetic.
4. Lubricate gloved index finger of
4. Theoretically, the use of an
one hand and tip of flexible
 an timicrobial ointment as a
urethral catheter with sterile
lubricant could interfere with
lubricating jelly or antimicrobial
bacteriologic cultures. Right-handed
oin tment.
persons should hold the catheter
coiled in the right hand and use the
 left hand to palpate the urethral
orifice.
5. Palpate urethral papilla (tissue
5. The urethral papilla is a 0.5- to 1.5-
surrounding urethral orifce) with
cm round, frm or soft mass in the
gloved index finger of one hand.
ventral midline of the vagina
approximately 3 to 5 cm from the
vulvar opening. The papilla is
usually beneath the tip of the index
finger when the finger has been
inserted into the vagina to the level
of the second knuckle.
6. Pass urethral catheter ventral to
 6. With practice, this procedure can be
gloved fnger in vagina and use
done as quickly as the visual method
fnger to guide catheter down into
 on any dog larger than 8 kg. The
urethral orifice while protecting rest.
advantages are that. it usually is
of catheter from contamination with
tolerated better than the speculum
palm of hand (Fig. 12-6).
technique and that it. permits easy
Figure 12-6 Introducing flexible urethral catheter into female dog by tactile technique
148
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
placement of flexible catheters.
Flexible catheters must be used for
 con tinuous urine drainage.
7. If end of catheter can be palpated
7. In such an instance, the catheter is
advancing past. tip of index finger,
probably being inserted into the
withdraw catheter slightly and
 proximal vagina toward the cervix.
redirect it. ventrally into urethral
orifice.
8. Advance catheter into urinary
8. The urethra of the female dog is
bladder.
approximately 5 to 10 cm long; it is
relatively short. as compared with
that of the male dog.
9. If no urine appears when catheter
9. Advance catheter 2 to 4 cm farther,
has been advanced sufficiently to
if necessary. Manual compression of
enter bladder, try to aspirate urine
the urinary bladder to start urine
from catheter by a syringe.
flow is not recommended because
this increases the risk of iatrogenic
infection.
10. Collect urine specimen. (See
10. We do not advise instilling dilute
antiseptic solutions into the bladder
continuous urine drainage system.)
after routine catheterization. Stock
solutions of antiseptics may be
con taminated with resistant bacteria.
11. Withdraw catheter by gentle traction
11. Note date, time, catheter type and
and note in animal's medical record
size, amount of urine collected, any
that. catheterization was performed.
medication instilled, comments, and
initials.
UrEthral CAtheTerIZatIOn Of Male CAT
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See pp. 141-142.
 2. Tranquilize or anesthetize cat, if
2. A person experienced in this
necessary.
procedure can perform it rapidly on
a fully conscious, even-tempered cat.
3. Assistant. Restrain cat in lateral or
3. An Elizabethan collar is a useful
dorsal recumbency; grasp tail base
 adjunct to restraint during this
and gently deflect tail dorsally or
procedure. Many cats object to
laterally (Fig. 12-7).
having their tails held, so use a light.
grip.
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION
149
Figure 12-7F
 Restraint of male cat for urethral catheterization.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Lubricate end of catheter with
4. A polyethylene tomcat. catheter is
sterile jelly.
 most commonly used. A catheter
with side holes and closed end is
less traumatic to the urethra and
bladder than is the open-ended
type.
5. Place thumb and index fnger of
 5. A right-handed person should use
 one hand on either side of prepuce
the left hand to extrude the penis
so that palm of hand rests on cat's
from the prepuce. Unless the penis
lower spine. Exert pressure with
 is extruded from the prepuce at.
thumb and index finger in cranial
least. l cm, catheterization will be
direction to extrude penis from
very difficult.
prepuce (Fig. 12-8).
Figure 12-8 Extending cat's penis from prepuce
150
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 12-9 (A) and (B) Advancing urethral catheter into penile urethra.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Introduce catheter approximately
1.5 to 2.0 cm into urethra such that.
holes in catheter tip are no longer
visible (Fig. 12-9A).
7. Allow penis to retract within
prepuce, leaving catheter in place.
 8. Pinch preputial skin gently between
 8. Applying traction to the prepuce at.
thumb and forefinger and pull
this step straightens the flexure in
prepuce caudally and ventrally while
the cat's penis and permits the
advancing catheter into urinary
catheter to pass over the ischial
bladder (Fig. 12-9B).
arch.
 9. If catheter cannot. be advanced
9. When the urethral blockage has
 because of urethral blockage, repeat.
been relieved, insert. a tomcat.
procedure using 22-gauge
catheter and empty bladder by
intravenous catheter (with needle
aspirating urine by a syringe
removed) in place of urethral
attached to the catheter. Manual
catheter. Flush catheter with sterile
compression should not be
saline until urethral debris is
attempted if a bladder has been
dislodged.
distended by an obstruction because
perforation can result.
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION
151
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
10. Collect urine specimen. (See
10. Foley catheters are not available in
Pp. 153-154 for management of
sizes small enough for cats. If the
continuous urine drainage system.)
catheter is to be left in place,
adhesive tape is folded over the
distal end of the catheter in a
butterfly configuration. The “wings"
of the tape are sutured once to the
preputial skin on each side with
nonabsorbable suture material.
11. Put Elizabethan collar on cat.
11. Use of an Elizabethan collar will
minimize the possibility of the cat's
deliberately removing the catheter.
12. Remove catheter and note in
12. Note date, time, catheter type and
animal's medical record that.
size, amount of urine collected, any
catheterization was performed.
medication instilled, comments, and
initials.
UrEthRAl CATHETeRIZATION OF FeMAle CAT
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Prepare for catheterization.
1. See pp. 141-142.
2. Assistant: Restrain cat in lateral
2. An Elizabethan collar is a useful
recumbency, grasp tail base, and
adjunct to restraint during this
deflect. dorsally or laterally (Fig.
procedure.
12-7).
3. Tranquilize or sedate cat, if
3. Many cats will fight this procedure
necessary.
unless they are obtunded from
disease.
4. Insert lubricated sterile tuberculin
4. Topical anesthesia requires only a
syringe (with needle removed)
few minutes to take effect.
con taining 0.2 mL topical
 ophthalmic anesthetic or 0.5%
 lidocaine approximately 2 cm into
vagina.
5. Instill anesthetic and wait 2 to 3
5. Instillation of topical anesthetic will
minutes.
decrease the animal's discomfort
and therefore lessen struggling
during the procedure.
152
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Lubricate end of catheter liberally
6. A 3l F to 5 F catheter is suitable for
with sterile lubricating jelly.
a female cat.
7. Pull vulvar lips caudally while sliding
 7. In many cases, the vagina of the
catheter along ventral wall of
female cat is too small to be opened
vagina, until catheter slips into
with a speculum or for the tactile
urethral orifice (Fig. 12-10).
technique to be utilized. The
"blind" technique can be successful
if the operator is gentle and patient.
8. Collect urine specimen. (See
8. Foley catheters are not available in
sizes small enough for cats. If the
con tinuous urine drainage system.)
catheter is to be left. in place,
adhesive tape is folded over the
distal end of the catheter in a
butterfly configuration. The “wings"
of the tape are sutured once to the
perineal skin on each side with
nonabsorbable suture material.
9.Put Elizabethan collar on cat.
9. Use of an Elizabethan collar will
minimize the possibility of the cat's
deliberately removing the catheter.
10.Remove catheter and note in
10. Note date, time, catheter type and
animal's medical record that.
size, amount of urine collected, any
catheterization was performed.
medication instilled, comments, and
initials.
Figure 12-10 Introducing urethral catheter into female cat.
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION
153
MANAGEMENT OF INDWELLING URETHRAL CATHETER
AND CLOSED URINE DRAINAGE SYSTEM
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. For continuous urine drainage,
1. Closed urine drainage carries less risk
 connect urethral catheter, preferably
of urinary tract infection and
a flexible vinyl or red rubber
 prevents urine scalding of skin that.
catheter, to collection container by
 can occur with an open indwelling
means of sterile tubing (e.g.,
urethral catheter. Flexible vinyl or
intravenous fluid administration set
red rubber catheters are softer and
and empty fluid bag) or commercial
cause less damage to the urothelium
urinary collection bag (Fig. 12-11).
than polypropylene catheters.
2. Place collection container below level
2. Urine flow must be downhill to
of animal's urinary bladder.
prevent backflow of contaminated
urine into animal's bladder
3. If Foley catheter is used: When
3. Urethral trauma will occur if the
catheter is draining well, inflate end
inflatable portion has not been
of catheter according to
advanced into the urinary bladder
man ufacturer's directions.
when inflation is attempted.
4. Place Elizabethan collar on animal
4. Animals can contaminate and remove
unless it is unconscious or can be
urethral catheters, even if sutured to
observed constantly.
the skin.
Figure l2-1l  Collection apparatus for continuous urine drainage
154
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
5. Cleanse urethral orifice-catheter
5. Some drainage will occur at the exit.
junction with soap and water twice
point of the catheter. Catheter care
daily and apply antimicrobial
helps prevent this exudate from
ointment to junction after cleansing-
entering the proximal urethra and
bladder. The value of daily external
urethral orifice care may be greater
for high-risk patients. Care of the
urethral orifice-catheter junction
must include the application of
antimicrobial ointment because
cleaning with soap alone actually
increases bacteriuria in some
patien ts.
6. If urine flow stops, check position of
6. The animal may kink or compress
 animal and catheter. Try flushing
 the catheter when changing position.
catheter with 5 to 10 mL of sterile
Flushing the catheter may be
saline.
necessary to dislodge small clots or
other debris in the catheter openings
or lumen.
7. If continuous urine flow cannot be
7. A free flow of urine is essential in
reestablished, replace catheter or
 preventing catheter-associated
reevaluate necessity for continuous
infection.
urine drainage.
Bibliography
Biertuempfel PH, Ling GV, Ling GA: Urinary tract infection resulting from catheterization in
healthy adult dogs. JAVMA 178(9):989-991, 1981
 Brunner LS, Suddarth DS: The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice, 3rd ed. Philadelphia,
JB Lippincott, 1982
Burke JB, Jacobson JA, Garibaldi RA et al: Evaluation of daily meatal care with polyantibiotic
ointment in prevention of winary catheter-associated bacteriunia. J Urol 129:331-334,
Feb. 1983
 a m l ro r ar i g  a rg r
2001
Comer KM, Ling GV: Results of urinalysis and bacterial culture of canine wrine obtained by
antepubic cystocentesis, catheterization, and the midstream voided methods. JAVMA 179:
891-895, 1981
Crow SE: Hematunia: An algorithm for differential diagnosis. Compend Contin Educ Prac Vet
II (12):941-948, 1980
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
URETHRAL CATHETERIZATION155
Koskeroglu N. (2006) The role of meatal disinfection in preventing catheter-related bacteriuria
in an intensive care unit: A pilot study in Turkey. Journal of Hospital Infection 56:
236-238
Lees GE: Use and misuse of indwelling urethral catheters. Vet Clin North Am 26(3):499-505,
1996
Lees GE, Osborne CA: Urinary tract infections associated with the use and misuse of urinary
catheters. Vet Clin North Am 9(4):713-727, 1979
Lees GE, Osborne CA, Stevens JB et al: Adverse effects caused by polypropylene and polyvinyl
feline urinary catheters. Am J Vet Res 41(11):1836-1840, 1980
Lees GE, Osborne CA, Stevens JB et al: Adverse effects of open indwelling urethral catheteriza-
tion in clinically normal male cats. Am J Vet Res 42(5):825-833, 1981
Lees GE, Simpson RB, Green RA: Results of analyses and bacterial cultures of urine specimens
obtained from clinically normal cats by three methods. JAVMA 184(4):449-454, 1984
Lulich J: The Uses and Misuses of Urinary Catheters. Lecture notes. University of Minnesota,
College of Veterinary Medicine, 2001
McCurnin DM, Poffenbarger EM: Small Animal Physical Diagnosis and Clinical Procedures.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1991
Osborne CA, Klausner JS, Lees GE: Urinary tract infections: Normal and abnormal host defense
mechanisms. Vet Clin North Am 9(4):587-609, 1979
Osborne CA, Klausner JS, Krawiec DR et al: Canine struvite urolithiasis: Problems and their
dissolution. JAVMA 179(3):239-244, 1981
Osborne CA, Kruger JM, Lulich JP, Bartges JW, Polzin DJ: Medical management of feline ure
thral obstruction. Vet Clin North Am 26(3):483-498, 1996
Osborne CA, Stevens JB: Handbook of Canine and Feline Urinalysis. St. Louis, MO, Ralston
Purina, 1981
Osborne CA, Polzin DJ: Nonsurgical management of canine obstructive uwrolithopathy Vet Clin
North Am: Sm An Prac 16(2):333-349, 1986
Smarick S, Haskins S, Aldrich J, Foley J, Kass P, Ling GV: Incidence of catheter-associated urinary
tact infection among dogs in a small animal intensive care unit. JAVMA (2004)
224:1936-1940.
Smith CW, Schiller AG, Smith AR, et al: Effects on indwelling urinary catheters in male cats.
 JAAHA 17:427-433, May/June 1981
Stogdale L, Roos CJ: The use of the laryngoscope for bladder catheterization in the female dog.
JAAHA 14:616-617, Sept/Oct 1978
Wolz GC: Urinary catheterization of the small animal patient, pp 207-215. Proceedings of 12th
Annual Seminar for Veterinary Technicians, Western States Veterinary Conference, Las
Vegas, NV, Feb 21-23, 1983
Chapter 13
DIGITAL RECTAL
EXAMINATION
f you don'tknow whereyou'regoingyouwillprobably endup
somewhere else.
LAURENCE J. PETER
finger placed into the rectal lumen through the anus.
Purpose
To identify diseases involving the rectum, anus, anal sacs, perineum, pelvic urethra,
 prostate, vagina, and pelvic bones
Specific Indications
1. Standard part. of complete physical examination
2. Pelvic trauma
3. Stranguria
4. Hematuria
5. Pyuria
6. Tenesmus
 7. Swellings or masses in perineal region
8. Hematochezia
9. Anal pruritus
10. Preputial or anal discharge
157
158
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Contraindications
1. Severe hematochezia
2.Painful tail base
Equipment
* Examination gloves
● Lubricating jelly
Restraint and Positioning
Rectal palpation may be performed with the animal in a standing or recumbent posi-
tion. The examiner should support the animal by gently cupping one hand under the
animal's caudal abdomen while the other gloved hand examines the rectal area. An
assistant should restrain the animal by cradling the head and thorax in both arms.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Place lubricant on index or middle
1. The index finger should be used for
finger of gloved hand.
small dogs and cats.
 2. Slowly and gently advance lubricated
 2. If there is a large amount of fecal
finger as far as possible into rectum
material present, it should be
(Fig. 13-1).
removed before proceeding.
 3. Systematically palpate pelvic canal
3. Proceeding from cranial to caudal in
and perineum proceeding from
a uniform sequence helps to avoid
cranial to caudal. A recommended
errors of omission. Particular
procedure is as follows:
 attention should be paid to structures
Slide finger lightly over rectal
that protrude into or occlude the
mucosa for its entire circumference.
pelvic canal or the lumen of the
 Palpate following structures for
rectum. In addition, note the
location, size, consistency, and
 animal's response when pressure is
shape:
 applied to each structure. The anal
+ Ventral aspect. of sacrum
sacs are identifed by squeezing them
●Right. ilium
between the lubricated fnger and
●Right. acetabulum
the thumb, which is placed against.
●Pubis
the perineal skin.
DIGITAL RECTALEXAMINATION
159
Figure 13-1 Placement of a gloved, lubricated finger in rectum for tactile inspection of the
pelvic and perineal organs.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
● Prostate or dorsal vaginal wall
+ Left acetabulum
●Left ilium
Withdraw finger 1 to 3 cm and repeat.
circumferential palpation of:
● Rectal mucosa
+ Ventral aspect. of coccygeal
vertebrae
●Right perineal fascia
● Prostate or dorsal vaginal wall
+ Dorsal aspect of ischium
● Urethra
· Left perineal fascia
Continue caudally to anus and
palpate:
● Anal sphincter muscles (note tone
and reflex contraction)
+ Anal sacs at 4 o'clock and 8 o'clock
 positions
4. Express contents of distended anal
4. Collect secretions on cotton.
sacs (see also Chapter 14).
160
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 5. As fnger is removed from rectum,
5. One to two centimeters of the rectal
examine mucosa visually.
mucosa can be readily everted by
 gentle traction at the time of
withdrawal.
6. Examine soiled glove for blood,
6. This examination should consist. of
mucus, foreign materials, or
 both inspection and palpation.
parasites.
Chapter 14
ANAL SAC
EXPRESSION AND
CANNULATION
Kindness is theoil that takes thefrictiononut of life.
M. A.HAMMARLUND
Anal sac expression is the manual removal of secretions that have accumulated in the
 animal's anal sacs. Many dogs need their anal sacs emptied frequently, but this pro-
cedure is rarely performed on cats.
Anal sac cannulation is the insertion of a tube into the anal sac orifice.
Purposes
1. To remove malodorous secretions before bathing and grooming of dogs
 2. To decrease irritation (pruritus) caused by distention or inflammation of the anal
sacs
3. To instill medication into diseased anal sacs
Specific Indication
Anal pruritus, usually manifest. as scooting, licking, or whining
Complications
1. Rupture of abscessed anal sac
2. Perforation of rectum
161
162
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Equipment Needed
* Cotton (or paper towels)
* Examination glove (s)
· Lubricating jelly
* Skin disinfectant, for example, 2% chlorhexidine solution
+Prescribed medication
Restraint and Positioning
The dog should be restrained in the standing position by an assistant. A muzzle or
Elizabethan collar may be needed. (see Chapter 1.)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Put on examination glove.
1. Normal anal sac contents are
malodorous. Use of an examination
glove prevents soiling of the hands.
2. Express each anal sac externally by
2. The anal sacs are located within the
placing cotton over anus and
anal sphincter muscles ventrolateral
pressing sac forward against.
to the anus (4 o'clock and 8 o'clock
perineum, while gently squeezing
positions). The duct of each sac
sac with thumb and one or two
opens just. inside the anal orifice.
fingers (Fig. 141).
 3. Apply generous amount of sterile
3. Liquid soaps may also be used in
lubricant to gloved index finger.
place of lubrican ts.
4. Express anal sacs more completely
1
This is the preferred method of anal
by inserting lubricated gloved index
sac expression because it ensures
fnger into rectum and gently
emptying of the sacs. Rectal
milking contents of sac between
perforation, a very rare
finger and thumb dorsomedially
 complication, can be prevented by
into anal opening (Fig. 142).
gentle technique and adequate
lubrication. If sacs cannot be
 expressed with light to moderate
pressure, consider cannulation
rather than applying more
pressure.
5. Examine material expressed from
 5. Normal anal sacs contain a granular
anal sacs.
brown, malodorous material.
ANAL SAC EXPRESSION AND CANNULATION
163
Figure 14-11
 External expression of anal sac.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Invert glove and tie it in knot.
6. Enclosing anal sac material in this
manner minimizes dispersion of
odor in the examination room.
7. If material expressed from anal sacs
7. Flushing with dilute chlorhexidine
is purulent in appearance, identify
solution cleanses the interior aspect
duct openings and cannulate anal
of the anal sacs. A 20-gauge
sac duct. Flush sacs several times
 polyethylene intravenous catheter is
with 2% chlorhexidine solution
suitable in diameter and rigidity for
(Fig. 143).
cannulating anal sac ducts.
Cannulation is facilitated by ejecting
flushing solution through the
cannula as it is introduced into the
duct opening.
8. Instill prescribed medication into
8. Topical ointments suitable for use in
anal sacs.
the ear have been used to treat.
inflammation of the anal sac.
Figure 14-2  Internal expression of anal sac.
Figure 14-3
 Flushing of anal sac by means of cannula inserted into anal sac duct.
164
ANAL SAC EXPRESSION AND CANNULATION
165
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
9. Note in patient's medical record any
9. Note date, time, medication, anal
abnormalities observed or
sac(s) affected, dosage, initials, and
medication instilled.
comments.
10. Clean anus and surrounding skin
10. Cleaning the area helps to dissipate
with disinfectant.
odors lingering from the procedure.
Bibliography
Anal Sacs. Client education series. Indianapolis, Eli Lilly and Company
McCurnin DM, Poffenbarger EM: Small Animal Physical Diagnosis and Clinical Procedures.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1991
Muller GH, Kirk RW: Small Animal Dermatology, Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1969
 Pratt PW (ed): Medical Nursing for Animal Health Technicians. Santa Barbara, CA, American
Veterinary Publications, 1985
Chapter 15
ENEMA
When a man has pity onall living creatures,then only is he noble.
BUDDHA
Enema is the infusion of fluid in the lower intestinal tract through the anus.
Purposes
1. To remove fecal material from the colon
 2. To prepare for survey and contrast radiographic studies of abdomen and pelvis
 3. To administer radiographic contrast. media
4. To irrigate the colon in certain types of poisoning
Specific Indications
1. Constipation or obstipation
2. Some poisonings
Complications
1. Rupture of colon
 2. Leakage of enema fluid into peritoneal cavity through already-ruptured gastroin-
testinal tract
 3. Hemorrhage, in cases of ulcerative colitis
167
168
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Equipment Needed
+Examination glove
+Lubricating jelly
● Enema container with attached tubing and nozzle
* Enema solution (one or more of the following items):
Warm water
Glycerine and water (1 : 1)
Mild soap and water
 Saline for irrigation
Commercial enema preparation
NOTE: Phosphate enema solutions should not be used in cats and small dogs because these
preparations may cause acute collapse associated with hypocalcemia.
Restraint and Positioning
The animal is restrained in a standing position, usually in a wash basin or bathtub.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Evaluate animal for evidence of
1. Enemas are contraindicated in
abdominal pain or ulcerative colitis.
cases of intestinal obstruction or
 If abdominal pain is present,
perforation because of the risk of
eliminate possibility of intestinal
forcing fecal material throughout.
 perforation or obstruction before
the peritoneal cavity. Enemas may
proceeding.
increase colonic bleeding in cases of
ulcerative colitis.
2. Place prescribed warm enema
2. Approximately 150 to 200 mL of an
solution in enema container.
enema solution can be administered
safely to an adult. cat; a medium-
sized or large dog can be given up
to 1 liter. Warm solutions are
preferred to cool solutions because
the former are more readily
retained and more comfortable for
the animal.
3. Put on examination glove.
3. The glove will prevent soiling of the
hand with feces and potential
transmission of zoonotic diseases.
ENEMA
169
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
4. Lubricate nozzle on end of enema
4. Lubrication of the nozzle facilitates
tubing with lubricating jelly.
atraumatic introduction of the tube
into the rectum.
5. Insert nozzle into animal's rectum
5. The nozzle must. be passed at. least.
(Fig. 15-1).
 5 cm cranial to the animal's anal
sphincter.
6. Place enema container higher than
6. Elevating the animal's hindquarters
animal's anus and permit solution
and gently gripping the sphincter
to flow by gravity into rectum.
around the nozzle will help to
 prevent. enema fluid from escaping.
If the enema flow rate is too fast,
it may cause reverse peristalsis and
vomiting.
7. After administrating enema fluid,
7. It may be necessary to administer
move animal immediately to suitable
two or three warm-water or saline
area for defecation.
enemas to clean the bowel
Figure 15-1 Inserting enema tube into animal's rectum.
170
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
adequately before a barium enema
procedure.
8. Note in patient's medical record
8. Note date, time, type of enema,
that. enema was given.
amount, initials, and comments.
9. For a barium enema: Anesthetize
9. A cuffed rectal catheter is preferred
animal, position in right lateral
to a routine enema nozzle for this
recumbency, and place barium
 procedure because anesthesia
contrast material (20 to 30 mL/kg)
relaxes the anal sphincter and
into colon.
leakage of barium can occur readily.
Contamination of the animal's hair
or skin with contrast. materials may
 result in radiographic artifacts that.
interfere with diagnosis.
10. Bathe animal's hindquarters or
10. The hair coat becomes soiled with
entire body.
feces during this procedure.
Bibliography
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures & Emergency Treat-
ment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
 Brunner LS, Suddarth DS: The Lippincott Manual of Nursing Practice, Srd ed. Philadelphia JB
Lippincott, 1982
Jones BV: Animal Nursing, Part 2. Oxford, Pergamon Press, 1966
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
Lane DR, Cooper, B: Veterinary Nursing (Formerly Jones's Animal Nursing, 5th edition).
Oxford, England, Pergamon Press, 1994
Pratt PW (ed): Medical Nursing for Animal Health Technicians. Santa Barbara, CA, American
Veterinary Publications, 1985
Part Il
SPECIALZED
CLNICAL
PROCEDURES
The procedures described in this section are described as
specialized because they require considerable prepara-
tion or have very specific indications. The reader should
pay particular attention to the indications and contraindi-
cations sections in applying these techniques.
As opposed to the "routine" procedures described in
Part I, the specialized techniques frequently have signifi-
cant inherent risk and may require specialized equipment.
For the most part, however, the needed instruments cre
readily available and are not expensive.
Many of the procedures that were included in the
first two editions of the Manual are still widely used today.
Many ofthe previously described needle biopsytechniques
often disposable equipment. In addition, sonography and
endoscopy have become standards of practice in the
last two decades. The safety and success of many
semi-invasive techniques, such as abdominocentesis, tho
racocentesis, pericardiocentesis, cystocentesis, and per-
cutaneous needle biopsies, care greatly enhanced by
concurent use of imaging or direct visualization with an
endoscope orlaparoscope.
171
172
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
In the interest of patient comfort and safety, we
routinely use endoscopic and sonographic guidance to
perform many of these diagnostic procedures. Endoscopes
and ultrasound machines are now commonly available in
progressive small animal practices in the United States;
however, not every practice may be able to incur the cost
of fhe expensive instruments. Consequenfly, we continue
to describe some procedures which can be performed
without the benefit of these excellent clinical cids.
Because these procedures cre less commonly used in
for routine techniques. Appropriate care and selection of
these clinical tools will help the practicing veterinarian and
technician to provide clients and patients with a more
complete range cand greater quality of diagnostic and
therapeutic services.
Things are only impossible until they're not.
JEAN-LUC PICARD
When all elsefails,read the instructions.
ANONYMOUS
Chapter 16
SKIN PREPARATION
We are held responsible not only for what we do, but for what we don't do.
CARL OSBORNE
Many of the procedures described in Part II are semi-invasive. Consequently, adequate
of dogs and cats are described in almost. every veterinary surgery text. For a thorough
discussion of theory and principles of skin preparation, we refer our readers to those
references.
Our preferred technique for skin preparation is described below. It is more than
adequate for minimizing the probability of postoperative infection in all of the pro-
cedures included in this manual. Occasionally, some modifications are needed—such
changes are described in the preparation section of each chapter for cases in which
standard skin preparation technique is not appropriate.
Equipment Needed
* Animal hair clipper, with No. 10 or No. 40 blade
· 2" × 2" gauze sponges soaked in 2% chlorhexidine scrub
+ 2" x 2" gauze sponges soaked in 70% alcohol
* Sponge forceps (optional)
+ Surgical towels
● Fenestrated surgical drape
+ Towel clamps (2 to 4)
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. If animal's skin is heavily soiled,
1. Bathing will help to minimize the
consider bathing whole animal
chance of gross contamination of the
before proceeding.
operative site.
173
174
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Immobilize operative site.
2. Refer to recommended restraint
measures for each procedure.
General anesthesia is the only
 method that insures adequate
immobilization for lengthy
procedures.
3. Clip hair close to skin from a large
3. Do not skimp on area clipped. A
area around operative site.
wide margin is required to prevent.
contamination of the operative field.
Clipped hairs should be less than
2 mm long.
4. Vacuum hair clippings and epithelial
4. Do not touch the vacuum hose to the
debris from entire area.
skin, as excessive suction may cause
bruising.
5. Gently scrub skin with sponges
5. Start at the operative site and move
soaked in 2% chlorhexidine scrub
the sponge outward toward the
haired edges of the field, using a
centrifugal spiral motion.
Chlorhexidine and alcohol are
recommended by the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC) for skin
preparation.
6. Remove soap by wiping operative site
 6. Several sponges may be required.
with alcohol-soaked gauze sponges.
7. Repeat Nos. 5 and 6 at least. two
7. The alternating surgical scrub and
times.
alcohol scrubs should be continued
until no soil is visible on the used
 sponges. Avoid applying excessive
amounts of solutions.
8. After last scrub, allow operative field
8. This delay allows the surgical scrub to
to air dry.
kill more microorganisms.
9. Place towels and drapes around
9. Towels and drapes help to prevent.
operative site and secure to skin with
inadvertent contamination of
towel clamps.
instruments.
Bibliography
CDC: Guideline for Prevention of Surgical Site Infection. www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dhqp/gl_
surgicalsite.html, 1999
Knecht CD, Allen AR, Williams DJ,Johnson JH: Fundamental Techniques in Veterinary Surgery,
3rd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1987
O'Grady NP et al.: Guidelines for the prevention of intravascular catheter-related infections
MMWR 51 (RR10): 1-26. www.cdlc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5110a1.htm, 2002
SKINPREPARATION
175
Osuna DJ, DeYoung DJ, Walker RL: Comparison of three skin preparation techniques; Part 1:
Experimental trial. Veterinary Surgery 19(1):14-19, 1990
Osuna DJ, DeYoung DG, Walker RL: Comparison of three skin preparation techniques; Part 2:
Clinical trial in 100 dogs. Veterinary Surgery 19(1):20-23, 1990
Pratt PW (ed): Medical Nursing for Animal Health Technicians. Santa Barbara, CA, American
Veterinary Publications, 1985
Riser WH: Preparation of the patient's skin. In Archibald J (ed): Canine Surgery, lst ed. Santa
Barbara, American Veterinary Publications, 1965
Slatter D: Textbook of Small Animal Surgery, 2nd ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1993
Tracy DL, Warren RG: Small Animal Surgical Nursing. St. Louis, CV Mosby, 1983
Chapter 17
INTUBATION
It's whatyou learnafteryouknow itall thatcounts.
JOHN WOODEN
Intubation is the insertion of a tube into an organ or body cavity.
ENDOTRACHEAL INTUBATION
Endotracheal intubation is the placement of a tube that extends from the oral cavity into
the trachea.
Purposes
1. To administer inhalation anesthetic drugs
 2. To ensure a patent airway in unconscious animals
3. To administer oxygen
4. To provide ventilatory assistance
Complications
1. Trauma to teeth or mucous membranes of mouth, soft palate, pharynx, or larynx
2. Tracheal inflammation or necrosis
3. Subcutaneous emphysema secondary to tracheal trauma
4. Laryngospasm
5. Obstruction of the airway with secretions
6. Inadequate ventilation due to introduction of endotracheal tube into a bronchus
7. Aspiration of endotracheal tube
177
178
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
TABLE 17-1
Recommended endotracheal tube sizes for routine use in
dogs and cats.*
Animal
Body Weight (lb)
Internal Diameter of Tube (mm)
1E0
2
3
4
3.5-4
8
4-4.5
Dog
5
5
10
6
15
6-7
20
6-7
25
6-8
30
7-8
35
7-8
40
8-10
45
8-10
60
11-12
80
12-14
*Individual variations exist, and obesity must be taken into consideration. Some breeds (e.g., Bulldogs)
 have relatively small tracheas for their body size, and some breeds (e.g., Dachshunds) have large
tracheas.
Equipment Needed
● Endotracheal tube of appropriate size and type (Table 17-1)
+ Gauze strip, 30 to 50 cm long
· Sterile lubricating jelly
●6-mL syringe
●Hemostat.
+ Laryngoscope or other light source
● Topical anesthetic (2% lidocaine) (for cats)
● Additional equipment depending on circumstances:
Injectable anesthetic agents
Inhalation anesthesia machine
Ambu bag
Emergency drugs
Restraint and Positioning
Endotracheal intubation is performed on dogs and cats that have been rendered
unconscious by sedatives or anesthetic agents, trauma, or disease. Endotracheal intu-
bation can be accomplished most easily when an assistant holds the animal in sternal
recumbency. An animal also can be intubated while in lateral or dorsal recumbency.
Large dogs may be intubated more easily while in lateral recumbency.
INTUBATION
179
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Select endotracheal tube of
1. Attempting to use a tube that is too
appropriate diameter (see
large can cause trauma to the larynx
Table 17-1).
or trachea. A tube that is too small
will not provide an adequate airway.
2. Premeasure length of tube against.
2. Once in place, the tip of the tube
animal's neck (Fig. 17-1).
should be located midway between
the larynx and the thoracic inlet. A
longer tube is required for some
surgical procedures (e.g., cervical
decompression).
3. Check function of inflatable cuff, if
3. Inflate the cuff with air, using a 6-
present. Check that tube is clean
mL syringe. Observe and listen for
and in good condition.
leaks; submerge the cuff in water
and observe for bubbles if in doubt.
about cuff seal.
4. Lubricate tracheal end of tube with
4. Lubrication reduces irritation to the
small amount of sterile lubricating
tracheal mucosa during intubation.
jelly or water.
5. Assistant: (Fig. 17-2)
5.Assistant:
a. Place animal in sternal
a. Hold the animal so that the head
recumbency.
and neck are not twisted to
either side.
b. Extend animal's neck and open
b. Strips of gauze are particularly
animal's mouth widely, with one
useful for holding the upper jaw
hand (or gauze strip) holding
of brachycephalic dogs.
upper jaw.
Figure 17-1  Pre-measuring length of endo-
Figure 17-2 Restraint of animal for endotra-
tacheal tube required for animal.
cheal intubation.
180
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
c. Pull animal's tongue out. of
c. Alternatively, the operator may
mouth with other hand.
grasp the tongue with one hand
(see Fig. 17-2). A gauze sponge is
useful for grasping a slippery
tongue.
6. Operator: Use laryngoscope to locate
6. Operator. The use of a topical
larynx (Fig. 17-3). If necessary, apply
anesthetic is helpful in preventing
topical anesthetic to larynx of cat.
laryngospasm during endotracheal
(one drop 2% lidocaine on each
intubation of the cat.
arytenoid)
 7. Depress epiglottis with tip of
7. It is advisable to place the tip of a
laryngoscope blade or endotracheal
curved laryngoscope blade just.
tube to examine arytenoid cartilages
anterior to the epiglottis in the cat.
and vocal folds (Fig. 17-4).
so as to avoid laryngospasm, which
can occur when the epiglottis is
stimulated.
8. Pass lubricated end of endotracheal
8. If the endotracheal tube is advanced
tube through glottis and into
too far down the trachea, it can
trachea until tip of tube is midway
enter the right or left mainstem
 between larynx and thoracic inlet
bronchus, thus preventing
(Fig. 17-1).
ventilation of the other lung feld.
 9. Check for correct placement of
9. Palpation of two frm tubes in the
tube.
neck indicates that the esophagus
a.Auscult both sides of animal's
(rather than the trachea) has been
chest for breath sounds.
intubated.
b. Palpate neck for presence of two
tubes.
c. Directly palpate larynx and
endotracheal tube if animal is
well anesthetized.
Figure 17-3  Laryngoscopic view of glottis.
INTUBATION
181
Figure 17-4  Use of laryngoscope to inspect glottis.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
10. Tie a single half-hitch knot around
10. The tie should be placed posterior
tube with gauze strip and then tie
to the animal's canine teeth. The
tube with quick release knot. to
position of the gauze tie will depend
upper jaw, lower jaw, or head
on whether a procedure is to be
behind ears (Fig. 17-5).
 performed in the head or neck
region.
Figure 17-5 Endotracheal tube tied in place.
182
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
11. Connect endotracheal tube to
11. The Ambu bag is used for manual
inhalation anesthesia machine,
ventilation of an animal in
 Ambu bag, or respirator when
respiratory arrest (Fig. 17-6).
required.
12. Inflate cuff of endotracheal tube
12. Inflate cuff to an air seal of 20 cm
with sufficient air to seal area
H,O in dogs and 12 to 15 cm H,O
between tube and trachea
in cats. Overinflation of the cuff can
(Fig. 17-7).
cause tracheal inflammation and
necrosis. If more than 5 mL of air
is needed to inflate the cuff in a
dog (or 2 mL in a cat), replace
endotracheal tube with one of
larger diameter. A leak should be
heard around the tube when one is
manually ventilating an animal with
more than twice its tidal volume.
This leak will act as a "safety valve"
and protect the lungs from
overinflation.
Figure 17-6 Manual ventilation with an Ambu bag.
INTUBATION
183
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
13. While animal is intubated, observe
13. Indications of adequate ventilation
frequently for:
include normal pink color of
 a. kinking of endotracheal tube due
mucous membranes and clear
to malpositioning of neck
lung sounds on auscultation. It is
b. obstruction of endotracheal tube
sometimes necessary to remove
with secretions
 secretions by tracheal suctioning
c. biting of endotracheal tube
through the endotracheal tube. An
(because of return of reflexes)
animal must be observed closely
d. twisting of endotracheal tube
while regaining consciousness so
that it does not bite through the
endotracheal tube and aspirate it.
Disconnect the tube from the
 breathing circuit when manipulating
or changing position to avoid
twisting or pulling on the tube,
which can cause tracheal tears.
14. When procedure requiring
14. In low-risk patients with good
anesthesia is completed, turn off
breathing patterns and little
inhalant anesthetic, but continue
 potential for airway obstruction,
delivery of oxygen until animal is
it is acceptable to stop the flow of
ready to be extubated.
oxygen and permit. them to breathe
room air for several minutes before
extubation.
Figure 17-7  Inflating cuff of endotracheal tube.
184
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
15. Loosen tie on tube as reflexes begin
15. Loosening the anchoring ties
to return.
permits rapid removal of the
endotracheal tube when the animal
begins to swallow.
16. Deflate cuff and remove tube
16. Avoid deflating cuff until the animal
(extubate) when swallowing reflex
is ready to extubate. The cuff
has returned.
 provides protection from aspiration
until the patient's swallowing reflex
returns. The animal's mouth and
airway should be evaluated for
foreign material prior to deflating
cuff and extubation. Removing an
endotracheal tube with an inflated
cuff is traumatic to the trachea and
larynx and should be avoided.
17. Position animal with head, neck
17. In the semiconscious state following
and tongue extended and continue
anesthesia, an animal can die as a
to observe until animal is fully
result of airway obstruction.
conscious.
 Brachycephalic breeds (e.g., English
bulldog, Boston terrier) are
 particularly susceptible to airway
obstruction during anesthesia
recovery. We recommend that short-
nosed dogs be recovered in sternal
recumbency only. Careful monitoring
for obstruction after the
endotracheal tube is removed is
essential, because many of these
dogs will partially or completely
obstruct their upper airway shortly
 after extubation. Be prepared to
reintubate immediately.
CHEST TUBE PLACEMENT
Chest tube placement is the insertion of a flexible catheter into the pleural cavity.
Purposes
1. To remove fluids or air continuously or repeatedly from the chest.
2. To infuse certain medications into the chest.
INTUBATION
185
Specific Indications
1. Pneumothorax
2. Pleural effusion
Complications
1. Leakage of room air into chest tube with resulting pneumothorax
2. Pleural inflammation or infection
3. Puncture of intercostal artery
4. Laceration of lung with resulting hemothorax or pneumothorax
 5. Laceration of heart. or great. vessels
Equipment Needed
+ Sterile chest tube: rubber or soft vinyl urethral catheter or commercial chest tube
14 F or larger
+ Cotton
* Clipper with No. 40 blade
* Skin preparation material (see Chapter 16)
· Drugs and equipment for general anesthesia, or 2% lidocaine for local anesthesia
 in critically ill animals
* Cap and mask
+ Sterile surgical equipment:
Drapes
Gown
 Surgeon's gloves
Gauze sponges
 Scalpel blade and handle
Scissors
 Two curved hemostats
Suture material: monoflament, nonabsorbable
 Three-way stopcock and catheter adapter
Straight hemostat.
60-mL syringe
* Bandaging material:
Sterile gauze sponges
Antimicrobial ointment
Gauze bandage
Adhesive tape (2 in. wide) or elastic adhesive bandage
186
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Restraint and Positioning
General anesthesia is preferred for the maintenance of strict asepsis during chest tube
placement. If the animal's critical condition precludes general anesthesia, the area
for chest tube placement, including the pleura, is infiltrated with 2% lidocaine. The
animal should be positioned in lateral recumbency.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip and surgically prepare skin
1. Failure to cleanse the skin
over lateral thorax from fifth to
thoroughly before chest tube
ninth intercostal spaces (see
insertion can result in infection.
Chapter 16).
2. If general anesthesia cannot be
2. A total of 2 to 5 mL of lidocaine
used, infltrate skin, subcutaneous
 may be needed to provide adequate
tissue, intercostal muscles, and
local anesthesia.
pleura with 2% lidocaine.
3. Don cap, mask, sterile gown, and
 3. Strict attention to asepsis is
gloves. Place sterile drapes around
recommended.
chest tube insertion site.
4. Cut additional holes in chest tube,
4. It is advantageous to have several
if necessary. Seal end of chest tube
holes in the tube to decrease the
with catheter adapter and three-way
chance of blockage of the tube with
stopcock.
secretions. The chest. tube should be
sealed during insertion to prevent
room air from entering the chest.
5. Make small incision in skin at level
5. The skin incision should be two
of mid-thorax over eighth or ninth
intercostal spaces caudal to the
intercostal space.
intended insertion site of the
chest tube.
6. Using curved hemostat, tunnel
6. The subcutaneous tunnel is made
cranially through subcutaneous
with the hemostat by gentle blunt
tissue to sixth or seventh intercostal
dissection. The tunnel must be wide
space (Fig. 17-8).
enough to accommodate a second
hemostat. and a chest tube.
7. Force closed hemostat into thoracic
7. The intercostal arteries are located
cavity, keeping close to cranial edge
along the caudal edge of each rib
of seventh or eighth rib (Fig. 17-9).
and must be avoided to minimize
the chance of severe hemorrhage.
8. Spread jaws of hemostat and leave
8. Spreading the jaws of the hemostat.
in place.
prevents the pleura and intercostal
muscles from occluding the
puncture site.
INTUBATION
187
Figure 17-8
Formation of subcutaneous tunnel for chest tube.
Figure 17-9
 Inserting closed hemostat into thorax.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 9. Place tip of chest. tube between
jaws of second curved hemostat.
Advance second hemostat. through
subcutaneous tunnel so that tube
tip just. enters thoracic cavity (Fig.
17-10A).
10. Open jaws of second hemostat and
manually advance chest tube well
into thoracic cavity (Fig. 17-10B).
188
SPECIALIZED CLINICALPROCEDURES
B
Figure 17-10 (A) Advancing second hemostat (with tip of tube clamped in jaws) through
tumnel created by frst hemostat. (B) Sliding chest tube between open jaws of lower hemostat
and into pleural space.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
11. Remove hemostat that held tube
11. Open the jaws of the second
frst, then hemostat that was used to
hemostat just enough to prevent it.
create subcutaneous tunnel.
from pulling the tube back out of
the chest. Once the tube is properly
in place through the thoracic wall
and pleura, remove the first.
hemostat.
12. Hold sponge over subcutaneous
12. If no fluid or air can be aspirated,
tunnel while aspirating chest tube
the tube should be advanced or
with 60-mL syringe (Fig. 17-11).
withdrawn slightly until patency is
ensured.
INTUBATION
189
Figure 17-11  Aspirating chest tube to ensure correct placement.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
13. Place suture through skin edges
around exit point of chest tube
from skin (Fig. 17-12A).
14. Make adhesive tape “butterfly"
14. The adhesive tape helps to anchor
around chest. tube and suture
the chest tube in position.
butterfly to skin with simple
interrupted sutures (Fig. 17-12B).
15. Place antimicrobial ointment and
 sterile gauze sponge over skin
incision.
16. Bandage chest tube in place by
16. The bandage must. permit the
completely encircling thorax with
animal to breathe easily, but it
gauze and adhesive tape or elastic
should be secure.
adhesive bandage.
17. Place straight hemostat on chest.
17. The hemostat is additional
tube proximal to stopcock, and
protection against iatrogenic
incorporate jaws of hemostat into
pneumothorax should the stopcock
bandage (Fig. 17-13).
become dislodged.
18. Aspirate chest tube at. prescribed
18. Do not leave an animal with a chest.
intervals, moving animal into 
tube in place unattended. Note
various positions if necessary.
date, time, volume and appearance
of material aspirated, initials, and
comments in animal's medical
record.
190
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
A
B
Figure 17-12
(A) Suture around exit point of chest tube. (B) Adhesive tape "butterfly" around
chest tube sutured to skin.
Figure 17-13 Bandage covering chest tube and jaws of hemostat
OROGASTRIC INTUBATION
the stomach.
Purposes
1. To administer medication and certain radiographic contrast materials
2. To remove stomach contents
INTUBATION
191
3. To perform gastric lavage (see Chapter 18, pp. 217-219)
4. To administer nutrients (e.g., to puppies and kittens)
Complications
1. Administration of materials into respiratory tract. due to incorrect. placement of
tube
2. Esophageal trauma
 3. Gastric irritation
4. Gastric perforation
Equipment Needed
+ Stomach tube:
12 F rubber urethral catheter for kittens and puppies
18 F rubber urethral catheter for adult. cats and dogs up to 40 lb.
Foal stomach tube for dogs >40 lb.
+ Speculum:
Commercial canine mouth speculum or roll of 2-inch-wide adhesive tape
1-inch-wide wooden dowel with center hole for cats
+ Lubricating jelly
· Syringe containing 5 mL of sterile saline
· Syringe or funnel for material to be administered
Restraint and Positioning
 Restrain the animal in sternal recumbency. Do not attempt to pass an orogastric tube
with an animal in lateral recumbency.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Premeasure stomach tube by holding
1. When premeasuring the tube, one
it next to animal. When tip is at level
must follow the curvature of the neck
of last. rib, mark point on tube at oral
in order to accurately estimate the
opening with felt pen or adhesive
length of the esophagus.
tape (Fig. 17-14).
192
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 17-14 Pre-measuring length of stomach
tube required for animal.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
2. Moisten tip of stomach tube with
2. Lubrication of the tube helps to
lubricating jelly.
minimize the possibility of
esophageal trauma while the tube is
passed.
3. Insert speculum into animal's mouth
3. Some cats object so strenuously to
and hold animal's jaws closed on
this procedure that it cannot. be
speculum.
performed without. anesthesia.
Nasogastric intubation should be
considered for such cats.
4. Pass lubricated stomach tube through
4. Inability to pass the tube to the
speculum and advance to premarked
 premeasured length may indicate
point (Fig. 17-15). If possible,
that:
advance tip of tube past. larynx while
a. It has been inserted into the
animal is exhaling.
trachea.
b. There is an obstruction in the
esophagus, or
c. Gastric volvulus has occurred,
preventing entry of the tube into
the stomach.
 5. Check proper placement. of stomach
5. If the tube is in the esophagus, two
tube as follows:
tubes (the stomach tube and the
a. Palpate tube within neck.
trachea) should be palpable in the
b. Smell end of tube for gastric
neck. If there is any evidence that the
odors.
tube has been inserted into the
c. Blow into tube while assistant.
trachea, remove the tube and
auscults stomach for gurgling.
reinsert it.
d. Administer 5 mL of sterile saline
through stomach tube and
observe for cough.
6. Administer materials prescribed or
6. If orogastric intubation is performed
remove gastric contents. Then
on an unconscious animal, a cuffed
INTUBATION
193
Figure 17-15  Inserting lubricated stomach tube through mouth speculum.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
administer 5 to 15 mL of water to
endotracheal tube should be inserted
flush tube.
 before passing the stomach tube.
This will prevent. aspiration of any
material regurgitated around the
tube.
7. Before removing tube, seal end of
7. Plugging the open end will help to
tube with thumb.
 prevent leakage of any material
remaining in the tube into the
pharynx as the tube is removed.
8. Note in animal's medical record that.
8. Note date, time, procedure, any
procedure was performed.
materials removed or administered,
initials, and comments.
NASOGASTRIC INTUBATION OF THE CAT
Nasogastric intubation is the placement of a tube that extends through an external naris,
the nasal cavity, pharynx, and esophagus, and into the stomach. This procedure is of
practical use mainly in the adult cat because of the relatively short nasal passage in
194
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
that species. The procedure cannot be performed on kittens or on any cat with an
obstruction of the nasal cavity.
Purposes
1. To administer medication and radiographic contrast. materials
 2. To administer nutritional supplements and water
Complications
1. Administration of materials into the respiratory tract.
2. Esophageal trauma
 3. Gastric irritation
Equipment Needed
* Nasogastric tube: infant feeding tube or 2l-gauge butterfly catheter (winged infu-
sion set) with needle assembly cut off
+ Topical ophthalmic anesthetic
* Lubricating jelly
* Syringe with 1 mL of sterile saline
* Syringe for material to be administered
● Bandaging material if catheter is to remain in place:
Gauze, 2 inches wide
Adhesive tape or elastic adhesive bandage, 2 inches wide
· Injection cap
Restraint and Positioning
The cat is held in a sitting position or in sternal recumbency by an assistant.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Instill four or five drops of topical
1. The cat may sneeze at first.
ophthalmic anesthetic into one
nostril (Fig. 17-16).
2. Wait. 2 to 3 minutes; then instill two
2. During instillation of the topical
or three more drops of topical
ophthalmic anesthetic into the
INTUBATION
195
Figure 17-16
cat's nostril.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
ophthalmic anesthetic into same
nostril, the cat's head should be
nostril.
positioned with its nose toward the
ceiling.
 3. Apply a small amount of lubricating
3. Lubrication of the tube helps to
 jelly to tip of nasogastric tube.
minimize irritation to the nasal
cavity, esophagus, and stomach
 during passage of the tube.
4. Hold cat's head with one hand and
4. The cat. can feel the pressure of the
use other hand to insert tube into
tube and may resist the procedure
ven tromedial aspect of anesthetized
sligh tly.
nostril (Fig. 17-17).
 5. Advance tube approximately 20 to
 5. If the tube is diffcult to pass, try
25 cm.
rotating it gently before advancing
it. farther.
6. Check proper placement of
6. If the cat coughs, it should be
 nasogastric tube by instilling 1 mL
assumed that the tube is in the
of sterile saline into tube.
trachea and the tube should be
removed and reinserted. Vigorous
laryngeal reflexes in cats usually
prevent inadvertent intubation of
the trachea.
 7. Administer prescribed materials and
flush nasogastric tube with 1 or
2 mL of water.
8. Bandage catheter in place to side of
8. Severely debilitated cats usually will
cat's neck if repeated nasogastric
tolerate long-term placement of the
196
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 17-17
[nserting nasogastric tube into
cat's nostril.
Figure 17-18
3 Nasogastric tube bandaged in
place.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
in tubation is anticipated and cat.
tube. The end of the catheter
will tolerate leaving tube in place
should be covered to prevent.
(Fig. 17-18).
aspiration of air into the cat's
stomach.
 9. Before removing tube, seal end of
 9. Plugging the end of the tube helps
tube with thumb or finger.
to prevent leakage of any material
remaining in the tube into the
pharynx as the tube is removed.
10. Note in animal's medical record
10. Note date, time, procedure, any
that procedure was performed.
materials administered, initials, and
comments.
INTUBATION
197
ESOPHAGOSTOMY TUBE PLACEMENT
An esophagostomy tube is the placement of a tube through the skin of the neck to the
caudal esophagus.
Purpose
To administer nutrients and medications orally over days or weeks to an animal that.
is unable or unwilling to eat because of debilitation, oral lesions, or head trauma but.
whose gastrointestinal tract is functioning normally
Complications
1. Vomiting or regurgitation
2. Aspiration pneumonia
3. Esophagitis or esophageal perforation
4. Distension of stomach with air
5. Gastritis
Equipment Needed
+ Sterile esophagostomy tube: soft. flexible polyurethane or red rubber feeding
tube:
10 to 12 F for cat or small dog
Up to 22 F for large dogs
* Commercial mouth speculum for dog or cat.
● Clipper with No. 40 blade
·Anesthetic drugs
● Skin preparation materials (see Chapter 16)
+ Sterile surgical equipment:
Surgeon's gloves
Scalpel blade and handle
 Carmalt curved forceps
Suture material
Scissors
Gauze sponges
+ Bandaging material:
Sterile gauze sponges
Gauze bandage
Adhesive tape, 1 inch wide
Adhesive tape or elastic adhesive bandage
198
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Restraint and Positioning
General anesthesia is needed for placement of an esophagostomy tube. The animal
 is positioned in right lateral recumbency.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip and surgically prepare skin on
left. side of animal's neck (see
Chapter 16).
 2. Place speculum in animal's mouth.
2. A mouth gag facilitates passage of
the tube through the mouth and
pharynx.
3. Measure distance from mid-cervical
esophagus to last. rib. Measuring
from tip to open end, mark tube at.
appropriate length.
4. Pass curved Carmalt. forceps
through mouth and proximal
esophagus to midpoint. of cervical
esophagus.
 5. Direct forceps laterally toward leff.
side of neck until tip of forceps jaws
can be seen (Fig. 17-19).
6. Make a small incision through skin
6. The esophageal incision should be
and through wall of esophagus over
as small as possible, just. enough for
tip of forceps (Fig. 17-20).
the tip of the forceps to protrude.
7. Push forceps through incision.
8. Grasp tip of esophagostomy tube
with forceps and pull up through
mouth (Fig 17-21).
 9. Direct tip of tube aborally down
9. Push tube with fingers or forceps
esophagus to predetermined length
through mouth until it slides easily
(Fig 17-22).
down esophagus.
10. Secure tube to cervical skin using
an overlapping, interlocking suture
(Chinese finger trap) pattern
(Fig. 17-23).
11. Place sterile gauze sponge over skin
incision.
12. Bandage tube in place by encircling
12. An Elizabethan collar should be
neck completely with gauze and
placed if the animal attempts to
adhesive tape or elastic adhesive
scratch at the bandage frequently.
Figure 17-19
 Passing forceps through mouth and into cervical esophagus.
Figure 17-20
Incising skin over forceps jaws.
199
Figure 17-21(
Grasping esophagostomy tube with forceps.
Figure 17-22 Directing esophagostomy tube aborally down esophagus.
200
INTUBATION
201
Figure 17-23
Esophagostomy tube sutured in place using finger trap suture pattern.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
bandage, leaving 4 to 6 cm
protruding from bandage (Fig
17-24).
13. Make a lateral radiograph of thorax
13. Potential malpositioning problems
to ensure correct position of
include advancing the tube too far,
esophagostomy tube (Fig. 17-25)
knotting it within stomach, or
doubling the tube back on itself.
14. When animal is fully awake, test
14. Some animals may vomit or
animal's tolerance of feeding
 regurgitate initially. If this problem
through esophagostomy tube by
persists, the esophagostomy tube
administering small amounts of
should be removed and an
water every hour.
alternative method of alimentation
instituted.
15. If animal does not regurgitate or
15. The tube should be flushed with 2
vomit, proceed with nutritional
to 6 mL of water before and after
program at. prescribed intervals.
each use and plugged between
feedings.
Figure 17-24 Bandage covering esophagostomy tube.
Figure 17-25
 Radiograph showing proper position for caudal end of esophagostomy tube.
202
INTUBATION
203
PERCUTANEOUS GASTROSTOMY TUBE PLACEMENT
cranial abdominal wall into the body of the stomach.
Purpose
To administer nutrients and medications orally over days or weeks to an animal that.
is unable or unwilling to eat because of debilitation, oral lesions, head trauma, or
esophageal disorders but whose gastrointestinal tract is functioning normally
Specific Indications
1. Feline hepatic lipidosis
 2. Oropharyngeal neoplasia
 3. Maxillary or mandibular fractures
4. Oral reconstructive surgery
 5. Esophageal masses or foreign bodies
6. Severe pharyngitis
Complications
1. Vomiting or regurgitation
 2. Aspiration pneumonia
3. Distension of stomach with air
4. Gastritis
 5. Dislodgement. of tube leading to fstula formation or peritonitis
6. Infection
7. Pressure necrosis at stoma site
Equipment Needed
● Malecot (18-20 F) or french-pezzar mushroom-tip (18-24 F) catheter
+ Sovereign intravenous catheter (18 g, 1/ in.)
* 80 cm (or longer) stainless steel or nylon suture material (o0 or 0)
* Rigid vinyl stomach tube of appropriate size and length, with flared or rounded
end, or Eld percutaneous gastrostomy tube applicator (Fig. 17-26)
204
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
* Clipper with No. 40 blade
● Anesthetic drugs and equipment for general anesthesia
● Skin preparation materials (see Chapter 16)
● Sterile surgical equipment:
Surgeon's gloves
Scalpel blade and handle
Kelly or Crile curved hemostat.
Needle holder
Curved or straight suture needle
Suture material: monoflament, nonabsorbable
Scissors
Gauze sponges
* Bandaging material:
 Sterile gauze sponges
Antimicrobial ointment
Gauze bandage
Adhesive tape (l-in. width)
Elastic adhesive bandage (2- to 6-in. width)
● Stopper for gastrostomy tube (e.g., male IV catheter adapter)
Advance Preparation of Gastrostomy Tube
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Flange preparation and placement.
1. The Malecot. catheter has an open
(Malecot. catheter)
mushroom-tip design but is much
a. Cut off 3 cm of open (distal) end
less rigid than the french pezzar-type
of catheter with scissors.
catheter. It will frequently dislodge if
b. Divide 3-cm segment into two
an inner flange is not used. When
1.5-cm pieces (inner and outer
the procedures recommended here
flanges).
are followed, the authors have found
c. Cut 3-mm holes on opposite sides
it to be a reliable gastrostomy tube.
of each piece.
The bevel at the end is to permit. the
d. Thread distal (cut) end of
catheter to be forced into the wide
catheter through holes in inner
end of the plastic Sovereign catheter.
flange; slide flange toward
proximal end of catheter so that.
flange nearly touches mushroom
tip (Fig 17-26).
e. Retain second flange for later use.
f. Cut distal end of catheter to form
a sharp bevel point (Fig 17-32).
g. Measure length of tube from
mushroom tip to 2 cm below
bevel.
INTUBATION
205
Figure 17-26 Prepared flange and distal end of
french-pezzar mushroom-tip catheter (gastros-
tomy tube).
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 2. Flange preparation and placement
2. The french pezzar mushroom-tipped
(french-pezzar mushroom-tipped
catheter has a relatively closed design
catheter)
but is much more rigid than the
a. Cut off 1.5 cm of open (distal)
Malecot catheter. It will rarely
end of catheter with scissors.
dislodge; an inner flange is not
b. Cut 3-mm holes on either side of
needed. The bevel at the open end
1.5-cm piece (outer flange).
permits the catheter to be forced
c. Retain this flange for later use-
into the wide end of the plastic
an inner flange is not needed for
Sovereign catheter.
this catheter.
d. Cut distal end of catheter to form
a sharp bevel point (Fig 17-32).
e. Measure length of tube from
mushroom tip to 2 cm below
bevel.
3. Orogastric tube preparation (not.
3. Rounding the edge minimizes
needed if using Eld device)*
 trauma to the esophagus and
a Use an open flame to slightly flare
stomach during introduction of the
and smooth distal end of thick
tube. Premeasurement helps in
vinyl stomach tube.
determining when the stomach has
b. Measure length of tube needed to
been entered. The total length of the
reach stomach by laying tube
tube should be only 20 to 30 cm
along animal's side with rounded
longer than the premeasured
end 1 to 2 cm caudal to last rib.
distance from nose to last rib. Do not.
c. Mark tube with adhesive tape at.
remove the tube from the freezer
tip of muzzle. Cut off excess tube.
until you are ready to pass it into the
d. Put tube in freezer for
animal.
approximately 30 minutes before
beginning procedure.
*NOTE:In keeping with the central thesis of this book,we describe a very successful technique
that requires very litle extra equipment;however,severalother methods may beused.Fiber optic
endoscopy is used preferentialy for large dogs. We recommend purchasing a commercialy avail-
p nus pun so iof (-1 ) (ap pia) ionp ang fuososn snond 
206
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Eld Gastrostomy TubeApplicator
Closeupof
Trocaropened
handle
Trocar
retracted
Figure 17-27 Eld percutaneous gastrostomy tube applicator.
This handy device is used in place of the orogastric tube,percutaneous catheter puncture,and
rigid introducer line.The Eld method is described at the end of the tube procedure.
Restraint and Positioning
General anesthesia is needed for placement of a gastrostomy tube. An endotracheal
tube with inflated cuff is used to provide an airway for inhalation anesthesia and pro-
tection against. aspiration of stomach contents or accidental trauma to the larynx or
trachea. The animal is positioned in right lateral recumbency.
Orogastric Tube Method for Line Capture
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip and surgically prepare skin
over left lateral abdominal wall
(see Chapter 16).
2. Place mouth speculum between
2. A mouth gag facilitates passage of
right upper and lower canine teeth.
the tube through the mouth and
pharynx.
 3. Lubricate rounded end of hardened
3. The tube should pass easily to the
(frozen) stomach tube, introduce it
level of the cardia.
into animal's mouth and gently
INTUBATION
207
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 advance it. down esophagus to level
of cardia.
4. Rotate tube counterclockwise while
4. A gentle 90- to 135-degree rotation
gently advancing in order to pass
usually results in the tube's slipping
cardia with minimal trauma.
through the cardia.
5. Turn tube back clockwise and
5. Rotating clockwise allows the tube
advance tube until it can be
to curve naturally within the
visualized through abdominal wall
stomach.
1 to 2 cm caudal to last rib.
6. Wiggle and rotate tube until tip lies
6. In most cases, the end of the tube
against stomach and abdominal wall
will be seen easily.
approximately one-third of distance
between epaxial muscles and ventral
midline (Fig 17-28).
 7. Grasp end of tube in one hand.
 8. Make 2- to 3-mm skin incision
 8. Do not penetrate subcutis,
directly over lumen of stomach
peritoneum, or stomach with the
tube.
scalpel blade!
 9. After passing needle tip through
skin incision, puncture abdominal
and stomach walls with over-the-
needle Sovereign catheter
(Fig 17-29).
10. Remove needle, leaving plastic
10. The needle is no longer needed.
catheter inside stomach tubelumen.
Figure 17-28 Locating the end of rigid stomach tube at left lateral abdominal wall
208
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 17-29 Placement of Sovereign catheter through abdominal wall, stomach wall, and into
lumen of stomach tube.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
11. Thread long, rigid suture
11. Stainless steel usually works best
(introduction line) through catheter
because it is least likely to kink or
and advance it through stomach
double back within the tube. The
tube until end is seen at mouth end
suture material should be at least
of tube (Fig. 17-30).
 20 cm longer than the stomach
tube.
12. Carefully remove plastic catheter
12. Be careful not to pull the
from stomach tube lumen by sliding
introduction line back out of the
it over end of introduction line near
mouth.
left lateral abdominal wall skin
incision. Place clamp on abdominal
end of introduction line.
13. Remove stomach tube over oral end
13. The clamp on the abdominal end of
of introduction line by applying
the line should prevent it from
steady traction.
 being pulled back into the stomach.
14. Cut off excess introduction line at
14. Only 20 to 30 cm are needed for
oral end.
attaching the rubber catheter
(gastrostomy tube).
Alternate Method for Line Capture Using Eld Device
(for Cats and Small Dogs)
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip and prepare skin over left.
lateral abdominal wall for surgery
(see Chapter 16).
INTUBATION
209
Figure 17-30
stomach tube.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Place mouth speculum between
2. A mouth gag facilitates passage of
right upper and lower canine teeth.
the tube through the mouth and
pharynx.
3. Lubricate tip of percutaneous
gastrostomy tube introducer (Eld
device).
4. With trocar point retracted and its
4. The curve of the device facilitates
distal end curve directed ventrally,
easy passage through the mouth
slide Eld device over tongue into
and pharynx.
animal's pharynx.
5. Rotate device one quarter turn
5. The Eld device should pass easily to
counterclockwise while gently
the level of the cardia.
advancing past cricopharyngeal
 area. While directing handle of Eld
device slightly laterally, gently
advance it. down esophagus to level
 of cardia.
6. Turn device clockwise while passing
6. A gentle 90- to 135-degree rotation
through cardia and advance tube
usually results in the device slipping
until it can be visualized through
through the cardia.
abdominal wall 2 to 3 cm caudal to
last rib.
7. Rotate device back and forth until
7. Rotating clockwise allows the device
tip lies against. stomach and
to curve naturally toward the
 abdominal wall approximately
greater curvature of the stomach.
210
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
one-third of distance between
The distal end of the device is
epaxial muscles and ventral midline.
readily identified.
8. Palpate carefully to be sure that.
8. If the spleen is lanced by the trocar,
 spleen is not trapped between
severe hemorrhage will occur!
stomach and abdominal wall.
 9. With Eld device pressed firmly
9. Hold the trocar trigger frmly. Do
against. abdominal wall, advance
not let the trocar retract until it has
trocar point through stomach and
been threaded.
abdominal wall by pushing trigger
button against spring until button
touches handle.
10. Thread about 20 to 30 cm of long
10. Only 20 to 30 cm are needed for
suture (introduction line) through
attaching the rubber catheter
hole in trocar point (Fig 17-31).
(gastrostomy tube).
11. Release trigger button to retract.
11. The suture material will be pulled
trocar into stomach lumen.
into the stomach lumen.
12. Withdraw entire device from
12. Pull steadily until the introduction
stomach, esophagus, and pharynx
line is out of the mouth.
by applying steady traction until end
holding suture exits mouth.
13. Clamp forceps to abdominal end of
13. Attaching the forceps prevents the
in troduction line.
end of the introduction line from
being pulled into the stomach.
14. Expose trocar again by pushing in
14. After the oral end of the
on trigger button and remove
introduction line is retrieved, the
introduction line from trocar hole.
Eld device is no longer needed.
Figure 17-31 Trocar point of Eld percutaneous gastrostomy tube applicator advanced through
stomach and abdominal wall, with introduction line passed through hole.
INTUBATION
211
Placement of Percutaneous Gastrostomy Tube
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
15. Thread tip of plastic Sovereign
15. The narrow tip should be oriented
catheter over oral end of
toward mouth.
introduction line.
16. Attach suture needle to oral end of
16. A straight or curved suture needle
introduction line.
or a hypodermic needle may be
used to place a suture in the rubber
tube.
17. Attach open, beveled end of
17. Use several throws to be sure the
gastrostomy tube (Malecot or
knot. is secure.
french-pezzar catheter) to
introduction line with mattress
suture (Fig 17-32)
18. Carefully force bevel tip of rubber
18. When fitted properly, no cuff of
tube into large end of plastic
rubber catheter should extend
Sovereign catheter. Pull on
 outside the plastic Sovereign
introduction line until end of
catheter.
rubber tube fts snuggly inside
catheter.
19. Advance catheter/tube assembly
19. Be sure that the catheter/tube
through mouth, esophagus, and
assembly passes through the mouth
and pharynx smoothly.
on abdominal end of introduction
line.
20. Catheter will emerge through skin
incision frst, followed by rubber
tube (Fig 17-33).
Figure 17-32 Suturing introduction line to beveled end of gastrostomy catheter
212
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Esophagus
Endotracheal
tube
B
Figure 17-33 Catheter/tube assembly being pulled through (A) mouth and esophagus, and
(B) stomach and abdominal walls.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
21. As soon as rubber tube is visible,
21. Grasping it with forceps helps to
 grab it with forceps and pull it.
 prevent the tube from retracting
through incision.
into the stomach.
22. Cut catheter and introduction line
22. By cutting it 2 cm from the beveled
with scissors 2 cm below bevel tip.
end, its length can be used to
determine its position within the
stomach.
INTUBATION
213
Figure 17-34
4  Inner and outer flanges in place against stomach mucosa and skin, respectively.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
23. Gently pull rubber tube through
23. When resistance is felt, the inner
abdominal wall until slight
flange is usually at its desired
resistance is felt.
position, that is, lightly contacting
the stomach mucosa. Check position
by measuring the length of the tube
from skin to distal tip. It should be
2 cm shorter than the original
measured length (see Advance
 Preparation—Technical Action,
step 2e).
24. Slip holes of saved outer flange over
24. The external flange is used for
end of tube and slide down to skin
suturing the tube to skin, regardless
(Fig 17-34).
 of which type of catheter is used.
25. Insert plug into open end of tube.
25. Plugging the end prevents stomach
contents from soiling the skin and
bandage.
26. Suture external flange to skin.
 26. Nylon simple interrupted sutures
are adequate for securing the tube.
27. Apply antimicrobial ointment and
27. Use of antiseptic technique helps to
sterile gauze sponge over skin
 prevent infection at the stoma site.
incision.
 28. Bandage gastrostomy tube in place
28. Be sure not to kink the tube in the
by encircling abdomen completely
bandage. The bandage should be
with gauze and elastic adhesive
changed weekly or whenever it.
bandage, leaving 2-3 cm of tube
becomes soiled.
214
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
 Figure 17-35 Full abdominal bandage showing plugged end of gastrostomy tube emerging
dorsally.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
protruding from bandage dorsally
(Fig. 17-35).
29. When animal is fully awake, test.
29. Some animals may vomit. or
animal's tolerance of feeding by
regurgitate initially. If this problem
gastrostomy tube by administering
persists, the gastrostomy tube should
small amounts of water every hour
be removed and an alternative
method of alimentation instituted.
30. If animal does not. regurgitate or
30. The tube should be flushed with 2
vomit, proceed with nutritional
to 6 mL of water before and after
program at. prescribed intervals
each use and plugged between
feedings.
Removal of Percutaneous Gastrostomy Tube
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Remove bandage carefully to expose
entire tube.
2. Flush tube with water prior to
2. Cleaning food and mucus from the
removal.
tube decreases contamination of the
stoma site.
3. Remove sutures from outer flange
with suture scissors.
INTUBATION
215
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Slide outer flange up and away from
4. It is best to be able to see the stoma
skin far enough to view stoma site.
site while retracting the tube.
5. Clean any discharge or encrusted
material away from stoma with
moistened cotton-tipped applicator.
6. Malecot catheter. Remove tube simply
6. Malecot catheter: The tip of the
by pulling steadily on tube until
Malecot. catheter is flexible and will
mushroom tip collapses and slips
slip through the inner flange holes
through inner flange.
with steady traction. The inner flange
remains in the stomach, but it will
usually be passed in the feces within
a few days.
French-pezzarmushroom-tipcatheter.
French-pezzar mushroom-tip catheter.
Insert. blunt metal rod (e.g,
The rigid metal rod stretches the
Steinman pin) that is 5 or more
mushroom-shaped tip into an egg-
cen timeters longer than gastrostomy
shaped tip. Traction will then allow
tube into lumen of tube until it
removal through the stoma with
reaches catheter tip. Then, while
minimal discomfort to the animal.
pushing pin inward slightly, pull tube
out through stoma (Fig 17-36).
7. Clean stoma site and rebandage for
7. The stoma will usually retract and
several days to avoid soiling.
close within 10 to 14 days.
Meanwhile, it is best to cover the site
to prevent escaping stoma contents
from soiling the animal's coat. or the
owner's possessions.
Figure 17-36 Removal of french-pezzar mushroom-tip catheter by stretching tip with intralu-
minal metal rod.
216
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Bibliography
Armstrong PJ, Hardie EM: Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy: A retrospective study of 54
clinical cases in dogs and cats. J Vet Int Med 4:202-206, 1990
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures & Emergency
Treatment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Baltimore: Williams & Wilkins, 1998
Bright RM: Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy Vet Clin N Amer: Sm Animal Pract 23(3):531-
545,1993
Bright RM, Okrasinski EB, Pardo AD, Ellison GW, Buurrows CF: Percutaneous tube gastrostomy
for enteral alimentation in small animals. Compendium Cont Educ Pract Veterinarian
13(1):367-372, 1991
Crowe DT, Devey J: Esophagostomy tube placement and use for feeding and decompression:
Clinical experience in 29 small animal patients. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 33: 393-403,
1997
DeBowes LJ, Coyne B, Layton CE: Comparison of french-pezzar and Malecot catheters for
Dodman NH, Seeler DC, Court MH: Aging changes in the geriatric dog and their impact on
anesthesia. Comp Contin Educ for Prac Vet 6(12):1106-1112, 1984
Ford RB: Nasogastric intubation in the cat. Comp Contin Educ for AHT 1(1):29-33, 1980
Fulton RB, Dennis JS: Blind percutaneous placement of a gastrostomy tube for nutritional
support in dogs and cats. J Am Vet Med Assoc 201:697-700, 1992
Glaus TM, Cornelius LM, Bartges JW, Reusch C: Complications with non-endoscopic percutane-
222, 1998
Harvey CE, O'Brien JA: Management of respiratory emergencies in small animals. Vet Clin
North Am 2(2):243-258, 1972
[reland LM, Hohenhaus AE, Broussard JD, Weissman BL: A comparison of owner management
tomy feeding tubes. J Am Anim Hosp Assoc 39:241-246, 2003
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 4th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
Maclntire DK, Drobratz KJ, Haskins SC, Saxon WD: Manual of Small Animal Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine. Lippincott, 2005
McCurnin DM, Poffenbarger EM: Small Animal Clinical Diagnosis and Clinical Procedures.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1991
Morgan RV: Handbook of Small Animal Practice, 2nd ed. New York, Churchill Livingstone,
1992
Salinardi BJ, Harkin KR, Bulmer BJ, Roush JK Comparison of complications of percutaneous
endoscopic versus surgically placed gastrostomy tubes in 42 dogs and 52 cats. J Am Anim
Hosp Assoc 42:51-56, 2006
Chapter 18
GASTRIC LAVAGE
Ifyoudon'tlearnfrom your mistakes,there's no sense making them.
HERBERT V. PROCHNOW
Gastric lavage is the flushing and evacuation of stomach contents.
Specific Indications
1. Ingestion of poisonous substances
 2. Inadvertent. overdosage of medication
3. Gastric dilation
Complications
1. Aspiration of gastric contents into respiratory tract
2. Inadvertent instillation of fluid into respiratory tract.
3. Trauma to the pharynx or larynx
Equipment Needed
+ Orogastric tube
● Plastic tubing adapter
● Isotonic diluting fluids
*Vacuum/suction system (if possible)
217
218
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Restraint and Positioning
The degree of restraint. required depends on the status of the patient. An agitated
thesia, whereas a comatose animal requires no further restraint. The ideal level of
restraint results in an animal that is tranquil and immobile but. conscious.
The animal is held in sternal recumbency or in a sitting position while the tube
is passed. While the stomach is filled with diluting fluids, the head is held upright.
Then the torso is rolled so that. the animal is in left lateral recumbency. This procedure
requires two persons.
NOTE: Speed is of great importance. In most instances, gastric lavage is only valuable when.
performed within 1 hour of toxin ingestion.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Obtain a detailed history and
1. Several types of poisons or
examine label of any suspected
compounds should not be treated
toxin, if possible.
by gastric lavage. Their labels
generally will indicate same. If in
doubt, consult the ASPCA Poison
Control Center (888-426-4435).
2. Perform a rapid but thorough
 2. Particular attention to pupillary size
physical examination.
and response, swallowing reflexes,
and alertness may help in deciding
what additional supportive care is
needed.
3. If animal is unconscious, insert.
3. Endotracheal intubation prevents
endotracheal tube and inflate cuff.
inadvertent aspiration of fluid. See
Chapter 17, pp. 177-184.
4. Pass an orogastric tube. Be sure of
4. See Chapter 17, pp. 190-193.
its proper position before
proceeding.
5. Evacuate all stomach contents by
5. If a suction line is available, attach
gravity flow, siphon, or suction.
to orogastric tube via plastic
adapter. If a vacuum line is not
available, establish the siphon effect
by holding the end of the tubing
below body level and applying
suction with siphon pump, bulb, or
mouth. (Be careful not to ingest. any
stomach contents!)
GASTRIC LAVAGE
219
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Save an aliquot. of first collection for
possible analysis.
7. Attach funnel or infusion set.
8. Rapidly infuse isotonic electrolyte
8. This volume should fill the stomach
solution (5 to 6 mL per kg of body
to approximately two thirds of its
weight).
maximum volume.
 9. While holding animal's head higher
9. This procedure allows bathing of
than stomach level, roll torso into
the fundic portion of the stomach
Jeft lateral recumbency.
while preventing aspiration of fluids.
10. Gently rock animal back and forth
10. Rocking may help to dislodge
several times by raising feet. 10 to
viscous fluids or solid materials
15 cm off table or floor.
adhering to the gastric mucosa.
11. Evacuate stomach contents as in
No.5.
12. Repeat Nos. 7 through 11 several
12. If the animal becomes unruly or
times.
uncomfortable, discontinue flushing
temporarily. Recommence within a
few min utes, if possible.
13. Infuse antidote or absorbent
13. If infusing activated charcoal, wear
through tube, if indicated.
disposable gloves and wrap a towel
around the animal to prevent
soiling.
14. Place thumb over end of tube and
14. Observe for swallowing reflex. If no
withdraw tube slowly by applying
swallowing is seen, observe the
gentle, steady traction.
animal closely for vomiting or
regurgitation. Consider placing an
inflated endotracheal tube.
Bibliography
Bistner SI, Ford RB: Kirk and Bistner's Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency
Treatment, 6th ed. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1995
Morey D: Personal communication, 1996, 2008
Chapter 19
DENTAL
EXAMINATION AND
PROPHYLAXIS
The gem cannot be polished withonut friction,nor man perfected
without trials.
CONFUCIUS
Dental prophylaxis is a series of procedures in which stain and calculus are removed
from the supragingival (crowns) and subgingival dental tissues and the surfaces of the
teeth are polished.
Purposes
1. To remove calculus and stain from teeth
 2. To improve condition of gingival tissues
3. To control periodontal disease
4. To treat halitosis caused by calculus and debris adhering to dental surfaces
Complications
1. Injury to gingival tissues
2. Damage to enamel
3. Bacteremia
Equipment Needed
* Gloves, mask, and eye shield
·Endotracheal tube
+ Apparatus and agents for general anesthesia
221
222
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
B
C
D
Figure 19-1 Manual dental instruments: (A) explorer, (B) graduated periodontal probe,
(C) hook scaler, (D) subgingival curette.
* Gauze sponges (3" x 3")
● Mouth gag (oral speculum)
+Dental chart.
● Dental instruments (Fig. 19-1):
Dental explorer
Graduated periodontal probe
Hand-scaling instrumen ts
Subgingival curette (s)
Sonic or ultrasonic tooth scaler with assorted tips
* Polishing equipment:
 Dental engine with prophy attachment for power-driven drill or commercial
 polishing apparatus
Prophy cups
Dental pumice paste (medium and fine)
● Plastic rinse bottles containing water and 0.1% chlorhexidine solution
Restraint and Positioning
Successful dental prophylaxis requires that the animal be under general anesthesia.
A routine presurgical evaluation should precede the administration of any anesthetic
DENTAL EXAMINATION AND PROPHYLAXIS
223
 agent. The anesthetized animal is positioned in lateral recumbency with its head tilted
slightly downward.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. If prophylactic antibiotics are
1. A transient bacteremia may occur
prescribed, give first dose 1 to 4
after any dental procedure.
hours before procedure, depending
on route of medication
administration (oral versus
 paren teral) .
2. Anesthetize animal and place
2. Use of an endotracheal tube with a
endotracheal tube. Check
properly inflated cuff will help to
endotracheal tube for evidence of
decrease the possibility of aspiration
leaks around tube or cuff.
of water or debris during the
procedure.
3. Carefully examine gingival tissues
 3. Dental charting is essential in long-
and evaluate subgingival sulcus
term management of dental disease.
(pocket) depths around all teeth
with graduated periodontal probe.
Note abnormalities on a dental
chart.
4. Evaluate occlusion and chart. any
4. When mouth is closed, the lower
abnormality.
canine tooth should fit distal to the
upper lateral incisor and mesial to
the upper canine tooth.
 5. Using a dental explorer, check for
5. Retained deciduous teeth and most
swelling and hyperemia of gingival
deformed teeth should be extracted.
edge, presence of fistulas, and
A root canal procedure or
fractured teeth; note any retained
extraction is required for abscessed
deciduous teeth, deformed teeth, or
teeth or fractured teeth with
asymmetry in calculus.
exposed pulp. Asymmetrical calculus
accumulation may indicate
reluctance of the animal to chew on
the side with the heavier deposits.
6. Place animal's head over grid or
6. The slight. downward tilt. of the
absorbent towels and tilt head so
animal's head helps reduce the risk
that rostral end of muzzle is slightly
 of aspiration of water used for
lower than rest of head.
rinsing during the procedure.
 7. Wear mask and goggles, especially if
7. The aerosol created by the
ultrasonic scaler is to be used.
ultrasonic scaler is likely to contain
bacteria that could be pathogenic
for human beings.
224
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
8. Remove accumulation of calculus
8. Calculus may be removed by use of
from crowns of teeth.
an ultrasonic scaler or hand-held
scaling instruments.
a. If ultrasonic scaler is used,
a. Heat is generated by the high-
ensure adequate water flow such
frequency vibrations of the
that. one drop of water per
instrument along the tooth. The
usau, u sdup puos
water spray prevents thermal
instrument. Move tip of
damage to the tooth and helps to
 instrument in overlapping
remove dislodged calculus.
strokes from gingival edge
Minimize the possibility of
toward crown (Fig. 19-2), with tip
etching the enamel or damaging
aligned parallel to tooth.
the tooth by excessive heat by
never leaving the instrument on
a tooth for more than 10 to 15
seconds at a time.
b. If hand-held scaling instrument is
b. Hand-held scaling instruments
used, hold instrument at 70- to
 are essential for removing
 80-degree angle to crown. Pull
calculus between teeth. Heavy
calculus from tooth with short,
accumulation of calculus may be
powerful, overlapping strokes
cracked before scaling with a
(Fig. 19-3), always moving from
tartar forceps.
gingival edge toward crown.
Figure 19-2 Use of ultrasonic scaler on crown of tooth.
DENTAL EXAMINATION AND PROPHYLAXIS
225
Figure 19-3 Use of hand-held scaling instrument.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
9. Using short. upward dislodging
9. Many ultrasonic scalers should not
movements, scrape away subgingival
be used under the gum line because
calculus on roots of teeth with a
they may cause thermal damage to
dental curette.
gingival tissues and the periodontal
ligaments that anchor the tooth in
the bone; however, some recently
 man ufactured machines (e.g..
Odontoson, Cavitron Thinline, SW
Titan Sonic) may be safely used for
removal of subgingival calculus.
10. Insert dental curette into crevice
10. The purpose of gingival curettage is
between tooth and gingiva with
to remove dead epithelium and
cutting edge toward gingival wall.
debris, thus stimulating healing of
Remove debris and diseased tissue
 the inflamed gingival tissue. Double-
by upward strokes of curette
edged dental curettes are available,
(Fig. 19-4).
 permitting simultaneous gingival
curettage and removal of calculus
from the tooth root.
11. Polish crown of each tooth using
11. Polishing removes stains and plaque
polishing device at low speed, taking
and smoothes the tooth surface,
care to avoid gingival edge. Use
thus slowing subsequent
226
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 19-4  Gingival curettage.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
quick, light touch to polish tooth
accumulation of plaque. Abrasion of
with dental pumice paste. Move
 enamel during polishing can be
instrument from tooth to tooth
prevented by keeping the
every few seconds (Fig. 19-5).
instrument on a single tooth for
 only a few seconds and by avoiding
excessive pressure or application of
too much pumice at any one point.
12. Rinse pumice, blood, and debris
from teeth by using a gentle stream
of water.
13. Instruct. client in regular care of
13. Cleaning teeth at home can retard
animal's teeth.
plaque accumulation. An animal's
teeth should be cleaned at least.
once daily at home with malt or
 poultry-flavored toothpaste and a
soft toothbrush or washcloth. The
risk of periodontal disease can be
significantly reduced by regularly
reducing plaque accumulation and
early detection of oral pathology. In
DENTAL EXAMINATION AND PROPHYLAXIS
227
Figure 19-5  Polishing crown of tooth.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
addition, there is evidence that
feeding commercial dry pet food
may decrease the incidence of
gingival disease.
Bibliography
Aller S: Basic Prophylaxis and home care. Compendium Cont Educ Pract Veterinarian
11(12):1447-1460, 1989
Black AP, Cnichlow RT, Saunder JR: Bacteremia duwring ultrasonic teeth cleaning and extraction
in the dog. JAAHA 16(4):611-616, 1980
Colmery B: Personal communication, 1982
Emily P, Penman S: Handbook of Small Animal Dentistry, 2nd ed. Oxford, Pergamon Press,
1994
Frost P: Canine Dentistry: A Compendium. Day Communications, 1982
Harvey CE: Veterinary Dentistry. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1985
Holmstrom SE, Frost P, Gammon RL: Veterinary Dental Techniques for the Small Animal
Practitioner. Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 1992
Hribernik G: Dentistry for the veterinary technician, Part I. Comp Contin Educ for AHT
2(5):241-R246, 1981
Hribernik G: Dentistry for the veterinary technician, Part Il. The Animal Health Technician
3(2):90-96, 1982
228
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
 Midwest Veterinary Advisory Boardl: Technique Sheets Nos. 1, 2, 5. Veterinary Products Group
of American Midwest, 901 W. Oakton Street, Des Plaines, IL 60018
Stedman's Medical Dictionary, 2lst ed. Baltimore, William & Wilkins, 1966
Studer E: The role of dry foods in maintaining healthy teeth and gums in the cat. Small Animal
Clin 68(10):1124-1126, 1973
Tholen MA: Veterinary periodontal therapy. VM/SAC 77(7):1045-1053, 1982
Chapter 20
NASOPHARYNGEAL
PROCEDURES
The secret of care of the patient is caring for the patient.
FRANCIS WELD PEABODY
Purpose
To thoroughly examine and obtain diagnostic specimens from the upper respiratory
tract.
Specific Indications
1.Epistaxis
2. Nasal discharge
3. Nasal obstruction
4. Stertor
 5. Upper respiratory stridor
6. Dyspnea
7. Dysphagia
8. Frequent. or expulsive sneezing
Possible Complications
1. Severe epistaxis
2. Aspiration of fluid into lower airways
3. Penetration of the cribriform plate
229
230
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Equipment
* Intravenous catheter
* Otoscope (with multiple specula) or rhinoscope; for large dogs, a fiber optic bron-
choscope may be used.
+Sterile cotton-tipped applicators
● 3.5 F polyethylene catheter
+ Laryngoscope
· Den tal mirror and light. source
* 10 F polyethylene catheter
· Sterile saline
* Endotracheal tube
* Collection receptacle
Restraint and Positioning
General anesthesia is required for thorough examination of the nasal passages and
pharynx. In our experience, no combination of sedatives or tranquilizers provides an
adequate degree of immobilization or analgesia. In fact, a deep plane of anesthesia
 is usually required for invasive procedures involving the nasal passages.
Preparation
Because the procedures described below represent only part of a diagnostic plan for
a variety of respiratory disorders (see Indications), they should be performed only
after careful evaluation of historical and physical findings. We strongly suggest that
high-detail survey radiographs of the nasal passages and frontal sinuses or, preferably,
computed tomography (CT) with contrast. enhancement be completed before pro-
ceeding to these invasive procedures. Even though imaging may not yield a specifc
diagnosis, CT scan images more accurately show the extent and location of intranasal
 disease. That localization provides the clinician a better opportunity to collect.
diagnostic samples.
When a nasal biopsy is anticipated, we recommend evaluation of coagulation
by performing an activated clotting time (see Chapter 31) or by submitting plasma
for coagulation tests (consisting of at least. partial thromboplastin time, prothrombin
time, and fbrinogen concentration). Blind nasal biopsy is always traumatic and
may be inconclusive. Consequently, we recommend collecting biopsy and culture
An intravenous catheter is essential for inducing and maintaining an adequate
level of anesthesia during nasopharyngeal examination and specimen collection.
If hemorrhage following nasal biopsy is severe, transfusion is occasionally required.
NASOPHARYNGEAL PROCEDURES
231
To prevent aspiration of fluid from the nasal passages or pharynx into the lower
respiratory tract, three precautions should be taken: (1) insert an appropriate-sized
endotracheal tube with inflatable cuff to prevent flow of secretions down the trachea;
(2) pack the nasopharynx with moistened gauze sponges to prevent caudal flow of
fluid from the nasal passages; and (3) place the animal on a slightly inclined table
with the head down to permit gravity flow of fluids out of the nares and mouth.
PHARYNGEAL EXAMINATION
The pharyngeal examination may be performed before or after the nasal specimen
collection procedures described above. It usually is best to perform the pharyngeal
examination before trauma associated with pharyngeal packing can occur.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. After placing endotracheal tube,
1. These areas may contain primary or
inspect tonsils and palatine pillars
metastatic oral neoplasia or show
carefully.
acute inflammation.
 2. Palpate dorsal and lateral walls
 2. Enlarged lymph nodes may be
of pharynx with gloved finger
discovered.
(Fig. 20-1). Note any swelling or
fracture of hyoid bones.
3. Inspect internal nares using dental
3. Posterior nasal masses may be
mirror and light source or a
identified.
reflecting endoscope (Fig. 20-2). If
 necessary, retract soft palate rostrally,
using Babcock intestinal forceps.
4. Remove endotracheal tube after
4. Do not. deflate the cuff completely,
partial deflation of its cuff.
and remove the tube gently to
retrieve any fluid that has entered
the airway.
5. Note larynx and epiglottis and their
 5. The epiglottis should just touch the
relationships to tongue and soft.
sof. palate.
palate.
 6. Note any asymmetry or abnormal
6. Note whether both arytenoids
structure in:
cartilages are deflected caudolaterally
+ Glottis
as the animal inhales. Failure to do
· Arytenoid cartilages
so as the animal regains
+ Vocal folds
consciousness is a sign of laryngeal
* Laryngeal saccules
paralysis.
● Aryepiglottic folds
232
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 20-1  Palpating dorsal pharnyx.
Figure 20-2
[nspecting internal nares using dental mirror.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
7. Observe swallowing as animal
recovers from anesthesia.
8. If abnormalities are observed and a
8. If soiled with blood or exudates, the
nasal examination or biopsy is to be
tube should not be reinserted.
performed, replace endotracheal
Replace it with a clean tube.
tube in order to maintain adequate
plane of anesthesia.
NASOPHARYNGEAL PROCEDURES
233
NASAl SPECImEN COllECTION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clean and disinfect. external nares.
1. Disinfection minimizes the chance
 of external contaminants altering
culture results.
2. Pass sterile cotton-tipped applicator
2. The swab should never be advanced
stick (culture swab) carefully
 a distance greater than that from
through one external naris, and
the rostrum to the medial canthus.
advance it caudally until it con tacts
 Directing it medially at. first. will 
firm surface.
facilitate its passage through the
naris.
3. Rotate swab and move it laterally
 3. The procedure may be performed
and medially; then withdraw and
on one or both sides. If cytology is
place in specimen container for
desired, a second swab is used and
culture (Fig. 20-3).
smears are made. If little or no
 material is obtained by the swab
technique, a nasal flush is
performed.
4. Advance 3.5 F catheter similarly to
4. Again, avoid passing the catheter
passage of culture swab.
too far caudally.
5. Attach syringe filled with 10 to
5. Particulate matter and exudates are
20 mL of sterile saline; inject. saline
dislodged by this action.
slowly, moving catheter in and out.
during injection (Fig. 20-4) .
Figure 20-3 Obtaining specimen from nasal passages, using a cotton swab.
234
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 20-4 Performing nasal flush.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
6. Collect effluent in sterile receptacle
6. The fluid is then centrifuged and
such as a pan or beaker.
the sediment. is prepared for
cytology examination.When
flushing yields few or no cells for
evaluation, a nasal biopsy may be
performed.
NOTE: The following steps are recommended onty when fiber optic rhinoscopy is not available
andamass lesion is identified by CT imaging.physical examination,or high-detail nasal
radiographs.Blind nasal biopsy is very traumatic and is not appropriate for diffuse nasal disease.
It is not recommended for cats or brachycephalic dogs.
7. Prepare 10 F polyethylene catheter
7. The bevel provides a cutting edge
as follows:
for the catheter. The location of the
* Cut end at sharp bevel with
mark is determined by measuring
scalpel blade.
the distance from the rostrum to
+ Make mark on catheter to
the medial canthus.
indicate maximal depth of
penetration.
● Attach 20-mL syringe containing
10 mL sterile saline.
8. Place pan or beaker covered with
8. The gauze acts as a filter for large
sterile gauze below nares to collect.
particles.
effluent material.
9. Advance catheter through naris
9. Do not advance farther than the
until it contacts a frm structure.
premeasurement mark. Doing so
NASOPHARYNGEAL PROCEDURES
235
Figure 20-5 Performing nasal biopsy with altered polyethylene catheter.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
may result in penetration of the
cribriform plate and damage to the
meninges or brain.
10. Force catheter in and out of nasal
10. During each stroke, the syringe
 passages approximately 1 to 2 cm
plunger is alternately advanced or
per stroke, repeating 5 to 10 strokes
 retracted, producing both flushing
(Fig. 20-5).
and suction actions. Considerable
bleeding is often encountered but.
will usually stop spon taneously
within 5 to 10 minutes. If active
 bleeding continues for more than
5 minutes, the nasal passage should
be packed with gauze for 30 to 60
minutes.
11. Withdraw catheter and eject
catheter lumen and syringe contents
through gauze (Fig. 20-6).
12. Immediately transfer particulate
12. Large pieces of tissue may be
material caught in gauze mesh to
collected for cytology as well as
slides or fixative for evaluation.
histopathology by this method.
236
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 20-6
Catching particulate matter from nasal biopsy in gauze sponge.
Postbiopsy Considerations
Considerable hemorrhage may occur following nasal biopsy. If bleeding continues for
more than 5 to 10 minutes, pack the nasal passages frmly with ribbon gauze. Remove
nose packs before animal recovers from anesthesia.
Bibliography
Withrow SJ: Diagnostic and therapeutic nasal flush in small animals. JAAHA 13:704-707,
1977
Withrow SJ, Susaneck SJ, Macy Dw, Sheetz J: Aspiration and punch biopsy techniques for nasal
tumors. JAAHA 21:551-554, 1985
Chapter 21
TRANSTRACHEAL
ASPIRATION
You cannot command success, you can only deserve it.
OG MANDINO
 Transtracheal aspiration is a diagnostic and occasionally therapeutic procedure involy-
ing the placement of a fne catheter through the cricothyroid membrane or interan-
nular membrane of the trachea.
Purposes
1. To obtain an uncontaminated sputum sample for microbiologic and cytologic
studies.
 2. To promote coughing in an animal with viscous respiratory secretions
cases of upper airway obstruction
Specific Indications
1. Chronic cough
2. Productive cough
3. Bronchial and peribronchial radiographic densities
Possible Complications
1. Tracheal laceration and hemorrhage
2. Acute dyspnea
3. Subcutaneous emphysema
4. Pneumomediastinum
 5. Iatrogenic infection
237
238
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 2l-1 Through-the-needle catheter used for transtracheal aspiration.
Equipment Needed
* 14 to 18-gauge, 20- to 30-cm-long, through-the-needle intravenous catheter
(Fig. 21-1).
* 12-mL or 20-mL syringe flled with sterile physiologic saline solution
● 2% chlorhexidine scrub and 70% alcohol
+ Local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
+ Sterile gloves
Restraint and Positioning
Physical restraint is usually adequate. Some animals require tranquilization, and local
 anesthesia is recommended. General anesthesia is contraindicated because the cough
reflex is suppressed. The animal is allowed to sit or to lie in sternal recumbency.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Extend animal's neck so that nares
1. This position facilitates palpation
point toward ceiling.
and observation of the ventral
aspects of the larynx and trachea.
2. Prepare skin over cricothyroid
2. The cricothyroid membrane is
membrane or trachea by clipping
relatively avascular and readily
hair and scrubbing skin in routine
identifiable. This site permits easy
manner.
access to the tracheal lumen and
minimizes trauma to the dorsal
tracheal membrane.
3. Inject 0.5 to 0.75 mL of lidocaine
3. Lidocaine should not be injected
2% into skin and subcutis at.
into the tracheal wall or lumen.
puncture site.
TRANSTRACHEAL ASPIRATION
239
NOTE:It is often advisable to use an interannular space near the thoracic inlet to permit passage
of the catheter into the carina.Alternatively,a long polyethylene catheter may be introduced
through a separate large-gauge needle inserted into the cricothyroid membrane.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Insert needle into tracheal lumen
4. The needle should be directed
by puncturing cricothyroid or
caudally toward the thoracic inlet.
interannular membrane at a
45-degree angle (Fig. 21-2).
 5. Advance catheter to its full length
5. The catheter is advanced within the
(Fig. 21-3).
plastic sheath.
6. Withdraw needle from trachea
6. A needle guard is secured to
leaving catheter in place (Fig. 21-4).
prevent. severing the catheter
inadvertently.
7. Rapidly infuse sterile saline
7. The saline loosens secretions and
(3 to 20 mL) through catheter
promotes coughing. Fluid infusion
(Fig. 21-5).
volume should be 0.5 mL/kg of
body weight. If little or no coughing
Figure 21-2 Puncturing tracheal or cricothyroid membrane.
Figure 21-3  Threading catheter through needle into tracheal lumen.
Figure 21-4 Withdrawing needle from tracheal lumen and attaching needle guard.
240
TRANSTRACHEAL ASPIRATION
241
Figure 21-5 Infusing sterile saline through catheter.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
is observed after infusion, sharply
percuss the chest. 2 or 3 times on
each side to loosen secretions.
8. While animal is coughing, aspirate
 8. Do not. expect to retrieve all of the
secretions and exudates into syringe
infused saline—20% or less of the
(Fig. 21-6).
infused volume is a common yield.
 9. Observe patient closely for dyspnea
9. If the patient. exhibits more severe
for several minutes before removing
 dyspnea, administer oxygen through
catheter.
the catheter or using an oxygen
mask.
10. Transfer contents of syringe to
10. Transtracheal aspiration permits
specimen tubes and submit. for
sampling from the respiratory tract
culture and antimicrobial sensitivity
without contamination from the
 and for cytologic examination.
oropharynx.
11. Remove catheter and apply digital
11. Pressure over the site may prevent.
pressure to puncture site for 30
excessive bleeding and
seconds.
subcutaneous or mediastinal
emphysema.
242
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 21-6 Aspirating tracheal fluids through catheter.
Bibliography
Creighton SR, Wilkins RJ: Transtracheal aspiration biopsy: Technique and cytology evaluation,
JAAHA 10:219-226,1974
Rebar AH: Handbook of Veterinary Cytology. St. Louis, Purina Company, 1981
Chapter 22
CENTESIS
He whothinks littleerrsmuch.
LEONARDO DA VINCI
Centesis is a diagnostic and therapeutic procedure involving introduction of a cannula
into a body cavity for the purpose of removing fluid or gas.
Purposes
1. To relieve clinical signs caused by free air or fluid in a body cavity
2. To obtain material for cytologic, biochemical, and/or microbiologic examination
PRINCIPLES AND TYPES OF CENTeSIS
NOTE:Centesis,like many other diagnostic procedures,isfrequently less successful than desired,
due to compartmentalization of fluids or gas, or due to errors in placement of the cannula. The
mithors strongly recommend using sonographic guidance whenever possible for optimal insertion
opppg finuun iokano pauonodonsppiouodaopdspinand ou ou pnuunopfo
THORACENTESIS
Specific Indications
1. Pleural effusion
 2. Tension pneumothorax
243
244
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 22-1  Sites for performing thoracentesis.
Complications
1. Iatrogenic lung laceration and pneumothorax
2. Exacerbation of dyspnea due to restraint.
Sites
Appropriate sites for thoracentesis vary and depend on the amount and location of
pleural fluid or gas. The cannula should be introduced at the cranial edge of a rib to
avoid laceration of intercostal vessels (Fig. 22-1).
Restraint and Positioning
Minimal restraint. is required in most cases. Excessive use of physical or chemical
restraint should be avoided. The procedure may be completed with the animal stand-
ing, sitting, or in sternal or lateral recumbency. Lateral recumbency is the most. effec-
tive and safest. position when pneumothorax is present, whereas the other positions
are better choices when fluid is present in the pleural cavity.
PERICARDIOCENTESIS
Specific Indication
Pericardial effusion
CENTESIS
245
Figure 22-2 Sites for performing pericardiocentesis.
Complications
1. Laceration of myocardium
2. Cardiac dysrhythmias
 2. Pneumothorax due to inadvertent. laceration of lung
Site
Between the fourth and sixth intercostal spaces of the left hemithorax, slightly ventral
to the costochondral junction (Fig. 22-2).
Restraint and Positioning
Minimal restraint. is required. The animal is positioned in right lateral recumbency.
ABDOMINOCENTESIS
Specific Indications
1. Abdominal trauma
2. Peritoneal effusion
246
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 22-3 Site for performing abdominocentesis.
Complications
1.Perforation of a hollow viscus
 2. Laceration of abdominal organs
3. Peritonitis, iatrogenic
Site
The site for abdominocentesis is slightly caudal and lateral to the umbilicus
(Fig. 22-3).
Restraint and Positioning
The most efficacious and convenient positions are lateral recumbency or standing
 positions; however, any position that is comfortable for the animal and allows pooling
of fluid to the operative site is satisfactory.
CYSTOCENTESIS
Specific Indications
1. Hematuria, dysuria, pyuria
 2. Distention of the urinary bladder (when lower urinary tract obstruction cannot. be
relieved by urethral catheterization)
3.Routine collection ofurine for analysis and/or culture
CENTESIS
247
Figure 22-4 Site for performing cystocentesis.
Complications
1. Rupture of bladder, resulting in urine leakage and possible chemical peritonitis
oq aq an jo un u us su r 
Site
The ventral abdomen just cranial to the pubis is the appropriate site for cystocentesis,
even if the bladder can be palpated more cranially (Fig. 22-4).
Restraint and Positioning
The animal is placed in dorsal recumbency or in lateral recumbency with the upper
leg abducted to expose the inguinal area.
ARTHROCENTESIS
Specific Indications
1. Joint pain
2. Joint distention
248
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Complications
1. Cartilage damage
2. Infectious arthritis, iatrogenic
3.Hemarthrosis,iatrogenic
Site
The preferred sites for arthrocentesis are depicted in Figure 22-5. In each site, care-
fully avoid superficial blood vessels.
Restraint and Positioning
Because of the possibility of cartilage damage and the discomfort. involved, sedation
or general anesthesia is recommended.
Equipment Needed
● 22-gauge hypodermic needles (% in. to 3 % in.)
● 3-mL or 6-mL syringe
* Three-way stopcock
+ Fluid infusion extension tube
CENTeSIS PrOCEDUre
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip and prepare operative site for
1. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
aseptic surgery.
Appropriate prophylaxis of
con tamination and infection is
extremely important.
2. Palpate operative site and instill local
2. Local anesthesia is recommended
 anesthetic when indicated.
for thoracentesis and
 pericardiocen tesis; sedation or
general anesthesia is recommended
for arthrocentesis.
Figure 22-5 Sites for performing arthrocentesis: (A) shoulder, (B) elbow, (C) carpus,
(D) stifle, and (E) tarsus.
249
250
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
3. Penetrate skin, subcutaneous tissue,
3. The needle is attached to an
and body cavity with one quick
appropriate collection system.
motion of sharp needle.
* For diagnostic purposes, a 3-mL to
10-mL syringe will suffice.
· For therapeutic purposes, attach an
infusion extension tube,three-way
stopcock, and a 60-mL syringe to
the cannula. Continue aspiration
until no fluid or air is obtained.
Record cumulative volume of air or
fluid and describe appearance of
fluid in animal's record.
4. Remove fluid or air by partial
4. If no fluid or air is obtained, the
withdrawal of syringe plunger.
animal or limb may be moved
slightly. If major repositioning is
required, the needle should be
withdrawn and a second puncture
performed.
5. Withdraw needle and syringe quickly
after releasing negative pressure.
6. Transfer sample to specimen
6. If fluid is blood tinged, place a
containers immediately.
portion of the sample in a tube
con taining an anticoagulant.
Bibliography
Crowe DT: Diagnostic abdominal paracentesis techniques: Clinical evaluation in 129 dogs and
cats. JAAHA 20:223-230, 1984
Ettinger SI: Pericardiocentesis. Vet Clin N Amer 4:430-512, 1974
Hardy RM, Wallace LJ: Arthrocentesis and synovial membrane biopsy. Vet Clin N Amer 4:449-
462, 1974
Schal1 WD: Thoracentesis. Vet Clin N Amer 4:395-401, 1974
Scott RC, Wilkins RJ, Greene RW: Abdominal paracentesis and cystocentesis. Vet Clin N Amer
4:413-418, 1974
Chapter 23
PER TONEAL
CATHETERIZATION
AND LAVAGE
An old error is always more popular than a new truth.
GERMAN PROVERB
Peritoneal catheterization and lavage involve infusion and recovery of fluids from the
 peritoneal cavity for diagnostic or therapeutic purposes.
Purposes
1. To obtain fluid for diagnosis of intra-abdominal disease or injury
2. To infuse medications or fluids into the peritoneal cavity
3. To drain medications or fluids out of the peritoneal cavity
 4. To perform peritoneal dialysis in renal failure patients
Specific Indications
1. Peritoneal dialysis for acute oliguric renal failure
 2. Acute pancreatitis
 3. Urinary tract. rupture
4. Ascites
 5. Suspected abdominal hemorrhage
 6. Suspected septic peritonitis
Complications
1. Catheter incarceration/plugging
 2. Puncture of viscus, especially urinary bladder
251
252
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
3. Subcutaneous infusion/leakage of fluids
4. Wound contamination/infection
Equipment Needed
+ Peritoneal catheter set. (Fig. 23-1).
●Infusion set. or large syringe
* Scalpel blades, No. 11
●Peritoneal dialysis solutions
● Bandaging materials, including gauze and tape
Figure 23-1H
 Peritoneal catheter set: (A) catheter with trocar/stylet in place, (B) trocar/stylet,
and (C) elbow adapter and extender
PERITONEAL CATHETERIZATION AND LAVAGE
253
Restraint and Positioning
Before performing peritoneal catheterization, allow animal to urinate, or empty
bladder by urethral catheterization. For most. animals, local anesthesia is sufficient. A
reversible narcotic sedative may be used if necessary. Place the animal in right or left.
lateral recumbency.
PERITONEAL CATHETERIZATION
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 1. Clip hair from periumbilical area of
1. The area of catheter entry is the
ven tral abdomen.
midline or paramedian region.
 2. Prepare skin for aseptic surgery.
2. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
3. Make 6-mm to 8-mm incision
3. The incision is made either in the
approximately 1 cm caudal to
ventral midline or slightly
umbilicus.
paramedian.
 4. Drive trocar and catheter through
4. Back and forth rotation and a steady
subcutis, abdominal muscles, and
thrust are recommended. A
peritoneum (Fig. 23-2).
popping sensation usually is felt
when the trocar penetrates the
peritoneum.
5. Direct. catheter caudally.
 6. Retract trocar point into catheter
6. Retraction of the point is essential
and advance catheter 8 to 10 cm
in order to prevent inadvertent
into abdomen.
penetration of abdominal organs.
7. Advance remainder of catheter
7. The trocar/stylet. acts as a guide to
with trocar/stylet still in place
ensure proper catheter
(Fig. 23-3).
advancement.
8. Withdraw trocar/stylet. completely
 8. Secure the attachment by wrapping
and attach elbow adapter and
with tape.
extender to end of catheter
(Fig. 23-4).
 9. If catheter apparatus does not have
securing wings, apply tape to distal
end of catheter, producing a wing
on either side of shaft.
10. Place mattress sutures through each
10. Suturing the catheter to skin
securing wing and through skin
prevents unwanted traction on and
(Fig. 23-5).
migration of the catheter.
11. Apply antibiotic ointment to skin at
11. Prevention of infection is facilitated
 point of catheter en try.
by this precautionary procedure.
254
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 23-2 Driving trocar and catheter
through abdominal wall.
Figure
23-3Advancing
catheter
into
abdomen.
Figure 23-4
:Attaching elbow adapter and extender.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
12. Carefully bandage entire abdomen
12. Wrap the extender in gauze so that.
with gauze and tape or elastic
its distal end is both immobile and
adhesive (Fig. 23-6).
accessible.
Figure 23-5  Peritoneal catheter sutured to skin.
Figure 23-6 Peritoneal catheter bandaged in place.
255
256
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
PERITONEAl LAVAGE
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Attach large syringe or infusion set. to
catheter extender.
2. Drain any fluid from abdomen by
2. Gentle pressure on the abdomen may
aspiration or gravity flow.
help in evacuating fluid. Save aliquot.
for fluid analysis, if indicated
3. Infuse dialysis solution (30 to 50 mL/
3. The abdomen should distend slightly
kg of body weight).
but. need not become taut.
4. Jostle abdomen gently with one hand
4. Leave the dialysis solution in the
 and mix peritoneal cavity contents by
abdomen for at least 45 minutes to
rocking animal back and forth.
ensure complete osmotic exchange
across the peritoneal membrane.
5.Drain fluid from abdomen by gravity
5. Vigorous suction should not. be used
flow.
because it may result. in clogging of
the catheter by omentum or
mesentery.
6. Repeat Nos. 3 through 5 as
6. Repeated or continuous
frequently as indicated.
replacements are required for
peritoneal dialysis. Single or
occasional infusions are used for
 pancreatitis or peritonitis.
 7. Infuse antibacterial solutions through
 7. This treatment may be a useful
catheter, when indicated.
adjunct to systemic therapy for acute
pancreatitis or localized peritonitis.
8. If catheter is left in place but not.
8. Fibrin clots may occlude the many
used for infusion or drainage, flush
openings in the end of the catheter.
every 4 hours with heparinized saline.
9. Remove or replace catheter after 3 or
 9. Removal involves cutting the bandage
4 days.
and sutures and withdrawal of the
catheter by gentle, steady traction.
The short skin incision usually is not.
sutured, but the abdomen should be
bandaged with a sterile dressing for
24 to 48 hours.
Bibliography
Crowe DT, Crane SW: Diagnostic abdominal paracentesis and lavage in the evaluation of
abdominal injuries in dogs and cats: Clinical and experimental investigations. JAVMA
168:700-705, 1976
PERITONEALCATHETERIZATIONAND LAVAGE
257
Kolata RJ: Diagnostic abdominal paracentesis and lavage: Experimental and clinical evaluations
in the dog. JAVMA 168:697-699, 1976
Parks J, Gahring D, Greene RW: Peritoneal lavage for peritonitis and pancreatitis in twenty-two
dogs.JAAHA 9:442-446,1973
Chapter 24
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF
MASSES AND
VISCERA
The largest room of all is the room for improvement.
WALTER MACKEY
Needle biopsies are procedures for obtaining tissue specimens from viscera and other
tissues to establish a histological and/or cytologic diagnosis.
NOTE:Theprocedures described inthis chapter represent the author'sfavored technique for most
cases. Because serious hemorrhage may result, coagulation times (PT and PTT) or activated
clotting time(ACT)should beperformed beforeproceeding(seeChapter31).Ifclotting timesare
prolonged,biopsies should be delayed or less traumatic procedures should be substituted.
Most needle biopsy techniques can be used for multiple anatomic locations.For example,
fineneedle aspirationofthe liverspleen,kidneysand prostate areall relatively safe procedre.
Transabdominal prostate biopsy is preferred when ultrasound guidance is available.In addition,
exposure of tissue is always desirable if it can be accomplished without adding complications or
discomfortforthepatient.Appropriate planningof biopsiesincludesreview ofallclinical problems
before proceeding.
TRaNSThORACIC LUNG ASPIRAtION bIOPSY
 Transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy is a procedure for establishing a cytologic diagnosis
in patients with diffuse lung infiltration or consolidation of one or more lung lobes.
Specific Indications
1. Consolidated or collapsed lung lobe
 2. Diffuse interstitial or alveolar pattern of lung infiltration
259
260
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Contraindications
1. Severe dyspnea
2. Emphysema or pulmonary bullas
3. Hemorrhagic diatheses
Complications
 1. Laceration of lung resulting in pneumothorax or hemorrhage
2. Chest wall puncture resulting in pneumothorax or hemorrhage
Equipment Needed
● 22-g or 25-g, 1/z-inch to 3/2-inch sterile needles
●6-mL syringe
● Glass microscope slides
* Skin preparation materials
Biopsy Site
Choice of site is determined by radiographic localization of areas of consolidation. In
cases of diffuse infltration of the lungs, the dorsocaudal thorax is often easiest. When
the lung lobe to be aspirated is consolidated and in contact with the chest. wall, sonog-
raphy can be helpful in directing the needle. Avoid the caudal edge of a rib space
when advancing the needle.
Restraint and Positioning
s s  sne n   si iss   s
 The animal is positioned in sternal or lateral recumbency to permit maximal exposure
of the affected lung.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. After identifying site for biopsy, clip
1. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
hair and prepare skin.
2. Attach syringe to needle and select.
2. The needle should enter the thorax
exact. site for needle penetration
near the cranial border of a rib to
 avoid damaging the intercostal
vessels.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
261
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
 3. Using a rapid, fluid motion, thrust.
3. Rapid insertion of the needle
needle through skin, subcutis,
reduces chances of lacerating the
intercostal muscles, parietal pleura,
lung.
and lung to depth of lesion or
halfway through consolidated lung
lobe.
 4. Apply negative pressure (suction) at
4. Several brisk excursions of the
 needle bevel by pulling back on
plunger are made.
syringe plunger while holding
barrel steady.
5. Partially withdraw needle and then
5. This step helps to ensure adequate
redirect into lung tissue.
sampling of the diseased lung.
 6. Again apply suction by pulling back
briskly on syringe plunger.
7. Release negative pressure by
7. By releasing suction, the sample is
allowing syringe plunger to retract.
retained in the needle lumen.
into barrel.
8. Withdraw needle from lung quickly.
8. Again, rapid movements tend to
minimize the potential to lacerate
the lung.
9. Detach syringe from needle and
draw air into barrel of syringe.
10. Reattach syringe to needle and
10. Expulsion should be rapid and
expel contents of needle lumen
forceful. Only a small drop of fluid
onto one or two clean microscope
is obtained in most aspirations.
slides.
11. Make smears of aspirated fluid
11. Push smears or squash preparations
immediately.
are made, depending on the
viscosity of the fluid.
Postoperative Care
   an  xd    i n
animal should be observed for 2 to 4 hours after biopsy to ensure early detection of
pneumothorax. Follow-up radiographs of the thorax are indicated if labored breath-
ing is observed.
PLEURAL BIOPSY
pleural thickening or effusion.
262
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Specific Indications
1. Confirmation of cytologic diagnosis of mesothelioma, metastatic carcinoma or
sarcoma, or chronic pleuritis
2. Pleural thickening
Complications
1. Laceration of lung resulting in pneumothorax or hemorrhage
 2. Chest wall puncture resulting in pneumothorax or hemorrhage
Equipment Needed
* Punch biopsy instrument with hook needle (Cope needle; Fig. 24-1)
+ Local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
B
C
A
Figure 24-1 Cope needle for pleural biopsy: (A) obturator (with hook), (B) cannula, and
(C) stylet.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
263
+ Skin preparation materials
* Scalpel blade (No. 11)
+ Sterile gloves
● Tissue cassette (Fig. 243 D)
Biopsy Site
Choice of site is determined by radiographic localization of areas of pleural thicken-
ing. If possible, avoid the cardiac apex/notch area.
Restraint and Positioning
Most animals require some sedation. Cooperative patients may be biopsied using local
anesthesia only. Choice of chemical restraint measures should be based on the degree
of respiratory insufficiency.
be positioned so that the biopsy site is uppermost (e.g., mass next to the middle of
the right eighth rib, with animal positioned in left. lateral recumbency).
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. After identifying site for biopsy,
1. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
clip hair and cleanse skin. Then
inject local anesthetic.
 2. Make a small incision with scalpel
2. Incising the skin facilitates insertion
blade.
of the biopsy needle.
3. Advance biopsy needle (with stylet.
 in place) through incision and
intercostal muscles.
4. Before puncturing pleura to enter
4. The needle should enter the thorax
thorax, remove stylet. from cannula
near the cranial border of a rib to
and attach syringe.
avoid damaging the intercostal
vessels.
 5. Slowly advance needle with twisting
5. Entry into the pleural space is
motion until pleural cavity is
detected by a sudden change in
entered.
resistance.
6. Aspirate fluid and retract needle
6. The cannula is now positioned just.
 just. far enough to prevent further
outside the pleural cavity.
fluid aspiration.
264
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 24-2 Obtaining a plewral biopsy using a Cope needle: (A) Advance obturator
while applying lateral pressure. (B) Withdraw obturator until hook catches in parietal pleura.
(C) Advance outer cannula into pleural cavity while maintaining light traction on obturator.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
7. Detach syringe and insert hooked
7. The hook opening is directed
obturator into outer cannula.
dorsally to avoid vessel damage.
8. Again, slowly advance obturator/
cannula assembly into pleural space
while applying pressure in direction
of hook opening (Fig. 24-2A).
9. Slowly withdraw obturator and
cannula in unison until hook
catches in parietal pleura (Fig.
24-2B).
10. While applying slight traction
10. As the sharpened edge of the outer
on obturator, advance outer
cannula cuts off the specimen held
cannula, using a rotating motion
within the hook, the tension on the
(Fig. 24-2C), until pleura is severed.
obturator will relax.
11. Remove instrument from chest and
11. Working over the biopsy jar prevents
slide cannula off obturator.
inadvertent loss of the specimen.
12. Assistant: Open lid of fixative
12. Small biopsy tissue samples are
receptacle at appropriate time.
placed in a cassette to prevent loss
 Using a sterile hypodermic needle
during processing. Once the
or scalpel blade, transfer specimen
cassette contains adequate biopsy
immediately to a small tissue
tissue, it. can be immersed in
cassette before placing it in fixative
formalin or other fxative solution.
(Fig. 24-3D).
13. If specimen is small or severely
fragmented, procedure can be
repeated once or twice.
 14. Repeat procedure using same skin
14. Direct the hook opening ventrally
incision.
 or cranially during subsequent.
procedures.
Figure 24-3 (A) Cook needle, (B) Temno needle, (C) close-up side view of obtuwrator tip.
265
266
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
D
Figure 24-3 Continued (D) Tissues cassettes.
Postoperative Care
Hemorrhage is usually readily controlled by digital pressure. The animal should be
observed for 2 to 4 hours after biopsy to ensure early detection of pneumothorax.
Follow-up radiography is recommended.
PERCUTANEOUS LIVER BIOPSY
Percutaneous liver biopsy is a diagnostic technique for establishing a histological diagno-
sis in patients with suspected diffuse hepatic disease.
 In previous editions, we described a technique for liver biopsy using a Menghini
needle. Because liver specimens obtained with the Menghini needle are small and
often fragment, histopathological interpretation is often very diffcult. Consequently,
we no longer recommend that. procedure. Instead, we strongly recommend using
direct visualization of lesions on the liver surface and large pieces of tissue to be
obtained; however, the techniques and equipment needed for laparoscopy are beyond
the scope of this manual. Consequently, we describe our preferred method of obtain-
ing a core sample with a disposable automatic-trigger needle (See Fig. 24-3).
Specific Indications
1. Hepatomegaly
 2. Hepatic dysfunction (e.g., hypoalbuminemia, icterus, persistently increased serum
liver enzyme activities)
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
267
Contraindications
1. Abnormal hemostasis
2. Severe circulatory disturbances
3. Extrahepatic biliary obstruction
4. Small liver
Complications
1. Laceration/hemorrhage of viscera, including caudal vena cava, portal vein, liver,
spleen, stomach, intestine, pancreas, diaphragm, lung, and heart.
2. Puncture of gallbladder/bile peritonitis
 3. Iatrogenic infectious peritonitis
Equipment
* Cook or Temno biopsy needles (14 g-18 g) (Fig. 24-3)
* Scalpel blade (No. 11)
+ Local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
+ Skin preparation materials
+ Sterile gloves
● Tissue cassette (Figure 24-3D)
Biopsy Site/Positioning
abdominal sonography or radiography Success of transabdominal percutaneous liver
biopsy depends on adequate localization of the liver. Careful direction of the needle
is essential; a “hit-or-miss" approach usually is unsuccessful and is associated with
marked danger of complications.
Place the patient in dorsal or left. lateral recumbency. Introduce the biopsy
needle through the ventral abdominal wall between the xiphoid process and either
right. or left. of the midsagittal plane.
Restraint
General anesthesia may be necessary in fractious or nervous animals. Needle biopsy
of the liver should not. be attempted when violent or unpredictable movements
268
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
prevent localization of the liver. General anesthetics that. require liver metabolism or
excretion should be avoided in animals with severe liver dysfunction.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
Preparatory Phase
Preparatory Phase
1. Perform activated clotting time.
1. See Chapter 31. If value is normal,
 proceed. If abnormal, delay
 procedure until risks have been
reassessed.
2. Withhold food for 8 to 12 hours.
2. Fasting decreases stomach size and
minimizes the likelihood of
inadvertent puncture.
3. Give small amount. of fat orally 30 to
3. A fatty meal may induce contraction
60 minutes before biopsy.
of the gallbladder, thereby reducing
its size and minimizing the chance of
 inadvertent puncture.
4. Remove ascites by abdominocentesis.
4. Distention of the abdomen by fluid
 may preclude localization of the liver.
See Chapter 22, pp. 245-246, 248,
250.
5. Sedate or anesthetize animal.
5. Sedation is essential to minimize
discomfort and to prevent the animal
from moving during the procedure.
Although general anesthesia may
accomplish these same goals, many
patients needing liver biopsy are
poor anesthetic risks.
6. Prepare operative site by clipping
6. Aseptic technique should be used
hair and cleansing and disinfecting
throughout the biopsy procedure.
skin in standard manner (see
See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
Chapter 16).
 7. Scrub hands and don surgical gloves
7. Using aseptic technique is always
using aseptic technique.
advisable when introducing a needle
into a body cavity.
8. Place all sterile equipment on a
8. A fenestrated drape helps to prevent.
sterile surgical towel and cover
contamination of the needle.
animal with a fenestrated drape.
9. Prepare needle for use, that is, “load"
9. Once the needle is loaded, it is ready
 it by holding cannula handle frmly
for use.
while pulling out. obturator trigger
handle until it clicks and locks in
place.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
269
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
Operative Phase
Operative Phase
1. Identify specific liver lobe or
1. If the liver is small or the lesion to
lesion within liver to be biopsied
be biopsied is too close to the
by ultrasound or deep
diaphragm, gall bladder, common
palpation.
bile duct, vena cava, or other large
blood vessel, another biopsy
technique should be used.
2. Inject local anesthetic into skin and
2. Even when animal is sedated,
parietal peritoneum at proposed
we recommend injecting local
biopsy site.
anesthetic to minimize pain
immediately following the
procedure.
3. Make a small stab incision with
3. Use a No. 11 or No. 15 scalpel
scalpel blade.
blade.
4. Advance biopsy needle through skin
4. Use gentle, even pressure as the
incision, abdominal muscles, and
needle is advanced through the
peritoneum toward liver.
abdominal wall.
5. Introduce end of outer cannula,
5. The point of the needle should
with inner obturator retracted, into
be directed away from the
 liver parenchyma approximately
vena cava, gall bladder, and
2 mm. (Fig. 244A).
diaphragm.
6. While holding needle handle firmly
6. A notch in the obturator accepts the
in one hand, advance inner
liver tissue to be removed.
obturator to its full length by sliding
 trigger handle smoothly forward.
(Fig. 244B).
7. When triger button touches
 7. This step cuts off the specimen and
outer cannula handle, frmly press
protects it within the biopsy notch
spring-loaded trigger button to
of the obturator.
automatically advance outer
cannula. (Fig. 244C).
8. Quickly but. carefully pull entire
8. Be careful not to lacerate the liver
biopsy needle directly out of liver,
while retracting the device.
abdominal wall, and skin.
9. Reload needle by holding
9. It is necessary to reload the device
cannula handle frmly while
to retrieve the core specimen from
pulling out obturator trigger
the obturator notch.
handle until it clicks and locks in
place.
10. Working directly over biopsy
10. Working over the biopsy jar prevents
receptacle, advance inner obturator
accidental loss of the specimen.
to expose specimen. Do not press
Inadvertent triggering of the device
trigger button.
at this time may result in ejection,
 Figure 24-4 Obtaining a liver biopsy using core needle technique: (A) Pierce abdominal wall
until capsule or target liver lobe is contacted. Direct needle away from aorta, caudal vena cava,
gall bladder, and stomach. (B) Advance inner obturator. (C) Advance outer cannula suddenly
by pressing needle's firing button.
270
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
271
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
laceration, or crushing of the
specimen.
11. Assistant: Open lid of fixative
11. Small biopsy tissue samples should
receptacle at appropriate time.
 be placed in a cassette to prevent.
Using a sterile hypodermic needle
loss during processing. Once the
 or scalpel blade, transfer specimen
cassette contains adequate biopsy
immediately to a small tissue
tissue, it is immersed in formalin or
cassette (Fig. 24-3D) before placing
other fxative solution.
in fxative.
12. If specimen is small or severely
12. Although repeating the procedure
fragmented, procedure can be
adds risk of hemorrhage or other
repeated once or twice.
complications, the consequences
of not obtaining enough tissue
for the pathologist. must be
considered.
Postoperative Care
Observe the patient for several hours after the procedure to determine whether exces-
sive hemorrhage has occurred. When the specimen is heavily bile stained, particularly
careful observation for signs of bile peritonitis should be emphasized to the animal's
owner. Development of signs such as sudden anorexia or vomiting should be pursued
vigorously in such cases.
PERCUTANEOUS KIDNEY BIOPSY
Percutaneous kidney biopsy is a procedure for establishing a histological diagnosis in
 patients with unilateral or bilateral renal disease. It is particularly valuable in obtaining
a specimen to predict functional recovery from renal disease.
NOTE:Thetechnique describedhereforkidney corebiopsycanbereadilyadaptedforperforming
biopsies of liver, prostate, soft tissue or visceral masses, or other tissues.
Specific Indications
1. Chronic renal failure
 2. Persistent proteinuria (suspect glomerulopathy)
3. Enlarged kidney(s)
4. Small kidney(s)
 5. Irregular kidney shape
6. Hematuria of probable renal origin
272
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Contraindications
1. Bleeding/clotting disorders
2. Nonpalpable kidneys
Complications
 1. Renal or perirenal hemorrhage
 2. Retroperitoneal or intraperitoneal urine leakage
Equipment
* Cook or Temno biopsy needles (16 g-18 g) (Fig. 24-3)
* Scalpel blade (No. 11)
* Local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
* Skin preparation materials
+ Sterile gloves
● Tissue cassette (Figure 24-3D)
Biopsy Sites
Left or right paralumbar fossa
Restraint and Positioning
The animal is held in left or right lateral recumbency. General anesthesia is rarely
required, but sedation or tranquilization is recommended.
Prebiopsy Considerations
The patient should be evaluated for coagulation abnormalities. Animals with oliguric
or anuric renal failure should be treated with fluids, and adequate urine production
should be realized before biopsy is attempted. Intravenous fluids are given during the
biopsy procedure and recovery period to prevent decreased renal perfusion.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
273
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
Preparatory Phase
Preparatory Phase
1. Perform activated clotting time.
1. See Chapter 31. If value is normal,
 proceed. If abnormal, delay
 procedure until risks have been
reassessed.
2.Withhold food for 8 to 12 hours.
 2. Fasting decreases stomach size and
minimizes the likelihood of
inadvertent. puncture.
3. Remove ascites by abdominocentesis.
 3. Distention of the abdomen by fluid
 may preclude localization and
immobilization of the kidney. See
Chapter 22, pp. 245-246, 248, 250.
4. Sedate or anesthetize animal.
4. Sedation is essential to minimize
discomfort and to prevent. the animal
from moving during the procedure.
 Although general anesthesia may
accomplish these same goals, many
patients needing kidney biopsy are
poor anesthetic risks.
 5. Prepare operative site by clipping
5. Aseptic technique should be used
hair and cleansing and disinfecting
throughout the biopsy procedure.
skin in standard manner (see
See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
Chapter 16).
6. Scrub hands and don surgical gloves
6. Using aseptic technique is always
using aseptic technique.
advisable when introducing a needle
into a body cavity.
7. Place all sterile equipment on a
7. A fenestrated drape helps to prevent.
sterile surgical towel and cover
contamination of the needle.
animal with a fenestrated drape.
8. Prepare needle for use, that is, “load"
8. Once the needle is loaded, it is ready
it by holding cannula handle frmly
for use.
while pulling out. obturator trigger
handle until it. clicks and locks in
place.
Operative Phase
Operative Phase
1. Isolate kidney to be biopsied in one
1. If the kidney to be biopsied is too
hand by deep palpation.
small or cannot be held in a fixed
 position, an open surgical biopsy
technique should be used.
274
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 2. Prepare skin of paralumbar fossa
2. Even when sedated, we recommend
overlying kidney in a routine
injecting local anesthetic to
manner; inject local anesthetic into
minimize pain immediately
skin at proposed biopsy site.
following the procedure.
3. Make a small stab incision with
3. Use a No. 11 or No. 15 scalpel
scalpel blade.
blade.
4. Advance biopsy needle through
4. Use gentle, even pressure as the
incision and retroperitoneal tissue
needle is advanced through the
toward either pole of kidney.
abdominal wall.
5. Introduce end of outer cannula,
5. The point of the needle should be
with inner obturator retracted,
directed away from the vena cava
through renal capsule
and renal pelvis.
approximately 2 mm (Fig. 245).
6. While holding needle handle frmly
6. A notch in the obturator accepts the
in one hand, advance inner
kidney tissue to be removed.
 obturator to its full length by sliding
trigger handle smoothly forward.
 7. When triger button touches outer
7. This step cuts off the specimen and
cannula handle, frmly press spring-
protects it. within the biopsy notch
loaded trigger button to
of obturator.
Figure 24-5 Proper position of needle for obtaining a kidney biopsy using a Cook needle.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
275
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
automatically advance outer cannula
(Fig. 24-3C).
8. Quickly but. carefully pull entire
8. Be careful not to lacerate the kidney
biopsy needle directly out. of kidney,
while retracting the device. Apply
abdominal wall, and skin.
firm digital pressure to biopsy site
for 3-5 minutes.
9. Reload needle by holding cannula
9. It is necessary to reload the device
handle firmly while pulling out.
to retrieve the core specimen from
obturator trigger handle until it
the obturator notch.
clicks and locks in place.
10. Working directly over biopsy
10. Working over the biopsy jar prevents
receptacle, advance inner obturator
inadvertent loss of the specimen.
to expose specimen. Do not press
 Inadvertent triggering of the device
trigger button.
at this time may result in ejection,
laceration, or crushing of the
specimen.
11. Assistant: Open lid of fixative
11. Small biopsy tissue samples should
receptacle at appropriate time.
be placed in a cassette to prevent.
Using a sterile hypodermic needle
loss during processing. Once the
or scalpel blade to remove tissue
cassette contains adequate biopsy
con tained in obturator notch,
tissue, it is immersed in formalin or
transfer specimen immediately to a
other fixative solution.
 small tissue cassette before placing
it in fixative.
12. If specimen is small or severely
12. Although repeating the procedure
fragmented, procedure can be
adds risk of hemorrhage or other
repeated once.
complications, the consequences of
not obtaining enough tissue for the
 pathologist to interpret must be
considered.
Postbiopsy Considerations
Many animals have microscopic hematuria for 12 to 72 hours after the biopsy, whereas
nique is used.
TRANSPERINEAL PROSTATE BIOPSY
tological diagnosis of prostatic disease.
NOTE:When the prostate is palpably enlarged or is palpable within the abdominal cavity,it is
often easier and safer to biopsy the gland using a transabdominal approach.
276
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Specific Indications
1. Prostatomegaly
2. Prostatic deformity or asymmetry
 3. Bloody urethral discharge
Contraindications
1. Prostate not palpable per rectum
2. Fluctuant. enlargement of the prostate
3. Bleeding/clotting disorders
Complications
1. Severe intrapelvic hemorrhage
2. Puncture or laceration of rectum, small intestine, urethra, or urinary bladder
Equipment
* Cook or Temno biopsy needles (16 g-18 g) (Fig. 24-3)
* Scalpel blade (No. 11)
* Local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
* Skin preparation materials
+ Sterile gloves
● Tissue cassette (Fig 243D)
Biopsy Site
Needle entry is at a point on the skin equidistant between the anal orifice and tuber
ischium on the desired side.
Restraint and Positioning
Because of the discomfort. produced in digital rectal palpation, heavy sedation or
 general anesthesia is recommended. If sedation is used, local anesthesia should be
added. The animal is positioned in sternal or lateral recumbency, with the tail reflected
dorsolaterally
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
277
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
Preparatory Phase
Preparatory Phase
1. Perform activated clotting time.
1. See Chapter 31. If value is normal,
 proceed. If abnormal, delay
 procedure until risks have been
reassessed.
2. Withhold food for 8 to 12 hours.
 2. Fasting decreases the likelihood that.
the colon and rectum will contain
large amounts of feces.
3. Evacuate feces from rectum manually
3. Removing feces from the rectum
or with enema.
prevents inadvertent soiling of the
perineum during the procedure.
4. Sedate or anesthetize animal.
4. Sedation is essential to minimize
discomfort and to prevent. the animal
from moving during the procedure.
General anesthesia is rarely needed
for prostate needle core biopsy.
5. Prepare perineal region for biopsy by
5. Aseptic technique should be
clipping hair and cleansing and
exercised throughout. the biopsy
disinfecting skin in standard manner
 procedure. See Chap. 16,
(see Chapter 16). Special care is
pp. 173-175.
taken to cleanse area because of
increased risk of fecal contamination
6. Scrub hands and don surgical gloves
6. Using aseptic technique is always
using aseptic technique.
advisable when introducing a needle
into a body cavity.
7. Place all sterile equipment on a
7. A fenestrated drape helps to prevent.
sterile surgical towel and cover
contamination of the needle.
animal with a fenestrated drape.
 8. Prepare needle for use, that is, “load"
8. Once the needle is loaded, it is ready
 it by holding cannula handle firmly
for use.
while pulling out obturator trigger
handle until it clicks and locks in
place.
Operative Phase
Operative Phase
1. Inject local anesthetic in perineal
1. Even when animal is sedated,
skin, even if sedation is used.
we recommend injecting local
anesthetic to minimize pain
immediately following the
procedure.
278
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Make 2-mm stab incision in perineal
skin with scalpel blade.
 3. Place gloved middle or index fnger
3. If the prostate is too small or too
in rectum and secure prostate
cranial to be held in a fixed
against. bony pelvis by digital
 position within the pelvic canal, a
pressure (Fig. 24-6).
 transabdominal needle biopsy or
open surgical biopsy technique
should be used.
4. Advance biopsy needle cranially
4. Use gentle, even pressure as the
through incision and perineum
needle is advanced through the
parallel to rectal wall until you can
pelvic canal.
feel tip of obturator touch caudal
pole of prostate.
5. Introduce end of outer cannula,
5. The point of the needle should be
with inner obturator retracted, into
directed away from the spine and
a lobe of prostate approximately
rectum.
2 mm (Fig. 246).
6. While holding needle handle firmly
6. A notch in the obturator accepts the
in one hand, advance inner
 prostatic tissue to be removed.
 obturator to its full length by sliding
 trigger handle smoothly forward.
 7. When trigger button touches outer
 7. This step cuts off the specimen and
cannula handle, firmly press
protects it within the biopsy notch
spring-loaded trigger button to
of obturator.
automatically advance outer
cann ula.
Figure 24-6 Proper position of needle for obtaining a prostate biopsy using a Cook needle.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
279
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
8. Quickly but carefully pull entire
8. Be careful not to lacerate the
biopsy needle directly out. of
prostate or urethra while retracting
prostate, pelvic canal, and skin.
the device.
9. Reload needle by holding cannula
9. It is necessary to reload the device
handle firmly while pulling out
to retrieve the core specimen from
obturator trigger handle until it.
the obturator notch.
clicks and locks in place.
10. Working directly over biopsy
10. Working over the biopsy jar prevents
receptacle, advance inner obturator
inadvertent. loss of the specimen.
to expose specimen. Do not press
 Inadvertent triggering of the device
trigger button.
at this time may result. in ejection,
laceration, or crushing of the
specimen.
11. Assistant: Open lid of fixative
11. Small biopsy tissue samples should
receptacle at appropriate time.
be placed in a cassette to prevent.
 Using a sterile hypodermic needle
loss during processing. Once the
or scalpel blade, transfer specimen
cassette contains adequate biopsy
immediately to a small tissue
tissue, it is immersed in formalin or
cassette (Fig. 24-3D) before placing
other fixative solution.
in fixative.
12. If specimen is small or severely
12. Although repeating the procedure
fragmented, procedure can be
adds risk of hemorrhage or other
repeated once.
complications, the consequences of
not obtaining enough tissue for the
pathologist to interpret must. be
considered.
Postbiopsy Considerations
Frank hematuria may be observed for 1 to 3 days after prostate biopsy.
NeEdle Core bIopsY Of cutaneouS OR
SUBCUTANEOUS MASS
Needle core biopsy is a procedure for obtaining tissue from skin or subcutaneous masses
to make a histological diagnosis.
Specific Indications
1. Large noncystic dermal masses
2. Subcutaneous masses of varying size and consistency
280
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
 3. Masses of the neck muscles, thoracic wall, abdominal wall, and peritoneal cavity
4. Masses of the proximal extremities
Contraindications
1. Bleeding/clotting disorders
2. Mast cell tumors
Complications
1. Subcutaneous or intra-abdominal hemorrhage
2. Inadvertent. puncture or laceration of viscera
Equipment
· Cook or Temno biopsy needles (14 g-18 g) (Fig. 243 A, B, C)
* Scalpel blade (No. 11 or No. 15)
+ Local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
* Skin preparation materials
● Sterile gloves
+ Tissue cassette (Fig 24-3D)
Biopsy Sites
Various
Restraint and Positioning
The animal is held in dorsal, sternal, left lateral, or right lateral recumbency, depend.
 ing on the location of the mass to be biopsied. Local anesthesia is required, and
sedation or tranquilization is recommended.
Prebiopsy Considerations
Unless there is clinical evidence to suspect. a coagulopathy, it is usually not necessary
to perform coagulation tests for needle biopsies of masses. Because general anesthesia
 is not generally needed, biopsy of masses does not. require overnight fasting.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
281
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
Preparatory Phase
Preparatory Phase
1. If mass being biopsied is intra-
1. Hold the mass securely by grasping
abdominal, remove ascites by
within the fingers or by pushing it.
abdominocentesis.
against. an immobile surface, for
example, bone, fascia, or muscle.
 If the mass being biopsied is in
the abdomen, check for ascites.
Distention of the abdomen by fluid
may preclude localization and
immobilization of the mass.
 2. Prepare operative site by clipping
2. Aseptic technique should be
hair and cleansing and disinfecting
exercised throughout the biopsy
skin in standard manner (see
 procedure. See Chapter 16,
Chapter 16) .
pp. 173-175.
3. Inject local anesthetic in intended
3. Sedation is recommended to
path of needle.
minimize discomfort and to prevent.
the animal from moving during the
procedure. Even when sedated,
we recommend injecting local
anesthetic to minimize pain
immediately following the
procedure.
4. Scrub hands and don surgical gloves
 4. Using aseptic technique is always
using aseptic technique.
advisable when introducing a needle
into a body cavity.
5. Place all sterile equipment on a
 5. A fenestrated drape helps to prevent.
sterile surgical towel and cover
contamination of the needle.
animal with a fenestrated drape.
6. Prepare needle for use, that is, “load"
6. Once the needle is loaded, it is ready
 it by holding cannula handle frmly
for use.
while pulling out obturator trigger
handle until it clicks and locks in
place.
Operative Phase
Operative Phase
1. Isolate mass to be biopsied in one
1. If the mass to be biopsied is too
hand by deep palpation.
small or cannot to be held in a
fixed position, an excisional or
incisional biopsy technique should
be used instead.
282
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Apply additional disinfecting scrub.
2. Grasping the mass often introduces
a chance of contamination.
3. Make a small stab incision with
3. Use a No. 11 or No. 15 scalpel
scalpel blade.
blade.
4. Advance biopsy needle through
4. Use gentle, even pressure as the
incision and into outer edge of
needle is advanced through the
tumor.
skin.
5. Introduce end of outer cannula,
5. The point of the needle should be
with inner obturator retracted,
directed away from the center of
through renal capsule
large (>5 cm) masses to avoid
approximately 2 mm.
sampling a necrotic central core.
6. While holding needle handle frmly
6. A notch in the obturator accepts the
in one hand, advance inner
fissue to be removed.
obturator to its full length by sliding
 trigger handle smoothly forward
(Fig. 24-7).
 7. When trigger button touches outer
7. This step cuts off the specimen and
cannula handle, frmly press
protects it within the biopsy notch
spring-loaded trigger button to
of the obturator.
automatically advance outer cannula
(Fig. 243C).
 8. Quickly but carefully pull entire
8. Be careful not to lacerate the mass
biopsy needle directly out of mass
or adjacent structures while
and overlying skin.
retracting the device.
 9. Reload needle by holding cannula
9. It is necessary to reload the device
handle firmly while pulling out
to retrieve the core specimen from
obturator trigger handle until it.
the obturator notch.
clicks and locks in place.
10. Working directly over biopsy
10. Working over the biopsy jar prevents
receptacle, advance inner obturator
accidental loss of the specimen.
Figure 24-7 Suggested position of needle for obtaining a subcutaneous mass biopsy using a
Cook needle.
NEEDLE BIOPSY OF MASSES AND VISCERA
283
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
to expose specimen. Do not. press
 Inadvertent triggering of the device
trigger button.
at this time may result in ejection,
laceration, or crushing of the
specimen.
11. Assistant: Open lid of fixative
11. Small biopsy tissue samples should
receptacle at appropriate time.
be placed in a cassette to prevent
 Using a sterile hypodermic needle
 loss during processing. Once the
or scalpel blade, transfer specimen
cassette contains adequate biopsy
immediately to a small tissue
tissue, it can be immersed in
cassette (Fig. 24-3D) before placing
formalin or other fixative solution.
it in fixative.
12. The procedure can be repeated
12. Although repeating the procedure
several times, unless marked
adds risk of hemorrhage or other
hemorrhage is noted.
complications, the consequences of
not obtaining enough tissue for the
pathologist to interpret must be
considered.
Postbiopsy Considerations
Many biopsy sites will appear bruised for 12 to 72 hours after the biopsy. Severe hem-
Bibliography
Berquist TH et al: Transthoracic needle biopsy. Mayo Clin Proc 55:475-481, 1980
     a  4s  1 1 7  s
1969
McEvoy RD, Begley MD, Antic R: Percutaneous biopsy of intrapulmonary mass lesions. Cancer
51:2321-2326, 1983
Michel RP, Lushpihan A, Ahmed AN: Pathologic findings of transthoracic needle aspiration in
the diagnosis of localized pulmonary lesions. Cancer 51:1663-1672, 1983
Roudebush P, Green RA, Digilio KM: Percutaneous fine-needle aspiration biopsy of the lung.
JAAHA 17:109-115, 1981
Weaver AD: Transperineal punch biopsy of the canine prostate gland. J Small Anim Pract
18:573-577, 1977
Chapter 25
UROHVDROPROPULSION
Success is simply a matter of luck. Ask any failure.
EARL WILSON
uroliths) from the urethra of male dogs.
Specific Indication
Lower urinary tract obstruction by foreign bodies or uroliths
Equipment
● Sterile flexible urethral catheter of appropriate gauge
+ 20 mL or 35 mL syringe
+ Sterile physiologic saline
+ Examination glove
· Lubricating jelly
Restraint and Positioning
Administer an antispasmodic drug, for example, phenoxybenzamine, before proceed-
ing, if possible. The operation requires placing one finger in the rectum. Sedation or
tranquilization is recommended. At least two persons are required for this procedure.
The dog is held in lateral recumbency and the prepuce is retracted as described for
urethral catheterization.
285
286
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Pass a sterile flexible catheter
1. See Chapter 12, pp. 139-144. A large-
through urethral orifice proximally
gauge catheter should be used to
to point of obstruction; then
ensure a tight fit.
withdraw it approximately 2 cm.
2. Attach syringe containing physiologic
2. Lubricants such as mineral oil may
saline to open end of catheter.
be added if desired.
3. Place operator's lubricated, gloved
fnger in rectum and occlude lumen
 of pelvic urethra by applying digital
pressure through ventral rectal wall.
4. Compress external urethral orifice
4. The lower urethra and syringe are
around catheter using thumb and
now a closed system.
forefinger.
 5. Assistant: Inject saline rapidly until a
5. The urethra will be maximally dilated
rebound of syringe plunger occurs
at this time.
(Fig. 25-1).
Figure 25-1 Schematic representation of forces and fluid flow during wrohydropropulsion.
UROHYDROPROPULSION
287
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
6. Operator:
6. The sudden release of pressure on
a. For a foreign body or large
the pelvic urethra causes back flow,
calculus too large to pass through
allowing the obstructing structure to
Os penis, quickly release pressure
move back toward the urinary
on proximal urethra.
bladder. Conversely, the sudden
b. For a structure or stone small
release of external pressure at. the
enough to pass through os penis,
urethral orifice causes flow in the
quickly release external urethral
opposite direction, allowing the
orifice pressure.
 obstructive object to move toward the
external urethral orifice.
7. Repeat infusion and release sequence
 7. Alternating the direction of urethral
several times.
fluid flow will sometimes help to free
a calculus. Often it. is necessary to
repeat this procedure several times to
force a calculus back into the bladder
or to cause it to be voided.
8. If no movement of a calculus is
8. Excessive attempts to dislodge calculi
apparent after three or four attempts,
or foreign bodies can lead to tearing
discontinue procedure.
of the urethral mucosa.
Bibliography
Osborne CA, Low DG, Finco DR: Urohydropropulsion. In Canine and Feline Urology. Phila-
delphia, WB Saunders, 1972
Chapter 26
PROSTATC
MASSAGEIWASHNG
Only a mediocre person is always at his best.
SOMERSET MAUGHAM
Prostatic massage/washing is a procedure by which prostatic fluid is obtained.
Purposes
1. To examine prostatic secretions microscopically for microorganisms and cellular
elements
 2. To obtain prostatic secretions for bacteriologic culture and antibiotic sensitivity
testing
Specific Indications
1. Pyuria
2. Hematuria
 3. Bloody urethral discharge
4. Prostatic asymmetry or distortion
5. Prostatomegaly
Complications
1. Rupture of prostatic abscess
2. Rectal perforation
3. Ascending urinary tract infection
289
290
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Equipment Needed
· Equipment for urinary catheterization of male dog (See Chapter 12, pp.
139-144):
Cotton
 Skin disinfectant or mild soap
Sterile flexible urinary catheter of appropriate size (See Table 12-1, p. 141)
Sterile gloves
+ Sterile containers for two specimens
● Two 5-mL syringes, each containing 5 mL sterile saline
Restraint and Positioning
 If the dog shows signs of pain when its prostate is palpated, a sedative should be given
prior to prostatic massage. The dog is restrained in a standing position for prostatic
 massage and washing. If desired, the dog can be placed in lateral recumbency while
the urinary catheter is introduced. Two assistants are usually needed for this
procedure.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Label sterile containers for urine and
prostatic fluid.
2. Advance urinary catheter into urinary
2. See Chaper 12, pp. 139-144. It is
bladder and empty urine from
important to premeasure the catheter
bladder.
by holding it. in its approximate
 intraurethral position near but not
touching the dog.
3. Instill 5 to 10 mL of sterile saline
 3. Washing the bladder and comparing
through catheter into urinary
results with those of the prostatic
bladder, then aspirate this saline into
massage/washing help to identify
same syringe and place into sterile
organisms and cells that are found
container.
 only in the prostate.
4. Place gloved finger in rectum.
5. Withdraw urinary catheter so that.
5. Premeasuring the catheter makes it.
catheter tip is in portion of urethra
possible to estimate the approximate
distal to prostate.
location of the prostatic urethra. In
 some dogs, the catheter tip may be
palpated as it. is moved within the
pelvic urethra.
6. Massage prostate with gloved finger
 6. Vigorous massage should be avoided
in rectum for 1 minute (Fig. 26-1).
if prostatic abscess is suspected.
Ask assistant to collect any fluid that
PROSTATICMASSAGE/WASHING
291
Figure 26-1 Digital massage of prostate transrectally.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
comes out. of catheter during
massage
7. Instill 5 mL of sterile saline through
7. Instillation of saline after the massage
catheter into urinary bladder, then
will enable collection of small
advance catheter into bladder again
amounts of prostatic secretions
and aspirate this saline.
released during prostatic massage.
8. Place second aspirate into prostatic
fluid container.
9. Submit both specimens for
9. Specimens should be labeled with
 bacteriologic and cytologic
date, time, animal identifcation, and
evaluation.
type of specimen.
NOTE: There is evidence that accurate diagnosis of chronic bacterial prostatitis may be made
morereadilybyanalysisofejaculatedsementhanfromaspecimenobtainedbytheprostatic
Chapter 27for semen collection procedure.)
Bibliography
Barsanti JA, Finco DR: Canine bacterial prostatitis. Vet Clin N Amer 9(4):679-700, 1979
Barsanti JA, Prasse KW, Crowell WA, Shotts EB, Finco DR: Evaluation of various techniques for
diagnosis of chronic bacterial prostatitis in the dog. JAVMA 183(2):219-224, 1983
Chapter 27
SEMEN COLLECTION
AND ARTIFICIAL
NSEMIINATION
When love and shill work together,expect a masterpiece.
 JOHN RUSKIN
Canine semen is collcted to evaluate breeding potential or to diagnose suspected pros-
tatic disease or infertility. Artifcial insemination is a technique used in place of natural
breeding for fertile breeding bitches and sires.
SEMEN COLLECTION
Purposes
1. To evaluate spermatogenic capability of proposed sire as part of a prebreeding or
prepurchase examination
 2. To obtain specimens for culture or cytology from prostate and testicle/
epididymis
3. To obtain semen for artificial insemination or cryopreservation
Complications
1. Paraphimosis
 2. Physical injury of male or handlers
3. Transmission of venereal infections (e.g., brucellosis)
Equipment
* Artificial vagina (latex rubber cone, with attached sterile graduated centrifuge
tube)
293
294
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
● Aqueous lubricating jelly
+ Clean, warm glass slides
Preparation
Attach the collection tube to the latex rubber cone. Lubricate the cone lightly with
jelly near its broad end to minimize trauma to the penis and to facilitate removal of
artificial vagina after ejaculation.
Restraint
The prospective sire and an estrous bitch are brought together in a quiet room with
a floor that is not slippery. Both dogs should be restrained by leash. The male and
female may be allowed to play. The male is encouraged to sniff the vulva of the bitch.
If the female resists the male's attention by snapping or biting, she should be muzzled
and restrained to prevent injury to the male or the handlers. The handler of the
estrous bitch should squat or kneel near the female's head and prevent her from
biting the male (see Chapter 1). Restraint is particularly important once the male
starts to mount.
NOTE: When semen is collected for diagnostic purposes onty, most males do not require a teaser
bitch.A docile,anestrous bitch usually will suffice.Inexperienced or shy males may need an
estrousteaser to stimulate erection andejaculation.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. When male is ready to mount. female,
semen collector kneels at male's side.
2. Stroke male's sheath and penis by
2. For inexperienced males or males
applying light digital pressure around
with diminished libido, repeated and
mid-shaft portion of penis.
vigorous stroking of the prepuce at.
the glans/bulbus glandis area may be
needed to induce an erection and
thrusting of the hips. At this point,
the male will usually atfempt. to
mount the female.
3. Once a frm erection occurs, place
artificial vagina over end of penis and
use cone to gently slide prepuce
SEMEN COLLECTION AND ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION
295
Figure 27-1  Placing artificial vagina over erect penis.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
caudally, enclosing erect. penis in
rubber cone to a point proximal to
bulbus glandis (Fig. 27-1).
4. Maintain gentle pressure on penis,
4. This step simulates the natural tie.
which is still ensheathed in artificial
vagina (Fig. 27-2).
5. Collect 1 to 20 mL of ejaculated
5. If the semen is to be used for
semen.
artificial insemination, a total volume
of approximately 5 mL of semen is
collected. If prostatic disease is
suspected, larger amounts should be
collected. If breeding soundness is
being tested, the last fraction, which
 is largely prostatic secretion, should
be collected in a separate tube so as
not. to dilute the sperm-laden
fraction.
6. After collection is complete, carefully
 6. Removal may not be possible in large
remove artificial vagina from shaft of
dogs. If artificial vagina is snug, do
penis.
not attempt to remove it—-let
erection subside naturally. Disconnect.
296
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 27-2 Collecting ejaculate.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
collection tube and process semen
sample. Place a large drop of sperm-
rich semen (second fraction) on a
 prewarmed glass slide; perform
semen analysis immediately.
7. Remove teaser bitch from room.
8. Allow male to rest or walk while
8. Always check male after erection
erection subsides.
subsides for paraphimosis or trauma
to the penis. Never send a dog home
until the penis is completely
retracted into the prepuce.
ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION
Purposes
1. To prevent exposure of male to venereally transmitted diseases
2. To breed more than one bitch with one ejaculate
3. To inseminate bitch with frozen, stored semen
Specific Indications
1. Physical abnormality of male or female that prevents intromission
2. Behavioral abnormality of male or female that. prevents natural service
 3. Geographical separation of sire and dam that precludes natural mating
SEMEN COLLECTION AND ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION
297
Complication
Vaginal laceration
Equipment
* Insemination pipette
·Syringe
● Aqueous lubricating jelly
● Semen extender (for shipping fresh chilled semen)
Preparation and Restraint
The bitch to be inseminated is restrained in a standing position. Chemical restraint
measures are rarely required. The assistant holds the tail to one side to expose the
perineal area (see Chapter 1).
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clean vestibule of excess discharge
with moistened cotton.
 2. Slide blunt pipette (containing
 2. The pipette is directed craniodorsally
semen) just below dorsal commissure
at a 60- to 75-degree angle from a
of vulva and through vestibule and
horizontal plane until it has passed
vagina to level of cervix.
through the vestibule, to avoid
contacting the clitoris. Then direct. it.
cranially at a 45-degree angle from a
horizontal plane.
 3. Elevate bitch's hindquarters by
3. This position helps to retain semen
 grasping stifles and raising legs off
at. the cervix. If possible, the
floor (Fig. 27-3).
hindquarters should be elevated for
5 minutes. Most females in heat will
readily tolerate this position.
4. Eject. semen remaining in pipette by
forcing 2 to 4 mL of air through it.
with a syringe.
 5. Gently eject. semen from pipette,
using a syringe and gravity flow.
298
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 27-3 Elevating hindquarters of bitch while insemination pipette is inserted.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 6. Remove pipette as soon as semen is
6. Retention of the pipette causes some
deposited.
discomfort. and may cause the bitch
to struggle.
Bibliography
Seager SWJ, Platz CC: Artificial insemination and frozen semen in the dog. Vet Clin N Amer
7:757-764, 1977
Seager SWJ, Platz CC: Collection and evaluation of canine semen. Vet Clin N Amer 7:765-773,
1977
Chapter 28
VAGINAL
EXAMNAIION
AND SPECIMEN
COLLECTION
I hear and I forget. I see and I remember I do and I understand.
CHINESE PROVERB
Visual and digital examinations of the vaginal mucosa are diagnostic methods essential to
for cytology examination and microbiologic study.
Purposes
1. To ascertain the physical characteristics of the mucosal surface of the vagina by
inspection and palpation
 2. To obtain cytology and microbiologic specimens from the vagina
3. To visualize the urethral orifce for urethral catheterization
Specific Indications
1. Vulvar or vaginal discharge
2. Vulvar swelling or odor
3. Infertility
4. Attraction of males by anestrous or spayed females
5. Estrus determination
6. Dysuria
7.Tenesmus
299
300
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Contraindication
The vaginal orifice of dogs less than 10 kg and cats is too small for digital
examination.
Complications
1. Vaginal laceration
 2. Severe discomfort and/or bleeding, if clitoral membrane present.
Equipment
+ Sterile examination glove
● Vaginal speculum and light source, anoscope, or proctoscope (adult or pediatric)
(Fig. 28-1).
● Sterile, guarded, cotton-tipped applicator (for microbiologic specimen)
●Aqueous lubricating jelly
Preparation and Restraint
 If the perineum is heavily soiled, clean the perivulvar skin and hair thoroughly using
mild soap and water. Remove excess vulvar discharge with a moist cotton pledget.
A
B
Figure 28-1
[nstruments used for vaginal examination: (A) speculum, and (B) anoscope.
VAGINALEXAMINATIONANDSPECIMEN COLLECTION
301
These procedures are best completed with the animal standing. The holder
cradles the animal in one arm while raising the tail with the other. It may be advisable
to muzzle the dog in some cases.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
Specimen Collection
Specimen Collection
1. Grasp vulva gently with thumb and
index finger and introduce a
guarded, sterile, cotton-tipped
applicator stick just below dorsal
vulvar commissure into vestibule and
 direct. it along dorsal vaginal wall
(Fig. 28-2).
2. Advance swab tip out. of plastic
guard.
 3. Move tip from side to side or rotate
3. These movements of the swab ensure
 it. Avoid irritating urethral papilla
adequate sampling of the vaginal
(orifice), which is located in ventral
mucosa.
vaginal wall.
4. Move tip back and forth in cranial
 and caudal direction.
Figure 28-2 Obtaining a swab specimen from the vagina.
302
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
5. Pull swab back into guard and
remove apparatus from vagina.
6. Immediately inoculate culture or
transport media.
7. Repeat Nos. 1, 3, and 4 with a
standard cotton-tipped applicator to
obtain specimen for cytology
examination.
8. Remove swab and immediately roll
8. Do not smear the tip on the slide-
tip of swab across faces of two or
rolling prevents distorion of vaginal
more glass slides.
epithelial cells.
9. Allow slides to air dry and stain them
immediately.
Digital Examination
Digital Examination
1. Grasp vulva with thumb and index
1. Proper positioning of fnger is
fnger and gently advance gloved,
 ensured by introducing it just below
lubricated index fnger of other hand
the dorsal vulvar commissure and
dorsal to clitoral fossa and into
directing it at. a 60- to 75-degree
vagina (Fig. 28-3).
angle to the horizontal plane until
the vagina is entered. Do not. attempt.
digital vaginal examination in dogs
weighing less than 10 kg or in cats,
even if they are anesthetized.
Figure 28-3 Performing digital vaginal examination.
VAGINAL EXAMINATION AND SPECIMEN COLLECTION
303
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Palpate urethral papilla, vaginal wall,
2. Use slow, gentle motions to avoid
cervix, and pelvic bones.
damage to the fragile mucous
membranes.
3. Remove finger slowly and examine it.
for discharges.
Visual Examination
Visual Examination
1. Grasp vulva with thumb and index
1. Be careful not. to catch the speculum
fnger and introduce speculum into
in the clitoral fossa because this will
vestibule just below dorsal vulvar
cause marked discomfort.
commissure. Advance instrument.
craniodorsally at angle approximately
60 to 75 degrees from horizontal
plane until it passes through
vestibule, then direct it forward at.
approximately 45 degrees from
horizontal plane (Fig. 28-4).
2. Remove obturator, if anoscope or
2. If abnormalities are noted, a swab for
proctoscope is used; examine all
cytology or culture, or a biopsy
surfaces of vaginal mucosa,
specimen, is obtained.
proceeding from cranial to caudal.
Note appearance of external urethral
orifice.
Figure 28-4 Inserting vaginal speculum.
304
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
3.Withdraw vaginal speculum slowly,
 main taining original directional
orientation.
Bibliography
Settergren I: Examination of the canine genital system. Vet Clin North Am l:103-118, 1971
Chapter 29
BONE
MARROW
ASPIRATION AND
BIOPSY
Wonderrather than doubtistherootofknowledge.
ABRAHAM JOSHUAHESCHEL
Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy are diagnostic procedures involving the introduction
of a rigid, hollow needle into the marrow-containing, cancellous part. of either a long
or flat. bone.
Purposes
1. To identify and quantify abnormal cell populations in bone marrow
 2. To identify abnormal maturation of hematopoietic stem cell lines
3. To stage certain neoplastic disorders, for example, lymphoma, leukemia, and mast.
cell tumors
Specific Indications
1. Nonregenerative anemia
2. Thrombocytopenia
3. Persistent leukopenia
4. Atypical cells in blood
 5. Monoclonal dysproteinemia
6. Suspected osteomyelitis
7. Suspected non-hematopoietic neoplasia of bone
 8. Clinical staging of lymphoma or mast cell tumors
Complications
 1. Bleeding and hematoma formation at operative site, especially when bleeding
disorders are present.
305
306
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
2. Puncture or laceration of muscles, nerves, or blood vessels
3. Osteomyelitis (iatrogenic)
4. Pain during and after procedure
Equipment
● Bone marrow aspiration needles (Fig. 29-1):
16-gauge Rosenthal needle or Illinois needle for medium-sized or large dogs
18-gauge Rosenthal needle for small dogs and cats
* Jamshidi bone marrow biopsy needles (Fig. 29-2):
12 gauge (adult) for most. dogs
14 gauge (pediatric) for small dogs and cats
● Sterile drape or towels
+ Sterile gloves
+ Antiseptic solutions and gauze sponges
* Local anesthetic (e.g., 2% lidocaine)
+ Scalpel blade (No. 11)
A
B
Figure 29-1 Bone marrow aspiration needles: (A) 18-gauge Rosenthal needle with matched
stylet, and (B) 16-gauge [llinois needlle with matched stylet and depth stop.
BONE MARROW ASPIRATION AND BIOPSY
307
B
C
Figure 29-2 Jamshidi bone marrow biopsy needles: (A) specimen expeller, (B) pediatric, and
(C) adult.
· Syringes:
6-mL and 20-mL
+ Needles:
22 and 25 gauge
+ CPDA: citrate phosphate dextrose adenine anticoagulant solution
·Laboratory equipment:
Precleaned microscope slides
Cover slips
Culture tubes (when indicated)
Hematocrit capillary tubes or small pipettes
 Petri dish
● Fixative (formalin or Zenker's fixative)
Preparation
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Give tranquilizer, sedative, or general
1. Most severely anemic animals do not
anesthetic as required for comfort
require systemic chemical restraint.
and immobilization.
308
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Restrain animal in appropriate
2. Excessive movement may result in
position for site of aspiration or
con tamination of biopsy site,
biopsy (see below and Chapter 1).
laceration of tissues, or increased
pain.
3. Clip hair from operative site, using
3. Marking the entry site helps to locate
No. 40 clipper blade. Mark proposed
the site for local anesthetic injection
entry site.
after a sterile drape is placed.
4. Prepare skin area for aseptic surgery
4. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
and cover area with a fenestrated
surgical drape.
ILIAC CREST ASPIRATION ANb BIOPSY
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Restrain animal in lateral
1. With an animal that is not.
recumbency.
 anesthetized, two persons are needed
for restraint to avoid contamination
of the operative site.
2. Locate dorsal iliac crest and mark site
 2. In the obese patient, it is frequently
for entry (Fig. 29-3A).
diffcult to locate the dorsal iliac
crest. Deep palpation will guide the
operator.
3. Infltrate marked area with local
3. The periosteum is the region of
anesthetic in skin, subcutis, and
greatest. sensitivity.
periosteum.
4. Make 3-mm stab incision in skin.
4. A small skin incision facilitates
insertion of the large, blunt needle.
5. Advance bone marrow needle (with
5. The tip of the needle (or stylet) is
stylet in place) through incision to
brought into contact with the dorsal
contact dorsal iliac crest.
iliac crest and directed ventrally,
parallel to a sagittal plane.
6. Advance needle by rotation and
6. Avoid unnecessary wobbling by
steady pressure (Fig. 29-4A).
keeping the elbow immobilized while
using a pronating and supinating
motion of the forearm. Considerable
force is often required.
7. Aspiration technique
7. Aspiration technique
a. When needle penetrates outer
a. There is usually decreased
cortex of bone, remove stylet.
resistance when the marrow cavity
is entered.
b. Attach 20-mL syringe and apply
b. The actual aspiration usually
negative pressure by forcefully
causes considerable discomfort for
pulling back on syringe plunger
animals that are not anesthetized.
(Fig. 29-4B).
Figure 29-3 Sites for performing bone marrow aspiration or biopsy: (A) iliac crest; (B) tro-
chanteric fossa; (C) head of humerus.
B
rotating motion and steady pressure. (B) Aspirate marrow sample.
309
310
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
c. Aspirate small volume of bone
c. Bone marrow usually is dark red,
marrow fluid into syringe.
more viscous than blood, and
contains fat particles. Less than
1 mL should be aspirated to avoid
excessive dilution of the sample
with blood (see alternate
technique).
d. Pass syringe to assistant.
8. Assistant: rapidly touch one or two
8. Assistant: the marrow may form a clot.
drops of marrow to surface of 8 to 10
 in 15 to 30 seconds, so it is important
slides and make thin, even push
to make smears quickly.
smears before marrow clots.
Alternate Technique
Alternate Technique
7. Aspiration technique
7. Aspiration technique
 a. When needle penetrates outer
a. There is usually decreased
cortex of bone, remove stylet.
resistance when the marrow
cavity is entered.
b. Attach 20-mL syringe containing
 b. The anticoagulant prevents rapid
2 mL of CPDA solution to bone
clotting but. does not distort.
marrow needle hub.
cellular morphology.
c. Apply negative pressure by
c.The animal may show
forcefully pulling back on syringe
considerable discomfort during
plunger.
the aspiration.
d. Aspirate 2 to 3 mL of bone
d. A large sample helps in obtaining
marrow fluid into syringe.
several bone spicules.
e. Pass syringe to assistant.
e. Pass the syringe aseptically so
that the aspiration may be
repeated if necessary.
8. Assistant: Expel contents of syringe
8. Assistant: Bone spicules are white or
into petri dish. Inspect fluid for
red dense particles, easily
cancellous bone spicules. Siphon
distinguished from fat particles.
spicules into capillary tubes and
Several spicules can be collected in
transfer to 8 to 10 clean glass slides.
each capillary tube. Spicules can be
Make thin, even push smears.
transferred to slides by blowing on
the other end of the tube or by
forcing air through with a
tuberculin syringe. Make enough
smears to allow for additional stains.
 9. Core biopsy technique (Jamshidi
9. Core biopsy technique (Jamshidi
needle)
needle)
a. When needle and stylet are
a. The needle should stand in place
frmly embedded in bone,
after the stylet is removed.
remove stylet.
ing motion and steady pressure. (B) Cut off biopsy sample by alternate, vigorous rotation and
gentle wobbling. (C) Remove biopsy by retrograde passage of expeller.
311
312
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
b. Advance needle 1 to 2 cm by
b. A comfort knob makes this step
 gentle rotation and steady
easier.
pressure (Fig. 29-5A).
c. Loosen biopsy sample by
c. Do this gently. Do not bend the
 alternate rotation and wobbling
needle!
of needle (Fig. 29-5B)
d. Partially withdraw needle, then
d. This repositioning obtains a
redirect needle at. a slightly
larger sample and ensures that.
different angle and reintroduce
the specimen is severed from the
it into bone. Repeat rotation and
bone.
wobbling of needle.
e. Remove needle from bone by
rotation and steady traction.
f. Remove biopsy sample from
f. The expeller is directed
 needle using expeller, and place
retrograde from the tip toward
it in appropriate fixative
the hub, pushing the specimen
(Fig. 29-5C).
out at the broader end. If
cytology slides are needed, roll
the core of marrow gently across
several clean glass slides before
transferring the specimen to the
fixative jar. Zenker's fixative and
formalin are used most.
frequently.
10. Apply pressure to puncture site
10. If thrombocytopenia is present,
un til bleeding ceases.
pressure should be applied to the
iliac crest for 3 to 5 minutes.
TrOCHANTERIC FOSSA ASPIRATION AND bIOPSY
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Locate trochanteric fossa by
1. The fossa is medial and slightly distal
palpation of greater trochanter
to the point of the greater
(see Fig. 29-3B).
trochanter.
2. Identify trochanteric fossa and mark.
 2. Orientation is facilitated by cradling
the cranial thigh in the palm and
extending the thumb along the
lateral aspect of the femur. This
allows manipulation and restraint of
the leg (Fig. 29-6).
BONE MARROW ASPIRATION AND BIOPSY
313
Figure 29-6  Restraint of leg and position of needle
for bone marrow aspiration or biopsy from trochan-
teric fossa.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
3. Infltrate marked area with local
3. The periosteum is the region of
 anesthetic in skin, subcutis, and
greatest. sensitivity.
periosteum.
4. Make 3-mm stab incision in skin.
4. A small skin incision facilitates
insertion of the large, blunt needle.
5. Advance bone marrow needle, with
5. The needle is directed medial to and
stylet. in place, through skin and
parallel with the operator's thumb as
subcutaneous tissue medial to great.
it lies over the length of the femur.
trochanter and into trochanteric
fossa (Fig. 29-6) .
 6. Advance needle by rotation and
6. Avoid unnecessary wobbling by
steady pressure (Fig. 29-4A).
keeping the elbow immobilized while
using a pronating and supinating
motion of the forearm. Considerable
force is often required.
7. Aspiration technique
7. Aspiration technique
a. When needle penetrates outer
a. There is usually decreased
cortex of bone, remove stylet.
resistance when the marrow cavity
is entered.
314
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
b. Attach 20-mL syringe and apply
b. The actual aspiration usually
negative pressure by forcefully
causes considerable discomfort. for
pulling back on syringe plunger
an animal that is not anesthetized.
(Fig. 29-4B).
c. Aspirate small volume of bone
c. Bone marrow usually is dark red
marrow fluid into syringe.
more viscous than blood, and
contains fat particles. Less than
1 mL should be aspirated to avoid
excessive dilution of the sample
with blood (see alternate
technique).
d. Pass syringe to assistant.
8. Assistant: rapidly touch one or two
8.Assistant: the marrow may form a clot.
drops of marrow to surface of 8 to 10
 in 15 to 30 seconds, so it is important.
slides and make thin, even push
to make smears quickly.
smears before marrow clots.
Alternate Technique
Alternate Technique
7. Aspiration technique
7. Aspiration technique
a. When needle penetrates outer
a. There is usually decreased
cortex of bone, remove stylet.
resistance when the marrow
cavity is entered.
b. Attach 20-mL syringe containing
 b. The anticoagulant prevents rapid
2 mL of CPDA solution to bone
clotting but does not distort.
marrow needle hub.
cellular morphology.
c. Apply negative pressure by
c. The animal may show
forcefully pulling back on syringe
considerable discomfort. during
plunger.
the aspiration.
d. Aspirate 2 to 3 mL of bone
d. A large sample helps in obtaining
marrow fluid into syringe.
several bone spicules.
e. Pass syringe to assistant.
e. Pass the syringe aseptically so
that aspiration may be repeated,
if necessary.
8. Assistant: Expel contents of syringe
8. Assistant: Bone spicules are white or
into petri dish. Inspect fluid for
red dense particles, easily
cancellous bone spicules. Siphon
distinguished from fat particles.
spicules into capillary tubes and
Several spicules can be collected in
transfer to 8 to 10 clean glass slides.
each capillary tube. Spicules can be
Make thin, even push smears.
transferred to slides by blowing on
the other end of the tube or by
forcing air through with a
tuberculin syringe. Make enough
smears to allow for additional stains.
BONE MARROW ASPIRATION AND BIOPSY
315
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 9. Core biopsy technique (Jamshidi
 9. Core biopsy technique (Jamshidi
needle)
needle)
 a. When needle and stylet. are
 a. The needle should stand in place
frmly embedded in bone,
after the stylet is removed.
remove stylet.
b. Advance needle 1 to 2 cm by
b. A comfort knob makes this step
gentle rotation and steady
easier.
pressure (Fig. 29-5A).
c. Loosen biopsy sample by
c. Do this gently. Do not. bend the
alternate rotation and wobbling
needle!
of needle (Fig. 29-5B).
d. Partially withdraw needle, then
d. This repositioning obtains a
redirect needle at a slightly
larger sample and ensures that.
different angle and reintroduce
 the specimen is severed from the
it into bone. Repeat rotation and
bone.
wobbling of needle.
e. Remove needle from bone by
rotation and steady traction.
f. Remove biopsy sample from
f. The expeller is directed
 needle using expeller, and place
retrograde from the tip toward
it in appropriate fixative (Fig.
the hub, pushing the specimen
29-5C).
out at the broader end. If
cytology slides are needed, roll
the core of marrow gently across
several clean glass slides before
transferring the specimen to the
fixative jar. Zenker's fixative and
formalin are used most.
frequently.
10. Apply pressure to puncture site
10. If thrombocytopenia is present,
until bleeding ceases.
pressure should be applied to the
iliac crest for 3 to 5 minutes.
HUMERAL HEAD ASPIRATION AND BIOPSY
NOTE:A technique for bonemarrow aspiration and biopsy of the humeralhead (seeFig.29-3C)
is notshown.The head of the humerus isan excellent source of bone marrowin small,anesthe
tized animals;however,obtaininga sample is more difficult to perform safely in large dogs or
unanesthetizedanimalsduetothethickcortexoftheproximal humeralmetaphysis.Care must
be taken to avoidhaving theneedleslipoff the hard bone andinadvertently puncture the chest
wall or other vital structures.Preparation and procedure are similar to those shown forthe other
two sites.Considerable strengthand exertionare neededin many cases.
316
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Bibliography
Perman V, Osborne CA, Stevens JB: Bone marrow biopsy. Vet Clin North Am 4:293-310, 1974
Schalm OW, Switzer JA: Bone marrow aspiration in the cat. Feline Practice 1:56-62, 1972
Suter SE, McDonald CE: Personal Communication, 2006
Chapter 30
CEREBROSPINAL
FLUID COLLECTION
Good intent does not always result in beneficial outcome.
CARL OSBORNE
Collection and analysis of cerebrospinal fluid (CsF) is one of the most. common diagnostic
procedures for diseases involving the central nervous system. Collection involves
introducing a fine-gauge needle into the subarachnoid space at the cisterna magna
or pelvic intumescence to withdraw a small volume of CsF.
Purposes
1. To obtain CsF for chemical, cytological, and microbiologic analysis
 2. To allow injection of radiopaque substances for contrast encephalography and
myelography
 3. To inject anticancer drugs intrathecally
4. To determine CSF pressure (see note below)
NOTE: A procedure for measuring CSF pressure was described in the first tuo editions. Although
the technique forthatmeasurement has not changed,CSFmanometry is now lessfrequently done
byneurologistsdue toincreasedriskofdamageto thespinalcordduringtheattachmentand
detachment of the manometer and stopcock. Advanced imaging techniques (e.g., myelography.
CT, and MRI) are more often used and more reliable in determining the presence of mass lesions
withinthebrainandspinalcord.
Specific Indications
1. Focal, multifocal, and diffuse dysfunction of the cerebrum, cerebellum, or brain
 stem, including the following:
* Motor deficits
+ Sensory deficits
317
318
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
+ Visual deficits
* Cranial nerve deficits
+ Altered state of consciousness and mentation (e.g., dementia or personality and
behavior changes)
* Epileptic seizures
 2. Myelopathy, resulting in motor or sensory deficits
Contraindications
1. Congenital abnormalities, involving malformations of the foramen magnum, or
suspected neural malformations in the region of the cisterna magna
2. Fractures, dislocations, or subluxations of the occipital region of the skull or cranial
cervical region, resulting in instability or distortion of the brain stem, medulla, or
cervical cord
3. Suspected or anticipated brain herniation
 4. Infection of soft tissues overlying the puncture site
Complications
1. No CSF obtained
2. Contamination of the CSF with blood
3. Herniation of the brain
4. Puncture or laceration of the medulla or cranial cervical spinal cord
 5. Infection of the central nervous system
6. Respiratory or cardiac arrest.
7. Vestibular dysfunction
8. Paresis/paralysis
NOTE: Serious complications may result when one is performing a cerebrospinal fluid collection,
bnit problems are not common when proper technique isused and specific contraindications are
considered.
Equipment
● Sterile spinal needles
+ Sandbags
* Sterile syringes (preferably glass)
+ Sterile tubes
● Sterile drape and gloves
Restraint and Positioning
Collection of CSF is always performed with the animal under general anesthesia. The
animal is positioned carefully in sternal or lateral recumbency. Sandbags should be
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID COLLECTION
319
because it permits collection of fluid without the use of a syringe.
Cisternal puncture is facilitated by ventral flexion of the neck, which increases
the dorsal exposure of the foramen magnum. Care must be taken to avoid kinking
the endotracheal tube. Use of a wire-reinforced endotracheal tube is recommended.
The ears are pulled toward the commissures of the lips (Fig. 30-1).
Lumbar puncture is facilitated by drawing the hind legs forward so that. the stifles
are adjacent to the animal's umbilicus (Fig. 30-2).
Collection Sites
Cisternal puncture -In most cases, CsF is collected by entering the subarachnoid space
 at the cisterna magna. This site is particularly useful for suspected lesions of the brain.
Anatomic landmarks include the external occipital protuberance, the cranial borders
of the wings of the atlas, and the dorsal cervical musculature. When the animal's neck
needle insertion (Fig. 30-1).
Lumbar punctureCollection of CsF from the lumbar region is performed less
often in small animal practice because the subarachnoid space is narrow at this site.
Only small amounts of CSF can be obtained. Lumbar puncture and CSF analysis ordi-
 narily are performed before myelography, usually for evaluation of suspected lesions
of the caudal cervical and thoracolumbar segments of the spinal cord. Anatomic
Figure 30-1 Correct positioning of dog for cisternal puncture
320
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Figure 30-2   Correct positioning of dog for lumbar puncture.
landmarks include the dorsal and transverse processes of the lumbar vertebrae, the
iliac crests, and the dorsal lumbar muscles (Fig. 30-2).
Cisternal Puncture Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip hair from dorsal occipital and
1. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
cranial cervical regions; prepare skin
Attention to asepsis is important in
in a routine manner. Place sterile
 avoiding microbial contamination of
drape around site.
the CSF.
2.Assistant:
2. Assistant: A depression usually is
a. Flex neck ventrally so that
visible when the skin is pulled taut in
animal's chin nearly touches its
this manner.
manubrium (cranial edge of
sternum)
b. Pull ears rostrally toward medial
can thi.
c. Raise muzzle and rotate head so
that entire cervical spine forms
straight line from skull to
shoulder blades.
3.Operator:
3.Operator:
a. Direct needle (with stylet in place)
a. The distance from skin to cisterna
through skin and underlying
magna is variable but is usually
tissue starting on midline at point
between 1 and 3 cm. A 1.5-inch-
midway between external occipital
long needle is adequate for cats
protuberance and cranial edge of
and a majority of dogs. The
spinous process of axis (C2
needle will often contact the
vertebra).
dorsal lamina of the atlas. When
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID COLLECTION
321
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
this occurs, the needle should be
redirected cranially in several
small steps until it does not
con tact bone.
b. Advance needle with moderate
b. Entry into the subarachnoid space
force through opening between
is sensed by a sudden slight loss of
occiput and atlas (Fig. 30-1) and
tension against. the needle. With
meninges (dura mater and closely
 practice, this sensation can be
adherent arachnoid membrane).
readily felt in most. cases. The
animal will often jerk or twitch if
the parenchyma of the spinal cord
is penetrated.
c. Pull stylet out to observe for fluid
c. By checking at each tissue
after passing through individual
interface, there is less chance of
soft tissue layers.
advancing the needle too far.
d. When fluid is seen in needle hub,
d.A small amount (0.25 mL) is
place collection tube below and
collected for culture, and a larger
Jet CSF drip into tube by gravity
amount (1 to 5 mL) is obtained
flow.
for fluid analysis. Collect as much
CSF as possible to permit chemical
and cytological evaluation.
e. Replace stylet and remove needle
by steady traction.
4. Relax neck and observe animal until
4. When the procedure is properly
normal respiration returns.
performed, complications are rare,
but. the animal should be observed
carefully for the next 24 hours.
Lumbar Puncture Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip hair over dorsal lumbosacral
1. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175.
region and prepare skin in routine
manner. Place sterile drape around
site.
2. Assistant: Draw hind legs forward
2. Assistant: This position tends to open
until stifles contact ventral abdominal
the spaces between the dorsal
muscles.
laminae of the lumbar vertebrae.
3.Operator:
3. Operator:
a. Direct needle (with stylet in place)
a. Entry point is midway between the
ventrally and cranially through
dorsal processes of fourth and
skin, subcutis, and musculature
fifth or ffth and sixth lumbar
toward dorsal lamina of more
vertebrae. When bone is contacted
322
SPECIALIZED CLINICAL PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
caudal vertebra. An angle of 20
(2-8 cm below the skin), the
 degrees from perpendicular to
needle is redirected slightly
long axis of spine is usually best.
cranially or caudally until the dura
 Keep needle in mid-sagittal plane
mater is contacted.
by directing it parallel to spinous
processes (see Fig. 30-2).
b. Advance needle with moderate
b-e. During lumbar puncture, the
force through opening between
spinal cord may be punctured,
vertebrae and meninges (dura
resulting in jerking movement of
mater and closely adherent.
one or both hind limbs. This
arachnoid membrane).
complication is more likely to
c. Remove stylet.
occur if a more cranial site is
d. When fluid is seen in needle hub,
chosen. For this reason, the
place a sterile tube below needle
preferred puncture site is between
hub and allow CsF to drip into
the spinous processes of the fifth
tube by gravity flow (Fig. 30-3).
and sixth lumbar vertebrae. If no
e. Replace stylet and remove needle
CSF is obtained, however, remove
by steady traction.
the needle and reinsert it between
the dorsal processes of the fourth
and ffth lumbar vertebrae.
Figure 30-3
Collecting CSF by
gravity flow.
CEREBROSPINAL FLUID COLLECTION
323
Bibliography
Campbell M: Personal communication, 2008
Kay WJ, Israel E, Prata RG: Cerebrospinal fluid. Vet Clin North Am 4:419-436, 1974
part Ill
EMERGENCV
PROCEDURES
happens unexpectedly and demands urgent and immedi-
offen nof available in many veterinary practices, but they
are common procedures in emergency clinics, specialty
centers, and teaching hospitals.
Transfusions of fresh or frozen blood or blood compo-
nents on a large scale require organization and attention
to detail. Keeping an active donor roster and avoiding
shortages requires the full-time attention of a dedicated
staff member.
Double-  and triple-lumen catheters are extremely
useful in managing animals in an intensive care unit. They
allow continual sampling of blood while maintaining a
patent avenue for cdministration of fluids and intravenous
medications. Proficiency in placement requires some prac
tice, but once learmed, the technique can be completed
in just a few minutes.
Tracheostomy is a technique that must be done
very rapidly; consequently, the person with the most ex-
perience placing tracheostomy tubes should perform the
operation.
Just do it.
NIKE
325
Chapter 31
RAPD
EVALUATION
OF BLEEDING AND
CLOTTING
DISORDERS
There is nothing so useless as doing effciently that which should
not be done at all.
PETER DRUCKER
Although many tests are available for evaluation of coagulation factors and platelets,
the activated clotting time and bleeding time are inexpensive, easy, and require no
sophisticated equipment or reagents. Each test can be performed in a few minutes at.
most veterinary facilities.
BleedING TiMe
 Bleeding time is a clinical evaluation of primary hemostasis. It is the time between the
making of a small incision and the moment when bleeding ceases.
Purposes
1. To evaluate platelet. function in animals with a normal platelet count.
 2. To screen animals with hemorrhagic diatheses for von Willebrand's disease
Specific Indications
1. Petechial or ecchymotic hemorrhages
2.Persistent epistaxis,hematuria, or hematochezia
327
328
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Contraindications
1. Clinically evident. prolonged bleeding (e.g., at. venipuncture sites)
2. Severe anemia
 3. Severe thrombocytopenia
Complications
1. Prolonged bleeding
2. Infection of incision sites
Equipment Needed
● Tourniquet. (pneumatic cuff or rubber strap and hemostatic forceps)
● Stopwatch with sweep second hand
* Filter paper (Whatman No. 1 discs)
● Skin preparation materials:
2% chlorhexidine surgical scrub
Sterile gauze sponges (2" × 2")
70% alcohol
+ Clipper with No. 40 blade
● Template and No. 11 scalpel blade (Fig. 31-1A)
● Simplate-II bleeding time device* (Fig. 31-1B)
* Commercial pet toenail clippers (guillotine or scissors type, Fig. 31-1C)
Restraint and Positioning
Little restraint is needed for most dogs and cats. The animal is held in sternal or
lateral recumbency by an assistant.
TeMPlate bleeDINg tiMe
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Carefully clip hair from 3-inch-square
1. Even a short-hair coat will prevent.
area of skin on dorsolateral surface
 proper assessment of the cessation of
of an tebrachium.
bleeding. In addition, long hairs may
provide an increased chance for
wound con tamination.
* General Diagnostics, Division of Warner-Lambert Company, Morris Plains, N] 07950.
RAPID EVALUATION OF BLEEDING AND CLOTTING DISORDERS
329
B
Figure 3l-1 Equipment needed for obtaining template and cuticle bleeding time: (A) tem-
plate and No. 11 scalpel blade, (B) Simplate-l bleeding time device, and (C) guillotine- and
 scissors-type pet toenail clippers.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 2. Scrub clipped area of skin gently.
2. See Chapter 16, pp. 173-175. Careful
clipping and scrubbing is essential to
avoid skin irritation, which could
result in surface capillary trauma and
increased capillary perfusion.
330
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 3. Apply tourniquet to leg above elbow.
3. The tourniquet helps to standardize
Wait 30 to 60 seconds before
capillary perfusion in the test leg.
proceeding.
4. Make several incisions of uniform
4. Use either the Simplate-II bleeding
depth and length (Fig. 31-2).
time device or a template and No. 11
scalpel blade (Fig. 31-2). Avoid
placing the device directly over or
near the cephalic vein.
5. Remove incision device and start.
 5. Do not. separate incision edges or
stopwatch.
otherwise disturb the wounds.
6. After 30 seconds, blot. the blood
6. Bring the edge of the filter paper
droplet that accumulates at incision
close to the incisions without
sites with edge of dry filter paper
touching the wound edges. Rotate
(Fig. 31-3).
the paper between each blotting.
 7. Repeat blotting every 30 seconds
7. Normal range for template bleeding
until blood no longer stains filter
time in dogs is 4 to 5 minutes. If
 paper. Record total elapsed time
incisions bleed different lengths of
from incision until cessation of
time, use the longest time obtained.
hemorrhage.
Animals with bleeding disorders
frequently bleed longer and more
profusely.
Figure 31-2 Making skin incisions with template and No. 11 scalpel blade.
RAPID EVALUATION OF BLEEDING AND CLOTTING DISORDERS
331
Figure 31-3 Blotting blood droplets with filter paper.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
8. Remove tourniquet and apply cotton
8. See Chapter 2, p. 27, Nos. 11 to 12. If
ball or gauze bandage, as for
 bleeding persists, consider placing a
venipuncture.
 pressure bandage.
CutIcle bleeding time
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Wipe toenail and blades of toenail
1. Application of an antiseptic such as
clipper with 70% alcohol. Allow to
alcohol minimizes the possibility of
dry for at least 30 seconds.
 infection of the nail.
2. Clip nail slightly too short to initiate
2. See Chapter 11, pp. 135-138. Darkly
bleeding (Fig. 31-4).
 pigmented nails should be clipped in
small (l-mm) increments until
bleeding starts; in white nails, the
 nail matrix (blood supply) is visible
so that an exact clip can be
performed.
3. Allow nail to bleed naturally.
 3. Do not squeeze foot, toes, or nails.
 Droplets of blood should not. be
blotted. Bleeding should stop
normally within 2 to 5 minutes
4. Repeat Nos. 1 to 3 on a second nail
4. Bleeding may continue for 15
to recheck results.
minutes or more in animals with von
332
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Figure 31-4 Clipping nail to level of blood vessels.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
Willebrand's disease or other platelet.
disorders. Hemophiliacs will often
stop bleeding after 2 to 3 minutes,
but bleeding will then restart and
con tin ue inde finitely.
ACTIVATED CLOTTING TIME
Activated clotting time is a rapid test for evaluating the intrinsic and common coagula-
tion pathways. It is the elapsed time between mixture of whole blood with a surface
activator and the development of a fibrin clot.
Purposes
1. To aid in the diagnosis of specific coagulation disorders
 2. To identify animals with subclinical coagulation disorders before performing
invasive or traumatic diagnostic procedures
 3. To monitor anticoagulant therapy
4. To evaluate progression or regression of coagulation disorders
RAPID EVALUATION OF BLEEDING AND CLOTTING DISORDERS
333
Specific Indications
1. Spontaneous subcutaneous hematoma
2. Hemarthrosis
3. Suffusion hemorrhage
4. Prolonged postoperative bleeding
5. Excessive hemorrhage at venipuncture sites
Equipment Needed
*Vacutainer* holder and needles
· Vacutainer clotting time test tubes con taining activator, and standard clot tubes
● 37*C heating block or water bath
+ Stopwatch with sweep second hand
NOTE:When the procedure is performed in the field,warming the tube ina pocket or in the
palrmmaybe substituted for the heating block or bath.
Restraint and Positioning
The animal is held in sternal recumbency, with forelegs extended forward and ventrally
and the neck extended dorsally, as for routine jugular venipuncture (see Chapter 2).
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Preheat tubes in heating block or
1. See Chapter 2, pp. 20-21.
bath. Prepare skin and distend
jugular vein as for routine
venipuncture.
2. Puncture vein with one smooth
2. It is essential that the venipuncture
stroke of sterile Vacutainer needle.
be atraumatic to avoid the
accumulation of tissue
thromboplastin in or on the needle.
3. Insert standard clot tube in holder
 3. Hold Vacutainer collection assembly
 and push tube until needle punctures
frmly throughout procedure to
tube stopper. Collect. 2 to 3 mL of
prevent migration of needle and
blood.
laceration of vein.
4. Disconnect. tube from holder while
4. This frst collected sample is used to
keeping needle within lumen of vein.
draw any thromboplastin out of the
Discard tube or save for serum tests.
needle.
 5. Insert. tube containing activator into
5. Blood normally will appear in
holder and puncture stopper with
vacuum tube immediately.
needle.
* Becton, Dickinson and Company, Rutherford, N] 07070.
334
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Figure 31-5 Inverting activated clotting time tube to observe for formation of clot.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
6. Start stopwatch the instant blood
6. Collection normally should be
enters tube and continue collection
completed within 10 to 12 seconds.
until blood stops flowing into tube.
7. Immediately disconnect. tube from
7. Do not. shake the tube. Inversion
holder, gently invert it three times,
 provides adequate mixing of blood
and place tube in heating block or
with the activator.
water bath.
Assistant: Apply digital pressure to
venipuncture site for at least l minute.
8. When stopwatch reads 60 seconds,
remove tube from heating block or
8. Observe for clot in tube as blood
bath and invert. tube gently once
flows from end to end. If no clot is
(Fig. 31-5). If no clot has formed,
seen, replace tube in heat. source.
replace tube in heating block.
9. Repeat. inversion and replacement.
9. Normal activated clotting time in the
every 5 seconds until a clot is formed.
dog is 60 to 100 seconds; in the cat,
Record elapsed time.
it is 70-120 seconds.
Bibliography
Byars TD et al: Activated coagulation time (ACT) of whole blood in normal dogs. Am J Vet Res
37:1359-1361, 1976
Dodds WJ: Cuticle Bleeding Time in Bleeding Disorders of Small Animals. Western States
Veterinary Medical Association Annual Conference, Las Vegas, February 1983
Middleton DJ, Watson ADJ: Activated coagulation times of whole blood in normal dogs with
coagulopathies. J Small Anim Pract 19:417-422, 1978
Mielks CH: Use of template for bleeding time incisions. Blood 34:204-206, 1969
Chapter 32
TRANSFUSION OF
BLOOD AND PLASMA
Fortune favors the prepared mind.
LOUIS PASTEUR
Purposes
1. Supply red blood cells (RBCs) to patients with anemia
 2. Provide clotting factors to patients with clotting disorders
3. Correct. massive acute hemorrhage
Complications
1. Sepsis
2. Vascular overload
3. Coagulopathy
4. Hemolysis
5. Pulmonary microembolism
Equipment needed:
● IV catheter with T-connection
· 3 mL of heparinized saline
+ Y-type blood administration set.
+ Extension sets
● One 250-mL bag of 0.9% NaCl
● Hemo-Nate filter (if administering blood or plasma from a syringe)
● Temperature probe
● Blood rocker (if administering fresh whole blood)
+ 250 mL 0.9% saline
335
336
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Pretransfusion Setup
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Place intravenous or intraosseous
1. Large lumen catheters are less
catheter or, if catheter is already in
likely to damage or lyse RBCs. Do
place, check for patency (See
not. give blood through a catheter
Chapter 4 or Chapter 33).
smaller than 22 gauge.
 2. Perform a blood typing procedure
2. Due to the risk of severe
and record results.
incompatibility reactions, cats
must always be typed before
tran sfusion.
 3. If patient has received a prior
3. Cross matches should be done on
transfusion, perform a donor-
any animal that has had a
recipient cross-match procedure
transfusion reaction to a prior
and record results.
blood transfusion or that has
received a blood transfusion
 previously, even if it was several
years ago.
4. If using stored blood or plasma,
4. FFP can be defrosted without
warm products prior to
thawing first in emergent
administration:
circumstances. If denaturing
a. thaw fresh frozen plasma (FFP)
occurs, you will note an area of
 at room temperature for 20
white congealed proteins in the
minutes, then defrost in
plasma. Blood can be given cold
lukewarm water.
in emergent situations, but the
b. warm refrigerated whole blood
 oxygen-carrying capacity will not.
 and packed RBCs in lukewarm
occur until the RBCs reach body
water.
temperature.
 5. Insert an indwelling temperature
 5. Make sure to give warm fluids
probe in rectum, if available.
and heat. externally if the patient.
is hypothermic.
6. Record baseline vital signs (rectal
6. It is essential to monitor the
temperature, pulse rate, respiratory
animal's vital signs and respiratory
rate).
pattern throughout. the entire
transfusion.
7. Attach 1 or 2 extension sets to
7. Aseptic technique should be
outlet of Y-type administration set.
used while connecting tubes,
bags, and filters to avoid
contamination of the products to
be transfused.
8. Attach blood component or plasma
8-11. These steps "prime" the line,
bag to one input port and 0.9%
making it ready for
NaCl bag to other input port.
administration. Expel any large
9. Open roll clamp and fill filter
air bubbles from the line before
halfway, then invert hand pump.
proceeding. Do not use the Ytype
TRANSFUSION OF BLOOD AND PLASMA
337
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
10. Fill hand pump with plasma or
blood administration set. in
blood product; when full, return
standard fluid pumps. The pump
hand pump to normal position.
will compress the line, causing
11. Fill remaining line and extension
damage to the cells. If available,
sets with plasma or blood product.
fluid pumps that. are labeled to
give RBC can be used. Blood is
incompatible with D5W and LRS.
Use 0.9% saline.
NOTE:If worried about fluid volume overload,administering blood via syringe is indicated
because it takes less saline to flush line and blood can be given at a more controlled rate.If
administering blood products or plasma via syringe, do the follwing in place of Nos. 7 through
11 above.
* Insert an injection port (e.g., Baxter
sampling site coupler) into plasma or
blood product. bag.
+ Draw blood product into syringe.
· Attach Hemo-Nate filter between
syringe and an extension set.
Transfusion Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. If animal is actively bleeding and
1. Patients with hemorrhagic shock can
there is not time to give a controlled
receive up to 22 mL/kg/hr.
 transfusion, blood can be given at a
rapid rate.
2. If animal is relatively stable, begin
2. Watch for signs of transfusion
infusing plasma or blood product at
reactions. Most reactions occur
2.5 mL/kg/hr.
because blood is being administered
too rapidly. If only a mild
temperature increase is noted,
decrease the rate of infusion.
 3. Vital signs should be monitored every
3. Discontinue the transfusion if any of
15 minutes for frst 45 minutes, and
the following reactions are observed:
then every hour until transfusion is
* evidence of vascular overload such
completed.
as pulmonary edema or dyspnea
* evidence of an immune-mediated
reaction such as restlessness,
nausea, vomiting, tachypnea,
tachycardia, urticaria, facial edema,
338
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
swelling, or pruritus (in cats,
especially noted by face rubbing).
4. Increase rate of infusion, if indicated.
4. If after 20 minutes no signs of
adverse reaction are noted, rate of
infusion may be increased to 5 to
10 mL/kg/hr. Heart failure patients
should receive no more than 1 to
2 mL/kg/hr.
5. When transfusion is completed,
 5. Blood is not compatible with 5%
administration set should be flushed
dextrose in water (D5W) or lactated
with 0.9%NaCl at same rate until
Ringer's solution (LRS). Saline
fluid line is mostly clear.
should be run at the same rate as
the blood or plasma to avoid
administering the remaining in the
line too rapidly.
Bibliography
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 7th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000
Macintire DK, Drobratz KJ, Haskins SC, Saxon WD: Manual of Small Animal Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine. Philadelphia, Lippincott, 2005
WSAVA 2003 Congress: Blood Transfusion Guidelines; Bernard F. Feldman, DVM, PhD
Chapter 33
PLACEMENT OF
NTRAOSSEOUS
CATHETERS
Small things,done in love,bring joy and peace
MOTHER TERESA
Intraosseous catheterization is the placement. of a hollow device, a catheter or needle,
through the bone's hard cortex and into the soft marrow interior.
Indications
Intraosseous catheterization can be used for animals with inaccessible peripheral
vessels (i.e., neonates, hypovolemic, hypotensive). This route of fluid and medication
administration is an alternate one to the preferred IV route when the latter cannot
be established in a timely manner, especially during cardiac arrest.
Purposes
1. To administer fluids, medication, and blood to neonates or very small animals
 2. To provide ready access to the circulatory system for anticipated metabolic emer-
gencies (e.g., seizures,hypoglycemia, shock)
Complications
1. Sepsis
2. Osteomyelitis
3. Contraindicated in fractured bones
339
340
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
Equipment Needed
+ 18- to 20-gauge needle
+ Clipper with No. 40 blade
+ Skin preparation materials:
2% chlorhexidine scrub
70% alcohol
 Sterile gauze sponges (2" × 2")
+ Scissors, needle holder, thumb forceps
● Suture material
+ Bandaging material:
Sterile gauze sponges
Gauze bandage
Adhesive tape (% in. and 1 in.)
* Syringe containing l mL of heparinized saline
●Fluid administration set. (if necessary)
Restraint and Positioning
The best sites for intraosseous catheterization are the trochanteric fossa of the proxj-
mal femur, the iliac crest, and the medial side of the proximal tibia (distal to the tibial
tuberosity). When the trochanteric fossa is cannulated, the animal is positioned in
lateral recumbency, with the femur to be catheterized facing up. If the medial tibia is
selected, the animal should be placed in lateral recumbency with the tibia to be cath-
eterized touching the table.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Clip and surgically prepare area over
1. Every precaution must be taken to
coxofemoral joint.
reduce the chance of causing
iatrogenic infection.
2. Apply local anesthetic (2% lidocaine)
2. Feel for the depression between the
to skin and subcutis at insertion
greater trochanter and the head of
 point, then down onto periosteum of
the femur. The needle should be
trochanteric fossa.
introduced on the medial side of the
greater trochanter and “walked"
down the bone into the fossa,
injecting small amounts of the local
 anesthetic as the needle is advanced.
3. While stabilizing leg with other hand,
 3. A needle with stylet is preferable to
make a small stab incision through
avoid occlusion with cortical bone or
skin to allow insertion of hypodermic
marrow during insertion.
or spinal needle.
PLACEMENT OF INTRAOSSEOUS CATHETERS
341
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
4. Locate depression between greater
4. By introducing the needle in this
trochanter and femoral head. Point
fashion, the sciatic nerve is avoided.
 needle slightly distal and advance it.
down medial side of greater
trochanter into trochanteric fossa
(Fig 33-1).
5. Once in position, push needle
5. Upon entering the marrow cavity,
through cortex into medullary cavity
resistance will diminish. A properly
by downward pressure and rotation
seated needle will feel solidly in
(about a quarter turn at. a time).
place.
 6. Check needle for proper position by
6. When manipulating the femur, the
manipulation of femur; then flush
needle should move in the same
needle with heparinized saline.
direction easily and you should not.
be able to see or feel the shaft of the
needle. The saline should infuse
easily through the needle.
7. Secure needle with butterfly tape and
 7. Patency is maintained by flushing
suture in place.
every 6 hours with heparinized saline.
The same bone cannot be reused as
fluids infused may leak out from
original hole in cortex.
 8. Apply a bandage to protect. needle
8. Intraosseous catheters can remain in
and insertion site.
place for up to 72 hours.
Figure 33-l Possible sites (proximal femur, iliac crest)
for introduction of intraosseous catheter.
342
EMERGENCYPROCEDURES
Bibliography
Hackett TB, Lehman TL: Practical considerations in emergency drug therapy. Vet Clin N Amer:
Small Animal Practice 35:517-525, 2005
Kirk RW, Bistner SI: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 7th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000
Chapter 34
TRACHEOSTOMY
Act as if it were impossible to fail.
DOROTHEA BRANDE
for passage of air.
Purposes
1. To circumvent upper respiratory obstructions and establish adequate ventilation
2. To reduce resistance to respiration
3. To facilitate artificial respiration
Complications
1. Obstruction of the airway with secretions
2. Tracheal inflammation or necrosis
3. Infection at insertion site
4. Subcutaneous emphysema secondary to tracheal trauma
5. Pneumomediastinum and/or pneumothorax
Equipment Needed
+ Sterile tracheostomy tube of appropriate size and type
* Clipper with No. 40 blade
· Skin preparation material (see Chapter 16)
● Scissors, needle holder, thumb forceps
+ Scalpel blade/handle
343
344
EMERGENCY PROCEDURES
● Suture material
● Umbilical tape or gauze
+ Bandaging material:
 Sterile gauze sponge
Gauze bandage
Adhesive tape
· Additional equipment depending on circumstances:
Ambu bag
Emergency drugs
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Select tracheostomy tube of
1. Attempting to use a tube that is too
appropriate diameter.
large can cause trauma to the
trachea. A tube that is too small will
not. provide an adequate airway.
2. Clip and surgically prepare ventral
2. Ideally, sterile technique is
cervical area (See Chapter 16).
preferred, but in an emergency
situation that may not be possible.
Care should be taken to clip and
clean the area once the patient is
stabilized.
3. Make a longitudinal ventral midline
3. This incision should be two to three
skin incision from cricoid cartilage
times the diameter of the tube to be
to sixth tracheal ring (Fig. 34-1).
inserted.
4. Using forceps, separate muscles
4. The fascia should be completely
overlying trachea to visualize
cleared away over a length of three
tracheal rings.
to four tracheal rings.
 5. Grasp trachea by a tracheal ring
with forceps or secure a stay suture
around ring to lift and stabilize
trachea.
6. Make a tranverse incision with
6. This incision should be just. long
scalpel blade through ligament.
enough to accommodate the tube
 between third and fourth cartilage
comfortably.
rings (Fig. 342).
7. Alternative technique: Make a midline,
7. Small, transverse incisions can be
longitudinal incision starting from
made at either end of the incision
second or third tracheal ring and
 to assist with tube insertion.
extending caudally so that tube rests
comfortably within lumen of trachea
(Fig. 34-3).
TRACHEOSTOMY
345
Figure S4-l Midline ventral cervical skin incision from cricoid cartilage to ffth or sixth
tracheal ring.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
8. If an orotracheal tube is in place,
8. The tracheostomy tube is inserted
remove it; then insert. tracheostomy
while stabilizing the trachea with
tube through incision and into
forceps or suture.
trachea, with curve of tube directed
aborally (toward thorax) (Fig. 344).
 9. Place stay suture loops around
9. These stay sutures are left in the
 tracheal rings cranial and caudal to
trachea to facilitate removal and
 tracheal incision, and leave long
cleaning of the tube and to allow
enough to be reached from outside
easy access to the airway in an
of animal.
emergency.
Figure 34-3   Longitudinal incision in trachea.
Stay sutures are placed around third tracheal
ning lateral to the center of the incision.
Figure 34-2 Transverse incision in trachea.
Stay sutures are placed around rings cranial
and caudal to incision.
Figure 34-4 Inserting tracheostomy tube
through tracheal stoma with curve directed
Figure 34-5 Sterile gauze placed around base
aborally.
of tracheostomy tube after skin closure.
346
TRACHEOSTOMY
347
Figure 34-6 Tracheostomy tube secuwred to neck
with umbilical tape.
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
10. Administer 100% oxygen and assist
10. Oxygenate immediately after
with ventilation if needed.
placing tube.
11. Close majority of incision with
11. Air will often escape from the
simple interrupted sutures, but.
tracheal incision and must be
avoid an airtight seal around tube to
allowed to vent to the outside of
allow venting of air from insertion
the patient. Otherwise, the air
sit.e.
will accumulate subcutaneously,
as well as into the mediastinum.
12. Cover skin incision with sterile
12. Applying a light bandage will allow
gauze that has been cut to fit.
the necessary air leakage into the
around tube (Fig. 345) and cover
environment.
loosely with roll gauze.
13. Secure tracheostomy tube to neck
13. The tube should be double-tied
using umbilical tape or roll gauze
around the neck.
(Fig. 34-6).
14. If using a cuffed tube, inflate only if
14. High pressure inflation of the cuff
mechanical ventilation is required
should be avoided to prevent.
 or to prevent aspiration in first.
tracheal necrosis.
24 hours.
Bibliography
Aron DN, Crowe DT. Upper airway obstruction. Vet Clin North Am Small Anim Pract 15:897,
1985
8四
EMERGENCYPROCEDURES
Hedlund Cs. Tracheostomies in the management of canine and feline upper respiratory disease.
Vet Clin North Am Smal1 Anim Pract 24:873-886, 1994
Hedlund CS, Tangner CH, Montgomery DL, Hobson HP. A procedure for permanent trache-
ostomy and its effects on tracheal mucosa. Vet Surg 1l:13, 1982
Jandrey K: Tracheostomies; UCD SVECCS Respiratory Watch, 2003
Kirk RW, Bistner Sl: Handbook of Veterinary Procedures and Emergency Treatment, 7th ed.
Philadelphia, WB Saunders, 2000
MacIntire DK, Drobratz KJ, Haskins SC, Saxon WD: Manual of Small Animal Emergency and
Critical Care Medicine. Philadelphia, Lippincott, 2005
Maclntire DK, Henderson RA, Wilson ER, Huber ML. Transverse flap tracheostomy: A tech-
nique for temporary tracheostomy of intermediate duration. J Veterinary Emergency &
Critical Care 5:25-31, 1995
Part IV
ROUTNE
CLNICAL
PROCEDURES
IN SMALL
MAMMALS
In the last two decades, many people have discovered
the joys of owning a house rabbit. Rabbits are curious,
affectionate, cnd playful. They are easily frained fo use a
litter pan. Spaying or castrating eliminates the few nega-
tive behavioral traits these animals have. A rabbit normally
naps during the morning and affernoon and is quite lively
in the early evening. Thus, the rabbit is quite content to rest
in an indoor cage during the day cnd interact with its
Owner(s) in the evening.
American and British house rabbit associations advise
owners to have their pet rabbits neutered. Veterinarians,
therefore, can expect to see young rabbits for surgery and
older rabbits for diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.
A rabbit's size approximates that of a cat or small dog.
Many clinical procedures that are routinely performed on
349
350
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
dogs or cats can be utilized in rabbits. The rabbit section
focuses on key differences in restraint and handling as well
cs modification of some procedures for the rabbit. We
encourage our readers to consultwith laboratory animal
veterinarians cnd veterinarians in exotic animal practice
when dealing with complex medical cases. Rabbits are
great patients, so hop to it!
One of the authors has spent more than two decades
looking after the special needs of laboratory animals at
two universities. The unique nature of each of these rodents
makes them interesting cnd fun fo handle and study. Even
though their lives are relatively short, they deserve the same
respect and gentle, humane treatment that we prescribe
for the dog, cat, and rabbit.
Do all the good you can,
Inall the ways you can,
In all the places you can,
At all the times you can,
Toall the[creatures} you can,
As long as ever you can.
Adapted from JOHN WEsLEY
What's up, doc?
BUGS BUNNY
Chapter 35
RESTRAINT OF
RABBITS
Once there was a little bunny who wanted to run away.So he
said to his mother, “I am running away."“If you run away,
said his mother, “I will run after you. For you are my little
bnny."
MARGARET WISE BROwN, The Runaway Bunny
Restraint is the restriction of an animal's activity by verbal, physical, or pharmacologic
means so that the animal is prevented from injuring itself or others.
Purposes
1. To facilitate physical examination, including ophthalmic examinations
2. To administer oral, injectable, and topical materials
3. To apply bandages
4. To perform certain procedures (e.g., intravenous catheterization, pedicure)
Complications
1. Dyspnea
2. Hyperthermia
 3. Hind limb paralysis due to fractured back (especially the seventh lumbar
vertebra)
Equipment Needed
* Large bath towel
* Cat. bag
351
352
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
MOVING OR CARRYING A RabBIT
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Observe the rabbit. briefly in its cage
1. If the rabbit seems aggressive, it. may
or pen before attempting to handle
be necessary to throw a towel over
it, noting its attitude.
the rabbit to remove it from the cage
 or pen. An aggressive rabbit or a
nursing doe may quickly inflict.
painful bites on a hand that. is
reaching for it.
2. Determine whether the rabbit is
2. Even minimal restraint may cause
breathing effortlessly at the usual rate
 respiratory arrest in a dyspneic
of 30 to 60 breaths per minute.
rabbit.
3. Talk quietly to the rabbit
3. From a rabbit's point of view, a
human being is a large potential
predator. A calm, quiet approach is
always advisable.
4. Try to stroke the rabbit's head, with
4. One does not offer a hand for the
your hand coming from behind its
rabbit to sniff, as with a dog, because
head.
a rabbit, with its laterally placed eyes,
has relatively poor depth perception
and may mistake the person's hand
for food.
5. Gently lift the rabbit by grasping skin
5. Keep the rabbit's back curved to
over its dorsal neck area with one
 prevent dorsiflexion of the spine and
hand while supporting the rabbit's
 possible fracture. The rabbit's feet.
hindquarters with the other hand,
should be pointed away from you
with its feet. pointing away from you
because a rabbit. can inflict painful
(Fig. 35-1).
scratches with its sharp toenails.
6. A quiet-natured rabbit can be carried
6. This position is more comfortable for
with one hand under its thorax and
large rabbits than being partially
the other hand supporting the
supported by the skin of the dorsal
rabbit's hindquarters (Fig. 35-2).
neck region.
7. Tuck the rabbit's head and front feet
7. When transporting a rabbit in a noisy
under your upper arm and carry
area or to another room, it is safer
the rabbit a short. distance with its
to place the rabbit in a box or
body supported by your forearm
commercial carrier before moving itf.
(Fig. 35-3).
NOTE:It is essential to keep the rabbit's back in its normal curved posture during handling
and restraint.Therabbit's relatively fragile skeleton and large lumbar muscles render it susceptible
tospinalfracturewhile struggling
Figure35-1
Carrying a rabbit by lifting dorsal neck skin while supporting rabbit's
hindquarters.
erekFo9s
Figure 35-2 Carrying a rabbit by placing one hand under rabbit's thorax while supporting its
hindquarters.
353
354
Figure 35-3 Carrying a rabbit by tucking its head under the handler's upper arm and support-
ing the rabbit's body with a forearm.
ToWel rEStraINt OF A rabbIt
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Place the rabbit. in the middle of a
1. If the rabbit is struggling, do this
large towel (Fig. 35-4).
entire procedure on the floor to
prevent injury to the animal and the
handler if the rabbit tries to jump off
the table.
2. Pull up on one end of the towel
2. Tension on one end of the towel
while wrapping and tucking the towel
helps ensure a secure wrap around
securely around the rabbit's neck and
the rabbit's neck. It is important. to
covering one front foot (Fig. 35-5).
completely enclose one front foot in
the underneath towel wrap. The
rabbit tends to hop with its front feet
simultaneously and having a front.
Figure 35-4  Placing rabbit in middle of towel for towel restraint wrap.
DerekFa
Figure35-5
5 Wrapping one end of the towel around the rabbit and under its front foot while
keeping upward tension on the other end of the towel.
355
356
Figure 35-6 Rabbit securely wrapped in a towel.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
foot securely restrained by the towel
has a calming effect.
3. Wrap the other end of the towel
3. Covering the rabbit's front feet. with
securely around the rabbit, leaving
the towel prevents the animal from
 only the head exposed (Fig. 35-6).
squirming out of the towel.
4. Leave towel in place for such
4. The towel is warm and comfortable,
procedures as ophthalmic procedures
 perhaps explaining why rabbits tend
(Chapter 9), blood collection from
to relax and their ear blood vessels
ear artery or vein, intravenous
dilate when the towel restraint
catheter placement in ear vein, and
method is used.
oral examination and administration
of oral medications.
5. Unwrap small areas of rabbit for
performing procedures such as
 toenail clipping or injections.
RESTRAINT OF RABBITS
357
CAT BAG RESTRAINT OF A RABBIT
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Place the rabbit in the cat bag by
1. Supporting the rabbit's back will help
 grasping skin over the rabbit's dorsal
prevent struggling without using
neck area with one hand and
excessive force to restrain.
supporting the rabbit's hindquarters
with the other hand and slipping the
rabbit backwards into the bag.
2. Secure the cat bag as necessary,
leaving only the head exposed.
3. Procedures such as ophthalmic
procedures (Chapter 9), blood
collection from ear artery or vein,
intravenous catheter placement in
ear vein, and oral examination and
administration of oral medications
can be accommodated in this
manner.
4. Sections of the cat bag can be
unzipped for performing procedures
 such as toenail clipping or injections.
5. Remove rabbit. from cat bag by
 5. Rabbits are less likely to jump or kick
 backing the rabbit. out of the bag.
out, thus fracturing their spine, if
 they are placed backward into cages
and such.
RESTRAINT OF AN AGGRESSIVE RAbbIT
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. To remove an aggressive rabbit from
1. Some rabbits will attack the first.
a cage or carrier, throw a towel over
towel thrown into the cage. While
 the animal and quickly bundle it up
this is occurring, throw a second
with its head completely covered.
towel over the rabbit.
 2. Place the “bundle” of aggressive
2. Once on the floor, the rabbit cannot.
rabbit on the floor, rather than on a
scratch the handler's face and also
table, for rewrapping in a more
may “freeze" in position in the
efficient manner.
unfamiliar surroundings.
 3. After placing an aggressive rabbit on
3. Some aggressive rabbits settle down
the floor, try putting pressure over
when handled this way.
358
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
the rabbit's shoulder area,
immobilizing the front legs, while
also applying pressure over the
hip area.
NOTE:Female rabbits that have not been spayed may become territorial and aggressive. Ouar-
iohysterectomy often results in dramatic improvement in behavior within a few weeks.
Bibliography
Ackerman S: Aggressive rabbits. Rabbit Health News 8:4-5, 1993
Beynon PH, Cooper JE: BSAVA Manual of Exotic Pets. Cheltenham, England, British Small
Animal Veterinary Association, 1991
Harkness JE, Wagner JE: The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, Williams and Wilkins, 1995
Hillyer EV: Pet rabbits. Vet Clin North Am: Small Animal Practice 24(1):25-65, 1994
Laber-Laird K, Swindle MM, Flecknell P: Handbook of Rodent and Rabbit Medicine. Oxford,
England, Pergamon Press, 1996
Manning PJ, Ringler DH, Newcomer CH (eds): The Biology of the Laboratory Rabbit, 2nd ed.
San Diego, Academic Press, 1994
Okerman L: Diseases of Domestic Rabbits, 2nd ed. Oxford, England, Blackwell Scientific Pub-
lications, 1994
Podberscek AL, Blackshaw JK, Beattie AW: The effects of repeated handling by familiar and
unfamiliar people on rabbits in individual cages and group pens. Applied Animal Behay-
iour Science 28:365-373, 1991
Chapter 36
SELECTED
CLINICAL
PROCEDURES IN
RABBITS
Peter was not very well during the evening.His mother put him
to bed,and made some camomile tea; and she gave a dose of it
toPeter!“One table-spoonful to be taken at bed-time."
BEATRIX POTTER, The Tale of Peter Rabbit
Routine clinical procedures in rabbits include blood collection, injections, placement. of
intravenous catheters, oral administration of medications, and a variety of diagnostic
and therapeutic procedures described in Part I and Part I of this book. This chapter
highlights the modifications of some of these routine procedures for ease in perform-
ing the procedures on the rabbit. If not. otherwise specified, a procedure should be
performed on a rabbit using the same technique as for a dog or cat.
INTRAVENOUS CATHETERIZATION OF tHE RAbbIT
Intravenous catheterization is useful in rabbits for collecting blood as well as for admin-
istering intravenous fluids to a rabbit.
Blood Collection from the Blood Vessels of
a Rabbit's Ear
NOTE:The marginal ear vein is a good choice for routine blood collection for any rabbit weigh-
ing at least 2 kg. The central artery of the ear is accessible and blood collection is rapid unless
the vesselis constricted ina cold or nervonus rabbit.Small amounts(1-3 mL)ofblood may be
collectedfromarabbit'scephalicveinorlateralsaphenousvein
359
360
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Equipment Needed
* Cloth towel
· Gauze sponges
+ Warm soapy water
· Syringe
+ Blood collection tubes
● Drugs for tranquilization (if necessary), for example, Acepromazine
* Petroleum jelly
· 24-gauge over-the-needle intravenous catheter
NOTE: Rabbit blood clots in 20 to 90 seconds, especially when collected using a metal needle.
For this reason,Teflon-coated intravenous catheters are preferred for blood collection from ear
blood vessels.
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Administer tranquilizing agent. to
1. It is difficult to collect blood from a
excitable rabbit.
frightened rabbit. Peripheral vessels
will constrict in such situations.
2. Wrap rabbit in a cloth towel (See
2. Even a tranquilized rabbit should be
Chapter 35).
wrapped in a towel to provide the
comfort and warmth that will
enhance relaxation of the rabbit
during the procedure.
3. Pluck hair over central artery of ear
 3. Removing the hair with an electric
 and/or marginal ear vein along
clipper is likely to irritate the
edge of ear (Fig. 36-1).
delicate skin on the rabbit's ear.
4. Clean ear with warm soapy water,
4. Surface debris should be removed,
if dirty.
but cool substances such as alcohol
will cause vasoconstriction of the ear
blood vessels.
 5. Inspect intravenous catheter for
 5. Discard any catheter with a barbed
flaws.
needle or with immobile parts.
6. Cover rabbit's eyes with fold of
6. A rabbit may tend to move if it. sees
towel (or ask assistant to cover
someone approaching it. with an
rabbit's eyes with hand) .
instrument.
 7. If necessary, distend (or ask assistant.
7. Pressure at the base of the ear
to distend) vein with blood by
 should be great. enough to keep the
applying firm pressure on vein at.
vein distended but not so much as
base of ear near rabbit's head.
to shut off arterial flow. Distention
of the artery is not necessary.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN RABBITS
361
Figure 36-1 Central artery of ear and marginal ear vein of rabbit.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
8. Insert needle and catheter into
8. Flow of blood into the hub of the
blood vessel with bevel up.
needle indicates entry into the
blood vessel.
9. Advance needle into blood vessel
9. The catheter is slightly shorter than
until at least one-half of needle is
the needle in an over-the-needle
within blood vessel (Fig. 36-2).
catheter. Entry of the catheter into
the lumen of the blood vessel is
ensured by placing at least one-half
of the needle within the lumen of
the blood vessel.
10. Hold needle in place with fngers of
10. Once the advancing of the catheter
one hand and slowly advance
has begun, the metal needle must.
catheter farther into blood vessel
not be reinserted through the
with fngers of other hand
catheter because the needle could
(Chapter 4).
cut the catheter while the catheter
is in the vessel.
11. Hold catheter hub and withdraw
11. The catheter can be removed
needle from catheter.
inadvertently if it is not held in
place while the needle is withdrawn.
362
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Figure 36-2
 Intravenous over-the-needle catheter placed into marginal ear vein of rabbit.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 12. Attach syringe to catheter hub and
12. It. may be necessary to hold pressure
withdraw needle from catheter.
on the vein at the base of the ear
during blood collection.
13. If blood flow stops, rotate catheter
13. The tip of the catheter may be
within blood vessel or withdraw it
wedged up against. the wall of the
slightly.
blood vessel.
14. When catheter is removed,
14. Pressure on the catheterization site
immediately apply pressure to
for 1 to 3 minutes following
 catheterization site with dry gauze
catheter removal will decrease the
sponge.
 possibility of hemorrhage and
subcutaneous hematoma formation.
15. Clean ear thoroughly with warm
15. Blood is a good culture medium for
 soapy water. Apply petroleum jelly
bacteria and must be removed from
to area of ear where hair was
the animal's ear or fur at the end of
removed to soothe skin and
the procedure.
promote healing.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN RABBITS
363
BAndAgINg IntRaVENouS CAthEter For
ADMINISTERING FLUIDS tO A RABBIT
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Insert intravenous catheter into
1. See pp. 359-362.
marginal ear vein as for blood
collection.
 2. Place injection cap on catheter
2. An injection cap provides a sterile
(Chapter 4, p. 5459),
seal to the intravenous catheter. A
needle attached to a syringe or
 intravenous fluid infusion tubing can
be inserted through the injection
cap.
3. Flush catheter with heparinized
 3. Heparinized saline will keep the
saline.
catheter patent while the bandage is
placed on the ear.
4. Insert small roll of gauze sponges
4. The small roll of gauze sponges helps
into rabbit's ear.
keep the ear cartilage in a natural,
comfortable position under the
bandage.
 5. Wrap adhesive tape strip attached to
 5. This tape anchors the catheter to the
catheter hub around ear (Fig. 36-3).
ear. Firm anchoring of the catheter
prevents trauma to the vein caused
by excessive movement of the
catheter.
6. Bandage ear using gauze bandaging
6. Careful bandaging of the ear over
 material, leaving only injection cap
a wide area helps to prevent.
exposed.
contamination of the catheter
insertion site and resulting infection.
7. Insert small roll of gauze sponges
 7. The small roll of gauze sponges will
into rabbit's other ear.
keep the other (noncatheterized) ear
in a natural, comfortable position
when the two ears are bandaged
together.
8. Bandage both ears together and
8. The rabbit is less likely to scratch at.
hook up intravenous drip set.
the catheter with front or hind legs
(Fig 36-4).
if the ears are bandaged together.
A single bandaged ear with an
intravenous catheter in place will
hang down on the side of the rabbit.
and be a source of annoyance to the
animal.
364
Figure 36-3  Bandaging of intravenous catheter to rabbit's ear.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
9. Secure all tubing away from rabbit's
9. A rabbit will chew through tubes
mouth.
readily, so all tubing must be secured
away from the rabbit's mouth. If
necessary, an Elizabethan collar can
be placed on the rabbit.
Blood collectIon froM the Jugular Vein of A rAbbIt
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale/Amplification
1. Wrap rabbit in a towel.
1. Tranquilization is advised for this
procedure to minimize the possibility
of injuring the spine of a struggling
rabbit.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN RABBITS
365
DerekB.Fox96
Figure 36-4 Bandaging of ears together for administering intravenous fluids to rabbit via
marginal ear vein.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
 2. Place towel-wrapped rabbit in dorsal
2. In a quiet room, some rabbits relax
recumbency with its neck extended
into an almost trancelike state when
 and its body restrained by an assistant
placed in this position.
(Fig. 36-5).
3. Collect. blood using a needle and
 3. Hold frm pressure over jugular vein
syringe.
for l to 3 minutes after the needle is
removed.
366
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Figure 36-5 Restraint of rabbit for jugular venipuncture.
Blood CoLleCtION FroM the LAterAl SAPheNoUS
Vein Of A rabbIt
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Wrap rabbit in a towel.
1. Tranquilization is advised for this
procedure to minimize the possibility
of back injury to a struggling rabbit.
2. Gently restrain rabbit with the hind
2. The ideal site for venipuncture is the
leg extended by an assistant.
lateral saphenous vein. The rabbit is
gently restrained with the hind leg
extended. The vessel lies across the
lateral surface of the tibia, proximal
to the hock.
 3. Collect blood using a needle and
3. A butterfly catheter or 25-gauge
syringe or butterfly catheter.
needle is used with a l mL syringe.
 Hold frm pressure over saphenous
vein for 1 to 2 minutes after the
needle is removed.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN RABBITS
367
ORAL ADMINISTRATION OF LIQUIb MEbICATION TO RAbbITS
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Check medication to be
1. It is important to take measures to
administered, using “The Five
prevent errors of medication
Rights": right patient, right. drug.
administration.
right dose, right route, right time
 and frequency.
2. Wash hands.
2. Washing hands between patients is
 important in controlling
communicable diseases in a hospital.
It is advisable to wear examination
gloves while administering oral
medication to an animal with a
communicable disease.
3. Place liquid medication in a small
 3. The rabbit's mouth does not. open
syringe (1-mL syringe for rabbits
widely. Oral dosing may require
under 2 kg, 3-mL syringe for rabbits
multiple insertions of a small syringe.
over 2 kg).
A metal ball-tipped feeding needle
can also be utilized, but care must be
 taken to avoid damaging soft tissues
 in the rabbit's mouth.
4. Place palm of hand on dorsal surface
4. It is important. to watch the
of rabbit's snout and pull back
placement of the syringe in relation
upper lips.
to the teeth because a rabbit will
generally not. swallow liquid placed in
the cheek area.
5. With rabbit's nose held parallel with
 5. Keeping the rabbit's nose parallel to
ground, gently insert syringe into
the ground will minimize the
rabbit's mouth behind incisor teeth
possibility of aspiration of the liquid
and direct end of syringe back into
into the respiratory tract.
posterior part of mouth (Fig. 36-6).
6. Administer small amount of liquid at.
6. A rabbit that refuses to swallow
a time (3 mL in a 4kg or larger
pleasant-flavored liquids may be
rabbit) and wait. until the rabbit
experiencing abdominal pain.
swallows before placing any more
liquid into the animal's mouth.
7. Note in rabbit's medical record that.
7. The following information should be
medication was given.
noted in the medical record: date,
time, medication, dosage, route,
 initials of individual administering
medication, and comments.
NOTE:A rabbit can be trained to drink from a small-diameter syringe (1 to 3mL) if the end
of the syringehas beenmoistened and thendippedinto granulated sugar.
368
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Figure 36-6  Rabbit receiving liquid oral medication.
ORal AdMiNISTratION Of tAblEtS tO RABbItS
Some rabbits will eat whole tablets if inserted into a sliced apple or banana. Alterna-
tively, tablets can be crushed and mixed with a variety of treat foods, including
bananas, raisins, fruit-flavored yogurt, and fruit jam.
INJECTION TECHNIQUES IN RABBITS
Subcutaneous Injection
 a    sa e n  a  so  a
neck area. A calm rabbit may be left in its cage and just pushed against one side of
the cage while the subcutaneous injection is given. A small-gauge needle (25 or 22
gauge) is suitable.
Intramuscular Injection
 The dorsal lumbar muscle group is a large, easily accessible muscle group when a
rabbit is partially wrapped in a towel. The quadriceps muscle on the anterior aspect.
of the femur may also be used.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN RABBITS369
Intravenous Injection
The marginal ear vein is the most easily accessible vein for intravenous injection in
the rabbit. The cephalic and saphenous veins are practical for use only in rabbits
that. weigh at least. 3 kg. Needle size should be 24 gauge or smaller, regardless of the
vein used.
URINE COLLECTION
Cystocentesis yields a sterile urine specimen from the rabbit, as for the cat and dog
(Chapter 22, p. 243-250). A nonsterile specimen can be obtained by using nonabsorb-
able veterinary medical litter or aquarium gravel in the rabbit's litter pan.
ENDOTRACHEAL INTUBATION IN THE RABBIT
Several factors in the rabbit make endotracheal intubation more challenging than in
the dog and cat: a sensitive oropharyngeal area, a long and narrow oral cavity, and a
large tongue. There are 2 techniques commonly used: blind technique and a tech-
nique that uses a laryngoscope.
A few drops of local anesthetic placed in the area of the larynx will help minimize
laryngospasm. The endotracheal tube should be 2.0 to 4.0 mm internal diameter,
depending on the size of the rabbit.
 In the blind approach, the sedated rabbit is placed in sternal recumbency with
its head held up so that the nostrils point toward the ceiling. An endotracheal tube
is lowered gradually into the mouth and observed for misting that would indicate
proximity to the larynx. The tube is advanced as the animal takes a breath.
A visual method of endotracheal intubation utilizes a small bladed laryngoscope
or an otoscope to locate the vocal folds. A small polypropylene urinary catheter is
preplaced in the trachea and the appropriate size endotracheal tube is threaded down
into the trachea over the catheter. The catheter is then removed.
Bibliography
Aeschbacher G: Rabbit anesthesia. Comp Contin Educ for Prac Vet 17(8):1003-1010, 1995
Bradley T: Rabbit care and husbandry. Vet Clin N Amer: Exotic Animal Practice 7(2):299-313,
2004
Cranney J, Zajac A: A method for jugular blood collection in rabbits. American Association for
Laboratory Animal Science: Contemporary Topics 32:6, 1993
Fick TE, Schalm SW: A simple technique for endotracheal intubation in rabbits. Laboratory
Animals 21:265-266, 1987
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Gilroy BA: Endotracheal intubation of rabbits and rodents. Journal of the Amer Vet Med Assoc
179(11):1295, 1981
Harkness JE, Wagner JE: The Biology and Medicine of Rabbits and Rodents, 4th ed. Philadel-
phia, Williams and Wilkins, 1995
Hillyer EV: Pet rabbits. Vet Clin North Am: Small Animal Practice 24(1):25-65, 1994
Laboratory Animals 28: 176-177, 1994
Laber-Laird K, Swindle MM, Flecknell P: Handbook of Rodent and Rabbit Medicine. Oxford,
England, Pergamon Press, 1996
 Macrae DJ, Guerreiro D: A simple laryngoscopic technique for the endotracheal intubation of
rabbits. Laboratory Animals 23:59-61, 1989
Okerman L: Diseases of Domestic Rabbits, 2nd ed. Oxford, England, Blackwell Scientific Pub-
lications, 1994
Chapter 37
SELECTED
CLINICAL
PROCEDURESIN
SMALL RODENTS
If you give a mouse a cookie, he's going to ask for a glass of milk.
LAURA JOFFE NUMEROFF, If You Give α Mouse α Cookie
MOVING, CARRyING, ANb RESTRaIniNG SmALl RObENtS
Restraint is the restriction of an animal's activity by verbal, physical, or pharmacologic
means so that the animal is prevented from injuring itself or others.
Purposes
1. To facilitate physical examination, including ophthalmic examination
2. To administer oral, injectable, and/or topical materials
Complications
1. Dyspnea
2. Hyperthermia
Equipment Needed
* Handkerchief for mouse, gerbil, or hamster
* Small towel or stockinette for rat, guinea pig, or chinchilla
371
372
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Mouse
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Lift mouse by base of its tail
1. If the tail is grasped near the tip, the
(Fig. 37-1).
skin of the tail can be easily torn off.
 2. Move mouse quickly to table.
 3. Restrain mouse by grasping skin
3. The mouse can turn around and bite
between its ears and along its back
if insuffcient skin is held.
(Fig 37-2).
4. Hold mouse's tail between fourth
4. Supporting the back in this manner
and ffth fingers with its back against.
is more comfortable for the mouse
palm of hand (Fig 37-3).
 and preven ts it from biting.
5. Observe breathing pattern.
5. The mouse can suffocate if the skin is
held too tightly over its neck.
Figure 37-1  Liffing mouse by base of its tail.
Figure 37-2  Restraining mouse by grasping skin between its ears and along its back
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL RODENTS
373
Figure 37-3 Holding tail of mouse between fourth and fifth fingers while resting its back
against palm of hand.
Rat
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Lift rat from cage with tail (Fig 37-4),
then support. with two hands and
move to table.
2. Support rat. on one arm while
holding tail with opposite hand
(Fig 37-5).
3. Hold tail, hind legs, and rump with
 other hand.
4. Place rat. in stockinette “sweater”
4. Prepare stockinette “sweater" in
(Fig 37-6) for minor procedures,
advance. Two-inch-wide stockinette is
including subcutaneous injections
 cut to appropriate length. Fold over
and blood collection.
one end to make collar. One-inch
adhesive tape is used to strengthen
the collar. The “sweater" must be
long enough to cover the whole
animal.
374
Figure 37-4 Lifting rat from cage with tail.
Figure 37-5
 Supporting rat on one arm while holding tail with opposite hand.
Guinea Pig, Gerbil, & Chinchilla
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Pick up guinea pig by whole body.
1. Guinea pigs are placid animals.
Minimal restraint is needed for most.
simple procedures.
 2. Pick up gerbil by whole body.
2. Gerbils have delicate tails. The tail
can be “degloved" with aggressive
handling.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL RODENTS
375
Figure 37-6
 Placing rat in stockinette “sweater" for minor procedures.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
3. Pick up chinchilla by whole body.
3. Chinchillas are nervous rodents that.
 like to jump and climb. With rough
handling, a chinchilla may have “fur-
slip"; however, in most cases, the fur
will regrow.
4. Use stockinette “sweater" when
working with rats, gerbils, guinea
pigs, and chinchillas.
376
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
5. Use small towel for restraint of
5. It can be used to wrap the animal
guinea pigs (Figs. 37-7 and 37-8) and
while administering injections or oral
chinchillas.
medications (Fig 37-9).
Figure 37-7
 Placing guinea pig on small towel for restraint.
Figure 37-8
Wrapping guinea pig in small towel.
Figure 37-9  Administering oral medications or injections to guinea pig wrapped in towel.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL RODENTS
377
Figure 37-10  Picking up hamster by grasping skin behind shoulders.
Hamster
Technical Action
Rationale / Amplification
1. Pick up hamster by grasping skin
1. Hamsters have tiny tails and deep
behind shoulders and supporting
cheek pouches. When a hamster is
body with other hand (Fig 37-10).
sleeping, wake it. carefully Hamsters
are nocturnal and like running in an
exercise wheel. Adult hamsters are
solitary rodents (except for
breeding). Hamsters often fill their
cheek pouches with food and
 bedding. Remove any items in the
cheek pouches before anesthetizing
a hamster.
2. Use a full hand grip for restraining a
2. Gripping the dorsal skin in this
hamster.
 manner provides control over the
 animal for technical procedures.
EXAMINING RODENTS
Procedure
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Observe the animal in cage before
 1. Place the animal on a small towel or
attempting to handle it, noting
in a small basket.
attitude and activity.
TABLE 37-1
 Normal respiratory rates in small
mammals.
Species
Respiratory Rate (breaths/minute)
Mouse
100-250
Gerbil
90-140
Hamster
33-127
Rat
70-150
Chinchilla
100-150
Guinea pig
90-150
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
2. Determine whether animal is
2. See Table 37-1 for normal respiratory
breathing effortlessly and at usual
rates of small mammals.
rate.
3. Observe body condition.
3. The condition could be normal,
obese, or emaciated.
4. Note hair coat and skin.
4. A rough coat may indicate illness or
ectoparasites. Crusts, sores, and
swellings are examples of abnormal
findings.
5. Check nose and eyes.
5. A red discharge from nose and/or
 eyes is abnormal, unless the animal is 
nervous.
6. Check skin color (foot pads, ears,
 6. Pale color may indicate anemia. If 
lips, tongue).
the animal is cyanotic, the skin may
be gray/blue.
7. Check anal area and feces in the
7. Signs of illness include diarrhea and
cage.
 protruding reddened rectal tissue.
Husbandry of Small Rodents
NOTE: The following statements regarding habits of the rodent species discussed in this chapter
are intended tohelp the reader understand these interesting animals and respond appropriately
totheir special qualities.
1. Rats are friendly and confident. They usually enjoy being petted. Most rats enjoy
a treat.
2. Guinea pigs have four toes on their front feet and three toes on their back feet.
They will squeal for food or after rough handling. When a guinea pig gives birth,
the babies' eyes and ears are open and they are able to walk. Dystocia is a common
problem in female guinea pigs. Guinea pigs must. have vitamin C in their diet
(tomatoes, strawberries, or spinach)
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL RODENTS
379
3. Chinchillas should have “dust. baths" every week.
4. Male and female gerbils live together naturally, so they should not be housed sepa-
rately by sex.
5. When a hamster is sleeping, wake it. carefully. Hamsters are nocturnal and like
running in an exercise wheel. Adult hamsters are solitary rodents (except for
breeding) . Hamsters often fill their cheek pouches with food and bedding. Remove
 any items in the cheek pouches before anesthetizing a hamster.
Determining Gender in Small Rodents
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Determine sex by measuring distance
1. A male will have a longer anogenital
between penis or vulva and anus
distance (Fig 37-11).
(mouse, rat, gerbil, hamster).
2. Determine sex by identifying
 2. In the male guinea pig and
prominent. genitalia in males (guinea
chinchilla, the penis can be
pig, chinchilla).
protruded by pressing gently on
either side of the prepuce.
Figure 37-11  A male gerbil.
380
ROUTINE CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL MAMMALS
Figure 37-12  Administering a subcutaneous injection to a hamster.
Figure 37-13
 Administering an intraperitoneal injection to a mouse.
Venipuncture and Fluid Administration in Small Rodents
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
1. Give ill rodents fluids subcutaneously
1. Additional intraperitoneal fluids can
(Fig. 37-12) or intraperitoneally (0.03
be given every 4 hours. Subcutaneous
to 0.05 mL/gram) (Figs. 37-13
fluids are absorbed more slowly.
through 37-15).
2. To collect. blood from a mouse,
 2. Apply petrolatum to the site and
gerbil, hamster, guinea pig, rat, or
collect. blood using a heparinized
chinchilla, use saphenous vein on
tube. The amount of blood to collect.
SELECTED CLINICAL PROCEDURES IN SMALL RODENTS
381
Figure 37-14
Administering an intraperitoneal injection to a rat.
Figure 37-15  Administering an intraperitoneal injection to a hamster.
Technical Action
Rationale /Amplification
pelvic limb (Figs. 37-16 through
from a mouse is 0.3 mL. A larger
37-19).
amount of blood can be collected
from the guinea pig, rat, and
chinchilla (see Table 37-2).
 3. Use syringe case to restrain mouse
3. The mouse can be restrained in a
for venipuncture (Fig 37-20).
plastic tube that is open at both ends.
 For example, use a syringe case with
a hole drilled in the closed end so
that air is available for the mouse to
breathe.
4. Administer oral medication with
4. A 1-mL syringe may be suffcient. to
small syringe (Fig 37-9 and 37-21).
administer liquid oral medications.
Figure 37-16
Clipping hair of pelvic limb for venipuncture.
Figure 37-17
 Leg prepared for venipuncture.
Figure 37-18
Puncturing vein on medial aspect of tibial segment of pelvic limb.
382
Figure 37-19(
Collecting blood into tube using capillary action.
Figure37-20
 Restraining mouse for venipuncture in clear tube.
Figure 37-21  Administering oral medication to a hamster
383
384
TABLE 37-2
Weight and blood volume of small mammals.
Total Blood Volume
Maximum Blood
Species
Weight (g)
(mL)
Draw Volume (mL)
Mouse
06
2.2-2.5
0.3-0.4
Gerbil
90
7.0-8.0
0.9-1.0
Hamster
100
7.5-8.5
1.0-1.2
Rat
400
30-35
4.0-4.8
Chinchilla
500
38-42
6.0-7.0
Guinea Pig
800
60-70
8.0-9.6
INDEX
Abdominocentesis, 245-46
indications,247
complications, 246
positioning,248
indications, 245
restraint, 248
positioning,246
site, 248, 249
restraint,246
Artifcial insemination, 296-98
site, 246
complications, 297
Activated clotting time, 332-34
equipment,297
equipment,333
indications,296
indications, 333
preparation, 297
inverting,334f
procedure, 297-98
positioning, 333
restraint, 297
procedure, 333-34
Artihcial vagina, 295f
restraint, 333
Aggression, 357-58
Bacterial culture, 88
Altered polyethylene catheter, 235f
Bandaging
Ambu bag, 182f
abdominal, 214f
Anal sac cannulation, 161-65
chest tube, 190f
complications, 161
full abdominal, 214
equipment,162
intravenous catheterization, 58f,
indication, 161
9-896
positioning,162
nasogastric tubes, 196f
procedure, 162-65
peritoneal catheterization, 255f
restraint, 162
rabbit ears, 365f
 Anal sar expression, 161-65
through-the-needle catheters, 65f
complications, 161
venipuncture,28f
equipment,162
Biopsy. See specific types
external,163f
Bleeding time, 327-28
indication, 161
complications, 328
internal,164f
contraindications, 328
positioning,162
cuticle, 331-32
procedure, 162-65
equipment,328
restraint, 162
indications,327
Anesthetics, ophthalmic, 195f
positioning,328
Anoscope, 300f
restraint, 328
Antimicrobial ointment, 213
template, 328-31
Applanation tonometer,121f
Blood collection
Arterial puncture, 31-33
for coagulation studies, 28-29
complications, 31
complications, 28
equipment, 31-32
equipment,28
femoral, 33f
positioning,28
positioning, 32
restraint, 28
procedure,32-33
complications, 28
restraint, 32
equipment, 28-30
Arthrocentesis, 247-48
rabbits, 359
complications, 248
jugular vein, 36465
equipment,248
lateral saphenous vein, 366
385
386
INDEX
Blood collection (continued)
abdominocentesis, 245-46
for transfusion, 29-31
complications, 246
complications, 29
positioning,246
equipment,29-30
restraint, 246
positioning, 30
site, 246
procedure, 30-31
arthrocentesis, 247-48
restraint, 30
complications, 248
Blood droplets, 331f
equipment,248
Blood/plasma transfusion, 335-38
indications, 247
complications, 335
positioning,248
equipment,335
restraint, 248
procedure, 337-38
site, 248, 249
setup, 336
cystocentesis, 24647
Blood volume, small mammals, 384t
complications, 247
Bone marrow aspiration/biopsy, 305-8
indications,246
complications, 305
positioning,247
contraindications, 305
restraint, 247
equipment,306-7
site, 247
humeral head, 315
pericardiocentesis
jliac crest, 308-12
complications, 245
indications, 305
indications, 244
preparation, 307-8
positioning,245
sites, 309f
restraint, 245
technique,309f
site, 245
trochanteric fossa, 312-15
principles, 243-48
Break-away needles, 6468
procedure, 248-50
advancing, 66f
thoracentesis, 243-44
equipment,64
complications, 244
peeling away, 67f
indications, 243
procedure, 6468
positioning,244
Bulb syringes, 132f
restraint, 244
Butterfly catheters, 26f
sites, 244
Central artery, 361f
Cannula, 262f
Cephalic vein
Capillary action, 383f
position for collection from, 20
Capsule
restraint for venipuncture, 22f
manual placement, 81f
through-the-needle intravenous catheter insertion,
oral administration of, 80-82
J09
placement
Cervical esophagus, 199f
in cats, 82f
Cheek pouch, 83f
in dogs, 81f
Chest tube, 184-90
pilling device, 82f
aspirating,189f
Cat bag restraint, 357
bandaging, 190f
Catheters. See specifc types
complications, 185
Catheter/tube assembly, 212f
equipment, 185
Cats
indications, 184
capsule placement, 82f
positioning, 186
intravenous catheter sizes for, 51t
procedure,186-90
restraint of, 5-18
restraint, 186
 in lateral recumbency, 13-14
subcutaneous tunnel for, 187f
moderately fractious, 15-17
sutures, 190f
in sternal recumbency, 15
Chinc hilla
urethral catheterization
respiratory rates, 378t
female, 151-52
restraint, 374-76
male, 148-51
weight and blood volume, 384t
urethral catheter sizes, 141t
Citrate phosphate dextrose adenine (CPDA),
Cauterization, 137f
0
Cellophane tape preparation,
Closed urine drainage system, 153-54
9192
collection apparatus for, 153f
equipment,91
Coagulation studies, blood collection for,
positioning, 91
28-29
restraint,91
complications,28
specimen collection, 92f
equipment,28
Centesis, 243-50
positioning,28
INDEX
387
procedure, 28-29
transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy, 260
restraint, 28
vaginal examination, 300
Commercial pilling device, 8lf
Cook needle, 265f
Complications
kidney biopsy, 274f
abdominocentesis, 246
prostate biopsy, 278f
anal sac cannulation, 161
Cope needle, 262f, 264f
anal sac expression, 161
Core needle
 arthrocentesis, 248
biopsy technique, 311f
artifcial insemination, 297
percutaneous liver biopsy, 270f
bleeding time, 328
Corneal staining, 115-16
blood/plasma transfusion, 335
equipment,115
bone marrow aspiration/biopsy, 305
fuorescein, 116f
chest tube, 185
procedure, 116
corneoconjunctival culture, 114
Cormeoconjunctival culture, ll4-15
cystocentesis, 247
complications, 114
ear car, 129
equipment,114
endotracheal intubation, 177
procedure, 114-15
enema,167
specimen,115f
equipment,168
Corneoconjunctival smear and scraping, 117-19
esophagostomy tube,197
equipment,117
fne-needle aspiration biopsy, 105
obtaining,119f
gastric lavage, 217
procedure, 117-18
intraocular pressure, 119
specimen,119f
 intraosseous catheters, 339
CPDA. See Citrate phosphate dextrose adenine
nasogastric intubation, 194
Cricoid cartilage, 345f
nasolacrimal ducts, flushing, 124
Cricothyroid membrane puncture, 239f
nasopharyngeal procedures, 229
CT. See Computed tomography
needle core biopsy, 280
Cutaneous masses, 279-83
ral administration, 79
Cutaneous punch biopsy, 97
orogastric intubation, 191
Cutaneous wedge biopsy, 99-100
pedicure, 135
removing,99f
percutaneous gastrotomy tube, 203
Cut-down catheter, 7478
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 272
equipment,74-75
percutaneous liver biopsy, 267
procedure,75-76
pericardiocentesis, 245
suture preplacement, 76f
peritoneal catheterization, 251-52
Cuticle bleeding time, 331-32
peritoneal lavage, 251-52
Cystocentesis, 246-47
pleural biopsy, 262
complications, 247
prostatic massage/washing, 289
indications, 246
restraint, small rodents, 371
positioning. 247
Schirmer tear test, 112
restraint, 247
semen collection, 293
skin biopsy, 95
Dental mirror, 232f
skin scraping, 89
Dental prophylaxis, 221-27
subconjunctival injection, 123
complications, 221
thoracentesis, 244
equipment, 221-22
topical administration of oral medications,
manual instruments, 222f
12122
polishing, 227f
tacheostomy, 343
positioning, 222-23
transperineal prostate biopsy, 276
procedure,223-27
 transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy, 260
restraint, 222-23
tanstracheal aspiration, 237
Dermatologic procedures, 87-100
vaginal examination, 300
cellophane tape preparation, 91-92
Computed tomography (CT), 230
equipment, 91
Contraindications
positioning, 91
bleeding time, 328
restraint, 91
bone marrow aspiration/biopsy, 305
cutaneous punch biopsy, 97
digital rectal examination, 158
cutaneous wedge biopsy, 99-100
enema,167
removing, 99f
needle core biopsy, 280
elliptical incisional biopsy, 99-100
 oral administration, 79
skin biopsy
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 272
complications, 95
percutaneous liver biopsy, 267
equipment, 95-96
ransperineal prostate biopsy, 275-79
positioning,96
388
INDEX
Dermatologic procedures (continued)
Elizabethan collar
preparation, 9697
dog, 13f
restraint, 96
use of, 12
skin culture, 87-88
Elliptical incisional biopsy, 99-100
equipment,87
Endotracheal intubation, 177-84
positioning, 88
complications, 177
restraint, 88
cuff inflation, 183f
wand attachment, 93f
equipment,178
skin scraping, 8991
positioning,178
complications, 89
pre-measuring, 179f
equipment,89
procedure,179-84
positioning, 89
rabbit,369
restraint,89
restraint, 178
skin vacuuming, 92-95
tube sizes, 178t
equipment,93
tying, 181f
procedure, 93-95
Enema
Dermatophytes, culture for, 8889
complications, 167
Detached needle technique, 106
contraindications, 167
Dextrose, 338
positioning,168
Diagnostic procedures, ophthalmic, 111
procedure, 168-70
Digital rectal examination, 157-60
restraint, 168
contraindications, 158
tube insertion, 169f
equipment,158
Equipment
positioning,158
activated clotting time, 333
procedure, 158-60
anal sac cannulation, 162
restraint, 158
anal sar expression, 162
specifc indications, 157
arterial puncture, 31-32
Distal ligature, tying, 77f
arthrocentesis, 248
Dogs
bleeding time, 328
capsule placement, 81f
blood/plasma transfusion, 335
Elizabethan collar on, 13f
bone marrow aspiration/biopsy, 306-7
female, 144-48
break-away needles, 64
 intravenous catheter sizes for, 51t
cellophane tape preparation, 91
male, 142-43
chest tube,185
muzzle use in, 9-12
complications, 168
application of, 10f-11f
corneal staining, 115
restraint of, 5-18
corneoconjunctival culture, 114
 in lateral recumbency, 8-9
corneoconjunctival smear and scraping, 117
physical, 67
cut-down catheters, 7475
in sitting or sternal recumbency, 7-8
dental prophylaxis, 221-22
 in standing position, 7f
digital rectal examination, 158
skin vacuuming,93f
ear car, 129-30
urethral catheterization
endotracheal intubation, 178
female, 144-48
esophagostomy tube, 197
male, 142-43
fne-needle aspiration biopsy, 105
restraint, 145f
gastric lavage, 217
urethral catheter sizes, 141t
impression preparations, 101-3
 Dorsal pharynx, 232f
injection techniques, 36
intraocular pressure, 120
Ear care, 129-34
 intraosseous catheters, 340
complications, 129
 intravenous catheters, 50
debris removal, 133f
rabbits,360
equipment,129-30
multiple lumen intravenous catheters, 68-69
pinna cleaning,133f
nasogastric intubation, 194
positioning,130
nasolacrimal ducts, flushing, 125
procedures,130-34
nasopharyngeal procedures, 230
restraint, 130
needle core biopsy, 280
Ectoparasites, 92-95
oral administration,80
Elbow adapter and extender, 254f
orogastric intubation, 191
Eld device
pedicure, 135-36
line capture, 208-10
percutaneous gastrotomy tube, 203-4
trocar point, 211f
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 272
Eld gastrotomy tube applicator, 206
percutaneous jiver biopsy, 267
Electrolyte solutions, 68
peritoneal catheterization, 252
INDEX
389
peritoneal lavage, 252
Guide wire
pleural biopsy, 262-63
jugular vein, 71f
prostatic massage/washing, 290
sliding catheter, 73f
restraint,6
multilumen catheter, 72f
rabbits, 351
Guinea pig
small rodents, 371
respiratory rates, 378t
Schirmer tear test, 112
restraint, 37476
semen collection, 293
weight and blood volume, 384t
skin biopsy, 95-96
skin culture, 87
Hair removal, 132f
skin scraping, 89
Hamster
subconjunctival injection, 123
intraperitoneal injection, 380f
tracheostomy, 343
oral administration, 383f
tansperineal prostate biopsy, 276
respiratory rates, 378t
tansthoracic jung aspiration biopsy,
restraint, 377-78
260
subcutaneous injection, 380f
tanstracheal aspiration, 238
weight and blood volume, 384t
urohydropropulsion, 285
Hand scaler, 225f
vaginal examination, 300
Hemostat, 187f, 188f
Esophagostomy tube, 197-202
Heparinized saline, 50, 56, 61, 68, 72, 76
complications, 197
Hook scaler, 222f
equipment,197
Humeral head aspiration/biopsy, 315
grasping, 200f
positioning,198
 1liac crest aspiration/biopsy, 308-12
procedure, 198-202
 1linois needle, 306f
pulling, 200f
Impression preparations, 101-3
restraint, 198
equipment,101
Explorer,222f
procedure,102-3
Exudate,removing,118f
Indications
abdominocentesis, 245
Feeding vessel wall dilators, jugular vein,
activated clotting time, 333
71f
arthrocentesis, 247
 Femoral artery, puncture, 33f
artincial insemination, 296
Femoral vein
bleeding time, 327
positioning for collection, 23
bone marrow aspiration/biopsy, 305
venipuncture,23f
chest tube,184
Fine-needle aspiration biopsy, 105-9
cystocentesis,246
complications, 105
gastric lavage, 217
equipment,105
intraosseous catheters, 339
procedure,106
nasopharyngeal procedures, 229
Fluorescein,116f
needle core biopsy, 279-80
Forceps, 199f
percutaneous gastrotomy tube, 203
Formalin, 312, 315
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 271
French-pezzar mushroom-tip catheter,
percutaneous liver biopsy, 266
204f
peritoneal catheterization, 251
removal of, 215f
peritoneal lavage, 251
pleural biopsy, 262
Gastric lavage, 216-18
prostatic massage/washing, 289
complications, 217
thoracentesis, 243
equipment,217
transperineal prostate biopsy, 276
indications, 217
transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy, 259
positioning, 218
tanstracheal aspiration, 237
procedure, 218-19
urohydropropulsion, 285
restraint, 218
vaginal examination, 299
Gauze, 346f
Injection cap, 57f
for catheter insertion points, 57f
Injection techniques
Gender determination, 379
complications, 35-36
Gerbil
equipment,36
respiratory rates, 378t
intradermal, 45-47
restraint, 374-76
intramuscular, 39-41
weight and blood volume, 384t
muscle groups for, 40f
Gingival curettage, 226f
needle placement, 41f
Glottis, 180f, 181f
quadriceps, 41f
Graduated periodontal probe, 222f
rabbits, 368
390
INDEX
Injection techniques (continued)
Dver-the-needle, 54-59
intraperitoneai,42-45
advancing, 56f
hamster, 381f
insertion of, 55f
mouse,380f
positioning, 50-51
rat, 381f
preparation for, 51
 intravenous, 38-39
rabbits, 36066
rabbits, 369
equipment, 360
positioning, 36
restraint, 50-51
 preparation for, 36-38
securing, 72, 7478
procedure, 36-38
sizes, 51t
rabbits
through-the-needle, 59-64
intramuscular, 368
advancing, 62f
intravenous, 369
bandaging, 65f
subcutaneous, 368
cephalic vein insertion, 60f
recommended routes, 36t
jugular vein insertion, 60f
restraint, 36
needle guard, 63f
subcutaneous, 42
positioning,63f
hamster, 380f
in transtracheal aspiration, 240f, 241f
rabbits, 368
winged infusion set, 52-54
Intraderma1 injection, 45-47
insertion,53f
needle insertion, 46f
securing, 53f
Intraluminal metal rod, 215f
Intravenous injections, 3839
 Intramuscular injections, 39-41
rabbits, 369
J0t roy sdnoi aosnu
 Introduction line, 209f
 needle placement, 41f
lntubation, 177-215
quadriceps, 41f
endotracheal, 177-84
rabbits, 368
contraindications, 177
 Intraocular pressure, 119-21
cuff inflation, 183f
complication, 119
equipment,178
equipment,120
positioning,178
procedure, 120-21
procedure, 179-84
Intraosseous catheters, 339-41
restraint, 178
complications, 339
esophagostomy tube, 197-202
equipment,340
complications,197
indications,339
equipment,197
positioning, 340
positioning,197
procedure, 340-41
procedure,197-202
restraint, 340
restraint, 197
Intraperitoneal injection, 42-45
nasogastric, 193-96
hamster, 381f
complications, 194
mouse,380f
equipment,194
rat, 381f
positioning,194
Intravenous catheters, 49-50, 230
restraint, 194
bandaging, 58f, 363-64
orogastric, 19093
with break-away needles, 6468
complications, 191
advancing, 66f
equipment,191
equipment for, 64
positioning, 191
procedure, 64-68
restraint, 191
complications, 49
percutaneous gastrotomy tube, 203-15
cut-dlown
advance preparation of, 204 5
equipment,74-75
complications, 203
suture preplacement, 76f
equipment, 203-4
equipment,50
indications, 203
feeding vessel wall dilators, 71f
placement of, 2ll-14
guide wires, 71f
positioning,206
in jugular vein, 73f
removal, 214-15
injection cap on, 57f
restraint, 206
insertion point covering,57f
ligature tying, 77f
Jamshidi needles, 307f
multiple lumen, 68-74
Jugular vein
equipment, 68-69
blood collection from, 364 65
passing over guide wire, 72f
feeding vessel wall dilators, 71f
procedure, 69-74
guide wire, 71f
securing by sutures, 74f
sliding catheter, 73f
INDEX
391
position for collection from, 20
Nail clipping, 332f
restraint for venipuncture, 21f
 Nasal biopsy, 235f
in lateral recumbency, 21f
particulate matter, 236f
through-the-needle intravenous catheter insertion,
 postbiopsy considerations, 236
J09
Nasal flush, 234f
 Jugular venipuncture, 366f
Nasal specimen collection, 233-35
fush,234f
Kidney. See Percutaneous kidney biopsy
nasal biopsy, 235f
Nasogastric intubation, 193-96
Lactated Ringer's solution (1LRS), 338
bandaging, 196f
Laryngoscope, 181f
complications,194
Lateral recumbency
equipment,194
physical restraint of cats in, 13-14
insertion, 196
physical restraint of dogs in, 89
positioning, 194
restraint for jugular venipuncture in, 21f
procedure, 19495
 Lateral saphenous vein
restraint, 194
blood collection from, 366
Nasolacrimal ducts, fushing, 12426
position for collection from, 20
complications, 124
venipuncture,22f
equipment, 125
Lidocaine, 144, 146-47, 151, 238, 262, 340
procedures, 125-26
Ligature
 Nasopharyngeal procedures, 229-36
distal, 77f
complications, 229
proximal, 77f
equipment,230
Line capture, 206-8
indications, 229
Eld device, 208-10
nasal specimen collection, 233-35
Liquid medication, 83-84
pharyngeal examination, 231-32
cheek pouch administration, 83f
positioning, 230
hamster, 383f
preparation, 230-31
rabbits, 367
restraint,230
Liver. See Percutaneous liver biopsy
Needle biopsy, 259-83
 Loosened debris, 133f
Needle core biopsy
LRS. See Lactated Ringer's solution
complications, 280
Lung. See Transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy
contraindications, 280
Lymph nodes, aspiration, 107f
of cutaneous or subcutaneous mass, 279-83
indications, 279-80
Marginal ear vein, 361f, 362f
equipment,280
 Medial saphenous vein, position for collection from,
positioning,280
23
postbiopsy considerations, 283
Medications
prebiopsy considerations, 280
liquid, 83-84
procedure, 281-83
ophthalmic, topical administration, 121-23
restraint, 280
oral administration, 79-84
sites, 280
of capsule or tablet, 80-82
Needles
complications, 79
Cook, 265f
contraindications, 79
kidney biopsy, 274f
equipment,80
J842 Xsdog anensoud
liquid, 83-84
Cope, 262f
positioning, 80
core
restraint, 80
biopsy technique, 311f
Mouse
 percutaneous liver biopsy, 270f
intraperitoneal injection, 380f
expelling fuid, 109f
respiratory rates, 378t
guard, 63f
restraint, 372, 384f
1linois, 306f
weight and blood volume, 384t
insertion, 46f
Mucus, 118f
introducing, into vein, 26f
Multiple lumen intravenous catheters, 68-74
Jamshidi, 307f
equipment, 68-69
placement, 43f
insertion, 70f
redirection,108f
passing over guide wire, 72f
Rosenthal, 306f
procedure,69-74
Temno,265f
securing by sutures, 74f
withdrawal, 108f
Muscle groups, 40f
Muzzle, use of, in dog, 9-12
Obturator, 262f, 264f
application of, 10f-11f
Ophthalmic anesthetics, 195f
392
INDEX
Ophthalmir medication, topical administration of,
procedure, 136-38
12123
restraint, 136
complications, 121-22
toenail clipping, 137f, 138f
Ophthalmic procedures, 1ll-26
Percutaneous gastrotomy tube,
corneal staining
20315
equipment,115
advance preparation of, 204 5
fuorescein, 116f
complications, 203
procedure,116
equipment, 203-4
corneoconjunctival culture, 11415
indications,203
complications, 114
placement of, 211-14
equipment,114
positioning, 206
procedure,114-15
removal, 214-15
specimen, 115f
restraint, 206
corneoconjunctival smear and scraping
Percutaneous kidney biopsy, 271-75
equipment,117
complications, 272
obtaining, 119f
contraindications, 272
procedure, 117-18
Cook needle, 274f
specimen,119f
equipment, 272
diagnostic, 111
indications, 271
intraocular pressure, 119-21
positioning,272
complication, 119
prebiopsy considerations, 272
equipment,120
procedure, 273-75
procedure,120-21
restraint, 272
nasolacrimal ducts, fushing, 12426
sites, 272
complications, 124
 Percutaneous liver biopsy, 266-71
equipment,125
complications, 267
procedures, 125-26
contraindications, 267
positioning,112
core needle technique, 270f
restraint, 112
equipment,267
Schirmer tear test, 112-14
indications,266
complications, 112
positioning, 267
subconjunctival injection, 123-24
postoperative care, 271
complications, 123
procedure, 268-71
equipment,123
site, 267
procedure,123-24
Pericardiocentesis, 244 45
therapeutic, 111
complications, 245
Oral administration, 79-84
indications, 244
of capsule or tablet, 80-82
positioning, 245
complications, 79
restraint, 245
equipment,80
site, 245
liquid medication, 83-84
Perineal organs, 159f
cheek pouch administration, 83f
Peritoneal catheterization, 251-53
hamster, 383f
advancing, 254f
rabbits, 367
bandaging, 255f
positioning,80
complications, 251-52
restraint, 80
equipment, 252
tablets, 368
indications, 251
Orogastric intubation, 190-93
positioning, 253
complications, 191
procedure,253-56
equipment,191
restraint, 253
line capture, 206-8
set, 252f
positioning,191
sutured to skin, 255f
procedure,191-93
Peritoneal lavage, 251-53
restraint, 191
complications, 251-52
Otoscopes, 131f
equipment,252
Over-the-needle catheter, 54-59, 362f
indications, 251
advancing, 56f
positioning, 253
insertion of, 55f
procedure,256
restraint, 253
Particulate matter, 236f
Pharmacologic restraint, 17-18
Pedicure,135-38
 Pharyngeal examination, 231-32
complications, 135
Pilling device, 81f
equipment,135-36
capsule placement, 82f
positioning,136
Pinna, 133f
INDEX
393
Plastic. sleeves
urethral catheterization, 140
disconnecting, 62f
urohydropropulsion, 285
through-the-needle intravenous catheters in, 62f
venipuncture, 20-27
Pleural biopsy, 261-66
Postoperative care
complications, 262
percutaneous liver biopsy, 271
equipment,262-63
pleural biopsy, 266
indications, 262
transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy, 261
positioning, 263
Potassium hydroxide, 93
postoperative care, 266
Prepuce,149f
procedure, 263-65
retracting,143f
restraint, 263
Procedure(s). See αiso Dermatologic procedures;
site, 263
Nasopharyngeal procedures; Ophthalmic
Polishing teeth, 227f
procedures
Positioning
activated clotting time, 333-34
abdominocentesis, 246
anal sac cannulation, 162-65
activated clotting time, 333
anal sac expression, 162-65
anal sac cannulation, 162
arterial puncture, 32-33
anal sac expression, 162
artihcial insemination, 297-98
arterial puncture, 32
blood coagulation studies, 28-29
arthrocentesis, 248
blood collection, 30-31
bleeding time, 328
blood/plasma transfusion, 337-38
blood coagulation studies, 28
break-away needles, 6468
cellophane tape preparation, 91
centesis, 248-50
cephalic vein collection, 20
chest tube, 186-90
chest tube, 186
corneal staining, 116
cystocentesis, 247
corneoconjunctival culture, 114-15 
dental prophylaxis, 222-23
corneoconjunctival smear and scraping, 117-18
digital rectal examination, 158
cut-down catheter, 75-76
ear care, 130
dental prophylaxis, 223-27
endotracheal intubation, 178
diagnostic, 111
enema,168
digital recta1 examination, 158-60
esophagostomy tube, 198
ear care, 130-34
femoral vein collection, 23
endotracheal intubation, 179-84
gastric lavage, 218
enema, 168-70
injection techniques, 36
esophagostomy tube, 198-202
intraosseous catheters, 340
fne-needle aspiration biopsy, 106
intravenous catheters, 50-51
gastric lavage, 218-19
jugular vein collection, 20
impression preparations, 102
lateral saphenous vein collection, 20
intraocular pressure, 120-21
medial saphenous vein collection, 23
multiple lumen intravenous catheters, 69-74
nasogastric intubation, 194
nasogastric intubation, 19495
nasopharyngeal procedures, 230
nasolacrimal ducts, flushing, 125-26
082 sdoig aio aipaau
orogastric intubation, 191-93
ophthalmic procedures, 112
pedicure, 136-38
oral administration, 80
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 273-75
orogastric intubation, 191
percutaneous liver biopsy, 268-71
pedicure, 136
peritoneal catheterization, 253-56
percutaneous gastrotomy tube, 206
peritoneal lavage, 256
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 272
pleural biopsy, 263-65
percutaneous liver biopsy, 267
prostatic massage/washing, 290-91
pericardiocentesis, 245
Schirmer tear test, 112-13
peritoneal catheterization, 253
semen collection, 294-96
peritoneal lavage, 253
skin preparation, 173-74
pleural biopsy, 263
skin vacuuming, 93-95
prostatic massage/washing, 290
subconjunctival injection, 123-24
skin biopsy, 9697
therapeutic, 111
skin culture, 88
topical administration of oral medications, 12223
skin scraping, 90
tracheostomy, 34447
thoracentesis, 244
tansfusion collection, 30-31
through-the-needle catheter, 63f
transperineal prostate biopsy, 277-79
 tansfusion collection, 30
transthoracic ung aspiration biopsy, 260-61
ransperineal prostate biopsy, 276
ranstracheal aspiration, 238-42
ransthoracic lung aspiration biopsy, 260
urethral catheterization, male dog, 142-43
transtracheal aspiration, 238
urohydropropulsion, 286-87
394
INDEX
Procedure(s) (continued)
complications of, 5-6
vaginal examination, 301-4
cystocentesis, 247
venipuncture, 2427
defining, 5
 Prostate. See Transperineal prostate biopsy
dental prophylaxis, 222-23
Prostatic massage/washing, 289-91
digital rectal examination, 158
complications, 289
dogs, 5-18
digita1,292f
in lateral recumbency, 8-9
equipment,290
physical, 67, 1718
indications, 289
in sitting or sternal recumbency, 7-8
positioning,290
in standing position, 7f
procedure, 290-91
ear care, 130
restraint,290
endotracheal intubation, 178
Proximal ligature, tying, 77f
enema, 168
equipment for, 6
Quadriceps, 41f
esophagostomy tube, 198
gastric lavage, 218
Rabbits
gerbil, 37476
bandaging ears, 365f
guinea pig, 374-76
blood collection, 359
hamster, 377
jugular vein, 36465
injection techniques, 36
lateral saphenous vein, 366
 intraosseous catheters, 340
carrying, 353f
 intravenous catheters, 50-51
endotracheal intubation, 369
jugular venipuncture, 21f
injection techniques
mouse, 372, 383f
intramuscular, 368
nasogastric intubation, 194
intravenous, 369
 nasopharyngeal procedures, 230
subcutaneous, 368
needle core biopsy, 280
 intravenous catheters, 360-66
ophthalmic procedures, 112
equipment,360
oral administration, 80
moving. 352-53
orogastric intubation, 191
oral administration
pedicure,136
liquid medication, 367
percutaneous gastrotomy tube, 206
tablets, 368
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 272
restraint, 351-58
percutaneous liver biopsy, 267-68
aggressive, 357-58
pericardiocentesis, 245
cat bag, 357
peritoneal catheterization, 253
complications, 351
peritoneal lavage, 253
equipment,351
pharmacologic
towe1, 35456
of cats, 1718
Rat
of dogs, 17-18
 intraperitoneal injection, 381f
 pleural biopsy, 263
respiratory rates, 378t
prostatic massage/washing, 290
restraint, 373-74
rabbits, 351-58
weight and blood volume, 384t
aggressive, 357-58
Respiratory rates, 378t
cat bag, 357
Restraint
complications, 351
abdominocentesis, 246
equipment,351
activated clotting time, 333
towe1, 35456
anal sac cannulation, 162
rat, 373-74
anal sac expression, 162
semen collection, 294
arterial puncture, 32
skin biopsy, 96-97
arthrocentesis, 248
skin culture, 88
artificial insemination, 297
skin scraping, 90
bleeding time, 328
small rodents, 371-77
 blood coagulation studies, 28
complications, 371
cats, 518
equipment,371
 in lateral recumbency, 13-14
thoracentesis, 244
moderately fractious, 15-17
transfusion collection, 30
physica1,17-18
 transperineal prostate biopsy, 276
 in sternal recumbency, 15
transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy, 260
cellophane tape preparation, 91
transtracheal aspiration, 238
cephalic venipuncture,22f
trochanteric fossa aspiration/biopsy, 313f
chest tube,186
urethral catheterization, 140, 145f
chinchilla, 374-76
urohydropropulsion, 285
INDEX
395
vaginal examination, 300-301
restraint, 371-77
venipuncture, 20-27
complications, 371
verba1, 6
equipment,371
Rosenthal needle, 306f
venipuncture, 380-84
weight, 384t
Saline, 239, 241f
 Sovereign catheter, 208f, 209f
heparinized, 50, 56, 61, 68, 72, 76
Speculum, 300f
Schirmer tear test, 112-14
insertion, 303f
complications, 112
Standing position, 6-7
equipment, 112
Sternal recumbency
procedure,112-13
physical restraint of cats in, 15
Semen collection, 293-96
physical restraint of dogs in, 7-8
complications, 293
Stomach tube, 192f, 207f
equipment,293
insertion, 192f
preparation,294
Subconjunctival injection, 123-24
procedure,294-96
complications, 123
restraint, 294
equipment,123
Sites
procedure,123-24
abdominocentesis, 246
Subcutaneous injection, 42
arthrocentesis, 248, 249
hamster,380f
bone marrow aspiration/biopsy, 309f
needle placement, 43f
082 %sdoig aro aipaau
rabbits, 368
percutaneous kidney biopsy, 272
Subcutaneous masses, 279-83
percutaneous liver biopsy, 267
needle position, 281f
pericardiocentesis, 245
Subcutaneous tunnel, 187f
pleural biopsy, 263
Subgingival curette, 222f
thoracentesis, 244
Sutures
transperineal prostate biopsy, 276
chest tube, 190f
transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy, 260
preplacement of, 76f
Sitting position, 7-8
securing intravenous catheters, 74f
Skin biopsy, 95-97
Syringes
base, 98f
air bubble removal, 34f
complications, 95
bulb, 132f
cutaneous, 97
expelling fluid, 109f
equipment, 95-96
plunger, 107f
positioning,96
redirection, 108f
preparation, 96-97
stabilizing, 26f
punch,98f
withdrawal, 108f
restraint, 96
Skin culture
Tablet, oral administration of, 80-82
equipment,87
rabbits, 368
positioning,88
Temno needle, 265f
pustule,88
Template bleeding time, 328-31
restraint, 88
Therapeutic procedures, ophthalmic, 1l1
wand attachment, 94f
Thoracentesis, 243-44
Skin incisions, 330f
complications, 244
Skin preparation, 173-74
indications, 243
equipment,173
positioning, 244
procedure, 173-74
restraint, 244
Skin pustule, 88
sites, 244
Skin scraping, 89-91
Through-the-needle catheter, 59-64, 238f
complications, 89
advancing, 62f
equipment, 89
bandaging, 65f
positioning,90
cephalic vein insertion, 60f
restraint, 90
jugular vein insertion, 60f
Skin vacuuming
needle guard, 63f
dogs, 94f
positioning.63f
equipment, 93
Toenail clipping, 137f, 138f
procedure, 93-95
Topical administration, 121-22
Small rodents. See aiso specific types
Topica1 ophthalmic anesthetic, 120, 125, 144, 146-47,
blood volume, 384t
151
examining, 377-83
Total parenteral nutrition (TPN), 68
gender determination, 379
Towel restraint, 354-56
respiratory rates, 378t
TPN. See Total parenteral nutrition
396
INDEX
Tracheal fluids, 241f
cat
Tracheal lumen, 240f
female, 151-52
Tracheal membrane puncture, 239f
male,148-51
Tracheostomy, 343-47
complications, 139
complications, 343
dogs
equipment,343
female, 14448
procedure, 34447
male, 142-43
securing,347f
equipment, 139-40
tube insertion, 346f
fexible,147f
Transfusion
indwe1ling, 153-54
 blood collection for, 29-31
insertion of, 144
complications, 29
introduction, 152f
equipment, 29-30
positioning,140
positioning, 30
preparation for, 141-42
procedure,30-31
restraint, 140
restraint, 30
female dog, 145f
blood/plasma, 335-38
sizes, 141t
complications, 335
Urine collection, 369
equipment, 335
Urohydropropulsion, 285-87
procedure, 337-38
equipment,285
setup, 336-37
indication,285
Transperineal prostate biopsy, 275-79
positioning,285
complications, 276
procedure, 286-87
contraindications,276
restraint, 285
Cook needle, 278f
equipment,276
Vacutainer, 25, 28
indications, 276
Vaginal examination, 299-304
positioning, 276
artifcial vagina, 295f
postbiopsy considerations, 279
complications, 300
procedure, 277-79
contraindications, 300
restraint, 276
digita1, 302f
site, 276
equipment,300
Transthoracic lung aspiration biopsy,
indications,299
259-61
preparation, 300-301
complications, 260
procedure, 301-4
contraindications, 260
restraint, 300-301
equipment,260
swab specimen, 301f
indications,259
Veins. See specifc veins
positioning,260
Venipuncture, 19-27
postoperative care, 261
bandaging, 28f
procedure, 260-61
cephalic, 20
restraint, 260
complications,19
site, 260
equipment,19-20
Transtracheal aspiration, 237-42
jugular, 20
complications, 237
 lateral saphenous, 20
cricothyroid membrane puncture,
medial saphenous, 23
239f
needle introduction, 26f
equipment,238
positioning, 20-27
jndications,237
procedure, 2427
 intravenous catheterization, 240f,
restraint, 20-27
241f
small rodents, 380-83
positioning,238
syringe stabilization, 26f
procedure,238-42
Ventilation, 182f
restraint, 238
Ventral cervical skin incision, 345f
tracheal membrane puncture, 239f
Verbal restraint, 6
Trochanteric fossa aspiration/biopsy.
312-15
Weight, small mammals, 384t
restraint, 313f
Winged infusion set, 52-54
insertion, 53f
Ultrasonic scaler, 224f
securing, 53f
Urethral catheterization, 139-54
advancing, 150f
Zenker's fxative, 312, 315